TTA ATL UL
00049293
—a a
Digitized with financial assistance from
Ms.Swati Thakar
on 13 March, 2020
ORL
Bay 2X
Mah | pve.
My uq24%
SHANTI PARVA. (
oe ee]
CONTENTS.
Ciabrer I.—The period of mourning.
udhishthira wants to know everything
about Karna’s bicth—p. 1.
Cuarer It,—The account of Karna’s life.
Deona’s curse—Karna becomes Rama’s
pupil—p. 2. i: :
Cuarrer II.—Karna’s trial. Jama-
dagni sleeps on his lap—His thigh is bored.
amadagni’s curse—p. 3.
Cuarrer 1V.—Swayamvara of Chitran-
gada’s daughter.—Karna’s success—p. §.
Carter V.«Karna defeats Jatasan-.
dha—p. 5.
Caneree VI.—Yudhishthira’s despair
p. 6.
Cwarter VIL.—Vudhishthira bewails to
Arjona for the destruction of kinsmen~6,
Cuapter VILL—Arjuna cheers up
Yudhishthira by saying that it is by prowess
that one acquires kingdom—=p. 8.
Cuaprer [X.—Yudhishthira is bent upon
~ following Renunciation—p. 10,
Cuartér X.—Arjuna urges upon him
the necessity of performing the duties of
kings—-p. 11. ;
Cuapter XI.—An account of certain
ascetics ‘who taking instruction from a bird
give up Renunciation and live like house-
holders—p. 12.
Cuarter XIl.~—Nakula adyocates the
necessity of action—p. 13.
Cuapter XI[1—Sahadeva also, urges
upon the Bing the necessity of action—15.
Cuaprek XIV,—Exhortation by Drau-
padi—p. 16. ;


Cuaprer XV.—Arjuna again asks Yu-
dhishthira to exercise the Rod of Punish-
ment—p. 17. : ‘ :


Carter XVI,—Bhima ‘also asks Yu-
dhishthira to follow their fore-fathers and
govern the kingdom—p. 19.


CHaPrer XVIL.—Yudhishthira denoun-
ces worldly enjoyments and activities.
real vision of men described—p. 20.


Cuarrear XVII—The discourse be-
tween king Janaka and his Queen—the
latter finding fault with the life of tnendi-+
cancy—p. 21. “on


The


ae OTB


Cuarter X1X.—Yudhishthira’s  deci«
sions. He holds that it is a mistake to


| think that there is nothing superior to


wealth—p. 23.

CiarterR XX.—The ascetic Devasthana
also advocates the acquisition of wealth—
Pp. 24. ;

Cuarter XX1.—The discourse between
Indra and Vrihaspati—The ideal of true
teligion—p. 25.

Cuarrer XX{1—The duties of a Ksha~
triya described by Arjuna—~p. 26. .

Cuarter XXI11.—Vyasa also urges upon
Vudhishthira to live like a house-holdéer,
The history of the king Sudyumana—p, 26,


Ye oF THESE
esate”


Cuarrer XXIV.—Vyasa ‘points out the -


duties of aking. ‘The history of the king
Hayagriva—p. 28. :


Cuarrer XXV.—Vyasa describes the .


Time—p. 29.

Cuartrer XX VI.—VYudhishthira describes
the two paths to heaven. The necessity of
Sacrifices and Vedic Study. The proper
use of wealth—p. 31. .


Cuarrer XXVIL~Vudhishthira’slamen= _


tations for the death of his people. Vyasa
consoles him by saying that all this is the
work of Destiny—p. 32. .

Cuaprer XXVIIL.—Conversation be-
Janaka and Ashma as to how should a man
act upon the accession and destruction of
both kinsmen and wealth—p. 34.

Carter XXIX Krishna consoles the
king. ‘The discourse between Narada and.
Shanjaya-=p. 36. :

Cuarrsr XXX.—Account of the Rishis
Narada and Parvata—p. 41.

Cuarter XXXI1.-The story of the birth
of the child whose excreta were gold—
P. 43. :

Cuaprer XXXIi.—Vyasa consoles Yu-
dhishthira saying that he has merely done
his: duties—p. 42.

Cuarrers XXXII & XXXIV.—Vyasa
exhorts him to cast off his grief and rule
his kingdom—p. 462

Cuarrer XXXV.—The necessary rites
of expiation of sin are describe—p, 47.


Cuarter XXXVI.—The same subject—


P4


.


Cuarrer XXXVII.—Vyasa describes
what food is clean and what unclean—p. 51,


Cuarrek XXXVIH.—Vyasa asks Yu-
dhishthira, on being asked, to enquired of


Bhishma the duties of- the four orders. |}.


P- 53-

Cuaprerk XXX{X.—Fhe Pandavas enter
the city. Charvaka condemns the king—
P. 55+

‘CHarrerR XL.—Keishna
king—=p. 56.


consoles the


Cuarter XLI.—Yudhishthira’s installas


tion—p. $6.

“Cuarter XLIL—Yudhishthira requests
all to treat Dhritarashtra as king—Distri-
bution of offices—p, 57.

“CuapteR XLHI.—The funeral rites of
the departed kingsmen—p. 58,

Cuaprer XLIV.~Vudhishthira describes
the various manifestations of Krishna
p. 58.

Cuapter XLV.—The
houses—p,. 59,

Cuarrer XLVI.—Yudhishthica
gizes Krishna—p. 60.

Carter XLVIf.—Vasudeva asks Yu-

‘dhishthira to receive instructions from
Bhishmap. 6r.

CHarrer XLVI{II.—Pandavas
Bhishma, who describes the procs of
Krishna-—=p, 62.

Cuaprer XLIX. —Yadhishthira asks
Bhishma about how the Kshatriyas multi-
pier after being exterminated by Rama—
p. 66.

Caaprer L.—The fresh birth of Ksha-
triya on earth described—p. 67.

Cuaprer Li,—Krishna and Yudhishthira
approach the bed of arrows and the former
acquires of Bhishma if his Snderataading
was all right-p. 70.

Cuarter LIL—Bhishma describes the
universal form of Krishra who asks the
former to deliver instructions—p. 71,

Cuarrer LU1.—Bhishma expresses his
inability, but Krishna presses him. Then
the Pandavas leave the eamp—p. 72.

Cuapter LIV.—Yudhishthira with all
the Pandavas go ayain to Bhishma—p. 72,

Cuarter LV.-Bhishma says that he
remembers all the duti€s. {Krishna says
that Bhisma’s sayings,[by his favour,{will be
an authority—p. 7§.

Cuartsr LVI—~The duties of the Ksha-
triyas described—p. 76.

Cuaprers LVII & LVIIL.—Royal duties
=p: 77>


distribution of


eulos


go to.


ii CONTENTS.


Caarter LIX
eignty—-p., 82. ‘
Crarrer LX. —The-duties of the four

orders described-=—p. 88,

Cuarrer LXI.—The four modes of life
described, ‘The duties of the Brahmanas—
p. go.

Cuaprer LX{I.—~The position of the
Brahmana who performs the duties of the
othac three orders—p. gt.


CHarpTerR LXUL--The duties of the
Brahmanas and of the Kshatriyas—p. gz.

Cuarrer LXIV.—The Kshatriya duties
——p. 93-

Cuarrer LXV.—~The ‘duties of other
aces described such as Yavanas, &c.—


X.—The history of sovets


95-
P Caarti€R LXVi.—~Royal duties further
described—p. 96.


-Caarrer LXVII.—-The principal duties


| of a kingdom—p. 98.


Cuarrer LXVILL—~The duties of a king;
why is he called a god—p. 99.

Cuaprer LXIX.—The duties of a king,
further described—102,

Cuarter LXX.—The thirty-six virtues
of a Ring—p. 106.

Carrer LXXL.—How should a king
protect his subjects—+p, 106.

Cuarrer LXXI.—The divine right of
the king. How should he appoint a priest
—p. 108.

Cuaprer LXXIII.—The appointment of
a priest. The discourse between Aila’s son
and Kashyapa—-p. 109.

CuarTer LXXIV..—The necessity of a
priest to a king. ‘The discourse between
Muchakunda and Vaisravana—p, 110.

CHarprer LXXV.—The virtues by which
a king acquires happiness in the next
world—p. 111.

Cuarrar LXXVI~The difference be-
tween the Brahmanas following the duties
of their own orders—and those following
other duties—p. 113.

Cuarrer LXXVII.-~The wealth of which
the king is masterp. 113.

Cuarrer LXXVIN.—Can a Brahmana
follow the duties of Vaishya?—p. 119.

Cuarrer LXXIX.—The' appointment of
sacrificial priests and their duties—p. 117.

CuaPTer LXXX.--The necessity of co-
operation for king--p. 118.

Cuarrer LXXXI—The means for ace
quiring the hearts of both friends and foes.
the diccourse between Vasudeva and
Narada on tls subject—p. 119.


eee *


CONTENTS. iit


Crarrer LXXXII.—The second means | Caarrer CVIII.—The most important
described—p. 121. duties described by Bhishma—p. -159.

Cuapter LXXXIU1.—The appointment | Caaprzr CIX.—The superiority of truth
of fJaw-makers, ministers of wars, com- | to false-hood—p. 161.


manders, counsellers &c.—p. 123. C#tarrer CX—How to get over difficul-
Cuarter LXXXIV.—The one thing for | ties—p. 162.

which a man becomes famous—p. 126. Caarter CXI.—How to distinguish
-CHaprer LXXXV.—The deeds for which | between men of tranquil souls and other-—

a king acquires eternal fame—p. 126. wise. The story of’ the discourse between


Cuarter LXXXVi—The description | 2 H8er and jackal—p. 1636
of the city in which a king should live | CHaprer CXII.—The works of a king,


—p. 128. The story of a camel—p. 167.
Cuaprer LXXXVIL—How a kingdom | Carrer CXIII.—The conduct of a king
should be protected—p. 129. towards a powerful enemy~p. 168.


Cuartek LXXXVIIL~-How should a| Cuarrer CXIV.—The conduct of a
king collect money from his subjects—p. 131. learned man when insulted with harsh


Cuarrer LXXXIX.—The duties of a words in a court—168.


king described—p. 132. Cuarrer CXV.—The selection of ser-
Cuarrer XC.—The duties of a king as | V2"'s and ministers by a kingp. 169,
described by Utathya—p. 133. Cuarter CXVI.—The story of the dog
Cuarrer XCI.—The same,subject conti- | 2°¢ !eopard—p. 170.
nued—p. 135, .| Cuarrsr CXVII—The same story
—p. 171.


Cuarrer XCII.—The conduct of a king
who seeks virtue as described by Vasudeva] Cuarter CXVIII The qualifications


<p. 137. of a minister and a kingsep. 172.

Cuarrer XCIIE.—How should a king Cuarter CX1X.—The fruits of appoint-
guard himself—p. 238. ing right men in right places—p. 173:

Cuarter XCIV.—The same subject Cuarter CXX.—An abridgment of
=p. 140. . royal duties—p. 174.

Cuarrer XCV.—How should a king | _ CuapreR CXXI.—A true account’ of
fight with another king—140, Punishment—p. 177. -

CuarTer XCVI.—The duties of aking] Cuarrzr CXXII —The : story of Vasu-
towards his enemy—p. 141. homa~-p. £79.

Cuarter XCVII.—The acts by which a] Carrer CXXIH.—An account of
king acquires blessed regions—p, 142. —~_—'}vitlue, Profit and pleasure—p. 181.


Cuarrer XCVIII.—The regions which Cuapter cxxiv.—The characteristics of .
a heroe acquires by meeting with death in | vituous conduct and how it can be acquired


battle—p. 143. —p. 183.

Cuarrer XCIX.—The duties of herdes CuarTer cxxv.—An account of hope
as described by king Janaka—p. 146. —p. 186.

Cuarrer C€.—How should kings lead| CHaPprer cxxvi1.—The story of Rishava
their armies in the batthe-field—p. 146. —p. 187.

Cuartsr Cl.—The conduct and dress CHAPTER cxxvint.—The discouse on
of the warriors—p. 148, hope—188.

Cuarrer Cll—The signs of a future} CHAPTER CxXxIx.~-The discourse on Moe
success<p. 149. ‘ rality between Gotama and Yama—p. 189.

CuapTer CIll—How shoild. a king CHAPTER CXxX¥.—Thé conduct of a king
treat his enemies—p, 151. when he has no friends or when he is sure


CHAPTER CIV.—The duties of a king | rounded by wicked) ministers—p. 190.

wllons Oppssed By ‘Ais ar officers—p. 153: CHAPTER CXXx1.—The conduct of a king
Cuarter CV.~The same subject=p. 156. who is weak, and whose kingdom is
CuarTer CVI.~-The advice of Janaka | divided—p. 192.


to king of Kosala-—p. 157. CHAPTER Cxxxu1.—When robbers attack


Cuarrer CVII.—How should °a king | 2 kingdom how should a Brahmava main-
treat his allies~p, 198. 5» lain his own people=-p. 193.


4


iv


CHAPTER Cx¥x111—How should a king
replenish his Treasury in emergency—
P. 194.

CuHaPTER Cxxx1vV.—The acqusition of
power by a Kshatriya—p. 195.

CHaprer CxxxV.—The story of a rob-
ber—p. 195.

Carrer cxxxvi.How should a king
fill his Treasury—p. 196.

CHAPTER C¥xxvii—The, exceltent story
of an idle taan—p. 197.

Cuapter cxxxvilt.—How should a king
act when attacked by many enemies, with
whom should he make war—p. i98.

CHAPTER CXXX1X.—How should a king
act without trusting others—p. 206.

CHAPTER CXL.—~The duty of a king when
his kingdom is attacked by robbers—p. 211.

Cuaprer CxirThe duties of a king
when sin prevails in his kingdom—p. 214.

CHAPTER C&Ltt=The means by which
kings should collect wisdom—p, 218.


CHAPTER CXLII1.--The merit of a person
who supports a beseeching men—p. 220,

CHAPTER CXLIV.—-The story of a pigeon
on the subject—p. 224.

CHAPTERS CXLV & CXLIX.—The same
Story—p. . ; aes

Cuarrer ci.—The purification of a pec-
son who commits sin from want of discrimi-
nation——p. 225.

CHAPTER CL1-™The fruit
the Bralimanas—p. 226. ‘ .

CHAPTER CLII.-—The purificatory rites of
a king-p. 227.

CuaPTER CLUI~~Whether a man revives
after death. ‘he Conversation between a
Vulture and a Jackal—p. 228.

Carter cLiv.The duty of a king
whenja neighbouring, but a powerful enemy
is offended by him—p. 233. ;

CHAPTER CLV.—The conversation
tween Narada and Shalmali—p. 234.

Cuaprer civi & CLvi1.—The same story
—P. 234.

CHAPTER CLVU1.~The source and basis
of sin—p. 236.

Cuartsr CLix.—Covetousness is the root
of all evils—p. 237.


Cuarrer CLX.—-The
duties—p. 238.


of satisfying


be-


{most important


CHAPTER cCLx1.—Pen&ance is the most


important—p. 239.


CHAPTER CLx11.—The marks of truth—


_p. 240,


CONTENTS.


CHAPTER CLXIti.—The source of angét
and lust—~p. 231.

Charrer cixiv.—The acts of a malevo-
lent person—p. 242.

CHAPTERS CLxv & CLxvi.—(Mistake)—<
The distribution of wealth among Brah-
manas—p, 243. :

CHAPTER CLxvit.~The question of Nakula
—the first creation of the swotd and the
author thereof—p. 246.

Chapter Cixvitt.—Vidura’s discourse on
virtue, Profit and Pleasure—p. 249.

Chapter cixvit.—An account of men
gentlejby nature and of true friends—p. 252.

Chapter €Lx1x.—Sojourn of Goutama—
P. 254.

Chapter CLxx.—The hospitality of Gou-
tama by Rajadharma—p. 255.

Chapter crxx1.—The meeting of Gou-
tama with the Rakshasa chief—p. 256.

Chapters cixxu1 & CLxx111.—The same
subject—p. 257. ~

_Chapter CLxxiv.—An account of Reti+
gion—p. 59. |

Chapter crxxv.—The duties of men in
view of approaching death—p. 262.

Chapter GLXxxv1.—The root of happiness
and misery—p. 264.

Chapter ctxxvi1.—The toot of happiness.
The story of Manki—p. 265.

Chapter ¢rxxvi1.—Value of wealth. The
various instructious—p. 267.

Chapter cixxtx.—The root of success.
The story of Praharda—p. 268.

Chapter CLxxx.—Relatives, acts, riches
and wisdom—which of them should be the
refuge—-p, 270.

Chapter Grxxx1.—Whether gifts, sacris
fices, penances and dutiful services to prea
ceptors yield wisdom and bliss—p. 272.

Chapter ctxxx11.—The origin of the
universe. ‘Ihe creator and the living crea
ture—p. 273. ‘

Chapter cxrxxx111.—The creation of the
universe—p. 274.

Chapter CLxxx1v.—The five elements
—P- 275+ : :

Chapter cxrxxxv.—The work of fire and
wind—p. 277. :

Chapter CLxxxv1.—The
—P. 277-

“Chapter cuxxxvit.—Death
change of form—p. 278.

Chapter CLxxxvii.—The creation of the
Prajapatis—of Duty, truth, Penance &c,
No distinction of castes—p. 280.

oN


work of air


is only a


CONTENTS; F


Chapter chxkez—The characteristics
_ 6E the four Varnas—p. 280. -

Chapter Gxc,—Trath and Untruth-p. 282;

Chapter cxct.—The four modes. of life
wp, 282. =

Chapter ¢xcit.—The Satie subject-p. 284.

Chapter cxettt.—The ordinances about
tonduct—=p. 285.
Chapter cxciv.—The spiritual science
ip. 287, eae

Chapter Cxtv.=-The four_kinds of Yoga
“=p. 290.

Chapter cxcvi.—The rules of silent
recitation=--p. 290.

Chapter cxcvis.—«The end of the recitors
wp. 292.

Chapter cxcviit— Do ssp, 292.

Chapter cxcix.—The discourse on the
subject by Savitri—=p. 293.

Chapter cc.—The reply of the Brah+
mana to Virupam»p. ss.

Chapter cc1.—The feuits of Jnana Yoga


<p. 300.

Chaptec ccik.=*The origin of the elements
and the formation of the bodies—p. 301,

Chaptse éc11t.—-The Soul and the three
Gunas—p. 303.

Chapter ccrv.=The same subject-p. 304.

Chapter ccv.— Worthlessness of physical
and mental sorrow. The value of wisdom
Pp. 305.

Chapter ecvi.—The divine Vishnu=p. 306.

Chaptee ccvi1.-An account of the Crea>
tor—p. 307.

Chapter ccvit1.—The Patriarchs—p. 309.

.CHarTzr cctx.—The various names of
Vishnu—p. 310. ;

Carrer ccx.—The creation: The
Brahma—p. 312.

CHAPTER cCxt.—The soul: understand=
ing mind—p. 314.-

Cuaprer coxit.—Acts and knowledge
—p. 315.

CuHaPrTer ccxitr.—=Knewledge of
Supreme Soul—p. 316.

CHAPTER CCXxIV.—The means of conquer-+
ing the senses—317.

CuHarter céxv.—The same—p. 319.

CHAPTER Ccxv1—A Yogin should give
up sleep—-p. 320.

CuapTeR ccxvi1.—The knowledge of
Supreme Brahma—p. 321. -


the


(Chaprer ccxviti.—The “acquirement of
Liberation by Janaka—p. 323.


CHAPTER céxtx.<The toliversation be-
tween Panchashiftha and king Janaka
=p, 326.

CHAPTER CCxx.—The acquirement of
happiness and meseryp. 329.

Cuarrer Céxxt.—Is fasting -a¥penance


=p, 330. .
CHAPTER ccxxit.els the man doer of
good and bad acts—~p. 330. vo


Cuarter ccxxuu=By following wha’
intelligence cah a king shorn of prosperity
live on earth ?—p. 332. -

Cuarprer CCXXIV.—The dialogue be»
tween Shakra and Vali on the subject
=P. 333: <

Cuarrer CCXXVI.—=The same=p. 336.

Cuarrer CCXXVIL—What is the good
for a man who is in distress for loss of
friends or kingdom—p. 339. .

CHafrer. CCXXVIIL—The marks of
future greatness and degeneration—p. 343.

Caastrer CCXXIX.—How does a man
attain to Brahma—p. 348.

Cwarter CCXXX.—The conversation
between Krishna jand Ugrasena about the
man who pleases all—p. 349.

Caarter CCXXX1—The origin and
end of all creatures—p. 350.

Cnarren CCXXXIL--The account of
Brahma-p. 351.

Caartex CCXXXIIL-«The night and
day of Brahmap. 353.

Cuarrer CXXX1V.—The duties of a
Brahmana—p._ 354- ;

Cuarrsr CCXXXV.—The same subject
—p. 356. :

Cuaprern CCXXXVI—How knowledge
is to be acquired—-p. 357.


Cuarrer CCXXXVII.—Knowledge by
which birth and death may be avoided
—P- 359-

Cuarrer CCXXXVIIL—The Vedas
—p. 361.

Cuarptar CCXXXIX.—The means by
which Brahma can be known=«p, 362.

Carrer CCXL.—The doctrine of knows
ledge according to the Yoga system—p. 363.

Cuaprer CCXLI.—The injunctions about
knowledge and action—p. 365.

Cuarter CCXLI1.—The various modes of
life—p. 336.


Cuarrer CCXLIIM.—The domestic mods
of life—p. 367. :


vi CONTENTS.


Cuartirn CCXLIV.—-The duties. of the
Vanaprastha mode of Life—p. 369. ;
CuarTeR CCXLV.—The means for ac-
~ gniring -the highest subject of acquisition
“—P. 370.
CHAPTER CCXLVI.—The various pHaa
ples—p. 372.
Cuarrer CCXLVIE—The various ele-
ments: ego: understanding—p: 373.
Cnarrer CCXLVIIL. ~-Mind and under-
standing—p.' 374.”
Cuarrer CCXLIX. —The knowledge of
soul~p. 375. -


CHAPTER CCL.—The foremost of all


duties—p. 376.
CHAPTER CCLI. —The account “of a true
Yogin—p. 378:


Cuarrer CCLIL--The subject of spiri- |”


tuality ; the formation of elements—p. 379.


Cuarter CCLII[.—~The account of Self |.


—P- 37%


CHARTER CCLIV.—The tree of desire |.


P- 380.


Cuaprer CCLV.—The. enumeration of. ii
“when .he should renounce sovereignty and


the principles—p. 381.
Cuapter CCL.VJ.—What is death—381.


CHAPTER CCLVIL.—The [Creation of
Death—-p. 382. __


Cuarrer CCLVII.—The. colloquy be- |


tween Death and Brahma—p. 383.


Cuarter CCLIX.—Aniaccount of Bigh?:


teousness—p. 385. |
CHAPTER CCLX.—Question by Yudbish-


Cuarrer CCLXL—The story of Tula-
dhara and Jajali—p. 387. ;


Cuarter CCLXI1.—The same. story~ |


Pp. 389..
Cuarter CCLXILI.—The same story
Pp. 392.


Cuarter CCLXIV.—The same story— |.


B. 394.
Cuarter CCLXV.—The story of king
Vicharakhu about: sacrifices—p. 395- :
Cuarrer CCLXVI.—The determination
of an obligatory act—p. 393. °


Cuartek CCLXVII,--How should a king .


protect his subjects without harming any
body. The conversation between Dyumut-
sena and Satyavat—f. 399.


Cuaprer CCLXVIII.—Religion of en- |


joyment and Liberation—p. qor.


Cwapter CCLXIX.—Various religious
sites described by Kapila—p. 402.


F and sorrow may be avoided.


Cuarter CCLXX.—The importance of
the Vedas and the Vedic rites—p. 406.

Cuarrer CCLXXI-Religion, Profit and
Pleasure—which of them is superior, The.
discourse of Kundadhara—p. 408.

Cuaprer CCLXXII.—The Sacrifice pers
formed for virtue—p. 411. ;

Caarrer CCLXXIII.—Deseription of
api Renunciation, sin and virtue —~
Pp. 4

Cuapres CCLXXIV.—The ‘means for’
acquiring Liberation—=p, 413. °~

Cuaprer CCLXXV.—The discourse bet«
ween Narada and Asita Devala about crea~
tion—p. 414.

Cuarrer CCLXXVI.—How the thirst
for riches can be removed, ‘The discourse
between Janaka and Mandavya—p. 416.
Cuarrer CCLXXVII.—The duty of 2
man as knowing that.the life of a man runs
speedily. The discourse between a father
and a son—p. 416.

Cuaprer CCLXXVII. Futon should a
man attain to Brahma—p. 418.


- Caaprer CCLXX1IX.—Yudhisthira asks


adopt a life of Renunciation—p. 419.
Cuapter CCXXX.—The greatness of
Vishnu described—p. 420.
Cuarpter CCXXXI.—The of
Vitra —p. 424.
Caaprer CCXXXI1—The destruction


defeat


‘of Vitra—p.. 426,


CHaPprerR CCLXXXUL. ~The origin of


thira about virtues and duties—p. 386. |; - Nenana ne


Cuaprer CCLXXXIV.—The destruc
tion: of the sacrifice of Daksha by Maha-
deva—p: 431.

Cuarrer CCLXXXV.—The names by
which- Daksha worshipped Shiva—p. 434.

CuapteR CCLXXXVI—The origin
and nature of the spiritual Science—p, 440.

Cuarter CCLXXXVIL—-How deatlr
The discourse
between Narada and Samanga—p. 442.


Cuarrer CCLXXXVIL—What tends


Fto the good of one who is not acquainted


with Scriptures—p. 443.


Cuarrer CCLXXXIX.—How grief may -
be avoided and happiness enjoyed. The
conversation between Sagara and Aristha«


-nimi—p. 446.


Cuaprer CCXC.—The
Ushanas—448.


history of


Cuarrer CCXCL—The means by whictlr


one acquireg, the greatest good both in this


world and in the next—p. 449._


€navrex CCXCII—Parasara’s
tourse on acts and

p. 451.

Cuarrer CCXCII.—Discourse on virtue
and wealth: The duties of Brahmanas and
Kshattyas—p. 452. ;

Cuaprer CCXCIV.—The duties. of the
Sudras, The gift to Brahrianas—p. 453.

Cuaprer CCXCV.—The duties of the
Bralimanas—p. 454. ~ .

Cuartrer CCXCVI.—The -ordinances
about penances as described by Parasara
=P. 453. :

_ Cuarrer CCXCVII.The origin of the
~ difference of color amongst different orders.

The birth of various castes—p. 457.

Craprer CCX€VIiI.—Discoursé
Kshatrya duties and death—p. 459.

Ciaprer CCXCVIII.~What _ yields
good. What is the best path? What is
that which being done is rievet destroyed?
What is that place from which there is no
return? Parasara’s replies—p. 461.

Carter CCC.—Merits of truth, self-
control, forgivenees and wisdoni—p. 463.

Cuaprer CCCI.—The difference between
Sankhya and Yoga systems of philosophy
~—p. 465. .

Cuarrer CCCI.—The principles of
Sankhya Philosophy—p. 467.

-Cuarrer CCCIII.—(Mistake in chapter
mack). How this universe is destroyed.
That which was never destroyed and will
never be destroyed—p. 472.

Cuarter CCCIV—The nature of the
soul—p. 474.

Cuaprer CCCV.—Soul’s passage through
births—p. 476. ;

Cuarrer CCCVI.—Individual
Nature and Supreme Soul—p. 477.

Crarrer CCCVIT—The practices of
Yoga and the nature of the Supreme Soul
—p. 478.

Crarrer CCCVIH.—Deseription of
Vidya (Knowledge) and Avidya (Nescience)
—p. 481. .

Cuarter CCCIX.—The Supreme Soul
and the Individual Soul—483.


Cuarter CCCX.—The discourse bet-
ween Vasuman and the Bralmana about
what is of the highest good to a man both
in this wosid and the next—p. 485.


Cuarrer CCCXI.—The origin of the
principles of the Sankhay System—p. 487.


Craeter CCCXI.—The d3ration of
time of the Supreme Purveha—p. 488.


expiation of sin~


on


soul,


dis--


him.


vil


Citaprer cecxin.—The. destruction of
the universe—p. 488. :

Caapter cccxiv.—The spiritual element
and accidental—p. 489.

CuarTser cocxv.—The three qualities of
Nature—p. 490.

CuaPrer cocxvi.—What is with qualitie §
and what is without qualities—p. 491.

CuapTer cccxviThe science of the
Yogins—p. 492. :

CuaPTeEr cocxviit.—The places to which
the dead go—p. 493.

CHarrer cccxix.—Yajriavalita’s attains
ment of knowledge... He describes the
manifest and unmianifest—p.. 494.


CaarreR cccxx —How a man can avoid
death and decrepitudé. ‘The narratives of
Panchashika—p. 499.


CHaprer cdcxxit.—The excellence of
Liberation; one can acquire it in domestié
mode of fife. The discourse between Janaka
and Sulabha—p. 499. Pe

Citarrer Cccxxi1.-—-How Sukha was won
over to Renunciation—p. 508.


CuHaprer’cocxxilt.—The efficacy of gifts,
sacrifice and penancés—=p. 512.


Carrer Cccxxi¥.—The history of Suka
—P. $13.

Cuabrer cCcxxv.—-The same—p. Side

CHAPTER CCCXXVI.— The same—p. 515.


CHAPTER CCCXXviI.—The conversation
between Shuka and Sanaka—«p. 517.


CHAPTER cOcxxviil.—The study of Self
by Self—p. 5g.


Caarrer cccxxix.—The suspension of
the Vedas. The disciples of Vyasa go
down for sub-dividing them—p. 22.


CHAPTER CCC¥X%.—Narada’s instruction
to Suka—p. 523.


Carrer cccxxx1.—Narada preaches
the importance of Yoga and Knowledge of
Self—p. 526.


CHAPTER CCXXX11.—The eternal situation
free from sorrows, Suka leaves his house
—p. 5238.


Carrer CCCxxxlI1—The practice of
yoga by Suka—p. 530.


Cuaprer ccoxxxty.—Suka passes through
the mountain to Mandakini. _ Vyasa follows
Mahadeva “consoles him describing
the origin of Suka~-p, 532.


Carrer cccxxxv.—Who is the God of
gods, The discourse between Narada and
Rishi Narayana on this subject—p. 535-


vill


Cuakrer cccxxxvt—Narada goes to see
Narayana born in the house of Dharma.
The characteristics of liberated men—535.

CeabTer GCcxxavit.—The birth of Vri-
haspati; the description of the White Island
—p. 538.

CitapreR Cccxxxviti.-The discubsion
whether goats should be sacrified. The
fall of King Vasu—p. 540. A

Cuatter cccxxxix.-Narada ‘worships

Narayana in’ the White Island—p. 542.

Carrer Cccxt —Narayaiia appears be-
fore Narada and tells him that those who
have implicit faith in Narayana becothe
liberated. {His Various incarnations are also
described=—p. 544. :

CHabreR ccoxtt.—The . of
Rudras etc, The Religion of Renunciation
—p. 549. _

Cuarrer céckrii-The hames of Nara-
yana—p. 554. ‘2
» CHAPTER CXXxx.Iit.<-The attainment of
uniformity by Agni and SoinaThe birth
of gods, Manus &c.-<p. 557.

Cuabrer ccoxtiv—Why did Narada


_ Succeed in Seeing Narayana? Why did he
go to see Nata and Narayana.—p. 566. *


CONTENTS.


Carter cccxtv.—Nara and Narayaitia
Said to Narada that for his devotion thé
Great God showed himself to him—p. 568.
_ CHabrzr cccxiv1.—The origin of Pinda
=p. 570.

Cuabtér Cctxivi1—An
Vishnu—p. 571.

CHapter cccxivrit.~The
of the Vedas.—Description of
p- 572.

CHArPTeR CCcxim.—The practices of
men who are devoted to Narayana—p. 576.

CitaPrzr Cccr.—The story that Vyasa
was Narayan’s son—p. 580.

Ciabtkk CcécLt.—Account of Sotl~<s84.

Cuatter Ccccnir.—Nature and action of
Soul—p. 585.

CHAPTER €cctLiri.—Duties of several


account of


Tepiacerient
arayaha—


modes—p. 536.


CHAEFTRER CCCLIV.-<The same—p. 586.

Cuatter tccotv.—Householders’ duties
—p. 587. ~

CHaPTeR CceLvi.—The


story of the
Naga king Padma—p. 583,


CHAPTERS CCCLVII—CCCLXVI.—=The same
=p. 588.


THE MAHABHARATA.


(IN ENGLISH.) a
SHANTI PARVA, —


CHAPTER I,


be


ue.


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA PARVA,)


Paving saluted-the Supreme Deity (Na-
vayana), and the highest of all male beings
(Nara), and also the Goddess of Learning
(Savraswatt) let us cry success.


_ Vaishampayana said :—

1—2. ‘Having offered oblations of water
to all their friends and kinsmen, the sons
of Pandu, Vidura, Dhritarashtra, and aif
the Bharata ladies, continued to live on
the banks of the sacred river. ‘The noble
sons of Pandu wished to pass the period
of mourning, which lasted. for a month,
outside the Kuru city. :


3. After king Yudhishthira had per-
formed the water-rites, many great sages
endued with ascetic success and many
Sainted Rishis came there to see the king.


. 4 Among them werethe Dwaipayana
Vyasa, Narada, the great Rishi Devala,
Devasthana, and Kanwa. They had in
their company the best of their pupils.


5. Many other Rishis, of great wisdom
and well versed in the Vedic lore, living as
householders or belonging to the Snataka
class, came to see the Kuru king.


6. Those high-souled ones, as they
came, were duly adored by Yudhishthira.
The great Rishis then took their seats on
rich carpets. Accepting the adoration
suited to the period of mourning, they sat


in due order around the king. a8


8. Thousands of Brahmanas corisoled
and comforted that king of kings living on
the sacred banks of the Bhagirathi with
heart exceedingly shaken by sorrow.


g—10o. Having accosted first the Rishis
headed by Vyasa, Narada addressed Yu-
dhishthira the son of Dharnra, saying,—
‘Through the strength of your arms and
the kindness of Krishna, the whole Earth,
O Yudhishthira, las been righteously
acquired by you, ae ;


- 11. By dint of good fortane, you havé
escaped alive from this dreadful battle.
Ever abiding by the duties of a Kshatriya,
why do you not rejoice, O son of Pandu?


12. Having killed all your’ foes, wilf


| you not please yout friends, O king?


Having secured this prosperity, I hope,
you have nothing to be sorry of now’.”


Yudhishthira said :—


13. ‘Indeed, I have conquered tha
whole Earth through my reliance’ on: the
might of Krishna’s arms, through the fae
vour of the Brahmanas, and through the
strength of Bhima and Arjuna,


i14—15. But his heavy grief, is always
preying on my mind, that through covetous~
ness I have brought about- this dreadful
destruction of kinsmen. Having. caused
the death of the darling son of Subhadra,,
and of the sons of Draupadi, this victory,
G holy one, appears to me as being tantas
mount to defeat. :


16. What. will, Subhadra of Vrishni's’
race, that sister-in-law of mine, say to me 2?
What also will the inhabitants of Dwaraka’
say to the. destroyer of Madhu when he
goes there from this place? i


ly. This Draupadi, again, whois eve.
busy with pleasing us, bereaved of son
and kinsmen, is causing me great pain.


18. There is another subject, O holy
Narada, about which I will speak to you,,
For Kunti having hidden a very important
matter, great has been my grief. :


19—21. That hero who had the stretigtft
of ten thousand elephants, who in this world’
was a peerless car-warrior, who was endued
with the pride and gait of a lion, who wag
gifted with great intelligence and compas-
ston, whose liberality was unbounded, who-
practised many high vows, who was the

refuge of the Dhartarasitras, who was


2


fensitive about his honor, whose prowess
was irresistible, who was ready to repay
all injuries and was always wrathful [in
Batile): who defeated us in various encoun-
ters, who was quick in the use of arms,
conversant with every mode of battle, skil-
ful and endued with wonderful courage,
‘that Karna was a son of Kunti, given
birth to by her secretly, and, therefore, a
uterine brother of ours.


22. Whilst{we were offering oblations of
water to the dead, Kunti described him as
_the son of Surya (Sun-God}. Possessed of
every accomplishment, that child had been
thrown into the water,


23—24. Having placed him in a-basket
made of grass, Kunti floated it in the water
ef Ganga. He who was known to the
world as theson of the charioteer Radha,
was ‘really the eldest son of Kunti, and,
therefore, our uterine brother! Hankering
after kingdom, alas, I have unknowingly
brought about the death of that brother of
mine, Itis thisthatis burning my body,
like a fire consuming a hap of cotton, ~


25. Arjuna having white horses knew
him not for a brother! Neither 1, nor
Bhima, nor the twins, knewhim as such!
"He, however, a great bowman knew us (for
his brothers). :


26. We have heard that once Pritha
went to him for seeking our well-being and
addressed him, saying,—You are my son.


% 27. That jllustrious hero, however, re-
fused to satisfy Pritha’s desire. Subsequent-
ly, we are informed, he said to his mother
these words :——


_ 28. "Il am unable to leave Duryodhana’s
side in battle! If I do so, it would be a
Gishonocable, cruel, and ungrateful act.


29. If, in pursuance of your wishes, I

make peace with Yudhishthira, people will

~say that I am afraid of Arjuna having
white horses.


30. Having defeated Arjuna with
Keshava, therefore, in battle, I will after-
wards make peace with Dharma’s son!’
These were his words as we have heard. —


*. 31. Thus answered, Pritha once mor
addressed her son having broad chest and
said,—'Fight with Phalguna then, but spare
my four other sons.’


32. The intelligent Karna, with joined
palms then replied to his trembling mother,
saying,—‘If } get your four other sons even
under my power, I will not kill them.


33. Forsooth, O goddess, you will always
have five sons! If Karna be killed ,with
Arjuna, you will have five! LM, on the other


MAHABHARATA,


hand, Arjuna be killed, you will have five;
with me.’


34. Seeking the well-being of her
children, his.mother once more said to
him,—‘Go, O Karna, do good to those
brothers of yours whose good you always
seek.’


35. Having said these words, Pritha
took his leave and returned to her residence.
‘That hero has,been killed by Arjuna,—the
uterine brother by the brother.


36. Neither Pritha, nor he,” had ever
divulged the secret, O Sic! That hero and
great bowman, was therefore killed by
Arjuna in battle.


37- Afterwards I have ‘come to know,
O best of Rishis, that he was my uterine
brother! Indeed, according to Pritha’s
words, | am informed that Karna was our
eldest-born.


38. Having caused my brother to be
killed, my heart is burning greatly. If I
had both Karna and Arjuna for helping
me, I could have defeated Vasudeva him-
self. — ;


39. Whilst I was tormented in the court
by the wicked sons of Dhritarashtra, my
ranger suddenly excited, became cooled on
seeing Karna.


40—41. Even while hearing. the harsh
and bitter words of Karna himself on the
occasion .of our match at dice,—which he
uttered; for pleasing Duryodhana,—my
wrath became cooled on seeing Karna’s
feet. It appeared to methat Karna’s feet
resembled the feet of our mother Kunti.

42. To make out the reason of that
resemblance between him and our mother,
I thought for a long time. Even trying
my level best I could not find the cause. ~

43. Why, indeed, did the Earth
swallow up the wheels of his car at the time
of battle? Why was my brother cursed?
You should relate all this to me. 3

44. 1 wish to hear everything from you,
O Rishi. You know everying of this world,
as also of both the past and the future,”


en


CHAPTER ITI,


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continued.


Vaishampayana said :—

1. * Thus accosted that best of orators,
vig., the sage Narada, described everyth-
ing about the manner in which he who was


SHANTI PARVA. 3


known as a charioteer’s son had been


cursed.”
Narada said‘— __ ee
2. ‘What you say, O mighty-armed one,


is true O Bharata! Nothing could resist
Karna and Arjuna in battle.


3. This, O sinless one, that Iam about
to tell you is unknown to the very celestials.
Listen to me, O mighty-armed one, as it
happened formerfy.


4. The question was mtooted, how ail
the Kshatciyas, purified by weapons, should
attain to blissful regions. For this, a child

-was conceived by Kunti while she was a
maid, capable of creating a general war.


“75. Highly energetic that child became
known as a Suta. He subsequntly learnt
the science of arms from the
(Drona), that foremost of Angirasa’s race,


6—7. Thinking of the prowess ° of
Bhimasena, the quickness of Arjuna in the
use of arms, your intelligence, O king, the
humility of the twins, the friendship, from
earliest years, between Vasudeva and the
holder of Gandiva, and the love of the
people for you all, that young man was
burnt with envy.


8. In early age he contracted friendship
with king Duryodhana, led by accident and
his own nature and the hate he cherished
against you all,


9—~i19. Marking that Dhananjaya was
superior to every one in the science of arms,
Karna one day approached. Drona privately
and said these words to him,—! desire to
master the Brahma weapon, with all its
Mantras and the power of withdrawing it,
for 1 wish to fight Arjuna.


11. Forsooth, the love you bear for every
one of your pupils is equal to what you
cherish for your own son! I pray that all
masters of the science of arms may, by your


favour consider me as one accomplished in


weapons.


12—13. Thus accosted by him, Drona,
on account of partial luve for Phalguna, as
also from his knowledge of the wicked-
ness of Karna, told him,—-None save a
Brahmana, who has duly practised all vows,
should master the Brahma weapon, ora
Kshatriya who has practised austere penan-
ces, and no other.


14. When Drona had answered thus,
Karna, having adored him, took his _per-
missiog and proceeded forthwith to Rama
then living on the Mahendra mountains.


15. Approaching Rama, he bowed to
him and said-I1 am a Brahmana of
of Bhrigu’s race !-This secured honor for
him, : ar


preceptor:


16. With this knowledge about his birth
and family, Rama received him kiadly
and said,—You are welcome!—at which
Karna became higily pleased. :


17. While living on the Mahendra
mountains resembling heaven itself, Karna
met and mixed with many Gandharvas,
and Yakshas, and gods. .


18. While living there, he learnt the use
of all the weapons duly, and became a great
favorite of the gods, the Gandharvas, and
the Rakshasas. —


tg. One day he walked on the sea shore
by the side of that hermitage. Armed
with bow and sword, Surya’s son wandered
alone. : é


20. While thus walking, O Partha, he
inadvertently and unwittingly killed the
Homa cow of a certain Brahmavadin who
daily performed his Agnihotra rite.

21—23. Knowing that he had perpe-
trated that crime from carelessness, he
informed the Brahmana of it. For -plea-
sing the owner, Karna repeatedly said,—
O Rishi, | have killed this your cow against
my will. Forgive the act! Filled with


vanger the Brahmana, rebuking him, said,


O wicked wight, you should be killed!
May you Suffer the fruit of this act, O you
of wicked soul!


24. While fighting him, O wretch,
whom you always challenge, and for whom
you are trying so much every day, the
Earth shall swallow the wheel of your ¢ar.


25. And while the wheel of your cat
shail thus beswallowed up by the Earth,
your enemy displaying his prowess, will
cut off your head, you being stupefied then.
Leave me, © vile man!


26—29. As you have carelessly killed
this my cow, so will your enemy cut off
your head while you wiil be careless!— ¢
Though cursed, Karna still tried to gratify
that foremost of Brahmanas by offering
him kine and wealth and gems. . The latter,
however, once more answered him, All
the-worlds will not falsify the words of
mine. Go hence or femain, do what
you like-—-Thus addressed by the Brah-
mana, Karna, hanging down his head ia
depression, returned timidly to Rama.”


CHAPTER III,
(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continued.


Narada said :—
1. That foremost of Bhrigu’s race, Rama
was well pleased with the power of Karna’s


4 - MAHABHARATA,


arms, his love. (for him); his sélf-restraint,
and the services he rendered to his pre-
ceptor. :


2. Ever practising ascetic penances,
Rama cheerfully communicated, with due
forms, to his disciple who practised penances
everything about the Brahma weapon with
the Mantras for withdrawing it.

3. Having acquired a knowledge of
that weapoiy, Karna began to live happily
in Bhtigu’s retreat, and highly powerful as
hei was, he devoted himself with great
energy to the stience of arms.

4 One day the highly intelligent Rama,
while walking with Karna in the vicinity
of his retreat, felt himself very weak for
the fasts he had undergone,


gs. From affection created by confidence,
the tired son of Jamadagni, placing his
head on ,Karna’s lap, slept soundty. —


6. While his preceptor was thus sleeping
fwith head] on his lap, a dreadful worn,
whose bite was very painful and which
lived on phlegm and fat and flesh and
blood, appeared before Karna.


q. Getting at Karna’s thigh, that blood-
drinking worm began to pierce it. Lest
his preceptor might get up, Karna could
ncither throw away nor kill that animal,


8. Though his limb was cut through by
that worm, QO Bharata, -the son of Surya,
test his preceptor should awake, allowed
it to do its pteagure.


9. Though the pain was unbearable,
Karna endured it with heroic patience,
and continued to hold Bhrigu’s son on his
lap, withoug trembling in the least and with-
out displaying any sign of pain.


“to—11. When at last
touched the body of the highly energetic
Rama, the latter awoke and said these
words in fear,—Alas, I have been pollutted.
What are you doing. ‘Tell me, without
any fear, what is the teuth of this matter.


1z. Then Karna informed him of that
worm’s bite. Rama saw that worm which
was like a hog in shape,


13%. It had eight feet and very sharp
teeth, and was covered with bristles pointed
like needles. its name was Alarka, its
limbs were then shrunk [with fear].


14. As soonas Rama <looked at it, the
worm died melting in that blood which it
had drawn. All this appeared wonderful,


15. A Rakshasa of terrible form, dark
in hue, of a red neck, capable of assuming
forms at will, and ‘staying on the clouds
Was seen in the sky.


Karna’s blood 1


16—17. Hi object fulfilled, the Rake
shasa, with joined palms addressed Rama,
saying, O best of ascetics, you have saved
me fromthis hell! Blessed be you, I worship
you, you have done me good.

18. The highly energetic and the mighty-
armed son of Jamadayni satd to him,—~
Who are you? And why did you fall into
hell ? ‘Yell me all this.


1g. He answered,—Formerly F was 2
great Asura by the name of Dansha, Iv
the Krita cycle, O sire, k was of the same
age with Bhrigu.

20. § ravished the dearly-loved wife of
that sage. Cursed by hinr F fell down or
the Earth in the form of a worm.


21. In anger your ancestor said to me,
living on urine and phlegm, O wretch, you
will live in hell.


2z. I then begged him, sayirg,—When,
O Brahmana, wilt this curse end 7—
Bhrigu replied, saying,—This curse shal}
end through Rama of my family.


z It was for this that FI had fed a life
like one of uncleaned soulf O righteous
one, by you, however, | have beet rescued
from that sinful life.


24. Having said so, the great Asura,
bowing to Rama, went away. ‘Then Rama
wrathfully addressed Karna, saying.


24. O fool, no Brahmana could bear
such a pain! Your patience is like that of a
Kshatriya { ‘Tell me the truth, without fear.


26. Thus asked, Karna, fearing to be
cursed, and trying to please him, said, O
you of Bhrigu’s race, know me for a Suta,
a race originating from the intermixture of
Brahmanas with Kshatriyas.


27. People call me Karna the son of
Radha! O you of Bhrigu’s race, be pro-
pitiated with my poor self who have thus
behaved for mastering the weapons.


28. Forsooth, a revernd preceptor in the
Vedas and other branches of learning is
one’s father! It was for this that |} intro
duced myself to you as a person of your
family.


29--30. Unto the cheerless and trembs


ling Karna, that foremost one of Bhrigu’s


race, smiling though angry, said to the
cheerless and trembling Karna who wag
lying on Earth with joined hands, since you
have from avarice of weapons, behaved
here falsely, therefore, O wretch, this
Brahma weapon shali not remain in your
remembrance.


31. Since you are neta Brahmana, this
Brahma weapon, shall not, up te the time


SHANTI PARVA,


of yor death, live in you when you wilt be
engaged with a warrior equal to yourself.
32. Go hence, this is mot the. place for
a person who behaves falsely.
no Kshatriya will be your equal in battle.


33. Thus addressed by Rama, Karna
came away, having duly taken~ his per-
mission. Arriving thet before Duryodhana,
he.informed him, saying,—I have learnt alb
weapons,” iz


CHAPTER IV.


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
: PARVA).-——Continued.


Narada said :—


1. “Having thus Jearnt the use of
weapons from Rama of Bhrigu’s race,
Karna began to live happily in the eom-
pany of Duryodhana, O foremost of
Bharata’s race.


_2 Onceon atime, O monarch, many
kings went to a Swayamvara at the capital
of Chitrangada, the king of the Kalingas.


3. That prosperous city, O° Bharata,
‘was known by the name of Rajapura.
Hundreds of kings went there for securing
the hand of the maiden.


4. Hearing that various kings had
come there, Duryodhana also, on his
golden car, proceeded there, accompanied
by Karna.

5. When the festivities commenced in
that Swayamvara various kings, O best of
kings, came there for the hand of the
maiden, - .

6—7. There were amongst them Shisu-
ala, Jacasandha, Bhishmaka, Vakra,
Kaportroman, Nila, Rukmi of steady
prowess, Shrigala who was ruler of the
kingdom of females, Ashoka, Satadhanwan
and the heroic king of the Bhojas.


8. Besides these, many others who lived
in the Deccan and many preceptors of the
Miechchha tribes, and many kings from
the East and the North, O Bharata, came
there,

g. All of them were bedecked. with
golden Angadas and shone resplendent like
pure gold. Of shining persons they were
like tigers of fierce might. :

io. After all those kings had. taken
their seats, O Bharata, the maiden entered
the arena, accompanied by her nurse and
a guard of eunuchs.


Gn Earth,


$s:


13. The names of the kings being men-
tioned to her that fair maiden passed by
the son of Dhritarashtra as she had pas-
sed others before him. :


#2. Duryodhana, however, of Kuru’s.
race could not bear that insult of self.
Discegarding all the bings, le ordered the
maiden to stop.


13. Elated with the pride of power and
relying upon Bhishma and Drona, kiag
Duryodhana taking up that matden of
his car, carried her away forcibly.


14. Armed with sword, clad in maif,
sand his fingers casedin leathern fences,
Karna, that foremost of alt holders of
weapons, riding on hig, ear, followed
Duryodhana. ;

15. A great tumult then took place
among the kings, all of whom were beng
upon fighting.—Put on your coats of- mail.
Get the cars ready!—(lhese were the
words that were heard).


16. Filled with ire, they pursued Karna
and Duryodhana, pouring their shafts upom
them like masses of clouds pouring rain
upon a couple of hills. ;


17. As they thus pursued them, Karna
struck down their bows and arrows on the
ground, each with a single arrow.


18. Amongst them some were deprived
of bow, some rushed bow in hand, some’
were on the point of diseharging their
arrows, and some pursued them, armed with
darts and maces, ;

1g. Endued with great lightness of
hands, Karna, that foremost of all strikers,
assailed them alt. He deprived many
kings of their drivers; and thus defeated
then.


20, They then themselves took up the
reins of their horses, and saying,—Go
away, go away,—turned away from the
battle with depressed hearts.

21. Protected by Karna, Duryodhana
also came away, with a gladdened heart,
bringing with him the maiden to Hastina=
pura.”


CHAPTER V.


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continued,


Narada said :—

1—2. “ Hearing” of Karna’s power the
king of the Magadhas, Jarasandha, —
challenged ‘him: toa single combat. Both.
of them were masters of celestial weapons.
A dreadful battle took place between them


6 MAHABHARATA, |


‘in which they struck each other with various
kinds of weapons. ;


3. At last when their arrows were run
out, and bows and swords were broken, and
they bath lost their cars, they began, powér-
ful as they were, to fight wit bare arms.


4. - While engaged with him ina dread-
ful encounter with bare arms, Karna was
about to cut the two portions of his anta-
gouist’s body that had been joined by Jara.


5. Feeling himself very much pained,
and giving up desire of hostility, the king
of Magadha addressed Karna, saying,—l
am pleased, :


6--7. Qut. of, friendship he then gave
fo Karna-the town Malini. Before this,
that foremost of men and subjugator of
all enemies (Karna), had beén king of the
Angas only, but from that time that grinder
of hostile forces, began to rule over Champa
also, as desired by Duryodhana, as you
know. .

8—g9. Thus Karna. became known on
Earth for the st®?ength of his arms, When,
for your well-being the king of gods
begged of him his (natural) coat-of-mait


and ear-rings, stupefied by celestial illusion,.


he gave away those precious things.


10. Deprived of his ear-rings and his
natural armour, he was killed by Arjuna
before Vasudeva.


rt—14. On account of a Brahmana’s
curse, as also of the curse of the great
Rama, of the boon granted ta Kunti and
the illusion practised én hinr by Indra, of
his being belittled by Bhishma as onty half-
a car-warrior, behind Rathas and Atirathas,
of the destruction of his energy caysed by
Shalya, of Vasudeva’s policy, and, lastly, of
the celestial weapons acquired by Arjuna
from Rudra and Indra and Yama and
Varuna and Kuvera and Drona and the
illustrious Kripa, Arjuna succeeded in
killing Vikartana’s son Karna of solar
effulgence.


15. Thus had.your brother been cursed
and beguiled by many! As, however, he
has fallen in battle, you should not grieve
for that foremost of men.”


es


CHAPTER VI.


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA,
PARVA).—Continued. |


Vaishampayana said :—

1. “Saying so the celestial Rishi Narada
became silent. The royal sage Yudhish-
thira, filled with sorrow began to meditate.


a—3. Seeing that hero cheerfess and
unnerved by grief, sighing like a snake
and shedding profuse tears, Kunti, berseté
filled with grief and almost beside herself
with sorrow, addressed him im these sweet
but weighty words and well suited to the
occasion i=


4. ‘O mighty-armed Yudhishthira, you
should ngt give way to sorrow thus! Q you
of great wisdom, destroy this grief and
listen to what I say.


5. tried formerly to inform Karna of
his being your brother. The god Surya
atso, O best of all righteous men, did the
same.


6. That god said to Karna in a dreant
and once more in my presence, all that a
well-wishing friend, from desire of good,
should say.


7. Neither by affliction nor by reasons
could Surya or myself succeed in pacifying
him or inducing him to join you.


8. Yielding to the influence of Time, he
was determined on creating enmity witlr
you. As he was determined upon doing
injuriesto you all, I myself gave up the
attempt.’


9., Thus addressed by his mother, king
Yudhishthira, with tearful eyes and heart
shaken by grief, said :— ;


Io. ‘For your having-concealed’ your
counsels, this great calamity has befallen
me.’ The highly energetic and the righteous
king then, tin sorrow, cursed all the womeir
of the world, saying,—‘Henceforth no wo-
man shalt succeed in Keeping a secret.’”


11. Recollecting his sons and grandsons
and kinsmen and friends, the king thea
became filled with anxiety and grief.

12. Stricken with'sorrow, the intelligent
king, resembling a fire covered with smoke,
was filled with despair.” :


CHAPTER VII.


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continued.


Vaishampayana said :—

1. ‘ The righteous Yudhishthira, witl
an agitated heart and burning with grief,
began to grieve for that powerful car-
warrior Karna,


2—3. Sighing repeatedly, he addressed
Arjuna, saying,—' If, O Arjuna, we had
lived like Snendicants in the cities of the
Vrishnis and theAndhakas, then we would


SHANTI PARVA, ”


not have been visited by this miserable end,
for our having exterminated our kinsmen.


4. Our enemies, the Kurus, have gained |


in prosperity, while we have been deprived
of all the objects of life, tor what fruits of


righteousness can be ours when we have j


been guilty of self-destruction 2


5. Fie on the practices of Kshatriyas,
fie on might and valour, and fie on anger,


since through these such a calamity has |


overtaken us.


6. Blessed are forgiveness, and self-
control, and purity, with renunciation and
humility and abstention from injury, and
truthfulness which are all practised by her-
anits dwelling in forests,


7. Full of pride and haughtiness, we
however, through covetousness and folly
and from! desire of enjoying the kingdom,
have fallen into this plight.


8. Seeing those kinsmen of ours that
were determined on acquiring the sove-
teignty of the world killed on the field of
battle, -we have been so much laden with
grief that one cannot gladden us by giving
us even the sovereignty of the three
worlds,


9. Alas, having killed for the sake of
the Earth, such kings as deserved not to
be slain by us, we are carrying on the
burden of existence, deprived of friends
and of the very objects of life.


to. Like a pack of dogs fighting one
another for a piece of meat, a great cala-
tity has befallen us. That piece of meat
is no longer dear to us. On the other
hand, it shall be thrown aside.


tr. They who have been killed should
not have been killed for the sake of even
the whole Earth or mountains of. gold, or
all the horses and kine in this world.


12. All of them filled with envy and
seeking all earthly objects, and influenced
by anger and pleasure, following the road
of Death, have repaired to the regions of
Yama. : :


13. Practising asceticism, Brahma-
charyya, truth and renunciation, fathers
wish for sons endued with every kind of
prosperity. -


14. Likewise by fasts and sacrifices and
vows and sacred rites and sacred cere-
monies, mothers conceive. ‘Ehey then hold
the foetus for ten months, :


15. Passing their days in misery and in
expectation of fruit, they always ask them-
selves—Shall these come out of the womb
‘safely? Shall these live after birth? Shall

they grow in power and, be honored on


Earth? Will they give us happiness in this
and the next werld ? 4


16. Alas, since their young sons, wear«
ing shining ear-rings, have been killed,
therefore, their hopes have not been
realised.


17. Without having enjoyed the sweets
of this world, and without having paid off
the debts they owed to their fathers and the
gods, they have gone to Yama’s abode.


18. Alas, O mother, those kings have
been killed just at that time, when their
parents expected to reap the fruits of theie
power and riches,


ig. They were always envious and han-
kered after: earthly objects, and always
yeilded to anger and joy. ‘Therefore they
could never expect to enjoy at any time -or
any place the fruits of victory.


20. {think the Panchalas and the Kurus
that have been killed (in this battle) have
been lost, otherwise he who kas killed
would, by that act of his, obtain all blissful
regions.


21. We are the root of the destruction
that has overtaken the world. ‘The fault,
however, should be attributed to the sons
of Dhritarashtra.


22. .Duryodhana’s heart was always
wily. Always malicous, he was addicted to
deception. Although we never offended


| him, yet he always behaved treacherously


towards us.


23. We have not gained our object, nor
have they gained theirs. We have not
defeated them, nor have they defeated us.
‘The Dhartarashtras could not enjoy this
Earth, nor could they enjoy women and
music.


24. They did not listen tothe counsels -
of ministers and friends and men well rea
in the scriptures. ‘hey could not, indeed,
enjoy their rich ‘gems and well-equipped
treasury and vast territories. :


25. Burning with the hate they cherished
against us, they could not enjoy happiness
and peace. Witnessing our advancement,
Duryodhana became colorless, pale and
emaciated. Suvala’s son informed king
Dhritarashtra of this. ;


26. Like an indulgent father, Dbrita<
rashtra tolerated the evil policy of his son.


27. Forsooth, by disregarding Vidura
and the great son of Ganga, and neglecting
to restrain his wicked and covetous son
entirely under the influence of his passion,
the king has met with destruction like my
poor self, oe ma


.


$ MAHABHARATA.


28. “rorsooth; Suyodhana, having caused
tis uterine brothers to be king and having
east this old pair into burning grief, has
fallen off from shining glory.


29. Burning with the hate he bore to
us, Duryodhana was always sinful at heart.
What other highly-born kinsman could tise
such language towards kinsmen as he, wiitlt
a view to fight, actually used in the presen-
ce of Krishna?


_ 30. We also have, through Duryodha
na’s folly, been tost for ever, like suns burn-


ing everything around them with. their-


own heat.


gi. ‘Phat wicked man, that embodiment
wt enmity, was our evil star. Alas, for
Duryodhana’s deeds alone, this race of ours
dhas. been rooted out.


“32. Having killed those whom we
should never have killed, we have incurred
the blame of the world.


- 33. Having installed that wicked prince
of sinfut acts; that exterminaterof his race,
as the monarch, King Dhritarashtra is ob-
liged to grieve to-day.

34. Our heroic enemies have been killed.
We have committed sin. His wealth and
kingdom are gone. Having killed them,
our anger fas been pacified. But grief- is
overcoming me.

35. O Dhananjaya, sin is always expia-
ted ‘vy pious acts, by giving wide publicity
to it, by repentance, by almsgiving, -by
penances,, by sojourn to ‘Tirthas after
renunciation of every thing, by constant
meditation on the scriptures.


36. Of all these, he who has practised
tenunciation is belived to be incapable of
committing fresh sins,


37. The Shrutis say that he who prace
tises renunciation escapes from birth’ and
death, and obtaining the right way, that
person of contcolled mind, attains Brahma.


38. 1 shail,. therefore, O. Dhananjaya,
oto the forest, with your permission, O
scorcher of enemies, disregarding ail- the
pairs of opposites, adopting the vow of
ilence, and walking in the -way pointed out
ie knowledge.


' 39. O destroyer of foes, the Shrutis
say it, andj I myself have seen it with my
@-- ‘hat one who is addicted td worldly


SYP, Nee wer, : Net
objects ead never obtain any ‘kind of res


ligionis merit.
_ 40. Desirous of obtaining wiovidly ob-
jects, I have committed sin, which as the
Shrutis declare, begets birth and death.


I shail go to the forest, escaping from thé
wortdly fetters, freed from grief, and witha
out affection for anything.


42. Do you govern this Barth, on which
peace has been restored, and which has
been freed of all its thorns. O best of
Kuru’s race, [ do not require kingdom or
pleasure.’


. 43. Having said so, King Yudhisthira the
just stopped. His younger brother Arjuna
then addressed him as follows.


CHAPTER VIII.


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA):—Continued.


Vaishampayana said :—

1—2. ‘Like a person reluctant to fors
give an insult, the highly energetic Arjuna
of keen speech and prowess, betraying
great fierceness and licking the corners of
his mouth, said smilingly these weighty
words t=

3. *O how painful, how distressing, If
am sorry to see this great agitation of
your heart, since having performed such a
superhuman feat, you are determined to
forsake the world.


4. Having killed your enemies, and
having acquired the sovereignty of the
Earth, which has been won by observing of
the duties of your own order, why should
you give up everythigg through fickleness
of ‘heart ? . =

5. Where on Earth has a eunuch or
a procrastinating person ever acquired
sovereignty? Why then did you beside
yourself with anger, slay all the kings: of
the Eatth ?°

6. He that would lead the life of a
mendicant, cannot, by any act of his, enjoy
the good things of Earth. Shorn of pros
perity and other resources, he can never
acquite fame on Earth or sons and animals.

7. lf, O-king, abandoning: this pros4
perous kingdom, you lead the wretched life
of a mendicant, what will the world say
of you? :


8. -Why do. you say that leaving aside
all the good things of the Earth, shorn of
prosperity, and of resources, you will live
like a mendicant and a-vulgar person.


__g. You are bortt in a royal family.
Haying conquered the whole Earth, do you


“4t. Abandoning the whole of my king. | foolishty°wish to live in the forest after fors
dom, therefore, and all the worldly objects, | saking every thing ef virtue and profit?


“SHANTI PARVA,


0. In your absence, dishonest men will
‘Gespoil sacrifices. That sin will certainty.
‘contaminate you,

11. Having ‘perpetrated many wicked:
acts in a state of poverty, king Nahusha
‘spoke ill of that state and said that poverty
is for recluses.

12. To make no provision for the morrow
‘Is a practice that suits Rishis.. You know
‘this weil! ‘The'religion of ‘kings, however,
‘depénds entirely on weatth,

13. One who obs another of riches,
‘cobs him of his religion as well; Who
‘amongst us, therefore, O king, would
forgive an act of depriving us of ouc
wealth. ,


14. -It is seen that a poor man, even
when he stands ‘hard by, is accused falsely.
‘Poverty is a sin. You should not, therefore,
‘Speak high of poverty.

15. A degraded man as also a poor man,
‘© king, have both to rue their fate, 1 see
‘no difference between these two.


- 46, Wealth dike a mountain begets all
Kinds of meritorious acts.


17. From wealth originate all ‘religious
‘acts, all pleasures, and heaven itself, O
king. Without wealth, a man cannot'find
‘the very means of maintaining his tife.


18. The acts of a ‘person who, endued
with little ‘intelligence allows ‘himself to be
‘divested of wealth, are all dried up ‘like
shallow rivers in the summer, e


19, He who has wealth ‘has friends. He
who has wealth has kinsmen. He who has
wealth is considered as a sinceré man in
tthe world. He who has wealth is regarded
‘as a learned man,


_ 20, If a ‘person who has no wealth
‘desires ‘to accomplish a patticular object, he
‘meets with failure. Wealth accumulates
‘wealth, like elephants ‘capturing » (wild)
‘elephants. ; ;


21. Religious acts, pleasures, joy, cour-
age, anger, learning, and sense of dignity,
a)l-originate from wealth, O king.


22. Wealth ‘begets family prestige.
wealth multiples one’s religious merit. He
who is without wealth has neither this warld,
‘nor the next, O foremost of men. :


23. The man who has no wealth can-:
‘not celebrate religious acts, for these ori-,
ginate from wealth, like rivers from a)
mountain. os

24. He whose limbs are lean is hota
truly a Jean man, but he who is lean in ‘res-


pect of horses and kine -and servants and


‘guests is truly so,
2


” 4


25.- Judge truly, O king,-and mark the
conduct of the gods and the .Danavas. Q.
king, do the pods‘ever seek anything else _
than the destruction of their kinsmen (the
Asuras ?


26. If the’ appropriation of anotter’s


‘wealth be not regarded as tight, how, O


monarch, will kings’ practise virtue on this
Earth? Learned men have, in the Vedas,
faid down this injunction. - 6
2g. The learned man have decreed that -

kings should live, reciting every day the
three Vedas, seeking to acquire wealth, and
carefully ‘celebrating sacrifices with the
wealth thus acquired. : '


28. The gods, through civil war, have
secured footing in the celestial region,
When the very gods have won their pros~
perity through civil war, what fault can -


tiiere be in such quarrels ? eS


29-30. Verily the gods, even behave
thus. The eternal precepts of the Vedas also
appreve of it. To learn, teach, sacrifice,
and assist at others sacrifices,these are
our primary duties. The wealth that kings
appropriate from gothers, becomes the ins=
trument of theic prosperity. Wealth is
never acquired without doing some injury
to others, \


gt. it is even thus that kings-conquer
this world, flaving conquered, they are
justified to regard that wealth as theirs, just
as sons speak of the wealth of their fathers
as their own. The royal sages ‘that have
gone to heaven have described this to be the
duty of kings. nt

32. Like water flowing on every direc=
tion from a rising ocean, wealth goes
‘on all sides from the treasuries of kings.


33. This Earth formerly belonged ‘ta
king Dwilipa, Nahusha, Amvarisha, and
Mandhatri. She is now yours.


24. You should, therefore, celebrate #
great. sacrifice with enough presents of
all sorts and a sufficent quantity of the
Earth’s produce. If you do not perform
that sacrifice, O king, then the sins of this .
kingdom will visit you, _

35. Those subjects whose king petforms
a horse-sacrifice with enough presents, are
all freed from sins. and sanctified by wit»
nessing the ablutions at the end of the
sacrifice.


. In @ great sacrifice requiring liba~
tions of all kinds of flesh, Mahadeva hint-
self, poured all-crettures as sacrificial liba-
tions and then his own self. :


37. This is the ‘eternal and holy road.
JVis fruits are nevey destroyed, ‘Thisis the


te


MAHABHARATA,


reat road called Dasharatha. Abandoning , 12. Or, living alone and observing th


t,° O king, what other path would you
follow! 2” e on . ae


cael
CHAPTER IX.
{RAJADHARMANUSHASANA |

PARVA.—Continued. -
Yudhisthira said :-~

=. ke * For a little while, O Arjuna, concen-
trate your attention, thought and hearing
on the inner self. If you_hear my words
in such state of mind, you will like
them! oo -
» 2, Abandoning all earthly pleasures, I
shall follow that path which jis. trod by the
righteous! IL shall not,, for ,your sake,
follow the path pointed out by you,

» 3¢ Ifyou ask me what path is auspici-
ous which only one should follow, I shall


tell you! Jf you are not inclined to ask
me, I shall yet, unasked by you, tell you of
at. A : x :


. 4 Abandoning the pleasures “and what
men do in this world, and practising the
austerest of penances, I shall wander in the
forest, with the animals dwelling there,
living on fruits and roots! .


§. Pouring fibations on the fire at the
appointed time and performing ablutions
at morning, and evening i shal} reduce
myself by restricted diet, and clad in skins,
bear matted locks on my head.

6—7. Enduring cold, wind, and heat, as
also hunger and thirst and toil, 1 shall
emaciate my body by penances as sahc-
tioned by the scriptures. 1 shall daily
listen to the clear notes of happy birds and
animals living in ‘the forest, which please
the heart and theear, :

8. I shall enjoy the fragrance of trees
and creepers, ‘covered with flowers and
‘see various kinds of charming products


‘that ‘grow in the forest.


9. ‘I shall also see many recluses there.
shall not do the slightest harm to any
ereature, what to speak of those who live
in villages and towns ?


‘10. Leading a retired life and engaged :

in contemplation, I shall live upon ripe and:

. unripe fruits and propitiate the, departed:
manes and the gods with offerings of forest’
JSruits) and spring water and beautiful:


hymns. ; en
11. Thus leading an austere forest-life,
T shall live on, calmly awaiting the diésolu-
. tion of my bod - es


Ye


vow of silence, with my head shaved clean:
I shall live by begging each day of only
one tree, :

13. Smearing my body with ashes, and
living -in forsaken houses, or lying at the
foot of trees, 1 shall live, forsaking all
things dear or hateful.


14. Without being overgrieved, or over«
joyed, -and considering censure and ap-
plause, hope and affection, in the same light
and ~conquering the pairs of opposites, I
shall live, casting ,off all the things of the
world. :


15. Without talking with anybody, 1
shall outwardly appear as a blind and deaf
idiot, while living in contentment and de-
tiving happiness from my innerself.


16. Without doing the least harm to the
four kinds of movable and immovable
creatures; I shall deal with all creatures
equally, whether fulfilling their duties, or
guided entirely by the senses. .


. 17. J shall mot: mock at ‘any one, nor
shall I frown at any body. Governing alt
Ae senses; ] shall always put on a cheerful
ace,


18. Without asking anybody about .the
way, proceeding along any way that I may
happen to see, I shall.go on, without caring
for the country or the point of the compass
to which or towards which I may go.


19. ' Not caring where I may go, I shali
not look behind. Divesting myself of
desire and, anger, and concentrating my
look .inwards, I shall go on forsaking pride
of soul and body.


20. Nature always walks before : hence,
food and drink will somehow come.
shall not think of those pairs of opposites
that are inimical to such a life.


_ 21. 1f even a small quantity of pure food


be not available in the first house (where I
may go) I shall secure it by going to other
houses. If I cannot procure it by even such
a round, I shall go to seven houses succes
sively and fill my cravings.


22——23. When the smoke of houses wit
cease to come out, their hearth-fires having
been put out, when husking rods will cease
working, and all the inmates will have


‘taken theic food, and when mendicants and
“guests will cease to walk, 1 shall sefeet a


moment ‘for going out abegging and solicit
alms at two, three, or five houses at the
most.., I shall wander over the Earth, shorn
of all desires. :


24; Uinmoved in success and failure,
I shall earn great Sd lk I shal


‘


SHANTI


behave neither like one who is fond of life |
nor like one who is about to die. '

5, Ishall notshow any liking for life
or dislike for death. If ‘one cuts off one
arm of mine and another smears the ‘other
with sandal-paste, I shall not wish evil
to the one or good to the other.


26. Abandoning all those acts which
lead to prosperity and which one can do
in life, the only acts I shall perform will be
to open and shut my eyes and take as
much food and drink as ‘will barely keep
up of my existence.


27. Without ever being attached to


action, and always restraining the senses, |


1 shall abandon all desire and free the soul
of all impurities.


‘28. Freed from all attachments and
snapping all fetters, I shall live free as the
wind,


9 29 Being freed from affections, I shall
enjoy everlasting contenment. Through
desire, and ignorance, 1 have committed
great sins.


30. Doing both auspicious and inaus-
picious. acts here, a class of meni maintain
their wives, children, and kinsmen, all
bound to them in pelatione of cause and
effect. ; '


3%. When the ae of their life expires,
abandoing their weakened bodies,' they
take upon themselves all the effects of their
sinful acts, for none bat ttre actor is laden
with the consequences of his own acts.


32. Thus, endued with actions, creatures
come into this wheel of life that is continu-
ally turning like ‘the wheel of a car, and
coming there, they meet with their fellow-
Creatures.


33. He, however, who gives up -his
worldly concern, which is reallya passing
illusion although it looks permanent, and
which -is afflicted by birth, death, detrepi-
tude, disease, and ‘pain, is sure to enjoy
happiness,


34. Again, when the very gods drop
Gown from ‘heaven and great Rishis from
their high positions, who that knows truths
of causes (and effects) would -wish to shave
even. heavenly prosperity ?


35. Having performed various acts ac-
cording to the diverse means of royal policy,
insignificant kings, often destroya great
king through some Contrivance.


36. Meditating on these circumstances,
this nectar of wisdom has come to me.
Having attained it;:¥ desire to' get a “per-
manent,. sernsly, and . ever-abiding place '
(f. or myse If).


| all been killed by us.


PARVA,


37-
dom and acting in this wise, I shall,


if


Always (behaving). with such wis-
by .


following that fearless path of life, end this


body that is subject to birth, death,’ ‘decre-


pitude, disease, and pain,”


CHAPTER X.
(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA.)—Continued,
Bhimasena said :—
I.
unintelligent reciter of the Veda for his


recitation of those scriptures, ‘ t


2. Ifcensuring the duties of kings you
would lead an idle life, then, O foremost


of Bhacata’s race, this {destruction af the:


Dhartarashtras was perfectly useless, :
3. Does not a Kshatriya’ ‘possess forgives


“Your understanding, O king, cannot ©
perceive the truth, like that.of a foolish and


ness and compassion and pity and abstett« ‘


tiga from injury ?


4. If we knew tha at this was your inten~
tion, we would ‘ther’ have ‘never taken‘ up
arms and killed a single creature.


We would then have lived by beg~


Ae till the destruction of this body! This.


dreadful battle between the kings would
also’ have never taken’ place !'


6. The learned have declared that what.


we see is food for the strong. This mobile
and immobile world jis MODY. jis of being
enjoyed by the strong.:


7s
‘duties have said that they who stand in the


Wise men conversant with Kshatriya ;


way of, the person taking the sovereignty’


of the Earth, should be killed.


8. Committing the same fault, those
that stood as enemies of our kingdom have
Having killed them,
© Yudbishthira, righteously govern this
Earth !


9. This act of our refusing the kingdom
is like that of a person’ who having dug a
well stops in his work before obtaining wa+
ter and comes up covered with mire.


to. Or, this our act is like that of a
person who having climbed up a tall tree
and collected honey therefrom dies before
masing ite


“tt. Or, it is like thatef a person who
having set out on’ a long ‘journey comes
pi in despair without having reached | his
goal. - ae:


_ 12, Of,- it is like that of a person who
having killed all his enémies, ‘O you ‘of


Kury’s race, at last dies at his own hand,


I MAHABHARATA. _


13.‘ Or, itis like that of a person with
hunger, who having obtained food, refuses


to take it, or of a person under the influ-.


ence of passion, who having obtained a
woman reciprocating his desire refuses to
know her. :


14. We have become butts of censure,
O Bharata, because, O king, we follow you
who are of weak ypndestanding, in con-
aroun of yourself being our eldest bro-
Rher !


15. We are endued with the might of
arms; we are accomplished in knowledge
and gifted with great energy. Yet we fol-
low the words of a eunuch as if we were
entirely helpless !


316. We are the refuge of all helpless
persons, Yet, when people see us so, why
would they not say that we are entirely
powerless to acquire our objects? Think of
what I say { :


17, It has been laid down that (a life
ef ) Renunciation should be adopted, only
in times of difficulty, by kings attacked
with decrepitude or defeated by, enemies !


18. Wise men, therélore, do not praise
Renunciation as the duty of a Kshatriya.
On the other hand, the clear-sighted think
that the adoption of such a life (by a
Kshatriya) involves even the loss of virtue.


19. How can those who are bornin that
order, who follow the practices of that order,


and that have theic refuse in them, censure’


those duties? Hf indeed those duties be
censurable, then why should not the Supreme
Ordainer be blamed ? ;


20. The persons who are shorn of
prosperity and wealth and who are un
believers, have laid down this precept of the
Vedas as the truth, In reality, however,
it is néver, proper fora Kshatriya to do so.


21. ‘He who can support life by prowess,
he who can support himself by his own
exertions, does not live, but really deviates
from his duty, by following the Hfle of
Renunciation.


22. That man only is capable of leading
a solitary life of happiness in the forest who
cannot support sons and grandsons and the
deities and Rishis and guests and Pitris..


23. As the deer and boars and birds
cannot attain to heaven, even s0 those
Kshatriyas who are not shorn of prowess
cannot attain to heaven by feading. only a
forest life. They should acquire religious
merit by other means, ;


24. If, O king, anybody could secure
success from Renunciatfon, then mountains
and trees would surely obtain it.


25. These latter always lead fives of


Renunciation. They do not harm arty ore.
They do not lead a life of worfdliness and
are all Brahmacharins, :


26. Hf it be the truth that a person’s
suecess depends upon his owr torture im
life and not upon that of others, then you
should take to action. Hettatis shorn of
action can never attain suceess. :


-27. Hf they who fill only their own
stomachs could achieve success, then alk
aquatic creatures would get it, for these
have none else to support save their owr
selves.


28. Behold, the world moves on, with
every creature on it acting according to its
nature. therefore, one should act. The
man shorn of action can never attain
success,


=_—e


CHAPTER. XJ.


{RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continued. <


Arjuna said :—

1, The old history of the discourse
between eertain ascetics and Shakra, is
cited in this connection, O foremost of.
Bharata’s race !


2. Certain little-witted well-born Brahe’
mana youths, without attaining manhood,
forsaking their homes, came to the woods
for leading a forest lite.


3. Considering that to be virtue, those
youths possessing sufficient resources de-.
sired to live as Brahmacharins, “having
abandoned their brothers and fathers. -
i: so happened that Indra felt pity for
them.


4. .Assuming the form of a golden bird,
Indra addressed them, saying,—What is
done by persons who eat the residue of a
Sacrifice is the most difficult of acts that
men can perform.


5. Such an act is productive of great
merit. The lives of such men are worthy of
every praise. Having attained the object
of life, those vittuous men, obtained the
highest end! ~

6. Hearing these words, the Rishis
said,—Lo, this bird praises those who live
upon thé remnants of Sacrifices! He
mentions this to us, for we live upon such
remnants !


The bird then said :— :
7-. The bird then said,-[ do n ot praise
you! . You are covered with mire and very


SHANTI PARVA,


impure! Piving upon offats, you are wicks
ed! Ye are not persons living upon the
remnants of Sacrifice !— : “


The Rishis said :—

8. We consider this course of life to be
highly blessed! Tellus, O bird, what is
for our well-being! Your words fill us
with great faith !

The bird said :—


g. If-by acting against your better selves,


you do not refuse me your faith, then I.


shall tell you true and beneficial words.


The Rishis said :—~


10. We shall hear words, O sire, for
you know the different paths! O you of
righteous soul, we desire also to obey your
behests. Instruct us now !


The bird said :~

11, Among quadrupeds the cow is the
foremost. Of metals, gold is the foremost.
Of words, Mantras, and of human beings,
Brahmanas, are the foremost.


12, These Mantras regulate all the rites
of a Brahmana’s life, beginning with those
consequent upon birth and the period after
it, and ending with those consequent on
death and the obsequial rites.


13- These Vedic rites constitute his
heaven, path, and best of sacrifices, If it
were otherwise, how could the acts of persons
seeking of heaven become successful through
Mantras ? ‘


14. He who, in this world, worships his
self, knowing it to be a deity of a particular
kind, attains to success consistent with a
natuce of that particular deity. Persons
dying in two fortnights go tothe Sun, the
Moon, or the Stars.


15. These three kinds of success, de-
pendent upon actien, are sought by every
creature, ‘Fhe life of a householder is very
superior and sacred and is called the tield
of success.


16. What path do those men follow


that censure action? Foolish and poor as
they are they incur sin.


17.: And since those little-witted men
live by abandonin
the gods, of the Rishis, and of Brahma,
therefore, they attain to paths disapproved
of by the Shrutis,


18, There is a verse in the Mantras
which says,—[Ye saerificer, perform -the
sacrifice with gifts of costly things, I will
give you the happiness represented by sons,
animals, and heaven.]—To live, therefore,


in aceordanee with the ordinances ts said to.


the eternal ‘paths - of |


be the highest form of asceticism. There-
fere, ye should perform -sacrifices and
penances in the shape of gifts,

1g. The proper performance of these
eternal duties, vg., the worship of the gods,
the study of the Vedas, and the grati-
fication of the Pitris, as alse respectful
services to the pteceptor,—is the -austerest
of penances, »

20. By practising such highly difficult -
pean: the gods have obtained: the
ighest glory and power. I, therfore, ‘ask
eae satisfy the heavy duties of a house~
holder,


21, Forsooth penances are the foremost
of all things and are the root of all crea-'
tures.. Asceticism, is attainable by leadin
the life of a househelder, upon which
depends everything. ‘

22-23. After duly distributing the food
merning and evening among kinsmen, they
who eat the residue attain to the ends that.
are highly difficult of attainment. - ;


24. They are called eaters of the residue
of feasts who eat after having fed guests
and gods and Risbis and kinsmen..


25. Therefore, those persons who observe.
their own duties, who practise excellent
vows and are truthful in speech, are greatl ;
respected in the world, with their own fait
greatly strengthened, :

26. Shorn pride, those achievers of the:
most difficult feats attain to heaven and live
for ever in the regions of Shakra !-.


Arjuna continued :-—
27. Hearing these beneficial and righte.
ous words, those ascetics abandoned the .
religion of Renuncition, saying,—There is,
nothing in it,—and began to live like house«

holders. aa
28. Therefore, O you, who are conver~,


sant with righteousness, availing -of that
eternal wisdom, rule the wide world, O
monarch, that is now shorn. of foes.”


ee
CHAPTER XII.


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA .-
PARVA).—Continued, s
Vaisham payana said:—
12. “Hearing these words of Arjuna,


.O chastiser of foes, the mighty-armed and’ -


broad chested, Nakula, temperate in:speech
and possessed of great wisdom, with coppers:
colored face, looked at the king, that fore-:
mest @f all righteous persons; and. spoke: .


4


these words, assailing his brother’s heart
{ with reason ). :


Nakula said:— .

3. Even the gods had placed their fires
in the reign calted Vishakha-yupa. Know,
therefore, O king, that the gods themselves
depend upon the fruits of action £


4. Qbserving the Vedic ordiances ( of
the Creator as declared in the Vedas),
the Piteis, who support (by rain) the lives
ef .even all disbelievers, are, O king,
engaged in action..

5—6. They are, indeed, consummate
“atheists who-do not aceept the injunction of
the Vedas (which incylcate action). By
following Vedic injunctions in all his acts,
the person . that is feed in the Vedas,
attains, O Bharata, tothe highest region
of haaven bythe way .of the deities. All
persons acquainted with Vedas have dec-
laced the life of a ‘householder to bé su-
perior ¢o all the (other) modes of life.


. _ 728 . O. king, the person who in sacrifi-
ces gives away his fairly acquired wealth to
“these Brahmanas who are well conversant
with the Vedas, and contracts his soul, is, O
monarch, regarded as the true Renouncer.
_g. He, however, who, disregarding the
life of a householder, the source of much,
happiness, adepts the next mode of life,


’


Renunciation, O monarch, is Ra enouneer |


possessed by the quality of darkness, |


to. “Fhat man who is bhonseless, who
rpves over the world like a mendicant who
has the foot of a tree for his refuge, who
“observes.the vow of silence, never cooks for
himself, and tries to-control his senses, is,
» © Partha, 4 Renouncer observing the vow
of mendicancy. ;


18,' ‘Phat Brahmana who, disregarding
anger and joy, and especially deceitfuliress.
always devotes his time to the study of the
Vedas, tS a Renouncer observing the vow of


mendicancy.


12, The four different modes of life were
at one time weighed in the balance. The
wise have said, O kitg, ‘fhat when the life
of a householder, was placed on one scéale,
it required the three others.to:balance it,


13. Marking the result of this examina-
tion by. scales, O Partha, and seeing: Jur-
ther, O Bharata, that the life ofa house-
holder alone contained both heaven and


- pleasure, the great Rishis and the persons’


convesrant with the ways of the world fol-
-igwed it, | -  € 2 &

114. .He, therefore,OQ foremost of Bha-.
rata’s race, who follows. this :mode of life,


" thinking it to be his duty and abandoning.


all. desice for fruit, isa tcue Renouncer, and


MAHABHARATA,


not that man whe having clouded imder-
standing goes to the forest abandoning
tome.

15. A person, again, who, putting om
the external marks of righteousness, fails to
conquer his desires even while living in the
forest, is hound fby Death with his deadly
fetters round the neck.


16. Acts which are the outcome of vanity
product no fruit. Those acts, however, O
monarch, which are the outcome of the
spirit of Renunciation, always bear abund-
_ant fruits.

17. ‘Franquility, setf-restraint, fortitude,
truth, purity, simplicity, sacrifices, per-
severance, and righteousness,—these are
always the virtues recommended by the
Rishis, é

18. The householder performs acts in«
tended for Pitris, gods, and guests, this-
mode of life alone, O monarch, contains
the threefold objects. ~

19. The Renouncer that rigidly follows
this mode of life, in which one is free to do
all acts, has not to meet ruin either here or
hereafter. ak

20. ‘The holy .Lord’ of all creatures, of
righteous soul, created creatures with the
purpase. that they would worship him by
sacrifices with profuse presents. - ;

at. -Creepers, trees, deciduous herbs,
and clean animals, and clarified butter,
were ceeated as materials of sacrifice. -


‘22. To a householder the petformance
of sacrifice is fraught with impediments-
For this, that mode of life is described as
exceedingly difficult and unattainable.

23. The ‘householders, who, possessed’
of wealth and corn and animals, do not
_berforny: sacrifices commit, O king, eternab
‘sin, .

-24. Amofigst Rishis, there are some who
consider the study of the Vedas to be a
sacrifice ; and some who consider contem<
plation to» be a great sacrifice which they
perform in their minds. »


25. The very gods, O king, seek the
companjonship of such a holy person, who
‘on account of his following such a way whicly
,consists in:the conéentration of the mind,
has become equal to Brahma. :


26. By refusing to spend in Sacrifice the
various, kinds of wealth which you -have
eollected from your enemies, you are only
displaying your,want of faith!

27.:-1 -have. never seen, O .monarch,@
‘king living as a householder renouncing
‘his wealth in any other way except‘in the

Fajoroys. the Ashwamedha, and other
+ kinds-of Sacrifies | ue :


SHANTI


3B. Like Shakré, (he king of the gods,
© sire, perform those other sacrifices that
are lauded by the Brahmanas! * :


29.. The king, through whose negligence
the subjects are plundered by robbers, and
who does not offer protection to those
whom he is called upon to rule is said to be
the personated Kali.

30-31. If, without giving away horses
and kine, and female slaves and elephants
adorned with trappings, and villages, and
populous countries, and fields, and houses,
to Brahmanas, we retire into the forest with
hearts not overflowing with friendly feelings
towards kinsmen,*even we shall be, O king,
like so many Kali Kshatriyas.

32. Kshatriyas who de not ‘practise
charity and give protection -(to others ),
commit sin. - Woe to them hereafter and
and not bliss. Lo.

33-34. If, O lotd, without celebrating
great sacrifices and the rites in honor of your
deceased manes, and if, without bathing in
sacred waters, 'you lead the life of a mendi+
cant, you will then meet with destruction


dike a small cloud, saperated from a mass |
and driven by the winds. -You will. then |


falloff from both worlds and will be born in
the Pishacha order. ©


35. -A person becomes a true Renouncer
by casting off internal and external ,attach-


ments, and not simply by leaving home for.


‘dwelling in the forest.


36. A Bratimana who follows all the or-
‘dianees in which there are no. obstacles,
does not fall off from this or the other world.

37. Observing the’ duties of ‘one’s own or-
der, respected by the ancients and practised


ty the.best of: men,--who is there, O Par--


tha, that would grieve, O king, for having


Allied in battle his enemies elated with pros- |
killing the forces of the.


-perity, like Shakra
aityas ? a i
38. Having, while observing Kshatriya:

duties, subjugated tke world by the help of

‘your prowess, and having made presents

unto persons Oonversant with the Vedas,

_you can, O king, go to regions higher than
eaven itself. You should not, O Partha,

indulge in grief.’


reo
e


CHAPTER XIII, .
(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
‘PARVA).—Continued.’ ——-
‘Sahadeva said :— j
1. “By ‘rendinéing all-extérnal objects
gnly, O Bharata, one does not obtain ‘suc-


«


a


cess. Even in the ‘casting éf of mental
attachments, the attainment of, success is
doubtful. :


2. May. our enemies have that religious
merit and that happiness which fall to the
share of him, who has relinquished externat
objects, bit whose. mind ,still internally
covets them. :

3. "On the -other hand, may our friends
enjoy that religious merit and happiness
which fall to him, who governs the Earth,
having shaken off all internal attachments,,

4. The word mama (mine), consisting
of two letters, is veritable Death; while the
opposite word za-mama (not mine ) consis4
ting of three letters, is eternal Brahma.

O King, entering’ invisibly into every
sou), ‘Brahma and Death, forsooth, eause
all creatures to act. : ;


PARVA.


6. If this being, O Bharata, which is
called Soul, is not subject to destruction,
then by destroying the bodies of creatures
one cannot be guilty of murder.


7. If, on, the other hand, the soul and the
bedy are born or killed together, so that
when the body is destroyed the soul also i&
cestroyed, then the celigious rites and acts


would be useless. ‘


8. Therefore, driving away all misgi+
vings regarding the ‘immortality ‘of .the :
soul, the intelligient;may ‘eshoutd adopt the
path of the righteous of old and older
times. : -


g. The life of that king is certainly use-
less who having acquried the entite Earth
‘with her mobile and and imniobile ‘creatus
res, does not enjoy her. — ne : ‘


m . f

to. Regarding the man ‘again ‘who
dwells in the forest. upon -wild ‘fruits and
roots, but whose attachment to earthly .ob+
jects has not ceased, such a one, O king,
lives within the jaws of Death, =


tr. Know,'O ‘Bharata, the hearts ‘and
‘the bodies of all creatures:to be but mani- |
‘festations of your-own. «They who regard
afl creatures as their own selves escape
from the great fear of Death..  - ,


- ee 7 z 2 arse ee a ad
12. You are my father, you are my-proe
tector, you are my brother, and you m
senior and precéptor. You'should, titere-
fore, forgivé these'incoherent utterances in
‘sorrow of a woestricken person, . tt


13. True or false, what I have said, O


‘| sing, ‘has been'said' from a ‘due ‘respect for


you, O best of Bharatas !”
re |


its +


| aed


——


CHAPTER XIV,


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
{ PARVA).—Continued,


Vaishampayana said :—

s. “When after listening to his brothers
who were telling these truths of the Vedas,
Kunti’s son king Yudhisthira the just re-
mained silent. .


a—g. That foremost of nobly bern
women, tis., Draupadi, of large eyes and
great beauty, O king, said these words unto
that foremost of kings seated in the midst
of his*brothers who were like many lions
and tigers, and like the leader of an
elephantine ‘herd in the midst of a herd
of elephants.


4—8. Always expecting respectful love
from afl her husbands but especially from
Vudhisthira, she was always treated with
love and indulgence by the king. Conver-
sant with duties and always satisfying
them, thatjlady of large hips, eyeing her
husband, drew his attention in soothing and
weet words, and said as follows :—


Draupadi said :—

6. ‘These your brothers, O Partha, are
erying and drying their tongues like Chata-
kas, but you do not please them.


7. Oking, cheer up these your brothers,

-who are like infuriate elephants (in prowess),

with proper words,—these heroes who have
always suffered miseries !


8. Why, O king, while living on the
bank of the Dwaita lake, did you say to these
your brothers then living with you, and
suffering from cold and wind and sun, these
words, vie. engaging in battle to win
victory, we will kill Duryodhana and enjoy
the Earth that is capable of


granting every
desire. ;


g—10. Depriving great car-wartiors of
their cars and killing huge elephants, and
covering the battle-field with the bodies of
car-warriors and horsemen and horses, O
chastiser of foes, you will celebrate great
sacrifices of various kinds with profuse
presents! All these sufferings of a life
of exile in the foregt will then end in
happiness{)* : oe


11, O foremost of the virtuous, having
yourself said these words to your brothers
then, why, O hero, do you, depress our
hearts now? a:


..12, Aeunuch can never enjoy wealth.
A*enunch can never have children, as there
can be ne fish ina mud (destitute of
water.)


MAHABHARATA.


13 A Kshatriya without the rod af
chastisement can never pecspet Without
the rod of chastisement a Kshatriya can
Never enfoy the Earth. The subjects of a
‘king who has no rod of chastisement can
never enjoy happiness!


14. Love for allcreatures, charity, study
of the Vedas, penances,—are the duties of
a Brahmana and not of a King, O best of
kings!

1%. Stppressing the wicked, imaititaining
the honest, and never retreating from battle
are the highest duties of kings!


16. He is the master of duties in whom
reside forgiveness and anger, giving and
taking, terror and fearlessness, and chas«
tisement and reward!


17. It was tot by study, or gift, o¢
mendicancy, that you have acquired the
Earth ?


18. That array of the enemy, O hero,
ready to attack you with all its might, con-
sisting of elephants and horses and cars,
protected by Drona and Karna and Ash-
wathaman and Kripa, has been defeated
and killed by you, O hero. I[t is for this


‘that I request you to enjoy the Barth.


tg. (Formerly), O powerful one, you had,
O king, governed with might, the region
called Jambu, O foremost of men, abound«
ing with populous districts !

20. You had also, O king, governed
with might that other region called


._Kraunchadwipa situate on the west of


the great Meru and equal to Jambudwipa
itself !


21. Youhad govetned with might, O
king, that other region called Shakadwipa
on the east of the great Meru and eqyal to
Kraunchadwipa itself !


22. The region called Bhadrashwa, on
the north of the great Meru and equal to
Shakadwipa was also governed by you, O
foremost of men ! 3 ‘


23. You had even entered the ocean and
governed with might other regions, too, O
hero, and the very islands encircled by the
sea and coritaining many pgpulous dis+
tricts. : : os


24. Having, O Bharata, made such
wonderful conquests, and having obtained
(through them) the worship of the Brah-
manas, how is it that your mind is not sa+
tisfied. Cre a:


25. Seeing these brothers of yours before
you, O Bharata,—these heroes endued with
might and resembling bulls or infuritate
elephants,—why do you not speak to them


&


sweet words,


€


SHANTI


-


you are capable of withstanding enemies.
All of you are capable of scorching your
enemies. If only one of you had become my
husband, my happiness would even then
hhave been very considerable.


27. What need [ say then, O foremost
of men, when all of you, five in number, are
my husbands (and take care of me) like
the five senses working up the body.


28. The words of my mother-in-law who
is endued with great knowledge and fore-
sight, cannot be untrue. She said,—O
princess of Panchala, Yudhishthira will al-
ways keep you in happiness, O excellent
tady. :

2g. Having killed many thousands of
powerful kings, [ see, @ monarch, that
through your folly you are about to make
such an attachment futile.


30. They whose eldest brother runs mad,
have all to follow him like mad men, For
your madness, O king, all the Pandavas,
are about to become mad. -


gt. {f, O King, these your brothers had
been sane, they would then have locked
you up with all unbelievers (in a prison)
and taken charge of the government of the
Earth. Lhe man who tor feeble intellect
acts thus never succeeds ia winning
prosperity. ,

32. ‘The man who behaves like a mad,
man should be subjected to medical treat-
ment by the aid of incense and collyrium,
of drugs applied through the nese, and of
Other medicaments.


33- O best of the Bharatas, [ am the
worst of all females, since i wish to live on
even thougli [ am deprived of my children.


34. You should not disregard the words
Spoxen by me and by these brothers of
yours who are trying thus to dissuade you.
indeed, abandoning the whole Earth, you
are inviting adversity and danger to assail
you.

35. You appear. in splendour now, O
monarch, even as those two foremost of
kinys, “gi¢.,° Mandhatri and Amvarisha,
respected by all the kings, did in former
days.


36. ‘Protecting your subjects righteous-
jy, rule over the goddess Earth with her
‘mountains and forests and islands. Do not,
O king, become disspirited, :

37. Worship the gods ‘with various’
sacrifices. Fight your foes? Present wealth,
clothes and other objects of enjoyment
to the Brahmanas, O foremost of kings !”


omnet


26. All of you are like celestials, All of f


PARVA, IZ


_ CHAPTER XV.


RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continued.


Vaishampayana said :—~


1. “Hearing these words of Yajna-
sena’s daughter, Arjuna once more spoke,
showing every respect for his mighty-rarmed
and ever iltustrious eldest brother,


Arjuna said :—

2. (A king with) the rod of chastise-
ment sways all subjects and protects them.
‘The rod of chastisement is awake when all
élse is under sleep. For this, the wise
have designated the rod of chastisement as
Righteousness itself.


. The rod of chastisement protects
Religion and Profit. It protects Pleasure
also, O king! ‘For this, the red of chastisee
pth is identified with the three-fold objects
of life.


4. Corn and riches are both protected
by the rod of chastisement. Knowing this,
O learned king, take up the rod of chas-
tisement and follow the ways of the world !


5. One class of wicked men refrain from
committing sins through feac ef the rod of
chastisement in, the king’s hands. Another
section desist trom similar acts out of fear
of Yama’s red, and another trom fear of
the next world. ot


6. Another class of persons refrain from
committing sinful acts through fear of so-
ciety. Thus, U king, in this world, everys
thing depends on the rod of chastisement.


7. There are persons who are checked
by only the rod of chastisement from devour~,
ing one another. If the rod of chastise-
ment did not protect people, they would |
have been immersed in the darkness of hell.


8. .The rod of chastisement ( Yanda }
has been so designated by the wise, because
it governs the ungovernable and putishes
the wicked. !


g. The chastisement should be meted ta’
the Brahmanas by words only; to the.
Kshatriyas, by giving them only that much
of food as would § suffice for the up-keep of
tife; to the Vaishyas, by the imposition of
fines and forfeitures of property, while for
the Shudras there is no punishment. t

1o. For compelling men to stick (to their .
duties) and for the>protection of property,
punitive laws, Oking, have been establish-
ed in the world.


11. ‘The subjects never forget their


} duties, where Chastisemmen, of dark comx*


18


plexion and red -eyes, stand ready (to
gtapple with every offender) and the king
is of righteous vision.


12. The Brahmacharin and the house-
holder, the hermit and the religious mendi-
cant, all follow. their respective duties
through fear of chastisement only.


13. He that is without any fear, O king,
uever celebrates a sacrifice. He that is
without fear never gives away.
that is without any fear never desires to
satisfy any engagement or cont: act


14. ‘Without cutting the vital parts of
others, without performing. the most diffi-
cutt deeds, and without killing creatures
like a fisherman (slaying fish), no person
cah acquire preat prosperiety.

15. Without slaughter no man has been
able to acquire fame in this world ot wealth
or: subjects. Indra himself, by killing
Vritra, became the great Indra,


16, "Those amongst the: gods that are
giyen to killing others are worshipped
much more by men. Rudra, Skanda,
Shakra, Agni, Varuna, are all destroyers. .


#7, Kala and Mrityn. and Vayu and
Kuvera and Surya, the Vasus, the Maruts,
the Saddhyas and the Vishwadevas, O
Bharata. are all destroyers. -


18. Humiliated by their power, alt
pent bow to these gods, but not to
rahman or Dhatri or Pushan at any
time, .


19. Only’ a few noble-minded men
worship in all their acts those among the
gods who treat all creatures equally and
who are self-restrained and peaceful.


20, I donot sée any suéti creature ‘in
this world that supports life without doing
any act of injury to others. Animals live


tipon animals, the stronger upon the
weaker.
‘21. The mungoose eats up mice; the


cat eats up the mungoose ; the dog eats up
the cat; the dog again is devoured by the
spotted leopard.


22. ‘Behold, all things again are eaten
up by the Destroyer when he comes! This
mobile and immobile universe is food for
living creatures.


- 23. This has been ordained by the
celestials, The learned man, therefore, is
never stupefied at it. You should, O great
king, become what you are by birth!


-24. Onlythe foolish (Kshatriyas) con-
trolling anger and joy, dwell in. the woods.
The very ascetics cannot maintain their
lives without killing creatures,


‘The man.


MAHABHARATA. -


. 25. Innumerable creatures live in water,
on earth, and in fruits. [tis not true that |
one does not kill them. What greater duty
is there than supporting one’s life ?


26. There are many creatures that are
so minute that their existence is not percep-


tible, “fhe falling of: the eyelids even kills
them,
27. There ate men who controlling


anger and pride love like ascetics and
abandoning villages and towns repair to
the forests. Coming there, those men be
Gome.-so stupefied that they live like house
holders again. :


28. Others living like householders and
tilling the soil,uprooting herbs, cutting -off
trees and killing birds ‘and ‘animals cele-
brate sacrifices and at last attain to
heaven... .


29. O son of Kunti, fam sure that the
acts of all creatures become successful cnly
when the policy of chastisement is properly
applied.


30. If chastisement were done away
with in this world, creatures would soon be
destroyed. Like fishes in the water,
stronger animals devour the weaker,


30. Formerly Brahman himself, said that
chastisement, properly applied, maintains
creatures. Behold, the very fires, when
put out, blaze up agdin, in fright, when
blown! ‘This is owing to the fear of force.


gi. If there were no chastisement in
the world differentiating the good from the
evil, the whole world wonld have been
covered with sheer darkness and all things
would have been unsettled.


33. By chastisement the violators of
laws, the atheists and ecoffers of the Vedas,
soon become disposed to observe.rules and
regulations,


34; Every one in this world is kept all
right by chastisement. A person by nature
pure and pious is rare. In fear of chastise
ment, man becomes disposed to observe
rules and restrictions.


. Chastisement was introduced by the
Creator himself-for protecting Religion and
Profit, for the happiness of all the four
orders, and for making them pious and
humble.


36. Ifthere had been no fear of chastisé-
ment, then ravens and beasts of prev’
would have devoured all other animale and
men and the clarified butter intended for
sacrifices,


37. If chastisement did not keep up and
protect (the world), then no body would
have read the Vedas, nobody would have


r


SHANTI


milked a milch cow, and no maiden would
have married.


38. If chastisement did not uphold and
protect, then destruction and confusion
would have prevailed everywhere and all
restrictions would have disappeared, aud
the idea of property would have gone away.


39. If chastisement did not uphold and
protect, people could never duly celebrate
annual sacrifices with profuse presents.


40. If chastisement did not uphold and
protect, no one would observe the duties
of his own order as sanctioned (in the
scriptures}, and no one would have succeed-
ed in gaining knowledge.


41. If chastisement did not reign supreme,
neither camels, nor oxen, nor horses, nor
mules, nor asses, would, even if yoked
thereto, would carry cars and carriages,


42. All creatures depend upon chastise-
ment. The learned, therefore, declare
that chastisement is the root of all things.
Upon chastisement rests the heaven that
people seek, and upon it rests this world
also,


43. No sin, no falsehoo', and no wicked-
ness, is to be seen there where foe-destroy-
ing chastisement is properly used.

44. If the rod of chastisemet be tot
taken up, the dog will lick the sacrificial
butter.” {f that rod were not raised up,. the
crow also would take away the first (sacri-
ficial) offering. scent ;

45. Fairly or unfairly, this kingdom has
now been gained by us. Our duty now is
to give up gricf. Do you, therefore, enjoy
it aud celebrate sacrifices }


46. Living with their dear wives the
lucky men, eat good food, weir. good: clo-
thes, and cheerfully acquire viitue.

47. Forsoooth, all our acts, depend on
wealth; that wealth again depends on chas-
tisement. Mark, therefore, the utility of
chastisement ! Se


48. Duties have been Jaid down for main-
taining the various relations. of the
world, There are two things here, vis,
abstention from injury and injury done with
righteous motives, Of these two, that
which brings in righteousness jis’ pre-
ferrable.,

49, There is no act.that is entirely pure,
nor any that. is entitely simple. In all acts,
right or wrong, something: of both prevaits..


: §0.. Animals. are’ castrated, and their


horus are gutoff,, They are then compelled/)


lo carry weights, are tethered, and beaten,


51. In this world that is unsubstantialfull
of abuses and painful, O king, do you #rac-


PARVA., 1g
tise the old customs of men, following the
rules and examples quoted above. ;

52. Celebrate sacrifices, distribute alms,
pretect your subjects, and practise rigtt-
eousness. Kiil your enemies, O son of
Kunti, and protect your friends.


53- Be not disspirited, O king, while .
killing enemies! He that does it, O Bha-
cata, does not commit the slightest sin! 7

54+ He who takes up: a weapon and
kills an armed enemy advancing against.
him, does wot incur the sin of killing a
man, for itis the anger of the advancing, |
enemy that excites the anger of the des-
troyer.

. The soul of every creature cannot: be
killed: When the soul cannot be’ killed
how then can one-be killed by another ?


56. As.a person enters-a new house, so
does a creature put on successive bodies,


57. Leaving behind decrepit bodies, a
creature acquires new forms. People gifted
with true insight consider this change as,
death.” .


CHAPTER XV...


(RAJADHARMANUSHAS/NA
PARVA).—=Continueg


Vaishampayana said :— oS
_ ts “After Arjuna had dfe the highly
wrathful and energetic BhiAasena, collect«
ing all his patience, said sfese words to: his:
eldest brother :—~+


2. ‘You are, O ki
duties. “Phere is n King unknown to you.
We always wish to/imitate your cdiduct,
but, alas, we canyét do it. _

3 I had wished not to say anything, ,
Excited, howevér, by great grief Lam com-
pelled to say something. Listen to these
words of mise, O king. ;

4. Everything has been imperilled by
the bewilderment of your faculties, and our. ,
selves are being made disspirited and
weak ns
rik How is it that you who are’ the king’
f


of dhe world, you who are the master of all
branches of knowledge, allow’ your under-:
standing to be clouded, with depression like
a coward ? ie ;
6. The fair and unfair paths of the’
world are known’ to you, Everything
belonging either to the future or the


present is known to you; O- powerful one,


20


7. When such in the case, O king, I will.
point out, O king, the reasons in favor of
your assuming sovereignty. Listen to me
with rapt attention. ;


9. There are two sorts of diseases, aiz.,
physical and mental. . Each originates from
the other. None of them exists indepen-
dently.


9- Forsooth, mental diseases originate
from ‘physical ones. Likewise’ physical
diseases originate from mental ones. ‘This
is the truth.


io. He who bewails for past physical
or mental afflictions, reaps affliction from
afflictions and suffers double afflictions.


tr. Cold, heat, and winds,—are the
three essentials of the body. Their harmoni-
ous existence indicates good health.


12. Incase of one of the three prevailing
over the rest, remedies have been prescribed.
.. Cold is checked by heat, and heat is check-
ved by cold.


‘43. Goodness, darkness, and ignorance
Ny the three qualities of the mind. The
yonious existence of these three is the
vo (mental) healtlr,

\IE one of these reigns supreme over
’ remedies have been laid down.
secked by joy, and joy is checked
\vine, living in the present enjoy-
‘ness, wishes to recollect his
Another, suffering in the


"shes to recollect his past
oer were never sorry


past miseri
present woe,
happiness. Y.
in grief or glad


happiness: You should’
not, therefore, u


: our memory for be-
coming sad during\imes of happiness, or
glad during times &* miseries. It seems
that Destiny is Omnikotent, Or, if
your nature, which aitjcts you, why do
you not then remember &-¢ sight you saw
before, vie., the scanti.,.clad Krishna
dragged, while in her sea:4n, before the
assembly ? ys .


19. Why do you not remem er our -ex-
plusion from the (Kuru) city an@ our exile
(into the forest clad in deer-skin§y. ag also
our, living in the great forests? = +,


20. hy have you forgotten thé woes
inflicted;by Jatasura, the battle with Thj-
trasena, and the miseries suffered at je
hands of the Sindhu king ? ; aN:


zt. Why have you forgotten the prins
cess Draupadi kicked by Kichaka while
we were living in concealment ?


22. A dreadful battle, O chastiser of
foes, like that which you have fought with


Bhishma and Drona is now before you, |


it be-


MAHABHARATA. ,


to be fought, (however) with your mind
alone.


23. Indeed, a battle is now before you
in which there is no necessity of arrows,
friends, of relatives and kinsmen, but
which will have to be fought with. your
mind only.

24. If you expire before conquering in
this battle, then, assuming another body,
you shall have to fight these very enemies
again.

25. Therefore, fight that battle this very
day, O foremost of Bharata’s race, not
cating for your body, and helped by your
own acts, conquer the enemy of your mind. |
_ 26. If you cannot win that battle what
will be your condition? On the other hand,
by acquiring victory in it, O monarch,
you shali have attained the great end of
life, ‘


27. Applying your intellect to this, and
determining the right and the wrong paths
of creatures, follow the course of your
fore-fathers ‘and govern properly your
kingdom. — 4 ;

28. By good fuck, O king, the sinful
Duryodhana has been killed with all his fol-
lowers. By good fuck, you too, like Drau-
padi’s locks, have regained your normal
position, :

29. Celebrate with due rites and enough
presents the horse-sacrifice. We are your
servants, O son of Pritha, as also the highly
energetic Vasudeva.’ ” ?


ee


CHAPTER XVII. |


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continued. ;


Yudhisthira said :-—


1—2. “Visited by the sins of discontent,
heedlessness, attachment to earthly ob-
jects, the absence of tranquility, power,
folly, vanity, and anxiety, O Bhima, you
covet sovereignty, Freed from desire, overs
coming joy and grief and acquiring tran-
quility, try to be happy. .


That matchless king who will. govern
this unbounded Earth, will have but one
stomach. Why do you then speak highly.
of this course of life? :


_ 4. One's desires, O foremost of Bharata’s
‘ace, cannot be satisfied in a day, or in
Many months. Desire, which cannot be


Sal\sfied, is not satisfied in one’s whole
life.\ ‘


SHANTI PARVA.


5. Fire, when fed with fuel, is lig) tel
up; Wher net so fed, it is put out. Vo
you, therefore, put out with little food the
five in your stomach when it appears. |


6. He who is shorn of wisdom seeks
much food for his stomach. Govern your-
stomach first. (After conquering the Death,
you will acquire what is for your perma-
nent good,


7. You speak highly of yous worldly
desires and enjoyments and _ prosperity.
But those who have renounced all enjoy-
ments and reduced their bodies by penances
obtain blissful regions.


.8. The acquisition and preservation of
kingdom is attended with both fair and
foul means. ‘The desire for them is in you.
Free yourself, however, from your great
burdens, and practise Renunciation.


9. The tiger, for filling one stomach
of his, kills many animals. Other weak
animals moved by covetousness live upon
the tiger’s prey.

1o. If kings, accepting worldly possess-
ions, practise Renunciation, they can ne-
ver acquire contenment. Mark the loss of
your understanding.


11. ‘hey, however, who live no leaves of
trees, or uSe two Stones only at their teeth
alone for husking their grain, or live upon
water only or air alone, can conquer hell.


12. Of the two, the king who rules this
wide unbounded Earth, and the person who
regards gold and pebbles in the same light,
the latter is said to have attained the object
of his life and not the former. ¢


13. Relying, therefore, upon that which
is the eternal source of joy both here and
hereafter, leave off all actions and attach-
ment thereto, ;


.14. They who have given up desire and

enjoyment have never to grieve. You,
however, grieve for enjoyments. Aban-
doning desire and enjoyment, you may.
succeed in freeing yourself from false
Speech. -


15. There are but two well-known roads
(for us), vis., the road of the Pitris and


21


‘18. A verse was sung (of old) by Jana-
ka who was liberated from the pairs of op-
posites, from desire and enjoyments, and
observed the religion of Moksha.


19. ‘The verse is,—My wealth is bound-'
less. yet I have nothing. If the whole of


| Mithila were burnt to ashes, nothing of


mine will be burnt.


20. As a person from the summit of'
a hill looks dew upon men on the plain
below, so he that has got up on the top of:
the edifice of knowledge, sees people griev-
ing for things which are not worth mourning
for. He, however, who is of foolish under.
standing, does not mark this.


2t. Hewho, really sees all visible things,
is said-to have eyes and understanding.
The faculty of understanding is known as
such, because of the knowledge and come.
prehension it gives of unknown and ins
comprehensible things. :


22.. He who understands the sayings of
persons who are learned, who are of purifi-’
ed souls, and who have attained toa state
of Brahma, secures great honors. :


.23. When a person regards creatures of
innumerable varieties to be all of one and’
the same and to be but various emanations
of the same essence, he is then said to have’
attained Brahma. ,


24. Those who have acquired this high
state of culture attain to that supreme and
blissful end, and nat they who have not ac-
quired knowledge, or they who are of weak.
understanding, or they who are bereft of
understanding, or they who do ‘not practise
penances. Indeed, everything rest on the:
understanding.”’


—oo


CHAPTER XVIII.


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA.
PARVA.)—Continued,
Vaishampayana said :—


1-2. “When after saying these words,


that of the celestials. ‘They who celebrate | Yudhishthira became silent, Arjuna, pain-


sacrifices go by the Pitri-path, while they
who want salvation, go by the celestial path,


16. By penances, by Brahmacharyya,
by study, the great Rishis, casting off their
bedies, go to regions which are above the
power of Death.

-17, Worldly enjoyments are-called fet-
ters. hey have also been called Action.
Freed from the sinful fetters of action, one
attains to the highest end.


j ed by that speech of the king, and burning


with sotrow and grief, once more said to
his eldest brother,-—‘ People recite this old
history, O Bharata, about the discouse’
between the king of the Videhas and his:
queen.

3- Itis the accoun? of the words which
the grief-stricken wife of the king of the
Videhas had said to her lord when the


.Jatter, leaving his kingdom, had resolved


to live like a mendicant. ne


22

4. Leaving off wealth and’ children arid
wives and valuable possessions of alf sorts
and the established path for acquiring
relivious merit and fire itself, king Janaka
shaved his head. ;

5.
wealth, practising the vow of mendicancy,
resolved to abstain from infficting any kind
of injury on. others, shorn of vanitv and
prepared to subsist upom.a handful of
barley fatten off from the stalk.

-6. Approaching her husband when he
was alone, the queen, possessing great
strength of mind, fearlessly and in anger,
told him these reasonable words :—


7. “ewhy liast you adopted a life of. men-


dicancy, leaving your prosperous kingdom


fall of corn? A handful of fallen off
barley is not your becoming diet.

8. Your resolution does not agree with
you acts, sinee teaving your large kingdom
you, O king, seek a handfut of grain,


(9. With this handful of barley; O king,
you will not be able to gratify your guests.

ods, Rishis, and Pitris ?- ‘hie your labour,
therefore, isin yvain.. .


to.. Alas’ forsaken by gods, guests, and
Pitris, you live like a wandering mendicant,
O king, having cast off all action.

t1. You, before this, supported thou-
sands of Brahmanas versed in the three
Vedas and many more others. How can
you desire to beg of them. your own food
to-day. :

12, Forsaking your blazing prosperity,

uw look about like a dog for his food.

our mother has to-day been made sonless
by you, and your wife, the princess of
Koshala, a widow. -


13. These helpless Kshatriyas, expect-
ing fruits of religious merit, wait upon you,
placing all their hopes on you. ;

14. By dissipating their hopes; to what
regions will you go, O king, especially when
salvation is doubtful and creatures are
dependent on actions 7”

15. Sinful as-you are, you. will acquire

Weither this world nor the next, since yow
wi-h to live, having cast off your married.
wife ?
. 16. Why, indeed, do you tead a life of’
toving mendicancy, abstaining’ from all’
actions, after having forsalken garlands and’
perfumes and ornaments and robes of’
various sorts, < .

17. .Having been, like a large’ and’
sacred lake to all creatures, having been a


mighty. tree: worthy of adoration, alas, how |: : }
-} for big having only’ renouucéd his worldly
¢ sith ae


Can you wait upon and adore: others:?:


His dear wife saw him deprived of }


T while another always makes gifts.


MAHABHARATA.


1B. Ff even an elephant gives up alf


F work, carnivorous creatures and innwnere


able worms would eat it up. What need
be said of yourself who are so powerless?


tg—20. How eouldst your hea:t approve
of that mode of Sife which recommends ai
earthery pot, and a triple-headed rod, and
which compels ‘one to give up his very.
cfothes, aird which sanctions the acceptance
of onty a handful of barley after leaving off
everything 7 ff, again, yor hold that kiny-
dom and a handful of barley are the same


, to you, then. why de yeu abandon the


former.


at. Bf, again, ‘a handful of barley be-
comes an. object of attachment with you,
then your eriginal resolution of leaving off
everything becomes futile! If, again, you
carry out: your resolution of leaving off


t everything, their who anx |, to you, who are


you to meé, and what can be your favour to


a 7
wMmeé s ig wet oe


22. Hf you wish to show your favour,
rule then this, Earthf ‘hey who seek
happiness but are very poor and abandoned
by friends may adopt, Renuncjation.


23. But he who imitates those men by
leaving off palatial edifices and beds and
vehicles and dresses and ornaments, acts:
improperly, indeed. ae

24. Ome abways accepts gifts from others,
You
know the difference between the two. — Who,
indeed, of these two should be cousidered
superior 7 an os

25. Fa gift is made to.one who always
accepts gifts, or to one who is proud, that
gift becomes-uscless Hike the clarified butter
that is poured upon a foreést-fire. .

26. Asa fire, O king, never dies till it
has consumed all that has been thrown into
it, even so a beggar'is silenced till he: re-
ceives something. se |

27. In this world, the food given by a,
charitable person, is the support of the pious. ,
If, therefore, the king-does not give (foud),
where will the pious go to, who aspire for


salvation.


28. They that have food (in their housesy,
are householders. Mendicants are support-
ed by them. Life is kept up by food.,
Therefore, the giver of. food is the giver of
‘life. : ‘ . :

29.. Coming out' from among those who
live:as householders, ‘mendicants depend!
upon those very persons from wliom they’
“come. By doing this, those self-contralied
men acquire and-enjoy fame.and power.


30.‘ Oe cannot’ be called a mendicant.


SHANTI PARVA,


Doseessions, or for his. having only led
# life of dependence on charity. He who
forsakes sincerely the possessions and plea-
sures of the world to be regarded a true
wiendicant. ; :


31. Unattachment at heart though show-
ing attachment outwardly, standing aloof
from the world, having broken alt bis fet-
- ters, regarding friend and foe inthe same
light, such a man, O king, is regarded to
be liberated.


32. Having shaved their heads clean
and put on the brown robe, people rave
fike meudicants, though fettered by various
ties and though always seeking useless
wealth.


33. They who, casting off the three
Vedas, their usual avocations and children,
five like ‘mendicants by taking up the the
triple-headed rod and the brown robe, are
teally persons of weak understanding.


34. Without having cast off anger and
other passions, wearing only the brown robe,
OU king, isdue to the desire of ‘earning the
means of livelihood. Phose persons of
clean-shaved heads who hold up the banner
of virtue, have the acquisition of sustendnce
for their only object in life.


35. Therefore, O king, controlling your
passions do you secure blissful regions for
yourself hereafter by maintaining ther that
are traly pious amongst those having
matted locks or clean-shaved heads, naked
or clad in rags, or skins or brown clothes,


36. Whois there that is more virtuous
than he who maititains his sacred fire, who
celebrates sacrifices with presents of animals
and money, and who administers charity
day and qight?’ :


Arjuna said .— ;

° 37. King Janaka was known as a truth-
knowing person in this world. Even he, was
bewildered in the ascertainment of duty.
Do not yield to’ stupefaction. ¢


38-39. The duties of a householder are
observed by: -persons practising charity.
By abstaining from all sorts of injuries,
by casting off desire and anger, by being
engaged in protecting all creatures, by
making charities and lastly by making
elders and aged persons, we shall succeed
in attaining such blissful regions as are aftet
our hearts. .


40. By duly satisfying gods, guests, and


all creatures, by adoring Brahmanas, and
by trithfulness of speech, we shall certainly
attain (o desirable regions of bliss.’ ”


omeeng


CHAPTER XIX,


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


1. “I know buth the Vedas and the scrip-
tures that lead to the attainment of Brahinia.
fn the Vedas there are both kinds of pre-
cepts, veg., those that preach action and those
that preach the renouncement of action.


2. The scriptures are conflicting and
their conclusions are based upon reasons.
The truth of the Mantras isduly known to
me.

3. You are conversant only with wean
pons and the practices of heroes. You are
unable to understand correctly the meaning
of the scriptures,


4. If you were really acquainted with
duty, then you could have’ understood that
words like these ought not to have been ad-
dréssed to ne by one possessing the true
knowledge of the scriptures and acquainted
with the truths of religion. i


5. What, however, you have said to me,
out of fraternal affection, has been fit and
proper, Osonof Kunti. { am, therefore,
gratified with thee, O Arjuna.


6. There is no one equal to you in the
three worlds in all duties connected with
battle and in skill in various kinds of acts:


7. You are, therefore, competent ta
speak of the niceties of those subjects,—that
are not understood by others. You should
not, however, Q Dhananjaya, doubt my in-
telligence. 46.

8. You are, a master of the science of
battle, but you have never waited upon the
aged. You know nat the conclusions ar«
rived at by those that have studied the sub.
ject briefly and fully. The. conclusion of
intelligent men who want salvation, is that
of ascetic penances, renunciation, and
knowledge of Brahma, the second is supe-
rior té the first, and the third is supériot to
the second. —— .

16. Your conclusion, that there is noe
thing superior to wealth, is a mistake. I
will convince you of it, so that you may not
agaia regard wealth in that light. J

11. All righteous .men are seen to be
devoted to ascetic pevances and the study
of the Vedas, The Rishis also, that have
many eternal regions for them, enjoy the
merit of penances.

12. Others -- possessed equanimity of
soul, having no enemies, and dwelling in


24


the forest, have, through penances and
study of the Vedas, proceeded to heaven.


13. By controlling desire for worldly ob-
jects and casting off the darkness of sin,
pious men proceed northward to the regions
reseryed for these who practise Renuncia-
tion, = td
. 14. “The path that lies to the south and
Jeads to regions of light is reserved for
men devoted to action, hese are ac-
quired by persons subject to birth and
death.


1s.. That end, however, which persons
who wishing to have salvation cannot be


described. Yoga is the best means for
attaining toit. It is not easy to explain
it :


16. Those that are learned live, medi-
tating on the scriptures for finding out what
is unreal. ‘hey, however, jump at this and
that in the belief that the object of their
search exists in this and that.


_ 17. Having studied, however, the Vedas
the Aranyakas, and the other scriptures,


‘they miss the real like men failing to
find solid timber in an uprooted Banana
plant. : ves


18, There are some who, disbelieving
in its oneness, consider the Soul, dweiling
in the physical body consisting of the five
elements, possessing the attributes of desire
and hatred.


19. Unseen by the eye, highly subtile,
and indescribable by words, it goes on ina
round (of re-births) among the creatures of
the Earth, keeping before it that whicls is
the root of action.


20. Having made the Soul gradually
come towards itself which is the root of all
bliss, having controlled all mental desires,
and having cast off all kinds of action, one
may become perfectly independent and
happy. a

21. When there is such a path that is
followed by the tighteous and that is attain-
able by Knowledge. why, O Arjuna, do you

" speak highly of wealth which is full of ail
sorts of dangers ?


22.. Men of olden times who were con-
versant with the scriptures, O Bharata,
=—men who were always engaged in gifts
and sacrifices and action, held this view, O
Bharata. ,


23. There are some fools whe, accom-
plished in the science of logic, deny the
existence of the Soul, for the strength of
their convictions of a pristine life. [t is
very difficult to make them accept this
truth about final liberation, 1


24. Those wicked men, though highly


MAHABHARATA,


learned, travel all over the Earth, delivering '
leetures in assemblies, and deprecating the
true doctrine about liberation.


25. O Partha, who else can understand
what we do not understand? Similarly
they do not succeed in knowing those wise
and pious persons who are truly great and
who are well-read in the scriptures.


26. O son of Kunti, men acquainted
with truth attain to Brahma by asceticism
and intelligence, and great happiness by
Renunciation.”


CHAPTER XX.


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Gontinued.


Vaishampayana said :—


t “After Yudhisthira hud stopped, the
great and- eloquent ascetic Devasthana,
said these words pregnant with reason to
the king, ;


Devasthana said :—

2. ‘Phalguna has told you that there is
nothing superior to wealth. I shall speak.
to you on that subject. Listen to me with
rapt attention. -


3: O you; having no enemy you have
righteously conquered the Earth. Having
won her, you should not, O king, abandon
her without cause. : : ’

4. Four modes. of life are laid down in
the Vedas. Do you, O king, duly pass
through them one after another.


5. , At present you should, therefore, cele-
brate great sacrifices with profuse presents,
Amongst the very Rishis, some celebrate
the sacrifice represented by Vedic study,
and some that represented by knowledge.


6—7. Therefore, O Bharata, you must
know that even the very ascetics also are
devoted to action. ‘Fhe Vaikhanasas, how-
ever, ate said to preach that he who does’
not seek for wealth is superior to him
that seeks for it. L think that he who would:
follow that precept would be visited by
many shortcomings.


8. -Men collect together various articles
(for the celebration of sacrifices) according’
to the Vedic prescription. He who, impell.-
ed by his own foolish understanding, gives”
away wealth to an undeserving person with-
out giving it to the deserving, dues not know
that he incurscthe sin of killing a foetus.


-SHANTI


9g. The distribution of charities after dis-
criminating the deserving from the unde-
Serving 1S not easy. ae

to. The Supreme Creator created wealth
for Sacrifice, and He created man also for
taking cace of that wealth and for celebrat-
ing Sacrifice. For this reason, the entire
wealth of a man should be devoted to the
celebration of a sacrifice. This would beget
picasure as a matter ot course.

11. By the performance of various sacri-
fices with protuse gifts of valuables, the
highly energetic Indra excelled all the gods.
Having thus become their king, he shines

‘in ‘heaven, Therefure, everything siould
be given to Sacrifices.

12. Clad in deer-skin the great Maha-
deva, having poured bis own self as a fiba-
tion inthe sacrifice called Sarva, became
the first of gods, and excelling all creatures
in the universe and reigning Supreme over
them thereby, shines in resplendance.


13. King Marutta, the son of a Avitshit
by the prafusion of his .wealth, defeated
Shakra bimself, the king of the gods, In
great sacrifice he perio:med, all the vessels
were made of gold, and the Goddess of
Prosperity herself came in person,


14. You have heard that the great king
Harishchandra, having celebrated sacrifices,
earned yreat merit and great happiness.
Though a man, he nevertheless defeated
Shaxra by wealth. For this reason every-
thing should be given to Sacvifice.”


———e


CHAPTER XXI.


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continued.


Devasthana said :—


1. Regarding this subject is cited an old
history, ws., the discourse thht Vrihaspati,
asked by Indra, delivered to him.


_Vrihaspati said :— ;

2. ‘Contenment is the highest heaven,
and the greatest bliss, There is nothing
superior to Contentuneni. Contentment
heads all.


When one contracts all his desirés
like a tortoise drawing in all bis iimbs, then
_the native effulgence of his soul soon mani-
fests itself, :

4. When one does not fear any creature,
nor any creature is frightened at one, when
one contracts one's desire and hatred, then

_ is one said to see one’s sul,


4


PARVA. 25

§. When one, seeks to injure nobady ia.
deed, word, and thought, and cherishes
no desire, he is said to attain to Brahma,

6. Thus. O son of Kunti, creatures reap
fruits according to the religion they -follow.
Awaken yourself by this thought, O
Bharata. ?

7—8. Some laud Peacefulness ; some laud
Activity; some laud Contemplation; some
speak high of both Peagelulness and Actin
vity, Some speak high ot Sacrifice; others,
Renunciation. Some speax high of Gifts;
others, Acceptance,


g—i2. Some leaving off every thing, live
in sifent meditation. Some speak of sover-
eignty and the caring atter subjects, after
Kiliing, cutting, and piercing (foes), Some
preter spending their days in retirement.
Observing all this, the learned hold that that
religion which consists is not injuring any
creature is the one approved of by the right-
eous, ‘Vhe practice of abstention from injus
ry, trthfulness of speech, justice, compas-
sion, self-control, procreation (of offspring)
upon one’s own wives, amiabitity, modesty,
patience,—is the best of all religious as
said by the self-born Manu himself. Vhere-
fore, O son of Kuni, de you practise this
religion | :


13—16, That Kshatriya, who, knowing
weil the royal duties, takes sovereignty upon
himself, controlling his soul at ail times,
regarding that wiuch is dear and that which
is not in the same light and living apon
the residue of sacrificial feats, who is enga+
ged it restraming the wicked and cherishing
the righteous, who compeiis his subjects to
foliow ine path of virtue and who bhinselé
follows that path, wivo at last hands over bis
crown to his sun and retires into the forest,
there to live on the products of the forest
and act according to the ordinances of the
Vedas after having thrown off ali idleness, —
that Kshatriya who acts thus, tollowing the
well-known duties of  kings,—is ste to
reap excellent fruits in *botn this world and
the next. The final emancipation, you speak
of, is lightly difficuit to obtain, and its
pursuit is attended with many obstacles,


17~-18, They who follow such duties
and practise charity and asceti¢ penances,
who are compassionate and are freed from
desire and anger, who ate engaged in rul-
ing their subjects with righteousness and
fighting for the sake of kine and Brahma-
has, attain hereaiter to a high cad.


19. For this the Rudras, with the Vasus
and the Aditas, O destroyer of toes, and the
Saddbyas and innumerable other’ kings
adopt this religion. Practising carefully
the duties laid dywn by that religion, they


Xb MAHABHARATA.


aitain to heaven through those dcts of fought ‘with his sinful kinsmeh for eight
theirs,” } hundred and ten times,

12. Those acts of his, O king, deserve
every commendation. Through then, as
we have heard, he became the sing of the
1 gods.
{ 13. D6 you, therefore, O monarch, cele-
| brate sacrifices with profusé presents even
Jas Indra did, O king, and thereby free
: } yourself from your fever. ;
Vaishampayana said :— 14. Dondét, O foreinost of Kshatriyas

i. “After this, Arjuna again said to | grieve thus for what is gone. They that
his eldest brother of unfading glory, king | have been killed have attained to the high-


Yudhisthira 01 cheerléss Weart :-— est end, purified by weapons and agree=
ably to the ordinances of the Kshatriya


CHAPTER XXUL.


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
- PARVA).—Continued.


2. ‘O you who are conversant with every Aan
‘kind ‘of daty, having by the practice of religion, 5M crab das tei de :
Kshatriya duties acquired sovereignty that 15. That which has takén placé was or-
is so very difficult of acquisition, and hav- dained to take place. ‘Destiny,'O foremost
‘ing defeated all your foes, why do you | Of hings, is incapable of being resisted.’ n
wrieve.

3. O king, as regards Kshatriyas, death
in battle is regarded more meritorigus for |.
them than the celebration of various sacri- ‘ sa
fices. It is so laid down in the ordinance CHAPTER XXII1.
that describes the duties of Kshatriyas.. , ; i

uteaaiacneh pan (RAJADHARMANUSHASANA

4- Penances and Renunciation consti- | - . i
“tute the duties of Brahmanas. Such is also .PARVA).—Continned.
the ordinance about the next world. © In- Fee eae ie Sa ee Weed
ueed, O powerful one, death in battle is aid | Vaishampayana said :—
‘down for Kshatriyas. i 1. "thus addressed by Arjuna of ewly

5.. ‘The duties of Kshatrivas are ‘highly hair, the. Kuru king, son of Kunti, re~
dreadful and ave always connected with the pte silent. “Phen Dwaipayana (Vyasa)
.use.of weapons, and it has been ordained, | 5474-

O chief of the Bharatas, that they should, an

iwhen the time comes, die by weapons on Vyesa said * eget .

the field of battle. 4 2, “The words of Arjuna, O amiable
pase , ‘ ‘| Yudhisthira, are true. ‘he highest religion

g i. Rasa Sete Ruin | as sanctioned ‘by the scriptures, consists in

ts not blameable, for Kshatriyas also tave' the duties of a pouselol ders ts

originated frdm Brahman, | 3.° You are acqtrainted with all duties.

Do you then .duly practise the duties
‘| prescribed for you (vis., the duties of a

householder.) A life of retirement in the
forest forgetting the duties of a householder
has not been laid down for you. .


4. The gods, Puris, guests, and servants


7. Neither Renunciation, nor Sacrifice,
nor Penances, nor dependence on the wealth
of others, O king, has been laid down for
Kshatriyas. .


8. You know full well all duties, and you
are of riyhteous soul, O foremost of Bha- 1 : :
rata’s race. You are a wise king, of skilful | i depend (for their_ maintenance) upon a
deeds. You ¢an discriminate what is right | householder, Do yoo then support all these,
in this'world from what is wrong. Shaking | O king.
off this cheerlessnéss begotten by repentatice |} 5. Birds and animals and various other
engage in action vigorously. Vhe heart of ‘creatures, O king, are supported by house-
a Kshatriya is hard as adamant. holders. He, therefore, who belowgs to

te. Having by the performance of Ksha- | that mode of life, is superior to all.

‘triya duties defeated your foes and acquired 6 The life of a householder is the rmoét
empire without a throu in its side, control | difficult of all the ‘fotir modes of life. Do
your soul, O king. and be engaged in the | you practise that mode of life then, O
performance of sacrifices and the practice of {| Partha, which is difficult of being practised
charity. : | by persons of uncontrolled senses.


tt. Indra himeelf, though a Brahmana, 7 Vou have mastered ali the Vedas.
became a Kouattiya in his deeds, and. You have earned gréat ascetic ‘merit. You
; : ;


‘SHANTE


should, therefore, bear like an ox the burden
of your ancestral kingdom.


8. Penances, sacrifices, forgiveness,
learning, mendicancy, restraint oe senses,
contemplation, living’ in solitude, content-
ment, and knowledge (of Brahma), should,
O kinp, be practised by Brahmanas to the
best of their ability for the attainment of


success.
g~it. I shall now tell you the duties of
Kshatriyas. They are not unknown to you.


Sacrifice, learning, activity, ambition, hotd-
ing, the rod of chastisement, dreadfulness,
protection of subjects, Knowledge of the
‘Vedas, practice of ali kinds of ‘penances, :
good conduct, acquisition of wealth, and
gifts to deserving gerson, these, O king,
when performed properly by the [<shatriyas,
secure for them both this world gnd the
mext, as heard by us.


12. Of them, O sun of Kunti, wielding
the rod of chastisement has been declared
to be the foremost. A Kshatriya must
always have strength, and upon strength
depends chastisement. fo)


13. Those I have mentioned are, O king,
the principle duties for Kshatriyas and lead
greatly to their success. Vrihaspati, in this
matter, sang this verse :— ;


14. Like a snake devouring a mouse, ,
the Earth devours a king {who is inclined
to peace and a Bramana who is greatly
addicted to a life of domesticity!


15. Itis heard again that the royal sage
Sudyumna, only: by wielding the rod of
chastisement, gained the highest success,
like Daksha himself, the son of Prachetas.’


- Yudhishthira said :—


16. ‘O holy sage, by what acts did king
Sudyumana gain the highest. success? [
wish to hear the history of that king.)’ -


Vyasa said :—

17. ‘In this matter is also cited this old:
history. There were .two brothers, wig.,
Shankha and Likhita of rigid vows.


18. The twa brothers had two separate
beautiful houses. Situate by the bank of
the river called Vahuda, both of those
houses were decorated with tees always
bearing flowers and fruits.


1g. Onceona time Likhita came to the.|


house of his brother Shankha. At that
time, however, Shankha had left his asy-
Jum with no fixed purpose. Se
20. Arrived at the asylum of his brother,
Likhita, plucked many ripe fruits.


“at.” Getting” them the Rishi Likhita


27°


pinch of conscience. While thus eating
Shanhka returned to his hermitage.

22. Seeing him eating, Shankha address-
ed his brother, saying,—Whence have
these fruits been got and for why are. you
eating them ? .


23. Approaching his elder brother and
saluting him, Likhita? smilingly replied,
saying,—I have taken them even from this
hermitage.


24. Fililed with great anger, Shankha
said to him,— You have committed theft by
taking yourself these fruits.


25. Go tothe king confess what you have
done. ‘fell him,—-O best of ‘kings, |-tave
committed the offence of taking what was
not given to me. rae!


26. Knowing me for a thief and follow.
ing your duty of order, dq you punish me
O king, like a thief, : }

27. Thus commanded by his brother,
the highly blessed Likhita: of rigid vows
proceeded to king Sudyumna. se

28. Hearing from his gate-keepers that
Likhita had come, king Sudyumna, with his
counsellors, went out (for receiving him.) .


29—30. Meeting with him, the king ad-
dressed that best of all persons ‘conversant
with duties, saying,— Tell me, O reverend
sir, why you have come.’ Know it is af-
ready accoimplished.—hus accosted, that
Risht said ta Sudyumna,—Do you promise
first that you will do it, You should then,
after hearing me, fulfil that, pramise.


31—32. O foremost of. men, I ate some
fruits that had not given me by my eldec
brother. Do you, O king, punish me for it
forthwith,—Sudyumna answered,—lIf the
king be considered tu wield the rod of chas-
tisement, he should be regarded, O fote-
most of Braluanas, aS equally competent
to pradon,

33. Purged of sin, O you of high vows,’
consider yourself as pardoned. ‘Tell me now
what else do you wish. I shall certainly
acomplish those your commands.’ .


“Vyasa continued :—
34, ‘Thus honored by the great king, the
the Rishi Likhita, however, did not ask for
any other favur,


PARVA.


35. ‘Then that king caused the two hands
of the high-souled Likhita to be cut off,
whereupon the latter, beating the punish-


ment, went away, ,


36. Returning.to his brother Shankha,
‘Lighita, irgreat agony said,—You should
now pardon this wretched man who ha


began to eat them without fecliy any | been duly panished (for what he did,’
‘ ; Z


28


Shankha said :—


37- ‘Lam not angry with you nor have
yon injared me, O foremost of all persons
conversant with duties. Your virtue, how-
ever, had deteriorated. I have saved you
from that plight.


a8. Proceed forthwith to the river
Vahuda and piease duly, with. oblations of
‘water, the gods, Rishis, and the Pitris, and
never again think of sin.’


39. Hearing these words of -Shankha,
Lixhita . performed bis ablutions in the
sacred river and began to perform the
watererite, - sees

40. Thereat, two hands, like two lotnses,
‘appeared at the extremeties of his stumps.
Stricken with wonder he returned to his
brother and showed him the two hands.


Shankha said :—


41. Alf this has heen done by me
through my penances! Do not be surprised
atit. Providence is the instrument here.


Likhita answered :—

42. Oyouof great splendour, why did
you not purify me at first, when, O best of
‘Rishis, such was the power of your.
penances ?


Shanka said:—


43. Tshonld not have acted otherwise.
Tam not your punisher. ‘Phe king has
‘been himself purified as also yourself, along
with the Pitris.


Vyasa said :—

44. That king, O eldest son of Pandu.
became great by this act and obtained
the greatest success like the lord Dakha
himself.

45. Such is the duty of Kshatriyas, o7s.,
the ruling of subjects. Any other, O king,
would be considered as a wrong path for
them. Do not grieve. .


46. O best of all persons conversant
with duty, listen to the wholesome words
of this your brother. Holding the rod of
chastisement, O king, is the duty of kings
and not the shaving of the head.”


CHAPTER XXIV.


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continued.
6


Vaishampayana said:— _

1. Once more the great sage [Krishna-
Dwaip=payana said these words to the son
ef Kunti, who had no enemies. ;


MAHABHARATA.


2—~3. Tet these great car-warriors. pote
sessing sufficient mental strength, O king,
let these your brothers, O Yudhisthira the
chief of the Biaratas, satisfying those
wishes of theirs which they entertained while
living in the woods. Rule you the Earth,
O son of Pritha, like (another) Yayati the
son of Nahusha. :


4. Before this you suffered misery while
living in the woods in the observance of
ascetic penances. ‘Phat misery has ended,
O., foremost. of men. Enjoy happiness,
therefore, ior some ume. ;

§. Having, O Bharata, acquired and
enjoyed religious merit and wealth and
pleasure for some time with your brothers,
you may then, O king, retire into the forest.


6. Be freed first, O Bharata, from the


‘debt yor owe to persons who may beg


of yow to the Pitris, and to the gods. You
may then,-O son of Kunti, follow all the
other modes of life. :


7. Do you, O son of Kurt's. race, cele-
brate the sacrifices of Sharvamedha and
Ashwamedha, You will then attain, O
king, to the highest end hereafter.


8. Making your brothers also perform
great sacrifices with profuse presents, you


will, O sonof Pandu, ecquire great fame.


9g. There is a saying, O foremost of men
and best of the Kurus! Listen to it, for
by acting according to it, O king, you will
not deviate from the path of virtue,

10. Those men only, O Yudhisthira,
who behave like robbers, advise a king to
undertake wars and acquire victory.


tr That king who, knowing proper
place and time and following the injunc-
tions ‘of the scriptures, pardons even a
number of robbers, incurs no sin,


12, That king, who, realising his tribute
of asixth, does nat protect his kingdom,
shares a fourth part of the sins of his
kingdom. — :


13. Listen also to that by which a king
may not deviate from the path of virtie.
By disregarding the scriptures one incurs
sin, while by obeying them one may live
fearlessly. ;

14. That king who; following the sctip-
tural injunctions and disregarding. lust and
anger, behaves impartially, like a father,
towards all his subjects, never incurs sin.


15.- © you of great splendour, if a king,
possessed by destiny, fails to accompiish
an act in proper time, such failure would
not be called a trespass.


16... By power and policy should the king
subjugate his foes. He must not allow sin


SHANTI


to be committed in his kingdom, but should
Cause virtue to be practised, ite


17. Brave men, the respectable, the vir-
tuous, the learned, O Yudhishthira, Brah-
manas conversant with Vedic texts and rites,
and men of wealth, should especially be
protected. . :


18. In trying cases and performing
réligious acts, they who are possessed of
great learning should alone be employed.
A prudent king should never place his con-
fidence in one individual however accom-
plished.


18—19. That king who does not protect
his subjects, whose passions are not under-
control, who is full of vanity, who is haughty
and malicious, incurs sin and becomes
Notorious as a tyrant. :


20. If the subjects of a king, O monarch,
Gie from want of protection and are afflict-
ed by the gods and oppressed by rovbers,
the sin of ali this affects the king himself,


at. There is nosin, O Yudhishthira, in
doing an act with full heart, after mature
consideration and consultation with men
capable of giving good advice.


- 23. Our works fail or succeed through
destiny. If activity, however, be applied,
sin would not affect the king.


23—24. [shall recite to yor, O foremost
of kings, the story of what happcn-d to
an ancient king of the name of Hayagriva,
O son of Pandu,—the story of the heroic
Hayagriva of unsuilied deeds, who after
having killed a host of enemies in battle,
was himself defeated and killed while with-
out a follower by his side.


25. Having done all for restraining his
foes and adepted all those. foremost of
means by which men may be protected,
Hayagriva won great fame from the battles
he tought and is now enjoying great bliss
in heaven,


26. Wounded by robbers with weapons,

. bravely fighting with them, and giving up

his lite in battle, the great Hayagriva,

ever devoted to his royal duties, achieved

the object of his life and is now enjoying
great bliss in heaven. .


27. The bow was his (sacrificial) stake
and the bow-string was the cord for trying
the animals. Arrows were the smaller
ladie and the sword the larger one, and
blood formed the clarified butter that he
poured. ‘The car constituted the altar and
the anger he left in battle was the fire, and
the four best of horses yoked to his
vehicle were the four Hotris.


es


28. Having poured tipon that sacrificial
fire his enemies as libations “and -then


PARVA. 29
his awn life at the termination of the’
sacrifice, that foremost of kings, ‘Haya-
griva, became freed from sin and is now
playing in the regions of the celestials. .  -


29. Having protected his kingdom with’
policy and intelligence, the great and self.
controlled Hayagtiva of great strength of
mind and given to the performance of
sacrifices filled’ all the worlds with his
glory and is now sporting in the region of
the celestiats.


30. Having acquited the merit of cele-
brating sacrifices as also every. kind of
merit of human worlds, he held the rod of
chastisement and enled the Earth with
vigor and without pride. For this the
virtuous and great Hayaytiva is sporting
in the region of the celestials.

3t. Learned men practising renunciation,
cherishing faith, and grateful, that king,
having performed various acts, left this wo
rid of men and attained the regions that are
reserved for the intelligent and the wise and
those who are of approved conduct and bee
haviour and prepared to kill themselves
in battle. a


32. Having read the Vedas well and the
other scriptures also, having governed his
kingdom properly and made all the four
orders follow their respective duties, the
Hayagriva is sporting merrily in the regi-
ons of the’ celestials, Having gained
many battles and cherished his subjects,
having drunk the Soma juice in sacrifices
and satisfied the foremost of Brahmanas
with presents and judiciously held the rod of .
chastisement over those placed under, his
sway and.at last sacrificed his life in battle;
that king is living happily in heaven. :


33. His life was worthy of every comple-
ment. Learned and honest, men speak high
of it, for it deserves every praise. Having
acquired heaven and won the regions re-
served for heroes, that great king of virtuous
deeds became crowned with success.” ° \


——ae


CHAPTER XXV.


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).-—Continued.


Vaishampayana said :—

1. “Hearng the words of Dwaipayana-
Vyasa and seemg Dhananjaya angry, Yue
dhisthira the son of Kunti saluted Vyasa
and said.”


Yudhisthira said:~
2. “This earthly: sovereignty and the
various objects of enjovments cannot -g've


30:


me any joy.
ful grief is cutting me to the quick.

-3. Hearing the lamentations of these
women who have lost their hereic husbands
and children, | ¢annat enjoy peace, O
sage,”


Vaishampayana said :—

4. “hus addressed, the virtuous Vyasa,
that-best of all persons conversant with
Yoga,. endued with great wisdom and a
master of tte Vedas, said to Yudhisthira,


Vyasa said :—

5. ‘Noane can acquire anything by his
own deeds or by sacrifices and adoration,
No man can give anything tq another,
Man gets everything through Time, ‘The
Great Ordainer has made the course of
Yime the instrument of acquisition.


_ 6, By mere intelligence or study of the
scriptures, men, if ‘Lime be not prapitious,
Gannot acquire any earthly object. Some-
times an ignorant fool may acquire wealth,
Time is the powerful jnstrument for the acs
complishment of all acts.


. 7. During the hour of adversity, nejther
science, nor incantations, nor drugs, . pro-
duce any fruits. In prosperity, however,
thase very things, properly applied, yield
abundant fruits. ; ;

- 8. By. Fime the winds blow violently ;
by Time the clouds become surcharged with
-rain; by Time tanks become adorned with
lotuses of various sorts; by ‘Fime trees.in
the forest are covered with flowers.


‘ g. By Time nights become dark or
lighted. By Time the Moon becomes full.
If the proper Time does not come, trees do
not bear flowers and fruits. If the proper
Wime doés not come, the currents of rivers
do not become powerful,


to. Birds, snakes, deer, elephants and
other animals never become excited when
the proper ‘Time does not come. [If the
proper Lime does not come, women do not
conceive. It is with ‘Time that winter,
summer, and the rainy seasons come.


it.
no gne is born and no one dies. ‘If the
Time does not come, the infant does not
gain power of speech. If the Time does
not come one does not come by youth.
It is with Time that the seed sown sprouts
“up. ‘


12. if the Time does not eome, the Sun
does not appear in the, horizon, nor, when
the ‘Lime for it does not come, does he set.
lf the ‘Time for it does not come, the Mosn

. does not increase por wane, nor the ocean
with its waves, cise and ebb.


On the other hand, this pain--


ff the proper ‘Time does not come,


MAHABHARATA.


In this connection js related the old


43.


_story, O Yudhisthira, by king Senajita in.


sorrow,


14. The powerful course of Time affects
all mortals, AN earthly abjects, ripened by
‘Lime, meet with destruction,

15. Some, O king, kill some men. The
killers, again, are slain by others. ‘This is
what the world says, In reality, however,
no one kills and no one is killed.

16. Some body thinks men kill (their
fellow men.) Another thinks men do not
kill, The truth is that the birth and death
af all creatures have been ordained to
happen by their yery nature. :

17. At the loss of one’s riches or the
death of one’s wife or son or father, one
cries out saying,—Alas what grief !—and
the continued: thought of that sorrow al-
ways increases it,


18. Why do you, like a foolish man,
gtieve? Why do you grieve for them wha
are gsnbject to grief?. Mark, grief is
euhanged by indulgence as fear is by
fearing.

19. This bady even is not mine. No-«
thing in this Earth is mine. ‘(he things
af this Earth belong as much to ‘others as
tome. Seeing this, the wise do not allow
themselyes to bs beguiled.


20. .There are thousands of causes for
sorrow and .hundreds of causes for joy,
These affect daily the ignorant only, but
nat the wise.


. 21. These in course of Time, become
objects of love or hatred, and appearing as
happiness or misery revolve for affecting
living creatures.


22. There is only sorrow in this world
and not happiness. ‘Therefore sorrow only
is felt. Desire begets sorrow and sorrow
happiness,


23. Sorrow comes after happiness, and
happiness after sorow. One does not al-
ways suffer sorrow or always enjoy happi-
ness.

24. Happiness always ends in sorrow,
and sometimes originates from sorrow it-
self. He, therefore, who desires perpetual
happiness must give up both.


25. When sorrow must arise upon ters
mination of happiness, and happiness upon
the termination of sorrow, and = should,
therefore, shake off, like a (snake-bit) limb,
that which begets sorrow or that heart-
burning which is reared by sorrow or that
which is the root of his anxiety.


26. Happiness or sorrow, whatever co-
mes should ‘be borne -with -an-udaffected
heatte« wo


SHANTI


27- Oanmiable kino, if you do dt in the
least, do what is agreenble to your wives
and children,. you shaif then know whe is
whose, and why so, and for what.


28. Only those who stollid fools and
those who are masters of their souls enjoy
happiness here. Whey, however, who oc-
cupy an intermediate position suffer misery.


29. This, O Vudhishthiea, is what the
highly wise the Senajit who was conversant
with what is good oc vad in this world, with
duties, and with happiness and misery ‘said.

30. He who is grieved at othe? peéople’s
griefs can never enjoy happiness. ‘Mere
is no end of grief, and grief originates from
happiness itself,

3t. Happiness and ‘misery, prosperity
and adversity, gain and loss, death and life,
in their turn, visit all creatures. here the |
wise man, endued with equanimity soul
would neither be puffed up with joy nor ‘be
depressed with sorrow.


32. Battle has been described as the
Sacrifice for a king ; observance of clrastise: ;
ment is his Yoga; and the gift of riches in
sacrifices in the form of presents his Reruns |
ciation, All these should be regarded as!
acts which purify him.


33- By governing the kingdom with in- |
telligence and ‘policy, casting ‘off pride, cele- |
brating sacrifices, and looking at every-' i
thing and all the persons with-kindness and |
imparitiality, a great king, after death, |
Sports in the region of the ‘celestials.


34. By gaining battles, protecting his!
kingdom, drinking the Soma- juice, mak. .
in his'subjects prosper, holding judiciously
ahe rod of chastisement, and’ refiduncing his
hody at last‘in fight, a king erijoy happiness
in heaven,


35. Having studied all the Vedas.and |


the other scriptures duly, having protected.
‘the kingdom duly, and having made all the’
* four orders follow their respective duties, a:
king become purified and finally sports in
‘heaven.

36. He is the best of kings whose cone
duct, even after his death, is praised by the
denizens of the city and the country and by
‘his counsellers and freinds.’ ”


CHAPTER XXV1.
_ (RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA):—~Continued.


Vaishampayana said:—
1, “dlereat, the great Yudhishthira


PARVAL 3r
| said to Arjana these words prennans with
Treason ¢


2. ‘You think, O ‘Pattha, that there
is nothing superior te wealth, and Uhat the
Poor nan can neither have heaven, ter
happiness, ‘nor the accomplishinem of his
wishes,

3. This, however, is not true. Many
persons are seen who have become success- ~
ful throuvh Sacrifice in the shape of Vedic
study. Muny sages are seen whe by prac+ _
tising penanees have acquired eternal
regions for themselves.

4 They, GQ Dhananjava who always
follow the practice of the Rishis by leading
the life of a Brabmacharin and who become
acquainted with all duties, are regarded by
the zods as Bralhmanas. -

5 QO Dhanajaya, yon should always
kwow those Rishis who are devoted to the
study of the Vedas and those who are de»


} voted tothe pursuit of true knowledge as


persons who are truly virtuous,

6. O sen of Pandu,all our acts should he
shaped by those who are ‘devoted to the
acquisition of true knowledge. Surely # is
the opinion of the Vaixhanasas, O pewere


il fut one.


7. The Ajas,-the Prishnis, the Sikatas,
O Bharata, Arwnas, and the Ketavas, have
all zone to heaven by the merit -of Vedic
study. :


8—g By performing those acts, O
Dhananjaya, ‘that are laid down «in the
Vedas, vis., battle, study of the V. edas,
‘Sacrifices, the control of passion that is so
difficult, one goes to heaven by the southern:
path of the Sun. Lb have, before this, told
you that those very regions are reserved for
persons who perform (Vedic) acts.


1o. You will see, however, that the
northern path istrodden by those who are
devoted to Yoga. - ‘Those eternal and bright
regions to which that.path leads is reserved
for Yogins.


ir, Of -these two, the northern path js
spoken highly by those conversant with the
Puranas. You should know that one gains
heaven through contentment. Contentmens
begets happiness.


‘1a Thereis iothing superier to content=
ment. ‘Yothe Yogin who has controlled
anger and joy, contentment is the greatest
success.


13. Regarding it is cited the discourse
of Yajati. Listening to that discourse ‘one
can withdraw all his desires like a tortoise
drawing in all his limbs.


14. When one entectains.no fear of anys
| thing, when one is not feared by anything;


32


when one entertains no desire, when ‘one
bears no hate, then is one said to have at-
tained to the dignity of Brahma.


15. When .one does not commit sin by
any creature, in deed, thought, or word, one
is then said to have attained to Brahma.


16. When one has governed his pride
aud folly, and withdrawn himself from all
attachments, it is then that pious man of
controlled sout becomes fit for attaining
to that emancipation which is brought
about by the anninilation of personal exis-
_ tence,


17. Listen now to me with rapt attention,
O son of Pritha, as I say it to you. Some
seex virtue; some, good conduct, and suaie,
wealth.


18. One may desire wealth. The aban-
donment, however, of such desire is better for
him. ‘There are many shortcomings attach-
ed to wealth and, therefore, to those religious
acts that are performed with wealth.


19. We have seen it with our own eyes.
You should also seé this. He that desires
wealth finds it very difficult to leave off
that which should by aH means be aban-
doned, ‘


20.. Good deeds are very rare in those
who collect riches. It is said that wealth
can never be acquired without injuring
others, and that, when acquired, it is atten-
ded with various troubles,


2t.
ing the fear of repentance, oppresses others,
tempted by even a little wealih, not know-
‘ing all while of the sin of Brahmanicide
that he incurs by his acts,


22. Acquiring wealth which is so diffi-
cult of acquisition, one burns with grief it he
has to give a part of it, even if it be, to his
servants,—tantamount to what he would ac-
tually feel if he is robbed by others. If, on
the other hand, one doés not distribute his
‘wealth, he becomes an object of censure.


23. One, however, that has no wealth, is
- fever blamed. Forsakingy all attachments,
such a person can become happy in all res-
pects by living upon what little he may get
as alms. No one, however, cau be happy
by acquiring riches.
24. Regarding it certain verses relating
-to Sacrifices are recited by persons well
read in ancient scriptures. -


25. Wealth was created by the Creator
for celebrating Sacrifices, and man was
created by him for protecting that wealth
znd performing Sacrifices. For this, ail
wealth should be devoted to Sacrifices. {t
is not proper that it should be spent foc eu-

cjoyiiguts, -


A weak-minded person, disregard. ] -


MAHABHARATA,


36. The Creator gives wealth to mortals
for the sake of Sacrifices. Know this,
O son of Kunti, foremost of all wealthy
persons, : :


27. ‘Therefore the wise think that wealth,
forsooth, is nobody’s on Earth. One should
celebrate Sacrifices with it and give it away
with a confident heart.


28. One should make gift of what he
has acquired, and not waste or spend it in
gratifying bis desire of enjoyment. What
use is there in hoarding up wealth when
proper objects exist in which to spend it.


29. “Those foolish people who give away
(wealth) to men who have neglected the
duties of their order, have to live hereaftec
for a hundred years on ordure and dirt.


go. Being unable to discriminate between
the deserving and the undeserving, men
give to the undeserving and refrain from
giving to the deserving. For this reason
the administration of charity is difficult.


31. These are the two faults with wealth
even when acquired, ozs., gift to an un-
deserving person and abstaining to give to


a deserving man’. °


CHAPTER XXVIII. -


_ (RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continued.


Yudhishthira said :— ;

1—3. “On account of the death of young
Abhimanyu of the sons of Draupadi, of
Draupadi, of Dhrishtadyumna, of Virata,
of king Orupada, of Vasusena conversant
with every duty, of the royal Dhrishtaketu,
and of Various other kings coming from
various, countries jin battie, grief does not
forsake my wretched self that am a destroyer .
of kinsmen! Indeed, 1 covet very much for
kingdom and am an exterminater of my
own race, :


4- He upon whose breast and limbs I
used to play, alas, that Ganga’s son has


been killed by me in battle out of desire for


sovereignty. ;
s—6. When_I saw that foremost of
men, vis., our grandfather, assailed by
Shikhandin and trembling and reeling in
consequence of Partha’s arrows that re<
sembled thunder-bolts in power, when [
saw his tall form cut all over with blazing
arrows and himself become weak like an
aged lion, my heart was greatly pained,


7. When I saw that destroyer of hostile


,| Cars reel likea mountain summit and drop
€


SHANTI PARVA.


Bown on the w..ace of his own car With his


tace turned towards the east, my senses
were bewildered.


8—r1o. That foremost of Kurn’s ‘race
who with bow and arréw in hand had
fought in dreadful battle for many days
with Rama himself of Bhrigu’s race.on the
field purified by Karu, that son of Ganga,
that hero, who, at Baranasi, for the sake
‘of maidens, had, on a single car, challenged


to battle the assembled Kshatriyas of the |


world, he who had consumed by the power
‘of his weapons that irresistible and best of
kings Ugrayudha, alas, that hero has been
\cilled in battle by me.


11. Knowing fall well that Shikhandin
‘the prince of Panchala was his slayer, that
hero still refrained from killing the prince
with his arrow. Alas, such a magnanimous
warrior was kiiled by Arjuna.


12. O best of sages, when 1 saw the


grandfather stretched on the Earth and
bathed in blood, a violent fever afflicted m

heart. fee
. 13—1%. He who had. protected and

brought us@ip when we were children, alas,
he was caused to be killed by my sinful self
that am covetous of kingdom, thatama
‘slayer of reverend elders, and a perfect fool,
for the Sake of fickle sovereignty.


14. I gave a false ‘statement ‘of his son
‘to our preceptor, the great bowman Drona,
worshipped of all the kings.

15-16. The recolléction of that act of
mine is burning all my limbs. Thhe precep-


tor said to me,—fell me truly, O king, |


whether my son_lives still,—-Expecting truth
from me, the Brahmana asked me only.
By silently saying the word elephant, I be-
haved falsely towards him.

19. Sinfal that Iam, highly covetous of
kingdom, and a destroyer of my reverend
elders, 1 behaved ‘even thus towards my
preceptor in battle, casting off the garb of
truth—for I said to hint that Ashwatthaman
had been slain when, in sooth, an elephant
of that name had been stain.


98. To what regions shail I gé (hereafter)
having committed such a crime? 1 caused
also my eldest brother Karna to be killed,
that terrible warrior who never retreated
from battle. Who is there more sinful
than I?

19. Through covetousness I caused
young Abhimanyau that hero who resem-

led a lion born in the hills, to enter into
the array that was protected by Drona
himself.


20. Tam guilty. of infanticide. Sinful
as ] am, I have not, since the, been able


5


33
to look at the face of Arjuna or the Totus-
eyed Krishna.

2t. Igrieve also for Draupadi who is
deprived of her five sons like the Earth
shorn of her five mountains.


22. Tama great sinner and a destroyer
of the Earth. Not rising from this seat
which I now occupy, I will emaciate my
body (by statvation), and meet with death.


23. Knowme whoam the destroyer of
my preceptor as one who has sat down here
observing the Praya vow. A destroyer of
my family, I must do so in order that | may
not be born again in any of other orders of
being.

24. shall abstain fromtaking all food
and drink, and without moving from here,
O great ascetic, shall dry up my lifes
breaths which aré so dear. :

25. 1 humbly pray you to grant me per=
mission in this and go wherever you please.
Let every one grant me permission, I shali
renounce this body of mine,’ ”’


Vaishampayana said :—
26. **Preventing Pritha’s son, who beside
himself with sorrow on account of his kins-
men, gave vent to such words, Vyasa, thae
best of ascetics, said, first telling him,—
‘This cannot be.
Vyasa said: .
27, ‘You should not, O king, indulge in -
such painful grief. I shallagain say what


1 have once, said. Ail this is Destiny, O
powerful one.


28. Forsooth, all creatures that are bor
show at first a union (of various ingredients
and forces). Dissolution, however, over-
takes them at the end. Lixe bubbies in
water they come and go away, .


29. All things ‘coilected together ar
sure to be dissipated, and all things that
rise must fall down. Union terminates in
dissolution and life terminates in death.


30. Idleness, {though pleasant for thé
time ‘being, ends in misery, and skilful
labour, though painful in the beginning,
ends in happiness. Affluence, Prosperity,
Modesty, Conteiitment, and Fame reside in
labour and skill but not in idleness,


31. Friends cannot confer happiness,
nor foes inflict misery. Likewise wisdom
does net give wealth nor does wealth bring
happiness. »

32. O son of Kunti, you have been
created by your Maker to engage yourself
in action. Success originates from Work.
You cannot, O king, avoid Work,”


34


CHAPTER XXVIII.


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).— Continued,


Vaishampayana said :—

1, “Vyasa then removed the grief of the
eldest son of Pandu, who, filled with sorrow
consequent on the destruction of his kins-
men, had resolved to throw off his life-
breaths,


Vyasa said :—

z. ‘Regarding this subject is cited the
old story, O foremost of men, that is known
by the name of Ashma’s discourse. Listen
to it, O Yudhisthira.


3. Janaka the king of the Videhas, O
king, filled with sorrow and grief, asked a
wise Brahmana ofthe name of Ashma for
removing his doub!s, :


Janaka said ‘—


4. How should a man seeking “his own
well-being act upon eccasions of the acces-
sion and the destruction of both kinsmen
and wealth 7


Ashma said:—


' 5. Immediately after the formation of a
man's body, joys and sorrows are them-
selves attached to it.


6. Although either of the two may over-
take the person, yet whichever actaally
overtakes him quickly deprives him of his
understanding Ike the: wind dissipating
gathering cloads,


7. In prosperity one thinks,—I am of
high-birth.—I can do whatever I lice.—I


am not an ordinary person.—His mind
because soaked with these three vain
thoughts.


8. Addicted to all earthly pleasures, he
begins to dissipate the wealth hoarded by
his ancestors, Impoverished in course of
time, he considers the misappropriation of
others’ property as even laudable.


9. Like a hunter striking a deer with his
arrows, the king then punishes the wicked
man, that robber of other people’s wealth, |
that transgressor, of law and regulations.


to. Without attaining to a hundred
years, such men scarcely live beyend twenty
or thirty years. :


it. Carefully observing the conduct of
all creatures, a king should, by the exer-
cise of his intelligence, concert measures
for alleviating the great sorrows of his
subjects.


42. Que ciuses of all mental sorrow are


MAHABHARATA.


twofold vrs , delusion of the mind and dis-
tress. No third cause is there.


13. All these various kinds of misery as
also those arising from attachment to earth-
ly pleasures that overtake man, are even
such,


14. Likea pair of wolves Decrepitude
and Death, devour all creatures, strong or
weak, short or tall.


¥5. No man can eseape decrepitnde and
death, not even the conqueror of the whole
Earth encompassed by the sea,


16. Happiness or sorrow whatever comes
upon creatures, it should be enjoyed or burne
without elation or depression, There is no
means of escaping from them.


17. Theevils of life, O -king, overtake
one in infancy or youth or old aye. They
can never be avoided, while those which one
seeks most never come.


18, ‘Phe abserce of what is pleasant, the
presence of what is disagreeable, good and
evil, happiness and misery, follow Destiny.


19. Likewise, the birth of creatures and
their death, and profit and los, are all
pre-ordained.


20. Assmell, color, taste, and touch ori-
ginate of themselves, so happiness and mi-
sery originate frony what has been pre-
ordained. :


2t. Seats, beds, cars, riches, drink and
food, always come to living creatures in the
due course of ‘Time. ;


22. Physicians even fall itl. The strong
become weak, he rich man bose all and
become poor, Lhe course of Lime is highly
wonderful,


23. Noble-birth, health, beauty, pros-
perity, and objects of pleasures, are all be-
gotten by Destiny.


24. The poor, although they may not
desire it, have many children. Yhe rich
again are seen to have none. Wonderful


is the course of Destiny.


25-26. The dangers of ‘ailment, fire,
water, weapons, hunger, poison, fever, and
death, and fails from elevated places, visit
a man according to the Destiny under
which he is born. It is generally seen in this
world, that somebody, without committing
any sin, suffers many miseries while an-
other, having committed sins, is not pressed
down by the weight of calamity.


27. Itisseen thata rich man dies in
youth ; while a poor man lives on suffering
from decrepitude, for a hundred years,


28. One born in a mean family may
live'very long, while one descended froma
noble family dies soon like an insect.


SHANTI PARVA, © - 35


tich men have no appetite, while the poor | brate sacrifices, judiciously pursue religion,
can digest pieces of wood. profit and pleasure.


44. Alas, no one perceives that the. world
is sinking in the deep ocean of Time which
is infested with those huge crocodiles called
decripitude and death,


45. Many physicians are seen suffering
from a disease along with all the members
of their families, although they have care-
fully read the science of Life.


46. Taking bitters and various sorts
of oily drugs, they cannot po beyond
death as the dcean cannot transcend its
continents.


30. Discontented with his position, what-
ever sinsa wicked man commits, under the
influence of destiny, saying,—I am the
doer,—he considers to be all for his good.


31. Hunting, dice, women, wine, quar-
rels, these are censured by the wise. Many
pecsons, well, and greatly, read in the scrip-
tures, are seen to be addicted to them.


32. Objects, whether sought for or othere
wise, come upon creature in course of Time.
No other cause is seen.

33. Who creates and maintains air,
etoer, fire, moon, sun, day, night, the
planets, tivers, and mountains ?


47. Despite the wise application of che-
mecal compounds, men well-versed in che-
mistry, are seen to be broken down by
decripitude like trees broken down by ele-
pants, :


48. Likewise, persons endued with asce-
tic merit, devoted to study of the Vedas,
practising charity and frequently celebrat-
ing sacrifices, cannot escape the hands of


34. Cold, and heat, and rain, come in
Jurn in course of Time. Such is the case,
O foremost of men, with the happiness and
the misery of mankind.


29. It is very common in this world, that ; the gods, perform all religious duties, cele-


35. Neither medicines, ror incantations,
can save the man attacked by decrepitude
or overtaken by death. decripitude and death,


|

36. Astwo pieces wood, floating on the | 49. Neither years, nor months, nor forts
great ocean, come together and are again nigits, nor days, nor nights that have once
separated, so creatures are united and are | gone away do ever return to creatures who
again Seprated in time. are born, ;


37. ‘Time acts impartially towards rich 50. Man, whose existence is so transitory,
men whd enjoy the pleasure of song and | is compelled, in course of Time, whether,
dance in the company of women and those | he will er no, to come upon this inevitabie
unfortunate men who live upon another’s | and broad path of all creatures, ge


food. 5t. Whether the body originates fro
38. Inthis world a thousand sorts of | the creature, or the creature originates from
relationship are made such as mother and | the body, one’s union, however, with wives
father and son and wite. In truth, however, | and other friends is like that of travellers in
whose are they and whose are we ? an inn. a


§2. Onecannot obtain another as his
companion for ever. One cannot obtain such
union even with his own body, How then
can it be secured with any one else?


39. No one can become any one’s own,
nor can any one become anybody else’s
own, Our union here with wives and kins-
men and well-wishers is like that of travel-
lers at an inn in the road.


40. Wheream1? Where shall T go?—
Who am I ?—How came | here?—Why and
for whom should I grieve ?—Uhinking of
all these questions one gets tranquillity.


al. Life and its surroundings are always
revolying like a wheel, and the companion-
ship of those who are dear is only for the
time being. The union with brother, mo-
ther, father, and friend is like that of travel-
lers in an inn,


42. The wise men behold, as if with cor-
poreal eyes, the next world which is unseen.
Without setting at naught the scriptures,
Po of knowledge should cherish

aith,


43. One possessed of knowledge -should
perform the rites laid down for the Pitas and
%’


53. Where, O king, is your father, to-day
and where your grandfathers? You do not
see them to-day and they do not see you. O
sinless One, :


54. No person can see either heaven of
bell. The sacred books, however, are the
eyes of the virtuous. O king, regulated
your conduct according to the scriptures,


55. With a pure heart, one should lead
the life of Bramcharyya and then pro¢reate |
children and then celebrate sacrifices, for
satisfying the debt one owes to the Pitris, -
the gods'and mien,


56. Celebrating sacrifices and engaged
in begetting (children), after having first
observed the vow of Brahmacharyya. one
who has eyes of wisdom shaking off all-


36.


anxiety of heart, should seek heaven, this
‘world, and his own soul: >


_57. That vituous king who tries judici-
ously for acquiring Heavén and Earth and
who takes his own share of earthly goods as
sanctioned in the scriptures, acquires a re-
putation that spreads over all the worlds and
‘among ail creatures mobile and immobile,


58. Having heard these words pregnant
with reason, the king of the Vidahas of
clear understanding, became freed from
grief, and taking Ashma’s leave proceeded,
towards his house. :

' 59. O you of unfading glory, cast off
your sorrow and rise up. You are equal to
Shakra himself. Cheer up your heart.
‘The Earth has been conquered by you
by means of Kshatriya duties. Enjoy here,
© son of Kunti, and donot disobey my
words 2! 7? i


CHAPTER XXIX,


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continued.


Vaishampayana said :—

1. ‘That highest of kings, v7z., Yu-
dhishthira the son of Dharma, still remained
silent and Pandu’s son Arjuna addressed,
Krishna and spoke as follows.


Ariuna said :—

a. ‘This scorcher of foes, v72., Dharma’s
son, is grieving for his slain singmen.
Solace him, O Madhava. :


3. Again, O Janarddana, all of us have
fallen into great calamity. You should, O.
mighty-armed one, remove his sorcew,’


Vaishampayana continued :—

4. ‘*Thus accosted. by the great Arjuna,
the lotus-eyed Govinda of unfading glory
looked towards the king. :

5. Wudhishthira could never disobey
Keshava.' From his infancy Govinda was
dearer to Yudhishthira than Arjuna himself,


6. ‘Faking up the king’s hand bedecked
with sandal-paste and looking like a column
of marble, the mighty-armed Krishna began
to speak, cheering up all lis hearers.


7. His face, adorned with beautiful teeth
and eyes, shone like a {full-blown lotus at
sunrise. f


Vasudeva said :-—
8. ‘ Do not, O foremost of men, so grieve


|S will reduce your body; ‘Phey -who. have |.


MAHABHARATA.


been killed inthis battle will by no meat,
be got back.


g. Those Kshatriyas, O king, that have
been killed in this great battle, ave like.
objects. that one gets in his dreams and
which disappear when one awakes.


ro. All of them were heroes and ornas
ments of the field. They were defeated
while attacking their enemies. No one.
amongst them was killed with wounds on the
kack or while flying away.


ni. All of them, having fought with
heroes in. great battle and having thrown,
off their life-breaths then, have, purified by:
weapons, proceeded to leaven. You should
not grieve for them,


12. Always following the duties of Ksha-
tryias, endued with courage, well read in
“the Vedas and their branches, all of them
. have attained to that blissful. region which is,
‘obtainable by heroes. You shouid not
grieve for them after hearing of those high-
souled kings of Earth, of ancient days, that
departed from this world,


13. Regarding it is cited the old dis-
course of Narada before Srinjaya when the.
latter was greatly stricken with grief on,
account of the death of his soi


Narada said :—


14. Subject to happiness and misery
myself, yourself, and all creatures, O
Srinjaya, shalk have todie. What cause.
hen is there for grief.


t5. Listen to me as I describe the great
bliss of (some) ancient kings. Hear me.
with rapt attention, You will then, O king,
cast eff your sorrow.


16. Listening to the story of those highe.
souled kings, lessen your sorrow hear me as,
I recite fully their stories to. you.

17. By listening to the charming and
delightful history of those kings of ancient
times, unfavourable stars may be propitia-
ted and longevity may be increased.


18—19. We hear, O Srinjaya, that there
was a king of the name of Marutta who,
was the son of Avikshit. He also met with,
death. The gods with Indra and Varuna,
and Vrihaspati at their head came to the
sacrifice, called Vishwasrij, celebrated by.
that great king. Challenging Shakra the
king of the gods, that king defeated him
jn battle.


20. Todo Indra a good turn the learned
Vrihaspati refused to officiate at Marutta’s,
sacrifice. ‘Fhereupon Samvacta, the young-
ec brother of Vrihaspati, complied with the
king’s request. : ;


21. Dui ing. the reign of that king, O-


SHANTI PARVA.


best of kings, the Earth produced crops
without being tilled and was adored: with
various kinds of ornaments. :


22. In the sacrifice of that king, the
Vishwedevas were the courtiers, the Maruts.
acted as distributors (of food and presents)
and the great Saddhyas were also present.


23. In that sacrifice of Marutta, the
Maruts drank Soma. The presemts of the:
king excelled (in value) those ever made by
the gods, the Gandharvas and men,


24. When even that king, O Srinjaya
who was superior to you in religious merit,
knowledge, renynciation, and wealth, and
who was purer than your son, met with
death, do not grieve for your son.


25. ‘There was another king of the name-
of Suhotra the son of Atithi. We hear, O
Srinjaya, that even he met with death.
During his reign Indra showered gold for
one whole year upon his kingdom.


26-27. Obtaining that king for her master»
the Earth became, in sooth,§Vasumati (en-
dued with wealth). ‘The rivers, during the
administration of that king, hore golden
tortoises, crabs, alligators, sharks, and por-
Poises, for the worshipful Indra, Q king
had showered these upon them. :


2g. Seeing those innumerable golden
fishes and sharks and tortoises, Atithi’s san
was filled with wonder,


2g. Collecting that vast wealth of gold


that covered the Earth, Suhotra celebrated .


a sacrifice at Kurujangala and. distributed it
amongst.the Brahmanas. .

30. When. that king, O Srinjaya, who
surpassed you in the four attributes of reli-
gious merit, knowledge, renunciation, and
wealth, and who wasipurer than your son,
met with death, do not grieve for your son
who is dead.


3t. Your son never celebrated a sacrifice
and never made presents. Knowing this,
console your mind and do. not. grieve.
We hear also, O Srinjaya, that Vriha-
dratha the king of the Angas, met with
death, ;

32--33. He gave away a hundred thou-
sand horses. He gaye away as presents
also a hundred thousand maidens, ador-
ned with golden ornaments in a.sacrifice
he celebrated.


34-36. He gave away as presents a hun-


died thousand elephants also of the bese |


breed in another sacrifice celebrated by him.
He gave away as presents a hundred
millions also of bulls, adorned with galden
chains, with thousands of kine while the
king of Anga performed his gsacrifice
by the hill called Vishnugada, Indra be-


‘No other man


37
came’ intoxicated -with the Soma ‘he
drank, and the Brahmanas with the


presents they obtained. In the hundreds
of sacrifices, Q monarch, which this king
performed of old, the = szcrificial pre»
sents far surpassed those ever made by
the gods, the Gandharvas, and men,
was born, or will ever
that gave or will giye. away


be born, 2
wealth as was distributed by


so much


‘the king of the Angas in the severt sacri<


fices he celebrated in which Soma juice was
given.

38. When, O Srinjaya, this Vrihadra-
tha even, who was your superior in the four
atributes and who was purer than your son,
met with death, do not grieve for your sen
who is dead. : ;


39. We hear also, O Srinjaya, that Shivj
the son of Ushinara, met with death. That
king governed the entire Earth as one
holds, the leathern shield in hig hand.


40. Riding on a single car, which wag
crowned with success in every battle, king
Shivi caused the whole Earth to resound
with the rattle of his wheels and brought
all kings under subjection.


41. Ushinara’s son Shivi distributed, in
a sacrifice, all the kine and herses he had,
both domestic and wild.


42. Brahma himself thought that no one
amongst the kings of the past or the future
had or could have borne the burden, O Srin-
jaya, that Ushinara’s son Shivi, that best of
kings and that most powerful hero, equal ta
that of Indra himself, bore. Do not, there+
fore, grieve for your son who never celebra-
ted any sacrifice nor made any preesent.


44. Indeed, O Srinjaya, when Shivi,
who was far superior to your in the four
attributes and who was purer than your soa
met with death, da not gricve far your: son
who js dead..


45. We hear, O Srinjaya, that the great
Bharata afso the son. of Dushmanta and
Shakuntala, whe had a vast and well-res
plenished treasury met with death.


46-47. Dedic ting three hundred horses
to the gads on the banks of Yamuna, twenty
on the banks of Saraswati, and fourteen on
the hanks of Ganga, that highly ener-
getic, king, in days af old, celebrated
this order) a thousand Horse-sactifices and
a hundred Rajasuyas,,

48. Na one amongst the kings of the
Earth can imitate the great deeds of
Bharata, aS no man can, by the power of
of his arms rise up into the sky.


“49. Erecting numerous sacrificial altars,
he presented numberless horses and im?


mense riches to tve sage Kanwa,


38


50. When even he, O Srinjaya, who was
far superior to you in the four attributes and
who was purer than your son, met with
death, do not grieve for your son who is
dead,

5t. Wehear, O Srinjaya, that Rama
also, the son of Drsharatha, met with death.
He always treated his subjects like his own
begotten sons.

§2. tn his kingdom there were no widows
and none that was helpless, Indeed, Rama
while governing his kingdom always follow-
ed his father Dasharatha.


- 53. The clouds, pouring rain in season,


caused the crops to grow profusely, During.


his regime, food was always abundant in
his kingdom.


54. No death occured by drowning or by
fire. As long as Rama_ ruled it, there
was no fear in his kingdom of any ail-
ment.


§5. Every man lived for a thousand
years, and every man was foitunate enough
to have a thousand children. During
Rama's reign, all men enjoyed health and
obtained the fruition of their wishes.


56. Even the women did not quarrel
with one another, what to speak of men?
During his reign his subjects were always
devoted to virtue.


57. During Rama's regime all men were
contented, obtained the fruition of their
desire, and were fearless, free, and truthful.


5g- The trees always bore flowers and
fruits and suffered from no accidents.
eat cow gave milk filling a drova-tull
niilk,


59. Having lived for fourteen years in
that forest practising severe penances,
Rama celebrated ten Horse-sacrifices to
which the freest access was given to all. -


60, Youthful and having a dark com-
oe and red eyes, he looked like the
eader of an elephantine herd. With arms
extending down to lis knees and of beauti-
ful face, his shoulders were like those of a
tion and the power of his arms was great.


61. Seated on the throne of Ayodhya, he
ruled for ten thousand and ten hundred
years.


62. When he, O Srinjaya, who was
superior to you in the four principal accom-
plishments and who was purer than your
Son, met with death, do not grieve for your
son who is dead. ¢t


63-64. We hear, O Srinjaya, that king
Bhagiratha also died. In one of the sacri-
fices of that king inebriate with drinking


MAHABHARATA.


' gods, defeated by the strength of his
arms, many thousands of Asuras.


65. King Bhagiratha, in one of -the
sacrifices he celebrated, gave away a mil-
lion of maidens -bedecked with ornaments
of gold.


66. Each of those maidens sat upon a
car to each of which were yoked four horses,
With each car were a hundred elephants,
all of the best breed and adorned with
golden trappings.


67. Behindeach elephant were a thou-
sand horses, and behind each horse a thou-
sand kine, and behind each cow a thousand
goats and sheep.


68. Ganga, named (from before) Bhagi-
rathi sat upon the Jap of this king living
near (her stream), and therefore, passed by
the name of Urvashi.


69. The Ganga who had three courses
had agreed to be the daughter of Bhagi-
ratha of Ikshaku’s race, who always cele-
brated sacrifices with enough presents to
the Brahmanas.


7o. When he, O Srinjaya, who was
superior to you in respect of the four princi-
ple attributes and who was purer than your
son, met with death, do not grieve for your
son, °


gt. We hear, O Srinjaya, that the great
Dwilipa also met with death. ‘Lhe Brah-
manas take pleasure in recounting his innu-
merable deeds.


72. Inone of his great sacrifices that
king, gave away with full heart the entire
Earth, abounding with wealth, to the Brah-
manas.


73. In each sacrifice celebrated by him,
the chief priest received as sacrificial fee a
thousand elephants made of gold.


74. In one of his sacrifices, the stake
was made of gold and looked highly beau-
tiful. Performing the duties asigned to
them, the gods having Shakra for their
king, used to seek refuge with that king,


75—76. Upon that highly effulgent golden
stake decked with a ring, six thousand gods
and Gandharvas danced in jay, and Vishwa-
vasu himself, in their midst played on his
Vina the seven notes according to the rules
of concordance. Such was the nature of
Vishwavasu's music that every creature,
wherever he might be, thought that the
great Gandharva was playing to him
alone.

77. No other king could imitate the


deeds of king Dwilipa. The elephants of
that king, intoxicated and adorned with


the Soma juice, Indra, the worshipful | golden ¢rappings used to lie down on the


chastiser of Pakaand the king of the


j t oads,


SHANTI


~


78. Those-men went to heaven who could
ebtain a glance even of the great king
Dwilipa who was ever truthful in speech
and whose bow could bear a -hundred
enemies powerful like a hundred Anantas,


79. Three sounds never ceased in
Dwilipa’s mansion, vig., the sound of Vedic
recitations, the twang of bows, and cries
of Let it be given.


80. When he, O Srinjaya, whoa was
superior to you in the four principal attri-
butes and who was purer than your son,
met with death, do not grieve for your son
who is dead.


_ 81. Nuvanashwa's son Mandhatii also
O Srinjaya, we have heard, met with death.
The celestials named Maruts took out that
child from his father’s stomach through une
of its sides.


82. Born from a quantity of elarified
butter that had been purified by Mantras
Mandhatri was born in the stomach of the
great Yuvanashwa. Highly prosperous, king
Mandhatri vanquished the three worlds.


83. Seeing that child of celestial beauty
lying on the lap of his father, the gods
asked one another,—whose breasts shall
this child suck ?


84. Then Indra approached him, say-
ing,—He shall suck me.—From this inci-
dent the king of the deities named the child
Mandhatri.


85. To give nourishment to that high-
souled child of Yuvanashwa, the finger of
Indra, placed in his mouth, began to give
a jet of milk.


86. Sucking Indra’s finger, he grew up
in a hundred days. In twelve days he
looked like a boy of twelve years.


87. The whole Earth in one day was
subjugated by that high-souled and virtuous
and brave king who was like Indra himself
in prowess. a


88. He defeated king Aneara, Marutta,
Asita, Gaya, and Vrihadratha the king of
the Angas.
~ 89. When Vuvanashwa’s son fought in
battle with Angara, the gods thought that
the sky was breaking with the twang of his
bow. :

- go. The whole Earth from the point
from which the Sun rises to where he sets
is said to be the field of Mandhattri.


‘gt. Having celebrated Horse-sacrifices
and a hundred Rajasuyas, he gave to the
Brahmanas many Rohita fishes.


92. Those fishes were each ten@ Yojanas
in Jength and one in breadth. The residue


PARVA, 39


after gratifying the Brahmanas, were divided
amongst themselves by the other classes.


93. When he, O Srinjaya, who was
superior to you in respect of the four prin-
cipal attributes and who was purer than
your son, met with death, do not grieve for,
your son who is dead.


94—95. We hear, O Srinjaya, that
Yyati the son of Nahusha also met with
death. Having brought under his sway
the whole world with its seas, he journeved
through it, adorning it with various sacri-
ficial altars the interstices between which
were measured by thiows of a heavy piece
of wood. Indeed, be reached the very
bank of the sea as he went on celebrating
great sacrifices,

96. Having celebrated a thousand sacri-
fices and a hundred Vajapeyas, he pleased
the lerding Brabmanas with three moun-
tains of gold. .


97. Having killed many Daityas and
Danavas duly in battle, Nahusha’s son
Yayati divided the whule Earth (among his
children).


98. At last discarding his other sons
headed by Yadu and Drahyu, he installed
(his youngest son) Puruon his throne and
then returned to the forest accuinpanied by
his wife.


99 When he, O Srinjaya, who was
superior to you in the four principal attri«
butes and who was purer than your son,
met with death, do not grieve for your son
who is dead.


100, We hear, O Srinjaya, that Amva-
risha also, the son of Nabhaga, met’ with
death. ‘That protector (of the world) and
greatest of kings was considered by his
subjects as the virtue incarnate.


tot. That king, in one of his sacrifices
dedicated to the Brahmanas, for serving
them, a million of kings who had themselves
celebrated thousands of sacrifices each.


102. Pious men praised Amvarisha the
son of Nabhaga, saying that such deeds had
never been done before nor would be done
in the future,


403. Those hundreds upon hundreds and
thousands upon thousands of kings became
(throngh Amvarisha’s merits) crowned with
the fruits of the Horse-sacrifice, and follow-
ed their chief by the Southern path to
heaven). e

104. When he, O Srinjaya, who was
superior to you in the four principal attri-
butes and who was purer than your son,
met with death, do not grieve for your son
who is dead. . .


40°


165—106." We hear, O Srinjaya, that
Shashavindu also, the son of Chitraratha,
niet with death. The great king had a
hundred thousand wives, and a million
of sons. All of them used to wear galden
coats of mail and all of them were flowers
of bowmen.


107. Each of those princes married a
hundred princesses, and each __ princess
brought a hundted elephants. With each
of those elephants were a hundred carts.


108. With éach car weré a hundred
horses, all of good breed and all adorned
with golden trappings. With each horsé
were a hundred kine, and with eachi cow
were a hundred shee# atid goats.

10g. This immiensé wealth, O king,
Sashavindu distributed in a Hotse-sacrifice
amongst the Brahrmanas,
ito. When he; O Stinjaya,. whe was
Superior to you in the four principal attri-
butes and who was purer than youf son,
inet with death, do not grieve for your sor
who is dead. -

rit. We heat, O Stinjaya; that Gayd
also, thé son of Amurtharayas, met with
death.’ For a hundred years. that kiiig
lived upon the tesidué of sacrificial food.


112. (Pleased with his devotion) Agni
offered him boons. ‘The beons prayed for
by Gaya were,—May tot wealth suffer
extinction even if I give ceaselessly. Let
ty respect for virtue exist for ever.

113. Let my heart ever love Truth,
through-your grace, O eatet of sacrificial
libations.=-It has been leatd by us that
king Gaya secured all those wishes from
Agni. :

114. Oi days of the tiew moon, on those
of the full moon, and on every fourth month,
for a thousand years, Gaya repeatedly celé-
brated the Horse-Sacrifice.

x15. Rising (at the termination of every
sacrifice) he distributed a hundred thousind
kine and hundreds of mules during this
time.

116. That foreniost of meti pleaged the
gods with Soma, the Brahmanas with
wealth, the Pitris with Swadha, and the
women with the satisfaction of all their
desires.

117. In this great Horse-satrifice; king
Gaya had a golden ground made, measur-
ing a hundred cubits in fength and fifty in
breadth, and gave it awayas the sacrificial
fee. . :

118. That foremost of men, vt2., Gaya
the son of Amurttarayas; distributed as
many kine as there arei sand grains; O
king, in the river Ganga.


MAHABHARATA:


itg9. When he, O Srinjaya, who wad -
superior te you in the four principal at-
tributes and who was purer than your sori
met with death, do fiot-grigvé for your
son. who is dead:


tzo—121. We hear, O Srinjaya, thaf
Sankriti’s son Rantideva also met with
death. Having practised the severest of
penances and worshipped him with great
feverence; he abtained these boons from
Shak#a, having solicited them, saying,—Let
us have profuse food dnd innumerable
guests!’ Let not my faith suffer any
deterioration, and Jet us not Nave to bes
anything of atty person ! :


123, The adimals, both domestic and
wild, killed in his sacrifice, used to come td
him, eig., the great Rantideva of rigid vows
and great famé, of theic own accord.


i293. The secretions that came out of the
skins of thé animals produced a strong
and celebrated river which till now passes
by the namie of Chafmianwati.


tZj. King Rantideva sed to make
presents to the Brahmahas i. an exten-
sive enclosure. When tlie king said.—td
you I give a hundred nishkas! To you
givé a hundred—the Brahmanas raised a
hue and cry of refusal,

125. When; however, the king said—t
give a thousand nishkas—the gifts were
all accepted. All the vessels and plates in
Rantideya’s mansion for carrying food
and other articles, all the jugs and pots;
the pans atid plates and cups were made
of gold.

127. Thete where the guests used to
live in Rantideva's palate twenty thousand


- atid oné hundred kine had to be killed.


128. Yet even on stich occasions, the
cooks, adortied with ear-rings, used to
say,—There is abundant juice. Eat ag
much as you wish, but we have not ag
much to-day of tmeat agon former octa-
sions.—Whett he, O Srinjaya,; who wag
fat superiot to you in the four principal
attributes'and who was ptrer than your
son, miet with death, do not grieve for
your son who is dead.

igo. We hear; O Sfinfaya, that the
high-souled Sagara also met with death.
He was born if the family of fkshaku, a
foremost-of men, and of superhuman power.


191. ‘Sixty-thousand sons used to follow
him, like countless. stars waiting upon. the
Moon, in the cloudless autumnal sky.


132. Heruled the whole of this Earth,
He gratified the gods by celebrating a
thousand Horse-szcrifices, °


SHANTI PARVA:


- 133-134. He gave away to deserving
rahmanas palatial edifices with columans
‘of gold and (ether parts) made entirely of
‘that precious metal, abounding in rich beds
and bevies of beautiful ‘ladies having ‘eyes
fike lotus-petals, and various other sorts
of valuable objects. At this ‘dehest the
Beahmanas divided those gifts among
themselves. :

135. Out of wrath that ‘king made'the
Earth ‘to be excavated, whereupon she
‘came to have the ocean on her bosom,
‘and, therefore, the ocean is called Sagara
after his name,

136. When he, © Srinjaya,, who was
‘superior'to youinthe four principal attri-
bures and who was purer than your son,
met with death, do not grieve for your son
who is dead.

137. We hear, @ Srinjaya, that king
Prithu also, the son of Vena met with
‘death, the great Rishis, assembled together
tin the great forest, installed him in the
sovereignty of the Earth.


138. And because it was expected that
the would advance all mankind, he was,
‘accordingly, ‘called Prithu (the advancer),
And because atso' he protected people from
‘injuries (Kshatta), he was, therefore, styled
 Kshatriya (protector from injuries). -

139. ‘Seeing ‘Prithu the son of Vena, alt
the-creatuares of the Earth, exclaimed,—-We
love him affectionately !—And for the loving |
attachment (to him of all creatures),.he was
called a Raja (one who gratifies all),

igo. The Earth, during his regime
produced crops without being tilled, every |
deaf of the trees bore honey, and every cow
gave a jugful of milk, 4
. A4t. ,All men enjoyed health and -all
their wishes were fructified. They had no
‘fear of any kind. ‘They used .to tive, as
-they. pleased, in; ftelds or houses, |
1! 142. “When Prithe desired to cross the
“sea, the waters ‘become solidified. Vhe
trvivers also never rose: when the -had to
cross them -but remained perfectly calm.
-Vhe standard -on bis «ar moved freely
reverywhere.

143. King ®ritha, in one of his great
cHorse-sacrifices, -distributed amongst the
Bcealimanas one and twenty mountains of
gold, ‘each measuring, twelve hundred
“COMDUS. , 7

144. When he, O Srinjaya, who was
-far ‘superior td you in the four ‘principal
“atribates' and: who -was purer than -your
son met with death, docnet- grieve for.your |
,S0n who is dead,


. 145. What ace-you,.O Scinjaya, thinking
6 : , ;


4k


ofi silently? It seems, ©. king, that you
do not pay heed to these words. of mine.
Tf you have mot heard shem, then this dis-
‘course of mine has’ been fruitless’ lik
medicine or djet to a persan on the point o
death,’ : pens =


Srinjaya said:—-< - ‘
‘146. ‘fam all attention, O Narada, ta
this discourse of yours, of excellent sense
and ‘perfumed tike a garland of flowers,—
this discourse regarding the conduct of:
great ‘royal sages of meritorious deeds and’
great fame, Uiat-can surely remove grief,


147. Your discourse, O great sage, had
not been fruitless. 1 have been freed from
Sorrow at yout very sight! Like one never
satiated ‘with drinking nectar, I am not
‘satiated with youe words. ‘9

148. OQ you of true vision, if you, 'O
lord, be inclined to show your grace to4
wards this man burning for the death of
his son, then that son, threugh your faveur,
‘is sure te be revived and to mix once more
with me (in this life).’


Narada said :— ay:

149. ‘Iwill give back tto.you that son
of yours named Suvarnashthivin, whom
Parvata gave you and who has been de-~
prived of life! Effulgent dike gold, that


mn


schild shall Jive a thousand years.


 mammmnmnnd


CHAPTER XXX.


{RAJA DHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Cantinued.


Yudhisthira said:— .

t. “ How did the ~ of Srinjaya be=
come Suvarnashthivin? |Why also did
Parvata give Srinjaya that child? And


t


why did he die?


se When al these. ‘men lived for a


thousand years, why did” Srinjaya’s son
die jin infancy ? ‘

3. Or, washe in name only Suvarnash-
thivin? How also did he come to be so!
1 wish to know ail this?


Krishna said :— os
A{ will recount, O king, the incidents
as they took place.: There are two Rishis
foremost in the world,named Narada and
Parvata. ; nate ges
:5~6. Narada js the maternal, uncle and
Parvata is .his sister’s son. With cheer
ful .heatts, ihe uncle Narada and_ the


43


nephew Parvata had in days of yore,.O
king, left the celestial region for a journey
on Earth for eating clarified butter and
rice.

7. Both of them endued with great
ascetic merit, they wandered over the Earth
living on food taken by human beings.

8, ‘Filled with joy and cherishing great
affection for each other, they entered into
an agreement that whatever wish, good
or bad, would be entertained by one,
should be disclosed to the other, but if one
happens to act otherwise, he should be
visited by the other’s curse,


g. Coming at that understanding, those
two great Rishis, worshipped of all the
worlds, repaired to King Srinjaya the son
of Shitya and said to him ?~


‘so. We two, for your well-being shall
live with you for a few.days. O lord of
Earth, do you satisfy all our wants duly!
The king, saying,-So be it, began to treat
them hospitably. .

11. After some time, one day, the king,
filled with joy, introduced to those illus-
trious ascetics his most beautiful daughter,
Sevingy 3 He OY daughter will serve you

oth.


12—13. Resembling in effulgence the
filaments of the lotus, she is beautiful and
of faultless limbs, accomplished and of
charming manners, and is called Sukumari
by name.—The Rishis replied, saying, Very
well. Thereupon the king directed his
daughter, telling ber,—O child, serve these
two Brahmanas as you would the gods or
your father,


_ 14 The pious princess, saying,—So be
it,—began to serye them in obedience to
her father’s command, .


15. Her dutiful services and her peer-
less beauty very soon created love in
Narada’s heart.


16. That tender feeling began to grow
in the heart of the great saint, like the
moon gradually increasing in the light fort-
night. :

17. The virtuous Narada, however, out
of shame, could not give out that burning
love to his sister’s son the high-souled
Parvata.


18. By his ascetic power, as also by
signs, .Parvata understood all. Excited
with rage, the latter thereupon made up
his mind to curse the love-stricken Narada.


fa
And he said:—- “
ig—20. ‘Having of your own accord
madean agreement with me that, whatever
wish, good or bad, would be entertained by


MAHABHARATA.


either of us should be disclosed to the other
you have violated it! These were yout
own words, O Brahmana! Itis for this
that I shall curse you.


21. You did not tell me before that yout
heart has been stricken with the beauiy o
the maiden Sukumari. [ shall, therefore,
curse you.

22.. You are a Brahmacharin. You
are my préceptor. You are an ascetic and
a Brahmana. Yet you have broken the
agreement you had made with me.


23. Filled with anger I shall, for this,
curse even you. - Listen to me. ‘This
Sukumari shall, forsooth, become your wife.


24. From the time of your matriage,
however, O powerful ene, both she and all,
men shall see you a monkey,‘for your real
features having disappeared, you will
appear like a monkey to all.


25—~26. Hearing these words of his’
the uncle Narada, excited with ire cursed
his nephew Parvata in return, saying,
Although you possess ascetic merit and
Brahmacharyya and truth and self-control,
and although you are ever devoted to virtue,
yet you will not succeed in proceeding to
heaven,


27. Filled with anger and feelings of
vengeance, they thus cursed each other like
a pair of infuriate elephants.


28. From that time the great Parvata
began to wander over the Earth, respected
as he deserved, O Bharata, for his owa
power, ;


29. Narada then, that best of Brah-
manas, duly married Srinjaya’s daughter,
the faultless Sukumari. a

30—~31. The princess, however,’ saw
Narada exactly as he kad been. Indeed,
just after the last of the wedding Mantras
had been recited, Sukumari saw the celes-
tial Rishi to have a face like that of a
monkey. She, however, did not for that dis«
regard her hnsband. On the other hand,
she bestowed her love on him.


32. Indeed, that chaste princess, de+
voted herself entirely to her husband and
did not in her heart’ even desire any one
else among the gods, Munis and Yakshas
for a husband,

33. ‘One day, as the illustrious Parvata,
while wandering about entered a solitary
forest, be saw. Narada there. ;

34. Bowing to him, Parvata said,


Favour me by permitting me, O powerful
one, to go to heaven. j


35—37- Seeing the cheerless Parvata
kneeling before him with joined palms,


SHANTI PARVA.


Narada, “himself raore disspirited, said
to him.—You had cursed me first, saying,
~+Be youa monkey !—After you had said


80 to me, I cursed you from anger, saying, |


—~From this day you w'll not tive in heaven,
You should not have done so, since you are
like a son to me.—The two saints then
released each jother from their mutual
curses,

28. Seeing her husband possessed of
celestial form shining with ‘beauty, Suku-
mari fled*from him taking him, to be some-
body other than her husband.

39. Seeing the beautiful princess flying
away from her husband, Parvata addressed
her, saying,—He is your husband, Do
hot entertain any scruple.


. 40. He is thef illustrious and powerful
Rishi Narada, ‘that foremost of virtuous
persons. He is your husband entirely
devoted to you. [)o not cherish any doubt.


4t.
great Parvata and informed also of the
curse on her husband the princess regained
the clamness of men. Then Parvata pro-
ceeded to heaven and Narada to his home.’


Vasudeva said :—

42. The illustrious Rishi Narada, who
himself did so, is here. O best of men,
asked by you, he will tell you everything
that took place.”


S ecmmmmammnal


CHAPTER XXXI.


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Conttinued.


Vaishampayana said :—

1. “The royalson of Pandu then ad-
@ressed Narada, saying—‘O holy one, I
wish to hear of the birth of the child whose
excreta were gold. :

2, Thus accosted by king Yudhishithira
the sage Narada began to describe to him
all that had taken place about that child
who passed golden excreta.


Narada said .—

3. ‘Itis so, O you of mighity arms, as
Keshava here has said. Asked by you 1
shall now recite the remaining portion of
this story. «2 ;

4. Myself, and my sister’s son, the great
ascetic Parvata, once came tg Srinjaya,
that foremost .of all victorious kings, for
living with him. ’

5. Honoured duly by-him who gratified
every wish of ours, We lived in his palace.


Assured in various ways by the |


43


_ 6. After the rains had gone, and when
the time for our own departure arrived,
Parvata said to me these weighty words
suitable to the hour.


7. We have, O Brahmana, lived in the
house of this king for some time, highly
respected by him. Think of what return we
should make.


8. I then, O king, said to Parvata,—O
nephew, itis really like you, and, O ye
of great power, all this depends upon youre
self,


9. By your boons fet the king be made
happy and fet him obtain bis wishes, Or,
if you wish, let him be crowned with success
by the power of the ascetic merits of both
Of US.


to. After this, Parvata having summon-
ed king Srinjaya, that foremost of victori-
ous persons, said to him these words, O
foremost of Kurus :— st


tr. We have been highly gratified, O
king, with yotur hospitality given with every
sincerity. With our permission, O foree
most of men, think ef the boon you should
pray.

12. Let the boon, however, be such that
it may not create enmity with the gods or
bring on destruction to men. Accept then,
eae a boon, for you deserved one as we
think.


13. Hearing these words, Srinjaya
replied,—If you have been pleased with me
my object then has been gamed, for this
itself is the highest gain and the fruition of
all my desires.


14. ToSrinjaya who said so, Parvata
again said,—Pray, O king, for the fruition
of that wish which you are cherishing in
your heart for a long time,


15. Srinjaya answered,—I! wish to have
a son who will be heroic and endued with
great energy, firm in his vows and of long
life, highly blessed and effulgent like the
king of gods.


16. At this, Parvata said,—This youe
desire will be satisfied. Your son, however
shall not live fong, sincn you wish to have
such a son for prevailing over the king of
the gods.


17, Your son shall be known by the
name of Suvarnashthivin. He shall be
effulgent like the king of the gods, but
take care to protect him always from that
deity.


18—19. Hearing thdse words of the great
Parvata, Srinjaya begged that saint for
ordaining otherwise, saying,—May my sen
jive long, O Muni, through your asceti®?


4h : MAHABHARATA:


nyerit..oParvata, however, said nething, out.
of his partiality for Fndra.

go, Seeing the king very clreertess, T
said to himyg-—Think of me, O king, (tr your
distress), and [ shalf promise to come when
thought of by you. ioe

2% Do not grieve, O king. I will give
you back your beloved child alive, even if
he be dead. ;


"92. . Having said so to that king both of
us left him for coming to where we wished,
and Srinjaya returned to his palace. -


23. After sonre time had passed, tle
royal sage Srinjaya had born unto him a
highly powerful and energetic som


24. ‘The child grew up like a large lotus
int 4 lake, and became Siuwvartashthivin fr


‘a5. Fhis wondettul fact, O best of the
iXurus, soon became widely known over ttie
world. "The king of the gods also learnt -of
it as the outcome of Parvata’s boon, ;

°26. Fearing humiliation the slayer of
Vala and Vritra began to watch for the
loophotes in that prince.

27. He commanded His celestial Weapon
Thunder, standing before him, ir embodied
form saying,—-Go, O powerful one, and
assuming the form of a tiger kill this prinee,

z8—2g. When grown up, this child of
Srinjaya may, by his’ deeds humiliate ‘me,

Yhunder, as Parvata thas said, thus
addressed by Shakra, the celestial weapon
“Sunder, that -sabjugator-of enemry’s to vns,
began from that day to continually wateh
for the Weak points of the prince.

go. ‘Srinjaya, meanwhile, having obtain-
ed that child-who was effulgent like Indra
himself, beeame filled with joy. Tbe king,
accompanied by his wives, and the other
ladies of his household, took up his quarter
in the midst of a forest.


* 31. One day, on the bank of the Bhagi-


_rathee, the boy accompanied by his nurse,


“it the nurse cried aloud in grief. -


wan here and -there in play.
42, Though only five years’ old, his


‘prowess, even then, resembled that of a
While hus playing |
she child met a powerful tigér that attacked |


spowerfnul’ elephant,


him suddenly,


33.° The infarit prince ‘trembled greatly | ‘


vag he was being mangled by the tiger and
svon fell down dead on the Earth. ©


34. Having killed the prince, the liger


“through Indra’s' powers of delusion, va- | '


‘nished there and then.


35. Hearing the cries of the nurse, the


king in great anxiety ran there.


ordained must take place.
‘to make it otherwise. ;


Seeing |


36. He saw his ‘sow there, his blbod' -
quaffed off and lying dead on the gryund!
like the moow dropped from the sky. .

a7. ‘Taking up or his lap the boy bathed
in blood, and the king, with heart stricker'
with grief, began to lament piteously.


38. The queen also smitten with sorrow,
and crying, quickly ram where king Sbrin-
jaya was. ‘

-39. Inthat plight the king thought of.
me with rapt attention. Knowing that
the king was thinking of me bk appeared
before him, -—

40. Assailed with grief as the king was, -
‘t recounted to him alk those stories, O
‘king, that this hero of Vudu’s race has


‘already recited to you.


4


eeality as wellasin name, - oe de


a. F restored Srinjaya’s. child: to life
with Indra’s permission. ‘Fhat which is
Fe is impossible


42. After this ptinee Survarnashthivin.


‘of great renown and power began to
'


gladden the hearts of his parents.
“43. Of great prowess, he ascended ‘the’


‘throne of his father after -the tatter had
‘died, and reigned for one thousand and
ene hundred years.


44. He worshipped the gods it many
great sacrifices: accompanied with profuse
presents, Highly effulgent he gratified
the gods and the Pitris, .


45. Having begotten many sons alt of
whont by their children multiplied the race,
he breathed his last, O king, after many
years, ‘i

46. Do ‘you, O foremost of kings, re-
move this grief of your heart, as Keshava
has advised you, as also Vyasa of austere
penartices, ©

47. Rise up, O king, and carry the
burden ‘of this your ancestral kingdom,
and celebrate high and great sacrifices so
that you may obtain (hereafter) whatever
tegions you may wish to acquire.


or


| CHAPTER XXXII.


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
- PARVA.)—Continueds_


Vaishampayana said :—
1.. ** Dwaipayana-Vyasa, that | great
ascetig conversant with the .truths of re+
ligion, spoke again -to- king Yudhisthira,
who still. remained silent and plunged in
griel. SSS


SHANTI


eso
Vyasa said =~
.2. ‘O you having eyes like fotus petals,
the protection of subjects is the duty of
kings.. Those men who are always ob-
setvant of duty tegard duty to be all
powerful. '
3. Do you, therefore, O king, follow.
youc forefathers, The penances are the
duty of the Brahmanas. ‘This is the eternal
prescription of the Vedas.


4. Penances, therefore, O foremost of
Bharata’s race, are the eternal duty of
the Brahmanas. A Kshatriya’s duty is to
protect all persons. :


5. That man, who addicted to earthly ob-
jects, disregards wholesome restrictions, that
man who transgresses at social harmony,
should be punished with a strong hand.


- 6—7. The fool who tries to transgress
authority, be he an attendant, a ‘son or
even a saint—indeed all such sinful men,—
should by every means be punished or even
killed. That king who behaves otherwise
incurs sin. weet
8. He who does not protect ‘morality
when it is being disregarded, is himself a
tresspasser of ‘the same. ‘he Kouravas
transgressed morality. They have with
their followers been killed by you. - :


_ 9. You have simply observed the duties
of your own order. Why then, O son of
Pandu, do you indulge in such grief 7
The king should kill ‘those that deserve
death, make gifts to persons deserving of
charity, and protect his subjects according
‘to the sacred laws.’


Yudhisthira said:— ~


10, ‘Ido not doubt your words, O you
of great ascetic merit? Everything re-
garding morality and duty is well known
to you, O foremost of all persons, conver-
sant with morality and duty.


it. I bave, however, for the sake of
kingdom, caused many persons to -be
killed. ‘Those deeds, O Brahmana, -are
Durning and consuming me.’


Vyasa said:—
.. 12.
the actor, or ismen the doer? Is every-
thing the outcome of Chance in the world,
‘or are the fruits of our pristine deeds ?


13. If man, O Bharata, does all acts,
‘good or evil, being urged by the Supreme
Being, then the fruits thereof should
rattach to the’ Supreme Being himself.” -

- £4. ‘Tf a person cuts-down by an axe a
tree in the’ forest, ‘it ‘is the person that com-:
Jnils the sin and not the axe.


‘O Bharata, is the Supreme Being’


PARVA. 43
15 Or,- if it be said that, the axe being
only the material cause, the consequence of
the aét-sliould altach to the animate agent,
then the sin visits to the. person, who has
made the axe. ‘This, however, can scarcely.
be true. :


16, ‘If this be-‘not reasonable, O son of
Kunti, that one man should be visited by
the sin of an act done: by another, then,
guided by this, you should throw all res<
ponsibility upon the Supreme Being. :


17. If, on the other hand, man i¢ himself
the agent of allt his acts, good and evif,
then there is no Supreme Being and, there
fore, whatever you have done cannot, bring
evil consequences on you. :


18. No one, O king, can ever escape
from what is ordained. Hf, again, Destiny
be the cesult of pristine acts, then no sitt
visits one in this -hife even as the-sin of
cutting down a tree cannot ‘affect the
maker of, the axe. Pas


19. If you say. it is Chance only that
acts in the world, then such an act of desp
truction could never take, place nor will ever
take place.”


_ 20. TE it is necessary.to determine -what
is good and what bad. in the world, attend
to the scriptures. In those seripturés it. has
been. ordained that kings should stand with
the rod of punishment pplifted in their
hands, ‘ ,


21. I think, © Bharata, that acts, good
and bad,- are perpetually revolving here as
on awheel, and men reap the fruits df
those acts, acts, good or bad, that they do.


22. One sinful act begets . another.
‘Therefore, O foremost. of kings, avoid all
évii acts and do not indulge in. grief,


23. You should follow, O Bharata, the
duties,-even if reproachable, of your own
order. This self-destruction, O-king, does
-not appear in you. ; : :


. i
24. Expiations, O king, have, beed laid
down for (evil) acts. | He that is alive can
perform them, but ‘he that dies cannot pete
‘form them.. . . i


2g. Therefore, O king, without laying
down your life, perform «those expiatosry
acts. If you do not perform them. you. may
“have to repent in the next world.’ '


a2
CHAPTER XXXIH.-


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).— Continued.


* ‘ si
Yudhisthira said :—

i—3. ‘Sons, grandsons, brothers, sires
fathers-in-law, preceptors, maternal uncles,
gtandsires, many great ‘Kshatriyas, many
relatives, friends, companions, sisters’ suns,
and kinsmen, O grandfather, and many
foremost of men hailing from various coun-
tries, have been killed. Alt these, O grand-
father; have been caused to be killed by
myself alone, from desire of kingdom.


' 4. - Having brought about the death of
$0 many heroic kings who were always
righteous and all of whom had drunk Soma
in’ sacrifices, what end shall I obtaia, O
Breat ascetic, ; : P

- 5. Thinking that this Earth has beer
deprived of many foremost of kings, all of
whom enjoyed great prosperity, & burn
continually te this day.


6. Having seen this ‘destruction | of
kinsmen and of millions of other men, 1}
burn with grief, O grandfather.


7. Oh, what will be the condition of
those foremost of ladies who have been
‘deprived of sons, of husbands, and of
’ brothers,


' §. Censuring the Pandavas and the
Vrishnis as cruel murderers, ‘those ladies,
reduced greatly and sunk in grief, will
throw themselves on the ,Hacth. -


g—10. Not seeing their father and
brothers and husbands and sons, those
ladies renouncing their lives in agony will

oto the abode of Yama, O foremost of
‘Brahmanas! { have no doubt of this!
"The course of morality is very subtile. {t
is clear that we shall be guilty of killing
women tor this, D Sn ot .

tr. Having killed our kinsmen and
friends and thereby committed a sin which
cannot be expiated, we. shall have to fall
into hell with heads downwards, = |


12. O best of men,-we shall, therefore,
-teduce. our bodies with the austerest of
penances! Tell me, O grand-father, what
mode of life I should follow.’


Vaishampayana said :—

‘. 13. “Hearing these words of Yudhish-
thira, the Dwaipayana- Rishi, -having re-
flected keenly for sometime, said again to
the son of Pandu. €


Vyasa said:— —
14, ‘Remembering the duties of a


MAHABHARATA.


Kshatriya, O king, do rrot indulge in grief #
Alt those Kshatriyas, O foremost of
Kshatriyas, have beer killed while following
their legitimate duties.

85. Pursuing great prosperity and fame
on Earth, those foremost of men, all of
whom were liable to death, have died
through the influence of Time.


16. Yow have not been their slayer, nor
this Bhima, nor Arjuna, nor the twins. It
is ‘ime that took away their lives accord
ing to the great law of change.


1% ‘Yime has neither mother, nor
father, nor anybody to whonr he shows any
mercy. He is the witness of the acts of
al creatures. By him have they beew
snatehed away.


18 ‘Fhis battle, UO forenrost of Bharata’s
race, was only an occasion ordained by
him. He brought out the destruction of
creatures through the instrumentality of
Time. In this manner it displays its
irresistible power.

tg. Know that Tine depends upon the
fetters of action and is the witness of alb
actions, good and evi. Ht is ‘ime that
brings about the fruits, pleasurable or
miserable, of our actions.


20. Think, O mighty-armed one, of the
acts of those Kshatriyas that have beer
killed. “hose acts were the causes of their
destruction and it js on account of them
that they have died.


at. Think also of your own acts of
observances of vows with controlled mind.
And think also how you have been coma
pelled by the Supreme Ordainer to do such
an act, :


22. As a weapon made by a smith or
carpenter is under the control of the person
who uses it, and moves as he moves it,
likewise this universe, controlled by actions
done in Time, moves as those actions move *
it. ae . ;
23: Beholding that the births and deaths
of creatures take place withoat any percep-
tible cause and order, grief and joy are
absolutely useless, é


24. Although this confusion of your
heart is a mere delusion, still, if you like, O
king, perform expiatory rites, : :

‘25. Itis heard, O Partha, that the gods
and the Asuras fought against each other.
The Asuras were the elder, and the gods
the younger brothers.


26... Seeking prosperity, they fought a
dreadful battle between them.. The fight
lasted for thirty-two thousand years,


27. Converting the Earth to one vast sea


SHANTI PARVA,


ef blood, the gods killed the Daityas and
occupied the celestial region.


~ 28. Having occupied the Earth, a host
of Brahmanas, conversant with the Vedas,
armed themselves, stupefied with _ pride,
with the Danavas for helping in the fight,


29. They were known by the name of
Shalavrika and were eighty-eight thousand
in number.
Rilled by the gods.


30. Those wicked persons who desire
to root out virtue and encourage. sinfulness
deserve to be killed even as the furious
Daityas were killed by the gods.


gi. If by killing a single individual a
family may be saved, or, if by killing a
single family the whole kingdom’ may be
oneegs such an act of slaughter is not
sinful.


32. Sin, O king, sometimes becomes
virtue, and virtue sometimes becomes sin.
The learned know which is which. ,


33. Therefore, console yourself, O son
of Pandu, for you are well readin the
scriptures. You have, O Bharata, only
followed the path of the very gods.


34. Men like yourselves never go to hell,
O foremost of Pandu’s race! Comfort these
your -brothers and all your friends, O
scorcher of foes.


35~-36. He who deliberately commits
sinful acts, and committing, them feels no
compunction but continues the same as
before, is known asa great sinner. There
is no expiation for him, and his sins never
disappear. .

37. You are born in a: noble family.
Urged by the sons of others, you have most
reluctantly done this, and having done this
you repent for it.


38. The rite of Horse-sacrifice, has been
indicated as an expiation for you. Make
preparations for that sacrifice, O king, and
you will be freed off of all your sins.


-39. Having defeated his foes with the
help of the Maruts, Indra gradually cele-
brated .a hundred sacrifices and became
Shatakratu. ;


40. Freed from sin, occupying heaven,
and having obtained many blissful regions
and great happiness and prosperity, Shakra
surrounded by the Maruts, is shining .in
beauty, and lighting up all the quarters
with his effulgence. :


41. The lord of Shachi is worshipped in
ithe heaven by the Apsaras. The Rishis
‘and the other gods all adore him with
‘Tespect. .


4z, You have” obtained the? Earth


All of them, however, were.


47


through your prowess. All the kings have
been defeated by you, O sinless one, through
your prowess.


43. Proceeding with your friends to their .
kingdoms, O king, install their brothers,
sons, or grandsons on their thrones.


44. Treating kindly even the children in
the womb, make your subjects glad and
happy, and govern the Earth. :


45- Install on their thrones the daughters
of those that have no sons. Women are
fond of pleasure and power. By this they
will shake off their sorrows and become
happy. - : :

46. Having comforted the.entire empire
in this way, O Bharata, worship the gods
in a Horse-sacrifice as did the victorious’
Indra in days of yore, It is not proper for
tts to grieve for those great Kshatriyas, O
foremost of Kshatriyas. ‘


_47. Stupefied by the power of the Des-
troyer, they have died while, satisfying the
duties of their own order. ; a

48. You have performed the duties of. a

Kshatriya and obtained the Earth throuless.
Follow your own duties, O son- of Kunti,
for then, O Bharata, you will enjoy happi-
ness in the next world,’ ”’ ;


(CHAPTER XXXV. -


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA -
: PARVA).-~Continued,
Yudhishthira said:— . ee
1. ‘What are the necessary: rites of.
expiation ? And what are those acts which


one must do for being released from sin?
Tell me this, O grandfather. '


Vyasa said:—

2. ‘Having omitted to perform those
acts that have been ordained, and done
those that have been forbidden, and having
behaved deceitfully, aman becomes lable
to perform expiation, ‘


3—8. The Brahmacharin, who rises from
bed after the sun rise, or goes to bed while
the sun is setting, one who has a rotten nail
or black teeth, one whose younger brother
marries first, one who marries before his
elder brother.is married, one who has been
guilty of Brahmanincide, one who speaks
ill of others, one *who marries a younger
sister before the elder sister has been
married, one who marries an elder sisier
after having married a younger one, one
who does not observe his vow, one kill who


48


a saint, one who imparts a knowledge of the.
Vedas to a unworthy person, one who does
not impart a knowledge thereof to a worthy
person, one who takes many lives, one who
sells ‘Hesh, one ‘who has abandoned his
(sacred) fire, one who sells the knowledge of
the Vedas, one who kills this preceptot or a
woman, one born in a sinful family, one
who kills an animal wilfully, one who gives
fire toa Awelling house, one who lives by
deceit, one who disobeys his preceptor, and
one Who has violated agreement,—these
ail are guilty of sins requiring expiation.
_ @ T shall now mention other acts which
men should not do, oes. acts that are for-
bidden by men and the Vedas. Listen to
‘me with rapt attention.


to—13. The rejection of one’s own
religion, the following of other people’s
weligion, assisting at the sacrifice or the
religious rites of one who does not deserve
such assistance, eating of forbidden food,
“deserting ‘one who seeks refuge, neglect in
‘naimaining servants and dependents, sell-
ing salt and treacle, killing ‘of dirds and
rarkwvals, ‘cefusal, though able ‘to beget
-children, upon a soliciting woman, negti-
wence of making the daily offering, negli-
gence to present-the dakshixa, hamiliating
a Brahmana,—these alf are considered as
forbidden acts by persons conversant with
duty. - - ;
14. The son that quarrels with the
father, the pefsdn. who violates the bed of!
his preceptor, one who neglects to beget
children -on ‘his ‘wile, are/ail sinfal, QO: fore-
most of men. oe
15. I have now described to you in
brief as also in detail, those-acts and omis-
isions >by which a man is compelied to
aperform -expiation.


16. Listen ‘now to the «circumstances
under which men, by even commiting these
acts, are not sullied with sin.


17. 1f.a Brahmana well acquainted with
‘the Véedas'takes‘up arnis and tries to kill
“you in'batile, you may proceed against him
‘for taking ‘his life. ‘By ‘such an act the
“glayer does not become guilty of Brahmani-

cide.

1 118. “Shere is:a ‘Mantra in.the Vedas, O
‘ison of Kunti, that.sanctions it. I describe
‘to you only those practices which are sanc-
‘tioned by the authority of the Vedas.


¥9. ‘One who kills a ‘Brahmana -who
‘deviates from ‘his‘own duties ‘and: who:goes
‘armed for kitting ‘a man, ‘does ‘net truly
“become the killer'of‘a‘Brahmana. In-such
“a’case it is ‘the ‘anger ‘of the'slayer-that
‘proceeds against the anger‘of the-slain,


a0. . A.-person -dy, drinking ialcohol .ua- -detali,’e?


MAHABHARATA.


knowingly or upon the advice of a virtuous
physician when his life is in danger, should
have the expiatory rites performed once
more in his case. ;


2t. All that { have told you, O son of,
Kunti, about the eating of forbidden food,
may be purified by such expiatory rites.


22. Knowing the preceptor’s wife at
the preceptor’s behest, does not stain the
pupil. ‘The sage Uddalaka caused his son
Shwetaketu to be begotten by a disciple.


_ 23. A person by committing theft for
his preceptor in a time of distress, is not
sullted by that sin. One, however, who
commits theft for procuring enjoyments for
himself, becomes stained.


24. One is not sullied by stealing from
other than Brahmanas in times of distress
and for the sake of his preceptor. Only
one who steals under such circumstances
without reserving for himself any portion
thereof, is not sullied by sin.


23. A falsehood may be. uttered for
saving one’s own life or that of another,
or for the sake of one’s preceptor, or for
gratifying a woman, or for bringing about
a marriage.

26. One’s vow of celibacy is net broken
‘by having nocturnal polutions, In such
cases the expiation consists in the pouring
of libations of clarified butter on the

27. If the elder brother'is killed or hat
‘teft the world, the ‘younger brother does
not ‘commit sin by marrying. He who
‘solicited by -a woman, ‘knows her committs
no sin. : :


28. One stiould not kill or cause to-be
killed an animal except in a sacrifice.
Animals have become sacred for the kinds
ness shown towards them by the Creator
‘himself ‘in the ordinance laid-down by him,

zg. By making a gift unknowingly to an
undeserving Brahmana one does not com
mit sin. The ignorant omission of ‘be
having with liberality towards a deserving
-person does not lead-to sin. :


30. By ‘forsaking an unchaste wife ‘one
‘does notincur sin. By such treatment the
woman herself. may be ‘purified iwhile .the
‘husband may avoid:sin. :


31. ‘One who ‘knows the true usesof the
Soma juice, does not commit sin by selling
it. By dismissing a servant who is incap-
able of doing service, one is not visited with


Site 6° .


32. 1 have now described those-acts by


deing which one..does ‘not ‘commit ‘sin, d


shall now speak to you of expiation ia


'


SHAKTI PARVA,


- CHAPTER XXXVEL


RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continued.


Vyasa said :— ;

1. ‘By penances, religious rites, and
gifts, O Bharata, aman purify his sins if
he does not commit them again.

2-3. By living upon only one meal a
day, procured by begging, by doing all
his‘acts himself, by going about abegging
with a human skull in one hand and a staff


with a skull og it ia another, by becoming.


a Brahmacharia and always ready for work,
by renouncing.ali malice, by sleeping on
the naked earth, by declaring his offence
publicly, by doing all this for full twelve
years, a person can cleanse himself from
the sin of a Brahmanicide, —

4—6. By perishing by the weapons of a
person living by the use of arms, of one’s
éwn accords and upon the advice of per-
sons read in the scriptures, or by throw-


ing one’s selfdown, for three times, with |


head downwards, upon a burning fire, or
by walking a hundred Yojanas reciting. the
Vedas, or by presenting one’s all to @
Brahmana well read in the Vedas, or at
least so much by which he would Jive com-
fortably for life, or a house properly fur-
nished, and by protecting kine and Brah-
manas, one .may be purged of the sim of
Brahmanicide,

‘7. By living upon poor diet every day
for six years, a person may be purged off
that sin. By observing a more difficult vow
about food one may be cleansed in three
years. :


8—to. By living upon one meal a month,
one may. be ‘cleansed in. a year. By ‘an
absolute fast, one may be. cleansed within
avery short time, one is again purified by.
a Horse-sacrifice. Men that haye been
guilty of Brahmanicide and who have
suceeded in taking the final bath at the
completion of the Horse-sacrifice, become
washed off all their sins. his is highly
authoritative injunction of the Shratzs.
One again, by renouncing his life in a
battle undertaken for a Bralmrana, becomes
cleansed of the sin of Brahmanicide.


‘a1. By giving away a hundred thousand
kine to deserving persons, one becomes
cleansed of the sin of Brahinanicide as also
of all other sins.


‘tz. One that gives away twenty-five
thousand kine of the Kapila breed all of
them having calves becomes cleansed of afl
his sins. :


+ 49

13. One who,-at the time. ‘of. death,
presents a thousand kine with calves tv
poor but deserving persons, becomes freed
from sin. es :

14. That man, O king, who gives away
a hundred horses of the Kamvoja breed to
Brahnianas of regulated ¢onduct, beconies
freed from sin, ; ;

1§.. That man, O Bharata, who gives ta
even one man all that he asks for, and who,
having given it, does not advertise his acty
becomes freed from sin,


16. Ifa person who has once taken wine,
drinks hot, water, he purifies himself botlr


here and hereafter. :

17. By falling from the summit of @
mountain or entering a burning fire, or by
going on journey for ever after renouncing:
the world, one is freed from all sing.

.18. -By celebrating the sacrifice laid’
down .by Vrihaspati, a Brahmana whoa
drinks wine may obtain the region of
Brahmana. This has ‘been said by Brah-
mana himself, . 3 : =

19. If a person, after having drunk wine,
becomes humble and makes a gift of land,
and abstains himself from it ever aftere
wards he becomes purified and cleansed,

‘20. The person that has violated his’
preceptor’s bed, should lie down on a sheet
of heated iron,, and having cut off the
| male organ, should leave the world and live
in the woods,’ ‘with eyes always turned
upwards, rs, Ss i

2t. By renouncing one’s body, one
becomes cleansed of all his’ sins. Women,
by leading a tegular life for one year;
become freed off of all their sing. , ;

22. The person who practises a very,
tigid vow, or gives away the whole of his
wealth, or dies in a battle fought for the
sake of his preceptor, becomes {reed off of


all bis sins. ‘

23- One who utters untruth before one’s
preceptor or acts against his wishes,
becomes freed of that sin by doing somes
thing agreeable to one's preceptor.


24. One who has deviated front tha
vow of celibacy may become freed of ‘that
sin by being clad in a bide of a cow for aix,
months and observing the penances laid,
down for Brahmanicide,


25. One who has been guilty of adultery
or of theft, is purified by practising rigi¢
vows fora year, ,


26., When one steals another"s property,
oné should, by all means in his power,’
return to the said party another property
of the value of what has been stolen,
One may then be freed of the 5jn,


xe

ay. The, younger.. brother. who. has
married before his elder brother is married,
as also the elder brother whose younger
brother has married before him, becomes
freed by observing a rigid vow, with con-
trolled mind for twelve nights. :

28. The younger brother, however,
shoufd- marry again for rescuing his de-
parted manes. Upon such second mar-
riage the first wife’ becomes purified and
her husband himself would not commit
sin by taking her.


29. Men well read in the scriptures
say that women may be freed of even the
greatest sins by practising the vow of
Chaturmasya living all the while upon
restricted and pure diet.


30. Persons well read in the scriptures
take. no notice of the sins that women
may commit at heart. Whatever their
sins may be. they are cleansed by their
menstrual course like a metallic plate that is
cleansed with ashes,


3t. Plates desercated by a Shudra eating
off it, or a vessel of the same metal that
has been smelt by a. cow, or stained by a
Brahmana’s Gandusha, may be cleansed
by the ten purifying substances.


32. It has been ordained that a Brah-
mana should acquire and practise all the
virtues. For a Kshatriya it has been or-
dained that he should acquire and practise
one fourth of all virtues.


33- So, a Vaishya should practise less
(than a Kshatriya’s) by a fourth, and a
Studra less (than a Vaishya’s) for a fourth.
The gravity or lightness of sins of each of
the four orders, should thus be ascertained,


34. Having killed a bird or an animal,
or cut down living trees, a person should
declare his sin publicly and fast for three
nignts.

35. By having intercourse with one
whom intercourse is forbidden, the expia-
tion:consists in wandering in wet clothes
and sleeping on a bed of ashes,


36. These, O king, are the expiations
for.sins, as laid down in scriptures -and by
Brahman himself.


37. A Brahmana may be freed off of all
sins by reciting the Gayatri in a sarced
place, living all the’ while upon restricted
fare, casting off malice, abandoning anger
and hate, unaffected by praise and blame,
and observing the vow of silence,


°38. He should during the day be under
shelter of the sky and should sleep in the
same way at night, thrice during the
day, and thrice during the night, he


MAHABHARATA,


should also. plunge with the clothes into
river or lake for performing his ablutions.


39. Practising rigid) vows, he should
abstain from speaking with women,
Shudras, and degraded persons. A Brah-
mana by observing such rules may be freed
off of all all sins unconsciously committed
by him.

40. A person reaps in the next world
the fruits, good or bad, of his acts here
which are all seen by the elements. Pro«
portionate to virtue or vice, one enjoys or
suffers the consequences.


41. By knowledge, by penances, and
by pious acts, therefore, one multiplies his


happiness. One, therefore, may likewise
increase his misery by committing sinful
acts.

42. One should, therefore, perform
righteous’ deeds and avoid altogether
sinful ones. :

43. I have now, described what the


expiations of the sins are. There is expia-
tion for every sin except those that are
(highly heinous.) :


44. Asregards sins regarding unclear
food and thelike, and improper speeches,
etc., they are of two classes, viz., those


| committed knowingly and those that com-


mitted unconsciously.


45. Alfsings that are committed know-
ingly are serious, while those that are
committed unwittingly are light. There is -
expiation for both. ‘


46. Forsooth, sin is capable of being
washed. away by following the ordinancess
Those ordinances, however, have been: laid
down only for them who have faith in God.


47. They are not for. atheists or those’
that have no faith, or those who are full of


_ pride and malice,


48. A person, O foremost of men, wha
seeks well-being both here and hereafter,
should, O foremost of virtuous men, always.
follow virtue, hear the righteous, and
satisfy the duties that have been ordained


for him.


49. Therefore, for the reasons already
pointed out by ote, you, O king, shall be
freed off of all your sins, for you have slain
your enemies in the discharge of your
duties 4s a king and for the protection of
your life and inheritance.


0. , Or, if despite.it; you still consider
yourself sinful, perform expiation. Do not
cast away your life for such grief that doeg


“not become a wise man.’


SHANTI PARVA.


Vaishampayana said :—

5st. “Thus accosted by the holy Rishi,
king Yudhisthira the just, having thought
for a short time, said thesé words to the |
sage,”


ma


CHAPTER XXXVI.


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARV A).— Continued.


Yudhisthira said :—


1. “Tell me, O grandfather, what food
$s clean and what, unclean, what gift is
praiseworthy, and who is the deserving, and’
who, undeserving (recipients of gifts).


Vyasa said :-—

_ 2 Regarding it is cited a old discourse
between the ascetics and that lord o

creation, vis., Manu. ,


3—~5. Inthe Krita age, a concourse of
Rishis, of rigid vows, having approached
the great and powerful lord of creation,
Manu, while seated at his ease, requested
him to describe duties, saying,—Wiat food
should be taken, who isto be. considered a
deserving person (for gifts), what’ gifts
should be made, how should a person study
and what penances should one perform and
how, and what acts should be done and
what acts should not be done. O lord of
creation, tell us everything in detail, Thus
solicited by them, the divine and self-sprung
Manu said to them,—Listen to me as
1 describe the duties in brief and in


detail.
6—7, In regions which have not been
forbidden, silent recitation of sacred


Mantras, homa round fasts, knowledge of
soul, sacred rivers, regions inhabited by
men devoted to pious acts,—these have
been laid down as purifying acts and
objects. Certain mountains also are purify-
ing, as also the eating of gold and bathing
in waters into which have been washed
gems and precious stones. 2 :


8. Sojourn to sacred pilgrimages an
eating of sanctified butter,—these also,
forsooth, speedily cleanse a man.


. No man would ever be called wise if
heis proud. If he wishes to live long, he
should for three nights drink hot water as
an expiation for the same.


10. Refusal totake what is not given,
gift, study of sacred books, penance,
abstention from injury, truth, freedom from
anget;- and adoration of the gods in
sacvifices,—these are the marks of Virtuce


gt


11. Virtue again, according to tine And.
place, becomes sin.. Thus misappropriation
of another’s property, untruth, and injury
and killing, may under Special circum+
‘stances, become virtue. ee 7

12-13. To persons capable of judging, acts
are of two kinds, vig., virtuous and sinful.
From the worldly and the Vedic points of
view again, virtue and vice become good or
bad. From the Vedic point of view, virtue
and vice, would be classed under action and
inaction. Inaction, #.e., abstention from
Vedic rites leads to liberation (from re-birth
while the fruits of action z. ¢., performance
of Vedic rites, leads to repeated death and
re-birth. From the worldly point of view,
acts that are evil, lead to sins and those that
are good, to virtue. From the worldly point
of view, therefore, virtue and vice are to be
marked out by the good and the evil
character of their fruits,


14. Even evil acts, when perfomed for
divine purposes, the scriptures, life itself,
and the means by which life is sustained,


-yield good consequences.


15.- Expiation has been laid down, for
an act undertaken for the purpose of
doing mischief .(to some one) in the future,
as wellas for an act done whose conse-
quence is apparently mischievous,


16—17, When an act is performed from
wrath or misjudgment, then expiation
should be performed by paining the body,
guided -by example by scriptures, and by
reason, When any action, is performed
for pleasing or displeasing the mind, the sin
originating thereform may be cleansed by
pure food and recitation of Mantras. -


18. The king who does not use (ina
particular case) the rod of chastisement,
should fast for one night. The priest who
dees not advise the king to inflict punish.
ment (in a proper case) should fast for
three nights.


1g. Aman who, from grief, attempts _
to commit suicide by means of weapons,
should fast for three nights.


20. There is no expiation for them who
do not observe duties and practices of their
order and caste, country, and family, and
who forsake their own creed. -


21. When any. doubt arises regarding ~
what should. be. done, .it should be settled
by the injunction of the scriptures which
ten persons versed in Vedic scriptures or
three of those who frequently recite them
may declare..


22. The bull, earth, little ants, worms
born in dirt, and poison, should net be


eaten.by Brahmanas,


- 44


") 24. They should also abstain fromeating
fishes that have ne scales, and four-legged
aquatic animals fike frogs and others;
except, the tortoise. - ;

24—26. A Brahmana shoiild not also
‘take water-fowils called Bhasas, ducks,
“Suparnas, Chakravakas, diving ducks;
cranes, erows; shags, vultures, hawks;


owls, as also all four-legged carnivorous.


animals and that have sharp and long
teeth, and birds, and animals having two
ieeth and those having four teeth, as also
the milk of the sheep, the she-ass, the shes
carbel, the newly-calved cow, women, and
deer, . ee 8
27. Beside this, the food that has been
offered ta the departed manes, that which
has been cdoked by a womati who has
recently given birth. to a dhitd; and food
wooked: by a unknown person, should not be
taken. The milk also of a cow that has
recently calved should not be drunk:


_ 28. Ifa Braimana takes food whick has
been cooked by a Kshatriya; it diminishes:
his power; if be takes the food supplied by
a Shadra, it decreases his Brahmanic
effulzence; and if he takes the food
supplied by a goldsmith of a wottiatt who


has umeither husband nor children, it de-


treases his longevity.

- 29. The food supplied by an usurer is
equfvaleng to ditt, while that supplied by a
prostitute is equivalent to semen. ‘The food
also supplied by persons who connive at the
unchastity of their wives, and by persons
who are hetipecked, is forbidden.

30-33. The food supplied by a person
Selected (for receiving present) at a sacri-
fice , by one who doés not enjoy his riches
or make any gifts, that supplied by one who
sells Soma, or one who is a shoe-maker, by
an unchasté woman,by a washermah, bya
physician, by watchmen, by a number of
persons, by one who is marked by a whole
village, by one who lives on the income of
dancing girls, by persons marrying before
theic eldér brothers are married, by profes-
sional penegyrists and bards, and by gam-
blerg, the food also which is brought with the
left raid or which is stale, the food which
is mixed with alcohol, the food which is
already tasted; and the residue of a feast,
should not be taken (by a Brahmana.)
Cakes siigarcanes, potherbs; and rite boiled
in sugared milk; whett shorn of relish,
should ot be taken.

34:, The powder of; fried Barley and of
othee sorts of fried graii, inixed with
curds; when stale with age; should not be
taken. Rice boiled in sugared milk, food
mixed with the Tila seed, meat, and cakes,
that have udi been dedicated to the gods,


MAHABHARATA.


should not be taken by Brahiidras, wie”
live as householders. Having first pleased

the gods, Rishis, guests, Pitris, and the
tutelary deities, a Brabmana householder
should thei: take his food. A householder.
by living thus in his own house beco mes
like a person of the mendicaut order thaé

has renounted the world.


37. A man of such conduct even living
with his ‘wives aS a houseliolder, earns
great religious merit. No one should make
a gilt’ for gaining fanie, or ftom fear of


censure or ta a benefactor,


38—39. A pious man would nevet make~-
gifts to p.rsons living by singing and
dancing of'to those that are jesters by pro=
fessiou; or to a drutikard, or to a mad
man, or toathief, or toa slanderer or to
an idiot, or to one that is’ pale colored ’
orto one that is defective of a jimb, or td
a dwarf, or to wicked persoh, of to oné
born in'’a degraded and wicked family;
or to one that has not been sanctifted by
the observance of vows, . sa:


‘40. No gift should be madetoa Brats
mana who has no knowledge of, the Vedas:
Gifts should be made to him only who is
well read in the Vedas. An improper gift
and an. improper acceptance beget bad
consequences to both the giver and thé
acceptor. — : :


43 As a person who tries to éross the
sea with the help of a rock or a mass of
catechu sinks with his support, so the ims |
proper giver and the acceptor buth sink
togethers .

42. As a fire that is covered with wet
fuel does not burn, so the acceptor of 4
gift who has not practised penances, and. ~
piety and studied Vedas cannot confer any
benefit (ipon the giver.) " :

43. As water id askull and milk ina
bay made of dog-skin beconie impure fod |
the uncleariness of the vessels in’ whiclt
they are kept; so the Vedas become fruit-
less in a persun who is uet of good.
conduct, ; . ‘

44. Oné tay give fron pity to a low
Brahmana who is without Mantras and
vows, who is innocent of the scriptures and
who is envious. ms

45. One may; fro pity, give to a:
persom whois poor or afflicted or Hl. But
he should not make charities to such a ~
person with the belief that he would derive
any (spiritual) benefit from it or that he-
would acquire atiy religious merit by it.

46. Forsooth, a gift made toa Brahmang .
ignorant of the Vedas, becomes perfectly
fruitless, for the shortcomings of the ree.
cipieny,


SHANTI PARVA.


_ 49. As ah elepliant made of wood, or
&n antelope made of leather, $0 isa Brah-
fmana who has not read the Vedas, All
the three have fAothing but names.


48. Asa eunuch cannot béget children
on women, as 4 cow does not procreats Gn
another cow, as a bird lives in vaiit that is
featherless, even so is a Brahmana that is
without- Mantras. ; :


49. As graia without kernel, as a well
without water, as libations poured en ashes,
even sois a gift toa Brahmana who -is
ignorant.

30. An wunleatned Brahmana is ati
enemy (to all) and is the destroyer of the
food that is offered to the gods and the
departed manes. A gift made to sucha
person becomes tiseless. -He is, therefore,
like a robber. He can iiever attain to
blissful regions hereafter. © ;

1. I have now told you in brief; O
Yadhishthira, all that was said by Manu
bi ‘that occasion. This high discourse
should be listened to by all, Q foremost of

harata’s race.! ”’ ™


é o


CHAPTER XXVIII.


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
. PARVA).—Continued.


Yudhisthira said :—


1. “O holy and great ascetic, I wish to
hear at length what the duties of kings
are and what the duties, in full, of all the
four ordeécs. :


2. I wish to hear; O foremost of Brah-


imaiias, how persons should behave in tinies
of distress, and how I miay subjugate the
world by following the path of morality.


3. This discourse on expiation, descri-
bing fasts and capable of extiting great
curiosity, has pleased nie.

4. The practice of yirtue and the per-
formance of royal duties are always incon.
sistent With each othet. I am always
perplexed to think how one may recoiicile
the two." ae :


Vaishampayana said:— .

5-6, ‘Then Vyasa, O king, that fore.
most of all persons. conversant with : the
Vedas, looking at that ancient and onini-
cient person, vis., Narada, -said.—It O
king; you wish to hear of duties and
morality at length, then ask Bhishma, O
rmighty-armed one; that old grandfather of
the Kurus, POPS


. fully how shall


ow


sy


7. Conversant: with aff duties and?
endued with universal knowledge that son
of Bhagirathi will remoye aif your doubts?
regarding the difficult subjects of duties.

8. That goddess, the celestial river of;
thrée courses, gave birth -to him. He saw,
with his. physical eyes all the celestials
headed by Indra. a

g. Having pleased with his dutiful,
services the celestial Rishis; headed by,
Vrihaspati, he acquired a knowledge of,
royal duties, : ;

16. That forentost one aniong the Kurus,
acquired a kriowledge also of that. science, .
with its interpretations, which Ushanas and;
the Rishi whe is the preceptor of the celes-
tials know. : -s

11. Having practised rigid vows, that
miglity-arimed one obtained a knowledge
of all the Vedas and their branches, from
Vashishitha and fron Chyavana of Bhrigu’s
race.


12. In the days-of yore he studied undej
the eldest son of the Grandfather himself, |
vis., the effulgent Sanatkumara, well con-:
versant with the truths of “niental and
Spiritual seietite. ,
13. He learrit the duties ii full of the
Vatis from Markandeya. ‘That foremost
of men. learnt the scietice’ from’ Rama and
Shakra, .

i4. Althoiigh borti as man, his death
itself isin his own hands,” Alihough ‘childs
less, yet he has many blissful regiong hergs
after as heard by us. , e

15. Rishis of great merit were his
courtiers. There is rotting on earth which
is unknown to hit. ee

16, Convergant witli ali duties and the
subtile truths 6f morality, he will deseriba
to you the. duty atid morality. See him
before he dies. ae

1. Thus accosted by him, the highs:
souled and wise son_of ,Kunti, said. tha!
following to Satyavati’s son Vyasa, that,
foremost of all orators...

Yudhisthira said :—

18. “Having caused a great and dreadful
destruction of kinsmen, I have offended
all and ani a destroyer of the Earth.

19. Having caused that Bhistma him
self, that honest warrior, to be Killed deceit.
1 approach him for asking
hint (about duties and morality) ?


>
Vaishanipayana said :— a
20. ‘Actuated by the desire of benefiting


all che four orders, the. mighty-arnied and
great chiel of Yadu’s race ouce more ade


84


dressed that foremost of kings (in the follow-
ing words} :—


Vasudeva said :—

at. ‘You should not thus continually
indulge in grief. Do, O best of kings,
what the hely Vyasa has said.


22. The Brahmanas, O mighty-armed
one, and these your highly energetic
brothers stand before you beseechingly like
persons soliciting Indra the gods of the
clouds at the close of summer.

23. The surviving kings, and the
peopte belonging to ail the four orders of
eu kingdom of Kurujangala, O king, are

ere, :


24. For the sake of doing what is agrees
able to these great Brahmanas, for satisfy-
ing the behest of your reverend senior
Vyasa of immeasurable energy, and at the
request of ourselves who are well-wishers,
and of Draupadi, O. destroyer of foes, do
what is agreeable to us, O slayec of foes,
and what is beneficial to the world. ,


Vaishampayana said :—


25. “Thus addressed by Krishna, the
great king (Yudhisthira) having eyes like
lotus petals, rose from his seat for the well-
being of the entire world.


27-28. That foremost of men, the illus-
trious Yudhisthira, solicited by Krishna
himself, by the Dwaipayana (Vyasa), by
Devasthana, by Jishnu, by these and
many others, shook off his grief, and
anxiety.

29. Fully conversant with the teachings
of the Srutis, with the science that explains.
them and with all that men usually hear
and all that is worthy of being heard, the
son of Pandu acquired peace of mind
and resolved upon what he should next do.


30. Surrounded by them all like, the
moon by the stars, the king, placing
Dhritarashtea at the head. started for the
city. ,

31. Desirous of entering the city,
Kunti’s son Yudhisthira, conversant with
every duty, worshipped the gods and thou-
sands of Brahmanas.-


' 32-33. Hethen got upon a new and
white car covered with blankets and deer-
skins, and ta. which were yoked sixteen
white bullecks endued with auspicious
marks, and which had been purified with
Vedic Mantras. Adored by panegyrists
and bards, the king got upon that car like
Soma riding upon his ewn -nectarine
‘wehicle.


\g4. His powerful brother Bhima took


MAHABHARATA.


the reins. Arjuna held over his head #
highly lustrous umbrella.


35. That white umbrella held upon the
car shone like a white eloud adorned with
stars in the sky.


36. The two heroic sons of Madri, v#z.,
Nakula and Sahadeva, took up two yak<
tails white asthe rays of the moon and let
with gems, for fanning the king.


37. The five brothers, adorned with
ornaments, having got upon the car, O
king, shorie like the five elements.


38. Riding upon another white car to
which were yoked horses fleet as thought,
Yuyutsu, O king, followed the eldest son
of Pandu.


39. Upon his own shining car of gold to
which were yoked Shivya and Sugriva,
Krishna, with Satyaki, followed the Kurus.


_ 40. The eldest uncle of Pritha’s son, O
Bharata, accompanied by Gandhari, head-
ed the train, upon a vehicle carried by
men.


41. The other Kuru ladies, as also Kunti
and Keishna, all proceeded on excellent
cars, headed by Vidura. |


42. Then followed aiarge number of
cars and elephants adorned with ornaments,
and the infantry and horses.


43.. His praises sung by sweet-voiced
panegyrists and bards, the king went to<
wards the city of Hastinapur.


44. Themarch,O mightysarmed one,
of kiag Yudhishthira, was so beautiful
that its like had never been witnessed on
Earth. Containing healthy and cheerful
men, the busy hum of numberless voices
was heard there.


4§. During the march of Pritha’s son,
the city and its streets were adorned with -
lively citizens.


46. The part through which the king
passed had been adorned with whtite
festoons of. flowers and numberless flags.
The streets of the city were perfumed with
incense.


47. The palace was covered with powder-
ed perfumes and flowers and fragrant
plants, and ornamented with garlands and
wreaths. ;


48. New metallic. jars, brimful with
water, weré kept at the door of every house,
and bevies of beautiful maidens stood at
different parts.


49. Accompanied by his friends, and
welcomed with .sweet words the son of
Pandu, entered the city through its well-


adorned gate.”


SHANTI PARVA,


CHAPTER XKXIX}


Fa
{RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continued.


Vaishampayana said :—


_L. “Then the sons ef Pritha entered the
city, thousands of citizens came out to see
the spectacle.


2. The well-adorned squares and streets,
with the crowd of men, shone like the ocean
rising at the rise of the mpon,


3. ' Thelarge palaces that stood on the
street-sides, gaily decked and full of ladies
seemed to shake, O Bharata, with their
fair denizens. -


4. With soft and modést voices they
@escribed the praises of Yudhishthira, of
Bhima and Arjuna, and of the two sons
of Madri. ,


“5. And they said,—You deserve ‘every
praise, O blessed princess of Panchala,
who wait by the side of these foremost of
men like Gautami by the side of the
(seven) Rishis.


6. «Your acts and vows have fruictfied,
O lady.’ Thus, O king, the ladies praised
the princess Krishna.


7. Praises being thus chanted, O Bharata,
and they conversing with one another, and
for the shouts of joy (uttered by the men),
the city became filled with a loud noise. —


8. Having passed through the streets
With becoming conduct, Yudhishthira ‘then
éntered the. beautiful palace (of the Kurus)
adorned with all ornaments.


“9. Approaching the palace, citizens and
villagers uttered speéches that were pleas-
ing to his ears.


10. ‘By good luck, O foremost of kings,
you have defeated your enemies, O slayer
ot foese By good luck, you have regained
your kingdom through virtue and prowess.


tt. Be, O foremost of king, our monarch
for a century and protect your sub-
jects virtuously like Indra protecting the
celestials’.


12—13. Thus welcomed at the palace- |
gate with words of blessings and accepting |


the bertedictions uttered by the Brahmanas
from all-sides, the king, graced with victory
and ‘the blessings of his people, entered
the palace resembling the mansion of
Indra himself, and then got down from
his car. ,


lt4. Entering the palace, Yudhishthita
approached the tutelary deities and addred
them with gems and scents and garlands,


355

15. Eridued with great fame and pros-
perity, the king came out once mote and
saw a number of Brahmanas waiting with
sacred articles in their hands.


16. Surrounded by those Brahmans
desirous of uttering blessings’ on him, the
king shane beautiful like the spotless moon
in the midst of the stars.

17—18. Accompanied by his priest
Dhaumya and his eldest uncle, the sen of ©
Kunti gladly adored, with due rites, those
Brahmanas with sweets, gems, and profusé
gold, and kine and dresses, O king, and
with various other articles that each de«
Sired.


19. Then loud acclamations of—This is
a blessed day,—arose, filling the entire sky,,
O Bharata. That sacred sound which was
sweet to the ear was highly gratifying to the
friends and well-wishers of the Pandavas.


20. The king heard that sound uttered
by those learned Brahmanas loud and clear.
like the sound of swans. He listened also
tothe melodious and significant speechés,.
of those persons well read in the Vedas.


21. Then arose, O. king, the peal of
drums and the ‘pleasant blare of conchs,
indicative of triumph. |


22. Some time.after, when the Brahma~
nas had become silent, a Rakshasa of the
name of Charvaka, who had disguised
himself as a Brahmana, addressed thé
king.

23—24. He wasa friend of Duryodhana
and stood there under the disguise of a
religious mendicant. With a rosary, with
a tuft of hair on his head, and with a staf€.
in his hand, he stood proudly and fearlessly


| in the midst of all those Brahmanas that -


had come therein thousands for. uttering for,
blessings, (upon the king) O king, and alt
of whom had practised penances and |
vows, -


25. That wicked Rakshasa, desirous of
doing evil to the high -souled Pandavas, and
without having consulted those Brahmanas,
said these words. to the king.


Charvaka said :~-


26. Making me. their spokeemad all
thesé Brahmanas, are saying,—Fie on you,
You are a-wicked king. - You area ‘des-
troyer of kinsmen.. :


27.. What will you gain, O son of
Kunti,' by having thus éxterminated your
race? Having killed also your elders and
preceptor, if is proper fot you to cast away
your lifé. - .

28. ‘Hearing these words of that wicked
Rakshasa, the Srahmanas there were


56
greatly moved. Cut to the quick. by that
Speech, they set up a loud ‘uproar.


29. And all of them, with king Vudhistc
ghira, O king, became silent from anxiety
and shame, — -


Yudhishthira said :—~

"go. ‘I bow down to you and solicit you
humbly, to be pleased with me. You
should net cry‘fie on me. | stall soon cast
off my life.’ ”


Vaishampayana said :—

‘ar, Then all those Barhmanas, O King,
Joudly said,—These are not our words.
Enoeperity to you, O king.


¥ ga. ‘Those gréat persons, well read in
the Vedas, with understandings rendered
«lear by penances, then learnt the disguise
sf the speaker by means of their spiritual
sight,


And they said :—


‘33. “This is the Rakshasa Charvaka,
the friend of Duryodhana. ‘Having put on
the guise of a religious mendicant, he seeks
bhe well-being of his friend Daryodhana.


1°34. "We have not, O you righteous soul,
Said anything of the kind. Drive away
your anxiety. May . , Prosperity be with you +
‘and your brothers.’ ?


Vaishampayana said:


35. ‘Those Brahmanas then, beside
themselves with anger, uttered’ the sound
hun. Freed off of all sins; they cengured
the sinful Rakshasa and killed him there.


36. - Consumed by the pow of those
Bratimavadins, Charvaka fell down dead,
fike‘a tree with all its blasted spouts by the


thunder of Indra.
4
37: Duly adored the Brahmanas went


away, “having pleased the king with their
dlessings.. Ihe royal son. of Pandu also,
with all his friends, became highly happy.”


CHAPTER. XL, |


{RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
, PARVA).—Continued.


Waishampayana said:—.

_ a2. “Then Devaki’s son Janarddana
endued with universal knowledge said to
king Yudhishthira who stood there with
Kis brothers,—'In this world, O friend, I
adore only the Brahmanas. They are gods
én Earth, have venom in their words, and
ave exceedingly easy to gratify,


| MAHABHARATA,


3. Formerly,.in the Krita age, O king,
a. Rakshasa ot the name of Gharvaka, U
mighfy-armed one, practised austere pe-
nancés for many yeats in Vadari.


4. Brahma cepeatedly asked him to ask
for boons. At last the Rakshasa prayed
for the boon,"O Bharata, of being freed
from tear of every being in the universe.


5. The Lord of the universe granted
that high boon of freedom from fear of aH
creatures, subject to the only condition
that he should be careful of how he offense
ded the Brahmahas,


»

6. Having obtained that boon, the
sinful and powerful Rakshasa of terrifi¢
deeds. and great power began to assail the
gods.


7. The gods, oppressed by the power of
the Rakshasa, assembling together, ap-
proached Brahman, for bringing about their
énemy’s destruction.


8. The eternal god answered them, O
Bharata, saying,—I have already arranged
the means ‘by which the death of this
Rakshasa may soon be encompassed.


g. There will be a king of the name
of Duryodhana. Among men, he will be
the friend of this creature. Out of affec+
tion towards him, the Rakshasa will insulg
the Brahmanas.

‘10. Pained by the wrong he will inflict
upon ‘them, the Brahmanas, whose power
isin speecly, willin anger censure him, at
which be ‘will die,

‘a1. That’ Rakshasa Charvaka, fe) fores
most of kings, killed by the curse of the
Brahmanas, lies there, dead. Do not, O
foremost of Bharata’s race, grieve.

12. Your ‘kinsmen, O. king, have all
died while performing the Kshatriya duties,
Those leading Xshatriyas, those high«
souled heroes, have all gone to heaven,


13. Do you attend to your duties now,
O you of unfading glory, do not grieve.
Kill your enemies, protect your. subjects,
and worship the Brahmanas,’ ”’


pit


ee


cH APTER XLF


(RAJ XDHARMANUSHASANA
‘PARVA).—Continued.


Vaishampayana, said :—


1. “Shorn of grief and anxiety the royat
son@f Kunti, took his seat, with face east.
wards, on an excellent seat made of gold,


SHANTI PARVA,


_°3. On atiother seat, beatiful and shin-
tng and made of gold, sat, with face
directed towards him, those two destroyer
‘of foes, vis., Satyaki and Vasudeva.
_ 3. Placing the king if their midst, on
his two sides sat Bhima and Arjuna upon
two beautiful seats Set with gems.

4. Upon a white ivory throne, decked
with gold, sat Pritha with Sahadeva and


Nakula.


g. Sudharman, and Vidura, and Dhau-
mya, ahd the Kara king Dhritarashtra,
‘each sat separately on separate Seats that
shone with the effulgetice of fire.

6. Vuyutsa and Sanjaya and the illus-
trious Gandhari, all sat down where king
Dhritarashtra tiad sat.

Seated there, thé righteos king,
touched the beautiful white Bowers: Swas-
tikas, vessels full of various articles, earth,
gold, silver, and gems.

8—d. Then héaded by the priést all the
Subjects came to see king Yudhishthira,
bringing with them various kinds of sacred
articles.

_g. Then éarth and gold, aiid tany sorts
‘ot gems, and all other articles in profusion
which were necessary for the performance of
the coronation rite, were brought there.

toi. There were golden jars britiiful
With water, those made of copper and
silver and éarth, flowers, fried paddy
Kusha grass, cow’s milk, (Sacrificial) fuel
tonsisting df the wood of Shari, Pippala,
and Palasa, hettey, clarified butter, (sacri-
ficial) ladles made of Udumvara, and
conchs adorned with gold. °

12, hen requested by Kristina; the
priest Dhauniya, constructed according td
tule; an altar gradually inclining towards
the east ahd the fiorth. A

13---14. Making the great Yudhishthira
then; with Krishna the daughter of Drii-
pada, seated upon a hahdsomé seat, called
Sarvatobhadra, with firm feet and covered
with tiger-skin and effulgent, began to
pour libations of clarified butter upen the
sacrificial fire with proper Mantras.

_1§-=16. Then: rising from his . seat,

tishna took up the sanctified conch,
poured the watér it céntained upon the head
of king Yudhishthira the gon of Kunti.
‘The royal sagé Dhritatashtra and all the


Subjects also did the same as requested by


Krishna. Thus bathed with the sanctified
water of the conch, the son of Pandu then,
With his brothers; looked highly beautiful.


ty. Then Pandavas ahd Anakas and
drums were beat. King Yudhishthira, duly
accepted the present made to him by the


8


37


subjects. Always raking’ eréugh of
presents in profusion in all his sacrifices,


the king honoted his subjects in return.


18, He gavé a thousand nishkas to the
Brahmanas who uttered blessings on him.
All of them had studied the Vedas and
were wise aiid well-behaved. bs

_ 16206. Pleased (with presents), the
Brahmanas, O king, wished him prosperc=
ity and victory, and with voice melodious
like that of swans, chanted his praises, saying
—O Yudhishthira of mighty arms, by good
hick, O son of Pandu, you have acquired
victory. By good luck, O highly effulgent
hero, you have regained your positidi
through prowess. , ,

21—21. By good hick, the wielder of
Gandiva, and Bhimasena, and yourself, O
king, and thé two sons of Madri, aré alt
well, faving killed your foes and escaped
alive from this battle, destructive of heroes.
Do you, O Bharata) attend forthwith ta
thosé acts that should next be done.’

23. Thus worshipped by those piois
men, king Yudhishthira, with his friends,
became installed onthe throne of a large _
kingdom, O Bharata,”


CHAPTER XLII.


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Coitintied,
Vaishampayania saidi— =

1-2. “Having lsteried té those words;
suitable to the. hour alid place, of. his
subjects, king Yudhisthira answered them
saying i—‘Great iiideéd must be the sati of
Pandu, whosé imetits, true or false, are
thus recited by guch foremost of Brahmana¢
assembled together,

3. Fotsodtti, we.are all yoiir favourites,
since you so freely describe us as possessing?


-those accomplishment:


4. King Dhritarashtra, however, is out
father arid god. If you wish to do what is
pleasing tome, always obey him did do
what he likes, -

§. Having killed all my kinsmen, I live
fot Him alone. My great'duty is to always
setve him with particular ¢ re,


6. If you, as also my friends; think that
I should be a favorite with you and them,
let me then request ydu all to treat Dhritas
tashtta as you used to do before.

7. Heis the master of the world, of
yourselves, and of myself. The whole world
with the Pandavas, is his, ‘


8. You should always remember those
-words of mine.’ The king then asked them
to go where they liked. :

9. Having sent away the citizens’ and
the people of the provinces, the Kuru
‘king appointed his brother Bhimasena as
Yuvaraja, ,


10. And he gladly appointed _ the highly
inteHigent Vidura for helping him with his


advi for tooki after tl ixfold
pevice Ge iter Wor ing act aie: aaly 1 wealth, gems, kine and clothes.


| 6 The king performed the Shraddha


requirements of the state.


11-12. And he appointed the old Sanjaya
‘endued with every accomplishment, as the
superintendent of finances.


giving them food and pay and for looking
after other affairs of the army.


13. King Yughishthica appointed Phal-
guna for resisting hostile forces and punish-
ing the wicked. ,


14, Heappointed Dhaumya, the fore-
most of priests, to attend daily to the Brah-
manas and perforiy all rites in honor of the
gods and all other religious rites.


15. He appointed Shahadeva to always
‘remain by his side, for the king thought, O
king, that he should always be protected by
that brother of his. .


16. The king cheerfully supported others
in various other affairs according to their
gratification.


17-18. That destroyer of hostile heroes,
wig., the righteous-souled king Yudhish-
thira, ever devoted to’ virtue, commanded
Vidura and the high-souled Yuyutsu,
saying,—‘You should always with attention
and care do everything that my royal father
Dhritarashtra desires,


1g. Everything for the citizens and the
residents of the provinces should be dene
by you in your tespective departments,
alter the king’s permission,”


CHAPTER XLII,
(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
i PARVA).—Continued, H
Vaishampayana said :--


z. After this ‘the noble king Vudhish-
thira caused the Shraddha_ rites to be
performed for every one of his kinsmen
killed in battle.


2. King Dhritarashtra also distributed,
for the good of his dead sons, excellent
food, and kine, and immense wealth, and
many beautiful and costly gems amongst
the Brahmanas, Pd


He appointed |
WNakula_ superintendent “of the forces, for |;


MAHABHARATA.


- g—4. Yudhishthira; accompanied - by
Draupadi, distributed much wealth for the
sake of Drona and the great Karna, of
Dhrishtadyumna and Abhimanyu, of the
Rakshasa Ghatotkacha the son of Hidimva,
and of Virata, and his other well-wishers
who had served him loyally, and of Drupar
da and the five sons of Draupadi.


5. For gach of these, the king pleased
thousands of Brahmanas with presents of


rite for the good, in the next world, of every
one of those kings also who had been killed
in the battle without a single excepted kins+
wian or friend,

*o, And the king also, forthe good of
the souls of all his friends, set up houses
for the distribution of food, and erected
places for the distribution of water, and
tanks to be excavted in their names.


8. Thus satisfying the debt he owed to
them and warding off the chance of censure
in the wortd, the king became happy and
began to protect his subjects virtuously,

g. He showed due honor as before, to
Dhritarashtra, and Gandhari, and Vidura,
and to alt the Kaurava elders and to all
the officers.

to. The kind Kura kittg honored and

rotected all those ladies also who had,
or the battle, been deprived of their heroic
husbands and sons.

t1. The powerful Ring showed kindness
towards the destitute and the blind and the
helpless by giving them food, clothes and
protection. '

42. Freed from foes and having van-
quished the whole Barth, king Yudhishthira
began tp enjoy great happines.”


CHAPTER XLIV.


{RAJADHARMANUSHASANS
PARVA).—Continued, :


-Vaishampayana said :—


1—3. “Having regained the kingdcr,
the highly pure and wise king Yudhishthira,
after the ceremony of instalation had been
over, joining his hands together, addressed
the lotus-eyed Krishna of Dasharha’s race,
saying, —‘Through your grace, O Krishna,
through your policy, might, intelligence and
prowess, O foremost of the Yadus, { have
regained this ancestral kingdom of mine.
© you having lotus-eyes, I repeatedly bow.
to yo&, O chastiser of foes, ;


SHANTI PARVA:


4. Vou have been called the One only
Being. You are’ the refuge of all wor-
shippers. The Rishis worship you under
Various names. :


5. Salutation to you, O Creator of the
Universe. You aro the soul of the Universe
andthe Universe has originited from you.
You are Vishnu, you are Jishnu, you are
Hari, you are Krishna, you are Vaikuntha,
and you are the greatest of ail beings.


6. Youhave, as said in the Puranas,
taken your birth seven times in the womb
of Aditi. You also took birth in the womb
of Prishni. The learned say that you are
the three Yugas.


7. All your deeds are sacred. You are
the master of our senses. You are the
great Lord worshipped in sacrifices. You
ate called the great swan. You are Three-
eyed Shambhu, You are One, though
known as Vibhu and Damodara. ;


- 8. Vou are the great Boar you are Fire,
you are the Sun, you have the, emblem of
bull on your banner, and you have Garuda
also for your emblem. You are the grinder
of inimical armies, you are the Being who
permeates: every form in the universe, and
you are of irresistible power.


9 Youare the foremost of all things,
ou are dreadful, you aré thé commander
in battle, you are Truth, you are the giver
of food, and you are Guha (the celestial
commander-in-chief). You yourself never
suffer deterioration, you cause your enemies
to fade and waste. You are the Brahmana
Of pure blood, and you are the issues of
intetmarriage. You are great..


- 10, You move in the sky, you are
called Vrishadarbha and Vrishakapi. You
are Ocean, you are without attributes,
you have three humps, you have three
abodés, and you create human forms on
Earth, comiag down from heaven,


rt. You are Emperor, you are superior
to Emperor, and even superior to him.
ou are King of the gods, and you are the
toot of the Uuiverse. You are all-powerful
you. are existence in every form, you are
formless, you are Krishna, and you are fire,


.12, Youarethe Creator, you are the
father of the celestial physicians, you are
{the sage) Kapila, and you are the Dwarf.


‘13 You are Sacrifice embodied, you are
Dhruva, you are Garuda, and you are
called Yajnasena. You are Shikhandin,
you are Nahtusha, and you are Vabhru.
You are the constellation Punarvasu
residing in the sky.

r4. You are of twany color, you are
‘the sactifice of Uktha, you are Sushena,
you are the drum. ‘The track-of you? car-


59


wheels is Hight. Yori are the lotus of Pros-
perity, you are the cloud Pushkara, and
you are adorned with garlands, :

15. You are rich, you are powerful, you
are the most subtife, and you are described
in the Vedas, You are the great sea, you
are Brahman, you are the sacred eles
and you know the residences of all. You
are called Hiranyagarva, you are the sa=
cred Mantras swadha and swaha, you aré
Keshava. ;

16. You are the cause of all, and you
are its dissolution. {n the beginning you
created the universe, This universe is under
your sway,’ O Creator of the universe,
Salutations to you, O wielder of Sharnge
bow, discus,’and sword.’


17. Thushymned by king Vudhishthica
in the midst of the assembly, the letus-eyed
Krishna: became pleased. That foremost
one of the Yadavas then began to cheer up
the eldest son’ of Pandu with many sweet
speeches, ” - :


CHAPTER XLV.


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA


PARVA).—Continued,
Vaishampayana said :~

1. ‘The king sent away all his subjects,
who, ordered by the king, came back ta
their respective abodes.

2-43. Solacing his brothers, Yudhish-
thira, shining with jbeauty, then addressed
highly powerful brothers Bhima, Arjuna
and the twins, saying,~‘Your bodies have,
in the great battle, been. wounded with
various weapons by the foe: You are
greatly tired, sorrow and anger have burnt
your hearts. —~ ; oe ’


4. Through my fault, O foremost of
Bharata’s race, you have suffered the
miseries of banishment in the forests like
ordinary men.

With great-joy and ease enjoy this
victory. After taking rest and refreshing
your faculties, meet me again in the
merning.:

6—7. After this, the mighty-armed
Vrikodara, like Indra entering ‘his own
beautiful mansion, entered the palace of
Duryodhana, that was decorated with many
excellent buildings” and rooms, that
abounded with gems of various kinds, and
that was full of servants male and female,
and which Yudhishthira assigned to him
with the consent of Dhritarashtra, ;


60


8—9. The mighty-armed Arjuna also,
at the king’s behest obtained the palace
of Dushasana which was not inferior ta
Duryodhana’s and which consisted of many
excellent mansions and was adorned with
a golden gate-way, and which was fulk of
riches and and attendants of both sexes.


10. Fhe palace of Durmarshana was
even superior to that of Dusshasana.
Resembling the palace of Kuvera himself,
it was adorned with gold and every sort


of gem.


11. King Vudhishthira gladty gave it
to Nakula who deserved it best and who
had -been reduced with sufferings in the
great forest,


12. The best of pataces belonging to
Dermukba was highly beautiful and ador-
ned with gofd. It was full of beds and
beautiful women having eyes like lotus-
petals,


33. The king gave. it to Sahadeva who | r
| dom the highly illustrious king, Q best of
| monarchs, paid due honors to. Yuyutsu and
| Dhritarashtra.


was ever busy with doing what was agree-
able to him. Obtaining it, Sahadeva
became pleased as the king of treasures
upon obtaining Kailasa.


t4. Yuyulsu and Vidura and Sanjaya,
© king, and Sudharman and Dhaumya,
proceeded to their former abodes.

15. Like a tiger entering his cave in
the hills, th. foremost of men, viz.,
Krishna, accompanied by Satyaki, entered
the palace of Arjuna, ;

16. Feasting om the dishes and drinks,
the princess passed the night in merriment.


' Awaking in the morning with delighted


heaits, they approached the presence. of the
king Yudhishthira,”


CHAPTER XLVE


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continued.


Janamejaya said :—

1. “You should, O learned Brahmana,
tell me what was next dene by Yudhishthira
the mighty-armed son of Dharma after
he had regained his kingdom. ,


2. You should tell me also, O Rishi,
what the heroic Hrishikesha, the supreme
lord of the three worlds, did after this.”


Vaishampayana said :—


3. “Hear me, O king, as I narrate fully,
O sinless one, what the Pandavas, headed
by Vasudeva, did after this.


4. Having regained his kingdom, O


MAHABHARATA.


monarch, Kunti’s son Yudhishthira made
each of the four orders of men perform their
respective duties.


5. The (eldest) son of Pandu gavea
thousand great Brahmanas of the Snataka


| order a thousand gold coins each.


6. He then pleased the servants who
were dependent on him and the guests wha
came to him, including persons who were
undeserving, by satisfying their wishes.

7 He gave to his priest Dhaumya kine
in thousands, and immense wealth and gold
and silver and dresses of various kinds.


8. © monarch, the king treated Kripa
like a preceptor. Ever observing vows
the king continued to honor Vidura highly,


@ ‘Fhat foremost of charitable men
satisfied alf persons with presents of food
and drink and dresses of various kinds and
beds and seats. .


10, Having restored peace. to his king~


rr. Placing his kingdom at the disposa,
of Dhritarashtra, of Gandhari, and of
Vidura, king Yudhishthira spent his days


-happily. ~~


12. Having pleased everybody, including.
the citizens, inthis way, Yudhishthira, O
foremost of Bharata’s race, approached
with joined hands the presence of the great
Vasudeva. ‘


13. Hesaw Krishna, of the hue ofa
blue cloud, seated on a large sofa bedecked
with gold and gems.


14. Clad in yellow silk robes and
adorned with celestial ornaments, his person
shone effulgent like a jewet set on gold.


\

15. His bosom adorned with the /Kaus-
tubha gem, he shone like the untain
with the rising Sun.


1617. There was no equal of his beauty
in the three-worlds. Approaching the great
one who was an inearnation of Vishnu, king
Yudhishthira addressed him sweetly ‘and
smilingly saying —‘O foremost of intelligent
men, have you passed the night happily ?


18. O you of unfading glory, have all
your faculties been fully invigorated? O
foremost of intelligent persons, is it all
right with your understanding ?


19. We have regained our kingdom and
the whole Earth has come under our sway,
O divine lord, through your favour, O
refuge af the three worlds and, O you of
three steps. Through your favour we have
gained victory and obtained great fame and


SHANTI


have not transgressed the duties of our
order.’


20. The divine Krishna did not speak a
single ward -to that chastiser of enemies,
King Yudhishthira, for he was then rapt in
meditation.”


CHAPTER XLVIE.


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).~—Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


1. ‘Wonderful it is, O you of immeasur-
able prowess, that you are rapt in medita-
tion. ‘O great refuge of the universe, is it
all well with the three worlds ?


2. When you have, O god, withdrawn
yourself from the world, having, O foremost
of men, adopted the fourth state (of perfect
unconsciousnees of the world) my mind has
been filled with wonder.


3. ‘The five vital airs which act within
the body have been controlled by you.
You have controlled your senses wthin your
mind.


4. Both words and mind, © Govinda,
have been concentered within your under-
standing. -All your senses, have been with-
drawn into your self.


5, The hair on your body stands erect.
VYour mind and understanding are both
calm. You are as immobile now, O
Madhava, as an wooden post or a stone ?


5. O illustrious god, you are as calm as
the flame of a lamp burning in a place
where there is no wind, You are as
immobile as a rock.


7. If I am fitto hearthe cause, and if
it is no secret, remove, O god, my doubt,
for I beg this favour from you.


8. You arethe Creator and you are the
Destroyer. You are destructible and yon
inedestructible. You are without beginning
and you are ‘without end. You are the first
and the foremost of beings.


9. O foremost of pious men, tell me the
cause of this abstraction. I solicit your
favour, and am your devoted worshipper,
and am bending my head to you.

10. ‘Thus accosted the illustrious youn-
ger brother of Vasava, reinstating his mind,
understanding, and the senses in their
proper places, said these words similingly.


Vasudeva said :—
tt. ‘That foremost men, viz., Bhishma,
who ‘is now lying on a bed of arrows, and


PARVA, 63


who is now like a fire that is about to be
extinguished, is thinking: of me, It is:
therefore my mind also was concentrated
on him.


12. My mind was fixed in him the twang
of whose bow and the sound of whose
palms Indra himself was unable to bear.


13. I was thinking of him who having:
defeated in a moment all the assembled:
kings, carried the three princesses of
Kashi for the marriage of his brother
Vichitraviryya. j


14. I wasthinking of him who fought
continually for twenty-three days with
Rama himself of Bhrigu’s race and whom
Rama could not defeat. -


15. Controlling all his senses and con.
centrating his mind by the aid of his under-'
standing, he sought my refuge. Jt was for
this that I had fixed my mind upon him, —,


16. I was thinking of him whom Ganga’
conceived and gave birth to, according to”
ordinary human laws and whom Vaishtha
took as a pupil. .


17 1 was thinking of that powerful hero
of great intelligence who is a master of all'
the celestial weapons as also of the four’
Vedas with all their auxiliaries. ;


18. I was thin kleg of him, O son of
Pandu, who is the favourite discipfe of
Rama the son of Jamadagni, and who is
the master of all the sciences. | '


ig. I wasthinking of that best of all.
persons conversant with morality and duty,
of him, O foremost of Bharatas, who
knows the Past, the Future, and the
Present.


20. After the ascension to heaven of that,
foremost of kings for his own achievements,
the Earth, O son of Pritha, will look like
a moonless night.


21. Therefore, O- Yudhishthira humbly
approaching Ganga’s son, v2¢., Bishma,’
ask him about what you may wish to learn.


22, O king enquire of him about the
four branches of knowledge, about the.
sacrifices and the rites sanctioned for the:
four castes, about the four modes of life,
and about the duties of kings.


23. When Bhishma, that foremost one of
Kuru’s race, will disappear from the world
every kind of knowledge will go away with
iets It is, therefore, that 1 urge you to

O ite


. ¢

24-25. Hearing these wholesome and
pregnant words of Vasudeva, the righteous
Yudhisthira, with voice suppressed with
tears, answered Janarddana saying-—'What
you have said, O Madhava, about the


ér


paie of Bhishma, is perfectly trae. I
ve hot the beast doubt about it.

- 26. Ehad heard of thepiety and great-
ness, of the illustrious Bhishma from great
Brahmanas talking about it.

27. You, O killer ef foes, are the
Creator of al! the worlds. There, cannot,
therefore,O delighter of the Yadavas, be
the least. doubt.in what you say.

28, If you are pleased to show us favour,
Q Madhava, then we shall
with yourself at our head.
ag. When the divine Sun shall have
turned towards the north, Bhishma_ will
leave (this: world) for those blissful regions
which he has acquired. That descendant
of. Kurt's racey therefore, OQ mighty-armed
One, deserves to see you,


Zo. Bhishma willthen seé you who are


the first of gods, and: who are destructible


and indestructible. Indeed, O lord, you
are the vast receptacle of. Brahma,


Vaishampayana said :—

Bt. ‘Hearing these words of king Yu-
Ghisthira, the destroyer of Madhu address-
ed Satyaki who was sitting by him, saying,
‘Let my car be yoked,’

32 At this Satyaki quickly left Ke-
shava’s: company and going: out, ordered:
Daruka, saying,—'Let. Krishna’s. car be
made ready.’


_ 33° Hearing the words of Satyaki,
Daruka immediately yoked Krishna's car:
That best of cars, adorned with gold, deck-
éd with profuse emeralds, and moon-gems
and sun-gems furnished with golden wheels;
effulgent, fleet as the wind, set-in the middle
with various other Kinds of jewels, beautiful
as thé morning sun, equipped with a beauti-
ful standard bearing the emblem ot Garuda,
and numberless other banners, was yoked
with those best of horses: quick coursing as
thought, vz., Sugriva and Saivya and the
other two, in trappings of gold. Having
yoked it, O tiger among kings, Daruka
Lane joined palms, informed Krishna of the
act.”


CHAPTER XLVIIL


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
: PARVA.)~—Continued,


Janamejaya said :—

1. “How did the grandfather of.the
Bharatas, who lay on a bed of arrows, cast
off his.bedy and what sort of Yoga did. he
adopt.?” -


go to Bhishma |


MAHABHARATA:


Vaishampayatia said :-~

2. “Listen, O king, with pure heart and’
rapt atteritioa, as to how, O foremost of the
Kurus, the great Bhishma renounced his’
body. :

3. Assoon as the Sun, passing the sofs-
titial point entered in his northerly course,
Bhishma with rapt attention, caused his
soul (as connected with and independent of
the body) to enter into the Universal Soul. |


4.. Surrounded by many foremost of
Brahmanas, that hero, his body cut with
innumerable arrows, shone like the sun with
his innumerable rays.- .


_§—12. Surrounded by Vyasaconversant _
with the Vedas, by the celestial Rishi

Narada, by Devasthana, by Ashmakasu-
mantu, by Jaimini, by the great Paila, by.
Shandilya, by Devarata, by the highly in-
telligent Maitreya, by Asita and Vasishtha
and the great Kaushika, by Harita and
Lomasa and the highly intelligent Atri’s
son, by Vrihaspati and Shukra and the
great sage Chyavand, by Sanatkumara and
Kapila and Vatmiki and. Fumvuru and
Kuru, by Maudgalya and Rama of Bhrigu's:
race, and the great sage Trinavindu, by
Pipalada and Vayu and Samvarta and:
Pulaha and Katha, by Kashyapa and
Pulastya and Kartu and Daksha and:
Parashara, by Marichi and Angiras and
Kashmya and Gautama and the sage,
Galava, by Dhaumya and Vibhanda and
Mandavya and Dhaumra and Krishnatiu-
bhautika,: by Uluka, that foremost of
Brahmanas and the great sage Markan<
deya, by Blashkari and Purana and’
Krishna and Suta,—that foremost of pious
men, surrounded by these and many other.
saintly sages of great souls and endued with
faith and self-controt and equanmity of
mind, the Kuru hero looked like the Moon
surrounded by the planets and the stars. ©


13. Lying on his bed of arrows; that
foremost of men, Bhishma, with pure heart
and joined hands, thought of Krishna in
mind, word,. and deed.


-14. With a cheerful and strong voice
he sang the encomium of the destroyer.
of Madhu, that lord of Yoga, the lotus-
navelled deity, that lord of the universe,
called Vishnu and Jishnu. .


15. With joined hands, that’ foremost
of orators, that. powerful Bhishma of highly
virtuous soul, thus praised Vasudeva.


Bhishma said :—

16. “O Krishna, O foremost of Beings,
be pleased with words which I utter, in
brief apd in full, from desire of singing


your praisess - —-


SHANTI


ij. Vou are pure and purity. You
transcend all, You are what people say
‘tobe THAT. You are the Supreme Lord.
With my entire heart. I seek your refuge,
0 universal Soul and Lord of all creas
tures !


18. You are without beginning and
without end. You are the greatest of the
greatand Brahma. Neither the celestials
nor the Rishis know you. The divine
Creator, Narayana or Hari, alone knows
you. .

* 19. Through Narayana, the Rishis, the
Siddhas, the great Nagas, the gods, and
the celestial Rishis, know a little of you,
. Vou are the greatest of the great and un-
decaying. : ,
' 20, The celestials, the Danavas, the
Gandharvas, the Yakshas, the Pannagas,
do not know whe you. are and whence you
have sprung.

' a1. All the worlds and all created things
live in you and enter you at the time of
dissolution. Like gems strung together in
a thread, all things possessing attributes
exist in you, the Supreme Lord, .


22. Having the universe for your work
and the universe for your limbs, this universe
tonsisting of mind and matter exists in -your
eternal and all-pervading soul like flowers
strung ‘together in a strong thread.


23. Vou arecalled Hari, have athou-
sand heads, thousand feet, thousand eyes,
thousand arms, thousand crowns, and thou
sand effulgent faces. You are called Na-
rayana, the deity, and the. refuge of the
tiniverse. , .

_ 24. Youare the subtilest of the subtile,
grossest of the gross, the heaviest of the
heavy, and the highest of the high.


_ 255° In the Vaks, the Anuvaks, the
Nishads, and the Upanishads, you are
regarded as the Supreme Being of irresis-~
tible power. In the Samans also, which
ae always true, you are known as Truth’s
self,


- gk. You afe of quadruple soul, Supreme
soul, individual soul, mind and conscious-
hess. You manifest yourself only in the
understanding of all creatures. You are
the Lord of your -votaries. O ged, you
are worshipped under four good, high, and
secret names, Vasudeva, Sangkarshana,
Pradyumna, and Aniruddha,

27. Penances are always present in you,
penances live in your form... You are the
Universal Soul. You | are omniscient.
You are the universe. You are the creator
of everything in the universe.


2%. Like two sticks creating a Blazing


PARVA, 64

fire, you have been born of the diving
Devaki and Vasudeva for the protection of
Brahma on Earth


2g. For his eternal liberation, the devout
worshipper; withdrawing his mind from
everything else and renouncing all desices,
behoids you, O Govinda, who are the pure
Soul, inthis own soul,


go. Vou excell the sun in glory. You
are beyond the perception of the senses and
the understanding.- 0 Jord of all creatures,
¥ place myself in your hands,


3t, In the Puranas you shave been
described as Purusha. In the begining of
cycles, you are said to be Brahma, and at
the time of urtiversat dissolution you are
spoken of as Sankarsana. You are worship
ful therefore I warship you, ;


32. Though One, you have yet many
ms. You haye your’ passions under
complete control. Faithfully performing the
rites laid down in the scriptures, your
piece sacrifice to you, O giver of every,
wish, : :


33. You are designated the sac within
which the universe ‘lies. All created things
reside in you. Like swans and ducks swim
ming on the water, all the worlds are seer
floating in you, :

34. Youare Truth. You are One and
Undecaying. You are Brahma. You are
beyond mind and*matter. Youre without
beginning, middle, and end. Neither the
gods nor the Rishis know you. : ,

35 The geds, the Asuras, the Gane
dharvas, the Siddhas, the Rishis, and tle
great Uragas, with concentrated minds,
always worship you. You are the great
panacea for all sorrow. ,


36. You are without birth and death.
You are Divine. You are self-born. You
are eternal. You are invisible and beyond
perception. You are. called Hari and
Narayana, O powerful ene. :


37. The Vedas describe you as the
Creator of the universe and the Lord of
everything existing in the universe. You
are the Supreme Protector of the universe.
You are Undeeaying and that which is
called the Highest.


38. You are gold-hued. Vou are the
killer of Asuras. hough One, Aditi gave
birth to you in twelve forms. Salutations ta’
you who are the Soul of the Sun. ;

: ad


39. Salutations to you in.your form.of
Soma who is the highest of Rishis and wha
gratifies withhnectar the gods in the light
fortnight and the Pitris in the dark,
fortnight,


64


40: You ate the One Being of transceri-
dent effulgence dwelling beyond darkness.

nowing you one has rio fear of death.
Salutations to you in that form which is ati
object of knowledge.
- 4t. Inthe grand Ukthya sdcrifice; the
Brahitianas worship you as the great-Rich.
In the great fire-sacrifice, they describe you
as the chief (priest). You are the soul of
the Vedas. Salutations to you.


42. The Rictts, the Yajus, and the
Samans are your tabitation. You are the
five sorts of pute libations, You are the
severi words used in the Vedas. Saluta-
tions to you in yout form of Sacrifice.


43. Libations are poured on the Homa
ré accompanied with seventeen Mantaras.

‘ou are the soul of the Homa, Salutations
to you.

44. VYouatethe Purusha described in
the Vedas. Your name is Yajus. The

o Vedic metres are your limbs. ‘The sacrifi-
ées laid down in the three Vedas form your
three heads, The great sacrifices called
Rathantara is your voice expressing your
gratification. Salutations to you in your
form of sacred hymns.

45- You ate the Rishi who had appear-
ed in the great sacrifice extending fora
thousand years celebrated by the Patriarchs,
You are thé gteat swan with wings of-gold,
Salutations to you in your form of a swan.


' 46. Roots with all kinds of affixes and
suffixes form your limbs. The Sandhis are
your joints. The consonants and vowels
are your ofnaments. ‘The Vedas have
Geseribed you as the divine word. Saluta-
tiens to you in your form asthe Word.


47. Assuming the form of 2 boar whose
limbs were Sacrifice, you had raised the
submerged Eartli for the behoof of the three
worlds. Salutations to you in your form of
infinite power. ;

48, Yousleép in Yoga on your ‘snake
sofa formed by the thousand hoods (of the
Naga}. Salutations to you in your form of
sleep. :

49. Younrake the bridge for crossing
the sea of life with Truth, with the means
of emancipation, and with the means by
which the senses may be controlled, Salu-
tations to thee in your form of Truth.

50. Men following various religions

moved by desire of various fruits, worship
you with various rites. Salutations to you
in your form of religion...
“ §t. From you have originated alf‘things.
You move all creatures having physical
frames and cherishing desires to action.
Salutations to thee in your form of Excite-
ment. 5


MAHABHARATA


§2.The great Rishis seek your “unnmranis
fest self within the manifest. Called Kshes
trajna, you sit in Kshetra. Salutations td
you in your form of Kshetra.

and


53. Thotigh always conscious
present in self, the Sankhyas still describe
you as existing in the three states of wake-
fulness; dream and sleep. They further
describe you as possessed of sixteen
attributes and representing the number
seventeen. Salutations to your form as
described by the Sankhyas.


54. Casting off sleep; restraining vital
airs, Yogins of controlled senses see you as
eternal light. Salutations to you in your
Yoga form:


55- Peaceful Sannyasins, freed from feat
of re-birth on acconnt of the extinction of
all their sins and merits, obtain you,
Salutations to you in your form of emancis
pation. ‘

56. At the end of a thousand cycles, you
assume the form of a fire with blazing
flames and consume all creatures. Saluta-
tions to you in your form of fierceness.


57. Having consumed alt creatures and
converted the universe into one sheet of
water, you sleep on the waters ia the form
of achild. Salutations to you in your your
as Maya (illusion).

58. From the navel of the Self-borir
having eyes like lotus leaves, sprung a lotus.
On that lotus is situate this universe, Salus
tations to you in your form as lotus.


sg. You have a thousand heads. Yoir
permeate everything. You are of im-
measurable soul. You have conquered thd
four Itinds of desire that are as vast as the
four seas. Salutations to you in your forn?
of Yoga sleep.


6o, The clouds are in the hair of your
Wead. The rivers are in the several joints
of your limbs. The four oceans are iin your
stomach. Salutations to you in your fornt
as water. : .


61. Birth and death originate from yous
All things, again, at thé’ universal dissolu~
tion, are dissolved in you. Salutations td
your form as cause. rea


62. Yow sleep of in the night, You.
are engaged in day time also. You' witness’
the good and the bad actions (of all).
Salutations to you in your form of (univer<
sal) observer.


63- Thereis no act which you cannot
do. You are again, always ready to do
righteous acts, Salutations to you in your
form of Work, the form, vzz., which is call«
ed VWaikuntha.


,


SHANTI


64. Inanger you had in battle, rooted


out twenty-one times the Kshatriyas who
had trodden virtue and authority under
their feet. Salutations to you in your form
of Cruefty.


65. Dividing yourself into five parts
you have become the five vital airs which
work within every body -and cause every
living creature to move. Salutativns te
you in your form of air,

66. You appear in every ¢ycle in the
forms called month and season and half
year and year, and are the cause of both
creation and dissolution. Salutations to
you in your form of Time,

67. Brahmanas are your mouth, Ksha+
triyas are your two arms, Vaishyas are
your stomach and thighs, and Shudras are
your feet, Salutations to you in your form
‘of caste,


68. Fice is your mouth. ‘The heavens
are. the crown of your head. The sky is
we navel. The Earth is your feet. ‘The

un is your eye. The points of horizon
‘are your eats. Salutations to you in your
form as the three werlds,

69. You are superior to Time. You
are superior to Sacrifice. You are higher
than the highest. Having yourself ne
origin, you are the origin of the universe.
Salutations to you in your form as Uni-
verse.


70. People according to the attributes
- assigned to you by the Vaisheshika theory,
consider you as the Protector of the world.
Salutations to you in your form ef Pro-
tector,


° gi. Assuming the forms of food, drink,
and fuet, you multiply the humours and the
vital airs of creatures and keep up their
existence, Salutations to you in your form
of life. = 7

72. For supporting the life you eat the
four kinds of food. Assuming also the form
of Agni within the stomach, you digest that.
food. Salutations to you in your form of
digesting fire, :

73. Assuming the form of mah-lion
with twany eyes andtwany manes with
teeth and claws for your weapons, you had
killed the king of the Asuras. Salutations
to you it your form of might.

74. Neither the gods, nor the Gah-
dharvas, nor the Daityas. nor, the Danavas,
-know you truly. Salutations to your form
of great subtility.

95. Assuming the form of thé beautiful,
illustrious, and powerful Ananta in the


‘nether region, you uphold the universe.
Salutations to your ferm of power 9


9


PARVA, 63

- 76. You stupefy all creatures by the
fetters of affection and love for the continu-
ance of the creation, Salutations to you in
yout form of stupefaction.


47. Knowing that knowledge which knows
the five elements to be the true Selfsknow«
ledge people approach you by knowledge.
Salutations to you in your form of Kuowe
ledge. :


_7%. Your body cannot be measured.
Your understanding and eyes see every
thing. You are infinite and immeasur-
able. Salutations to you in your form of
vastness.


79. You had assumed the form of »
hermit with matted locks on head, staff iu
hand, a tong stomach, and having alms
bow! for your quiver. Salutations to you
in your form of Brahma,


80. You carry the trident, you are
the lord of the celestials, you have three
eyes, and you are great. Your body. is
always besmeared with ashes. Salutations
to you it) your form of Rudra.


8r. The crescent forms the ortiament of
your forehead. You have snakes for the
holy thread found your neck. You are
armed with Pinaka and trident, Salutations
to your form of dreadfulness,


82. Vou ate the soul of all creatures.
You are the Creator and the Destroyer of
all creatures. You are without anger,
without enmity, without affection, Satutas
tions to you in your form of Peace.

83. Everything is ‘in you. Everything
originates from you. You are Everything
Evérywhere are you. You are always the
All, Salutations to you in your form as
Everything, a


84, Salutatlens to you whose work is the
universe, to you whe are the souliof the uni-
verse,to you from whom has originated the
universe, to you who are the dissolution of
all things, to you who are beyond the five
élemefits,


85. Salutations to you who are the three
worlds. to you who are above the three
worlds! Salutatior$ to you who are’all the
directions. Yotiare All and you are the
one refuge of All.


86. Salutations to you, O divine Lord, O
Vishnu, and, O eternal origin of all the
worlds. You, O Heishikesha, are the
Creator, you are the Destroyer, and you are
iavincible.


87. 1 cannot see that divine form it
which you are manifest in the Past, Present,
and Future. 1 can,: however, see truly
your eternal form,


66


88. You have filled heaven with your
head, and Earth with your, and feet the
three worlds with your energy. You are
Eternal and permeate every thing in the
universe,

89. The directions are your arms, the
Sun is your eye, and prowess is your vital
fluid. You are the ford of all creatures.
You stand closing the seven paths of the
Wind whose power is immeasurable.


96. Those who worship you, are freed
from all fears, O Govinda of undecaying
prowess, you areclad in yellow robes of
the color of the Atasi flower.


gt. The lowering of head to you for
ence, O Krishna, is equal to the completion
of ten Horse-sacrifices. The man who has
celebrated ten Horse-sacrifices is not free
from the obligation of re-birth. .


@2, The man, however, that salutes
Krishna is freed. from re-birth. They who
- have Krishna for their vow, they who think
ef Krishna .in the night, and upon getting
np from sleep, may be said to have
Krishna for their body. Those people
(after death) enter Krishna's self even
as libations of clarified butter sanctified
with Mantras enter the burning fire.


- 93. Salutations to you who remove the
fear of hell, to you, O Vishnu, that are a
boat to them who are sunk in the eddies of
the ocean of worldly life. >


94.. Salutations to you, O Ged, that
are the Brahmana’s self, to you who are
the benefactor of Brahmanas and kine, to

. you that are the benefactor of the universe,
to you that are Krishna and Govinda.


. 95. The two syllables Hari are the purse

of those who sojourn through the wilderness

of life and the panacea that effectually cures

_ all worldly attachments, and the means
‘which remove sorrow and grief.


96. As Truth is full of Vishnu, as the.


universe is fullof Vishnu, as everything is
full of Vishnu, so let my soul be full of
Vishuu, and my sins be dissipated.


97. I seek your refuge and am. devoted
to you, desirous of obtaining a happy end.
O’you having eyes like lotus petals,
best of gods, do you think of what will be
for my well-being. eee ae oe

98 Having: yourself -no. -origin,.O
Vishnu, you are the origin of Knowtedge
and Penances. c


with me.


eg. The Vedas are devoted to, Naraysna.


Penances are devoted to Narayana. The
gods are devoted to. Natayana, Every>
shing else is Narayana,’./?


: You.are thus Jauded, O.
Janarddana,-. thus adored, by, me ia the.
Sacrifice of words only, be, O'god, gratified '

i Oy Brae?


MAHABHARATA.


Vaishampayana said :—


too. “Having said these words, Bhish
ma, with mind fixed upon Krishna, said,


—‘Salutations to Krishna.’ And bowed
to him.
ror. Learning by his Yoga power of the


devotion ef Bhishmia, Madhava, called
also Hari, (entering his bedy) conferred
upon him divine knowledge of the Past, the
Present, and the Future, and went away.


102. When Bhishma became silent, the
Brahmavadins, with voices suppressed with
tears, worshipped that great chief of the


Kurus in excellent words. j

103. Those foremost of Brahmanas
Jauded Krishna also, that first of Beings,
and then continued  silenty to praise


Bhishma repeatedly.


104—10§. Learning of the devotion of
Bhishma towards him, that foremost of
Beings, vzs., Madhava, suddenly rose
from his seat and got on his car, Keshava
and Satyaki proceeded on one car. On
another proceeded those two great princesy,
vig., Yudhishthira and Dhananjaya,.


106—107. Bhimsena and the twins rode
ona third; while those foremost of men;
vis.,, Kripa and Yuyutsu, and that
scorcher of foes, wiz., Sanjaya of the
charioteer caste, proceeded on their respec<
tive cars, each of which looked like a town.
And all of them went on, making the
Earth tremble with tle rattle of theit
car-wheels,


108. That foremost of men, as he went
on, cheerfully listened to the laudatory,
speeches uttered by the Brahmanas. Tire
destroyer of Keshi, with a cheerful heart,
saluted the people waiting by the road side
with joined hands and bent heads.”


CHAPTER XLIX.


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continued,


Vaishampayana said :—

i—2. ‘Then Hrishikesha, and king
Yudhishthira, and all those persons headed
by Kripa, and the four Pandavas, riding
on those ears resembling fortified cities and
adorned with standards and _ banners,
quickly went to Kurukshetra with the help


-of their quick-coursing horses.


3. They descended on that field which
was covered with hair, marrow and bones,


-and where mijlions of great Kshatriyas


had ded,


SHANTI


4. It also contained many hills made of
the bodies and bones of elephants. and
horses, and human heads and skulls were
‘scattered over it like conch-shells,


5. Interspersed with thousands
funeral pyres and containing masses of


armour and weapons, the vast field looked.


like the drinking site of the Destroyer him-
self used and left of late.


6, The powerful car-warriors quickly
proceeded, seeing the field of battle haunted


by crowds of spirits and thronged with”


Rakshas.


7. While proceeding, the powerful
Keshava, that delighter of all the Yadavas,
spoke to Yudhishthira about the -prowess
of Jamadagni’s son.


8. ‘Yonder, at a distance, O Partha’
are the five lakes of Rama. There Rama
offered oblations of Kshatriya blood to his
departed manes,


g. It was here that the powerful Rama,
having freed the Earth of Kshatriyas for
twenty-one times, accomplished his task.’


Yudhisthira said :—-


yo. ‘I have doubt very much ef what
you say about Rama’s having twenty-one
times rooted the Kshatriyas in days of yore,


at. When the very Kshatriya seed was
burnt by Rama, OG foremost of the Yadus,
how was the Kshatriya order revived ?


12, How, O best of the Vadus, was the
Kshatriya order exterminated by the illus-
triow and great Rama, and how did it
again grow? .


13. In dreadful car-encounters millions
of Kshatriyas were killed. The Earth, O
foremost of orators, was covered with the
corpses of Kshatriyas.


t4—15. Why was the Kshatriya order
this rooted out in days of old by Rama, the
great descendant of Bhrigu, O foremost of
the Yadus. O Vrishni hero, remove this
doubt of mine, O Garuda-fanned hero. O
Krishna, Q younger brother of Vasudeva,
the highest knowledge is from you,’ ”


Vaishampayana said :—

16. “The powerful elder brother of
Gada then described fully to Vudhishthira
everything that had taken place, as to
how the Earth had become filled with
Kshatriyas.”’


of


PARVA. 67


CHAPTER L.,:


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA.)—Continued,


Vasudeva said :—

1, ‘Listen, O: son of Kunti, to the story
of Rama’s energy and powers and birth
as I heard from great Rishis discoursing
upon the subject. 3


2, Listen to the story of how millions o
Kshatriyas were killed by Jamadagni’s son
and how those that were born again in the
various royal houses in Bharata were agaia
killed.


3. jJabiu had a son named Rajas.
Rajas had a son named Valakashwa.
King Valakashwa had a pious son named
Kushika, | %


4. Resembling the thousand-eyed Indra
on Earth, Kushika, practised the austerest
of penances from desire of getting the lord
of the three worlds for a son. :


4. Seeing him engaged in the hardest
of penances and capable of begetting a son,
the thousand-eyed Purandara himself
inspired the king. with his energy.


6. The great lord of the three worlds,
vig., the chastiser of Paka, O king, thea
became Kushika’s son known by the name
of Gadhi.


7. Gadhihada daughter, O king, by
the name of. Satyavati. The powerful
Gadhi married her to Richika a descendant
of Bhrigu.


8. Her husband of Bhrigu’s race, O
delighter of the Kurus, became highly
pleased with her for the purity of her
conduct. He cooked charu the sacrificial
food of milk and rice for giving to Gadhit
a son, : ;

g- Calling his wife, Richika of Bhrigu’s
race, said,—This portion of the sanctified
food should be taken by you, and this (the
other) portion by your mother. 2


10. An energetic son will be born of her
who will be the foremost of the Kshatriyas,
Invincible by. Kshatriyas on Earth, he
will be the destroyer of the foremost of
Kshatriyas.


'


11, Astregards you, O blessed lady, this
portion of the food will give you a son of
great wisdom, a personification of tranquil¢
lity, endued with ascetic penances, and the
foremost of Brahmanas.


12. Having said these words to his wife,
the blessed Richika of Bbrigu’s race,
setting his heart on penances,s entered into
the woods,


‘been


68


13. About. this time, ‘king Gadhi,
making a pilgrimage to the sacred waters,
arrived with his queen at the hermitage of
Richitka, : .

14. O king, thereupon taking the two
portions of the sanctified food, Satyavati
cheerfully and quickly, represented the
words of her husband to her mother.


15. The queen-mother, O son of Kunti,
gave the portion reserved for herself to
her daughter, and herself took unwittingly
the portion intended for the latter. -s


16. Thereupon Satyavati, her body blaz-
ing with lustre, conceived a child of dread-
sul form intended to become the extermi-
nater of the Kshatriyas. ae


17, Seéing the Brahmana child lying
within her womb, that foremost of the
Bhrigus said to his wife of heavenly beauty
these words :—~


18, ‘You have been imposed upon by
your mother, O blessed lady, by the substt-
tution of the sanctified food. Your son will
become a man of cruel deeds and vindictive
heart. Your brother again (born of your
mother) willbe a Brahmana ever devoted
to ascetic penances.


19. The seed of the supreme and univer-
sal Brahma had been placed into the sancti-
fied food intended fer you, while into that
intended for your mother had been placed
the sum-total of Kshatriya energy.


20.° On account of the substitution of the
Awo parts, O blessed lady, that which: had
intended will not happen. Your
mother will get a Brahmana child while
you will get a son that will becomea
Kshatriya.’


21. Thus addressed by her husband the
highly blessed Satyavati bent down her
head at his feet and tremblingly said,—
You should not, O holy one, speak such
words to me, vis. You will obtain a wretch
among Brahmanas for your son.”


Richika said :—


23. ‘This was not intended by me, O
blessed lady, for you. A son of terrific
‘deeds has been conceived by you for the
substitution of the sanctified food.’


Satyavati replied :—

24. ‘If you wish, O sage, you can create
other worlds, what shall 1 say of a child?
You should, O powerful one, give me a son
who wilt be pious and peaceful.’

te


Richika said :—

25. ‘L had never uttered even in jest, 0
blessed fady, an untruth. What need then
be said of a time for preparing. sanctified


MAHABHARATA,


food with the help ef Vedic formulz afte
lighting a fire?

26. it was ordained of yore by Destiny,
O lovely damsel. I have known it ali by
my penances. All the descendants of your
father will be endued with Brahmanic
virtues.’


Satyavati said :-—

27. ‘O powerful one, let our grandsow
be such, but, O foremost of ascetics, let me
have a quiet son.’


Richika said :—


28. ‘O fair lady, I see no distinction,
between a son anda grandson. It will be,
O lovely lady, as you say.’


‘Vasudeva said :—


2g.. ‘Phen Satyavati gave birth toa son
in Bhrigu’s race who was devoted to.
penances and peaceful eccupations, #3,
Jamadagni of regulated vows.


30. Kaushika’s son Gadhi begot a sow
named Vishwamitra. Pcssessed of every
attribute of a Brahmana, that son though a
Kshatriya by birth was equal to a Brah-
mana, ,


gt. Richika (thus) begat Jamadagni,
that sea of penances. Jamadagni begot
a son of dreadful deeds.


32. The foremost of men. that son
mastered all the sciences, including that of
arms. Like a burning fire, that scn was
Rama, the exterminater of the Kshatriyas.


23. Having satisfied Mahadeva on the
Mountains of Gandhamadana, he begged
from that deity for weapons, especially’ the
axe of fierce power in his hands.


34. For that peerless axe of fiery splen-
dour and irresistible sharpness, he became
unequalled on Earth, — :


357-37. Meanwhile the powerful son of
Kritavieryya, the king of the Haihayas,
endued with great power, highly pious, and.
possessed of a thousand arms through the.
favour of (the great’ Rishi) Dattatreya,
having cenquered in battle, Doe strength
of his own arms, the entire rth with her
mountains and seven islands, became a very
powerful.sovereign and (at last) gave away
the Earth to the Brabmanas in a horse-
sacrifice.


38. Once begged by the thirsty god of
fire, O son of Kunti, the thousand-armed
king of great prewess gave alms to that °
deity.

39. Originating from the. point of his
arrow, the highly powerful god of fire
desirOus of consiming (what was offered}


SHANTI


burnt villages and towns and kingdoms
and hamlets of eowherds.


40. Through the prowess of that fore-
most of men, vis., the powerful Karta-
viryya, the god of fre consumed mountains
and great forests,


41. Helped by the king of the Haihayas
the god of fire, increased more by the wind,
consumed the uninhabited but the charming
hermitage of the high-souled A pava,


4¢—43. O mighty-armed king, seeing
his hermitage consumed by the powerful
Kshatriya, the highly energetic Apava
cursed that monarch in anger, saying,—
Since, O Arjuna, without reserving these
my woods, you have burnt them, therefere,
Rama (of Bhrigu’s race,) will cut your
thousand arms, ‘


44—47. The powerful Arjuna, however,
of great prowess, always devoted to peace,
ever obedient to Brahmanas and ready to
protect all classes, and charitable and
brave, O Bharata, did not think of that
curse impreeated on him by that great
Rishi. His powerful sons, always proud
and cruel, on account of that curse, became
the indirect cause of his death. The
princes, O foremost of Bharata’s race,
caught and brought away the calf of Jama-
dagni’s Homa cow, against the knowledge
of Kartaviryya the king of the Haihayas.
For this reason a dispute took place be-


tween the great ;Jamadagni and the
Haihayas. .
48. The powerful Rama, the son of


Jamadagni, filled with anger cut off the
arms of Arjuna and breught back, O king,
his father’s calf which was grazing within
the inner appointment of the king’s man-
sion, , 7


49—50. Then the foolish sons of Arjuna,
going in a body to the hermitage of the
great Jamadagni, cut with their lances,
‘O king, the head of that Rishi from : off
his trunk . while ithe celebrated Rama had
gone out for fetching sacred fuei and
grass.


st. Worked up with anger at the death
‘of his father and filled with vengeance,
Rama vowed to rid the Earth of Ksha-
triyas and took up arms.


52. Then that foremost of the Bhrigus,
éndued with great energy, displaying his
prowess, quickly killed all the sons and
grandsons of Kartaviryya.

. $3. Killing thousands of Haihayas in
anger, the descendant of Bhrigu, O king,
covered the Earth with blood.

54. Highly energetic, he speedily freed
the Earth of all Kshatriyas. Filled then
with pity, he retired into the woods.a


PARVA.


$3°-


55. Afterwards, after the expiry of some
thousands of years, the powerful Rama,
who was angry by nature, was.aceused of
cowardice.


56—57. The grandson of Vishwamitra
and soln of Raivya, possessed of great
ascetic merit, named Paravasu, O king,
began to accuse Rama publicly, saying,—
O Rama, were not those pious men, vés.,
Pratarddana and others, who were assem-
bled ata sacrifice at the time of Yayati’s
death, Kshatriyas by birth ? :


58. You are not truthful, O Ramal
You simply brag before people. For fear
of Kshatriya heroes you have betaken
yourself to the mountains.


59. Hearing these words of Paravasu,
the descendant of. Bhrigu, once more took
up arms and once more covered the Earth
with hundreds of Kshatriya bodies.


60. ‘Those Kshatriyas, however, O king
counting by hundreds, that were not killed
by Rama, multiplied (in time) and became
powerful monarchs on Earth. :


61. Rama once more killed them quickly,
not sparing even the very children, O king.
The Earth again was covered with the
bodies of Kshatriya children of. premature
birth. : ;


62. Agssoon as Kshatriya children were
born, Rama killed them, Some Kshatriya.
ladies, however, succeeded in hiding their
children from Rama. ‘


63. Having made the Earth shorn of -
Kshatriyas for twenty-one times, the power
ful Bhargava, atthe completion of a horse
sacrifice, gave away the Earth as sacrificial
present to Kashyapa. a


64—65. For preserving the residence of
the Kshatriyas, Kashyapa, O king, point-
ing with his hand that still held the sacri-
ficial ladle, said these words,—O great
sage, go to the shores of the southern
ecean. You should not, O Rama, live
within my kingdom. ,

66. At these words, Ocean all on a sud-
den made for Jamadagni’s son, on hia
other shore, a region called Surparaka.


’ 67. Kashyapa aiso, O king, having
accepted the Earth in gift, and madea
present of it to the Brahmanas, entered
into woods.

68. Then Shudras and Vaishyas, began
wilfully to know, O° foremost of Bharata’s
race, the wives of Brahmanas.

69. When anarchy begins on Earth, the
weak are oppressed by the strong, and no
man is master of his own possessions. ‘

70.- Uuprotected duly by the virtuous
Kshatriyas, and oppressed by the wicked


ss


for that disorder, the Barth quickly sank to
the lowest depths,


71. Seeing the Earth sinking from fear,
the great Kashyapa held her on his Jap;
and because the great Ridfit held heron his
lap (aru) therefore is the Barth known by
the name of Urvi.


72, The goddess Earth for securing


protection, pleased Kashyapa and begged


of him a king.


The Earth said :—

73. ‘There are, O Rishi, some leading
Kshatriyas concealed by me among
women, They were born in the family
of the Haihayas. Let them, O sage, protect
me.


7a. There is another person ef Puru’s
family, vtg., Viduratha’s son, O powerful
one, who has been brought up ameng bears
in the Rikshavat mountains.


75. Another, vis, the son of Saudasa;
has been protected, through pity, by the
highly energetic Parashara ever engaged in
sacrifices.

76. Though born in the family of a
twicerborn one, yet like a Shudra he does
everything for that Rishi and has, therefore
been named servant of all work.


77. Shivi’s energetic son Gopati, has,
been prong up in the forest among kine.
Let him, O sage, protect me.


78 Pratraddana’s highly powerful son
named Vatsa has been brought up among
calves in a cowpen. Let that Kshatriya
protect me,


79. Dadhivahana’s grandson and Divi-
tatha’s gon was kept hidden on the banks
of Ganga by the sage Gautama.


80. His name is Vrihadratha. Possess-
ed of great energy and endued with numer-
ous accomplishments, that blessed prince
has been protected by wolves and the
mountains of Griddhrakuta,


81. Many Kshatriyas of the race of
Marutta have been protected. Equally
energetic like the lord of Macuts, they have
been brought up by Ocean.


82. These children of the Kshatriyas
have been heard of as housing in different
places. They are residing with artizans
and goldsmiths. [Uf they protect me I shall
then remain unmoved.


83. Their fathers and grandfathers have
been killed for my sake by the highly
powerful Rama.. It is my duty, O great
sage, to see that their funeral rites are
properly performed..


MAHABHARATA. a


84. I do net desire that I should be pro-
tected by my present kings. Do you, O
sage, quickly make such arrangements that
1 may remain (as before),’ i


Vasudeva said :— ,

85. ‘Then, finding out those energetic
Kshatriyas whom the goddess had named,
the sage Kashyapa installed them duly as
kings.

86. Those Kshatriya races that are now
in existence are the offsprings of those
princes.— What you have questioned me,g0
son of Pandu, thus took place in days of
yore,’


Vaishampayana said :—


87. “Conversing thus with Yudhisthira,
that foremost of pious men, the great
Yadava hero proceeded quickly on that car
lighting up all the quarters like the divine
Sun himself.”’


CHAPTER LI.


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).— Continued.


Vaishampayana said : —

1—2. ‘ Hearing of those wonderful deeds
of Rama, king Yudhisthira became stricken
with wonder and said to Janarddana,—‘O
you of Vrishni’s race, the prowess of the
great Rama, who in anger had freed the
Earth of Kshatriyas was like that of Shakra
himself,


3 The sons of Kshatriyas, stricken witls
the fear of Rama, -were concealed (and
brought up) by kine, Ocean, pards, bears,
and monkeys,


4. Indeed, praiseworthy is this world of
men and fortunate are they that live in it
where such a wonderful but righteous deed
was performed by a Brahmana.’


s. After this discourse, those two iflustri«
ous herees, viz., Krishna of undecaying
glory and and Yudhishthira proceeded
where the powerful son of Ganga Jay -on
his bed of arrows.


6. They then saw Bhishma lying on his
arrowy bed and shining like the evening
Sun covered with his own rays.


7. The Kuru hero was encircled by
many ascetics like Indra of a hundred
sacrifices by the denizens of heaven. The
spot on which he lay-was highly sacred, for
it was situate on the banks of the river


Oghavat.


SHANTI PARVA,


B95. Seeing him from -a distance,
Krishna and Dharma’s royal son, the four
Pandavas, and the others headed by
Shwaradwat, got down from their cars and
restraining their minds and concentrating
all their senses, approached the great
Rishis.

10. Saluting those foremost of Rishis
headed by Vyasa, Govinda and Satyki
and the others came to the son of Ganga.


11. Seeing Ganga’s son of great ascetic
merit, the Yadu and Kuru princes, took
their seats, around him.


12, Seeing Bhishma tesembling a fire
’ about to be extinguished, Keshava witha
rather depressed heart. addressed him as
follows.


Keshava said:—


13. ‘Is your understanding now as clear
as before? [ hope your understaning, O
foremost of orators, is not clouded?


14. I hope your limbs are not afflicted
by the pain originating from the wounds
inflicted by arrows? Mental grief also
weakens the body,


15. By virtue of the boon granted to you
by your father, the righteous Sharitanu,
your death, O powerful hero, depends on
your own wilt. I myself have not that
ite for which you have obtained this
oon, .


16. Even the smallest pin when put into
the body produces pain. What need then
‘be said, O king, boneteds of arrows that
have pierced you 7


17. Surely, pain cannot be said to assail
you. You’can, O Bharata, instruct the
very celestials regarding the origin and
dissolution of living creatures.


18, Possessed of great knowledge, you
know everything belonging to the Past, the
Future and the Present.


1g. The dissolution of created beings
and the mode of righteousness, are well
known to you, O you of great wisdom, for
you are an ocean of virtue and duty.


20. While living in the climax of pros:


perity, Lsaw you forego female intercourse


though surrounded by female companions.


#1—22. Except Shantanu’s highly
powerful son Bhishma firmty devoted to
righteousnéss, possessed of heroism aad
having virtue for the only object of life, we
have never heard ef any other person in the
three worlds who could, by his power of
asceticism, though lying on a ed of arrows
and on the pointof death, prevent death
from attacking him.) q


nn


23—24. Wehave never heatd of anyone
else who was so devoted to truth, to pens
ances, to gifts, to the celebration of sacrifi«
ces; to the sciences of arms, to the Vedas,
and to the protection of persons begging
for the same, and wie abstained from injur«
ing any creature, $o pure in conduct, so self-
controlled, and so bent upon doing good ta
all creatures, and who was also so greata
car-warrior a8 you. ‘


25. Forsooth, yo are competent to
defeat, ona single car, the gods, Gans
dharvas, Asuras, Yakshas, and Rakhasas.


26. O mighty-armed Bhishma, you are
described by the Brahmanas as the ninth
of the Vasus. By your vittues, however,
you have excelled them al] and are equal te
Vasava himself. ;


27. I know, O best of persons, that yott
are celebrated for your prowess, O foremost
of beings; among even the very abstracts.

28. Among men on Earth, O foremost
of men, we have never seen nor heard of


any one endued with such accomplish<


ments,


29. O Kshatriya chief, you excell the .


gods themselves in all these accomplish
ments, By your ascetic power you cat
Create a universe of mobile and immobile
creatures,
you have acquired many blessed regions by
means of your foremost of virtues ?


go. Remove riow the sorrow of the eldest
son of Pandu whois burning with sorrow
on account of the destruction of his kins
men,


31. Allthe duties that have been laid


What is the use of saying that ‘


down for the four orders about the four .


modes of life are well known to you.
32-33. Everything again that is in the
four branches of learning; in the fout


Hotras,; O Bharata, as also those eterfial


duties that are laid down in Yoga and
Sankhya philosophy, the duties too of the
four orders and those duties that are not
inconsistent with theit practices,—all these,
along with their interpretations;—O son of
Ganga, are known to you.

34. The duties that have been laid dows
for the issues of intermarriages and and
those laid down for particular countries and
tribes and familes, and those declared by
the Vedas and by wise men, are all well
known to yo.


35. Wou are the master-topics of his
tories and the Puranas. Ail the scriptures
treating of duty and practise are centered
in your memory, ;


‘


36. Expect you, O foremest of mee, °
there is no other person that can dispell the -


qa


doubts that may arise regarding the sub-
jects of knowledge studied in the world.

- 37. With the help of your intelligence,
do you, O
felt-by the son of Pandu. Persons endued
with so great and such varied knowledge
live only for solacing those whose minds
have been stupefied’.”?


CHAPTER LI.


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Centiiued,


Vaisha mipayana said :—
‘4. “Hearing those words of the highly
intelligent Vasudeva, Bhishma, raising his.
head a little, said these words with jcined
hands.

_ Bhishma said —

2. ‘Salutations to you, O divine
Krishna! You are the origin and the
dissolution of all the worlds. You are the
Creator and you are the Destroyer. You,
O Hrishikesha, cannot be defeated by an
one, :


3.. Tha universe is the work of your hand.


You are the soul of the universe and the
universe has originatedfrom you. Saluta-
tlons to you. You are the end of all
created things. You are above the five
élements.


4.- Salutations to you who are the three
worlds and that are again above the
three worlds. O lord of Yogins, salu-
tations te you who are the refuge of
|


5—6. O foremost of beings, those words


which you have said regarding me have
« enabled me tosee yout divine attributes as
‘manifest in the three worlds. O Govinda,
I also behold your eternal image. ;


- 9. You stand closing the seven paths o
the powerful Wind. ‘The sky is eccupied
py your head, and the Earth by your
eet.


8—9. The quarters are your two arms,
and the-Sun is your eye, and Shakra is
jour prowess. © you of undecayiag glory;
your body clad in yellow robes that resemi-
ble the colour of the Atasi flower, seem to
us to be like a cloud charged with flashes of
lightning. ‘Think of that, O best of gods,
which would be good, O you having lotus
eyes, for my humble self who am devoted
to, you, who seek refuge with you, and
whe am desirous of acquiring a blissful
end’ ai


grince of men, drive the sorrow |


" MAHABHARATA:


Vasudeva said :—

to. ‘Since, O foremost of met, yoiit
devotion to me is very great, for this,
O prince, I have shown my divine form ta
you. :

tt. I donot, O foremost of kings, dis«
play myself to one which is not my votary,
ot to a devotee who is not sincere, or to one,
O Bhatata, who has not restrained his
soul.


12. .You are devoted;to me and always
observe righteousness. Of a pure heart,
you are always self-restrained and ever
practice penances and make gifts.


13. Through your own penances, O
Bhishma, you are cempetent to see me.
‘Those regions from which no one returns,
O king, are ready for you.

14. Fifty-six days, O foremost of Kuru’s
race, still remain for you to live. Renounc-
ing youf body, you shall then, O Bhishma,
obtain the blessed meed of your deeds.


13. See; those deities and the Vasuts, alf
having fiery forms, riding on their cars,
are waiting for you invisibly till the
moment of the Sun’s entering on bis
northerly course.


16. Subject to univetsal time, when the


. divine Sun turns to his northerly course, you,


O foremost of men, shall go to those regions
whence no man returns to this. Earth.


tz, When you, O Bhishma, will leave
this warid al! Knowledge, O hero, will end
with you. Et is, therefore, that all these
persons, assembled together, have ap<
proached you for listening to discourses ow
duty afid morality.

18. Do you then speak words of truth,
containing merality and profit and Yoga,
to Yudhisthira who is firm in truth but
whose léarning has ween clouded by sortow
consequent of the destruction of liis kinss
men, and do you, by this; speedily remove
that grief of his’.


CHAPTER LIII.
(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continueds

Vaishampayania said :—
1. “Hearing these words of irishia
pregrant with tiorality and worldly profit,


Shantanu’s ‘son Bhishma atsweted him
thus. - :


Bahishma said :—
2. 'O lord of alithe worlds, O mighty«


‘armed one, O Shiva, @ Natayana, O you


SHANTI BARVA,


ef undecaying glory, hearing your words I
have been filled With joy. :
3. But what words, O master of speech,
‘can I communicaté in your presence, when
‘especially all the subjects of speech have
been treated in your speech
_ 4. Whatever in either world should be
done or is done, emanates from your in-
telligent self, O god.


5. That person, who can speak on the
subject of heaven before the king of the
‘celestials, himself is able to deal with
morality and desire and profit and libera-
tion in your presence. 2 -

6. My mind, O destroyer of Madhu, is
greatly agitated by the pain of wounds
inflicted by arrows. My limbs are weak.
My understanding is not clear.


7. 1 am so afflicted, OQ Govinda, by
these arrows resembling poison or fire that
1 have not the power to speak anything.

8. My strength is leaving me. My vital
airs are about to feave me. The very
vitals of my body are being consumed.
My understanding ts clouded.


9. From weakness my words aré be-
coming indistinct; How then can I dare
speak O lord of Dasharha’s race, be
pleased with me.

to. O mighty-armed one, I will not say
anything. Pardon me. Even the lord of
speech (Vrihaspati) will hesitate to speak
before you.


1m. LE cannot any longer decipher the
points of the compass, nor distinguish the
sty from the earth’ Through your energy,
© slayer of Madhu, 1 am only alive.


12. Do you, therefore, yourself speak
for the behoof of king Yudhisthira, for you
are the ordainer of all the ordinances. _


13. How, O Krishna, when you, the
eternal creator of the universe, are pre-
sent, can one like me speak like a disciple
before his preceptor ?


Vasudeva said :—


i4. ‘Your words become you only who
are the foremost of Kuru’s race, who are
endued with great energy, who are of
great soul, and who are possessed of
great patience and conversant with every
subject.


15. Regatding what you have said
about the pain of wounds, receive, O
Bhishma, this boon what I grant you, O
powerful one, from favour.


: 16. Uneasiness, stupefaction, burning


pain, hunger and thirst shall not, Q son
io


73


of Ganga, assail you, O you of undetaying
glory.

_17. Your perception and memory, O
sinless one, shall be unclouded, Your
understanding shall not disappear.


18. Your mind, O Bhishma, freed fron:
the qualities of darkness and ignorance,
will always be subject to the quality of
goodness, fike the moon coming out of the
clouds. - ~


19. Your understanding will penetrate
every subject regarding duty, morality, ot
profit, you will think upon.

20. O foremost of kings, acquiring
choice vision, you will, O you of incoms
parable prowess, succeed in seeing the four
orders of created things.


21. Possessing the eye of knowledge, yow
will, O Bhishma, see, like fishes in a limpid
stream, all created things that you will try
to recoflect.’” .


Vaishampayana said :— .

22. “Then those great Rishis, wittt
Vyasa amongst them, worshipped Krishna
with hymns from the Richs, the Vajus,
and the Samans,


23. A shower of celestial flowers of alf
seasons feli on that spot where ‘the Vrishni
hero with Ganga’s son and the son of
Pandu were.


24. All kinds of celestial instruments
played in the sky andthe Apsaras begatt
to sing. No evil portent appeared there.

23. An auspicious, pleasant and pure
breeze, carrying every kind of fragrance,
began to blow. Alithe poitits of the hori+
zion becarne clear and quiet, and all the
animals and birds began to move about
peacefully. ;

26. Sooh after, like a fire at the outskirt
of a great forest, the divine Sun of a
thousahd rays was see to descend wests
wards.


2y. Theh, rising up; the great Rishis
cue Janarddana ahd Bhishma and king
udhishthira, -


28. Upon this, Keshava, thé sons of
Pandu, Satyaki, Sanjaya, and Shatadwat’s
son Kripa, bowed reverentially to those
sages.

29. Always righteous those sages, thus
adored by Keshava and othérs, quickly


went to their respective habitations, saying


—'We will return to-morrow.’


30. After this, Keshava and the Pandas
vas, saluting Bhishma and going round him,
got upon their beautiful cars,


74


3%; Those heroes then went out, accom-
panied by many other cars adorned with
golden Kuvarzs, and infuriate elephants
ng mountains, and horses quicle-
. zx as Garudas, and the infantry

-.é. with bows and weapons. ;

“g2.. Vhat army. moving quickly, pro-
ceeded in two detachments, one in the van
and the other in the rear of those princes.
The spectacle shone tike two currents of the
great river Narmada at the point where it
is divided by the Rikshavat mountains
Standing across it.

33. Cheering up that great army the
divine Moon rose before it in the sky, once
more giving moisture, by his own force, to
the terrestial herbs and plants whose juice
has been drunk up by the Sun,


34. Then that foremost of Yadu's race
and the sons of Pandu, entering the (Kuru)
city which was shining like that-of the city
of Indra itself, proceeded to their respec-
tive edifices like tired lions seeking their
cayes,”’ : : :


oe nas


CHAPTER LIV.


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).-—Continued,


Vaishampayana said:- i;

1. Retiring to his bed, the destroyer of
Madhu, slept happily, _

2. Awaking when half a period was
wanting for the appreach of the day, he
made himself ready for meditation. Con-
centrating all his ‘senses, he meditated on
the eternal Brahma.


3. Then a number of .well-trained and
sweet voiced persons, conversant with
hymns and the Puranas, began to sing the
praises of Vasudeva, that master of all
ereatures and the ereator of the universe..

4. Others, keeping time by the clapping

ef hands, began to sing sweet hymns, and
vocalists began to sing. Thousands of
conch-shells and drums were. blewn and
beat.
. 5. The charming sound also of Vinas,
Panavas, and bamboo flutes, was heatd.
The spacious edifice offKrishna, seemed, as
# to laugh with music.

6. in the mansion of king Yudhisthira
also melodious. voices were heard, exclaim-
ing auspicious fwishes, and the sound of
songs too and musical instruments.

- 3. Then the Dasharha hero performed
his ablutions. Joining his hands, the


; let my best of cars be made ready.


MAHABHARATA. -


mighty armed hero, of undetaying glory,
silently recited his -sacred Mantras, an
lighting up a fire poured libations of clari-+
fied butter upon it.


8. Distributing a thousand  kire
amongst a thousand Brahmaras all of
whom were masters of the four Vedas,
Hed made them utter benedictions upod
nim.


g~10. Touching next various sorts of
sacred articles and beholding himself in a
clear mirror, Krishna addressed Satyaki,
saying,—='Go, O descendant of Shini, and
repairing to Yudhisthira’s palace, ascertain
whether if the king is dressed for visiting
Bhishma,’


tr—~12, Thus commanded by Krishna,
Satyaki, proceeding quickly to the royal
son of Pandu, said to him,~—‘The foremost
of cars, belonging to the. highly intelligent
Vasudeva, is ready, O king, for Janarddana
will go to see Ganga’s son.


13. O righteous king, he is waiting for
you. You should now do what should be
done next.—Thus addressed, Dharma's son
Yudhisthira answered as follows.


‘Yudhisthira said :—


14. ‘O Phalguna of matchless splendour,-
We
should not be accompanied by the soldiers,
but we shall proceed alone.


15. ‘that best of righteous persons viz.,
Bhishma, should not be vexed. Let not
the guards, therefore, O Dhananjaya ac-
company us to-day. :

16, From this day Ganga’s son will dis<
course on things that are great mysteries.
I donot, therefore, O son of Kunti, wish
that there should be a miscellaneous as-
sembly.’


Vaishampayana said :—

17. “Hearing these words of the king,
Kunti’s son Dhananjaya, that best of men,
went out and returning said to him that his
best of cars stood ready for him,


18 King Yudhisthira, the twins, Bhima
and Arjuna, the five resembling the five
elements, then proceeded towards Krishna’s
mansion.


1g. While the great Pandavas were
coming, Krishna accompanied by the
grandson of Shini, got upon his car.


20. Saluting one another front their cars
and each enquiring of the other whether he
had passed the night happily, those fore-
most of men proceeded, without stopping,
on those foremost of cars whose rattle re«
sembied the roar of the clouds.


SHANTI PARVA.


at. Krishna’s horses, vis., Valahaka,
_Meghapushpa, Shaivya and Sugriva were
driven by Daruka.

22.
tan on marking the Earth with their hoofs.

23—24. Highly strong and- quick-
coursing, they flew onwards, devouring as
if the very skies. Traversing the sacred
field of Kuru, the princes went to that spot
where the powerful Bhishma was lying on
his bed of arrows, surrounded by those
great Rishis, like Brahman himselfin the
midst of the celestials.

25. Then Govinda, Yudhishthira.
Bhima, and the wielder of Gandiva, the
twins and Satyaki, getting down from
their cars, saluted the Rishis by raising
their right,hands. =

26. Encircled by them, king Yudhish-
thira, like the moon in the midst of the
stars, approached Ganga’s son like Vasava
proceeding towards Brahman,


27. Possessed by fear, the king timidly
cast his eyes on the mighty-armed hero
lying on his bed of arrows like the Sun
himself dropped from the sky.


CHAPTER LV.
RAJADHARMANUSHASANA


PARVA).—Continued.
Janamejaya said :—
1—3. ‘When that foremost men, of


righteous soul and great energy, strictly
devoted to truth and with passions res-
trained, viz, the son of Shantanu and
Ganga, named Devavrata or Bhisma- of
undecaying glory, lay on a hero’s bed with
the sons of Pandu sitting around him, tell
me, O great sage, what conversation took
place in that meeting of heroes after the
destruction of all the soldiers.”


Vaishampayaena said :-—

4. ‘When Bhishma, that chief of the
Kurus, lay on his bed of arrows, many
Rishis and Siddhas, O king, headed by
Narada, came there.

5. The residue of the kings with
Vudhishthira at their head, Dhritarashtra,
Krishna, Bhima, Arjuna and the twins also
came there.

6. Approaching the grandfather of the
Bharatas who shone like the Sun himself
dropped from the sky, those great persons
began to bewail for him.


7—8, Then, reflecting for a moment,


The animals, urged by him, O king :


75


Narada, of divine features, addressed all
the Pandavas and the residue of the kings,
saying, ‘The time, } think, has come for
you to question Bhishma for Ganga's son
is about to die like the Sun that is on the .
point of setting. _:


9. He is about to give up his ghost.
Do you all, therefore, request him to dis-
course to you. He is acquainted with the
various duties of all the four orders,


to. Aged as he is, after renouncing’ his
corporeal frame -he will attain to high
regions of bliss. Request him, therefore,
forthwith to clear the doubts that exist in
your minds.’ :


11. Thus accosted by Narada, those
princes ‘approached Bhishma, .but unable
toask him anything looked at one another.


‘ya. Then Yudhishthira the son of Pandu,
addressing Hrishikesha, said,—‘'There is
no one else than Devaki’s son ‘who can-
question the grandfather.


13. O foremost one of Yadu’s race, do
you, therefore, Q destroyer of Madhu,
speak first. You are the foremost of us’
alt and are conversant with every duty aad
practice,’


14. Thus addressed by theson of Pandu,
the illustrious Keshava of undecaying glory,
approaching the unconquerable Bhishma,
spoke to him as follows.


Vasudeva said :—


15. ‘Have you, O best of kings, passed
the night happily? Has your ,understand-
ing become unclouded ?


16. Does your knowledge, O sinless one,
shine in you by inward light ? ; ;
17._ | hope your heart does'not feel pain
and your mind is no longer agitated ?” .


Bhishma said :—


18. ‘Burning, stupefaction, toil, exhaus-
tion, and pain, through your grace, O you
of Vrishni’s race, have all left me ina
single day, ,


39. Q you of matchless splendour, I
behold as distinctly as a fruit placed in my
hands, all that is past, all that is future,
and all that is present.


20. 1 behold clearly, O you of unfading
glory, by ,virtue of the boon granted by
you to me, all the duties laid. down in the
Vedas, and inthe Vedantas,


21. The duties that have been described
by persons of learning and righteous con-
duct are still fresh fin my memory. | am
conversant also, O Janarddana, with the
duties and practices obtaining in particular


76


countries and among particular tribes and
families.

22. Ef remember again everything
regarding the four modes of Hfe. I am
acquainted, Q Keshava, with the royal
duties.


* 23. 3 would say, O Janarddana, every-~
thing in its proper hour, Through your
favour, I have acquired an auspicious
understanding.


24. Strengthened by contemplation of
you, I feel as if I have become a young
man again. Through your favour, O
Janarddana, I have become capable to talk
on what is.for the behoof of the world,”


25. Why, however, O holy one, do you
not yourself desctibe to Pandu’s. son all
that is good? What explanation can- you


give about it? Tell me quickly, O
Madhava,’
Vasudeva said :—


26. “Know, O you of Kuru's race, that
TF anr the root of fame and of everything
that produces. good. All things, good or
bad, emanate from me.


27. Who on Earth will wonder if the
Moon be said possessing cool rays ?
larly, who will
cribed as one endued with the greatest
fame.


28. I have, however, resolved to en-
hance your fame, O you of great splen-
dour. Jt is for this, O Bhishma, that
I have just filled you with great intelli-
gence.


29. Astlong, O king, as the Earth will
last, so long will your fame travel with
unmitigated lustre through all the worlds.


30. Whatever, O Bhishma, you will say
to the inquiring son of Pandu, will pass on
Earth like the authoritative declarations of
the Vedas.


‘gl. That person, who will follow the
authority of your declarations, will obtain
hereafter the meed of every meritorious
act.


32. For this reason, O Bhishma, I have
conferred on you celestial understanding
so that your fame may be increased on
Earth.


33. As long as a man’s fame lasts in
the world, so long are his good deeds
alive.


34. The unslain residue of the kings are
sitting around you, desirous of hearing
your discourses on morality and duty. Do
you speak to them, O Bharata. -


Simi- }.
wonder if I were des- |


MAHABHARATA.


35. You are aged and your conduct is
consistent with the injunctions of the Srutis.
You are a master of the royal duties and
of every other science of duty.


36. No one, has ever marked the slight-
est transgression in you since your very
birth. All the kings know you to be a
master of the sciences of morality and
duty,

37. Like a father to his sons do you,
therefore, O king, describe to them high
morality, You have always adured the
Rishis and the gods.


38. You should discourse on these sub-
jects fully to persons desirous of listening to
discourses on morality and duty. A learned’
person, especially when requested by the
righteous, *should talk of the same. The
sages have declared this to be a duty.


39. O powerful one if you do not speak
on such subjects, you will incur sin. There-
fore, questioned by your sons and grand-
sons, O learned one, about the eterna
duties (of men), do you, O foremost
of the Bharatas, describe this subject to
them.’’”


—ae


CHAPTER LVI.


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).~—Continued.


Vaishampayana said :— -

¥. The highly energetic delighter of
Kurus, v7z., Bhishma said,—'I shall des-
cribe the subject of duty. My speech and
mind have become steady, through your
favour, O Govinda, since you ave the eter-
nal soul of every being.


2. Let the righteous-souled Yudhisthira
enquire of me ‘about morality and duty. §
shall then be much pleased to speak of ald
duties.


3. Letthe son of Pandu, that virtuous
and noble royal sage, upon whose birth
all the Vrishnis were filfed with joy,
question me.


Let the son of Pandu, who has no peer
among all the Kurus, among’ all righteous’
persons and among celebrated men question
me.


5. Let the son of Pandu, who is
endued with intelligence, self-restraint,
Brahmacharya, forgiveness righteousness,
mental vigour and energy, question me.

6. Let the son of Pandu, who always by
his favour honours his relatives and guests
and,servants and dependants, question me.


SHANTI PARVA.


7, Let the son of Pandu,.who is settled
in truth, charity, penances, heroism, peace-
fulness, cleverness, and fearlessness, ques-
tion me. r


8. Let the pious son of Pandu, who
would never commit a sin actuated by
desire of pleasure or profit or from fear,
question me, 2


9. Letthe son of Pandu, who is ever
truthful, forgiving, endued with knowledge,
and attentive to guests and who always
makes gifts to the pious, question me.


to. Letthe,son of Pandu, who always
celebrates sacrifices and studies the Vedas
and satisfies the morality and duty, who
is ever peaceful and who has heard all
mysteries, question me.’


Vasudeva said :—


11, ‘King Yudhishthira, possessed by
great shame and fearing your imprecations,
does not venture to approach you.


12, That king, O monarch, having
caused a great carnage, ventures not to
approach you from fear of your curse.


13. Having wounded with arrows thase
who were worthy of his worship, those who
were devoted to him, those who were his
preceptors, those who were his relatives
and kinsmen, and those who deserved his
highest regard, he ventures not to ap-
proach you,’ ;


Bhishma said .—


14. ‘As the duty of the Brahmanas is
to practise charity, tostudy, and perform
penances, so the duty of Kshatriyas is
to renounce their bodies, O Krishna, in
battle. : .


“35. Kshatriyas should kill fathers and
grandfathers and brothers _and preceptors
and relatives and kinsmen that may give
them an unjust battle. This is their open
duty.

16, That Kshatriya, O Keshava, knows
his own duty who kills in battle his very
preceptors, if they happen to be sinful and
covetous and negligent of restraints and
vows. ;


-.19. ‘That Kshatriya knows his duty who
kills in battle the person who out of cove-
tousness neglects the eternal restrictions
of virtue.


18, That Kshatriya knows his duty who
in battle converts the Earth into a lake of
blood, having the hairs of killed} warriors
for the grass and straw floating on it, and
having elephants for its rocks, and stan-
dards for the trees on its banks.


i


1


19. A Kshatriya, when challenged,
must always fightin battle, for Manu has
said that a righteous battle acquires both
heaven and fame on Earth for him,’


Vaishampayana said :—

20. ‘After Bhishma had spoken thus,
Dharma’s son Yudhishthira humbly ap-
proached the Kuru lero and stood beforé
him.


21. He seized the feet of Bhishma who in
return cheered him with affectionate words.
Smelling his head, Bhishma asked Yu-
dhishthira to take his seat. .


22. Then Ganga’s son, that best ‘of
bowmen, addressed Yudhishthira, saying,
—'Do not fear, O best of the Kurus.
Ask me, O child, without any hesitation.’


CHAPTER X.


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continued.


Vaishampayana said:—


1, ‘Having saluted -Hrishikesha, and
Bhishma, and taken the permission of all
the elders assembled there, Yudhishthira
began to question Bhishma.”


Yudhishthira said :—


2. ‘Persons conversant with duty and
morality fecture that royal duties are the
highest ‘science of duty. I also regard
the burden of those duties as being highly’
heavy. Do you, therefore, O king, des-
cribe those duties.


3. O grandfather, do you speak fully
on the duties of kings. ‘The science of
royal duties is the refuge of all creatures.


4. O you of Kuru’s race, Religion,
Profit, and Pleasure depend on royal duties.
It is also clear that the practices that lead
to liberation equally depend on them,


5. Asthe reins govern the horse or the
iron ‘goad the elephant, so the science
of royal duties forms the reins for restrain-
ing the world, =

~6. If one becomes bewildered regard-
ing the duties observed by kings, disorder
would prevail on Earth and everything will
he in confusion.

z7. As the Sun rising removes darkness,
so this science destroys all the evil conse«
quences of the world.


8. Therefore, O grandfather, do yous
for my sake, discourse on royal duties first


73-


of all, for you, O chief of the Bharatas,
are the foremost of all persons conversant
with duties,


9. O destroyer of foes, Vasudeva con-
siders you as the foremost of all intelligent
persons. Therefore, all of us expect the
best knowledge from you.’


Bhishma said :—


Io. ‘Saluting Dharma who is Supreme,
Krishna who is Brahma in full, and the
Brahmanas, I shall discourse on the eternal
duties (of men). -


tr. Hear from me, O Yudhishthira,
with rapt attention, all the royal duties
described accurately and fully and other
Guties that you may wish to know,


12. In the first place, O chief of Kuru’s
face, the king should, for pleasing (his
subjects), wait ~humbly upon the gods
and the Brahmanas, always following
implicitly the ordinance.


13. By adoring the celestials and the


Brahmanas, O increaser of Kuru’s race,
the king satisfies his debt to duty and
morality, and acquires the respect of his
subjects.

- 44. © son, you should always exert
promptly, O Yudhishthira, for without
exertion and manliness mere destiny never
accomplishes the objects the kings wish
to achieve,


_ 15. These two, oiz., exertion and des-
tiny, are equal. Of them, I consider exer-
tion to be superior,cfor destiny is determin-
ed from the results of exertion.


16. Do not be sorry if what is under-
taken ends disastrously, for you should
then exert .yourself in the same work
with redoubled attention, This is the
highest of royal duties.


17. There is nothing which leads so
much to the success of kings as Truth.
The king who is devoted to Truth enjoys
happiness both here and hereafter.


18. Even tothe Rishis, O king, Truth,
is the greatest wealth. Likewise for the
kings, there is nothing that so much
Creates confidence in them as Truth.


19. The king who is endued with all
accomplishments and good conduct, who
is self-controlied, humble, and righteous,
who has his passions under control, who is
of a beautiful countenance and not too
enquiring, never loses prosperity.


20. By administering justice, by follow-
ing these three} expedients, vzs., conceal-
ment of his own shortcomings, ascertain-
ment of the loop-holes of foes, and keeping
his own counsel close, as also. by acting


MAHABHARATA,


straight-forwardly, the king, O delighter
of the Kurus, acquires prosperity.


21. if the king becomes mild, every-
body disobeys him. On thefother hand,
if he becomes fierce his subjects always
fear him. Therefore, do you conduct your-
self in both the ways.


22. O foremost of liberal men, the
Brahmanas should never be punished by
you, for the Brahmana, O soni of Pandu,
is the foremost of human beings on the
Earth.


23-24. The great Manu, O king of
kings, has written two Slokas. As regards
your duties, O you of Kuru’s race, you
should always remember them. Fire has
originated from water, the Kshatriya from
the Brahmana, and iron from stone. The
three, viz., fire, Kshatriya, and iron, can
act on every other thing, but coming
into contact with their respective origins,
their force becomes neutralised.


25--26. When iron strikes stone, or fire
fights with water, or Kshatriya treats a
Brahmana inimically, these three soon be-
come weak. When this is so, O king,
(you will see that) the Brahmanas deserve
to be worshipped. The foremost of the
Brahmanas are gods on- Earth. Duly
adored they maintain the Vedas and the
Sacrifices.


27. But they, O foremost of kings,
who wish to have such honor, though they
may be abstacles to the three worlds,
should always be repressed by the strength
of your arms,


28-29. The great Rishi Ushanas, O
gon, recited two Slokas in days of yore.
Listen to them, O king, with rapt atten-
tion, ‘Fhe true Kshatriya, ever observant
of his duties, should punish a Brahmana,
inspite of his being the master: of the
Vedas if he rushes to battle with an up-
lifted weapon.


30-31. The Kshatriya, observant of
his duties, who maintains righteousness
when it is tresspassed against, does not
by that act, commit sin, for the anger of the
assilant justifies the anger of the punisher.
With these restrictions only, O foremost
of kings, the’ Brahmanas should be protec-
ted. If they commit any offence they
should be banished out of the country.


32—33. Even when they deserve punish-
ment you should, O king, show them
mercy. Ifa Brahmana becomes guilty of
Brahmanicide, or of violating the bed of his
preceptor oc of other elders, or of causing
miscarriage, or of treason against the
king, he should be punished with banish«


SHANTI PARVA.


Hient frott your tetritories. No corporal
punishment ts laid down for them.


34. Those persons who revere the Brah-
manas should be favored by you. There
is no wealth more valuable to kings than
the proper selection of servants.


35. Among the six kinds of forts des-
cribed in the scriptures, among every kind
of other forts the service and the love of
the subjects is the most impregnable.


36. Therefore, a wise king should
always show mercy towards the four orders
of his subjects. The righteous and truthful
king suceeds in pleasing his subjects.


37- You should not, however, O son,
always forgive every body, for a mild king
is regarded as the worst like an elephant
shorn of fierceness.


38. In the Samhita of Vrihaspati, a
Sloka_was recited in days of yore applicable
to the present subject. Hear, O king, |
shall recite it.


39. If the king becomes always forgiving,
the lowest of persons influences him, as the
driver who sits on the head of the elephant
he gitides,

40. The king,
always be mild.
terrific.’ He should be like the vernal sun,
neither too cold nor too hot,


4t. By the diréct evidence of the senses,
by conjecture, by comparisons, and by the
injunctions of the scriptures, O monarch,
the king should study friends and enemies’


42. Onoble king, you should renounce
all those evil practices which are called
Vyasanas,
should never indulge in them. What, how-
ever, is necessary is that you should not be
attached to them.


43. He that is attached to those prac-
tices is under the influence of every one.
The king who does not [ove his subjects fills
the latter with anxiety.


m=44. The king should always treat his
subjects as a mother does the chitd of her
womb, Hear,O king, why this is de-
sirable, :


45, As the mother, even not caring for
those objects which she likes best, seeks the
well-being of ber child alone, so, forsootn,
should kiags treat their subjects.


46. A righteous king, O foremost one of
Kurw’s race, should always act in sucha
manner,as to sacrifice what he loves most
for the sake of securing the well-being of
his people.

47. You should never, O son of Pandu,
abandon fortitude, The king wao is


therefore, should not


Nor should he always be-


It is not incumbent that you’


‘


78


crowned with fortitude and who punishes
wrong-doers, has no cause of fear. .-


48. O foremost of speakers, you should
never Cut jokes with your servants. O fore
most of kings, listen to the short-comings of
such an act.


4g. If the master mixes too freely with
them, setvants begin to disregard {him,
They forget their own position and do sot
care their master.


go. Ordered to do a thing, they hesitate;
and give out the master’s secrets. They
ask for unbecoming things and take the
food that is intended for the master.

51. ‘They even display their anger and
try to excell their master, They evei try to
reign supreme over the king, and taking
bribes and practising deceit, hinder . the
business of the state. —

52. hey ruin the state with abuses by
falsifications and- forgeries. They make
love with the female warders of the palace


and .dress in the same way as theic
master,
53: They become so shanteless as to pass


wind and spit before the very eyes of theie
master, O foremost of kings, and they do.
not fear even to speak of him lightly’ before
others.


54, Hf the king becomes mild and ¢uts
jokes, his servants, disobeying him, ride on
horses and elephants and cars as good as
the king’s.

55. His counsellors, in court, plainly say
—This is beyond your power. This is a
wicked attempt, :

56. If the king becomes angry, they
laugh; nor are they pleased if favors be
conferred i 208 them, though they may
express joy for other reasons.


57. They give out the secret counsels of
their master and speak of his evil deeds.
Without the least anxiety they disregard
the king’s commands,


58. ‘If the king’s jewels, or food, or the
nececsaries of his bath, or unguents, be not
ready, the servants, in his very presence, do
not display the least anxiety.


59. They donot take what belongs to
them legitimately. On the other hand,
without being content with what has been


‘given to them, they take to themselves what


belongs to the king.


60. They wish to sport with the king as
with a bird tied in a rope, and always make
the people understand that the king is on
very intimate terms with them and loves
them dearly. :


80


61, Ifthe king is mild and disposed to
cut jokes, O Yudhisthira, these and many
other evils originate from it.


nein


»


CHAPTER LVIL.,


(RAJA DHARMAN USHASANA
PARVA).—Continued.


Bhishma said :—


1. ‘The king, O Vudhisthira, should
always address himself for action. That
ing does not deserve praise who, like a
woman, is destitute of exertion.


2. On this subject, the holy Ushanas
has recited a Sloka, O king. Listen to it
with attention, O king, as I recite it to
you.


. 3. Like a snake swallowing up miice, the
Earth swallows up those two, w7z., the king
who does not like to fight and the Brah-
mana who is exceedingly fond of his wives
and children. -


: 4 You should, O foremost of kings,
always remember it. Make peace with
those enemies with whom™ peace should be
made, and fight with them with whom war
should be waged.


. 5+ He, who acts inimically towatds your
kingdom consisting of seven limbs, should
be killed, may he be your preceptor or
friend.


6. There is an ancient Sloka recited by
king Marutta, quite of a piece with Vri-
haspati’s view, O king, about the duty of
kings. ~
8 7-8. According to the scriptural infune-
tion, there is punishment, for ‘even the


preceptor if he becomes haughty and  dis- ’


regardful of his duty, and if he transgresses
jall testrictions. Wahu’s son, the highly
-intelligent king Sagara, from desire of doing


good to the citizens, banished his own eldest”


son Asamanjas. -


Asamanjas, O king, used to drown
the children of the citizens in the Sarayu.
His father, therefore, remonstrated with
and exiled him.


10. The Rishi Uddalatta renounced his
favorite son Swetaketu of rigid penances,
because the latter used to isvite Brah-
manas with false promises of entettain-
ment ‘

11, To make their subjects happy, to
observe truth and to act sincerely are the
eternal duties ofikings.

12, The king should not harker after
the wealth of others. He should in time


MAHABHARATA.


give what should be given. If the king be
comes endued with prowess, truthful iit
speech, and forgiving in temper, he would
never be shorn of prosperity.


13. With soul purged off sins the king
should be able to govern his anger and all
his conclusions should be according to
the scriptures. He should. also always
follow morality, worldly ,profit, pleasur¢
and emancipation. .


14. The king should always keep his
counsels close regarding these three. No
greater misfortune. can betake the king
than the giving out of his counsels.


15. Kings should protect the four castes
in the discharge of their duties. It is-the
eternal duty of kings not to allow the con+
fusion of duties of the different orders.


16. The king should not confide (irt
others than his own servants), nor should
he place too much confidence (in even his
servants). He should, by own intelligence,
find out the merits and short-comings of
the six principal works of sovercignty.,


19. The king who marks the short
comings of his enemies and eleverly fot-
lows morality, profit, and pleastre, who
engages intelligent spies for determining
secrets and triesto win over the officers of
his enemies by presents of wealth is indeed
praise-worth y.


18. The king should administer justice
like the Regent of Death and amass riches
like the god of wealth. He should also
mark the merits and short-comings of his
own acquisitions and losses and of his owi
territories.


19. Heshould feed those who have not
been fed, and enquire of those who have
been fed. Always sweet-speeched he
should speak with a smiling face.


20. He should always wait upon his
eldets and put down procrastination. He
should never covet others’ properties.


21. Heshould strictly follow the cone
duct of the righteous. He should never
take money from the righteous, Taking
the wealth of those who are not righteous
he should give it them who are righteous.


22. The king should himself be clever
in smitting. He should be Hberal.. He
should have his mind under control.-- He
should dress himself gorgeously. He
should make presents in proper time and
be regular in his meals. He should also
be of good conduct.


23—~25. Theking who seeks to acquire
prosperity should always engage the ser-
vices of men who are brave, devoted, and
incapable of being imposed on by enemies


_SHANTT-PARVA,


well-born, healthy, well-behaved, and con-
mected with well-behaved and respectable
families, never inclined to insult others, well
vead in all the sciences, possessing a know-
dedge of the worldly affairs, never unmind-
ful of fature life, always observant of their
-duties, honest, and firm {ike mountains,
The objects of enjoyments should be the
same with him and them. The only differ-
nce should be in his umbrella and his
power of passing orders. :


26. He should always treat them equally
before or behind. The king, who behaves


in this way, is never overtaken by cala-'


mity. be :

27. That crooked and covetous king,
‘who suspects every body and who imposes
heavy taxes on his subjects, is soon killed
by his own servants and relatives. . -


28. That king, however, who is righte-.


us and who is ever engaged in attracting
the hearts of his people, is never .cuined
when attacked by -foes. If defeated, he
soon regains his position,

29. If the king is not angry by nature,
if he is not addicted to evil habits and not
severe in his punishment, if he succeeds
in keeping his passions under restraint
he becomes an object of confidence to all
jike the Himavat mountains.


30—32. He is the best of kings who is
wise, who is liberal, who is ready to take
advantage of the short-comings of foes,
who has an agreeable countenance, who is


conversant with what is good. and what.is .


bad for each of the four orders of his sub-
jects, who is prompt in action, who has
anger under control, who is not vindictive,
who is high-minded, who jis angry’ by


mature, who performs sacrifices and other


religious acts, whe does not brag and who
vigorously brings to close all works by
im. :
33. He is the best of kings in whose
kingdom men live fearlessly like sons in
the house of their father.


34 He is the best of kings whose sub-
jects have not to hide their wealth and

now what is good and what is bad for
them. 2 Ye ;

35-34. He, indeed, is a king whose
subjects follow their respective duties: and
do not féar to renounce their bodies for
duty’s call; whose subjects protected pro-
perly, are all of peaceful conduct, obedient,
docile, governabdle, reluctant to dispute and
liberal, That king earns eternal merit in
whose kingdom there is. na wickednes:
dissiroulation, deception and envy. ;


37. “Phat king truly deserves to govern’


who honours knowledge, who is davoted
a


So


to the scriptures and the good of his-people,
who wends the path of the righteous,. and
who is liberal. eS Fee atts

38. That king deserves to rule ‘whose
counsels and acts done and undone remain’
close to his enemies. ca


39.. The following verse was recited in
days of yore by Ushanas of Bhrigu’s race,
in the narrative called Ramacharita, on,


‘| the subject, O Bharata, of royal duties.


- 40. One should first select a king.' The
should he select a wife, and then acquire
wealth. If there be no king, what would’
become of his wife and properties?» ~


4t.. About those who! seek kingdom,
there js no other eternal duty than the pro,
tection (of . subjects). Bhe protection the,
king grants, to his subjects maintains the,
world, O rety ve ~
. 42, Manu, the son of Prachetas, recited
these two verses regarding the duties of
kings.: Listen to them with attention, ,

‘a3—44. These ® six' persons should be
shunned like a leaky boat on the sea; vis.,
a preceptor. whe does net speak, a priest
who has not studied the scriptures,.a king
who does not give protection, a wife wha
utters disagreeable words, a cow-herd- who
likes to rove within the village and a barber
who wishes to go to the forest. :


4


—
CHAPTER LVIIL.


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA..
- PARVA).—Continued.


Bhishma said :— ;

t. ‘Protection of the subjects, O Yudhis¢,
thira, is the quintessence of duties. The
divine Vrihaspati does not speals so highly.,
of any other duty. Lo , ie

2——3. The divine Kavi (Usanas).of Jarge '
eyes and austere penances, the thousand«:
eyed Indra, and. Manu, the -son .of
Prachetas, the divine Bharadwaja, and the,
sage Gaurasiras all devoted to Braama and |
utterers of Brahma, have composed, works,,
on the duties of kings. — _ ve cA re

4., All of them speak highly of the duty,
of protection, O foremost of virtuous persons
regarding the kings. O you having eyes
like lotus petals and copper-coloured, listen,
to the means by. which protection may be
obtained, “ ae

3—12. They consist of the employmené


| of spies and servants, paying them their


just dues‘ without ‘pride, the realisation” of
taxes with mercy, nevef taking anything’


3a


whimsically‘and unjustifiably. O° Yudhis-
thira, the selection of honost men, heroism,
skill and cleverness, truth, seeking the good
of the people, creating discord and disunion
among the enemy by fair or unfair means,
the repel of old and dilapedated buildings,
the infliction of corporal punishments and
imposition of just fines,’ never abandoning
the honest, giving employment and protec-
tion to respectable persons, the keeping in
reserve ‘of what should be kept, living in
the company of intelligent persons, always
gratifying the soldiers, supervision over the
subjects, steadiness in the transaction of
business, filling the. treasury, absence of
blind confidence on the guards of the city,


ereating disloyalty’ armen the citizens of'a_
lo


hostile town, carefully. looking after the
friends and allies living in the midst of the
enemy’s country, keeping a strict eye on the
servants and officers of the state, personal
supervision of the city, distrust-of servants,
comforting ‘the enemy. with assurance,
steadily following the settled policy, readi-
ness for action, never disregarding, an ene-
my, and driving away the-wicked.- | |

13. Readiness for action in kings is the
root of royal duties. - This has been said by
Vrihaspati. Listers to the verses recited
by him, - 23 ‘“

14. ‘By exertion ‘the ambrosia was


obtained ; by exertion the Asuras were


killed ; by exertion Indra himself acquired
sovereignty in heaven and on earth.


ts. The hero who works is superior to
one who speaks. ‘The heroes who
piers gratify and worship the heroes who
work, ; .


16, Theking, who is-shorn of exertion,
even if endued with intelligence, is always
defeated by foes like a snake that is shorn
of peison, © ° " ' son

iy. The king, even if very powerful,
should not neglect a foe however weak.
A scintillation of fire can produce a con-
iy paaal and ‘a particle of poison can

i. , . :

18., With onty one kind of force, an
enemy, from within a’ fort, can ‘assail the
whole country of even a powerful and pros-
Perous king, ~~ :


19-20. The.secret speeches of a king,


the collecting of troops for the purposes of
victory, the wily purposes in his heart,
desires for accomplishing particular objects,
and the wrong acts he does or intends to
do, should be concealed by assuming a bold
appearance. He should act righteously for
keeping his people under control. .


21. Wily persons can nat govern an” ex-


tensive empire, A king who is mild cannot i


MAHABHARATA.


acquire superiot fattk the acquisition of
which depends upgit exertion.

22, A kingdom, which is sought for by
all like meat can never be protected by
candour and simplicity. A-king, O Yudhis«
thira, should, therefore, always resort to


.both candour and wiliness.


_23. Even while protecting his subjects a
king is beset with danger, he earns great
merit. Such should be the conduct of
kings. a

24. I have now told you a part only
of the duties of kings. ‘Tell me, O best
of the Kurus, what more you wish to
know.” |


Vaishampayana said :—

25—~26. ‘The illustrious Vyasa, Deva-
sthana, Ashwa, Vasudeva, Kripa, Satyaki
and Sanjaya, filled with joy, and with faces
resembling full-blown flowers, said,—
‘Excellent! Excetlent!’ and sang the
praises of that best of men, wis., Bhishma,
that foremost of virtuous persons,


‘27-28. Then “Yudhishthira, that chief
of Kuru’'s race, with a depressed heart and
eyes bathed in tears, gently tonched Bhi-
shma’s feet and said,—'O grandsire, I
shall ‘tomorrow enquire after those points
about which I have my doubts, for today
the sun, having sucked the moisture of the
earth, is about to set. .


zg. Thea Keshava, Kripa, Yudhish-
thica and others, saluting the Brahmanas
and circumambulating Bhishma, gladly
got on their cars.


go. All “of them, observant of excellent
vows, then bathed in the river Drishadwati-
Having offered obiations of water to their
depearted manes’and silently recited the
sacred mantras and performed other aus-
picious rites, and having adored the even-
ing twilight with due rites, those scorchers
of enemies entered the city of Hasti-
napur.”


CHAPTER. LIX.


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continued,


Vaishampayana said :—


‘tr. “Rising from their beds the next day
and performing the morning rites laid down
in the scriptures, the Pandavas and the
Yadavas started on their cars resembling
fortified towns. :


SHANTI PARVA,


2. Proceeding tothe field of Kuru and
approaching the sinless Bhishma, they en-
quired of that best of car-warriors if he
had spent the night happily. attire


3. Saluting all the Rishis, and having
been blessed by them in return, the ptinces
sat around Bhishma.


4. Then having adored Bhishma, king
Yudhishthira, said these words with joined
hands.


Yudhishthira said :—


5. ‘Whence came the word Rajan, O
king, that is used, O Bharata, on Earth?
Tell me this, O scorcher of faes.


6—8., Having hands and arms and neck
like others, having an understanding and
senses like those of others, subject like
others to the same kinds of weal and woe,
having back, mouth and stomach similar
to those of the rest of the world, having
vital fluids and bones and marrow and
flesh and blood similar to those of the rest
of the world, drawing in and sending out
breaths like others, possessed of vital airs
and bodies like other men, resembling
others in birth and death, in fact, similar
to others regarding all the attributes of
men, why does one man, wts., the king
govern the rest of the world consisting of
many brave and intelligent persons ?


__ 9. Whence is it that one man governs
the vast universe consisting of brave, ener-
getic, well-born and well-behaved men ?
Why do all men try to get his favour?

to. Why is it that if one min becomes
cheerful, the whole world is cheerful and
if that one man is sorry the whole world
‘is sorry? : . F

it. I wish to hear this in detail, O fore-
“most jof Bharata’s race. O foremost of
speakers, describe to me this fully. :


12, O king, there must be some mighty
reason for all this because it is seen that
the whole world bows down to one man as
toa god.’ he :


Bhishma said :—


13. ‘With rapt attention, O foremost of
kings, listen to it fully as to -how in
the golden cycle sovereignty was first
instituted

14. At first there was no sovereignty, no
king, vo punishment, and no punisher. « All
men used to protect one another piously.

15. As they thus lived, O Bharata,
righteously protecting one another, the:
found the task (in time), to be painful.
Error then possessed their hearts.


16. Having become subject to errer, the


we used to pour downwards.


83


perceptions of men, O prince, became’
clouded, and thenee their virtue began
towane. . are 2 ;

t7.. When their perceptions were cloud
ed and when men became subject to error,
all of them became. covetous, O chief of
the Bharatas. | :


18. And because men tried to secure
objects which were not their own, another
passion called lust. seized them.


19. When they became subject to lust,
another passion, named anger, soon attack-
ed them. » Once subject.to. anger, they lost
all -considerations of what should be done
and what should not be. -


20. Unrestrained sexual indulgence be«
gan. Men began to say what they liked.
All distinctions between clean and unclean
food and between virtue and vice disap-
peared. :


21. When this confusion set in amongst
men, the Vedas disappeared. Upon the
disappearance of the Vedas, and righte-
ousness also was gone. . .


22, When both the Vedas and righte-
ousness were lost, the gods were overcome
by fear. Overcame with fear, O foremost
of men, they sought the help of Brahman.


23-24. Having propitiated the divine
Grandfather of - the universe, the gods,
stricken with grief, said to him, with joined
hands :—'"O god, the eternal Vedas have.
been afflicted in the world of men by
covetousness and ‘error.’ For this, we
have been assailed with fear.’ _


25. - With the foss of the Vedas, OG
Supreme Lord, righteousness, also has been
lost.. For this, O Supreme Lord of the
three worlds, we .are about, to be reduced
to the status of human beings, 2, - .


. 26, Men used to pou’ upwards while
For the
stoppage of ail religious ‘rites aniong men
we will’suffer great distress.) §° =~ - °


27—29. Do you then, O Grandfather,
think of that which would be for eur well-
being .so that the universe, created by
your power, may not meet with destruc-
tion.” Thus addressed, the Self-create and
divine Lord said ‘to ,them :-=‘I shall. thinks
of what will do you good, Ye «foremost of
gods, let your fears be: removed.’, The
grandfather then composed by his own
intelligence a work consisting of a hun-
dred thousand lessons. In it were treated
the subjects of religion, Profit and Plea-
-suce. ; r


30. The self-create named the book as.
one of three subjects. He treated ef ao


3


foiirth dubject called liberation whose means
ing and attributes are diferent. * ,

3h. The three-fold characteristics of
fiberation according to the attributes’ of
Goodness, Darkness and Fgnerance and


another’ hamely the performance of duty.-


without the desire for fruits were: also
described init. Another three-fold charac-
teristics of Punishment vs., Conservation,
Growth, aad Destruction, were treated
in it. _ : Sea:

-. 32. Another six consisting of the hearts
of men, place, time, means, tacts, and al-
tiances,Jand causes, were described in it.


» 33. The religious rites laid down in the
three. Vedas,: knowledge, and- the acts
necessary for the. support of life, (uis.,
ugriculture, : trade, etc), O foremost of
Bharata’s race, and the _very extensive
branch-of learning called legislation, were
described init. , ae tor
34—~35. The subjects also of behaviour
towards ministers, of spies; the indications
of princes, of secret agents, of envoys and
agents af other kinds, - conciliation, sewing
seeds of discord, gifts, and punishment,


king, with toleration as the fifth, were - :
: : it .| subjects who are well disposed towards the


Qui esctibed there, ~


7 36 —37- Deliberation of all-sorts, coun-
sel Pc creating disunion, the’ mistakes of
deliberation, the results of the success or


failure of counsels of three kinds vis, bad, |


middling, and good, made through fear,
good conduct and gilts of wealth, were
described there © ss *

38—39. Tl.etour sorts of time for ma-
king journeys.'the details of the aggregate
‘of- three, the’ three sorts of: victory, oz,
that secured piously, that acquired by
riches -and that obtained by deceit were
deseribed fully. ‘The three kinds: of at-

” tributes, viz, bad, middling and good, of
the five expedients (wiz, counsellors, ‘king-
dom, fort, army, and treasury) Wweré also
described in it.


. 40.. Punishments of two kinds, ots, open
and secret, were also described. Thé eight
‘kinds of open punishments as~ also che
eight kinds of secret punishment were
described fully.


4t—43. ‘Cars, elepharits, horse; and
infantry, O'son of Pandu, forced labourers,
‘crew, and paid attendants (of armies),
and guides ‘taken ‘from the country which
is the seat.of War,-'these. are the! eight
means; O Kauravya, of opén punishment.
The administration of movable and .immo-
vable poison was also mentioned regard-
ing the three kinds, of things, v7z., dress, °
food, and incantations. Enemies, , alfies,
and neutrals,these algo were described, - .


MAHABHARATR.


1 g4-=58. “Thé “various characteristics o
reads (to follow), the nature of the: soil en
which to encamp, protection of self, superin-
tendence of the construction of cars and
other utensils,of war and use, the various
means for protecting and improving men;
elephants, . cars, and horses, the various
kinds of arranging soldiers, strategies, and
and mancevres in war, planetary conjunc:
tions indicating evil, evil auguries (such as
earthquakes), skillful methods of warfaré
and retreat, knowledge of weapons and
their proper care, the disorders of troops
and how to get rid of them, the meéans of
filling the army with joy and confidence,
diseases, times of distress and danger,
knowledge . of guiding the infantry in
battle, the methods of creating alarms and
notifying orders, striking the enemy with
fear by display of flaps, the various means
of assailing enemy’s kingdom by means of
robbers and dreadful wiid-tribes, and fires

iver and poisoners and forgerers, by creat-
ing union among the--principal officers of
hostile armies, by cutting ‘down crops and
plants, by destroying the efficiency of the
enemy’s elephants, by producing alarms,
by honoring those among the enemy’s


invador, and by filling the enemy with
‘confidence, the waste, growth, and harmony
of the seven principal requisites of soverei-
gnty, capacity for, works, the means for
accomplishing them, the methods of ex-


‘tending the kingdom, thé means of winning


| over persons living in the énemy’s country,


the punishment and destruction, strong atid
the impartial administration of justice; the
extermination of the wicked, wrestling,
shooting and threwing and hurling of
weapons, the methods of making presents
and of keeping in- store necessary things,
feeding-.the unfed and supervision over
those that have been fed, gifts of wealth in
season, freedom from the jvices, the attri-
butes of king, the qualification of military
officers, the sources of the three requisilés
and its merits]and short-comings, the vari-
ous kinds of evil intents, the behavioltr of
dependents, suspicion against every one,
the avoidance of carelessness, the acquisi-
tidn of objects unadttained, the improving of
objects already obtained, gifts to deserving
persons, spending of wealth for. religious
purposes, for acquiring objects of desire,
and for removing danger and distress, were
alf described in that work. .


89. The ten’ dreadful vices; "O chiet of
the Kurus, begotter by ariger and fust,
were describéd inthat work. ° a ‘
ho) oc gots af anit

60, The four kinds of vices begott¢n o°
lust, ceéa.,; “hunting, gambling, drinking?


SHANTI PARVA,


find sexual intercourse were described by.
the Self-sprung in that work.

_ 6£. Roughness of speech, fiérceness,
severity of chastisement, infliction of pain
on the body, suicide,-and frustrating one’s
own objects, these six kinds of faults be-
gotten ot anger have also been described.


-62~—63. Various kinds of -machines and
their: actions have been described there;
Devastation of the . enemy’s territuries,
attacks upon enemies, the destruction and
removal of boundary lines and ether indi-
Cations, the cutting down of large trees,
siege of forts, supervision of agriculture
and other useful operations, the hoarding of
necessaries, dresses and the best means of
manufacturing them, were all described,


64—71. The characteristics and uses of
Panavas, Anakas, conchs and drums. O
Yudhishthira, the six'sorts of articles viz.,
gems, animals, lands, dresses, female slaves,
and yold and means of acquiring them
and ot destroying them, pacification of new-
ty acquired kingdom; honofing the good,
making friendship witti the Feacned, know-
ledge -of the rules of gifts and ° retigious
rites such as Hloma, the touch of auspicious
articles, attention to and adoring of the
body, the manner of preparing and using
food, piety of conduct, the .attainnient of


prosperity by following one. path, truthful- |


ness of speech, sweetness of speech, obser-
vance of acts on occasions of festivity and
social gatherings and those dotie within the
household, the open and secret acts of
persons in all places of meeting, the -cons-
tant supervision of the-conduct of men, the
freedom of Brahmanas from punisliment,
the infliction of reasonable punishment,
Jenors paid to dependetits for kinship and
merit, the protection of subjects .and the
-means of extending the territories, the
advice that a king, who lives in the midst
of a dozen kings, should follow regarding
the four kinds of enemies, the four kinds of
allies, and the four kinds of neutrals, the
seventy two acts laid down in medical works
about the protection, exercise, and improve-
ment of the body, and the practices of
particular countcies, § tribes and families,
were all duly described in that work,
72—73- Religion, Profit, Pleasure, and
Tibération were also treated in it. The
various means of- acquisition, thé desire for
various Sorts of wealth, Q giver of profuse
presents, the methods of agriculture and
other works constituting the chief source of
the revenue, and the various means for
producing and applying illusions, the
methods by which stagnant water is ren-
dered foul, were described in it. :


74. All those means, O forem@st of


‘the rest.


85.


kings, by which men. might be prevented,
from falling off from the path of righter |
ousness and honesty, were all treated in it.

“.75. Having composed that highly béene-
ficial work, the divine Lord cheertufiy said
to the deitiés led by Indra, thése words.


96. For the behoof of the world and for
establishidg the “three-fold objects (viz.
Religion, Profit, and Pleasure), | have cont-
posed this science’ representing thé very
essence of speech, ~ é un

97. Helped by punishment this sciétice
will protect the world. Meting dut rewards
and’ punishments, this scierice’ will work
among men, i 3

‘98. ‘And beéause mén will be goveried
by punishment, therefore witl this science bé
known in the thteé worlds aS Dandaniti
(science of puriishment). : :


yg. Containing the cream of all the
attributes of the six, this science will Always
be much fespected by great persons.
Religion, Profit, Pleasure, aiid Liberation
have all been described in it. :

80. After this, the husband of Uma,;—
the divine and many.férmed Shiva of largé
eyes, the source of all blessings, first.
read and mastered it. ‘ :


8, In view, however, of the gradual
decréase of the Span of fruman existence, the


| divine Shiva abridged that highly important


science compiled by Brahman. ae

82. The abridgment, cailed Vaishalak-
sha, consisting of ten thousand chapters.
was then received by Indra, devoted to
Brahman and possessed of great ascetia
merit. ; - —_

83.. The divine Indra again abridged it
into.a work containing five thousand
chapters and named.it Vahudantaka, = |


84. Afterwards the powerful Vrihaspati,
by his intelligence, further abridged the
work, into one containing three thousand
chapters and named it Varhaspatya. .


85. Next, that famous teacher of Yoga,
Kavi of unlimited wisdom, ‘abridged it
further into a work of a Waousand chapters,!

86. Considering the petiod of human
existence and’ the general “decréasé ‘of
every thing), great Rishis did thus, for the.
well-béing of the -world, abridge ‘that
science. ‘ : = es


fu G . ;

87. Then, approaching .that lord .of
creatures, vig., Vishnu, the god said to
him,—Point, out, O god, that one among
men who deserves to reign supreriedver


?
' i


88, The divine and powerful Narayana,


86


thinking a little, created by his will a son
born of his energy, named Virajas.


89. The highly blessed Virajas, how-
ever, did not desire to rule on Earth. His
mind, O son of Pandu, was bent for a life
of renunciation.


.90. Virajas had a son named Krittimat.
He too cast off pleasure and enjoyment.
Krittimat had a son named Karddama.
Karddama also practised severe austerities,


gt. ‘The lord of creatures, Karddama,
begot a son named Ananga, who became a

rotector of creatures, pious and well-read
in the science of punishment.


92.
well-read in politics.
empire after the death of his father,
became a slave of his passions.


. 93° Mcrityu, O king, had a mind-be-

gotten daughter named Sunita well-known

ever the three worlds. She was married

° Ativala and gave birth to a son named
ena,


94. - Vena, a slave of anger and malice,
became impious and tyrannical towards allt
creatures, The Brahmavadin Rishis kill-
ed him with Kusha blades inspired with
Mantras.


95-95. Uttering Mantras all the while,
those Rishis pierced the right thigh of
Vena, Thereupon, trom that thigh, sprang
a ghort-limbed person on earth, resembling
a charred ‘brand, having blood-red eyes
and black hair. ‘Those Brahmavadins
said to him,-——Nishida (sit) here.

97. From him have originated the
Nishadas, vrs., those wicked tribes who
live in .the jhills and the forests, as also
those hundreds aud thousands of Mlecchas,
living on the Vindhya ranges.

98. The great Rishis then pierced the
right arm of Vena. Thence originated a
person who was a second Indra in form,


‘gg. Clad in mail, armed with swords,
bows-and ‘arrows, and well~versed in the
scienee of war, he was alsoa master of
the Vedas and their auxiliaries, :


ioo. .All the ordinances. of the science
of punishment, O king, came in their
bodily forms to that best of men. The son
of Vena then with joined-hands, said to
those great Rishis,

tor. I have got avery keen and fair
understanding. Tell me fully what I shall
‘do with it.
* y0o3. I shall unhesitatingly accomplish
any useful task which you will be pleased
to indicate.


to3. Thus addressed, the gods that


Obtaining extensive
he


Ananga begat a son named Ativala, |


MAHABHARATA.


were present there, also the Rishis said


t him,—=""Do you fearlessly perform all sorts
-of righteous works.” 1:


te4—105. Without caring for what is
dear and what not so, regard al! creatures
with impartiality. Renounce ‘lust, anger,
covetousness and honor, and always follow-
ing the dictates of righteousness, do you
punish with your own hands the man,
whoever he may be, who does not satisfy
his duty. - ,


106. Do you also swear that you would’
in thought, word, and deed, always main-
tain the religion laid on earth by’ the
Vedas. ah


107. Do you also swear that you would
fearlessly follow the duties laid down in the


; Vedas with the help of the’ science of


punishment, and that you would never act.
capriciously. eee ;
108. O powerful one, know that Brah-
manas are exempt from punishment, and
promise further that you would protect the
world from an intermixture of castes. ;


« 109.- Thus addressed, Vena’s son ra
plied to the deities headed by the Rishis,
saying,~—Those foremost of men, vis., the
highly blessed Brahmanas shall ever be
adored by me. ‘ :


110. Those Brahmavadins then said to
him,—Let it bé so,—Then Shukra, that
great repository of Bralima became hig
priest.
"111. The Valakhillyas became his minis-
ters, and the Saraswats his companions,
The great and illustrious Rishi Gagra be-
came his astrologer.’


112. This great declaration of the Shrutis
is known among men that Prithu is the
eighth from Vishnu. A little before, twe
persons named Suta and Magadha were
born. They became his bards and pane-
gyrists,


113. Pleased, Prithu, the royal son of
Vena, endued with great prowess, gave to
Suta the land lying on the sea-coast, and
to Magadha the country since known as
Magadha. ;


114. We have heard that the “surface
of the earth had before been very uneven,
It was Prithu who levelled its surface.


r15—117. In every period of Manu the
earth becomes uneven. Vena’s-son re
moved the rocks lying all around, O king,
with the horn of his bow. By this means.
the hills and mountains were increased in
size. Then Vishnu, and ‘the gods with
Indra, and the Rishis, and the Regents of
the world, and the Brahmanas, assembled
for cfowning Prithu, The earth herself,


SHANTI PARVA.


© son of Pandu, came incarnate to him,
with a tribute of jems and jewels.


t18. Ocean, that lord of rivers, and
Himavat, the king of mountains, and
Shakra, O Yudhisthira, gave him inex-
haustible wealth. ~


tig—tzo. The great Meru, that moun-
tain of gold, gave him heaps of that pre-
cious metal. The divine Kuvera, carried
on shoulders by men, that lord of Yakshas
and Rakshasas, gave him wealth enough
for performing the necessary works of re-
ligion, profit, and pleasure. Horses, cars,
elephants, and men, by millions,


t21.
soon as Vena's son thought of them. At
that time-there prevailed neither decrepi-
tude, nor famine, nor calamity, nor disease
(on Earth). .


122, On account of the protection affor-
ded by that king, nobody entertained any
fear from reptiles and thieves or from any
other source,


123. When he’ went to the sea, the
waters used to be turned solid. The moun-
tains gave him way and hisastandard was
never obstructed any where,


124. He drew from the Barth, as a
milcher from a cow, seventeen sorts of crops
for the {food of Yakshas, and Rakshasas,
and Nagas, and other creatures.


‘125. That great king ‘caused all creas
tures to consider righteousness as the fore-
most of all things; and because he pleased
all the people, therefore, he was called
Rajan (king.)

126. And because he also healed the
wounds of Brahmanas, therefore, he passed
by the name of Kshatriya. And because
the Earth (during his regime) became cele
brated for the practice of virtue, therefore,
she passed by the name of Prithivi. +


427, The eternal Vishnu himself, O
Bharata, confirmed his power, telling him,
—No one, O king, shall excet you.


128. The divine Vishnu entered the
body of that king for his penances. There-
fore the entire universe adored Prithu who
was the greatest of kings.


129. O king; your kingdom should
always be protected by the help of the
science of punishment. You should also, by
careful observation made through the move-


ments of your spies, protect it in such a


manner that no one may injure it.


130. All good aets, O king, lead to the
well-being of a monarch. The conduct of a
king should be governed by his own intelli-
gence as also by the opportunities and
means that may come of themselves...


O son of Pandu, were born as”


87


13t. What other cause ean there be for
which sll men obey one person, ‘save
the divinity of the monarch? At that
time a golden lotus sprang from: Vishnu's
brow.

132. The Goddess Sree was born of that
fotus. She becsme the consort of the highly
intelligent Dharma. Upon Sree, O son
of Pandu, Dharma begot Artha,


133—~134. All the three, oés., Dharma


and Artha. and Sree, were established ina’


king. A person, upon the wane of his merit,
descends from heaven to Earth, and is born
as a king well read in the science of punish-
ment. Such a person becomes great and is
really a portion of Vishnu on Earth. He
becomes highly intelligent and obtains
supetiority over others.


135. Established by the gods, no one
goes above him. It is therefore that every-
body obeys one, and it is for this, that the
world cannot ¢ommand him. -


136. ‘Good acts, O king, lead to good,
It is therefore that a great mary obey
his command, though he belongs te the
same world and is- possessed of . similar
limbs.


137-- He who once beheld Prithu’s sweet
face, became obedient to him. ‘henceforth
he began to know him as handsome, wealthy
and highly blessed.


138. For the might of his sceptre, the’
practice of morality and just conduct became
so visible on Earth. It is therefore that the
Earth abounded with virtues.


139-140. “Thus, O Yudhisthira, the
histories of the past, the origin of the great
Rishis, the holy rivers, the planets and stars
and asterisms, the duties of the four modes
of life, the four kinds of Homa, the ‘charace
teristics of the four castes and the tour
branches of learning were all described in
that work (of Brahma) m3


141—143. Whatever objects or things,
O son of Pandu; there are on Earth, were
all described in that work of the Grande
father. Histories, the Vedas and the
Nyaya (logic) were ail described in it, as
also penances, knowledge, abstention from
injury to all creatures, truth, falsehood, and
high morality. -


144... Adoration of agéd persons, gifts, .


purity of conduct, readiness for work and
mercy towards afl creatures, were very
fully treated in it.


145. There is no doubt in this. Since
then, O king, the learned have begun to say
there is no difference between a god and a
king,


83


MAHABHARATA


146. |. have now told everythirtg about j saccifices. -It has been declared by the


the greatness of kings. What other sub-
ject is there, Q chief of the Bharatas, which
L shall next describe.


CHAPTER LX.


. (RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
' PARVA).—Continued.


Vaishampayana said :—

“ y—-2. ‘ After this, Vudhishthira, salu-
ted his grand father, the son of Ganga,
and with joined hands and rapt attention,
once more asked him, saying,—' What are
the general duties of the four castes and
what the especial duties of each. What
mode of life should be adopted by which
order and.what duties are especially de-
signatéd as the duties of kings. . +


3. By what means does a kingdom
prosper and what are the means by which
the king himself prospers? How also, O
foremost of Bharata’s race,.do the citizens
and the servants of the king prosper ?
+4. What sorts of wealth, punishments,
forts, allies, counsellors, priests and-pre-
ceptors,{should a king avoid ? a

5. Whom should the king trust in what
sorts of distress and danger? What evils
should the king avoid? ‘Yell me all this, O
grand father,


Bhishma said:—


6. ,1 salute Dharma who is great and.
Having saluted”


Krishna who is Brahma.
also the Brahmanas (assembled here) I
shall describe the eternal duties.


" 9. The control of anger, truthfulness of
speech, justice, forgiveness, begetting chil-
dren upon one’s own married wives, purity
of conduct, avoidance of quarrel, simplicity,
and miantenance of dependents,—these
are the nine duties which all the four orders
should follow, »


* 8. 1 shall now describe the duties which
the Brahmanas should exclusively follow.
Self-controt, O king, has been declared
to be: the first duty of Brahmanas. Study
of the Vedas, and patient’ practice of aus-
terities, (are also their other. duties). By
pracusing these two, all their acts are
one. ,


+ g—10. If while engaged in the obser-
vance of his own duties, without doing any
unfair act, riches comes to a peaceful Brah-
mana endued with knowledge, he should
‘then marry and seek to beget children, and
should also practise charity and celebrate


wise that wealth thus acquired should be
enjoyed by distributing it among warthy
persons and relatives.

it. By his study of the Vedas all the
pious acts are done. Whether he does ors


‘| does not acquire anything else, if he only


studies the Vedas, he becomes known as
a Brahmana er the friend of all creatures.


12. 1 shall also tell you, O Bharata,
what the duties of a Kshatriya are. A
Kshatriya, O king, should give but not’
beg, should himself celebrate sacrifices but
not officiate as a priest in the sacrifices
of others, v2 ue


13. He should never teach the Veda
but study the same witha Brahmana tea-
cher. He should protect the people. Al-
ways trying his best for the destruction
of robbers and wicked people, he should
display his prowess in battle.


14. Those among Kshatriya kings who
celebrate great sacrifices, who have a
knowledge of -the Vedas and who gain
victories in battle, become foremost of those
who acquire many blessed regions hereafter «
by their merit.


15. Persons well read in-the scriptures
do not speak highly of a Kshatriya who
returns unscathed from battle.


16. This isthe conduct of a wretched
Kshatriya. There isno greater duty for
him than the supression of robbers,


17. Gifts, study, and sacrifices, yield
prosperity to kings. Therefore, a king who
desires to (obtain religious merit should
engage in battle.


18. Compelling all his subjects to follow’
their respective duties, a king should make
all of them do everything according to the
dictates of righteousness. ;


tg.. Whether he does or does not do anys
thing else, if only he protects his subjects,
he is considered to accomplish all religious
acts and is called a Kshatriya and the fore<"
most ofmen. he os


20. I shalt now tell you, O Yudhisthira,
what the eternal duties of the Vaisyas are.
—A Vaisya should make gifts, study the
Vedas, celebrate sacrifices, and acquire
wealth by fair means. ;


2t, With proper care he should also take
care of and rear up all domestic animals as
a father looking after his sons. Anything
else that he will do, will be considered as
improper for him. ’ oe


22. By looking after the (domestic}
animals he would secure great happiness.
Having created the (domestic) animals, the
Credter, assigned their care to the Vaisyas:


SHANTI PARVA,


_ 23. To the Brahmana and the Kshatriya
he assigned (the protection of) all creatures.
i shall tell you what the Vaisya’s profession
is and how he is to earn the means of his
maintenance.


24. Ithe keeps (for others) six kine, he
may tale the milk of one cow as his own
remuneration ; and if he keeps (for others)
a hundred kine, he may take a pair as his
remuneration, If he trades” with other’s
money, he may take a seventh part of the
profits as his share. A seventh part of
the profits arising from the trade in horns
is also his; but he should take a sixteenth
if the trade is in hoofs. If he makes culti-
vation with seeds given by others, he
may take a seventh part of the produce.
This should be his annual remuneration,


25. A Vaishya should tever wish that
he should not tend cattle. If a Vaishya
desires to tend cattle no one else should
undertake that task.


26. I should tell you, O Bharata, what
the duties of a Shudra are. ‘The Creator
{intended the Shiudra as the servant of the
other three castes, '


27. Therefore, the service of the three
‘other classes is the duty of the Shudra.
By thus serving the cther three, a Shudra
may acquire great happiness,


28-29. He should serve the three other
classes according to their order of seniority.
A Shudra should never amass riches, lest
by them, he makes the members of. the
three superior orders obedient to him. By
‘this he would incur sin. With the king’s
permission, however, a Shudra, for religious
observances, may acquire wealth,


go. IL shall now describe the profession,
he should pursue and the means by which
he may earn his subsistence.


31. {tis said that the Shudras should be
maintained by the three other castes.


32. Used wntbrellas, hed-gears, beds,
seats, shoes atid fans, should be given to
the Shudra servants.


33. Torn clothes, which ate rio longer
fit for wear, should be given by the upper
three castes to the Shudra. ‘These are the
latter’s rightful acquisitions.


34. Men, well read in the science of
duties, hold that if the Shudra apprvaclies
any one belonging to the three twice-born
orders for doing menial service, the latter
should give him proper work.


38. The master should offer “the funeral
cake to the sonless Shudra servant. The
weak and the old amongst them should be
maintained. The Shudra should never jeave


42


89


his master whatever may be the miseries he
may suffer from. :


36. If the master loses his wealth, h
should with greatest care be maintained by
the Shudra servant. A Shudra cannot enjoy
wealth even if it be hisown. Whatever he
possesses belongs lawfully to his master.


37. Sacrifice has been laid down as @
duty of the three other castes. It has been
laid down {for the Shudra also, O Bharata, _
but he is not competent to utter swaka and
sadha or any other .Vedic mantra.


38. Therefore the Shudra, without ob<
serving the vows laid down in the Vedas,
should adore the gods in minor sacrifices,
called Paka-yajnas. The gift called Purna«
patra is known as the Dakshina of such
sacrifices,


39. We have heard that in days of
yore a Shudra of the name of Paijavana
gava Dakshina (in one of his sacrifices)
consisting of a hundred thousand ,Purana~«
patras, according to the ordinance called
Aindragni, (¢, e. a hundred thousand ani«
mals). | :

40. Saerifice,O Bharata, has béen as
much sanctioned for the Shudra as for the
three other orders. Of all sacrifices, devo~«
tion bas been laid down to be the forex
most.


4t. Devotion is a great god. It purifies
all sacrificers. Then again Brahmanas are
foremost of gods to their respective Shudra
servants, ;


42. They ‘adore “the gods in sacri
fices, for obtaining the fruits 6f various
wishes. The members of the three other
orders have all originated from the Brah«
manas, .


43. The Brahmanas are the gods of the
very gods. Whatever, they would say
would be for your great good. Therefore
all kinds of sacrifices naturally belong to alf
the four orders. ‘The celebration of these
sacrifices is obligatoty and riot optional.


44. The Brahmana, who is conversant
with Richs, Yajus, and Samans, should
always he adored as a god. ‘The Shudra;
who is without Richs and Yajus and
Samans, has Prajapati for his god.


45. Mental sacrifice, O sire, is sanction
ed fot all the orders, O Bharata. Itis not
true that the gods and other persons do not
express a_ desire to share the offerings in
such sacrifices of even the Shudra. For this
reason, the sacrifice of devotion is laid down
for all the castes,


46. The Brahmana is the foremost 6f
gods. It-is not true that they that belong
to that order do not celebrate the sacrifices


go


of the other orders. The fire called Vitana,
though procured from Vaisyas and inspired
with mantras. is still inferior, he Brah-
mana can celebrate the sacrifices of the
three other castes.

47. Therefore, all the four castes are
holy. All the castes are allied to one
‘another by blood through the interme-
diate classes. They have all originated
‘from Brahmanas, [In as¢ertaining (the
‘priority of origin) it witl “be seen that
amongst all the castes the Brahmana was
created first. Originally Saman was one;
Yajus was one, and Rich was one.


48. Regarding it, persons, conversant
“with ancient histories, ce a verse, O king,
sung in praise of sacrifice by the Vaikha-
nasa Munis on the oecasion of performing a
sacrifice of theirs. :


49. Before or after sun rise, a person of
controlled senses. with heart filled with
devotion poureth Hbations on the fsacri-
ficial) fire according to the Vedie prescrip-
tion. Devotion is a powerful agent.


50. Respecting homas again, that
variety which ts called skanua is the first
one, while that which is ealled askanna is
the fast though the most important. Sacri-
fices are many, their rites and fruits again
are many.


51. That Brahmana, possessed of devo-
' tion. who, gifted with seriptural learning,


knows all. the rites; is competent to celebrate F ing sets without caring to


sacrifices, ‘

52. That person who desires to cele-
brate a sacrifice is regarded as righteous
ever if he happens to be a thief, a Skiner or
the worst of sinners.


53+ The Rishis speak highly of such a
man, Forsooth they are right. This then
¥s the conclusion that all the castes should
always and by every means in their power
celebrate sacrifices.


54. There is nothing in the three worlds
said that every one,. with heart shorn of
malice, should celebrate sacrifices, helped


by devotion which is sacred,.to the best of
his ability and as he pleases.’


CHAPTER LXI.


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Coxtinued.
Bhishma said :—


. & ‘O mighty-armed one, hear me, O
you of prowess incapable of being bafiled,


of great


; ber except in


MAHABHARATA.


as I name the four modes of life and deg-
cribe their respective duties.


2. The four modes are Vanaprastha
(hermit), Bhaikshya (mendicant), Garhastya
merit (house-hofder), Brahma-
charyya (religious student) which is adopted
by Brahmanas,

3—4. Performing the purificatory rite
consequent upon bearing matted locks,
and of regeneration and having performed
for sometime the rites of the sacred fire and
studied the Vedas, one should, with purified
soul and controfled senses having first care-
fully performed all the duties of the house-
hold order, proceed, with or without his
wife, to the forest for adoption of the mode
called Vanaprastha.


5. Having studied the scriptures called
Aranyakas, having restrained his vitab
fluid and having retired from all worldly
affairs the pious hermit may then find him-
self immersed in the eternal Soul knowing
no deterioration.


6 These are the signs of ascetics that
have drawn up their vital Auid. A learned
Brahmana, O king, should first practise
and perform them.


3. Fhe Brahmana, O king, who is
desirous of liberation, is competent to adopt
the mendicant’s life after having gone
through the mode called Brahmacharyya.


8—g9. Steeping at the ptace where even-
improve hie
situation, without a home, living on what-
ever fare is got (in charity), given to medi-


tation, practising self-restraint, with the
, senses under control, without desire, regard


ing all creatures impartially, without enjoy-
ments, without dislike to anything the
Brahmana, possessed of learning, by adop-


‘ting this mode of Hfe, attains to unification


with the eternal undecaying Soul.


to, The person, leading the life of a
house-holder, should, after studying the


equal to sacrifice. Therefore, it has been ; Vedas, accomplish all the religious acts


prescribed for him. He should procreate
children and enjoy pleasures ated fuxuries.
With careful attention he should satisfy alt
the duties of this mode of life which is
highly spoken of by ascetics and which is
extremely difficult to follow (without sins.)


11. He should be satisfied with his own
married wife and should never approact
her season. He should
follow prescription of the scriptures, should
not be cunning and deceitful. He should
be sparing in diet, devoted to the gods,
grateful, mild, shorn of cruelty, and
forgiving.


12, He should be of a tranquil heart,
peaceful and careful in making offerings to


SHANTI PARVA:


gt


the gods and the Pitris. He should always ‘ Bhishima said :—


be hospitable to the Brahmaiias. He
should be shorn of pride and should not
‘make charity to one sect. He should always
carefully perform the Vedic rites.


13. Regarding it, the illustrious. and
great Rishis cite a verse sung by Narayana
himself, highly important and endued with
high ascetic merit. Hear me as I repeat it.


14. By truth, simplicity, worship of
guests, acquisition of religion and profit,
and enjoyment of one’s own married wife
one should enjoy various kinds of happiness
poth here and hereafter.


15. The great Rishis have said that the
thaintenance of sons and wives, and the
study of the Vedas, are the duties of those
who follow this high mode of life.


16. That Brahmana_ who, always
engaged in the celebration of sacrifices,
duly passess this mode of life and properly
discharges all its duties, obtains blessed
rewards in heaven. ;


17. Upon his death, the rewards sought
by him become eternal. indeed these wait
‘upon him for ‘eternity like servants ever
careful to execute the orders of their
master,


18-~21,
silently reciting the mantras obtained from
his preceptor, worshipping all the gods, O
Yudhishthira, dutifully attending upon and
serving his preceptor with his own body
smeared with clay and filth, the person,
leading the Brahmacharyya mode of life,
should always observe rigid vows and, with
senses under restraint, should always pay
attention to the instructions he has received.
Meditating on the Vedas and satisfying - all
the duties he should live, dutifully serving
his preceptor and always bowing to him.
Unengaged in thé six kinds of work and
never doing with attachment any kind
of acts, never showing favor or disfavour
to any one, and doing. good even to his
enemies,—these, O son, are the duties of a
Brahmacharin,


CHAPTER LXU.


(RAJ ADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continued.


Yudhisthira said :—


ft 1. ‘Tell us those duties which persons
like ourselves should follow and which are
auspicious, yeild happiness in the future,
benevolent, applaued by all, pleasant, and
agreeable, >


‘


Always studying the Vedas,


2. 'The four modes of life, O powerful
one, have been laid down for the Brahmana.
The other three orders do not adopt them,
O best of the Bharatas,


3. Many acts, O king, leading to heaven
and especially fit for the Kshatryas, have
already been mentioned. Those, however,’
cannot be referred to in reply to your’
present question for all of them have been
duly laid dowa for such Kshatriyas who
are merciless,


4. That Brahmana,’S-who follows the
practices of Kshatriyas and Vaishyas and
Shudras, is ;blamed in this world as a
wicked person and goes to hell in the nexé
world, :


5. Those names, which are ‘applied
among nen to slaves, dogs, wolves and
(other) beasts, are given, O son of Pandy,
to the Brahmana who does works which do
not become him.


6—7. That Brahmana, who, in all the
four modes of life, performsthe sixfold acts’
(as regulating the breath, contemplation,
&c), who performs alt his duties, who is
patient, who has his passions under res~'


-traint, whose heart is pure and practises


penances, who -has no desire of bettering
his situation and who is charitable, attains
to regions of bliss in the next world.


8. Every one gets his own inclination’
from the nature of his acts regarding’
their eircumstances, place, means and
motives.


g. You should therefore, O king, consi-
der the study of the Vedas, which is en-
dued with such high merit, the manliness
of kingly power, the pursuits of agricul-
ture, trade, and hunting as all equal.


to. The wowd is moved on by Time.
Its works are settled by the course of Time.
Man does all his acts, good, bad, and in-
Gifferent, entirely under the influence of
Time.” ‘


11. Those .good acts of a man’s past
life which exert the greatest influence on
the next, are liable to be exhausted. Men,
however, perform always those acts to which
their inclination leads. Those propensities
again, fead a living being to various
directions. .


92
CHAPTER LXHE


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).— Continued.


Bhishma said ;—

_¥. ‘Drawing the bowstring, destruction
of enemies, agriculture, trade, tending cattle
and serving others for money are not proper
for a Brahmana.


-2. An intelligent Beahmana, living as a

householder, should duly perform the six
Vedic acts. The retirement of a Brah-
mana into the woods, after having duly
performed all the duties of the domestic
mode of life, is highly spoken of.


3. A Brahmana should avoid service of
the'king, money obtained by agriculture,
sustenatice derived from the trade, all kinds
of wily conduct, knowing any but his mar-
ried wives and usury, :


4 That wretch of a Brahmana, who
megleets to satisfy his duties and whose
conduct becomes wicked, becomes, O king,
a Shudra. The Brahmana, who marries a
Shudra woman, who becomes vile in conduct
or a dancer or a village servant or per-
forms other unbecoming acts, becomes a
Shudra, :


. §.. Whether he recites the Vedas or not
O king, if he does such improper acts, he is
reduced to the position of a Shudra and on
accasions of feeding he should be given a
place amongst Shudras.


6. Such Brahmanas become equal to
Shudra, O king, and should be discarded at
the time of worshipping the gods.


7. Whatever presents of food dedicated
to the departed manes are made to Brah-
manas, who have transgressed all restraints
or become impure in conduct or addicted
to wicked callings and cruel acts or who
have neglected their legitimate duties,
pee no merit (to the giver.) Therefore, O

ing, self-control, purity arid ysimplicity
have been laid down as the duties of a
Brahmana. Besides these, O king, all the
four modes of life were prescribed by Brah-
man for him. ;


8. He, twho is self-controlled, has drunk
the Soma in sacrifices, is of good conduct,
has mercy for all creatures and patience to
bear everything, has no desire of improving
his position by acquisition of wealth, is
frank and simple, mild, shorn of cruelty,
and forgiving, is truly a Brahmana, and
not he who is of sinful deeds.


9g. Men, desirous of acquiring virtue,
seek the help, O king, of Sudras, Vaishyas,
and Kshatriyas. If, therefore, the mem-
bers of these (three) castes do not adopt


MAHABHARATA.


peaceful duties, Vishnu, O son of Pandu,
never extends his favour to them.


to. If Vishnu be not pleased, the happi-
ness of all men in heaven, the meric arising
from the duties prescribed by the four
orders, the injunctions of the Vedas, all
kinds of sacrifices, and all other religious
acts of men, and all the duties of the vari-
ous modes of life, become fost.


tr. ‘ ‘Listen now, O son of Pandu, to
those duties which should be practisd in the
four modes of life. ‘These should be known
to the Kshatriya who wishes the members
of the three (other) orders (in bis kingdom)
to strictly follow the respective duties of
those modes,


12-13. For a Shudra who wishes to hear
(such scriptures as are not forbidden in his
case), who has performed his duties, who
has procreated a son, between whom and
the superior orders there,is not much differ-
ence for the purity of his conduct, all the
modes of life have been laid down save the
observance of universal peacefulness and
self-contrel.


14. For a Sbndra practising all these
duties, as also for 4 Vaisya, O king, and a
Kshatriya, the Bhikshu mode of life has.
been sanctioned,


15. Having performedthe duties of his
order, ‘and having also served the king, an
aged Vaisya with the king’s permission,
may adopt another mode of life.


16—21. Having studied the Vedas duly
and the works describing the duties of kings,
O sinless one, having procreated children
and performed similar other acts, having
drunk the Soma and governed and pro-
tected all his subjects piously, O foremost of
speakers, having celebrated a Rajasuya, the
horse sacrifice, and other great sacrifices,
having invited learned Brahmanas for recit-
ing the scriptures and made presents ta
them according to their merits, having ob-
tained victories small or great in battle,
having placed on his throne his own hegot-
ten son or some Kshatriya of good birth for
the protection of his subjects, having wor-
shipped the departed manes by performing
with due rites the sacrifice prescribed for
honoring them, having attentively adored
the gods by performing sacrifices and the
Rishis by studying the Vedas, the Ksha-
triya, who in old age seeks another mode
of life, may, O king, adopt it by leaving
the preceeding one and by that means be is
sure to acquire (ascetic) success,


22. A Kshatriya, for leading the life of
a Rishi, O king, may take the Bhikshu
mode of life; but he should never do so
fer enjoying the pleasure of the world


SHANTI PARVA,


Having abandoned the life of a house-
holder, he may adopt the life of mendicancy
by begging what would barely maintain
his life.


23. A life of! mendicancy is not compul-
sory for the three orders (vis., Kshatriyas,
Vaishyas, and Shudras), O giver of profuse
presents. This mode of life, is open to all
the four castes because they can adopt it if
they choose.


24. Amongst” men, the highest duties
are those which are practised by Kshatriyas.
The whole world is subject to the power of
their arms, All the duties, principal and
minor,, of the {three other -castes, depend
upon the duties of the Kshatriya, The
Vedas declear this.


* 25. As the foot-prints of all the other
animals are covered by those of the eleph-
ant, so all the duties of the other castes,
under every circumstances, are covered by
those of the Kshatriya,


26. Men, well-read in the scriptures say
that the duties of the other three castes give
but limited relief or protection, yeild petty
rewards. The learned have said that the
Guties of the Kshatriya afford great relief
and yeild great rewards.

27.
all dutise. All the castes are protected by
them. Every sort of Renunciation is
included in kingly duties, O king, and
Renunciation has been declared to be an
eternal virtue and the foremost of all,


' 28. Ifthe science of punishment disap-
pears, the Vedas will be lost. Al! these
scriptures also describing the duties of men
become fost. Indeed, if these ancient duties
ofthe Kshatriyas be abandoned, all the
duties of all the modes of life, become lost.


29. All sorts of renunciation are in
kingly duties ; all kinds of initiation are in


them; allsorts of learning are connected .


with them; and all sorts of worldly conduct
are in them. :


go. As animals, killed by the vulgar,
become the instrument of destroying the
virtue and the religious acts of the destroyer
so all other duties, if deprived of the pro-
tection offered by kingly duties, become
subject to attack and destruction, and men,
full of anxiety, neglect the practices laid
down for them.’” : ;


The royal duties are the foremost of,


93


CHAPTER LXIV.


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).— Continued.


Bhishma said :-— .

1. ‘the duties of all the four motes of
life, those of Yatis, O son ‘of Pandu, and
the customs followed by men in general,
are all comprised in kingly duties.


2. All these acts, O chief of Bharatas
are.in Kshatriya duties, If the functions
of royalty are disturbed, all creatures meet
with evil.

3. The duties of men are not clear.
They have, again, many exceptions.
Guided by many (false) systems, their
true nature is sometimes spoiled.


4. Others, who implicitly believe the
decisions of men, without really knowing
anything about the true nature of duties
(as described in the scriptures), are at last
Constrained to believe in faiths whose ulti-
mate ends ace unknown.


gs. The duties of the Kshatriyas are

fain, conducive to great happiness, evident
in their results, free from deceit, and benefi-
cial to the whole world. ,


- 6. -As ‘the duties of the orders, as
also of Brahmanas and of those that have
retired from the world, O Yadhishthiray
have before this been described as being
included within those of that sacred mode
of life wiz., that of a house-holder so, the
whole world, with all actions, is subjeet to
kingly duties.

zg» 1 have told you, O monarch, haw
many brave kings had, in days of yore, re-
paired to that lord of all creatures, vi'g., the
divine and powerful Vishnu of great prowess
for removing theic doubts about the science
of punishment.


8.. Those kings, always observant of the
injunctions of the scriptures enforced by
examples, waited in days of yore, upon
Narayana, after having compared theic
acts with the duties of each of the modes
of life. :


‘g. Those deities, v7z., the Saddhyas,
the Vasus, the Ashwins, the Rudras, the
Vishwas, the Maruts, and the Siddhas,
created in days of yore by the first of gods,
always practise Kshatriya duties,


to—t2. 1 shall now recite to you a
history, consisting of the conclusions of
both religion and profit. In days of yore
when the Danavas had multiplied and done
away with all impediments and distine-
tions, the powerful Mandhatri, O monarch,
became king. ‘hat lord of the Earth, viz,


94


king Mandhatri, celebrated a great sacri-
fice with a view to see the powerful Nara-
yana, that god of gods, without beginning,
middie, and end.


13, In that sacrifice he adored humbly
the great Vishnu, assuming the form of
Indra. ‘The supreme Lord appeared be-
fore him.


14. Accompanied by many good kings
he offered his adorations to that powertul
god. ;


45. This high discourse took place be-
tween that foremost of kings and that
illustrious god in the form of Indra, re-
garding the highly effulgent Vishnu.


Indra said :—


16, -What is your object, O foremost
of virtuous persons, ‘in thus trying to see
that Ancient and First of gods, vis., Nara-
yana, of inconceivable power, and number-
less illusions,


17. Neither myself, nor Brahman him-
self, can acquires a view of that god of
universal form. I shall grant ‘you what
other objects you may desire to have-for
you art the foremost of mortals,


18. Your soul jrests] on peace; you are
devoted to righteousness; you have your
senses under control ; and you are heroic.
You always try your best to do what is
agreeable tothe gods. For the sake also
of your intelligence, devotion, and great
faith, E shall grant you whatsoever boons
you may wish to have.


Mandhatri spid :—

19. IT bend my head for pleasing you;
forsooth however, I wish to see the first
of gods, O divine lord. Renouncing alt
(earthly) desires, 1 wish to acquire religious
mecit, and to lead the foremost mode of
life, that path of the good held in highest
esteem by all,


20. By performing the great duties of
a Kshatriya, I have acquired many regions
of endless merit in the other world, and
1 have also, through those duties, spread
my fame. I do not, however, know how
to satisfy those duties the highest in the
world emanating from the first of gods.


Indra said :—~

21, Those who are not kings, even if
they satisfy their duties, cannot easily at-
tain the highest meed of duty. Kingly
duties first emanated fram the original
god. Other duties sprang afterwards
from his body.


22. Numberless other duties, with those


of the Vanaprastha mode of life, were


: 26.


MAHABHARATA,


created afterwards. The fruits of ail those
areendless. Kingly duties however, are
superior to them, ‘hey include ail other
duties. Therefore Kshatriya duties are
described to be the foremost of all.


23.- In days of yore Vishnu, by acting
according to Kshatriya duties, forcibly
suppressed and killed his enemies. Accord-
dingly he gave relief to the gods and the
Rishis of immeasurable power.


“a4. Téthe divine Vishnu of inconceiva-
ble energy had not killed all his enemies
among the Asuras, then the Brahmanas,
and (Brahman) the Creator of the worlds
and Kshatriya duties, and the duties
that first originated from the Supreme
deity, would all have-been lost.


25. Hf that first and foremost of gods
had not, by displaying his prowess, sub-
jugated the Earth with all her Asuras,
then all the duties of the four orders and
all the duties of the four modes of life
would all have been destroyed owing to
the destruction of Brahmanas,


26. The eternal duties (of men) had:
all been destroyed but by the exercise of
Kshatriya duties they were revived.


In every cycle the duties of Brah-
manas regarding the attainment to Brahma
first set in. These, however, are all
protected by kingly duties. The latter, on
this account, are regarded as the highest.


27—28.—Casting away life in: battle,
mercy for ali creatures, knowledge. of earthly
affairs, protection of men, saving them from
danger, celieving the distressed and the
oppressed;——all these. aré included in the
category of Kshatriya duties, Persons that
do not obey healthy restraints and who are
under the influence of anger and lust, do
not openly sin fram fear of kings. Others
who are docile and righteous succeed, for
the same influence, in ‘satisfying all their
duties. Therefore the Kshatriya duties are
regarded to be righteous.


29. Forsooth all creatures tive happily
in the world, protected by kings exercising
Kshatriya duties like children protected
by their parents, ;


30. Kshatriya duties are the highest of
all duties. Those eternal duties, regarded
as the first in the world, include the pro-
tection of every creature. Themselves
eternal, they bring on liberation.


SHANTI
CHAPTER LXV.


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA:
PARVA).—Contixued.


Indra said :—

1. Kshatriya duties, O king, which are so
very potent, which embrace the exercise of
all other duties, and which are the highest
of all duties, should be observed by persons
that are like you so high-souled and seek
the well-being of the world. Uf those
duties are not properly satisfied all crea-
tures would be ruined.


2. The king, cherishing mercy for all
creatures, Should consider these as the high-
est of his duties, viz., reclaiming the land
for cultivation and fertilizing it, celebration
of great sacrifices for purifying himself,
aversion for begging, aud protection of
subjects, :


3-4. Making gifts is said by the sages
to be the greatest of virtues. Of all kinds
of gifts again, that of the body in battle,
is the highest. You have seen with your
own eyes how the kings, ever following
Kshatriya duties, having duly waited upon
their preceptors and acquired great learn-
ing, at last sacrifice their bodies, while
fighting with one another. The Kshatriya,
desirous of earning religious merit, should
after following the Brahmacharyya mode,
live like a house-holder which is always
meritorious,


56.2 While settling the question of right
(between) his subjects), he should be per-
fectly impartial. For making the various
orders follow their respective duties, for the
protection they give to all, for the various
contrivances and ‘means and the prowess
and exertion Kshatriya duties, which
embrace ail other duties, are said to be the
highest. he other orders are able to
follow their respective duties for kingly
duties. ‘Therefore the former depend upon
the latter regarding the merit they
produce. :


q.- Those men, who disobey all healthy
checks and who are too much attached to
the worldly objects, are regarded as brutes.
‘They are coustrained to act justly by the
exercise of kingly duties. Those duties,
therefore, are said to be the highest of all.


. 8, ‘Phat course of conduet which has
been laid down for Brahmanas who follow
the three Vedas, and those modes of: life
that have been laid {down for Brahmanas,
should, first, of all’ be observed by every
‘Brahmana. If a Brahmana acts other-
wise, he should be punished like a Shudra.


L 9. The duties of the four modes 9f life


PARVA; 95
and the rituals laid down in the Vedas, O
king, should always be followed by a
Brahmana ; he has no other duties.


to. A Kshatciya should never maintain
a Brabmana acting otherwise. His reli-
gious merit increases for his acts.° A
Brahmana, indeed, is like Dharma.


t1. That Brahmana who does works that
are not sanctioned for him, deserves no
respect. If not engaged in his proper acts,
he should not be trusted.


12. These are the duties of the various
orders. Kshatriyas should look after them
so that their observance may be ‘improved,
These are the duties of Kshatriyas. For
these reasons also, kingly duties and no
others, are the highest of all. They are,


‘as I believe, the duties of heroes, and the


heroes are foremost in following them,


Mandhatri said :—


1315. What duties should be prac
tised by the Yavanas, the Kiratas, the
Gandharas, the Chinas, the Shavaras, the
Barbaras, the Shakas, the Tusharas, the
Kankas, the Palhavas, the Andhras, the
Madrakas, the Paundras, the Pulindas, the
Ramathas, the Kamvojas, the several castes
that have originated from Bralhmanas and
Kshatriyas, the Vaishyas, and the Shudras,
that live in the dominions of Aryan kings 7
What are those duties again which kings
like ourselves should compel the tribes
living by robbery to follow. P


16. I wish to hear alf this. .O illustrious
god, instruct me. O chief ot all the gods,
you are the friend of us Kshatriyas.


Indra said :—


17. All the robber tribes should serve
their parents, their precepters| and other
elders and hermits living in the forest,


18 All the robber tribes should also
serve theie kings. The duties and rites
laid down in the Vedas. should also be
followed by them.


19. They should celebrate sacrifices in
honor: of the departed manes, dig wells,
for the public, give water to thirsty
travellers, distribute beds and other presents
amongst Brahmanas.


20—21. Abstention from injury, truth,
control of anger, supporting Brahmanas
and relatives by giving them their dues,
maintenance of wives and children, purity,
peacefulness, making presents to Brahma-
mas at all sorts of sacrifices are duties to
‘be followed by every person of this tribe
who seeks his own prosperity. Such a
person should also celebrate all kinds of


96


Paka-yajnas with rich presents of food and
wealth. .


22, These and similar duties, O sinless
one, were laid down in days of yore for
persons of this class. All these acts, which
have been laid down for alt others, should
be done by the robbers atso, O ting,


Mandhatri said :—


23, In this world, such wicked men may
be seen living in disguise among all the
four castes and in all the four modes of
life. :


Indra said :—

24. When the kingly duties are lost as
well as the science of punishment, alt
creatures become exceedingly exercised, O
sinless one, for the oppression of kings.


25. After the termination of the Krita
age, a confusion witl set. in regarding
the various modes of life, and numberless
mendicants will appear with sectarial marks
of various sorts.


26. Disregarding the Puranas and the
great truths of religion, men, urged by lust
and anger, will wend wrong ways.:


27. When sinful men are restrained by
high-souled persons with the help of the
science of punishment, then religion, which
reigns supreme over everything and is
eternal and which is the source of all good,
becomes firmly established.


28. ‘The gifts, and libations, and offer-
ings to the departed manes of the man who
disregards the king who is superior to every
one, become useless.


29. The very gods do not disobey a
virtuous king who is truly a personification
of god.

30. Having created the universe, the
divine Lord of all creatures meant the
Kshatriya to rule men making them follow
their duties,


3%. I respect and worship that person
who, helped by his understanding, watches
the course of the duties performed by men.
Upon such supervision depend Kshatriya
duties. ;


Bhishma continued .—

32. ‘Having said these words, the divine
and powerful Narayana, im the form of
Indra, accompanied by the Maruts, re-

aired to his eternal abode of endless
elicity.


33- When, O sinless one, duties were
thus followed in days of yore what man of
cleansed soul and learning is there that
would disregard the Kshatriya ?


MAHABHARATA.


34. Like blind men lost on the way
creatures, acting uncighteously, meet with
ruin.

35- O foremost: of men, do you follow
those duties which were first promulgated
and whicts the ancients had followed. 1
know, O sinless one, that you are quite
comipetent to do this.’


——


CHAPTER LXVI.


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—

1. You have described to me the fout
modes of life. I desire to know more of
them. Do you describe them.’


Bhishma said :—-

2. ‘O Yudhishthica of mighty-arms, alf
the duties which are practised in this world
by the righteous are known to you and me,


3- O foremost of virtuous persons, hear
now what you ask wz., the merit that a king


‘acquires. when the duties are practised by


others leading other modes of life.


4. All the merits, O son of Kunti, which
accrue to persons practising the duties of
the four modes of life, ace partaken of, O
foremast of men, by righteous kings.


g. A king whois sot under the intluence of
lust and hate, who rules with the help of the


' science of punishment, and who regards alf


creatures ingpartially, O Yudhishthira,
attains to the object of a mendicant’s life.


6. That king, who is possessed of knows
ledge, who makes gifts to worthy persons ow
proper occasions, who knows how to favour |
and punish, who follows the injunctions of
the scriptures im all his deatings, and wha
has tranquility of soul, attains to tlre object
of the Garhastya mode of life. :


7. That king, who always adores those
who are worthy of adorations by having paid
them their due, attains, O son of Kunti, to
the object of the Bhaikshya mode of life,


8. That king, O Yudhishthira, who
saves front distress, to the best of his ability,
his tkinsmen and relatives and friends,
atains to the object of the Vanaprastha
mode of life.


9 That king, who on every occasion
honors the forentost men and the foremost
of Yatis, attains, O son of Kunti, to the
objec: of the Vanaprastha mode of life.


SHANTI PARVA:


to#11. That king, O Partha, who daily
presents ‘offerings to the departed manes,
‘and large offeringsto all living creatures
including men, attains to the object of the
‘same mode of ‘life.


-12, That king, .O foremost of men, who
attacks the kingdoms of others for protect-


ing the pious, attains to the object of the -


same mode of life.

13.
as also of the proper protection of his own
kingdom, a king acquires the merit of as
many sacrifices as the number of creatures
protected, and therefore attains to the object
of the Sannyasa mode of life.


14, Study of the Vedas every day, for-


giveness, and worship of preceptors and
services rendered to one’s own teacher,
secure the attainment of the object of
Brahmacharyya. _


‘15. That king who silently recites his
mantras evecy day and who adores the gods
according to the ordinance, attains, O fore-
most of men, to the object of the Garhas-
tya mode of life. °


16. That king, who fights with the object
‘of protecting his kingdom or meeting with
death, attains to the object of the Vana-
prastha mode of life.. . et


17. That king, O Bhatrata, who always
treats all creatures with fairness and
sincerity, attains to the object of Vana-
prastha mode of life.


. 18 That king, who gives to persons
feading a Vanaprasthajmode of ,life and to
Brahmanas versed in the three Vedas,
attains to the object of the Vanaprastha
anode of life, -


19. That king, who shows mercy towards
all creatures and abstains entirely from
eruelty,,O Bharata, attains tothe object of
ail the modes of life. >


‘ 29, That king, @ Yudhishthira. who;


‘shows mercy tothe young and the eld,'O
‘son Kunti, under every circumstance,
attains to the objects of ali modes of life,
“at. Thatking, O perpetuator of Kuru’s
‘race, Who relieves the oppressed who seek
refuge with hint, ‘attains to the object of the
Garhastya mode of life.


_ 22. That king, who protects afl creatures
tmobile’ and immobile, and honors them
duly, attains to the object of the Garhastya
mode of life. — : :

. 23., Granting favors and infliciting
punishments upon the wives of brothers
elder and younger and upon their sens and
‘grandsons, constitute the domestic duties
‘of a king and these are also his best
“,enances, ?


P
13


For the protection of all the creatures |


97


24. By honoring those who are pious
and worthy of adorations and protecting
those who have (by their penances) ace
quired a knowledge of self, a king, O fore-
most of men, attains to the object of the
Garhastya mode of life. ;

28. Inviting to his home, O Bharata,
persons who have adopted the Vana+
prastha and other ca of life,. and
feasting them form the domestic duties of
a king.

26. That king who duly follows the
duties laid down by the Creator, acquires
ihe blessed merits ‘of all the modes of
life.

27. That king, O son of Kunti, who has
allthe yirtues, that foremost of men, O
Yudhisthira, is said by the learned to be a
person who follows the Vanaprastha and all
the other modes of life. : 7


28, That king who duly honors the
offce or rank worthy of honor, the race or
family worthy of honor, and those old men
who deserve honor, is said, @ Yudhisthira,
to live in all the modes of life.


29. A king, O son of Kanti, by follow~
ing the duties of his country and those of
his family. acquires, O foremost of men,
the merits of atl the modes of life.


30. That king, who at proper seasons
gives to pious men riches and precious
gifts, earns the merits, O king, of all the
modes of life, :


3t. That king, O son of Kunti, who
even when beset with danger. and fear
still keeps hig eye on the duties of alt
ey earns the merits of all the’ modes of
life.


32. Theking partakes of the metits ac«
quired under his protection by righteous
people in his territories,


33- On the other hand, if kings, O
foremost of men, do not protect the righte-
ous ,people within their territories they then.
aré visited by the sins of the latter. -


34. Those men also," O Yudhisthira,
who assist kings (in protecting theic
subjects), are equally entitled, O sinless
one, to a share of the merits acquired by
others, ; :


35. Thelearned declare that the Gar«
hastya, which we follow, is supérior to all
the other modes of life. The conclusions
pogece it are veryclear, Itis certainly
sacred, O foremost of men. aan

36. Thatman, who regards all creatures
-as his own self, who never does any harm
and has his anger under control, enjoys
_great happiness both here and here-
after, peer


98 |


MAHABHARATA,


37. Ating can easily cross the ocean! one another. An anarchy is the worst of
of the world having kingly duties as his | all conditions.


Meet boat urged on by the breeze of gifts,
raving the scriptures for its tackle and
intelligence for the strength of its helms-
man, and kept afloat by the power of
cirtues ' : :

' 38° When all attachment for every
earthly object, is withdrawn from his heart
heis then regarded as one leaving in his
understanding alone. In this state he soon
attains to Brahma.

39. Becoming cheerful by meditation
and by controlling desire and other passions
of the heart, O foremost of men, a king,


engaged in discharging the duty of
protection, succeeds in acquiring great
merit.


‘40, Do you, therefore, O Yudhisthira,
try your best to protect Brahmanas of pious
deeds and devoted to the study of the Vedas,
as also alt other men,


4t. By following the duty of protection
only, O Bharata,the king acquires merit
that is a hundred times greater than what
: earned by hermits in their asylums in the
‘orest,


42. ‘I have now described, O eldest.
son of Pandu, the various duties of men,
Do you follow kingly duties which are
eternal and that have been practised by
great men since days of yore. :

33- If you devote yourself head and soul
to the duty of protecting (your subjects), O
foremost of men, you may then, O son of
Pandy, acquire the merits of ait the four
modes of hte and of all the four orders of
men.’


encremarmed


CHAPTER LXVIL


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA.)}—=Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


1. You have described what the duties
are of the four modes of life and of the
four Orders. Tell me now, O grandfather,
eae the principal duties of a king-

om.


Bhishma said :—


a. ‘The (election and) coronation of a
‘king is the first duty of kingdom. A king. |
‘dom in which anarchy reigns becomes weak
and-is soon attacked by robbers.

+ 3. In kingdoms torn by anarchy, righte-
eusness cannot live. Fhe denizens devour


4 The Shrutis say that in crowning 4.
king, it is Indra that is crowned in the
person of the king. A person, who seeks
his own prosperity, should adore the king
as he should adore Indra himself.


§. Noone should live in kingdoms torn
by anarchy. Agni does not carry the
libations that are poured upon him in king-
doms where anarchy -reigns.


6—7. If a powerful king approaches
kingdoms weakened by anarchy, with a
view to annex them to his dominions, the
people should go forward and receive the
invader with honor. Such conduct would be
quite of a piece with wise counsels, There
is no evil greater than anarchy.


8. I[€ the powerful invader be a little just,
everything will be right. If however, he
be exercised with anger he may extermi-
nate all.

g. That cow which cannot be easily
milked suffer much pain. On the other
hand, that cow which is easily milked, has
not to suffer any pain whatever,


10. The wood that bends easily heed
not be heated. The tree that bends easily,
is not required to suffer any torture,


tr. Guided by these examples, O hero,
men should bend before those that are
powerful. ‘The man who bends his head
to a powerful person really bends his head
to Indra.


12. For these reasons, men, seeking
prosperity, should (elect and) crown some
person as their king. They who live in
countries where anarchy reigns cannot
enjoy their wealth and wives.


13. During times of anarchy, the sinful
man enjoys by robbing the wealth of other
people, When, however, his i! acquired
riches are taken away by others, he wishes
for a king.

14. It is clear therefore, that in times
of anarchy the very wicked even cannot be
happy. ‘The wealth of one is taken away
by two. ‘That of those twois taken away
by many acting in concert.

15. He who is not a slave is made a
slave. Women, again, are forcibly carried
away. For these reasons the gods created
kings for protecting the people.


16. If there were no king on Earth for
holding the rod of punishment, the strong
would then have oppressed the weak after
the manner of fishes in the water.


47-18. We have heard that men, in
days of yore, in consequence of anarchy,
were Yuined, devouring one another like


SHANTI


Stronger fishes devouring the weaker ones
in the water. We have heard that a few
amongst them then, assembling together,
made certain agreements saying,—He who
becomes harsh in speech, or violent in
temper, he who seduces other people’s
wives or robs other’s wealth should be
renounced by us.


tg. For inspiring confidence among all
classes of the people, they made such an
agreement and lived for some time.


20, Assembling after some time they
proceeded in great miseries to the Grand-
athet, saying,—Without 4 king, O divine
lord, we are meeting with ruin, Appoint
Some one as our king.

at. All of us shall adore him and he
shali protect us—Thus prayed for the
Grandfather asked Manu. Manu, how-
ever, did not agree te the proposal,


Manu said :—

22, ‘I fear all sinful deeds. To govern
a kingdom is highly difficult, especially
among men who are always false and
deceitful ia their conduct.’ ’


Bhishma said:—

23-24. ‘The denizens of
then said to him,—Do not fear. $
that men commit will affect those: Y ain
commit them. fF your


th


For the increase 0
wealth, we will give you a fiftieth part of our
animals and precious metals and a tenth
part of our grain. When our maidens also
will become desirous of marrying we shall,
when the question of marriage’ comes up,
give you the most beautiful ones among
them.

25. Those amongst men who will be-
come the foremost of all in the use of
weapons and in riding animasl, and other
conveyances, shall go behind you like the
deities behind Indra, ;


26. With your strength increased in this
way, and becoming invincible and endued
with great power, you will be our -king and
protect us happily like Kuvera protecting
the Yakshas and the Rakshasas,

27. A fourth part of the merit which
men will acquire under your protection will
belong to you.

28: Strengthened by that merit so
easily acquired by you do you protect us,
O king, like Indra of a hundred sacrifices
protecting the gods.


- 29. Like the Sun burning down every-
thing with his rays, do you set out acquir-
ing victories, Crush the ‘pride of enemies
and let righteousness always be victorious

(in the world), -

: ’ r)


PARVA. 99


30. Thus addressed by those denizens of
the Earth, Manu, endued with great energy,
proceeded, accompanied by a large army.’
Born of a great family he seemed then to
shine with power. |

31-32. Seeing the power of Manu, tike
the gods seeing the might of Indra, the in-
habitants of the Earth became stricken with
fear and began to follow theie respective
duties. Manuthen went round the world
suppressing everywhere all acts of wicked-
ness and compelling all men to follow theie
respective duties, like a cloud -surcharged
with rain,


33. ‘Thus, O Yudhisthira, men on
Earth seeking prosperity should first elect
aii crewn a king for the protection’
of all, ;


34. Like disciples bowing themselves
down before their preceptors or the gods
before Indra, all men should humble them


selves before the king. :

33. One who is respected by his own
people becomes an object of esteem with
his enemies also, while one who is disre-
garded by tis own is set at naught by
enemies. *

36-37. Ifthe king be disregarded by
his enemies, all his subjects become un-
happy. Therefote, umbrellas, vehicles ex-
ternal ornaments, foods, drinks, palaces,
seats, beds, and all utensils for use
and show, should be dedicated to the
king. a

38, By such means, the king will better
discharge his duties of protection and
become irresistibte. He should always
smilingly be spoken to by others and he
should speak to others sweetly.


39. Grateful, firmly devoted, and with
subdued passions, he should give to
others their due, Eyed by others, he
should look at them mildly, sweetly, and
beautilully


CHAPTER LXVIII.


RAJA DHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—-Continued, aes:


Yudhisthira said :~

1. ‘Why, O foremost of Bharata’s race,
have the:Brahmanas declared that the king,
that ruler of men, is a god, -


Bhishma said:—-
a. Regarding it is cited the old story, O


Bharata, of the discourse of Vrihaspati and
Vasumanas,


400


3. There was a highly intelligent king
of Keshala, natied Vasumanas. On a
certain occasion hé questioned the great
wise sage Vrihaspati. -


4~5. Always humble, king Vasumanas,
ever devoted to well-being of all, having
observed the proper humitities and- having
gone round the great sage and, bowed to
him duly enquired of the virtuous Vrihas-
pati about the institutes of a kingdom,
actuated by the desire of securing the
happiness of men.


Vasumanas said :—

“6. By what means do' creatures grow
and by what are they destroyed? O you
of great wisdom, by worshippmg whom do
they succeed in acquiring eternal happi-
ness.—Thus : questioned by the highly
_ powerful Koshala king, Vrihaspati of great
wisdom. described to him . coolly about
the regard which should be paid to
kings, : tds “as
Vrihaspati said:—

_ 8. The duties of all men, O you of great
wisdom, originate from the king. It is
through fear of the king only that men do
fot devour oné another.


g. It is the king who establishes peace
on Earth through due observances of- duties


by checking all disregard for healthy res- |


traints and all kinds of lust.
he shines in glory. —


- lom13. “As, O king, all creatures cannot
see one another and sink in utter darkness
if thesun and the moon do not rise, as
fislies in shallow water and birds in a safe
place dart and move about as they please
(for a time) and repeatedly attack and
grind one another with force and then are
Gestroyed so men sink in utter darkness
and meet with destruction if they have no
king to protect them like a herd of cattle
without the herdsman to take care of them.


14. Ié the king did not obsetve the duty
of protection, the Strong would by force
‘misappropriate the properties. of the weak,
and if the latter refuse to surrender to


Acquiring this


them easily their very lives would be taken. |


15. Nobody. then, about any of his
belongings would be able to say—This is
mine.— Wives, sons, foed, and other kinds
of property, would cease to exist.


16. Ruin would befall everything if the
king did not observe the duty of protection.
Wicked men would by force appropriate
the cars, dresses, ornaments, precious stones


and other binds of property belonging to.


others, if the king did not protect.


17. In the absence of protection by the
king, various kinds of weapons would fall


MAHABHARATA,


“ypon: righteous persons and unrighteous?


hess would prevail everywhere.


38. In the absence of king’s protection:
ten would disobey or even injure their:
very parents if aged, their very preceptors,.
guests and elders,


1m Fé the king did ot protect, alft
persons possessing wealth: would have ‘to.
meet with death, imprisonment and perse-
cution and. the very idea of property would:
be lost.


zo Hf the king did not protect, every<
thing would -be destroyed untimely and
every part, of the country would be laid
waste by robbers, and everybody would falt
into dreadful hell.


at. Ifthe king did:not protect, all res-
trictions about marriage and intercourse
would. disappear; all matters of agriculture:
and trade would fall into confusion ;. mora~
lity and the three Vedas would. dis-
appear,


22. Sacrifices, duly finished with presents.
according to the ordinance, would no longet
be celebrated and. no marriage would take-
place; society itself would cease to exist, if
the king did not observe the duty of pro+
po


he bulls would not know cows and

would not be churned, and mem
living by rearing kine would be ruined, -if
the king did not exercise the duty of protece
tion.

24. In the absence of king’s protection,
all things, filled with fear and anxiety and
becoming senseless and uttering cries of
misery would be ruined in no time.


25. No sacrifices extending fora year
and finished with presents according to
the ordinance would take place if the
king did not observe the duty of pro-
tection.

. 26. Inthe absence of king’s protection
Brahmanas would never study the four
Vedas or practise austeriti¢s or be purified
by knowledge and rigid vows,


27. In the absence of king’s protéction
the destroyer of a person guilty of Brah-
manincide would not get any reward;
rather the person. guilty of Brahmanicide,
would not be punished.


28. In the absence of king’s protection,
men would take away other people's wealth
from their very hands, and all healthy ‘res
trictions would be abolished, and every
rare stciken with, fear would seek safety in

1g t ' : i +


29. In thé absence of king’s protection,
all kipds of injustice would commence; an


- SHANTI PARVA.


tnterminture of castes would occut; and
famine would devastate the kingdom.

30. Again by virtue of royal protection,
men can everywhere sleep fearlessly at their
ease without shutting their houses and
doors with bolts and bars.


gt. Nobody would stand the evil words
of others, far less assaults, if the king did
not righteously protect the Earth.


32. If the king observes the: duty of
protection, women adotned with orna-
ments may fearlessly walk about every-
where without male relatives to guard
them.


- 33. Men become righteous and without
injuring serve one another because the king
‘observes the duty of protection.


34. By virtue of royal protection the
members of the three castes can celebrate
high sacrifices and engage themselves
in the acquisition of learning with atten-
tion. . :


35» The world depends upon agricul-
ture and trade and is protected by the
Vedas. All these again are duly pro-
tected by the king exereising his principal
duty. :
* 36. Since the king, taking a heavy
burden upon himself, protects his subjects
with the help of a mighty force, it is there-
fore that the people are able to live in
happe Me

fhe Le ° .

372. .Av-9 is there who will not worship
him on whose existence depends the exis-
tence of the peaple and by whose destruc-
tion. the people are destroyed 7. ©

38. That person who does what is agree-
able and beneficial to the king and who
participates in the jburden of kingly duties
which fill every caste with fear, conquers
both this and the ether world. |

39.. That man who even thinks of injare |
ing the king, forsooth meets with grief here _
and goes to heil hereafter. |
+ 40, Ne one should ‘obey the king by |
taking him for a man, for he is in-sooth.a |
great god in human form. i


' {


41. The king puts on five different forms ||.


_ according td five different occasions. He
-beeomes Agni, Aditya, Mrityu, Vaishra-
-yana, and Yama. ; i -

42. When the king, imposed on by false-
“hoed, consumes with ‘his dreadful energy
‘the offenders before him, he is said to -put
‘on the form of Agni. +6


43. When he marks through ‘His spies


‘vhe acts of all persons and does whatis for'j.


the general -behoof, ‘he is said to put on-the
formof Aditya, ¢  .-- :


IOs


44: When he kills in anger hundreds of
wicked men with their sens, grandsons, and
telatives, he is then said to put on the form
of the Destroyer.


45. When he suppresses the wicked by
punishing them severely and favours the
righteous by giving them rewards, he is
then said to put on the form of Yama.


46—47. When he pleases with profuse
gifts of riches those who have done him
valuable services, and takes away the
riches and precious stones of those who
have offended him, indeed, when he confers
wealth upon some and takes it away from
others, he is then, O king, said to put on the
form of Kuveraon Earth. ~


48—49. No person who is clever, who
is capable of work, who wishes to acquire
virtue, and who is shorn of malice, should
ever spread evil reports’ about the king.
No person, by acting against the king, can
ever make himself happy, even if he be the
king’s son or brother or companion or one
whom the king considers as his second self.
Fire, increased by the wind, blazing forth,
may leave a residue. ~

50. The anger of the ‘king, howevef,
leaves not anything to the person who hap«
pens to incur it. Everything that belongs


‘to the king should be avoided from a dis-


tance,


5t. Oneshould turn away from the king’s
property as he would from death itself.
A person, by taking what belongs to. the
king, soon meets with destruction like a deer
upon touching poisea. ‘

52. An intellgent man should protect as
his own what belongs to the king.


§3« Those, who take wealth belonging to ~
the king, sink senseless into a deep hell of
eternal darkness and infamy. :


54. Who is there who will not adore the
king who is described by terms,—‘delighter
of the people,’ ‘bestower of happiness, pos-
sessor of prosperity, the best of all, healer of
injuries, master of Earth,’ and protector
of men’’? ‘

55. That man, therefore, who seeks this
Own prosperity, who satisfies all heaithy-
restraints, who has his soul under control,
who has subdued his passions, who is gifted
with intelligence and memory, and who is
a clever (business man), should always be


-attached to the king.


g6. THe king should duly honor the
minister who is grateful, wise, large-hearted


| loyal, a master of his senses, virtuous, and


observant of the dictates of policy. .


57. Theking should entertain the man
who. is. loval,. grateful, virtuous, :self-con«


402


trolfed, brave, noble, and competent to
complete works without the help of others.


g38. Knowledge makes men proud. The
king makes men humble. ‘Ihe man who is
assailed by the king can never enjoy happi-
ness. Onthe other hand, the man who
gets royal favours becomes happy.


89. The king is the heart of his people ;
he is their great refuge; he is their glory ;
and he is their greatest happiness.
Those men, O king, who are ‘attached to
the king, can conquer both this and the
next world,


60. Having governed the Earth with
the help of the qualities of self-control,
truth, and friendship, and having worship-
ped the deities by great sacrifices, the king,
acquiting great glory, acquires an eternal
abode in heaven.


61. That best of kings viz., the heroic
Vasumanas, king of Koshala, thus instruc-
ted by Vrihaspati the son of Angiras,
began thenceforth to protect his subjects,’


CHAPTER LXIX.


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continued,


Yudhishthira said—


1. ‘What other special duties remain
for the king te satisfy? How should he
protect his kingdom and how vanquish his
foes. =

2. How should he engage his spies?
How should he create confidence in the
four orders of his subjects, his own servants,
wives, ahd sons, O Bharata ?


Bhishma said :—
3. ‘Listen, O king, with attention to
the various duties of kings,—to those acts


which the king or one who is in his position
should first do.


4. The king should first conquer him-
self and then try to subdue his enemies,
How can a king who bas not been able
to conquer his own self be able to conquer
his enemies ?


5. The conquest of these, e#z., the
five objects, is tantamount to the conquest of
self. The king who has governed his senses
is capable to resist his enemies.


6-+7. He should place infantry in his
forts, frontiers, towns, parks, and pleasure
gardens, O delighter of the Kurus, as also,
in alt places where he himself goes, and


within his own palace, O foremost of men. |


MAHABHARATA.


8. He shoukl appoint as spies men
looking like idiots or like those who are
blind and deaf. ‘These should all be well-
tried persons who are endued with wisdom,
ie who are able ta bear hunger and
thirst.


9—to. With proper attention the king
should engage his spies to watch the actions
of all his counsellers and friends and sons,
in his city and the provinces, and in the
territories of feudatory chiefs. His spies
should be so employed that they may nos
know one another,


11—12. He should atso, O foremost of
Bharatas, know the spies of his enemies by
himself placing spies in shops and places
of amusement, amid gatherings of people,
among beggars, in his pleasure gardens
and parks, in meetings and assemblages of
the learned, in the country, in public places,
in the court, and in the houses of the
citizens.


13. An intelligent king may thus
ascertain the spies sent by his enemies. If
these be known, the king may derive im
mense benefit, O son of Pandu.


14, When the king, after seeing every-
thing finds himself weal, he should then,
consulting with his ministers make peace


‘with.a stronger foe.


15. The wise king should quickly make
peace with enemies even when he knows
that he is not weak, if hecan derive any
advantage out of it. |


16. Engaged in protecting his kingdom
piously the king should make peace with
accomplished persons capable of great
works, virtuous and honest.


17. When the king finds himself over-
taken with danger and about to be ruined,
he should kill all offenders whom he had
overlooked before and al such persons as
are marked out by the people.


18. A king should not deal with a person
who can neither benefit nor injure him, or
with one who cannot save himself from
distress.


19~-20. As regards military operations,
a king, who &nows his own strength, should,
commanding a large army cheerfully and
couragously give the order to march, with-
out announcing his destination, against one
shorn of allies and friends. or already at
war with another and hence careless or
one weaker than himself, having first made
arrangements for the protection of his
own city. :


2t.. A king should not for ever live
under a more powerful king. Though
weals, he should try to assail the stronger,


SHANTI


tid resolved upon this, continue to rule his
Own.

22. He should assail the kiigdom of
the stronger one by means of weapons
fire, and the administering of poison. He
should also create dissensions amongst his
thihisters and servants.


23. Vrihaspati has said that an intelli-
gent king should always avoid war for the
acquisition of territory. The acquisition of
territories should be made by the three well-
known means (of conciliation, gift, and
Gissension).


24. The wise king should be satistied
with those acquisitions that are made by
means of conciliation, gift, and dessension,


25. The king, O delighter of the Kurus,
should take a sixth of the incomes of his
subjects as tribute for performing the duties
of their protectiotion.


26. Heshould also take away by force
the wealth, much or little, of the ten sorts
of offenders mentioned in the scriptures, for
the protection of his subjects.


27. A king should, forsooth, consider

- his subjects as his own children. In settling

their disputes, however, he should not show
any mercy, .

28. For hearing the charges and defen-
tes in judicial suits, the king should always
repel wise persons endued witha know-
ledge of worldly affairs, for the state really
depends upon a proper administration of
justice.

zo. The king should appoint honest and
trustworthy men to Jook after his mines,
salt, geain, ferries, and elephant corps,


30. The king, who always judiciously
holds the rod of punishment, acquires great
merit. The proper regulation of punish-
ment is the great duty of kings and deser-
‘ves great praise.


gt. The king should master the Vedas
and their auxilliaries, be possessed of wis-
dom, engaged in penances, charitable, and
devoted to the celebration of sacrifices.


32. All these qualities should always be |-


ina ong Ifthe king fails to administer
justice, he can neither acquire heaven nor
fame. . ‘


43. If a king be attacked by a stronger
one, the former, if intelligent, should seek
refuge in a fort. | —


44. Collecting his friends for consulta-
tion, he should devise proper means.
Adopting the policy of conciliation and of
creating dissensions, he ‘should devise
means for fighting with the assailants, ,


PARVA, - 103

35. He should place the inhabitants of
the woods on the high roads, and, if, neces~
sary, cause whole villages to be removed,
removing alf the inhabitants to minor towns
or on the outskirts of great cities.


36. Giving repeated assurances to his
wealthy subjectsand tte principal officers
of the army, he should make the dwellers of
the open country to take refuge in well«
protected forts.


37. He should deposit all sorts of grain
in bis forts. If that is impossible, he should
destroy them completely by fire.

38. He should engage men for destroys
ing the crops on the fields of the enemy.
Bailing to do this, he should destroy those
crops by means of his own men. :

39. He should destroy all the bridges
over the rivers in his kingdom. He should


‘draw out the waters of ali the tanks in his


territories, or, if incapable to-do so, cause
them to be poisoned.


40. Disregarding the duty of protecting
his freinds, he should, considering present
and future circumstances, seek the protec
tion of another king who may happen to be
the foe of lis foe and who may be capable
to fight with his enemy on the field of
batue.


4t. He should demolish all the minor
forts in his kingdom. He should also cut
down all the smaller trees except those
called Chaitya.


42. He should cause the branches of all
large trees to be cut off, but he. should not
touch the very leaves of the Chaitya ones.


43. He should erect outer ramparts
round his forts, and fill his trenches with
water, putting pointed stakes at their bottom
and fiilling them with crocodiles and sharks.


44. He should keep smatt’ outlets in his
walls for firing guns from his fort, and cates
fully make arrangements for theic defence
like that of the greater gates.


48, In all his gates he should place des«
tructive engines. He should place on rame
parts Shataghnis and other weapons.


46. -He should lay by wood for fuel and
dig and repair wells for supply of water to
the garrison. ia

47. He shoutd have all houses made of
grass and straw plastered over with mud, -
and if it is summer, he should, from fear of
fire, collect in a safe place all the stores of
grass and straw. _


"48. He should order all food to be


‘cooked at’. night. -.No fire should be


lighted during the day, except for the


daily homa.


104


, 49. Particular care should be taken of
the fires lighted in smitheries and lying-in
chambers. Fires in the houses of the in-
hahitants should be well covered.

50.
it should be announced that a person, light-
ing fires in the day time, will be suffi-
ciently punished.


5t, During such times, all beggers,
cartmen, eunuchs, lunatics, should, O fore-
most of men, be driven out of the town,
for if they are allowed to remain, evil will
come.


“52. In places of public resort, in tirthas,
in assemblies and in the houses of the
citizens, the king should keep capable
spies,

53. The king should have wide roads
constructed, and open up shops, and places
for the distribution of water, at proper sta-
tions.


_ 54-55. Shops of necessary articles,
arsenals, camps and quarters for.soldiers,
stables for horses and elephants, encamp-
ments of soldiers, trenches, streets and
lanes, ‘houses and-pleasure gardens should
be so made that their situations may not -be
known to others, O Yudhisthira.


56. A king, who is attacked by a hostile
army, should collect wealth, and store oil
and fat and honey, and clarified butter,
and medicines of all-sorts,


_§7-—-58, And charcoal and munja grass,

leaves, arrows, scribes and draftsmen,
grass, fuel, poisoned arrows, weapons of
all sorts such as darts, swords, lances
and others. The king should store such
articles, ~


§9—60. Heshould.especially keep ready
various -drugs, roots and fruits, the four
kinds of physicians, .actors and dancers,
athelets, and persons capable of .assuming
various disguises. He should adorn his
capital and please all his subjects.


61. The: king should speedily subjugate
such persons as may .cause fear, be they
his servants or counsellors. or citizens or
neighbouring kings.

. 62, Whenever any of his work is done
the king should reward those who have
helped in its accomplishment with wealth
and other becoming presents and grateful
speeches,


63. It has been laid down in the scrip-
tutes, O delighter of the Kurus, that a king
satisfies his debt when he defeats his foe or
‘kills him at. once. ~ ;

64—65. A king should take care .of
ve things. Listen to me as I name
t em.


For the better protection of the city, '


They are his own self, his ministers,


MAHABHARATA.


his treasury, his servants for inflicting
punishments, his friends, his provinces, and
his capital. He should carefully protect
his kingdom consisting of these seven
limbs.


66. That king, O foremost of mon, who
is conversant with the collection of six and
theee objects, and the high collection of
three, gains the sovereignty of the whole
Earth.


67—68. Hear, O Yudhisthira, what is
called the aggregate of six. ‘They are
ruling peacefully after making a treaty
(with the foe),, marching to battle, creating
disunion among the enemy, concentration of
army for filling the enemy with fear, pre-
paration for war with readiness for peace,
and alliances with others, .


69—70. Listen now with attention fo
what are the triple objects. They are
decrease, maintenance of what is, and
growth, The great three fold objects con-
sist of religion, Profit and Pleasure. These
should be followed judiciously. By the help
of religion a king succeeds in ruling the
Earth-for ever.


gt. Regarding this matter, Angirasa’s
son Vribaspati himself has recited two
verses. Blessed be you, O son of Devaki,
you should hear them.—_-


ga. ‘Having satisfied all his duties and
having protected the Earth, and having
also protected the cities, a king enjoys great
happiness in heaven.


73. O§F what use are penances to that
king, and what need has he of sacrifices
who protects his people properly ? Sucha
king should be known as one conversant
with every virtue.’


Yudhisthira said :—


94. There is the science of pudishment ;
there is the king, and ‘there: are she
subjects. Tell me. O grandfather, what


‘advantage is derived by one of -these from
the others.


Bhishma said :—~ .
75. Listen to me,,O king, as I,describe, O


Bharata, the great virtues of the science of


punishment in weighty and sacred words. -
76. The science of punishment compels


all men to satisfy the duties of their res-


pective orders. Properly administered, it


‘compels people to perforn virtuous acts.


77—78. When the four ‘orders ‘perform


-their respectiye duties, when. all healthy


restrictions are kept up, when peace ,and


‘happiness: emanate from the science of
- punishment when the people are.shorn of


all fear, .and.the three higher orders try


SHANTI


according to their respective duties, te
preserve harmony people become truly
happy at sach times. :


7g. You should not doubt whether it is
the king that makes the age, or, it is the
age that makes the king; the qruth is that
the king makes the age.


'80 When the king rules depending
entirely on the science of punishment the
foremost of ages ‘called Krita is then
taid to flourish. :

8c. Righteousness prevaitsin the Krits
age. Nothing unrighteous exists then;
the four orders are net inclined to take any
pleasure in unrighteousness.


- 82. Forsooth, all men succeed in acquir~
ing the objects they seek and preserving
those that have been acquired. AH the
Nedic rites yield merits

83. All the seasons are delightful and
free from eyil. The voice, pronunciation,
and minds of ail men become clear aad
delightful.


84, Ailments disappear and all men
enjoy long lives. Wives do not become
widows, and no person becomes a miser.


85. The Earth yield crops without
being cultivated and herbs and plants grow
abundantly, Barks, leaves, fraits, and
Toots, gbecome strong and profuse.


86. No unrighteousness is seen. No-
thing but righteousness exists. These are
the characteristics, O Yudhishthica, of the
Krita. . ° i

87. , When the king depends upon only
three ‘of the four parts of the science of
punishment teaving out a fourtir, the age
called Treta sets in. - :


88. A fourth part of unrighteousness
seis in by the observance of the great
science by three-fourths. The Eurth gives
crops but waits fer cultivation; the herbs
and plants grow by cultivation.


. 89. When the king follows the great
science by only a half, leaving out the
ether half, then the age that sets in: fs
called Dwapara.


90 A half of uncighteausness: follows
the observance of the . great -science by
half. ‘fhe Earth’ yields ccops by half and
that even by tillage. :


91. Wher the king, feaving aside the
great science altogether, oppresses his sub-
jects by all manner and means the age that
Sets in is called (Kali. :


92. During the age calfed Kali, un-
sigh €20usness assumes the full proportion
atid nothing of righteousness is seen. ‘She


14:


PARVA, 190s


hearts of men of all the orders,


inclined to their respective duties.


93.¢ Shudras live by adopting lives of
mendicancy, and Brahmanas live by serv-
ing others.’ Men canaot acquire the objects
they seek and preserve those ‘already
acquired. Intermixtute of the four castes
takes place. 2 :

94. Vedic rites fail to yield fruits, Alt.
the seasons cease ta be delightful and are
visited by evils, os,

95. The voice, prenunciatien, and minds
ef men Jose power. Diseases appear, and
ngen die untimely. . '

96. Wives become widows, and many
crwel men appear; the clouds de not rain in
seasons and ereps fad). ;


97. All kinds of moisture atso fail,
when the sing does not, by duly felowing
the great science, protect the subjects. :

98. The king is the creator of the Krita
age, of the Freta, and of the Bwapara.’
‘The king is ithe. creator of the fourth age ©
{called Kali). : pe

99. Ifhe creates the Krita age, he
acquires eternal heaven. If he creates the
Treta age, he acquires heaven far a limited
peried,

too. If he creates the Bwapara, he.
attains tq btessedness in heaven in propor-
tion to his merits. By creating the Kali .
age, the king incurs a heavy sin.


tot. Sullied by wickedness, he suffers
in kell for numberless years, for being °
drowned in the sins of his subjects, he
incurs great sin and infamy himself, -


102. Following the great science the
Jearned Kshatciya should try to acquire
those objects which he seeks and pratect,
those which he has already acquired, ;


203. The science of punishment, which
establishes all men in the observance of
their respective duties, whicl is the basis
of all healthy distinctions, and which teul
keeps up tite world and sets it agoing if
properly administered, protects all men like
pareats protecting their childrea.


tog. Know, O foremast of men, that the

very tives of creatures: depend spon it,

‘The greatest merit of a king consists in his
acqu‘tintance with the science of punishment

and adininistering it propertly. %,
10g. Therefore, O you of Kuru’s race,
protect your subjects righteously, with the
help of that great science. By protecting
your subjects and adopting such a conduct,

ou will, forsooth, attain to such blessdeness ©
in heaven which cannot be easily acquired.”

T


are dis-


1


| caeeameaiataieell


106


ar


CHAPTER LX.


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA),~~Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


t. “By following what conduct, O you
who are a master of every kind of behaviour,
can a king succeed in easily acquiring, both
in this world and in the next, objects which
yield happines in the end?”


Bhishma, said :-—

2. There are thirty-six virtues which a
king should practise.
thirty-six retated with these. A virtuous
person, by following these vitues, can cer-
tainly acquire great merit.


3. The king should follow his duties
without any malice. He should not cast
off mercy. He should have faith. He
should earn wealth without persecution and
cruelty. He should seek pleasure without


attachment.


4., He should cheerfully speak out what
is pleasant, and be brave without brag. He
should be liberal, but should not make gifts
to unworthy pérsons. He should exercise
power without cruelty.


gs. He should make alliances, but not
with the wicked. He should not act inimi-
cally towards his friends. He should
never employ persons who are not devoted
to him as his spies and secret emissaries.
He should never acomplish his works by
oppression,

6. He should never give out his pur-
poses before the wicked.persons. He should
speak of the merits of others but never his
own. He should take money from his
subjects but never from those who are good.
He should never take the assistance of
wicked persons.


7. He should never inflict punishment
without makiig careful enquiry. He should
never give out his counsels. He should
distribute money, but not amongst covetous
persons. He should place confidence in
others, but never in those who have in-
jured him,


8. He should not entertain malice. He
should protect his married wives. He
should be pure and should not always be
exercised by compassion. He should not
seek too much female companionship, He
should take wholesome food and never that
which is bad.

9- He should without pride pay respect
to worthy persons, and serve his preceptors
and seniors with sincerity. He should seek


They are another {-


MAHABHARATA.


prosperity, but never do anything that
brings calumny.


to. He-should serve his elders with


humility. He should be clever in busines —


but should always wait for the opportune
moment. He should solace men and never
send them away with empty words,
Having favored a person, he should not c ist
him off,


tt. He should never strike in ignorance.
Having killed his enemy he should never be
serry. He should display anger, but should
never do so when there is no occasion. He
should be mild,;but never to the offenders.


12, Behave thus while ruling your king-
dom if you wish to enjoy prosperity. ‘The
king that behaves otherwise is visited by
great calamities.


13. That king, who observes all these
virtues that [ have mentioned, enjoys
many blessings on Earth and great rewards
in heaven.’


Vaishampayana said :—

14. ‘Hearing these words of Shantanu’s
son, king Yudhishthira, always obedient
in receving instructions, endued with great
intelligence, and protected by Bhima and
others, then adored his grandfather and
from. that time began to cule according to
his dictates,


CHAPTER LXXL


(RAJ ADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Cortinued.


Yudhishthira said :—


1. “ett me, O grandfather, how should
the king protect his subjects so as to be able
to avoid- grief and. so as not to militate
against fairness ?”’ :


Bhishma said :— .


2. ‘I shail recite in brief, O king, those
eternal duties, for, if | were to mention them
fully, I would never finish them.


3. You should. always worship those
Bratrmanas who are ardent in the per-
formance of theic duties, are learned,
tegulae in adoring the gods, observant
of high vows, and: gifted with other
accomplishments, when they come to your
mansion, engage -them in officiating in
your sacrifices.


4. With your priest accompanying you, ;


you should rise up when they approach you, .
and touch and adore their feet, and do


_every other necessary act, “


SHANTI PARVA.


. §. Doing these acts of piety and per-
' forming other acts that are for your own
well-being, you should (by presents) make
those Brahmanas utter benedictions on
you for the success of your object.


6. Gifted with sincerity, wisdom and
intelligence, O Bharata, you should follow
truth and avoid lust and anger.


4, That foolish king, who pursues Profit
without being shorn of lust and anger, fails
to win virtue and ultimately loses Profit as
well.


‘8. Never appoint persons covetous and
foolish in matters of Pleasure and Profit.
You should always appoint men who are
free from covetousness and intelligent.


9. Possessed of Iust and anger and raw
in the transaction of business, foolish
persons, if vested with power in matters of
Profit, always oppress the people by various
mischeivous means, ;

to. Witha sixth part, making a fair
calculation of the produce of the soil, as
his tribute, with fines and forfeitures collect-
ed from offenders, with the other taxes,
according te the scriptures, upon merchants
and. traders ‘in exchange for the safety
granted to them, a king should fill his
treasury. ’


1t, Realising these just taxes and go-
verning the kingdom properly, the king
should carefully act in such a way that
his subjects may not suffer from want.


* 12, Men become deeply attached to that
king who satisfies the duty of protection
properly, who is liberal, who is steady in
the observance of righteousness, who is
vigilant, and who is shorn of lust and
hate. mae

13. Never desire to fill your treasury by
acting unfairly or from  covetousness.
That king who does not follow the scrip-
tures fails tp acquire riches and religious
merit. ‘


14. That king, who is negligent about


the means of acquiring riches, never suc--


ceeds in acquiring both religious merit and
wealth. The wealth again that he acquires
dy such means} is spent lavishly on un-
~warthy objects,


15.. That avaricious king, who foolishly
-oppresses his subjects by levying taxes not
sanctioned by scriptures, is said to wrong
his own self. -


a6, Asa person wanting milk never gets
any by cutting off the udders of a cow,
similarly a kingdom, assailed by improper
taxes, never gives any profit to the king,


17. He, who treats a milch cow with


104°


kindness, always obtains milk ‘from ik.
Likewise the king, who rules his kingdom
by proper means, gets much fruits from it.


18. -By protecting a kingdom properly
and ruling it judiciously a king, O Yudhis-
thira, may succeed in always acquiring
immense wealth, -


1g. The -Earth, well protected by the
king, yields crops and gold like a mother
giving milk willingly to her child. teeta


20. Follow the example, O king, of* the
flower vendor and not of the charcoal-
maker. Acting thus and _ satisfying the
duty of protection you may be able to enjoy
the Earth for ever.


at. If in attacking an enemy’s kingdom
your treasury is exhausted, you may
replenish it by taking. wealth from all
except Brahmanas,


22. Your heart shoukd not be agitated
even when you are in great distress, upon
seeing Brahmanas having wealth. I need
not mention then of what you should do
when you are well off. .


23. You should give them wealth to
the best of your power and according to
their worthiness, and protect them, comfort-.
ing them at all times. By acting thus you
may acquire regions which are acquired
with difficulty. ,


24. Behaving thus virtuously-you should
protect your subjects. You may then ace
quire, O delighter of the Kurus, fame that
is eternal, high, and pure. - ;

25. Protect your subjects piously, O s
of Pandu, fer you will ven suffer no re-
gret-or pain. :

26. Protection of the subject is’ the
greatest duty of the king, since mercy for
all creatures and protecting them from
injury has been said to be the highest
merit.


27. Persons, conversant with duties,
consider that to be the greatest merit of
the king, when, ‘engaged in protecting all
creatures, he shows mercy towards them, ~

28. The sin, a king incurs by neglecting
for a single day to .protect his subjcts
from fear, is such that his sufferings are not
terminated in hell till after a thousand
years, we


- ag. >The merit, of aking by protecting
his subjects righteously for a single day, is
such that he enjoys its reward in heaven
for ten thousand years.


30. A king, by only protecting his sub-
jects virtuously, soon -gains those regions
that are, acquired by persons leading duly


* 168;


the Garhastya, the Bralsmacharyya, and
the Vanaprastha modes of life.

‘3t. Do you, O son of Kumti, foflow with
great care this duty (of protection). You
wilf then obtain the reward of righteous-
ness and suffer no grief and pain. You
shall, -O son of Pandu, obtain great
prosperity in heaver,

32. Persons who are not kings do tot
@ain merit like Usis. A person, therefore,
who is a king, and no other can earn such
rewards of virtue, - : bs
-.33. Endued with intelligence, you have
obtained & kingdom. Do you protect your
subjects righteously.. Please Indra with
offerings of Soma and your friends and well-
wishers with the objects they desire for.’


CHAPTER LXXIh :


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA.)—Continued.


Bhishuta gaid:— ;

i ‘fA king should appoint that person
as his priest who would protect tle good
and punish the wicked.


2, Regarding it is cited the old story
about the discourse between Pururavas the
son of Aila and Matarishwan.


Pururavas said :—


_ g Whence has the Brahmana origi«
Nated and whence the three other orders?
Why also has the Brahmana become the
fotemost ? You should tell me all this.


Matarishwan answered :—

_ 4. ‘The Brahmana, O best of kings, has
originated from the mouth of Brahman.
“She Kshatriya has originated from his two
atms, and the Vaishya from his two
thighs. 7

§. For serving these three orders, O
king, a fourth order, viz. the Shudra,
came into being created from the feet (of

+ Brahman). ; .

6. Thus created, the Brahmana is born
on Earth as the lord of al! creatures, his
duty} being to preserve the Vedas and the
othee scriptures, :

7. Then, for ruling the Earth and hold-
ing the rod of punishment and protecting
all. creatures, the sécond order, vis., the
Kshatriya was created,


_ 8... The Vaishya was created for support-
jing the two other orders and himself by
bultivation and trade, and finally it was


opaammenad


+


MAHASTIARATAD


.


ordained by Brahuran ttrat the Shudra
should serve the three orders as a servant. —
Pururavas said :—

g. Telt me, truty, O god of Wind, te
whonr does this Earth faicly belong. Does


# belong to the Brahmana or to the
Kshatrly a.


The god of Wind said :~ F

to. Everything that exists in the ariverse
belongs to the Brahmana on account of
his birth and precedence. Persons, can<
versaat with morality, deciare it.


z¥. What the Brabmana eats is his owm
‘Fhe place he dwells im is his own, What
he gives away is his owm He deserves
the respect of all the (other) orders. He
is the first-born and the foremost,


1z. Asa woman, im the absence of her
husband, marries his yeunger brother,
even sa the Earth, .for the refusal of the
Brahmana, has accepted his next-born,
vig., the Kshatriya, for her master. ‘This
ts the first rule. In times, however, vf
distress, there is exception to this. ;

13-14. If you try to satisfy the duties
of your order and wish to acquire the
highest place in heaven, then give to the
Brahmana, all the land you may conquer,
to him who is learned and of virtuous com-
duct, who is conversant with duties and
observant of penances, who is contented
with the duties of his.order and not covetous
of wealthy.


1g. ‘The well-bora Brahmana, wist
and humble, guides the king in every matter
by his own great intelligence. , :


16, By sound advice he makes the -king
acquire prosperity. The Brahmana peints
Out to to the king his duties. :

17. As tongasa wise king, observant
of the duties of. his order, and short
of pride, is desirous of listening td the
advice of the Brahmana, so long is he res-
pected and so long does he enjoy fame.
The priest of the king, therefore, partake’
of-the merit that the king acquires.


18. When the king behaves himself thus,
all his subjects, depending upon him,. bee
come virtuous in their behaviour, follow their
duties, and are freed from every fear. - -


19. The king shares a fourth part of
those righteous acts which his subjects, well«
protected by him, perform in his kingdom.

20. The gods, men, Pitris, Gandharvas,
Uragas, and Rakshasas, all derive their
support from sacrifices. In a country having
no king, their can be no sacrifice. ‘


at. The gods and the Pitris live upon


SHANTI PARVA.‘


the offerings ttade 4 sacrifices, actilice,
however, depends upon the king.

22. In summer, men seek comfort from
the shade of trees, cool water, and cool
breezes, In winter, they derive comfort
from fire, warm clothing and the sun.

23. The'treart of man finds pleasure in
sound, tovch, taste, vision, and smell.
The man, however, who is filled with fear,
finds no pleasure in all these things.


24. That person, who removes the fears
of men, acquires great merit. here is no
present so valuable in theese worlds as that
of life..


285. The king is Indra. The king is
Yama... The king ts Dharma, The king
puts on different forms. ‘The king preser-
ves and supports every thing.


——amee


CHAPTER LXXUL


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA |
j : PAR VAs Consens


Bhishma saidi— —.


"1. (The king, observing both teligious
merit and profit’ which are very intricate,
should, forthwith, appoint a priest learned


and acquainted intimately with the Vedas |


dind the (other) scriptures,


are pious and conversant with policy, and
are possessed of good. attributes, enjoy
prosperity everywhere.i ,

3. Both the priest and the king should
have. such qualities as arrest honor, and
should observe the vows and penances.
They would thea suceeed in supporting the
subjects, the deities, the. Pitris, and the
children,


' 4g. ‘Itis laid down that they should have
similar hearts and should be each other’s
friends. For such friendship between Brah-
mana and Kshatriya, the subjects ‘become
happy.

§. If they do not repect éach other,
destruction would befall the people: The
Brahmana and the Kshatriya are said to be
the creators of all men.


6. Regarding it is cited the old story
‘about the discourse between Aila’s son and
Kashyapa. Listen to it, O Yudhishthira.


Aila’s son said:—* - *
7. When the Brahmana forsakes the


t Kshatriya forsakes the ||
Be ee y rf “What also is his form? Creatures are


seen ta be destroyed by greatures,- Tell me


Brahmana, who amongst them, should be
- considered superior, and upon whom would


Yos:


the other orders’: depend and ‘ inaintairt
themselves ?


Aashy ape said :-—~

Ruin befalls the kingdom of ‘ise
Kshatriya when the Brahmana and Kshas
triya fight with each other. Robbers attack
that kingdom in which anarchy reigns
and all good men regard the kiag as a
Mleche¢ha.


9- Their oxen do not thrive, | nor do thei¢
children. Their pots (of milk) are not
churned, and no sacrifices are celebrated
there. ‘The children do not study the
Vedas in kingdoms where Brahmanas fore
sake Kshatriyas.


10, In their houses wealth does not mul-
tiply. Their children do.not become good
and do not read the scriptures and celebrate
sacrifices. Those Kshatriyas that forsake
the Brahmanas become impure in blood. |


tr, The Brahmanaand the Kshatriya
are connected with- each other by nature)


‘and each protects the other. The Ksha


triya is the roat of the Brahmana’s advance-
ment and the Brahmana is ‘tlre root * the
Kshatriyas’s advancement, —

12, When each helps. the other, ‘both
enjoy great prosperity. If their friendship,
existing from days of yore, fs snapped,
anarchy ‘prevaits everywhere.”


13. No person, desirous of crossing the


j ocean of life, succeeds. in his attempts like @
‘2. Those kings, who have priests, who |


small boat floating ou the bosom of the sea.
The four orders of men becoine confounded
and meet with destruction. -


14. Ifthe tree of a Brahmana is pro-
tected, it showers gold and honey. J£ on
the other hand, it is not protected: it then
showers tears and sin, sehen


15. When Brahmanas neglect the study
of the Vedas and seek protection from


‘the scriptures, then Iadra does not. pour


rain in time and various sorts of eaeniee
constantly assail the kingdom.


‘86. When a sinful wretch,’ “having bittea
a woman ora Brahmana;: does. not- incur
censure in assemblies of fellowmen and
dloes not fear the king, thet” _ danger
threatens the Kshatriya king.


Ze For the sins. perpetrated by sinful


. men, the god Redra appears in, the king-


dom. Indeed, the sinful by their sias
invite that god of vengeance. He then
kills all, ‘the: ‘honest and’ the wicked alike. —


Aila said— . : ,
18. Whence ‘does Rudra originaté ?


‘


Fie.


alt this; O -Kashyapa. Whence does the
gad Rudra otiginate.


Kashyapa said:— — --

_.¥9. Rudra exists in the hearts of men.
He destroys the bodies themselves in which
he lives as also the bodies of others.
Rudra ig like visitations of the sky and his
form is like that of the wind-god.


Aila said :—.

zo. The Wind does not, by blowirig,
visibly destroy men at all times, nor does
Indra do so by pouring rain. On the other
hand, it is seen among men that they’ lose
their senses and are kifled through lust and
malice.


Kashyapa said :— :
at. Fire burning in one house, burns a
whole quarter or an entire village.
wise this deity stupiffes the senses of some
“one and thenSthat stupefaction affects all,
the honest and the wicked alike, without
any distinction.


Ailsa said s~ :

22. If punishment affects all, ais., tite
honest and the wicked alike, on account of
the sins committed by the sinful, why
should men, in that case, perform acts that
fare meritorious 2 Indeed, why should they
abstain, from wicked acts.


Kashyapa said :—~

. 23. By standing aloof from the sinful,
‘one becomes pure and stainless. However,
by being mixed with the sinful, the sinless
‘aré. punished. Wet wood, if mixed with
dry wood, is consumed by fire for such is
‘mixture. The sinless, therefore, should
ttevec associate with the sinful.


_Aila said :—


24. The Earth contains the honest and
-the wicked. The sun warms the honest
and the wicked. ‘The wind blows equally
for them. ‘Water cleanses them equally.


Kashyapa said :—~—

- 2§. Such, indeed, is the course of this
world, O prince. It is not so, however, in
another world. Inthe other world, there
‘ig a great difference between the person
-that acts virtuously and him that acts
sinfully.


Pa


>


26. The regions which virtuous men
acquire are full of honey and the splendour

. of gold or of fire upon which clarified
. butter has been poured. They are com-
* paced to the navel of ambrosia. The meri-
; borious person enjoys great happiness theres


-| assail the people.


Like- |


MAHABHARATA.


Death, decrepitude, and sorrow are ttof
there,


27. The region for the sinful is hell.
Darkness and constant pain are there, and
it is full of sorrow. Sinking in infamy, the
sinful man grieves for many years.


28 For a division between Brah-
manas and Kshatriyas, numberless griefs
Knowing this, a king
should appoint a (Brahmana) priest having
experience and wide knowledge.


29. A king should first engage the
priest in his office, and then perform his
own coronation. ‘This has beon laid down
in the scriptures The ordinance declare
that the Brahmana is the foremost of
all creatures. Mest who know the Vedas
say that the Bralimana was created first.


30. For the precedence of his birth, all
things that are good in this world are in
him. The Brahmana, who is the owner of
bést productions of the creation, is also for
such precedence, worthy of the respect and
the worship of all creatures.


3, A king, however powerful, sliould
according to the injunctions of the scrip-
tures confer upon the Brahmana whatever is
best and superior to all others.


gz. The Brahmana contributes to the
advancement of the Kshatriya, and the
Kshatriya to that of the Brahmana. Brah-
mana should, therefore, be especially and
always adored by kings.’


Cee!


CHAPTER LXXIV. |


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continued.


Bhishma said :—

t. ‘It is said that ‘the preservation and
advaticement of the kingdom depends upon
the king. The preservation and advances
ment of the kings depends upon the king’s
priest. .

2. That kingdom truly enjoys, felicity
where the invisible fears of the subjects,
are removed by the Brafimana and all
visible ones are suppressed by the king with |
the strength. of his arm.

3, Regarding it is cited the old discourse
between king Muchukunda and Vaishra-
vana, ; :

4. King Muchukunda, having conquer-
ed the’ entire _Earth, went to the lord of
Alaka for testing his strength. > - ‘


§. King Vaishravana created a large


SHANTI PARVA,


army of Rakshasas. These grinded the
army led by Muchugunda.


6. Witnessing the destruction of his
army, king Muchukunda, O chastiser of
foes, began to rermnonstrate with his owa
jearned priest Vashistha.


7. Thereupon that foremost of righteous
persons, wiz., Vashistha, practised very
austere penances, and, causing those Rak-
shasas to be killed, ascertained the true
course which Muchukunda was following,


8. When king VWaishravana’s troops
were being killed, he showed himself to
Muchukunda and said these words, -


The Lord of Death said :—


9. Many kings of yore, more powerful
“thaa you, aided by theic priests, had never
approached me thus.


to. Ail of them were clever in weapons
and all of them were powerful. Kuowing
measthe giver of happiness and misery,
they approached me for. offering adora-
tions,

ta. In truth, if you have might ef arms
you should display it. Why do you act so
proudly, helped by Brahmana power.


‘12, Enraged at these words, Muchu-
kuanda, shorn of pride and fear, said to the
Lord of Death these words pregaant with
teason and justice. ¢ :


13. The Seff-create Brahman created
the Brahmana and the Kshatriya. They
have a common origin, Uf they apply their
energies separately, they would never be
able to keep up the werld.


14. The power of penances and Mantras
was given to the Brahmanas; the strength
of arms and of weapons was conferred upoa
KXshatriyas. hes os


15. Helped by both kinds of strength,
kings should protect their subjects. 1 am
acting in that way. Why do you, O ferd
of Alaka, remonstrate with me then ?


16, Thus accosted, Vaishravana said to
Muchukunda and his priest,—I_ never,
without ,being ordered (by the Self-born)
confer sovereignty upon any one, Nor
do 1 ever, without his behest, snatch
it away from any one. Know this, O
king. - ee

17. De you rule then the boundless
Earth.—Thus addressed, king Muchukun-
da replied, saying.— ; En 4

18. £ do not, O king, desire te enjoy
sovereignty given by you asa gift. I desire
to enjoy sovereignty secured by the power
of my own arms, me Vg


TL


Bhishma said :— ig

1g. At these words of Muchukunda,
Vaishravana, seeing the king undaunted in *
the observance of Kshatriya duties, was
stricken with surprise.


20. King Muchukunda, devoted to
Kshatriya duties, continued .to cule the
entice Earth acquired by the power of his
own arms.


2t. That virtuous king, who governs his
kiagdom, aided by and reveriug the Brah.
mana, succeeds in subjugating the whole
Earth aad acquiring great fame. ‘


28. The Brahmana should daily perform
his religious rites and the Kshatriya shoul
always be ready with weapons. ‘They both
ate the rightful owners of everything in the
world.’


eye


CHAPTER LXXV.


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continued, ~ —


Yadhisthira said :—~


1. “Describe to me, O grandfather, the
conduct by which a king succeeds in ad-
vancing his subjects and earning regions of
happiness in the other world.”


‘| Bhishma said :— -


2. ‘The king should: be fiberal and
should celebrate sacrifices, O Bharata.
He should observe vows and penances, and
should be devoted to the duty of protecting
his subjects,

3. Virtueusly protecting ail his subjects
he should honor all pious persons by stande .
ing up when they come and by, making
presents to them. '


4 Uttheking honors it, righteousness
is honored yeverywhere. Whatever acts -
and things a king likes they are liked by .
his subjects. :


5. The king should always be fike |
Death to his enemies- with the rod of
punishment uplipted in his hands. He
should root out robbers in his kingdom and
never pardon any one capriciously. ‘


6.° The king,:O Bharata, acquires a
fourth part of merit that his subjects acquire *
under his shelter. ;

7-8. By only protecting his subjects
the king acquires a fourth part of merit that |
his subjects acquire by study, by gift, by’.
pouring libations, and by ‘adoring the gods.
The king acquires a fourth part of also the


| sin that his subjects’ commit on account.


REA


any distress in the kingdony arising from
the king’s neglect in satisfying the duty of
protection. _


Qs. Some say that the king ¢arns a half,
and some say the full measure, ef whatever
sin is caused by his becoming cruel and
alias; an ‘ :

10. Listes now to. the means by- which
the king may purge off such sins, If
the king fails to restore toa subject the
wealth that has been stolen away by thieves
tie should then make good the floss from his


own treasury, or, in case of inability, with.


wealth taken from his dependents.


"tt. All the castes should protect
the wealth of a Brahmana as well as his
body and life. ‘Fhe person that offends
against Brahmanas should -be banished
from the kingdom.


12. Everything is protected by protect-
ing Brahmana’s wealth. Through the
favour of the Brahmanas, which may thus
be secured, the king becomes crowned with
Success, . i Paes

13. Men seek the shelter of a capable
king like creatures seeking relief from the
clouds or birds seeking refuge. in a- large
tree. : ; : :

14. A cruel and covetous king, always.
lustful and seeking the gratification of his
desires can never protect his subject.”


Yudhishthira said:—-- -.


11§- -“L de not, for a moment, seek the
happiness pf sovereignty itself for its own
sake, I desire it, however, for the sake of
the merit gone may gain from it. It seems
to me that ‘it has no merit. :


i 16--17.' There is. na such necessity by
which ao, merit can be acquired. I shat,
therefore, retire. into the forest acquiring
religious merit. Laying aside the rod of
punishment and controlling my senses, I
shall goto the forest which is sacred and
_ seek to acquire the merit of righteousness
by becoming an ascetic living upon fruits
and roots.” .


Bhishma said :—-

18. ‘I know, O Yudhishthira, what the
nature of your heart is, and how inoffensive
youare. You will not, however, by inoffen-
siveness alone, succeed in governing your
kingdom.


_ Ig. Your heart is mild by nature, vou
are merciful, and highly righteous. You
are without energy, are virtuous-and full of
compassion. People, however, do not res-
pect you.


20. Follow the conduct of yeur father


MAHABHARATA«


and. grandfather. - Kiags.. should neved
follow the conduct which you, geek to ado *


at.- Never be affected by ‘anxiety,
never adopt such inoffensive eonduct.
becoming $0, you would not earn that mer
of righteousness which, arises from protec
ting subjects. ;

22, "The conduct you wish to follow,
urged on by your intelligence and wisdom,
is not quiet of a piece with those blessings
which your father’ Pandu or your mother
Kunti used to solicit for you.


23. ‘Your father always prayed for your
courage, might, and truth, unti always
prayed for your high-emindedness and.
liberality. 4 _ . :

24. The offerings with Swyha and Swa-
dha it Shraddhas and sacrifices are always
solicited from. childcen by the Pitris and the’
deities. .

25,-. Whether gifts, study, sacrifices and
the protection of subjects, virtuous ar sinful,
you, are born, ta practise and perform them,


26. “The fame of men never suffers, even
if they fail in bearing the burden which is
placed on them and to which they are
wedded for life.


27. Evena horse, if properly trained,:
succeeds in carrying without dropping down
a burden, One incurs no blame if only his:
acts atid words be proper, for success de
pends upon them. . yi

-29. .No person, be hea virtuaus house-
holder, of be he a king, or be hea Brahe.
macharin, has ever succeeded in conducting
himself without failyre., ‘

29. It is better ta.do. an act which is
good, and- which carries but limited metit
than to tatally abstain from all acts, for.
perfect inaction is very, culpable. ;

30. When a high-born and righteous:
Person acquires profuse wealth the king
then succeeds in obtaining prosperity in. alt
his works. ; 7

31. A wictuaus king, having obtained a.
kingdom, should try to subdue some by
presents, some by force, and: some by sweet,
words, eo i

32. There is no one more virtuous than.
he, upon whom high-born and earned
persons depend from. fear of losing their
means of sustenance and depending upon,
whom they live cantentedly,’


Yudhisthira said :-—

33. ‘What acts, O sir, tead to heaven ?
What is the nature of the great happiness
that is derived from them? What also is
the high prosperity that may be obtained
from them? Tell me all this, if you know.’-


'


SHANTI PARVA,


Bhishma said =

“24. That man, from whom a person as-
sailed by fear obtains even a momentary
welief, deserves heaven from amongst the
sbest of us. What [ tell you is very true.

35. Be you gladly the king of the Kurus,
‘O foremost one of Kuru’s race, acquire
‘heaven, protect the good, and kill the wicked.

36. Let your friends, together with all
shonest man, derive theie support from you,
ice all creatures from the god of the clouds
.and like birds from a large tree with sweet
-fruits,

37. Men seek refuge with that person
.who is dignified, courageous, capable of
striking, merciful, has senses under control,
ais affectionate towards all, and .impartial
and just.’


———


CHAPTER LXXVA.
ARAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continued.


Vudhisthira said :-—


t. “OQ grandfather, amongst Brahmanas -
some follow the duties proper to their order
while others follow other duties. ell me
the difference between.these wwo classes.”


Bhishma said :—

.2. ‘Those Brahmanas, O king, who are
learned and beneficent, and who look ppon-
_all creatures impartially, are said to be
-equal to Brahma.

3. Those who are conversant with the
Richs, the Yajus, and the Samanas and
who follow the practices of theic order, are,
:Q king, equal to.the very gods.

“4 Those, however, who are not well-
:born and do not follow the duties of their


.order, and are, addicted to evil practices,


_are.like Shudras,


. A virtuons king shonld realise tribute
from and compell to enter the public service
without any cemuneration those Brahmanas
who are not well read in the Vedas
and who have not their own fires to wor-
ship.

6. Those, who are employed in law
courts for summoning people, those who
perform worship for others for money, those
who perform the sacrifices of Vaishyas and
Shudras, those who officiate in Sacrifices on
tbebalf of a whole village, and those who


make voyages on the ocean,—these five are.
regarded as Chandalas among Brahmanas, ;


39


for his maintenance, he does nat
from thefts, he shonld then,
of foes, be exiled from the kingdom witt


“41g


g. Those who become Ritwijas, *Puro-
hitas, counsellors, envoys -and messengers;
become, .U king, equal to Kshatriyas.

8. Those, who ride horses or elephants
or cars or become foot-soldiers, become, Q
king, equal to Vaishyas.

g. df the king’s treasury is not well
replenished, he may take tribute from these.
An realising tribute, the. king, however,
should except those Brahmanas who are
equal to, the gods or Brahma.

to, The Vedas say.that the king jis the
master of the wealth of all the orders
except Brahmanas. He can take the
wealth of those Brahmanas who have
neglected to perform their legitimate


“duties, '


nr. The king should never treat ine
differently those Brahmanas who do .not
observe their duties. For the sake of
making his people virtuous, he should
punish apd take them away from their
betters.

12. That king, O monarch, in whose
territories a Brahmana becomes a _ thief, is’


‘| charged by the learned as the doer of that


misdeed,
13. ‘Persons conversant with the Vedas


declare that.ifa Brahmana versed in the


Vedas and observant of vows becomes,’


through want of means, a thief, it is the
duty of the king to support him.


14. If, after provision has been made
abstain
O  scorcher


all liis relatives,


CHAPTER LXVIUL.


({RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Coxtinued,


Yudhishthira said:—

1. "Of whose weatth, O foremost of
Bharata’s racé, is the king considered to ba
the master? And what conduct also should
the king follow? Describe to me this, Q
grandfather! : .


Bhishma said .—

2. ©The Vedas declare that the king is
the master of the wealth that belongs to all
persons except Brahmanas, as also of those
Brahmanas who do not follow their proper
duties. — ,

3. The king should not spare thos
Brahmanas who do not follow their dutie


11g


The righteous say that this is the ancieZ
Practice of kings. ;

4. That king, O monarch, in whose
dominion a Brahmana becomes a thief, is
considered to be the doer of that misdeed.
The king is visited by sias on that account.


§. For suchan offence, kings consider
themselves to be worthy of reproach, All
righteous kings, therefore, provide Brah-
manas with the means of sustenance.

6, Regarding it is cited the old narrative
of the speech made by the king of the Kai-
keyas toa Rakshasa while the latter was
about to abduct him away. 2


- 9. Of rigid vows and well-read in the
Vedas, the king of the Kaikeyas, O mo-
narth, while living in the forest, was by
force seized on a certain occasion by a
Rakshasa. .


The king said :—~

8, There is no thief in my kingdom, nor
any wicked person, nor any orre who-drinks
alcohol. There is no one in my kingdom
who does not preserve his sacred fire or who
does not celebrate sacrifices. How then
have you been able to possess my heart ?


_9. There is no Brahmana in my territo-
ries who is not learned or who does not ob-
serve vowsor who has not drunk Soma.
Shere is no one who does not preserve his
sacred fire or who does not celebrate sacri-
fices. How then have you been able to
possess my soul ?


.to. In my kingdom no sacrifice has
been celebrated without completing it by
Dakshina. Noone in my kingdom studies
the Vedas who does not observe yows.
How then have you been able to possess
my soul?


tr, The Brahmanas in my kingdom
teach, study, sacrifice, officiate at others’
sacrifices, give, and receive presents. All
of them perform those six acts,


12. The Brahmanas in my kingdom
devatedty follow the duties of their order.
Adored and provided for, they are mild,
and truthful in speech. How then have
you been to possess my soul ? :

83—14. The Kshatriyas in my kingdom
devoiedly follow the duties their Gee hey
never beg but give, and are conversant
with truth and virtue. “Fhey never teach
but study, and celebrate sacrifices but never
officiate at the sacrifices of others. They
protect the Bralhmanas and never fly from
battlefield. How then have you been able
to possess my soul ?

. 15. The Waishyas in my kingdom all
follow the duties of theic order. With sim-
plicity and without deceit they gain their


“" 2.


‘ledge of self.


MAHABRARATA.


livelihood from agriculture, cattle-keeping,
and trade. ‘They are all careful, observant
of religious rites and excellent vows, and
truthful in speech.


16. They give to their guests what is
their due, are self-controlled and pure, and
devoted to their relatives and. kinsmen.
How then have you been to possess my
heart ? :

197. The Shndras in my kingdom, always
follow the duties of their order, humbly and
duly serve and wait upon the other three
orders without cherishing any malice tos
wards them, How then have you been
able to possess my heart 7


18, I support the helpless and the old,


‘the weak, the i#, and helpless women, by


giving them all thetr necessaries. How
then have you been able to possess my
heart 7


1g. I have never done away with the
special customs of families and of countries
obtaining from days of yore. How ther


| have you been able to possess my heart 7


20. The ascetics in my kingdom are
protected and adored. They are always
honored and fed with food. How then have
you been able to possess my heart !


f never eat without feeding others
from my food. I never know other people’s
wives. I never sport or recreate alone.
How then have you been able to possess my


| heart ?


22, No one in my _ kiugdom save a
Brahmacharin begs his food, and no one who
lives a mendicant’s hife desires to be a Brahe
macharin. No one but a Ritwif pours liba-
tions (of clarified butter) upon the sacrificial
fire. How then have you been able to


:possess my soul ?


23- Enever disrespect the learmned or the
old or those who practise penances. When
all people are asleep, 1 keep up (for watch-
ing and protecting). Fkow then have you
been able to possess my heart


24. My priest is endued with the know *
He practises penances, an
isa master of duties. Highly intelligent
he has the fullest power over my kingdom,


25- By presents I desire to acquire
knowledge, and by truth and the protection
of Brahmanas. IF wish.to attain blissfut
‘regions of heaven. I abways strive to serve
my preceptors with my services. I do net
fear the Rakshasas.


26. In my kingdom there are no widows,
no wicked Brahmanas, no Brahmana who
has not satisfied his duties, no deccitfut
person, no thief, no Brahmana who offt-
ciates in the sacrifices of those for whom


SHANTI PARVA.


ye should never officiate, and no perpe-
trator of sinful deeds. I do not fear the
Rakshasas.


27. Thereisno space in my body, of
even two fingers’ breadth, which does not
contain the mark of a weapon-wound. I
always fight for the sake of fairness.
How then have you been able to possess
my heart ? .


28. The people of my kingdom always
bless me so that | may--always be able
to protect kine and Brahmanas and cele-
brate sacrifices.
able to possess me?


The Rakshasa said :—


29. Since you satisfy your duties under
all circumstances, tlerefore, O king of the
Kaikeyas, go back to your palace. Blessed
be you, I leave you.


go. They, O king of the Kaikeyas, who
protect kine and Brahmanas and all their
subjects, have no fear of Rakshasas, what
to speak of sinful persons.


gr. Those kings, who yield to Brah-
manas and whose might depends upon that
of the Brahmanas, and whose subjects are
always hospitable, always succeed in gain-
ing heaven.


Bhishma continued :—


32. You should, therefore, protect the
Brahmanas. Protected by you, they will
age youin return. Their blessings, O
i


ing, would, forsooth, come upon righteous,


kings.

33. For the -sake of righteousness;
those Brahmanas who do not follow the
duties of their order should be chastised
and separated from their betters.


34. A king, who behaves thus towards
the people of his city and the provinces,
enjoys prosperity here and Hves in heaven
with Indra.


CHAPTER LXXVIIE


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).— Continued.


Yodhisthira said :—


t. “It is said that in seasons of distress }-


a Brahmana may support himself by follow-
ing Kshatriya duties. But can he, how-
ever, at any time, maintain himself by
following the duties of the Vaishyas 2?”


How then have you been


thing in exchange.


‘the Rishis and others.


115


| Bhishma said :—


2. ‘When a Brahmana foses his means
of livelihood and is visited by distress, he
may certainly act like a Vaishya and:
derive his support by agriculture and tend-:
ing cattle, if, of course, he is not capable to
perform Kshatriya duties.’ .


Yudhishthira said :—

3. “If a Brahmana, O foremost of.
Bharata’s race, follows the duties of a
Vaishya, what articles may he sell without
losing his chance of attaining heaven 7”


Bhishma said :—


4—5 ‘A Brahmana must not sell wines, .
salt, sessamum seeds, animals having
manes, bulls, honey, nreat and cooked food,
O Yudhisthira, under any ‘circumstances.
A Bralvoane, by selling these, would go’
to hell. ,


#%A Brahmana, by selling a goat, com~-.
re sin of selling the god of fire;-

by selling a sheep, the sin of selling the god
of water ; by sefling a horse, the sin of-
selling the sun-god; by selling cooked food,.
the sin of selling land; and_ by selling a.
cow, the sin of selling Sacrifices and the.
Soma juice. A Bralmana, therefore, must
not sell these. :


7. The good donot speak highly of the
purchase of uncooked food by giving cooked
food in return. Uncooked food, however,:
may be given for procuring cooked food,’
O Bharata!


8. We will eat this cooked food of you,’
You may cook these raw things (that we.
give in return). In such an agreement
there is 10 sin.


@ Listen, O Yudhishthica, I shall des-
cribe to you the eternal practice, obtaining
from days of yore; of persons conducting
themselves according to approved usages.


'


I give you this. Give me this other
Such an exchange is
righteous. To take things by force, is:
sinfal,


tr. Such is the old practice followed by:
Forsooth, this is


10.


righteous.’


Yudhishthira said :-—


12. “ When, O sire, giving up their res«
pective: duties, all the castes take up atms
against the king, then, of course, the

ower of the king suffers decrease. How

would the king then become the protector
and refuge of the people? Remove this,
doubt of mine, O king, by speaking to
me fully.” ‘


a1@


Bhishma said :-—
_. Ig. “ By gifts, by penances, by saérificés,
by peacefulness, and by self-control, all the
castes led by the Brahmanas showld, on
such occasions, seek their own behoof.

‘15, Those amongst them who are
gifted with Vedic strength, shold rise up
on all sides and like the celestial empower-
ing Indra contribute (by Vedi¢ rites) to
increase the strength of the King.


16. Brahnianas are Said to be the refuge
of the king while his power is gone. A
wise king seeks the inéreasé of his power
by means of the power of the Brahmanas.


_.17. When the king, ,after acquiring
victory, tries to ce-establish peace, all the
castes then follow their respective duties.
48. , When robbers overcoming al
restraints, lay waste the country, all
the orders niay take up ars. By so
doing they commit no sin, O Yudhishthi” &
Yudhishthiira said: ee
. tg. “Ifall the Kshatriyas stand against
thé Brahmanas, who then will protect the
Brahianas and their Vedas? What then
should bé the duty of the Brahmanas and
who will be their shelter ?”

Bhishina said :— _

_10. *By penances; by Brahmacharya,
by weapons, and by (physical) power,
applied with or without the help of deceit,
the Kshatriyas sliould be vanquished.


_ 2%. Ifthe Kshatriya misbehaves him-
self, especially towards Brahmanas, the
Vedas themselves will put them down.
The Kshatriyds liavé ofiginated fromi the


Brahmanas.
, 22. Fire


has originated water; the
Kshatriya, from the Brahriiana; and iron,
from stone. ‘he power of fire, the
Kstiatriya, and iron, are irresistible. But
when these conflict with their sources, their
force becomes neutralised. sata

_ 23. When iron strikes against stone, ot
five fights with water, or the Kshatriya
stands against the Brahmana, then the
Strength of each of those three is destroyed.


‘24—b9, Thiis,; O Wudhishthiza, the
energy and imight of Kshatriyas, however
great and irresistible be, are destroyed
as soon as they dre directed agaiiist thé
Brahmanas.. When. the power - of. the
Brahmanas becorhes mild; when that of the
Kshatriyas is weakened, when all meii ill-
treat the Brahmaias, those strong-minded
persons, who moved by righteous. indig-
ation, then fight, casting off all fear of
death, for protecting the Brahmanas,
inoiality, and their own selves,—ssucceed


MAHABHARATA.


in winning high régions of: bliss fiereatted:
All persons should’ fight for the seke
Brahmanas.

.28. .. Those brave, persons who fight for

Brahmanas, acquire those happy regions in
heaven which are reserved for persons who
have always studied the Vedas with atten.
tion, who have, practised the austerest of
penances, and that have, after fasting, cast’
off their bodies into burning fires.
+ 2g. The Brahmana, by fighting for the
three other castes, does not commit sin.
People say that there is no higher duty
than renouacing life under such citcums-
tances. .

30. T bow to théent and blessed bé they’
who {hus renounce their lives while trying
to punish the énemies of Bralimanas. Let
us attain to that region which is reserved’
for them. Manu hiniself has said that those’
heroes go to the region of Braman.


31, As persons become freed off of alf
their sins by taking the final Bath ina
horse-sacrifice, so those who dié by weapons:
while fighting wicked people, are freed off
of all their sins.

32. Righteousness becomes unrighteous
ness, and unrighteousness becomes right-
eousness, according to place and time.
Such is the power of place and time.

33. The friends of humanity, by per-
forming even acts of cruelty, have attained
to éxalted heaven. Pious Kshatriyas, by
doing even sinful aets, have attained to
blessed eds:


34. The Brahmana, by fighting on these
three otcasions, does not commit sin, v2.,
for protecting himself, for compelling the
other castes to follow their duties, aid for
punishing robbers.’

Yudhisthira said :—

35—-37.. “If when robbers become power-
ful and an intermixture of the orders beging
to take place on account of anarchy, and
Kshatriyas become incapable, some power-
fil person except a Kshatriya seeks to put
dowii tliose robbers for protecting the peo-
ple, indeed, O best of kings, if that power-
ful person happens to be a Brahmana or 4
Vaishya or a Shudra, and if tia succeeds
in protecting the people by fairly. holding
the rod of punishment, is he justified in
doing what he does; or is he tegtrained by
the ordinances from accomplishing that
duty? It seems that others, wheii the
Kshatriyas are so incomptent; should take
up arms.” ~~
Bhishma said :—

38. ‘Be hea Shudra or be he the meni-
ber of any other caste, tte that becomes a

c


SHiANTY PARVA.


faft on a fafiless énrrent, or a rieans of
évossing where no means exist, forsooth,
deserves every fespect.

‘39-40. That person, O king, dépend-
ing upon whoni helpless mén, oppressed and
diadé miserable by robbers, live happily,
Geserves to be adored by afl as ff he were
a near relative. ‘he person, O you of
Kuru’s race; that tenioves the féarcs of
Others, is worthy of every respéct.


-41. What use is there of bulls, that would
hot carry burdens, ‘or of kine that would
not give milk, or of a wife whois barren?
Likewise, what neéd is thete for a King who
is not capable to gratit protection ?

'42—4% ~=As an elephant niadé of Wood,
or a deer made of leather, as a person wWith-
out riches, or one that if a eunuch, or a
field which ig barreti, even so isa Bralsia-
hha who is void of Vedie learning and a
king incapable of giving protection, .Both
of them are like a Cloud that does hot pour
tain.

44. That perso who always protects
the good and checks the wicked; deserves
to become a king aud to,govern the world.’


CHAPTER LXXIX.


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continued.


Yudhisthira said :—

1. “How O gtandfather; sliduld pers
sons, employed as priests in ottr sacrifices,
act? What sort of persons should they
be, O king? ‘Lell die all this; O foretitost
of orators.”


Bhishnia said :—

: 2, ‘It is laid down for those Brahrianas
who dre competent to officiate as priests that
they slould know the Chhandas including
the Sarians, and all the rites laid down in
the Shrutis, and that they should be able ts
perforin all such religious acts as secure the
prosperity of the Bitig. : ;

3. They shoiild be devotedly loyal atid
utter sweet words iri addressing kings.
‘They should also be frieridly totvards one
another, and regard all impartially.


4—6. They should be short of cruelty,
and truthful. They sheild never lay out
Money on interest and. shold always be
simple and sincére. One that is peaceful
in temper, shorn of vanity, niodest, chari-
table, self-controlled, and contentéd, in-
telligent, truthful, observant of vows, and”
harmless to all creatures, without lust, and


Ity


mialice, and endued with the three other ex-
cetlént qualifies, devoid’ of envy and blessed
with knowledge, is worthy of the seat of
Brahmaii himself. Persons possessing sich
qualitiés, O sire, are the best of priests and
deserve évery respect.’

Yudhishthira said :—

q. ‘There are Vedic texts relating to
the gift of Dakshina inv sacrifices, Thére
is“ ho ordinance, however; which says that
So muth Should bé giver, ;


8. This ordinance (about the gilf of
Dakshina} is not the outcome of niotives
connected with the distribution of wealth,
The conimiartd of the orditiance, when one
canhot give according to the prescription;
is tersible. ‘That commandment has
altogethet meglettéd the capacity of the
sacrificer.. :

g. It occurs in the Vedas that a pétgon
should, with devotion, célebfaté a. sacrifice,
But what can devotion do when the sacrifice


‘is sullied by false substitutes?”


Bhishuia said :—


10. ‘No man gains blessednéss or merit


by disregarding the Vedas or by deceit


or falsehood. Nevet thitk that it is others
wise, :

11, Dakshina is one of the limbs of
sacrifice aind cotiduces to the ‘nourishment
of the Vedas. A Sacrifice without Dak-
shina caty never bring on satvation, .


12, The efficacy, however, of a single
Putnapatra is tantamount to that of any
Dakshina however rich. Therefore, O sire,
every one belonging (6 the three castes
should celebrate sactifices.


13. The Vedas have settled that Soma
is the kifig. of the Brahtanas. Yet they
wish to sell it for the sake of celebrating
sacrifices, though they never wish to sell it
for acquiring a livelihood. be


14. Pious Rishi$ have declared, attord-
ing to the dittatés of morality, that a
sacrifice performed with the income of the
sale of Sonia serves to exterid satrifices;


15. These three, vig., a person, a sacris
fice, and Soma, must have good character.
A person of a bad character neither enjoy
this tier the other world, - :


16. We have heard this Sriiti that the
sacrifice which high-sottled Brahtianas
petform by wealth acquired by excessive
physical labour; does not yield great merit.


17. - There is an injunction in the Vedas
that penances are higher than sacrifices, I
shall now describe penances to you, O


learned prince; listen to mes


118


18, Abstention from injury, truthfulness
of speech, benevolence, mercy,—these are
considered as penances by the wise atid not
the emaciation of the body.


19. Disregard of the Vedas, disebe-
‘dience to the scriptural injunctions and
violation of all healthy restraints, bring on
self-destruction.


20. Listen, O son of Pritha, to what has
been laid down by those who pour ten liba-
tions upon the fire at ten times of the
day.—-For them who perform the sacrifice
of. penance, the Yoga they strive to bring
about with Brahma is their ladle; the
heart is their clarified butter; and high
knowledge is their Pavitra (a couple of
Kusha blades for pouring clarified butter).


2%, All sorts of crookedness mean death.
and all sorts of sincerity. are called
Brahma. This is the subject of know-
ledge. The verses of philosophers cannot
affect this.’


CHAPTER LXXX.


RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—~


1. ‘Even the most insignificant act, O
grandfather, cannot be accomplished by any
man without cooperation. What then need
be said of the king (who has to govern a
kingdom) ? ;

2. How should the king’s minister act
and behave? Upon whom should the king
dere alae and upon whom he should
not


Bhishma said :—

3. ‘Kings, O monarch, have four sorts of
friends. They are—one who has the same
object, one who is devoted, one who is
related by birth, and one who has been
won over (by gifts and kindness).


4. Arighteous person, who would serve
one and not both sides, is the fifth of
the King’s friends. Such a person follow.
that side on which righteousness is, and
accordingly acts righteously.

' §. Regarding such a person, the king
should. never disclose such purposes of
his as. would not find his sympathy.
Kings who wish to attain success are com-
pelled to adopt both kinds of roads, fair
and unfair. :

6. Of-the, four kinds of friends, the
second and the third ‘are superior, while the


MAHABUARATA,.


first and the fourth should afways be looked
upon with suspicion, Regarding those acts,
however, which the king should do - persue
ally, he should always luok with suspicion
on all the four.


The king should never act carelessly
in watching his friends. A king who. is
careless is always overpowered by others.


8. Awicked man puts on the appearance
of honesty, and he who is honest becomes:
othewise. An enemy. may become a friend,
and a friend may become an enemy..


g. A man cannot always be of the same
mind, Who is there that would trust him
implicitly 2 All the pricipal works, there-
fore, a king. should perform in his own
presence,


to. An absolute confidence (in his minis-

ters) destroys both morality and profit. A

efile of confidence again ia all worse is than
leath,


t1. Over-cotifidence is premature death,
‘One incurs danger by over-confidence.
| one trusts anether completely, he is said
to live by the favour of the trusted person.


12. Therefore every one should be trust -
,ed as also mistrusted. “Ihis rule of policy,
;}O sire, should always be kept in view.


:° 43. One should always mistrust that
‘person who would upon one’s death, obtain
one’s wealth. ‘The wise describe such a
person to-be one’s enemy.


14. A person whose joy knows no limit
upon Seeing the advancement of the king
and who feels pain upon seeing the king’s.
decay, is one of the best friends of the.king.


tg§—16. Hewho would meet with ruin
by your fall, should be trusted by you come
pletely even as you should trust your father,
“You should, to the best of your power, ad-
vance hint as you secure advancement for
yourself, :

17, One wlio, in even your religious
rites, tries to save you frem harm, would:
try to save you from harm in every other
transaction. Such aone should be known:
as your best friend. ‘They, on the: other:
hand, who wish one ‘harm are one’s:
enemies, '

18. That friend is like-your own self who.
is filled with fear when calamity befalls you.
and with joy: when prosperity. smiles. on.
you,


19, _ A person endued with beauty, fair
complexion, sweet voice, liberality, high
mindedness, and good birth, cannot be such
a friend. :


| 20-22. That person who is endued with
intelligence and: memory, who is smart in:


SHANTI PARVA.:


rBhsacting business, who is ‘by nature
Bhorn of cruelty, who is never wrathful,
and who whether honored or negiected
is never dissatisfied, be he your ptiest or
preceptor or trusted friend, iienld always
veceive your adoration if he accepts the
office of your counseller and fives in your
-palace.


23. You may communicate to such a
person your most sectet counsels and
the true state of all your affairs, spiritual or
temporal. You may trust him as you.may
‘your own father.


24.. One person should be appointed to
one work, aud not two or three. These
may not tolerate each other. It is always
seen that several persons, if engaged in
one and the same work, disagree with one
another.


25—26. That person who acquires fame,
who observes all restraints, who is never
jealous of able and competent persons, who
never does any evil act, who never renoun-
ces righteousness from lust or feat or
‘covetousness or wrath, who is smart in
transacting business, and who always
speaks wise and weighty words, should be
your foremost of ministers. ,


27—28. Weil-behaved persons and born
in good families, who are liberal and never
given to- brag, who are brave and respect-
able, and learned and full of resources,
should be appointed as ministers for
supervising all your affairs. Respected by
you and gratified with riches, they would
act for your well-being and be of great
help to you, :

29. Appointed to offices of emolument
and of other important matters, they will
‘always secure great prosperity.


30. Actuated by a feeling of healthy
tivalry, they satisfy all duties regarding


profit, consulting with one another when:


necessary,


31. You should fear your kinsmen as
you should death itself.
‘never bear a kinsman’s prosperity even as a


feudatory chief cannot bear to see the-


“prosperity of his lord,


32. None but a kinsman feels joy at the


destruction of a kinsman endued with sin--
‘cerity, mildneéss, tiberality, modesty and:


‘truthfulness.


33. They, again, who have no kinsmen,
‘can not be happy. No man is more -con-
temptible than he who has no kinsman.
A person who has no kinsman is easily
“overthrown by enemies. ;


34. Kinsmen are the refuge of one who


is attacked by others, for kinsmen can never:


A kinsman can:


Ang


bear to see'a kinsman assailed by other
people.

33. ‘When a kinsinan is persecuted by
even his friends, every kinsman of his cone
siders the injury to be inflicted upon
himself. In kinsmen, therefore, there are
both merits and shortcomings. A person
having-no kinsmen never shows favors to
any one nor humbles himself to any one.
In’ kinsmen, therefore, both merit and
demerit are seen.


37- One should, for this reason, always
honor and adore his kinsmen in words and
deeds, and do what pleases them with-
out injuring them at any time.


38. Though one may mistrust them af
heart, he should behave towards them as if
he trusted them completely. Thinking 0}
their nature, it seems that they have neither
demerits nor merits.


39- A person who carefully conducts
himself in this way finds his very enemies
shorn of. hostility and converted into
friends. ;


40, One who always conducts himself in
this way with his kinsmen and relatives and
treats thus his friends and enemies, suc
ceeds in acquiring everlasting fame.’


—um


CHAPTER LXXX1.


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA),.—Continued,


Yudhisthira said :—


1. “If one cannot thus win over one’s
kinsmen and relatives, the intending friends
become foes. How should one, then,
behave so that the hearts of both friends
and enemies may be won ?”’


Bhishma said :—

2. ‘Regarding it is cited the old history
of a discourse between Vasudeva and the
divine saint Narada.


3. Once on a time Vasudeva said,
Neither an illiterate and foolish friend,
nor a learned friend of fickle mind,
deserves, O Narada, to know one’s secret
counsels, :

4. ‘Relying on -your friendship for me,
I shall say something to you, O sage! O
you'who: can ‘go to heaven at your plea-
sure, one should speak to another if
he is convinced of the intelligence of that
other.

5: I never behave with slavish tendency
towards my kinsmen by flattering speeches
about their prosperity, 1 give them haif


:


120


of what 1 ‘tiave, and forgive their evil
wards.

6. Asafire-stick is grinded by a person
who seeks to get fire, so my heart is
grinded by my kinsmen with theie cruel
words. Indeed, © celestial Rishi, those
cruel words cansume my heart every day.


7. Power lives in Sankarshana; -mild-

ness in Gida; and as regards Pradyumna,
he.excels eveh myself in beauty. Still d am
helpless, O Narada !
' $. Many others among the Andhakas
and the Vrishnis are endued with great
prosperity, might, daciag courage and
constant perseverance, x


9 He, with whom they do not side, meets
with destruction. He, on the other hand,
with whom. they side, acquices everything.
Dissuaded by both Ahuka and Akrura, I
do not side either of them.


to. What.can be more distressing far a
person jthan to have both Ahaka and
Akrura on hig side? What, again, is more
painful for one than mat to have both of
them on his side? ;


HH.
gambling against each other, praying for
wictory to both. , 3

12. famthus,O Narada, affticted b
both, You should tell me that which
is for the behaof of both myself and my
ikinsmen,


Narada said :—

13. Calamities, O Krishna, are ‘of two

Sorts, vis., external and internal. They
are beyotten, O you of Nrishni’s «race,
by one’s awn acts or by the acts of
others.
‘ a4. The calamity that has now over-
faken you is an jnternal one and is
begotten of your own acts. Valadeva and
others, of the Bhoja race, are partisans of
Akryra, and have-sided him either for
wealth, or for mere caprice, or actuated by
words or by hatred. As for you, you
have given away wealth obtained by you
tto another.

16, hough having many friends, you
have, however, by your own act, invited
calamity over your head. You cannot
take back that wealth, even as one cannot


swallow again the food that he has vomited |


himself.
17. The kingdom cannot be taken back
_from Babhru and Ugrasena. You, O
Krishna, cannot, in particular, take it
back from fear of creating intestine feuds.
18, Supposing the attempt succeeds, it
gwill do so after much trouble and after the


1 am Tike the mother of two brothers -


MAHABHARATA.


achievment ofthe most difficult works, A
great slaughter and a great loss of wealth
will take place, pethaps, even total des-
truction. :

19. Use then a weapon which jis not
awmade of steel, which is very mild and vee
apable of pieraing all hearts. Sharpening
that weapon again and again rectify the
tongues of your kinsmen! |


Vasudeva said :—

20. What is that weapon, © sage, which
is not made of steel, which is mild, which
still cuts all hearts, aad which 1 must use


for correcting the tongues of my kinsmen ?


Narada said :—

21. ‘The giving of food to the best of
your ability, forgiveness, sincerity, mild-
ness, and honor to whom honor is due,—
these make a weapon which is not made of
steel.


- 22. ‘With soft words alone turn away the
anger of kinsmen about to utter.cruel words,
and please their hearts and minds and
slanderous words,


23. Nonewhois not a great man with
purified soul and endued with accomplish-
ments and having friends can bear a heavy
burden. Take up this great weight and _
hear it on your shoulders,


24. Ad oxen.can carry heavy loads on a
level road. ‘The stronger ones only among
them can carry such loads on a difficult
road.


25. Disunion will create destruction
which will befall all the Bhojas and the
Vrishnis{ You, O Keshava, are the fore-
mast of them. Do you act in sucha way
that the Bhojas and the Veishnis may not
meet with destruction.


26. Nothing but intelligence and for-
giveness, control of the senses, and libera-
lity, reside in a person of wisdom.


27. The advancement of one’s own
race is always praiseworthy and glorious
and conducive to long life. Do you, 9
Krishna, act in such a way that destruction
may nat overtake your kinsmen.


28. There is nothing about policy and
the art of war, Q lord, which you do nat
kuow?4


29. The WYadavas, the Kukuras, the
Bhojas, the Andhakas, and the Vrishni,
all depend on you even as all the worlds and
all the regents of their quarters, O mighty-
armed one! The Rishis, O Madhava,
always pray for your advancement.


‘SHANTI PARVA,


3a. Vou are the lord of all creatures.
You know the past, the present, and the
Future. You are the foremost of all the
Yadavas, Depending on you, they expect
to live happily,


mrs a
CHAPTER LXXXII,


{RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continueds


Bhishma said:—

t. ‘This that I have told you is the
first means, Listen now, O Bharata, to
the second one. ‘hat man who seeks the
advancement of the king should always be
protected by him,


2—-3. Ifa person, O Vudhishthira, who
is paid or not, comes to you for informing
you of the damage done to your treasury
when its contents are being embezzled by a
minister, you should grant him an audience
in private and protect him also from the
minister. The ministers guilty of embezzle-
ment seek, O Bharata, to kill such infor-
mants.


4. They who plunder the royal treasury
combine together for opposing the person
who tries to protectit, and if the latter be
left unprotected, he is sure to be destroyed,


5. Regarding it an old story also is cited
of what the sage Kalakavrikshiya had said
to the king of Koshala. :


6. We have heard that once ona time
the gage Kalakavrikshiya came to Kshe-
madarshin, who had ascended the throne of
Koshala.


7. Desirous of examining the conduct of
all the officers of Kshemadarshin, ‘the sage,
with a crow kept within a cage in his hand,
travelled again and again through every
part of that king’s' dominions.


8 And he ,spoke to all the men and
said,—Study ye the practice of crows!
The crows tell me the present, the past,
and the future!


g. Proclaimiag this in the kingdom, the
sage, accompaniéd by a large number of
men, began to mark the misdeeds of all
the state officers.


10--13. Having ascertained all the affairs
of the.state, and having learnt that ali
the officers appointed by the king were
guilty of misdeeds, the sage, with his
crow, came to see the king. Of rigid vows,
he said to the king,—I know everything.
Coming to the king, he said to his minister
holding the insignia of his office that jhe


16


tay


had been informed by his crow that the
minister had done such a crime in such a
place, and that such and such persons
know that he had robbed the royal treasury !
My crow tells me this. Admit or prove the
faiselrood of the charge speedily.


14. The sage then mentioned the names
of other officers who had likewise been
guilty of embezzlement, adding,—My crow
never says anything false!


1s. Thus accused and injured by the
sage, all the officers of the king, O you of
Kuru’s race, in a body pierced his crow,
while the sage slept at night,

16—-17. Seeing his crow pierced with a”
shaft within the cage, the twice-born Rishi
going to Kshemadarshin in the morning
said to him,—O king, I seek your help.
You are all powerful and you are the lord
of the fives and riches of all! If you
permit me I can then say what is for your
well-being. Sorry for you whom I regard as
a friend, I have come to you, impelled by
my devotion and ready to serve you with
my whole heart. ;


18. You are being robbed of your wealth,
I have come to you for disclosing it with~
out showing any mercy for the robbers,
Like a driver that urges a good horse, I
have come here for awakening you whom
I consider a friend, ;


19. A friend who knows his own interests
and seeks his own prosperity and advance~
ment, should forgive a friend that intcuder
himself forcibly, actuated by devotion and
anger, for doing what is beneficial, ;

20, The king replied to him, saying,
Why should 1 not hear anything which you
will say, since I am not blind to what is for
my good ?

21. 1 grant you permission, O twice~
born one! Tell me what you tike. I shalf
certainly obsy your instructions, OQ
Brahmana !


The sage said :— :

22. Ascertaining the merits and demerits
of your servants, as also the dangers which
you may meet with at-their hands, 1] have
come to you, actuated by my devotion, for
informing you of everything.


23. Theancient preceptors have declared
what the curses are, O king, of those that
serve others, The lot of those that serve
the king is very miserable and wretched.


24. He who has any connection with
kings is said to have connection with snakes
of deadly venom, Kings have many
friends as also many enemies.


25. Those who serve kings have to fear


[122


all of them, Every moment,- again, they
entertain fear from the king himself, O
monarch,


26. A person serving the king cannot
escape the charge of carelessness in doing
the king’s work. Indeed, a servant who
d:sires to acquire prosperity should never
show carelessness in the discharge of hig
duties.

27. His carelessness may create the
king’s anger, and such anger may bring
about his destruction. Carefully learning
how to behave himself, one should sit before
the king as he should in the presence of a
burning fire.


28. Prepared to give up his life itself at
every moment, one should serve the king
attentively, for the king is all powerful and
lord of the lives and the riches of all, and,
therefore, like to a snake of deadly venom.


29. He should always fear to utter evit
words before the king, of to sit cheerlessly
or in disrespectful postures, or to walk dis-
dainfully, or to show insolent gestures and
disrespectful motions of the limbs.


30. If the king becomes pleased he can
shower prosperity like a god. If he be-
comes angry he can consume to the very
roots like a burning fire.


31. This, O king, was said by Yama.
Its truth is seen in the wordly affairs. 1
shall now do what would increase your
prosperity.

32.
friends like you the help of their intelli-
gence in times of danger, This crow of
mine, O king, has been killed for doing
your business,


33. I cannot, however, blame you for
this. You are not loved by those who have
killed this bird. Ascertain who are your
friends and who, your foes. Do everything
yourself without handing over your intelli-
gence to others,


34. Your establishment consists of all
miscreants. They do not seek the well-
being of your subjects. I have incurred
their hostility. ;


35. Making a conspiration with those
servants who can always approach you, they
covet the kingdom after destroying you.
‘Their plans, however, have not succeeded
owing to unforeseen circumstances.


36—37.. Through fear of those men, O
king, | shall leave this kingdom for some
other hermitage. I have no worldly desire,
yet those deceitful persons lave shot this
arrow at my crow, and have, O lord, sent
he bird to Yama’s abode. I have seen


Friends like ourselves can give to


MAHABHARATA.


this, O king, with eyes whose vision hag
been improved by ascetic penances.


38. With the help of this single crow |
have crossed this kingdom of yours that
is like a river consisting of alligators, shark,
crocodiles and whales.


39. Indeed, with the help of that bird, !
have passed through your dominions like a
Himalayan valley, impenetrable and inac-
cessible for these trunks of (fallen) trees and
scattered rocks and thorny shrubs and sions
and tigers and other beasts of prey.


40. The learned hold that a region in-
accessible for darkness can be passed
through with the help of a light, aud an un-
fordable river can be crossed by means of a
boat. No means, however, exist for pene-
trating through the labyrinth of royal
affairs.

4%. Your kingdom is like an inaccessible
forest covered with darkness. You scannot
trust it. How then can |,


42. Good and evil are seen here in the
same light. ‘To live here is not, therefore,
safe. Here a righteous person meets with
death, while an unrighteous man incurs no
danger,


43. For the sake of justice, a person oJ
unrighteeus deeds should be killed but
never one who is righteous in his deeds. It
is not proper, therefore, for one to live in
this kingdom long. A sensible man should
leave this country soon,


44. There is a river, O king, of the
name of Sita. Boats sink init. This your
kingdom is like that river. An all-des-
tructive net appears to have been cast
around it.


45. You are like the fall which awaits
the collectors of honey, or like attractive
food containing poison. Your nature now
resembles that of dishonest men and not
that of the good. You are like a pit, O
king, abounding with snakes of deadly
venom.


46. You resemble, O king, a river full of
sweet water but difficult of access, with
steep banks overgrown with Kariras and
thorny canes.


47- Youare like a swan in the midst . of
dogs, vultures, and jackals.


48. Parasites, supported by a huge tree,
grow luxuriously, and at last covering the
tree itself overshadow it entirely.


49- A forest fire sets in, and catching
those grasses first, consumes the tree with
them. Thy ministers, O king, resemble
those parasites of which I speak, Do you
check and correct them,


e


SHANTE PARVA.


‘sa. They have been nourished by you,
But making conspiracy against you, they
are destroying your prosperity.


St. Concealing the faults of your ser-
vants, I am living in your palace in
constant dread of danger, even like a
person living in a room with a snake within
it or like the lover of a hero’s wife. My
object is to ascertain the behaviour of the
king who lives with me.


52. I wish to ascertain whether the king
has his passions under restraint, whether
his servants obey him, whether he is loved
by them, and whether he loves his subjects.
For the object of ascertaining all these
points, O best of kings, I have come to you.


53. Like food to a hungry person, you
have become dear to me, .I dislike your
ministers, however, as a person, whose
thirst has been satisfied, dislikes drink.


54. They have found fault with me,
because I seek your well-being. I have no
doubt that there is no other cause for their
hostility to me. hd


55- I do not cherish any hostility
towards them. I am engaged in only
ascertaining their faults. As one shouid
fear a wounded snake, every one should
fear a wicked foe.


The king said :— :
~ 56. Reside in my abode, O Brah-
mana. I shall always treat you with
respect and honor, and always adore you,

57. They that will dislike you shall not
live with me. Do you then yourself award
what should be their proper sentence,


58. Do yau see, O holy one, then
that the rod of punishment is wielded
properly and that everything is done


well in my Bingdom. Reflecting upon
everything, do you guide me in such a way
that I may acquire prosperity ! ;


The sage said :—

59. Closing your eyes first of all to this
oftence of theirs, do you weaken them one
by one. Prove their faults then and punish
them one after another. ;


69. When many persons become guilty
of the same offence, they can, by acting in
‘concert, soften the very points of the thorns.
Lest your ministers (being suspected, act
agajnst you and) disclose your secret coun
sels, [ advise you to proceed cautiously.


. 64. As regards ourselves, we are Brah-
manas, by nature merciful and reluctant to
give pain to any one. We desire your, as
well as of others, well-being, even as we
wish the good of ourselves, :


123

62. I speak of myself, O king! Tam

your friend, 1 am known as the sage Kata-
kavrikshiya.


63—64. 1 always follow truth, Your
father knew me as his friend. When dis-
tress overtook this kingdom during the
reign of your father, O king, I performed
many penances (for driving it off), leaving
off every other business. Out of my affection
for you I say this to you so that you may
hot again commit the fault.


65. You have obtained a kingdom with- -
out any hitch. Think of éverything connec.
ted with its happiness and misery. You
have ministers in your kingdom, But why,
O king, should you be guilty of care-
lessnes ?


66. After this, the king of Keshala took
a minister from the Kshatriya order, and
appointed that foremost of Brahmanas (wis.,
the sage Kalakavrikshiya), as his priest.


67. After these changes had been made,
the king of Koshala brought the whole Earth
under subjection and acquired great fame.
The sage Kalakavrikshiya adored the gods,
in many grand sacrifices performed for the
king. = z

68. Having listened to his wholesome
advice, the king of Koshala conquered the
whole Earth and acted in every: way as the
sage directed.’


——


CHAPTER LXXXIUlE.


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continued.


Yudhishthira said:—

1. '‘What should be the gratification, O
grandfather, of the law-makers, the minis-~
ters of war, the courtiers, the commanders,
and the counsellors of a king 1”


Bhishma said :—

2. ‘Such persons as are endued with
modesty, self-control, truth, sincerity, and
courage to say the proper thing, should be
your law-makers. ; “


3. They who are always devoted to you
who are gifted with great courage, who are
of the twice-born caste, highly. learned,.
well pleased with you, and persevering in
acts, should, O son of Kunti, be sought by
you for becoming your ministers ‘of war
at all seasons of distress, O Bharata!


4. One whois born ina high family,
who treated honorably by you, always tries


-} his best on your behalf, and who will never


124


forsake you in happiness or misery, illness
or death, should: be kept by you as a
courtier. : ae


5- Those who are of high descent, who
are born iq yout kingdom, who have wis-
dom, beauty, great learning, and dignity
of conduct, and who are, besides, devoted
to you, should be employed as officers of
your army, " ‘


6. Persons of low birth, who are covetous,

cruel and shamelss, woutd seek you, O sire,
_as long asthey are paid.

7. Those who are of good-birth and good
behaviour, who éan interpret all signs and
gestures, who are shorn of cruelty, who
know the requirements of place and time,
who always seék the well-being of their
master in all works, should be appointed as
ministers by the king in all his affairs. ‘ '


8. Those whd have been won over with,
gifts of wealth, hongrs, respectful recep-
tions, and means of giving happiness, and
who on that account may ‘be known by you
as persons inclined to do you good in all
your affairs, should always bé made sharers

_ of your happiness,


9g. They who are unchangeable in con-
duct, endued with learning and good
hebaviour, observant of excellent vows,
large-hearted, and truthful in speech, will
always attend to your affairs and will never
forsake you.


10. They, on the other hand, who are
disrespectable, who do not follow healthy
control, who are wicked, and who have
fallen away from good practices, should
always be compelled by you to observe all
healthy restraints,


tr. When the question arises as to
which of two sides should be adopted, you
should not abandon the many for adopting
the side of one. When, however, that one
person excels the many by virtue of his
possessing many accomplishments, then
you should for that one, forsake the
many.

12. The marks of superiority, are pro-
wess, devotion to works that bring fame,
and observance of healthy restraints.


13-14. He, again, who honors all able.


persons that never cherishes feelings of
rivalry with meritorious persons, who never
forsakes righteousness from lust or fear or,
anger or covetousness, who is humble, who.
is truthful and forgiving, who has his mind
under control, who has a Sense of dignity,
and who has been tried in every situation,
should be appointed by you as your coun-
seller. yet


“15. High birth, purity of blood, forgive.


ness, Gleverness, and purity of mind, bravery


MAHABHARATA,


gratefulness, and truthfulness, are, O sen
of Pritha, characteristic of superiority and
goodness. ; 2

16. A wiseman who condccts himself
thus, succeeds in freeing his very enemies
of their hostility and converting them into
friends,

17. A king who has his mind under
control, who is endued with wisdom, and
who seeks prosperity, should carefully


‘examine the merits and demerits of his


ministers.


18—ig. A king who seeks prosperity and
wishes to outdo his contemporaries, should
have for ministers trustworthy persons, of
high descent, born in his own kingdom,
incapable of being corrupted, unstained by
adultery and similar vices, well proved,
belonging to good families, possessed of
learning,’ sprung from ancestors who
held similar offices, and adorned with
humility. .

20—-21, °The king should appoint five
such persons to superintend his affairs, who
are intelligent, shorn of pride, possessed of.
a good disposition, energy, patience, for,
giveness, purity, loyalty, firmness, and.
courage, whose merits and faults have been
well proved, who are aged, who are,
capable of bearing burden. and who are,
free from deceit.


22—23. Men who are wise in speech,
whe are endued with heroism, who are full
of resources under difficuliies, who are
of high descent, whio are truthful, who can,
read signs, who are shorn of. cruelty, who
know the requirements of place and time,
and who seek the well-being of their
masters, should be appointed by the king
as his ministers in all affairs of the
kingdom, :


24. One who is shorn of energy and
who, has been forsaken by friends can.
never ‘work with perseverance. Such a
man if, appointed, fails in almost every
work, :

25. A minister possessing little learning,
even if he be highly born and attentive to
virtue, profit, and pleasure, cannot choose
proper courses of action.


26. Likewise, a person of low birth, even
if endued with, great learning, . always
makes mistakes, like a blind man without a
guide, in all acts requiring cleverness and
foresight, : :

27. A person, again, who is of unsettled
purposes, even if endued with intelli-
gence and Iearning, and even if con-
versant with means, cannot long act with
success. : are


28, A wicked man possessed of no


SHANTI


learning may begin a work but he fails ta |,


determine what the results will be of his
work,


zg. A king should never trust a minister
who is not devoted to him. Hé should,
therefore, never give out his counsels to a
minister who is not devoted to him.


_ 30. Suth a wicked minister, in conjunc-
tion with the other ministers of the king,
may, ruin his lord, like fire consuming


a tee by entering into, it through the |


holes in its body with the help. of the
wind.


31. Being angry, a master may deprive
a servant of his offtce or reprove him, from
rage, in harsh words, and restore him to
power again. :


32. None save a servant devoted to the
master can stand and overlook such treat-
ment. Ministers also become. sometimes
highly offended with their masters,


33. That one, amongst them, who sub-
dues his anger. from desire of doing good to
his master,—that person who partakes. in
the king’s happiness, and misfortane,—
anouie be consulted by. the-king in, all his
affairs.


34. An wily person, even if he be
devoted to his master and possessed of
wisdom and adorned with numerous ac-
complishments, should. never be consulted
by the king. :

35. One who is allied with enemies. and
who does not.care for the interests of the
king’s subjects, should be regarded as an
enemys The, king should never consult
nim.

36. One who is not learned, who is not
pure, who is proud, who seeks the king’s
enemies, who is given to brag, who is
unfriendly, wrathful, and covetgus, should
not be consulted by the king.


37- One who is a stranger, even if he be
devoted to the king and possessed of great
learning, may be honored by the king
and pleased with majntenance, but the
king should. never consult him in his
affairs.


38. A person whose father was unjustly
exiled by coyal order should not be con-
sulted by the king, even if the king may
have afterwards conferred honours upon
him and given him the means of suste-
nance.

39. A. well-wisher whose property was
once confiscated for a slight offence, even
if he be endued with all accomplish-
ments, should not still be consulted by the
king, © ; Ze ;


PARVA. 128


40,. A person endued with wisdom,
| intelligence, and learning, who is bora
within the kingdom, who is pure and
righteous in all his works, should be con-
sulted by the king.


41. One who is possessed of knowledge
and wisdom, who knows the nature of
I friends and foes, who is a friend of
, the king like his second self, should be
; consulted. :


42. QOnéwho is truthful .in speech
and, modest and mild, and who is a
hereditary servant of (he king, should be
consulted, -

43. One who is contented: and honored,
who is truthful and dignified, who hates .
wickedness and wicked men, who is conver~
sant with policy. and the. requirements of
time, and who is courageous, should be:
consulted by the king, |

44. One who is capable to win over alf
men by conciliation should be consulted, O'
monarch, by the king, who wishes to rule
according to. the. dictates of. the science of,
punishment,


45. Onewhom the. inhabitants: of both:
the capital and the provinces trust for his.
righteous conduct, who is competent ta
fight and conversant with the rules of
policy, should be consulted by the king.


46. Therefore, men endued: with suclr
accomplishments, men conversant with the.
nature. of all and. desirous of achieving high.
acts, should. be honored: by the king and:
made his ministers.. Their numbes alsa
should not be less.than three.


47. Ministers should be employed in;
noticing. the shortcomings.of their masters,
of themselves, of the. subjects, and. of the;
foes of their masters. ._ The. kingdom depends.
upon the counsels of policy which the:
Mninistess give, and its growth originates:
from the same source.


48. Ministers should act in such a way
that the enemies of their master may not be
able te detect his loopholes. On the other
hand, when theie shortcomings are seen,
.they should then be assailed. Like the
tortoise protecting its limbs by withdrawing
them within. its shell, ministers should
keep close their own counsels, They
should, even thus, conceal their own short-
comings.


49. Those ministers of. a. kingdom, who


-| succeed in keeping their counse)s.close, are


said to be wise. Counsels are the armour
of a king, and the limbs of- his subjects and:
‘officers. .


so. A kingdom depends upon spies and
sectet agents, and its strength lies in


126


counsels of policy. If masters and minis-
ters follow each other for getting support
from each other, controlling pride and
anger, and vanity and envy, they may then
both become happy. ;


51. A king should also consult such
ministers as are free from the five kinds of
deceit. .


§2—53. Ascertaining well, first of all, the
different opinions of the three whom he has
consulted, the king should, for subsequent
settlement, go to his preceptor for intorm-
ing him of those opinions and his own.
His preceptor should be a Brahmana well
read in all matters of virtue, profit and
pleasure. Going, for such subsequent

_ deliberation, to him, the king should, with a
calm mind, ask his opinion. When a deci-


sion is got at after due deliberation with.


him, the king should then, without attach-
ment, carry it out into practice.


54. Those who know the science of
consultation hold that kings should always
hold consultations in this way. Having
settled plans in this way, they should then
carry them into execution, for then they will
be able to win over all the subjects,


55- There should be no dwarfs, no
hump-backed persons, no lean tan, no
lame or blind man, no idiot, no woman,
and no eunuch, at the spot where the king
holds his consultations. Nothing should
move there, before or behind, above or be-
low,,or in opposite directions.


56. Getting up ona boat, or going to
an open space shorn of grass and grassy
bushes and whence the surrounding land
may be distinctly seen, the king should
hold consultations at the proper time,
avoiding shortcomings of speech and ges-
tures,


CHAPTER LXXXIV.


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continued.


Bhishma said :—

1. ‘Regarding it, O Yudhisthira, the
old account of a conversation between Vri-
haspati and Shakra is cited,


Shakra said :—


2.° What is that one act, O twice-born
one, by finishing which with care, a person
may be respected by all creatures and be-
come famous,


MAHABHARATA.


Vrihaspati said :—

3. Sweetness of speech, O Shakra, is
the one thing by practising which a
person is esteemed by all and becomes
famous.


4. This is the one thing, O Shakra,
which yields happiness to all. By practis-
ing it, one may always secure the love of
all creatures.


5. The person who does not speak a
word and whose face is alwavs marked with
frowns is hated of all. Want of sweet
speeches makes him so.


6. That person who, on seeing others,
speaks to them first with smiles, succeeds
in winning over every one.


7. Even gifts, if not made with sweet
speeches, do not please the recipients,
like rice without curry.


8. If even the wealth of men, O Shakra,
be .snatched away with sweet speeches,
such sweetness of conduct can even propi-
tiatethe robbed. |


9. A ting, therefore, who is desirous of
even inflicting punishment, should use sweet
words. Sweetness of speech never fails,
while at the same time it never pains any
heart.


to. A person of good deeds and good,
pleasant and sweet speeches, has no peer,


Bhishma continued :—


11. Thus addressed by his priest, Shakra
began to follow those instructions. Do
you also, O son of Kunti, practise this
virtue.’


CHAPTER LXXXV.


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continued.


| Yudhishthira said :—


1. ‘QO foremost of kings, what is that
method by which a king governing his
subjects may, thereby, acquire great
blessedness and eternal fame?” cat


Bhishma said :—


2. ‘A king of pure soul and devoted to
the duty of protecting his subjects acquires
merit and fame, both here and hereafter,
by acting righteously.’


Yudhishthira said :—
3. ‘What should attitnde of the king
‘with regard to the treatment of others


SHANTI


Asked by nie, O you of great wisdom,
you should tell me eveiything duly |

.4.. The virtues of meit, which you have
described, cannot, be found to exist in any
single individual.”


Bhishma said :—

5. ‘You are highly intelligent; O Yudhis-
thira! [tis what you say. The person
is very rare who is endued with all those
good qualities.


. 6, In short, sucha one, [who is possessed
of all those virtues] is very difficult to
be seen even upon careful search. tf
shall, however, tell you what kinds: of
ministers should be appointed by yous


9—ti, Four Brahmanas, learned in the
Vedas, endued with a sense of dignity,
beloiging té the Sanataka order, and of
pire conduct, and eight Kshatriyas, all of
whom should have physical strength and
be capable of wielding weapons, and one
and twenty Vaishyas, all of whom should
be rich, and three Shudras, every one of
whom should be humble and of pure con-
duct and devoted to his daily duties, and
one man of the Suta caste, possessing of
the knowledge of the Puranas and the eight
- ptincipal virtues, should be your ministers,
Every ore of them should be fifty years
old, endued with sense of dignity, free from
envy, masters of the Sutris and the Smrttis
humble, impartial, capable of deciding then
and there in the midst of disputants pointing
out varioas courses of action, free from
covetousness, and. from the seven terrible
vices called Vyasanas. he king should
consult with those eight ministers and lead
them.


12. He should then announce in his
kingdom, for the information of his subjects,
the results’ of such consultations. You
should always, following such a conduct,
watch over your people,


13—14.. You should never confiscate
what is deposited with you or appropriate
the thing whose ownership is disputed by
two persons. Such a conduct would spoil
the administration of justice. Ifthe admi-
nistration of justice be thus spoiled will
assail you, and afflict your kingdom as well
and strike your people with fear as little
birds on seeing the hawk. Your kingdom
will then vanish like a beat wrecked on the
séa.

15. Ifaking governs his subjects un-
fairly, fear takes possession of his heart
and the door of heaven is shut against
hin.


16—17. A kingdom, O foremost of men,
depends upon righteousness, That minister,


PARVA: 74
or king’s son,, who acts unfairly, holding
the seat of justice, and those officers who;
having accepted responsible -offices, act
unjustly, dctuated by self-interest, all sik
in hell afong with the king himself.

18. Helpless men, who are oppressed by


the stroag and who consequently bewail
piteously; have the king for their protector.


19 In cases of dispute between twa
parties, the decision should depend upon
the evidence of witnesses. If one of the
patties has no witnesses and is helpless, the
king should give the case his best consi-
deration.


zo, Thekitig should punish the offens
ders according to their offences. ‘The
wealthy should be punished with’ fines
and confiseations; the poor, with loss of
liberty,

21. The wicked should be punished by
the king with eorporal punishments. The
king should maintain all good men with
‘sweet speeches and presents of riches.


22. He who tries to bring about the
death of the king should be punished witty
death to be effected by various means.
One who becomes guilty of arson or theft
or sueh co-habitation with women as may
lead to an intermixture of castes, should be
punished with death, ;


23. A king, O- monarch, who inflicts
punishments duly and according to. the
dictates of the science of punishment, com-
mits no sin by the act. On the other hand,
he acquires eternal merit,


24. That foolish king who inflicts
punishments whimsically, earns infamy here
and sinks into hell hereafter.


23. One should net be punished for the
fault of another. Bestowing sufficient
thought upon the code, a person should
be convicted or acquitted. 7


26. A-king should never kill a messert-
ger under any circumstances. That king
who kills a messenger sinks’ into hell with
all his ministers. ;

27. That king, mindfuf of Kshatriya
practices, who kills a messenger faithfully
speaksing out his message, causes his de-
patted manes to be stained with the sin of
killing a foetus,

28. A messenger should have these
seven acécomplishments, viz., he should
be of trigh descent, of a good family, elo-
quent, clever, sweet-speeched, faithful in
delivering the message with which he is
sent, and possessed of good memory-


zg. The aid-de-camp of the king, wha
guards his persons, should also possess
similar qualities. ‘Fhe officer alsO that .


123


guards his capital or citadel should pos-
sess the sathe qualities.

30. The king's minister should be welt-
read in the scriptures and capable in
directing wars and making treaties. He
should also be intelligent, courageous,
modest, and capable of keeping secrets.


31. He should also be of high birth,
have strength of mind, and be pure in
conduct. If endued with these qualities,
he should be regarded worthy. ‘he com-
mander of the king’s forces should have
also the same qualities.


32. He should also be master of the
various sotts of battle array and with the
uses of engines and weapons. He should
be able to bear exposure to rain, cold, heat,
and. wind, and watchful of the short-
comings of foes.


33. The king, O monarch, should, be
able to_ make his enemies sleep under a
sense of security. He should not, however,
himself trust any one, The reposing of
confidence on even his own son is not good.


34. I have now, O sinless one, described
to you what are the injunctions of the scrips
tures. Not to trust any one has. been re-
garded one of the greatest mysteries of
king-craft??


- es


_CHAPTER LXXXVIL


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continued,


Yudhisthira said:— —-
1. ‘What should be the kind of city
+ within which: the king should himself live ?
Should he select. one already made, oc
should he cause one to be especially made ?
_ Vell me this, O grand-father !” :


Bhishma said :—

2. ‘Itis proper, O Bharata, to enquire
about, how should a king live on a city, and
how should he defend it, O son of Kunti.


.3. Ushall, therefore, describe to you this
subject, referring especially to the defences
of torts, Having heard me, you should
make, the arrangements required and con-
duct yourself attentively as directed.


4. Keeping his eye on the six different
sarts of forts the king should buiid his
cities, containing every kind of riches and
every article of use in profusion.


§- Those six kinds are water-citadels,
earth-citadels, hill-citadels, human-citadels;
mud-citadels, and forest-citadels,


MAHABHARATA.


6~—to, The king, with his ministers atid
the army perfectly loyal to him, should live
in that city which is defended by a fort,
which contaitis profuse rice and weapons,
which is protected with inipenetrable walls
and a trench, which hasasufficient number
of elephants, horses and cars, which is ine.
habited. by learned men ard well-versed in

tlie mechanical atts, where storage of pro-
visions of every sort has been made, whose

inhabitants aré virtuous and clever in

business, strong-bodied and energetic}
and as also its animals, which has many
open squares and rows of shops;
where all persons are righteous, where peace
reigns where no danger exists, which shines
with beauty and resounds with music and
songs, where the houses are all spacious,
where the residents have among them many
brave and rich persons, which echoes with
the chanting of Vedic hymns, where festi-
vities and rejoicings frequently take place,
and where the deities are always adored.


tr. Living there, the king should always
try to fill his treasury, to increase his army,
multiply the number of his friends, and
establish courts of justice. He should
Suppress all abuses ard evils in both his
cities and provinces, -


~ t2, He should collect provisions of all
sorts and replenish his arsenals carefully.
He should also increase his storage of rice


and other grain, and strengthen his
counsels,
13—14. He should, increase his stores


of fuel, iron, chaff, charcoal, timber, horns,
bones, bamboos, marrow, oils, clarified
butter, fat, honey, medicines, flax, resin,
fice, weapons, arrows, leather, catgut,
canes, and strings and cords made of Munja
grass and other plants and creepers,


15. He should multiply the number of
tangs and wells containing large quantities
of water, and should protect all shady
trees, ; ‘


16—17. He should entertain with honor
the teachers of various sciences, Ritwijas,
priésts, powerful bowmen, persons skilled
i architecture, astronomers, astrologers,
physicians, as well as all men endued with
wisdom, intelligence; self-control, cleverness,
courage, learning, high-descent and energy,
and competent to do ail work.


18. The king should honor the righte-
ous and punish the unrigltéous. He should,
acting with resolution, compell the several
castes follow their respective duties.


19. Knowing properly, through spies, .
the external conduct and the state of mind
of the inhabitants of his city and provinces,
he should take tire necessary steps,

€


‘SHANTI


20. The king should himself look after
jis spies and counsels, his treasury, and
the instrument for inflicting punishments.
Everything depends upon these.

21. Having spies for his eyés, the king

should learn all the acts and intentions of
his foes, friends, and neutrals.
_ 22, He should then, éarefully, concert
his own measures, honoring those that are
loyal to him and chastising those that are
hostile.

23. The king should always worship
the gods in eacrifices and make gifts without
giving pain to anybody. He should pro-
tect his subjects, never doing anything that
may stand in the way of righteousness.


24. He should atways support and pro-
tect the helpless, the lordiess, the aged,
and widows.


25. The king should always honor the
ascetics and present them, at proper times,
with clothes, vesséls and food.


26. The king should, with sufficient care,
inform the ascetics of the state of his own
self, of all his measures, and of the king-
dom, arid should always behave humbly in
their presence.


27. Whén he Beholds anchorites of high
descent and great learning that have for-
saken all earthly objects, he should Honor
them with presents of beds and seats
and food.


28. Whatever be thé distress which lie
befalls him, he should confide in an ancho-
tite. The very rdbbers place confidence
Upon persons of that character.


2g. The king should keep his wealth in
charge of an ascetic and- should take wise
coursels from hirh.
ever, always wait upon thent or adore them
at all times,


30. Fron aniong those living in his own
kingdom, he should select one for friendship.
Likewise, he should select another from
among those that live in the kingdom of
his enemy. He should select a third from
among reclises in the forests, and a fourth
from amidng thosé living in his tributary
kingdoms,


gt. Heshould treat theri hospitably and
fionor them and assign them the nieans of
maintenance. He should treat the ascetics
living in the kingdoms of enemies in the
forests in the same way as those that live
in his own kingdom,


32. Engaged in pénances and of rigid
vows, they would, if calamity befalls the
king and if he prays for protection, grant
him what he wants.. >


17


PARVA.


He should not, how-.


129


thé


33. I have ‘now told you briefly
ich the,


characteristics of the city in wh
king should live.’


CHAPTER LXXXVIL.
(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continued.

Yudhishthira said :—
1. ‘How, O king, may a kingdom bé
firmly established, and how should it bé


protected? I wish to know this. Tell me -
all this, O foremost of Bharata’s race.”


Bhishmia said :-— -

‘Listen to me with close attention. {f°
shall tell you how a kingdom niay be con-
solidated, and how also it may be
protected,


3. A headman should be Selected for
each village. Over ten villages (or ten
headmen) one superintendent should be
appoirited. Over two such superintendents :
there should be one officer. Above the
latter should be appointed persons under
each of whom should be a hundred villages; .
and above the last kind of officers, shoul
be appointed men each of whori should
govern a thousand villages. 3


4.° The headman should determine the
characteristics of every person in the village
and all the crimes also that demand
punishment, He should report everything
to the officer in charge of ten villages.
The latter, again, should report the sdme'
to the officer in charge of twénty villages.


5. The latter; again, should report the’
conduct of all the persons within his pro=
vince to the officer in charge of a hundred +
villages.


6. The village heddmian should controf
over all the produce and the properties:
of the village: Every headmiari_ -should
contribute his quota fot miaintdining th
chief of ten villages, and the latter should.
do the samie for maintaining the chief of,
twenty villages. :

7. The lord of a Hundred villages
should receive all honors from the kin
and should have for his support 4 large |
village, Q chiet of the Bharatas; popiious
and rich. .

8. Suth’a village, so given to a lord of
a hundred villages, should be; however,’
within. the jurisdiction of the. chief of a
thousand villages. That high officer, again,
vigz., the lord of a thousand villages, should
have a small town for his support.


{30


“g. He should use for his ownself the
grain dnd gold and other things derivable
from it. He should perform all the duties
relating to its wars and manage all its
other internal affairs.


10. Some pious minister, should care-
fully supervise the administrative affairs
and mutual relations of those officers. In
every town, again, there should be an
officer for looking after all matters relating
to his jurisdiction.

11, Like some dreadful planet moving
above all ‘the -asterisms below, the last
mentioned officer should move and. act
above all the officers subordinate to him.
Such an. officer should learn the conduct of
those under him through his spies.


12. Such high officers: should protect
the people from all persons-having murder-
ous inclination, all wicked men, all robbers,
and all cheats, and all-of whom are regard-
ed to be possessed by the devil.


-13. Looking after sales and the pur-
chases, the state of the roads, the food and
dress, and the stocks and profits, and the
moeeres the king shouid impose taxes on
them. : ;


‘14. Knowing every time the quantity of


the manufactures, the receipts and expences |


of the manufacturers, and the state of the
arts, the king should tevy taxes upon the
artisans regarding the arts they follow.

‘15. The king, O Yudhishthira, may levy
high taxes, but he should never levy such
taxes as would oppress his people.


16. No tax should be levied without
determining the outturn and the amount of
labour necessary for its production. Nobody
would work without sufficient cause.


17. The king should, after proper
thought, impose taxes in such a way that he
and the person who labours to produce the
article. taked may both partake of the out-
turn,


18 The king should not, by his greedi-
ness, destroy his own foundations as well as
those .of others. He should always avoid
those acts for which he may incur the
hatred of his people. Indeed, by aeting
thus he may win popularity.


1g. The subjects hate that king who
becomes notorious for greediness. How can
a king who is hated acquire prosperity ?
S.uch a king can never secure what ia for
h is well-being. :
bg !

20. An intelligent king should. mitk his
Kingdom like caives. HH the calf be permit-


ed to suck, it grows strong, O Bharata,
and carries- heavy loads,


MAHABHARATA.


‘ar. Hf, on the other hand, O Yudhisa
thira, the cow is milked too much, the calf
becomes lean and incapable of making
itself very useful to its owner. Similarly,
if the kingdom be: drained inordinately. the
subiects become helpless and incapable of
acheving any great act.


_ #2. That king who protects his kingdom
himself aud shows leniency to his subjects
and supports himself upon what is easily
got, succeeds in doing much.


23. Tooes not the king then acquire
wealth enough to meet his wants? Tha
entire kingdom becomes then to hint
his treasury, and his treasury becomes his
bed room.


24. Hf the denizens of the cities and the
provinces be poor, the king should, whether
they depend upon him directly or indirect-
ty, show them mercy to the best of bis
power,


25. Punishing aH robbers who infest the
boundaries, the king should protect the
people of his villages and make them
happy. Partaking of the king’s happiness
and misery, the subjects become greatly -
pleased with him.


26. First of all, for making collection, the
king should visit the principal centres of his
kingdom one after another and try to fill his
people with fear. ;


27. He should tell them,—Here, a grea
danger. threatens. us. Our enemies havet
engendered a great calamity for us! f
have every reason, however, to hope that
the danger will pass away, for the enemy,
like a flowering bamboo, will very soon be
destroyed.


28. Many enemies of mine, having rise
up and combined with a large body of


robbers, wish to put our kingdom into
difficulties, for themselves being dese
troyed,


29. To meet this calamity and dreadful
danger, I seek your wealth for concerting
measures for your protection, ‘


30. When the danger passes away, I
will repay you what I now take. Our
foes, however, will not return what they
Mi unopposed) will take from you by

Fce,


31. Onthe other hand, they will ever
kill all your relatives with your very wives!
Forsooth, you wish wealth for the sake of
your children and wives,


32. Tam happy to see your prosperity,
and I solicit you as I would my own -chil-
dren. I shall take from you what you can
easily spare for me. Tdo not wish to give
pain to any one. : :


SHANTI PARVA.


33. Inseaswns of danger, you should,
like strong bulls, bear such hurdens, In
seasons of distress, you should not value
wealth too highly.


34. Aking knowing Time should, with
such agreeable, sweet, and complimentary
words, send his agents and make collections
from his subjects.


35. Pointing out to them the necessity
of repairing his forts and of meeting the
expences of his establishment and other
heads, striking them with the fear of foreign
invasion, and pointing to them the necessity
that exists for protecting them and enabling
them to ensure the means of living in peace,
the king should impose taxes upon the
Vaishyas of his kingdom.


36. If the king does not care the
Vaishyas, they become lost to him, and
leaving his dominions retire inte the woods.
The king should, therefore, treat them lini-
ently. .


37. The king, O son of Pritha, should
always conciliate and protect the Vaishyas,
take measures for filling them with a sense
of security and for ensuring them in the
enjovment of what they possess, and always
+ do what they like.


48. The king, O Bharata, should always

#a treat the Vaishyas that their power to
mialtiply money may ‘be enhanced. The
Vaishyas enhance the strength of a kings
dom, improve its agriculture, and develop
its trade,
39. A wise king, therefore, should
always please them. Acting with careful-
ness and leniency, he should impose mild
taxes upon them. :

40. {tis always easy to treat the Vai-
shyas kindly. There is nothing which does
greater yood to a kingdom, O Yudhisthira,
than such treatment of the Vaishyas of the
kingdom.’


CHAPTER LXXXVIIIL.


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continued.


Yudhisthira said :—

1. “ Tell me, O grandfather, how should
the king behave if, despite his great
wealth, he seeks more !”


Bhishma said :—

2, ‘A king desirous of acquiring religi-
ous merit, should seek the good of his sub-
jects and protect them according -to coysi-


1¥gt


derations of place and time and to the best
of his intelligence and power, __


3. He should, in his kingdom, adopt
such measures as would in his view secure
their good as also his own. hoo

4, A king should milk his kingdom like
a bee collecting honey from plants. He
should act like the cow-herd who takes mille
from her without boring her udders and.
without starving tie calf,


5. Theking should act like the leech
taking blood mildly... He should treat his
subjects like a tigress carrying her cubs,
touching them with her teeth but never
cutting them therewith.


6. He should behave like a mouse which.
although it has got sharp and. pointed
teeth yet cuts the feet of sleeping animats
in such a way that they do not at all”
become conscious of it,


9. Little by tittle should be drained
from a prosperous subject. The demand
should then be gradually increased till
it reaches a fair amount.


8. The king should increase the burden
of fis subjects by and by like a person
gradually increasing the load of a young
bullock. Treating them with care an
mildness, he should at last put the reins
on them.


If the reins are thus. put, they would
not refuse to bear them. Indeed, sufficient.
measures should be taken for making them
obedient. Mere entreaties to bring them
to subjection would be of no avail,


10. It is impossiite to treat all equally.
Conciliating the leaders only, the ordinary
pecple should be reduced to obedience. .


11. Creating dissensions among «the
common people wito are te carry the bur-«
dens, the king should himself come forward
to conciliate them and then enjoy happily
what he would draw from then,


12. The king should never impose taxes
in a bad form and on persons who cannot
pay them, He should impose them gradu-
ally and with mildness, in proper time and
according to due forms, °


13- The ways I suggest you are the
legiitimate means of kingcraft. They are
not known as deceitful means, One wha
tries to control horses by unfair methods
only makes them furious.


14—15. Drinking-shops; public women,
pimps. actors, gamblers, and keepers of
gambling houses, and other persons, of this
sort, who always create disorders to the
states, should all be checked. Living
within the kingdom, these afict and injure
tie better classes of the subjects,


332


16. No one should ask anything of any
one when on distress prevails. Manu him-
self in days of yore has laid down this
injunction regarding all men.


17. If all men were to tive on alms and
and abstain from work, the world would,
forsooth, come to an end.


- 18. The king alone is able to restrain
and check. That king who does not pre-
vent his subjects (from committing sins) is
visited by a fourth part of the sins commit.
ted by them. This is the injunction of the
Shrutise


-49.' Since the king shares the sins of his


subjects like their merits, he should, there- |


_ fore, O king, check his sinful subjects.


-20. The king who fails to restrain him- |


self commits a sin. He is visited by a
fourth part of their sins as he does ac-
quire a fourth part of their merits.


2t. The following sins of which I speak
should be checked. They are such as bring
on penury on every one. What wicked act
is there that a person under the influence of
Passion would not commit.


22. A person under the control of pas-
sion indulges in stimulants and’ meat, and
appropriates the wives and the wealth of
other people, and .sets a-bad example - to
others. :

23. They who do not livé upon alms
may beg at the time of distress. The
righteous king should make gifts to them
from mercy but not from fear.


24. Let there be'no beggars or robbers
in your kingdom. It is only the robbers
who give to the beggars, Such givers are
not benefactors of men.


25. Wet such men live in your kingdom
as advance the interests of others and do
them good, but not such as root out others.


26, Those officers, O king, who realize
from the subjects more than what is due
should be punished. You should then ap-
point athers who will take only what is due.


27. Agriculture, tending of cattle trade
and similar. other acts, should be pursued
by many persons in sucha way that they
may not suffer injury. ;

28. Ifa person engaged in agriculture,
cattle-tending, or trade, feels a sense of
insecurity, the king, incurs infamy thereby.


29. The king should always honor his
tich subjects and should say to them,—Do
you, with me, advance the interests of the
people!


30. In every kingdom, the wealthy form
an eState in the realm. Forsooth, a weal-
thy person is the foremost of men: .


MAHABHARATA.


gt. He who is wise, or brave or rich o¢
influential, or righteous, or engaged in
penances or truthful. in speech, or endued
with intelligence, assists in. protecting his
fellow-subjects,


32. For these reasons, O king, do you
love all creatures, and show the qualities. of
truth, sincerity, absence of anger andi
abstention from injury.


33. You should thus hold the rod of
punishment, and multiply your treasury and
support your friends and consolidate yous
Kingdom thus, practising the qualities of
truthfulness and sincerity and supported
by your friends, treasury, and army.’


CHAPTER LXXXIX.


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
¢ PARVA).—Coxtinued.


Bhishma said :—


1. ‘Let not fruit growing trees be cut.
down in your dominions, Fruits and roots
are the property of the Brahmanas. The
sages have declared this as an injunction
of. religion. :

2. The residue, after supporting the
Brahmanas, should be devoted to the sup-
portof other people. Nobody should take
by injuring the Brahmanas.


3. Ifa Brahmana, for want of support,


| wishes to leave a kingdom for securing


maintenance elsewhere, the king, ©@
monarch, should, with love and respect,
give him the means of sustenance.


4. If he does not still abstain from
leaving the kingdom, the king should repair
toa concourse of Brahmanas and say—-
Such a Brahmana is leaving the kingdom.
In whom shall my subjects then find at
authority for guiding them ?—


5. Ifafter this, he does not renounce
his intention of leaving, and does not say
anything, the king should say to him—.
Forget the past !—-This, O son of Kunti, is
the eternal way of the royal duty.


6. The king should further say to him,—
Indeed, O Brahmana, people say that only
that which is sufficient should be assigned to
a Brahmana to maintain him. I, how-
ever, do not hold that opinion. On the
other hand, I think that if a Brahmana
seeks to abandon a kingdom for the king
neglecting to provide him with means of
support, such means should be assigned to
him, and, further, if he wishes to take tha¢
step for.procuring the means of luxury, be


SHANTI PARVA.


should still be requested to- stay and sup-
plied with those luxuries.


7. Agciculture, cattleetending, and
trade, supply ali men with the means of
subsistence. A knowledge of the Vedas,
however, supply them with the means of
acquiring heaven. —


8 They, therefore, that impede - the
study of the Vedas and the Vedjc prac-
tices, are known as enemies of society. For
exterminating these that Brahman created
Kshatriyas.


g. Subdue your foes, protect your sub-
jects, adore the gods in sacrifices, and fight
battles bravely, O delighter of the Kurus !


' to. Aking should protect those who are
worthy of protection, ‘The king who does
this is the best of rulers. Those kings who
do not perform the duty of protection live
uselessly.


11. For the behoof of all his subjects the
king should always seek to learn the acts
and thoughts of all, O Yudhishthica ; and
for that reason he should ‘engage spies-‘and.
secret agents.


12. Protecting others from your own,
and your own from others, as also others
from others, and your own from your own,
do you always maintain your subjects.


13. Guarding his own self first from
every one, the king should protect the Earth.
Men of knowledge have said that every-
thing originate from self, :


14. The king should always think of
-these, viz.,—What are his shortcomings to
what evil habits he is addicted, what are
the sources of his weakness, and what aré
the sources of his follies. ; .


15. The king should make ‘secret and
trusted agents travel through the king-
dom for ascertaining whether his conduct
of the previous day has, or has not, met with
the approbation of the subjects, ©


16. Indeed, he should know whether his
conduct is, or is not, generally applauded,
or is, oris not, liked by the people of the
provinces, and whether he has, or has not,
succeeded in gaining a good name in his
kingdom.


17—-18. Amongst the virtuous and wise,
amongst those who never retreat from bat-
tle, and those who do not live in your king:
dom, those who depend on you, and those
who are your ministers, as well as those
who do not follow party, they who praise ot
blame you should never be disregatded by
you, O Yudhishthira !


19. No man, O sire, can acquice the
golden opinion of all persons in the world,


‘ments of goyernin


433


All persons have friends, foes, and indiffer-
ent ones, 0 Bharata.’


Yudhisthira said :—


20. ‘Of persons all of whom are equal
in strength of arms and accomplishments,
how does one réign supreme over all the
others, and how does he succeed in lording
over them all,”


Bhishma said :—


21. ‘The mobile creatures devour things
that are immobile; animals having teeth
devour those that have none ; angry snakes
of dreadful venom devour smaller ones of
their own species.


22. Theking, O Yudhishthira, should
always be careful of his subjects as also of
his enemies, If he becomes careless, they,
attack him like vultures,


23. Take care, O king, that the traders in
your kingdom, who purchase articles for,
purposes of trade at prices high and low,
and who while itenerating have to sleep ot,
take rest in forests and inaccessible regions,
may not suffer from the imposition of heavy
taxes. os


24. Let not the agriculturists ia your
kingdom leave it through oppression; they,
who bear the burden of the king, support
the other residents also of the kingdoms —-


25. The gifts made by you in this world’
support the gods, Pitris, men, Nagas,
Rakshasas, birds, and animals, cd

26." These, O Bharata, ‘are’ the instrue’
a kingdom and _protec<°
ting its king. I shall again’ talk to you on
the subject, O son of Pandu,’ se Octet


CHAPTER XC


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
- , PARVA).—Coutinued.


Bhishma said:—-

t. ‘That best of all persons conversane .
with the Vedas, viz., Utatthya of Angi-+
rasa’s family, discoursed gladly to Yuvanae
shwa’s son Mandhatri. ; ;

2. I shall now, O Yudhishthira, relate
to you every thing that Utatthya, that fore
most of all persons conversant with the
Vedas, had said to that king.


Utatthya said :—


3- One becomes a king for advancing
the cause of virtue and not for acting capris
ciously, Know this, O Mandhatri; th
king is, indeed, the protector of the world,”


134


4. Uf the-king acts piously, he attains to
the dignity of a god. 1f, however, he acts
uarighteously, he sinks into hell.


5—6. Allcreatures depends upon right-
eoustisss. Righteousness again depends
upon the king, That king, therefore, who
maintains righteousness, is truly a king,
that king who has a pious soul and possesses
every kind of accomplishments is said to be
an embodiment of virtue. If a king fails to
punish iniquity, the god leave his palace
and he incurs disreputation among men.


_9. The endeavours of men who observe
their own: duties are always successful.
Therefore all‘men try to obey the injunc-
tions of righteousness which yield pros-
perity.

_8. When sin is not restrained righteous-
ness disappears and unrighteousness mul-
tiplies itself. ;

g. When sin is not restrained, no one
can, in view of the rights of property as
sanetioned by the scriptures, say,—This
thing is mine and this.is not mine.


* yo, When sinfulness reigns rampant in
the world, men cannot own and enjoy theic


own wives and animals and fields and |


houses,


‘ a1. When sia is not restrained the deittes |


get no adorations, the Pitris no offerings
in Shraddhas, and guests no hospitality.


12. : When sinfulness is not restrained,
the twice-born ones do not study the Vedas,
or practise high vows, or perform sacri-
fices,


of men, O king, become weak and bewil-
dered like those of persons wounded with
weapons.

14. Looking on both the worlds, the
Rishis made the king, that best of men,
with a view that he should be righteous-
ness incarnate on Earth. ,


15. Heis called Rajan in whom righte-
ousness predominates. That king, again,
in whom there is no righteousness, is-called.
a Vrishala, “ ;


16. Righteousness Has another name,
ewis., Vrisha. He who weakens Vrisha
passes by the name of Vrishala. A king
should, therefore, further the cause of
Righteousness.


17. All creatures prosper by the growth
of righteousness and deteriorate with its
decay. Righteousness, therefore, should
never be suffered to decay,


18. Righteousness is called Dharma, be-
cause it helps the acquisition and preserva~
tion of wealth. The sages,OQ king, have


13. When sin is not restrained, the minds


MAHABHARATA,


declared that -the Dharma restrain$ and:
limits all evil acts of men.


19. The Self-create created Dharma
for the aggrandisement ard growth of
creatures. Therefore, a king should follow
the dictates of Dharma for Lenefitting - hia
people, ,

20. Therefore also, O furemost of kings?
Dharma has been said to be the highest
of all things. That best of men wh?
governs his subjects righteously is called 4
king. +

2t. Disregarding fust and anger’
follow the dictates of righteousness. Of al
things, O chief of Bharata’s race, which
secure the prosperity of kings, righteous-
ness is the foremost,


2a. Dharma, again, has originated from
the Brahmana. ‘Therefore, the Brabmana
should always be adored. You, should,
O Manghawi, satisfy humbly the wishes o
Brahmanas.


23. Neglecting to please Brahmanas
the king brings danger on himself, for such
neglect, be cannot acquire friends while
his enemies multiply.


24. For entertaining malice out of folly
towards the Brahmanas, the goddess of
| eeekaadetd who had formerly lived with him

ecame irate and deserted the Asura Vali
the son of Virochana.


25. Deserting the Asura she went to
| Indra the king of gods. Seeing the
goddess living with Purandara, Vali re-
gretted idly.


26. This, O powerful one, is the out-
come of malice and pride. Be you awaken-
ed, O Mandhatri, so that the goddess: of
| prosperity may not in anger desert you.


27. The: Shrutis say that Unrighteouse
''mess begata son named Pride upon the
goddess of prosperity. This Pride, O king,
i brought ruin upon many among. the gods
and the Asuras. —


28. Many royal sages were ruined fo
him. Do you, therefore, awaken, O king f
He who can conquer him becomes a king.
He, however, who suffers himself eto be
conquered by him, becomes a slave. ,


29. Hf, O Mandhatri, you wish to enjoy
a lite of perpetual happiness, live as a king
should who does not indulge these two,
vis., Pride and Unrighteousness,


go. Do not associate with him,—who is
intoxicated with pride, who does not follow
honesty, who scoffs at religion, who is in-
sensate and negligent in paying homage to
all of them even when united.


31-+32. Keep yourself aloof from the
company of ministers whom you have once


‘SHANTI


piinished and especially of wWwoiten, as
also from riountains and uneven lands and
inaccessible forts and elephants and horses
and reptiles, You should never wandet in
the night, and avoid  stinginess, vanity,
boastfulness, and anger. .


33. You should never know unknow#
women, or the eunuchs, or those who are
lewd, or those who are ihe wives of other
men, or those who are unmarried,


34. When the king does not restrain
vice, an jntermixture of castes follows, and
sinful Rakshasas, eunuchs, children desti-
tute of limbs or possessed of thick tongues,
and idiots, begin to take birth in even res-
pectable families.


‘45: Therefore, the king should take
particular care to act righteously for the
behoof of his people.


36. If aking acts heedlessly, it produces
a great evil. Unrighteousness multiplies
Causing an intermizture of castes.


*37. Cold appears during the samnter
months, and disappears in its preper season.
Drought and flood and pestilence attack the
people, ©

38. Evil stars arise and dreadful comets
appear on such odcasions. Various other
portents, presaging destruction of the king-
dom, appear. ‘

39. If the king does not take steps for
his ewn safety and dees not protect ‘his
Subjects, the latter first meet with destruc-
tion which ultimately overtakes the king
himself,

“40. Two persons in unision take away
the wealth of one, and many acting
together rob the two. The virginity of
maidens is destroyed. Such a state of
things originate from the king’s faults.


4. Allrights of property are destroyed
among men, whea the king, forsaking
righteousness, acts heedlessly.


oman
CHAPTER XC.


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARV A).—Continued,


Utatihya said :—


- 1, If the god of the clouds pours rain Bedy enblect, to Munillauocs Take: tare


: that the eyes of the Weak do not burn you
! with your kinsmen,


in season and the king acts victueusly, the
prosperity that comes keeps the subjects
in pomess, .

_ 2. That washerman who does not know
how w wash away the dirt of cloth without
destroying its dye, is very unskilful in his
profession, ae


PARVA, 135

3. That perso ariong Beahmianas o¢
Kshatriyas or Vaishyas who, having de~
viated from the proper duties of his caste,'
has beconie a Shudra, is truly to be com-
pared tosuclt a washermar, .


4. Menial service is the duty of the
Shudra ; agriculture is that of the Vaishya ?-
the science of punishment of the Kshatriya;
and Brahmacharyya; penances, Mantras;
and truth, belong to the Brahmana.


g. That Kshatriya who knows how to
correct the wrong-doings of the other castea
and to wash them clean like a washerman,
isreally their father and deserves to be
their king.


6. The various cycles called Krita,
Treta, Dwapara, and Kali, O feremost of
Bharata’s race, all depend on the conduct.
of the king. It is the king who makes
the cycles. :


9. ‘The four castes, the Vedas, and the.
duties of the four modes of life, all suffer
from confusion and weakness when the king
becomes heedless. : '


% The three kinds of fire, the three
Vedas, and sacrifices with Dakshina, -all.
ciesppear: when the king becomes -care<
less. ‘


g The king isthe creator of all creas
tures, and is theic destroyer. That righte«
ous king is regatded as the creator;
while the sinful one is regarded as- the
destroyer. ' ‘

to. The king’s wives, sons, kinsmen,
and friends, ali become unhappy and gtieve
when the king becomes careless, Kev


- tt, Elephants, horses, kine, camefs;
mules, asses and other animals all lose their
vigor when the king becomes sinful,


12. It is said, O Mandhatri, that the
Creator created Power for . protecting
Weakness. Weakness is, really, a great
being, for every thing depends upon it.

13. Allereatures adore the king. All
creatures are the children of the king, Tf,
therefore, Q monarch, the king becomes
unrighteous, all creatures meet with ruin,


#4. The eyes. of the Weak, of the Muni,
and of the venomous snake, should be con-
sidered as unbearable. Do not, therefore,


| meet the Weak ag you would do an enemy.


t5. You should regard the Weak as


16. Ina family seorched by the eyes:of


| the Weak, no children are born. Such eyes


burn the family to its very roots. Do not,


. therefore, treat the Weak inimically,


136


17. Weakness. is more powerful ‘than!
even the greatest Power, for that Power
which is scorched by Weakness is abso-
lutely rgoted out.

18. Ifa person, who has been humiliated
or struck, fails, while crying for help, to
get a protector, divine punishment ovet-
takes the king and brings about his fall.


19. Do not, O sire, while excersing
Power, take wealtlt from the Weak. Take
eare that the eyes of the Weak do not burn
you like a burning fire,

to. The tears shed by weeping men
afflicted with falsehood kill the children and
anon of those that have uttered those

ies.


21. Like a cow a sinful act does not
yield immediate fruits. Jf the fruit is not
Seen in the pecpetrater himself, itis seen
in his‘son or jn his grand-son or daughter’s
son,

22. Wheti a Weak person fails to finda
protector the ereat rod of divine punish-
ment overtakes the king.


23. When all the subjects of a king are
compelled by distress to live like Brah-
manas, by begging, such mendicancy
brings destruction upon the king. ;

24, When ali the officers of the king
living in the provinces unite together and
act unfairly, the king is then said to bring
about a state of unredeeming evil upon his
kingdom.

25. When the officers of thie king extort
money, by unfair means or acting from
lust or avarice, from persons piteously
praying for mercy, a great destruction,
torsooth, befalls the king.


26. A huge tree,


«

Ca growing, assumes
large proportions. Numberiess creatures
then come and séek its shelter. When,
however, it is cut down or burnt, those who
had taken its shelter become all houseless.


27. When the denizens of a kingdom
perform pious acts and all religious rites,
and praise the good qualities of the king,
the latter acquires riches. When, however,
the residents, out of ignorance, forsaké
righteousness and act unrighteously, the
king suffers {rom misery.


28. When sinful men of known acts ate
allowed to move among the righteous, Kali
then overtakes the kings of those kingdonis.
When the king punishes all wicked people,
his kingdom prospers, :


29. Forsooth, the kingdom of that king
certainly. prospets who honors his minis-
ters and employs them in policy and in
battles. Such a king enjoys the wide Earth
or ever. a .


“MAHABHARATA.,


go. That king who duly licriors at
good acts and good speeches acquires greal
merit. ,


3t. The enjoyment of good things with
others, paying proper honors to the minis-
ters, ee subjugations of persons who are
proud of their strength, are the great duty
of a king.

32. Protecting all men by words, body,
and deeds, and never forgiving even his
offending son himself, form the great duty
of the king.


33. The maintenance of the Weak by
sharing with them the things he has and
thereby increasing their strength, form the
duty of the king.


34, Protection of the kingdom, extermi-
nation of robbers, and conquest form the
duty of the king.


35. Not to forgive a person, however
dear if he has committed an offence, by act
or word, forms the duty of the king.


36. Proteeting these who seek refuge
with him as he would protect his own child-.
ren, and never depriving one of the honors
to which he is entitled; form the duty of
the king.

37. Adoring the gods, with devotion, in
sacrifices completed by presents, and sub-
Going lust and envy, form the duty of the

ing.


38. Wiping the tears of the distressed,
the helpless, and the old, and filling them
with joy, form the duty of the king. :


39. Advancing friends, weakening ene=
mies, and honoring the good, form the.
duty of the king.


40. Cheerfully adhering to truth,
always making presents of land, entertain=
ing guests, and maintaining dependents,
form the duty of the king..

4t. That king who favors those who
deserve favors; and punishes those who
deserve chastisement, acquires great merit
both here and hereafter.


42. Thekingis Yama himself. He is,
O Mandhatri, the’ god ({iricarnate) to alf
righteous persons. By controlling his
senses he acquires great riches. By not
subduing them he commitssin.


43. Paying proper honors to Ritwijas
and priests and preceptors, and doing thent
good, form the duty of the king.


44. Yama governs all creatures without
any distinction. The king should imitate
him in his conduct by restraining all his
subjects duly,


©


SHANTI PARVA,


43. The king is said to resemble the -


‘Thousand-eyed © (Indra).‘ ‘O° foremost ‘of


‘men, that which is regarded by the ‘king |-


as Righteousness ‘is accepted as such by all.


46. You shoald diligently ciltivate for-
'giveness, intelligence, patietice and the love
‘of all creatures. You should also’ deter-
‘mine the strength and weakness of all men


and tearn to distingaish between right ‘and |


wrong.


all creatares, make gifts, and utter agree-

‘able and sweet words. You should maintain

_ the residents of your ‘city and the provinces
“jn happiness. :

_48 A king, who is not clever, can never

_ protect his subjects. Sovereignty, O sire,

isa very heavy burden,

49. Only that king who is endued with

wisdom and courage, and who is a master

“of the science of punishment, can protect a

kingdom. He, onthe other hand, who is


‘devoid of energy and intelligence, and who |


‘is not Vetséd in ‘the great science, cannot
bearthe Btrden of sovereignty. ;

50., Helped by ministers of beautiful
features and good birth, clever in business,
‘devoted to their masters, and highly fearn-

“ed, you should examine the hearts and acts
_ of ail men including the very hermits.

3t.. Behaving thus, you will be able to

Yearn the daties of all orders of men. This
“will help you in observing your own duties
“whether'when you are in your’‘country or

when you go to other kingdoms.

32, Amongst these three objects, 7s.’

. Virtue, Profit, and Pleasure, Virtue is the


‘foremost. He, who is of virtuous soul,
‘acquires ggreat ‘happiness both “here and
hereafter, ot :


53—~54. Ifmen are treated with honor
they can abandon their very wives. and
‘sons. By winning over good men, by gifts,
sweet words, carefulness, and purity ‘of
conduct, a king may acquire for himself
“great. prosperity. Do not, therefore, O
. Mandhatri, be negligent of these qualities
, and acts, ; ms
55. ‘The king should never, negfect to
fook after his owa weak points as also after
“those of his foes. He-'should act in such a
way that his enemies may not be able to
discover his weak points, and he {should
himself assail them when theirs are seen.
56. In this way Vasdva, and Yama,
_ and Vruna, and all the great royal sages
have acted. Do you follow the same
conduct, :


57. Do you, O great king, follow the
conduct of these royal sages, Do you sgon,


18


ig7
O foremost of Bharata’s race, foHow this
heavenly road.

58. The gods, the Rishis, the Pitris,
and the Gandharvas, possessed of great
energy, chant the praises, both here and
hereafter, of that king who is righteous!
Bhishma said :-— -

59. Thus spoken to by Utatthya, O


; | Bharata, Mandhatri unhesitatingly did as
47- You should behave properly towards |


he was directed, and became
of the wide Earth. — -

‘60. Do you also, O king, act righteous<
ly like Mandhatri. You will then, aftet
ruling the Earth, live in heaven ?’


the soul king


ss


CHAPTER XCII,


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continued.:


Yudhisthira said :—


1. “ How should a righteous king, wha
wishes to follow the ways of righteousness,
behave? [ ask you this, O foremost .of


j-men! Answer me, O grand-father 1’


Bhishma said :— .
2 Hag ati it is cited the old story 6
what the highly intelligent Vamadeva ac»


| quainted with the true import of everything


sang in days of yore, © we tts

3. Once upon a time, king Vasumanas;
endued with knowledge, fortitude, purity of
conduct, asked the great Rishi Vamadéva
of great ascetic merit, saying + -

4. lastruct. me, O holy one, in words
fraught with fairness and great significance
asto what that conduct is by ebserving
which I may not deviate from the’ duties
prescribed for me ! awree

5. To him having a golden hue and
seated at his ease like Yayati the son
of Nahusha, that foremost.of ascetics,
2is., Vamadeva of great energy, said as
follows, : ef op


Vamadeva said :~

6. Do you act righteously, There is
nothing superior to Righteousness. The
righteous kings succeed in conquering the
whole Earth. ; aaa

gj. That king who considers Righteous«
ness as the most effectual instrument for
accomplishing his objects, and who follows
the advice of the righteous, shines with
righteousness, :


1


138


8 That king who neglects Righteousness
and wishes to. act with brute force, soon


- fails away from Righteousness and loses


both Virtue and Profit.


9. That king who -follows the advice of
a vicious and sinful minister becomes a
destroyer of righteousness and deserves to
be killed by his subjects with all his family.
Indeed, he very soon meets with destrac-
sion, ;


to, That king who cannot satisfy his


royal duties, who is governed by caprice in.


all his acts, and who vaunts, soon meets
with destruction even if he happen to be the
king of the whole Earth.


11. That kjng, however, who seeks
prosperity, who is‘shorn of malice, who has
his senses under restraint, and who is
endued with intelligence, rolls in wealth
Tike the ocean swelling with the waters put
into it by a hundred rivers.


tz, He should never consider ‘himself as
possessing enough of Virtue, enjoyment,
wealth, intelligence, and friends.


13. Upon these depends the world.


‘By listening to this advice, a king ac-


quices fame, great deeds, prosperity and


- subjects.


14. Being virtuous that king, who triés’to
acquire virtue and wealth by such means,
and who undertakes all his measures after
thinking upon their objects, succeeds in
acquiring great prosperity.

15. That king, who is illiberal, and
shern of affection, who oppresses his
subjects by undue punishment, and who
is rash in his -aets, soon meets with
destruction.


16. That king, who is not intelligent, fails
to see his own faults. Beset with infamy
here, he sinks into hei} hereafter.


17. Uf the king honors them properly that


‘deserve it, makes gifts, and recognises the


value of sweet speeches by himself uttering
them always, his subjects then remove the
calamities that overtake him as if these had
fallen upon themselves.


18. ‘That king, who has none tofinstruct
him in the ways of righteousness and who
never seeks advice from others, and who
seeks to acquire wealth by means that
caprice suggests, never enjoys happiness
long. ot

19. That king, on the other hand, who
follows the advice of his preceptors in
matters of virtue, who supervises the affairs
of his kingdom himself, and who in all his
acquisitions follows virtue, succeeds in en-
joying happiness for a long time.


“ MAHABHARATA.


CHAPTER XCIII.


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continued. -


Vamadeva said :—-


1. When the king, who_ is powerful,
acts unfairly towards the Weak, persons
born in his family imitate the same con-
duct.


2. Others, again, imitate that wretch
whotcommits sins. Such imitation of the
man who does riot care for restraints soon
brings destruction upon the kingdom. ;


3. The conduct of a king, who observes
his proper duties, is accepted by men in
general as a model for imitation. The
conduct, however, of a king, who deviates
from his duties, is not tolerated by his ver:
kinsmen. :


4. That rash king, who, neglecting the
injunctions laid down in the scriptures,
acts with high-handedness in his kingdom,
very soon meets with fall.


5. That Kshatriya, who does not follow
the conduct observed from days of yore by
other Kshatriyas conquered or unconquers
ed, deviates from Kshatriyas duties.


6. Having captured in - battle a royal
enemy that did some good to the conqueror
on a former occasion, that king, who, does
not, out of malice, honor him, is said Lo
deviate from Kshatriya duties.


7. The king should show his power, live
merrily, and do what is neccessary in times
of danger. ‘Such a_ king is loved of all
creatures and never falls away from pros-
perity, .


& If youdo evil to any person, you
should, when the times comes, do him
good. One who is not loved becomes an
object of love if he does what is good.


9. Falsehoods should be avoided. You
should do good to others without being
asked for the same. You should never
abandon righteousness from lust or anger
or malice.


10. Donet reply harshly when question-
ed by anybody. Do not utter mean words.
Never be in a hurry to do anything.
Never cherish malice. By such means an
enemy is won over. .


tr. Do not be overjoyed when anything
pleasant occurs, nor give away to sorrow
when anything disagreeable occurs. Never
grieve ater your wealth is exhausted,. and
always remember the duty of doing good to
your subjects. :

€


SHANTI PARVA.,


32, That king, who always does what is
agreeable by natural inclination, acquires
success in all his undertakings and is never
shorn of prosperity. '

13. The king should always, carefully,
cherish that devoted servant who abstains
from doing injury to his master and who
always does what is for his good.


14. He should employ in responsible
offices persons who have controlled their
senses, who are devotedly loyal and of pure
conduct, and who are abte.


(85. That person, who by possessing such
qualifications, pleases the king and who
never neglects to take care of the interests
of his master, should be appointed by the
king in the affairs of his kingdom.


16—17. On the other hand, the king
becomes shorn of prosperity by appointing
to important offices men who are fools and
slaves of their senses, who are covetous and
of disreputable conduct, who are deceitful
and hypocritical, who are malicious, wicked,
and ignorant, who are low-minded, and
addicted to drink, gambling, women, and
hunting.


18, That king, who, first protecting his
own self, protects others worthy of protec-
tion, feels the satisfaction of seeing his
Subjects prosper. Such a king succeeds
also in acquiring greatness,


.19. Aking should, by devoted secret
agents, watch the conduct and acts of other
kings. By such means can he acquire
superiority. .

20. Having injured a powerful king, one
should not comfort himself with the idea
that the injurer lives at a great distance
from the injured. Such kings when injured
attack the injurer like the hawk swooping
down upan its prey, in careless moments.


21. Aking, whose power has been con-
solidated and who is confident of his own
strength, should attack a neighbour who is
weaker than himself but never who is
stronger.

- 23. Having acquired the sovereignty of
the Earth by prowess, a virtuous King
should protect his subjects fairly and kill
enemies in battle.

» 23. Everything belonging to this world
is liable to destruction. Nothing here is
Jasting. Therefore, the king, following
righteousness, should protect his subjects
righteously.


24. The defence of forts,. battle, admi-
nistration of justice, consultations on ques-
tions of policy, and keeping the subjects-of
happiness, these five increase the. domi-
wions of a king.


139


25. That king who takes proper care of
these is considered to be the best of kings.
By always doing these, a king succeeds
in protecting his kingdom. ms ok


26. It is impossible, however, for one
man to look after all these matters at all
times. Transferring such supervision to his
ministers, a king may govern the Earth for
ever. ;


27. The people select such a person as
their king who is liberal, who shares alf
objects of enjoyment with others, who is
mild by nature, who is of pure cons
duct, and who will never forsake his
subjects.

28. He is obeyed in the world who,

having listened to the advice of the
wise, accepts them, leaving aside his own
opinions,
- 29—30. That king, who does not . accept
the advice of a well-wisher for its being
oppesed to his own views, who listens , with
inattention to what is said to him in oppo-
sition to his views, and who does not always
follow the conduct of high and noble persons
conquered or unconquered, deviates from
the duties of Kshatriyas, . ,


31—32. -From ministers, who have once
been chastised, from women in particular,
from mountains and inaccessible quarrels,
from elephants and horses and reptiles, the
king should always carefully guard himself.
That king, who, leaving his chief ministers,
makes favourites of low persons, soon falls
into distress and never succeeds in attain«
ing his objects.

33. That weak king, who, under the
influence of anger tand malice, does not
love and honor those amongst his kinsmen,
who are endued with good qualities,
is said to live on the very brink of
destruction. ,


34. That king, who wins over accom-
plished persons by doing good to them
even though he may not like them
heartily, succeeds in enjoying fame for
ever. .


35. . You should never impose taxes
unseasonably, You should not be sorry at
the occurrence of anything disagreeable,
nor rejoice exceedingly at anything agree-
able. You shouldst always try to accome
plish good acts. . ‘


36. Youshould always determine wha
amongst the dependent kings is truly. devo~=
ted to you, and who is loyal to you from
fear, and who amongst them has faults.


37. The king, even if he be powerful,
should trust the weak, for in moments of
carelessness the weak may attack tech


‘


140


powerful. fike a flock of vulttces seizing
their prey. ; ;

38. A sinful mam seeks to injure his.

master even if the latter be sweet-speeched
and endued with every accomplishment.
Do not, therefore, repose confidence in such
men. Leino 8 mo :
39. Nahusha’s son Yayati, in describing
the. mysteries. of king-craft, said. that a
person in ruling men should kill even con-
temptible foes.


Ee raed


CHAPTER XCIV,
RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continned.


pa Re ee
Vamadeva said:—

‘45 The king should acquire victories
without battles. Victories won. by battles
are- not spoken of highly, O king, by the
wise,

2.° Wher the sovereign's own power has
not been consolidated, he should not try to
make new acquisitions, It is not proper
that a king whose power has not heen cone
firmed should try to make such acquisi-+
tions,: , ,
"3. The power of that king whose terri-
tories are vast and contain immense wealth,
whose subjects are loyal and contented,
and who ‘has a large number of officers, is
said to be confirmed.


4. That king whose soldiers are cone
tented, gratified and competent to impose
on foes, can, with even a small force, sub-
jugate the whole Earth.

§- The power of that king, whose sub-
jects whether living in the cities or the pro-
winces, have mercy for all creatures, and
possess: wealth and grain, is said to be
confirmed,


6. When the king thinks that his power
is greater than that of an enemy, he should
then, helped by his intelligence, seek
to acquire the latter’s territories and
wealth.


7. A king, whose resources are in-
creasing, who is compassionate to all creas
tures, who never loses time by idleness,
and who is: careful, in protecting his own
self, succeeds in advancing himself,

8 That king, who treats deceitfully his
owr people that have not been guilty of
any fault, cuts his own self like a person
cutting down a forest with an axe. :

9» If the king does not always attend to
the task of killing his enemies, the latter do i


MANABHARATA.


riot diminish. ‘That king, again, .who
knows to destroy his own anger, finds no
enemies,


ro. Hf the king be wise, he would never
do any act that is disapproved by good
men. He would, however, always perform
such acts as would do him and others good.


rr. That king, who, having performed
all his duties, becomes satisfied with the
verdict of his own conscience, has never to
incur the displeasure of others nor has he
any occasion to indulge in regrets.

12. That king, who deals with’ men in
such a way, succeeds in subjugating bottr
the worlds and enjoy the fruits of victory.


Bhishma said :— ;
13. Thus aecosted by Vamadeva, king
Vasumans did as he was directed. For~'


sooth, following these counsels, you wilk
succeed in conquering both the worlds.’


CHAPTER XCV.


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).--Coniinued.
Yudhishthira said :—
1. “Ifa Kshatriya wishes to subjugate
another Kshatriya in battle, how shoul


the former act there? Questioned by ine,
do you answer it !”


Bhishma said :—

2. “That king, with or without an army
to follow him, entering the territories of
the king he would bring under subjection,
should say to all people,—1 am your king !.
I shall always protect you ! :

3. Give me the just tribute or fight witlr
me !+-If the people accept: him as their
king, there need not be any fighting.

4 If,, without being born Kshatriyas
they show signs of hostility, they should
then, because they follow praetices’ not
sanctioned for them, be tried to be restrain-
ed by every means. 2

5. People of the other castes do take up
arms if they see the Kshatriya not ready for
fight, incompetent to protect himself, and
too much afraid of the enemy,’


Yudhisthira said:—
6. Tell me, O grandfather, how should
that .Kshatriya..king fight. who marches


against another Kshatciya king !”
Bhishma said:- :

7. ‘A Kshatriya must not’ put on’armour
for fighting a Kshatriya who is not clad in


SHANTI PARVA, -


coat of mail, One should fight one, and
leave the opponent when the latter becomes
disabled.

8. If the enemy comes clad in mail, his
opponent also should put on armour. If
thé enemy advances with an army at his
back, one should, calling into requisition,
his own strength, give him the battle,


9. Ifthe enemy fights deceitfully, he
ghould be paidia his own cain. If, how-
ever, he fights fairly, he should be resisted
with fair means.

to, One should not on horseback run
against ‘a carewarrjot. A  car-warrior
should fight with a car-warrior. When an
antagonist is ina bad plight, he should not
be struck; nor should one who has been


frightened, nor one who has been defeated.


11, Poisoned or barbed arrows should
not beused. ‘Fhese are the weapons used
by the wicked, One should fight fairly,
ane giving way to anger or desiring
to kil, 2


12. A weak or wounded man should
not be killed, nor one who is sonless; nor
one whose weapon has been broken; nor one
who has fallen info distress; not one whose
bowstring has has been cut; nor one who
has lost his car. A wounded opponent
should either be sent to his own home, or, if
brought to the victor’s house, should have
his wounds dressed by skilful surgeons, -


13. - When for a fair fight between two
kings, & righteous warrior is reduced to
straits, he should, when cured, be liberated,


This is the eternal duty.


14. Manu himself, the son of the Self-
create (Brahman), has said that -batiles
should be fought fairly, “The righteous
should always treat the righteous fairly.
They should follow righteousness without
destroying it. :

15._ If a Kshatriya, whose duty it is
fight fairly, wins a victory by unfair means,
heincurs sin thereby. Of deceitful con-
duct, such a person is said to destroy his
ownself, :


16.. The wicked follow this practice.’


Even the wicked should be subdued by
fair ‘means. It is better te sacrifice life
itself in ‘the observance of righteousness
than to acquire victory by unfair means.

17, Like a cow, O king, sin, when: per-
petrated, does not yield immediate fruits.
That sin destroys the perpetrator after con-
suming his roots’and branches,


18.) Acquiring wealth “by foul “means,


‘a sinful person becomes overjoyed. ‘But
gaining advancement. by sinful ways, the
mis¢ereant becomes a coufirmed sinner,


iscoffs at righteous men.
: Virtue; he at. last is Jost.


| ike a tree on the river side


4t;


19. Thinking virtue as impotent, he.
Disbelieving in..


20: Though bound im’ the noose of


’ Varuna, he still considers-himself immortal, .


Like. a@ large leathern, bag puffed. up with
wind, the sinner severs himself entirely-
from virtue. However, he soon disappears,
> washed. away
with its very roots. ; re Hae

21, Then seeing him look like an,
earthen pot broken on a stone surface, .
people describe him as, he deserves, The
king should, therefore, seek both victory
and the increment of his resources, by
fair means,” my


CHAPTER XCVI.


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA. -
PARVA).—Continued,


Bhishma said :—~

1. ‘A king shoutd never desire to con¥
quer the Earth by unfair means even if
such subjugation would secure, him the
sovereignty of the whole Eaith, What
king is there who becomes -happy. alter
acquiring victory by unfair means ? ot

2. A victory sullied by unrighteousness
is uncertain and never leads to ‘heaven.
Such a victory, O foremost of Bharata’s
ae weakenS both the king and the

arth. " : :


&; A warrior whose armour has slipped
off of his body, or who prays fox’ rescue,
saying—I_ am yours,—or joining his hangs, ~
or who ‘has thrown off his weapon, «fay
simply be captured but never killed. ”


4. Ifa hostile king be defeated. by. the
army of the invader, the latter should noe
himself fight his defeated enemy. ‘On ‘tht
other hand, he should bring him to his
place and induce him for .a whole year, to


| say—I am your slave !—Whether he says


or does not say this, the defeated enemy,
by living for a year in the hoyse of his
victor, indeed gains a new life.


5. Ifaking carries forcibly a maiden
from the house of his. defeated foe, , he
should keep her for a year .and ask her’
whether she would marry him or any ‘one
else. ,If she does not agree, she should then
be returned. He should likewise deal with
all other kinds of wealth that ‘are acquired
by force. ee

6. The king should never appropriate
the riches confiscated from thieves and


others awaiting execution, The kine cap+


142


tured: trom the enemy by force should be
given away to the Brahmanas so that they
may drink their milk. The bulls taken from
the enenty:should be engaged in agricul-
tural work or returned to the enemy.


‘9. Itis laid down that a king should
fight with a king. One who is not. a king
should never strike a king. - -


8. If a Brahmana, with a view to secure
peace, fearlessly intervenes between the two
contending armies,:both should immediately
stop fighting.

9. He would break an eternal rule who
would killor wound such a Brahmana.
If any :Kshatriya breaks that rule, he
would become the most cursed of his
order.


* to. Furthermore, the ° Kshatriya, who
destroys righteousness and transgresses all
wholesome restrictions, is not regarded as
a Kshatriya ‘and should be driven from
society.

mt, A sels desirous of wianing victory,
should never behave thus. What gain can
be greater than victory won fairly.


‘12. The sections of men who are liable
to'excite people (in a newly conquered
kingdom) should forthwith, be conciliated
with. soothing words and presents. This
isa good policy which the king should
adopt, : oo a

. 13. Tf instead of doing this, a king
‘tries te govern them with. impolicy, they
would then leave the kingdom and side
with his foes and wait for calamities to
‘pverwhelm bim. . :


-, 14 Watching for the calamities of the.


king, discontented men promptly side with
the fatter’s enemies, O monarch, in time of
danger. 2h

- “tg. An enemy should not be imposed
on by unfair means, Nor should he be
wounded mortally, For, if struck mor-
tally, his. very life may disappear.

‘ 16. If a king is satisfied with little
reais he considers life falone as valu-
able. ;


17. That king, whose dominions ate
- extensive and rich, whose subjects are loyal,
whose servants and officers are all con-
‘tented, is said to be firmly settled.
. 18 That king whose Ritwijas, priests,
-preceptors and others about him that are
well-versed in the scriptures and worthy
--of honors are all duly honored, is consi-
dered as the master of the worldly ways.


1g. It was by such conduct that Indra
“became the king of the world, It is by
this conduct that earthly kings attain to
the dignity of Indra,


MAHABUARATA.


Defeating his enemies in great
battle, King Pratarddana took all their
wealth, including their very grain and
medicinal herbs, but left their land un-
touched, ,

21. After subjugating his foes, King
Divodasa brought away the very residue
of their sacrificial fires, their clarified butter,
and their food. Therefore he was deprived
of the merit of his conquests.


22. King Nabhaga gave away whole
kingdoms with their rulers as sacrificial
presents to the Brahmanas, save the wealth
of learned Brahmanas and ascetics.


23. The conduct, O Yudhisthira, of all
the righteous kings of yore, was excellent,
and I approve of it wholly.


- 24. That king who wishes for his own
prosperity should try to make conquests
by fair means, but never with deceit but
ones on or with pride.’


20.


CHAPTER XCVIL


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARV A).—-Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


1. “No action, O king, is more sinful
than that of the Kshatriyas ! While march-
ing or in battle, the king destroys the
Vaishyas, :


2. By what acts then does the king ac-
quire blessed regions? © foremost of

harata’s race, enlighten {me on this, O
fearned one, 1 am as anxious to know.”


Bhishma said :— >

3. ‘By punishing the wicked, by winning
over and maintaining the good, by sacri-
fices and gifts, kings become pure and
cleansed.


4. It is true, kings, desirous of victory,
torture many creatures, but after victory
they secure the advancement of all.


5. By the power of gifts, sacrifices, and
penances, they dissipate their sins, and
their merit increases so that they may be
able to do good to all creatures, —


6. For reclaiming a field, the reclaimer
takes up both paddy blades and weeds.
His course, however, instead, of destroying
the blades of paddy, he makes themfgrow
more vigorously.


7. Those, who use weapons, destroy
many who deserve to be killed. Such
wholesale destruction, however, helps the
growth and advancement of the remnant,


SHANT! PARVA,


" . Hea who protects people from plunder,
destruction, and affliction, he, for thus
saving their lives from robbers, is regarded
as the giver of wealth, of life, and of food.


9, Therefore, by thus worshipping the
‘ods by means of a union of all sacrifices
whosé Dakshina is the removing of every
body's feat, the king enjoys every kind of
happiness here and lives with India in
heaven hereafter. ;

to. That king, who, going out, fights
his enemies in battles that have arisen for
the sake of Brahmanas, and sacrifices his
life, is regarded as the embodiment of a
sacrifice with endless presents. ;


11. If aking, with his quivers full o
arrows, shoots them fearlessly at his
enemies, the very gods do not see any one
superior to him on Earth.


42. In such a case, regions ‘eternal and
capable of granting every {desire propor-
tionate to the number of arrows he dis-
charges for wounding the enemies, await

Am.


13. The blood that flows” from his body
purges him off of all his sins along with the
very pain that he feels then.


14. Persons well read in the scriptures
say that the pains a Kshatriya suffers in
battle act as penances for increasing his
merit.

15. Righteous persons, stricken With
fear, stay in the rear, begging for life from
heroes that have rushed to battle, even as
men pray for rain from the clouds.

16. Without allowing the solicitors to
incur the dangers of battle, if those heroes
place them in the rear by themselves facing
those dangers and defend them at that
time of fear, they acquire great merit,


17. And, if appreciating that act of
bravery, those timid persons always res-
pect those defenders, they do simply what.
is proper and just. By acting otherwise
they cannot overcome fear.


18. There is really a great difference
between men who seem outwardlytequal.
Some rush to battle, amid ‘its dreadful din,
against armed enemies.


to. Indeed, it is the hero who only
rushes against crowds of enemies, that
leads him to the road to heaven. The
coward, on the contrary, stricken with
fear, seeks safety in flight, leaving behind
his comrades in danger.


20—22. Let not such wretches of men
be born in your family! The very gods
headed by Indra send calamities to them
who leave behind their comrades in battle
and come home unscathed. and un-

,


143


injured. He who desiresto save his ows
tife by teaviag behind his comrades, should
be killed with sticks or stones or rolled in a
matjof dry grass for being burnt to death.
The Kshatriyas who would be guilty of sucht
conduct should be slain like animals.


23. Quiet death ona bed, after throw-
ing. out’ phlegm and urine and uttering
piteous cries, is sinful for a Kshattiya. ,


24. Persons well-read in the scriptures
do aot praise the death of a Kshatriya with
unwounded body. ;

25. ‘he death of a Kshatriya at home
is not praiseworthy. They . are heroes,
Any unheroic act on their part is sinful and
censurable.


26. In disease, people hear one crying,
—What sorrow! How painful! f must
be a great sinner! With face emaciated
and bad smell coming out of his body
and clothes, the sick man drowns his relae
tives into grief, : -

27. Hankering after the condition of
healthy men, such a man again and agaia
desires for death itself. A hero, ° havin
dignity and pride, does not deserve suc
an inglocious death. ab a ka

28. Surrounded by kinsmen and killing
his enemies in battle, a Kshatriya should
die at the edge of keen weapons. . __-


29. Actuated by lustful desire and filled
with rage, a hero fights furiously arid:
does not feel the wounds inflicted on his
person by enemies, ; :


go. Meeting with death in battle, h
acquires great merit, fame and the ‘respect
of the world which belongs to his order and
in the end tives with Indra in heaven. .


31. The hero, by not retreating from
battle and fighting by every means in his
power, careless of life itself, at the van
of battle, lives with Indra. :


32. Wherever the hero has met with deat!
in the midst of enemies without showing”
ignoble fear or cheerlessness, -he has. suc-
ceeded in acquiring blessed regions .here« ~


‘after.’
—
CHAPTER XCVIIL
(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA —


PARVA).—Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—

1. ‘Tell me, O grandfather, what regions
are.earned by unretreating heroes by meet«
ing with death in battle!’ 7


-


“hag :
Bhishma said:— -


‘2. ‘Regarding it, O Yudhishthira, is
cited the old-story of the discourse between
‘Amvarisha aiid Indra, c


‘ 2. Having gone to heaven that is so
Aifficult of acqusition, Amvarisha, the son
“of Nabhaga,: saw his own commander-in-
‘chief in those celestial regions in the com-
pany of Indra, "

‘4. ‘The king saw his: powerful general
‘shining with every kind of energy, gifted
with celestial form, seated on a very
-beautiful car, and going up and up towards
still higher regions.

5. Witnessing the prosperity of his
general Sudeva, and observing how he
-passed through regions that were still
higher, the great Amvarisha, stricken’. with
iwonder, addressed Vasava, in the following
vmanner,- -


Amvarisha said :—
6—9.. Having -propetly governed the
entire Earth bounded by the oceans, ,jhaving
“from. desiteé of acquiring religious merit
«practised atl those duties which are com=
mon to the four orders as sanctioned by
_ the scriptures, having practised with rigid
‘austerity all the duties of the Brahma-
“charryya‘mode, having waited with bbe-
dience upon ‘my preceptors and other reve-
‘vend: elders; having studied properly the
+ Vedas and the scriptares treating. on royal
eduties, having pleased the guests with food
and drink, the Pitris. with offerings in
« Shraddhas, the Rishis with attentive study
- of the scriptures and with initiation and
gthe, gods: with many good and high
sacrifices, having duly followed Kshatriya
duties according to the injunctions of the
“geriptures, having looked fearlessly at -hos-
‘tile troops, 1 acquired ‘many victories in
*-battle, O Vasava.
t0.. This Sudeva, O king of the deities,
‘ ayas formerly the commander-in-chief of
+ my army. tis true, he was a warrior of
‘a controlled soul. For what reason, how-
“vever, has-he succeeded jn superceding me?


zt. He never adored the gods ia high
and great sacrifices. He never pleased the
Brahmanas according to the ordinance.
-Why then, has he succeeded in supereed-
ing me?


Indra said :~


12, About this Sudeva, O sire, the great
sacrifice of battle had often been performed
by -him. And _ such. becomes the case with
coe other man, who engages himself in

2:-Dattle.


“430° Every warrior ¢Jad in a coat of mail


MAHABHARATA.


by .advancing ‘against enemies, in battle,
becomes installed in that sacerfice. Indeed,
it is settled that such a person, by acting
in this wise is regarded as the performer
of the sacrifice of battle. ;


Amvarisha- said :—

14. What are the libations In that sacri«
fice? What are its liquid offerings ? What
is its Dakshina? Who, again, are its
Ritwijas? ‘Tell me all this, O performer
of a hundred sacrifices. :


Indra said :—

15. Elephants are the Ritwijas of that
‘sacrifice, and horses are its Addhyaryus,
The flesh of foes are its libations,’ and
blood is its liquid offering. :


16, Jackals, vultures, and ravens, as
also winged arrows are its Sadasyas,


| These drink the residue of: the liquid -6ffer-


ing in this sacrifice and eat-‘the remnants>+
of its libations.

17. Masses of blazing, sharp, and well-
tempered lances and spears, of swords and


-darts and axes form the ladles of' the


sacrificer. ©


18. Straight, sharp, and well-tempered
shafts, with keen points and capable of
piercing the bodies of enemies, shot off
well-stretched bows, form its large double
mouthed ladies. ;


19. Sheathed in scabbard made of tigers
skin and equipt with in ivory handle, and
capable of cutting off the elephant’s trunk,-
the sword forms the wooden-stick of this
sacrifice. y :


20. Fhe strokes inflicted with shining
and keen lances and darts and swords and
axes, all made of hard iron, ‘form its pro-
fyse wealth collected. from the respectable
people by agreement regarding the amount
and. period, ;

21. The blood that runs over the field
for the fury of the attack, forms the finat
libation, which yields great merit and is
eapable of granting every wishin the Homa
of this.sacrifice. to

22. ‘Cut, Pierce,’ and such other sounds,
that are heard in the front ranks of. the
army, are the: Samans sung by its Vedic
chaunters in the abode of Yama. :

23. The front ranks of the enemy’s
army form the vessel for keeping libations.
The number of elephant and horses and
men equipt with shields forny the Shyena-
ehit fire of that sacrifice. .


24. The headless trunks that rise up
after thousands have. been killed form
the octagonal stake, made of Khadira


SHANTI PARVA,


Wadd, for the héro who célebrates that
‘sacrifice.

25. The cries Of the elephant when
\irged on with hooks, form its Ida Mantras.
The kettle-drums, with the striking of
palms forming the Vashats, O king, are its
Trisaman Udgatri.

26. Whea the préperty of a Brahthana
is being taken away, he who renounces his
dear body for protecting that property,
does, by that act of self-devotion, acquire
the merit of a sacrifice accompanied with
numberless presents.

27. That hero, who, for the sake of his
master, shows prowess at the van of the
‘array and does not retreat through fear,
acquires those regions of happiness that are
tine.

28. He, who covers the altar of the 3a-
trifice formed by battle, with swords cased
in bide-scabbards arid severed arnis resem-
bling heavy blidgeons, acquires the happy
regions like tire,


29. That warriér, who detertiined dpon
gaining victory, enter’ into the midst of the
enemy’s ranks without waiting for any help,
acquires happy régions like mine,


30+34. That wartidr, who in battle makes a
river of blood to flow, dreadful and difficult
16 crdss, Heals kettle-drims for its frogs
and tortoises, the bones of feroés for its
sands, blood and flesh for its mire, weds
and shields for its rafts, the hair of killed
warriors for its floating weeds and moss,
the number of horses and elephants and
tard for its bridges, Standards and banners
for its bushed of cane, the bodies’ of killed
elephatits for its boats aiid huge alligators,
swords and scimitars for its larger vessels,
vultures and Kankas and ravens for the
rafts that float upon it;—-that warrior, who
causes Such a river, which can with difficul-
ty be crossed by everi those who are coura-
geols aud powerful and which terrorizes
all timid men, is safd to complete the
Sactifice by performing thé final ably-
tions.


35. That hero, whose altar is covered
with the heads of foes, of horses, and of
elephants, acquires regioris of felicity like
tiine. d


’ 36~—37. The3ages have said that that
Warrior ,who considers the van of thie hostile
army as the quarters of his wives, who
regards the van of his own army as the
vessel for thé preservation of sacrificial
offerings, who takes the wartiors standing
to his south for his courtiers and those to
this north as his holders of fire, and who
tegacds the hostile army ds his marrigd


19


14s


Wife, succeeds in acquiring all regions of ©
felicity.

38. The open space, lying Between two
armies drawn up for fight, forms the altar
of such a Sacrificer, and the three Vedas
are his three sacrificial fires. Upon that
altar, helped by the recitation of the Vedas,
he celebrates his sacrifice.

. That infamous warrier, whe, retrea=
ting from the fight in fear, is killed by foes,
sinks into hell. There is nd doubt in this.


40. That warrior, of thé other hand,
Whose bldod drenchés the sacrificial altar
already covered with hair and flesh and
bones, forsodth, succeeds in acquiring 4 —
glorious end.

41, That powerfal warrior, who, having
killed the commander of the hostile army;
gets dpon the car of his fallen antagonist, is
considered as powerful as Vishnu himself
and as intelligerit as Vrihaspati, the pre+
ceptor of the gods.

42. That warrior, who can capture alive
the commander of the hostile army or his
son or some other respected leader, ac-
quires regions of Felicity 1iké mitie,


43. One should iiever lanient for a hero
killed in battle. A killed hero, if nobody
grieves for him, goes té Neaven and
acquire’ the respect of its residents,


44. .Men do hot wish te give food and
drink. Nordo they bathé nor eriter into
mourning for him. Listen to mie as I des-_
cribe the happitiess that is in store for such
a person, ; ;

45. Thousaids of leading nymphs, gd
out speedily coveting birn for their lord.

46. That Kshatriya, who duly observes
his duty In battle, witis by that act the
therits of penances and of righteousness.
Indeed, such conduct on his part is quite of
a piece with ile eternal path of duty.
Sitch a man dequires the merits of all thé
four modes of life. « ;

aj. The aged and the children should
not be killed;. nor a woman not oiie
who is flying away; nor one that holds
astiaw inhis-lips (sign of unconditional
surrender) ; nor oné wlio sayS—I am yoirs,
48—49. Having killed in battle Jams
bha, Vtitra, Vala, Paka, Shatamaya, Vi-
rochana, the irresistible Namuchi, Sham-
vara of numberless illusions, Viprachitti,—
all these sons of Diti and Danu,;—as also
Prahladha, I miyself have becortie the king
of the gads.


Bhishma continued :—
So. Hearing these words of Shakra and
approving of them, king Amvarisha under


14g


stood how warriors succeed in achieving
success for themselves,’


CHAPTER XCIX.


- (RAJADHARMANUSHASANA ©

; PARVA).—Coutinued.
Bhishma said :—

1. ‘Regarding it is cited the old story of


the battle between Pratarddana and the
king of Mithila.


2, The king of Mithila, vig. Janaka,
after installation in the sacrifice of battle,
pleased all his soliders. Listen to me, O
Yudhishthira, as | relate the story. ‘


3. Janaka, the great king of Mithila,
conversant with the truth of everything,
showed both heaven and hell to his own
warriors,


4. He addressed them, saying,—Look,
these are the effulgent regions, reserved
for those who fight fearlessly! Abounding
with Gandharva girls, those regions are
eternal and capable of granting every
desire.


8. There, on the other side, are’ the
regions of hell, reserved for those who
retreat from battle! ‘Khey would have to
rot there for ever in everlasting shame.


6. Determined upon saerificing your
very lives, do you conquer your enemies!
Do not fall into mfamous hell! The sacri-
fice of life in battle forms the happy door
of heaven for heroes!

7. Thus addressed by their king, O sub-
duer of hostile towns, the warriors of


Mithila, pleasing their king, defeated their


enemies in battle. The  strong-minded
psople should take their stand in the van
of battle.


8. The car-warriors should be placed in
the midst of elephants. Behind the car-
warriors should stand the cavalry. Behind
. the last should be placed the infantry all
clad in mail.


9. That king, who makes his battle array
inthis way, always succeeds in defeating his
enemies. ‘Yherefore, O Yudhisthira, the
ae of battle should always be formed
thus, ‘


to. Filled with wrath, heroes wish to
-acquire blessedness in heaven by fight-
ing fairly. Like Makaras agitating the
sea, they agitate the ranks of the
enenly.

it. Assuring oné another, they should
cheer up the cheerless, ‘he victor should


MAHABHARATA,


protect the newly conquered country, He
should not cause his troops to pursue the
dispersed enemies.


12, The attack cf rotited persons, wha
rally after being dispersed, is dreadful,
since losing all hope of life and des-
pairing of safety, they attack their pursuers.
Therefore, O king, you should not cause
your troops to pursue the, dispersed foes toa
tashly.


13. Brave warriors do not wish to strike
them that run away quickly. That is
another reason why the scattered foe should
not be pursued hotly.


14. ‘Things immobile are devoured by
those that. are mobile; toothless creatures
are. devoured by those that have teeth ;
water is drunk by the thirsty ; cowards are
devoured by heroes.


15, Cowards only sustain defeat, though
they, like theirvictors, possess similar backs,
stomachs, arms and legs. ‘They, who are
stricken with fear, bend their heads and
joining their hands stand before the coura-
Reouss

16. This world depends on the arms of
heroes ike a son on those of his father.
A hero, therefore, should be honored under
every circumstance.


17. ‘There is nothing superior in the three
worlds to heroism. ‘The hero protects and
maintains all, and all things depend upon


the gro.’


CHAPTER C.


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


1. Tell me, O grandfather, how kings
seeking victory should, O foremost of Bha-
rata’s race; lead their troops to battle ever
by acting slightly against the rules of :
righteousness.”


Bhishma said :—
2. ‘Some say that Righteousness is made


permanent by Truth; some, by Reasoning }
some, by -good conduct; and some, by


the application of means and cofttri-
vances,

3. I shall presently describe to you the
Mmeasis aid contrivances, which yield


immediate fruit. Robbers, transgtessing

all wholesome limits, very often become

destroyers of property and religious merit.
C


SHANTI PARVA.


4. For opposing and restraining them,
J shall tell you the means indicated in. the
scriptures. Hear as 1 describe those means
for the success of all deeds,


_ §- Both kinds of wisdom, plain and wily,
should be within the king’s reach, Vhoagh
acquainted with it, he should not, however,
apply the wily wisdom. He may use it
for withstanding the dangers that may be-
fall him.


_ 6, Enemies frequently injure a king by
creating disunion. ‘The king, conversant
with deceit, may, by the help of deceit,
counteract those enemies. :


7-9. Leathern armour for protecting the
bodies of elephants, as also those for bulls,
bones, thorns, and keen-pointed iron wea-
pons, coats of mail, yak-tails, sharp and
well-tempered weapons, all kinds. of armour
yellow and red, banners and standards of
various colours, swords, lances sharp scimi-
tars, battle axes, spears and shields, should
be manufactured and kept profusely in
store.


10. The weapons should all be properly
whetted. ‘Ihe soldiers should be filled with
courage and resolution, It is proper to
march the troops in the month Pi Chaitra
or Agrahayana.


11, The crops ripen about that time and
water also is not scarce. hat time of the
year, O Bharata, is neither very cold nor
very hot. .


#
' 12, Troops should, therefore, be marched
at that times If the enemy, however, be
reduced to a miserable plight, troops
should immediately be despatched. These


(two) are fhe best occasions for the
movement of troops for defeating the


enemies.


#3. That road which has profuse water
and grass along it, which is level and easy of
march, should betaken. The regions lying
near the road should previously be recon-
niotered through skilful spies having an
intimate knowledge of the woods,


14. The troops must not, like animals,
be marched through forests. Kings desir-
ous of victory should, therefore, follow good
roads for marching their army,


13. Inthe van should be placed a de-
tachment of brave, strong and high born
men. As regards forts, one which has
walls ‘and a trench full of water on
every side and only one entrance, is the
best. .


16. While attacking enemies resistance
may be offered from within it. In pitching
the camp, a region lying near the forest


is regarded as much better than one
. Ale


147


andere the open sky by men who are masters
of military science and warfare. The camp
should be pitched for the troops not far
from such a forest.


18. Pitching the camp at such a place,
placing the infantry in a safe place, and
meeting the foe as soon as he comes, are
the means for preventing danger and Gis-
tress. ©


1g. Keeping the constellation called
Ursa Major behind them, the troops
should fight, standing firmly like hills. By
this means, one may defeat even irresis-
tible foes.


19. The soldiers -should be placed in
such a position that the wind, the sun, and
the planet Shukra should blow and shine
from behind them. For acquiring victory,
the wind is superior to the Sun, and the sua
is superior to Shukea, O Yudhisthira.


21. Men who know the art of warfare
approve of a region which is freed from mire,
and whichis not watery, not uneven, and
not abounding with bricks and stone, as
well fitted for the operations of cavalry. -


22, A field which is free from mire
and holes is best suited for car-warriors.
A region which abounds with bushes and
large trees and which is under water is
suited for elephant warriors,


23. Aregion which has many inaccessible
spots, which abounds with huge trees and
cane, bushes, as also a hilly or woody region,
is well suited for the work of infantry.


24. Anarmy, O Bharata, which bas 4
large infantry, is considered very strong.
Anarmy which has a greater number of
cars and horsemen is considered to be very
powerful in a clear day,


25. Anarmy, again, which consists of a
greater number of infantry and-elephants
becomes effective in the rains. Having
carefully observed these points, the king
should devote his attention to the characte»
istics of place and time.


26. That king, who, having attended to


‘all these points, marches, under a propec


constellation and an auspicious luminary, .
always succeeds in acquiring victory by
properly leading his treops. ;
27—29. Noone should kill the sleepy, or
the thirsty, or the fatigued, or one whose ar- ,
mours have fallen away, or one who has set
his heart on final liberation, or one who is
flying away, or one who is walking along a
road, or one engaged in drinking or eating,
or one who is mad, or one who is insane, -
or one has been wounded mortally, or
one who has been greatly weakened by
his wounds, or one who is residing confi-
dentally, or one who has begun any


148


task without. having been able to finish
#, or one who is a master of some
particular art, or ome who is im grief, or
one who goes out of the camp for procuring
forage or fodder, or men who pitch camps
or ate camp-followers, or those who wait at
the gates of the king or of his ministers, or
his menials, or the heads of such servants. .


30. Those of your warriors who break
the ranks of enemies, or rally your retreat-
ing soldiers, should have their pay doubled
and should be honored by you with food,
drink, and seats equal to your own.


3t. The heads of ten soldiers amongst
them should be: made. heads of a hundred.
And the carefal bero who is the head of a
hundred soldiers, should be made the
head of a thousand.


- 32. Gathering together the leading wars
riors, they should be. addressed, saying,—
Let. us swear to conquer, and never to
leave one another!


: 33 Let these, who are afraid of their

life, remain. where they are. Let those
also stay behind who would cause their
chiefs to be killed by themselves neg-
lecting to act heroically in the thick of
the fray!


.34- Letsuch men only come as would
never retveat from battle.or cause their own
comrades to be killed! Protecting theic
own selves as also their comrades, they
are sure to kill the enemy in fight.


35-36. The result of retreating from
battle is loss of wealth, death, infamy, and
teproach, Unpleasant, sharp and cutting
remarks await the fate of him who re-
treats from battle, who Joses his lips and
teeth, who casts off all his weapons, or who
allows himself to be taken as a cuiptive by
the enemy. Let such evil results always
befall the warriors of our enemies.


37. Those who retreat from battle are
wretches among men. They simply in-
crease the number of men, ‘hey will
“neither piss in this world nor in the next
for true manoood.

38. Victorious enemies, O Sire, pro-
ceed gladly in pursuit of the flying comba-
fants, their praises all the while recited by

ards,


39. When enemies, coming to battle
Spoil the fame of a person, the misery the
latter feels is more piercing, I think, than
that of death itself,


40. Know that victory is the source of
religious merit and of every sort of happi-
ness. The heroes bear cheerfully what is
regarded as the highest misery by cowards,


41. Determined.upon acquiring heaven


MAHABHARATA.


we should fight not caring for fife itseff,
and prepared to conquer or die, and we
would attain then a blessed end in heaven!


42. Waving taker such amoath, and
prepared to cast away life itself, hernes
should bravely rush against the enemy’s
tangs.

43. In the van should be posted a
detachincnt of men armed with swords and
shields. In the rear should be planted the
car-division. In the interstice should be
placed other classes of warriors.


44. This should be the arrangement for.
attacking the enemy. ‘The veterans of the
army should fight in the van. They would
protect their comrades in the rear.


45- Those who are the foremost for
Strength and courage, should be placed in


the van. The others should stand behind
them.
46. The fear-stricken should, with care,


be comforted and encouraged. These
weaker combatants should be placed on the
field only to show the number of the army
to the foe.


47. Hf the troops are few, they should
be arranged closely for the fight. Wher
necessary, if their leader wishes, the close
arrangement may be extended widet
When a small number of soldiers is to figh
with a great many, they should be arranged
like a needte-point.


48. When asmall army is engaged with
a larger one, the leader of the former may
shake hands wih his men and cry aloud,
saying;— Ihe enemy is routed! The enemy
is routed! ;


46. Fhe strong amongst them should
resist the enemy, loudly saying to their
comrades,—Fresh friends have arrived!

earlessly strike at your enemies !

50. Those who have gone in advance
should utter loud shouts and make variout
kinds of noises and shovld blow and beas
Krakachas, cow-horns, drums, cymbals,.
and kettle-drums.’ :


CHAPTER CI.


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Cantinued.


Yudhisthira said :—


1. “OF what nature, of what conduct,
of what form, how clad, and how armed
should the warriors be in order that they
may be competent for battle 7” oat


SHANTI


Bhishma said :—

‘ a, ‘The soldier should use those weapons
and cars with which they have become:
familiar by use. Taking those weapons
and vehicles, brave soldiers, engage in
battle.


3. The Gandharas, the Sindhus, and
the Sauviras fight best with their nails and
fances. They are brave and very strong.
Their armies are capable of defeating all
forces.


4 The Ushinaras are endued with great
strength and skilled in-all sorts of weapons.
The Easterners are skilled in fighting from
the backs of elephants and are masters of

_all the ways of unfair fight.


5. The Yavanas, the Kamvojas, and
those that live around Mathura are well
skilled in fighting with bare arms. ‘The
Southerners. are expert in fighting swords in
band.


6, Itis well known that persons endued
with great strength and great courage are
born in almost every country. Listen to me
as I describe their characteristics.


7. Those, who have voices and eyes like
those of the lion or the tiger, those who
havea gait like that of the lion ,;and the
tiger, and those who have eyes like those
of the pigeon or of the snake, are all heroes
capable of grinding the enemies.

8. Those, who have a voice like a deer,


and eyes like those of the leopard or the
bull, are highly active. Those, whose voice


“is like that of bells, are excitable, wicked,


and weathful,


g- Those, who have a voice deep tike the
Lipeeehy of the clouds, who have angry
faces or faces like those of camels, those who
have hooked noses and tongues, are gifted
with great speed and can shoot or hurl
their weapons to a great distance.


to. Those, who have bodies curved like
that of the cat, and thin haic and thin skin,
are gifted with great speed and restlessness,
and are almost invincible in, battle.


rt. Some who have eyes closed like
those of the iguana, a mild disposition and
speed and voice like the horse’s, are capable
to fight all enemies.


12—13. Those, who have well-formed,
and symmetrical and beautiful bodies, and
broad chests, who are irate upon hearing
the enemy’s drum or trumpet, who take
delight in fights of every kind, who have
eyes indicative of gravity, or eyes which
seem to shoot out, or eyes which are green,
those who have frowing faces, or eyes
like those of the mungoose, are all brave

>


PARVA. 349


and capable of sacrificing their tives in
batile.


14—15. Those, who have crooked eyes,
and broad foreheads, and check-bones not
fleshy, and arms strong as thunder-bolts,
and fingers bearing circular, macks, and
who aresparely built, and whose arteries
and ‘nerves are visible, rush with great
impetuosity when the collision of battle
takes place. Resembling angry elephants,
they, become irresistible, ’


16-20. They who have greenish and
eurling hairs, who have flanks, cheeks, and
faces. fat and fleshy, who have elevated
shoulders and broad necks, who have fears
ful faces and fat calves, who are fiery like
the horse Sugriva or like the son of Garuda
the son of Vinata, who have round heads,
large mouths, faces like those of cats, shrill
voice and angry temper, who rush to battle,
impelled by its din, who are wicked and
full of arrogance, who are of dreadful coun-
tenances, and who live in the outlying dis-
tricts. never eare for their'lives and do never
fly away from battle. Such troops shou d
always be planted in the vam. ‘They always
kill their foes in fight and suffer themselve:
to be killed without fying. ‘


19. Of wicked conduct and ‘foreign
manners, they consider soft speeches as
marks of defeat. if treated leniently,
they always: show anger against their
sovereign,’


——


CHAPTER CII.


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Conlinued. :


Yudhishthira said :— :

1. “What are the well-known signs, O
foremost of Bharata’s race, of the future
success of an army? I wish to kn6w
them, :


Bhishma said :—


2. ‘I shall tell you, O foremost ‘of Bha-
rata’s race, all the well-known marks of the
(future) success of an army ? —


3—4. When the gods become angry
and men are. impelled by Destiny, learned
persons, . seeing everything with the eye
of divine knowledge, perform various aus-.
picious acts and expiatory rites including.
Homa and the silent recitation of Mantras,
and thus counteract all evils,


5. That army in which the troops
and the animals are all. hearty aad-
cheerful, O Bharata, is: sure to gain a
decided success. .


150 MAHABHARATA,


. 6. The wind blows favorably from | 17. The victory, O Bharata, that one
behind such troops. Rainbows appear in | gains by battle is very inferior. Victory in
the sky, ‘Ihe clouds cast their shadows | battle, depends on caprice or destiny.
upon them and occasionally the sun shines 18. When a large army is routed and the

_ Upon them. troops begin to fly away, it is highly difficule
‘9. The jackals, ravens and vultures | to restrain their flight. The force of the
become auspicious to them. When these | flight resembles that of a mighty current of
show such regard tothe army, great suc- | water or of a frightened herd of deer.
cess is sure to be achieved by it. 19. Seeing some routed,- others, even

.' 8 Their sacrificial fires burn up with a | though they are brave and skilled in fight,
pure splendour, the light going upwards | break without sufficient cause. A large
and the smokeless flames shghtly bending army, consisting of brave soldiers, is like
towards shes south. The vee poured a large herd of Ruru deer.
thereon send out a sweet smell. These. are : ~

4 20. Sometimes it is seen that even fift
the marks of {future success. men, firm and relying upon one enone,
g. The conchs and drums blown and | cheerful and prepared to sacrifice theic
beat, send forth loud and deep peals. | lives, succeed in grinding enemies much
The watriars become filled with confidence. superior to them in number.
These are the marks of future success, Be 1 Bomeiiniea: even. 2 Riko OR ae oe:
to, If deer and other quads once: be | seven men, firm and standing close together,
seen behind or to the left of those that have | of high birth and esteemed of those that
already started for battle or of thase that | know them, defeat enemies much superiort
are about to start, they are regarded aus- | to them in number.
picious. Lf they appear to the right of. the 22. The collision of battle is not at alf
warriors about to engage in slaughter, it is : . .

A desirable as long as it can be avoided.
considered as a mark ofsuccess, If, how- Whe policy af eoncilialian, osereating: diac
ever, they appear in the van of such ‘ Dard nan - ‘ite sh ld fest S

ersons, they presage disaster and de- | UnlOn, ang maxing, gills sueu c
eat tried; battle, it is said, should take place
a If the birds, swans, cranes, Shata ie ee:
hee et , Sao A 23. On seeing a hostile army, fear para
patras and Chashas utter auspicious cries, lyses the timid” as on seeing a thunder-,


and all the able-bodied warriors become ; ‘
cheerful, these are considered as marks of- ane they ask,~—Qh upon what would it


future success. ; cai! ;

12, They, whose arrangement shines} 24: Having determined that a battle is

forth and becomes terrible to look at for | T28'™&: the limbs of those that go to join

the lustre of their weapons, machines, it, as also of him that is conquering, are
covered with perspiration.


armour, and standards, as also .
shining hue of the faces of the stro 25.. The entire seat of war, O king, be-|
which compose it, always succee comes agitated and afflicted, with all its
feating ‘heir enemies. mobile and immobile residents. The very

13. lf the warriors of an army be of marrow of creatures, scorched with the heat
pure conduct and madest manner and treat | Of weapons, languishes with pain. :
one another with loving kindness, it is re- 26. A king should, therefore, at al
times, use the means of conciliation, -ae-


garded as a mark of future success. u r
14. If sweet sounds and odors and sen- | COMpanied with hard measures, When
sations of touch prevail, and if the warriors people are assailed by enemies they always
are filled with gratitude and patience, it is | display a tendency to come to terms.
27. Secret agents should be sent for


regarded ag the root of success. ;
15. The crow on the left of a person en- | Creating apaee meted the allies of the.
aged in battle and on the right of him | enemy. aving create isunion, it ts very |
B86 8 desirable that peace should then be made;


who is about to engage in it, is considered | 4¢ : A ,
auspicious. Appearing at the back, it pre- | With that king who is more powerful than
the enemy,


sages the non-fulfilment of the objects in :
view, while its appearance in the front indi- 28. If the invader does not act thus, -he
‘| can never succeed in crushing his enemy.


cates danger. .
completely. In dealing with the foe, care


16, Even after enlisting a large army : :
consisting of the fourfold forces, you should, shoe be taken for attacking him from all ,
sides.


O ¥udhisthira, first behave peacefully. If
29. Forgiveness always comes to the:


your attempts to secure peace fail, then you
may engage in battle. | Bood. It never comesto the bad. Listen ;
? : : :


SHANTI PARVA.


Yidy, O Partha, tothe uses of forgiveness
and of hardness.


30, The fame of a king who shows for-
Riveness after conquest spreads more
widely, The very enemies of a forgiving
person trust him even when he beéoriies
guilty of a heinous crite.


31. Shamvara has said that having
assailed aii enemy, forgiveness should be
shown afterwards, for a wooden pole, if
made straight without heat, very soon
assumes its former state.


32. Persons conversant with the scrip-
tures do not; however, praise this. Nor
do they consider this a characteristic of a
good king. On the other hand, they say
that an enemy should be subdued and res-
trained like a father subduing and checking
ason, without anger and without killing
him.

33. If, O Yudhishthira, a king becomes
severe, he is hated of all creatures. If, on
the other hand, te becomes inild, he is
disregarded by all. :Do you, therefore,
practise both severity and mildness.


34. Before striking, O Bharata, and
while stiking, utter sweet words ; and after
having beaten them, show them mercy and


fet them understand that you are grieving’.


and weeping for them.


35. Having defeated an army, the kirig
should address the survivors saying,—{ am
hot at all glad that so many have beef
killed by my men. Alas, the latter, thoiigh
repeatedly dissuaded by me, have inot
obeyed my orders,


36. I wish they were all alive. They do
not deserve such death. They were all
dod atid sincere men, and unretreating
from battle. Such nien, indeed, are rate.


37. Hethat has killed such a hero in
battle, has Surely done that which I do not
Kike.— Having said so before the survivors
ofthe defeated enemy, the king should in
secret hotior those airiongst-his own troops
that have bravely killed the foe.


38. For comforting the wounded slayers
for their sufferings at the hand of the enemy,
the king, desirous of securing their devotion
lo: lintseff, shotld eVen weep, catching

- their hands affectionately,


39. The king shotild thus, under all
circumstances, behave with conciliation.
A fearless and virtuousiking, is loved by all
creatures.


4o. All creatures, also, O Bharata;
trust such a king. Winning their confidence,
he succeeds in enjoying the Earth as he
pleases,


“¥8t


.4t. The king shoyld, therefore, by
casting off deceitftiIness, seek to secure the
confidence of all creatures. He should also
try to protect his subjects from. all fears if
he seeks to enjoy the Earth,’


CHAPTER Cit.


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continued.


Yudhisthira said :—

1. “Tell me, O grandfather, how should
a king treat a mild foe, one who is fierce,
and one who has thatty allies and a large
army.”
Bhishmia said ‘— ae

2. ‘Regarding it is cited, O Yudiis
ishthird the old discourse between Vrihas-
pati and Indra,


3. Once on a tithe; that destroyer of
hostile hetoes, v7., Vasava; the king of
the gods, joining his hands, approached
Vrihaspati, and saluting him, said these
words;


Indra said ‘=

4. How, O twice-born otie, should t
treat my etiernies ? How shotild ji. subdue
them by various contrivances, without
rooting them out ? ,


5. In a collision between two armies,
victory may be achieved by either sidev
In what way should I behave so that this
shining prosperity that I have atquired
and that scorches all my enetnies; may not‘
leave me? -


6. Thus addiessed, Vrihaspati, skitled
in Virtne, Profit, aiid Pleasure, endued
with a knowledge of royal duties, and great
intelligence; answered Indra as follows.


Vrihaspati said :—

j. Ohe should never wish to vanquisli
hig enemies by quarrel. Worked up with
anger and shorh of forgiveness, boys obly
seek quarrel,

8. One who wishes for the destruction of
a foe, should not make that foe careful.
On the other hand, one should never dis-
play one’s anger or fear o¢ joy. -He should
conceal these within his own heart.


g. Without trusting one’s foe in reality,
one should treat him in such a way as if he
trusted. him completely. One should
always speak sweet words to one’s enemies
and never do anything that is disagree-
able,


152


' to—rr. One should avoid useless acts
of hostility as also insolent speech, As a
fowler, carefully uttering cries like those
of the birds he wishes to catch} or destroy;
captures and brings them ander his control,
even so should a king, O Purandara, bring
his enemies under subjection and thea kill
them if he lives.


12. Haviiig defeated one’s enemies, otte
should not sleep at ease. A wicked enemy
rises up again like a fire carelessly extin-
guished te-appearing itself.


13. When vic‘ory may be achieved by
either side, a hostile collision of arms
should be avoided. Having made an
enemy feel security, one should subdue him
and achive one’s end.


14—15. Having consulted his ministers
and intelligent persons conversant with
policy, an enemy that is distegarded and
heglected, nevet owning sdbmission at
heart, striktes the disregarder at the proper
season, especially when the fatter takes a
false step. By engaging trustworthy agents
of: his own, such an enemy would also make
the other's forces inefficient by creating
disunion.

16+17. Knowing the beginning, the
middle, and the end of his enemy, a kiri,
should secretly entertain feelings of hostility
towards them. He should corrupt the forces
of his enemy, determing everything by posi-
tive evidence; creating disunion, making
gifts, and administering poison. A king
should never live with Kis toes.

18. A king should wait long and then
kill his enemies. Indeed, he should wait, for
the opportunity, so that he might attack


his enemy ata time when the fatter would |


hot expect him in the feast. A king should
never killa large number of the enemy's
army, although he should certainly do that
which would secure him decisive victory.


tg. ‘The king should never do such an
injury to his enemy as wouldremain in the
fatter's heart. Nor should the afflict hiny
with wordy datts and arrows. If the oppor-
tunity comes, he should strike him, without
fetting it slip. En.this way, O king of the
gods, should a king, desirous of killing his
foes, treat them.


ze. Ff an opportunity, with respect to
the man who waits for it, ofce goes away,
it can never be secured again by the
person desirous of acting.


zai; Acting according to the advice of
the wise, a king should’ only break the
strength of his enemy. He should never,
when the opportunity is not favorable, try
to-achieve his end. Nor should he, whe
the opportunity arises, persecute his enemy.


MAHABARATA.


22. Giving up fist, ariger and pridé;
the king should, carefully and continuaby;
watch for the shortcomings of his foes.


23. His own mildness, (he hardship of
his punishments, his inactivity and care-
lessness, O king of the gods, and the
deceitful means well applied (by his foes),
tuin a foolish king,


24. That king wha cart overcome these
four shortcomings arid counteract the de-
ceitful expedients of his enemies, succeeds,
forsooth, in smiting them all.


25. When only one ministet is capable _
to perform a sécret object, the king should
consult with that one minister only regard-
ing such secret object. Many ministers;
if consulted, try to throw the burden of the
task upon one another's shoulders and evert
give out that object which should be kept
close.


26. If consultation with one is not pro-
per,’then only should the king consult witht
many. When enemies are ftot seen, he
should invoke divine punishtiient upon
them ; when seen, the army, consisting of
fourfold forces; should be set in motion.


27. ‘The king stioild first use the
means of creating disunion, as also those of
conciliation. When the time for each par-
ticular meats acrives, that pee ex.
pedient should be made tse of.

28. Occasionally the king should ever
prostrate him self before a powerful enemy.
tt is again desirable that acting with evety
care, he shoutd try to bring about the
victor’s destruction when the fatter be- '
comes careless.

zg. By prostfating one’s self, by giving
tribute, by utteriig sweet words, one should
humble one’s self befote a more powerful
king. Ore should never do anything that
may ¢réate the suspicions of one’s powetlul
enemy. .

go. The weaker king should, tinder such
circumstances, carefully avoid every actthat -
may Create suspicion. A_ victorious king,
again, should not trust his defeated ene-
mies, for the vanquished always remain
alert. ;

31. There is nothing, O best of gods,
that is more difficult to be done than the
acquisition of prosperity, O king of gods;


‘by restless persons,


g2. The very existence of restless person¢
is dangerous. Kings should, therefore, with
minute attention, determine their friends, °
and enemies.


23. A mild king is always disregarded.
Hf he becomes fieree, te strikes people witlr
fear. Therefore do not be fierce. De not, -


SHANTI PARVA;


again, be mild. But be both fierté and
raild.

34. As a’ rapid current ceaselessly
washes away the high bank and causes
large landslips, so carelessness and mistake
bring about the ruination of a kingdom.

35—36. Never attack matty enemies
simultaneously. By using the méans of €on-
ciliation, orof gift,or of creation of disunion,
O Purandara, they should be assailed one
by one. The victor may treat peacefully
the reninant. An intelligent king, even if
competent for it, should tiot begin to crush
all simultaneously.


37~—38. When a king happens to have a
Jarge army consisting of sixfold forces and
enough of horse, elephants, cars, foot, and
engines, all devoted to him, when he
thinks himself superior to his enemies in
many respects upon a fair éomparison, then
should he openly strike the enemy without
hesitation.


39. Ifthe enemy be sttrong, the adop-
tion of a policy of conciliation is not good.
On tlie other hand, punishment by- secret
means should be inflicted. Such enémies
should not be treatéd mildly, repeated
attacks, destruction of crops, poisdning of
wells and tanks, and suspicion regarding
the seven branches of administration,
should be made.


40. The king should, on such occasions,
adopt various kinds of deception, various


expedients for setting his foes. against one -


another, and various kinds of hypocrisy.
He should also, through trusted agents,
Jearn the doings of his enemies in their
cities and provinces,


4. Kings, O killer of Vala aiid Vritra,
pursuing their enemies and entering theic
towers, seize and approepriate the best
things that ate to be had there, arid adopt
proper measures of policy in theie own
cities and dumiaions,

42. Presenting theni wealth privately,
and confiscating their properties publicly,
without, however, injuring them materially,
and proclaiming that they ate all wicked
men who have‘ stffered for their own mis-
deeds, kings should despatch their agents
to the cities and provinces of their enemies.


_ 43. At the same time, in their own cities;

they should, through others persons well-
read in scriptures, eiidued with every
accomplishment, acquainted with the in-
junctions of the sacred books ; and possessed
of learning, cause incantations and foe-
destroying tites to be petformed.


Indra said — :
44. What ate the marks, O. best of the
29


153


twice-born, of a wicked person!’ Accosted
by me, tell me how am I to know who is
wicked ! :

Vrihaspati said :-— ey

45. A wicked person is he who speaks
of the faults of others at their back, who is
filled with envy on seeing the accomplish-
ments of others, and wlio remains silent when
the merits of other people are described
before him, being most unwilling to join
them.

46. Mere silence is no mark of wicked-
ness on such occasions. Awicked person
breathes heavily, bites his lips, and shakes.
his head, :


47. Such a person always mixes in
society and talks irrelevantly. Such a
man never does what he promises, when
the persori ta whom he -has given the
assurance does not observe him. When
this man observes him, the wicked ntan
does not even refer to the subject. E


48. The wicked man eats alone, and
finds fault with the food placed before him,
saying,—All is not right to-day, as before,
His true nature comes out when sitting;
lying down; and riding. .

49. Lamenting in times of sorrow and
rejoicing’ in times of joy arezthe marks of
a friend.. Contrary actions form thre indi-
cations of an enemy.


- 50. Keep in hg heart these sayings,.
O king of the gods! The nature of wicked
meni can never be concealed.


gt. I have now told you, O foremost of
gods, what are the marks of a wicked
person. Having listened to the truths given
dut in the scriptures; follow them duly;
O king of the gods! oe


Bhishria said :—

52. Having heard theésé words of Vri-
haspati, Puratidara, engaged in defeating
his foes, followed theri strictly. Bent upon
victory, that destroyer of foes, when the
opportunity came, followed: these instrucs
tions and subdued all his enemies !’


CHAPTER Civ.
(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continued,
Yudhishthira said —~_ 7

1. ‘How should a righteoiis king; wha
is opposed by. his own officers, whose trea-
sury and army are not under his control,


and who has no wealth, att for acquiring
happiness 7” ;


154.


Bhishma said :—

2. ‘Regarding it the story of Kshema-
darshin is often related. I shall describe
that story to you. Listen to it, O Yudhis-
thira. ;

3, We fhave heard that intdays of yore,
when prince Kshemadarshin had become
weak in strength and fallén into great dis-
tress, he went to the sage Kalakavrikshiva
and saluting him humbly, said him these
words,


The king said :—

4—5. What should a perso like me
who is worthy to have wealth, but who has,
after repeated attempts, failed to regain
his kingdom, de, ‘O Brahmana, excepting
suicide, thieving and robbery, seeking
fefuge with others, and other acts of mean-
ness of a similar nature? O best of men,
tell me this, °


‘6. One like you who are conversant with
morality and full of gratefulness is the
refuge of a person suffering from disease
mental or physical. :


7. Man should renounce his desires.
By acting in that way, by casting off joy
and sorrow, and acquiring the wealth of
knowledge, he succeeds in acquiring happi-
ness. :

8. 1 am ‘sorry for them who follow
worldly happiness accruing from wealth.


All ‘that, however, disappears “like a
dream.
g. They who can renounce vast wealth


achieve a most difficult task, As for our-
selves we are unable to renounce that
wealth which exists no longer,


to. ‘Lam shorn of prosperity and have
been reduced to a miserable and unhappy
plight! Instruct me, O Brahmana, what
happiness I may yet try to secure.

tr. Thus accosted by the intelligent
prince of Koshala, the sage Kalakavrikshi-
ya gave the following answer,


fhe sage said —

12. You have, it appears, already
understood it. Endued with knowledge
as you are, you should act as you think.
Your belief-is correct, namely,—All this
that I see is brittle, myself as also every-
thing that I have !

13. Know, ‘© prinee, that those things
which you consider.-as existing do not
in reality exist. The “wise know this
very well, and are, therefore, never pained
with the distress whatever that may be.


| 14, What has taken place and what
will bring to pass are all unreal, When


MAHABHARATA.


t you will know this which should be known
by all, you will be shorn of unrighteousness,


15. Whatever things had been acquired
by those that came before, and whatever
acquired by their successors, have all per-
ished. ‘Thinking of all this, who is thete
that will give way to grief ?


16. Things that were, are no more.
Things that are, will again be no more.
Grief cannot restore them. One should
not, therefore, succumb to grief.


17. Where, O king, is your father to-day
and where your grandfather? To-day you
see them‘not,*nor do they now see you !


18. Meditating on your own instability,
why do you grieve forthem? Think with
the help of your intelligence, and you will
understand that you will cease to be !


to. Myself, yourself, O ting, your
triends, and your foes, shall forsooth,
cease to be. Indeed, everything will cease
to be.


zo. Those men who are now twenty or
thirty years old, will, forsooth, all die within
the next hundred years.


21. If a man cannot willlngty relinquish
his immense wealth, he should then try to
think that his belongings, are not his own
and by that means seek to do good to
himself,


- 22. Future acquisitions should be con-
sidered by one as not one’s own. Lost
properties, should also be regarded by one
as not his own. Destiny should be
deemed.as all powerful. ‘They who think
in this wise are eonsidered wise. Thig
mood: of regarding all things is an attribute
of the good.


23. Many persons who are equal or
superior toyou in intelligence and manli-
ness, though bereft of wealth, are not kings
but are still alive.


24. They are not, like you. They do
not indulge in grief like you. ‘Therefore,
eease to grieve in this wise! Are you not
superior to those men, or at least equal to
them in intelligence and manliness ?


The king said :—

25. I consider the kingdom which I had
with alt its parapharnalia to have been
acquired by ‘me without any exertion.
Omnipotent Tinte, however, O twice-born
one, has swept it away.


26. The result, however, that E see, of
my kingdom having been carried away by
Time as by a stream, is that 2 am obliged
to subsist upon whatever I get as-alms!


SHANTI PARVA.


The se ge said :—

27. Actuated by the knowledge of what
is true, one should never grieve for either
the past or the future. Be you of such a
mood of mind, O prince of Koshala,
tegarding every affair that may arrest
your attention !


28. Wishing to possess only that which
is obtainable and not what is unobtainable,
do you enjoy your present belongings and
never grieve for what is absent.

29. Be you satisfied, O prince of
Koshala, with whatever you can easily get.
Even if divested of prosperity, do not grieve
for it but try to maintain a pure character.


30. Only an unfortunate and foolish wight


when divested of former prosperity, blames |.


the supreme Ordainer, without being con-
tented with his present position.

31—32. Such a person considers otherss
however undeserving, as men blessed with
prosperity. Therefore, those who are
possessed of malice and vanity and puffed
up with a sense of egoism, suffer more
misery still. You, however, O king, are
not sullied by such vices,


33- Bear the prosperity of others, inspite
of your being divested of the same. Clever
and expert men succeed in enjoying the
prosperity of their enemies. Prosperity
relinquishes the person that hates others.


34. Pious and wise men conversant with
the duties of Yoga renounce prosperity
and sons and grandsons of their own
‘accord,


35- Others, considering earthly posses-
sions to be exceedingly unstable and
unobtainable, and dependent upon con-


155


wealth, such a person foses all other objects
of life.


| 40. H, O prince of Koshala, a person
loses that wealth which had been acquired
with difficulty and after which he had han-
kered, he then, overcome by despair, gives
up all desire of wealth,


41. Some righteous and highly-born
persens devote themselves to the acquisi-
tisn of virtue. These renoimce every
kind of worldly happiness from securing
the same in the other world.


42. Some persons sacrifice life itself,
actuated by the desire of acquiring wealth.
These do not think that life without wealth
has any use.

43. Mark at their pitiable condition !
Witness their foolishness! When life is sa
short and uncertain, these men, actuated by
ignorance, seek wealth.


44. Whois there that would busy him-
self with hoarding when destruction is its
end, hanker after Jife when death is its
end, and after union when separation is its
end ?


45. Sometimes man renounces wealth,
and sometimes wealth renounces man,
What man endued with knowledge is
there who would grieve at the loss of
wealth ? There are many other persons
in the world who lose wealth and friends,

46. See, O king, with your intelligence,
and you will come to tearn that the cala-


mities which befali men are all owing
| 40 theie own conduct! Do you, there-
‘| fore, control your senses, mind and
speech, “


47. For, if these become weak and


tinued exertion, are also seen to renounce | productive of evil there is no man ‘who can


at.


stand aloof from temptation of externat


36. You seem to be endued with wisdom. ‘objects by which he is always surrounded.


‘Why, then, do you grieve so piteously, seek-
ing for things which should not be sought


for, since they are unstable and depen-.


dent on others?

37. You wish to know the temperament
of mind which would give you happiness.
The advice I give you is to renounce all


objects of desire! Objects which should be,


discarded appear to one as those which he
should seek to secure, while those which
should be secured appear to him as objects
which should be avoided.

38. Some lose their wealth while seeking
the same. Others consider wealth as the
source of endless happiness, and, therefore
pursue it eagerly. .

39. Some again, overjoyed with wealth,
think that there is nothing superior to it.
While eagerly seeking for the acquisition of


As no one can form a good idea of the past
nor of the future, there being many inter-
vals of time and place, a person like you
who are endued with such wisdom and such
prowess, never grieve: for union and sepa-
jfation, for good or evil.


48. A person so mild by-nature, of con-
trolled self, and settled conclusions, and
.observant of Brahmacharyya vows, never
grieve and never becomes restless from the
desire Yof acquiring or from the fear of
losing anything insignificant,


49. Itis not proper that such a man
should follow a deceitful life of mendicancy,
a life that is sinful and wicked and cruef
and which befits only a. human wretch.


50, Do you goto the great forest and
lead a life of happiness there, all alone and


156


subsisting upon fruits and roots, restraining
words and soul, and filled with mercy for
all creatures.


51. He, who cheerfully teads such a life
in the forest, having elephants of large tusks
for companions, with no human being by
his side, and contented with the produce of
the forest, is said to follow the footsteps of
the wise.


52. A large lake, when it becomes dis-
turbed, becomes silent itself. Likewise, a
wise man, when disturbed in such matters,
becomes tranquil of himself. I see. that a
person, who has been reduced to such a
plight as yours, may live happily even
thus,

53- When it is impossible for you to
recover your prosperity and when you are
without ministers and counsellors, such a
course is open to you. Do you expect to
reap any benefit by depending upon
destiny ? ; ’


S atiemtaaaadl


CHAPTER CV.


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).~—-Continued, “go


The sage said :—

1. If, ott the other hand, O Kshatriya,
you think that you still possess any prowess,

shall describe to you about that line of
policy which you may follow for recovering
your kingdam.  - . ;

2. If youcan adopt that policy and try
to exert yourself, you can still regain your
prosperity. Listen attentively to alithat I
say to you fully.

3. If you act according to those counsels,
“you may sot eae immense wealth, your
kingdom and kingly power and great
prosperity.

4. Hf you like it, O king, tell me, for
then I shail describe to you that policy.


The king said :—

3. Tell me, O holy one, what you wish
tosay. [am willing to hear and act accor
ding to your advice. Let this my meeting
with you to-day produce mighty results. -


The sage said :—


6. Casting off pride, desire, anger and


joy and fear, wait upon your. very foes,’


humbling yourself and joining your hands.

7. Do you wait upon Janaka the king
of Mithila, always performing good and
pure asts.


The highly truthful king of.


MAHABHARATA.


Videha will,
wealth.


8. You will then become the right arm:
af that king and secure the confidence of alk
persons. As an outcome of this, you will
win. over many courageous and persevering
allies, pure in behaviour, and free from the.
seven cardinal faults.


9g. By following his duties, a person of
subdued self and having his senses under
control succeeds in raising himself and
gladdening others.


to. Honored by Janaka endued with
intelligence ‘and: prosperity, you will
certainly become the right hand of that
king and enjoy the confidence.of all.


t1. Having then mustered a large force
and held consultations with good ministers,
do you create dissensions among youc
enemies, and setting them against one
another, break them all like a person break-
ing a Vilwa with a Vilwa. Or, making
peace with the enemies of your foe, destroy
the latter’s power.


T2—13. You will then cause your
enemies to be attached to such good things.
as are not easily got at, to beautiful women
and clothes, beds and seats and cars, alt
very costly, and houses, and birds and
animals of various species, and juices and
pecfumes and fruits, so that your foe may
be ruined of himself. :


14. If one’s enemy be thus managed, or
if he is treated indifferently, one, who wishes.
to act according to good policy, should
never allow that foe to know it at all.


-15. Following the conduct approved of
the wise, do you enjoy every kind of plea-
sure in the territories of your enemy, and
imitating the conduct of the dog, the deer,
and the crow, be outwardly a friend to your
enemies, .


16. Make them undertake works which,
ate difficult of accomplishment. See also
that they enter into hostilities with powerfu 4
enemies. ;

“17. . Making them attached to pleasure,
gardens and rich beds and seats, do you,
by offering such objects of enjoyrnent, |


forsooth, give you great


-| exhaust your enemy’s treasury.


18. Advising your enemy to celebrate
sacrifices and make gifts, do you please the
Brahmanas. The latter will do goodr to
you in return, and devour your enemy like
wolves. :


19. Forsooth, a person of righteous deeds
acquires a high end. By such deeds men
earn highly happy regions in heaven,


20. If the treasury of your faes be'.ex-


SHANTI


hausted, every one of them, O prince of
Koshala, may be subdued.


a1. The treasury is the source of happi-
ness in heaven and victory on Earth. It is
in consequefiée of their wealth that enemies
enjoy such happiness. The’ treasury,
therefore, shoald by every means be drain-
ed. Do not speak highly of manliness in
the presence of your foe, but speak highly
of destiny.


22, Forsdoth, ‘the man who depends too
much on acts of worship of the gods soon
meets with ruin. Making your enemy
perform the great sacrifice called Vishwajit
and divest him by that means of all his
wealth.


' 23, Through this “your object will be
acoomplished. You may then inform your
enemy of the fact that the best men in his
kingdom are being oppressed, and point out
some great asceit a master of Yoga.


.24. Your enemy will then desire to
adept renunciation and_ retire into the
wo@eds seeking liberation. You will then,
with the help of drugs prepared by boiling
highly efficacious herbs and plants, and of
artificial salts, kill the elephants and horses
and men,


' 25. These and many other well-laid
plans exist, but they are alt connected with
fraud. An intelligent person can thus
destroy the denizens of a lNostile kingdom
with poison. ;


'


CHAPTER CVL


'(RAJADMARMANUSHASANA
PARVA.)-—Continued.


The king said :—.

t. I donot wish, O Brahmana, to sup-
port life by deceit or fraud. I do not seek
wealth, however profuse, which is to be
acquired by unfair means.


2. Inthe very beginning of our present
discourse I excepted these means. By
adopting only such means as would not
imcur censure, such means as would benefit
me in every respect, by doing only such
acts as are not harmful, 1 wish to live in
this world! 1 canmot follow these ways
which you point out tome! Indeed, these
instructions do not become you!


The sage said :—

4. These words, O Kshatriya. which
you give vent to, point you out as a pious
man, Indeed, you are pious by nature
and understanding, O you of great experi-
ence.


5. I shail try for the good of you both.
I shall create a union, between you and
that king, which should be eternal and can-
not be broken. :


6. Who is there that would not like to
have a minister like you‘who are born of a
noble family, who abstain from all unfaie
acts and cruelties, who are highly learned,
and who are well versed in the art of
government and of conciliation.


7. 1 say this, O Kshatriya, because,
though bereft of kingdom and plunged
into great distress, still you wish to follow
a pious course,


8. The king of the Videhas, ever de-
voted to truth, will come to my residence
soon. Forsooth, he will do what I will ree -
quest him to do, : ye


Bhishma said :—

9. Thereafter, inviting the king of the
Videhas, the sage said these words to him,
-—This person is of royal bieth. I know his
very lieart. °


1o. His soul isas pure as the’ surface
of a mirror or the disc of -the autumnal
moon. He has been perfectly examined by
me. I do not see any shortcoming in him. .


rt. Let there be friendship between him
and you. Do you place confidence in him
as in myself. A king who has no capable
minister cannot govern his kingdom even
for three days, ~


12. The minister should be brave and
highly intelligent... By these two qualities
one may conquer both the worlds. Mark,
O king, these two qualities well, since they
are necessary for governing a kingdom.


13. Pious kings have no such refuge as
a minister endued with such attributes.
This great person is of royal birth. He
always treads the path of the righteous.


14. This one, who always follows right-
eousness, has been a valuable acquisition.
Hf treated by you with respect, he will sub-
due your enemies, «


15-16. If he engages in battle with you,
he will do what asa Kshatriya he should
do. Indeed, if, following the conduct of
his ancestors, he fights for conquering you,
it will be your duty to fight him, for asa
Kshatriya it is your duty 10 conquer anta-
gonists. Without engaging in battle, how-
ever, do you, at my behest, employ him
under you from desire of benefiting your-
self, .

17. Have your eyes on righteousness,
casting off covetousness. You. should not
abandon the dufies of your order from lust


or from desire of battle.


£58


. ¥8. Victory, O sire, is not certain.
Defeat also is not certain. Knowing this,
peace should be made with an enemy by
giving him food and other things of
enjoyment. 4


19. One may witness victory and defeat
in his own case. They, who seek to root out
an enemy, are sometimes exterminated
themselves :in their endeavours !


20—21. Thus accosted, king Janaka,
properly salating and honoring that fore-
most of Brahmanas worthy of every honor,
replied to him, saying,—VYou are highly
learned and wise. hat you have said
from desire of benefiting us, is certainly
adyantageous for both of us.


- 32, Such a course of conduct is. highly
beneficial to us. I do not hesitate to
say this ! 4

23. Then, addressing the prince of
Koshala, the king of Videha said these
words, —Following Kshatriya duties as also
with the help of policy, I have conquered
the world, .


‘pg. IT have, however, O best of kings,
been conquered by you with your good
qualities, Without feeling any sense of
humiliation, live you with me as a victor.


25. I honor your intelligence, and “Tf”


honor your power. I do not disregard
you, saying that I have conquered you.
On the other hand, live you with me as 4
victor.


26. Honored duly by me, O ‘king, you
will-go to my house.—Both the kings then
adored that Brahmana, and trusting each
ather, proceeded to the capital of Mithila.

27. Making the prince of Koshala enter
his house, the king of the Videhas honor-
ed him, who was worthy of every honor,
with offerings of water to wash his feet,
honey and curds and the usual articles,


28. King Janaka also conferred upon
his guest his own daughter and various
kinds of gems and jewels. This is the
greatest duty of kings ; victory and defeat
are both uncertain,’


CHAPTER CVI


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continued.


Yudhishthira said:—


_ 4. “Vou have, O scorcher of -foes, des-
tribed the duties, the general conduct, the
tacans of sustenance, with their results, of


MAHABHARATA,


Brahmanas,
Shudras.


2a—5. You have described also the duties
of kings, and discoursed on their treasuries,
the means of filling them, and on the subject
of conquest and victory. You have also
described the characteristics of ministers,the
measures that secure the prosperity of the
subjects, the characteristics of the six limbs
of a kingdom, the qualities of armies, the
means of marking aut the wicked, and the
marks of the good, the attributes of those
that are equal, those that are inferior, and
those that are superior, the conduct which
a king seeking self-aggrandisement should
follow towards the masses, and the manner
in which the weak should be protected and
cherished. You have described all these
subjects, O Bharata, delivering instructions
sanctioned by the scriptures.


6. You have also described the conduct
that should be followed by kings desirous of
conquering theie enemies. I desire now,
O foremost of intelligent men, to hear how
should a person treat the number of brave
men (vassals) that gather round a king.

7. I wish to hear how they may ad-
vance, how they may be attached to the
person of the king, and how, O Bharata,


Kshatriyas, -Vaishyds and


“they may subduing foes gain friends.


8. It appears to me that disunion alone
can encompass their destruction. I think
it is always difficult to keep counsels close
when there are many in the assemblage.


9. I desire to hear all this fully, O
scorcher of foes. Tell me also, O king,
the means by which they may not happen
to quarrel with the king.”


Bhishma said :— ;


to, ‘O king, avarice and anger be-
tween nobles and the kings create enmity.


11. The king yields to avarice. And,
therefore, anger takes possession of the ,
other. Each bent upon weakening and
wasting the other, they both meet with
destruction. :

12, By engaging spies, instuments of
policy, and physical force, and adopting
the means of conciliation, gifts, and dissen.
sion, and applying other methods for pro-
ducing weakness, waste, and fear, the
parties attack.each other,


13. The aristocracy of a-kingdom ina
bedy become alienated from the king, if
the latter seeks to exact too much from
them. Alienated from the king, all of them
become dissatisfied, and from fear join the
enemies of the king.


14. ‘If again the aristocracy of a ‘king-
dom are divided, they meet with destruc~.


SHANTI PARVA.


lon. Disunited, they are easily ruined by
their foes. The nobles, therefore, should
always act unitedly.


15. If they-be united together, they may
acquire valuable properties by means of
their strength and prowess. When they
are thus united, many people from outside
seek their alliance.


16. Wise people speak highly of those
nobles who are united with one another in
ties of love. If of one purpose, all of them
can be happy.


417. They can establish fairness of
conduct. By behaving properly, they grow
prosperous,


18. By restraining their sons and bro-
thers and instructing them in their duties,
and treating all persons kindly whose pride
has been subdued by knowledge, the aris-
tocracy grow prosperous.

19. By always engaging spies and con-
certing measures of policy, and filling up
their treasuries, the aristocracy, O you of
mighty arms, grow prosperous.


20,. By receiving properly those, who are
endued with wisdom, courage and perse-
verance and who show steady prowess in
all kinds of work, the aristocracy grow
prosperous.


2%. Having wealth and resources, and
mastered‘the scriptures and all the arts and
sciences, the aristocracy rescue the igno-
rant masses from all sorts of distress and


danger.

22, King’s anger, disunion with him,
terror, punishment, persecution, oppres-
sion, and executions, O chief of the Bha-


ratas, quickly alienate the aristocracy
from the king and make them side with the
king’s enemies.


23. Therefore, the leaders of the aristo-
cracy should be honored by the king. The
affairs of the kingdom, O king, depend

" greatly upon them.


24. Consultations should be held with
the leaders of the ‘aristocracy, and ‘secret
agents should be engaged, © crusher of
foes, to watch them. I'he king should not,
O Bharata, consult with every member of
the aristocracy.


25. Acting jointly with the leaders, the
king, should do whatis for the behoof of
the whole ‘order. When, however, “the
aristocracy are divided and disunited and
have no deaders, other courses of action
should be followed. , ;


26. Ifthe members of the ‘aristocracy
fall-out with one another and act, each ac-
cording to his -means, Without unity, their


159


prosperity disappears and diverse sorts of
evil occur. vase :
27. The learned and wise amongst them
should put down a dispute as soon as it
takes place. Indeed, if the elders of a
family grow indifferent, quarrels break
out amongst the members, Such quarrels
bring about the ruin of a family and create
disunion among the nobles. rons


28. Protect yourself, O king. from alt
internal fears. External fears, however,
are not very important. The first kind of
fear, O king, may cut your roots in @
single day.

29—31, Persons who are equal in family
and blood, under the influence of anger,
folly and covetousness cease to speak
with one another. This is an indication
of defeat. It is not by courage, nor intelli-
gence, nor by beauty, nor by ridiig, that
enemies can destroy the aristocracy. It is
only by disunion and gifts that it can be
brought to subjugation, Therefore, union:
is the greatest refuge of the aristocracy.’ ,


——


CHAPTER CVIIL


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continued,


Yudhishthira said :—


1. “ The path of duty is Jong. Jt has
also, O Bharata, many branches. What
are those duties which you hold to be the
be best to practise. MEN kt

‘g. What are the most important duties
in your view by the practice of which may
acquire the highest merit both in this world
and in the next.” oe :


Bhishma said :— i 35

3. ‘The adoration of mother, father, and
preceptor is, I consider, the most important.
The man, who satisfies that duty here,


t


| suceeeds in winning great fame and many


blesssd regions.


4. Adored by you, whatever they will
command you, be it consistent with righte-
ousness, or be it inconsisfent with: it, you
should carry it out unhesitatingly, O Yu-
dhisthica, oO


§. One should never do what they
forbid. Forsooth, their command should
always be done. °


6. They are the three worlds. They
arethe three modes of life.. They are
the three Vedas, They are the three
sacred fires, . :


160


y. The father is said to be thé Gar-
haptya fire; the mother, the Dakshina
fire; and the precepter -is the fire upon
which libations are poured. These three fires
aré, of course, the gteatest. If you adore
carefully these three fires, you will conquer
the three worlds.

8. .By serving the father regularly one
may cross this world. By serving the
mother in the game way, one may enjoy


blessed regions in the next. By serving.


the preceptor regutatly, one may acquire
the region of Brahma,


9. Properly treat these three, O Bha-
tata, you will then acquire great fame in
the three worlds, and be you blessed, great
will be your merit and reward.


‘to. Nevet ttansgtess them in your
deeds, Never eat before they eat, nor eat
any thing that is better than what they eat.
Never attribute any fault to them. One
shoutd always serve them humbly. That
is an act of great merit.

ii. By acting thus, O best of kings, you
may acquire fame, merit, honor, and bless~-
ed regions hereafter. He, who honors these
three.is honored of all the worlds.


12. He, however, who disregards these
three, cannot acquire any merit from any
of his acts, Such a man, O scorcher of
foes, neither obtains this world not the
hext.


13. He, who always disregards these
three elders never enjoys fame either in this
world or it the next. Such a man never
feaps any good in the next world.


14. All that I have dedicated to the


honor of those three has multiplied a hun-
dred-fold or athousand-fold. On accotint
of that merit that even now, O Yudhisthira,
the three worlds aré clearly visible to
me.


15. One Acharyya is superiot to ten
Bratmanas learned in the Vedas. One
Upadhyaya is again superior to ten
Acharyyas. The father, again, is superior
to ten Upadhyayas.


16, The mother, again, is supérior to
fen fathers, or, perhaps, the whole world.
there is no one sognuch worthy of reverence
as the mother, :


17, Inmy view, however, the precep-
for’. deserves greater respect than the
father or even the mother. The father
and the mother are the creators of one’s
Being.


18 The father and the mother, O Bha-
rata, only create the body. The life, on
the other hand, which one. acquires


MAHABHARATA.


from his preceptor, is divine. That life


suffers no decay and is immortal.


19. The father and the mother, even if
they offend; you, should never be killed.
By not punishing a father and a mother;
one does riot commit sin. Indeed, such
reverend pegsons, by escaping punishment
do not stain the king. The gods and the
Rishis do not withhold their favours from
such persons who try to maintain even their
sinful fathers reverently.


20. He, who favours a person by giving
him true instruction, by communicating the
Vedas, and by giving immortal knowledge,
should be honored as parents. The disciple;
out of gratitude for what the instructor has
done, should never de what would injure
the latter.


2t. They, who do not honot their pre-
ceptors after receiving instruction from
them by obeying them dutifully in
thought and deed, commit the sin of killing
a fetus. There is no greater sinner in this
world than this. Preceptors always treat
theie disciples with great affection, The
fatter should, therefare,; revere their precep-
tors duly.


22, He, therefore, who wishes to acquire
that. high merit which has existed from days
of yore, should adore his preceptors and
carefully share with them every object of
enjoyment.

23. Prajapati himself is pleased witlr
him who pleases his father. He, who
eres his mother, pleases* the Earth her-
self. con tee ;


24. He, who pleases his preceptor’
pleases Brahma, ‘Therefore, the precptor
deserves greater fespect than either the
father or the mother.

_25. Hf pteceptors, are adored, the very
Rishis; and the gods, together with the
Pitris, are all pleased: Therefore, the
preceptor deserves the highest respect.

26 The preceptor should never in
any way be dishonored by the disciple.
Neither the mother nor the father deserves -
the honor which the preceptor does.


247. No insult should be offered fo the
father, the mother, and the preceptor. No’
act of theirs should be censured. The gods
and the great Rishis are pleased with hint
who tréats his preceptors reverentially.


28. They, who injure in’ thought and
deed their preceptors, or fathers, or mothers,
eommit the sin of killing a foetus. There
is no sinner in the world equal to them,


zg. That son, who, being born of
parents and brought up by them and’ when!
he comes to age, does not maintain then


SHANTE PARVA,


Ry Sires Peat leas £ .

in hig tira, Commits the sin of kitling
a fetus. There is no sinner like him in the
world,

. 30. We have never heard that these
four, vtz., he, who injures a friend, he, who
is ungrateful, he, who kills a woman, and
he, who kills a preceptor, ever succeed in
purifying themselves, ,


3t. I have described to you in general


‘Jall that a person should do iu this world. |


Besides those duties that [ have described,
there is nothing which yields greater
happiness. Thinking of all duties, 1 have
Wescribed to you their essence.’


CHAPTER CIX, .


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
“PARVA).—Continaed.


Yudhisthira said :—

1. “tow, O Bharata, should 4 person
act who wishes to follow virtue? O fore-
imost of Bharata’s race, learned as you are,
enlighten me on the question put by me, —


2. ‘frath and falsehood exist, all over


the world, Which of these two, O king,’


should a virtuaus person follow.


3. What again is truth ? What is false-
hood ? What, again, is eternal virtue?
When should a person tell the truth, and
when should he tell an anteuth ?”


Bhishma said i—

4 Yo tell the teath is righteous
‘There is nothing higher than truth. I
shall now, O Bharata, tell you what men
do not know generally.


5. There, where falsehood prevails as
truth, truth should nut be said. .Vhere,
again, where truth passes for falsehood; even
talseliood should be said.


6. That ignorant person commits sin,
who says truth which is. not righteous.


‘That person is armaster of duties who can


distinguish truth from untruth,


7. Eyen a person, who is disreputable,
who is of impure soul, and who 1s very
truthless, may succeed in acquiring great
merit as the hunter Valaka by killing the
blind beast. ae

8. How extraordinary it is that a foolish
person though désirous of winning merit still
perpetrated a sinful deed! An owl, again,


living on the banks of the Ganges, acquired:


great merit, ;
g. ‘The question you have-put to me ig a


difticult one, because it is difficult to $a)


ak


"Gn


what is righteousness. It is not easy to dés=
cribe it. No one describing righteousness,
can describe it accurately.


10. Righteousness was declared for the
aggrandisement and growth of all creatures.
Therefore, what brings on advaricement
and growth is righteousness.


t1. Righteousness was declared for
preventing creatdrés from injuriig one
another. Therefore, Righteousness is that
which prevents injury to creatures.


12, ‘Righteousness’ is also so called
because it maintains all creattires, fn fact,
all creatares are kept up by Righteousness,
Therefore, Righteousness is what is capable
of upholding all creatures.


13. Some say that Righteousness ts the
injunction of the Shrutis. Otherg do not
agree to this. I would not Blame them
that say so. Everything, again, has not
been described in the Shrutis. ;


14. Seametimes meni, desirous of getting
hold of the wealth of some one, make en~
quiries. One should never answer suc
enquiries. ‘hat is a settled duty, ;

15—16. {€° by beconiing silent, one
succeeds in escaping, one should remain
silent. If, however, ore’s silence at a tim?
when one nist speak creates suspicion, it
would be better then to say what is untiue
than what is true. This is a right concluy
sion. fe one can escape from sitiful men by
an oath, one may take it without commit
ting sin. :

17. One shduld not; even if he is able,’
iid away his wealth to sinful men,

ealth given to sinful meri assails even the
giver,


18 If a cteditor wishes to take from his
debtor a payment of the loan by bodily
service, the witnesses would ‘all perjure, if,
summoned by the creditor for establishing
thetruth of the agreement, they did not say
what shonid be said. When life isein
dangér, or oti otcasions of marriage, one
may eay an untrutti. : : So


20. One, who seeks for virtue, does not
commit a sin by saying a falsehood, if it be
said to save the wealth and prosperity of
others, or for religious purposes,

21. Having promised to -pay, one is
bound to: satisfy his promise. If failing,
the self-appropriator must be forcibly en-
slaved. li a petson without satisfying a
fair engagement.acts improperly, he should,
forsoot», be punished. with the rod of
punishment for, behaving thus.


22. ‘Deviating from all duties and aban-
doning those of‘his own order, a decéitfux


Fa


person always wishes to follow the conduct
of Asuras for maintaining life.


23. Such a sinful wight living by deceit
should be killed by all means. Such sinful
creatures do not see any thing in tbis world
superior to wealth,


24. Such men should never be tolerated.
o one should eat with them. They
, Should be considered as degraded for their

sins. Indeed, degraded from the status of
humanity and shut out from the grace
of the gods, they are even like evil
genii, :

25. Abandon their companionship who
do not perform sacrifices and penances,
Hf their wealth be lost, they commit even

_ suicide which is highly pitiable.


26. Of those sinful men there is none
to whom you can say,—-This is your duty.
Let your heart be te it !—~Their firm belief is
that there is nothing in this world which is
equal to wealth.


27, The person that would kill such a
¢réature would commit no sin. He, who
slays him, slays one that has been already
killed by his own acts. If killed, itis the
dead that is killed.


28, He, who promises to kill those
persons of lost senses, should keep: his
promise. Such sinners are like the crow
and the vulture who live by deceit. When
their bodies are dissolved, they are born
_ again as crows and vultures.

29. One should treat another as the
latter does him, A deceitful person should
be thwarted with deceit, while an honest
man should be treated with honesty.’


a


CHAPTER CX, ~


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
° PARVA).—Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—

1. ‘Creatures are seen tobe assailed by
various means and almost continually,
‘Tell me, O grandfather, in what way can
one get ‘over all those difficulties !”


Bhishma said :—

2. ‘hose members of the twice-born
class, who duly follow, with restrained souls,
the duty sanctioned by the scriptures for
the several modes of life, succeed in getting
ever all these difficulties. ;

3. Theos, who never practise deceit,
those, whose conduct is regulated by whole
some restrictions, and those, who control all


MAHABARATA.


worldly desires, succeed in getting ovef
all difficulties,


4. Those, who do not speak when ad-
dressed in evil words, those who do not in=
jure others when injured themselves, those,
who give but do not take, succeed in yets
ting over all difficulties,


5. Those, who always treat guests hos«
Pitably, those, who do not cherish malice,
those, who constantly read the Vedas, suc
ceed in getting over all difficulties.


6. Those persons, who, conversant with
duties, treat their parents properly, those,
who do not sleep during the day, succeed
in getting over all difficulties.


7. Those, who do not commit any kind
of sin in thought, word, and deed, those,
who never injure any creature, succeed in
getting over all difficulties,


- 8. Those kings, who do not, under the
influence of passion and covetousness, im-
pOse oppressive taxes, and those, who pros
tect their own dominions, succeed in getting
over all difficulties,


9g. Those, who know their wedded wives
in season without seeking the company of
other women, those, who are honest and
attentive to their Agnihotras, succeed in
getting over all difficulties,


to. Those, who are endued with cous
rage and who, shaking off all fear of death,
engage in battle, desirous of gainining
victory by fair means, succeed in getting
over all difficulties, i

11. Those, who always speak truth in this
world even when life isin danger, and who
are models for all creatures to follow, suc


| ceed in getting over all difficulties.


12. Those who never act deceitfully, whose
words are always sweet and whose wealtl
is always well spent, succeed in getting ovet
all difficulties.


13. Those Brahmanas, who never study
the Vedas at improper hours, and who
practise penances with devotion, succeed
in getting over all difficulties,


14. Those Brahmanas, who follow the
life of celibacy and Brahmacharyya, who
practise penances, and who are purified by
learning, Wedic knowledge, and proper
vows, Succeed in getting over all difficulties.


15. Those, who have restrained the
qualities belonging to Darkness and Ignoe
rance, who are possessed of great souls, and
who practise the quality of Goodness, suc<
ceed in getting over all difijculties.


16. Those, of whom no creatures are
afraid, and those, who are not afraid, of any
creatures themselves, those, who regard al
i ©


SHANTI PARVA, * 263
creatures as their awn’self, succeed in get- ) Brahmanas, succeed in"getting over'all diffi«
ting over all difficulties. culties, ,

17, Those foremost of men, who are 30. Thave now, O sinless one, described


oud, who are never stricken with grief on


) i to you all those acts by which men may get
Seeing other people’s prosperity, and who


over all difficulties bot h in this world and in


abstain from all kinds of ignoble conduct,
succeed in getting over all difficulties.


18. Those, who bow to all the gods, who
listen to the doctrines of all creeds, who
have faith, and who are possessed of tran-
quit souls, succeed in getting over all
aifficulties.


19. Those, who do not seek honor for
themselves, who give honor to others, who
bow down to those who deserve. their
adoration, succeed in getting over ail
difficulties, .


20. Those, who perfom Shraddhas on the
proper lunar days, with pure minds, for
having offspring, succeed in getting over all
difficulties,


2t. Those, who congqiter theie own anger
and pacify the anger of others, and who
are never irate with any one, succeed in
getting over all difficulties. =


22. Those, who do not take, from their
birth, honey and meat and intoxicating
drinks, succeed in getting over all diffi-
culties. : . 5


23. Those, who take food for onty sup-
porting life, who live with women for the
sake of offspring only, and who open their
lips for speaking what is true, succeed in
getting over all difficulties,


24. Those, who adore with devation the
god Narayana, that Supreme Lord of all
creatures, that origin and destruction of the
universe, succeed in getting over all difft-
culties.


25. This Krishna here, having eyes red
as the lotus, clad in yellow attire, possessed
of mighty arms,—this Krishna, who is our
well.wisher, brother, friend, and relative,—
is Narayana of undecaying glory.


26. He of his own will covers all the worlds
like a leathern case. He is the powerful
Lord of inconceivable soul! He is Govinda,
the best of all beings. :


27. This Krishna, who always does what
is agreeable and beneficial to Jishnu, as
also to you, O king, is that foremost of all
beings, that ‘irresistible one, that abode of
eternal happiness.


29 Those, who devotedly seek the refuge
of this ‘Narayana, called also Hari, succeed
in getting all difficulties.


29. Those, who read these verses regard-
ing the getting over of difficulties, who recite
then to others, and who speak of them to

a


the next.


ed


CHAPTER CXL


(RAJADHAR MANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continued,


Yudhishthira said :-—


1. ‘Many persons here, who do not in
reality possess of tranquil souls, appear
externally as men of tranquil souls. ‘There
are again others, who are really of tranquil
souls but that appear otherwise. How, O
sire, shall we succceed in knowing these .
people.” /


Bhishma said:—

2, Regarding it is recited the ofd story
of the discourse between a tiger and a
jackal. Listen to it, O Yudhishthira,

In days of yore, in a wealthy city
called Purika, there was a_ king named


Paurika. That worst of beings was highly
ruthless and took pleasure in injuring
others.


4. When the lease of his life ran out
he obtained an. undesirable end, In fact,
sullied by the evil deeds of his human
life, he was bora again as a jackal. :


Remembering his pristine prosperity,
he was filled with grief and abstained from
meat even when brought before him by
others.


6. And he felt mercy for all creatures,
and was truthful in speech, and firm in
the observance of austere vows. At the
appointed hour he took food which consisted
of fruit which had dropped from the trees.


7. That jackal lived in a vast crema-
torium and liked to live there. And as it
was his birth place, he never desired to
change it for a better one.


8: Unable to bear the purity of his
conduct, the other jackals tried to m ke
him change his resolution by addressing
him in the following humble words -—


g Though living in this dreadful cree
matorium, you desire yet to live such a pre
life. Is nat this owing to yeur: perverse
understanding, since you are by nature an
eater of carrion? ;


10. B you like us! Allof us will give
youfood, Eat that which ought always ta


164:


Be your food, leaving’ of such ‘purity’ of
condyct!


i pn Hearing these words. of theies, the
jackal replied to them, with rapt attention,
an these sweet and reasonable words, incul-
cating harmlessness to all :-—


12. My birth has been low. It is con-
duct, however, which determines the birth.
J wish to act in such a way that my fame
may spread.


33. .Although I live in this crematorium,
yet listen to my vows regarding my conduct.
One’s owa self is the root of one’s acts.
‘The mode of life which one may adopt is
not the root of one’s‘religious acts.


‘ 14. Ef one, while following a particular


mode of life, kills a Brahmana, will not the |


sia of Brahmanicide -assai} him? H, on
the other hand, one gives away a cow,
while not even following any particular
tuode of life, wilf that- pious gift yield no
merit ?


15. Actuated by the desire of getting
what is agreeable, you are only busy with
filling your stomachs. Overcome by folly,
you are blind te the three faults which are
in the end. ;


16. 1 da not like to follow the Hife which
you lead, which yields evil both inthis
world and’ in the next, and which is charac-
terised by loss of virtue brought about by
discontentment and temptation }


17. A tiger, well known for prowess,
happened to overhear this conversation,
and accordingly, taking the jackal fora
Jearned person of pure conduct, offered him
such respectful worship as became his own
self and then expressed a desire for
appointing him his minister.


The tiger said :—


18, O righteous person, I know what
you are! Do you look after the duties of
government with myself! Enjoy whatever
articles you may wish to have, leaving off
whatever you may not have a liking for.


1g. As regards ourselves, we are known
to be of a fierce nature. We inform you
beforehand of this. If you act with
mildness, you will be benefited and reap
advantages for yourself,


20. Honoring: these-words of that great
ford of all animals, the jackal, bending
Jow his head a Jittle, said these humble
words,


The jackal said :—


‘.ar, O king of beasts, these werds of
yours about myself are such as become you.
It is also becoming of you that you should
esek for ministers of pure conduct and who


‘that of your old servants.


| not mind small things,


MAHABHARATA,


aré conversant with duties and worldby
affairs. \

22. You. ‘cannot eeintann your great
power without a pious minister, O- hero, or
with a wicked minister who ‘always tries
to put an end to your very life.

23-24. You shontd, O highty blessed.
one, honor those of your ministers who are
devoted to you, who. are conversant with


| policy, and who are independent of one


another, desirous of securing victory for
you, unstained by covetousness, free from


| deceit, wise, ever engaged in your well-


being, and gifted with great mental vigor,


| even as you should honor your preceptors,


or parents.


25. But, O king of beasts, as } am
perfectly contented with my present situa-


| tion, | do not like to change it for anything,
| else.


I do not hanker after luxuries or the.
happiness that originates from them.

26. My conduct, again, may not be like.
If they be of
wicked conduct, they will create disunion,
between you and me.


27. -Dependence upon another, even if


‘he be a bright person, is:not desirable nor.


| praiseworthy. ;
28. EF am of pure-soul, F am highly
blessed. | cannot treat even sinners,


, severely, [ am gifted with great foresight.


{ have capacity for great exertion, Ido,
fam endued with
great strength, Tam successful in acts, &
never act uselessly. | have every object of
enjoyment.

<9 Tam never satisfied with a littte §
have never served another, } am, further
more, unskilled in serving. [| live accords
ing to my pleasure in the forest.


30. All who live in court have to suffer
great pain for evil speeclies against them-
selves. ‘Those, however, who live in the
forest, spend their days, fearlessly and with-
out anxiaty, observing vows, ,


3t. The fear, which possesses the heart
of a person, who is sunimoned by the king
is aakioen to persons passing their days
happily in the forest, living upon fruits and
roots.


32. Simple food and drink got without
effort, and rich food procured with fear,
widely differ from each other. Thinking of
these two, I hold that there is happiness
where there is no anxiety.


33. <A few only of the servants of kings
are justly punished for their offences. A
great number of them, however, meet with
death under false charges.


SHANTI


34. Hf, notwithstanding all this, you
Appoint me, O king of beasts, as your
ninister, I wish to: make an agreement
with you regarding your treatment towards
me.


"3s, Those words that I shalt speak for
your well-being should be listened to, and
honored by, you. ‘Fhe provision which you
will make for me you will never interfere
with,

.36. I shall never consult with your other
ministers. If 1 do, for they always seek
superiority, they will then impute various
kinds of faults to me.


137. Meeting with you alone and in
secret | shall say what is for your well-
being. About your kinsmen, you will not
ask me what is for your behoof or what
is otherwise,

: 3g. Having consulted with me you shall
not punish. your other ministers afterwards.
Getting enraged you will not punish my
followers and dependents.


' 39. Thus addressed by the jackal, the’


King of beasts answered him,—Let it be so! |
—and showed him every honor. The jackal


then accepted the ministership of the tiger,


. 40. Seeing the jackal treated with res-
pect and supported in all- his deeds, the old
servants of the king, uniting together,
began continually to show their hatred
towards him.


41. Those wicked persons at first tried
to please and win him over with friendly
conduct and make him put up with
the various abuses which existed in the
state.

42. Robbing other people's. property,
they had long enjoyed their sports. Now,
however, being governed by the jackal,
they were unable to take anything belong-
ing to others.


, 42. Seeking aggrandisement and pros-
perity, they began to tempt him with sweet
words. Indeed, large bribes even were
offeced to tempt his heart. Highly wise,
the jackal showed no signs of yielding to
chose temptations.


'44. Then some amongst them making
an agreement amongst themselves for
‘bringing aboyt his destruction, snatched
away the well-dressed meat that was
intended for, and much desired by, the king
of beasts, and kept it secretly in the house
of the jackal.


45. The jackal knew who had taken
awaythe meat and the party who were
connected with the act. But though -he
knew everything, he bore it for a particular
object.


' advice.


| charge.


PARVA. 165


46. He had made an agreement: with
the king at the time of his becoming the


| minister, saying,«-You seek my friendship,


but you will not, O king, mistrust me with-
out cause. 7


Bhishma gaid :—


47. Feeling fungry, wken the king of
beasts came to eat, he did aot found the
meat which should have been kept ready
for his dinner. ‘The king then ordered,
Let the thief be detected !


48. His deceitful ministers represented
to him that the meat kept for him had been.
taken away by his learned minister, the
jackal, that was so proud of bis own
wisdom. ;


49. Hearing of this unwise act of the
jackal, the tiger was insensate with rage.
Indeed, the king, yiélding to wrath, ordered,
his minister to be killed.


50. Finding the opportunity,.the former.
ministers said to the king,—The jackal is.
always ready to take away from all of us
the means of sustenance.


51. Having saidso, they once:more spoke-
of the jackal’s act of robbing the king of
his food. And they said,—-Such then’ is.
his conduct! What is there which he
would not venture to do?


52. Heisnst asyou had heard. He-is,
righteous in words, but he is really is sinfuk
by nature.


53. At heart a wretch, he has disguised
himself by assuming the grab of virtue.:
His conduct is really vicious. For serving
his own purpose he had practised austeri-.
ties in matters of diet and vows,


54. If you disbelieve this, we will give.
you proof !—Having said so, they imme
diately caused that meat to be found out.


by entering the jackal’s house.


55. Determining that the meat was,
brought back from the jackal’s house and
hearing all those representations of his: old,
servants, the king ordered, saying,—Let,


| the jackal: be killed,


56. Hearing these words of the tiger,
his mother came there for awakening:
her son's good sense with wholesome,


57. The venerable dame said,—O son,,
you should not. believe this deceitful
Actuated by envy and rivalry,
wicked men impute faults to even an hones§,
person.


58. Enemies desirous of:a quarrel cannot


| bear the elevation of an enemy: engendered’


by his great deeds, Faults are: attributed


166


to evena person of pure soul performing
penhances.


59. Even for an ascetic living in the
forest and engaged in his own acts, there
are three parties, wis., friends, neutrals,
aud foes.


- 60. ‘Fhe rapacious hate the pure. The
idte hate the active. Phe ignorant hate the
learned. The poor hate the rich. The
unrighteous hate the ,vighteous. The ugly
hate the beautiful.


61. Many of the learned, the ignorant,
the capacious,- and the deceitful, would
falsely accuse an innocent person even if
the latter is endued with the virtues and
intelligence of Vrihaspati himself.


_ 62, He meat had really been stolen from
your house in your absence, remember the
jackal refusés to take any meat that is
even given to him. Let sufficient attention
be paid to. this fact.

63. Wicked persons sometimes pass for
the virtues, and the virtues are sometimes
taken for the wicked. ‘Phere are various
aspects in creatures. itis, therefuse, neces-
Sary to examine which is which.


64. The sky seems to be like the sotid
base of a vessel. ‘Ihe fire-fly appears like
the actual sparks of fire. In sooth, however,
the sky has no base and: there is no fire
in the fire- fly.


-65, You should there scrutinize even
things which you see with your own eyes.
It a person determines everything after
scrutiny, he never regrets afterwards.


66. ft is not atall difficult, O son, for
a master to put his servant to death.
Forgiveness, however, in persons endued
with power, ‘is always praiseworthy and
yields fame. :

-67. You had made the jackal your first
minister. For that act, you had acquired
great fame among alb the neighbouring
ciiefs. A good minister cannot be secured
easily. The jackal is your well wisher. Let
him, therefore,'be supported.


68. That king, who -considers a really’.


innocent person. falsely accused by his
enemies to 3be guilty, is soon ruined by the
wicked ministers who. create that conviction
inhimt 7° ' - 7

69. After the tiger's mother had had
her say, a righteous agente of the jackal,
coming out of that array of his enemies,
-disclosed everything about the way in
which that false accusatioa had been made.


qo. The jackal’s innocence being proved,
he was aqcuitted and respected by his
master. The king of beasts embraced him,

~ affectionately again and again.


J


MAHABHARA


71. Burning with grief, the jacked,
howeves, who was a master of the science.
of policy, salutated the king of beasts and
solicitei his permission for sacrificing his.
life by cbserving the Praya vow.


72. Looking upon the virtuous jackal
with affection and honoring him with rever-
ential worship, the tiger, tried to dissuade
him from fulfilling his wishes.


73. Seeing his master moved with affec--
tion, the jackal bowed down to him, and,
in a voice suppressed with tears, said,—~ t


74. Honored by you first, | have after-~
wards been insulted by you. Your conduct -
towards me is calculated to. make me an
enemy of yours. Et is not meet, therefore,
that § should any longer live with you.


75—-77. Servants who are: discontented,
who have been dismissed from their offices,.
or who have been degraded from. honorable:
situations, who have brought destitution-
upen themselves, or who. have been ruinedr
by their enemies, who have been weakened,.
who are rapacious, or enraged, or alarmed,
or deceived, who have suffered confiscation,.
who are proud and willing to perform great.
feats but who are deprived of the means of
acquiring wealth, and who burn with grief
or. auger for any injury done to them,—


| always wait for misfortunes to befall their


masters. Being deceived, they‘forsake their


| masters and become powerful instruments:
. in the hands-of his enemies. .


78. ¥F have been insulted by you and
degraded. from my place. How will you:
trust me again? low shall. L continue to.
live with you 27 :


79, Kuowing me to be competent your
appointed me, and having examined me-
you had placed me in office. Violating the
agreement then. made (beween us) you
have insulted me. ;


80. If one speaks of a particular person
before others of righteous conduct, one
should not, if desivous of keeping one’s
consistency, afterwards describe the same


person as wicked. .


8. 1, who have thus been dishonored
by you, cannot any longer enjoy your con-
fidence. On my part, when [ shall find


} vou withdraw your confidence from me, E


shall be stricken with alarm and anxiety.


&2.° You entertaining suspicion and my «'
self entertaining fear, our enemies will?
always try to find qut opportunities for in-
juring us. Your subjects will, as a matter.
of fact, become anxious and discontented.’
such a state of things has many shorts’
comings.


SHANTI


83. The wise -do not consider that posi- |


Vion as happy in which there is honor first
and dishonor afterwards,


84. It is difficult to unite again two who
have been separated, as it is difficult to
separate two that are united. If persons,
reunited after separation, meet one another
again, their conduct eannot be affection-
ate.


. 85. No servant is to be seen who always
wishes to do good to his master. People
work with the desire of doing good to his
master as also to one’s own self. All works
are undertaken from selfish desires. Un-
selfish works or motives are very rare.


86. Those kings, whose hearts ate res-
tless and ungurt; cannot gain a true know=
feige of men, Only one ina hundred can
be found who is either capable or un-
daunted.

87. The prosperity of men, as also their
downfall, originates of itself. - Prosperity
and adversity, and greatness, all originate
from weakness of understanding.


Bhishma said:—

88. Having said - these conciliatory
words pregnant with virtue, pleasure and
profit, and having pleased the kiny, the
jackal retired to the forest. ;


89. Without heeding the entreaties of,
the king of beasts, the intelligent jackal
renounced his body by sitttng in Praya and
‘went to heaven,’


(CHAPTER CXiIl.
(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA )—~Coxtinued.
Yudhishthira said :—


1. “What works: should be done by a |


king, and what are those works by doing
whicK ‘a king may become happy ?_ Tell
me this fully, O you who are the foremost
of ail persons acquainted with duties.”


Bhishma said :— ae

2. ‘C shall tell you what you wish to
know! Hear what should be done in this
world by a king and what those works are
by doing which a king may become
happy.

3. A king should not act like a camel
of which we have tieard. Listen to that
history then, O Yudhishthira.


' 4. There was, in the golden cycle, a huge
gamel wno had recollection of his pristine


PARVA. - 267


deeds. Practising the most. rigid vows, that
camel practised Very severe austerities its
the woods.

5. When his penances were terminated -
the powerful Brahman became pleased with
him. ‘The Grandfather, therefore, desired
to grant him boons.


The camel said :—

6. Let my néck, O holy one, become
long through your favour, so that, U power-
ful lord, | may be able to get any food that
_may be even at the end of even a huodred
Yojanas. :

q. The great giver of boons said,—Let
it be so !—Having got that boon, the camel
then returned to tts own forest.


8, Since the day of securing the boon,
the foolish animal became idie. Indeed,
stupefied by fate, the wretch did not trom
that day go out for grazing,

g. One day, while extending his long
neck of a hundred Yojanas, the animal
was engaged in picking his food without
any troudle, there uprose a great storms


to. Keeping his head and.a portion of
the neck withit the Gave of a mountain;
the camel cesolved to wait till the storus
would be over. Meanwhile rain: came down
in torrents, deluging the whole Earth


it. Wetted by the rain and shivering:
with cold, a jackal, with his wife, dragged
himself with difficulty towards that very
cave and entered it quickly for protection. ~

12—13. Living as he did upon meat;. °
and greatly hungry and tired as.he was, O
foremost of Bharata's race, the jackal,
seeing the camel’s neck, began to eat a3
much of it-as be could,. When he perceived
that his neck was being eaten, the camel.
tried sorrowfully to shorten it.


14. But as he moved jit up and down,
the jackal and his wife, catching it, cons
tinued to eat it away, .


15- Within a short time the camel wag
dead. Having thus killed and. eaten the
camel, the jackal then came out of the Gavé
after the storm and shower had ceased.


16. Thus did that foolish camel die
See what a great evil followedidleness.


17. As for yourself, avoiding idleness
and econtrolling-your sétises, do everything
in the world with proper means. Manu
himself has declared that victory rests upon,
intelligence.


18. All acts that are performed with
the help of intelligence are regarded as
the highest, those performd with the help of
arms ate middling, those pertor ned with


168


the help of feet are inferior, while those
done by carrying loads are the worst.

19. If the king cleverly .doés his busi-
ness and conttroffs his senses, his kingdom
lasts. Manu himself has declared that it
is with the help of intelligence that an
ambitious person succeeds it gaining vic-
tories,

40. In this world, O Yudhishthira,
those, who listen to wise advice, those, O
-sinless one, who have allies, and act after
proper scrutiny, sdcceéds in achieviig all
their objects.

21. A person with such means succeeds
in culing the éntire Batti. :

22. QO you powerful like Indra himself,
this hag been declared by ancient sages.
conversant with the scriptural injunctions !
1, also, having my eyes on the scriptiires,
have said the same to yoit. sing your
imeligence, do yoti act in this world, O
deing:’


re


CHAPTER CXL. .—


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).-—Continued,


Yudhisthira gaid :—

1. “Tell me, O foremost of Bhatata’s
race; how a king, without the usual helps,
having obtaitied a kingdom which is so
valuable a possession, Should treat a power-
ful enemy.”


Bhishma said: -

2. ‘Regardirg it is cited the old story of
the discourse between the Ocean and the
Rivers,


In days of yore, eternal Ocean, that [


lord of Rivers, that refuge of the enemies
of the gods, asked all the Rivers for solving
this doubt that had arisen in bis mind,


The Ocean said :—

4 Ye Rivers, I see that all of you,
with your strong currents, wash away trees
of huge trunks, with their roots and bran-
ches. You do not, however, ever bring to
me a cane.

5. The canes that grow on your banks
have small stems and are not strong. Do
you refuse to wash them down through
contempt, or are they of any utility to you?


6-7. 1 desire, therefore, to hear what
is your motive about it. Indeed, why is it
that canes, are not washed down by any of
you from the banks where they grow ?—
‘Thus addressed, the River Ganga replied,


MAHABHARATA.


to Ocean, that Lord of all Rivers, in thesé
words of great significance, fraught with
reason, and, therefore, liked of all.


Ganga said :—

8. Trees stand iri one and the same
place and ate never displaced from where
they stand. For. this by their nature
resisting our currents, they are obliged ta
leave the place of their growth. Canes;
however, act otherwise.


g. The cane, seeing the eadvanciag
current, bends to it. The others do not
act in this way. After the ctirrent has
passed away, the cane reSumes its pristine
posture.

16. The care is acquainted with the
virtues of ‘Yime arid opportunity. It is
docile arid obedient. Let is: yielding, but
not stiff, Therefore; it stands where tt
grows, without being compelled to follow
Our current. ‘

1t, Those plants, trees, drid creepers
that bend aind rise before the force of wirid
and water, aré never rooted out.


Bhishuia said :— :

12, That person, who does riot yield to
the power of a pawerful foe who lias grown
and whois competent ‘to imprison or kill;
soon meets with ruin.

13. That wise nian, who acts after deters
mining fully the strength and weakness, the
power and energy; of himself and his ene-'
miés ig never discomifitted.

14. An intelligent nian, therefore; whet
he sees his enemiy to be more powerful than
himself, imitate the conduct of the care,
That is a sign of wisdom.’


CHAPTER CXIV.


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVWA).—Continued,


Yudhishthiira said :—

1. ‘ How, O Bharata, should a learned
and modest man behave, © chastiser -of
foes, when atiacked with harsh speeches in:
the court by an ignorant pérson puffed up’
with conceit 2’


Bhishma said :~

2. ‘Listen, O king, how this subject.
has been treated of [in the scriptures], 1.e.,3 -
how a person of good soul should endure
in this world the abusive words ef foolish, .
persons, :


SHANTI


- 4 Hea person; wher abused my another,
does trot become irate, he is then sure to
Win the merit of all the good deeds that
have been done by the abuser. The endurer,
in such a case, transfers the demerit of all
his own bad deeds to the person who being
angry absues him.


4~—5. An intelligent’ man should pay no
allention to an utterer of abusive words
who resembles, after all, only a Vittibha
uttering dissonant notes. One, who is
possessed by hate is said to live in vain. A
fool is often heard to say,——I addressed such
words to such a respectable man amid such
an assembly of men !—and to even boast of
that wicked act,


6. ‘He would add,-Abused by me, the
man stood silent as if dead with shame !—
Even thus does a shameless man _ boast of
an act-ef which he should never boast.


4. Such a wretched wight should care-
fully be disregarded. ‘The wise man should
endure every thing that such a foolish
person may say.


‘8. What can a vulgar person do by either
his praise or blame? He is ke a crow
that caws uselessly in the forest.


9. If those, who blame others by only
their. words, could establisti those accusa-
tions by such means, then, perhaps, their
words would have been considered to be
of some value. However, their words are as
effective as those uttered by fools invoking
death upon them with whom they fall out.


to. That man simply says that he is
abastard who indulges in such conduct
and words. Indeed, he is like a peacock
that dances while shawing such a part of
his body which should never be shown,


11. A person of pute conduct should
mever even speak with that sinful person,
who dees not scruple to utter anything o¢
do anything.


iz. That man, who speaks of one’s quali-
ties when the lattec marks him and who
_ Speaks ill of him when. he does not see him,
. is really likea dog. Such a person does
not acquire heaven and the fruits of any
knowledge and victue that he may have.


13. The man, who speaks iif of one in
his -absence, leses the fruits of aH his
libations on fire and of the gifts he may
make to even a hundred persons. :

14. A wise man, therefore, should un-
hesitatingly avoid such a sinial person who
“should always be shunned by all honest,
“men, a3 he would avoid the fiysh of the
dog. :

15. That wicked wretch, who mentions
the faults of a high-souled person, really


aa


PARVA, 769


displays his own evil- nature even. as a
snake shows his hood. ;

16. The sensible man, who tries to op-
pose such a back-biter always engaged in.
doing awork congenial to himself, finds him-~,
self in the painful situation of a stupid ass.
sunk in a heap of ashes. ;


- 17° A man who always speaks ill of
others, should be shunned like a furious
wolf, or an infuriate elephant roaring
madly, or a fierce dog, ,


18, Fie on that sinful wretch, who has
followed the footsteps of the foolish who has
transgressed alt healthy restraints and
modesty, who always injures others, and
who does not care for his own prosperity.


19. If an honest man wishes to speaic
to such wretches when they try to humi-
liate him, he should thus be advised :—Dd
not allow yourself to be afflicted. A wordy
torrents between a high and a low person is
always disapproved by persons of sober
intelligence. :

20. A slariderous wretch; when influenced
by an anger, may strike another with his
palms, or throw dust or chaff at ancther,
or frighten anether by showing or grind-
ing his teeth, But all this is well-known,


21.’ That man, who bears the reproaches
and slanders. of wicked men uttered iW
assentblies, or who reads frequently these
instructions, never suffets any pain, froiw
words,’ ;


ed


- CHAPTER CXV.


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continued.


Yudhishthira said:—

“1, *@ grandfather, O you of great
wisdom, 1 have one great doubt whiclr.
perplexes mel You sheuld, Oking, re~
move itl You. are a promoter of our
family. :


2. You have described to us the slander~
ous speeches uttered by wicked. men of
bad conduct, I desire, however, to ques
tion you further. ;


3-4. That which is beneficial to a
kingdom, ttt which yields happiness to the
family of kings, that which yields good and
advancement in the [uture and the present,’
that which is good regarding food, drink
and the body, are topics upon which {
wish you to dwell,


5. How should a king, who has been
‘put onthe throue and who continues to,


476


occupy it, gurrounded by friends, ministers
and servants, please his subjects 7


6—7. That ting, who, taken away by his
natural propensities and proctivities, be-
comes devoted to evil companions, and
flatters wicked men for his being under the
influence of his senses, finds alf servants
of good birth and blood displeased with
him. Such a king never: gets those ob-
jects the accomplishment of which depends
upon one’s having a number of good ser-
yants about him.


- 8 You, who are equal to Vribaspati
himself in istelligence, should describe to
me these duties of kings which are diff-
cult to be ascertained and thereby resolve
my doubts.


“g. You, O foremost of men, are ever
engaged in encompassing the good of our
family. For this reason you always des-
eribe to us on the duties of the kings,
Endued with great wisdom, Vidura -also
gives us always valuable instraction.


to. Hearing instructions from you which
are productive of good to our family and
kingdom, 4 shall be able to live happily
like a person pleased with having drunk the
immortal nectar. ;


af


_ 11, What classes of servants areto be


considered as inferior and what as possess-
ing all accomplishments? Helped by what
elass of servants or by servants of what
ind of birth, should a ‘king rule ?

12. Ifthe king choose to act alone and
without servants, he-can never protect his
people. All persons, however, of high


birth wish for the acquisition of sovere-
ignty ?”


Bhishma said :—

13%. ‘The king, O Bharata, cannot
alone govern his kingdom. ‘Without ser-
vants to help him, he caanot accomplish
any object. Even if he gains any object,
“he cannot retain it.


1q. That king, whose servants are ail
gifted with knowledge and wisdom, who
always seek the well-being of their master,
and who are of high birth and quiet disyo-
sition, enjoys the happiness of sovereignty.


15—16. That king, whose ministers are
all born in respectable families, incapable of
being alienated from hit, who always live
with him, who always give advice to their
master, who are endued with wisdom and
goodness, who havea knowldge of all things,
who can provide for future events and con-
tingencies, who have a good knowledge of
the virtues of time, and who never regret
for the past, succeeds in enjoying the hap-
ess ol suvercignty., ~ :


MAHABHARATA?


‘47, That king, whose servants partake
of his serrows and joys, who always de
what he likes, who always try to accomplist:
their maser’s objects, and all of whom are
faithful, enjoys the happiness .of sover-
eignty.

18. That king, whose subjects are always
happy and magnanimous, and who always
went to the path of the righteous, enjoys
the happiness of sovereignty.


to. Heis the best of kings, the various
sources of whose revenue are managed and
supervised by contented and trustworthy
men who know fully the means of multi-+
plying the finances.


20. That king acquires great riches
and merit whose respositaries and barns
are looked after by trustworthy, devoted,
and uncovetous and scrupulous servants
always bent upon gathering.


21. That king in whose city justice is
administered properly which leads to the
fining the plaintiff or the defendant, if his
Case is untrue, and in which criminal laws
are administered after the mannar of Shan-
kha and Likhita, acquires the merit of


_ Sovereignty.


-..22.."Fhat king, who wins over subjects by
| kindness, who is a master of the duties of


kings, and who is mindful of six cardinal
objects, acquires the merit of sovereignty.’


CHAPTER CXVI.


RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—~Continned.


Bhishma said :—


1. ‘Regarding it fs cited the following
ancient history. That history is considere
asone of the gratest precedent amongst
good and wisemen. .


' a. That history is connected with the
present subject. [ heard it in the asyluns
of Rama the son of Jamadagni, recited by
many foremost of Risitis.

3. In acertain large forest uninhabited
by human beings, there lived an ascetic
upon fruits and reots, practising rigid vows
and with his senses under restraint. _


4. Observing strict regulations and self-
restraint, of great and pure’ soul, always
making Vedtie recitations, and of heart .
purified by fasts,-he treated all creatures
with goodness. : + s4)

5. Highly intelligent, as he, was, as he
sat on his seat, the goodness of his conduct
having been known to all the creatures that


SHANTI PARVA,


dyvelt in that forest, they used to approach
him with affection. : ‘


6—). Dreadful lions and tigers, infyri-
ate elephants of huge body, leopards, thino-
ceroses, bears, and other dreadful animals,
living upon blood, used to come to the
Rishi and question him politely. Indeed,
all of them behaved towards him like dis-
ciples and slaves and always did what was
agreeable to hin.


8. Ceming to him they made enquiries,
‘and 4hen went away to their respective
habitations. One domestic animal, how-
ever, resided there permanently, never,
leaving the ascetic at any time.


g. He was greatly attached to the saint.
Weak and emaciated with fasts, he lived
upon fruits and roots and water, and was
tranguil and of inoffensive character.


to. Lying at the feet of that great
Rishi as the latter sat, the dog, with a
humane heart, became greatly attached to
him for the affection with which he was
treated.

11, One day a very strong leopard
canie there, leaving upon blood. Of a
cruel nature and always delignted at the
prospect of prey, the dreadful animal
looked like a second Yama, Ones


12, Licking the corners of his mouth
with the tongue, and lashing his tail furi-
ously, the leopard came there, stricken with
hunger and thirst, with wide open jaws,
desirous of catching the doy as his prey.


13. Seeing that dreadful animal coming,
© king, the dog, in fear of his Ife, spoke
to the ascetic as follows, Listen to them,
O king !~—


14. © Rishi, this leopard is an enemy
of the dogs. It wishes to kill me. ©O great
sage, do you so act that alt my fears from
this animal may be removed. through your
favour. O you of mighty arms, forsooth,
you are omniscient.


15. Reading the thoughts of all crea-
tures, the sage felt that the dog had suffi-
cent cause for fear. Endued with the six
attributes and capable of reading the voices
of all animals, the sage said as follows.


The sage said :—


16. You shall have ne fear of death from
leopatds any longer! Let your natural
form disappear and be youa leopard, O
son | cee :


17. Thereat, the dog was metamorpho-
sed into a leopard with skin bright as gold,
With stripes on his body and with huge
teeth, thenceforth he began to live in that
forest fearlessly, ~ ° ,


17K


18. Meanwhile, seeing. before him an
animal of his own species, the leopard,
forthwith renounced all feelings of enmity
towards it. ; :


19. Sometime after, there came into that
asylum a dreadful and hungry tiger with
mouth wide open. Licking the corners of
‘his: mouth with the tongue, and eagerly
desirous of drinking blood, that tiger began
to approach the animal that had_ been
metamorphosed into a leopard. .


- 20. Seeing the hungry tiger of dreadful
teeth approach that forest, the leppard
Hite o the Rishi’s protection for saving
ns like. .


21. Thesage, whohad great affection
for the the leopard for its living in the same
place with him, immediately transformed
his leopard into a tiger powerful for all
enemies. : , eS

22. The tiger seeing a beast of his own
species did not injure him, O king.
Having in course of time been metamor-
phosed into a powerful tiger living upon
flesh and blood, the dog, abstained from his
former food of fruits and roots,


23. Indeed, from that time, O king,
the transformed tiger lived, living upon the
‘other animals of the forest, like a true king
of beasts.’


CHAPTER CXVII.


{RAJA DHARMANUSHASANA
: PARVA).—Continued.


Bhishma said :— .

1. ‘Gratified with the flesh of killed
beasts, the dog metamorphosed into a tiger,
slept at lis ease. One day as he lay on
the yard of the asylum, an infuriate eleph«
ant cameé there, resembling a cloud.


2. Possessed of a huge stature, and rent
cheeks, and having signs of the fotus on
his body, and with broad frontal globes,
the animal had huge tusks and a voice.
deep as the muttering of the clouds. -


3. Seeing that infuriate elephant, proud '
of his strength, approach him, the tiger,
moved with fear, sought refuge with the:
Rishi. > "

4-. Thereupon that foremost of sages
transformed’ the tiger into an elephant.
Seeing an animal of his own species, the,
real elephant, ,huge as a mass of clouds,
became afraid. .


5.. The Rishi’s elephant then, covered
with the filaments of lotus, dived gladly


192:


into lakes abounding with lotuses and
weet by their banks filled with rabbit
oles.


. 67. Sufficient time ain away in this
way. One day as the elephant was gladly
passing along the vicinity of the asylum,
there came before him a maned lion born
in a mountain cave and accustomed to kill
elephants,


8. Seeing the lion coming, the Rishi’s
elephant, from fear of life, began td
tremble and soaght refuge. with the
sage. :


9. Thereupon the sage metamorphosed
that prince a elephants into a lion. As
the wild Hon was an animal of the same
species with him, the Rishi’s lion no longer
feared him. On the other hand, seeing a
stronger beast of his awa species be-
fore him, the wild-lion became afraid.


10. The Rishi’s lion began to live in
that asylum within the forest. From fear
of that animal, the other animals no longer
ventured to approach the asylum. Indeed,
they all seemed te. be stricken with fear
about the safety of their lives.


1112. Sometime after, one day a des-
troyer of all animals, endued with great
strength, terrorizin ‘ i
eight legs and eyes on the forehead, v7z.,
a Sharabha, came there. He came to
that very asylum for slaying the Rishi’s
lion,


13. Seeing this, the sage transformed
his lion into a very strong Sharabha.


14. Seeing the Rishi‘s Shrabha before
him more powerful than himself, the wild
Pda forthwith fled away from that
orest,


15. Having beer’ thus metamorphosed
into a Sharabha by the saint, the animal


lived happily by the side of his trans. -


former.


16. All the animals then that lived in
the neighbourhood were stricken -with fear
of that Shrabha. ‘Their fear andthe desire
of saving their lives made thenrall fly away
from that forest.


17. Filled with delight, the Sharabha
continued daity to kilkanimals for his food.
Metamorphosed into a carnivorous beast,
he no longervliked fruits and roots upon
which be had lived before.


-18. One day that ungrateful beast who
had first been a dog but who was now
metamophosed into a Sharabha, eagerly


thirsting for blood, wished to kill the’


sage.


19. The latter saw it ail by his spiritual
vision and ascetic power, Highly wise the


all creatures, haying-


MAHABHARATA,


sage, having learnt the object of the beast,
spoke to him these words.


The sage said :-—

20. O dog, you were” first"metamor-
phosed into a leopard. From a leopard
you were then made a tiger. From a tiger


‘you became an elephant with the temporat
4 jitice trickling adown your cheeks. Yow


were then transformed into a lion.


2%. From a powerfut lion, you were then
transformed into a Sharabha. Filled with
Tove for you, it was who transformed you
inte these variousforms. You did not, and
do not belong by birth, to any of those
species. 7

22. Since, however, O sinful wretch,
you wish te kill me who have done no
injury to you, you will assume the forms of
your own species and be a dog again.

23. After this, that mean, foolish, and’
wicked animal, transformed into a Shara«
bha, again for the Rishi’s ewrse, put on
his owu proper form of a dog.’


CHAPTER CXVIIE.
(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA


PARVA).—Continued.
Bhishma said :— ; .
1. ‘Having once - more assumed his


proper form, the dog became very dise
spirited. Chiding him the Rishi drove the
sinful creature from bis asylum. :


2--3. Following this example an intelfi-
gent king should appoint servants, each fit
for the office assigned to him, and exercise
proper control over them, having first
ascertained their qualifications of truthfule |
ness, purity, sincerity, general disposition,
knowledge of the scriptures, conduct, birth,
seli-coi trol, mercy, strength, energy, dig
nity, and forgiveness, .


4 A king should never appoint a
minister without first having examined
him. Ifa king has about him low-born
persons he can never be happy, _


5. Even if persecuted without any fault
by his master, a person of high birth
never thinks of, jn ¢onsequence of the
respectability of his blood, injuring his
master.

6. A mean and fow-born individual,
however, having obtained even great riches
from his connection with some honest man,
becotnes an enemy of the latter if he is


i merely reproached,


“SHANTI PARVA,


g—mty. A minister should be passessed
of high birth and strength; he should be
forgiving and self-controlled, and have alt
his senses under restraint; he ‘should be
free from the vice of rapacity, contented
with his just gain, pleased with the pros-
perity of his master and friends, well-
informed of the requirements place and
time, ever engaged in attaching men to
himself or his master by doing them good,
always mindful of his duties seeking the
ood of his master, always careful, faithful
in the | discharge of his own duties,
a thorough master of the art of war
and peace, knowing full well the king’s
requirements about three objects, be-
loved by both the citizens and the deni-
zens of the provinces, acquainted with all
kinds’ of battte-array for breaking the
enemy’s ranks, capable of gladdening the
hearts of his master, and of reading
signs and gestures, acquainted with all
requirements about. march, skilled in the
art of training elephants, shorn of pride,
confident of his own powers, clever in the
transaction of business, always doing what
is right, of fair conduct, surrounded by
honest friends, of sweet speech, possessed
of pleasing features, capable of leading men,
well-versed in policy, endued with accomm-


plishments, energetic in actions “active,


ingenuous, Of a sweet temper, modest in
conversation patient, brave, rich, and capa-
ble of taking measures according to the
requirements of place and time.


15. That king, who gets such a minister
can never be humiliated or defeated by any
one. Indeed, his kingdom by and by
spreads over the Earth tike the light of
the moon,

16. A king, again, who is well-read in
the scriptures, who considers righteousness
as being superior to everything, who al-
ways protects his subjects, and who is
endued with the following virtues, secures
the love of all, .


17-—20. He should be patient, forgiving,
of pure conduct, severe when necessity
requires jt, know the virtues Of manliness,
respectful towards his elders, possessed of a
knowledge of the scriptures, teady to
listen to the instructions and advice of
competent men, capable’ of judging cor-
rectly from amongst the: various course of
action suggested to him, intelligent, of a
retentive memory, ready to de what is just,
self-controlled, always sweet-speeched, for-
giving even to enemies, practising charity
personally, possessed of faith, of lovely
features, ready to help distressed per-
“sons, having ministers who always seek
his well-being, free from eégoism, ‘never
without a wife, and undisposed to do any.


173


thing hastily. He should always rewafd
his ministers when they perform’ anything
great. He should love those whe are
devoted to him. :


2t. Avoiding idleness, he should al-
ways win over men by doing them good.
He should always be cheerful in appears
ance. He should always look to the
wants of his servants and never yield to
anger. He should be magnanimous.


2z. Without laying aside the rod of -
Punislment, he should hold it with pro-
priety. He should make all men about
him act fairly. Having spies for his
eyes, he should always look after the
affairs of his subjects, and should be a
master of all matters relating to virtue and
wealth. A king, who endued with these’
hundred qualifications, acquires the love of
all. Every king should attempt to be such.


23. Theking should also, O king, seek
out good warriors possessed of -the neces«
sary qualifications, for helping him in. pro«
tecting his kingdom.


24. A king, who seeks his own advances
ment, should -never disregard his army,
That king, whose soldiers are brave in
battle, grateful in conduct, and well-read
in the scriptures, whose army consists
of ‘infantry thoroughly versed in the
works on religion and duty, whose elephants |
warriors are brave, whose car-warriors are
skilled in their own niode of fighting and
well-versed in discharging arrows and in’
holding other weapons,-succeeds in subju-
gating the whole Earth. :


26. Thatking, who always tries to wit
over men to himself, who is ready for work,
who is rich in friends and allies, becomes
the foremust of kings.


27. A king, who has won over all men to
himself, may, O Bharata, with the help
of even a thousand brave horsemen, sut+
ceed ih conquering the entire Earth.’


—


CHAPTER CXIX.


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continued,


Bhishma said:—

1—2. ‘Following the fesson drawn’
from the story of the dog, that king, who
appoints his servants to offices for which.
each is, competent, enjoys the happiness of
sovereignty. A dog should not, with
becoming honors, be posted in a position far,
above that for which he is fit. If a dog
be posted above that ‘situation « which
is fit for him, he becomes inebriete’ with-
haughtiness,


174


'3. Ministers should be appointed to
offices for which they are competent and
should possess accomplishments necessary
for the same, Appdiniment of unworhy
persous is not at all approved,


4. That king, who appoists servants to
offices for ,which each is competent, suce
ceeds, for such merit, to enjoy the happi-
ness of sovereignty,


§. A Sharabha {should occupy the posi-
tion of a Sharabha; a lion should be
elated with the power ofa lion; a tiger
should be placed in the position of a tiger ;
and a feopard should be placed in that of a
leopard.


6. Servants should, according to the
scriptural injunction, be appointed to offices
for which each is competent. If you wish to
achieve success, you should never appoint
servants in offices higher than what they
deserve, ° ;

"q. That foolish king, who, disregarding
precedent, appoints ‘servants to offices for
which they are not fit, faiis,to please his
people.

*8. Aking, who wishes to have accom-
plished servants shoutd nevee appoint per-
sons who are shorn of intelligence, who are


low-ininded, who are without wisdom, who |-


are not masters of their senses, and who are
not highly born.


9g. Men, who are honest, born in high
family, brave, learned, shorn of malice and
envy, noble, pure in conduct, and clever
in business, deserve to be appointed as
ministers.


lo. Persons, who are humble, always
ready to perforin their duties, of a peaceful
nature, purein mind, adorned with vari-
ous other gifts of uature, and are never
spoken ill ot for the offices they hold, should
be the intimate companions of the king.


11. A tion should always associate with
alion. [f one that is not a tion associates
with a lion, it acquires all the
that belong to a'lion. ;


12.4 That lion, however who, while per-
forming the duties of a lion, has a pack of
dogs only for his companions, never suc-
ceeds for such companionship, in perform-
ing those duties. , :


‘13. Thus, O monarh, a king may suc:

ceed in subjugating the entire Earth if he
has for his ministers men endued with
courage, wisdom, great learning, -and
high-birth.


14. O foremost of kings, kings should
never keep a servant who 1s shorn of learn~
ing, sincerity, wisdom and great wealth.


advantages -


MAHABHARATA


15. Those men who are devoted to thei
master proceed unimpeded Jike arrows.
Kings should always speak sweet words to
those servants who are always busy with
doing good to theic masters.


16. Kings should,
look after their treasuries. tndeed, kings
depend on their treasuries. A king should,
always, try to swell his treasuries. ‘


17. Let your barns, O king, be filled
with corn.
honest servants. Do you try to increase
your wealth and corn.


18. Let your servants, skilled in battle,
always attend to their duties. It is desir-
able that they should be skilful ia the
management of horses.

19. O delighter of the Kurus, look to
the wants of your kinsmen and friends.
Be encircled by friends and relatives.
Seek the good of your city.

20. By mentioning the example of the
dog I have instructed you about the duties
you should adopt towards your subjects.
What further do ycu wish to hear ?’


CHAPTER CXX,


{RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continued,


Yudhishthira said:—


1. “You have, O Bharata, described the
many duties of king-craft, which were
observed and laid down in days of yore
by persons of ancient times conversant
with royal duties.


2. Wou have, indeed, described fully
those duties as approved by the wise. Do


you, however, O 1oremost of Bharata’s race, .


always, diligently -


And fet them be entrused to ‘


give us an abridgment of the same, SO that -


we may keep it in memory.”


Bhishma said :—


3. ‘he protection of all creatures is


considered the highest duty of the Ksha- ’


triya. Listen new to me, O king, as to
how the duty of protection is to be per-
formed,


4. A king conversant with his. ‘duties


should put on many forms as the peacock ,


displays plumes of various hues.


5. Keenness, crookedness,
sincerity, are the qualities which should be
present in him. He should practise im-
partially the qualities of
to acquire happiness.


= e


truth, and


goodness if he is


6. ‘He must-assume that particular color |
of form which is beneficial for the partix.


SHANTI PARVA:


ular object which he tries-to -actieve, A
king who can put on various forms succeeds
. dn achieving even the most subtile ebjects.


- 9. Dumb like the peacock in autumn, he
should keep his counsels close. He should
speak little, and that little should be sweet.
He should be of good features and well-
read in the scriptures.


8. He should always be very eareful
about those gates through which dangers
may come and befall him, like men guard-
ing breaks in embankments through which
the waters of large tanks may rush and
flood their fields and houses. He should
seek the protection of Brahmanas crowned
with ascetic success as men seek the refuge
of powerful rivers caused by the rain-water
deposited within moutain lakes. That
king, who wishes to amass riches should
act like religious hypocrites who keep
Sikha or tuft of hair.


. g. The king should always have the rod
of Punishment uplifted in his hands. He
should always levy taxes carefully after
examining the incomes and expenses of his
subjects, like men going to a full-grown
palmyra for drawing juice.


10. He should treat equitably. his own.


subjects ; cause the crops ot his enemies to
be crushed by the foot of his cavalry, march
against enemies when his own wings have
decome strong ; and mark all the sources
of his own weakness,


at. He should announce the faults of
his enemies; crush those who are their
partizans; and collect riches from outside
like a person plucking flowers from the
forest.


12, He should kill those foremost of
kings who are puffed up with might and
stand with upraised heads-like mountains,
by bribing the governors of the forests and
by ambuscades and sudden attacks.


13. Like the peacock in the rains, he
should enter his nightly habitations alone
and unseen, Indeed, he should - enjoy,
dike the peacock, within his inner apart-
ments, the company of his wives, _

14. He should not put off his coat of
“mail. He should himself guard his own
self, and avvid the nets spread out for him
by the spies and secret agents of his
enemies. ‘


18-16. He should also gain over the spies
of his enemies, but destroy them fully when
opportunity presents itself. Like the pea-
.cocks the king should destroy his powerful
_ and angry foes of crooked policy, and kill

their force and drive them away from home.
_ Lhe king should also like the peacocks, do


275 :


what is good to him, and gather. wisdom
from all sides as they collect insects even
from the forest. a :

17~ Aw wise and peacock-like king
should thus govern his kingdom and pursue
a policy which is. good for him.


18. By dint of his own intelligence,
he should determine what he is to do.
consulting with others he should either leave
off or conform such resolution. Helped
by that intelligence which is sharpened by
the scriptures, one ean fix bis courses of
action. Herein consists the utility of the
scriptures, :


19. By following the means of concilia-
tion, he should create confidence in the
hearts of bis enemies. He should show his
own strength. By judging of various
courses of action in his own mind he should
by dint of his own intelligence, make his
decision, \ ,


20. The king should be a master of the arts
of conciliating policy; he should be endued
with wisdom and should be able to do what.
should be done and avoid the otherwise,
A highly wise and intelligent person does
not require counsels or instruction.


2t—22. A wise man, who is endued with
the intelligence of Vrihaspati, if he incurs
obloquy, soon regains his true nature like
heated iron dipped in water. A sing
should perform objects, of his own or a!
others, according to the injunctions of the
scriptures. : :


23. A king, who knows well the means
of acquiring riches, should always engage
in his acts such men as are mild by nature
and endued with wisdom, courage and
great strength. :


24. Seeing his servants emplayed in acts
for which each is fit, the king should act
in unision with them like the strings of a
musical instrument, set to proper tension,
according with their notes. ;

25. The king should do good to all
persons without violating the injunctions of
Righteousness. That king stands firm asa
rock whom everybody regacds—He is
mine,


26. While settling the claims of Hti-
gants, the king, without making any differ-
ence between persens who are liked and
those who are disliked by him, should pre-
serve justice, ne ae!

27-28. The king should appoint in all
his offices such men as know very well
the characteristics of particular families, of
the people in general and of various
countries; as are mild in words ; as are of
middle age; as have no shortcomings ; as
are devoted to good acls;-as are never


476


‘careless ; ag are free from rapacity ; as are
possessed of learning and self-controt; and
as are firm in virtue and always ready to
‘preserve the interests of both virtue and
‘profit.


2g. In this way, having determined tle
course of actions and their final ends, the
king should accomplish them carefully ;
and instructed in all matters by his spies,
he may live happily. .


30. “That king, who never yields to anger
and joy without sufficient cause, whe looss
after all.his acts himself, and who superin-
tends his income and expenditure with his
own eyes, succeeds in acquiring great
-wealth from the Earth,


gt. That king isa master of his royal
duties who rewards his officers and subjects
publicly, whe punishes those who deserve
‘punishment, who protects his own self, and
bi protects his kingdum from every
evil,

32. Like the Sun shedding his rays
Upon everything underneath, the king
should always look after his kingdom him-
self, and helped by his intelligence, he
should supervise all his spies and officers,


33» The king should collect wealth from
his subjects at the proper time.
never announce what he does, ‘Tike an
intelligent perso milking his cow every
day, the king should milk his kingdom
every day. ; ;


34. As the bee gathers honey from
flowets gradually, the king should collect
wealth gradually from his kingdom for
keeping it in store. :


33. Having kept apart a sufficient por-
tion, hé should with the remaining portion
acquire reljgious merit and gratify his
desires for pleasure. That king, who is
acquainted with duties and who is gifted
with intelligence, would never’ squander
what has been stored, :


36. The king should never disregard
any wealth, however litle it may be; he
should never belittle his foes for their
powerlessness ; he should, by his own intel-
tigence, examine his ownself; he should
never place confidence in ignerant per-
Sons. -


37-38. Steadiness, cleverness, self-control,
intelligence, health, patience, bravery, aad
attention to the requirements of time
and place,—these eignt qualities always
multiply wealth, be it small or be it much.
A litle fice, fed with clarified butter, may
end- into a conflagration. <A single
seed may produce a thousand trees. A
king, therefore, -even when he knows that
his income and expenditure are great,
should not neglect the smaller items, :


He should,


MAHABHARATA,


39. An enemy, whether he be a childf a
young man, or an aged one, succeeds itt
killing a careless person. An insignificant
enemy, wherr he becomes powerful, may
root outa king. A king, therefore, who is
Conversant with the requirements of time
is the greatest of all kings,


40. Anenemy, strong or weak, impelled
by malice, may very soon destroy the fame
of aking, impede the acquisition of reli-
gious merit by him; and deprive him of
even his energy. “Pherefore, a king, whe
is of a controfled’ mind, should never be
careless when he has an enemy.


41. If an intelligent king desires for
riches and victory, he should, after know-
ing his expenditure, income, savings, and
administration, make either peace or war.
For this reason the king should seek the
help of an intelligent minister, <


42. Brilliant intelligence weakens even 4
powerful person; by intelligence the grow-
img powec may be protected; a growing
enemy is weakened by the help of intelli
gence; therefore, every work which is
unde:taken with intelligence is deserving of
praise.


43. Aking, who is patient and without
~any -fault, may, if he likes, obtain the
fruition of all his wishes, with the help of
even a smali force, ‘Vhat king, however,
who wishes to be encircled by a number of
self-secking @atterers, can never derive the
smallest benefit, '


44. For these reasons, the king, should
mildly collect wealth from his subjects.
if a king continually oppresses his people,
he is destroyed. lice a flash of Ughting
that shines only for a second. Sao sb


43. Learning, penances, immense wealth,
indeed, everything, can be acquired by
exertion. Exertion of embodied creatures ia

overned by intelligence. E£xertion, there-
ore, is the greatest of all things. ae


46. The human body is the habitation
of many intelligent, and energetic creatures,
of Shakra, of Vishnu, of Saraswati, and of
other beings. A learned man, therefore,
should never disregard the body. ‘


47- A covetous man should be. brought
under control by continued presents. He
that is covetous is never satiated with taking
othee people’s riches, Every one, however,
becomes covetous of happiness. ff a
person, therefore, becomes destitute of
wealth, be becomes shorn of virtue and
pleasure, .


’ 4


48. A covetous man seeks to take to
himself the riches, the enjoyments, the sons
and daugh ters, and the affluence of others.
Evory kind. of fault is seen in covetous meng


SHANT! PARVA,


Pte tig, therefore, should nevet appoint a
toveteds tian as his minister or officer.

49. A king should éveri send a low
fierson to ascertain the disposition and
Udings of his eneniies. A wise king should
frustrate all tlie attempts and objects of
his enemies.

g0. That tonfiderit ard high-born king
who seeks instruction from learned and
pious Brahmanas and who is protected by
his ministers, can keep all his tributary
chiefs urider proper control.


st. O king, I have briefly described to
you of all che duties laid dows in the scrip-
tures. Attend to them, helped by your
intelligence, That king, who, in obeying
his protectos, attends ta these, succeeds in
ruling the whole Earth.


$2. That king, who neglects the happi-
mess which policy yields and seeks for that
which chanee may bring; never succeeds in
Enjoying thé happiness of sovereignty or ln
acquiring blissful regions hereafter.


+ §3- By properly looking to the require-
Ments of war and peace, a careful king,
paceneds iti killing even such foes as are
ighly rich, adored for intelligence and


good conduct, endued with accomphsh-


ments, brave iti ‘battle, arid ready for work.- ©


_ $4 The king should find ‘out those
Means which are supplied by different
kinds of acts and measures. He should
hever depend upon destiny. One who sees
Faults in {nniocent persons, never sticceeds in
acquiring prosperity and fanie. ;

55- When two friends engage in doing
one and the same act, a wise man always
praises him among the two who undertakes
the heavier share of wort.

56. Do you practise these duties of kings
that I have described to you. Be ready
to perform the duty of protecting nien.
You may then easily acquire the meed of
virtue. All the regions of liappiness hére-
altee depend upon metit.’

Seemed


CHAPTER CXXI.


_(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA |
PARVA).—Continued.


Yudhishthira said —-
ut “QO graridfather, you have now
finished your discotirse upon the duties of
Rings. From what you have said it appeats
that punishment occupies a high position
and isthe master of everything; for every-
thirig depends upon punishment.


23


fim


377

2—3. It seems, O powerful one, that
funislimert, which is Highly powerful and
Which is présent everywhere, is the forer
most of all beings among either gods and
Rishis and great Pitris and Yakshas and
Rakshas !and Pishachas and Sadbyas,
or living beings in this world consisting of
beasts and birds.


4. You have said that the entire uni-
verse, mobile and immobile, including gods,
Asuras; and men, depends upon punist-
ment, 2

s§. 1 now wish, O foreniost of Bharata's
race, to know truly who Punishment is.
Of what kind is he?) What is his form?
What is his nature ?


6. Of what is he made? Whence is his
origin 2? What are his features ? What ig
his splendour? How doés he remain awake
among living creatures se vigilantly ?

7. Who is he that reniains perpetually
awake, protecting this universé ? Who is
he that .is known, to be the greatest of all
iliings ? Who, indeed, is that high person
called punishment? What is that upon
whicli Punishment depends ? Aad what is
his movement ? : :


Bhishrra said:

8. ‘Listen, O scion 6f the Kurtis, who
is punishment and why is he also called
Vyavahara. That upon whom all things
dépend is called puriishiitent,

g. Punishment is that by which righte-
ousness is: miaititained. He is sometimes
called Vyavahata. Punishiviertt is called as
stich so that the rightéousiess ‘of a Ring wha
is Wide awake nidy riot sulfer extinctiot,


to—tr, Te is; therefore, that the nanie
Vyavahara is applied to it: In days of yar,

anu, O King, declared first of all this
truth, ais..—-He who protects all creatures,
the loved and the hated equally, by intpate
tially holding the rod a punishiierit, is
said to be the tighteovstiess incartiaté.  ~*


13. These words, that I have said; were;
© king; first uttered in days of yore by
Manu. They represetit the gceat wotds af
Brahmiana. yee


13, And betavse these word¢ werd
Spoken first, therefore, they ate known as
the first. And since Punishment which
stops the ple uae bari of other people’d
wealth, therefore, Punislrment has conte t¢
be called by the name of Vyavahara, - -


34.. The aggregate of tl:ree objects als
ways depends on well-applied Punishments
Punishment is a great god, Ja form he
tooks liké a burning fires ;


478


: 15, Hie complenion is dark fike that of
the petals of the blue lotus. He has four
feath, four arms and eight legs.and many
eyes. His ears are pointed like arrows and
his hair stands upright.


16. He has matted focks and twe ton-
gues, His face has the cotor of copper,
and he is elad inva lion’s skin, That irre-
sistible god assumes such a dreadful form,


r7——-48. Assuming again the fornr of the |
sword, the bow, the mace, the dart, the
trident, the mallet, the acrow, the thick and
short club, the battle-axe, the discus, the
‘noose, the heavy bludzeon, the rapier, the |
lance, and, in fact, of every sort of weapon {
that exists on Earth, Punishment moves it
the world. .
+ 9. Indeed, Punishment moves on
Earth, piercing and cutting and assenting


and lopping off and dividing and strilt-
ing and killing and rushing against its
victims,


1 20--22. These, O Yudhisthira, are
gome of the names of Punishment gvz.,
sword, Sabre, Righteousness, Fury, the
Irresistible, the father of prosperity, Vic-
tory, Punisher, Checker, the Eternal, the
Seriptures, Beahmana,. Mantra, Avenger;
the Foremost of . first Legislators, -Tnige;
the Undecaying, God, the individua} of
icresistible course, the Ever-going, the
First-born, the individual without love, the
Soul of Rudra, the eldest Manu, and the
great Benefiter. : a

23 Punishment is the holy Vishnu. - He
_ 38 the "powerful Narayana. And because
he always puts on dreadful form, therefore
be is called Mabapurusha. ;
‘ 24. His wife Morality passes - by the
games of Brahmean’s daughter, Lakshmi,


wv


Vritti, Saraswati, and ther ef the
wniverse. Punishment has thus mary
forms,


25-33. Blessing and curse, pleasure
and pain, righteousness and unrighteous-
ness strength and weakness, fortune and
misfortune, merit and demerit, virtue
and fault, liking and disliking, seasor
and month, night and day and hour, care~
fulness and carelessness, joy and anger,
peace and self-control, destiny and manli-
ness, salvation and damnation, fear and
intrepidity, injury and abstention from
injury, penances and saciifice and rigid
abstirence, poison and wholesome food,
the beginning, the middfe, and the end,
the result ef all murderous acts, insolence,
insanity, arrogance, pride; patience, pulicy,
impolicy, powerlessness and power, respect,
disrespect, decay and firmness, humility,
tharity, fitness of ‘time and -unfitness. of
cme,. falsehood, wisdom, truth, belief, dis-


MAHABHARATA,


betief, impotence, trade,.profit, loss, success,
defeat, fierceness, mildness, death, acquisi«
tion and non-acquisition, agreement, and
disagreement, wiyat should be done and
what should mot be done, strength and
weakness, malice and good will, righte-
ousness and unrighteousness, shame and
shamelessness, modesty, prosperity, and
adversity, energy, acts, learning, eloquence,
keenness of understanding,—all these, OF
Yudhisthira, are forms of Pawuishment in
this world. Therefore, punishment hay
many forms, .

34. If ponishmrent had not existed, alk
creatures would have struck one another,
Through fear of punishment, O Yudhis-
thica, living ereatures do rot kill one
another. ‘


3§- O king, always’ protected by punish-
ment, the subjects, inerease the might of
their ruler. Itvis for this that punishe
ment is regarded as the highest refuge
of a . Z .


36. Punishment, O king, quickly sets
the world on the path of righteousness,


; Depend upon treth, righteousness exists:


in the Brahmanas.


37. Filled with righteousness, leading
Bratimana's--take to the study of the Vedas.
From the * Vedas the sacrifices originate.
Sacrifices please the gods,


38. The godsbeing gratified, commend
the dwellers of the Earth to Fndra. For
benefiting the inhabitants of the Earth,
Indra gives then food, . ¢

39, The life of all creatures depends
upon foed. From food creatures derive theie
suppore and growth. Punishment in the
shape of king remaitvs wakeful amongst
them. ,

40. For serving this object, punishment
assumes the form of a Kshatriya among
men. Protecting {men he remains awake,
always careful and never decaying.


41. Punishment has again these other
eight names, ws. Ged, Man, Life, Power,
Heart, the Lord of all creatures, the
Soul of all things, and the Living crea-
ture. -

42. Ged gave both prosperity and the
rod of punishment to the king who is pos-
sessed of strength and whois acombinatiow
of five expedients. _

43. Nobility of blood, rich ministers,
knowledge, the various kinds of forces witty
the eight objects mentioned below, and the
other force, should be sought for by the
king, O Yudhisthira.


44. Those eight objects are elephants,
korses, cars, infantry, beats, impressed


SHANTI -PARVA


Rabourers, increase of population, and cattle, :


‘such as sheep, etc.


45. Well-armed adldiers cat-warriors, |


elephant-warriors, cavalry, infantry, officers.
sand surgeons form the limbs.

46—47. Beggars, principal judges, as-
trologers, performers of »propitiatory and
Atharvan rites, treasury, allies, grain, and
all other requisites, form the body, -com-
yposed of seven attributes and eight kmbs,
of a kingdom. Punishment its another

werful Jimb of a-kingdom. Punishment
as the creator of a-kingdom.


48. God himself :has, with great care,
gent Punishment for the use of the Ksha-
triya, This eternal universe is impartial
Punishment’s self,


49- There is nothing which deserves
greater respect from kings than Punish-
ment by which the ways of Righteousness
are marked out. Brahman himself, for the

rotection of the world .and for establish-
ang the duties of different orders, sént down
Punishment,;

0. There is another kind of Vya-
wahara (Law) originating from. the disputes
of litigants which also has sprung from
Brahman. Principally marked by a belief
fm either of the two parties, that Vyava-
thara, (Law) yields great good.

‘ gr. There is another-kind of Vyavahara
which has the Veda for its soul. It also
originates from the Veda. There is, O
foremost of kings, a third kind of Vyava-
thara (Law) which is connected with ge |


, customs but which is quite-of a piece wii


the scriptures. .


1 ga. That Vyavahara (Law) which has, as
spbove, been said to be macked by a belief
in either of twe litigant parties, should be
&nown by us as being inherent in the king.
it should be alse known by the name of
Punishment, as also by the name of
Evidence, es

53. Although Punishment is regulated
by Evidence, yet it depends upon Law.

yavahaca (Law) is ceally based upon
Vedic precepts.

84. That Vyavahara (Law), which ori-
ginstes from the Vedas, is Morality or
duty. It yields géod to persons believing in
duty and morality; men of purified souls
have spoken of that Vyavahara qLaw) as
they have done of ordinary taw.


_ 8§ The third kind of Vyavahaca is
also a protector of men, and it also origi.
‘nates from the Veda, O Yudhishthira 1 -It
keeps up the three worlds.” It has Trath
for its soul and yields prosperity.


' §6. That which is punishment is eternal


aid


Vyavahara. That which has beeti said
be Vyavahara is really the Veda)


- 'g7, That which is the Veda is motaliy.


and duty, What is morality and duty is
the path of Righteousness. This fast in,
the beginning had been the Grandfather:
‘Brahman, that Lord of all creatures.


38. Brahman is the Creator of the
entire tniverse with the gods and Asuras
and Rakshasas and human beings and
snakes, and of every other thing. ‘


59. Hence that law whicl: is charace
terised ‘by a belief in either of two Htigant.
parties has also originated from him.
‘Therefore, he has laid down the following.
regarding Vyavahara. ‘

60. Neither mother, nor father, nor,
brother, nor wife, nor priest, is unpunish~.
able with that king who govetns agreeably
to his duty.’


pene -


CHAPTER CXXit,


. RAJADHARMANUSHAISANA
*"" -PARVA).—Gontinued.


Bhishma, said —

xr. ‘Regarding it is cited the following
old fetory. There was among the Angas @
highly effufgent king called Vasuhoma,

2. That king was always engaged ia
acts of plety, accompanied by his.
wife he always practised the ausierest
penances, He went to the -spot called
Munjaprishtha highly respected by the
Pitris and the celestial Risiyis, ok

3: There, on that peak of Himavat,
near the golden mountain of Mery, Rama,
sitting under the shade of ‘a well-known


.banian, had tied his matted locks together.,


4. From that time, O king, the spot,
which is a favorite resort tof Rudra, passed
by the name of Munjaprishtha among
Rishis of rigid vows. : : vA

gs. Living there, king Vasuhoma acquired
many pious attributes and, having gained
the regard of the Brahmanas, came to be
regarded as a celestial Rishi in holiness.

6. One day, that grinder of enemies,
that friend of Shakra, oz., king Mandhatr
of great soul, came to Vasuhoma on bis
mountain retreat, :


7. Arrived there, and seeing king Vasu
homa of austere’ penances, “stood ‘haably
before the latter, + nae

ot ‘


t


T


180


m7


about the well-bein
kingdom consisting of seven limbs.


g. After this, Vasuhoma addressed his
royal guest who strictly followed the con-
duct of the righteous men of old, saying, —


What, O king, shali } do for you,


to Thus addressed, O detighter of the
best of kings,
highly pleased, answered the greatly wise
in the


Kurus, Mandhatri, that


Vasuhoma seated at his ease,
following words,


Mandchatri said :—


1h


Ushanase Pa:


12, 1 wish to know what is the origin
What was awake before
What also 1s said to be


of Punishment.
Punishment ?
its end?


13. How came Punishment to depend
‘Tel! me alt this, O
you of great wisdom. 1! approach you asa


upon the Kshatriya ?
disciple,ready to give you the tuitgorhfge. . .


Vasuhoma said :—


14. Listen, O king, as to how Punish
ment, that upholder of the world, sprang up.
ft ig the sout of righteousness, and eternal,
and was created for preserving the proper
government of alt creatures.


‘45, Webave heard that once upon a
time, the Grandfather of all the worlds,
gis., the divine Brahmana, degiring to
gelebrate a sacrifice, could not find a priest
equally qualified like himself. ;


16. Therefore, he once conceived in his
brain and held the foetus there for mary
fong years. After a thousand years, the
great god sneezed. In that act, the fcetus
dropped from his head.


17. The divine being, O chastiser of
foes, who was thus bern trom Brahman
passed by the name of Kashupa. Highly
powerful he became a lord of creatures.
That Kashupa officiated as priest, O king,
in the sacifice of the bigh-souled Grand-
father. : ;


_.


18, Upon the commencement of that
sacrifice, of Brahthan, O ‘best of kings,
punishment disappeared on account of the
visible farm that the Grandfather was then
obliged to assume. :


19. Punishment having disappeared, a
great confusion arose among all creatures.
dhere was nv lunge: any distinction


8. Vasuhoma offered his guest water to
wash his feet, and the Arghya consisting of
the usual articles, and enquired of him
er otherwise of his


You have O king, studied all the
doctrines of Vrihaspatz! QO best of men,
you know also the doctrines laid down by


, .
MAHABHARATA.


becween what should’ be ‘done and what
should not. All difference, again, between
ctean and unclean food disappeared.


20. Men could not distinguish between
what drink was allowable and what drivk
was not. All creatures began to injure one
another. ‘here were no restraints about
the union of the sexes. All idea of pro-
perty disappeared.

31. All creatures began to rob, snatche
ing meat from one another, ‘She strong
began to kill the weak. Nobody cared
the least for his neighbour. ., ‘


22—23. Then, having adored the divine
and eternal Vishnu, the grandfather ad-
dressed that great boon-giving god, say-
ing, —You should, O Keshava, show mercy
on the present occasion. Let it be so
ordained by you that the confusion that
has already set in may disappear.


24. Thus: addressed, that foremost of
gods, armed with an enormous Shula,
thinking for some time, converted his owum
self into the form of Punishment.


25. From that form, having Righteous-
ness for its legs, the goddess Saraswati
created Danda-niti (Science of Punish-}
ment} which very soon became celebrated
all over the watid.


_ 2G. Thereafter the great god armed
with a huge Shula, having again reflected
fur sometime, appointed a few among the
gods as the rulers of their respective
classes.


27. It was then that he made the divine
Indra of a thousand eyes the king of gods,
Yama the son of Vivaswat was made the
lord of the departed manes,


28. Kuvera was made the lord of riches
and of all the Rakshasas. Meru was made
the king of the mountains, and Ocean was
made the lord of the rivers,


29. The powerful Varuna was made
the lord of the waters and of the Asuras,
Death was made the lord of life and of all
living creatures, and Fire was made the
chief of all things possessed of energy.


30. The powerful Ishana the great and
eternal Mahadeva, of three eyes, was made
the king of the Rudras. aan


gt. Vashishtha was made the king of
the Bralimanas, and Jatavedas was made
the chief of the Vasus. Surya was made
the lord of all luminous bodies, and Chan-
dramas was made the Jord ef Stars and
constellations. :


32. Anshumat was made the chief of all
herbs, and the poweriul -and foremost of
deities, wiz., Kumara or Skanda, having


SHANTI


twelve arms, was made the lord of all the
spirits and ghosts. ,, a
33. Time, containing the seeds of both
- origin and destruction was made the lord
of all creatures, as also of the four parts of
Death vis., weapous, diseases Yama, and
acts, and lastly of grief and joy,


34. The Shrutis say-that the great god :


Mahadeva, that lord of lords, O king,
armed with, Shula, is- the lord of the
Rudras. |


33« Thérod of punishment was given to
Brahman’s latest-born son, wig., Kashupa,
the lord of all creatures and the foremost of
the virtuous.


36. Upon the completion of that sacri-
fice according to due rites, Mahadeva after
making proper reverence handed over
Punishment, that protecior of Righteous-
ness, to Vishnu,


- 37. Vishnu gave it to Angiras, and
Avgiras, that foremost of ascetics, handed
it'over to Indra and Marichi. Marichi gave
it to Bhrigy,

38. Bhrigu gave that rod intended for
the protection of righteousness to all the
Rishis. ‘The Rishis gave it to the Regents
of the quarters, and the Regents made it
over again to Kashupa. tee


39. Kashupa then handed it over to
Manu the son of Surya. -The god of
Shraddhas (vis., Manu), gave it to his sons
for the sake of tue righteousness and
siches, :


‘40, Punishment should be meted out
‘witli discrimmation, guided by righteous-
ness and not by caprice. Lt is intended for
checking the wicked. Fines and confisca-
tion ace intended for creating terror, and
not for replenishing the king’s treasury.


* at. The wounding of one's body or the
infliction of deatly should not be made for
trivial causes. ‘he infliction of physical
pain by various means, hurling fromm tops of
mountains, and banishment also, should not
be guided by similar causes.

42. Surya’sson Manu gave the rod of
punishment, (to his sons) for the protection
of the world, Punisiment in the hands of
successive holders, remains awake, protec-
ting all creatures,


44—49. At the top of. the ladder, the
divine Indra is awake; after him, Agni of
burning flames; after him, Varuna ; after
Varuna, Prajapati; after Prajapati, Righte-
ousness whose essence is restraint; after
Righteousness, the son of Brahman, oz.,
the eternal Law, -after-- Law, Energy is
awake, employed inthe act of protection;
alter Energy, the herbs; after the begbs,


PARVA, 181

the mountains; after the mountains, all
kinds of juices and their’ attributes ; after
these, the goddess Niriti;- after Niriti, |
the planets and the luminens bodies in’
heaven ; after these, the Vedas; after the-
Vedas, the powerful form of Vishnu”
with the horse head; after him the
almighty and eternal grandfather, gis.,
Brahman; after the grandfather, the
divine and blessed Mahadeva; after’
Mahadeva, the Vishwedevas; after them,
the great Rishis ; after the Rishis,- the divine
Soma ; after Soma, the eternal duties; after
the gods, the Brahmanans are awake. '


go. After the Brahmanas, the Kshatri--
yas are piously protecting ali creatures.
Yhe universe,’ consisting if ‘mobile and
immobile creatures, is kept awake by the
Kshatriyas.


5t. Creatures are kept awake in this’
world, and Punishment is awake is among
them. Effulgent like the Grandfather him-
self, Punishment keeps together and main-
tains everything,

52—53. Time, O Bharata, is always
awake, in the begining, the middle, and
the end, ‘The lord of afl the worlds, the
lord of all creatures, the powerful and.
blessed Mahadeva, the god vf gods, is,
always awake. He passes also by the names
Kaparddin, Shankara, Rudra, Bhava,
Sthanu, and-the lord of Uma,

84. Yhus Panishment also keeps awake
in the beginning, the middle and the end.
A virtuous ting should duly rule, guided
by Punishmeit. : .


Bhishma said :—

'g5. That person who listens to this
teaching of Vasuhoma, and having listen-
ed to it behaves according to ‘its trend, .is
sure to acquire the fruition of all his desires.

56. I have now, O foremost of men,
told you everything as to who- Punishment
is, that resteainer of the universe which js
governed by righteousness.”


CHAPTER CXXIIL..


{RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA.) Continued.


Yudhishthira said:~ =”

r.:] wish, O sire, to hear the final
conclusions about Virtue, Profit and Plea-
sure. Depending upon which of these
does life proceed ? a

2. What are the’origing of Vittue, Profit
and Pleasure? ~What is again the out


182.


ry t


come of those three? They are sometimes
seen intermixed with one another, and
sometimes to exist separately and indepen-
dently of one another.”


Bhishma said :—

3. ‘When men in this worid try with
pure hearts to gain Profit with the help
of Virtue, then those thrée, vi#., Virtue,
Profit, and Pleasure, may be seen to exist
in a state. of union regarding time, cause,
and action.


4. Peofit originates from virtue, and’


Pleasure ig the fruit of Profit, AH the
three again originate from Will. Will is
connected with the objects. 3

5. All objects exist in a body for grati-
fying the desire of enjoyment. Upon these
depend the threefold objects of life. Renun-
ciation of all objects is liberation. :

6. It is said that Virtue is sought for
the protection of the body, and Profit is
forthe acquisition of Virtue. Pleasure is
merely the gratification of the senses. All
the three are, therefore, pervaded the
quality of Rajas (darkness.)

7. Victue, Profit, and Pleasure, when
sought for the sake of heaven and
such other rewards, ate considered
remote, becatse the rewards theniselves
are remote, They ate wear when sought,
however, for’ the sake of Knowledge
of Self.- One should seek them for
the purity ef soul. Qne should nat
renounce them even in mind.
Profit, and Pleasure are to be abandoned,
one should abandon them when one has
liberated one's self by ascetic penances.


8. Fhe aim of the threefold objects is
emancipation. I wish men could attain it.
One’s acts, undertaken and completed with
even the help of intelligence may or may
not yield the expected fruits. —


g. Virtue is not always the root of Profit,
for other things than Virtue lead to Wealthy
There is again the opposite view. In some
Cases, Wealth acquired has produced evil.
Other things again than Wealth have
brought on the acquisition of Virtue. There-
fore, an ignorant man, whose understanding
has been debased by ignorance, never suc-
ceeds in acquiring the highest object of
Virtue and Profit, ots., Emancipation.


to. The defeat of Virtue consists in the
desire of reward ; that of Profit consists in
amassing it; when freed from these impu-
tities, they yield mighty fcuits.


‘33, Regarding itis cited the discourse,


that took place in days of yore between
Kamandaka and Angarishtha.


«


If Virtue, |-


MAHABHARATA,


12. One day baving waited for the
opportunity, king ' Aagarishtha saluted
the Rishi Kamanda as he was seated!
at his ease, and put to him the following
questions.— 7

13. Tf a king, under the influence of
lust an@ folly, commits sin for which he
afterwards repents, how, Q Rishi, can
those sins be destroyed. .

14. Heagain a man, guided by igno-
cance, does what is sinful in the belief that
he is acting piously, how shall the king
suppress that sin prevalent among men ?


Kamanda said :—"


1§. That man, who, renouncing Virtue
and Profit, pursues only Pleasuce, reaps as
the result of such conduct the destruction of
his intetligence.

16. Yhe destruction of intelligence is
followed by carelessness which at once des«
troys both Virtue and Profit. Such careless-
ness, beget dreadful atheism and systema-.
tic wickedness.

17, Tfthe king does not subdue those
wicked men of sinful conduct, all good sub+
jects then live in dread of him likea
person Jiving in a room within which a

snake has concealed itself,


18. The subjects do not follow such a.
king. ahmanas and all pious persons
also do the same. As a consequence the
king incurs grave danger, and ultimately
the risk of his life.


19, Laden with infamy and insult, te
has to carry on a miserable existence. A
ae = infamy, however, is tantamount to
jeath.


20. Men well read: in the scriptures
have laid down the following expedients!
for suppressing sin. The king should:
always study the three Vedas.’ He should
fespect the Brahmanas and do them.
good. ; : .


2t. He should be given to righteousness,
He should make alliance with high families.
‘He should serve the great Brahmanas*
endued with the virtue of forgiveness,


22. He should perform ablutions and
recite sacred Mantras and thus spend his,
days happily. Banishing all wicked sub-
ijects from himself and his kingdom, he
should we with victuous men. -


"23. .He should please all persons by
sweet words or geod acts. He should say.
to-all—I am yours,—and declare the
virtues of even his enemies.

24. By behaving thus he may séon'
cleanse himself of his sins, and gain ‘tha®

t ae re e+ ee eS:


eh


rt


SHANTI PARYVA, 1183


high esteem of aff. Forsooth, by such #
coriduct all his sins will be destroyed.

25. Youshould satisfy all those great
duties which ‘your seniors and preceptors
Would indicate. You are sure to acquire
gteat blessings through the grace. of your
Seniots and preceptors.’ :


eetcenneneca
“CHAPTER CXXIV.


(RAJA DHARMANUSHASANA
_PARVA).—Continued.


Yudhisthira said :—

i. “All persons on Earth, O foremost of
men, speak highly of vittuous conduct, I
have, hawever, great misgivings regarding
Athis subject of their praise.

2. Ifthe subject be not far from oor
comprehension, O foremost of virtuous
men, I wish to hear everything about
the way in which virtuous conduct can be
acquired. :

3. How is, that conduct acquired, O
Bharata! 1} wish to trear it, Tell me also,


O foremost of orators, what are the charac-.


teristics of that conduct,”
Bhishma said :~


_ 4. *Formerty, O givers of honors, Dur-
yodhana while burning within at your
and your brothers’ prosperity at Indra-
ptastha, and for the jeers he received
for his mistakes atthe grand palace, had
asked his father Dhritarashtra the same
uestion. Hear what transpired at that
time, O Bharata.


6. MHaving seen that grand palace and
that great prosperity of yours, Duryodhana,
while sitting before his father described to
him of all he had seen.


7. Having heard the words of Duryo-
dhana, Dhritarashtra, addressing his son
and Karna, replied to him as follows.


Dhritarashtra said:—~

8 Why do you grieve, O son! 3
wish to heae the cause fully. Ff after
hearing the reasons they appear to be suffi-
cient, E shall then try to hstrect you.

'g. O sabjugator of hostile towns, you
too have acquired great afffuence. All
your brothers are ever obedient to you, as
also alt your friends and relatives. si


40. You are clad in the best robes. Vou
take the richest food. Horses of the best
species beac you, Why then have you

me pale andemaciated 2 Mp


tive ts cited, it was -formerty


| brought the three worlds under s


Duryodhana said :--
tt. Ten. thousands of great Snataka
Brahmananas daily tale their food at


‘Yudhishthira’s place from plates of gold. ,


-1a—1z. Seeing his beautiful palace
adorned with excellent flowers and fruits,
iis horses of the ‘Tittiri and the Kalmasha
breeds, his dresses of various sorts, indeed,
seeintg that high prosperity -of my enemies,
vis., the sons of Pandu,—a_ prosperity
resembling that of Vaishravana himself,
¥ am burning with grief, O Bharata ‘—


Dhritarashtra said:—


14. Tf you wish, O sire, to acquire
prosperity Hke that of Yudhishthira or
that which is even superior to it, do you
then, O son, try to be of virtuous conduct.


1§. Forsooth,; one'may, by his conduct
alone, conquer the three worlds, There is
nothing which virtuous -persons. cannot
obtain. ve ee


.16. Mandhatr? conquered the whole
world in only one night, Janamejaya, ia
course of three; and Nabhaga, in course
of sever,


_17. All these kmgs were endued with
merty and virtuous conduet. Therefore,
the Earth came to them at their will, wom
over by their virtues!


Duryodhana said —..
#8, I wish to hear, O Bharata, how

that condact may be acquired, by which

the Earth was won by them so squickly fos


Dhritarashtra said :—
19. Regarding it the following ofd narra«

€ recited by

Narada, with regard to virtuous conduct.


‘20. In days of yoré, the Daitya Prah~
fada, by the merit of his conduct, snatched


from the great Indra. his sovererenty =
jection.


2%. Shakra then, with joined hands,
approached Wrihaspati. ndued with
great wisdom, the god of the celéstials
addressed the great preeeptor, saying,—f
desire you to tell me the source of happi-


ness, ‘ { ,


2z. Thus accosted, Vrihaspati said te ~
him that Knowledge isthe source of the
gteatest happiness.


23- Indeed, Vrihaspati pointed out
Knowledge to be the gource of supreme
happiness, [ndra, however, once more
asked him as to whether there was. any


| thing superior to that,


184


»


Vrihsapati said —


24... There is some thing, O son, which


is still higher. The gréat’ Bhargava
‘(Ushanas) will instruct you better, Go to
him, blessed be you, and enquire of tim,
O king of the celestials ! “4


25. Endued with great ascetic merit and
‘effulgence, the king of the celestials then

went td Bhargava and acquited from him,
with a geatified heart, a knowledge of that
which was to his greatest good.

26, Acquiring the permission of the great
Bhargava, the celeberator of a hundred
sacrifices once more asked the sage as
to whether there was anything superior to
what the sage had already told him.


27. The omniscient Bhargava said,—
The great Prahlada has better knowledge !
—Learning this, Indra became highly
pleased. :


2% The chastiser of Paka, endued with
supreme intelligence, assumed the forut
of a Brahman and going to Prahlada,
asked him saying—»f desire to hear what
‘cohduces to felicity.


29. Prahlada answered the Brahmana,
sayinz,—Q chief of the twice-born, | have
na time, being wholly engaged with the

-.task of sulting the three worlds! J carinet
therefore, instruct you. ¢


go. The Brahmana said,—-O king when
you may have leisure, 1 wish to listen to
your instructions about that conduct whieh
‘yields good ¢ ' ;


gt. At this answer, king Prahlada
became pleased with that Brahma-Vadia.
. Saying,—So be itt—he availed of a
favorable | opportunity for delivering
to- the Brahman the truths of know-
ledge. on


.3% The Brahmana duly treated Prah-
Jada as 4 disciple should his preceptor,
and began with his whole heart to do what
Prahtada wished,


33., Many. a time the Brahmana en-
‘quired, saying,—O chastis® of enemies
- ‘by what means have you been able to
“acquire the sovereignty of the three worlds?
Tell me, O pious king, what those means
Bret—Prahiada, O' king, ‘answered the
. question of-the Brahmana.


Prahlada said :— tgs
34. I do not, O twice-born one, feeF any
pride for my being a king, nor do I enter-
‘tain any hostile feelings towards the Brah-
‘manas! On the other hand, f accept and
foitow the policy they describe to me based
upon the teachings of Shukras :


—btessed.be


. ,MAHABITARATA.


35, Full confident they say 16 me what
‘they wish to say, and restrain me fro
unrighteous or improper courses. { art
ever obedient to the teachings of Shukra.
I wait upon and serve the Brahmanas and
my elders. | bear na malice,


g6. Eat of righteous soul. I have
conquered anger, { am self-centrolled,
and all my setises are under restraint.
‘Those twice-born ones that are my insteuc-
tors give me whwulesome advice like bees
dropping honey into the cells of theit
comb.


37, | taste the ambrosia dropped by
those. learned men, and hke the Moon
among the stars f live among the members
of my family. : .

38- Even listening to the teachings
of Shukra_ from the lips of Brahmanas
and following them in practice, is this
nectar on Harth, even this is the clearest
eye.

39--40. The good of a man consists iw
these.— Thus. said Prahlada to that utterer
of Brahina. Setved dutifully by bim, the
chief of the Asutas once more said,—O
fgremrost of twice-born ones, I am highly
pleased with you for your dutiful conduct
towards me. Ask of me the boon you wish,
vw, for E shall grant you what
you will ask.


41. The Brahmana answered the king
ofth Asuras saying,—Very well. I wiit
obey you.-—Prahlada, pleased with hiur,-—««
soid,—~Take what you wish.


The Brahmana said :~


42. tf, O king, you have Been pleased
with me and if you wish to do what is
agreeable to me, [ wish then to acquire
your behaviour! ‘This is Ure boon that f
pray for.

43. Atthis, though pleased, Prahlada
became stricken with a great feat. Indeed.
when this boon was indicated by the Brah-
mana, the Asura king thought that
tlre solicitor could not be an ordinary
persor. ; b0 4 2 .

44. Wondering much, Prahlada at last
said,—Let it be sol—Having, however,
granted the boon, the Asura king became’


4 filled with grief, ©


45. Having received the boon, the
Brahmana went away, but Prahlada, O
king, was stricken with a deep anxiety and’
knew not what to doy a

46. “While the Asura king sat brooding
over the matter, a flame of light came out
of his person. [t had a shadowy form of
great effulgence and huge proportions:


| Prahlada asked the form, saying,<—Whé
. 44 ary ‘7 -


weg


Ir


SHANTI PARVA.


sare Vou 2--The form. answered, tsaying,—=
a am the embodiment of your ‘conduct.’
Renounced by you | am going away.


- 48. 4 shail henceferth, O king, dwell in
that blameless and foremost of Brahmanas
who had become your devoted disciple f
w~Haviag said these words, the form
vanished and soon after entered the body
vof Shakra.


-49, After the disappearance of that
form, another of similar form issued out of
Prahlada’s body. The Daitya king ad~
dissing it, said —-Who are you ?


” s0.° The form answered, saying,—~—
Krow me, O Prahlada, for the embodi-
‘ment ef Righteousness, 1 shall go there
where that foremost of Brahmanas js, for,
© king of the Daityas, I reside there where
Conduct lives !


5t. Upon the disappearance of Righte-
“ousness, a third highly effulgent form, OQ
monarch, issued out of the body of the
’ great Prahlada.


52. Asked by Prahlada as to who he was,
that highly effulgent form answered,
sayings _fencw, O king of the Daityas,
that | am Truth. [shall
following the way of Righteousness!

53. Avec Truth had feft Prahlada,
following kK.ghteousness, another great
person jssued out of Prahlada’s body.
Asked by the Daitya king, the mighty
being answered,—I am the embodiment of
good works. Know, O Prahlada, that I
live there where the Truth lives!


54. After this one had left Prahlada,
another being come out, giving vent to
loud and deep eries. Addressed by Parhe
Jada, he answered,—Know that I am
Power. I live thece where good works are.


55. Having said these words, Power
went away where good works had gone.
After this, a goddess of great effulgence
_came out of Prablada’s person,


56. The Daitya king asked her and she
answered him saying that she was the
embodiment of Prosperity, adding,—I lived
in you, O hero, O you of prowess incapa-
ble of being baffled. Renounced by you,
I shalt follow Power,


57. The great Prahlada, stricken with
fear, once mo-e asked the goddess, saying,
— \Vhere do :> go. O goddess, O you
that live auld | uses ?


58. You ar: cver, devoted to truth, O

goddess, and ycu are the foremost of

u-@eities, Whe is th. t foremost of Brahma-
nas? 1 wish to knuw the truth !


24


leave you, |
‘the great


The goddess of Prosperity said :—


59. Practising the vow of Brahma.
charyya, that Brahmana who was instruc
ted by you was Shakra. O. foremost one,
he robbed you of that sovereignty which
you had over the three worlds. :


Go. © Righteous one; it was by your:
conduct that you had reduced the three
worlds to subjection. Knowing this the
king of the gods robbed -you of . your
conduct ! :

61. Righteousness and Truth and goed
works and Power and myself, O you of
great wisdom, alt originate from conduct,


Bhishma said: :
62. ‘Having Said these words, the god-
dess of Prosperity went away, as also all
the rest, O Yadhishthira, Once more
addressing his father, ‘


Duryodhana said :— :

63. O detighter of the Kurus, ft wish
to know the truth about conduct. , Tell
me the means by which it may be acquired, :


Dhritarashtra said ‘—


64. Those means were described by
Prahlada while discoursing
to Indra. Listen, however, O king, ag
to how in brief couduct may be acquired,


65. Abstention from injury, by art,
thought, and word to all creatures, mercy,
and gift, constituie the praise-worthy
behaviour, = * ae

66. That act or exertion which does not
de good to other, or that act for which one
has to feel shame, shouid never be done.


67. That act, on the other hand, should
be. done for which one may be lauded in
society. O best of the Kurus, 1 have now
told you briefly as to what conduct is, ~


68, If, O king, wicked persons ’ do
ever acquire prosperity, they do not ‘enjoy
it long, O son, and are soon rooted out.


Dhritarashtra said :— ’
69. Knowing all this truly, do you, O
son, be of good conduct, if, you wish to


obtain: greater prosperity than Yudhish
thira.’


Bhishma said :~


70. *This was what king Dhritarashtra
said to his son. Do you follow these ins
tructions, O son of Kunti, and you wit
then surely acquire their iruit.’


+ eee


186
CHAPTER CXXvV.


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continued.


Yudhishthira said:—'


t. “You have said, O grandfather, that
-eonduct js the first thing (for a man).
Whence, hewever, dees Hope arise? ‘Fell
“me what it is,


2. This great doubt has occupied my
mind. There is no other person than you,
-O  subjugator of hestile towns, who can
remove it! . .


O grandfather, I had great hope
about Suyodhana that when a battle was
about to take place, he would, O lord, do
what was proper. ;


4 Hope is the sheet-an-chor of every
man. When that hope is destroyed, great
grief follows which, forsooth, is almost
equal to death itself.


‘gs. Fool that I am, Dhritarashtra’s
“wicked son, Duryodhana, destroyed the
hope 1 had entertained. Mark, O
king, the foolishness of my mind.


6. think that hope is bigger.than a’
Mountain with allits trees. Or, perhaps,
it is bigger than the sky itself. Or,
pares O king, it is really immeasur-
able.


gq. Hope, O chief of the Kurus, is highly
difficult of being understood and equally
difficult of being conquered. Seeing this
last attribute of Hope, | ask, what else is
so unconquerable as this ?


Bhishma said :—


8. I shall deseribe to you, O Yaudhish.
thira, regarding it, the discourse between
Sumitra and Rishabha that took place in
days of yore. Listen to it!


9. A royal sage of the Haihaya family,
Sumitra by name, went = ahunting.

aving pierced a deer with a straight
arrow, he pursued it.


to. Endued with great strength, the deer
ran ahead, witly the arrow sticking to him.
The king was equally powerful,: and ac-
cordingly pursued his precious game with
great speed.


tr. The animal, highly fleet, quickly


ran 2 low ground and then a level
plain.
12. The king, young, active, and strong,


and armed with bow and sword an
protected with a coat of mail, still pur-
wed it.


“MAHABHARATA.


13. Having none with hint to chase
the animal through the forest, the king
crossed many rivers and lakes.


14. Possessed of great fleetness, the animal,
at its will, appearing now and then before
the king, ran on with great quickness.


¥§. Pierced with many arrows by the
king, that wild animal, O monarch,
asif in sport, again and again lessened
the distance between itself and the.
pursuer.


16. Repeatedly showing its quickness and
crossing one forest after another, it now
and then appeared before the king at a
néar point.


#7. At last, taking up a very excellent
arrow, sharp, terrible, and capable of
cutting the very vitals, that crusher of foes,
set it on his bow-string.


18. That buge animal then, as if laughing
at the pursuer’s efforts, suddenly went toa
great distance by reaching a point fulf
four miles ahead of the range of the
arrow.


19. That effulgent arrow accordingly
fell on the ground. The deer entered
a large forest, but the king still pure
sued it.’ ,
Nr


ea . Z
Ay,
CHAPTER CXXVIL


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—-Coz:t2ned.
Bhishmwia said :—


1. ‘Having entered that large forest,
the king arrived atan asylum of ascetics.
Worh out with toil, he sat himself doivn


for rest.
z. Seeing him armed with bow,
exhausted with toil, and hungry, the


ascetics approached him and honored him
duly.


3. Accepting the honors offered by
the Rishis, the king asked them about
the progress and advancement of their
penances.


4. - Duly answering the questions of the
king, those Rishis having asceticism for
wealth, asked that foremost of kings as to
the cause of his coming to that retreat.


5: And they said,—Blessed be you,
in pursuit of wbat delightful object have
you, O king, come to this hermitage, walk-
ing on foot and armed with sword, baw and
arrows ?


6. We wish to hear whence you are
coming, O giver of honors! Teil us alsa
in what family you are born and what your
name is !—= ae


SHANTI PARVA.


y=. Thus addressed, O foremost of
men, the king described himself, O Bha-
fata, saying.—f am born in the family of
the Haihayas. My name is Sumitra, and f
am the son of Mitra. I chase herds of deer,
killing them in thousands with my -shafts.
Accompanied by a large army and my
ministers and the ladies of my household, |
have come out ahtnting. Istruci¢ a deer
with a shaft, but the animal with the
drow sticking to his body ran speedily.

to. En chasing it I have, purposelessly
arrived at this forest and find myself before
you, shorn of splendour, toil: worn, and with
hope disappoisited. ?


11. What can be more pitiable than this,
vig., that I have arrived at this hermitage,
exhausted with toil, shorn of the signs of
royalty, and disappointed of my hopes.


12, I am not atall sorry, Oh ye ascetics,
at my being now divested of the signs of
toyalty or at my being now at a distance
from my capital, I feel, however, a great
grief for my hopes being frustrated,


13. The king of mountains, vis., Hima-
vat, and that vast receptacle of waters,
wiz., the ocean, cannot, for its vastness,
equal the extent of the sky. '

14. Oh ye ascetics, fikewise, 1 aiso
cannot makexout the limit of hope. With
penances you have made yourselves omni-
scient. ‘Lhere is nothing which is hidden
fiom you.


1516. Ye are also highty blessed. 1
beg you, therefore, ta remove my doubt.
Which of these two appears vaster to you,
hope of man, or the wide sky? 1 desire to
hear fully, what is so unconquerable as hope.


17. Hthe subject be one which you can

roperly describe, then tell me all about it
fon wwith, IL donot wish, ye foremost of
the twice-born, to hear anything from you
that may be a mystery and improper to
describe.


18-19. H again the subject be injuri-
ous to your penances, 1 would not wish
you to describe. |f the question asked by
me be a befitting subject of discourse, |
would then wish to hear the cause fully,
Devoted to penances as ye are, do ye all
insteuct me on the subject.’ :


eee


CHAPTER CXXVII.
(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA


PARVA).— Continued.
Bhishma said :— :
1. *Then the best of Rishis, o7s., the


twice-born Rishava, sitting in the midst of
ail those Rishis, smiled a little and said :—>


| one’s little finger,


287


2. Formerly, O foremost of Kings, while
sojourning among sacred places, 1 arrived
Q lord, at the beautiful hermitage of
Nara and Narayana, :


3. There fies the charming spot called
Vadari, and there also is that Jake in the
sky. There the sage Ashwashiras, O king,
reads the eternal Vedas.


Having performed my ablitions in’
that lake duly offered libations of water te
the departed manes and the gods, I entered
the hermitage.


5.. Within that retreat the Rishis Nara
and Naravana always spend their time
happily. Not far from that place { went
to another hermitage for taking up my
quarter,


6. While seated there I saw a very
tall and emaciated Rishi, clad in rags
and skins, coming towards me. Rich in
penances, he was named Tanu.


Compared, O mighty-armed one,
with other men, his height wag eigit times
greater, Regarding his leanness, O royal
sage, I can say that I have never seea
its like, - ;


8. His body, O ting, was as thin ag.
His neck and arms and
legs and hait were ail of extraordinary
character, ,


g. His head was proportionate to his
body, and his ears and eyes, also, were the
same. His -speech, © best of kings, and
his movements were highly feeble, ;


10. Seeing that highly emaciated Brahe
mana I became very dispisited and frighe
tened, Saluting his feet, 1 steod before
him wiih clasped hands.


11. Having given out to him my name
and family, and having told him also the
name of my father, O foremost pf men, :
I slowly sat myself down on @ seat that’
was pointed out by him. =


12, Then, O . king, that foremost of
virtuous men, vs., Tanu, began to des-
cribe in the midst of the Rishis living
iv that hermitage the topies regarding
Righteousness and Profit,

13. While engaged in discourse, 4 king,
having eyes like lotus-petals and accom~
panied by hig forces and the ladies of his,
seraglio, came or a cart drawn by quicke
coursing horses.


‘


14. The name of that king was Vira-
dyumna. Of beautiful features, be was
highly illustrious. His son’s name was
Bhuridyumna. The chilh had been mis- -
sing, and the father, highly dispwited,
came there in course of his wanderings


*


3.3


amid thé forest in pursuit of the missing
oéne. ae: . '

tg. E shaft find my son here {—} shalt
find my son here !—Carried on by hope in
this way, the king wandered through that
forest in those days.


16. Addressing the emaciated Rishi he
said,—-Forsooth, that highly virtuous son
of mine cannot be traced by me. Alas,
he was my only son. He is lost and can
nowhere be found.


_17.: Though he cannot be discovered
my hope, however, of finding him is . very
great! Witt that hope (which is frequ-
ently disappointed) } am almost on the
point of death.


, 1% Hearing these words of the king,
that foremost of ascetics, viz., the holy
‘Tanu, remained for a Short while with head
lowering down and himself immersed in
contemplation.

"19-20. Seeing him immersed in con-
templation, the king became highly disspiri-
ted. With great sorrow he began te say
slowly and softly,—What, © celestial Rishi,
is that ich cannot be conquéred and what
is it that is greater than hope ? O holy one,
tell me thle. if] may hear ik without any.
objection. res


The ascetic said :—
21. ween great ascetic had been


insulted your son. He had done it
through WRK, actuated by his foolish
understanding.


.22. The ascetic had asked your son for
a golden jar and vegetable barks. Your
son refused, out of contempt, to please the
ascetic,


23, Thus treated by your son, the great
sage became disappointed !—Thus addres-
sed, the king adored that ascetic worship-
ped of ail the world. Of virtuous soul,
Viradyumna sat there, worn out with toil
even as you, © best of men, now are.


24.. The great ascetic, in return, offered
the king, according to the practice of the
forest. dwellers, water to wash his feet and
the Arghya. :


24. Then all the ascetics, QO foremost
of kings, sat there, encircling that fore~
most of men like the stars of the constella-
tion of Ursa Major surrounding the Pole
Slats . . ;

26. And they asked the tinvanquished
king about the cause of his arrival at that
hermitage.


Janythi


MAHABTIIARATA,


CHAPTER CXXVIFE


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Ccnttaued.


The king said :—


r ‘fam a king ramed Viradyumna,
My fame has traveled everywhere. My
son Bhuridyumna has been lost. To fud
him out I have come to this forest.


2. Ovye foremost of Brahmanas, that
¢hild was my only son and, O ye ef sinless
ones, he is very young. He cannot, how-
ever, be found here. 1 am traveling every-
where for finding him out.


Rishava said .—

3. After the king had said so, the ascetic
Fanu lowered his bead. He remained
absolutely silent, without giving any res-
ponse.


4—-5. Formerly that Brahmana had not
been much respected by the king. Out of
disappointment, O king, he had practised
austere penanees for a tong time, being
determined that he should never accept
ing as present from either kings or”


members ot any. oder caste.


me


6. And he said to himself,— Hope moves
every foolish man. 1 sfall banish hope
from my mind !—Such was his resoirtion.
Viradyumna once more asked that toremoss
of ascetics, saying,—


A «3
The king said :—

7. What is the extent of the faintness a
Hope? Whaton Earthis highly difficult
to acquire? ‘Tet! me this, O hély one, for
you are a Master of virtue and profit,


Rishava said :—

8. Remembering all the past incidents
and calling them back to the recollection of
the king also, that holy Brahmana of
emaciated body said to the king,


‘fhe sage said :—


y


There is nothing, O king, which is*
so sender as Hope. I had requested many’
kings and found that there is nothing which’


is so difficult of acquiring as an image pre-
sented by Hope before the mind fame


The king said :—

1o. At your words, O Brahmana, I
understand what is feeble and what is not
so. I understand also how difficuit it is to
acquire.the images placed by Hope before
the mind. I consider these words of yours
aa Sheati. ‘


SHANTI PARVA,


- at. © youof great wisdom, one doubt,’
however, is ta my. mind’ You-shoald, O
Sage, explain it fully to me,


12, What is stenderer than your body ?
Tell me this, G holy one, if, however, O
best of sages, the subject is one, which may
fairly be dealt with: -


The emaciated sage said :—

13. tis highly difficult to find a conten-
ted applicant, Perhaps, there is none such
in the world. Still rare, O sire, is the man
who never disregards an applicant.


14. The hope in persons who do not,
after making promises, do good to others,
to the best of their abilities and according
to the fitness of the applicants, is slen-
derer than even my body.


1s, The hope in an ungrateful man, or
in one who is cruel, of in one who is idle, or
in one who injures others, is slenderer than
even my body. ar


16. The hope entertained by a father
who has only one son, of once ‘more seeing
him after he has been lost or missed, is
stenderer than even my body.


17. The hope that old women hold of
giving birth to sons, O Bing, and which
is cherished by rich men, is slenderer .than
even my body. .


18. The hope of marriage in grown up
maidens wlien they hear any body only talk
of it in their présence, is slenderer than
even my body. '


19. Hearing these words, O monarch,
king Viradyumna, and the ladies of his
household, laid themselves low before that
foremost of Brahmanas and touched his
feet with their bent heads, ;


The king said :— or ;

20. I beg your favour, U holy one. ft
wish to meet with my child. What you
have said, O best of Brahmanas, is very
true. There is no doubt of the truth of
your words,


Rishabha continued :—-


23.. The holy Tanu, that best of virtu~
ous persons, smiling, -caused,. by virtue
of his learning and his penances, the king’s
son to be brought there, : ,


22. Having caused the prince to be
brought there, the sage remonstrated with
the king (his father). hat foremost of
virtuous persons then showed himself to’ be
the god of righteousness.


223. Indeed, -having shown his own
wonderful and celestials form, he entered an
adjacent forest, with heart shorn of anger.
and she desire of revenge, | A


J 89.


24. Tsawall this, O king, and heard’
the words | have said, Dispell your hope, ’
that is even slenderer than any of those
which the sage pointed out.


Bhishma said: ;

25. Thus addressed, O king, by the
great Rishabha, king Sumitra quickly..
renounced the hope that was in his heart.
and which was slenderer than any of the
various sorts of hope pointed out by the
emaciated Rishi.


26. Do you also, O son of Kuonti,
hearing these words of mine, be calm and
composed like Himavat.


27. Stricken with distress you have
questioned me and heard my answer,’
Having heard it, O monarch, you should
remove these regrets-ef yours.’ :


re eseeaeal


’ CHAPTER CXXIX.


(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).— Continued,


Yudhishthira said :—


¥
‘+. “Lie one who drinks ambrosia my,
thirst is never satiated with the nectar of
your words of wisdomas they fall from your
mouth. Asa person endued with a know-'
ledge of self is never satiated with meditation,’
even so 1 ain never satiated with hearing’
yeu,


2, Do you, therefore, O grandfather,
describe again morality. am never
satiated with drinking the ambrosia of your:
discourses upon morality.” \


Bhishma said :—


3. ‘ Regarding it is cited the old discourse
between. Gotama and the illustrious Yama.


4. Gotama hada wide retreat on the.
Paripatra hills. Listen to me as to. how.
many years he lived in that asylum. For.
sixty thousand years that sage practised
ascetic austerities in that asylum.

§ One day, the Regent of the dead,‘
Yama, O foremost of men, went to that’

reat sage, of purified soul ‘while he was
practising the severest auasterities. Yama
saw the great ascetic Gotama , of rigid
penances. a ee


6. Understanding ‘that it was Yama.
who had come, the twice-born quickly’
saluted him and .sat with closed hands‘
in an attentive attitude. -* _


7. Beholding ‘that foremost ‘of Brah-
manas, the royal. Dharma~duly saluted”


19d


. MAHABHARATA


him and addressing. him, asked what he: your own intelligence do you think what


should do for him. ;
Gotama said :—

8 How does a man liberate his
self from the debt he owes .to his
parents? How, also, does he succeed in
Cr biissful regions which it is so
Giffieuit to acquire.

Yama said :—
g. Peaetising truth, purity and penances,


one sheuid continuously adoe his
Parents.
to. One should, also, celebrate Horse-


saccifices with profuse presents tothe Brah-
manas, By such acts ene acquires many
happy and wonderful regions.’


Ce mum


CHAPTER CXXX.
(RAJADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Conciuded.


Yudhishthira said:—


x. ‘How should a king beflave who is
shorn of friends, has mavy enemies, and an
exhausted treasury, ane: ig destitute _of
troops, O Bharata. * poe Pe


2. Again how should he behave himself
when he is surrounded by wicked ministers,
when his counsels are all divulged, when he
does not find his way clearly before hin,
when he attacks another kingdom, when he
is engaged in grinding a hostile kingdom,
and when though weak he is at war with a
powerjul king? How should a king act
whose affairs are ill-managed and who
disregards the requirements of place and
time, who is unable, for his oppressions, to
bring about peace and create disunion
among his enemies? Should he try to
acquire wealth by foul means or should
he sacrifice -his life without seeking
wealth 2?” -


Bhishma said :—

-5. ‘Conversant as you are with duties,
you have, O foremost cf Bharata’s race,
asked me a question dealing with the
mystery of dutics.


6. Without being asked, O Yudhisthira,
1 could not venture to dwell upon this duty,
Moratity is very subitie. One understands
it, O foremost of Bharata’s race, by the
help of scriptural texts.." By remember-
ing what one has heard and by doing good
acts, Some one in some place may become
a righteous person.


7. By acting intelligently the king may


reply should be gigen to your query on this
subject, 5


8. Listen, O Bharata, to the highly
meritorious expedient which kings should
follow (during times of distress). For the
sake of true morality, however, 1 would not
call those means fair.


g. If the treasury be filled by oppression,
such a conduct brings the kiny to the
brink of destruction. Such is the conclu.
sion of allinteiligent men wno have delie
berated upon the subject.


to. ‘She scriptures or science which one
always studies imparts him the knowledge
which it can give. Such Knowledge be-
comes agreeable to him.


11. Iynorance yields barrenness of ine
vention about means. Finding out of ex-
pedients, again, through the help of know-
ledge, becomes the source of great happi-
ness. Without cherishing any misgivings
and any malice, hear these instructions,


12. ‘Through the decrease of the trea-
sury, the king’s army suffers deterioration,
the king should, therefore, replenish his
treasury like one creating water ina forest
which is without water,


93.. [no pursuatice of this code of morali»


ty practised by the ox ents, the king
should, when the opporiu.i.y presents itself,
show mercy to his subjects, ‘Ibis is eternal
duty. }

14. For able and competent men the
duties are of one kind. In times of distress,
however, one’s. duties assume a different
arpect. Without riches a king may, by
penances acquire religious merit. Lite,
however, is much more impostant than
religious merit. :


1s—16. By acquiring only religious merits
a king, who is weax never succeeds in
acquiring just and proper means for main«
tenance; and because he cannot, by even
his best endeavoyrs, acquire power by the
help of only religious merit, therefore the
practices in time of distress are sometimes
cegarded as quite of a piece with woraltty.
The learned, however, opine that those
practices beget sinfulness,


17, After the time of distress is over,
what should the Kshatriya do? He should
act in such a way that his merit may not
be dissipated. Lle should also act in suctt
a@ way that he may not have to yield to his
foes. These are his duties. He should not
be despondent.


18-19. He should not try to save the.
merit of others or of himself. On the
other hand, he should save his own self.


or mpy not acquire wealth. Guided by | This is the settied conclusion. There cuns-


SHANTI PARVA:


this Shruti, eis., that the Beuhmanas, whe
‘are conversant with duties; should be
proficient ia them. Likewise, as regards
the Kshatriya, his proficiency sliould be in
exertion, since migtt of arnis is his great
wealth.


go, When a Kshattiya’s mieans of
sustenance are gone, what should he not
take excepting what belongs to ascetics
and Brahmanas ?


at. Even as a Brahtnana in 2 tine of
distress mtay officiate at the sacrifice of a
person for whom he should never officiate
and eat forbidden food, so there is no doubt
that a Kshatriya may take riches from
every One save ascetics and Bralmanas.


22. For one attacked (by an enemy and
seeking the means of escape) what can be
an unfair means? Fora person confined in
a@ dungeon and seeking escape what can be
‘an improper path ? hen a person be-

comes afflicted, he escapes by even an
improper way. | : .

23. Foe a Kshatriya who has, fot his
insufficient treasury and arm, become
exceedingly humiliated, neither a life of
mendicancy nor the profession of a Vaishya
Or that of a Shudra has been sanctioned.


24. The profession prescribed for a
Kshatriyais the acquisition of wealth by
battle and victory. tle should never beg
of a member of his own casia. ‘The
erson who maintains hinself ordinarily
y following the praetices primarily sanc-
tioned, for him; mav, in times of distress,
support himself by following the practices
laid down in the alternative.


25. Ia atime of distress, when ordinary
practices cannot be followed, a Kshatriya
may support himself by even unjust and
improper means. The very Brahmanas,
it is seen, do the same when their means of
living run out.

26—~27.
what doubt is there regarding the [con-
duct of the Khatriyas]? This is, in-
deed, settled. Without despairing and
pielding to destruction, a Kshatriya may,

y force, take, what he can, from rich
persons. Kuow that the Kshatriya is the

rotector and the destroyer of the people.
Therefore, a Kshatriya in difficulty should
take by force, what he can, witha view to
protect the people,

28. No person in this world, O king,
can maintain himself without injuring other
creatures. ‘The very ascetic leading a
Solitary life in the forest is no exception.


29. A Kshatriya shouldjnot live, depend.


ing upon destiny, especially he, O chief of -


the Kurus, who wishes to rules.


’


When the Brahmanas act thas,.


igt


30, The king and the kingdoni should
always mutually protect each other, ‘This
is ari etetnal duty.

qt. Asthe king protects, by spending
all his money; the kingdom, when it is m
distress, so should the kingdom protect the
king when he is in distress,


34. The king, even when reduced to
straits, should never abandon his treasury,
his machinery for punishing the wicked, his
army, his friends and allies, and other
necessary institutions and the chiefs living
in his kingdom, ,

33» Masters of duty say that one must
keep his seeds, even front his very food,
This is a truth cited from the work of
Shamvara, well-known for his great powers
of illusion,


34. Fie onthe life of that king whose
kingdom is weakened, Fie on the life of
that man who from want of means goes td
a foreign country in quest of a living,


35. The king depends upon his treas
sury and army. His arniy, again, des
pends on his treasury. His army is the
source of all his religious merits. His reli
gious merits; again, are the root of his
people.


. 36. The treasury can nevee be repleni-
shed without oppressing others. Flow then
can the army be maintained without ope
pression? ‘Ihe king, therefore, in mes. of
difficaltly, commits no sin by oppressing


_bis subjects for filling the treasury.


37. For celebrating sacrifices many ims
propér deeds are done. Therefore a king
commits no sin by doing improper acts
{when he seeks to fill his treasury in a time
of disti ess), ;


38. For the sake of wealth improper
practices are followed im seasons of distress.
H (at such times) such improper practices
be not fotlowed, evil is the sure consequence.
All those institutions that are maintained
for working destruction and misery exist
for te sake of collecting wealth. Guided
by such considerations, an intelligent king
should setule his conduct.


39. As animals aad other articles are
necessary for sacriftces, as sacrifices are for
purifying the heart, and as animals, sacri«
fices, and purity of the heart, are all for
final liberation, even So policy aad punist-
ment exist for the treasury, the treasury,
exists for the army, and policy and treasury
and army all the three exists for defeating
enemies and protecting or enlarging the
kingdom. ee

40-—~41. shall here quote an example
illustrating the true way of morality. A
large tree is cut down for making out of it a


T1992


- sacrificial stake. [4 cutting it; other trees
‘which stand in its way ‘thave alsotabe cut
down, ‘These, also, while falling down, kill
others standing thereabout.


42. Sothey who stand in the way of
‘replenishing a treasury must be killed. I
do not see how else success can be ac-
‘quired,

43- By wealth, both the worlds, v7z.,
this and the other, can be acquired, as also
‘Trath and celigious merit. A person who
has no wealth is nore dead than alive.


44. Wealth for the celebration of sacrifi-
tes shoutd be won by every means. ‘The
demetit of an act, done ih an hour of diffi-
culty, does not equal to that which permeates
‘the same, if done at otlrer times, O
Bharata,


45. The acquisition of wealth and its
abandonment cannot both be possibly seen
‘in the same individual, GQ king. EF do nat
see a'rich man in the forest.


46. With respect to wealth which is seen
in this world, every one fights with every
one else, saying, This shalk be mine,—
This shall be mine. :

47. There is nothing, O scorcher of foes,
which yields greater merit to a_ king than
“the possession of a kingdom... ft is’ sinful
‘for a king to oppress his subjects with heavy
“taxes at ordinary times. In a season of
distress, it is quite different.


48. Some acquire wealth by gifts and
sacrifices; some who like penances acquire
“the same by penances; some acquire it by

the help of their intelligence and clever-
“ness.

+ 49. A-person who kas no wealth is said
to be weak, while he who has wealth be-
“comes spowerful. A man of riches may

acguire everything. A king who has a

well-replenished treasury can accomplish
. everything.

$0. By his treasury a king may acquire
‘ religious merit, gratify his desire for ptea-
sure, acquire the next world, and this also.
The treasury, however, should be filled by
the help of righteousness and never by
unrighteous deeds, which pass for righte-
ousness in times of difficulty.’


@


CHAPTER CXXXI.
{APADDHARMANUSHASANA.
: PARVA).
Yudhisthira said :-—
“4, “What, ‘besides this, should be done


‘by aking, who is weak and procrastina~"


* ting, whe does not engage in battle from


MAMABHARATA.


anxiety for @fe* fives of his frfends, wie
is always stricken with feas and who
cannot keep his counsels close ?


2—3. What, indeed, should that king
do whase cities and kingdoms have been
divided and appropriated by enemies, who
is divested of wealth, who cannot honor “his
friends and win them over to himself, whose
ministers are disurited or brought over by
his enemies, who is obliged to stand in the
face of enemies, whose army has been di-
minished, and whose heart has been agi-«
tated by some strong enemy ?”


Bhishma said :—


4. ‘Lf the attacking enemy be of pure
heart and if he be a master of both virtue and
profit, a king of the sort you have pointed
out, should, forthwith, make peace with the
invader and secure the restoration of those
parts of the kingdom which tave already
been conquered.


g. If, again, the invader be powerful
and iniquitious and seek to acquire victory
by unfair means, the king should make
peace with him, too, by feaving off a por-
tion of his kingdom.


6. If theinvader be reluctant to make
peace, the king should then leave his very
tapital and all his properties for escaping
from danger. If he can save his life he
may expect to make similar acquisitions in
future.


7. What man who knows virtue is there,
who would sacrifice his own self, which is a
more valuable property, for meeting that
danger from which he can escape by aban-
doning his treasury and army 7


8. A king should protect the ladies of
his seraglio. Ifthese fall into the hands
of the enemy, he should not show any
mercy. As long as he can, he should
never surrender his own self to the enemy.’


Yudhishthira said :—


g. ‘What should a king do when his
own people are dissatisfied with him, when
he is oppressed by invaders, when his
treasury is exhaustedand when his coun-
sels are given out ?” .


Bhishina said :—


1o. ‘A king, under such circumstances,
shouid lif bis enemy be righteous) try to
make peace with him. If the enemy be
vicious, he should then display his coucage.
He should by such means, try to cause the
enemy to retire from his, kingdom ; or,
fighting bravely, he should sacrifice his life
and ascend to heaven.


tr. A king can conquer the whole Earth


with the help of even a small army if that


SHANTI PARVA:


‘Brity be loyal, contented, and devoted to
his well-being. . =

12. If killed in battle, he is sure to as-
‘tend to heaven. Tf he succeed in kilfing
“(his enemies), he is sure to enjoy the Earth,
By sacrificing one’s fife in battle, one lives
with tndra himself.’


ae
CHAPTER CXXXIl. «+
(APADDHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA)—Continued,


Yudhishthira said -~

_ 1-2. “ When virtaous practices calcu-
dated to be beneficial the world, disap-
‘pear, when all the means and resources
‘for subsistence fall into the hands of
tobbers, when such a calamitous time
appears, by what means. should a Brah-
mana, O grandfather, who from affec-
tion cannot leave his sons and grandsons
‘maintain himself ?”’


Bhishma said :—

3. ‘When such a time appears the Brah-
mana should live by the help of knowledge.
Everything in this world is for the good.
‘Nothing here is for the wicked.


4. He, who, himself being an instrumént
‘of acquisition, takes wealth from the wicked
‘and gives it to ttre good, is sdid to be ‘con-
versant with the victue of adversity.


3. Desirous of preserving his rule, the
‘king, O monarch, without making his sub-
‘§ects indignant and rebetlious may
take what ‘is not given to him by the
‘owner, of his own accord, saying,—This is
‘mine. :

6. That wise man, who, purified by the
‘possession of knowledge, power and righte-
‘ous conduct at-other times, acts ‘censurably
in such times, does not really deserve to
‘be blamed. ;


4. They, who always support themselves
‘by displaying their power, never prefer any
other mode of living. The powerful, O
‘Yudhishthira, always live by the help of
“prowess,

8, ‘The ordinary injunctions of the scrip-
‘tures, without exceptions of any kind, should
be followed by a king at such times, while
following those scriptures, an intelligent
king would do something more.


At such times, however, the king
‘should not oppress Ritwijas,
preceptors and Brahmanas, all of whom
are respected and held in high esteem. By
‘oppressing them, even at such times, he
iucurs blame and sin,


25


s)


Purohitas |


193


_ 16, This is considered as an authority
jin the wortd. Indeed, this is the eternal
eye. One should be guided by this autho-
rity. Whis determines whether a kiag is
‘to be called good or wicked,


11. It is seen that moved by jealousy
and anger many persons, living in villages
and towns, vilify one another. The king
should never, as said by them, honor or,
punish any body. : .

12. Slander should never be circulated...
TE spoken, it should never be heard. When
any slanderous conversation goes on, one
should close one’s ears or leave the place
immediately.


13. Slanderous conversation becomes only
wicked men. It is asign of depravity. They,
on the other hand, O king, who meatior
the virtues of others in assenblies of the
good, are good men.


iq. As a pair of good-tempered bulls,
governabie and well-trained to bear loads,
put their necks jto the yoke and drag the
‘cart willingly, so should the king bear his
‘burden in times of difficulty.


15. Qthers say that a king should be-
have in such a way that le may succeed in
acquiring a large number of allies. Some
consider ancient practices as the highest
mark of righteousness.


16. They, however, who laud the conduct
followed by Shankha towards Likhita, da
not hold this opinion. They do not pass
such an opinion through eiher malice or,
‘covetousness.


17. There are even great Rishis who
have laid down that even preceptors, if
addicted to evil practices, should be
punished. But there is no recognised
authority for such a holding.


18. The gods will punish such men
when they happen to be vile and’ guilty of
wicked practices. The king, who replenishes
bis treasury by fraudulent means, certainly
diviates from the path of righteousness,


19. That code of morality which is
honored by good persons in affluent circum
cumstances, and which is approved by
every honest man, should be followed,


21. He is the master of duty wha
knows it as depending on alf the four foun-
dations, It is as difficult.to find out the
reasons of duties as it is difficult to find out
the legs of the snake,


2t. As a hunter discovers the track of
a deer wounded with arrow by marking
spots of blood on the ground, so sheuid
one try to find out the reasons of duties,


22, Thus should a man follow humbly


194


the path of the good. Such was the con-


MAHABHARATA,


He should rather go to the forest and live


duct of the great royal sages of yore, O | there with wild animals. -


Yudhishthira.


CHAPTER CXXXIII.


(APADDHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continued.


Bhishma said :— :


1. * By taking riches from his own king
dom as also from the kingdoms of bis ene-
mies, the king should, replenish his treasury,
Religious merit springs from the treasury,
O son of Kunti, and it is through the
treasury that the roots of his kingdom
extend. ;

2. For these reasons the treasury must
- be replenished ; and when filled, it should
be carefully kept, and even sought to be
increased, This is the eternal practice.


3» The treasury cannot be resplenished


by (acting with) purity and fairness, nor.


by (acting with) ruthless cruelty. It
should be filled by following a middle
course.


4. How can aweak king have a trea-
sury? How cana king who has no trea-
stry have strength ? How can a weak
man maintain a kingdom? How, again,
can one, who has no kingdom of his own,
acquire prosperity ? ? aot

5. Adversity is like death to a person
of high rank. Therefore, the king should
always muliply his treasury, and army,
and allies and friends.


6. All men disregard a king, who has an
empty treasury. Without being pleased
with the little that such a king can give, his
servants:never show any zeal in his business.


7. By riches, the king acquires great
honors. Indeed, riches conceal his very
sins, a3 a dress conceals such parts of a
female form as should not be exposed+to the
public gaze.


8. The former enemies of the king
become stricken with grief on seeing his
newly acquired riches. Like dogs they
once more serve him, arid though they only
seek an opportunity to kill him, he treats
them as if nothing has taken place.


9. How, O Bharata, can such a king
enjoy happiness? The king should always
try for acquiring greatness.


10, He should never bend “low in humi-
lity. Exertion is manliness. He should
rather break when an unfavourable oppor-
tunity comes than bend low before any one.


tr. But he should not, however, live in
the midst of ministers and officers who have
hike, robbers transgressed all restraints.
Even the wild robbers may supply a large
number of soldiers for the performance of
the fiercest of deeds, O Bharata.


12. Ifthe king disregards all healthy
restraints, all people are filled with terror.
The very robbers who know not what
mercy is, fear such a king.


13. Therefore, the king, should always
set down rules and restraints for pleasing
his subjects. People always welcome rules
even regarding insignificant matters,


14. There are men who hold that this
world is nothing and the future also isa
myth. He, who is such an_ unbeliever,
though his heart is moved by secret. fears,
should never be trusted.


15. If the wild robbers, while observing
other virtues, commit robberies, in respect
of properties those deeds may be considered
as innocent. The lives of thousands of
creatures are protected when robbers follow
such restraints.


16-17. Killing a retreating enemy,
ravishment of wives, ingratitude, plunder-
ing: the property of.a Brahmana, depriving
a person of his entire property, violation
of maidens, continued occupation of villages
and towns as their lawful lords, and adul-
tery. with other people’s wives,these are
known as sinful acts among even robbers,
and robbers should always stand aloof
from them. :


18. It is again certain that those kings,
who try to create confidence in the robbers,
succeed, after, watching all their ins and
outs, it rooting them out.


19. Therefore, in dealing with robbers,
it is necessary that they should not be des-
troyed outright. They should be grady-
ally hrought under the king’s sway. The
king should never treat them cruelly, think-
ing that he is more powerful than they..


20. Those kings, who do not root them
out outright have no fear of their ruin.
They, however, that do root them out,
stand always in dread of them.’


SHANTI PARVA,


CHAPTER CXXXIV.


(APADDHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continued.


Bhishma said :—


1. ‘Regarding it, persons well read in
the scriptures declare this text about
duty, vés., for a learned and_ intelli-
gent Kshatrya, (the acquisition) of religious
merit and wealth is his obvious duty.
By ingenuous discussions on duty and
about the future world, he should not,
abstain from performing those two duties,


2. As it is useless, upon seeing certain
foot-prints on the ground, to argue, whether
they are the wolf’s or not, so is all discus-
sion regarding the nature of righteousness
and unrighteousness. Nobody in this world

“evet witnesses the fruits of righteousness
and unrighteousness,


3. A Kshatriya, therefore, should try
to acquire power. .A powerful person is
master of everything. Wealth secures the
possession of an army. He, who is power-
ful, gets intelligent advisers,


4. He is truly degraded who has no
wealth. A little is considered as the filthy
residue of a feast. If a strong man com-
mits even many bad deeds, nobody,
through fear, speaks ill of him. If Righte-
ousness and Power be associated with
Truth, they can save men from - great
dangers.


5. If, however, the two be compared,
Power will appear as superior to Righte+
ousness. From Power originates Righte-
ousness, Righteousness depends upon
Power as all immobile things upon the
Earth.


6. As smoke depends upon the wind, so
Righteousness depends upon Power.
Righteousness which is the weaker of the
two depends upon a tree,

7. Righteousness depends on the power-
ful does as pleasure on the pleasure
hunters. There is nothing which powerful
men cannot do, Everything is pure with
the powerfal.

8. By committing evil acts, a powerless
man, can never escape. Men fear his con-
duct even as they are alarmed on seeing a
wolf, - ;

. One becoming poor after being rich
leads a life of humiliation and sorrow. A
life ih humiliation and censure is like death
itself.


_ 0. The learned have said that when on
. account of one’s sinful deeds he is forsaken
by friends and companions, he is cut agajn


195


and again by the wordy arrows of others
and has to burn with grief on that account.


11—14. Teachers of scriptures have
held that for the expiation of sins one
should study the three Vedas, serve and
adore the Brahmanas, please all men by
looks, words, and acts, shake off all mean-
ness, marry in high families, sing the
praises of others while admitting his own
worthlessness, recite Mantras, perform
the usual water-rites, assume a mildness
of conduct, and abstain from too much
speaking, and practise austere penances,
seek refuge with the Brahmanas and Ksha-
triyas, Indeed, one who has perpretrated
many evil acts, should do all this, without
being angry at the censures of other men.


15. By behaving thus, one is soon
purged off of all bis sins and wins the
esteem of the world. Indeed, one acquires
great respect in this world and meed in the
next, and enjoys various sorts of happiness
here by behaving thus and by sharing his
riches with others.’


,


CHAPTER CXXXYV.


(APADDH ARMANUSHASANA
PARVA.)—Continued.


Bhishma said :—

1. ‘Regarding it is cited the old story of
a robber who having in this world observed
testraints was not ruined in the next.


2. There was a robber by name Kaya. -
vya, born of a Kshatriya father and a Nie
shada mother. Kayavya followed Kshariya
duties. Capable of grinding, endued with
intelligence and bravery, well-read in the
scriptures, shorn of cruelty, devoted to thé
Brahmanas, and adoring his elders and
preceptors with respect, he protected the
ascetics who practised religious penances.
Fhough a robber, he still acquired happi-
ness in the celestial region, . :


4. Morning and evening he used to_
excite the anger of the deer by chasing
them. He knew very well the practices of
the hunters as also of all animals living in
the wilderness.


5. Well acquainted with the require-
ments of time and place, he roamed over
the,mountains. Knowing full well the habits
of all animals, his arrows never missed
their aim, and his weapons were strong.

6, Alone, he could defeat many ‘hun-
dreds of soldiers, He adored daily his
old, blind, and deaf parents in the forest,


196


With honey, meat, fruits, roots and
other kinds of excellent tood, he haspitably
-treated all persons worthy of honor and did
them many good offices.


8. He showed great reverence for those
Brahmanas who had retired from the world
for liviag in the forest. Killing the deer,
he often took meat to then.


g- As regards those who were reluc-
tant, from fear of others, to aceept gifts
from him for the profession he followed, he
used to repair to their houses before dawn
_ and leave meat at their doors.


10. One day many thousands’ of
irregular and merciless robbers desired to
elect him as their leader,


The robbers said :—


11. Wou are. acquainted with the re-
quirements of place andtime. You have
wisdom and courage. Great is your firm-
mess in everything you take up! Be you our
chief of leaders, adored by all of us!


11% We wilt follow your behest!


Protect us duly, even as a father of a.


mother,


Kayavya said :—

13. Never kill you, a woman, or a person
who retreats in fear from fight, or a child,
or ali ascetic! You should not kill one who
abstains from fight, nor should you seize or
carry women by force.


14, None of you should ever kill a
woman amongst all creatures. Let Brah-
manas be always blessed and you should
always fight for their well-being.


15. You should never sacrifice truth.
Vou should never obstruct the marriages
of men. You should never injure those
houses in which the deities, the Pitris,
and guests are adored.


16. Amongst creatures, | Brahmanas
should always be exempted by you in your
plunders. By giving away everything you
have you should adore them.


17. He, who incurs the anger of the
Brahmanas, he, whose discomfiture they
seek, cannot find a rescuer in the three
worlds.


18, He, who vilifies the Brahmanas and
wishes for their destruction, is himself ruin-
ed like darkness at sunrise.


1g. Living here, you shall :acquire the
fruits of your valour. ‘l'roops will be ‘sent
against those who will refuse to give us: our
dues.


20. Therod of punishment is intended
Scrthe wicked. tis vot intended for self-


| acquired = great


MAHABHARATA. |


seeking. They who oppress the good
should be killed.


21. They who seek to multiply their
fortunes by afflicting kingdoms unscrupu-
lously, are as vermins in a dead body.


22. Those robbers, again, who would
follow the restraints of the scriptures, would
soon acquire salvation although leading a
plundering life.


Bhishma said :—


a?. Thus addressed, those robbers.
obeyed all the commands of Kayavya.
By desisting from sin, they acquired great
prosperity.

24. By behaving thus, by thus doing
good to the honest and by thus restraining
the robbers from bad practices, Kayavya
success (in the next ~
world).


25. He, who always meditates on this
narrative of Kayavya will have no fear
from the forestrangers, in fact, from any
earthly creature.


26. Such aman will have no fear from
any creature, O Bharata. He will have no
fear from wicked men. Hf such a man
goes to the forest, he will be able to live
there as securely as a king.”


CHAPTER CXXXVI.


{APADDHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continued,


Bhishma said :-—


1. ‘Regarding the way in which a king
should fill his treasury, persons well read
in the scriptures of olden days, cite the fol-
lowing verses sung by Brahmana himself.


2. The wealth of persons who celebrate
sacrifices, as also the wealth dedicated to
the deities, should never be taken. A
Kshatriya should take the wealth of such
persons as never perform religious rites
and sacrifices, and who are, therefore, con-
sidered to be equal to robbers.


3. All the creatures of the Earth and
all the enjoyments of sovereignty, O
Bharata, belong to the Kshatriyas.. Al!
the wealth of the Earth is thé Kshatriya’s
and not any one’s else.


4. The Kshatriya should .use that


wealth for maintaining his army and for —


the celebration of sacrifices. Tearing up
useless creepers and plants, men burn thenr°
for cooking vegetables af food.

€


. SHANTL PARVA,


3. Men knowing duty have said that
useless is his wealth who does not, with
libations of clarified butter, feed the gods,
the Pitris, and men.


6. A virtuous ruler, O king, should
appropriate such riches. By that wealth,
a large number of good people can be
pleased. He should not, however, amass
that wealth in his treasury.


7. He, who is the instrument of acqui-
sition and, taking away wealth from the
wicged, gives them to those that are good,
“knows weil the science of virtue.


8. A king should conquer the next
world according to the meazure of his
power, and as gradually as vegetables grow.
As some ants are Seen to originate from an
insignificant cause, even sa sacrifice springs
from insufficient wealth,


g. As flies, gnats, and ants are driven
off from the bodies of kine and other
domestic animals, so should all persons,
who are averse to the celebration of sacri-
fices, should be similarly driven off from the
kingdom. This is quite of a piece with
morality. 3

to. As being pounded between two
‘Stones, the dust becomes finer and finer, so
questions of morality, the more they
— discussed, becemes subtler and sub-
Uer,


CHAPTER CXXXVII.


(APADDHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).— Continued,


Bhishma said :—

1. ‘The two, viz., one, who provides for
the future, and one, who has presence of
mind,—always enjoy happiness. An idle
nan gains nothing.


2. About it, listen attentively to the
following excellent story of on idle person.


3. Ina shallow lake which abounded
with fishes, there lived three Shakula
fishes who were friends and constant com-
panions.


4. Of those three, one had much fore-
thought and always liked to provide for the
future. Another had great presence of
mind. The third was idle.


One day certain -fishermen came to
that Jake and began [to draw out its waters
to a lower ground through various
channels,


6. Seeing the water of the lake gradu-.


ally decreasing, the fish that had much
>


197


foresight, said to his two companions about
the coming danger.

7. A great danger isj about to befall
the acquatic animals living in this Jake.
Let us quickly go to some other ‘place
before our path becomes obstructed.


8. He, who resists future evil by the help
of good policy, never meets with serious
danger. You follow my advice. Let usail
quit this place.


9g. That one, amongst the three, who was
idle then answered,~—It is well said. There
is, however, no necessity of such haste..
This is my opinion.

1o, Then the ‘other “fish, who had
presence of mind, said to his idle compa-
nion,—When the time for anything comes,
I take the necessary precautions.


11. Hearing the replies of his two
companions, the one, which had fore-
thought and intelligence, immediately
started by a current and reached another
deep lake. :


12. Seeing that all the water had been
drawn out, the fishermen shut in the fishes
which remained by various means.


13. Then they began to agitate the
little remaining water, and as they began
to catch the fish, the idle Shakula was
caught with many others,


14-15. When the fishermen began to
tie up the fishes they had caught, the
Shakula who was known for presence of
mind placed himself in the midst of those
that had been so tied and remained quietly
among them, biting the string, for he
thought that by it they would take him to
have been caught. ‘The fishermen believed
that all the fishes tied to the string had
been caught.


16. They then removed them to a deep
water for washing them. Just then the
Shakula known for presence of mind, left
the string, and quickly escaped.

17. That fish, however, who had been
idle, foolish, and senseless and without in-
telligence, and, therefore, unable to escape,
met with his death.


18.° Like the idle fish, who from want of
intelligence could not foresee the danger,
every one meéts with destruction.


19. Again, a man, who knowing himself
as clever, does not seek his own good in
proper time, is visited by great dangers
like the Shakula who had presence of
mind. _ ; 7

20. Therefore these two only, vzs., he,
who has much forethought and he, who
has presence of mind, can secure happi-


198


ness. An idle person, however, meets with
destruction. :


2t. There are various divisions of time,
such as Kashtha, Kala, Mahurta, day,
night, Lava, month, fortnight, the six
seasons, Kalpa, year.


22. Fhe divisions of the Earth are
called place. Time js not seen. Regarding
ithe success of any object or purpose, it is
gained ot not gained according to the
manner in which the mind is engaged to
think of it.


23. Therefore, the person of forethought
and the person of presence of mind, have
been described by the Rishis to be the fore-
most of men in all works on virtue, profit
and emancipation.


24. One, however, who does every-
thing after reflection and scrutiny,
one, who takes the advantage of proper
means for the achievement of his objects,
always succeeds in achieving much.
Those, again, who work with proper
attention to time and place, succeed in
acquiring fruits better than the mere man
of foresight and the man of presence of
mind,’


CHAPTER CXXXVIIIL.


(APADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—

1. ‘ You have, O foremost of Bharata’s
race, said that that intelligence which
provides for the future, as well as that
which can meet present difficulties, is
always superior, while idleness brings about
destruction.


2. 1 wish, O grandfather, to hear of that
superior intelligence by which a king,
conversant with the scriptures and well-
versed in virtue and profit,j may not be
stupefied even when surrounded by many
enemies, 7


3. I ask you this, O Kucu chief! You
should describe it to me.

4. I wish to hear everything in -con-
nection with the duties of a king gwhen he
is, attacked by many foes, as has been laid
down in the scriptures.

5. When a king meets with distress, a
large number of enemies, provoked by his
past deeds, rise against him and try to
defeat him.” ; ;

6. How cau a king, weak and alone,
hold his own, when attacked on all


MAHABHARATA.


sides by many powerful
in a body?

7. How does a king at such times make
friends and enemies? How should he, O
foremost of Bharata’s race, treat at sucha
time, both his friends and enemies ?


8. When those, who are friends really
become his enemies, what should the king
then do if he is to secure happiness ?


9. With whom should he make war and
with whom should he make peace? Even
if he be strong, how should he act by his
foes?


ro—11. O scorcher of foes, this I consider
to be the most ‘momentous of all questions
regarding the satisfaction of royal duties.
There are few men, who wish to listen to
the answer of this question, and none to
answer it except Shantanu’s truthful son
Bhishma, who has all his senses under
control, O you, who are highly blessed,
think on it and describe it to me.”


Bhishma said :—

s2. ‘O Yudhishthira, this question cer-
tainly becomes you. Its answer yields
great happiness. Listen to me, O son, as
1 describe to you, O Bharata, all the
duties which are not generally known, but ”
which should be practised in times of
distress.

13. An enemy becomes a friend, anda
friend also becomes an enemy. ‘Through
combination of circumstances, human


kings joined


| actions become uncertain.


14. Regarding what should be done and
what should not, it is necessary that in
view of the-requirements of time and place,
one should either trust one’s enemies or
make war. .


15. Trying his very best, one should
make friends with intelligent and wise men
who desire his welfare. One should
make peace with even his enemy, when, O
Bharata, his life cannot be saved by any
other means,


16, That foolish wight, who.never makes
peace with enemies, cannot acquire any
profit or any of those fruits for which others
try. °

17. He, again, who makes peace with
enemies and falls out with even friends
after carefully considering all,circumstances,
acquires great fruits.

18. Regarding it is cited the old story of
the conversation between a cat and a mouse
at the foot of a banian tree.


Bhishma said :—
19. There was a_ huge
the midst of a vast forest.


banian tree in
Covered with


SHANTI!


many sorts of creepers, and various sorts of


birds used to live on it.


zo. It had a large trunk from which
numerous branches spread on all sides.
‘Delightful to look at, its shade was very
refreshing. [t stood in the midst of the
forest, and various animals lived on it.


21. A highly wise mouse, named Palita,
lived at the foot of that tree, having
made a hole there with a hundred
outlets.


22, On the branches of the tree there
lived happily a cat, by name Lomasha,
daily devouring a large number of birds.


23. Sometime after, a Chandala came
to that forest and built a hut for himself.
Every evening after sunset he spread his
traps.


24. Spreading his nets made a leathern
Strings, he returned to his hut, and, passing
the night happily in sleep, returned there at
the dawn of day.


25. Various sorts of animals fell into his
traps nightly. And it sd took place that
one day the cat in a moment of carelessness
was caught in the trap.


26. O you of great wisdom, when his


enémy the cat, whois always an enemy of |


the mice, was thus caught in the trap, the
mouse Palita came out of bis hole and
began to move about fearlessly. :


27. While confidently passing through
the forest in search of food, the mouse
after a little while saw the meat,


28. Getting upon the trap, the fittle
animal began to eat the flesh. Laughing
in his mind, he even got upon his enemy
caught in the net.


29. Busy with eating the flesh, he did
not see his own danger, and as he suddenly
cast his eyes, he saw there a dreadful
enemy of his,


30. It was a restless mungoose of
toppery eyes, of the name of Harita.
Living in holes underneath, its body
resembled the flower of a reed.


31. Tempted to come there by the scent
of the mouse, the animal came quickly for
devouring his prey. He stood on_ his
haunches, with head raised up and licking
the corners of his mouth with his tongue.


32. The mouse saw at the same time
another enemy living in the holes of trees,
then sitting on the branch of the banian.
It was a night-ranging owl, by name
Chandraka having sharp beaks.


33. Being seen both by the mungoose
and the owl, the mouse, in great fear, began
@ think thus. B)


PARVA. 199


34. In sucha great danger, when death
itself is staring me in the face, when fear
prevails on every side, how should one act
who seeks lis own well-being 2


35. Beset with danger, and seeing fear
on all sides, the mouse, stricken with fear
for his safety, made a high resolution.


36. Preventing numberless dangers by
hundreds of means, one should always
save his life. Danger, now, besets me on
every side,


37- If I were to descend from this trap
on the ground, without sufficient precau-
tions, the mungoose will surely catch and
devour me. If I remain on this trap, the
owl will surely catch me. If, again, the cat
can free himself from the net, he, also, is
certain to devour me,


38. It is not proper, therefore, that a
person intelligent like myself should lose
his wits. I shall, therefore, try my best to
save my life, by having recourse to proper
means and intelligence.


39. An intelligent and wise person and
conversant with the science of policy never
sinks, however great and terrible may be
the danger which threatens him.


40. At present, however, 1 do not see
any other refuge than this cat. He
is an enemy. But he is in difficulty. |
The service that I can do him is very
great.


4t. Three enemies are trying to devour
me, and how should I now act for saving my
life? I should now seek refuge with one of
those enemies, v7s., the cat.


42. Following policy, let me advice
the cat for his behoof, so that I may,
ae my intelligence, escape from all the
three,


43. The cat is my great enemy, but
the danger into which he has fallen is very .
great. Let me see if | can make this
foolish creature understand his own
interests. Having failen into such difficulty
he may make peace with me.


44. A person, when attacked by a
stronger one, should make peace with even
anenemy. People conversant with policy
say that such should be the conduct of one,
who being beset with danger seeks to save
his life. .


45. It is better to have a learned persori
for an enemy tharra fool fora friend. As
for myself, my life now depends-entirely on
the hands of my enemy the cat. :


46. 1 shall now speak to the cat about
his own liberation. Perhaps, now it would


| not be wrong to consider the ‘cat:an


200


intelligent and learned enemy. Thus -did
that mouse, surrounded by foes, think.


- 47—48. Having thought thus, the mouse,
well-read in the science of Profit and well-
acquainted with times when war should be
declared and peace made, gently spoke to
the cat, saying,—I speak to you as a
friend. O cat! Are you alive? | with you to
live! I seek the good of us both.


_ 49. O amiable one, you have nocause
for fear. You will live in happiness! [
shall save you, if, indeed, you do not kill
me,

. §0. Thereis a very good means I see
by which you may obtain escape and [
may acquice great benefit. —


$1, By thinking I Nave found out this
expedient for your sake and for my sakes
for it will do us both good.


$2. There are the mungoose and the
owl, both waiting with evil desire. O cat,
so long as they do not attack me, my life
is safe.


53.’ There that wretched owl with rest-
less looks and dreadful cries is seeing me
from .the branch of that tree! 1 am
Stricken with great fear.


34. Good men become friends by walk-
ing together only seven stéps. Highly wise
as you are, you ate my friend. I shall
treat you asa friend. You need have no
fear now.


55. Withou, my help, O cat, you will
trot be able totearthe net. I, however,
shall cut the net for serving you, if you. do
not Bill me. :


56. You have lived on this tree and I
have lived at its foots Both of us have
lived hete for many long years. All this is
Known to you.


§7.' The wise never laud him whom
nobody trusts, nor him who never trusts
another. Both of them are unhappy.


58. Therefore, let our tove for each
other increase, and fet us be united. The
wise never speak highly of the attempt of

‘doing an act when its opportunity is gone.


59. Know this to be the proper time
for such a compact between us. [| wish
that you should live, and you also wish
that I should live.


60. A man crosses a deep and large.
tiver by a piece of wood. It is seen there
that the man takes the piece of wood to
the other side, and the piece of wood also
takes the man to the other side.


61. Like this, our agreement will lead
to ourhappiness. I will save you, and you,
also, will save me.


MAHABHARATA


62. Having said so, which was beneficial
to both of them, highly reasonable and
acceptable, the mouse Palita waited for art
answer.


63. Hearing these well-selected, rea-
sonable and good words of the mouse, the
mouse’s enemy, endued with judgment
and forethought, the cat said these words
in reply.

64. Reflecting upon his own coridition,
the highly intelligent and eloquent cat
praised the words of the speaker and
hotiored him by gentle words in return.


65. Quietly looking at the mouse, the
cat, calied Lomasha, having sharp fore-
teeth and having eyes that resemble the
stones called Japis lazuli answered as
follows :—3


66. I am pleased with you, O amiable
one! Blessed be you who wish mie to live!
Do that, without hesitation, which you think
would do us good.


67. Iam surely in great distress. You
are, if possible, In greater distress still {
Let there be an agreement made between
us forthwith.


68. I will do that which is opportune and
tiecessary for the success of our business, O


.powerful one! [f you save me, your service


will not go for nothing.


. 69. 1! leave myself in your hands! I am
devoted to you. I shall attend and serve
you like a disciple. I seek refuge with you


and shall always obey you.


zo. Thus accosted, the mouse Palita,
speaking again to the cat, who was
entirely under his controf, said these highly
significant and wise words :—


71. You have spoken most magnani+
mously. {It could be expected from one-
like you. Hear I shall describe the expé-
dient I have thought of.for benefiting both


of us.


72%.
body.
Do you save me.

capable of save you.


73. Save me also from the owl, for that
wretch too wishes to catch me for his prey.
I shall cut the noose that fetters you,
swear by Truth, O friend.


T will crouch myself beneath yout
I am in great fear of (he mungoosé«
Kill me not. 1} am


74. Hearing these wise and reasonable
words, Lomasha filled with joy looked at
Palita and praised him with exciamations
of welcome.


75. Having praised Palita, the cat
which was friendly disposed, thought for a
moment,. and gladly said without losing
any time,—


SHANTI


36. Come quickly to me. Blessed be
you, who are, indeed, a friend dear to
me as life, OQ you of great. wisdom,
through your grace I have almost regaitied
fay life.

Whatever I can do, tell me and {
shall do it for you. Let there be peace
between us, O friend,


78. Freed from this danger, [I shall, with
all my friends and relatives, do what is
agreeable and good to you.


_ 79. O amiable one, freed from this
danger, I shall surely try to please you, and
adore and honour you on every occasion in
return for your good offices.


80. By returning even sufficient services
amancannot equal the person who. did
him good in the first instance. The former
does them for the sake of services rander-
ed. ‘The latter, however, acted without
any such motive.


Bhishma said :—

81. Having thus made the cat under-
stand his own interests, the mouse trustfully
crouched beneath his enemy’s body.


82. Learned, and thus assured by the
cat, the mouse confidently laid himself thus
under the breast of the cat as if it were the
lap of his father.or of his mother.


83. Seeing him thus enclosed within
the body of the cat, the mungoose and the
owl beth, gave up hopes of catching their
prey.

84.. Marking that close intimacy between
the. mouse and the cat, both Harita and
Chandraka became stricken with fear and
wonder.


85. .Both of them .were endued with
strength and intelligence.
ing their prey, though near, the mungoose
and the owl could not make the mouse and
the cat break that agreement.


86. Indeed, seeing the cat and the
mouse make that agreement for fulfilling
their mutual object, the mungoose and the
owl both left that spot and repaired to
their respective quarters.


87. Thereafter, the mouse Palita, who
knew well the requirements of time and
place, began, ashe lay under the body of
the cat, to cut the strings of ‘the ‘noose
slowly, waiting for the proper time to finish
his work. '


88, Pained by the strings that fettered
him, the cat became impatient upon seeing
the mouse slowly cutting away the noose.

89. Seeing the mouse so slow in the
work, the cat wishing to hurry it _on,
said a 7


26


Clever in catche.


I.


PARVA. 20t


go. How is it, O amiable one, that yor
do not proceed quickly with your work ?
Do you disregard me now, having accom-
plished your ewn work? O slayer of foes,
cut off these strings quickly} ‘The hunter
will soon come here.—


gt. Thus addressed by the wmpatient
cat, the intelligent mouse said these benefi-
cial words to the cat who did not seem to
possess much wisdom:— —


92. Wait silently, QO amiable one!
Quickness is not necessary, Remove all.
your fears. We know the requirements of
time. We are not wasting time.


93. Whena work is begun at an ins
proper time, it never becomes profitable
when finished. ‘That act, however, which
is undertaken at the proper time, yields,
rich fruits. suit

go4. I€ you are freed at an improper
time, I shall have to fear you. Therefore, ,
do you wait for the proper moment. Do,
not be impatient, O friend. \


95. Whrn I shatl see the hunter come
here armed with weapons, 1 shall cnt the:
strings at that very moment of fear to,
both of us. 1


g6. Freed then, you will get upon the
tree and not think of anything else except
the safety of your own lite,


97. And when‘you, O Lomasha, will-fly
away in fear. I shail enter my hole and
you will ascend the tree.


98. Thus addressed by the matse with
these beneficial words, the intelligent snd
eloquent cat, impatient of saving his' life,
addressed the mouse in the following
words. ‘


g9- Indeed, the cat, who had. quickly
and properly carried his own part of the
agreement, addressing the mouse who was
hot quick enough in fulfilling his part,
said,— : ;

too. I saved you from a great datiger
with considerable promptness.| Alas,
honest persons never thus dé the business
of their friends. Filled with joy while
doing it, they do it otherwise.


tot. You should do quickly what is for
my well-being. O you of great wisdom, du
you try a litthe so.that good may ba done tu
both of us.


102. 1f,, however, femembering ow
former hostility yor are only allowing thy
time to alip away, know, O wicked crea-
ture, that the consequence of this yore act
will surely lessen your own tife.


q


1e3.., If [| have ever, before this, Gn
knowingly ‘done you any wrong, you


202


should not bear it in mind. 1 beg your
patdon. Be pleased. with me.


tog. After the cat had said these words,
the intelligent and wise mouse, well-read in
the scriptures, said these excellent words to
him i~
_ 30g. Ihave, O cat,. heard what you
have said to further your own object.
Listen, however, to me as I tell you what is
proper for my own objects. :

106. That friendship which is beset with
fear and which cannot be maintained with-
ont fear, should be preserved with great
caution like the hand (of the snake-
charmer) from the snake's fangs!


107. The person that does not protect
himself after having made an agreement
with ‘a stronger individual, sees that it
yields injury instead of good.

108. Nobody is nobody’s. friend; no-
body is nobody's wellwisher ; persons be-
comes friends or enemies only from motives
o interest. ;


109. Interest brings interest even as
tame elephants catch wild elephants JAgain,
when a work is done, the doer is hardly
thought of. Therefore, all works should
Ay so done that something may remain un-

one.


110. When I shall liberate you, you will,
from fear of the hunter, fly away for
your life without ever thinking (of catching
me.


ttt. See, all the strings of this net have
been cut by me. Only one remains to be
cut. Tf will cut that also soon. Be com-
forted, O Lomasha. |


112, While the mouse and the cat were
thus conversing, both in serious danger, the
night gradually passed away. A great
fear, however, possessed the heart of the
cat.


tt3—-114. When the dawn set in, the
Chandala, whose name was Parigha, came
there. His appearance was terrible. His
hair was black and twany. His hips were
huge and his look was very fierce. Of a
large mouth extending from ear to ear, and
highly filthy, his ears were very long.
Armed with weapons and accompanied by
a pack of dogs, the grim-visaged man
came there.


115. Seeing that man who resembled
a messenger of Yama, the cat was stricken
with fear. Filled with fear, he ad-
dressed Palita, saying,—What will you do
now ?


116, The mouse very quickly cut the
remaining string which held fast the cat.


MAHABUAATA.


Freed from the noose, the cat run quickly
and got upon the banian.


117. Palita also, freed from that peri-
lous position and from the preseiice of a
terrible enemy quickly fied and entered his
hole. Lom:ssha meanwhile had got upon
the high tree.


118, Seeing everything, the hunter tool
up his net. His hopes defeated, he alsa
quickly left that place.


119120. Indeed, O foremost of Bha-
rata’s race, the Chandala returned to his
house freed from that great danger, and
having regained his precious life, the cat
from the branches of that tree addressed
the mouse Palita then living within the
hole, and said,—Without having talked to
me, you have suidenly run away. 1 hope
you do not suspect me of any evil motive.
Fam certainly grateful and. you have done
me a great service. ;


tat. Having created confidence in me
and having given me my life, why do you
not come to me at a time when friends
should enjoy the sweets of friendship ?


122. Having made friends, he who
ioe them afterwards, is a wicked person
and never gets friends at times of danger
and necessity.


123. I have been, O friend, respected
and served by you to the best of your
power. You should now enjoy the com-
pany of my poor self who has become
your friend.

124. Like disciples adoring their pre=
ceptor, all the friends I have, all my cela-
tives and kinsmen, will respect and adore
you.


125. I myself too shall adore you with
all your friends and kinsmen. What grate-
ful person is there who will not adore the
giver of his life.


126. Be you the master of both my_
body and homef Be you the disposer of
alt my wealth and properties.


127. Be you my respected adviser and
do you govern me like a father! I swear
by my life that you need not fear us.


128. “In intelligence you are like Ushanas
himself. By the power of yout understand-
ing you have conquered us. Clever in
policy, you have given us our life.


t29. Accosted thus with sweet’ words
by the cat, the mouse, who knew all whic
produces the highest good, replied in these
sweet words that were beneficial to himself.


130. I have heard, O Lomasha, all that
you have said. Listen now as 1 say what
I think.


SHANTI


131. Friends should be well tried.

nemies also should be well studied. In
this world, a task like this is considered by
even the learned as a difficult one requir-
ing sharp intelligence.


132. Friends appear like enemies, and
enemies appear like friends. When agree-
ments of friendship are made, it is difficult
for the parties to know ‘whether they
are really actuated by lust and anger.


133. There is no such thing as a friend,
_It is circumstances which make friends and
‘enemies.


134. He, who considers his own interests
safe as long as another lives, and thinks
himself in danger when the latter dies
takes him as his friend so long as those
interests of his are not clashed against,


135. There isno condition that passee
for ever. by the name either of friendship
or enemies. Both friends ande nemies arise
from considerations of interest and gain.


136. Friendship becomes enemity in the
course of time. An enemy also becomes a
friend, Self-interest is very powerful.


137. He, who blindly places confidence
in friends- and always treats enemies mis-
trustfully without paying any heed to
considerations of policy, finds his life
unsafe.


198. He, who, neglecting all considera-
tions of policy, seeks either friends or. foes,
is regarded as a person whose understand-
ing has been unhinged.


139. Qne should not trust a person un-
deserving of trust, nor should one trust toe
much a person worthy of trust. ‘The danger
- from blind confidence is such Ghat it cuts
the very roots.


140. The fatner, the mother, the son
the maternal uncle, the sister’s son, an
other relatives and kinsmen, are all moved
by interest and profit.


14t. -Father and mother may be seen to
discard the deat son if he is addicted to
irregular practices. People take care of
their own selves. See the efficacy of self-
interest. y

142. O highly wise one, his escape is
very difficult, who, immediately after he is
freed from danger, seeks the mean3 of bis
enemy’s happiness.


143. Youhave come down from the top
of the tree to this very spot. You could ‘not,
from foolishness know that.a tet had been
spread here.


144. A person, who has né setise, cannot
protect his own self. How can he protect
others? Such a person, forsooth, ruins all


his acts, ,


‘theie form.


PARVA. 203

145. You speak sweetly that I am very
dear to you. Hear me, however, O
hie, the reasons which I have on my
side.


146. One becomes dear from a suffi-
cient cause. One becomes an enemy from
sufficient cause. The entire world of crea-
tures is actuated by the desire of gain.
One never becomes dear to another with-


‘out cause,


147. The friendship between two uterine
brothers, the love between husband and
wifé, rests upon interest. I do not know
any kind of love amongst persons that does
not depend upon some motive of self-
interest,


148. Itis sometimes seen that uterine
brothers or husband and wife having quar-
relled are united again from a natural
affection. But such a thing is not to be
seen in persons who are not connected with
one another. -


149. One becomes dear for his liberali-
ty. Another becomes dear for his sweet
words. A third becomes so for his religi-
ous acts. Generally, a person becomes
dear for the purpose he serves. ,


150. The love between ws originated
from an adequate cause, That cause no
longer exists. On the ether hand, from
sufficient reasons that friendship between
us has terminated, .


151. What is that reason, I ask, for
which I have become so dear to you,
besides your -desire for eating me up?
You should know that I am not forgetful
of this.


152. Time spoils reasons. You seek
your own interests, Otherwise men, again,
understand their own interests. ‘I'he world
is guided by the example of the wise. You
should not thus speak to a person who is
learned and capable of understanding his
own interests,


.153- You are powerful.. The reason
which you show for your love for me now
is ill-timed. Moved, howeyer, by my owa
interests, 1am always very strong about
peace and war that are themselves very
unstable. :


154. The circumstances under which
peace is to be made or war declared
change as speedily as the clouds change
This very day you were ma
enemy. ‘This very day again, you becam&
my friend. This very day you have agata
become my enemy. Mark the considers-
tions that move living creatures !


155. There was friendship between us ea
lony as there was necessity for the sams


204


That reason, the outcome of time, is gone.
Withoat it, that friendship also has passed
awiy. , :


156. You are by nature my enemy.


From circumstances you became my friend.-


“That state of things has gone away.


‘She old but ‘natural state of enemity has.


‘teturned.


- 157.. £ am well-read in the dictates of
policy ; tell me, why shall I enter to-day,
for yeur sake, the set that is spread
‘for me ?


158. Through your power I was freed
froma great danger. Through my power
"you have beew freed from a similar danger.
Rach of ug has served the other. There

is no need for us for becoming friends
“again, ; , ‘
459. ,.O amiable one, your object has
heen accomplished, , ‘Fhe object I had, has
_#tso been accomplished. -You do not
require me except to make me. your food.


_ ¥o. I, am .your food. You are the
eater. I am weak. You


When we are So unevenly placed,,


161. 1 .understand your wisdom.
Having been released from the net, you
speak highly of me so that you may easily
-make food of me, ‘ :


, 162, You were entangled in the net for
the sake of food. You have been freed
from it. You feel. now tLe pangs of hun-
per. Following wisdom of the scriptures,
you tiy to eat me up to-day.

1 163. [ know! that you are hungry. I
know that this is the tme of your taking

_lood, You ace seeking your prey, and you

_ have your eyés on me. ; ’

164. Youhave sons and wives, You

still iry to make friends hip with me and
wish to treat me with affection and do me
vices. : O friend, Leannot accept this pro-
posal. :

» 165. Sceing me with you, why will not
your dear wife and your loving children

_ cheerfully eat me up ? :


166. t shall not, therefore, make friend-
ship'with you. There is’ no reason any
Jonger for such aunion. If, indeed, you
do not forget my good offices, think of
what will be good for me and be comfort-
able. i


as 167. What sane man will place himself
, under the power of an enemy who is not

wel-known for virtue, who is hungry, and
- Mho is in search of a prey? :


(8. Be happy then, I will presently
gave yen. lam afraid even to see you


} are strong. }
There cannot be any friendship between us


MAHABHARATA.


from a distance. . I shall not mix with you,
give up your attempts, O Lomasha !


169. If you think that E have done you
a service, do me a: friend’s work when |
may happen to move trustfully or carelessly.
Even that will be gratitude in you.


170. To live near a powerful and strong
person is never praisworthy. Even tf
the éstimated danger no longer exists,
I should always fear one more powerful
than myself. -


171. Hf youdo not seek your own in-
terests, tell me then whatis there that 1 can
do for you. { shall certainly give you
everything save my life.


172. For protecting one’s own self one
should abandon his very children, kingdom,
jewels, and wealth. One should sacrifice
one’s all for protecting one’s own self.


173. ¥f a person lives he can recover al
the wealth that he may have to give to
enemies for protecting his life.


174. It is not desirable to abandon life
Jike’ one’s riches. Indeed, ‘one’s ‘own self
should always be protected by, as I have
already said, even removing his wives and
wealth,


.17§. Persons who care to protect their
own selves and who do all their works after
a proper consideration, never suffer from
dangers as the consequence of their
acts.


176. The weak always regard the
powetful as their enemies. Their under-
standing, based. firmly on the truths of the
scriptures, is never unhinged,


177. Thus rebuked by the mouse Palita
the cat, hlushing with shame, said to the
mouse. a


Lomasha said :—


178, -Truly I swear by you that I con.
sider it highly censurable to injure a friend.
I know your wisdom. 1 know also that you
are devoted to my well-being.


176. Guided by the science of profit,
you have said that there is sufficient cause
for a breach between you and me. You
should not, however, © good friend, take
me for what I am not ! ;


180. I considér you a great friend for
your having saved my life. I am, again,
familiar with duties. | always appreciate
other people’s-merits. Iam very grateful


- for strvices received.:


_ 181. Lam devoted to the service of
friends. fam, again, especially devoted to
you. For these reasgns, O good friend,
you should reunite yourself with me.

c


SHANTI PARVA,


182. If f am ordered by you, I-can,
with all my kinsmen and relatives, sacrifice
my very life. The learned and wise see
sufficient reasons for reposing their conf-
dence in persons of such mental disposition
as ourselves, O you who are a master of
the truths of morality, you should not sus-
pect me. as.


183. Thus addressed by the. cat, the.


mouse, thinking a while, said thesejweighty
words to the former.


184. You are highly good. f have
heard all-that you have said and am glad
to hear you. For all that, however, I can-
not trust you. It is impossible for you,
by such eulogiums or by present of great
wealth, to induce me to unite with you
‘again.

185. I tell you, O friend, that the wise
never place themselves, without sufficient
reason, under the power ef an enemy. «


186. Having made an agreement with -
a stronger one, when both are threatened |°
by enemies, a weak person should act care--


fully after considerations of policy. Having
gained his object, .the weaker of the
two parties should not again trurst the
stronger. - 8 9


_ 187. One should never trust a peron
unworthy of trust. Nor should one blindly
trust a person deserving of trust. One
should always try to secure other's cenfi-
dence, One should not, however, himself
trust his foes, Ao


188. For these reasons one should,
under every circumstances, protect’ his own
self. One’s possessions, children and
everything else are so tong valuable as he
‘is alive. ‘


149. In short, the highest truth of all-


works on policy is Mistrust. Therefore,
mistrust of all persons yields the greatest
good, : .


190. However weak people may be,;


if they mistrust their enemies, the latter,
even if strong, never succeed in reigning
supreme over them.:


191. O cat, one like myself should
always guard his life from persons like
you. Do you also protect your’ own life
from the -Chandala whose ‘anger has
been worked up. ; : a tee


192. While the mouse thus spoke, the
cat frightened at the mention of the
hunter, hastily left the branch of thé tree,
ran away with great speed.


193. Having thus shown his power of
understanding, the mouse Palita also, who
was conversant with the truths of serip-
,


"205


ture and ‘endued with wisdom, entered
another hole.


Bhishma continued :—

194. Thus did the wise: mouse’ Palita,
though weak, and alone, succeed in bs filing
many powerful enemies. + or erty


195. An intelligent and learned’ mah
should make peace with a powerful enemy.
The mouse and the cat escaped by their
reliance upon each other’s services. é


196. I have thus pointed out to you fully
the course of Kshatriya duties. Listen
now to ine in brief.


i97. When two persons who were once
enemy make peace with each other, it is,
certain that each of them has it in his
heart to control the other, aa


198. In such a case the wise .man
succeeds by the power of his understand-
ing in controlling the other. He, on the
oher hand, who has no wisdom suffers
himself, for his carelessness, to be defeated
by the wise. .


199. It is necessary, therefore, that in
fear one shauld appear to be fearless, and,
while really mistrusting others,.one should
seem to be trustful. One, who acts with
such carefulness never Joses his steps,
or, even losing it, is never ruined. ° ‘


290, When the opportunity presents its-
self, one should make peace with an enemy ;
and when the time comes, one should aati
war with even a friend. hose, who are
well read in peace and war, say that
one should conduct himself thus, O king.


201. Knowing this, O king, and remem-
beriag the truths of scripture, one should,
sensibly and carefully, act like a person in
fear before the cause of fear actually
arrives. oy

202. One should before the cause of
fear actually arrived, act like a person in
fear, and make peace with enemies. Such
fear and carefulness--beget keenness of
understanding.


203. If one acts like a man in fear before
the cause of fear is so near, one is never
filled -with ‘fear: when ‘that cause actually
arrives. And fromthe fear. of a person, who
always acts with fearlessness, very great
fear originates. 2 = :


204, Never cherish fear,—such an. advice
should never be given to any one. ‘The
person, who entertains fear from a con-
sciousness of his weakness, always seeks
the advice of wise and experienced men.


- gos. For these reasons, one should,
when afraid, appear to be fearleyy, and


206


when .mistrusting (others) should seem to
be trustful. One should not, even in
serious acts, treat others with falsehood.


206. Thus have I recited to you, O
Vudhishthira, the oldestory (of the mouse
and the cat}. Having listened to it, do you
act properly in the midst of your friends
and kinsmen,

207. Deriving a- great lesson from that
story, and learning the difference between
friend and enemy andthe proper time for
war and peace, you will discover means of
escape when beset with dangers.


208,
mon danger, with a powerful enemy, you
should act with proper consideration when
uniting woureell
mon danger is gone).
gained your object, you should not trust
the enemies again. —


piece with the three-fold objects of life,
(vis,, Virtue, Profit, and Pleasure) {Ojking!
Guided by this Shruti, do you acquire


prosperity by once more protecting your


subjects.
210. O son of Pandu,


world and the next,


211. They are teachers of duty and
morality. ney are always grateful, O
powerful one! If adored, they are sure to


do you good. Therefore, O king, you should -


always adore them.


212, You will then, Ofking, duly acquire
Kingdom, great good, fame, achievements,
and offsprings in their proper order. ;


peace and war between the mouse and the
cat, written in excellent words and capable
of sharpening the intellect,,a king should
always act in the midst of his enemies.’


ae


CHAPTER CXXXIX.


(APADDHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).— Continued,


Yudhisthira said :—


1. “You have prescribed, O mighty one, :


thet no confidence should be reposed in
enemy. But how would the king maintain
himself if he were not to confide in any-
body? ‘


2. O king, you have said, great danger
arises to kings from confidence... But how,


Making peace, at a time of com--


with him (when the com- :
Indeed, having:


always try to |
associate with Brahmanas in all your acts!
Brahmanas give great benefit both Yn this |


MAHABHARATA;


O monarch, can a king, without trusignt
others, conquer his enemies.


3. Kindly dispell this doubt of mine,
My mind is confused, O grandfather, at
what I have heard you say on the subject
of mistrust.’’


| Bhishma said :—~


4. *Hear, O king, what took place at
the jresidence of Brahmadatta, vs., the
conversation between Pujani and king
Brahmadatta.


§. There was a bird named Pujani who
lived for a considerable time with king
Brahmadatta in the inner apartments of
his palace at Kampilya. :

6. Like the bird Jivajivaka, Pujani
could imitate the cries of all animals,
Though a bird by birth, she had ac-


: | quired great knowledge and was conver*
209, This path of policy is quite of a.


sant with every truth.

4. While residing there, she brought
forth a highly effulgent young one. Simut:
taneously the king also begat on his queen
a son.


8. Out of gratefulness for the shelter
of the king’s roof, Pujani used to go daily
to the shores of the ocean and bring a
couple of fruits for the nourishment of
her own young’ one and the infant prince. ‘


9. She gave one of those fruits to her


‘own child and the other to the prince.


10, The fruits she brought were sweet
like ambrosia, and capable of increasing
strength and energy. Every day she
brought them and every day she distributed
them in the same way. The infant prince


| gained great strength from the fruit which
213. Always looking at this history of


Pujani gave him.

a1, One day the infant prince, while
carried by the nurse on [her arms saw the
little youngone of Pujani. Going dowu
from the jnurse’s arms, the child ran
towards-the bird, and out of childish im-
pulse, began to sport with it, liking the
same very much. »

12. At length, raising the bird which
was of the same age with himself with his
hands, the prince pressed it to death and
then retuined to his nurse. pare
43. .The bird, O king, who ‘had as
usual been out in her search of fruits, re-
turning to the palace, and saw her young
one lying on the ground, killed by the
prince. .

14—1§. Seeing her son dead, Pujani,
with tears trickling down her cheeks, and
heart burning with grief, wept bitterly and
said,—Alas nobody should live with a
Kshatriya or contract friendship with him,


SHANTI


or take pleasure in having any connection
with him ! When they have any object in
view, they behave with courtesy. When
that object is accomplished, they abandon
the instrument,


16. The Kshatriyas do evil to all. They
should never be trusted. Even after doing
an injury they always try to solace and
assure the injured for nothing.


‘17. I shall, forsooth, wreak vengeance,
for this act of enmity upon this ruthless
and ungrateful betrayer of trust.


18. He has been guilty’ of three-fold
sins in taking the life of one that was born
on the same day with him and that was
bing brought up with him in the same
place, that used to eat with him, and that
depended on him for protection.


_ 19—20. Having said these wotds aside,
Pujani, with her talons, pierced the eyes’
of the prince, and finding some comfort
from that act of vengeance, once more
-said,—A_ sinful deed, committed with
deliberation, assails the doer without any
loss of time. ‘They, however, who avenge:
an injury, sever lose their merit. -


2t.' Uf the fruits of a sinful act be not
seen in the perpetrator himself, they would
certainly be seen, O king, in his sons, of
son’s sons, or daughter’s sons!

22. Seeing his son blinded by Pujani,
and considering the act to have been a
proper vengeance for what his son_ had
done, Brahmadatta said these words to
Pujani. ‘


Brahmadatta said :—

‘23. An injury, was done by’ us to you.
You have avenged it by doing an. ny in
return. The account is settled, Do ‘not
leave your present residence. On the other
hand, continue to live here, O Pujani.


Pujani said :—

24. The learned never speak high of
tle conduct of a person, who having’ 04 ce
injured another continues to live with that
other. Under such circumstances it is
always better for the injurer to quit his old
place. ;


25: One'should never trust the soothing
assurances received from an injured party.
‘lhe. fool. that: trusts such assurances is
Enmity


soon ruined. is


cooled.


26. The very sons’ and grandsons of
persons, who have injured each other, meet
with destruction. For such destruction of
their children, they lose the next’ world
also; 7” a


not quickly


PARVA. 207


2% Amongst men who have injuced one
another, distrust would yield happiness.
One who has betrayed confidence should
never be trusted in the least.


28. One; who is not’ worthy of confidence,
should not be trusted; nor should too mittch
trust be reposed in a person worthy of trust.
The danger originating from blind confi-
denre engenders absolute destruction.
One should try to secure the confidence of
others. One, however, should never place
confidence jn others, .


29. The parents only are the best of
friends. The wife is merely a soil for sowe
ing seeds. ‘The son is oitly one’s seed,
the: brother is an enemy. The friend or
companion watits to have his palms
oiled if he is to coritiaue so. One's own.
self enjoys or suffers one’s happiness ot
misery. R

30. Real peace cannot live amongst —
petsons who have injuted one another. No
such necessity exists any longer fot which I
lived here. :


31. The mind of a petson who has once
injured another, becomes naturally: filled
with want of confidence, if he sees the in-
jured person adoring him with gifts and
onors, Such conduct especialiy when
shorn iby the strong, always strikes the
weak with tear. bd


32. An intelligent person should leave
that place where he first meets with honor
in order to meet next with dishonor and
injury. Despite any subsequent honor that
ener get fram his enemy, he should act
thas. =” . :


33. {have tived in your house for a'long
time, respected all along by fyou. A cause
of enmity, however, has at last taken place.
U should, therefore, quit this place without
arty hesitation. ;


Srahmedatta said.— .


34. One; who does rettitn injury for an
injury, is never considered as offending.
Indeed, the avenger closes his account by
such behaviour. ‘Therefore, O. Pujani,
continue to live here without quitting this
place! as
Pujani said :—

35- No friendship can again be formed
between a person who has injured and him
who has inflicted art isjury in return,
The hearts canriot forget what’ has takea
place. :


Brahmadatta eaid :— —
26. itis necessary that an injurer and


the avenger of the injury should be united. .
Mutual enmity upon such a union has beet.


208


seen to voot down.’ No feesh injury has


taken place.


Pujani said :—

37. Enmity originating from mutaal
injuries can never die. the person injured
should never trust his enemies, thinking —O
I have. been comforted with assurances of
goed will!—-In this world, men, frequently
suffer destruction for (misplaced) confidence.
‘Therefore, it is necessary that we should no
lenget meet each other.


38. Those, who cannot be subdued .by
force and sharp weapons, can be conquered
by insincere professions of love like
(wild) elephants through a (tame) she-
elephant.


Brahmadatta said:—

*39. For two persons tiving together,
even if one inflicts upon the other deadly
injary, fraternal love ‘and mutual trust
naturally raise between them, as in the case
of the Chandala and the dog.


40. -Amongst persons who have injured |-


one another, living together blunts the
sharpness of enmity. Indeed, that enmity
does not last long, but disappears quickly
like water poured upon the leaf of a
lotus. . ; rf


eee
Pujani said :— ;
4t. Enmity originates from five catisés.
Learned persons know it. ‘Those five causes
are woman, land, harsh words, natural
Gisagreement, and injury.


42. When the person, with whom enmity
takes place, happens to be a liberal man,
hé should never be killed, particularly ‘by
a Kshatriya, openly or by hidden means.
In such a case the man’s fault should be
duly considered, _


43-44. When enmity has arisen with
even a friend, no further trust should be
placed ‘in him. Feelings of enmity tie
hidden like fire in forest.


44. Like the Atrvya fire within the
waters of the ocean, the fire of enmity can
never be put. out by presents of riches, by
display of prowess, by conciliation or by
scriptural learning. a


45. The fire-of enmity, once fighted.—

__the result of an injury once inflicted,—is

never extinguished, O king, without des-
troying the right one of the parties.


46. One, having injured a person,
should never trust. him again as his
friend, even though he might have


(after the infliction of the injury) adored


him with wealth and tonors,. Injury thus


inflicted fills the injurer with fear.


MAHABHARATA.


47. 1 never injured you, You alsa did
never do me an injury. ‘Therefore I lived in
your house. All that is changed, and
at present { cannot trust you.


Brahmadatta said :—


48. It' is Time that does every work.
‘There are various sorts all of which proceed
from Time. Who, therefore, injures whom?


49. Birth and Death take place in the
same way. Creatures act under the
influence of Time, and it is in consequence
also of Time that they cease to live.


50. Some are seen to die at once.
Some die one at a time. Some are seen
to live for a long time. Like fire consum-
ing the fuel. it gets, Time destroys all
creatures.


gt. O-blessed lady, I am, therefore,
not the cause of your sorrow, nor ate
you the cause of mine. It is Time
which always ordains the happiness and
misery of embodied creatures.


52. Do you then continue to live here
at your pleasure, with love for me and
without fear of any injury from me.
What you have done has been forgiven


by me. Do you also forgive me,
Pujani. ;
Pujani said :—


53. If Time, as you say, be the cause
of all acts, then, of course, nobody can
entertain feelings of enmity towards any-
body on Earth. I ask, however, why do
friends and kinsmen, when friends and
kinsmen are killed, try to avenge the
latter. . .


$4—55. Why also did the gods and the
Asuras in days of old kiil “each other in .
battle 7 If it is Time that begets happi-
ness and misery and birth and death, why
do physicians then seek to administer
medicines to the sick? [f itis Time that |
is shaping the course of everything, what
need is thereof medicines. :


56. Why do people, deprived of their
senses by grief, indulge in such tamenta-
tions? {f Time, as you say. be the cause of
all works, how can religious merit be ac-
quired by persons performing religiousacts ?


"57. Your ‘son killed my child. Ihave
injured him for that. I have by- that act,
O king, become liable ta be killed by
you, 3 aod ka “


58. Moved by grief for my son, I have
thus injured your son. Listen now to the
teason why I should be killed by you.


89. Men wish either to kill birds for
food or to kéep them in cages for sport
f


SHANTI


Thre is ‘no third reason éxcept Killing ot
‘caging for which men would seek birds.
60. Birds again, from fear of being
‘either killed or put into cage by men, seek
‘safety in flight. Persons conversant with
the Vedas have said ‘that death aad im-
‘prisonment both paiafal.

‘61. Life is dear to all.
‘dre thade miserable by grief and pain.
‘creatures wish for happiness.

62. Misery originates from ‘various
‘sources, Pecrepitude, O Brahmadatta, is
‘misery. The ‘loss of wealtir
The neartiess of anything disagreeable or
‘evil is misery. Separation ar dissociation
‘from friends and beloved objects is misery.

‘63. Misery originates from death and
imprisonmeit.
and from other natural causes. The misery
‘that originates from tle death of children


‘changes and afflicts all ‘creatares very :


‘greatly.

64. Some foolish persons say that there
js no misery in seeing other’s misery.
Only ‘he who has not felt any misery him-
‘self can say. so'before men, | :


‘65. He, however, who has felt sorrow .


‘and misery, weuld never venture to say so.
‘One, who has felt the pangs of all sorts of
‘misery, sympathizes with the misery of
‘others.

66, What t have done to you, O king,
and what you have doné to mé, cannot
be washed away by even a‘century..

67. There cannot be a reconciliation
after what we have done to each other.
Whenever you will think of your sdn,
your enmity towards me -wilt become
fresh. :


68. {fa person after avenging an injury, .


wishes to make peaee with the injared, the
parties cannot be properly reunited even
like the pieces of an eattlien vessel.


69. Men well read in scriptures have
laid it down that trust never yields happi-
ness.’ Ushanas himself sang two verses to
Prahtada in days of yore.


70. He, who trusts the words, true or
false, of an eneny, meets with destruction
Tike a seeker of honey, it a pit covered with
dry grass. : ;

zt. Enmities outlive the enemies, for
there is no want of persons who speak of the
quarrels of deceased fathers before their
surviving children. ,

72. Kings kilt animosities by means of
tonciliation but, when the opportunity pre-
Sents itself, they ‘break their enemies to
pieces like earthen jars fuli of water dashed
against stone. 4


27


All creatures |
All}


is misery. ;


Misery arises from women.


PARVA, 209

73- Ub thé king injures any one, he
should never trust him again. By trusting
a person who. has been injured, one suffers
great misery.


Brahmadatta said :— _

74. Noman can secure the fraition of
any object by distrusting others. By
cherishing fear one always is compelled to
live as a dead person.

Pujani said :—

75. He whose feet have become sore,
certainly meets with a fall if he seeks.
to move, however cattiously he may
do it.

76. By opening his eyes against the
wind, a man, who has got sore eyes, finds
them greatly pained by the wind.

77. He, who, without knowing his own
strength, treads.a wicked path and persists
in walking along it, sooa loses his very life
as the result of it. :

78. The man, who, shorn of exertion, tills
his land, without taking care of the season.
of rain, never reaps a harvest. F

He, who takes daily nutritive food,
be it bitter or astringent or palatable or
sweet, lives lony,


80, He, on the other hand, who neglects


| wholesome food and takes injurious ones


regardless of consequences, soon méets witht
death, r

81. Destiny and Exertion depend upon
each other, The high-minded pertorm
good and great feats, while eunuchs only
flatters Destiny.


82. Whether it is harsh or mild, a
benehcial act should-be done, The un@
fortunate man of inaction, however, is
always assailed with ail sorts of calamity.

83. Therefore, casting of everything
‘else, one should display his energy. Ine,
deed, disregarding everything, men should
do what.does good to themselves.

84. Knowledge, courage, cleverness,
strength and patience, are one’s natural
friends, The wise live in this world with
the help of those five.


85. Houses, precious metals, land, wife,
and. friends,-—-these are spoken by the
learned. as the secondary sources of #dod.
A man may obtain them everywhere. .

86, A wise man may be delighted every
where. - Such a man shines everywhere,
He never strikes anybody with fear. If
tried to be frightened, he never yields ta
fear himself, :


_ 87. ‘The wealth, however little, of an
intelligent man iscertain to increase, Such -


Zio?


aman does every act cleverly. By self-
restraint he acquires great fame.


“88—89. Home-sick foolish wights have
to put up with shrew wives who eat up their
flesh like the young ones of a crab eating
up their mothers. ‘There are men who
through loss of understanding become very
disspirited at the prospect of leaving home.
‘Fhey say,>-These are our friends! ‘This
is our country !
these 2


go. One should, forsooth, feave his
mother-country if it be affected by plague
orfamine, One should live in one’s own
country, respected] of all, or go to a foreign
country for living there,

‘gt. £ shall, therefore, repair to some
other region. I do not venture to live any
longer in this place, for E have greatly
injured your child, O king,

92. One should from a_ distance re-
nounce a bad wife, a bad son, a bad king, a
bad friend, a bad allie and.a bad country.


63. One shoutd not confide in a bad
son. One cannot find delight in a bad
wife. ‘There can be no happiness in a
bad kingdom. One cannot obtain a liveli-
hood in @ bad country.


9}. There can be no permanent friend:
ship with a bad friend whose attachment is
very uneertain, There is disgrace in a
bad connection, when there is no necessity
for it.

95. She, indeed, is a wife who speaks
only what is pleasant. He is a son who
makes the father happy, He’ is a friend
whom one can trust. ‘That, indeed, is ane’s
country where one acquires his living.


96. He is a strict king who does not
oppress, who sypports the indigent and in
whose kingdom there is no fear.


“97. — One can have wife, country, friends,
son, kinsmen, and relatives, if the king be
accomplished and virtuous.


98. If the king happens to be sinful, his
subjects, for his oppressions, meet with
destruction. The king is the root of three-
fold objects, i.e, Virtue, Wealth, and Plea-
sure. He should protect his subjects care-
fully. ;

99. Taking from his subjects a sixth
part of their riches, he should protect them
all, ‘That king, who does not protect his
subjects, is indeed, a thief, :


too, ‘Fhat king, who, after holding out
hepes of protection, does not, from
rapacity satisfy them,—that sinfal king
is visited by the sins of all his subjects and
ultimately goes into hell.


Alas, how shall we leave.


‘MAHABHARATA.


tot. On the other hand, that king, wha;
having given hopes of protection, fulfils
them, is honored as a universal benefactor
in consequence of his protecting all his
subjects.


102. The ford of all creatures, o7z.,
Manu, has declaredjthat the king has seven
attributes: .he is mother, father, preceptor,
protector, fire, Vaishtavana, and Yama.


103. The king by treating his people
mercifully is called their father. The
subject who plays’him false, is born in his.
next life as an animal or a bird.


104. By doing good to them and by
supporting the poor, the king becomes a
mother to his people. By consuming the’
wicked he is regarded as fire, and by res-
training the sinful he is called Yama.


108. By making presents of riches to his
dear ones, the king is regarded as _ Kuvera,
the grantor of wishes. By delivering ins-
tructions on morality and virtue, he becomes
a preceptor, and by exercising the duty of
protection he becomes the protector.


106. That king who pleases the inhabi--
tants of his cities and provinces by nteans
of his virtues, is never divested of his
kingdom for observing such a duty.


107. That king who knows how to honor
his subjects, never suffers misery either in
this world or in the next.


108. That king whose subjeets are.
always stricken with anxiety or laden with
taxes, and overwhelmed with- all sorts of,
evils is defeated by his enemies,


‘ tog. That king, on the other hand, whose
subjects grow like a large lotus in a lake,
acquires every reward here and at last
meets with honor in the celestial region.


110. Enmity with a powerful person, 0
king, is never spoken highly of. That king
who has incurred the hostility of one more
powerful than himself, loses both kingdom
and happiness.


Bhishma said :-— .
tir. O. monarch, having said so, the


bird, took the king’s leave and went away.
of her pleasure,


132, I have thus recited to you, O fore+
most’ of kings, the conversation between
Brahmadatta and Pujani, What else do:
you wish to hear.” =


SHANTI PARVA.


: CHAPTER CXL.


{APADDHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Coxtinued.


Yudhishthira said :--


t. ‘When both virtue and men, O
Bharata, suffer for the gradual lapse of a
cycle and when the world is assailed by
robbers, how, O Grandfather should a
king then behave.”


Bhishma said :—

2. ‘I shall tell you, O Bharata, the
policy the king should pursue amid such
distress. I shall tefl you how he should
behave himself at such a time, casting off
mercy.


3. Regarding it is cited the old story
of the conversation between Bharadwaja
and king Shatrunjaya.


4—-5. There was a king name Shatrun-
jaya among the Sauviras. He was a great
car-warrior. Guing to Bharadwaja, he
asked the Rishi about the truths of the
science of Profit, saying—How can an
unattained object be attained. How,
again, when acquired, can it be multiplied ?
How also, when increased, can it be protec-
ted? And how, when protected, should it
be used.


6. Thus accosted about the truths of
- ‘the science of Profit, the twice-born one
said the following reasonable words to that
king for explaining those truths.


The Rishi said :—

7. The king should always remain with
the rod of punishment in his band. He
should always show his prowess. Him-
self without shortcomings, he should mark
those of his enemies. Indeed, his eye
should always be used for that object.


8 On seeing a king who has the rod
of punishment ever uplifted in his hand,
every one is filled with fear. Therefore, the
Bing should rule all creatures with the rod
of punishment.


g- Men endued with learning and know-
edge of truth speak high of Punishment.
Hence, of the four-fold means, viz., Conci-
liation, Gift, Dissention and Punishment,
Punishment is said to be the foremost,


to. When the root of a refuge is cut off,
all the refugees die. When the root of a
tree cut off, how, would- the branches
live ? .

it. A wise king should cut off the very
roots of his enemy. He should then win
over and bring under his contro! the allies
and partisans of that enemy, 7


1


ait


12. When calamities befall ihe king, he
should advise wisely, show his prowess
properly, fight with ability, and even
retreat with wisdom, ;


13. In words only should the king show
his humility, but at’ heart he should be
sharp as a razor. He should renounce
lust and anger, and speak sweetly and
mildly. ‘ mS

14. When the time for communication
with an enemy arrives, a far-sighted king
should make peace, without trusting him
blindly. When the transaction is finished,
he should speedily renounce the new ally. °


15. One should conciliate an enemy
with sweet assurances as if fe were a
friend. One, however, should always fear
that enemy tike a room within which there
is a snake. ;


16. You should assure him with refer-
ences to the past whose sense you want to
control. A wicked man should be assured
by promises of future well-being.


17. The wise person should be assured
by present services. The person ‘who is
desirous of: acquiring prosperity should
join hands, swear, use sweet words, adore
by bending down. his head, and shed
tears.


18. One should carry his enemy, on
his shoulders as long as time is unfavorable,
When,’ however, the opportunity presents
itself, one should break him into pieces like
an earthen jar on a stone.


19. It is better, O monarch, that a king
should burn up for the time being - like
charcoal of -ebony-wood than that he
should smoulder and smoke like chaff for
many years. ‘


20. Aman who has many things to do,
should not hesitate to deal with even ar’
ungrateful person. If successful, one can
enjoy happiness. If unsuccessful, one loses
respect.


21. Therefore, in doing the works of
such persons, one should, without finish.
ing them completely, always keep somes.
thing undone. A king should. do what is.
for his well-being, imitating a_ kokila, a
boar, the mountains of Meru, an. empt
chamber, an actor, and a devoted friend. ||


22. The king should, always, with cares
ful application, go to the houses of his
enemies, and even if calamities overtake
them, ask them about their well-being.


23. Those who are idle never acquire
riches ; nor those who are shorn of manli-
ness and exertion ; nor those who are vain;
nor those who fear unpopularity ; nor those


who are always dilatory.


2rz


a4. The king should act im such a way
that his foe may not see his shortcomings.
He should, however, himself notice the
weak points of his enenry. He should
imitate the tortuise which conceals its limbs.
Fle should always keep hidden ‘his own
hales,

25. He should think of all financiat
Matters like a crane. Heshould show his
prowess ikea Hon. He should lie im anr-
bush like a wolf and attack and pierce his
foes like an arrow.


26. He should be careful in his enjoy-
ments regarding drink, dice, women,
hunting, and music. Addiction to these
produces evil.


27. He should make his bow of bam-
boos; he should sleep like the deer; he
should be blind when it #9 meeces<xary for
him to be so, or he should ever be deaf
when it is neccessary to be deaf. ~


28. The wise king should display his.


prowess, considering time and place. If
these are not favorable, prowess becomes
useless.


29. Noting the opportune and inop-
portune moment, reflecting upon his owa
strength and weakness, and improving his
own strength by comparing it. with that of
the enemy, the king should take up
his work. :


- go. That king who does not crust down
an enetny by military force, provides for
his own death lice the crab when she
conceives.


31. The king should show blos ons bat
nat fruits. When showing fruits he should
be difficult of climbing; and though unripe
he should seem to be ripe. If he acts thus


he would: succeed in upholding himself
against all enemies.
32. The king should first strengthen


the hopes (of the suitors). He should then
put impediments in the way of the fulfl-
ment of those hopes. He should say that
those impediments are merely due to. time.
He should next represent that those occa-
sions are really the outcome of weighty
causes,


33. As long as the cause of fear does
not actually arrive, the king should make
all his arrangements like a person filled
with fear. When, however, the cause of
fear arrives, he should smite fearlessly.


34. No mancan derive benefit without
incurring danger. If, again, he succeeds
in preserving his life in the midst of danger’s
he ts sure to acquire great benefits.


35. A king should determine all future
dangers; when they are present, he should


MAHABUARATA.


conquer them; ard fest they nvay grow
again, he should, even after conquering
them, consider them, as unconquered.

36. The relinquishing of present happi-
ness and the pursuit of the future one, is
never the policy of an intelligent person.

37. ‘That king who having made’ peace
with an enemy sleeps fhappily and confi-


dently is like a man who sleeping on tie
top ot a tree awakes after a fall.
38. When one is in distress, he should


raise himself by any means in his power,
mild or stern; and after such advance-
ment, le slrould, if able, practise virtue.


39. The king should always honor the
enemies of his foes. He should consider
his own spies as agents employed by his
enemies.


40-42. ‘Fhe king should see that his
own spies are not made out by his enemy.
He should appoint atheists and ascetics ao
spies and despatch them to the kingdom
of his enemies. Sinful] thieves, who violate
the laws of victue and who are thorns with
every person, enter gardens and pfaces of
amusement and houses set up for giving
drinking water to thirsty travellers and
public resturants and deinking spots and
houses‘of iil fame and Yirthas and public
assemblies. These should be recognised
and arrested and suppressed.


43. The king should not confide in an
unworthy person; ner should he overe fide
in a person who is worthy of trust. Danger
originates from confidence. Confidence
shoutd never be placed without previ-
ous examination.


44. Having by ostensible reasons crea-
ted confidence in the enemy, the king
should strike him when he makes a mis-
lake.


45. The king should fear him front
whom there is no fear; he should alse
always fear them who should be feared.
Fear rising from a person who is not
feared, may bring on total extermination, |


46. By devotion to religious persuits,
by taciturnity, by . assuming the orange
garb of monks, and wearing matted locks
skins, one should create confidence in his
enemy, and then, when. the time comes,
sheuld pounce upon him like the wolf.


47- A king seeking prosperity- should
not hesitate to kill son or brother or father
or friend, if any of these seek to thwart
his objects.


48. The very preceptor, if he is
haughty, ignorant of what should be done
and what should not, and an impious person,
shpuld be restrained by Punishment,


SHANTI


49. As .sharp-stinged insects cut off
alfthe flowers and fruits of the trees on
which they sit, the king should, after hav-
ing created confidence in his emenies by
honors, salitations and gifts, go against
him and deprive him of everything.


‘50.° Withont cutting the very vitals of
others, without performing many erucl
deeds, without killing living creatures like
fishermen, one cannot win great pros-
perity. wf. ¥

5t. There is no
creatures called enemies or friends.
sons become friends or enemies according
to the trend of circumstances.


52. The king should never allow his
enemv to escape even if he bewails piteous-
ly. He should never be moved by these;
on the other hand, he should destroy the
person who has done him an injury.


53- A king seeking prosperity should
studiously win over as many men as he
can, and do them good. In his conduct
towards his subjects he should always be
shorn of malice. He should also studi-
ously punish and resteain the wicked and
‘disaffected. :


54. When he wishes to take wealth,
he should say what is agreeable. Having
collected weaith, he should say similar
things.
‘his sword, he should grieve and shed tears.


55- A king seeking prosperity should
win over others by sweet words, honors, and
gifts. Thus should he take men into his
service.


56. The king should never engage in
idle disputes. He should never cross a
river with the help only of his two arms.
To eat cow-horns is useless aud never
gives strength. By eating them one’s teeth
are broken while tne taste is not gratified.


$7. The three-fold objects have triple
disadvantageous adjuncts. Carefully con-
sidering them, the disadvantages should be
avoided.


58. The unpaid residue of a debt, the
unquenched remnant of a fire, and the
unkilled remnant of foes, by and by grow
and increase. Therefore, all those should
be completely rooted out.


59. Debt which always multiplies is
sure to remain unless it is wholly paid up.
Likewise are the defeated foes and
neglected diseases. ‘These always create
great fear. .


separate order of


60. Every work should be done com-
pletely. Ouneshould be always careful. If
extracted ‘badly, such a minute thing as
a thorn leads to obstinate gangrene,


Per-°


Having severed one’s head with.


PARVA. 213

6t.~By killing its inhabitants, by
breaking its roads and otherwise injuring
them, and by burning and pulling down its
houses, a king should devastate an enemy’s
realm.


62. A king should be far-sighted like
the vulture, stable like a crane, watchful
like a doy, brave like a lion, dreadful like a
crow, and enter into the ‘kingdom of his
enemies like a snake with ease and
without anxiety.


63. A king should win over a hero by
clasping his hands, a coward by terrorising
him, and a covetuus man by presents of
money, and with an equal he should wage
war carefully, ‘ .


64. He should take care to create
dissension among the leaders of sects and
of conciliating those that are dear to bins,
He should protect his ministers from dis-
sension and destruction,


65. Tf the king becomes mild, ‘the
people disrespect him. ff he becomes
Stern, the people are afflicted. The rule
is that he should be stern when sternness
is necessary, and mild when miidness ts
necessary.

66.. By mildness the mild should be con-
quered. By mildness one may destroy
that which is dreadful. There is nothing
which mildness cannot do. ‘Therefore, mild
ness is said to be sharper than fierceness.


67. Vhat king who becomes mild when
mildness is necessary and who becomes
stern when sternness is necessary, gaits
all his ends, and represses his enemies.


68. Having created an enemy in a
person endued with knowledge and wisdom,
ong should not be satisfied with the belief
that he is at a distance from his foe. | The
arms of an intelligent man are exten-
sive by which he injures when injured,


69. ‘The uncrossable should not be
sought to be crossed. ‘That which the enemy
would be able to recover should not be
snatched from him. One should not try
to dig at all if by digging one could get at
the root of the thing for which one digs,
One should never strike him whose head
one would not cut off.


go. A king should not always act in
this way. The course of conduct that I
have pointed out should be followed only
in times of distress. Actuated . with the
desire of doing you good I have said this
for instructing you as to how you should
act when attacked by enemies.


Bhishma said :—


7t. Hearing these
; to by that Brahmana


words given vent
with the desires


 ‘o14


of doing him gaod, the king of the Sauviras
obeyed those instructions gladly and
attained with his kinsmen and friends
shining prosperity.’


CHAPTER CXLI.


(APADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Conttzued.


Yudhishthira said :— a

13.‘ When virtue is deteriorated and
is transgressed by all, when sin is consi-
dered as virtue, and virtue becomes vice,
when all healthy restraints are washed away,
and all truths regarding righteousness are
disturbed and confounded, when people
are oppressed by kings and robbers, when
men of all the four modes of life become
stupefied about their duties, and all
works are shorn of merit, when men see
cause of fear on all sides for lust and
covetousness and folly, when all creatures
cease to trust one another, when they kill
one another by deceitful means and impose
‘upon ove another, when houses are con-
sutned throughout the country, when the
Brahmanas are greatly assailed, when the
clouds do not discharge a drop of rain,
when every one’s hand is turned against his
neighbour, when all the necessaries of life
ate misappropriated by -robbers, when,
indeed, such a season of dreadful distress
sets in, by what means should a Brah-
mana live who is reluctant to renounce
mercy and his children? How, indeed,
should a Brahmana maintain himself at
such atime? Tell me this, O grandfather !
How also should the king live at such a
time when iniquity possess the:world 2? How,
O scorcher of enemies, should the king live
so that he might not deviate from both
virtue and profit.”’


Bhishma said :—


9. ‘O mighty-armed one, the peace and
prosperity of subjects, profuse and season-
able rain, disease, death, and other cala-
mities, all depend on the king.


10. I have no doubt also in this, O fore-
most of Bharata’s race, that the setting of
Krita, Sreta, Dwapara and Kali, all
depend on the king’s conduct.


11. When such a time of calamity as
has been described by you séts in, vir-
tuous men should support themselves [by
the help of judgment.


12. Regarding it is cited the old story
of the conversation between Vishamitra


MAHABHARATA.


and the Chandala in a village of


Chandalas.


13. . Towards the end of Treta and the
commencement of Dwapara, a_ dreadful
drought took place, extending for twelve
years, in consequence of what the gods
had ordained.


14—15- At that time which was the end
of Treta and the commencement of
Dwapara, when the time came for many
sufficiently old creatures to give up theic
lives, the thousand-eyed god *poured no
rains The planet Vrihaspati: began to
move in an opposite course, !and Soma,
giving up his own orbit, receded towards
the south.


16. Not even could a dew-drop be seen,
what’to speak of the gathering clouds? ‘Ihe
rivers were all reduced into narrow stream-
lets.


17. Everywhere, takes, wells and springs
disappeared and lost their beauty for that
change brought about by the gods.


18. Water becoming scarce, ‘the places
for the distribution of charities became
desolate. ‘The Btahmanas abstained from
the celebration of sactifices and recit itionfof
the Vedas. They did no longer utter


Vashats and performed other propitiatory


rites.


19. Agriculture and tending of cattle
were givenup. Markets and shops were
abandoned. Stakes for binding sacrificial
animals disappeared. People no longer
collected various sorts of articles for sacri-
fices. All festivals and amusements died. °


20. Everywhere heaps of bones were
seen and every place was filled with the
shrill cries and yells of of terrific creatures,
The cities and towns of the Earth were
shorn of inhabitauts, Villages and ham-
lets were burnt down. st


21. Some assailed by robbers, some, by
weapons, and some, by bad kings, and in
fear of one another, began to fly away. ~


22. Temples and places of worship
became desolate. The aged were forcibly
turned out. of theic houses. Kine, goats,
sheep and buffaloes fought (for food) and
died in large numbers, The Brahmanas
began to die on all sides.


23. Protection was at an end. Herbs
and plants were dried up. The Earth was
divested of all her beauty and looked highly
awful like the trees in a crematorium.


24. In that dreadful period, when right-
eousness was lost, O Yudhishthira, men
in hunger, lost their senses and began ta
eat one another. e,


s


SHANTI PARVA,


3g. The very Rishis, giving up their
vows and their fires and deities, and
deserting their forest«retreats, began to
walk about in quest of food. cs

26. The holyand great Rishi Vishwa-
niitra, endued with great intelligence,


wandered homeless and stricken with
hunger: .
f§27. Leaving his wife and son in some


place of shelter, the Rishi walked about,
fireless and homeless, without caring for
pure or impure food.


28. One day he arrived at a hamlet, in
the midst of a forest, inhabited by cruel
hunters given to the deStruction of living
creatures,


29. The little hamlet was filled with
broken jars, and pots made of earth.
Dog-skins were seen here and _ there.
Heaps of bones and skulls, of boars and
asses, lay In various places.


30. Clothes of the dead lay here and
there, and the huts were adornd with
garlands of used up flowers. Many of the
denizens again were dressed with sloughs
cast off by snakes.


31. The place was resonant with the
loud crowing of cocks and hens and the
discordant bray of asses. The inhabitants
quarrelled with one another, uttering harsh
words in shrill voices.:


32. There were temples of gods on all
sides bearing emblems of owls and other
birds. Resdunding with the sound of iron
bells, the hamlet was filled with dogs
_ Standing or lying on every on every side.


33- Stricken with hunger and engaged
in search after food, the great Rishi
Vishwamitra entered that hamlet aud tried
his level best to find something to eat.


34. Though the son of Kushila begged
again and again, yet he could not get any
nieat or rice or fruit or root or any other
kind of food. '


35. He then, exclaiming—Alas, great
is my suffering !—dropped down from
weakness in that hamlet of the Chandalas.


36. The sage began to reflect, aside,—
What is best for me to do now ?—~Indeed,
O best of kings, he then thought only of the
tieans by which he could avoid immediate
death, ,

37. Hesaw, O king, a huge piece of
flesh, of a dog that had recently’ been
killed with a weapon, spread on the floor
of a Cnandala’s hut...


38. The sage thought and decided
that he sliould steal that meat, And he
4


218


said to himself,—I have tio means now of
keeping up my life.

39. Theft is sanctioned in an hour of dis+
tress for even a great man. It will not
divesti{him of his eminence. Even a Brahe
mana for saving his life may do it, This is
certain,

40. ‘First of all one should steal from a
degraded person. Failing such a person
one may steal from one’s equal. . Failing
an equal, one may steal from even a great
and virtuous man. :


4t. I shall then, at this time when my


life itself is almost gone, steal this meata-


I do not see sin in such theft. I shall,
therefore, steal this haunch of dog’s meat.


42. Having thus resolved this resolution,
the great sage Vishwamitra lay down
for sleep where the Chandala was.


43. Seeing sometime after that the
night had advasced and that the whole
Chandala hamlet were in sleep, the holy
Vishwamitra, quietly rising up, entered
that hut.

44. The'Chandala who was the owner
of it, with eyes covered with pleghm, was
lying like one asleep.


and discordant voice.


The Chandala said :—


45- Who is there, busy with opening up
the latch ? The whole Chandala hamlet ig
asleep. _I, however, am awake and not
asleep. Whoever you are, you are about to


be killed !—These were the harsh words _


that met the sage’s ears.


46—47. Stricken with fear, his face reds.


dened with the blushes of shame, and his
heart filled with anxiety caused by that act
of theft which he had tried, he answered,
saying,—Oh you long-lived one, | am
Vishwamitra! 1 have come here suffering


from hunger. O you of righteous soul, do.


not kill me, if your vision be ciear !


48. Hearing these words of that great
Rishi of pure soul the Chandala rose up
in fear from his bed and approached the
sage.


49. Clasping his hands from. respect
and with eyes bathed in tears, he addressed


Kushika’s son, saying,—What do you seek


here in the night, O Brahmana ?


Of disagreeable -
look, he said these harsh words in a broken


50. Conciliating the Chandala, Vishwa ,


mitra said,—l am greatly hungry and
about to die of starvation,
away that haunch of dog’s meat.


1 wise to take’


51. Being hungry I have become sinful. .


One who seeks food has no shame. It is


216


hunger which is actnating me to commit
this sin. [1 is for this that 1 wish to take
away that haunch of dog’s meat.


52. My lifeis on the point of departure.
Hunger has sallied my Vedic learning. I
am weak and have lost my senses. I have
na scruple about pure and impure food.
Although [ know it is sinful still { wish to
take away.that haunch of dog’s meat.


53° After L had failed to secure any
alms, having- wandered from house to
house in this your hamlet, £ determined to
perpetrate this sinful act of taking away
this haunch of dog’s meat.


84. Fire isthe mouth of the gods. He
fs also their priest, He should, therefore,
take nothing save pure: and elean things.
At times;, however, that great god becomes
a consumer of everything, Know that i have
now become like him.


55. Hearing these words of the great
Rishi, the Chandala answered him, saying,—
Lister) to me. Having heard these truthful
words of mine, act in such a way that your
religious merit may not suffer. - -

86. Hear, O regenerate Rishi, what 1
say to you about your duty. ‘Fhe wise say
that a dog is impurer than a jackal. The


haunch, again, of a dog: is. impurér that-


any other part of his body.


§7- This is not wise resolution of yours,
therefore, O iyreat Rishi, this act, this theft
of what belongs toa Chandala., this theft,
moreover of impure food, is not right.


‘38. Blessed be you, do you look ont for
some other means for keeping your fife.
O great sage, let not your penances suffer
destruction for this your strong desire for
dog's meat.


“59. Knowing as you do the duties sanc-
tioned in the scriptures, you should not do
an act which leads to a confusion of duties.
Do not renounce righteousness, for you are
the foremost of all pious persons.


6o—61. Thus addressed, O. king, the
great Rishi Vishwamitra, — strick-1 with
hunger, O foremost of Bharata’s race,
once more said,—A long time has passed
away without my having taken any food,
I do not see any means again for keeping
up my life,

‘62. One should, when he is about to die,
keep up his life by any means in his . power
without judging of their charcter. After-
wards, when able, he should seek the ac-
quisition of merit.


63. The Kshatriyas should follow the
conduct of Indra. It is the duty of the
Biahmanas to behave like Agni. The
Vedas are fire.* They form my strength.


MAHABITARATA,


i I shall, therefore, eat even this impure fod!
for satisfying my appetite.


64. That by which life may be preserved
should, forsooth, be done unhesitatingly.
Life is better than death. By fiving, oné
may acquire Virtue.


65. Seeking to preserve mty life, I wish,
with my perfect sense, to eat this impuré
food. You just order me.


66. Continuing to tive I shall try to
acquire virtue and shall dissipate by penan-
ces and by knowledge the calamities which
have. befallen me, like the luminaries
of the sky destroying even the thickest
darkness.


The Chandala said :—

67. By eating this food one like yourself
cannot live long. Nor can one (like you)
get strength (from such food), nor that


gtatification which ambrosia yields. Do
you beg for some other kind of alms. Be
not bent upon eating dog’s meat, ‘The


meat of dog is, forsooth, an impure food for
the twice-born ones.


Vishwamitra said :—

68, Any other sort of meat cannot bé
easily had during a famine. like this:
Besides, O Chandala, I have no mosey, If
ain very much hungry. I cannot move any
longer. [Tam utterly hopeless. I think.
that all the six sorts of tasté exist in that
piece of dog’s meat.


The Chandala said :~


69. Only five sorts of "meat are clean
food for Brahmanas and Krhatriyas and
Vaishyas, as sanctionéd in the scriptures.
Do not wish to have forbiddé food.


Vishwamitra said: —

go. While hungry, the great Rishi
Agastya ate up the Asuta named Vatapi.
I am in distress. Iam hungry. I shalt,
therefore, eat that haunch of dog’s meat. .


The Chandala said :—


gt. Do you beg for something else.
You should not do such a thing. Verily
you should not do such an act. If, how-
ever, you like, you may take away this
piece of dog’s meat.


Vishwamitra said :—


72. The good are the authorities in
matters of duty. I am following their
example. - I now consider this dog's
haunch tobe better food than any other
pure food.


. SHANTI PARVA,


The Chandala said :—

73. The act of an impious man can
never be regarded as an eternal practice.
An improper act can never be a proper one.
Do not commit a sin by deception.


_ Vishwamitra said :—

94. Aman who is a Rishi cannot ‘com-
mitasin. Inthe present case, deer and
‘dog, I think, are the same. I shall, there-
fore, eat this dog’s haunch.


The Chandala said :—


75. Begged by the Brahmanas, the
Rishi (Agastya) did that act. Under the
‘circumstances it could not bea sin. Right-
‘eousness is that in which there is no sin.
Besides, the Brahmanas, who are the pre-
‘ceptors of the three other orders, should
‘be protected and maintained . by all
‘means.


Vishwamitra said :—


.76. Tama Brahman. This my body is
‘my friend, Itis very dear to me and de-
‘serves ‘the highest respect from me. In
‘order to keep up the body I wish to take
vaway that dog’s haunch. 1 have become


so eager that | do not fear you and your |


dreadful brethern any longer.


The Chandala said :—


977. Men give up their lives bat still they
‘do not seek impure food. All their wishes
‘are fulfilled who can conquer appetite in
this world. Do yoa also conquer your
hunger and obtain those rewards.


Vishwamitra said :— .

78: About myself, I always observe
rigid vows and my heart is set on peace.
Bor preserving the root of all: religious
‘merit, I shall eat impure food,


79. It is‘clear that such an act would
be considered moral for a person of -pure
soul. ‘To a petson, however, sf impure
‘soul the eating of dog’s flesh would appear
sinful. Even if my conclusion be wron
{and if L eat this dog’s meat) 1 shall not, for
that act, become one like you.


The Chandala said :~

_ 80. It is my settled conclusion: that I
‘should try my best to prevent you from this
sin, By doing a wicked act a Brahmana
‘goes duwn from his elevated station. It is
for this that femonstrating with you.


VYishwamitra said :—
81. Kine go on drinking without caring
for the croaking of the frogs. You haye


28


{| IT am speaking thus to you.


By


no right to decide what is right (and what,
not), Do not speak highly of yourself,


The Chandala said :—


82. I have become your friend, therefore,
Bo what is
good. Do not, from temptation, do what is
sinful.


Vishwamitra said :— :
83. If you bea friend who wishes me


happiness, do you then extricate me from
this distress. In that case, casting off this


| dog’s haunch, I may think myself saved by


the help of righteousness (and not by that
of sinfulness). .


The Chandala said :—


84. I dare not present this piece of
meat to you, nor can I quietly atfow you to
rob me of my own food. If I give you this
meat and if yea take it, yourself being a
Brahmana, both of us will go down to re-
gions of misery in the next world.


Vishwamitra said :—

85.- By committing this sin to-day T shalt”
certainly- save my life which is very sacred.
Having saved my life 1 shall afterwards
practise virtue and purify my soul. Yell
me which of these two is preferable.


The Chandala said:—


86. One's own self isthe best judge,
while discharging the duties of his ‘own
caste or family, You yourself know which
of those two acts is sinful. He who would
consider dog’s meat as pure food, I. think,
would not shrink from taking anything and
everything.


Vishwamitra said :—


87. There issin in accepting (an un-
clean present) or in eating (unclean food).
When one’s life is in peril, there is no sin
in accepting such a present or eating such
food. Besides, the eating of unclean food,
when it does ‘not involve destruction and
deception and when the act will excite only
mild rebuke, is not a very important
matter,


1 The Chandala said :—


88. If this be your argument for taking
impure food, it is then evident you do nut
respect the Veda and Aryan morality.
Taught by what you are about to do, I see,
O foremost of Brahmanas, there is no sin
in neglecting the difference between pure
and impure food.’ - ,


Vishwamitra: said :—'
89. Itis not seen that a person cammit¢


238


a grave sin by taking interdicted food. It
is only an oral precept which says that one
becomes fallen by drinking wine. The other
forbidden acts,—in fact, every sin,—cannot
destroy one’s mecit.


The Chandala said :—


go. That learned man who takes away
dog’s meat from an unworthy place like
this}, from an impure wretch (like me),
from an wicked man (like me), commits
an att which is mever done by the good.
On the other hand for his connection with
such act, he is sure to undergo the pangs of
repentance.


Bhishma said :— -


ot. Having said these words to Kushi-
ka’s son, the Chandala became silent.
Vishwamitra then, of refined understand-
ing, took away that haunch of dog’s meat.


92. Having secured that piece of dog’s
meat for saving his life, the great ascetic
took i¢ away into the forest and wished
with his wife to eat it.


93. He thought that having first duly
pleased the gods, he should then eat that
haunch of dog’s meat at his pleasure.


94. Lighting up a fire according to the,
Brahma rites, the ascetic, in pursuance of
the rites of Aindragneya, began himself to
cook that meat into sacrificial Charu,


93. He then, O Bharata, began to per-
form the ceremonies in honor of the gods
and the departed manes, by dividing that
Charu into as many parts a$ were necessary,
according to the injunctions of the scrip-
pe and by invoking the gods headed by

nara. ?


96. Meanwhile, the king of ‘the gods
began to pour profusely, Reviving all
creatures by those showers, he made plants
and herbs grow once more,


97. However, having completed the rites
in honor of the gods and the Pitris and
having pleased them duly, Vishwamitra,
himself took that meat.


g8. Consuming all his sins afterwards
by his penances, the sage after a long
time, gained the most wonderful (ascetic)
success.


99. Thus, having the preservation of life
itself in view, a high-souled person, endued
with learning and acquainted with means,
should rescue his own cheerfess self when
fallen into distress, by all means in his
power.


too. With such a view one should
always preserve his life. A person, if alive,
can acquire religious merit and enjoy hap-
piness and prosperity.


MAHABHARATA.


-tot. Therefore, O son of Kunti, 4
person of purified soul and endued with
learning should live and act in this wortd,
depending upon his own intelligence in
ascertaining virtue and vice.’


teamed
CHAPTER CXL.


(APADDHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).— Continued.


Yudhisthira said :-—


1. ‘Ifsucha terrible act which should
always be discarded like falsehood, be
pointed (as duty), then what act is there


from which I should forbear? Why
also should not robbers then be
honored ?


2. Lam stupefied! My heart is pained.
All the bonds that tie me to morality are
loosened. I cannot conrpose my mind
and dare act in the way pointed out by
you.


Bhishma said :—

‘I do not instruct you regarding duty,
taught by what I have heard from the
Vedas alone. What I have told you isthe
result of wisdom and experience. This
is the honey that the learned have
gleaned.


4. Kings should collect wisdom from
various sources. One camnot go success-
fully through the worldly course with the
help of a one-sided morality,


5. Duty must originate from the under-
standing! and the practices of the good
should always be determined, O' son of
Kuru. Obey these words of mine.


6. Only kings of superior intelligence
can rule, expecting victory. A king by
the help of his understanding and guided
by knowledge gathered from various sour~
cés, should so arrange that moral laws may
be observed. :


7. The duties of a king cam never be
satisfred by rulesdrawn from a oneesided
morality. A weak king can never show
wisdom for his not having drawn it from
the examples before him.


8. Righteousness sometimes appears like
unrighteousness. The latter also some-
times appears like the former. He who
does not know this, becomes confused when
an actual instance presents itself before
him. Before the time comes, one Should,
O Bharata, understand the circumstances,
under which righteousness and its opposite
become confused,

C


SHANTI PARVA.


9. Having gained this knowledge, a
wise king should, when the time comes,,act
accordingly, helped by his judgment. is
acts at such atime are misunderstood by
ordinary people.


10. Some persons are endued with true
knowledge. Some persons have false
knowledge. Truly determining the ‘nature
of each kind of knowledge, a wise king
derives knowledge from the good.


t1. The violators of moral Jaws find
fault with the scriptures. They who have
themselves no money, point out the incon-
sistencies of the works on the laws of
wealth.


12. Those who wishto gain knowledge
merely for carrying their sustenance, are,
O king, sinful. besides being enemies of
morality.


13. Wicked men of unripe understand-
ings, can never know things truly, as persons
ignorant of scriptures are unable in all their
acts to be guided by reason.


14. Always seeing the faults of the scrip-
tures, they decry them. Even if they un-
derstand the true import of the scriptures,
they are still in the habit of saying that
scriptural injunctions are unsound.


15. By decrying the knowledge of others,
such men announce the superiority of their
own knowledge. They .have words for
their weapons and arrows and speak, as if
they are well grounded in those sciences.


& 16. Consider them, O Bharata, as
traders in learning and Rakhasas among
men. By the help of mere pretext they
renounce that morality, which has been
established by good and wise men,


17. We have heard that the .texts of
morality cannot be understood by either
discussion or one’s own intelligence. Indra
himself has said that such isthe opinion of
the sage Vrihaspati.


18. Some hold that no scriptural text
has been written without a reason, Others
again, even if they properly ‘understand
the scriptures, never follow them,


19. One section of wise men say that
morality is nothing else than the approved
conduct of the world. The man of true
knowledge should find out for himself the
moral laws laid down for the good, ’


20, If even a wise man speaks of mora-
lity when he is angry or bewildered or
ignorant, his speech produces no effect.


at. Discourses on morality made with

the help of an intelligent understanding of

the true letter and spirit of the- scriptures,

should be lauded and not those which are
4


219


made with the help of anything else. Sen-
sible words, even if heard from an ignorant
person, are regarded as pious and wise.


22. In daysof yore, Ushanas said to
the Daiteyas this truth, which dispells all -
doubts, that scriptures are no scriptures if
they cannot stand the crucible test of
reason,


23. The possession or absence of doubt-
ful knowledge is the same thing. You
should root out and drive off such know-
ledge. .


24. He who does not listen to these
words of mine, is to be known fas one who
has suffered himself to be misguided. Do
you not observe that you were created for
the performance of terrific deeds ?


26. See me, O dear child, how, by
following the duties of my own order, I have
sent innumerable Kshatriyas to heaven!
‘There are some who are not pleased with’
me for this.


26. Goat, horse, and Kshatriya, were
created by Brahman for the same purpose
(of being useful to everybody), A Ksha-
triya, therefore, should always seek the
happiness of all creatures,


27. The sin of killing a person wenaeiled
of being killed is tantamount to that whic
is incurred by not killing one who deserves
to be killed. Such is the established order
of things which a weakeminded king never
thinks of attending to.


28. Therefore, a king should force all
his subjects to observe their respective
duties. If this is not done, they will prowl
like wolves, devouring one another. :


29. He is a wretch among Kshatriyas in
whose kingdem robbers go about pillaging
the property of other people like crows
taking little fishes from water.


30. Appointing high-born men with
Vedic knowledge as your ministers, do you
govern the Earth, protecting your subjects
piously. . : ‘

gt. That Kshatriya who, innocent of
the established customs and contrivances,
improperly taxes his people, is considered
as a eunuch of his order. |

32. A king should neither - be serve
nor mild. If he rules fairly he deserves
praise. A king should not renounce both
the qualities ; on the other hand, becoming
severe when (it is necessary), he should be
mild when it is necessarry to be so,

33. The observance of Kshatriya duties
is highly difficult. I love you greatly.
You are created for the performance of
severe acts, Therefore, do you rule king-
dom, :


F224
34. The highly imtelligent Shakra has


duty of a king is to punish the wicked and
protect the good.’


Yudhishthira, said :—

35.
royal duties) which should, under no cir-
cumstances, be violated 2? I ask you this,
O foremost of virtuous persons! ‘Fell me,
O grandfather.”


Bhishma said :—
36.


penanees, and observant of Vedic injune-
tions,
duty,

37. Youshoufd alwaystreat the Brah-
manas like the gods. The Brahmanas,
if enraged, can inflict pains in a variety
of ways, O king.

38. If they be pleased, you will win high
fame. If otherwise, great will be your fear,
If pleased, the Brahmanas become like
ambrosia. If enraged, they become like
poison.”


Snead


CHAPTER CXLIIE


(APADDHARMANUSHASANA
, PARVA).—Continued,


Yudhisthira said :—


1. “O grandfather, O you of great wis-
dom, O you who are a master of scriptures,
tell me what the merit is of one who
supports a person seeking his protec-
tion,”


Bhishma said :—

2. ‘Great is the merit, O king, in sup-
porting a suppliant. Itis worthy of you,
O best of the Bharatas, to ask such a
question, —- Foote

3. Those great kings of yore, wiz., Shivi
and others, O king, acquired supreme
heavenly bliss by having supported sup-
pliants. : os

4. We: have heard that a_ pigeon
received reverentially a suppliant enemy
according to due rites and even fed him
with his own flesh.’


Yudhisthira said :-— ;

5. ‘How, indeed; did a pigedn in days of
yore feed a suppliant enemy with his own
flesh? What end, QO Bharata, did he win
by such conduct.”,


“Ts there any such rule (regarding :


‘One should always adore Brah- |.
manas respected for fearning, devoted to |


This, indeed, is a high and sacred |


| eyes were blood red.


MAHABUARATA


ae, , . Bhishma said :—
said that ia times of distress the great [


6q ‘Listen, O king, to this most beauti-
ful story which cleanses the hearer of every
sin, and which Bhrigu’s son (Rama) had


recited to king Muchukunda.


7. This very question,O son of Pritha,
had been put humbly to Bhrigu’s son by
Muchukunda.


8. ‘Fhe son of Bhrigu described this


| story to him of how a pigeon, O king, wou


success,


The sage said :— .

9- Omighty-armed king, listen to. me
as I describe to you this story containing
lessons on Vistue, Profit, and Desire.


20. A wicked and dreadful fowler, re-


rsembling the Destroyer himself, used im
| days of yore to wander through the great


wilderness.

tt. He was black as a raven and his
He looked like

ama himself. He had _ long legs,
short feet, targe mouth, and protruding
cheeks.

1z. He had no friend, no celative,.
no kinsman... He had been discarded
by them all for the exceedingly cruel life
he led.

13. Indeed, a wicked man should be
shunned from a distance by the wise, for he.
who injures his ownself cannot be expected
to do others good.

14. Those cruel and wicked men who.
destroy the lives of other creatures are
always like venomous snakes, a source of,
trouble to all creatures. ;

15. Taking his nets with him, and
killing birds in the forests, he used to self
the meat, O Ring. / :

16. Thus working, the wicked wretch
lived for many long years” without
ever understanding the sinfulness of his
life.

17. He was in the habit of sporting with
his wife in the forest for many long years:
in the pursuit of this profession, and, stupe-
fied by destiny, he liked no other profes-
sion.


18. One day as he was wandering
through the forest carrying on his business,
a great storm took place that shook the
trees, almost uprooting them.

1g. In’a moment dense masses of clouds
set in the sky, accompanied with lightning,
and presenting the view of a sea covered
with merchant boats and vessels. :

20. The god of a hundred sacrifices
having entered the clouds with a profuse

€


SHANTI


supply of rain, the Earth became flooded
with water in a moment. :


*
2t. While the rainfell in torrents, the
fowler lost his senses from fear. Trem-
bling with cold and stricken with fear, he
roamed through the forest.


22. He could not find any elevated spot
{which was not under water). ‘he paths of
the forest were all under water.


z3. For the force of the rain, many
birds dropped dowa dead on the ground.
Securing some elevated spots they had
found,lions and bears and other animals lay
down to rest.


24. All the dwellers of the forest were
stricken with fear for that dreadful storm
and rain, ‘Terrified and hungry, they
roved through the forest in small and large
packs,


25. With limbs benumbed by cold, the
fowler, however, could neither stop where
he was, nor could he move. While in this
state he saw a she-pigeon lying on the
ground, benumbed with cold.


26. Beholding the bird, the sinful person,
though he himself was in no better circums-
tances, picked her up and put her ina cage,
Himself afflicted with distress, he did not
hesitate to overwhelm a_ fellow-creature
with painful affliction. :


27. Indeed, through force of habit alone,
the wretch committed that sin even at such
atime. He then saw in the midst of that
wood a huge tree blue as the clouds.


28. It was the refuge of numberless
birds seeking shade and shelter, as if it
were placed there by the Creator for the
behoof of all creatures like a good man in
the world,


29. Soon the sy cleared and became
spangled with myriads of stars appearing
like a splendid lake smiling with blooming
lilies.

30. Looking at the clear sky, rich with
stars, the fowler began to advance, still
trembling with cold. Seeing the sy
cleared of clouds, he looked around and
finding that he had already been benighted,
he began to think,


31. My house is at a great distance from
where 1 am !—He then thought of passing
the night under the shade of that tree.


32. Bowing down to it with clasped
hands, he addressed that k'ng of the forest,
saying,~—I seek refuge with all the gods
who have this tree for their resting place.


33. Having said so, he spread seme
leaves for a bed, and laid himself down on
it, placing his head ona stone, In spite.

3


PARVA. 221


of his being overwhelmed with afff.ction,
the man soon fell asleep.” :


CHAPTER CXLIV.


(APADDHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA.)—Continued,


Bhishma said :—


1. ‘In one of the branches of that tree, ‘es
pigeon having beautiful feathers, O king
lived for many years with his family. :


2. That morning his wife had gone out
in quest of food but had not yet come
back. Seeing the approach ef night and
his wife still not returning, the bird began
to bewail, saying,— 7 ;


3. O, what a great storm and a terrible
shower took place to-day! Alas, you have’
not come back yet, O dear wife! Woe is
on me, what must be the cause of her not
returning yet, j


4. Is everything right with that dear
wife of mine in tlre forest? Separated
from her, this my home appears to me
void.


5. A_ house-holder’s home, even if
filled with sons, grandsons daughters-in-
law and servants, is regarded empty if
there isne housewife.


6. One’s house is not his home; one’s
wife only is his home. A louse without the
wife is desolate like a forest, ~ oe


z. If that dear wife of mine, having red
eyes, variegated plumes, and sweet voice,
does not return to-day, my life itself will
have no value. *


8. Practising most excellent vows, she
never eats before leat, and never bathes
before | bathe. She never sits before
I sit down, and never lies before I lie
down, : “2


g. She rejoices when I rejoice, and
becomes sorry when | am sorry. She is
cheerless when I am away, and she is all
sweetness when I am angry.


to. Always devoted to her husband and
ever relying upon him, she always did what -
was agreeable to and beneficial for her lord.
Indeed, such a person deserves praise on
Earth who has such a wife.


11. That amiable creature knows that
Tam worn out and hungry. Devoted to
me and firm in her love, my genial wife is
devout in her adoration to me. . : '

12. Even the foot of a tree is one’s home,
if he lives there with his wife as a compa-


222


nion. Without one's wife, even a palace is
a desolate forest.


13. One’s wife is his companion in all
his acts of virtue, profit and desire.
When one starts for a strange country his
wife is his trusted cotnpanion.


14. It is said that the wife isthe richest
treasure of her husband. In this world the
wife is the only companion of her husband
in all the worldly affairs,


15. “Fhe wife is the best of pamaceas in
sickness and woe.


16, There is no friend like wife. There
is no refuge better than the wife. There is
no better associate in the world than the
wife in acts undertaken for the acquisition
of religious merit.


17. He who has not in his house a wife,
chaste and of sweet speech, should go to
the forest, For such a one there is no
difference between a home and a forest,


CHAPTER CXLV.


(APADDHARMANUSHASANA.
PARVA)}—Continued.


Bhishma said :—


1. Hearing these piteous cries of the
pigeon on the tree, the she-pigeon caught
by the fowler began to say aside thus,


The she-pigeon said :—

2. WhetherI have any merit or not,
indeed, there is no limit to my good for-
tune when my dear husband thus speaks
of me.


3. She is no wife with whom her hus-
band is not pleased. If their husbands are
pleased with’ women all the gods also
become pleased with them.


4. Since the marriage union takes place
in the presence of fire, the husband is the
wife’s greatest god.

5. That wife with whom her husband
is not pleased is reduced to ashes, like a
oeret adorned with flowers ,in a forest

re.


6. Having thought thus, the she-pigeon,
stricken with woe, and encaged by the
fowler, thus spoke to her woe-stricken hus-
band.

zy. TI shall say what is now good
for you. Hearing me follow my advice,
O dear husband, be yuo the rescuer of a
suppliant,


MAHABHARATA.


8. This fowler lies here by your house
stricken with cold and hunger. Treat him
hospitably.

9. Thesin that a person commits by
killing a Brahmana or that mother of the
world, viz., a cow, is equal to what one
commits by allowing suppliant to die.


to. You are endued with the knowledge
of self. You should, therefore, follow that
course which has been ordained for us as
pigeons on account of our birth.


11. We have heard that the house-hold-
er who practises virtue according to his
abilities, acquires hereafter endless regions
of bliss.


12. Youhavesons. You have progeny.
O bird, casting off all love for your own
body, therefore, and for acquiring virtue
and profit, adore this fowler so that he may
be pleased.


13. Do not, O bird, grieve for me.
You may live, marrying other wives.


14. The amiable she-pigeon, laden with
sorrow, and casting her eyes upon her
husband from the fowler’s cage within which
she had been put, said these words to him.’


CHAPTER CXLVI.


(APADDHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continued,. -


Bhishma said :—


1. Wearing these words of morality and
teason spokeu by his wife, the pigeon was
filled with great delight and his eyes were
bathed in tears of joy. «,


2. Seeing that fowler whose profession
was to kilf birds, the pigeon honored
him scrupulasly according to scriptural
rites.


3. Addressing him, he said,—You are
welcome to-day. Tell me what I shall do
for you. You should not repent. This is
your home.


4. Tell me quickly what I am to do and
what is your pleasure. 1 ask you this in
good spirit, for you have sought protection
of us. :


5. Ulospitality should be shown to even
one’s enemy when the fatter comes to his
house. ‘The tree does not withdraw its
shade from even the person who comes for
cutting it down.

6. One should, with diligence do the
duties of hospitality towards a person who
seeks shelter, Indeed, one is particularly


£


SHANTI PARVA:


bound to do so if he leads the lifé of
a house-holder that consists of the five
Sacrifices.


7. If one, while living like a house-holder,
does, not from want of judgment, ¢elebrate
the five sacrifices, one loses, as laid down
in the scriptures, both this and the next
world.


8. Tell me then clearly and confidently
what your wishes are. I will accomplish
them all. Do not think of grieving.


9. Hearing these words of the bird, the
fowler replied to him, saying,—I am be-
numbed with cold. Just make arcrangé-
ments for warming me.


Io. Thus addressed, the bird collected a
number of dry leaves on the groitnd, and
taking a leaf in his beaks quickly went
away for fetching fire.


t1—12. Going where fire is kept, he got
a little fire and returned. He then set fire
to those dry leaves, and when they blazed
up into a powerful fire, hejsaid to his guest,
Do you with confidence and fearlessness
warm your limbs, ,


13-18. Thus addressed, the fowler said
— So be it !—<and began to warm his stiffen-
ed limbs. Regaining as if his life; the fowler
said to his host,—Hunger is distressing me.
I wish you to give me some food !—Hearing
his words the bird said,~—I have nothing
in store by which you may satisfy your
hunger. ‘e, dwellers of the forest, always
live upon what we get every day,


16, Like the ascetics of the forest we
never amass for the morrow !—Having said
so, the bird’s face grew pale.

17. He began to think’aside as to what
he should do and mentally blamed his own
mode of living.


--18. Soon, however, his mind became
clear, Addressing the destroyer of birds,
he said,—I shall please you!—Wait for a
moment !


19-20. Saying these words he lighted
tip a fire with the help of some dry leaves,
and filled with joy, said,—I heard formerly
from great Rishis, gods and Pitris that
there is great merit in honoring a guest.


2t. O amiable one, be kind tome, To
tell you the truth my heart is bent upon
honoring you my guest.


22. Having thus made up his mind, the
great bird, with a smiling face, thrice went
found that fire and then entered its flames.


23. Seeing the bird enter that fire, the
fowler began to think! and asked himself,
— What have I done,


224


24. Alas; dreadful will be the sin, the
outcome of my own acts. am highly
ruthless and blameable.


25. Indeed, seeing the bird lay down
his life, the fowler, considering his own acts,
began to bewail thus pitiously.;


CHAPTER CXLVIt.


(APADDHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—<Continued.


BShishma said :—

1—2.' Beholding the pigeon fall inte
the fire, the fowler filled with compassion
once more said,—Alas, cruel and senseless.
that I am, witat have I done! I am, forsooth,
a mean wretch! Great will be my sin
which will last for ever. ;


3. Thus censuring himself he began ta
say again and again,—I do not deserve
any credit! My understanding is wicked!
1 am ever sinful !


4. Atlas, renouncing all sorts of honor-
able occupaticn, 1! have become a fowler
A cruel wretch that 1 am, forsoeth, this
noble pigeon, by sacrificing his own life;
has taught me a great lesson.

5. Renouncing wives and sons, I shalf
certainly cast off my very life which is so
dear! The great pigeon has taught mé
that duty.

6. From this day, denying every coms
fort to my body, I shall exhaust it like a
shallow tank in sunimer,

qj. Capable of bearing hunger, thirst;
and penances, and being emaciated with
veins visible all over, 1 shall by various sorts ,
of fasts, practise such vows as wilt take
me to the other world.

8. Alas, by giving up his body the
pigeon has shown how a guest should be
adored! Taught by his example, 1 shall
hereafter practise righteousness. Righte~
ousness is the greatest refuge! Indeed, I
shall practise the righteousuess shown by
the virtuous pigeon, that foremost of all
winged creatures.


9. Having thus made up his mind and
said these words, that fowler, once of
dreadful deeds, started on a journey
never to end, observing all the while the
most rigid vows.

to. He threw away his strong staff, his
sharp iromn-stick, his nets and springes,
and his iron cage, and liberated the she-
pigeon that he had caught and imprisoned.’


— eae


224
CHAPTER CXLVIIL


(APADDHARMANUSHASANA
‘ PARVA).— Continued. :


Bhishma said :—


1. After the fowler fad left there, the
she-pigeon, remembering her husband and
stricken with grieffor him, wept profusely
and bewailed thus :—


2. I cannot, O dear husband, remember
a single instance of your having done me
an injury! -Widows, even when they are
mothers of many children, are still miser-
able! Bereft of husband, a woman be-
comes helpless and att object of pity to
her friends,


3. 1 was always supported by you and
for the great respect you had for me I was
always bonored by you with sweet, agree-
able, charming, and deligutful words. —


4. TF sported with you in valleys,
springs and on charming trees.


5. Iwas also made happy by you while
passing with you through the skies! I used
to sport with you before, O dear husband,
but where are those joys now.


6. The gifts of the father, of the
brother, and of tthe son to a woman are
but limited. But unlimited are the gifts
that her husband alone makes to her!
What woman is there that would not,
therefore, worship her husband. .


7. A woman has no protector like her
husband, and no happiness like her hus-


in


band. Casting off ali her riches and posses-:


” sions, a woman should follow her husband
as her only refuge.


‘8. Useless is life to me, O lord, now
that | am separated from you! What
chaste womah is there who would, when
bereft of her husband, venture to bear the
burden of life,


.g. Hilled with sorrow and bewailing
thus, the she-pigeon, devoted to her hus-
band cast herself on the burning fire.


to. She then saw her husband be-
decked with bracelets, seated on a (celestial)
car, and worshipped of many great and
Meritorious beings standing around him.


tt. Indeed, there he was in the sky,
decked with excellent garlands and clad in
excellent robes, and adorned with every
ornament ‘There were numberless celestial
cars around him ridden by beings who had
acted meritoriously while in this world. -


12. Seated on his own celestial car, the
bird went to heaven, and getting proper
honors for his deeds in this world, con-


_ MAHABHARATA,


tued to sport in joy, accompanied by hig
spouse,


——


CHAPTER CXLIX.


(APA DDHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continued,


Bhishma said :—


1. ‘lt so chanced that the fowler, G
king, saw that pair while seated on their
celestial car. Seeing the couple he be-
came filled with sorrow and began to think
of the means of acquiring the same end.


2. And he said to himself,—I must, by
austerities like those of the pigeon, acquiré
such a high end!—Having made this
resolution; the fowler, who had lived by
the destruction of birds, started on am
unreturning journey,


3. Without any attempt (for getting
food) and living upon air alone, he
renounced all other desires for acquiring
heaven,


4. After he had gone for some distance;
he saw an extensive and charming lake
full of cool and pure water, adorned with
lotuses and abounding with various sorts of
water-fowl.


5—6. Forsooth, the very sight of such
alake is capable of satisfying the thirst
of a person. Physically reduced with
fasts, the fowler, however, O king, without
casting his eyes upon it, gladly entered
into a forest inhabited by beasts of prey,
having previously learnt its wide extent.
After ahad entered the forest, he was
painfully cut by sharp-pointed thorns.


7~- Cut and torn by prickles, and bathed
in blood, he began to wander in that forest,
shorn of men but abounding with animals
of various species,


8. Sometime after, on account. of the
friction of some huge trees caused by a4
strong wind, a wide spread forest-fire
arose.


. The raging element, appearing
like the fire at the end of the Cycle, the
powerful fire began to consume that large
forest abounding with tall trees and thick
bushes and creepers,


io. Indeed, with flames fanned by the
wind and numberless sparks flying about’
in all directions, the all-consuming god
began to consume that dense forest teem<
ing with birds and beasts.


11. The fowler, desirous of renouncing
his body, ran with a delighted heart to
wards that spreading fire.

t


4


SHANE


.2. Consumed by that fire ‘the fowler
became purged of all his sins and acquired,
‘O best of the Bharatas, high success.


13. The anxiety of his mind gone,
he at last saw himself in heaven, shining
like Indra in the midst of Vakshas and
Gandharvas and persons endued with
ascetic success.


14. Thus the pigeon and his devoted wife,
with the fowler, went to heaven for their
‘meritorious acts.


‘15. The woman who thus follows her
husband speedily ascends to heaven and
shines there like the she-pigeon of whom I
have spoken.


‘16. This is the ancient history of the
great fowler and the pigeon. Thus did
they acquire highly meritorious end by
their righteous acts.


17. No evil overtakes the person who
listens every day to this story or who recites
it every day, even if error possesses his
“mind, :

18. O Vudhishthira, O foremost of all
righteous persons, the protection of a sup-
pliant is, indeed, a great act of merit. By
following this duty, even the killer of a
cow may be cleansed of sin.


19. That man, however, will never be
cleansed who kills a supplianm. By listening
to thistsacred and sin-destroying story one
becomes freed from distress and goes to
heaven at last.’


CHAPTER CL.


- (APADDHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).— Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—~


t%. ‘O best of the Bharatas, when a
person commits sin from want of discrimi-
nation, how may he be purified by it? Tell
me all about it.”


Bhishma said :—~

2."' It this connection [ shall recite to you
the old narrative, spoken highly ot by the
Rishis, of what the twice-born Indrota, the
son of Shunaka, said to Janamejaya.


3. There was, in days of, old, a highly
energetic king, called Janamejaya, who
was the son of Parikshit. On one occasion
frota want of discrimination, that sking be-
came guilty of Barhmanicide.

4, Upon this, all~the Brahmanas to-
gether with his priests, cast him off,


29


PARVA, :. 225.


retired into the forest.


‘5. ‘Desertéd by his subjects too, he
adopted this ourse for acquiring great
merit. Reduced by repentance, the king
practised the most rigid austerities,


6. For purifying himself of the sin of
Brahmanjcide he asked many Brahmanas,
and travelled’ from‘one country to ane
other over the whole Earth. ao

7. 1 shall now tell you the ‘story of his
expiation. -Burning with the recollection.
of his sin, Janamejaya wandered about.


8. One day, in course of his peregrena~
tions, he met Indrota, the soa ef Shunaka,
of rigid vows, and approaching him touch«
ed his feet.


g. Seeing the king before him, the sage
reproved him, saying,—You have com«
mitted a great sin. You have beetk
guilty of foeticide. Why have you coma
here.


10. What have you to do with! us?, Da
not touch me! Go, go away! Your pré«
sence does not give us pleasure ! *


11. Your body smells like blood. You
Jook like a corpse. Though impure, you
appear as pure, and though dead you move
like a living being! ef aon

12. Dead within, you are of impure soul
for you always wish to commit sins
‘Though you sleep, and wake, your Tife,.
however, is spent in great misery.


13. _ Useless is your life, O king. You
live most miserably. You have been
created for ignoble and sinful acts.


14. Fathers wish for sons for obtaining
various kinds of blessings, and hoping they
would perform penances and sacrificesy
adore the gods, and practise renuncia~
tion,


15. Seeall your ancestors have faltert
into hell for your-acts, Alt the hopes your
fathers had placed upon you have beer
frustrated.


16. You live in vain, for you, always
entertain hatred and malice towards the
Brahmanas,—by worshipping whom other
men acquire long life, fame, and
heaven.


18. Leaving this world, you shall have ta
fall (into hell) with head downwards and
remain in that posture for numberless years
for your sinful deeds.


18. There you will be tortured by vul-
tures and peacocks having iron beaks.
Returning thence into this world, you will
be born again In a wretched order of crea
tures,


Burning day and hight with grief, the king


226


19. If you think, O king, that this
world is nothing and that the next world is
but a shadow, the attendants of Yama in
the infernal regions will convince you,
removing your scepticism.


ements


CHAPTER CLI.


_ APADDHARMANUSHASANA
‘ PARVA).—Continued.


Bhishma said :—


i. Thus accusted, Janamejaya replied
to the sage, saying,— You chastise one who
deserves to be chastised. Vou censure one
who is worthy of being censured.


2. You blame me and my acts. I beg
you to bekind tome! All my acts have
been sinful, 1 burn, however, with repen-
tance as if 1 am in the midst of burning
fire, . ‘ i

3- Remembering my deeds, I am
cheerless. Indeed, I am much afraid of
Yama. _ ss, :


= 4, How can I live without taking out
that dart from my heart? O Shaunaka,
suppressing all your anger, imstruct: me
now


5, Fortnerly 1 used to show a great
reverence to Brahmanas.. I |solemnly:’ say
that I shall once more show the same res-
pect to them. Let not my family be
extinct. Let not the family in which | am
born be reduced to the dust.


6. It is not proper that. they who have
injured Brahmanas and have for that, on
account of Vedic injunctions, forfeited
all claim to the respect of the world and to
social intercourse with their fellowmen,
should have any one who will continue the
name of their family.


7. Yam overwhelmed with despair.. I,
therefore, repeat my promises. I pray you
to protect me like sages who always protect
the poor,


8, Abstaining from sacrifices, sinful
persons never attain to heaven. Leaving
(this world), they have to pass their time
in hell like the degraded tribes of Pulindas
and Khasas.

9. Ignorant as I am, give me wisdom
like a learned preceptor to his pupil or like
a father to his son. Be pleased with me, O
Shaunaka! ~


Shaunaka said :—
10. What wonder is there that an igno-
rant wight should do many improper acts ?


MAHABHARATA,


Knowing this, a really wise person is never
angry with foolish creatures.


11. By getting upon the tep of wisdom’s
palace, one grieves for others, his own self
being then too pure to be grieved by others.
For his wisdom one surveys all creatures
in the world like a person on a mountains
top seeing people below. .


12, The person who is censured by good
men, who hates good men and who hides
himself from their view, never acquires any
blessing and never understands the fitness
of acts.


15. You know the energy and the
nobility of the Brahmana as laid down in
the Veda and other scriptures. Act now
in such a way that you may have tranguil-
lity of heart and fet Brahmanas be your
refuge.


14. ff the Brahmanas donot be angry
with you, you will, forsooth, enjoy happiness
inheaven. H, again, you repent for sins.

our sight will be clear and you will succeed
in seeing righteousness.


Janamejaya said :—

15. lam repenting for my sins. 1 will
never again try to suppress victue. I wish
to obtain blessedness. Be you pleased
with me,


Shaunaka said :--


16. Removing arrogance and pride, O
king, 1 wish you to respect me. Do
good to all creatures, always remembering
the dictates of virtue.


17. am not blaming you from fear or
narrowness of mind or covetousness.
Listen now, with these Brahmanas here, to
the words of truth.


18 I do not ask for anything. I shall,
however, instruct you in the ways of virtue.
All persons will croak and bray and cry fie
on me.


ig. They will even call me sinful. My
kinsmen and friends will renounce me.
However, hearing the words I speak, my
kinsmen and friends will surely succeed in
vigorously crossing the difficulties of life.


20. The wise will understand me
aright. Know, Ochild, what are my views,
O Bharata, regarding the Brahmanas.


2t. Do you act in such a way that they
may, through my efforts, obtain every


blessing! Do you also, O king, promise
that you will not again injure the
Brahmanas.


Janamejaya said :—


| 22a iE swear, touching even your feet,


SHANTI PARVA,


that shall never again, ia thought, word,
Or deed, harm the Brahmanas,


coe


CHAPTER CLIL


(APADDHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Contenued.


Shaunaka said :—


1. [shall for these reasons describe to
you virtue, you whose heart has been ex-
ceedingly agitated. Endued with know-
ledge, great strength, and a contented
heart, you seek virtue of your own accord,


2. First becoming exceedingly stern, a
king then shows metcy and does good to
all creatures by his acts. ‘This is certainly
very wonderful.


3. Peopte say that that king who begins
with sternness consumes the entire world.
You were stern before. But you now seek
righteousness.


4. Forsaking luxurious food and afl
articles of enjoyment, you are now practis-
ing rigid penances for a long time. All this,
O Janamejaya, is sure to appear wonderful
to those kings who are sunk in sin. .


5. It is not at all wonderful that he who
has wealth should become liberal, or that he
who has wealth of asceticism should be-
come unwilling to spend it. It has been
said that the one dees not live far off from
the other.


6. An ilt-judged thing produces enough
of miseries. That, on the other hand,
which is done with the help of sound
judgment yields excellent results.


q- Sacrifice, gift, mercy, the Vedas, and
truth, O king,—these five,—are purifying.
The sixth is penance well-practised, ‘Vhis
last, O Janamejaya, is highly purifying for
kings.

8. By following it duly, you are sure to
acquire great merit and blessedness. Pul-
grimage to sacred places has also been
described to be highly purifying.

g. Regarding it is cited the following
verse sung by Yayatit:—That mortal who
would acquire life and longevity should,
after having celebrated sacrifices with
devotion, renounce them and practise
penances.


10. The field of Kuru has been des-
cribed to be sacred. ‘The river Saraswati
is considered more so. The Ticthas of the
Saraswati are more sacred than the Saras-
wati herself; and the Yirtha called Prithu-
daka is more sacred than all the ‘Lirthas of


5


229


the Saraswati. One that has bathed ia
Prithudaka and drunk its waters will
not have to be sorry for a premature
death.


tf. You should go to Mahasaras, te all:
the Tirthas known by the name of Pushkara,
to Prabhasa, to the northern lake Manasa,
and to Kalodaka. You wil then regain
life and acquire longevity.

12, Lake Manasa is where the Saras+
wati and the Drishadwati join each other,
A person endued with. Vedic lore should
bathe in these places. Manu has said that’
liberality is the highest of all duties,
and that renunciation is better than libe-
tality.

" 13. Regarding it is cited the followin
verse composed by Satyavat. (One should
act) as a child full of simplicity and shorn
of either merit or sin.


14. For all cseatures there is in this
world neither misery nor happiness.
Such is the true nature of all living crea~
tures,


15. Of all creatures, they are superior
who have betaken themselves to renuncia-_
tion and abstained from acts both meri-
torious ahd sinful. {£ shall now tell you
those acts which are best for a king,


16. By showing your power and libera-.
lity do you ¢onquer heaven, O king. ‘That
man who is endued with might and energy
acquires righteousness, a


17, Do you govern the Earth, O king,
for the sake of the Brahmanas and for the
sake of happiness. You used formerly to
blame the Brahmanas. Do you please
them now, : :


18. Though they have censured youand*
though they have deserted you, do you still,
guided by knowledge of self, solemaly
promise never to injure them. Engaged in
becoming acts, try to do what is for your
highest good.


19. Amongst kings some one becomes
as cool as snow ; some one, as fierce as fire;
some one becomes like a plough i and
some one, again, becomes like a thun-
der-bolt. ;


20. He wha wishes to prevent self-des-
truction, should never mix with wicked
persons for general or particular pur-
poses. .


12. From a sinful act committed only
once, one may clear himself by repenting
for it. From an act committed twice, one
may purify himself by vowing never to re
peat the act.


228


22. From such an act committed thrice,
one may purify himself by determining to
act virtuously alt along afterwards. By
committing such an act again and again,
one may purify himself by visiting sacred
places. One who wishes to acquire pros-
perity should do all that yields blessed-
ness, ;


23. They who live amidst fragrance
themselves become fragrant by virtue there-
of, ‘hey, on the other hand, who live in
the midst of foul smell themselves become


Koul.


24. One who practises ascetic austeri-
fies is soon purged of all one’s sins. By
adoring the sacrificial fire for a year,
one sulli¢d ‘by various sins becomes
purified.

‘15. One guilty of foeticide is purified by
adoring the fire for. three years. One
guilty of foaticide becomes, purified fat even
a hundred Yojanas from Mahasara, or the
Tirthas called Pushkara, or Prabhasa, or
Manasa on the north, if only he sets out for
any of them.


26. -& slayer ‘of creatures is purged of
his sins by.saving from impending danger
as many creatures.of that particular kind
as have beety killed by him. :


27. -Manu has said that by diving in
water after reciting thrice the sin-destroy-
ing Mantras, one reaps the fruits of the
final bath in a Horse-sacrifice.


28. Such an act very soon purifies one
of alt his sins, and he becomes, once
again, the esteemed ofthe world. All
creatures obey such a person, like helpless
idiots.


29. Approaching, in days of yore, the
celestial preceptor Vrihaspati, the gods and
Asuras, O king, humbly enquired of him,
saying,-You are cognizant, O | great
Rishi, of the fruits of virtue, as also the
fruits of those other acts which lead to hell
in the next world,


30. Can not that person free himself
from both virtue and sin who regards
the’ two (happiness and misery) equally ?
‘Tell us, O great Rishi, what are the fruits of
rigifgousness, and how does a virtuous
person remove his sins !


Vrihaspti answered :—

-3t. If, having committed sin through
foolishness, one performs meritorious acts
understanding their nature, he succeeds, by
such righteotisness, in cleansing “himself
from sin even asa piece of dirty cloth is
washed clean by 6ome saline substance.


32. One should not brag after having
poamdtted sin. By having fatth and by


MAHABHARATA.


freeing one’s self from malice, one acquires
blessedness.


33. That person who screens the faults
of good men, even when exposed, acquires
blessedness even after committing sins.


34. As the sun rising on the morning
remaves all darkness, so does one dissipate
all his sins by acting virtuously.


Bhishma said :— ¥

35. Having said these words to king
Janamejaya, Indrota, the son of Shunaka,
assisted him in the celebration of the
Horse-sacrifice, ;


36.. Purged of his sins, and regaining
blessedness, the king shone like a burning
fire, and that slayer of enemies then entered
his kingdom like Soma in his full form en-
tering the celestial region.” ;


—


CHAPTER CLIIL.


- (APAD DHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continued,


Yudhisthira said :—


1. ‘ Have you, O grandfather, ever seer
or heard of any mortal restored to life after
having met with death.”


Bhishma said :—


2. ‘Listen, O king, to the discourse’
between a vulture and a jackat as it took
place in days of yore. ‘This incident hap-~,
pened in the forest of Naimisha,


3. Once upon a time a Brahmana had,
after great difficulties, got a son of large
éyes. ‘Lhe child died of infantile convul-,
sions. :

4. Violently agitated by grief and be-
wailing aloud, some of his kinsmen took up
the litle boy who was the: only wealth of
his family. ;


5. Taking the dead child they went in:
the direction of the crematorium. Going’
there they began to take the child from one
another’s breast and cry more bitterly ir
sorrow. ; ‘


6. Remembering with sorrowful hearts
the former speeches of their minion again
and. again, they could not return home
casting the body on the naked earth,


7. Hearing their cries, a vulture came
there and said:—Go away, and do not
delay, you who have to cast off but one
child ?


t


SUANTI


8. Kinsmen always go away leaving
here thousands of men and women brought
here in course of Time.


9. See, the entire universe is subject to
happiness and misery. Union and dis-
unton are seen in turns.


to. They who have come to the crema-
tori.m with the dead bodies of their rela-
tives, and they who sit by those bodies
themselves go away from the world for
their own acts when the allotted periods of
their own lives expire.


11. Therejis no necessity of your wait-
ing in the crematorium, this dreadful place,
which abounds with vultures, jackals and
skeletons and fills every creature with
fear. -


12. Whether friend or enemy, no one
becomes alive having once yielded to the
power of Time. Such, indeed, is the des-
liny of all creatures.


13. In this world of mortals, every one
who is born is sure to: die. Who shall
restore to life one that is dead and gone
on the way ordained by the Destroyer ?


15. At this hour when men are about to
terminate theic daily labours, the Sun is
retiring to the setting: hills. Go to your
homes, renouncing this love for the
child.


15. Hearing these words of the vulture.
the grief of the kinsmen seemed to decrease,
aud placing the child on the naked earth
they were about to go away.


16. Knowing very well that the child
had died and giving up every hope to see
him again, they began to go back, bewailing
loudly. ‘

17. Firmly assured, and giving up all
hopes of restoring the dead to life, they cast
off that offspring of their’ family and pre-.
pared to turn back from that spot.


18 At this time a jackal, black asa
raven, came out of his hole and said to
those departing kinsmen, forsooth, you who
are kinsmen of that dead child have no af-
fection.


* 19. There the Sun still shines in the sky,
ye fools! Give vent to your feelings, fear-
lessly! Many are the virtues of the
hour. ‘Fhischild may regain its life.


20. Spreading a few blades of Kusha
grass on the ground and leaving that dear
child on the crematorium, why do you go
away with hearts of steel and renouncing
every affection for the darling.


at. Surely, you have no fove for that
sweet-speeched little child, whose words, as


PARYA, 229


soon as they left his lips, used to please you
greatly ! ; : ,


22. Mark the affection that even birds
and beasts cherish for their young ones
‘They get no return for rearing up their
young ones!

23. Like the sacrifice of the Rishis, thé
love of quadrupeds, of birds, and insects,
yields no reward in heaven.


24. Though they love their children,
they are never seen to derive any benefit
from the latter either in this world oc in the
next. Yet they love their young ones.


25. Growing up, their children never
maintain them in ape. Still do they not
feel pained when they do not see their little
ones ?


26. How is affection to be seen in
human beings since they only indulge in
rief? Where would you go leaving here
this child who is the perpetuater of his
family. '


27. Do you shed tears for him for some
time, and fook at him a little longer with
affection. It is difficult to cast off objects
which are so dear.


28. It is friends and not others who
wait by the side of the weak, of the
prosecuted in a court of law, and of him
who is borne towards the burning place.


2g. Life is dear to all, and all’ feel the
influence of love. See the affection that is
cherished by beasts and birds,


30. Howcan you go away, casting off
this boy having eyes large as the lotus
petal, and beautiful as a newly-wedded
youth washed clean and bedecked with
gaclands. - on

31. Hearing these words of the jackal
who ‘had been thus giving vent to ¢xpres- —
sions of grief, the men turned back for the
sale of the dead body.


The Vulture said :-—


32. Alas, -ye men shorn of strength of -
mind, why do ye tura back at the call of- a
cruel, mean and little-witted jackal.


33. Why do you lament for that com-
pound of five elements deserted by their
presiding gods, no longer occupied (by
the soul), motionless, and stiff as a piece .
of wood? Why do you not grieve for
your own selves. 12 . a


34. Do you practise austerities by which.
you will succeed in purifying yourselves.
from sin! Everything may be got by’
penances. What will lamentations do’? !


35. Death is born with the body. It is


230


for ill-luck that this boy has departed,
plunging you into infinite grief!


36. Wealth, kine, gold, precious gems,
children, all originate from penances.
Penances again are the outcome of Yoga.


37. Amongst creatures, the measure of
happiness or misery depends on. pristine
deeds. Every creature is born in the world,
taking with him his own measure of happi-
ness and misery.


38. The son is not fettered by the acts
of the father, or the father by those of the
son, Fettered by their own acts good and
bad, all have to wend this common road.


- 39. Duly follow all the duties, and
abstain from acts of untighteousness!
Reverentially wait, according to scriptural
injunctions, upon the gods and the
Brahmanas!


. 40. Shake off sorrow and _ cheerlessness,
and abstain from parental affection! Leave
the child on this open ground, and go
away forthwith.


4t. The doer alone reaps the fruits of
his good er bad acts. What concern have
kinsmen with them,


42. Leaving dead kinsman however
Gear, kinsman leave this spot. With
eyes full of tears, they go away, ceasing
to show affection for the dead.


43. Wise or ignorant, rich or poor,
every one yields to Time, endued with good
and bad acts.


44. OF what. use is mourning? Why

you grieve for the dead? Time is the

master of all, and he by his very nature
looks impartially on all things.


_ 45- In. proud youth or in helptess
infancy, in age or while lying in the

_ mother’s womb, every one is subject to be
attacked by Death. Such is the course
of the world.


The Jackal said :—


46. Alas, the love which you enter-
tain for your dead child, and manifested
in your sorrowing eyes and mournful looks,
has been lessened by that foolish vulture.


47- It is, indeed, so, since influenced
by his well-applied words teaching tran-
quility and capable of producing conviction,
that man there returns to the town, casting
off affection that is so hard to throw off.


48. Alas, 1 had thought that the grief
felt by men bewailing aloud for the death
of a child and for the corpse on a crema-
torium, is great like that of kine’ bereft of
calves,


#9. To-day, however, I perceive “the |


MAHABHARATA.


extent of grief of human beings or eartt.
Seeing their great affection I had shed
tears myself.


go. One should always exert.
and through destiny one succeeds.
tion and destiny, joining together,
fruits.


s§1. One should always exert hopefully.
How can happiness be secured from des-
pondency? Objects of desire may be
acquired by resolution. Why then do you
return so heartlessly ?


52. Where do you go, leaving in the
forest this your own begotten son, this
perpetuater of the race of his father.


53. Stay here till the sun sets and the
evening comes. You may then take away
this boy with yourselves or remain here
with him,


The Vulture said :—


54. I am, ye men, thousand years old
this day, but | have never seen a dead
creature, male or female or eunuch, revive
after death.


55. Some die in the womb; some die
soon after birth ; some die while crawling 3,
some die in youth; and some in old age.


56. The fortunes of all creatures, in-
cluding beasts and birds, are fickle. The
extent of life of all mobile and immobile
creatures is fixed beforehand.


57. Shorn of wives and dear ones and
filled with sorrow for children, men leave.
this spot every day with aggrieved hearts
for returning home.


51. Leaving here thousands of both
friends and enemies, kinsmen stricken with
grief go back to their homes,


59. Leave off this dead body which has
no longer any animal heat in it and which
is as stiff as a piece of wood. Why then
do you not go away, leaving the body of
this child which is like a piece of wood and
whose life has entered a new body ? ;

60. This your love has no meaning,
and this caressing of the child is useless.
He does not see with his eyes or heat
with ears.


61. Leaving him here, go away forth
with.


62. Thus addressed by me in words
which are seemingly cruel ‘but which in
teality are reasonable and are directly
connected with the great religion of emancis
pation, ceturn he to your respective homes, .


From it
Exers.
yield


63. Addressed thus by the vulture gifted
with wisdom and knowledge land. capa ble
of giving. intelligence and awakening the

Cc


SHANTI PARVA.


understanding, those men were about to
go away from the crematorium. Grief
becomes two-fold on seeing its object and
on remembering the acts of that object
(in life).

64. Having heard these words of the
vulture, the men resolved to leave that
place. Just at that time the jackal, coming
there quickly, spied the child lying in the
sleep of death.


The Jackal said :—


65. Why, indeed, do you leave, at the
vulture’s suggestion, this child bearing
golden hue, adorned with ornaments, and
capable of giving the obsequial cake to
his depnrted manes ?


66. If you abandon him, your love will
not terminate, nor these piteous cries. On
the other hand, your grief will multiply
itself,


67. We have heard that a Shudra
named Shamvuka having been killed and
virtue having been upheld by the powerful
Rama, a (dead) Brahmana child was
restored to life.


68. Likewise the son of the royal sage
Shweta had died (prematurely), But the


virtuous monarch succeeded in reviving his
dead child.


69.- Similarly, in your case also, some
sage or god may be willing to grant your
desire and show mercy to you that are
crying piteously.

70. Thus accosted by the jackal, the
men, stricken with yrief and full of affection
for the child, returned, and placing the
child’s head on their laps one after another,
began the bewail piteously. Hearing their
cries, the vulture, coming there, once more
spoke to them as follows.


The Vulture said :—


71. Why are you bathing this child
with your tears? Why are you pressing
him with your palms inthis way? At the
behest of the grim king of justice the child
has been sent to that sleep which will
never be broken, :


72. Those who have acquired the merit
of penanceés, those who are gifted with
wealth, those who are ‘endued with great
intelligence, in fact, all yleld todeath. This
is the place intended for the dead.

.73. {t is ‘always seen that casting off
thousands of kinsmen, young and old kins-
men pass their nights and days in grief,
rolling on the naked earth.


_ 7% Stop this ardour in putting on the
trappings of woe. It is impossible that
phis child would be restored to life again,


231


75. He will not regain his life at the
call of the jackal. If a person once dies
and deserts his body, his body never re-
gains animation. .


76. By sacrificing their own lives, hun-
dreds of jackals will not be able to revive
this child in hundreds of years.


77. (Vf, however, Rudra, Kumara, Brah-
man, or Vishnu, grant him a boon, then
only may this child be cestored to life.


78. Neither the shedding of tears, nor
the heaving of long sighs, nor profuse
jamentations, will restore this one to life.


79.. Myself, the jackal, you all, and all
the relatives of this one, with all our
virtues and sins, are wending the same
way. °

80. Therefore a wise man should, from
a distance, avoid behaviour that displeases
others, harsh words, the infliction of injury
on others, the cohabitation with other
people’s wives, and sin and falsehood,


81. Seek with care virtue, truth, the
good of others, justice, mercy for alt
Creatures, sincerity, and honesty.


82. They incur sin who, while living,
do not take care of theie parents, kinsmen
and friends, —


83. What will you profit by crying, for
him after death, who does not see with his
eyes and stir in the least,


84. Thus addressed, the men, laden
with sorrow and burning with grief on ac-
count of their love for the child, departed
for their homes, leaving the body.


Tne jackal said :—


85. Alas, dreadful is this world of
mortals! Here no creature can escape.
Every creature's life ts short. Beloved
friends are always going, ;

86. It is futl of vanities and falsehoods,
accusations and evil reports! Witnessing
again this incident which increases pain
and grief, 1 do not for a moment like this
world of men.


87. Alas, shame on you, ye men, who
thus return like foolish persons, on hear-
ing the vulture’s words, though you are
burning with grief on account of the death
of this child,


88. You cruel ‘men, how can you go
away, renouncing parental affection upon
hearing the words of a sinful vulture of
impure ‘soul, ‘ ,


89. Happiness is followed by misery,
and misery by happiness, In this world
which has both happiness and misery,
none of these two exists without break,


232


99% You little-witted men, where will
go, Casting off on the naked earth this
beautiful child, this son who is an orna-
ment of your family.


gt. Verity, Leannot conceive that this
child endued with grace, youth and beauty
is dead.


92. Itis not proper that he should die.
It seems that you are sure to gain happi-
ness. You who are stricken with grief
for the death of this child will, forsooth,
have good luck to-day. :


+93. Anticipating inconvenience and pain
and. seeking your own comfort, where will
you, like persons of fittle intelligence, go,
feaving this darling.


Bhishma gaid :—


9gi—95. Thus, O king, the kinsmen of
the dead child, unable to settle what they
should do, were, for fulfilling his own pur-
pose, induced by that sinful jackal -»hg
uttered sweet falselioods,—thyyt'“dweller of
the crematorium whgsr went there every


2 is ae at .
aay tit SHES of foods


The Vulture said:—


- 96. Dreadful is that spot, this wilder-
ness, which resounds with the screams of


owls and is filled with spirits and Yakshas.


and Rakshasas.


‘gz. tt appears dreadful like a mags of
blue clouds. Casting off the body, perform
the funeral rites.


~ 98. Throwing away the body, perform
those cites before the sun sets and before
the points of compass are: covered with
darkness,


99. The hawks are uttering hideous


cries. Jackals ace’ howling hideously.
Lions are roaring. The sun is setting.
too. The trees on the crematorium are


appearing dark for the blue smoke of the
funeral pyres. Stricken with hunger the
carnivorous animal are yelling in rage.


_ tot. All those creatures of dreadful
forms which live in this fearful place, all
those grim-visaged animals that haunt this
desert, will soon attack you. :

102, This forest is certainly dreadful.
Danger will beset you.

103. Indeed, if you listen to these fals@
and useless words of the jackal against


your own good sense, all of you will surely
meet with death,


The Jackal said :— .

. 104. Remain where you are. There is
no fear even in this desert as long as the
sun shines, Do you remain here hopefully,


MAHABHARATA.


moved by parental affection till the sun
sets.


105. Without any fear, bewailing as you
lease, continue to look at this child with
oving eyes. ‘Though this forest is dread-
ful, no danger will overtake you.


106. In sooth, this wilderness is quiet
and peaceful. It is here that the Pitris
by thousands departed from the world,
Wait as long asthe sun shines. Of what
avail are this vulture’s words to you ?


107. Jf, being stupefied, you follow the
cruel and harsh words of the vulture, then
your child will never regain life.


Bhishma said:— |

108. The vulture then said to those men,
that the sun had set. ‘The jackal said that
it was not so. Botl the vulture and the
jackas fell hungry and thus addressed the


. ‘ie. a PS et
kinsmen. vf ie dead duiia. -


tog. Both of them were determined
upon accomplishing their respective pur-
poses. Exhausted with hunger and thirst,
they thus quarrelled, taking advantage of
the scriptures. . .


" t10. Moved by these words, ° sweet as
ambrosia, of those two creatures, wis., the
bird and the beast, both of whom had
‘wisdom and knowledge, the kinsmen at one
time desired }to go away and at another
to remain there,


tir, At-tast, actuated by sorrow and
depression, they waited there, bewailing -
piteously. They did not know that the
beast and the bird, very clever in achieving
their ends, had only stupefied them (by
their words.) ; :


112. While both the hird and the beast
were thus dispuling and while the kinsmen-
of the dead child sat listening to them, the
great god Shankara, urged hy his diviné
consort (Uma), arrived there with eyes
bathed in tears of mercy. .


113114, Addressing the kinsmen of
the dead child, the god said,—I am Shan-
kara the granter of boons!—With hearts
laden with grief, those men laid them-
selves low before the great god and said
to him in reply,—Bereft of this our only
child, all of us are on the brink of déath..
Be you pleased to grant us life by granting
life to this our son.


115. Thus begged, the illustrious god,
taking up some water in his hands,
granted to that dead child life extending
for a hundred years. .


126. Ever engaged in the behoof of all
creatures, the illustrious holder of Pinaka


SHANT$ PARVA.


sfranted a boon to both the jackal and
the vulture for which theie hunger was
‘appeased,

‘117. Filled with joy and having gained
“great prosperity, the men bowed to the god.
Gaining success, they then, O king, left
that spot'in great glee.

118. Through continued  hopefulness
and firm determination and the grace of the
great god, the fruitg of one’s acts are
‘gained forthwith.


116. Mark the combination of circums-
‘tances and the determination of
‘kimsmen. While crying with heavy hearts,
their tears were wiped and dried up.


120. See, how within only a short time,
- ‘through their firmness -of resolution, they


‘gained the grace of Shankara, and their |


sorrows removed, they were made happy.
121. Indeed, through Shankara’s favour,


'O chief of the Bharatas, those scrrowing |


‘kinsmen were filled with wonder and joy at
‘the restoration of their child to life.

122, Then, O king, shaking off that
‘grief caused by theic child, those Brah-
‘manas, filled with joy, quickly returned to


their town, taking the restored child with |


‘them. Such a conduct has been laid down
for all the four castes.


133. By frequently listening to this aus-


picious story fraught with virtue, profit, |


and emancipation, a man acquires happi-
‘ness both in this world and the next,’


CHAPTER CLIV.
{APADDHARMANUSHA SANA
PARVA).—Continued,
Yadhisthird said-— —
1-3.


folly excite, by improper and boastful words,
a@ poweriul ewemy always living near him,


‘capable of doing: good and* chastising and -


always ready for action, how should the
former, relying on his own strength, act
when the latter proceeds against him in
anger for extirpating him?”


Bhishma said:—


4. ‘Regarding it is cited, O chief of
the Bharatas, the old discourse between
Shalmali and Pavana.


s§. There was a huge (Shalmali) tree on
‘one of the peaks of Himavat. Having
gtown for many hundred years, he had
spread out his branches wide around, Hig


30 -


those |


“Tf a weak, worthless and light- .
hearted person, O grandfather, does from |


233%


A t ioe eS
trunk also .was huge and his twigs and
leaves were numberless.


6. Under-his shade elephants, exhausted
and covered with temporal juice and sweat,
used to rest, and as also many other
animals. ; :

7. The circumference of his trunk was
four hundced cubits, and the shade of his
branches and leaves was dense. Laden
with flowers and fruits, it was the abode
of numberless parrots male and female.


8. While travelling, caravans of mer-
chants and traders, and ascetics living in
the forest, used to rest under the shade _ of
that charming king of the forest.


9—10. One day, O foremost of Bharata’s
race, seeing the wide-extending and num-«
berless branches of that tree: and the cir«
cumference of his trunk, the sage Narada,
approached and addressed him, saying,—
O, you are delightful! O, you are charms
ing! O foremost of trees, OQ Shalmali,
I am always pleased to see you,


11. O charming tree, beautiful birds of
various kinds, and ‘elephants and other
animals gladly live on ,your branches and
under their.shade.


12, Your branches, O wide-branched
king of the forest, ace lofty and majestic as
huge is your trunk! 1 never see any of
them broken by the god of wind.


13. Isit, O child, becduse that Wind-~
god is pleased with you and is your friend
so that he protects you always in these
woods ?


14. The iflustrious Pavana of great


| speed and force unfixes ‘the tallest and


strongest trees, and even mountain sum-~
mits. : :
1s. That sacred carrier of perfumes,


| blowing at his pleasure dries up rivers, -


lakes and seas, including the very nether
region, . :


16, Forsooth, Pavana protects you out
of friendship. It is, therefore, that, though
possessed of numberless branches, you
have still leaves and flowers,


17. Oking of ihe forest, this your hue
is delightful since these birds, O child,
filled with joy, sport on your twigs and
branches, :


18. ‘When you put forth your blossoms,
the sweet notes of all these dwellers of
your branches are heard sepatately when
they sing their melodious songs,


19. Again, O Shalmali, thexe most
beautiful elephants, bathed in sweat and
indulging in cries (of. joy), approach you


-and enjoy happiuess here.


234


20. Similarly various other animals
fiving .in the woods, also adorn you.
Indeed, O tree, you appear beautiful even
like the mountains of Meru, peopled by
all creatures.


21. Resorted to also by. Brahmanas
endued with ascetic success, by others en-
gaged in penances, and by Yatis devoted
to meditation this your region, I think, is
like the celestial region itself,


CHAPTER CLV.


{(APADDHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continued,


Narada said:—

¥. Forsooth, O Shalmali, the dreadful
and irresistible god of wind always pro-
tects you from friendliness. :

2. It seems, O Shalmali, that a close
intimacy exists between you and the Wind.
It seems, you have said him these words,
vis.¢—l am yours—and it is, therefore, that
the Wind-god protects you,

$- I do not See the tree or mountain or
pe lace in this world which may not, I think,

e broken by the Wind.


4. Forsooth, you stand.-here with all
our branches and twigs and leaves, simply
ecause, O Shalmali, you are protected by

the Wind for some reason; or reasons (un-
known to-us) ! : .


The Shalmali said :—


5. The Wind, O twice-born one, is

-aeither my friend nor companion nor well-

wisher. Nor is he my great Creator that
he should protect me.


6. My terrific energy and power, O
Narada, are the greater than the Wind's.
In sooth, the strength of the Wind is only
an eighteenth part of mine.


7. When the Wind blows fearfully,
tearing up trees and mountains and other
things, I abate his strength by displaying
mine, :

8. Indeed, the Wind that breaks many
things has himself been again and again
broken by me. Therefore, O celestial
Rishi, I nm not afraid of him even when he
comes in fury, - mee


Narada said :—~
9. O Shalmali, what you think seems to
be quite the reverse of truth. There is no
_ doubt inthis. There is no created thing
which is so strong asthe Wind. — :


MAHABHARATA.


ro. Even Indra, Yama, Vaishravana, of
Varuna the king oféthe waters, is not equal
to the god of wind in might. What to
speak of you who are only a tree.


11. The illustrious Wind-god is always
the root of all the acts of creatures in this
world, since it‘is he that is the giver of
life.


12. When that god does his work pro-
perly, he makes all living creatures live at
their ease. When, however, he does it im«
properly, calamities!visit the Earth.


13. What else can it be but weakness of
understanding which induces you not to
adore the god of wind, that foremost of
beings in the universe, and worthy of


adoration.


14. You are worthless and of a wicked
understanding, you are but making an idle-
boast. Your intelligence being confounded
by anger and other passions, you indulge
in untruths, O Shalmali. ;


15. 1 am_certainly angry with you, for
your giving vent to such words, . .

16.’ 1 shall myself communicate to the
Wind-god ali these derogatory words of
yours. :


17. Chandanas, Syandanas, Shalas
Saralas, Devadarus, Vetasas and Dhanwa, .
nas and other. noble trees that are fae
stronger than you, have never, O you or
wicked understanding, spoken such evil
words against the Wind.


18. All of them are cognizant of the
power of the Wind as also the power that
each of them possesses. For these reasong
those foremost of, trees respectfully salute


that god.


19. However, through folly, you are only
unaware of the infinite power of the Wind.
1 shall, therefore, go to that god,


CHAPTER €LVI.


(APADDHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continued.


Bhishma said :—

1. Having said these words to the Shal-
mali, that foremost of alf persons conversant
with’ Brahma, v7g., Narada, communicated -
to the Wind-god all that the Shalmali had
said about him. os ; )


Narada said:


2. There is a certain Shalmali on the
Himalaya, adorned with branches and
leaves. His roots have gone deep into the


1


SHANTI PARVA.


Earth and this branches have spread wide
around. That tree, O Wind-god, disres-
pects you,


3. He spoke many insulting words
against yourself. It is not meet, O Wind,
that I should repeat them in your hearing.


_4. I know, O Wind, that you are great -
est of all created things. I know too that
you are a very superior and very powerful
being, and that in anger you resemble the
Destroyer himself.


Bhishma said :-—


-5. Hearing. these words of Narada, the
Wind-god going to that Shalmali, said to
him angrily as follows.


The Wind-god said :— |

6. ©O Shalmali, you have uttered dero-
gatory;words against me before Narada,
Know that I am the the god of wind. I
shall, certainly show you my power and
might, :

zg. I know you well. You are no
stranger to mé. . While creating the world,
the powerful Grandfather had fora time
rested under you.


7. For this incident 1 have hitherto
shown you favour. O worst of trees, it is for
this that you stand uninjured and not for
your own power. You consider me lightly
as if I were a vulgar thing. { shall, how-
ever, appear to you in such a way that you
may not disrespect me again.


Bhishma said:— —

to, Thus addressed, the Shalmali laugh-
ed in ¢ontempt and replied, saying,—O
Wind-god, you are angry with me. Do not
stop showing the extent ef your power.


tt. Do you vomit all yout anger upon
me. By becoming angry, what will you ‘do
fo me? ‘Even if your power had been
all yout own, I would rot still have been
afraid of you. Iam -superior to you in
power, I am not afraid of you.


12. Those who ate strong in understand-
ing are strong in reafity. Those who endued
with only physical strength are not to be

- regarded strong... -


_ 13. Thus addressed, the Wind-god
said,—Tomorrow I shall test your strength.
—-Thereafter night came.


14. Determining in his mind the extent


of the Wind’s might and seeing his ownself |


to be inferior to the
began to say aside,~


16, Allthat I said to Narada is untrue.


god, the Shalmali


Tam, forsooth, inferior, in power to the.


Wind. Verily, he is superior in strength.


235


16. The Wind, as Narada said, is
always powerful. Forsooth, | am weaker
than other trees,

17. But in intelligence no tree is equal
to me. Therefore, depending , upon my
intelligence I shall view this fear which
arises from the Wind.

ig. If the other trees in the forest all
depend upon the same kind of intelligence,
then, no injury can come to them from the
Wind -god when he is irate..

19. All of them, however, are shorn of
understanding, and, therefore, they do not
know, as I know, why or how the Wind
succeeds in shaking and tearing them up.


CHAPTER CLVII.


(APADDHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continued.


Bhishma said :— : .

1. Having thus determined, the Shal-

mali, himself sorrowfally’ caused all his
branches, main and minor, to be cut off.
- 2 Casting off his branches, leaves and
flowers, in the morning the tree looked
ee at the Wind as he came towards
nim. :


3. Filled with anger and breathing hard,


. the Wind came, felling large trees, where


the Shalmali stood.

4. Seeing him divested of top, branches,
leaves and fiowers, the Wind, filled with
ioy, smilingly said to that lord of the forest
which had before sucha huge appearance,


The Wind said :—

. § Filled with anger, Q Shalmali, 1
would have done to you exactly. what _ you
have done to’ yourself by. cutting off all
your branches,


6. You are now shorn of your proud
top and flowers, and you are now without
your shoots and leaves. For your own.bad
counsels, you have heen brought under my
control,


Bhishma said :—

q. Wearing these words. of the Wind,
the Shalmali felt great shame. Remem-
bering also the words of Narada, he began
to repent greatly for his mistake.


8. Thus, O foremost of kings, a weak
and foolish person, by exciting the enmity
of a powerful enemy, is at last compelicd
to repent like the Shatmali in story,


236


6. Even when gifted with equal might,
people do not suddenly ereate enmities with
those who have injured them. On the
other fhand, they show their power gradu-
ally, O king...

to. A foolish person should never excite
the hostility of an intelligent person. -In
such cases the intelligence of the intelligent
man: works like fire penetrating a heap. of
dry grass, _


tt, Intelligence is the most valuable
thing that a person can have: Likewise,


O king, a man can have nothing here more |.


valuable than power.


12. One should, therefore, pass over
the wrongs isflicted by a person possesed
of superior strength, as one should overlook
the acts of a child, an idiot, or one who is
blind or deaf. The wisdom of this saying
is seen in your case, O slayer of foes.


13. The eleven Akshauhinis’ (of Dur-
yodhana), and the seven. (collected by
yourself), were not, in power, equat to the
single-handed Arjuna of great soul.

14. All the troops (of Duryodhana),

- therefore, [were dispersed and killed by
that illustrious Pandava, that son of Paka’s
chastiser, as he moved about in the field of
battle, depending on his own strength,

15. I have, O Bharata, described: to

ou the duties of kings and ethicsjof con-
in detail. What else, o king, do you wish
to hear.


r
ented


CHAPTER CLYVIII.


(APADHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continued,


Yudhishthira said :—

tr. “T wish, O foremost of Bharata’s
race, to hear fully the source from which
sin proceeds and the basis upon which it
depénds.”


Bhishma said:~-

2. ‘Hear, O king, what is the origin of
sin ! Covetousness alone is a great destroy-
er, From covetousness originates sin.


3. Sin and impiety proceed from this
source, along with great‘ misery. This
coveteusness is the root, of also all the
cunning and hypocrisy in the world. It is
covetousness thac makes men perpetrate
sin.

4—5. From  covetousness  ériginates
anger, from covetousness grows lust ; and
it is covetousness which begets loss of
judgment, deception, pride, haughtiness,


MAHABHARATA,


malice, vindictiveness shamelessness, loss
of prosperity, loss ef victue, anxiety, and:
infamy.

6—10. Covetousness also begets miser-
liness, cupidity, inclination for every sort
of improper deed, pride of birth, pride of
learning, pride of beauty, pride of riches,
mercilessness for all creatures, malevolence:
towards all, trustlessness in respect of all,,
insincerity towacds all, appropriation of
other people’s property, ravishment of
other people’s wives, harshness of speech,.
anxiety,,desire to speak il] of others, strong
lustful: desire, gluttony, ability te prema=
ture death, strong inclination to. matice,.
strong desire for falsehood, irrepressible
desire for indulging the passions, insati-
able desire for indulging the -ear, evil>
speaking, bostfulness, arrogance, neglect
of duties, rashness, and. perpetration of
every kind of evil deed. :


tr Men are unable, whether infants.
or youths or men, to cast off covetousness.
in. life. Such is the nature of covetousness.
that it never disappears even. with the:
loss of life. ;


12, Like the ocean ‘that ean never be
filled by the continued flow of even


. numberless rivers of immeasurable depths,.


covetousness is incapable of being con-
quered by any number of acquisitions.


13—14. That covetousness, however,
which is never satisfied by acquisitions.
and satiated by the fulfilment of desires,.
that the real nature of which is not known.
to the gods, the Gandharvas, the Asuras,.
the great snakes, and, in fact, to aH beings,
that irresistible passion, together with that
foolishness which draws the heart, to the
unrealities of the world, should always be
conquered by a person of purified soul.

15. Pride, malice, slander, wiliness and
incapacity to hear other people’s good, are
vices, O Kuru chief, that are to be seen in
persons of impure soul under the influence
of covetousness,


16. Even highly learned ‘men who


| recollect. all the scriptures, and who are-


capable of removing the doubts of others,
appear very weak inthis matter and feek
great misery for this passion.


17. Covetous men .are swayed by
malice and spite. They are beyond the
range of good conduct. Wily as they are
in their hearts, their speeches are sweet.
They are like dark pits whose mouths are
covered with grass, :


Z "ws
18. They dress themselves in the
hypocriticai garb of teligion. Low-minded
as they are, they] rob the world, showing
the standard of religion and virtue.


SHANTI *PARVA,


Depending upon the strength of palpable
reasons, they create various divisions in
religion. Being anxious to serve cupidity,
they destroy the ways of righteousness.


19. When wicked men under the
infiuence of covetousness practise for the
mere show of righteousness, the result is
that 'the desecrations committed by them,
soon Secome current among men.


20. Pride, anger, arrogance, insensibi-
lity, fits of joy aid sorrow, and self-conceit,
all these, O descendant of Kuru, are to
be seen in persons under the influence of
covetousness. :


21. They who are always under the
influence of covetousness are wicked. I
shall now tell you of those about whom
you ask,—those who are called good and
whose practices and pure.


22—-25. They who fear no obligation
of returning to this world (after death),
they who have no fear of the next
world, they who do not take animal
food and who have no liking for what
is agreeable and no dislike for what
is otherwise, they to whom good con-
duct is always dear, they who practise
self-restraint, they who consider pleasure
and pain as same, they who have truth for
their refuge, they who give but not take,
they who have mercy, they who adore,
Pitris, gods, and guests, they who are


always ready to work (for the behoof of


others), they who are universal benefactors,
they who are endued with great courage


(of mind), they who follow all the duties |


sanctioned by the scriptures, they who are
devoted tothe well-being of all, they who
can givegtheir all and sacrifice their very
lives for others, are considered as good
and virtuous, O Bharata.


26. Those promoters of virtue cannot
be seduced from the path of virtue.
Thetr conduct, in imitation of that of virtu-
ous men of yore, can never-be otherwise.


27. They are perfectly fearless; they
are tranquil; they are mild; and they
always follow the right path. Full. of
mercy, they are always adored by the
good. :


28. They arefree from lust and anger.
They are not attached to any worldly
object. They have no pride. They observe
excellent vows. They always command
respect. Do you, therefore, always at-
tend them and seek instruction from them,


29. They never acquire virtue, O Yudhis-
thira, for the sake of riches or'of fame,
They acquire it only, because they ‘know
it as a duty like that of supporting the
body. a


237


go. Fear, anger, restlessness, and sér-
row do not live in them. They carry no
external garb of religion for misleading
their fellow-men. They observe no mystery.


3t. They are perfectly contended. They
have ecror of judgment originating frona
covetousness. They always follow truth
and sincerity. Their hearts never deviate
from righteousness, You should always
respect them, O son of Kunti! »


32. They are never overjoyed at any
acquisition or pained at any loss, Without
being attached to anything, and shorn of
pride, they are devoted to the quality of
Goodness, and they regard all impartially.


33 Gain and loss, happiness and misery,
the agreeable and the disagreeable, life
and death, are held in equal estimation by
those men of firm mind, engaged in
acquiring (divine) knowledge, anc wending
the path of tranquility-and righteousness. °

24. Keeping your senses ‘under controf
and without yielding to carelessness, you
should always adore those great persons
who bear such fove for virtue. O blessed
one, one’s words always yield good only
through the favour of the. gods. Under.
other circumstances, words beget evil
consequence,’ .


CHAPTER CLIX,


(APADDHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—-Continued. —


Yudhisthira said :—

1. ‘ You have said, O grandfather, that
the root of all evils is covetousness, I wish,
O sire, to hear fully of ignorance.”


Bhishma said :—

2. ‘ The person who commits sin out of
ignorance, who does not’know that his end
is near, and who always hates persons of
good conduct, soon incurs infamy in the
world. ys


3. In consequence of ignorance one
goes to hell. Ignorance is the root of
misery. Through ignorance one suffers
miseries and incurs great danger,


Yudhishthira said :—.

4-5. “1 wish, O king, to hear fully the
origin, the place, the growth, the decay,
the rise, the root, the attribute, the course,
the time, the cause, and the result of igno-
rahce, The misery that is felt here is the
outcome of ignorance.” ;


238


Bhishma said :—

6—7. ‘Attachment, hate, loss of judg-
ment, joy, sorrow, vanity, lust, anger,
pride, procrastination, idleness, desire,
aversion, jealousy, envy, and all other sin-
ful habits pass by the common. name of
ignorance, . ‘


8 Hear fully now, O king, about its
nature, growth and other characteristics
after which you enquire,


Qg. These two, viz., ignorance and cove-
tousness, know, © king, are the same.
Both produce the same fruits and same
faults, O Bharata.


10. Ignorance originates from covetous:
ness, Ignorance grows along with cove-
_ness. Ignorance exists simultaneously
with covetousness.. Ignorance decreases
with cevetousness, {[t rises with the rise of
covetousness. Manifold again is its course.


11, The root of covetousness is loss of
judgment. Loss of judgment, again, is its
-inseperable quality. Eternity is ignoran-
ce’s course. The time when ignorance
occurs Is whén the objects of covetousness
are not gained.


12, From ignorance proceeds covetous-
ness, and from the latter proceeds igno-
rance, Covetousness produces all faults.
For these reasons every one should avoid


covetousness. Janaka, Yuvanashwa, Vri-.


shadarbhi, Prasenajit, and other kings
acquried heaven for their having conquered
covetousness, ;


14, Do you before all persons, avoid
covetousness by a strong. determination, O
Kuru chief. Avoiding covetousness you
will acquire happiness both here and in the
next world,’


——


CHAPTER CLX.


(APADDHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continued,


Yudhisthira said :—


x. “O grandfather, O you of virtuous
soul, what, indeed, yields great merit
for a person assiduously engaged:in the
study of the Vedas and desirous of gaining
victue,


2. That which yields in this world
high merit is of various kinds as described
in the scriptures. Tell me, O grandfather,
about what is regarded as such both in this
world and in the next.


3. The path of duty is long and
has numberless branches, O Bharata.


*
MAHABHARAIA.


Amongst those duties what are those few


which should, in your opinion, be observed
in preference to all others ?


4 Tell me, O king, fully about that
which is so vast and which has so many
brasches.’


Bhishma said :—~ .


5. ‘I shall describe to you that by which
you may acquire high merit. Wise as you
are, you will be satisfied with the know-
ledge I will impart to you, like a person
gratified with having drunk ambrosia. :


6. Therules of duty described by the
great Rishis, each depending upon his own
wisdom, are many. The highest among
them all is self-control.


7. Those amongst the ancient Rishis
that were acquainted with truth said that
self-control, leads to the highest merit.
Self-control ‘is the eternal duty of the
Brahmanas especially.

8. It is from self-contro] that he acquires
the due fruition of his acts. Sslf-control
surpasses (in {merit) charity and sacrifice
and study of the Vedas.


- g. Self-contral increases (his) energy.
Self-control is highly sacred. Through
self-control a man becomes purified of alt
his sins and gifted with energy, and there-
fore, acquires the highest blessedness.


. to. We have not heard that there is any
other duty in all the worlds equal to self-
control. Self-control, accordiny to all vice
tuous persons, is the highest virtues in this
world. . f


tr. Through self-control, Ogforemost
of men, a person enjoys the highest happi-
ness both in this world and in the next.
Gifted with self-conteol, one wins great
virtue. :


12. The self-controlled man ‘sleep’ in
happiness and awakes in happiness, and
moves through the world in happiness, His
mind is always cheerful.


13. The maa who is without self-controt
always suffers misery. Such a man brings
upon himself many calamities all begotten
by his own faults.


14. It has been said that in all the four
modes of life self-control is the best of
vows. I shail now describe to you the
characteristic marks the sum-total of which
is called self-control,


15—16. Forgiveness, patience, absten-
tion from injury, impartiality, truth, sin«
cerity, control of the senses, cleverness,
mildness, modesty, firmness, liberality,
freedom from anger, contentment, sweet-
ness of words, benevolence, freedom from


SHANTI PARVA, -


malice—all these is combined make up self-
control, ;


17—18. It also consists, O son of Kuru,
of respect for the preceptor and mercy
for all. The self-controlled man avoids
both adulation and slander. Depravity,
infamy, falsehood, lust, covetousness, pride,
arrogance, self-edification, fear, envy, and
disrespect, ate all shunned by the self-
controlled man,


19. He never incurs obloquy. He is
free from envy. He is never satisfied with
trivial acquisitions. He is like the ocean
which can never be filled.


20. The self-controlled man is never
fettered by the attachments originating
from earthly connections and sentiments
like these,--'I am yours, You are yours.
They are in me, and | am in them.’


21. Sucha man who follows the prac-
tices of either cities or the woods, and who
never vilifies others nor indulges in adula-
tion, acquires liberation. °


22. Practising universal friendliness,
and {virtuous conduct, and possessed of
cheerful spirit and psychic knowledge, and
freed from the various attachments of the
Earth, a person acquires great reward in
the next world.


23.- OF excellent behaviour and observ-
ant of duties, cheerful and endued with
learning and knowledge of self, such a
man acquires esteem while in this world
and attains to a high end hereafter. ,


24. All acts that are considered as good
on Earth,all those acts that are practised
by the righteous, form the path of the
ascetic oncyed with knowledge. A person
that is good never traasgresses that path,


23. Retiring from the world, and
living in the woods, that learned person,
having a complete mastery over the senses
who treads in that path, expecting his own

“demise, is suré to acquire the state of
rahma,


26. He who has no fear of any creature,
and whont no creature fears, has, after,
the dissolution of his body, no. fear to
meet.


27. Hewho exhausts his merits with-
out trying to hoard them up,. who con-
siders all creatures equally and cherishes
friendship for the entire universe, attains
to Brahma.

28, As the route of birds along the
sky or of fowl ovec the surface of water
cannot be made out, so the path of such a
person (on Barth) does not attract notice.


29. O king, many bright worlds await
him for eternal enjoyment, who, renouncing


father


36


his domestic life, adopts the religious
course of emancipation. ;
30—31. If abatidoning all acts, abandon.
ing penances in due ttime, leaving - off the
various branches of study, in fact, leaving off
all things, one becomes pure in his desires,
freed from all restraints, of cheerful soul,
conversant with self, and of pure heart,
he then acquires esteem in this world and
at last attains to heaven. ;


32. That eternal region of the grands
which originates’ from Vedie
penances, and which is conceafed in a cave,
can only be acquired by self-control.


33- He who finds pleasure in true
knowledge, who has become enlightened,
aud who never injures any creature, has no
fear of returning -to this world, not to
speak of any fear from the other.


34. There ts only one fault in self-con-
trol. No second fault is seen in it.
person who has self-control is considered
by men as weak and imbecile, ;

33. O you of great wisdom, this attria,
bute has only one defect. Its merits*are
many. By forgiveness, the man of self
contro] may easily aCquire numberless
worlds,


36. Of what use isa forest to a man
of self-control. Likewise, O Bharata, of -
what use is the forest to him that has
no self-control 2? That is a forest where the
man of self-control tives, and that is even
a sacred asylum.’


Vaishampayauna said :—
37. ‘ Hearing these words of Bhishma,


Yudhishthira betame highly pleased as if
he had drunk nectar.


38. Again the ne asked that foremost
of virtuous mien. That perpetuater of
Kuru’s race once more began to discourse
cheerfully da the subject.’


senile


CHAPTER CLXI.


(APADDHARMANUSHASANA
PAR VA).—-Continued.


‘Bhishma said:— .


I. 'They who are endued with knows
ledge say that everything springs from
penance. That foolish person who has
“not practised penances does not get the
rewards of even his own acts.


2. The powerful Creator created all
this universe with the help of penances,


240_


in the same way, the Rishis won the Vedas
by the power of penances.


3. {t was by the help of penances that
‘ the Grandfather created food, fruits and
roots. It is by penances that ascetics be-
hold the three worlds, with enraptured
souls,


4. Medicines and all antidotes to poison-
ous articles, and the various acts (seen
here), produce their intended results
through the help of penance. The ful-
filment of all putposes depends upon
pehancé.


§. Whatever things there are
seen to be unattainable are sure to be
acquired by pénance. Forsooth, the
Rishis acquired their sixfold divine
attributes through penance.


6. A person who takes intoxicating
liquors, one who appropriates others’
properties without their consent, one guilty
of fosticide, one who violates his preceptor’s
bed, are all purified by penarice duly
perforrned. -


7, Penanéges are manifold. They throw
themselves through garious channels, Of
alf sorts of penance, however, that one
may practise after abstaining from pleasure
and enjoyment, abstention from- food is
thé greatest and best.


8, The penance of abstention from
_food is superior, O king, even to mercy,
truthfulness, gifts, and restraint of senses.


9. There is no act more hard to perform
than gift. There is no mode of life which
is superior to serving one’s mother. There
is no creature superior to those who are
conversant with the three Vedas. Like-
wise, Renunciation is the highest penance,

10. People restrain their senses for
taking care of their virtue and heaven.
There is no penance higher than abstention
from food in control over the senses as also
in the acquistion of virtue. E


11-12. The Rishis, the gods, human
beings, beasts, birds, and all other crea~-
tures, mobile or immobile, practise penan-
ces, and whatever success they acquire
is won through penance. It was through
penance that the gods acquired their supe-

: riority. :

13. The luminous bodies in the sky
have got their position through penance.
Forsooth, through penance the very status
of godiiead may be gained.’


which


. Truth may be won,


MAHABHARATA


CHAPTER CLXIE.


(APADDHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).— Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


- x, “ Brahmanas, Rishis, Pitris and the
gods all speak highly of the duty of truti.
1 wish to hear of truth. Describe it to
me, O grandfather.


_ 2. What are the marks, O king. of
truth? How may it be acquired? What
is acquired by practising truth, and how ?
Tell me all this,’


Bhishma said :—

3. ‘A confusion of the duties of the
four castes is never highly spoken of. What
is called Truth always exists in @ pure and
unmixed state in every one of those four
castes.


4. Truth is always a duty with the good.
Indeed, Truth is eternal duty. One
should respectfully bow to Truth, ‘Truth
is the greatest refuge (of all).


5. Truth is duty; Truth is penance;
Truth is Yoga; and Truth is the eternal


Brahma. Truth has béen said to be a
Brea Saceiicn: Everything depends upon
Truth. . .


6. 1 shall- now tell you the forms of
Truth one after another, and its character-
istic marksijalso in due order.


7. You should hear also as to how
Truth, O Bharata,
as it exists in all the world, is of thirteen
sorts, 7


8—9. The various forms of ath are
impartiality, self-control, forgiveness, mo-
desty, endurance, goodness, renunciation,
meditation, dignity, fortitute, compassion,
and abstention from injury. These, O
great king, are the thirteen forms of
Teuth,


to. Truth is immutable, eternal, and
unchangable. It may be won through
practices which do not oppose any of the
other virtues. It may also be won through
Yoga.


rr. When desire and hatred, as also
lust and anger, are destroyed, that quality
by virtue of which one is able to look ime ,
partially upon one’s own self arid one’s
enemy, upon one’s good and one’s evil, is
called impartiality,


12. Self-control consits in never wish
ing for another man's property, in gravity
and patience and power to remove the fears
of others regarding one’s own self, and


SHANTI PARVA,


iteedom from disease,
through knowledge:


13. Devoted to liberality and the per-
formance of all duties are considered by
the wise as forming good-will, One gains
universal good will by continued devotion
to Truth. :


14. Regarding unforgiveness and for-
giveness, it should be said that the quality
by which an esteemed and good man puts
up with both ‘what is agreeable and dis-
agreeable, is said to be forgiveness. This
virtue may be acquired by the practice of
truthfulness. :

15. That virtue by which an_ intelligent
man contented in mind and words performs
many good deeds andis never blamed by
‘others, is called modesty. It is acquired by
the help of gighteousness.


16. That virtue which forgives for the
sake of virtue and religious profit is called
endurance. Itis one of the form of for-~
giveness. Itis gained through patience,
avs its object is to attach people to one’s
self.


17. The casting off of worldly desires as
also of all earthly possessions, is designated
renunciation. Renunciation can never be
gained except by one who is shorn of anger
and malice.


18. That virtue under the influence of
which one does good, with diligence and
care, to all creatures is designated good-
ness. it has no particular form and con-
sists in the casting off of all selfish attach-
ments.

19. Tnat virtue by which one* remains
unchanged in weal and woe is called for-
titude. That wise man who seeks his
own well-being always practises this
virtue.


20. One should always practise forgive-
ness and be devoted to truth. The wise
man who can renounce joy, fear and anger,

‘an gain fortitude. . =

21. Abstention from injury to all crea-
tures in thought, word, and deed, and kind-
ness, and gift, are the permanent duties of
the good. :

‘22. These thirteen qualities, though
seemingly different, have but one and the
same shape, namely Truth. All these,
O Bharata, hold up Truth and strengthen
ut. a

23. It is impossible, O king, to exhaust
the merits of Truth. For these reasons the
Brahmanas, the Pitris and the gods speak
highly of Truth.

24. There isno duty which is higher
than Truth, and no sin more dreadful than


3f


It may be won:


244


untruth. Indeed, Truth is the very root ot
righteousness, T hecefore one should never
destroy ‘Truth.


25. From Truth originate gifts, and
sacrifice with presents, as well as the three-
fold Agnihotras, the Vedas and everything
else which leads to righteousness.


26. Qn one occasion a thousand Horse«
sacrifices and Truth were weighed agains
each otherin the balance. Truth proved
heavier than a thousand Horse-sacrifices.’:


ed


CHAPTER CLXIIL


(APADDHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA),.—Coutinued.


Yudhisthira said -—


t. Tell me, O you of great wisdornt,
everything about that from which? originate
anger and lust. O foremost of Bharata’s
race, and sorrow, loss of judgment, inclina~
tion to injure others, jealousy, malice, pride
envy, slander, incapacity to see the good
of others, unkindnes# and fear, Tell
me everything truly and fully about ail
these.”


Bhishma said :—


3. ‘These thirteen vices are known as
very powerful enemies of all creatures.
These, O king, approach men’ and tempt
them from ail sides. :

4. They goad and afflict a carefess or a
foolish man. Indeed, as soon as they see 2
person, they attack bim powerfully like
wolves jumping upon their prey.

5. From these originate all: sorts of
grief. From these originate all sorts of sin.
Every man, -O foremost of men, shoutd
always know this. ; ‘


6. I shall now describe to Fou theie
origin, the objects upon which they rest,
and the means of their destriction, O king.
Listen, first, O king, with rapt attention,
to the origin of anger truly and fully.


7. Anger originates from covetotsness.
It is strengthened by the ‘shortcomings of
others. Through forgiveness it lies
dormant, ayd through forgiveness it dis«
appears. ;

8. Regarding fust, it orginates from
resolution. Indulgence strengthens it.
When a wise man resolutely tucns away
from it, it disappears and dies.

9g: Envy of others originates from bet«
ween anger and covétousness.. It disaps
pears by mercy and knowledZe of self,


242


For mercy for all creatures, and for dis-
regard for all worldly objects, it disappears.
It also springs from seeing the weakness
of other people. But in intelligent men
it quickly disappears. by virtue of true
knowledge.

10. Less of judgment originates from
ignorance and sinfulness of habit. When
the man whom this fault attacks begins to
find pleasure in wise men, the vice at once
and immediately disappears.


it. Men, O you of Kuru’s race find
divergent scriptures. Therefrom origina-
tes the desire for various kinds of action.
When true Knowledge has-been acquired,
that desire is satisfied.


12. The sorrow of an embodied crea-
ture originates from affection which is
created by separation, When, however,
one learns that the dead do not come back,
it disappears.


13. Incapacity !to bear other people’s
good originates from anger. and covetous-
ness, Though mercy for every creature
and by virtue of indifference to all worldly
objects, it is put out.

14. Malice springs from the casting off
of truth and indulgence in wickedness.
This vice, O child, disappears when one
waits upon the wise and good,


15, Pride, iw men, originates from
birth, learning and prosperity. When
those three, are truly known, that vice
immediately disappears.


16. Jealousy originates from fust and
delight in low and mean people. ft is des-
troyed by wisdom.


17. Slander foriginates from errors of
men’s daily conduct and through disagree-
able speeches expressing aversion. It dis+
appears, O king, when the whole wortd is
seen, .


18. When the person that injures is
powerful and the one injured is unable to
avenge the injury, hate appears. It dis-
appears, however, through kindliness.


to. Mercy proceeds from seeing the
helpiess and miserable persons with whom
the world:abounds. It disappears when
one understands the strergth of virtue.

20,
rance. It disappears when one sees the in-
stability of all objects of enjoyment.


21. It has been said that tranquillity of
soul, can alone conguer all these thirteen
faults. All these thirteen faults visited the
sons of Dhritarashtra. Yourself, always
desirous of truth, have conquered all of
those vices by virtuue of your respect for
your elders,” : bd


~


Covetousness originates front igno- |


| benefactor,


MAHABHARATA,


CHAPTER CLXIV.


(APPA DDHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


1. ‘I know what benevolence is, be-
cause I have always marked the conduct
of good people. 1 do not, however, know
them who are malevolent, nor the nature
of their deeds, O Bharata.


2. Indeed, people always shun male«
volent persons of ruthless deeds even as they
avoid thorns and pitfalls and fire.


3- Itis evident, O Bharata, that he
who is malevolent is sure fo be consumed
with misery both in this world and in the
next. ‘Therefore, O you of Kuru’s race,
tell me what, in sooth, tlre @ts of such a
person are.”


Bhishma said :—


4. ‘Malevolent persons always commit
sinful acts and feel an irresistible inclina-
tion for doing them. ‘They speak ill of
others and are themselves censured. They
always consider themselves as cheated of
what is their due.


.§. , & malevolent person always speaks

of his own charitable acts. He sees others
with malicious eyes. He is very mean.
He is deceitful, and wily. He never pays
others their dues. He haughty. He
lives in evil company and is always
boastful.


6. He fears and suspects all with whom
he mixes. He is foolish, in. understanding.«
He is miserly. He praises his companions,
He feels excessive aversion and hatred for
all hermits who have retired imto the
forest. a : :

7. He finds pleasure in injuring others.
He is perfectly careless in marking the
merits and faults of others. He is a liar.
He is discontented. He is highby covet-
ous, and always acts cruelly.


8. Such‘ man considers a virtuous and
qualified person as a pest, and thinking
every one else to be like himself never
trusts any one. :


- 9 Such a person trumpets the faults
of other people however unsuspected those
faults might be. But about similar faults
in his ownself, he does not refer to them
even remotely, for the sake of the advant-
age he reaps from them.


1o. He considers the person who does
him good as a simpleton whom he has ims
posed upon. He repents for having at any
time made any gift of wealth even toa


e


is


al


SHANTI


tr. Know him for a malevolent anda
wicked person who quietly and alone takes
choice foods and drinks even when persons
stand by with eager eyes:


12. He, however, who dedicates the
first portion to Brahmanas, and takes the
residue, dividing it with friends and kins-
men acquires great Felicity in the next
world and infinite happiness here.


13. I have now, O foremost of Bharatas,
‘said to you what the marks are of the
wicked and malevolent man. Such a
person should always be shunned by a wise
man!


CHAPTER CLXVI.


(APADBHARMNUSHASANA
PARVA.)—Continued.


Bhishma said »—


1—2. Wealth and knowledge,.O Bha-
rata, Should be given to such pious and
impoverished Brahmanas as have been
robbed of their wealth (by thieves), as are
engaged in the celebration of sacrifices,
as are well-read in all the Vedas, and as
are desirous “of acquiring the merit of
righteousness, so that they may satisfy
their duties to preceptors and the Pitris,
and spend their days in reciting and study-
ing the scriptures.


3. Only the Dakshina, O best of the
-Bnaratas, should be given to those Brah-
nranas who are not poor, Uncooked food
should be given beyond the limits of the
sacrificial altar, to those Brahmanas that
have fallen away (in consequence of their
sinful deeds) from their own dignity.


4. The Brahmanas represent the Vedas
themselves and all the sacrifices with pro-
fuse presents, Desirous of excelling one
another, they always celebrate sacrifices,
actuated by their various desire. The
king should, therefore, make presents of
Various sorts of valuable wealth-to them.


5. That Brahmana, who has sufficient
stores for feeding his family for three or
more years, deserves to drink the Soma.


6—7. If inspite of the presence of a
pious king on the throne, the sacrifice
undertaken by any one, but especially by a
Brahmana, cannot be completed for want
of only a fourth part of the estimated cost,
then the king should, for the completion
of that sacrifice, take away from his re-
latives the wealth of a Vaishya who has
a large flock of cattle -but who is averse
from sacrifices and abstains from drinking
Soma.


PARVA. 243


8. The Shudra is not competent to
celebrate a sacrifice. The king should,
therefore, take away (wealth for such a
purpose) from a Shudra’s house.


g. The king should, also, unscrupulously
take away from their kinsmen the wealth
of him who does not celebrate sacrifices al-


though he has a hundred kine, and also of |


him who does not perform, sacrifices al-
though he has a thousand kine.


-to. The king should, always, publicly —


take away the wealth of a person who does
not perform charities. By acting in this
wise the king acquires great merit. :


It—12. Listen again to me. That


Brabmana who has been compelled by ~


want to fast for three days, may take| away
without permission, according to the rule
of a person who cares only for to-day and
not for the morrow, only what is necessary


for a single meal, from the husking tub or -


the field or the garden or any other place
of even a degraded man. He should, how-
ever, whether asked or unasked, inform the
king of his deed. :


13. If the king knows his own duty he
should not punish such a Brahmana. ' He
should remember that a Brahmana be-«
comes strikcen with hunger only through
the fault of the Kshatriya. oS


14. Having learnt a Brahmana’s learn=
ing and conduct, the king should provide
for his living and protect him as a fathee
protects his own begotten son. . .


15. On the expiry of every year, one
should celebrate the Vaishyanara sacrifice.


Those who are conversaat with religious °
codes say that the practice of an alterna- -


tive act, does not destroy virtue.


16. .Fearing death in seagons of dis« ‘


tréss, the Vishwedevas, the Saddhyas, the:


Brahmanas, and great Rishis, do not hesi-: +


tate to follow the alternative provisions
laid down in the scriptures.

17. That man, however, who while able
to live according to the first provision, as


laid down above, follows the alternative, .


comes to be known as a wicked person and


never succeeds in acquiring any happiness : ,


in heaven.


18, A Brahmana conversant with the
Vedas should never mention his power and
knowledge to the king.


19. Comparing again the power of a
Brahmana with that of the king,


4


the «


former will always be found to be superioe '


to the latter. ;


20. Therefore the power of the Brahe,


manas can hardly be borne or resisted by


244


a‘king, ‘Lue tirahmatna is said to be
creator, king, ordainer, and god.

21. No abusive word or dry speeches,
should: be spoken to a Brahmana. ‘The
Kshatriya should get over all his difficulties
by the help of the power of his arms.


2223. The Vaishya and the Shudra
should get over their difficulties by riches ;
the Brahmana should do so by Mantras
and Homa. None of these, viz., a maiden,
a young. woman, @ -person unacquinted
with Mantras, an ignorant person, or one
who is impure, is competent to pour liba-
tions on the sacrificial fire. If any of
these do so he or she is sure to go to hell,
with him on whose behalf they act.
Therefore none but a Brahmana well-read
inthe Vedas and skilled in all sacrifices
should pour sacrificial libations. .

24. They who are well-acquainted with
the scriptures hold that that man who,
having lighted the sacrificial fire, does not
give away the dedicated food as Dakshina,
is not the kindler of a sacrificial fire.


25. A person should, after having con- |


trelledh is senses, and with proper devotion,
do all the meritorious acts. One should
never adore gods in sacrifices in which no
Dakshina is given.


26. A sacrifice not completed with
Dakshina, encompasses the ‘destruction of
one’s children, animals, and heaven.- Such
a sacrifice destroys also the senses, the
glory the achievements, and the very life,
itself. .


27. Those Brahmatias who know women
in their season, or who never celebrate
sacrifices, or whose families have no mem-
bers well-read in the Vedas, are considered
as Shudras in act.


28. That Brahmana who, having mar-
tied a Shudra girl, lives for twelve years
continually in a village which has only a
well to give water, becomes a Shudra in
act.


29. That Brahmana “who brings to his
bed a maiden, or allows a Shudra, knowing
him as deserving of respect, to sit upon the
same carpet with him, sbould sit on a bed
of dry grass behind some Kshatriya or
Vaishya and show him respect in that way.
It is in this way that he can be purified.
Hear, O king, my words on this subject.


30. The sin that a Brahmana perpetra-
tes in one night by respectfully serving a
member of a lower caste or by playirg
with him in the same spot or on the same


bed, is purified by observing the practice of |


sitting behind a Kshatriya or a Vaishya on
a bed of dry grass for three years continu-
ally.


MAHABHARATA.


3r. An untruth spoken for jest is not
sinful; nor one spoken at the time of wed-
ding; nor one spoken for doing geod to
one’s pre ceptors nor one spoken for
saving one’s own life. These five sorts of
falsehood in speech, it bas been said, are
not sinful. =


32. One may gain useful knowledge
from even a person of degraded calling,
with devotion and reverence. One may
take up gold, unhesitatingly from even an
uncleanh spot.


33. A woman who is the ornament of
her sex may be married from even a vile
race. Nectar, if extracted from poison, may
be drunk ; women, jewels and other value
ables, as also water, can never, according
to the scriptural injunetion, be impure or
unclean. °


34. For the good of Brahmanas and
kine, and on occasions when mixture of
castes takes place, even ,a Vaishya may
take up weapons for his own safety.


34. Drinking wine, killing a Brahmana,
and the violation of the preceptor’s bed, are
sins when committed consciously, can never
be expiated. The only expiation laid down
for them is death.


36. The same may be said of stealing
gold, and the theft of a Brahmana’s pro-
perty. By drinking wine, by knowing pro-
hibited women, by mingling with a de-
graded person, by knowing a Brahmana’s
woman, one becomes for ever fallen.


38. By associating with a fallen person
fdr one whole yearin sacrifices and teaching
and sexual intercourse, one becomes fallen,
One, however, does not become so by asso-
ciating with a fallen person in riding on the
same Car, sitting on the same seat, and eat-
ing in the same line.


39. Excluding the five heinous sins that
have been mentionéd above, all other sins
have expiations. Expiating those sins
according to the ordinances taid down
for them, one should not commit thent
again. ‘


40. Regarding those who have been
guilty of the first. three of these five sins,
(namely, drinking wine, killing a Brahmana,
and violation of the preceptor’s bed), their
(surviving) kinsmen have no_ restrictions
about taking food and wearing ornaments,
even if their funeral rites remain unper-
formed when they die. The surviving
kinsmen need make no scruple about such
things at such times. ; .


41%. A virtuous man should, while ob-
serving his duties, discard his very friends
and elders. In fact, so long as they do not


¢


SHANTI PARVA.


patform expistion, the virtuous should not
even talk with those sinners. A man whe
has committed sins dissipates them by
acting virtuously afterwards and by pen-
ances. :

42. By calling a thief a thief, one com-
mits the sin of theft. By calling a person
thief who, however, is not a thief, one com-
mits a sin just double the sin of theft.


43. The maiden who spoils her virginity
incurs three-fourths of the sin of Brahmani-
cide, while the man who knows her incurs a
sin equal to a fourth part of that of Brah-
manicide,


‘44. By speaking against Brahmanag or
by striking them, one sinks in infamy for a
hundred years.


43. By slaying a Brahmana one under-
goes the torments of hell for a thousand
years. Noone should, therefore, speak ill

. ofa Brabmana or,slay him.


46. ‘If aman wounds a Brahmana ‘with
a weapon, he will have ‘to live in hell
for as many years as the grains of dust
that are soaked by the blood flowing from
the body of the wounded,


"47. One guilty of foeticide becomes
urified if he dies of wounds received in
battle fought for the sake of kine and
Barhmanas. He may also be putified by
casting his person on a burning fire.


.48. A drinker of spirituous liquors be-
comes purified by drinking hot spirit. He
is purified by his death, brought on ly that
hot drink, in the other world. A Brahma-
na stained by such a sin attains regions of
felicity by such a course, andsuch a course
only, and not by any other.


.49. The wicked and sinful wretch who


violates the bed of a preceptor, becomes


purified by the death that results from em-
bracing a heated iron statue of a female,


50. Or, emasculating himself and cut-
ting off his organ, and bearing them in his
hands, he should go straight way to-
wards the south-west and then give up his
ghost.


51. Or, he may cleanse himself of ail his
sins, by meeting with death for the sake of
benefiting a Brahmana. Or, he may re-
gain esteem both in this world and in the
next by performing a Horse-sacrifice ora
Cow-sacrifice or an Agnishtoma.


52. The killer of a Brahmana should
practise the vow .of. Brahmacharyya for
twelve years, and devoting himself to pen-
ances, he should wander, holding -in his
hands the skull of the killed all the time
and the time and prociaiming his sin to ail.


248


53- He should even adopt such a course,
devoted ;to penances and leading the life of
an ascetic.
provided for one who skills a woman quick
with child, knowing her condition.


54-755. Tlie man that knowingly kills
sucha woman ineurs double the sin that
follows from Brahmanicide. A drinker of
spirituous fiquor should live on spare diet,
practising Brahmachayya vows, and sleep
on the naked earth, and perform, for
more than three years the sacrifice next
to the Agnishtoma. He should then pre-
sent athousand kine with one bull (to a
good Brahmana). He would then regain
his purity by doing all this.

56. Having killed a Vaishya one should
perform such a sacrifice for two years and
present a hundred kine with one bull.
Having killed a Shudra, one should perform
such a sacrifice for one year and presenta
hundred kine with one bull. Having killed
a dog or a bear or a camel, one should
perform the same penance that is laid
down for killing a Shudra. :


57. For killing a cat, a chasa, a frog, a
crow, a reptile or arat, it has been said,
ono incurs the sin of animal, slaughter
O king. ee


58. I shalf now tell you of other kinds
of expiations one after the other. For all
minor sins one should repent or ptactise
some vow for one year.


59. For ravishing the wife of a Brah-
mana well read in the Vedas, one should,
for three years, practise the vow of Brahma-
charyya, living on spare diet at the fourth
part of the day. For ravishing any. other
woman .one should undergo similar: pen-
ances for two years,


60. For enjoying oneself in the company
of a woman as by sitting with her on the
same spot or on the same seat, one should
live only on water for three days. By
doing this he may purify himself of his sin.
The same is laid down for one who befouls
a burning fire (by throwing impure things
on it.) ;

61—62. He who, without sufficient reason


. leaves his father or mother or preceptor,


forsooth, becomes degraded, O ye scion of
Kuru’s race, as is laid down in the scrip-
tures. Only food and clothes shall be
given to a wife guilty of fornication or one
confined in a prison, Indeed, the vows
that are laid down for a male person guilty
of fornication should also be forced on a
woman who js as well guilty of the same.
63. That woman who abandoning a
husband of a superior caste, commits
adultery with a vile person (of a lower


Even such is the expiation -


246.


order), should be made by the king to be
devoured by dogs in a public place in the
midst of a large number of spectators.


64. A wise‘ king should make the male
person, committing adultery under such
Circumstances to be placed upon a heated
bed of iron and then, placing woods under-
neath, buen the sinner thereon.


65. The same punishment,
folds for the woman who is guilty of
adultery. Thie wicked sinner who does not
perform expiatory rite within a year of the
perpetration of the sin incurs demerit that
ig double of what attaches to the original
sin.


66. One who mixes with such a person
for two years must walk over the Earth,
devoting himself to penances and living
upon alms. One mixing with a sinner for
four years should follow such a mode of
life for five years.


67... If a young brother marries before
his elder brother, then the younger brother,
the elder brother, and the woman that is
married, all three, on account of such
wedding, become degraded. :


68. All of them should ‘observe the
vows laid-down for a_ person who las
neglected his sacrificial fire, or practise the
, vow of Chandrayana fer a month, or some
other painful vow,: for purging themselves
off their sin.


- The younger brother, marrying
should give his wife to his unmarried elder
brother. Having acquired the permission
of the elder brother, the younger brother
may take back his wife. By such means
all three may be cleansed of their sin.


70. By killing animals except a cow,
the Biller is not stained, ‘Phe fearned hold
that man has supremacy over all the
fower animals.


qi—72. Holding in his hand a yak-
tail and an earthen pot, a sinner should go
about, giving a_ publicity to his sin. He
should every day beg of only seven families,
and live upon what may thus be got. By
doing this for twelve days he may be puri-
fied of his sin, He who cannot hold in his
hand the yak-tail while practising this vow
should become a -mendicant (as stated
above) for one whole year.


O king,


73. Amongst men such expiation ranks
foremost. The practice of charity has been
sanctioned in all such cases for those that
are able to practise charity.


74. Those who have faith and virtue
may purify themselves by giving away only
one cow. :


“Nakula who was an


MAHABHARATA.


75. One who eats or drinks the flesh,
ordure, or urine of a dog, a boar, a man,
a cock or acamel must have the ceremony
of putting on the sacred thread performed
again.

76. If a Soma-drinking . Brahmana
smells alcohol from the mouth of one who
has drunk it, he should drink warm water
for three days or warm milk for the same
period.


77. Or, drinking warm water for three
days he should live for that period upon
air alone. These are the eternal injunctions
prescribed for the expiation of sin, espe-
cially for a Brahmana who has perpetrated
these sins through ignorance and want of .
judgment.


CHAPTER CLXVII.


‘ (APADDHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Coztinued,


Vaishampayana said :—'


1. ‘When this discourse was finished,
exPert swordsman
thus questioned the Kuru grandfather lying °
on his bed of arrows. .


Nakula said :—


2—3. ‘Fhe bow, O grand-father, known’
as the foremost of weapons in this world. I,
however, prefer the sword, since when the
bow, O king, is cut off or broken, when
horses are dead or weakened, a- good
warrior, well-teained in the sword, can
protect himself by means of his sword.


4 A hero armed with the sword can,
alone, withstand many bowmen and many
antagonists armed with maces and arrows.


5. [have this doubt, and I am anxious
to know the truth. Which, O king, is
really the foremost of weapons in all
battles.


6. How was the sword first created and
why % Who also was the first teacher in
that weapon? Tell me ail this, O grand-
father.’ ; : as


Vaishampayana said :—


_ 9~9. Hearing these words of the
intelligent son of Madri, the virtuous.
Bhishma, that perfect master of thee


science of the bow, lying upon his bed of
arrows, answerd in many refined words of.
great significance, of sweet cadence, and
showing considerable. skill, to the. great.
Nakula, that discipline of Drona of -skilfu


} training.


SHANTI


Bhishrita said:— .
1o. Hear the truth, O son of Madri,
about what you have asked me! I am


worked up by this question of yours; like a
hill of red chalk.


tr. In days of yore thé universe was
one vast sheet of water, fixed and skyless,
and without this Earth existing in it.


12. Covered with darkness, and unseen,
it presented a dreadful aspect. Perfect
silence prevailed everywhere and it was
immeasurable in extent. In his own pro-
per time the Grandfatirer (of the universe)
was born.


13—14. He then created wind, and fire,
and the highly powerful sun. He also
created the sky, the heavens, the nether
regions, Earth, the quarters, the firmament
with the moon and the stars, the constel-
lations, the planets, the yeat, the seasons,
the months, the two fortnights and the
smaller divisions of time.


15. Assuming a visible form the divine
Grandfather then begot (by the power of
his will) some highly energetic sons.


16—17. They ara the sages Marichi,
Atri, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Vashishtha,
Angiras, and the mighty and powerful
ford Rudra, and Prachetas. ‘The last begat
Daksha, who in his turn begat sixty
daughters. All, those daughters were ac-
cepted by the twice-born sages for the
purpose of begetting children upon them,


18—20, From them originated all the
Creatures of the uvivecse, including the
gods, Pitris, Gandhatvas, Apsaras all
sorts of Rakshasas, birds, animals, fishes,
monkeys, great snakes, and various species
of fowl ranging in the-air or the water
and vegetables, and all oviparous or vivi-
parous being or those or born of filth. In
this wise the whole universe consisting of
mobile and immobile creatures came into
being, .


2t. Having thus created all mobile and
immobile creatures, then the universal
Grandfather preached the eternal religion
of the Vedas. ;


22—25. That religion was accepted by
the gods, with their preceptors and priests,
the Adityas, the Vasus, the Rudras, the
Saddhyas, the Maruts, the Asliwins,
Bhrigu, Atri, Angiras, the Siddhas,
Kashyapa of penances, Vashistha, Gau-
tama, Agastya, Narada, Parvata, the
Valkhillya Rishis, those other,Rishis known
as Prabhasas, the Sikatas, the Ghritapas,
the Somavayavyas, the Vaishwanaras, the
Marichipas, the Akrishtas, the Hansas,
those born of Fire, the VWanaprasthas, and

: +


BARVA, 247
the Prashins, Alf of them followed the
corimartds of Brahman. :


26. Disregarding the commands of the
Grandfather, and giving way to anger and
covetousnéss, the foremost of the Danavas,
however, began to bring about the destruc¢,
tion of virtue, :


27. They were Hiranyakashipu, Hi-
tanyaksha, Virochana, Shamvara, Vipra«
chitti, Prahjada, Namuchi and Vali.


28. Disregarding all restraints of duty
and religion, these and many other Daityas
and Danavas sported and found pleasure
in all sorts of wicked acts. :


29. Contidering thernselves equal in
point of birth with the gods, they began to
Challenge them and the pure sages.

zo. They never did ‘any good to the
other creatures of the universe or showed
mercy for ‘any of them. Neglecting the
three weH-known means, they began to
petseciite and assail all creatures by hold
ing only the rod of chastisement. .


31—32, Indeed, those foremost af
Asuras, filled with pride did not treat other
creatures as friends. Accompanied by thé
twice-born ones the divine Brahman, pros
ceeded to a delightful summit of Himavat,
extending for a hundred Yojanas in area,
adorned with various sorts of jewels and
gems, and upon whose surface the stats -
existed like so many lotuses ena lake.


33. On that king of motintains, O- sire,
filled with forests of blossoming trees, that
foremost of the gods; wig. Brahmana;
lived for sometime for accomplishing the
busitiess of the world. os


34. After the expiration of a thousand
years, the powerful lord made arrangements
for a grand sacrifice according to the ordi«
nances prescribed in the scriptures,


35. The sacrificial altar’ was adorned
with Rishis skilled in sacrifice and capable
performing all acts; with sacrificial fuel,
and with burning fires, — ;


36. And it looked highly beautiful for
the sactificial plates and vessels having
been all made of gold. All the ‘leading
gods sat there. . :


37, The platform was further adorned
with Sadasyas who were ail high regene-
rate Rishis. 1 have heard fromthe Rishis
that something very awful soon took place
in that sacrifice. :


38. It is heard that a creature came out
(from the sacrihcial fire) scattering the
flames around him, and whose. effulgence
equalled that of the Moon himself wher
he rises in the sky be spangled - with
stars. : :


2 48


39- His complexion was dark like that
of the petals of the blue lotus. His teeth
were keen. His stomach was fean. His
Stature was tall, He appeared highly irre-
sistible and energetic.


~~ 40% When that, being appeared, the

Eacth shook. ‘Ihe Ocean became agi-
tated with mountain billows and dreadful
eddies,


41. . Meteors, foreboding great calami-
ties, passed through the sky. ‘Phe branches
of trees began to fall down. All the points
of the horizon became unquite. Inauspici-
ous winds blew. All creatures began to
tremble with fear every moment.


42. Seeing that.dreadful agitation of the
universe and that Being originated from
the sacrificial fire, the Grandfather said to
the great Rishis, the gods, and the Gan-
dharvas. ;


43. This Being was thought of by me.
Highly energetic his name is Asi (sword or
scimitar). I have created him for the pro-
tection of the world and the destruction of
the enemies of the celestials.


. 44. Leaving off the form he had first
assumed, that being then took the shape of
a sword of great effulgence, highly poli-
shed, sharp-edged, and sprang like the
all-destructive Being at the end of the
cycle.


.45. Then Brahman handed over that
sharp weapon to the blue-throated Rudra
‘who has for his emblem the foremost of
bulls, for empowering him to suppress irre-
ligion and sin.


46. At this, the divine and great


Rudra, praised by the great Rishis, took |-


up that sword and assumed a different
form,


47. Displaying four arms, he became so
tall that though he stood on the Earth he
touched the very sun with his head. With
eyes turned upwards, and with every limb
extended wide, he began to eject flames of
fire from his mouth. ‘


48—49. Assuming various hues such as
‘blue, white and red, and wearing a black
deer-skin set with stars of gold, he bore on
his forehead a third eye resembling the
efful gent sun. His two other eyes, one of
which was black and the other twany,

’ shone very brilliantly.


50—51. Taking up the sword which was
effulgent like the all-destructive Yuga fire,
and wielding a large shield with three high
bosses which shone like a mass of dark
clouds stricken with flashes of lightning,
the divine Mahadeva, the bearer of the


MAHABHARATA.


perform varions kinds of evolutions. Ene
dued with great prowess, he began to
whir] the sword in the sky, seeking an
enéounter.


52. He uttered loud roars and awful
was the sound of his laughter. Indeed, O
Bharata, then Rudra assumed an exceed+
ingly terrible appearances.


53. Hearing that Rudra had assumed
that form for performing dreadful deeds,
the Danavas, filled with joy, began tocome
towards him quickly, showering huge rocks
upon him as they came, and burning
brands of wood, and various kinds of terri-
ble weapons made of iron each sharp as of
a razor.


55- However seeing that foremost of all
beings, the indestructible powerful Rudra,
swelling with might, the Danavas army
became stupefied and began to tremble.


56. Although Rudra was alone and
siugle-handed, yet so quickly did he move
about on the field of battle with the sword
in his hand that the Asuras thought there
were a thousand Rudras fighting with
them.


57- Tearing and piercing and assailing
and cutting and lopping off and grinding
down, the great god moved about quickly
among the large number of his enemies like
a forest- fire amid heaps of dry grass spread
around. :


58. Assailed by the god with his sword,
with arms and thighs and chests cut off
and pierced, and with heads cut off, the
powerful Asuras began to drop down on
the Earth. ©


59. Stricken with strokes of the sword,
other Danavas broke and fled in all direc
tions, cheering up one another as they
fled,


60, Some entered into the bowels of the
Earth; others got into the caves of moun-
tains. Some went upwards; others enters,
ed into the sea.


Gt. During that dreadful and fierce
battle, the Earth was covered with flesh
and blood, and dreadful spectacles appear-
ed on ali sides.


62. Covered with the fallen bodies of
Danavas bathed in blood, the Earth looked
as if overspread with mountain summits
filled with Kinshuxas.


63, Drenched : with blood, the Earth
looked highly beautiful, like a fair one
intoxicated with wine and clad in crimson
robes, ’


64. Having killed the Danavas and re-


Shula, the tearer of Bhaga’s eye, began (0! established yirtue on Earth, the auspiciows


x


c


SHANTI PARVA,


Rudra‘cast off his dreadful form and_put
‘on his beneficient shape.


65. Then all the Rishis and all the gods
‘adored that god of gods with loud cries of
this victory, -

66. After this the divine Radra gave the
‘sword, that protector of retigion, covered
‘with the blood of Danavas, to Vishnu
‘with proper adorations.

67. Vishnu gave it to Marichi,, The
‘divine Marichi gave it to all the great
‘Rishis. the latter gave it ‘to Vasava,


‘68. Vasava gaveitto the Regents of
the quarters. The Regents, O son, gave
‘that large sword to Manu the son of the
Sun-god.

69. Atthe time of giving it to Manu,
they said,—You are the lord of all men.
Protect all ‘creatures ‘with this sword
‘having religion within its womb.


jo. Properly punishing’ those who have
‘disregarded the restraints of virtue for
the. sake of the body or the mind, ‘they
‘should be protected according to the ordi-
‘nances but never according to caprice.


71. Some should be punished with rebu-
‘kes, fines and forfeitures. ‘Loss of limb
‘or death should-never be inflicted for slight
‘offences.


72. .These punishments, having rebukes
as their first, are considered as so many
forms of the sword, They are the forms


‘that the Re assumes for the sins
‘of persons “under the protection (of the
‘king).


__ 73 n time Manu installed his own son
Kshupa as the king of all creatures,
‘and gave him the sword for their protec-
tion. ;

74, Kshupa gaveit to Ikshaku, and
Ikshaku to Pururavas. @ururavas gave it
to Ayus, and Ayus to Nahusha.


_ 75. Nahusha gave it to Yayati, and
Vayatito Puru. Puru gave it to Amurtta-
‘raya, From Amurttaraya it went to the
royal Bhumishaya. _


76. Bhumishaya gave it to Dhushmanta’s
son Bharata. Bharate, O king, gave it to
the righteous Ailavila.


77. Ailavila gave it to king Dundumara.
Dhundamara gave it to Katmvoja, and
Kamvoja to Muchukunda.

78. Muchukunda gave it to Marutta,
and Marutta to Raivata. Raivata gave
it to Yuvanashwa, and Yuvanashwa to
Raghu,


e
79.- Raghu gave it to the valiant Hari-
nashwa. Harinasha gave the sword to


32


249


Sunaka, and Sunaka to the righteous-souf-
ed Ushinara. From the last it was taken
by the Bhojas and the Yadavas,

80, Thg Yadus gave it to Shivi. Shivi
gave it to Praterddana, Pratarddana gave
it to. Ashtaka, and Ashtaka fo Prisha-
dashwa.


81. Prishadashwa gave it te Bharad-
waja, and Bharadwaja to Drona. ‘Drona
gave it to Kripa. Kripa gave that best of
swords to you and your brothers. :


82. The constellation “under which th
sword was born is Kritika. Agni is its god,
and Rohini is its Gotra. Rudra is its great
preceptor.


83. The sword has eight names which
are not generally known. Hear as 1 name
them to you. If one mentions these names,
O son of Pandy, one may always acquire
victory. ;

84. Those names then are Asi, Vaisha-
sana, Khadg&a, sharp-edged, hard of ac~
quisition, Shrigarbha, victory and protec-
tor of virtue.

85. Of all weapons, GQ son of Madra-
vati, the sword is the greatest. The Pu-
ranas truly say that it was first held by
Mahadeva.

86. Regarding the bow, again, O-chas-
tiser of enemies, it was Prithu who first
created it. It was with the help of this
weapon ‘that that son of Veta, while
he ruled the Earth virtauously for many
years, milked her profusely of crops and
grain,

87. You should, O son of Madri, consi-’
der what the Rishis have said as sufficient
proof, All persons skilled in battle should
adore the sword.


88. I have now told you truly the first
portion of your question fully, about the
origiy and ‘creation of the sword, O fore~
most of Bharata’s family, ;

89. By hearing of this excellent story
of the origin of the sword,a man acquires
fame in this world and eternal ‘happiness in
the next,’ . sg .


el


CHAPTER CLXVII.


(APADDHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—-Continued.


Vaishampayana said :—

t—2. ‘When after having said this,
Bhishma became silent, Yudhishthira (and
the others) returned home, Addressing his


1250


‘brothers with Vidura forming the fifth,
‘the king said,—‘The course of the world
depends upon Virtue, Profit and Desire.
Amongst these three, which is the foremost,.
‘which the second, and which the last, in
importance.


3. For suppressing the three vices, viz.,
Just, anger and covetousness), upon which
of the first three (vza., Virtue, Profit and

- Desire) should the mind be fixed? You
should all cheerfully answer this question
in true words.


4. Thus addressed by the Kuru chief,
Vidura, who was conversant with the
science of Profit, with the course of the
world and with the real nature of thing,
and endued with great intellect, spoke first
these words, remembering the contents of
the scriptures. f


Vidura said :—

5. Study of the various scriptures,
asceticism, gift, faith, celebration of sacri-
fices, forgiveness, sincerity ‘ of purpose,
mercy, truth, self-control,—these form the
possessions of Virtue,


6. Do you adopt Virtue. Let not your
heart go away from it. Both virtue and
worldly profit originate from these. I]
think that all these may be signified by
one term. : 2

. Je It is by virtue that the Rishis
have crossed the world. All the worlds
depend upon virtue. It is by virtue that
the gods acquired their superior posi-
. tion. Upon Virtue, Profit or Wealth
depends, ane


__ 8, Virtue, O king, is foremost of all.
Profit is said to be middling. Desire it
a8 by the wise, is the lowest of the
three.


9. Therefore, one should five with con-
trolled soul, paying his best attenfion to
Virtue. One should also treat all creatures
as he should do himself.’


Vaishampayana said :—

1o. ‘After Vidura had finished his
say, Pritha’s son Arjuna, well-skilled in,
the sclence of Profit, and conversant also;
with the truths of both Virtue and Profit,
urged on (by Yudhishthira’s question),
said.


Arjuna said :—

11-12. This world, O king, is the
field of work. Action, therefore, is spoken
highly of here. Agriculture, trade, tend-
ing of cattle, and various kinds of arts,
form what is called profit. Profit, again,
is the end of all such acts. Without


"Wealth. -


t the excellence of Wealth.s


MAHABHARATA


profit or wealth, both virtue and desire
cannot be acquired. This is the injunction
of the Shruti.

13. Even persons of impure souls, if


possessed of various sorts of wealth, can
perform the highest acts of virtue and


gratify desires that cannot be easily
satisfied,
14. Virtue and Desire are the limbs of


Wealth as the Shruti says, With the acquis-
tion*of Wealth, both Virtue and the objects
of desire may be acquired.


15. Like all creatures adoring Brah-
man, even persons of superior birth adore
a man possessed of Wealth.


16. Even they who are clad. in deer-
skins and bear matted locks on their heads,
who are self-controlled, who smear their
bodies with mire, who have their senses
under complete control, even they who
have bald heads and that are devoted
Brahmacharins, and who live separated
from one another, cherish a desire for


17--18. Qthers clad in yellow robes,
bearing long beards endued with modesty,
and learning, contented, and freed from
all attachments see& Wealth, Others,
following the conduct of their ancestors,
and observing their respective duties, and
others: desirous of heaven, do the same.


19. Believers and unbelievers, and those
who practise the highest Yoga all sfeak of


*

20. He, indeed, is said’ to be trul
sessed of Wealth who pleases. his depen.
dants with objects of enjoyment, and
punishes his enemies, This, U foremost of
intelligent men, is my opinion. : .

21, Hear now Nakula and Sahadeva,


pos-


| who are about to speak.


Vaishampayana continued :—

22. After Arjuna had ceased, the two
sons of Madri, viz., Nakula and Sahadeva,
said these words of high import.


| Nakula and Sahadeva said :—


23., Sitting or lying, walking or stand-
ing, one should try to acquire Wealth even
by the most difficult means.


24. Tf Wealth, which is difficult of acqui«
sition and highly agreeable, be acquired,
the person who has acquired it, forsooth, is
seen to earn all the objects of Desire.


- 25. That Wealth which is connected
with Virtue, as also that Virtue whick is
connected with Wealth, is certainly like
ambrosia. For this reason we hold these
opinions. ;


¢


SHANTI. PARVA,


-25. A person without wealth cannot
satisfy any desire; likewise, there can be
no Wealth in one who is destitute of virtue.
He, therefore, who has no virtue, or wealth,
is feared by the world,


27. One should, therefore, try to acquire
Wealth with a devoted. mind, without
neglecting, the requirements of Virtue.
They who have faith in this injunction
succeed in gaining whatever they desire.


28. One should first practise Virtue ;
next amass Wealth witheut sacrificing
Virtue; and’then seek the gratification of
Desire; for this should be the last act of
one who has successfully acquired Wealth,


Vaishampayana continued :—
29. After having said these words,

the twin sons of the Ashwins remained

silent. Then Bhimasena began to say.


‘ Bhimasena said :—


30. One without Desire never seeks
Wealth. One without Desire never seeks
Virtue. One whois destitute of Desire has
no wish, Desire, therefore, is the foremost
of all the three.


gi. It is under the influence of Desire
that the very Rishis practise penances,
living upon fruits, or living upon roots or
air only.

32. Others endued with Vedic learning
always tead the Vedas and their auxili-
aries or perform rites of faith and sacrificial
acts, or make gifts or accept them.


33. Traders, agriculturists, cattle-keep~
ets, artists and artizans, and those who are
engaged in fites of propitiation, all act
from Desire,


34. There are some who go into the
depths of the ocean, actuated by Desire.
Desire, indéed, assumes various forms.
Every thing is permeated by the principle
of Desire.


35- Aman who has no Desire never is,
was, or will be, seen in this world. This,
O king, is the truth. Both Virtue and
Wealth depend upon Desire.


36. As butter is the essence of curds, so
is Desire the essence of Profit and Virtue.
Oil is better than oil-seeds. Clarified but-
ter is better than sour milk.


37. Flowers and fruits are better than


a


wood. Likewise, Desire is better than Vir- |


tue and Profit. As honey is extracted from
flowers, se is desire from these two. Desire


is the father of Virtue and Profit. Desire
is the soul of these two.
38. Without Desire the Brahmanas


would never give either sweets or ciches to


‘and death,


251


Brahmanas. Without Desire the various”
kinds of action which are seen jn the world
would never have been seen. For these
reasons, Desire is the foremost of the three
objects, ;


39. Approaching beautiful women clad
in excellent robes, decorated with orna-
ments and up with sweet wines, do you
sport with them.. Desire, O king, is the
foremost of the three with us.

40. Thinking upen the question to its
very roots; { have arrived at this conclusion,
Do not hesitate to accept this conclusion, O
son of Dharma! These words of mine are
not shallow. Fair as they are, they will be
acceptable to all good men. ;


4t. Virtue, Profit, and Desire should
ali be equally pursued. That man who
follows only one of themis certainly not a
superior person. .He is middling who fol-
lows only two of them. He, on the other
hand, is the best who follows all the
three. ‘
42. Having said these words both briefly.
and fully, to those heroes, Bhima endued
with wisdom, surrounded by friends smear=
ed with sandal-paste, and decorated with
beautiful garlands and ornaments, remain
ed silent.


43. Then the just king Yudhisthira, that
foremost of virtuous men, endued with
great learning, thinking only for some time
upon the words spoken by all of them, and
thinking all those speeches to be false phi-
losophy himself spoken as follows: ,


Yudhisthira said :—~

44. Forsooth, all-of you have settled
conclusions regarding the scriptures, and
all of you. know well the authorities, I
have heard these words,


45. Listen now, with rapt atterition, to
what I say to you. He who is not employ-
ed in virtue or in sin, he wha does not at-
tend to Profit, or Virtue, or Desire, who is
above all shortcomings, who regards gold
andaclod of Earth with equal eyes, be- —
comes freed trom pleasure and pain andthe |
necessity of accomplishing his purposes.


43. All creatures are subject to birth
All are liable to decay and
change. Risen to theic senses by the vari-
ous benefits and evils of life, all of them
speak highly of liberation, We do not
know, however, wliat liberation is.


47. The Self-sprung and divine Brafi<
man has said that there is no liberation .
for him who is fettered with ties of attach«
ment and love. The tearned, however,
seek Extinction, Therefore, one should


252


never regard anything as either pleasant or
unpleasant. :
', 48 This view seems to be the best.
No one in this world can act as he likes. I
act precisely as I am made to do. The
great Creator makes all creatures move as
He wills. The Creator is Supreme. Know
this, allof you. ~

49. Noonecan, by his deed, acquire
what is unobtainable, That which is to be,
occurs. Know this. And since one who
has withdrawn himself from the three-fold
objects may acquire liberation, it seems,
therefore, that liberation yields the highest
good, .


Vaishampayana continued :—

‘go. Having heard all these njost signifi-
cant reasonable and pleasant words, Bhima
and others were filted with joy and joining
theic hands, bowed to that prince of Kuru’s
race.


5t. Oking, having heard those sweet
words of the king, acceptable to the heart,
and divested of dissonant sounds and
words, indeed, those foremost of men began
to speak highly of Yudhisthira.


Sz. The great and highly energetie son
of Dharma, in return, praised his auditors ;
and once more the king addressed Bhishma,
possessed of a high soul, for enquiring
about duties.” .


meet


CHAPTER CLXVIII.


(APADDHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continued.


Yudhisthira said :—

1. ‘O grandfather, O you of great wis-
. dom, I shall ask you a question,
should, O enhancer of the joy of the Kurus,
to describe it fully to me.


2. What kind of man are gentle by
nature? With whom.may the best friend-
ship exists? ‘ell us also who are able to
do good now and in the future.


3. I think that neither increasing
wealth, nor relatives, nor kinsmen occupy
that place which well-meaning friends-do.
-.4. A friend capable of hearing benefi-
cial advice, and also of doing good, is
highly care! You should O, foremost of
virtuous men, describe fully those subjects.


Bhishma said :—
5. Hear, O Yudhishthica, as I speak to
you fully ef those men with whom friend-


You’


"MAHABHARATA.


ships may be contracted and those witt
whom friendships should not be made.


6—14. One who is covetous, one
who has cast off the duties of his castes,
one who is dishonest, one who is a knave,.
one who is mean, one who is of sinfuf
deeds, one who suspects all, one who is idle,
one who is procrastinating, on® who is
of a crogked nature, one who is a butt of
universal censure oneewho dishonors the
life of his preceptor, one who is addicted to:
the seven well-known vices, one who shuns
Gistressed friends, one who is wicked, one
who is shameless, one whose eyes are al«
Ways on sin, one who is an atheist, one who
yilifies the Vedas, one whose senses are


f not under control, one who is lustful, one


who is untruthful, one who is forsaken by
all, one who disregards all restraints, one
who is deceitful, one who is destitute of
wisdom, one who is envious, one who
is sinful, one whose: conduct is bad,
one whose soul has not .been purified,
one who is cruel, one who is a gambler,
one who always tries to injure friends,
one who covets au other’s wealth, that
wicked man who is never content with what.
another may give him according to his
means, one who is never pleased witit
his friends, O foremost of men, one who
becomes angry on bad occasions, one
who is of restless mind, one who quarrels
without cause, that sinful man who feels:
no scruple in deserting well-meaning
friends, that wretch who always seeks his
own interests and who, O king, falls out
with friends when these do him a very
slight injury or do him a wrong unknow-
ingly, one who acts like au enemy but
speaks like a friend, one who is perverse
in perception, one who does not see his own
good, one who never finds pleasure in what
is good fer himself or others, should be
shunned.


15—16. One who drinks Wine, one who
hates others, one who is angry, one who is
merciless, one who feels pain on seeing
other’s happiness, onte who injures friends,
one who always kills living creatures, one
who is ungrateful, one who is vile, should
be shunned. Friendship should never be
contracted with any of them. Likewise,
no friendship should be made with hinr
who is always busy with seeing the faults
of others. Listen now to me as I mention
the persons with whom friendship may be
contracted,


17—1g.. The well-born, the eloquent,
the polite, the learned and scientific men,
they that are of beautiful and pleasant fea-
tures, the accomplished and meritorious per-
sons, those who are free from covetousness,
those whe are neyer. worn out with labour


SHANTI PARVA.


253


those who are good to their friends, the Bhishma said:— _


grateful, those who keep varied information
and knowledge, those who are shorn of
avarice, those who are endued_ with agree-
able qualities, those who are firm in truth,
those who have subjugated their senses,
those who are devoted to athletic and other
exercises, those- who are. nobly born, those
who multiply their families, those who are
shorn of faults, those who are possessed of
fame, should be accepted by kings for
making friendship with them.


20—25. Those, again, O king, who be-
come pleased and contented if one treats
them according to the best of his powers,
those who never yet angry on occasions
when anger should not be displayed, those
who never become displeased without
sufficient cause, those persons who are
well-read in the science of Profit and who
even when annoyed, can keep their minds
quiet, those who give themselves up to the
service of friends at personal sacrifice,
those who never cast off their friends, but
who remain unchanged (in their attach-
ment) like a red blanket made of wool,
those who never disregard, from anger, those
who are poor, those who never dishonor
young women by giving way to lust and
loss of judgment, those who never show
wrong paths to friends, those who are
trustworthy, those who always practise
tighteousness, those who consider gold
and clod of earth with an equal eye, those
who are devoted to friends and well-wish-
ers, those who collect their own people
and try to be friend them, without caring
for. their own dignity and their own
respectability, should be oonsidered as
persons with whom (friendship) showd be
formed. Indeed, the kingdoms of that
king spread on all sides, like the light of
the moon, who makes friendship with such
superior men, ; :


26, Friendship should be formed with
men who are well-practised in weapons,
who have completely subjugated their
anger, who are always strong in battle
and are highly born, and are of good beha-
viour, and varied accomplishments. °


- ‘27. Amongst the vicious men, O sinless
one, that i have mentioned, the vilest,
O king, are those who are ungrateful and
who injure friends, ‘Those wicked persons
should be shunned by all. ‘his, indeed,
is a settled injunction.’


Yudhisthira said :—

28. “I wish-to hear fully this description.
Tell me who they are who injure friends
and ungratelul persons,”


+ 29. ‘I shall recite to you an old story
‘tthe incidents of which took place in the
country, O king, of the Mlecchas that
lies to the north.


go. There was acertain Brahmana of the
middle country. He had no Vedic learn=
ing. (One day), seeing a prosperous
village, the man entered it from desire
of getting alongs.


3t. In that village lived a very rich robber
conversant with the characterertics of alt
the castes, devoted to the Brahmanas, firm
in truth, and always engaged in making
gifts, anes: ; ;

32. Going tothe house of that robber,
the Brahmana begged for alms. Indeed,
he prayed fora house to live in and the
necessaries of life lasting for a year,


33. Thus begged by the Brahmana,
the robber gave him a -ptece of new .cloth
.with its ends complete, and a young widow.


34. Getting all those things from the
tobber, the Brahmana become filled with
joy. Gautama began to live happily in
that big house given to him by the robber.


35. He began to help the relatives and
kinsmen of the female slave the robber.
chief gave him. Thus he lived for many
years in that prosperous village of hunters.


36.37. He began to practise with
great zeal the art of archery, Every day,
like the other robbers living there, Gauta-
ma, king, went into the forest and
killed a large number of wild cranes.
Always engaged in killing living creatures,
he became well-skilled in that act and soon
became shorn of mercy. For his intimacy
with robbers he became one dike one
of them.


38. Living happily in that robber village
for many months, he killed a number of
wild cranes.


39. One day another Brahmana came
to that village. Hewas clad in rags and
deer-skins and bore matted locks on his
head. Of highly pure conduct, he was
devoted to the study of the Vedas.


40. Of a humble disposition, of restricted
diet, devoted to the Brahmanas, well-read
in the Vedas, and observant of Brahma~
charyya vows, that Brahmana had been a
dear friend. of Gautama and belonged to
that part of the country from which
Gautama had come. . ‘


4t. In course of his peregrinations, as
already said, the Brabmana came to that
robber village where Gautama was living,
He never accepted any food if given by a


254


Shudrd and, therefore, began to look for the
house of a Brahmana there.


42,
direction in that village filled with robber-
families. At last that foremost of Brah-
manas came to the house of Gautama.


_ 43. Itso happened that just then Gau-
tama also, returning from the forest,
was entering his house.’ The two friends
meé, : :


@ ~
44. Armed with bow and sword, he care
ried on his shoulders a load of killed cranes,
and his bedy was covered with the blood
that trickled down from the bag on his


shoulders.


’ 45. Seeing that man who looked like a
cannibal and who had fallen away from the
pure practices of his caste, and entering his

ouse, the newly-arrived guest, recognising
him, O king, said these words :—~


* 46. What is this that you are doing
here out of ignorance. You are a Brah-
‘nana, and the perpetuater of a Brahmana
family. Born ina respectable family be-
Jonging to the Middle country, how is it
that you have, become like a robber in your
conduct, ;


47, Recollect,O twice-born one, your
famous kinsmen of former times, all of
whom were well-read in the Vedas.. Born
in their family, alas, you have siulled it.


' 48. Awake yourself by your owt exer-
tions, Remembering the power, the con-
‘duct, the Teacning, the self-control, the
mercy (which belong to your caste },
leave this your present house, O twice-born
one. ;


49. Thus spoken’ta by that well-meaning
friend of his, O king, Gautama answered
him ia great.distress of heart, saying,—O
foremost of twice-born ones, Iam poor. I
have no knowledge of the Vedas. Know,
O best of Brahmanas, that I have taken up
ny quarters here for the sake of money
only.


5t. Seeing you, however, I am blest
to-day. We shall together leave this place
tomorrow. Do you spend the night here
with me, 7


-.52. ‘Thus accosted, the newly-arrived
Brahmana. full of mercy as he was, passed
the night there,. without touching anything.
Though hungry and requested again and
again, the guest refused to touch any food
in that house.


Accordingly he wandered in every.


_MAHABHARATA.


® CHAPTER CLXIX.


(APADDHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continued.


Bhishma said :—

t. After the expiration of that night, and
that best of Brahmanas had left the house,
Gautama issuing from his house, began to
proceed towards the sea, O Bharata.


2. © the way he saw some sea-fa ring
merchants. With that caravan of mer-
chants he proceeded towards the sea. ~


3. It so took place, however, O king,
that large. caravan was attacked, while
passing through a mountain valley, by an
infuriate elephant. Almost all the persons
were killed, ‘


4. Somehow escaping from that great
danger, the Brahmana Aled towards the
north for saving his life, not knowing where
he went.


§. Separated from the caravan and
gone to 4 great distance, he began to travel
alone in a forest, like a Kimpurusha.


6. At last coming upon a road leading
towards the ocean, he travelled on till he
reached a chartning and heavenly forest
filled with blossoming frees.


7. It was adorned with mango trees.
which carried flowers and fruits throughout
the year. {t appeared like the garden of
Nandana (in heaven) and was inhabited
by Yakshas and Kinnaras.


8. It was also decked with Shalas Pal-
myras, Tamalas, and with clusters of black
aloes, and many large sandal trees.


9. “Upon the charming table-lands that
he behield there, fragrant with perfumes of
various kinds; birds of* the best species
were always heard to send out their sweet
notes.


s
to. Other birds, called Bharundas and
having faces like human beings, and those
called Bhulingas, and others belonging to
mountainous regions and to the sea, poured
forth their sweet notes.


11. Gautama went through that forest,
listening, as he went, to those delightful
and charming notes of nature’s songsters.


1z. On his way he saw a very charm-
ing and level spot of land covered with
golden sands and resembling heaven itself,
O king, in its beauty.


“13. On that plot was huge and beauti-
ful banian with aspherical top. Having
numberless branches which wore like the
parent tree in beauty and size, that banian
looked like an umbrella set over the plains,


’


“ments that he wore and that


’ SHANTI


14. The spot underneath that beauti-
ful tree was drenched with water perfumed
with the most fragrant sandal. Highly
beautiful and abounding with sweet flowers
all around, the spot appeared like the
court of the Grandfather himself,


15. Seeing that charming and _ peerless
Spot, filled with blosssoming trees, sacred,
and looking like the house ‘of a very god,
Gautama was highly pleased. 5


1617. Arrived there, he sat himself,
down with a_ delighted mind. While
Sitting there, O son of Kunti, a sweet,
charming, and auspicious breeze, carrying
the perfume of many kinds of flowers,
began to blow softly, cooling the limbs of
Gautama and filling him with divine
pleasure, O king.


tg. Fanned by that sweet-scented breeze,
the Brahmana became refreshed, and for
the pleasure he felt he sogn fell asleep.
peenowalle the sun set behind the setting
ills,


19. When the shining luminary entered
his chambers in the west and the evening
twilight came, a bird that was the best
of his species, returned there, which was’
his home, from the regtons of Brahman,


20, His name was Nadijangha and he
was a great friend of the Creator. He was
a prince of Cranes, endued with great wis-
dom, and a son of (the sage) Kashyapa.'


21. He was also known widely on Earth
by the nante of Rajdharman. Indeed, he
excelled every one on Earth in fame and ,
wisdom. The child of a celestial maiden,
endued with great beauty and learning, he
shone like a celestial.

22. Decorated with the many orna-
were as
brilliant as the sun himself, that child of
a celestial girl shone in great beauty.


23. Seeing that bird:. arrived there,
Gautama was stricken with wonder. Worn
out with hunger and thirst, the Brahmana
began to look atthe bird from desire of
killing him,


Rajdharman said :—

24, Welcome, O Brahmana! By good
luck have! got you to-day in my house!
The sun is set. The evening twilight is
come.

25. Having come to my house you are
to-day my dear and excellent guest!
Having received my adorations according
to the rites laid down in the scriptures, you
may go where you like tomorrow morning.


rome


PARVA, 255


CHAPTER CLXX.


(APADDHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continued.


Bhishma said—

1. Hearing these sweet words,
Gautama was filled with wonder. Feeling.
at the same time a great curiosity, he
looked at Rajdharman without being able
to with draw his eyes from him.


Rajadharman said :—


2. O Brahmana, I am the son of
Kashyapa by oheof the daughters of (he
sage) Dhaksha, Highly meritoritorious
as you are, you are my guest to-day! You
are welcome,, O foremost of Brahmana,.


Bhishma said :—


3. Having offered him hospitality ac
cording to .the scriptural rites, the crane
made an excellent bed of the Shala flowerg
that lay all around.


4. He also gave him several large fishes
caught from the deep waters of the Bhagi-
rathi. . \
- 5. Indeed, the son of ' Kashapaya
offered for the acceptance of his guest
hoi a burning fire and certain large
shes, :


6. After the Brahmana had eaten and
hecame satisfied, the bird having asceti<-
cism for his wealth began to fan him with
his wings for removing his fatigue.

7. Seeing his guest seated at his ease;
he asked him about his birth. The mati
answered, saying,—I am a Brahmana by.
Ee name of Gautama !-and then became
silent. :


8. The bird offered tis guest a soft bed
made of leaves and perfumed with many
sweet-scented flowers. Gautama lay on it,
and felt great happiness. _ -,


g. When Gautama had: laid’ himself
down, the eloquent son of Kashyapa, who
was like Yama himself in his knowledge
of duties, asked him about the cause of
his arrival there.


to. Gautama answered him, saying, I
am, O gteatone,very poor. For acquir+
ing riches I wish to go to the sea.

11, The son of Kashyapa’ cheerfully
told him,—You should not feel any anxiety,
You shall succeed, O. foremost of Brahmas
nas, and shall return bome with property. |


12. The sage Vrihaspati has mentioned
four kinds of expedients for the acquisi-
of wealth, vzs., inheritiance, sudden acqui-


| sition due to good luck or the favor of


256


the gods, acquisition by labour, and ac-
quisition through the help or kindness of
friends.


13. I have become your friend. I
entertain good feelings towards you! I
shall, therefore, try in such a way that
you may acquire wealth.


14, The night passed away and morn-
ing came.
from bed, the bird said, Go, O amiable one,
along this very path and you are sure to
succeed.


15. At the distance of about three
Yojanas from this place, there is a power-
ful king of the Rakshasas. Highly strong
as he is, his name is Virupaksha, and he
is a friend of mine.


16. Go to him, O foremost of Brah-
manas! 4That chief, at my request, will,
forsooth, give you'as much wealth as you
wish to have.


17. Thus addressed, O king, Gautama
cheerfully started from that place, eating
on the way, to his best satisfaction, fruits
sweet as nectar.


18. Seeing the sandal and aloe and
birch trees that stood along the road, and
enjoying their refreshing shade, the Brah-
mana went on quickly.


19. He then reached the city of
Meruvraja. It had lare porches made of
stone, and high stone walls. It was also
girted on all sides with a ditch, and large
pieces of rock and engines of many kinds
were kept in readiness on the ramparts.


* 20, He soon became known to the
highly intelligent Rakshasa chief O king,
as a dear guest sent to him by the chief’s
friend (the crane). The chief received
Gautama very gladly.

2t. The king of the Rakshasas then,
O Vudhishthira, ordered his attendants,
saying,—Bring Gautama soon here from
the gate. ;


22. At the behest of the king, certain
persons, quick as hawks, went out from the
splendid palace of their ruler, and proceed-
ing to the gate accosted Gautama.


23. The royal messengers, O monarch,
said to that Brahmana,—Come quickly,
the king wishes to see you.


24. You may have heard of the king
of the Rakshasas, Virupaksha by name,
endued with great courage. He is im-
patient of seeing you! Come quickly and
delay not.


25. Thus accosted, the Brahmana,
forgetting his exhaustion in his surprise,
ran with the messengers. Seeing the


Seeing his guest rise cheerfully |


MAHABHARATA,


great prosperity of the city, he was filled
with wonder.


26. He soon entered the king’s palace
in the company of the messengers, desir=
ous of seeing the king of the Rakshasas,


tomer


CHAPTER CLXXI.


(APADDHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—Continued,


Bhishma said :—


1. Conducted into a spacious aparts
ment, Gautama was introduced to the king
of the Rakshasas. Adored by the latter;
he sat on an excellent seat.


2. The king asked him about his caste
and his practices, his study of the Vedas
and his observance of the Brahmacharyya
vow. The Brahmana, however, without
answering the other questions, only stated
his name and caste.


3. Having ascertained only the name
and the caste of his guest, and finding
that he was shorn of Brahmanic splendour
and Vedic studies, the king next enquired
about the country of his residence.


The Rakshasa said :—


4. Where is your residence, O blessed
one, and to what race does your wife
belong? Tell us truly, Deg not fear.
Trust us without anxiety,


Gautama, said :—


3. I belong by birth to the Middle
country. I liveina village of hunters.
have married a Shudra woman who had,
pect a widow. What I tell you is the
truth.


Bhishma said :—


6. The king then began to think as td
what he should do. Indeed, the king began
to think how he might acquire merit.


7. He said to himself,—This man is
by birth a Brahmana. He is, again, a
friend of the great Rajadharman. He has


been sent to me by that son of Kashyapa. .


8. 1 must do as my friend desires mes
Heis my very intimate with me. He is
my. brother, and a dear relative. He is,
indeed a friend, of my heart.


g. On this day of the month of Kartika,
a thousand Brahmanas of the highest
order areto -be entertained in my house.
This Gautama also shall be entertained
with them and I shall give wealth to him
too.


" SHANTI PARVA,


10. This is a satted day. Gautama

has‘come here as a guest. The wealth that

-isto be given away is ready. What is
there then to think of. :


11. jJast about this time a thousand
Brahmanas, endued with great learning,
with bodies purified by baths and adorned
with sandal-paste and flowers, and clad
in long ‘robes of linen, came there.


42, The Rakshasa king Virupaksha,
‘O monarch, received the guests, as they
‘came, duly and according to the rites
‘sanctioned in the scriptures.


13. By the order of the king, skins
were spread out of them. The royal ser-
vants then, O best of the Bharatas, spread
‘mats of Kusha grass on the ground.


_ 14. Having been duly adored by the
‘king, those foremost of Brahmana§s, sat
down on those seats.
‘once more adored his guests, according to
the ordinance, with sesame seeds, green
blades of grass, and water,


15. Some of them: were selected for re-
presenting the Vishwedevas, the Pitris,
and the gods of fire. These were smeared
with sandal-paste, and flowers were offered


to them. They were also worshipped with | Highly intelligent as he was, he adored


‘the other sorts of costly offerings.


16—21. After such worship, every one of
them looked as effulgent as the moon in


the sky. Then bright and polistiea golden |%


‘plates, adorned with engravings, and
filled wich tich viands prepared with clar-
fied butter and honey, were given to those
Brahmanas. Every year in the month of
Ashada and Magha, a great number of
Brahmanas used to receive from the Raksha-
sa chief, after proper honors, the most ex-
‘cellent food which they desired. Especially,


on the day of full moon in the month of |


Kactika, after the termination of autumn,
the king use to give to the Brahmanas
much wealth of various kinds, including
gold, silver, jewels, gems, pearls, costly
‘diamonds, stones of the lapis lazuli variety,
deer-skitis, and skins of the Ranka deer.
indeed, O Bharata, throwing a mass of
wealth of various sorts for giving it away
as Dakshina, the powerful irupaksha,
addressing those foremost of Brahmanas,
said to them,—Take from these jewels and
gems as much as you wish and can hope to
carry away.

22. He alsosaid to them, O Bharata,
these words:—-Taking those golden plates,
and vessels which you have used for your
dinner, ‘go away, QO foremost of Brah-
manas.


23. When these words were uttered by
the great Rakshasa chief, those foremost


33


The Rakshasa chief |


257


of Brahmanas, teok as much wealth as
eath desired.

24. Adored with those rich jewels and
gems, those best of Brahmanas, clad in
excellent cobes, were filled witti delight,

25—26. Having restrained the Raksha-
sas that had come to his palace from various
countries, the Rakshasa king, once more,


| addressed those Brahmanas and said,—


This one day, ye twite-born ones, you
need have no fear from the Rakshasas here.
Sport you as you wish, and then go away
quickly.

27. Then, teaving that place, the Brah-
manas, went away in all directions quickly.
Gautama also, having taken up a heavy
quantity of gotd immediately, went away.


28. Carrying the toad with difficulty,
he reached the former banian tree. He sat
down, fatigued, worn out, and hungry.


29. While Gautama was taking rest
there, that best of birds, viég., Rajadhar-
man, O king, came there. Devoted to
friends, he gladdened Gautama by wel-
coming him.

30. By flapping his wings he began to
fan his guest and remove his fatigue.


eee and made arrangements for his
food,


31-32. Having eaten and refreshed
himself, Gautama began to think,—
Heavy is the load which I have taken of
bright gotd, actuated by covetousness and
fotly. I have a tong way to travel. I
have no food by which I can live on my


| way.


33. What should I do for keeping my
life?—Thus he thought. It so happened
that even upon much thinking he found.no
food which he could eat on the way.


34. Ungrateful as he was, O foremost


of men, he thus thought.—This prince of


cranes, so large and having a heap of
flesh, is by my side.

34. Killing and bagging him, I shall
leave this place and go away quickly.’


—
CHAPTER CLXXII.
(APADDHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).—<Continued,
Bhishma said :—~
1, There, undér that banian tree for
the protection of his guest, the prince of


birds had lighted and kept up a fire with
high and burning flames.


”


258


2. On one side of the fire, the bifl-}“


slept confidently. The ungrateful and
winced wretch prepared to kill his sleeping
ost.


3. With the heip of that blazing fire
“he killed the trustful bird, and having
killed hima, became filled with joy, never
thinking there was sin in what he did.


4. Clearing off the feathers and the
down, he roasted the flesh on that fire.
Then taking it up with the gold he had
brought, the Brahmana fled quickly from
that place.


5. The next day, the Rakshasa king,
Virupaksha, said to his son, Alas, O son,
1 do not see Rajdharman, that best of
birds, torday,


6. Every morning he goes to the regions
of Brahman for worshipping the Grand-
father. While returning, he never goes
home without seeing me.


7. These two mornings and two nights
have passed away, and the has not come to
my house. My mind, therefore, is not in
peace. You enquire after my friend.


8. Gautama, who came here, is shorn
of Vedic learning and Brahmanic efful-
gence. He has seen the abode of my friend.

reatly fear that wretch of I Brahmanas

as kilted Rajdharman,


g. Addicted to-evil practices and of
wicked understanding, I read him through
by the signs he showed. Without mercy,
‘of cruel and grim visage, and of wicked
disposition, that vilest of men is like a rob-
ber. That Gautama has gone to the house
of my friend. Far this reason my heart is
extremely anxious,


ao. O son, going hence with great
speed to the house of Rajdharman, learn
whether that pure-souled bird ig still alive!
Do not delay.


It, Thus addressed by his father, the
prince, accompanied by other Rakshasas,
went away. quickly. Going to the foot of
that banian, he saw the remains of
Rajdharman, .


12. Weeping with sorrow the son of
the mtelligent king of the Rakshasas, ran
quickly to the best of his power, for seizing
Gautama, :


- 13. The Rakshasas had not to go far
when they caught the Brahmana and found
the body of Rajdharman shorn of wings,
bones, and feet.


14. ‘Taking the captive with them, the
Rakshasas returned quickly te Meruvraja,
and showed the king the mutilated body
of Rajdharman, and that ungrateful and
sinful wretch, Gautama,


A :
MAHABZIARATA.,


15—16. Sceing the remains of his
friend, the king, with bis counsellers and


priest, began to weep aloud. Loud lamentas -


tions were heard in his house.


17. The entire city of the Rakshasa
king,—men, women, and children,—was
plunged in grief. The king then ordered
his son, saying,—Let this sinful wretch be
killed! Let these Rakshasas_ here eat
merrily bis flesh.


18—19. Of sinful deeds, of sinful habits,
of sinful soul, and used to sin, this wretch,
I think, should be killed by you !—Thus
addressed by the Rakshasa king, many
Rakshasas of dreadful prowess expressed
their reluctance to eat the flesh of that
sinner,


20. Indeed, those night-rangers addres-
sing theic king, said,—Let this vilest of
men be handed over to the robbers.


21. Lowering their heads to their king,
they told him so, adding, you should not
give us this sinful wretch for our food.


22. The king said to them,—Let it be
so! Let this ungrateful person be forthwith
delivered to the robbers, .


23 Thus ordered by him, the Rakshasas,
armed with lances and battle-axes, hacked
that sinful wretch into pieces and gave
them away tothe robbers. ~


24. It so came about that even the very
robbers refused to eat the flesh of that
vile man. ‘Though cannibals, O king, they
would not eat an ungrateful person.


25. . There is expiation, O king, for one
who slays a Brahmana, for one who drinks
wine, for one who steals, for one that has
not fulfilled a vow.- But there is no expia-


‘tion for an ungrateful person,


26. That cruel and mean man who does
injury to a friend and turns ungrateful, is
not eaten even by the very cannibals nor
by the worms that feed on carrion.


CHAPTER CLXXIIL


{APADDHARMANUSHASANA
PARVA).==Concluded.


Bhishma said :—


i. The Rakshasa king then caused a
funeral pyre to be made for that king of
Cranes and decked with jewels, gems,
perfumes, and, costly dresses. :


2. Settiug fire to it with the body of that
prince of birds, the powerful king of the


Rakshasas caused the obsequial rites of his
‘


N


SHANFI PARVA.


{riend “to be performed according to the
Ordinance. :


3. Atthat time, the auspicious goddess
Surabhi, the daughter of Daksha, appeared
in the sky above the place where the pyre
ned been made. Her breasts were full of
milk.


4. From her mouth, O sinless king,
froth mixed with milk dropped upon the
funeral pyre of Rajdharman.


5. Thereat the prince of cranes - became
revived. Rising up, came to his friend
Virupakslia, the king of Rakshasas.


6 At this time, the king of the gods
himself came to the city of Virupaksha.
Addressing the Rakshasa king, Indra said,
—By good luck, you have revived the
prince of cranes.


7. The king of the gods further recited
to Virupaksha the old story of the course
imprecated by the Grandfather upon that
best of birds named Rajdharman.

8—g. Addressing the king he -said.—
Once on atime, O monarch, this prince of
cranes did not come to the region of Brah-
man when he was required. In anger the
Grandfather said to this prince of birds,—
Since this vile crane has not come to-day in
my assembly, therefore, that wicked one
shall not soon die.


to. In consequence of these words of
the Grandfather, the prince of cranes,
though killed by Gautama, has been* res-
tored to life, by the nectar with which his
body was drenched,


tt. After Indra had become silent,
Rajadharman, having bowed unto the king
of the gods, said, O king of gods, if you
wish to show me favour, then let my dear
friend Gautama be restored to life.


12. Hearing these words of his, Vasa-
va, O king, sprinkled ambrosia over the
Brahmana Gautama and restored him
to life.


13. Coming to his friend Gautama who

still bore on Nis shoulders the load of gold,
- the king of cranes embraced him and felt
great joy.

14. Dismissing Gautama of sinful
deeds, with his wealth, then Rajadharman,
that prince of cranes, returned to his own
abode.


.t§. At the due houe he went (the next


day) to the Grandfather’s region. The
latter honored the great bird with such
attentions as are shown to a guest,


16. Gautama also, coming back to his
home in the village of the hunters, be-


259


got many siaful children upon his Shudra
wife. ;


- 17. A great curse was imprecated upon
him by the fgods that having begotten,
within a few years, upon the body of his re-
married wife many children, that ungrateful
sinner should sink into a dreadful hell for
many years.


18 All this, O Bharata, was described,
to me formerly by Narada. Remembering:
the incidents of his important story, O best
a Bharata’s race, 1 have recited it to you
ully.


19. Whence can an ungrateful person
acquire fame? Where is his place?
Whence can he enjoy happiness? An un-
grateful person should not be trusted. An ”
ungrateful person can never escape.


20. No person should injure a friend
He who injures 4 friend sinks into dreadfu
and everlasting hell.


21. Every one should be grateful, anid
every one should try to do good to hs*
friends.’ Everything may be got from e
friend, Honors may be got from friends,


22, For friends one. may enjoy various
objects of life. By the exertions of friends,
one may escape from various sorts of
danger and distress, He who is wise
would honour his friends to the best of his
power.


23. An ungrateful, shameless and sinful
wretch should be shunned by the wise.
One who injures his friends is a despicable
character. Such a sinful person is the vilest
of men,


24. I have thns told you, O foremost of
alt virtuous men the characteristics of a
sinful wretch who is stained by ingratitude


and who injures his friend. What else do
you wish to hear.’


Vaishampayana said :—

25. ‘ Hearing these words spoken by the.
great Bhishma, Yudhisthica, O Janame-
jaya, was highly pleased.” .


Cel


CHAPTER CLXXIV.
(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).
Yudhishthiva said:-


1. “You have, O grandfather, deseri-
bed the sacred duties of kings regarding the
persons in distress. O king, you should tell
me now those foremost of duties of those
who lead the (four) modes of life,’!


4


260


Bhishma, said :-—~


- 2 ‘Religion has many.doots. The
observance of the duties sanctioned by reli-
gion can never be useless. Duties have been
laid down regarding every mode of life.
The fruits. of Penance with regard to the
development of the Soul, are to be had in
this world.

3. The object to which one devotes


oneself, whatever it may be, O Bharata,
and nothing else,.appears to one as the


highest of acquisitions fraught with the |


greatest of blessings.

4. When‘one meditates properly, one
comes to know that the things of this world
are useless as straw. Forsooth, one is then
freed from attachment of those things.

5. When the world, O Yudhishthira,
which is full of shortcomings, is so framed,
every fintelligent man, should try to acquire
the liberation of his soul.’


Yudhisthira said :—
5. “Pet me, O grandfather, by what
éondition of mind should one kill his grief


when he.loses his riches. og his wife, or
son, or father,’


Bhishma said :—.


7. ‘When one’s wealth is fost, or one’s | ¥ he
| joy originates sorrow, and sorrow comes


wife or son or father ts dead, he certainly
says to oneself,—Alas, it is a great sorrow.
— But then one should, by the help of
meditation, try to kill that grie?.

8, R
story of the speech that a twice-born friend
of his, coming to Senajit’s court, made to
that king.


_ 9. Seeing the monarch stricken with
grief and burning with sorrow on account of
the death of his son, the Brahmanana said
to that king of very cheerless heart :—


10. Why are you stupefied ? You are
without anv intelligience. You are your-
self an object of -grief, why do you grieve
(for others) 7~ A few days hence others will
grieve for you, and in their turn they will
be grieved for by others still. :


11. Yourself, "myself, and others who
wait upon you, O king, shall all repair
whence all of us have come.


Senajit said :— ;

32. What is that intelligence, what that
penance, O learned Brahmana, what that
concentration of mind, O you having asce-
ticism for wealth, what that knowledge,
and what that learning, by gaining which
you do not give way to grief ?


arding it is mentioned the old |


MAHABHARATA.


The Brahmana said :—~


13% See, all creatures,—the  sitperior,
the middling, ‘and the inferior—on account
of their respective acts, and entangled in
sorrow.


14. {£ do not consider even my own self
to be mine. On the other hand, I consider
the whole world to be mine. [ again con-
sider all this as much mine as it belongs to
others, Grief ecarnot attack me for this
thought.


- 14. Having gained such an understand-
ing, 1 do no give way to joy or to grief.


16. As two pieces of wood floating on
the sea meet together at one time and are
again separated, so is the union of (living}
creatures in this world.


tz. Sons, grandsons, kinsmen_ relatives,
are all of this nature. One should never
feel attachment for them, for separation
with them is inevitable.


18, Your son came from am invisible
quarter. He has gone away and become
invisible. He did not know ‘you. You
did not know him. Who are you and for
whom do you grieve. *


1g. Grief is the child of the disease
created by desire. Happiness again comes.
when the disease of {desire is cured. Fronr


again and again.

20. Sorrow comes. after joy, and joy
after sorrow. The joys and sorrows of
human beings are revolving on a wheel,


21. After happiness sorrow has come
to you. You will again enjoy happiness
for good and no one enjoys happiness for
good, :


. 22, The body is the abode of botl
sorrow .and lappiness» An embodied
creature suffers the consequences of what-
ever acts he performs with the help of his
body. .

23. — Life comes with the creation of the
body. The two exjst together, and the
two die together.


24. Men of impure souls, attached to é
worldly objects by various fettets, disappear
like embankments of sand_in water.


25. Miseries of various sorts begotter
by ignorance, act like pressers of oil-seeds,
for attacking all creatures for their attach-
ments; these press them like oil-seeds in
the oil-making machine subjecting thenr
to the round of re-bicths.

26. Man, for the sake of his wife,


commits numberless evil deeds, but suffers
alone -various kinds of misery both in this


_and the next worid.


SHANTI PARVA,


27. All men, attached to children, wives
kinsmen and relatives sink in the miry sea
of sorrow like wild elephants, when shorn
of strength, sinking in a miry slough.


28. Indeed, O king, upon loss of wealth
or son or kinsmen_ or relatives, man suffers
great misery burning -him like a forest
fire.
ag. ‘All this, viz., joy and grief, exis-
tence and non-existence depend upon
destiny. 2


30. One having friends as well as one
having none, one having enemies as well
asone having none, one having wisdom
as well as one shorn of jt, each and every
one amongst these, enjoys happiness
through destiny.


31. Friends are not the root of one’s
happiness. Enemies are not the root of
one’s misery. Wisdom cannot bring on
wealth ; wealth cannot give happiness.


32. Intelligence cannot give wealth, nor
is stupidity the cause of poverty. Only
a wise man} and none else, understands
the order of the world.


33. Of the intelligent, the heroic, the
foolish, the cowardly, the idiotic, the
learned, the weak, or the strong, happiness
comes to him only for whom it is or-
Gained,


34. The cow belongs to the calf, to the
cowherd who is her master, and to the
thief. Indeed, she is his who drinks her
milk.”

35. They whose understandings are
dormant, and they who have that state of
the mind which lies beyond the range of the
intellect, succeed in enjoying happiness.
Only they who are between - these two
classes, suffer misery.


36. The wise find pleasure in the two
extremes but not in the intermediate states.
The sages have said that the attainment
of any of these two extremes form happi-
ness. Misery lies in the intermediate states
between the two.


- 37. Those who have succeeded in acquir-
ing real happiness, and who have become
freed from the pleasures and pains of this
world, and who are shorn of envy, are
never: moved by either the accession of
wealth or its loss.


38. Those who have not gained that
intelligence which brings on real happiness,
but who have got over fally and ignorance
yield ta excessive joy and excessive misery.


39. Men.who have no ideas of right or
wrong, who are . beside themselves with
pride and with success over others, give way
to transports of delight like the celestials,

. : i;


:


26t


40. Happiness must terminate if misery.
Idleness is misery ; while cleverness (in -
action) is the root of felicity. Affuence
and prosperity live in a clever man, but not
in an idle wight. ;


4t. Be it happines or be it misery, eb
it pleasant or be it otherwise, what comes
to one should be enjoyed or put up with an
unconquered heart. ; :


42. Every day a thousand occasions for
sorrow,-and a hundred occasions for fear
attack an ignorant and foolish man but
a wise man is never so affected,


- 43. Sorrow can never touch an intelfi-+
gent man, one who has acquired wisdom,
one who obeys the instructions of his elders,
one who has no envy, and one who has
controlled his self, ‘


44. Depending upon such an under
Standing, and guarding his heart (against
the influences of desire and the passions),
the wise man should work on in this world.
Indeed, sorrow cannot affect him who knows
that Supreme Self from which everything
emanate and to which everything disap-
pears,


45. The very root of grief, or heart-
burning, or sorrow or of action, should, even
if it be a part of one’s body, be cast off.


46. That object, whatever it may be,
which one considers as his own, is- a source
of grief and heart-burning.


47. If objects, of desire, are renounced
they become sources of happiness. The
man who follows objects of desire is
ruined. in that pursuit. :


48. Neither the happiness which is
derived from a gratification of the senses
nor that great happiness which ene may
enjoy in heaven, even comes up to a six-
teenth part of the happiness which origi-
nates from the destruction of all desire.


49. The consequences of pristine deeds,
right or wrong, affect the wise and the
foolish, the brave and the mind.


50. Thus joy and sorrow, the agreeable
and the disagreeable, continually revulve
among living creatures.


st. Thus knowing an_ intelligent and
wise man lives at ease. A person should
renounce all his desires, and never give
way to anger.


- §2. This anger originates in the heart
and becomes powerful there, This anger
which lives in the bodies of men_ and is
born in their minds, is described by the
wise as Death.


53. Whena person withdraws all his
desires like -a tortoise withdrawing all its


262


limbs, then its soul, which is self-luminous, !
can seeitself.

54. That object, whatever it may be,
for which one cherishes the notion of
mineness, becomes a source of grief and
heart-burning, ;


_ 55. When a person himself feels no fear
and is feared by no one, when he has no
desire and no hatred, he is then said to
attain to the state of Brahma.


56. Renouncing both truth and false-
hood, grief and joy, fear and courage, the
agreeable and the disagreeable, you may
acquire equanimity of soul. .

57. When a person does no. wrong to
any creature, in thought, word, or deed,
he is then said to attain to a state of
Brahma. ;


58. Healone enjoys true happiness who
cay renounce that thirst which cannot be
cast off by the misguided, which does not
decay with decrepitude, and which is con-
sidered as a fatal disease.


59. About it, O king, are heard the
verses sung by Pingala regarding the way
in which she had acquired eternal merit
even at a very unfavoueable time,


60. Having gone to the agpointed place,
a fallen woman of the name of. Pingala
could not enjoy the comparfy of her lover
through an accident. At that time of
great misery, she acquired equanimity of
soul.


Pingala said :—.

61. Alas, [have for many long years
lived ignorantly, by the side of that dear
Self in whom there is nothing but tranqui-
lity. Death has been at my door.
this, I did not, however, approach that Es+
sence of Purity. ;


62. shall cover this house of one co-
lumn and hine doors, z. ¢., body, (by means
of true Knowledge). hat woman is
there who considers that dear Supreme
Soul, even when He is so near, as really
dear,


63. I am now awake. I have been
roused from the sleep of ignorance. I am
no longer under the influence of desire.
Human lovers, who are, in fact, so many
embodiments of hell, shall no longer im-
pose upon me by approaching me lust-
fully. : i


64. Evil yields good through destiny or
theough pristine deeds. Roused from the
sleep of igworance, [ have renounced all
desire for worldly objects. I have gained
a complele mastery over my senses,


Ere |


MAHABHARATA.


65. One freed frém desire and hope
sleeps happily. Freedom from hope and
desire is happiness. Having renounced


desire and hope, Pingala sleeps happily.


Bhishma said :-—

66. Consoled with these and other
words of the learned Brahmana, king
Senajit enjoyed delight.and became very
happy.’


CHAPTER CLXXV. |


(MOKHADHARMA PARVA)—
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


1. | ‘' Fime, which destroys every created
thing, is rolling on. Tell me, O grand-
father, what is that good thing which one
should seek.


Bhishma said :—
2. Regarding it, O king, an old dis-

course between father and son, O Yudhis-

thira, is menrioned’ ;


3. <A certain Brahmana, O Partha, who
was given to the study of the Vedas, got a
very intelligent son who was called Me-
dhavin.


One day, the son, who was cognisant
of the truths of the religion of liberation,
and acquainted also with worldly affairs,
addressed his father given to the study of
the Vedas. ;


The son said :—


5. Seeing that the tease of human life is


passing away so very speedily, what should
a wise man do? O father, tell me the duties
which one should perform, \without failing
to mention the fruits. Having heard you,
I wish to practise those duties.


The sire said :—

6. O son, following the life of celibacy,
one should. first read the Vedas, Ue
should then wish for children for saving his
departed ancestors. Kindling his fire next,
he should try to celebrate the (prescribed)
sacrifices according to due rites. At last,
he should enter into woods for practising
contemplation. ;


The son said :—
7. When the world is thus encircled on

all‘sides and is thus attacked, and when

such irresistible things of dreadful conse-

quences fall upon it, how can you say these

words so calmly.

ip


SHANTI


The sire said :—

8. How is the world attacked? What
is that by which it is encircled? What
again, are those irresistible things of
dreadful consequences that fall upon it?
Why do you terrify me thus 2


The son said :—
Q. Death is what assails the world.


Decrepitude brings it about. Those irres--


istible objects which come and go away ate
the nights,


to. When I know that Death waits for
mone, how can | pass my days without
covering myself with the raiment of
knowledge.


tr. When passing away, each succeeds
hight lessens the lease of human life, the
wise man should consider the day to be
fruitless,


12. What man is there who would, tike
a fish ‘in a shallow water, feel happy ?
Death approaches 2 maw before all his
desires have been fulfilled.


13. Death takes away a person when
he is engaged in plucking flowers and
when his heart is otherwise busy, like a
tigness carrying away a ram.


14. Do you, this very day, do what is
for your well-being. Let not this death
approach, Death drags its victims before
their acts are done.


15. What should be done tomorrow
should be done to-day, and the deeds.of
the afternoon in the forenoon. Death does
not wait to see whether the acts of its
victim have all been done or not,


16. Who knows that Death will ‘not
spetose® him even to-day? In prime of
‘life one should begin the’ practice of
virtue. Lifeis fickle, 1f virtue be practised,
one will meet fame in this, and happiness
in the other, world.


17. Possessed by ignorafce, one is
ready to work hard for sons and wives..
Doing good or evil deeds, one brings them
up and advances their interest,


18. Like a tiger carrying away a sleep-
ing deer, Death takes away the man
addicted to the gratification of desire and

the enjoyment of sons and animals;


19. Before he has been able to pluck
the flowers which he seeks, before he has
been satiated with the acquisition of the
objects of desire, Death carries him away
like a tiger carrying away its prey.


20. Death attacks a man while he
enjoys the happiness arising@#from the
gtatification of desire, and while he still


PARVA. 264


thinks,—this has been done; this is be
done; this has been half-done,


2t. Death carries “.away the man,
whatever he is called according to his
calling, attached to his field, his shop, or
his home, before he has acquired che fruit
of his acts.


23. Death carries away the weal, the
strong, the brave, the timid, the idiotic,
and the learned, before any of these
acquires the fruits of his acts.


2%. When death, decrepitude, disease,
and grief originating from various causes,
are all living in your body, how is it that
you live as H you are petfectly hale,


24. Assoon asan embodiéd creature is
born, Decrepitude and Death follow him
to bring about his destruction.« All things,
mobile and immobile, are affected by these
two, é


2%. Theattachment which one feels for
living in villages and towns is considered as
the very mouth of Death. The forest, on
the other hand, is considered as the fold
withia which the senses may be penned up.
This is the injunction of the Shrutis.


26. The attachment a petson feels for
living In a village or town is like a cord
which fetters him strongly. Those that are
good break that cord and acquire liberation,
while they the gicked cannot break them.


27. Hewho'never injures living creatures
by thought, word, or deed, is never injured
by such agencies as wild beasts and lawless
men always destroying life and propetty. |


28. Nothing can resist the emissaries
of Death when they advance except Truth
which devours Untruth. Immortality, lives
in Truth.


29. For these réasons, one should
practise the vow of Truth; one should
devote himself to Truth ; one should accept
Truth for one’s: Veda; and controlling his
senses, one should defeat the Death by
Truth.


30. Both Immortality and Death are
in the body. One meets with Death
through ignorance and loss of judgment}
while Immortality is gained by Truth,


31. Ishalt, therefore, injure no one and
try to acquire Truth, and transgressing the
control of desire and . anger, consider
pleasure and pain impartially, and
gaining tranquillity, avoid Death like an
immortal.


32. When with the coming of the sea-
son the Sun will march towards the
north, I shall, centrolling my senses, en-
gage in the practice of self-denial in the


264


reflection of Vedantic truths, in the recita- |


tion of the mystic syllable Om, and in the
contemplation of the Supreme Self.


33. How can one like ‘me adore his
Maker with sanimal-sacrifices involving
cruelty, or satrifices of the body such as
Pishachas only can perform and such as
yield transitory fruits.


34. That person whose words, thoughts
penances, rénunciation, and Yoga medita-
tion, all depend on Brahma, acquires the
highest good. .


35. There is noeye which is equal to
that of Knowledge. There is no penance
like Truth. There is no sorrow like Attach-
ment. There is no happiness like Renun-
ciation, :


36. have sprung from Brahma through

_ Brahma. I shall devote myself to Brahma,

though I have no child. I shalt return to

Brahma, ~I do not require a son for rescu-
ing me,


37. A Brahmana can have no wealth
which is the state of being alone, the state
by virtue of which he can look upon every-
thing impartially, the practice of truthful-
ness, good conduct, patience, abstention
from injury, simplicity and avoidance of all
rites and sacrifices,


38. -Why do you, O Beahmana, care for
wealth or kinsmen and relagives and wives,
when you shall have to die? Seek your Seif


which is concealed in a cave. Where
are your grandfathers’ and where is your
sire, .


Bhishma said :—-


39. Do you also, O'king, act yourself
like the father (in this story), behaved him-
self devoted to the religion of Truth, after
having heard the words of his son,’


nS


CHAPTER CLXXV1L.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA.)~
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


1. ‘* Tell me, O grandfather, whence and
how happiness and misery approach the
rich, and the poor, but who follow different,
practices and rites.”


Bhishma said :— ‘
2. Regarding it is cited the old histor
of what was sung by Champaka who had
acquired tranquillity and liberation for

hiniself.


MAHABHARATA,


3. In days of yore a certain Brahmana
made miserable by a bad wife,. bad dress,
and hunger, and practising the vow of re«
nunciation, sang me these Verses.


4. Various sorts of sorrow and happi-
ness overtake, from the day of birth, the
person who is born on the Earth.


5, If he could ascribe elther of
them to the work of Destiny, be would
then be indifferent to either happiness or
misery as they fall to his share.


6. Though your mind is freed of desire,
yet you bear a heavy burden. You do
hot strive to accomplish your own good.
Are you not successful in subduing your
mind ?


~-y. Having ronounced home and covet-
ed wealth, if you go about, you shall then
know what is real happiness. One who is
shorn of everything, sleeps soundly and
rises happily. :

8. Abject poverty, in this wortd, is the
road to happiness. It is the safest way, it
leads to the source of all blessings, and
the path is not beset with any peril. Per-
sons cherishing desire, cannot reach this
goal (but those who have riden over theit
desire, can easily do so.


_.g. Stretching my eyes on every part of
the three worlds, 1 do not find the person
who can be equal to a poor man of
unblemished character and who is ina
different to worldly things.


to. 1 weighed poverty and sovereignty
iri the balance, and found sovereignty
wanting, and ‘poverty to all appearances
possessed greater merits than sovereignty.


tt. Between poverty and sovereignty
there is this great difference, wiz., that the
sovereign of vast possessions is always
troubled with painful anxiety and seems to
be an easy prey of death.


12, Regarding, however, the poor man
who has no wealth to call his own, not
any hopes to entertain, and as such has
emancipated himself, neither fire, nor foe;
nor death, nor thieves, can override him.


13. The very gods praise such a man
who wanders about according to his will,
who fies down on the naked Earth with his
arm for a pillow, and who possesses a
tranquil soul.


14. The man of wealth, affected by
anger and lust, stains himself with his
sinful heart. He casts sidelong glances
and makes dry speeches. He becomes
sinful and his countenance loses its Iustet
with his wry face.

15. Bging his lips, and worked up with
passion, he gives vent to harsh and cruel


SHANTI PARVA,


Words.
‘even a gift of the whole world, who is there
that would like to look at him even.


16. Continuous. Prosperity Stupefies a
person of weak intellect. Like the wind
‘driving off the autumnal clouds, it drives
‘off his judgment. Association with Pros-


‘ful. lam wealthy.

+, 17. Tam high-born! 1 am successful
in my undertakings! 1 am no ordinary
individual !—for these three reasons, his
heart becomes intoxicated.


18. He makes a -waste of the posses-
‘sions left by his ancestors by fullowing
the bent of his heart eager for worldly
‘enjoyments. And then when reduced to
want he does not regard the appropriation
‘of other’s wealth as sinful, :

19. At this stage when he outstrips al!
barriers and becomes reckless of conduct as
regards his appropriation of other’s posses-
‘sions from every side the rulers of men
‘checks and afflict him like sportsmen afflic-
ting a deer with their sharp arrows which
they espied in the woods.


‘2 o. Such a man is then overwhelmed
With many other afflictions of a like nature
that originate in fire-and weapons,


21. Thérefore, becoming indifferent to
‘all worldly attachments z.¢., for children
‘and wives) together with all fleeting phan-
toms {as the physical body, etc.,) one should,
Nelped by his intelligence, treat himself
with proper medicine for the cure of those
painful afflictions.


22. Without

never be happiness. Without Renunciation
‘one ‘can never be successful jn gaining what
is his highest good. Without Renunciation
‘one can never be at -his €ase even in Sleep.
‘Therefore, renouncing every thing, make
happiness your own.
. 23. A Bralhmaiia, told me all this, at
Hastinapore, in times gone by, about what
Campaka had sung. | hold Renunciation,
therefore, as the foremost of things.’


CHAPTER CLXXVII.
({MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued,

Yudhisthira gaid:—
1. “If any person, desirous of accom-
plishing acts of charity and sacrfices, fails


to find (the necessary) wealth, and thirst
of wealth gets the better of him; wha:


34


Hf such & man desires to make.


‘perity induces him to think,-I_ am peauti- |


Renunciation oné can |


363


course should he purstré td obtain bappi>.
neés ?” .
Bhishma, said :—

2. ‘He who makes no difference betwkéen
two opposite agents, vis., pleasure-and pain,
honor and insult, etc., who never troubles
himself for the gratification of his desire
for worldly possessions, who observes vera=
city of speech, who has freed‘himself from
all kinds of attachment, and. who has re
nounced his desire for action, is, OQ Bharata,
a happy man.

3. The awcients say these areé the fivé
means by which perfect tranquillity or
emancipation could be obtained. -‘Shesé
are called Heaven. These are Religion
These form the highest happiness.

4. Regarding it is cited the old story of
what Manki had sung, when freed from
attachments» Hear it, O Yudhisbthira,


5. Manki, desirous of weafth, found that


ge was doomed to an unending series of


disappointments. With a little remnant of
his property he purchased at last a couplé
of young bulls with a yoke for training
them (to pastoral labour).


6—7. One day the two bulls, properly
yoked, were taken out for training (in the
fields). Shying at the sight of a camel
which was fying down on the road, the
annimals suddenly ran towards the camel,
and fell upon its neck. Enragéd at finding
the bulls fail upon its neck, the camel,
possessed of great speed, got up aiid rat
with full speed, bearing away the two
helpless creatures dangling ot either sidé
of its neck. : a_i

8—-g., Beholding his two bulls thus
carried away by that strong camel, and
seeing that they were of the point of death,
Manki began to say,—IEf it 8 nét ordained
by destiny, wealth cab riever be obtained
even by a clever man strenuously and
confidently striving and skillfully doing all
that is neccessary towards the accomplish+


‘ ment of his object.


16. I had, all along, tried by all mariner
and means, and with great devotion, to ac-
quire riches, But all this misfortune to my
Property is due to Destiny. ‘

11, My bulls are carried away, rising
and falling, as the camel is running in
an uneven coutse. This event seems td
be an accident like the ore brought about
by the crow td a ripe fruit while perching
on a palmyra tree,


12, Alas, those dear bulls of miné aré
dangling on the camel’s neck like a
couple of gems! . This is the resitlt of
Destiny alone. Exertion is of no avail
tin what is due to Chance:


268


13. Or, if the existence of anything
like ‘Exeition (as a resulting factor) be
admitted, a littl more scrutiny would find
that Destiny is at the bottom, | :


, 14. ,Therefore, he who is desirous of
happiress, should renounce all attach-
ment. He who is indifferent to worldly
surroundings, has renounced all desires for
acquireing wealth, can sleep happily.


15. Ho, it was well-said by Shuka
while going to lhe great forest from his’
father’s house, renouncing everything.


16. Amongst these two, vizs., one who
obtains the freition of alt his desires, and
one who renounces ali desires, the latter,
who casts off everything, is superior to the
first who obtains the fruition of all his
desires.


17. No one could ever attain tothe end
of desire.’ Only he who is destitute of
knowledge and judgment feels an avidity
for protecting his body and life.


18. Renounce all desire for action, Oe
my Soul which has become a prey of cupi-
dity, adept tranquillity by freeling your-
self from all worldly attachments. Re-
peatedly have you been cheated (by
phantomis of hope). . How is it that you
do not still free yourself from attach-
ments 7


19. If J am not one* who deserves
to be crushed by you, if f am one with
whem you should play in delight, then, -O
my wealth-eoveting Soul, do not induce
me towards cupidity. :


2


20.
hoardéd. wealth} O my wealth-coveting
and foolish Soul, wher will you succeed in
getting rid of your desire for wealth


2t. Shameon my foolishness. EF have
become 4 toy of yours. It is thus that one
becomes a slave of others. e


22. No one born on Earth did ever
attain to the end of desire, and no one who
will be born hereafter will succeed in attain-
ing to it. Renouncing all acts, have at
last been roused from sleep. I am now
awake, - -


23. Without doubt, O Desire, your


heart is hard like that of an adamant, |


since though affected by a hundred reverses,
you do not break into as many fragments.


, 24. EF know you, O Desire, and all those
things that are dear to you. Seeking what
is dear to you, ] shall feel happiness in my
own Self. ret

25. O desire, I know your origin.
You originate from Will. I shal, therefore,
avoid Will, You will then be rooted out.


1 26, The desire for wealth can never


You have now and again lost your |


MATIABHARATA.


yield happiness. Wf acquired, the acquiret
feels great anxiety. \f lust after acquisition
it is felt like death. Again acquisition itself,
is very uncertain,


27. Wealth cannot be secured by even
the surrender of one’s person. What can
be more painful than this? When acquired,
one is tiever gratifid with its quantity, but
one continues to hanker after it.


28. Like the sweet wafer of the Ganges’,
riches-only enhances one’s hankering. If
is my destruction. I am now awakene d
Do you, O desire, leave me.

2g. May that desire which reside$ in
this my body,—this compound of (five),
elements,—go wherever it Itkes and live


happily wherever it likes,


.30. Ido not like you a'l who are not, of
the Soul,’ for you bring on Desire and
Cupidity! Forsaking all of- you E*shall
seek refuge with the quality of Goodness.


3i—32. Seeing ali creatures in mty owt
body and_ my own mind, and devoting my
reason to Yoga, my life to the instructions
of the wise, and soul to Brahma, I shalf
happily rove through the world, without
attachment and without calamities of any
kind, so that you may not be able to plunge
me agant into such sorrows.


33. If T continue to be unrufffed by you,
O desire, E shall necessarily be without a


| path (by which to effect my salvation). You


O desire, are always the parent of thirs¢,
of sorrow, and of fatigue and toil,


34. Tconsider the sorrow that one feets


Fat the loss of wealth is proportionately


greater than what one feels under any other
adverse circumstance. Relatives and friends


| forsake him who has fost his wealth.


35- With aH sorts of humiliation num<
bering by thousands, there are many other


| faults im property which are even much more
| painful. On the other hand, the very small


happiness that resides.in wealth is: mingled
with pain and sorrow. ;


6. Robbers kill, in the sight of all, the
per8on who has riches, or torment him with
all sorts of severity, or put him into fright
now and again. hos

37. At last, after a long time, I have
realised that the desire fon wealth. is
attended with sorrow. Whatever the’
object, O desire, upon which you set your
heart, you force me to follow it! You are
without judgment. Youare a fool. Yow
are difficult of being satisfied. You can
never be contented. You burn like fire.


38. pu do not-enquire when following
the object you pursue, whether it is easy or
difficult of attainment. Like the nether


€


" SHANTI


region’ you cannot be filled to the brim.
You wish to cast me into grief. From this
day, O desire, I am incapable of living
with you.


39. I who was disappointed, at first, at
the loss of my property, have now attained
to the high state of perfect freedom from
attachments. At this moment I no longer
think of you and your train.


4c. Thad, before this, felt great misery
on your account. I do not (now) regard
myself as devoid of intelligence. Having
taken to Renunciation on account of the
loss of my property, I now can rest, being
freed from every kind of fever.


41. I cast you off, O Desire, with all
the passions of my heart. You shall not,
again, find any place in me nor shal! you
sport with me.


42. I shall forgive them who will slander
or speak ill of ‘me. I shall not harm even
when I am injured. If anybody from
aversion speaks disparagingly of me, with-
out caring for those disagreeable words I
shall greet him courtecusly. With a con-
tented heart and with an easy mind, I
shall always live upon what I may obtain
for myself.


43. Ishall not gratify those wishes of
yours which are inimical to me. In-
difference to worldly concerns, renunciation,
contentment, tranquillity, veracity, self-
control, forgiveness, and universal mercy,
have now come to be my qualifications.


44. Therefore, let Desire, Cupidity,
Thirst, and Miserliness, bid me adieu. J
have now taken to the path of Goodness,


45. Having renounced Desire and
Cupidity, my happiness has now been
great. I shall no longer surrender myself
to the influence of Cupidity, nor shall 1
undergo the pangs of misery likaa person
of impure ad),


. _ 46. Inasmuch as one renounces his
desires so sure is he to reap his deserts.

‘Truly he who surrenders himself to Desire

always undergoes the pangs of misery.


47. Whatever passions arising from
Desire are cast off by a person, all come
under the category of Passion. Sorrow


and shamelessness, as also discontent, all |


owe their origin to Desire and Wealth,


48. As in the hot summery a person
plunges himself into a cool lake, I have
now merged myself into Brahma. I have
renounced work. I have extricated myself
from grief. Unalloyed happines has now
come to my share. e


46. The happiness which results from
the fruition of Desire, or the serene happt-


PARVAs | 267


ness which one enjoys: in heaven, is not
equal to a sixteenth part of that which
springs from renunciation of all kinds of
thirst, ; ;


so. Laying axe at the root of desire.
which with the body makes an aggregate
of seven, and- which isa bitter foe, I have
made my way to the immortal city of
Brahma and there shalf I pass my days in
happiness like a king.


. : ‘< Ll 7 oa

5. Putting his faith upon such intelli-

gence, Manki succeeded in freeing himself

from attachments, by Jhis self-renunciation

and obtained the blissful region of
Brahma,


52. Forsooth, on account of the loss of |
his two bulls,Manki attained to immortality.
In fact, because he laid the axe at the very

. roots of desire, he succeeded, through that:
means to obtain for-himself supreme bappi-
ness. ;


ae


CHAPTER CLXXVIII,


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA),.~—
Continued.


Bhishma said :—


1. ‘Regarding jt is also cited the old
story of the verses sung by Janaka, the
king of the Videhas, who had so qualified
himself as to obtain tranquillity of the soul.


2, What the monarch said was,—-
My wealth is unlimited. At the same time .
I have nothing. If the whole of (my king-
dom) Mithila be reduced to ashes in a con- .
flagration, I shall lose nothing.


4. Once on a time the rayal son of
Nahusa [eve asked the Rishi Vodhya
who: had, on account of Renunciation,
attained to tranquillity of soul and who had
a thorough knowledge of the scriptures,


The king said :—

5. O you of great wisdom, vouchafe -
me those instructions which lead to tran-
quillity. What is that understanding
which has enabled you to wander over the
world in tranquillity of soul and free your-
self from all acts ? a


‘


| Vodhya said :—


6. I follow the principles of others and
never thurst myself as an instructor. I
shall, however, give you the outlines of -
those principles. Reflection will enable you
to catch their spirit.


_ 7+ Pingla, the osprey, the snake, the bee
in the forest, the maker of shafts (in the


268


stery), and the maiden {in the story),—
these six are my preceptors.


8. Hope is the one powerful agent to
agitate human breast, O king. Freedom
from hope is supreme bliss. Reducing
hope to a nullity, Pingala sleeps in peace.

as


g. Seeing an osprey with a piece of
meat in his beaks, those that have been
unable to find any meat for themselves,
pounce upon hifm and finally make him
asprey, while a certain other osprey, by
abstaining from meat altogether, be-
came happy.


to. To build a house for one’s ownself
conduces not to his happiness but becomes
the source of his "annoyance. The snake
residing in another creature’s place of
abode, lives in happiness,


tt, Adopting the life of mendicancy, the
ascetics live in happiness, without having
any object of fear from any creature, like
the bees in the forest. ‘


42. A certain shaft-maker busy with his
work, was so deeply engrossed with it that
he did not notice the king who was passing
by him.

13. When many herd together, it
foments dispute. Even when two reside
together, they are sure to talk with each
other. I, however, tike the anklet mace of
sea-shells in the wrist of the maiden in the
story wander alone.’


\


Cea


CHAPTER CLXXIX.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued. °
Yudhishthira said :—

1. ‘© O you who are an adept in the mys-
tery a human conduct, tell me what
course of person should pursue to succeed
in this, world, freed from grief. And


“how should he behave himself to gain his
end?”


Bhishma said :—

z. ' Regarding it is cited the old story
of the discourse between Prahrada and the
sage Ajagara.

Once ona time king Prahrada en-
dued with great intelligence, enquired of a
. wandering Brahmana of great intelligence
and of a purified and tranquil soul.


Prahrada said :—
4. Shorn of desire, with a purified
soul, of hamane disposition, and given to the


MAHABHARA FA.


practices of self-restraint, without desire of
action, free from malice, agreeable iw
speech, endued with dignity and intelligence
and wisdom, you live (in simplicity) like
a child,

5- You never covet for any kind of gain,
nor are you overpowered with any kind of
loss. You are always cheerful, O Brah-
mana, and do not seem to have any Hsing
for anything in the world,


6. While all other creatures are being
carried away in the stream of desire and
passion, you are perfectly indifferent to all
works of Retigion, Profit and Pleasure.
You seem to be in a state of quietude,.
having nothing to disturb the perfect equa-
nimity of your soul.


7. Regardless of all sensuous enjoy-
ments, you move kke an emancipate? self,
only witnessing everything, (but never
taking part in anything).

8 Osage, what is your wisdom, what
your learning, and what your behaviour
(through which all this has become
possible)? Telk me this without delay, if,
O Brahmana, you think it will conduce tg
my well-being.


Bhishma continued :—


9. Thus questioned by Prahrada, that
intelligent Brahmana who was well-conver-
sant with the duties of the world, answered
him in words of melodious sounds and
of great significance.


10. Behold, O Prahrada, the origin of
creatures, their growth, decay, and death,
cannot be ascribed to any intelligible cause.
It is for this reason that I do not give way
to either joy or sorrow.


#1. Allthe propensities (for action) it
the universe may be seen to come from the
innate nature of the creatures. AH thing
(in the universe are dependent on their res«
pective mature. Hence I am not delight-
ed with anything,

12. Behold, O Prahrada, all kinds of
union are subject to severance. All ac-
quisitions are certain to end it destruction.
Hence I never set my heart upon the ac-
quisition of any object.


13. All things possessed of attributes
are sure to come to an end. What
remains there for a person then to do
who (like me) is familiar with both the
origin and the end of things.

14. The end is noticeable of all aquatic
things, large or small. ;

15. I See alsa the death, which is mani-
fest, O chief of Asuras, of all things, mobile
cond immobile, belonging to the earth.


SHANTI PARVA._


- 16. O best of Danavas, death comes in
season even to .the strongest of winged
éreatures which float in the air.


17. 1 see again that the luminous bodies,
large andsmall, which range the firma-
ment, fall down when their time comes.


’ 18. Seeing all created things to be thus
subject to death, endued with knowledge,
and thinking all things to be possessed of
the same nature, | sleep in comfort with
no thought to disturb me. :


19. lf & get without trouble a heavy
meal I waver not to enjoy it. On the other
band, I am used to pass many days to-
gether without tasting anything.


20. Sometimes people feed me with lu-
xurious edibles in profusion, sometimes
with a small quantity, sometimes even with
less, and sometimes I get no food at all.


21. I sometimes eat only a portion of a
grain; sometimes the dry sesame cakes
from which the oil has® been expressed.
I sometimes eat rice and meat and other
food of the richest kind.


22. Sometimes! sleep on an elevated
edstead of the best kind; sometimes I
sleep on the naked Earth; sometimes I
lay myself dawn on a comfortable bed made
within a fine palace or a beautiful mansion.


23. Sometimes J am clad in rags, some-


times in sackcloth, sometimes in raiments’


of fine texture, sometimes in deer-skins,
semetimes in richest robes, :


24. never reject such enjoyments as
are not inconsistent with virtue and as can
be secured without effort. I donot at the
same time, stir myself for gaining objects
difficult of acquisition,

_25. The cigid vow Ff have betaken to, is

called Ajagara. That vow can secure im-
mortality. It is auspicious and griefless.
Itis peerless and pure. It is in harmony
with the advices of the sages. It is dis-
regarded by persons of weak intellect who
never practise it. With pure heart I
conduct myself in accordance with to it.


26. My mind never swerves from this


vow. 1 have not swerved from the prac-
tices af my order. 1 am abstemious in
everything. I know the past and the


present, “Shorn of fear and anger and
cupidity and errors of judgment, | practise
this vow with a pure heart,


27. There are no interdictions in respect
of food and drink and other objects of en-
joyment for one practising this vow. As
everything is dependent on destiny, there is
no observance of the considerations of time
and place for one like us. ‘The vow I
practise contributes to true happiness of the


26g


heart. Itis never followed by those that
are wicked. I observe it with a pure
heart. :


28. Led by cupidity, men pursue differ-
ent kinds of wealth. Lf foiled in the at-
tempt, broken-hearted and dispirited they
become. ‘Thinking properly upon all this
by the help of my intelligence which has
penetrated the truths of things, | practise
this vow with a pure heart,

2g.. I have seen persons in distress seek-
ing, for the acquisition of wealth, the ‘shel+
ter of both good and bad men. Devoted
to tranquillity and with my passions under


control, 1 observe this vow with a pure
heart. ;
30. Seeing by the help of truth, that


happiness and misery, profit and loss, at-
tachment and renunciation, life and death,
are all ordained by destiny, I observe this
vow with a pure heart.


31. Shorn of fear and attachment and
errors of judgment and pride, and possess-
ed of wisdom, intelligence, and understand
ing, and devoted to tranquillity, and. hear-
ing that large snakes, without stirring out
enjoy the fruit that comes to them of
itself, I ‘fotlow their practice with a pure
heart,


32. Without restrictions of any king in
respect of bed and food, endued by my
nature with Self-restraint, abstemiousness,
pure vows, truth and purity of conduct,
and without any desire to store (for future
use) the rewards of action, I observe, this
vow with a delighted and pure heart.


33- All causes of grief have fled from
me on account of my having ridden over
desire. Having received an accession of
light, I observe this vew with a pure teart,
for controlling my soul which is thirsty
and uncontrolled but which is capable of
depending upon itself. ;


34. Without paying any attention to
the matters, towards which my heart, mind,
and words would like to lead me, and
knowing that the happiness which these
afford is both hard of being acquired and
transitory, in duration, 1” follow this vow
with a pure heart,


35. Learned and highly intelligent men,
desirous of giving a publicity to their own
feats, have while supporting their own
theories and censuring those of others,
indulged in vague expressions in delivering
themselves on this topic which is beyond
the scope of argumentation, ;


“36. Foolish men cannot properly under-
stand this vow. “I, however, see that: it
kills Ignorance. To safeguard against
this immortality and various sorts of evil,


270


T travel among men, having controlled all
shortcomings atid having freed myself from
thirst after material enjoyments.


Bhishma said :—

37. ‘That great person who, having
freed himself from attachments and got rid
of fear, cupidity, foolishness, and anger,
follows this Ajagara vow, or indulges in
this sport, as it may be. called, surely
spends his time in great happiness.


eed


CHAPTER CLXXX. -


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued.


Yudhisthira said -—

1. ‘Which of these, O grandfather,
vig., relatives, or acts or riches, or wisdom,
should be the refuge of a person? Ac-
costed by me, answer me this!’


Bhisma said :~

2. ‘ Wisdom’is the refuge of creatures.
Wisdom is considered as the greatest of
acquisitions, Wisdom is the greatest
happiness. in the world. Wisdom is re-
garded by the good and virtuous as
heaven.


3. It was through+wisdom that Vali,
Prahrada, Namuchi, and Manki, when
‘they lost their prosperity, succeeded in
gaining happiness. What is tbere that
is superior to wisdom.


4. Regarding it is cited. the old story
of the conversation between Indra and
Kashyapa, Listen to it, O Yudhisthira !


5. Once'on a time a rich Vaishya,
enjoying. the highest state of prosperity
and elated with his afluence, threw down,
by rashly driving his car, a Rishi’s son of
rigid vows, named Kashyapa, given to
penances. °

6—8, Laid flow on the ground, the
young man, in great pain, yielded to his
anger; and in despair resolved, saying,
I shall renounce my life. A poor man
has no necessity of life in this world !—
While the Brahmana was lying in that
condition, silent and agitated, shorn of
energy and on the verge of death, Indra
appeared there in the shape of a jackal
and addressing him, said,—All (inferior)
Creatures seek to be born as men. Among
men, again, the dignity of a Brahmana
is much coveted.


- g. You, O Kashyapa, are a buman
being! Amongst men, you are again a


MAHABHARATA


Brahmana. Among Brahmanas, you are.
again well-read in the Vedas. Having
acquired that which it is difficult to get,
you should not give up life from folly.


lo.
are fraught with pride.
hold about it is perfectly true. You
appear as the embodiment. In forming
such a resolution about renouncing your
life, you act from cupidity.


11, Those who have hands become suc-
cessful, I eagerly wish to be like those
creatures who have hands.


12, Weseek hands as eagerly as you
seek riches. There is no acquisition more
valuable than that of hands.


13. See, O Brahmana, [I cannot get
out this thorn that has entered my body,
or crush these insects and worms that are:
biting and paining me greatly.

14. Those who have got two hands
with ten fingers, cdn throw away or crush
the worms that bite their limbs,


15. They can make shelters for them *
selves against rain, cold and heat. ‘TheY
can also enjoy excellent clothes for them
selves, good food, comfortable beds, an
excellent houses. «


i6. Living on this Earth, those wha
have hands enjoy kine and other animals
‘and cause them to carry loads or draw
their cars, and by the help of various
means make those animals obey them.


17. Those living creatures that are
without tongues, that are helpless, that
have little strength, and that have no hands,
suffer all kinds of misery. By good luck,
O ascetic, you are not like them.


18. By good-luck, you are not a jackal,
nora worm, nor a mouse, nor a snake,
hor a frog, nor any other wretched animal.


19. With this gain, you should, O Kash-
yapa, be contented. How happy, again,
should you feel yourself, as you think that
amongst living creatutes you are a superior
Brahmana.


20. These worms. are biting me. For
want.of hands I cannot drive them off.
Look at this my miserable condition. ;

21. 1 donot renounce life because it is a
very sinful act, and lest, indeed, | may
have a more miserable birth. .


‘22. This birth, to which J now belong, is
rather tolerable, Miserable as it is, there
are many more orders below it which are
more miserable.


23. By birth certain classes of creatures
become happier than others who suffer


All sorts of (earthly) acquisitions
What the Shrutis


SHANTI
frreat miseries. But I never see that there
js any order of being which can enjoy con-
summate happiness, .

a4. Having acquired riches men next
wish for sovereignty. Having acquired
riches mei next wish for sovereignty.
Having acquired sovereignty they next wish
to be gods. Having acquired that status
they then wish to be the king of the gods.


2§. If you become affluent, you will
ftever become a king, nor a god. If by
any means you become a god; you will then
wish for the kingship of the gods. [n no
state you will be contented. :


26. Contentment ‘does @hot come ftorti
acquisition of objects of desire.
never satiated although there is sufficient
water. The thirst for acquisition is only
increased by each fresh acquisition like a
fire with new fuels thrown into it. —


27, You have grief for yout associate.
But joy, at the same time, lives in you.
Both happiness and misery live in you.
Why should you then yield to gtief?


28. One should shut up, like birds in a
cage, the very springs, vzz., the unders-
, and the serises; of his desires and

cts.


29. A second head, or a third hand,
can never be cut. That which does not
exist produces no fear,


30. One who has not experiened the
enjoyment of a certain object, never feels a
desite for that object. Desires originate
from the actual experience of the pleasures
that touch, or sight, or hearing gives.


- 31. You have no idea of the taste of the
wine called Varuni or of the meat of the
birds called Ladwaka. ‘There is no drink
and no so food sweeter than these.


32. You have no idea also, O MKa-
shyapa, of every other superior kind of
drink and edible -that exists among men,
for you have neyer tasted it.


33. Forsooth, therefore, a man to
acquire happiness should vow not to taste,
fot to touch, and fo see.


"34-35. Creatures that have hands,
forsooth, become strong and acquire riches.
Men are forced by men to become servants,
and are repeatedly afflicted with death,
imprisonment, - and _ other punishments.
Although such is their condition yet even
they laugh and sport and become merry.


36... Althogh gifted with strength of arms,
knowledge and great energy of mind,
ethers again, follow censurable, sinful,
and miserable callings.


' 37. They tey to change such professions
or better ones but then they are fettered


Thirst is .


PARVA., 374
by their pristine deeds Arid by the force of
Destiny, 7

38.. The vilést Wiad of tte Pukkasa or
the Chandala orders never wishes to ré-
fiounce his life. Heis quiet satisfied witli
his birth. Mark the illusion in it. -


39. Seeirig thosé amongst your ordér
that have no arms, of até struck with
palsy, or suffering from other diseases, you
can consider yourself as very happy and
possessed of. valuable properties amongst
the mienibers of your own ordér. ;

4o. If this your régeneratéd body reé-
mains all tight, and free from disease, and
all ‘your linibs remajn petfect, you will
incur reproach amotigst men.

4%. You should tiot, O Brahtiana, re-
hounce your life, even if any blame affects
you which can be proved and which’ can
lead to your excommunication, Rise, atid
practise virtue. You should not throw away
your life, :

42. If, O twice-borri ote; you Tisten ta
me and confide in my words, you wilf
acquire the highest reward of the religion
laid down in’the Vedas. ;

43. Engage, in Vedic studies, and pro«
perly maintain your consecratéd hearth,
and observe truth, ard self-control, and
charity. Never compare yourself boastfully
with another.

44. They who, by studying thé Wedas,
become conipetent for celebrating sacrifices
for tliemselves and others; need not regret
or fear any sort of evil. : :


4§- They who ate born under aa auss
picious Constellation ov an auspicious luna«
tion and at an au4picious hour, try thei¢
best for performing  sactifices, Heese
chatity, and procreating children, an
wishing .te pass their time cheerfully in
those acts, at last acquite wery great
happiness. i .

46. They, on the other hand,’ who are
born under evil slaves, inauspicious lunations
and at evil hours, cannot pérform sacrifices.
and get progeny and at last fatl into thé
Asura order,  s ;

47. In my previous birth I had mucl.
useless learning. f always tried to find out
reasons and had very Ittle faith. I[ used.
to censure the Vedas. | was unacquainted
with the {fourfold objects of life, and was
devoted to the science of reaping which is’
based upon ocular or tangible proofs.


48. 1 used to speak of reasons only,
Indeed, in assemblies, I always spoke of
reasons. £ used to speak irreverently of.
the injunctions of the Shrutis and address
Brahmanas haughtily. °


a7?


49. 1 was an atheist a septic, and
though really ignorant, proud of my
Nearing, ‘this birth of a jackal that 1 have
got in this life ts thé outcome, O twice
born one, of those sins of mine.


So—st. If even after hundreds of days
andenights, a jackal that | an now, I can
once again secure the birth of humanity,
Ishall then pass my life in contentment,
caring for the true objects of existence, ard
engaged in sacrifices and gifts. I shall then
know what should be known, and shun
_ what should be shunned.


%2. “Thus addressed, the ascetic Kash-
yapa, rising up, said,—O, you are surely
endued with great knowledge and intelli=
gence! I really wouder at all this.


53. With eye whose vision was extenfled
by knowledge, the Bralimana then saw that
being “who had addressed him as fudra
the king of the gods and the lord of
Shachi.


54. Kashyana then. adored that god
having the best of horses to carry him.
Receiving afterwards-with the god's per-
mission, the Brahmana returned to his
house. .


ee
CHAPTER CLXXXI.


(MOKSHADHARMA .PARVA).—=
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—

1. Telt me, O grand-father, if gifts,
sacrifices, penances ayd dutiful services
offered to: pteceptots; yield wisdonr and
supreme bliss.”’


Bhishma said :—

a, ‘If the mind is strickeh with desire,
anger and other evil passions, it then
inclines towards sin. If one’s acts dre
sullied by sin, he is obliged to dwell in
painful regions. °

3. Sinful men dre born as poot men
and suffer again and again the pangs of
famine, woe, fear, and death.

4. The virtuous, the faithful, and the
self-restrained, become born as affluent
men and continually enjoy festivities and
heaveti and happiness,

5. Unbelievers, with their hands bound,
aré sent to regions rendered inaccesible
by carnivorous beasts and -elephants, and
dreadful, with snakes and robbers. What
more should I say of them.


6. They, on the other hand, who res-


MAHABHARATA,


pects gods and guests, who aré liberal,
who love good and honest men, enjoy for
their acts of charity, that happy way
which.belongs to persons of pucified souls.


7. They who have no respect for virtue
are as vile among men as seedless grains
among corn or the gnat among birds.


8. The pre-ordained act follows the doér
even if the latter tries his best for leaving
it behind. le sleeps when he sleeps and
does whatever else he does.


b. Like his shadow it takes rest wher
he rests, goes on when he goes on, and
acts when he ad. 2


to. Whatever acts aman does he tet«
tainly enjoys the fruits threof,


11. Death is dragging all creatures
who ate destined to take birth according
to their deserts and are liable to enjoy
or suffer that which has beeri ordained
a3 the fruit of their acts. +


12. Pristine acts develop their conse.
quences in théir own proper time even ag
flowers and fruits, without any outwdar
efforts, never fail to appear when the Propeiy
season sets in,


13. After the ordained consequences;
of pristine acts have been dissipated (by
enjoynient or sufference), honor and.
disagrace, profit and loss, development and
decay no longer come. This takes place
again and again.

14. While still in the mother’s womb, a
creature enjoys or suffers the happiness of
the misery that has been ordained for him
by his own acts: .

15. Inchildkood of youth of old age;
whenever a man does a good or bad act;
the consequences thereof surely visit him id
his hext life at precisely the Same period,


16. Asa calf recognises and comes to it
mother in the midst of even athousand king;
so the pristiné acts recognise and visit the
doer in his new life.


.


17. Washed in water a piece of ctotli
becomes clean. Likewise, men; repenting
(for their past misdeeds), get eternal hap:
piness by proper penances,


18, By living’in the woods and by.prac«
tising austerities for a long period, one can
wash themselves of their sins, and get the
objects of their hearts. :

1g. Asno onecan mark the track of
birds in the sly or of fishes in the water,
so the track of persons whose souls have
been purified by knowledge cannot be seerr
by any.


‘


SHANTI


a0. There is no need of speaking more
of sinful acts. Suffice “it to say that one
should, with proper judgment and as best
as he can, do what is for his well-being.
This is the means by which wisdom and
great happiness may be acquired,’


eet


CHAPTER CLXXXH.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued.


Yudhisthira said:=- ©

1. -**Whence has this universe, consisting
of moible and immobile creatures, origina~
ted? Whom does it go to when it is des-
troyed? Tell me this, O grandfather.


2. Indeed, by whom has this universe
with its oceans, its sky, its mouniains, its
clouds, its lands, its fire, and its wind,
been created.


2. How were all objects created ?
Whence has this division of creatures origi-
nated ? Whence are their purity and im-
@rty, and the laws about virtue and vice ?


4. Of what nature is the life of living
creatures? Where algo do they go who
die? Tellus everything about this and
the next world.”


Bhishma said :—


5. ‘Regarding itis cited the old dis-
course of the sacred words that Bhrigu
said in reply to the questions of Bhara-
dwaja. é
_ 6. Seeing the great Rishi Bhrigu shin-
ing with energy and splendoyr, seated on
the summit of the Kailasa mountain, Bhara-
dwaja addressed him thus :—


Bharadwaja said :—


g- By whom was this world with its
ocean, its sky, its mountains, its clouds, its
lands, its fire, and its wind, cteated ?

8. How were all creatures first created ?
Whence originated this distinction of cas-
tes? Whence the pucity and the -impurity
df conduct, and whence the laws about vir-
tue and vice, for living creatures ?


g. What is the nature of the life of
living creatuces? Where do they go who
die? Yeu should tell me everything about
this and the ether world. , .


“to. Thus accosted about his doubts’ by
Bharadwaja, the illustrious and twice-born
‘Rishi Bhrign who took after Brahma itself,
replied to him thus :-


35


PARVA; 273
Bhrigu said :— :
a1. Theré is a Primeval Being, known


to phe great Rishis, by the name of Manasa.
He is without beginning and without end.
That Divine Being cannot bé cut by wea» |


pons. He is without decay and is Im«
mortal.
_i2. Heis Unmanifest. He is Eternal,


Undecaying, and Unchangeable. By Him ™
i creatures born and through Him they
1@  .


13. He first created a Divine Being |
known by the name of Mahat (Great).


14. Mahat created Consciousness, , who ,
created Space. That powerful Being holds
all created objects.


15: From Space was born Water, and:
from ‘Water, were born. Fire and Wind.
Through the union of Fire and Wind was ,
born the Earth. - i :


16. Self-born Manasa then created a.
divine Lotus of Energy. From that -
os originated Brahman, that Ocean of

eda,


17. The Shrutis say that as soon as born,.
that divine Being uttered the words—-I_ am
He, For this He passed by the name of
Consciousness. All created things are his.
body and He is their Creator. ‘These five.
elements that we see arte the Brahman of.
great euergy. |


18. The Mountains form nis bones.
The Earth forms his fat and flesh, ‘The.
Oceans constitute his blood. Space is his
stomach.


19.. The Wind forms his breath. Fire
is his energy. ‘The rivers forms his arte.
ries and veins. Agsi and Soma, other-
wise called the Sun and the Moon,. are
his eyes. os,

20 The sky is above his head. The
Earth is his two feet. The cardinal and
minor points of compass are his arms,
Forsooth, He is incapable of being known
and His Soul cannot be conceived even by
successful ascetics.


21. “That Divine Being, who pervades
the entire universe, passes also by the name
of Ananta {Infinite}. He lives in Consci-
ousness, and persons of impure souls can-
not know him. rl .

22. Asked by you I have now told you
of Him who created Consciousness for
bringing into being all created objects,
and from whom this, universe has ori<
ginated. ‘


Bharadwaja said :—


23. What is the extent of the sky, of the
points of the horizon, of the surface of this


374


Earth, and of the Wind? _ By telling me
the truth, remove my doubts.


24. The sky you see above is Infinite.
It is the abode of successful ascetics and ©f
celestial beings. Itis lovely and . consists
ef various regions. Its limits cannot be
determined.


25. The Sun and the Moon. cannot see,
above or below, beyond the range of their
own rays. There where the rays of the
Sun and the Moon cannot go are lumi-
naries -which are self-effulgent ~ and

- Shining like the Sun or the fire.


26. Know this, O giver of honors, that
- even these luminaries which have great
effulgence, do not see the limits of the
sky for the inaccessibility and infinity of
those limits. : .

27. This Space which even the very
celestials cannot? measure contains man
shining and self-luminous worlds ea
above the other. . Rue Re


' 98, Beyond the limits of land are oceans,

Beyond water is darkness, Beyond dark.

ness is water again, and beyond water is
ee i


.29. Uuderneath, beyond the nether
regions is water. EGeyond water is the
region of the great serpents. Beyond that
is sky once more, and beyond the sky is
water again.


30. .Thus exist water and.sky alternate-
ly without end. Such are the limits of the

od of water. The very gods cannot

etermine the limits of fire and wind and
water,


‘gi. The nature of fire, wind, water,
and land, is like that of space, It is the
absence’ of true knowledge that draws dis-
tinction between them.


32. Sages read in various scriptures
the limits of the three worlds and the
aceat,


33. Who is there, however, who can set

limits to what cannot be seen and what is
inaccessible ? : ;
. 34. HH even it becomes possible to learn
the timits of the sky which is the region of
the gods and succesful ascetics, it is not
Pee to set limits to that which is
imitless and passes by the name of the
Infinite, to that which answers its name,
vig., the high-souled Manasa ?


35. When again His form is sometimes
contracted and sometimes expanded, how
cawi any one else save one who is equal to
him, petceive his limits ? ‘


36. From the Letus sprang first the
Omniscient lord Brahman, endwed with


MAHABHARATA;


form, of the essence of Righteousness, ard
the Creator of all mobile and immobile
things.


Bharadwaja said:—

37. li Beahman originated from the
Lotus, then it ts the Lotus that should be
considered as the first-born and not
Brahman, Why, however, is Brahman
said tobe the first? Do you dispel) this
doubt of mine.


Bhrigu said :—~


38. The Earth is called that Lotus. [¢
was created for giving a seat to that form
of Manasa whi became Brahman. ° a


39. Extending up to heaven itself, the

umeru became the pericarp of that Lotus.
Remaining within it, the powe:fut Lord of
the Universe created all the worids,


CHAPTER CLXXXIII.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).-
Continued.


-Bharadwaja said :—


1. Tellme, O best of Brahmanas, how
the powerful Brahman, living within Meru,
cteated these various kinds of objects. —


Bhrigu said :~ poe
2. The great Manasa {in his form of,
Brahman) created the various objects
by his Will. For the protection of ali
creatures, he first created water. .


3. Water is the life ‘of life of alt
creatures, and it helps their growth. If
there be to water, all creatures would die,
The entire universe is pervaded by water.’

4. Earth, mountains, clouds, and alf
things which have form, are all as transe,
formations of water. They have all been
produced by water being solidified.


Bharadwaja said :—
- How did water originate? How Fire

and Wind? How also was the Earth.

created ? I have great doubts about it,


Bhrigu said:—  . te 2

6. O twice-born one, in very ancient
times called the Brahma-kalpa, great
Rishis, when they assembled together, felr
this very. doubt about the creation of the
universe. ;

7- Governing speech, they remained
immovable, engaged in contemplation ¢


SHANTI


Having abstained from: food, they lived
upon air alone, and remained thus for a
thousand divine years.


8. At the end of that time, certain
words as sacred as those of the Vedas
simultaneously reached “the ears of all.
Indeed, this celestial voice’ was heard in
the sky to say:— __


9. Formerly there was only infinite
Space, motionless and immovable. With-
out sun, moon, stars, and wind, it seemed
to be asleep.


1o, Then water originated like some-
thing darker within darkna@j® Then from
the pressure of water sprang wind.


11—12. As an empty vessel having no
hole appears at first to have no sound, but
when filled with water, air appears and
makes a great noise, so when infinite Space
was filled with water, the wind arose with
a great noise, passing through the water.


13. Generated by the pressure of the
ocean of water, that wind still passes on.
Occupying empty space, its motion is never
stopped, :


14. Then on account of the friction of
wind and water, fire endued with great
power and burning energy, came into being,
with flames directed upwards. ‘That fire
dissipated the darkness that had covered
Space.

15. Helped by the wind, fire combined
Space and Water. In fact, combining with
the wind, fire bgcame solidified.

16. While dropping from the sky, the
liquid portion of fire being solidified again
became what is known as the Earth.

17- The Earth or land, in which every-
thing is born, is the root of all sorts of
taste, of all sorts of scent, of all sorts of
liquids, and of all kinds of animals.


CHAPTER CLXXXIV.
(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—


Continued,


Bharadwaja said :—

1—2. When the great Brahman has
created thousands of creatures why is it
that only these five elements which he
created first, which permeate the entire
universe and which are great creatures,
are truly Known by the name of creatures,


Bhrigu said :— _ Loe
3. All things which -belong te the In-
finite er the Vast are known by the name
>


PARVA. 275
of Great. Therefore these five elements
are called Great creatures, oot


4. Activity is wind. The sound is space.
The heat that lives within it is fire. The
liquid juices contained in it are water. The
solidified matter, ¢%is., flesh aad bones
form the Earth. The bodies are thus made
of the five elements. 7 :


5. All mobile and immobite objects are
formed of these five elements. ‘The five
senses also made of the five elements,
The ear is formed of the properties of
space. The nose. of earth; the tongue of
alg touch of wind; and the eyes of
re. -


Bharadwaja said:—- =

6. If all mobile and immobile objects.
be made of these five elements, why is it
that in all immobile objects those elements
are not seen.


7. Trees do not appear to have possess+
ed any heat. They appear to have no
motion. They are again formed of thick
particles. The five elements are not seetr
in them. ,


8. Trees do not hear; they do not see;
they cannot smetl or taste. They cannot
touch. How then can they be regarded
as formed of the five elements.


-g. It appears to me-that for the absence -
of any liquid matter in them, of any heat,
of any earth, of any .wihd, and of an
empty space, trees cannot be considere
as compounds of the five primary ele
ments. i


Bhrigu said:— . :

to. Forsooth, though possessed of dene
sity, ttees have space within them. They
always bear flowers and: fruits. -


tt. They have heat within them for
which leaf, bark,’ fruit, and flower are
seen ta fall off. ‘They.sicken and dry up,
This indicates that they have perception
of touch.


12. By sound of wind. and fire and
thunder, their fruits and flowers fall down,
Sound is perceived through the ear. Trees
have, therefore, ears and do hear. ~


.13. A creeper entwines a tree all around.
A blind thing cannot see its way. There
fore it is evident that tcees have vision.


14. Again trees regain vigor and put
forth flowers for good and bad smell, of
the sacred incense of.all. sorts, It is evi-
dent that trees have scent.


-


t5., They draw water by their roots.
‘They catch all sorts of diseases. Those
diseases again are cured sy various


276


Operations. From this it is elear that
trees have perception of taste. .


. 16, As one can draw water through the
hole of a lotus-stalk, trees also, with the
help of the wind, drinls through their
foots,


17%.. They are subject to pleasure and
pain, and grow when cut or lopped off.
‘These facts clearly [prove that trees have
life. They are not inanimate.


_ 18 Fire fand wind cause the water thus
drawn up to be digested. The tree grows
‘and becomes humid proportionate to the
aquantity of the water taken up.


19. Inthe bodies of all mobile things
the five elements reside. The proportions
are different in edch. Mobile objects can
move forthese five elements.


20, Skin, flesh, bones, marrow, and ar-
teries and veins, that exist together in the
body are formed of earth. :


at. Energy, anger, eyes, internal heat,
and the heat which digests the food taken,
these five, form the fire that exists in all
embodied creatures.


{22. ‘The ears, nostrils, mouth, heart,’


and stomach, these five, form the element
_of space that exists in the bodies of living
Creatures. .


23, Phlegm, bile, sweat, fat, blood are
the five kinds of water that exist in mobile
‘bodies.


24, Through the vital breath called
Prana, a living creature is -capable of
moving about. Through that caled Vyana
tify act. That called Apana goes down-
ward. That called Samana lives’ within
.the heart...


25. Through that called Udana one
passes exertion and is enabled to speak
‘by virtue of its going through (the lungs,
the throat, and the mouth). ‘'hese are the
five sorts of vital airs that cause an em-
bodied creature to live and move.


26. Through the earth-element an em-
bodied creature perceives the properties
of scent. From the water-element he per-
‘ceives taste, From the fire-element as
represented by the eyes, he perceives forms,
and from the wind-element he perceives
touch. :


27. Scent, touch, taste, vision and
“Sound, are considered as the common pro-
perties of all mobile and immobile objects.
“4 shall first ‘describe the several sorts of
scent.

at. They are pleasant, unpleasant,
sweet, pungent, far-reaching, varied, dry,
indifferent,


MAHABHARATA.


29. Scent which is formed of the earttre
élement,. consists of these nine sorts. Light
is seen by the eyes, and touch through the
wind-element.


30. Sound, toueh, vision and taste are
the properties of -water, I shall describe
fully that now the preception of taste.
Listen to me.


gi. Great Rishis have mentioned vari-
ous sorts of taste. They are sweet, saltish,
bitter, astrigent, sour, and pungent.


32. ‘These are the six sorts of taste ber
longing to the water-element.


33. Througlh light one perceives forms,
Form is of various kinds. Short, tall, thicts
square, round, white, black, red, blue,
yellow yreddish, hard, bright, smooth, oily,
soft and terrible.


35-35. These are the sixteen sorts of
form which forms the property of light or
vision. The property of the wind-element
is touch. Touch is of various sorts: warm,
cold, agreeable and disagreeable, in-
different, burning, mild, soft, Hght and
heavy.


37- Both sound and touch form the two
‘properties of the wind-element. ‘Tiese are
the ae properties which belong to the
wind,


38. Space has only one property,
namely sound. &£ shall now describe to you
the different sorts of sound,


39. They are the seven origmal notes
called Shadaja, Rishabha, Gandhara,
Maddhyama, Dhaivata, Panchama, and
Nishada. .


40. These are the seven sorts ef the
property which belongs to space. Sound
pervades like the Supreme Being the entire
space though attached especially to drums
and other instruments,


41.\ Whatever sound is heard from
small and large drums and conch-shells,
and clouds, and cars, and animate and
inanimats creatures, are all contained in
these seven sorts of sound already men-
tioned.


42. Thus sound, which is the property
of space, is of various sorts.’ The learned
have described sound to be born of space.
When created by the various kinds of
touch, which is the property of the wind, it
may be heard. It cannot, however, be
heard, when the different kinds of touch
are not used. Mixed with their counter~
parts in the body, the elements increase
and grow, :


44, Water, fire, wind, always live in the
bodies of living creatures, They form the
€ %


SHANTI PARVA.


roots of the bady. Pervading the five
vital airs they live in the body.


CHAPTER CLXXXV.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued,


Bharadwaja said :-—

1. How does bodily fire or heat, enter-
ing the body, live there? How also does
the wind, getting space fer itself, cause
the*body to mave and work ?


Bhrigu said :-—

2. I shall, O ttwice-born one, describe
to you the course in which the wind moves,
and how, O sinless one, that powerful ele-
ment makes the bodies of Jiving creatures
move and work. _


3. Heat lives within the head (brain)


and protects the body. The vital air called.


Prana, living within the head and the heat
that is there, create all sorts of exertion.


4.. That Prana is the living creature,
the universal self, the etecnal Being, and
the Mind, Intellect, and Consciousness of
all living creatures, as also ali the objects
ef the senses.


5. Thus Prana makes the living creature
move about and exert. Then by virtue of
the other vital air called Samana, every one
of the senses performs its own work. :

6. The vital aie called. Apana, by the
help of the heat that is in the urethra,
abdomen and intestines, moves, carrying
out urine and excreta.


: 9. That single vital air which works in
these three, is called Udana by those who
are wellsread in this science. :

8. That vital air which works, living in
all the joints, is called Vyana. ~

Qg. Heat is circulated all over the bodies
of living creatures by the vital air Samana.
Living thus in the body, that vital air
works upon the various sorts of water


and other elementary substances and all


bad humours, .


10. The heat, living between Apane
and Prana, in the navel, works, with the
help of those two vital airs, in digesting
all food that is.taken by a living creature.


ir. There is a canal beginning from
.the mouth down te the anus. Its extremity
is called the anus.
various minor ones branch out in the
bodies of ail living creatures,


From this main canal.


277


12 The various vital “airs passing”
through these canals mix with each other,
The heat which lives in Prana is called
WUshman. This heat causes digestion in
embodied creatures. 7?


13. The vital air called Prana, carrying
a current of heat, goes (from the head)
downwards to the extremity of the anal
canal. and thence goes up once tnore,
Returning to the head again, it once more
sends down the heat it carries.


14, Below the navel is the quarter of
digested matter. Above it is that for the
food which is taken. In the navel reside
all the forces of life that keep up the
body.

15. Urged by the ten sorts of vital airs
having Prana for their first, the canals,
branchiag out from the heart, carry the
fiquid juices of food, upwards, dewnwards,
and in contrary directions.


16. The main channel leading from
the mouth to the anus is the path by which
¥Yogins, knowing no fatigue, calm in happi-
ness and misery, and_ highly patient,
succeed in attaining to Brahma by dtaw-
ing the soul within the brain. :

17. Thus is heat placed in the vital
airs called Prana and Apana and others,
of all embodied creatures. That. heat is
always burning theredike a fire placed in
vessel which can be seen, an


—


CHAPTER CLXXXVI.
” (MOKSHADHARMA PARVA),-


Continued.


Bharadwaja said :-—
1. If itis the air that keeps us afive,
if it is the air that makes us move and act,
if it is the air that makes us breathe and
speak, then it appears that life is _not
worth much, os ive:
2. If the animal heat be of the nature.
of fire, and if jt is that fire which helps
digestion by dissolving the ,food we take,
then life is not worth much.


3. When an animal dies, that which is
ealled its life is mever seen to depart.
Only the vital air relinquishes it, and -the


- internal heat is put out.


4. “If life were nothing else than alr,
or if life depended only on the air, then
it could have been seen like the outward
sea of air, and when passing out it would
have been mixed with that air,


brroag


278


" .§. If life depended upon air, and if
it ended with the passing of that air from
the body, it would then mingle with the,
eternal air like a pertion of water pass-
ing into the great sea and thereby only
changing the place of its residence.


. 6. .If a quantity of water be thrown
into a well, or if the flame of a lamp be
‘thrown into a burning fire, either of them,
entering the original element, loses its
independent existence. If life were air,
it also, when the animal died, would
“merge in the great sea of air outside.


| 7. How we can say that there is tife in
thts animal body which is composed of the
five elements? If one of those elements
disappear, the dissolution of the other four
is brought about.


8, The element of water dries up if food
is not taken. The element of air disap-
(pears if the breath is controlled. The ele-
‘ment of space disappears if the excretions

_ €eage. So also the element of fire disap-
pears if food does not go in,


g. The element of earth is shattered
to pieces by disease, wounds and other suf-
fetings. If onty one of the five is spoiled,
‘the union is dissolved and the five go away
into five different directions.


to. When the five ingredients of the
body which is a compound of the five ele-
ments, are separated, where does life go?
What does it then know. What does it
then hear? What does it then say ?


“tr. This cow, it is said, will save me in
the next world. The animal, however,
which is given away, itself dies. Whom
then will this cow save ?


12, The taker of the cow and the giver
are both equally subject to death. Both of
“them meet with destruction in this world,
‘ How then will they meet again ?


13. How will the man that has been
eaten up by birds, or that has been shat-
:tered to pieces by a fall from a mountain
; Summit, or that has been consumed by fire,
. Fegain life?


14. The root of a tree that has been cut
-down does not revive. Only the seeds put
-forth sprouts. Where is the ,person who
: having died regains life?”


15. Only seeds were originally created.

. All this universe is the creation of seads in

Succession, ‘They that die, die for ever.
. Seeds come from seeds. ,


[ ememeianiaimted


I ‘.
MAHABHARATA,


CHAPTER CLXXXVIE


MOKHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued.


Bhrigu said :—

1. The living creature, or what is given,
or our other acts, are never destroyed. ‘The
death of a creature is only 2 change of form.
The body alone is dissolved.


2. The living creature, though it de-
pends upon the body, is not destroyed when
the body is destroyed. It is not seen after
the destruction of the physical body just, as
fire is not visible after the consumption of
the fuel with which it was lighted.


Bharadwaja said :—


If there is no destruction of the living
Creature like that of fire, I say, fire itself is
not visible after consumption of the fuel
(that ignited it). °

4. When the supply of a fuel is stopped,
the fire is put out, and as far as I know, is
destroyed. What has no longer any action
should be considered as destroyed, for it

roves its non-existence and which no
longer occupies any space. ‘
Bhrigu said :—

5. itis true that after the consumption
of fuel fire is no longer visible. lt mixes
with space because there is no longer any


visible. object wherein it can abide, and
hence it cannot be perceivedby us.


‘6. Likewise, upon renouncing thé body,
the creature lives in space, and cannot be
seen for its extreme subtility as is the
case with fire.


7. Itis fireor heat that keeps us the
vital airs called Prana and the others.
Know this heat is called life or the living
agent. The heat which keeps up vital airs,
is extinguished for the suppression of
breath. ; ’


8. With the extinction of heat, the body
itself loses animation. Falling down, it
is metamorphosed into earth, its ultimate
destination, :


8. The breath that exists in- all mobile
and immobile objects’ mingles with space,
and the heat which is in ‘them follows that
breath, i


‘Io. These three (véz., space, air, and
fire), mingle together. The other two (viz.,
water and earth), exist together in the,


shape of earth.


11. There is wind where. space ‘is, and


| there is fire where wind is, They have in
.@


SHANTI PARVA. -


teality no forms, and become endued with
form only in embodied creatures.


Bharadwaja said :—

12. If in the bodies of all living creatures
there are heat, wind, earth, space, and
water, what then are the signs of the living
agent ? Tell me these, O sinless one.


13. { wish to know the nature of the life
that exists in the bodies of living beings,
composed of the five principal elements, en-
gaged in the five acts, endued with the five
senses and animation.


14. After the dissolution of the body
which is a compound of flesh and blood, a
mass of fat, sinews and bones, that which
is the living agent is not seen.


15. If this body, composed of the five
elements, has no life, who or what then is
that which feels misery on account of either
physical or mental pain ?


16. The living agent hears what is said,
through the ears, It is, again, the fact, O
great Rishi, that the same agent hears not
when the mind is elsewhere engaged. It
appears, therefore, that what is called the
living agent serves no purpose.

17. What the living agent sees with
eyes acting in unison with the mind, the eye
sees not, even when lying before it, if the
mind is elsewhere engaged. _


18. Then again, when itis asleep, that
agent neither sees nor smells, nor hears,
for speaks, nor feels the perceptions of touch
and taste.


19. Who or what then is that which
feels joy, becomes angry, or sorry and suf-
fers tribulation? What is that which
wishes, thinks, feels hatred and utters
words.


Bhrigu said :—

20. The mind, like the body also, is
made of the five elements. Therefore it is
useless regarding the acts mentioned by
you. Only the soul sustains the body.
At is he that perceives smell, taste, sound,
“touch, form and other properties.


21, Permeating all the limbs, that Soul
witnesses the acts of the mind possessing
five attributes and living within the body
composed of the five elements. It is he
who feels pleasure and pain, and when
separated from him the body does not feel
them. : ie


22, When one has no preceptien of
form or of touch, when there js no heat in
the fire ef the body,—when that animal
heat is gone,—the body,. being renounced
‘by the Soul, meets with destruction, :


.


279


23. This whole umiverse is made of
water. Water is the form of all embodied
creatures. In that water lives the Soul
which is seen in-the mind, ‘That Sow) is
the Creator Brahman who exists in all
things, ‘ ss


24. When the Soul is endued with
ordinary attributes, it is called Kshetrajna.-
When freed from those attributes, it is
designated Paramatman or Supreme Seif.


2g. Know that Soul. He is full of
universal benevolence. He lives in the.
body like a drop of water in a lotus.


26. Know well what is called Kshetrajna
and which has universal benevolence,
Goodness, darkness, and ign: rance are the
three attributes of the living agent.


27. The learned hold that the Soul has
Consciousness and has the attributes of life,
The Soul works and makes everything to
work... Persons cognizant of the Soul say
that the oul is different from life. It is
the Supreme Soul that has created the
seven worlds and makes them work.


28. There is no destruction of the
living agent even when the body is dis-.
solved. Men shorn of intelligence say.
that is dies. That is in fact false. All
that the living agent dpes is that it goes
from one body to another. What is called
death is merely the dissoultion of the body.-


29. It is thus that. the Soul, covered
with various forms, goes from form to
form, unseen and unnoticed by others.
Persons endued with true Knwledge
witness the Soul by their keen and subtile.
intelligence.


30. ‘Living on restricted diet, and with-
heart purged of all sins, devoting himself
to meditation, a wise man succeeds every
night, before sleep and after sleep, in seeing
Soul by the help of his Soul. coy


31. Possessing a contented heart, and
by renouncing all acts, good or bad, one
can get infinite happiness by depending
upon one’s Seul. ;


32. The king, effutgent, like fire living’
within the mind is called the living agent.
It is from that Lord of everything that this.
creation has originated. -This is the con-
clusion of the enquiry into the origin of
creatures and the soul,


286
CHAPTER CLXXXVIIL


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA)—
Continued.


Bhrigu said :—

‘t. Brahman first created a few Brah-*
manas who passed by the name of Praja-
patis (lord of creation). Effulgent like the
fire or the Sun, they were created out of
the energy of that First-botn Being.


2. The powerful Lord then created
Truth, Duty, Penance, the eternal Vedas,
all sorts of pious deeds, and Purity, for
enabling creatutes to acquire heaven (by
Practising them).


3-4. After this, the gods and the Da-
navas, the Gandharvas, the Daityas, the
Asuras, the great snakes, the Yakshas, the
Rakshasas, the Serpents, the Pishachas,
and mankind with theit four divisions,
wis., Brahmanas, Kshatriyas, Vaishyas,
and. Shudrds, O foremost of twice-
Dorn ones, and all the other @rders of
creatures, were created.


5. The complexion of the Brahmanas
was white ; that of the Kshatciyas was red ;
that of the Vaishyas yellow; and that of
the Shudras was black,


Bharadwaja said:

6. If thé distinction between the four
castes be made by means only of color,
then it seems that all the four orders have
been intermixed.


7» Lust, anger, feat, cupidity, grief,
anxiety; hunger, exhaustion, possess and
prevail over all men. How can men be dis-
tinguished by the attributes ?


8. The bodies of all men sweat and puss
urine, faeces. phlegm, bile and blood. How
then can men be divided into classes 7?


g. Mobile objects are endless in
number ; the immobile objects are also
innumerable. How then can so many dif-
ferent objects be divided into classes ?


Bhrigu said :<-

to. There is in fact no distinction be-
tween .the different castes. The whole
world at first consisted of Brahmanas.
Created equally by Brahman, men have,
on account of their acts, been divided into
various castes, ‘


11. They who found excessive pleasure
in enjoyment, become possessed of the attri-
butes of harshess and anger, endued with
courage, and were unmindful of the works
of piety and worship,—those Brahmanas
possesing the quality of Darkness, became
Kshatriyas.


MAHABHARATA,


12, Those Brahmanas again who, tina
mindful of the duties laid down for them,
became endued with bothe the qualities of.
Goodness and Darkness, and follow the
professions of cattle-tending and agricul-
ture, became Vaishyas.


13. Those Brahmans again who wete
given to untruth and injuring other crea-
tures possessed of cupidity,—performed
all sorts of works for their maintenance
and had no purity of behaviour, and
thus possessed of the quality of Darkness,
became Shudras.


14. Divided by these occupations, Braha
manas, falling away from their own ordet
became members of the other three castes,
All the four castes, therefore, have always
the right to perform all pious rites and
sacrifices.


1g. Thus were the four castes at first
created equally by Brahman who ordained
for all of them the observances described
(in the Vedas). Cupidity alone brought
about the fall of many, who were possessed
by ignorance.


16, The Brahmanas are always devoted
to the Brahmaascriptures and practising
vows and restraints, are capable of under-
standing Brahma. ‘Yheir penances, theres
fore, never prove fruitless.


17. They amongst them are not Brahe
manas who cannot understand that every
created thing is Supreme Brahma. These,
falling away, became members of various
(inferior) castes.


18. Destitute of the light of knowledge,
living a loose life of dissolution they are
born as Pishas and Rakshasas and Ghosts,
and as Mleccha tribes. :

19. The great Rishis who at the begins
ning were created (by Brahman’s Will)
afterwards themselves treated, through
their penances, men devoted to the duties
laid down for them and rites laid down
in the Eternal Vedas.


20. Yhat other Creation, however,
which is eternal and undecaying, which
depends upon Brahma and_ has originated
from the Primeval God, and which hag
Yoga fot its support, is a mental one.


CHAPTER CLXXXIX.
‘(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA.)w#
- Continued,


Bharadwaja said :—


t. By what deeds, does one become 4
Brahmana? By what, a Kshatriya? @


SHANTI


foremost of twice-born ones, by what deeds
again does one become a Vaishya or a
Shudra? felt me this, QO foremost of
orators. ;


Bhrigu said :—

2—3. That person is called a Brah-
mana who has heen sanctified by birth and
other rites; whois pure in conduct; who
is devoted to the study of the Vedas; who
is constant in his practices of the six well-
imown pwificatory rites; who is steady


in all works of pity; who is not given to | },
take his food without having offered it duly |
who is attached to |
his preceptor; and who is always mindful |


to gods and guests;


vows and truth.


4. He, with whom truth, gifts, absten-


tion from injury to others, mercy, shame,
benevolence, and penance are associated,
is called a Brahmana,

15. He, who follows the profession of
war, who studies the Vedas, who makes
gifts and takes wealth, is called a
Kshatriya, :


6. He, who acquires fame by tending


cattle, who is engaged in agriculture and |


_the means of acquiring riches, who is pure
“ in condact and attends to the study of the
Vedas, is called a Vaishya, .


is engaged in doing every sort of work,
who is impure in behaviour, who does not
study the Vedas, and whose conduct is
unrighteous, is said to be a Shudra,


8. If these marks are not seen in a
Shudra, and if they are not seen in a Brah-
mana, then such a Shudra is no Shudra,
and such a Brahmana is ne Brahmana,


‘9g. One should conquer cupidity and |


anger by every means. This, together
with self-control, is the grandest results of
Knowledge.


10. One should control those two pas-


sions with his whole heart. They appear for |


killing one’s greatest good.

11, One should always protect his
prosperity against his angers his penances
from pride; his knowledge from honor and
disgrace ; and his soul from mistakes.


_ 12. That intelligent man, O twice-born
‘one, who does all acts without seeking for
fruits, whose entire riches exist for purposes
of charity, and who performs the daily
Homa, isa real Renouncer. One should
“be like a friend to all creatures, standing
aloof from ail acts of injury.


13. One should; without taking any
gilts, by the help of his own intelligence,


36


PARVA.,


| be associated with Prana,


281


completely control his passions. One
should live in his self where there is no
grief. Qnefwould then have no fear in this
world and attain to a fearless region in the


next world.


14, One should live always practising
penances, and with all passions completely
controlted; observing the vow of silence,
and with soul concentrated on itself; de-
sirous of conquering the senses, and une.
attached, ;


15. Ail things that can be perceived
y the senses are designated Manifest.
One should seek to know all, howevever,
that is Unmanifest, that is beyond the
perception of the senses, that can be
ascertained only by the subtile senses.


16, {f there is no faith, one will never
attain to that subtile sense. One should,
therefore, cherish faith, The mind should
and Prana
should then be held within Brahnta.


17. One may secure immersion in
Brahma, by withdrawing oneself from ail
attachments. There is no necessity of mind-
ing any other thing. A Brahmana can
easily attain to Brahma’ by the road of
Renunciation. The marks of a Brahmana
are purity, good conduct and universal


| benevolence,
7. He, who takes every sort of food, who |


CHAPTER CXC.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA}.—
Continued.


| Bhrigu said :—


1. ‘Trutti is Brahma; truth is Penance;
it is Truth which Creates all creatures:
Truth sustains the entire universe and it
is with the help of Truth that one goes to
Heaven.


2. Untruth is only another shape of
Darkness. It is Darkness that leads down-
wards. Those who are possessed by
Darkness, cannot see the bright regions of
Heaven,


3. It has been said that Heaven is
Light and that Hell is Darkness. The
creatures living in this world may obtain
both Heaven and Hell. \


4. In this world also, Truth and Un-
truth bring on contray action and contrary
indications, such as Righteousness and
‘Unrighteousness, Light and Darkness, |
Pleasure and Pain.


Amongst these, Truth is Righteous-
ness ; Righteousness is Light ; and Light is


282


Happiness. Likewise, Untruth is Un-
righteousness; Unrighteousness is Dark-
ness; and darkness is Sorrow or Misery.


6. Seeing that the world is stricken with
physical and mental pain and with plea-
sures are that sure to end in misery, the
wise never'suffer themselves to be stupe-


ry


7. A wiseman will try to rescue himself
from sorrow. The happiness of living
creatures is fragile both here and here-
after. :


8, The happiness of creatures that are
possessed by Darkness disappears like the
seulkent of.the Moon wher possessed by

abu.


9. Happiness is of two ‘sorts, vis, phi-
sical and mental. The visible and in-
visible fruits of action, both this 4nd the
other world, are described for the sake
of happiness. There ‘is nothing more im-
portant than happiness among the fruits
of the threefold objects of life. Happiness
is desirable, . It is an attribute of the Soul.
Both Virtue and Profit are sought for it.
Virtue is jts origin. This, indeed, is its
origin. The end of all acts is the attain-
“ment of happiess.


Bharadawajas said ee :


to. You have said that happiness is the
greatest object. £ do not undestand this.
“Lhis attribute of the soul which you des-
oribe as so desirable, is not sought by the
Rishis who are engaged in something pro-
mising a greater reward. We have heard
that the Greator of the three worlds, uiz.,
the powerful Brahman, lives alone, obser-
ving the vow of celibacy. He never seeks
happiness which is obtained from the grati+
fication of desire, Also, the divine Master
of the universe, the lord of Uma, reduced
Kama (god of love) to ashes. ' Therefore,
we say that happiness is not sought by
great people. Nor does it seem to bea
high attribute of the Soul. I cannot believe
what your divine self has said, vzz, that
there is nothing superior to happiness, It
is merely a commonplace cant of the
world that, there are two sorts of conse-
quences of our acts, vis., the origin of hap-
piness from good acts and of sorrow from
sinful deeds, «


Bhrigu said :—

11. The following is said on this topic:
from Untruth originates Darkness. Those
who are possessed by Darkness pursue
only Unrighteousness and not Righteous-
ness, being influenced by anger, cupidity,
malice, falsehood, and similar evils. The
never enjoy happiness either in this world


*


MAHABHARATA,


or in the next. On the other hand, they
are assailed by various sorts of disease
and pain and trouble. ‘They are also tor-
tuted by Death, imprisonment, and various
other punishments, and by the sorrows
originating from hunger, thirst and toil.
They also suffer from endless physica} trous
bles that originate from rain and wind and
burning heat and excessive cold. They
also suffer frum numerous mental grief
caused by loss of wealth and separation
from friends, as also by griefs caused by
decrepitude and death,


1z. Those who are free from all these
sorts of physical and mental sufferings,
know what happiness is,


13: These evils do not exist in heaven.
There sweet breezes blow, In heaven there
is also external fragrance, In heaven there
exists no hunger, no thirst, no decrepitude,
no sin,


14. In heaven there is perpetual happi-
ness. Both -happiness ¥and misery exist
in this world, In hell there is only misery,
tiappiness is, therefore, the greatest object
of acquisition.


15. The Earth gives birth to all crea-
tures. Females partake of her nature,
The male animal is like Prajapati himself.
The seminal fluid, it should be known, is
the creative energy.


16. In days of yore thus did Brahman
ordain that the creation should go on.
Each, by his own deeds, obtain happinesg
and misery.


CHAPTER CXCI.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA)--_
; Continued.


Bharadwaja said :—

1. What is the fruit of gift? What of
Righteousness ? What ofconduct? What
Penances duly performed? What of the
study and recitation of the Vedas? And
what of pouring libations upon the fire.


Bhrigu said :—

2. Sin is dissipated by pouring libations
on the sacred fire, One comes by blessed
peace of mind, by study of the Vedas.
One acquires pleasures and objects of en-
joyment, by gift. One winesblissful heaven,
by Penances, '


3 Gift is said to be of two sorts: gifts |
for the other world, and those for this.
Whatever is given to the good: yields fruits
to the giver in the other world.


SHANTI PARVA.


4. Whatever is given to those that are
not good yields fruits in this world. The
fruits of gifts are proportionate to the gifts
offered.


Bharadwaja said :—


5. What duties should be performed by
whom? What also are the charateristic
marks of duty? How many kinds of duty
are there? You should tell me these.


Bhrigu said :—


6. The wise men who are engaged in


performing the duties laid down for them, -


acquires heaven as their reward. By
doing otherwise people are sullied with the
sin of folly.


Bharadwaja said :—


7. Nou should tell me about the four
modes of life that were formerly laid down
by Brahman, also the practices enjoined
for each of them.


Bhrigu said :—

8. In days of yore, the divine Brah-
man, for the behoof of the world, and for
the protection of righteousness, laid down
four modes of hfe. Of them,. to live in
the house of the preceptor is the. first (in
order of time). In this mode of life one
should have his soul cleansed by purity
of conduct, by Vedic rites and by res-
traints and vows and humility. He should
adore the morning and evening twilights the
Sun, his own consecrated hearth, and the
gods. He should shake off procrastination
and idleness. He should purify his soul by
saluting his preceptor, by studying the
Vedas, and by attending to his preceptor’s
instructions. He should perform his ablu-
tions thrice,


9. He should lead a life of celibacy;
attend to his consecrated hearth serve his
preceptor dutifully; daily go out for alms
and give ungrudgingly to his preceptor the
whole of what is got in alms. Carrying
out willingly the behests of his preceptor,
he should be ready to receive such Vedic
instruction as his preceptor may give him
as a favour, There is a verse on this
subject: That Brahmana who receives his
Veda by attending reverentially upon his
preceptor, attains to heaven and acquires
the fruition of all his desires, :


10, Next comes the life of a house-
holder. .We shall explain to you all the
pious acts and characteristic marks of that
mode.
those who, having lived: the full term in
the preceptor’s house, return home, who
‘are of pious conduct, who wish the fruits
of a virtuous life with ‘their wives. In it


This mode of life is .ordained for.


283°


exist Virtue, Profit and pleasure. It is
(thus) suited to the cultivation of the
three-fold objects of life. Acquiring riches
by irreproachable acts, or with wealth of -
great efficacy which is got ‘from recitation
of the Vedas, or living upon means
followed by the regenerate Rishis, or with
the produce of mountains and mines, or with
the wealth of offerings made in sacrifices
and on the finish of vows and other obser-
vances, and those made to gods, the house-
holder should lead this mode of life. That
mode of life is considered as the root of alt
the others, Thgse who live in the pJouses
of preceptors, those who lead fives of men-
dicancy, and others who observe vows and
restraints, derive from this mode the means
they live upon, the offerings they make to
the departed nianes and the gods, and, in
short, their entire support. ;


tr. The third mode of life is called the
Vanaprastha or life in forest. Those that
lead it, need not keep in store wealth and.
articles. Living upon good food, and en-
gaged in the study of the Vedas, generally
those pious and god men walk over the
Earth for visiting the sacred shrines and
various other kingdoms. Standing up,
advancing forward, sweet and_ sincere
speeches, gifts according to the means of
the giver, offer of seats and beds of the
best sort, and presents of excellent viands,
are some of the means for showing them
regard.


12, There is a verse on this subject. If
@ guest gues away from a house with ex-
pectations not fulfilled, he is supposed
to take-away the merits of the house-
holder and transfer to the latter all his
sins.


13. Then again in the domestic mode of
life the gods ate prepitiated by sacrifices
and other religious rites: the departed
manes ‘by. the performances of obsequial
rites ; the Rishis by the study of the Vedas,
by listening to the instructions of ptecep-
tors, and by getting by. heart the scrip-
tures; and lastly the Creator by begetting
children, :


-14. There are two verses on this subject.
One following this mode of life, should
address all creatures with wards of affec-
tion, and pleasant to the ears. To give pain,
to inflict tortures, and use harsh words, are ,
all censurable.


15. Insult, pride, and, deceit, also
should be avoided. Abstention from in-
iury, truth, and absence of anger, yield
te ‘merit of penances in all the modes of
ite. .

16. These are allowed in a heuse-hold-
er’s life, véz., the use and enjoyment of


284


gatlands, ornaments, dresses, perfumed
oils and scents, enjoyment of pleasures ac-
cruing from dancing and music both vocat
and instrumental, and all pleasant sights
and scenes; the enjoyment of various kinds
of foods and drinks belonging to best kinds
of edibles, viz., those that are swallowed,
those that-are lapped, those that are drunk,
and those that are sucked ; and the. enjoy-
ment of pleasures derivable from sports and
all sorts of amusement and the gratification
of desires.t


17. That man who folfowing this mode
of life s8eks to acquire the “three-fold ob-
jects of life (viz., Religion, Profit, and
Pleasure) as well as Emancipation,—the
great end of the three qualities of Goodness,
Darkness and Ignorance, enjoys great
happiness-in this world and at last attains
to the end reserved for virtuous and good
persons.


18. Even that householder who satisfies
the duties of his life by following the prac-
tice of picking up fallen yrains of corn from
the lines of fields and who gives up sensual
pleasure and attachment to action, does
not find it difficult to acquire heaven.


entcctesl


CHAPTER CXCIH.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued.


Bhrigu said :—~

1. Hermits in order to acquire virtue,
sojourn to sacted waters and rivers and
springs, and practises penances ia solitary
and secluded forests abounding with deer,
buffaloes, boars, tigers and wild elephants.
‘They forsake all sorts of raiments and food
and enjoyments which pedple in society
like. They live abstemiously upon wild
herbs, fruits, roots and leaves of various
kinds. The naked Earth is their seat.
They lie down on the bare earth or rocks
ov pebbles or gravel or sand or - ashes.
They are clad in grass and animal skins
and barks of trees. .They never shave
theie heads and *beards or pare their
nails, They perform their ablutions at
regular times,. They pour unfailingly
libations on the ground, and on the sacred
fire at the proper time. They enjoy no rest
till they finish their daily collection of the
sacred fuel and sacred grass and flowers
and till they have swept and cleansed
(their sacrificial altars). They bear with-
out any concern cold and heat and rain
and wind, and, therefore, the skin of their
bodies is cracked all over; and for per«


MAHABHARATA


forming various kinds of rites vows and


acts, their flesh, blood, skin and bones ~
become greatly reduced. Gifted with great
patience and calmness, they live, always
practising the quality of Goodness.


2. ‘That person who, with controlled
soul, follows such duties originally laid
down by regenerate Rishis, consumes alt
his sins like fire and acquires blissful
regions for themselves which are so difft-
eult of attaining.


3 FT shall now describe the conduct
of the Parivrajakas, which is as follows:
alienating themselves from attachment to
the sacred fire, wealth, wife and children,
and robes, seats, beds, and such other
objects of enjoyment, and snapping the
fetters of affection, they walk about,
regarding with an equal eye a clump of
earth or rock and gold. They Hever
think of acquiring or enjoying the three-
fold objects of life. They regard impartially
foes and friends and neutrals or strangers.
They never injure, in thought, word, or
deed, immobile objects, or creatures that
are viviparous, or oviparous, or born of filth,
or called vegetables. They have no homes.
They roam over hills and mountains, upon
shores of rivers or oceans, under shades of
trees, and among temples of gods. ‘They
may go to towns or villages for living. In
one town, however, they should not live for
more than five nights, while in the same
village they should not live for more than
one night. Entering a town or a village,
they should, for nraintaining their life, go to
the houses of liberal Brahmanas only. ‘They
should never ask for any alms but accept
what is put into the bowls they carry.
They should free themselves from lust,
anger, pride, cupidity, delusion, miserliness,
deceit, slander, vanity, and injury- to
creatures. -


4. There are some. verses on this sub-
ject :—that person who, observing the vow’
of silence roams without giving any creature
cause of fear, is never filled with any fear
himself by any creature. ;


5. That learned person who performs
the Agnihotra with the help of the fire that
is in his own body, who pours libations.
into his own mouth and upon the fire that
is_in his own body,—acquires endless bliss-
ful regions on account of that fire having
been fed with such libations acquired by
a life of mendicancy, oe


6. That twice-born person who obsetves
in the aforesaid way this mode of life
having Liberation for its end, with a pure
heart and understanding, attains to Brahma
after the manner of ‘a tranquil ray of light
that is not fed by any burning fuel, :


SHANT! PARVA.


Bharadwaja said :— =

7. Beyond this region there is a region
of which we have heard but never seen.
wish to know all about it. You should


describe it to me.


Bhrigu said :—

8. Towards the north on the other a
side of Himavat, which is sacred and full
of merit, there is a sacred, blessed, and
highly desirable region. That is called
the other world.


g. The men who dwell in that region
are righteous in act, pious, of pure hearts,
freed from cupidity and errors of judg-
ment, and not subject to miseries of any
sort.


to. That region is, equal to heaven,
possessed of excellent attributes. Death
comes there at the proper time, Diseases
never attack the inhabitants.


81. Nobody looks for the wives of other
people. Every one is devoted to his own
wife. These people do not assail or kill
one another, or covet one another’s things.
There is no sin or doubt.


12. There the fruits of all sacred rites
are visible. There some enjoy seats and
best sorts of drinks and food, and live
within palaces and mansions,


13. There some, bedecked with orna-


ments of gold, surround themselves with
every article of enjoyment. There are
again, some. that eat very sparingly for
only keeping body and soul together.


14.. There some, with great exertion,
try to suppress the vital airs. Here some
men are devoted to righteousness, and
some addicted to deceit. Some are happy
and some; wretched; some are poor and
some, rich, .


15. -Here are to be found exhaustion,
and fear, and delusion and painful hunger.
Here cupidity for wealth is also seen, a
passion that stupefies even the learned,


16. Here various opinions are advanced
by those who do virtuous or sinful deeds.
That wise man who knows all these
opinions which may be divided into two
sorts, is never sullied by sin.


17—~18. Deceit with fraud, theft, slander
malice, oppression, injury, treachery, and
untruth, are vices which destroy the merit
of one’s penances. A learned. man how-
ever, who avoids them, find the merit of
his penances multiplied. :


19. Here there is much thought about
fair and sinful acts. This region where
we live isthe field of action, one reaps the


285


fruits of his actions, according to the life he
has led.


zo. Here, in days of yore, the very
Creator and all the gods having performed: ~
proper penances, with the Rishis became
cleansed and attained to Brabma,.


21-22, The northern part of the Earth
is highly auspicious and sacred, People of
our region (who perform fair deeds or show
regard for Yoga, are-born in that region.
Others are born in the intermediate species.
Some again, when their lease of life run
out, become lost on Earth,

23. Engaged in’ feeding upon one
another and sullied by fcupidity and delu~
sion, these men return to this very region
without being able toa go to that northern
region.


24. Those wise men who with vows and
observing Brahmacharyya listen with reve= ©
rence to the instructions of preceptors, cam °
learn the ends reserved for all classes
of men.


25. I have now described to you briefly
the duties laid down ‘by Brahman. He,
indeed, is an intelligent man who knows
what is righteousness and its “opposite in
this world. .


Bhishma said :—


_26. hus, O king, did Bhrigu speak the
highly energetic Bharadwaja. Of. highly
virtuous soul the latter became filled with
wonder and adored the great sage with
veneration, =


27. Thus,.O king, the origin of the uni-
verse has been described fully to you,
What, O you of great wisdom, do you.
wish to hear after this,’


.


—e


CHAPTER CXCIII.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued,


Yudhisthira said:—
1. IE think, O grandfather, that -you
know everything. O you, who are con-
versant with duties, I wish to hear you
describe to me, O sinless one, the ordi«
nances about conduct.” ;


Bhishma said :—
2. Those are called -wicked men who
are of. bad conduct, of bad .acts, of
wicked understanding, and great rashness,
or wicked men. The good are distin-
guished by purity of conduct and habits,


4


286


3. They are ‘good men’ who never
answer calls of nature on the high roads,
in cowpens, or in fields filled with paddy.


4. One should, having finished the neces-
sary rites, perforin, his ablutions in river-
. water and gratify the gods with oblations
of water. This is the duty of all men.


5. The Sun-god should be always
adored. One should not sleep after sun-
rise. Morning and evening the prayers
should be ‘said, sitting with face turned
towards the East and towards the West
. Tespectively.


6. One should, washing the five limbs,
eat silently with face turned towards the
East. One ‘should never speak of the
food which he is to eat. One should eat
food which is good to the taste.


‘7. One. should, after eating, wash
hands and rise.
sleep at night with wet- feet. The divine
Rishi Narada said that are these marks of
good conduct. :


8. One should every day go round a
sacred place, a bull; a sacred- image, a
cowpen, the crossing Penne of four roads,
a pious Brahmana, and a sacred tree.


g- One shoutd make no distinctions be+
tween his guests and servants and kins-


his


men in matters of food. To treat servants.


equally in this matter is highly spoken of.


10. Eating morning and evening is an
ordinance of the gods. It is not sanc-
tioned that one should eat at any inter-
mediate period. He who eats according
to this rule gains the merit of a fast.


11. GOne should pour libations, at the
hours fixed for Homa, on the sacred fire.
Without wishing to know other people’s
wives, the wise man who seeks his own
wife in her season, acquires the merit of
Brahmacharyya.


12, The remnants of a Brahmana’s
food are like nectar. YVhey are like the
mother’s milk. People highly value those
remnants. The good, by eating them, at-
tain to Brahma. ;


..13. He who pounds turf to clay or he
who cuts grass, or he who uses his nails
only for taking food, or he who always
lives on the residue of Brahmana’s dishes,
or he who acts, actuated by desire for
reward, has not to live long in the world.


14. One who has abstained from meat,
should not take meat even if it be sancti.
fied .with Mantras from the YVajurveda.
One should also avoid the flesh of the
vertebral column and the flesh of animals
not killed in sacrifices.


One should never go to.


MAHABHARATA.


15, One should never make his guest to
fast, whether at his own house or in a
strange land, One should, having obtain-
ed alms, offer them to his elders.


16. One should offer seats to his elders
and respectfully bow to them. One obtains
long life, fame, and prosperity, by adoing
his elders.

16. One should never see the Sun at
the moment of rising, nor should one gaze
ata naked woman who is another man’s
wife. Living with one's wife (in her
Season) is not sinful, but itis am act that
should always be done secretly,


t7. The heart of all sacred places and
shrines is the Preceptor. The heart of
all pure and cleansing things is Fire.
All acts done by a good and pious person
are good and praiseworthy, including even
the touching of the hair of a cow’s tail.


1g. One should make polite enquiries
every time he meets with another. One
should salute Brahmanas every morning
and evening.


20. Intemples of gods, amid cows, in
performing the rites of religion sanc-
tioned for Brahmanas, in studying, the
Vedas, and in eating, the right hand
should be raised.


2t. The adoration of Brahmanas, morn-
ing and evening, according to due rites.
yields great merit. Through such worship
the stock of the merchant, and the pro-
duce of the agriculturist, become profuse.
The produce of all sorts of corn and
the supply. of all articles of enjoyment also
become profuse.


22. Oneshould say, while giving food
to another, —* Is it sufficient 2?’ One should
ask, when presenting drink,—Will ic
please ?—One should ask, when giving
sweetened milk and rice, or sugared gruel
of barley, or milk with sesame or pease,
—Has it fallen ?—People should repectfully
adore Brahmanas, after shaving, after
spitting, after bathing, and after eating.
Such adoration is sure to grant longlife to
sickly men.


24. One should not pass urine with
face turned towards the Sun, nor should
one sce his own excreta. One shouid not
lie on the same bed with a woman, nor


eat with her. is


25. One should never Thou-Thee their
elders, while addressing them, nor take
their names. Thou-,thee<,ing, or taking of
names, is only allowable in addressing in-
feriors or one’s compeers.


26. The hearts of ‘sinful men betray
the sins committed by them. Those sinfuf


¢


SHANTI


tien who conceal their conscious sins from
good men meet with destruction.


27. Only ignorant fools try to conceal
the sins which they commit knowingly.
it istrue that men do not see those sinus,
but the gods see them. .


28. A sin concealed by another sin
begets fresh sins.. Again, an act fof merit
increases the merit, if concealed by an act
of merit. The‘acts of a virtuous man
always follow Virtue.


29. A man shorn of understanding
never thinks of the sins committed by him.
Those sins, however, overtake the doer
who has disreyarded the scriptures. As
Rahu comes to Chandra, those sinful acts
come to the foolish man.


30. The objects that are set apart with
expectation are hardly enjoyed. Such
storing is never spoken highly of by the
wise, for death waits for no one.


31. The wise hold that the righteous-
ness of all creatures is a quality of the
mind. One should, therefore, in his mind,
do good to all.


32. One should practise virtue alone.
In the practice of virtue one need not seek
the help of others. If one follows only the
Ordinances of the scriptures, what cana
companion do.


33. Righteousness is the origin of man-
kind. Righteousness is the nectar of the
gods. After death, men enjoy, through
Righteousness, eternal felicity.’


CHAPTER CXCIV.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued,


Yudhishthira said:— _

t. Tell me, O grandfather, what and
of what nature is that which passes by the
name of Adhyatma (spiritual) and which
is laid down for every persons


2. O you who are acquainted with
Brahma, whence bas this universe, con-
sisting of mobile and immobile objects,
been created? When univetsal dissolution
sets in, to whom does it go? You should
describe this subject to me.”


Bhishma said :—

3. ‘This Adhyatma, O son of Pritha,
that you ask me about, I will presently des-
cribe. It is, O son, highly agreeable and
productive of great happiness.


PARVA. 237.

4. Great teachers have (before this)
described the Creation and thé Destruction
(of the universe). [Knowing those truths,
a person may acquire, even in this world,
great satisfaction and happiness, Such
knowledge also bring on the acquisition of


great fruits, and it is highly beneficial to .


all creatures,

5. Earth, air, spate, water, and light
as the fifth, are considered as Great
Creatures. These form both the origin
and the destruction of ali created objects.


6. To Him from whom these great
prima} elements spring, they return again
and again, severing themselves from all
creatures like the waves of the ocean.


7- As the tortoise extends its limbs and
withdraws them again, so the: Supreme
Soul creates all objects and again with-
draws them into Himself,


8. The Creator places the five primary
elements in all created objects in different
proportions, The living creature, however,
does not mark it.


* g. Sound, the organ of hearing, and
all holes,—these three,—originate from
Space. ‘Touch, action, ‘and skin are the
three-fold attributes of the Wind.


10. Form, eye, and digestion are the
three-fold attributes of Fire or Energy.
Taste, all liquid secretions, and the tongue
are the three attributes of Water.

11. Smell, the nose, and the body are
the three properties of Earth. The great
elements are five. The mind is the sixth. |


12. ‘Fhe senses and the mind, O
Bharata, are the organs through which the
cognition of a living creature is made. The
seventh is the understanding; and the
eight his the Soul.


13. Thesenses are for perceiving; the
mind creates uncertainty. The under-
standing brings all knowledge to cerainty,
The Soul exists as a witness. ~


14. Ali that is above the two feet, all
that is behind, and all that is above, are
witnessed by the. Soul. iKnow that the
Soul permeates the entire being without
left vacant.


15. ‘All men should ‘know fully the
senses, the mind and the understanding,
The three universal tendencies or qualities
called Goodness, Darkness and Ignorance,
exist, dependent on the senses, the mind,
and the understanding.


16. Man, by understanding with the
help of his intelligence, the manner in which
creatures come and leave the world, is sure
to attain by and by to steadfast peace.


288


17. The three qualities lead the uuder-
standing to worldly attachments. In this
matter, the Understanding is identical with
the Senses and the Mind. The Under-
standing, therefore, is identical with the
six (the five senses and the mind), and also
with the objects cognised by it. When,
however, the Understanding is destroyed,
the three qualities cannot produce action,


18, This universe of mobile and immo-
bile objects consists of that Intelligence.
It is from that Intelligence that every-
thing originates and it is into it that
everything subsides. he scriptures point
out, therefore, that everything is a mani-
festation of Intelligence.


1g. That by which one hears is the ear.
That by which one smells is called the
organ of smell, and that by which one dis-
tinguishes the tastes is called the tongue.


20. One acquires perception of touch
by the shin that covers the body. That
which is called the Intelligence ‘undergoes
changes. When the intelligence desires
anything itis called Mind.


21, The foundations of the Intelligence
are five in number, each serving a different
purpose. They are called the senses. The
invisible principle, vés., [Entelligence,
Depends on them.


a2. The Intelligence that exists in a
living creature embraces the three qualities.
Sometimes it obtains happiness and some-
times misery.


23. Sometimes it becomes shorn of both
joy and misery. Thus the Intelligence
exists on the minds of allmen. ~


24. Sometimes the Intelligence, which
is made up of the three qualities, transcends
them (by Yoga), like the Ocean, with his
surges, transgressing his high continents.


25. That Intelligence which transcends
the three qualities exists in the. mind ina
pure state, of (unmodified) existence alone.
The quality of Darkness, however, that
leads to action, soon pursues it.


26. At that time the Intelligence sets all
the senses to action. The properties fof the
three are these: happiness dwells in Good-
ness; sorrow in Darkness ; delusion in Ig-
norance, ,


27. All the states of the mind are in-
cluded in the three qualities. [ have now,
'O Bharata, described to you the course of
the understanding.


28. An intelligent man should control
all his senses. The three qualities of
G-eaness, Darkness and Ignorance are
always attached to living creatures,


MAHABHARAILA.


29. Three kinds of intelligence alsa ara
seen. in every creature, vis., that which
depends upon Goodness, that upon
darkness, and that upon Ignorance, O
Bharata.


go. The quality of Goodness brings
happiness ; the quality of Darkness produces
sorrow; and if these two combine with the
quality of Ignorance then neither happi-+
ness nor sorrow is produced. ~


3t. Every state of happiness that
appears in the body or the mind is due to
the quality of Goodness.


32. A disagreeable state of sorrow to
oneself, is due to nothing but the quality
of Darkness. One should never think of
it in fear.


33. That state, which is full of delusion
and error, and for which one knows not
what to do, which is unascertainable and
unknown, should be regarded as belongs
ing to the quality of Ignorance.


34. Joy, satisfaction, delight, happiness,
tranquillity of heart, these are the pro+
perties of the state of Goodness. Man
sometimes acquires a portion of them.


35. Discontent, heart-burning, grief,
cupidity, vindictiveness, are all marks of
darkness. They are seen with or without
sufficient causes for producing them.


36. Disgrace, delusion, error, sleep and
stupefaction, that befall one through excess
of ill-luck, are various properties of the
state of Ignorance,


37- That person whose mind is fare
reaching, capable of going on all directions,
not confident about acquiring the objects
it desires, and well-controlled, is happy
both here and hereafter.


38. Mark the differencece between
those two subtile things, vzz., Intelligence
and the Soul. One of these a2s., Intelli+
gence) displays the qualities. The other
via., the Soul) does nothing of the kind.


39. A gnat and a fig may be seen to
be united with each other. Though united,
each, however, is separate from the other.


40. Likewise, Intelligence and Soul,
though different from each other, by their
respective natures, yet they may always be
seen to exist in a state of union. A fish and
water exist together, But each, however,
is different from the other, The same is
the case with Intelligence and Soul.


41. The qualities do not know the Soul,
but the Soul knows them all. The Soul is
the spectator of the qualities and consider
them all as emanating from itself,


SHANT! PARVA.


43. Acting through the senses, thé.


Ymind, and the understanding which ig the
seventh, all of which are inactive and have
“no self-consciousness, the Soul discovers
the objects like a lamp showing all objects
around it by styedding its rays through an
Opening in the covering.

? 43. The understanding or Intelligence
creates all the qualitres. The Soul only
sees them. Suq@p is certainly the connection
between the intelligence and the Sdul.

44.

gence or Soul. The understanding creates
“the mind, but never the qualities.


45. When the Soul, by means of the
mind, sufficiently controls the rays that
proved from the senses, it is then that it
becomes visible (to the Understanding)
fike a lamp burning within a cover.


46. That person who renounces all ore
dinary acts, practises penances, devotes
himself to study the Soul, taking a delight
fn it, and regards himself as the Soul of
~all creatures, acquires a supreme end.


47. As an acquatic bird while moving
over the waters, is never wetted, so does
a wise person move among Creatures.


48. One should act in the world, by
the help of his intelligence, in this way,
without grief, without joy, without distinc-
tion of personality, for all, and shorn of
malice and envy.


49. One living in this way creates the
qualities (¢.¢., transcends them), like a
spider creating threads. The qualities
should, indeed, be, considered as the
threads of the spider.

S0—81. Some say that the qualities: of
such men are not lost. Some say that they
are all lost, Those who say that they are
not lost rely upon the Shruzéis, which do
not contain any declaration to the con-
trary. They, however, who say, that the
qualities are all lost rely on the Smritis.
One should taking into consideration bath
these opinions, judge as to which of them
is right.


$2. One should thus solve the knotty
question which is capable of shaking the
understanding by doubt, and thereby ac+
quire happiness. When that doubt will
be removed, one will no longer have to
grieve.


53. Men of impure hearts may by
knowledge acquire success like persons
plunging in a. full river purifying them-
selves of all dirts. °


84. One who has to get over large river,
does not feel. happy at only seeing the
other shore. If the case were otherwise,


37


There is no resort of either Intelli-


289


(.e., if by merely seeing the other shore
he could reach it) then might one become
happy. - Ic is quite different with one ac«
quainted with ruth, The T'mere knowledge
of Truth will give him happiness, As
soon as such knowledge begins to fructify,
the person may be considered to have
reached the other shore, They who thus
know the Soul as freed from all woridly
objects and is but the One, are said to
acquire high and excellent knowledge.


§5. By knowing the origin and the end
of all creatures, a person which is such, and
by thinking upon the subject, a person by
and by obtains infinite felicity,


56. He who has understood the three«
fold objects and reflecting upon it, casts
it away, succeeds by Yoga to see the Truth
and secure perfect happiness, :


57. The Soul cannot be seen unless the
senses, which are set on various objects
and are difficult of being controiled, be
ali duly restrained,


§8. He who knowssthis, is really wise.
What other mark is there of a wise man?
Acquiring this knowledge, intelligent men
considered themsetves to be crowned with
success.


59. That which strikes the Ignorant
with fear can never create fear in persons
of Knowledge. There is no higher end
for anybody than Liberation. Lhe sages
say that on account of the excess or other=
wise of good qualities, differences are seen
regarding the-degree of Liberation.


60. A person succeeds, by acting witha
out expecting fruits, (by those acts) in
destroying his pristine sinful acts. Yo a
wise man, the acts of a former life and
those of this life also, do not yield any
disagreeable result. But how can acts, if
he continues to be engaged in them, bring
about what is agreeable (vez., Liberation.)


61. People blame a person who is
possessed of lust, envy, and other evil pas-
sions), ‘Those vices draw the person down
in his next life into yarious sorts of inferjor
births. .


62. Mark attentively the vicious in
this world who grieve exceedingly for the
loss of their possessions. See also those
who are gifted with judgment and who
never grieve when placed in similar cir-
cumstances! ‘Those who are conversant
with both, deserve to be called truly
wise.’


1


‘298,
| CHAPTER CXCV.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARYA.)—
Continued. :


Bhishma said :-—


1-3. ‘f shall now, O son of Pritha, des-
.cribe to you the four kinds of Yoga medi-
tation. Obtaining a knowledge of the
same, the great Rishis, attain to eternal
success even in this world, Pleased with
knowledge, with hearts engaged in Libera-
tion, and conversant with Yoga, great
Rishis, act in such a way tnat their Yoga
meditation may get on properly.


3. Oson of Pritha, being freed from
-the faults of the world, these are not born
‘again, Freed from liability to te-birth,
they live in their sate of original purity.


4. Freed from the influence of all pairs


of opposites (such as heat and cold, joy


and sorrow, e(c.), ever existing in their own
(pure) state, freed (fronr attachments),


never accepting anything (in gift), they live
-in places separated from thete wives and


children, without others with whom dis-
putes may arise, and favorable to perfect
tranquillity of heart. :

5. There “restraining speech, such a
person sits like a piece of wood, killing all
the senses, and with mind immersed in


.the Supreme Self by the help of medi-


tation.


6. He has no preception of sound thro-
ugh the ear; no perception of touch
through the skin no perception of form
through the eye; mo perception of taste
through the tongue.


7. Hehas no perception also of scents
through the organ of smell. He would,
immersed in Yoga and meditation, re-
nounce all things.


8. Possessed of great energy of mind,
he has no desire for anything that works up
the five senses. The wise man, then should,
withdrawing his five senses into tke mind,
fix the unstable mind with the five senses
(into the Intellect).


9g. The Yogin should, possessed of pa-
tience, fix his mind which always wanders,
so that his five gates may be made firm re-


_ garding things that are themselves une


stable. He should, in this sky of the heart,
fix his mind into the path of meditation,
making it independent of the body or any
other refuge.


to. i have spoken of the path of -medi-
tation as the first, since the Youin has first
to destroy his senses and the mind.


MAHABHARATA.


11. The mind, which constitutes the
sixth, when thus controlled, tries to flash
out like the capricious and fickle Hghtning
playing among the clouds.


32. Asa drop of water on a leaf is un-
stable and moves about on all sides, so be-
comes the Yogin’s mind when first fix on
the path of meditation.


13. When fixed, for sagre time the mind
Stays ‘in that path. VYhen, however, it
goes astray again into the path of the wind,
‘it becomes as ffeet as the wind.


14. The perso who has mastered the
science of Yoga,—without losing his heart
by2this, never regarding the fuss of the toil
undergone, shaking off idleness and malice,
—should, again, direct his mind to medita-
tion,


15. When one oberving the vow of
silence, begins to set his mind on Yoga,
then discrimination, knowledge, and powert
to avoid evil follow him in the traal.


16. He should, though disturbed by the
figkleness of his mind, fix it in meditation.
The Yogin should never despair, but seek
own his well-being.


17-19. As when dreched with water, a
mass of dust or ashes or of a burnt cows
dung, does not seem to be soaked, as it
remains dry if drenched partially, and
requires continued drenching before it
becomes thoroughly soaked, so should the
Yogin, graduatly control ail his senses.
He should gradually withdraw them (from
all objects). he man who acts thus suc
ceeds mm controlling shem,


20. One succeeds, O Bharata, by direc=
ting one’s mind and senses to the path of
meditation, in controlling them perfectly
by steadfast Yoga. .


21. The happiness that he feels who has


‘succeeded in controlling his mind and senses


is such that its like can never be experi~
enced through Exertion or Destiny.

22. Enjoying such felicity, he continues
to find pleasure in the act Qf meditation.
Yogins, attain,fin this way, to the highly
blessed state of Nirvana.’


Se camel


CHAPTER CXCVI.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
* Continued.
Yudhisthira ‘said :—


1. ‘You have described the four modes
of life and their duties. You have alse


SHANTI PARVA,


spoken of the duties of kings. You have
recounted many histories of various kinds
and on various subjects.


2. I have also heard from you, O you
of great intelligence, many discourses about
morality. I have, however, one doubt.
You should remove it.


3. I wish, O Bharata, to hear of the
feuits which silent Reciters of sacred Man-
tras acquire. What are the fruits that
bave been shorn for such men? What is
that region to which they repair after
death 2?


4. You should, also, O sinless one, tell
me all the rules that have been laid down
regarding such silent recitation 7? When
the word Reciter is uttered, what shall 1
understand by it? Is such a man to be
considered as following the ordinances of
Vedanta or Yoga or W ork.


5. Or, is sucha man to be considered
as following the oridnances of (mental)
sacrifices ? How is the path of the Reciters
to be called ? You possess universal know-
dedge.. ‘Tell me all this.”


Bhishma said :—


6. ‘Regarding it is cited the ofd history
“of Yama, ‘Time and a certain Brahmana.,.


7. Sages who knows the means of at-
‘taining to Liberation have spoken of two
methods, vts., the Vedanta and the Yoga.
Amongst these, in the Vedanta System
Renunciation has been described as the
result of silent recitation. ‘he declarations
of the Vedas hold that absent of rites,
- yields tranquillity, ang secures Brahma.

8. Indeed, the two paths pointed out by
sages bent on acquiring what is for their
well-being vs., Vedanta and Yoga, are
such that they are both concerned and
again unconcerned (witt silent recitations.)


g—ti. | shall row expiain the man-
ner in which silent recitation is connected
(with each of the two paths) and the
cause. In both, as in the case of silent
recitation, it is necessary to subdue the
senses and Ax the mind (after withdrwal
from external objects; as also to have
truth, keeping up of the (sacred) fire,
residence in solitude, meditation, penance,
self-control, forgiveness, benevolence, self-
restriction of food, withdrawal from worldly


attachments, the absence of garulousness,


and tranquillity. ‘hese form a Sacrifice in
acts, Listen now to the course which
consists of abstention (from acts).


12, I pill presently describe the manner
in which the acts of the reciter observing
the vow of Brahmacharyya may cease.
Such a person should behave in every. way


291


according to what has been (already) said.
by me. me ae . es

13. Follow the path of abstention, he
should try to do away with his dependetice
on both the External and the, Internal.


14. Sitting on Kusha grass, with Kusha
in hand, and binding his hairs with Kusha,
he should surround himself with Kusha and
have Kusha for robes.


15. He should, bowing to all earthly
matters, take leave of them and never think
of them. He should, acquiring equanimity
of, mind, fix his mind on the mind jtself. — -


16. He should, reciting the highly bene~
ficial verse (vis., the Gayatri), meditate witli
the help of his intellect on Brahma alone.
Afterwards he should even leave off that,
being then absolutely immersed in contem-
plation. - eT


. at

17. His dependence on the efficacy of the

Gayatri which he recites, will give him this

concentered contemplation, He attains by

penances to purity of soul, and self-control,
and cessation of hatred and désire.


18. Freed from attachment and delusion,
being above the influence of all paits of
oppasites, he never grieves and never suffers
himself to be attracted towards worldly
objects. He does not consider himself as
the actor nor as the enjoyer or sufferer of
the fruits of his acts. :


19. He never, out of selfishness, fixes
his mind on anything. Without being
engaged in the acquisition of wealth, he
abstains also from disregarding or insulting
others, but not from work.


20. The work in which he is engaged
is that of meditation; he is devoted to
meditation, and seeks meditation. By
meditation he acquires concentered con-
templation, and then gradually leaves off
meditation itself, ;


21. He enjoys, in that state, the happi-
ness which follows Renunciation. Having
thoroughly controlled his desires, he casts
off his life-breaths and merges into the
Brahmic body. : é


22. Or, if he does not desire to merge
into the Brahmic body, he at once goes
upwards into the region of Brahma and is
never born again.


23. Having become tranquillity’s self,
and being freed from all sorts of calamity,
such a person, by depending upon-his own
intelligence, attains to that Soul which is
pure and immortal and which is without a
stain,’


292


CHAPTER CXCVIL


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued.


Yudhisthira said :—

't. “You have described the very high
end to which the Reciters attain. I beg to
enquire whether this is their only end or
there is any other to which they attain.”


Bhisma said :—

2. ‘Listen with rapt attention, “O
powerful king, to the end that silent Reci-
Rers attain, and to the various kinds of
hell into which they sink, O foremost of
men.

3. That Reciter who does not at first act
according to the rulés which have been
laid down, and who cannot compfete the
ritual or course of discipline laid down,
has to go to hell.


,


4 That Reciter who work without faith,


whois not contented with his work, and
who takes no pleasure in it, forsooth, goes
to hell.

§. They who follow the ritual with pride
in their hearts, all go to hell. “Phat Reciter
bolls insults and disregards others has to go
to hell.


6. That man who makes sifent recitation
under the influence of stupefaction and from
desire of fruit, acquires all those things
which he seeks at heart.


7. That Reciter who seeks at heart the
supreme power of Yoga, has to go to hell
‘and never becomes freed from it.


_ 2. That Reciter who makes recitation
under the influence of attachments, obtain
those objects which he seeks for,


_ Q. That Reciter of wicked understanding
and uncleansed soul who engages in work
with an unstable mind, obtains an unstable
end or goes into hell.


ro. That Reciter who is not gifted with
wisdom and who is foolish, becomes stupe-
fied or deluded ; and for such delusion has
to go to hell where he is obliged to grieve.


xt. Jf a person even of fixed heart,
determining in to complete the discipline,
makes recitation, but fails to come tothe
“end, for his having freed himself from
attachments by a violent stretch without
Zenuine conviction of their worthlesssness
of harmful character, he also has to go to
hell,’


Yudhishthira said :—


12. “When the Reciter attains to the
essence of that which exists in its own


MAHABHARATA.


nature, which is Supreme, which is beyond
description and comprehension, and which
dwells in the syllable One forming the
subject of both recitation and meditation,
why is it that they have a gain to take
birth in embcdied forms ?’”


Bhishma said :—


13. ‘Reciters, for want of true know-
ledge and wisdom, ¢9 to various descrip-
tions of hell. The discipline followed by
Reciters is surely very superior. ‘These,
however, that I have spoken of are their
weak points,”


CHAPTER CXCVIIE.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


1. Tell me what sort of hell is obtained
by a Reciter? I am curious, O king, to
know this, You sheuld describe this sub-
ject to me.’’ =


Bhishma said :—

2. ‘You have originated from a porticn
of the god of righteousness. You are by
nature observant of righteousness, Listen,
© sinless one, with undivided attention,
to these words having righteousness for
their root.


3-6. Those reSions that are owned


by the great gods, that are of -various
aspects and colours, of various des-
criptions and productive of various


fruits, and that are of great excellence,
those cars again that- move at the desire of
the riders, those beautiful palaces and hells,
those various pleasure-gardens decorated
with golden lotuses, those regions that be-
long to the four Regents and Shukra and
Vrihaspati_ and the Maruts and Vishwe-
devas and Saddhyas and the Ashwins, and
the Rudras and the Adityas and the Vasus,
and other dwellers of heaven, are, O sire,
spoken of as hells, when compared with the
region of the Supreme Self.


7—8. The region last spoken of is shorn
of fear, lincreate, without pain of any sort,
without any agreeable or disagreeable ele-
ment, beyond the reach of the three quali-
ties, freed from the eight things {vtz., the
five primal elements, the senses, the mind,
and the intellect), without thesthree (dis-
tinctions between the knower, the known,
and act of knowing); freed also from the


four attributes (seeing, hearing, thinking,


SHANTI


and knowing,) without the fourfold causes
(of knowledge) without joy and delight and
sorrow and disease,


9. Time makes it appearance there for


use. Timeis not the ruler there. That
supreme region is the ruler of Time as also
of Heaven.


10. That Reciter who becomes identified
with his Soul (by withdrawing everything
into it) goes there, He has, after this,
Never to experience any sorrow. ‘This
region is called Supreme. The other re-
gions are hell,


11. I] have not told you of all those re-
gions that are called hell, Indeed, as
compared with that foremost of regions all
the others are called hell.’


=


CHAPTER CXCIX.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued,


Yudhisthira said -—

1. ‘ You had mentioned the dispute be-
tween Time, Mrityu, Yama, Ikshaku, and
a Brahmana. You should describe the
story in full.”


Bhishma said :—

2—3. “Regarding this subject that I am
describing, is cited the old story of what
took place between Surya’s son Ishaku
and acertain Brahmana, and Jjme and
Mirtyu. Listen to me as to what happened,
and what was the conversation that took
place between them, and the place where
it happened.


4. There was a certain and highly
famous and pious Brahmana. He wasa
Reciter. Greatly wise, he was conversant
with the six branches (of the Vedas). He
by ofthe Kushika race and son of Pippa~
ada.


5. He acquired (by his austerities)
spiritual insight into the various branches
of the Vedas. Residing at the the foot of
Himavat, he was devoted to the Vedas.


6. He practised, silently reciting the
Gayatri, severe austerities for attiaining to
Brahma. A-thousand years passed away
while he was engaged in the observance of
vows and fasts.


q. The goddess (of Gayatri or Savitri)
_appeared before him and said,—I am
pleased with you.—Continuing to recite the
sacred Mantra, the Brahmana remained
silent and spoke not a word to the goddess,


PARVA, 263
8. The goddess felt marcy for him anc
became highly pleased. “Fhen that mother
of the Vedas spoke highly of that recitation
in which the Brahmana had been engaged.


g—io. After finishing his recitation the
Brahmana stood up and, lowering his head,
laid himself down before the goddess’s feet.
The pious Reciter, addressing the goddess,
said,—By good tuck, O goddess, you have
been pleased with me and ‘shown yourself
tome. If, indeed, you are pleased with |
me, the boon I ask is that my heart may
find pleasure in the act of recitation.


Savitri said :—

tr, What do you ask, O twice-born
Rishi? What wish of yours shall I make
good? ‘Tellme, O foremost of Recit&s,
everything will be as you wish, :


\
12. Thus addressed by the goddess, the
Brahmana, conversant with duties, replied,
saying,—Let me wish about continuing my
recitations go on increasing every day.


13. Let also, O auspicious goddess, my
Samadhi be more cémplete !—The goddess
sweetly said,—Let it be as you wish.

14. Desiring to do good to the Brah-
mana, the goddess once again said to him,
—You shalfnot have to go to hell, z. ¢,
there where great Brahmanas go.


75. You shall go to the region of Brah-
ma which is increate and free from every
fault. I go hence, but that which you have
asked me shall take place.


16. Goon reciting with controlled soul
and raptttention, ‘Fhe god Dharma will
in person come you. Time, Mrityu, and
Yama also will come to you. There will be
a dispute of morality,’ . :


Bhishma said :-~-


17. The goddess, having said ‘these
words returned to her own house. The
Brahmana continued in recitation for ‘a
thousand divine years. Restraining anger,
and always controlling self, he passed his
time, firmly: devoting himself to truth and
shorn of malice. :


18. Ugon the completion of his obser-
vance by the intelligent Brahmana,- Dhar-
ma, plaesed with him, appeared before that
twice-born one. ;


Dharma said:— ;
19. O twice-born one, see mé who am.
Dharma. I have come here for seeing you.
You have acquired the meed of this recita-
tion in which you had been engaged.
Listen to.me as to what that reward is.


20. You have acquired all the regions
of felecity which belong to either gods


agf:


or men. O good man, ‘you shall ascend
above all the abodes of the gods,


21. Q_ascetic, cast off your vital breaths
then, and go to whatever regions you
please. By casting off your body you wiil
acquire many regions of felicity.


The Brahmana said :— _
22. What have I to do with those regi-
ons of felicity of which you speak. O
Dharma, go wherever you like, I will not,
O powerful lord, cast off this body which
is subject to much happiness and misery.


Dharma said :—
“23. Your body,
tidg, should certainly be cast off. Do you
ascend to heaven, O Brahmana. Or, tell
us what else would please you, O sinless
one. .


The Brahmana said :—

_ 24. 1 donot, O powerful tord, wish to
‘five in heaven itself without this body of
mine, Leave me, O Dharma. [| have no
desire to go to heaven itself without my own


ody.


Dharma said :—

25, Without setting your. heart on your
body, cast it off and be happy. Go into
regions that are {ree frem_ the quality of
Ignorance. Indeed, going there, you shall
never have tc experience any misery.


The Brahmana said :—


e
26. O highly-blessed one, I take great
pleasure in recitation. What necesity have
I for those eternal regions of which you
speak? Indeed, O powerful lord, I do
not wish to go to heaveneven with this
body of mine.


Dharma said :—

27. If you do not wish to cast off your
body, behold, O twice-born one, there is
Vime, and there is Mrityu, and there is
Yama, who are all approaching you.


Bhishma said :— :

28. After Dharma has said this, the
three Vivaswat’s son (Yama), Time and
Mrityu,—approached that Brahmana, O
blessed king, and addressed liim thus,


Yema said :—

zg. Tam Yama. I say to you that a
high reward awaits you for these well-per-
formed penances of yours and for this your
pious conduct.


O foremost of asce-


MAHABHARATA


Time said :— :

30. You have acquired a high reward
which is, indeed, commensurate with the
recilation that you have finished. The time
is come for you to ascend to heaven, | am
‘Time and I have come to you.


Mrityu said :—

3r. You who are conversant with rights
eousness, know me for Mrityu herself in-
her own proper form! [have come ta you
in person, urged by Time, for taking you
hence, O Brahmana.


The Brahmana said :—


32. Welcome to Surya’s son, to great
time, to Mrityu, and to Dharma, What,
shall 1 do for you all,


Bhishma said :-—


33. In that meeting, the Brahmana
gave them water to wash their feet, and
the usual articles of the Arghya, Highly
pleased, he then addressed them, saying,-~
What shall I do for you all to the best of
my power.


34. Just at that time, O monarch, (king)
ikshaku, who had started on a pilgrimage
to holy waters and shrines, came there
where those gods had been assembled to-
gether,


35, The royal sage Ikshaku bowed his
head and adored them all. ‘That best of
king then enquired after the welfare of alt
of them. .


36. The Brahmana offered the king a
seat, as also water to wash his feet, and
the usual Arghya. Having next made the
usual enquiries of courtesy, he said,— .


37- You are welcome, O great king.
Communicate to me all your wishes. Let
your noble self tell me what 1 shall have to
do for you by putting forth my might,


The king said :—

38. lLamaking; You are a Brahmana
observing the six well-Known duties, 1
will give you some wealth. That is well-
known. “Yell me how much I shall give
you. .


The Brahmana said :-—

39- There are two kinds of Brahmanas,
Oking. Morality or righteousness also is
of two sorts: devotion to. work, and abs-
tention from work. As regards myself, [
do not accept gilts. ;


40. Give presents to them, O king, who
are given to the duty of work and accept-
ance, .I shall not, therefore, accept any


SHANTI


pitt. On the other hand, Task you, what
is fot ‘your well-being. What, indeed,
shalt I give you? ‘Tell me, O foremest of
‘kings, and I shall do it with the help of my
penances.


The king said ~~

4t. lama Kshatriya. I do not know
how to say the word—Give. The only
thing, O best of twice-born. ones, that we
can say is—Give (us) battle.—


The Brahmana said ;—

42. You are content with the obser-
vance of the duties of your order. Like
‘wise, 1 am content with the duties of mine,


O king. There is, therefore, little dif-
ference between us, Do what you
please. :

The king said :—


43. .You gave vent to these words first,
wis.—I shall give you according to my
might.—I, therefore, pray, O twice-born
one,—Give me the fruits of this your reci-
tation.


The Brahmana said :--

_ 44... You boasted that your words always
pray for battle. Why then do you not pray
foc a battle with me,


‘The king said :—

45. Ite is said that ‘Brahmanas are
armed with the thunder of speech, and that
Kshatriyas have might of arms. Hence,
O learned Brahmana, this wordy warfare
has taken place between you and me.


Phe Brahmtana said :—


46. As regards myself, this is my reso-
Jution to-day. What shall I give you ac-
cording to my might? Tell me, O king of


_kings, and I shall give you. Do net
delay. :
The king said :—

47. If, indeed, you wish to give- me


anything, then give me the fruits you have
- acquired by practising recitation fot these
thousand years.


The Brahmana‘said:-

48. Take'the greatest fruit of the reci-
tations I have practised. Indeed, take
half, without any hesitation ‘the entire fruits
of that recitation.

49. Or, O king, if you desire, ‘take

‘ withdut any‘hesitation the entire fruits ‘of
my recitations.


The king said :—


50. Blessed be-you, I tiave no necessity
3


“me?


‘my recitations.
‘your words and mine prove true.


PARVA, 258
for the fruits of your recitations which I
have begged. Blessings on your head.
am about to leave you. ‘Tell me, however;
what those fruits-are.


The Bralimana said :— ;


5%. I have no knowledge of the fruits ‘f
have acquired. 1 have, ‘however, given
you those fruits that 1 have acquired by
recitation. These, w2., Dharma and’
time and Yama, and Mrityu, are wit+
nesses,


The king said :—

§2. What will the fruits, which are not
known, of these your observances, do for
If you do not }tell me what are the
fruits of -your recitations, let those fruits


-be yours, for, forsooth, Ido not -wish for


them.


The Brahmana said ~ ;


53. 1 will not accept afy any other word
(from -you). -1 have given you the fruits of
Let, O royal sage, both


‘84. As regards my recitations, I never


-entertained any particular desire'to do.


How then, O foremost of kings, should !
have'any' knowledge of what: are the fruits
of those recitations ? : ;

55. You said,—Give !—f said,—lI give !
—1 shall not falsify these words, Keep the
truth, Be calm,


56. Ifyou refuge to keep my word, O
king, great sin of untruth will visit you.


37. O chastiser of foes, you ‘should not
wter what is untrue. Likewise, | dare
not falsify what I have said. :


58. I have, before this, unhesitating.
ly said,—I give !~If, therefore, you are
firm in truth, accept my gift,


fy


59. Coming here, O king, you begged
of me the fruits of my recitations, There
fore, take what I have given away, if,
indeed, you are truthful.


60. He who is: given to falsehood has
neither this world nor the next. Sucha
person cannot rescue his departed manes.
‘How again shall-he succeed in doing good
to progeny ? '


61. The rewards of sacrifices and gifts,
as also of fasts and religious observances,
are not so powerful in rescuing as - truth,
O-foremost of men, in both this and the


next world, :


62. All the penances that have ‘been
practised by you -and all those ‘that you


*


. B96


will practised in the future for’ hundreds
and thousands of years are more efficacious
than truth, _ :


63. Truth fs the one undecaying Brah-
ma. Truth is the one undecaying Penance.
‘Truth -is the one tndecaying Sacriftce.
Truth is the one undecaying Vedas


64. “ruth is awake inthe Vedas. The
_ fruits attached te truth have been descri-
bed as the highest. From truth originate
Righteousness and Self-control. Every-
thing depends on truth,


65. Truth isthe Vedas and their bran-
ches. Truth’ is Knowledge. Truth is the
‘Ordinance. ‘Truth is the observance of
vows and fasts. Truth is the Prime
Syllable Om,


» 66. Truth is the origion of creatures.
Truth is their progeny. It is by truth
‘ that the Wind moves. It is by truth that
the Sun gives heat.


67. It is hy truth that Fire burns. It
fs on truth that Heaven rests. ‘Truth is
Sacrifice, Penance, Vedas, the verses of
Samans, Mantras, and Saraswati.


68. We have heard that once on a
time teuth and all religious observances
were weighed in a scale. When both were
weighed, that scale on which truth was,
proved heavier. :


69. There is truth where Righteousness
is. Everything multiplies through truth,
Why, O king, do you wish todo false
"act.


jo. .Be firm in truth. Do not tact
falsely, O king. Why do you falsify the
words—Give : (me) !—~which you have said ?


7. If you refuse, O king, to accept
the fruits that | have given you of my
recitations, you shall then have to wander
over the world, fallen away from Righte-+
ousness,


72. That person who does not give after
having promised, and he also that does
hot accept after having begged, are both
Stained with falsehood. You should not,
therefore, falsify your own words. ~


The king said :—

Yo fight and to protect from the
duties of Kshatriyas. It is said that Ksha-
triyas are givers. How then shall 1 take
anything from you.


The Brahmana said :— .

74. I never pressed you, O king. I did
not seek your house. Yourself, coming
here, you yourself begged of me, Why
then do you not take ?


- MAMABHARATA,


Dharma said :—


75. Know you both that 1am Dharma
himself. Let there be no dispute between
you. Let the’Brahmana possess the reward
of gift, and Tet the king also obtain the
merit of truth.


Heaven said :—


46. Know, O great king, that I am
Heaven's self-incarnate, come here in per+
son. Let this dispute between you cease.
You are both equal in respect of the merit
or rewards that you have acquired.


The king said :—

77. Ihave no use with Heaven. Go, O
Heaven, to the place you have come from.
{f this learned Brahmana wishes to goto
you, let hin take the rewards that I have
acquired.


The Brahmana said :—


78. In my boyhoood I had, through
Ignorance, stretched my hand for accep«
ting gifts. Now, however, I recite the
Gayatri, observing the duty of abstention.


79. Why do you, O king, tempt me
thus, me who have for a long time followed
the duty of abstention? I shall myself do
what my duty ts. I do not wish to particia«
pate in the rewards acquired by you, O
king. J am given to penances and to the
study of the Vedas, and I have abstained
from acceptance,


The king said :-—

80. If, O Brahma, you are really
prepared to give me the excellent reward of
your recitation, then let half that reward be ~
mine, you also take at the same time half
the reward that 1 myself have gained by
my acts,

‘81. Brahmanas follow thé duty of accep-
tance. Persons born in the royal order
follow the duty of giving. If you are not
unaware of the duties, let our fruits be
equal,


82, Or, if you do not wish to be my
equal regarding our rewards, take then the
whole ef the rewards that I may have
gained. Do take the merit E have gained
if you Wish to show me favour,’


Bhishma, continued :—

83. ‘At this time two very ugly persons
came there. Each had his arm upon the
other’s shoulder ; both were _il-dressed,
They said these words :-—


84. You owe me nothiag [—Tf realty owe


you !-If we dispute in this way, here is the
king, who governs men,


SHANI! PARVA, - 397


; 85. i say truly, you owe me nothing !—
You Speak falsely. I owe you a debt!


86. Both of them, greatly exercises in
dispute, then addressed the king, saying, —
See, O king, that none of us may be visi-
ted by sin!


AD
Virupa said :—

87. I owe my companion Vikrita, O
king, the merits of the gift of acow. [ am
willing to satisfy thar debt, This Vikrita,
however, refuses to accept repayment.


Viktita said :—
*-88. This Virupa, O king, owes me no-


thing. He speaks an untruth under the
appearance of truth, O king,


The king said :—


89. ‘Tell me, O Virupa, what is that
which you owe your friend here. I wish
do what is


to first hear you and then
proper. .


Virupa said :—

go. Hear attentively, O king, all the
circumstances fully about how [ owe my
companion, viz., this Veikita, O king.


gt. This Vrikita had, in days gone by,
for the sake of acquiring merit, O sinless
one, given away an auspicious cow, O royal
sage, to a Brahmana given to penances and
the study of the Vedas.


92. Going to him, O king, I begged of
him the reward of that act. With a pure
heart, Vikrita made a gift to me of -that
ceward.


93. I then, for my purification, did some
good acts, 1 also bought two kapila cows
with calves, both of which used to give
large quantities of milk.


93. I then presented according to due
rites and with proper devotion, those two
cows to a poor Brahmana living by picking
solitary grains. Waving formerly accepted
the gift from my companion, I wish, O
lord, even here, to give him in return twice
the reward, The circumstances being such,
O foremost of men, who amongst us two
shall be innocent and who guilty ?


96. Disputing with each other about
this, we have both come to you, O king,
Whether you judge rightly or wrongly,
settle our dispute and put us in peace, *


97. If this my companion does hot wish
to take from me in return a gift equal to
what he gave me, you shall have to judge
patty and put tis both on the right
oad,


38


-as an unfathomable pit.


The kifig said :~,

98. Why do you not accept payment
that is sought to be made for the debt that
he owes to you? Do not delay, but accep?
Bevan: of what you know, to be your

ue!


Vikrita said :— - .

. This one says that he owes me. 1
teli him that what I gave I give away. Hé
does not, therefore, owe me anything. Let
him go wherever he likes.


The king said :—

100. He is ready to give you. You are;
however, reluctant to take. It does not
appear proper to me! I think you should
be punished for this, There is little doubf
in this. :


Vikrita said :— .

tor. I madea gifttohim, O royal sage f
How can I take it back ? If Lam guilty ir
this, do you. declace .the punishment, O
powerful one,


Virupa said :—~

102. If you refuse to take when I ani
ready to give, this king will, forsooth, punish
you, for he is an uphoider of justice,


Vikrita saidi—-
103. Begged by him I gave him what


was my own. How shall I now take it
back? You may go away. I permit you,


The Brahmana said :—


104. Vou have heard, O king, the wordd
of these two. Do you take unhesitatingl?
what I have promised to give you,


The king said: .
105. This subject is, indeed, aS deep


How will thé
tenaciousness of this Reciter end.


1o6. If I do not take what has been
given by this Brahmana, how shall I avoid
being polluted with a great sin %


107. The royal sage then said to the
two disputants,—having acquired your res«
pective objects, go you both. I should seé
that kingly duties, which aré in me, may
not become useless. ;

108. It is settled that kings should follow
the duties sanctioned for them, To my
‘misfortune, however, the course of duties
laid down for Brabmanas has affected my
wretched self,


The Brahmana said :—
109. Accept, O king! Lowe you, ¥Yox


298


begged it of me, and I also have promised !
If, however, you refuse to take, O king, I
Shall forsooth curse you. .


The king said :—

- 119. Fie on royal duties, the fixed action
of which is even such! I should, however,
take what you give only for making the two
sorts of duty exactly equal,


111. This my hand, that was never
before expanded, fs now stretched forth.
Give me what you owe me.


The Brahmana said :—


112. Jf I have acquired any fruits by
reciting the Gayatri, accept them all.


‘The king said :—

113. These drops of water, see, O fore-
most of Brahmanas, have fallen upon my
hand. I also wish to give you. Accept
my gif& Let us both stand equal. ,


Virupa said :—

114. Know, O king, that we twoare
Desire ‘and Anger. We have induced you
to act thus! You have made a gift in
retura to the Brahmana. Let there be
equality between you and this twice-born
one somarding blessed regions in the next
world. =


115—116. This Vikrita realty does not
owe me anything. We eppenies to you
for your own sake. Time, Dharma, Mrityu,
and we two, have examimed everything
about ‘you, here in your very presence, by
creating this quarrelt between you and
that Bratmana. Go now; as you like, to
those regions of happiness which you have
acquired by means of your deeds.


Bhishma said :—~

117. I have now told you how Reciters
win the fruits (of their recitation) and what,
indeed, is their object, what the place,
and what the regions, that a Reciter may
acquire, : ;

118, A Reciter of Gayatri goes to the
supreme god Brahman, or to Agni or
enters the region of Surya.


119. Ifhe plays therein his new form,
then stupefied by such attachment, he is
affected by the attributes of those particular
regions.


120. He is equally affected if he goes to
Soma, or Vayu, or Earth, or Space. The
fact is, he lives in all these, with attach-
ment, and shows the attributes peculiar to
those regions.


x21. If, however, after having freed
himself from attachments, he goes ta those


MAHABHARATA.


regions and does not trust the happiness
he enjoys) and wishes for That Which is

upreme ‘and Immutable, he then enters
even That,


~ 422. In that case he acquires the
ambrosia af ambrosia, toa state free from
desire and individual consciousness. He
becomes Brahma’s self, freed from the in-
fluence of the pairs of opposites, happy,
tranquil, and without pain.


123. Indeed, he acquires that state
which is free from pain, which ts tranquil,
which is called. Brahma, whence there is
no return, and which is called the One and
Jummutable.


124. He becomes freed from the four
means of peception, v7z., Direct knowledge
(through the senses), Revelation, Inference,


and Intution, the six conditions, (Hunger,


Thirst, Grief, Delusion, Disease, and
Death), and also the other six and ten
attributes, v7s., five breaths, the ten senses,
and the mind. ‘Transcending the Creator
(Brahman), he becomes at one with the
One Supreme Soul.


125, Or, if moved by attachments, he
does not wish for such absorption, but
wishes to have a separate existence depen-
ding on that Supreme Cause of everything, -
then he gets the fruition of all his desires.


126. Or, if he hates all regions of hap-
piness, which have been called hells, he
then, driving off desire and freed from
everything, enjoys supreme happiness even
in those very regions.

127. Thus, O king, I have deseribed to
you about the end acquired by Reciters.
I have told you everything. What else do
you wish to hear from me ?’


CHAPTER CC.


(MOKHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued.


Yudhisthira said :—

1. “Tell me, O grandfather, what reply
was given by either the Brahmana or the
king to Virupa after he had finished his
speech,

2. What kind of end was it, amongst
thase deseribed by you, that they acquired 7?
What, indeed, was the conversation that
took place between them, and what did
they do there ?’’


Bhishma said :—
3. Saying,—Let it be as you have said,


SHANTI PARVA,


the Brahmana, adored Dharma and Yama
and Time and Mirtyu and Heaven,:all of
_ whom deserved adorations.


4—5. He also adored all those foremost
of Brahmanas that had come there by
bending his head to them. Addressing
the king then, he said,--Gifted with the
rewar@ of my recitations, O royal sage,
acquire an eminent position. With your
“permission I shall set myself to my recita-
tions again.


6. O youof great -power, the goddess
Savitri gave me a boon, saying,—Let your
devotion to recitation be continuous,


.The King said :—

.. 7. Ufyour success has become futile,
and if your beart is -bent upon practising
again, go, O learned Brahmana, half and
half with me, and you alone enjoy the
reward of your recitations:


The Brahmana said :—


8. You have exerted your best before
all these: men. Let us then! become equal
regarding our rewards, and let us go to
receive our end,


9. Apprised of these determination, the
king of the celestials came there, accom-
panied by the gods and the Regents of the
word,


to. The Saddyas, the Vishwas, the

antras, various sorts of loud and sweet
music, the Rivers, the Mountains, the Seas,
the Sacred Waters, the Penances, the Ordi-
fnances about Yoga, the Vedas, the Sounds
accompanying the singing of the Samans,
Saraswati, Narada, Parvata, Vishwavasu,
the Hahas, the Huhus, the Gandharva
Chitrasena with all the members of his
family, the Nagas, the Siddhas, the Munis,
the god of gods, viz., Prajapati, and the
inconceivable and thousand-headed Vishnu
himself, came there. Drums and trumpets
were beat and blown in the sky.


14. Celestial flowers were poured upon
those great beings. Bevies of Apsaras
danced all around.


15. Heaven, in his;"“embodied form,
came there. Addressing the Brahmana,
he said,—You have acquired success. You
are highly blessed.—Then addressing the
king, he said,—You have also, O king ac-
quired success.

16: Oking having done good to each
other, the king and the Brahmana, with-
aad their senses from the objects of the
world, :


__ 17. Fixing the vital airs Prana, Apana,
Samana, Udana, and Vyana in the heart,


-| assembled),


299


they ‘fixed the mind in Prana and Apana
united together. . © :
ta


18. They then placed the two united airs
in the abdomen, and fixed their eyes on
the tip of the nose and then immediately
below the two eye-brows. They next saw
the two airs, with the help of the mind, in
the interstice between the two eye-brows,
bringing them there by and by.


19. With bodies perfectly motionless:
they were absorbed with fixed gaze. Hav-
ing controlled their souls, they ther placed
the soul within the brain. .


20. Then passing the crown of the great
Brahmana a fiery flame of great effulgence
went up to heaven.


21. Loud exclamations of sorrow, utter~
ed by all creatures, were then heard on all
sides. - Lauded by all, that splendour then
entered Brahmana’s self, - ‘


22. Coming forward, the great gtand-
father addressed that splendour which had


become like a span in size saying,—Wel-


come,


23. And again he uttered these sweet
words :--Verily, Reciters acquire the same
end with the Yogins,


24. When the Yogins attains his end
he gets a direct vision unto all these (here
Regarding Reciters, however,
there is this distinction, that they are ho-
nored by Brakman’s advancing forward to
receive them.


25. Live you in me.—Thus spoke Brah-
man and once more gave conscioysness to
that splendour. Indeed, then, freed from
all anxieties, the Brahmana eutered th
mouth of the Creator. .


26. The king Ikshaku, too, in the same
way, entered the divine Grandfather like
that best of Brahmanas. .


27, The deities saluted the self-create
and said,—A very superior end is, indeed,
laid down for Recitets,


28. This your exertion is for Reciters.
We only came here for seeing it. You have
made these two equal, honored them equally


and granted them an equal end. .


29. We have seen to-day the high end
that is reserved for both Yogins and Re»
citers. Transcending all happy regions,
these two are capable of going wherever
they like, © :


Brahman said :—~


‘30. Healso who would read the great
Smriti (v#z., the Vedas) and_he too who
would read the other sacred Smritis that
follow the former, (vs., Manu’s and the


4


309.


rest), woufd, similarly attain to the same
region with me. ®@

31. He also, who is devoted to Yoga,
will, forsooth, acquire likewise, after death,
my own regions, :

32, Igo hence. Go ye all to your res-

ective. abodes for the accomplishment of
your ends,


Bhishma said :—

33. Having said so that faremost of
gods disappeared there and then. Having
obtained a leave from him beforehand the
gods returned to their respective quarters.


34. Having honored Dharma, all those
great beings proceeded with well-pleased
hearts, O king, walking behind that great
‘gad.


35 Thesé are the rewards of reciters
and this their end. I have described them
to you as I myself had heard of them,
What else, O king, do you wish to hear of ?'


neta e


CHAPTER CCL


MOKSHADHARMA PARVA.-—_
(Continued.)


Yudhisthira said :— ;


xr. “What are the fruits of the Jnana
Yoga, of all the Vedas, and of the (various)
observances and vows ? How also may the
individual soul be known? Tell me this,
O grand father.”


Bhishma said:

2. ‘Regarding it is cited the old nar-
rative of the conversation between that
lord of creatures, vzg., Manu, and the great
Rishi Vrihaspati,


3~—4. In days of yore, the foremost of
celestial Rishis, vis., Vribaspati; who was
a disciple of Manu, bowed to his preceptor
.and addressing that king and pegs alt
creatures, said,— What is the origin of the
universe? Whence have the ordinances
originated? What are those fruits attri-
buted by the learned to Knowledge? -Tell
me also truly, O ilhistrious one, what is
that which the very Vedas have not been
able to show 2 1


5. What are those fruits which are res-
pected by eminent sages conversant with
the science of Artha, with the Vedas, and
with the Mantras, through sacrifices and
profuse gifts of kine? Whence do those
fruits originate? Where are they to be
found 7


MAHABHARATA.


6. Tell me also this old history, vis.,
whence have the Earth, all earthly objects,
wind, sky, aquatic animals, water, heaven,
and the dwellers of heaven, all originated.


Man is inclined towards that object
which he seeks to know. | kave no know-
ledge of that Ancient and Supreme Being.
How shall I free myself from a false dis-
play of my leaning towards Him ?


8. I have read the Riks, all the Samans, *
all the Yajuses, the Chhandas, Astronomy,
Nirukta, Grammar, Sankalpa, and Shiksha,
But I have no knowledge of the nature of
(the five principal elements which form
everything.

g. Describe to me all I have asked you,
by making only simple statements and
using qualifying adjectives or attributes.
Tell me what the fruits are of Knowledge,
sacrifices and other religious rites. Explain
to me how also.an embodied being leaves
his body and acquires a new one.


Mauu said :—


to. What is agreeable to one consti-
tutes his happiness. Likewise what is dis-
agreeable to one forms his misery, feeling—~
“By this { shall acquire happiness and
prevent misery’’—men perform all religious
acts.


it. The efforts for the acqusition of
Knowledge, however, originate from a


‘desire for avoiding both happiness and


misery.

12, The ordinances about sacrifices and
other observances, which are in the Vedas,
all originate from desire. He, however,
who frees himself from desire, attains ta
Brahma. That man who, from desire of
acquiring happiness, perfoms various acts
is constrained to go to hell. .


Vrihaspati said :—

13. Men aspire to acquire the agreeable
which ends in happiness, to avoid the dis-
agreeable which begets misery. Such
acquisition and such advoidance again are
brought about by acts.


Manu said :—


14. By freeing oneself from acts that a
man succeeds in entering into Brahma.
‘The injunctions of Karma or acts are laid
down for that very end. ‘The ordinances
of Karma tempt only those whose hearts
are not shorn of desire. By freeing one«
self from acts one wins the highest state.


15. By performing religious rites, one.
who wishes liberation becomes purified
(from attachments, for these acts have for


i gheir object, the purification of the souls


’


SHANTI PARVA,


and at last acquires great splendour. By
freeing oneself from acts, one acquires the
highest end, vig, Brahma, which reigns
supreme over the reward which acts give,


16. Creatures have all been engendered
by Mind and Act. These are the two
best paths adored of all. External acts
yield fruits that are both transitory as also
eternal. For acquiring the latter there is
no other means than relinquishing the
desire for fruits by the mind. ;


17. As the eye, when night passes away
and the veil of darkness is gone, leads its
possessor by its own power, so the Under-
standing, when it becomes endued with
Knowledge, sees all evils which should be
shunned.


18. Men avoid snakes, sharp blades, of
Kusha and pits, when they find them on
their way. If some tread upon or fall into
them, they do so by ignorance. Mark
the superiority of the fruits of knowledge.


1g. Duly administered Mantras, sacri-
fices, the presents called Dakshina, gift of
food and goncentration of the mind are
the five acts which yield fruits, there being
none else.


e

20. Acts have the three Gunas (of Satwa
Rajas, and Vamas) for their soul. The
Vedas say this, The Mantras, therefore,
have the same three qualities, since it is
with Mantras that acts are performed.
The ritual also is possessed by the same
three qualities. The fruits of action
depend upon the mind. It is the embodied
creature who enjoys those fruits.


21. All excellent sorts: of sound, form,


tastes, touch, and scent, are the fruits of*


acts, being acquired in the region of acts.
As for, however, the fruits ef knowledge,
man acquires them even here before death.


22. Whatever acts are performed by
means of the body, one enjoys the fruits
thereof in this body. ‘fhe body is, indeed,
the structure to which adhere both happi-
ness and misery, .


23. Whatever acts are performed by
means of words, theie fruits are enjoyed:
in a state in which words can be spoken.
Likewise, whatever acts are ‘performed by


-the mind, their fruits are enjoyed in a


state in which one is not freed from the
mind.

24. Seeking the fruits of acts, whatever
acts (Satwika or Rajasika or Tamasika)
a person petforms, the fruits, good or bad,
that he actually enjoys are permeated by
their nature.


25. Like fishes going against a cur-
rent of water, pristine acts visit the actor,’


308


The embodied creature enjoys happi-
ness for his good acts,* and suffers misery
for his evil ones.


26. I will now describe Him from whom
this universe has originated, Him by knowe
ing whom persons of purified souls cross
this world, Him who has not been exe
pressed by Vedic Mantras and Words,
Listen to me as I speak of that greatest
of the great.


27. Himself freed from the several sorts
of taste and scent, and sound .and touch
and form, He is. incapable of being com-
prehended by the senses, unmanifest, with-
out color, the One, and He has creatéd
the five kinds of objects for His creatures.


28. Heis neither female, nor male, nor
of the neuter sex. He is neither existent,
nor non-existent, nor existent-nonexistent, °


Only those that are acquainted with
Brahma see Him. He knows no detiora-
tion.


CHAPTER CCI.


(MOKSHA DHARMA PARVA).—
Continued,


Manu said :—


1. From that eternal and undecaying
One first originated Space; from space
came Wind; from wind came Light; from
light carne Water. From water originated
the Universe ; and from the universe, alk
things that exist in it.


2. The bodies of all. (earthly) objects, ©
(after dissolution), first enter into water,
thence to light of heat, thence to the wind,
and thence to space. They who seek libera~
tion have not to return from space. On
the other hand, they attain to Brahma.


3. The refuge of liberation, v#z., Brahma,
is neither hot, nor cold, neither mild nor
fierce, neither sour nor astringent, neither
sweet nor bitter. He is not endued with
sound, or scent, or form. He transcends
all these and everything, and is without
size. - :

4. The skin perceives touch ; the tongue,
taste; the nose, scent; the ears, sounds;
and the eye, forms. Men not conversant
with Adhyatma succeed not in seeing what
is above these.


5. Having withdrawn the tongue from
tastes, the nose from seents, the ears from
sounds, and the eye from forms, one secs
his ownself, om


302


6. Ithas been said that that which is
the Cause of the actor, the act, the material
with which the act is done, the place and
the time of the act, and the inclinations
and propensities about happiness and
misery, is called the Self (or Soul).


7. That which. permeates everything
which does everything, that which exists
in the universe even as the Mantras say,
that which is the cause of all, that which
is the highest of the high, and that which
-is One without a second and does all things,
is the Cause. Every thing else is effect.


8. It is seen that a person, on account
of the acts performed by him, reaps fruits
both good and evil, which exist harmoni-
ously. Indeed, as the good and evil fruits
begotten by their-own acts live together in
the bodies of créatures which are their re-
fuge, so Knowledge lives in the body.


As a lighted lamp, while burning,
sees other objects before it, so the five
senses which are like lamps fixed on high
trees, find out their respective objects when
lighted by Knowledge.


to. As. the various ministers of a king,
in a body, .givé him advice so the five
senses which exist in the body all obe
Knowledge. The latter is superior to all
of them. ;


_ 41. As the flames of fire, the current of
the wind, the rays of the sun, and the
waters of rivers, go and come, again and
again, so the bodies of embodied creatures
are going and coming repeatedly.


. 12, As a person by taking up an axe
cannot, by cutting open a piece of wood,
see either smoke or fire in it, so one cannot,
by cutting open the arms, feet and stomach
of a person, cannot see the principle of
knowled ge, which, does nat partake of the
nature of stomach, the arms, and the feet.


13. As again one sees both smoke
and fire in wood by rubbing it against
another piece, so a person endued with
true intelligence and wisdom, by uniting
the senses and the soul, may see the
Supreme Soul which, of course, exists in
its own nature. *


14, Asin the midst of a dream one sees
his owrr body lying on the ground as some-
thing distinct from one’s own self, soa
person, having the five senses, the mind,
and the understanding, sees (after death)
his own body and then goes from one into
another form.


15. The Soul does not undergo birth,
growth, decay, and destruction. Acts of
life being followed by effects, the Soul,
clothed in body, passes trom this body
into another, unseen by others,


MAHABHARATA.


16. oNone cansee with the eye the
form of the Soul. ‘The Soul again, is not
touched by another. With the senses, the
Soul performs no act. The senses do not
approach the Soul. The Soul, however,
apprehends them all. ae


17. As anything, placed in a-burning
fire before a spectator, assumes a certain
color on account of the light and heat that
acts upon it, without taking any other color
or attribute, even so the Soul’s form is
seen to take its color from the body.


~~
18. Likewise, man, renouncing one bedy,
enters another, unseen by all, Indeed,
casting off his body to the five great prin«
cipal elements, he assumes a form that: is
likewise made of the same elements.


19. Upon the destruction of his body
the embodied creature enters space, wind,
fire, water, and earth in such a way that
each particular element in his body mingles
with the particular element (out of his
body) partaking of its nature. The senses
also, which are engaged in various occu-
pations and depend on the five elements
enter their five elements what call forth theic
functions,


28 The ear derives its power from
space; and the smell from the earth.
Form, which is the property of the eye,
is the outcome of light or fire. Fire or
heat depends on water. The tongue which
has for its property taste, is merged in
water, The skin which has touch for its
roperty, is lost in the wind whose nature
It pactakes.


21. The fivefold attributes, (v7z., sound,
etc.,) dwell in the five principal elements.
Those fivefold objects of the senses (vis,
spate, etc.,) live in the (five) senses, All
these again follow the mind. The mind
follows the Understanding, and the Under-
standing follows That which exists in its ~
oa and pure nature, viz., the Supreme

lf. ;


22. The actor in his new body receives
allthe good and bad acts done by him
here, as also all acts done by him in his
pristine existence. All these acts done in
this life and the next ones follow the-mind
even as acquatic animals pass along a
current,


°23. As a quickly-moving and restless
object comes in view, as a minute object
appears huge (when seen through spec-
tacles), as a mirror shows a person his own
face, so the soul becomes an object of the
Understanding’s apprehension,


SHANTI


CHAPTER CCIllI.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued.


Manu said :—

1. Lhe mind united with the senses,
remembers after along time the impres-
sions of objects received in the past. When
the action of the senses is suspended, the
‘Supreme Soul in the form of the Under-
Standing, exists in its own true nature.

c)


“2, When the Soul does not in the least
regard all those objects for their simul-
taniety or otherwise in point of time but
collecting them from all directions holds
thetn before it together, it necessarily hap-
pens that he wanders among all incon-
gtuous things. He is, therefore, the Wit-
ness. Hence the Soul put in body is
something having a distinct and indepea-
dent existence.


3. There is Rajas, there is Tamas, and
there is Satwa the third. ‘There are again
three conditions of the understanding, viz.,
waking, dreaming, and sound sleep. The
Soul perceives the pleasures and pains,
which are-all contradictory, of those states,
and which partake of the nature of the
three-fold qualities first mentioned. The
Soul enters the senses like the wind enter-
ing the fire in piece of wood, -


4. One cannot see the form of the Soul
by his eye, nor can the sense of touch,
amongst the senses, apprehend it. The
Soul, is not, again, perceived by the ear. It
may, however, be seen by the help of the
Srutis and the instructions of the wise, As
for senses, that particular senses which
apprehends it, loses upon such apprehen-
sion its existence as a sense. ,


5. The senses cannot themselves appre-
hend their respective forms. The Soul is
omniscient. It sees all things.- Being
omniscient, it is the Soul that sees the
senses. :


6. Nobody has seen the other side of
the Himavat mountains, nor the reverse of
the moon’s disc. Yet jt cannot be said
that they do noi exist.


7. Likewise though never apprehended
by the senses, yet nobody ¢an say that the
Soul, which dwells in all creatures, which is
subtile, and which has knowledge for its
essence, does not exist.


8. People see the world reflected on the
moon’s disc in the shape of spots. Though
seeing, they do not know that it is the
world that -is so reflected there. Such is
the knowledge of the Soul. That knowledge


PARWA, 303


must come of itself. The Soul depends


upon the Soul itself.


g- Reflecting on the formlesshess of
visible objects before birth and after des-
truction, wise men behold by the help of
intelligence, the formlessness of objects that
have visible forms, Similarly although ‘the
Sun’s motion cannot be seen, yet persons,
by watching its rising and setting, conclude
that the sun has motion.


10. Likewise learned and wise men see
the Soul by the help of the lamp of intelli-
gence, though it is at a great distance from
them, and seek to merge the fivefold ele-
ments, which are near, into Brahma.


11. Verily, an object cannot be per-
formed without the application of means.
Fishermen catch fish by means of nets
made of strings.


12, Animals are caught by employing
animals as the agents. Birds are caught
by employing birds as the agents. Ele-
phants are taken by employing elephants.
In this way the Soul may be apprehended
by the principle of Knowledge.


13. It is heard that only a snake can see
a snake’s legs, Likewise one sees, through
Knowledge, the Soul encased in subtile
form and living within the gross body,


14. People cannot, through their senses,
know the senses, Likewise mere Intelli- -
gence at its highest cannot see the Soul
which is supreme, -


15. The moor, on the fifteenth day of
the dark fortnight, cannot be seen on ac-
count of its form being hidden. It cannot
be said, however, that destruction over-
takes it. Such is the case with the Soul
living in the body.

16. On the fifteenth day of the dark
fortnight, the gross body of the moon is
seen: Similarly the Soul, when freed from
the body, cannot be apprehended.


17. As gaining another point in the
sky, the moon begins to shine once more,
similarly the Soul, acquiring a new body,
begins to manifest itself once more.


18. The bjrth, growth, and disappear-
ance of the moon can all be directly per-
ceived by the eye. These phenomena,
however, belong to the gross form of that
juminary. The like are not the attributes
of the Soul.


19. The moon, when it appears after its
disappearance on the fifteenth day of the
dark fortnight, is considered as the same
luminary that had become invisible.
Similarly despite the changes represented
by birth, growth, and age, a person is


304


considered as the same individual without
any doubt of his identity.


20. It is not distinctly seen how Rahu
approaches and leaves the moon. Like-
wise the Soul cannot be seen how it leaves
one body and enters another.


ar. Rahu becomes visible only when it
exists with the sun or the moon. Like-
wise the Soul is apprehended onty when
it exists with the body.


22. When freed from the sun or the
moon, Raha is no longer eeen. Like-
wise the Soul, freéd from the body, can no
longer be seen,


23. Then again, as the moon, even
when it disappears on the fifteenth day of
the dark fortnight, is not left by the cons-
tellations and the stars, the Soul also, even
though separated from the body, is not
deserted by the fruits of the acts it has
won in that body.


CHAPTER CCIV..


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued.


Manu said:—

1. As in a dream this body. (inactive)
and the enlivening spirit in its subtile form,
separating itself from the former, walks
forth, so, in the state called deep sleep (or
death), the subtile form with all the senses
becomes inactive, and the Understanding,
geparated from it, remains awake. ‘The
game is the case with Existence and Non-
Existence,


2. As when a sheet of water is clear,
images reflected in it can be seen by the
eye, similarly, if the senses be undisturbed,
the Soul is capable of being seen by the
unde: standing.


3. If, however, the piece of water is
agitated, the person’ standing by it can no
longer see those images. Likewise, if the
senses become disturbed, the Soul can
no longer be seen by the understanding.


4. Ignorance produces Delusion. Delu-
sion possesses the mind. When thé mind
becomes impure, the five senses which have
on mind for their refuge become corrupted
also.


5. Overfilled-with Ignorance, and sunk
in their mire of worldy objects, one cannot
enjoy the sweets of contentment or tranquil-

_ lity. The Soul with its good and evil acts,
returns again and again tothe objects of
. the world,


.


MAHABHARATA


6. -On account of sin one's thirst is nevef
satisfied. One's thirst is then satisfied
when one’s sin is dissipated.


7. On account of attachment to earthly
objects, which hasa tendency, to multiply
itself, one wishes for things other thad
those for which one should wish, and accor-
dingly fails to attain to the Supreme.


8. From the destruction of all sinful acts,
knowledge eriginates in men. When Know-
ledge arises a person sees his Soul in his
understanding even as one sees his own
image in a polished mirror. ay


Qg. One reaps misery for his serses being
not controlled. One acquires happiness on
account of his senses being restrained.
Therefore, a person should control his
mind by self-exertion from objects appre-
nended by the’ senses.


1o. Above the senses is the mind ;
above the mind is the understanding ;
above the understanding is the Soul;
above the Soul is the Supreme. ,


11, From the Unmanifest originates the
Soul; from the Soul has originated the
undestanding ; from the understanding
has originated the mind. When the mind
is united with the senses, than it appre-
hends sound and the other objects of the
senses,


iz, He whorenounces those objects as
well as all those that are manifest, he who
liberates himself from all things that arise
from primordial matter, enjoys immortality.


13, The Sun rising spreads his rays.
When -he sets, he withdraws to himself
those very rays that were spread by him.


14. Similarly, the Soul, entering the
body, obtains the fivefold objects of the
senses by spreading over them his rays
represented by the senses. When, how-
ever, he turns back, he is said to set by
withdrawing those rays to himself,


15. Continually driven along the path
that is created by acts, he reaps'the fruit of
his acts for his having followed the practice
of acts. -


16, Desire for the object of the senses
does not affect a person who has no such
desire. -Desire, leaves him who has seen
his soul, which, of course, is entirely free
from desire,


17. When the Understanding, shorn of
the attachment to the objects of the senses,
is concentrated in the mind, then does one
succeed in attaining to Brahma, for it is
there that the mind with the understanding
withdrawn into it can possibly be destroyedy


“oe


SHANTI


“18. Brahma is not an ‘object of touch
or of hearing, or of taste, or of sight, or of
smell, or of any other inference, Only the
Understanding cam get it.


ig. All objects that the mind apprehends
through the senses can be withdrawn into
the mind; the mind can be withdrawn into
the understanding ; the Understanding
can be withdrawn into the Soul, and the


Soul into the Supreme. é


20. The senses cannot lead to the success
of the mind. ‘The mind caniuct apprehend
the Understanding, ‘The Understanding
cannot apprehend the manifested Soul. The
Soul, however, which is subtile, sees these all.


CHAPTER CCV.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued,


Manu said :—

1, When physical and mental sorrow,
appear one cannot practise Yoga. There-
fore, one should not brood over sucli
sorrow.


_2. The medicine for sorrow is absten-
tion from brooding over it. When sorrow
is brooded over, it becomes multiplied.


3. One should remove mental sorrow
by wisdom, and physical sorrow should be
tured by medicines. Wisdom teaches this.
One should not, while under sorrow, act
like a child, ;


4. A wise man should never hanker
after youth, beauty, longevity, accumulation
of riches, health, and the companionship of
those that are dear, all of which are tran-
sitory. ;

5. One should not’only grieve for a
sorrow that affects a whole community.
Without grieving, one should, if he finds
an opportunity, seek to use a remedy.


6. Forsooth, sorrow is much greater than
happiness in life. Death which is disagree-
able comes for his stupefaction to one
who is content with the objects of the
senses.

7. ‘That man who avoids both sorrow
and happiness attain to Brahma. Such
wise persons have never to grieve.

8 Worldly belongings beget sorrow. In
protecting them one can enjoy no happi-
ness, fhey are again acquired with misery.
One should not, therefore, mind their loss.

g. Pure Knowledge, exists in the various
objects of knowledge. Know that mind is


39


PARVA.. 305


only an attribute of Knowledge. ~ When
they mind is united with the faculties of
knowledge, then the understanding sets in.


10. When freed from the attributes of ac-
tion, the understanding is directed towards,
the mind; then does it succeed in knowing
Brahma by meditation or Yoga ending in
complete absorption (Samadhi).


11. The Understanding, originating
from Ignorance, and endued with the senses
and attributes, runs towards external
objects, like a river originating from a
Mountain summit and flowing towards
other quarters,


12, When the understanding, with-
drawn into the mind, succeeds in absorbing
itself into contemplation that is shorn of
attributes, it acquires a knowledge of
Brahma like the touch of gold on a touch
stone.

‘13. The mind apprehends the objects of
the senses. It must first be extinguished.
Depend upon the attributes of objects
that are before it, the mind can never
show that which is without attributes.


14. Closing all the doors formed by the
senses, the Understanding should be with«
drawn into the mind. fn this condition
when absorbed in contemplation, it acquires


| the knowledge of Brahma,


15. As upon the destruction of the
attributes by which they are known, the
fivefold great creatures are contracted inta
their subtile forms, so the Understanding
may dwell in the mind alone, with the
senses all withdrawn from their objects,


16. When the Understanding, though
endued with the quality of certainty, lives
in the mind, busied with the internal, even
then it is nothing but the mind,


17. When the mind or consciousness,
which attains to perfection through contem-
plation, succeeds in identifying qualities
with their possessors, then can it cast off
all attributes and attain to Brahma which
is without qualities. ; :

18. There is no indication that which
can give a knowledge of the Unseen.
Yhat which cannet be described in lan«
guage, Cannot be acquired by any one,


_19. With purified soul, one should try
10 approach the Supreme Brahma, through
the help afforded by penances, by inferen-
ces, by self-control, by the practices and
observances sanctioned for one’s own order,
and by the Vedas. ;


20. Persons of clear vision seek him in
even externa! forms by freeing themselves
from qualities, ‘The Supreme; which is


305


called by the name of what should be
known, on account of the absence of all
qualities or of .its own nature, can never be
apprehended by argument.


21, Whenthe Understanding becomes
freed from qualities, then only can it attain
to Brahma, When it is endued with qua-
lities, ie falls back from the Supreme. In-
deed, such is the nature of the understand.
ing that it rushes towards qualities and
moves among them like fire among fuel.


22. Asin the state of deep and dream-
fess sleep the five senses exist freed from
their respective works, similarly the Su-
abet Brahma exists high above Prakriti,
reed from all its qualities.


23. Embodied creatures perform vari+
ous actions on account of attributes.
When -they abstain therefrom, they ac-
quire liberation. Some again go to
heaven. ; 7

24. The living creature, primordial na-
ture, the understanding, the objects of the
senses, the senses, consciousness, conscious-
ness of Ego, are called creatures,


25: ‘The original creation of all these
proceeded from the Supreme, Their second
creation is dueto the union of couples or
pairs and is confined to all things except
the principal five, and is governed by laws
for which the same species produce the
same species,


26. From righteousness cteatures obtain
3 great end, and from sinfulness they earn
a low end. ,He whois not freed from at-
tfchments, goes through rebirth; while he
who is freed therefrom, attains to Know-
ledge (or Brahma),


CHAPTER. CCVI.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued. .


Manu said-—

: 4. When the five attributes are united
with the five senses and the mind, then is
Brahma seen by the individual like a thread
passing through a gem. :

2—3. As a thread may lie within gold
or a pearl or a coral or any earthen object,
so one’s soul, for his own acts, may livé
within 4 cow, a horse, a man, an elephant,
or any other animal, or within a worm or
an insect,

4. The good deeds which a person per-
forms in a particular body yield sewards


ing for their root.


MAHABHARATA. |


that the individual enjoys in that particular
body.


5. A _ soil, seemingly drenched with one
particular kind of liquid, supplies to each
different sort of herb or plant that grows on
it the sort of juice it requires for itself.
Similarly, the Understanding, whose course
is witnessed by the Soul, is obliged ta
follow the path marked out by pristine
deeds.


*6. From knowledge origmates desire.
From desire originates resolution. From
resolution proceeds action. From action


| Proceed fruits.


therefore, have actions as
Actions have the understand-
The understanding has
knowledge for its root, and knowledge has
the Soul for its cause.


8. That excellent outcome which is
gained by the destruction of knowledge,
of fruits, of the understanding, and of acts
is called knowledge of Brahina.


g. High indeed is that self-existent
Essence which Yogins witness. They who
are devoid of wisdom,—and whose under-
standings are addicted to worldly objects
ttever see that which exists in the soul itself,


7. ‘Fruits,
their cause,


to. Water is superior to the Earth;
Light is superior to Water; Wind is
superior to Light.


_ it. Space is superior to Wind; Mind
is superior to Space; Understanding is
superior to Mind; ‘ime is superior to
Understanding.

12, The Divine Vishnu, who is identical
with this universe, is superior to Time.
That god is without beginning, middle,
and end. era

13. For his being without beginning,
middle, and end, he is Unchangeable. He
is above all sorrow, for sorrow has limits,


14. That Vishnu is cafled the Supreme
Brahma. He is the refuge or object of
what is called the Highest. Knowing
Him, they who ate wise,-freed from every
thing which is under the influence of Time,
acquire liberation, - - toe :

15. Whdt we perceive is displayed in
attributes. That which is called Brahma,
being without attributes, is superior to
these. Abstention from acts.constitutes the


A Saige religion. That religion is sure to


bring on deathlessness.


16. The Ricks, the Yajuses and the
Samans depend on the body. They flow
from the end of the tongue. They cannot
be acquired without exertion and are subs
ject to destruction. - :

C


SHANTI


_ 17+. Brahma, however, cannot be acqu-
ired in this way, for it depends upon that
(Soul) which has the body for its refuge.
Without beginning, middie, or end, Brahma
eannot be acquired by effort.


18. The Richs, the Samanas, the Vaju-
ses, have each a beginning. ‘Those that
havea beginning have also an end. But
Brahmais said to be without beginning.


to. And because Brahma has neither
beginning nor end, it is said to be infinite
and unchangeable. On account of un-
changeableness, Brahma transcends all
sorrow as also pairs of opposites,


20, ‘Through unfavorable destiny, through
inability to find out the proper expedient,
and through the obstacles put in by acts,
men cannot see the path by which Brahma
may be reached,


2t. On account of attachment to wordly
objects, in view of the joys of the highest
heaven, and for seeking something other
than Brahma, men do not attain to the
Supreme.


2a. Others seeing worldly objects seek
their possession. When they hanker after
such objects, they do not see Brahma in-
asmuch as it is shorn of all attributes,


23. Howcan one who is endued with
inferior qualities, acquire a knowledge of
Him who is possessed of superior qualities ?
It is by inference that one can arrive at
a knowledge of Him who transcends all
things in attributes and form.


24, Wecan knowhim only. By subtile
intelligence, we cannot describe Him in
words, The mind is caught by the mind,
the eye by the eye. ?


25. By knowledge the understanding
can be purged off of its impurities, The
understahding may be engaged for purify-
ing the mind. The senses should be res-
trained by the mind. Performing all this,
one may attain to the Unchangeable.


26. One who has, by contemplation,
“become freed from attachments, and who
has the wealth of a discerning mind, suc-
ceeds in attaining to Brahma which is
without desire and above all attributes. As
the wind does not touch the fire that lies
within a piece of wood, so persons who
are moved (by desire for worldly objects)
stand aloof from that which is Supreme.


27, When all earthly objects are des-
troyed, the .mind always attains to That
which is higher than the Understanding ;
while upon their separation the mind always
acquires that which is below the Under-
standing. Therefore, a person, who,
according to the method already described,

)


PARVA, 307
becomes engaged in destroying earthly
Gbjecis, becomes immersed in Brahma.


28. Though the Soul is. unmanifest,
yet when endued with qualities, its acts
become manifest. When dissolution sets
in it once more becomes unmanifest. Thé
Soul is really inactive. Its exists, endued
with the senses which create either happi«
ness or misery.


29. United with all the senses and body,
it takes refuge in the five primal elements.
{t cannot, however, act through want of
power, however, when it is deprived of
force by the Supreme and Unchangeable.


ga. No tan sees the end of this earth,
but know this, viz, that the Earth’s end
will surely come. Man moved here (by
attachments) is surely fed to his last resort
like the wind leading a vessel, tossed on the
sea to a safe harbour at last.


3t. | Diffusing his rays the sun becomes
the possessor of an attribute, withdrawing
‘his rays he once more becomes an object
shorn of attributes. Similarly a person
casting off all distinctions and practising
Renane ss atlast enters the indestructible .

rahma which is shorn of alf attributes.


32. By knowing Him who is without!
birth, who is the highest refuge of alt pious
men, who is self-create, from whom every
thing originates and to whom every thing
returns, who is unchangeable, who is with~
out beginning, middle, andeend, and wha
is self and supreme, a person attains to
immortality,’ ae


CHAPTER CCVIEf.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA,)—=
. Continued,


Yudhisthira said :—


1—2. "QO grandfather, O you of great’
wisdom, I wish to hear fully, O chief of the
Bhharatas, of that lotus-eyed and indestruc-
tible one, who is the Creator of all but who
has been created by none, who is called.
Vishnu, who is the origin of all creatures
and to whom all creatures return, who is
known by the names of Narayana and
Hrishikesha and Govinda and Keshava,
and who is incapable of being defeated by
any orfe,””


Bhishma said:


3. ‘I have heard of this subject from
Jamadagni’s son Rama while he described
it from the celestial saint Narada and from
Krishna: Dwaipanya,


308


4. Asita-Devala, QO son, Valmiki of
austere penances and Markandeya, des-
cribe Govinda as the Most Wonderful and
the Supreme.


5. Keshava, O chief of Bharata’s race,
ss the divine and powerful Lord of all. He
is called Purusha, and is present in every-
thing, having multiptied himself,


6. Listen now, O Yadhisthira of power-
ful arms, to those attributes which great
Brahmanas say are to be seen in the great
wielder of Sharnga.


7. I shalt also, O king, recite to you
those acts which persons well-read in old
histories attribute to Govinda,


8, He is the soul of all creatures, the
great one, and the forémost of all beings.
He created (by his will) the five elements
wvis., Wind, Light, Water, Space and
Earth.

g. Having created the Earth that power-
ful Lord of all things, that great one,
that foremost of all beings, lay on
surface of the waters.


to. While thus floating upon the waters,
‘that foremost of all beings, that resort of
every sort of energy and splendour, created
consciousness, the first-born of all beings
in the universe.


a1. We have heard that He created
consciousness with the mind,—Conscious-
ness which is the resort of alt created
things. ThateConsciousness maintains all
creatures and both the past and the
future.


12. After that great Being, O mighty-
armed one, viz., Consciousness originated
a highly beautiful lotus, effulgent like tlie
Sun out of the navel of the Supreme
Being.

13. Then, O son, the. illustrious and
divine Brahman, the Grandfather of all
creatures, came into being from that lotus,
lighting all the points of ‘the horizon with
his effulgence. :


14. After the high-souled Grandfather
had, O mighty-armed one, thus originated
from the primeval lotus, a great Asura of
the name of Madhu, having no beginning,
came into being from the quality of .ignor-
ance, (Tamas).


15. The foremost of all Beings for helping
Brahman, killed that dreadful Asura of
terrific deeds, engaged even then aia the
fearful act of killing the Grandfather. —


16. For- slaying this demon, O son, all
the gods and the Danavas and men called
that foremost of all righteous persons by
the name of Madhusudana (slayer of
Madhu). . .


the:


MANABHARATA.


17. After this, Bratman, created, by
his will, seven sons with Daksha at their
head. They were Marichi, Atri, Angiras,
Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu. -


18. The eldest born, wiz., Marichi,
begat, by his will, a son named Kashyapa,
highly energetic and the foremost of all
persons conversant with Brahma.


19. From his toe, Brahman had, even
before the birth of Marichi, created a son.
That son, O Bharata’s chief, was Daksha,
the progenitor of creatures.


20. Daksha begat thirteen daughters,
O Bharata, the eidest of whom was called
Diti.

21. Marichi’s son Kashyapa, O son,
who was a master of duties and their
distinctions, whawas of righteous deeds and
great fame, espoused them.


22. The highly blessed Daksha next
begat ten other daughters. ‘That progeni-
tor of creatures, viz,, the righteous Daksha,
conferred these upyn Dharma,


23. Dharma became father of the
Vasus, the highly energetic Rudras the
Vishwedevas, the Saddhyas, and the
Maruts, O Bharata.


24.° Daksha next begat twenty-seven
other younger daughters. he highly
blessed Soma espoused them all.


25. The other wives of Kashyapa gave
birth to Gandharvas, horses, birds, kine,
Kimpurushas, fishes, and trees and plants.


26. Aditi gave birth to the Adityas, the
foremost ones among the gods, and highly
powerful. Amongst them Vishnu was born
in the form of a dwarf. Otherwise called
Govinda, he became the foremost of them
all.

27.
gods
defeated.
Asuras,


28. Danu gave birth to the Danavas
having Viprachitti as their head. Diti gave
birth to allthe powerful Asuras.


29. The destroyer of Madhu also
created the Day and the Night, and the
Seasons in their, order, and the Morning
and the Evening.


30. After meditation he also created
the clouds, and all the tmmobile and mobile
objects. Highly energetic he also created
the Vishwas and the Earth with all things.
upon her. ; : 7 :

31. Then the highly blessed and power-
ful Krishna, O VYudhishthira, once again
created from bis mouth one hundred fores
most Bralimaus, °


By his power the prosperity of the
increased. The Danavas_ were
The children of Diti were the


SHANI PARVA.


32.
hundred “Kshatriyas, and front his thighs
one hundred Vaishyas. Then, O foremost
of Bharata’s race,*Keshava created from
his two feet one hundred Shudras.


33. Endued with great ascetic merit,
the destroyer of Madhu, having thus created
the four orders of men, made (Dhatri Brah-
man) the master and ruler of all created
beings. | . :

34. Of incomparable effulgence, Brah-
man became also the exponent of the Vedic
lore. And Keshava made him called Viru-
paksha, the ruler of the spirits and ghosts
and of those females called the Matrikas
(mothers).


35. And he made Yama the ruler of the
departed manes of all sinful men, The
Supreme Soul of all creatures also made
Kuvera the lord of allriches. °


35. Hethen created Varuna the lord of
waters and governor of all acquatic animals.
The powerful Vishnu made Vasava the
king of all celestials.


37. In those times, ‘men lived as long as
they chose to live, and had no fear of Yama.


38. Sexual intercourse,"O chief of the
Bharatas, was then not necessary for per-
petuating therace. 1n those days, offspring
were begotton by the will,


- 39, In the cycle that followed, v7z.,
Treta, cfildren were begotten by touch
alone, The people of that cycle even, O
king, had no necessity of sexual intercourse.


40. It wasin the next cycle, v7z., Daw-
para, that the practice of sexual intercourse
originated, O king, amongmen. [fn the
Kali age, O monarch, men have come to
marry and live in pairs.


4tt I have now told you of the supreme
Lord of all creatures. He is.also called the
Ruler of all and everything. I shall now,
O son of Kunti, describe to you the sinful
creatures of the Earth. Listen to me.


42. Those men, O king, are born in
the southern region and are called Andha-
kas, Guhas, Pulindas, Shavaras, Chuchu-
kas, Madrakas. .


43- I shall also name those that are
born in the northern region. ‘Chey are
Yaunas, Kamvojas, Ghandharas, Kiratas,


and Barbbaras.


44. All of them, O son, are sinful, and
live on this Earth, acting like Chandalas,
ravens and vultures.


45. In the Kirta cycle, O son, they
did not live on Earth. , [tis from the Treta
that they sprang and began to multiply, O
chisf of Bharata’s race,


From his two arms, he created one:


309
_46. When the terrible period of the junc-
tion of Treta and the Dwapara, set in the
Kshatriyas, approaching one another,
began to fight.


47. Thus, O chief of Kuru’s race, this
universe was created bythe great Krishna.
That observer of ali the worlds, viz., the
celestial saint Narada, has said that Krishna
is the Supreme God. # :


‘48, Even Narada, O king, acknow-
ledge the supremacy and eternity of Kri-
shna, O mighty-armed chief of Bharata’s
race,


49: Thus, O mighty-armed one, is
Keshava of unvanquishable prowess. ‘That
lotus-eyed one is not a man. Fle is in-
conceivable !


CHAPTER CCVIII.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued,


Yudhisthira asked :—


1, '* Who are the first Patriarch, O fore-
most of Bharata’s race? What highly
blessed Rishis are there, and on which
quarters do each of them dwell ?” '


Bhishma said :-—


2. ‘Hear me, O chief of the Bharatas,
about what you ask. I shall tell you who
the Patviarchs were and what Rishis are
mentioned as living on which points of the
horizon,


3. There was at first one Eternal,
Divine, and Self-create Brahman. ‘The
self-create Brahman begat seven illustrious
sons.

4. They were Marichi, Atri, Angiras,
Pulastva, Pulaha, Kratu, and ‘the highly
blessed Vashistha who was equal jo the
Self-create hunself. :


5. ‘These seven sons have been described
in the Puranas as seven -Brahmanas.
I shall now name the succeeding Patri-
archs. |


6. In Atri’s family was born the eternal
and divine Varhi the ancient, born of
penances. From Varhi the ancient were
born te ten Prachetasas,


gq. The ten Prachetasas had one son
between them, viz., the Prajapati called
by the name of Daksha. ‘This last has
two names in the world, viz, Daksha
and Ka,


'


310


8. Marichi had one son called Kashypa.
This last also has two names. Some call
him Arishtanemi, and some Kashyapa.


g. Atri had another son born of his
loins, viz.,
Soma of great power. He practised pen-
ances for a thousand divine cycles.


Yo. The divine Aryyaman and his sons,
O king, have been described as those who
issued injunctions, and as creators of all
creatures,


Yi--12, Shashavindu had ten thousand
wives. Upon each of them he begat
a thousand sons, and thus they were ten
hundred thousand in number. ose sons
refused -to call any body else save them-
selves as Patriarch.


13. The ancient Brahmanas bestowed
a name on the creatures of, the world,
derived fromm Shashavindu. That exten-
sive family of the Patriarch Shashavindu
became in time the progenitor of the
Veishni race.


14. These that { have named are noted
as the illustrious Patriarchs. After this, 1
shall name the ceélestials who are the lords
of the three worlds. :


15. Bhaga, Ansha, Aryyaman, Mitra,
Varuna, Savitri, Dhatri, Vivaswat of great
might,

16. Tashtri, Puhshan, Indra, and Vishnu
known as the twelfth,—these are the twelve
Adityas, all originated from Kashyapa.


17. Nasatya and Dashra are mentioned
as the two Ashwitns. These two are the
sons of the illustrious Martanda, the eighth
in the above list.


18-20, These were called first the gods
and the two classes of departed manes.
‘Yashtri had many sons. Amongst them
_were the beautiful and famous Visharupa.
Ajaikapat, Ahi, Bradhna, Virupaksha, and
Raivata. ‘Then there were Hara and
Vahtrrupa, Tryamvaka the chief of the
Deities, and Savitrya, Jayanta and Pinaki
the invincible. The highly blessed eight
Vasus have formerly beén enumerated
by me.

21. These were considered: as gods at
the time of the Prajapati Manu. These
were at first called the gods and the
Pitris.

a2. The Siddhas and the SaddhySs were
divided into two classes for their conduct
and youth. The deities were formerly
divided into two classes, viz., the Ribhus
and the Maruts. -


23. Thus have the Vishwas, the gods,
and the Ashwins, been enumerated.


the handsome and princely:


MAHABHARATA.


! Amongstfthem, the Adityas are Kohatriyas ,
and the Maruts are Vaishyas.
24. The two Ashwins, practising severe
penances, have been said to be Shudras.
‘The deities sprung from Angirasa’s family


have been said to be Brahmanas. This is
certain,
25—34. Thus have I told you about the


fourfold order among. the gods. ‘The
person who, after rising from his bed in the
morning, recites the names of these deities,
becomes purged off of all his sins whether
committed by himself intentionally or un-
intentionally, or whether born of his inter-
course with others. Yavakrita, Raivya,
Arvavasu, Paravasu, Ausija, Kakshivat,
and Vala, are described as the sons of
Angiras. These and Kanwa son of the
Rishi Medhatithi, and Varhishada, and
the well-known seven Rishis who are the
progenitors of the three worlds, all live in
the East. Unmucha, Vimucha, the highly
energetic Sastyatréya, Pramucha, Idhma-
vaha, and the divine Dridavrata, and
Mitravaruna’s highly energetic son Agas-
tya, these twice-born Rishis all live in the-


South. Ushanga, Karusha, Dhaumya,
Parivyadha of great energy, and those
great Rishis called Ekata, Dwita, and


Trita, and Atri’s son, viz., the illustrious
and powerful Saraswat, these high-souled
ones live in the West. Atreya, and Vashi-
sMiha, and the great Rishi &ashyapa,
and Gautama, Bharadwaja, and Vishwa-
mitra the son of Kushika, and the illustri-
ous son of the high-souled Richika, viz.,
Jamadagni,—these seven live the North.
Thus have I described to you the great
Rishis of fiery energy who live in the
different points of the world.

35. Those great ones are the witnesses
of the universe, and are the creators of all
the worlds. Thus do they live in their
respective quarters.

30. By reciting their names one is
purged off of all his sins. A person by
sojourning to those quarters becomes freed
of all his sins and succeeds in returning
home safely.’


nee


CHAPTER CCIX.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued.


Yudhishthira said:— -

1. ‘QO grandfather, O you of-great
wisdom and invincible prowess in. battle, I
wish to hear fully of Krishna who is immu-


table and omnipotent, - |
€


SHANTI PARVA,


2. © foremost of men, tell me’ truly
everything about his great energy and the
great deeds performed by him in days of
yore,

3. Why did that powerful one assume
the form of an animal, and that for per-
forming what particular act? ‘Tell me all
this, O mighty warrior.”


Bhishma said :—


4. ‘Formerly, on one occasion, while
out on hunting, [ arrived at the asylum of
Markandeya, There lt saw various classes
of ascetics seated by thousands.


5. The Rishis honored me by offering
honey and curds. Accepting their adora-
tion, I reverentially saluted them in return.


6. What I shall recite was described
there by the great Rishi Kashyapa. Lister
with rapt attention to that excellent and
charming throne, «


4—8. Formerly the principal Danavas,
possessed by anger and cupidity, and
hundreds of powerful Asuras having Naraka
for their first, elated with power, and num-
berless other Danavas invincible in battle,
became highly jealous of the peerless pros-
perity of the gods,


9. Oppressed by the Danavas and
finding no peace, the gods and the celestial
=*"Rishis;: led away in ail directigns.


“to. The dwellers of heaven saw the
Earth looking like one sunk in sore distress,
Qverspread:with mighty Danavas of terri-
ble countenance, the Earth seemed to be
oppressed with a heavy load, Cheerless and
grief-stcicken, she seemed as if going down
into the nether region.

“tt, “The Adityas, ‘stricken with fear,
went to Brahman, and said,—How O Brah-
man, ‘shall we continue to put up with these
oppressions of the Danavas. ‘

12, The self-create answered them, say-
ing,—l have already ordained what is to
‘be done in this matters; 0-2 er

33-15. Having obtained -boons,: and
possessed of power, and elated with pride,
those senseless wretches do not know :that

Vishnu of invisible form, that god ingap-
able of being defeated by the very gods in
a body, has assumed the form of aboar.
That Supreme Deity, going to thd spot
where those wretched Danavas, of .grrible
mein, are living in thousands below the
Earth, will .kill them all !—Hearjng these
words of the Grandfather, those foremost
one among the deities were overjoyed,


16. ,Sometime after, Vishfiu of mighty
energy, assuming the forth of a Boar,
J


Py


Bir


penetrating into the nether regions, rushed
against those children of Diti,


17. Seeing that extraordinary creature,
all the Daityas, in a body stupefied by
Time, quickly proceeded against it for
displaying their strength, and stood encir-
cling it. .

18. Soon after, they all rushed against
that Boar and caught it simultaneously.
Filled with anger they tried to drag the
animal from every side,


19. Those foremost of Danavas, of
huge bodies, endued with mighty energy,
swelling with strength, OQ monarch, could,
do nothing to that Boar.


20. At this they were stricken with
wonder and fear. Numbering in thousands,
they thought that their last hour had
come. :


21. Then that Supreme God of all the’
gods, having Yoga for his soul and com-
panion, became immersed in Yoga, O chief.
of the Bharatas, and began.to roar terribly
agitating those Daityas and Danavas.


22. All the worlds and the ten cardinal
points resounded with those roars, which
for this reason, agitated all creatures and
struck them with fear. : :


23. The very gods headed by Indra
became terror-stricken, ‘The whole uni-
verse became calm in consequetice of that
sound, It was a dreadful time. .


24—25. All mobite and immobile beings,
became stupefied by that sound. , The
Danavas, terrified by that sound, began to
fall down dead, paralysed by the energy of
Vishnu. ‘fhe Boar, with its hoops, began
to pierce those enemies of the gods, those
dwellers of the nether regions, and tear
their flesh, fat, and bones,


26. On account of those tremendous
roars, Vishnu passed by the name of
Sanatana,


247. He is also called Padmanabha. He-
is the foremost of Yogins. He is the Pre-
ceptor of all creatures, and their supreme
Lord. All the sects of the gods then went
to the Grandfather.


28. Going there, those illustrious ones
addresed the Lord of the univetse, say~
ing,—What sort of noise is this, O powerful
one 7 We do not understand it. Who is
this one, or whose is this sound by which
thé universe hag been stupefied,


29. With the power of this sound or of
its maker, the gods and the Danavas have


‘all been deprived of their senses.


30. Meanwhile, O mighty-armed one,
Vishnu in his Boar form came before the


312


assembled gods, his praises lauded by. ‘the
great Rishis.


The Grandfather said :—


31. Fhat is the Supreme God, the
Creator of all beings, the Soul of all
creatures, the foremost of all Yoyins. Of
huge body and gréat streagth, he comes
here, having killed the leading Danavas.


32. He is the Lord of all beings, the
master of Yoga, the great ascetic, the Soul
of allliving beings, Beé silent, all of you?
He is Krishna, the destroyer of all impedi-
tents.


. 33. That Supreme God of immeasurable
sheen, that great refuge of all blessings,
having performed a most difficult task that
€annot be accomplished by others, has
returned to his own pure nature.


- 34. Itis He from whose navel the pri-
meval lotus had sprung. He is the fore-
most of Yogins.
the creator of all beings. ‘There is ‘no
necessity for sorrow or fear or grief, ye
foremost of celestials.


35- He is the Ordainer. He is the
Creating Principle. He is all-destroying
‘Time. It is He who maintains all the
worlds. ‘Phese roars that have alarmed
you are being uttered by that Breet otie.


36. Of mighty arms, He is the object
of univesal adoration. Incapable of deteri-
oration, that lotus-eyed one is the origin of
all beings and their ford.’


CHAPTER CCX.
(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—


Continued.
Yudhishthira said :—
‘‘y, “Tell me, O sire, that high Yoga
by whieh, O .Bharata,, | may obtain


liberation. O foremost of speakers, |
wish to kuow everything about that Yoga
truly.”


Bhishma said :—


2. ‘Regarding it is cited the old narrative
of the discourse between a ,preceptor and
his disciple on the subject of liberation.


- 3. There was a twice-born preceptor who
was the foremost of Rishis. He looked
like a mass of effulygence, Endued with a
high soul, he’was firm in truth and a com-
plete master of his senses,


Of supreme soul, He is-


MAHABHARATA,


4—5. Once upon a time, a highly intel-
ligent and attentive disciple, desirous of
obtaining what was foe lus highest good
touched the preceptor’s feet, and standing
with joined palms before him, said,~If O
illustrious one, you have been pleased with
the adoration I have offered you, you should
slove a great doubt of mine.


6—7. Whence am [ am and whence are
you? Tell me this fully. ‘Tell me alsa
what is the final cause. Why also, O best
of twice-born ones, when the material
cause in all beings is the same, their origin
and destruction take place in such dis-
siafilar ways? You should, UO you of
yreat learning, also explain the object of
the saying in the Vedas, the meaning of
the injuiictions of the Smritis and of those
injunctions which apply to all classes of
men,


The precaptor said :—

8. Listen, O disciple, O you of great
wisdom. ‘This what you have asked me is
not described even in the very Vedas and
is the highest subject for thought or dis-
course. It is called Adhyatma and is the
most precious of all branches of learning
and of all sacred institutes.


9. Vasudeva is the Supreme (cause)
of the universe. He is the origin of the
Vedas (viz... @m). He is Truth, Know-
ledge, Sacrifice, Renunciation, Self-control,
and Righteousness,


10. Persons well-read in the Vedas know
Him as All pervading, Eternal, Omnipre-
sent, the Creator and the Destroyer, the
Uumanifest, Brahma, Immutable, .

'


_11—12,. Hear now from me the story of
Him who was boin.in the Verishni family.
A Brahtmana should hear the greatness of
that God of gods, called Vishnu of immea-
surable energy, from the lips of Brahmanas.
A Kshatriya should hear it from persons of
that order. One who isa Vaishya, should
hear it from Vaishyas, and a high-souled
Shudra should hear it from Sudras.


13 You deserve to hear it. Listen now
to the sa¢red accountg of Krishna, that
theme which is foremost of ali themes. .
Vasudeva is the Wheel of Time, without
beginning and without end. Existence
and Non-existence are the qualities by
which His real nature is known.


14. The universe rolls like a wheel,
depending upon that Lord of all beings.
O best of men, Keshava, that foremost of
all beings is said to be Indestructible, Un-
manifest, Immortal Brahma, and Immu-
table.


SHANTI PARVA,


ig. The highest of the high, and with-
out change or destruction himself, he
created the departed nianes, the gdds, the
Rishis, the Vakshdas, the Rakshasds, the
Nagas, thé Astiras, and mankind.


16. He also created the Vedas and_ the
eternal duties and customs of niet. Hav-
ing reduced everything into nothing, he
once more, in the beginning #f a (new)
cycle, create$ Prakriti, - a

17. As the various phenomena’ of the
Several seagons set in one after another
according to the season that corhes, sd crea-
tures.come inte being at the contmence-
inent of every cycle.


18. Corrésponding with those creatures
who canie into being; rules and duties are
faid for regulating the world’s course.


1g. Atthe end of every cycle the Vedas
and all other scriptures disappear. Through
the favour of the Selfecreate, the great
Rishis, by means of their penances, first re-
acquire the togt Vedds atid the scriptures.


zo. The Self-create (Brahwiari) first
acquired the Vedas. ‘Vheir brancties
tallied the Angas were first acquired by
Vrihaspati. Bhrigu's sor (Shukra) first
acquired the science of ethics which ts so
Beneficiat for tlie universe, °


21. Narada acquired tlie science of
inusic ; Bhatadwaja tliat of armas; Girgya,
the history of the Celestial Rishis; the
dark son of Atri tliat of medicine.

22, Various other Rishis whose names
dre coiinected therewith, proniulgated vari-
bus other. sciences sich as Philosophy,
Logic, etc. Let that Brahma whith those
Rishis lave described by argumerits drawn
from reason, by mearis of the Vedas, and
by inferences drawn from the direct evi-
dence of the senses, be worshipped.


23. Neither the gods nor the Rishis
Were able to grasp Brahtna who is without
begginning and who is tlie liigliest of the®
high, Only the divine creator of all things,
vig., the powerful Narayana, had known of
Brahma.


24. From Narayana, tite Rishis the fore-
most of the deities; the Asuras, and the royal


sages of old, acquired the knowledge of that"


highest panacea for the cure of sorrow.


25. When Prakriti creates through the
action of Purusha, the universe with all
its potencies begins to spring from it:

26. From one tighted lamp thousands
of other lamps are capable of being lighted.
Simitarly, Prakriti produces thousands of
existent things. On account of its infinity,
primordial matter is never exhausted,


27. From the Unmanifest flows the !


40


313


Understanding determined by acts. The
Understanding creates Consciousness.


From Conscioustiess procéeds Space. From
Space proceeds Wind.

28. From the Wind proceeds Heat.
From Heat proceeds ater, and from
Water is produded the Earth. ‘fWese Eight
form primordial Prakriti, The universe
rests oh theni, :

29. Froni those Eight have originated
the five organs of knowledge, the five
organs of actidn, the five objects of the
(first five) organs, and tlhe one, viz., the
Mind, forming the sixteenth, which is the
outcome of their modification. ;

30. ‘The ear, the skin, tlie two eyes, the
tongue; and tlie nose are the five organs of
knowledge. Tlie two feet, the atius, the
organ of generation, the two arms, and
speech, are tlie five organs of action,


3%. Sound, touch, form, taste, and
Sitéll are the five objects -of thd senses,
eovering ail things. The Mind lives upon
all thie senses and théir objects.


32. In the perception of taste, the
Mind becomes the tongue, and in speech
Mind beconies words. Covered with the
different sensés, Mind becomes all the
objects whicli exist in its apprehension.


33. These sixteen, existing in their
respective formis, should be kuiown as gods,
These adore Him whio creates all know-
ledge dnd lives within tlie bady. :


34-35. ‘Taste is tle attribute of water ;
scent is the attribute of earth; hearing
is the attribute of space; vision is the attri+
bute of fire or light; and toiich is the attri«
bute of the wind. ‘This is the case with ail
creaturés at all tires. :

36. ‘The Mind, is the attribute of exist-
enee, Existence springs from the Prakriti
which exists ja ‘That which is the Soul of
all existent beings.


37. ‘These existences, resting upon the
suprethe Divinity that is above Prakriti
and that is inactive; iphold the entire
universe of mobile and ithmubile objects.


38. This satred bailding of fine doors
(body) is endued with all these existences.
That which is high above them, viz., ihe
Soul; lives within it, pervading it all over.
Therefore it is called Purusha, :

39. ‘The Soul is not subject to decay and
death. It has knowledge of what is mani-
fest and what is unmanifest. It is again
all-pervading, eadued with Qualitiés, sub-
tile, and the refuge of all existences and
qualities. :


40, Asalamp shows all objects great


314


or small, similarly the Soul dwells in ail
Creatures as the principle of knowledge.


4t. Making the ear to beac what it
hears, it is the Soul that hears. Likewise,
making the eye works, it is the Soul that
sees, This body supplies the means by
which the Soul derives knowledge. The
bodily organs are not the doers, but it is the
.poul that is the doer, of all acts.


42. There is fire in wood, but it is néver
Seen by cutting open a piece of wood.
Similarily, the Soul lives within the body,
‘but it can never be seen by cutting the
body.


43. The fire which exists in wood may

be seen by proper means, viz., rubbing the
‘wood with another piece of wood. Simi-
larly, the Soul which lives within the body
may be seen by employing proper means,
.viz., Yoga.
44. Water must exist in rivers. Rays
of light ate always attached to the sun,
Similarly, the Soul has a body. ‘This con-
nection is not stopped begause of the cons-
lant Succession of bodies that the Soul has
to pass Urrough.


45- Ina dream, the Soul, éndued with
the five senses, leaves the body and moves
over wide areas. Similarly, when death
takes place, the Soul passes out of one body
for entering another,


46. The Soulis fettered by its pristine


acts, Tettered by acts done by it in one
state of existence, it attains to another
- state. Indeed, it is led from ove into


another body by its own acts which are
of very powerful consequences,


47. I will now describe how the owner
of a tuman body, casting off his body,
enters another, and then again into another,
and how, indeed, the whole range of beings
is the result oi theie respective acts.’


—


CHAPTER CCXt.


(MOKSHADH ARMA PARVA).—
Continued.


Bhishma said :—

1. ‘All immobila and mobile beings,
divided into four classes, have been dés-
cribed to be of unmanifest birth and un-
manifest death. Existing only in the un-
manifest Soul, the Mind is said to possess
the attributes of the unmanifest.


2 Asa vast tree jies within a small un.
blown Ashwatha fluwer and is seen only
when it comes out, so birth takes place
from what is unmanifest.


‘MAHABHARATA -


3 <A piece of iron, which is inanimate,
runs towards a piece of loadstone.  Like-
wise, inclinativuns and propensities due to
natural instincts, and all else, run towards
the Soul in a new life.


4. indeed, as those propensities born
of Darkness and lgnorance, and ine
active in theim pature, are united with the
Soul when re-born, similarly, those other
inchnativus and aspiraiiuus of the Soul that
have their look directed towards Bralina
become united with 1%, coming to it directly
from Brahma itself.


5. Neither earth, nor sky, uor heaven,
nor things, ner the vital airs, nor virtue
and vice, vor anytinng else, existed before,
except the Intelligence-Soul. Nor have
they any necessary connection with even the
Entelligence-Soul corrupted by Darkness.


6. The Soul is eternal. Et is indestruc-
lible. It is in veryscreature. [t is the cause
of the Ming. ktis without qualities, hig
universe before us is due to Darkness or Iy-
norance. Fhe Soul’s apprehensions of form,
etc., are due to past desires.


7. The Soul, when it becomes endued
with desires, engages in aets. On account
of that condition,—this vast wheel of exis-
tenes revolves. with beginning and without
end.


8. The Understanding, is the nave of
that.whee]. The body with the senses, forms
its spokes. The perceptians and acts are
its circumference Urged by on the quality
of Darkness, the Soul presides over it.


g. Like oilmen pressing oilseeds in theie
machine, the consequences born of Dark
ness, assailing the universe which is mois-
tened by Darkness, press, or grind it i
that wheel,


10. In that succession of births, the in
dividuat Soul, seized by the idea of Kyo in
conssquence of desire, performs acts. fy
the union of cause and effect, those acts
again become fresh causes. +


it. Effects do not enter into causes. Nor
do causes emter into effects. ‘Vime is the
instrumental in the production of effects.


12. The primordial éssences, and their
changes endued with causes, exist unitedly,
on account of theie being always presided
over by the Soul.


13. Like dust following the wind that
moves it, the individual Soul, shorn of
body, but endued still with inclinations
born of Darkness and Ignorance and with
principles of causes formed by pristine
deeds, moves on, following the direction of
the Supreme Soul.


14. The Soul, however, is never affected


SHANTI PARVA,


315


by those inclinations “and propensities. | a path for attaining to Liberation, without


Nor are these affected by the Soul that is
superior to them. The wind, which is
Naturally pure, is never sullied by the dust
it Carries.


15. As the wind is separate from the
dust it carries away, so, the wise man
should know, is the connection between
life and the Soul. No. one®should think
that the Soul, on account of its seeming
tinion with the body and the senses and the
other inclinations and beliefs and unbeliefs,
is really endued therewith as its necessary
and absolute qualities. On the other hand,
the Soul should be considered as existing
in its own nature.


96. Thus did the divine Rishi remove
the doubt that had taken possession of his
disciple’s mind. Inspite of all this, people
depend upon means consisting of acts and
scriptural rites for removing misery and
acquiring happiness.

_ 17. Seeds that are burnt by fire do not
- put forth sprouts. Likewise, if everything
that produces misery be consitmed by the
fire of true knowledge, the Soul is freed
from the obligation of re-birth in the world.


CHAPTER CCXIL.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA)—
Continued. ;


Bhishma said :— .

1, Persons who perform acts consider
the performance of acts highly. Likewise,
those who are devoted to Knowledge do
not regard anything ether than Know-
ledge,


_ .2 Rare are persons fully conversant
with the Vedas and depending upon the
injunctions contained therein. The more
intelligent however consider the abstention
from acts as the better of the «wo, viz.,
heaven and liberation.


_ 3+. Abstention of acts is observed by
highly wise men. That conduct, therefore,
_is praiseworthy. The intelligence which
advocates abstention from acts, is that by
which one attains to liberation.


4. Endued with body, a person, through
folly, and endued with anger and cupidity
and all the propensities born of Darkness
and Ignorance, cherishes attachment fo
all earthly objects. :


5. One, therefore, who wishes to des-
troy his connection with the body, should
never perform any impure act. On the
other hand, one should create by his acts


wishing for regions of happiness.


6. As gold, when united with iron, loses
its purity and cannot shine, so Knowledge,
when existing with attachment to earthly
objects and snch other shortcomings, fails
to display its splendour.


7. He who, influenced by cupidity,
desire and anger, practises unrighteousness,
transgressing the path of righteousness, is
completely destroyed. :


8. One who is desirous of benefiting
oneself should never seek, with too mnch
attachment, earthly possessions represented
by the objects of the senses. If one does
it, anger and joy and sorrow arise from
one another.


9g. When every one’s body is made“up
of the five original elements as also of the
three qualities of Goodness, Darkness, and
Ignorance, whom shall one worship and
whom shall one censure with what words ?


to. Only the fools become attached to
the objects of the senses. On account of
foHy they do not -know that their bodies
are only modifications of earth.


tr. Asa house made of earth is covered
over with earth, so this body which is made
of earth is saved from destruction by food
which is only a change of earth.


12. Honey, oil, milk, butter, meat, salt,
treacle and grain of all kinds and fruit
and roots are all modifications of earth and
water, :


13. Giving up all desire (for rich food)
hermits living in the forest take simple and
unsavoury food, for only keeping up the
body.


14. , Likewise, a person who lives in the
forest of the world, should be ready for
labour and should take food for passing
life, like a patient taking medicine. ;

i5—16. Examining all earthly things
that meet him, by the help of truth, purity,
candour, a spirit of reriunciation, enlighten -
ment, courage, forgiveness, fortitude, in-
telligence, reflection, and austerities, and
desirous of securing tranquillity, a person
of great soul should restrain his senses,


17. AM creatures, stupefied by Ignor-
ance by the qualities of Goodness, Dark.
ness, and Ignorance are céntinually revol- ~
ving like a wheel.


18. All faults, begotten of Ignorance,
should be closely examined and the idea
of Self, which originates - from Ignorance,
and creates misery, should be avoided.


19. The five elements, the senses the
qualities of Goodness, Darkness and Ignor-


316


ance, the three worlds with the Supreme
Being himself, and acts, all rest on Self-
consciousness.


zo. As Time, under its own laws,
always creates the seasons one after an-
other, so one should know that Conscious-~
ness in all creatures is the mover of acts.


21. [Ignorance produces delusions. It
is like Darkness and is born of Ignorance.
All the joys and sorrows belong to the
three qualities of Goodness, Darkness,
“and Ignorance.


22. Listen now to those consequences
that spring from the qualities of Goodness,
Darkness and Ignorance. Contentment,
the satisfaction that arises from joy,
certainty, intelligence, and memory,—these
‘are the results of the quality of Goodness.
I shall now describe the consequences of
Darkness and Iynoranee.


23. Desire, anger, error, cupidity stupe-
faction, fear, and fatigue, belong to the
‘quality of Darkness. Cheerlessness, grief
discontent, vanity, pride, and wickedness,
all belong to Ignorance.


24. Examining the weight or lightness
of these and other evils that exist in the
Soul, one should reftect upon each of them
one after another.’


Yudhisthira said :—

25. ‘What evils are shunned by persons
seeking Liberation? What are those that
are weakened by them? What are the
evils that come again and again? What,
again, are regarded as weak, through
stupefaction.


26. What, indeed, are those evils upon
whose gravity and weakness a wise man
“should reflect with the help of intelligence
‘and of reason? I have doubts upon these
subjects. Describe these to me, O grand-
father.”


Bhishma said :—


27. ‘By rooting out all evils, a person of
pure Soul succeeds in obtaining Liberation.
As an axe made of steel cuts a steel chain,
similarly, a person of cleansed Soul, des-
troying all the evils that originate from
Darkness and that are born with the Soul,
succeeds in cutting off his connection with

‘the body.


28. The gualities having their origin
in Darkness, those that originate from
Ignorance, and those stainless ones cha-
racterised by purity, formas it were the
seed from which all embodied creatures
have sprung. Amongst these, the quality
of Goodness alone is the cause through
which persons'of pure souls succeed in
altaining to Liberation.


MANABHARATA.


29. A person of pure soul, therefore,
should cast off all the qualities begotter
of Darkness and Ignorance. hen again
when the quality of Goodness becomes
freed from those of Darkness and Igno-
rance it shines the more,


30. Some say that sacrifices and other
acts performed with the help of Mantras,
and which bring about the purification of
the Soul, are evil or cruel acts. On the
other hand, those acts are the chief ins-
truments for dissociating the Soul from
all worldly attachments, and for the ob-
servance of the religion of peace.


gt. Through the influence of the quali-
ties born of Darkness, all impious acts
are perpetrated and atl earthly acts as
well as such acts as originate from desire
are performed.


32. Through qualities born of Igno-
rance, one does all acts fraught with
cupidity and springing from anger. In
consequence of the attribute of Ignorance,
one feels sleep and procrastination and:
becomes addicted to all acts of cruelty -
and carnality. :


33. That person, however, who, endued
with faith and scriptural knowledge, fol-
lows the quality of Goodness, attends only
to all good things and becomes endued
with beauty and a soul free from every
corruption,


CHAPTER CCXIII.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued.


Bhishma said :—

1. Delusion or loss of judgment arises
from the quality of Darkness. Anger,
Cipidity, fear and pride originate from
the quality of dgnorance, O foremost of
Bharata’s race. When all these are des-
troyed, one becomes pure.

2. By obtaining purity, a person ac-
quires the knowledge of the Supreme Soul
which is effulgent, incapable of deteriora-
tion, without change, pervading all things,
having the unmanifest for his refuge, and
the foremost of all the gods.


3- By His illusory power men fall away
from knowledge and become senseless, and
their knowledge being darkened, yield to

.anger.


4. From anger, they become subject to
desire. From desire originate cupidity,
delusion, vanity,’ pride and_ selfishness.
From such selfishness proceed various sorts


of acts. :


SHANT!


‘ §. Fram acts originate various ties of
affeetion and from those ties of affection
&prings sorrow or misery and from acts
imbued with joy and sorrow proceeds the
liability to birth and death.


6. On account of the obligation of birth,
one is compelled to live within the womb,—
for the union of vital seed and blood.
Living there is defiled with excreta
urine and phlegm, and always fouled with
blood that is created there.


7. Overwhelmed by thirst, the Intelli-
gence Soul becomes fettered by anger and
the rest that have been described above.
It seeks, however, to escape those evils,
In this respect, women must be considered
as instruments which set the stream of

reation agoing.

- 8. By their nature, women are Kshetra,
and men are Kshetrajna in respect of
qualities, Therefore, wise persons should
Not pursue women especially.


: 9. Indeed, women are like dreadful
Mantra powers. They stupefy persons
shérn of wisdom. They are sunk in the
quality of Darkness. ‘They are the eternal
embodiment of the senses.


10. On account of the strong desire
that men cherish for women, offspring pro-
ceed from them, due to the action of the
seminal fluid. As one throws off from his
person such vermm as are born there but
as are not on that account agp part of one-
self, so should one cast off those vermin
of one’s body that are called- children,
who, though regarded as one’s own, are
not his own in sooth.


11. From the seminal fluid and sweat
creatures spring from the body, influenced
by pristine acts or in the course of nature.
Therefore, a wise man should feel no re-
gard for them.


12, The quality of Darkness rests on
that of Ignorance. The quality of Good-
ness, again, rests on that of Darkness.
Darkness which is unmanifest overspreads
-itself on Knowledge, and creates the pheno-
mena of Intelligence and Consciousness.


13. That Knowledge possessing the at-
tributes of Intelligence and Corisciousness
has been described as the seed of indivi-
dual Souls. That, again, which is the seed
of such knowledge is called the Jiva
(or Individual Soul). On account of acts
and the virtue of time, the Soul goes
through birth and repeated rounds of
re-birth,


14. Asin a dream the Soul plays as if
invested with a body which, of course, is
due to the action of the mind, similarly, it
gets in the mother’s womb a body iu


PARVA. 317
consequence of qualities’ and propensities
created by pristine deeds. i


15. Whatever senses; while it is there,
are -awakened by pristine deeds as _ the
operating cause, become created in Con-
sciousness i) consequence of the mind co«
existing with attachments. .


16. On account of the past thoughts of
sound that are awakened in it, the Soul,
subjected to such influences, gets the organ
of hearing. Similarly, from attachment
to forms, its eye is produced, and from its
desice after smell its organ of smelling.


17. From thoughts of touch it acquires
the skin. Likewise, the five vital airs are
acquired by it, viz., Prana, Apana, Vyana,
Udana, and Samana, which make the body
agoing. :

18. Encased in body with all limbs fully
‘developed on account of pristine deeds, the
Soul takes birth, with beth physical and
mental sorrow, in the beginning, middle,
and end. :


19. It shoyld be known that sorrow
originates from the very formation of bod
(in the womb), It increases with the idea
of Self. From renunciation of these, sorrow
is destroyed. He who knows sorrow’s end
attains to Liberation.


20. Both the origin and the destruction
of the senses depend on the quality of
Darkness, A wise man should act with
proper scrutiny with the help of theeye of
the scriptures.


23. The senses of knowledge, if they
Succeed in acquiring all their objects, can
never stupefy the man who is without thirst.
‘The embodied Soul, by making its senses
weak, is saved from the obligation of
re-birth, : ‘ ;


CHAPTER CCXIV.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).<<«
Continued,


Bhishma said :—


- 1. ‘ E shall now describe to you the means
of conquering the,senses as seen with the
eye of the scriptures. A person, O king,
wiil attain to the highest end by the help of
such knowledge and _ by shaping his conduct
accordingly.

2. Amongst all living creatures man is
said to be the foremost. Among men, the
twice-born are the foremost ; and amongst
the twice-born, persons wel] read in the


Vedas are the foremost. a,


318
’ 3. These last are considered’as the souls
of all living creatures. Indeed, fthose
Brahmanas who have mastered the Vedas
-are considered as all-seeing and omniscient.
They are persons who have become conver-
sant with Brahara.


4. As a blind man, without a guide,
meets with many difficultieson a road, so
has a person shorn of knowledge to meet
with many impediments in the world.

_ Therefore those who are endued with know-
ledge are considered as superior to the rest.


5. Fhose who wish te acquire virtue
Practise various rites according to the
scriptural injunctions. They do not, how-
ever, attain to Liberation. They only
acquire those good qualities which [ shall
presently mention.


6. Purity of speech, of body, and of
mind, forgiveness, truth, firmness and in-
telligence,—these good qualities are shown
by pious persons who observe both kinds-of
religion.


7 . What is called Brahmacharyya is
considered as the means of attaining to
Brahma, ‘That is ‘the foremost of alt
religions. It is by the practice of that
religien that one acquires the highest end.


8. Brahmacharyya has no connection
with the five vital airs, mind, understanding,
the five senses of perception, and the_five
senses of action. It is, threfore, free from
all the perceptions that the senses give. It


is heard only as a word, and its form, is.


not seen, but can only be conceived.


9. It is a state of existence only on the
mind. It has ne connection with the senses.
That pure state shoufd be attained to by the
‘understanding alone.


10. He who practises it duly attains to
Brahma ; he who practises it half and half,
attains to the status of the gods ; while he
who practises it indifferently, is;born among
Brahmanas and possessed. of learning at-
tains to eminence,


11. ‘Brahmacharyya is highly difficult to
practise. Listen now to the means theréof,
That twice-borm one who follows it should
subldue the quality of Darkness as soon as
it begins to show itself or as soon as it be-
sins to be powerful.


12. One who has taken that vow should
not speak with women, He should never
look ata naked woman. The sight of women,
under even indifferent circumstances, ex-
cites the passion of all weak-minded men.


13 If a person feels a desire for woman
rising in his heart, he should observe the
vow called Krichcchra and also pass three
days in water. If desire is formed even in
a dream, one should, diving in water,


MAHABHARATA.


mentally repeat for three times the three
Riks by Aghamarshana.


14. That wise man who follows this vaw
should, with a liberal and enlightened
mind, consume the sins in his mind which
are created by the quality of Daricness.


15. As the passage that carries away the
refuge of the body is very closely connec-
ted with the body, so the embodied Soul is
very closely connected with the body that
confines it. .


16. The different sorts of juices, passing
through the network of arteries, nourish
men’s wind, bile, phlegm, blood, skin, flesh,
intestines, bones, marrow, and the whole
body.


17. Know that there are ten princigle
canals. ‘These help the functions of the five
senses. From those ten issue out thousands


of other passages that are minuter in form.


18. Like rivers filling the ocean at the
the proper time, all these channels, con-
taining juices, nourish the body.


19. There is a channel leading tothe
heart called Manovaha. It draws from
every part of the human body the seminal
fluid which is born of desire.


20. Numberless other channels issuing
from that principal one extend into every
part of the body and bearing the element
of heat cause the sense of vision (and the
rest).


2t. As the butter that lies within milk
is churned up by churning rods, so the
desires that are created in the mind draw
together the vital seed that lies within the
body. -

22. Inthe midst of even our dreams
passion originating in imagination attacks
the mind, with the result that the passage
already named, viz., Manovaha, throws
out the seminal fluid born of desire.


23. The grey and divine Rishi Atri is
a master of the subject of the generation of
the vital seed. The juices that are produ-
ced by food, the passage called Manovaha,
and the desire that is born of imagination,
—these three are the causes which create
the seminal fluid which has Iindra for its
presiding god. ‘The passion that helps the
passing out of this fluid is, therefore, called
Indciya.


24. Those persons, who know that the
course of seminal fluid is the cause of in-
termixture of castes, are men of controlled
passions. Their sins are considered ta have
been consumed, ‘and they are never sub-
jected to re-birth.


25. He who performs action simply for
the purpose of maintaining his body, reduc-


€


SHANTI PARVA,


ing with the help of the mind the qualities
into a state of equilibrium, and brings at his
fast moments the vital airs to the channel
called Manovaha, is freed from re-birth, ~


26. The Mind is sure to acquire Know-
ledpe. [cis the Mind which assumes the
form, of all things. Acquiring success


through meditation, the minds of all great
persons, become treed from desire, eternal,
and shining. . .

27. Therefore, for destroying the mind,
one should perform only ‘pure deeds, and
freeing himself from. the qualities of ark-
ness and Lynorance, one is sure to acquire
a very desirable end.


28. Knowledge (ordinarily) acquired in
younger davs becomes weakened with de-
crepitude. ‘Through the good effects of past
lives, a person, however, of fripe under-
standing succeeds in killing his desires.


29. Such a person, by getting over the
fetters of the body and the senses like a
traveller crossing a path full of impediments,
and transgressiny all faults he sees, succeeds
in testing the ambrosia (of Liberation.)


mie


CHAPTER CCXV.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued,


Bhishma said :—


1.
senses which are always imbued with evil,
living «cteatures become helpless. Those
great persons, however, who are not attach-
ed to them, acquire the greatest end,


2. Seeing the world beset with the evils
formed by birth, death, decrepitude, sorrow,
disease, and anxieties, the man of intelli-
yence should try for the attainment of
Liberation.

3: g
and body; he should be shorn of pride.
Of} tranquil soul and endued with know-
ledge, he should live like a mendicant, and
/pursue happiness withBut beng atrached
to any worluly object.

4. Again, if his mind is filled with at-
tachment for mercy to Creatutes, le should,
seeing that the universe is the cesult of

‘acts, oue should show indifference even to
mercy itself, ;

5. Whatever good acts are done, or
whatever sin is committed, the acter reaps
the points thereof. Hence, one should, in


|
|
i


wo


ae ee


| any


By being attached to objects of the.


319


6. He enjoys happiness who practises.
abstention from injuring (others), truthiul-
ness of speech, honesty towards aj! crea-
tures, and forgiveness, and who is never
Careless.


7- Hence one, exercising his intelligence,
should fix his mind, after training it, on
peace towards all creatures.


8. That man who considers the practice
of the virtues mentioned . above as the
greatest duty as securing the happiness of
ail creatures, and as destroying all sorts
ef sorruw, is possessed of the greatest
knowledge, and succeeds in acquiring.
happiness. Hence, one should, exercising -
his inteltigence, fix his mind, after training
it, on peace towards all creatures.


9g. °One should never think of com-
mitting evil to others. One should not.
covet what is far above his power to
acquire. One should not fix his thoughts
On Objects which are not real, One should,
on the other hand, direct his mind towards
knowledge by continued exertions.


to—14. With the help of the injunctions
of the Shruyis and of continued efforts
calculated to bring success, Knowledge is
sure to originate. One whois desirous of
saying good. words or observing a religion
which is purged off of all impurities, should
speak only truth which is not fraught with
malice of censure. One who has
got a sound beart should speak words
which are not fraught with dishonesty,
which are not harsh, which are not cruel,
which are not evil, and which are not
characterised by garrulitv. ‘The universe
is bound in words.” If a pérson dis-
posed to renunciation he should proclaim,
with a humble mind aud a cieansed under-
standing, his own evil deeds. He who
performs action, urged thereto by pro-
pensities pervaded by the quality of Darke
ness, suffers much misery in this world and
at last sinks into hell. One ghould, there


4 fere, practise self-control in body, words


He should be pure in words, thought,


words, thought, and deed, do only good |


acts.


and mind, —


15. Ignorant persons bearing the weight
of the world are like robbers ladew with
their booty of straguling sheep. ‘The
latter always avoid roads which are not
favorable to thein,


16. Indeed, as robbers have to throw
away their booty if thev wish safety, so
should a person cast off all acts induced
by Darkuess .and Ignorance, if he is to
acquire happiness,


17—18. Forsooth, a person who is shorn
of desire, free from the fetters of the world,
contented to live in solitude, abstemious
in diet, devoted to penances, and with


328


senses under réstraint, who has consumed
aH his sorrews by knowledge,- who finds
Pleasdre in practising Yoga and who bas
a cleansed soul, succeeds, on account of
his mind belng withdrawn into itself, in
attaining to Brahma or Liberation.


1g. One endued with patience and a
pure soul should, forsooth, control his
understanding. With the understanding,
ene should next restrain mind, and then
with the mind overpower the objects of
the senses. :


zo. Uport the mind being thus restrain-
ed and the senses being all subdued, the
sensés will shise and gladly enter into
Beahnia.


When one's serises are withdrawn
into the mind, the result becontes, that
Brahma becomes ntanifested iv tt. Indeed,
when thé senses are destroyed, arid the
soul rettirns to the quality of pure existence,
it is regarded as béing transformed into
Brahuia,

22. Then again, ore stiould tiever show
his Yoga power. On the other hand, one
Should always try to restrain his senses
by practising the rules of Yoga. Indeed,
one engaged ia Ue practice of Yoga
should do al! those acts ‘by whiclr hig con-
duct aud nature may beconie pure.


23. Ove should rather live ugon broken
grains of corn, ripe beans, dry cakes of
seeds from which tlre off has been pressed
out, potherbs, haff-ripe barley, flour of
{vied pulses, fruits, and roots, secured by
begging.

24. Reffecting upon the characteristics
ef time and place, one should according
to his inclinations observe, after proper
search, vows and rules about fasts.


25. One shoutd tot suspend a rite that
has been begun. Like one slowly creating
a fire, one should by and by perform an
act that is prompted by knowledge. By
so doing, Brahma by and by shines in owe
Tike the Sun.

26. The Ignorance whictt rests on
Knowledge, extends its influence over all
the three jstates. Vhe Knowledge, again,
that follows the Understanding, is attacked
by Ignorauce.


27. The evil-hearted person cannot
acquire a krowledge of the Self for his
considering it as united with the three
states although in reality it transcends
them all. When, however, he perceives
the Hmits under which the two, viz, union
with the three states and separation from
them, are manifested, it is then that he
becomes shorn of attachment ard attains
to Liberatiom


at.


MAHABHARATA,


28. When sticl an appreliensicn dé
been acquired, ore transcends the effects of
agé, rises superior to the consequences of
decrepitude and déath, and obtains Brahma
which is eternal, deathless, immutable, and
undetériorating.


CHAPTER CCXVI.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued.


Bhishma said :— :

1. The Yogin who wishes to always
practise pure Brahmacharyya aud who is
cognizant of the faults attaching to dreams,
should, with his whole heart, try to give ug
sleep.

z. Ia dreams, the erabodied soul, pos-

sessed by the qualities of Darkness and
Iynorance, seems to become possessed of
another body and move aid act influence
by desire. ’
3. On account of application for acquirs
ing kttowledge and of continued = reftection'
and recapitulation, the Yoyin remains
always awake. Indeed, the Yoyin can keep
hintself continually awake by giving hint-
self up to knowledge:

4. Regarding this subject it Nas beer
asked what is this state in which thé em-
bodied creature thinks himself encircled by


e


; and eagaged in objects and acts? It is true
| that the embodied being, with its senses


really suspended, still considers itself to
be possessed of bedy witty all the senses of
knowledge and of action, .

§. tis said that that mraster of Yoga,
named Hari, perceives truly how it hap’
pens. The great Rishis say that the
explanation yivetyr by Hari is correct and
reasonable.

6. ‘The learned says that it ig on account
of the senses being exhausted with fatigue,
dreams are seen by all creatures. The
mind, however, never becoimes inactive and
lence arise dreams. This cowsidered as
their principal cause.

j. As the imagination of a person who
is awake and engaged in acts, is due only
to the creative power of the mind, stmilarly,
the impressions itt a dreany belong only to
the mind,

8. A person with desire and attachment.
receives those imaginations based upon tlre
impressions of numberless pristine lives.
Nothing that impresses the mind once is
ever Jost, and the Soul being cognisant of


_all those impressions makes them appear.


“SHANTI


®. Whichever among the tliree quatitles
tf Goodness, Darkness, and Ignorance is
caused by the influence of pristine acts and
bv whichever amongst them the mind ‘is
affected for the time being in whatever
way, the elements (in their subtile forms) or
indicate accordingly (in the way of images).


to. After images have thns been created
the particular quality of Goodness Dark-
ness or [ynorance that may have been
brought by pristine acts rises in the mind
and produces its last result, vis., happiness
or misery. -


11, Those images originating princi-
pally wind, bile, and phlegm, which men
apprehend through ignorance and in con+
sequence of tendency pervaded by Dark-
ness and Igaorance, cannot, it has been
said, be easily discarded,


12, (When one is awake) whatever
objects a person perceives in the mind
through the senses in a clear state are ap-
prehended by the mind in dreams while the
senses are inactive,


13. The Mind exists without obstruction
in all things. ‘This is due to the nature of
the Soul. The Soul should be compre-
hended. Ali the elements and the objects
they form exist in the Soul.


14. Inthe state called dreamless sleep
the manifest human body which, of course,
is the duor of dreams, disappears in the
mind. Possessing the body the mind enters
the Soul which is unmanifest and upon
which all existent and non-existent things
dedend, and becomes a wakeful witness


with certainty of apprehension. Thus living |


in pure Coneciousness which is the soul
allthings, itis considered by the learned
as transcending both Consciousness and all
things in the universe. .


15. ‘Flat Yogin who by desire covets
any of the divine qualities (of Know-
ledge o¢ Renunciation, etc.,) should
regard a pure mind to be at ove with the
object of his desire, All things. exist in a
pure mind or soul.


16. ~ This isthe result acquired by one
who practises penances. That Yogin, how-
ever, who has got over Darkness or igno-
tance, is endued with transcending efful-
gence. When Darkness or [znorance has
been got over, the embodied Soul becomes
' Supreme Brahma, the cause of the uni-
verse, F Pata’ :

1% The deities have. penances and

edic sites. Darkness (or pride and cruel-
ty), which destroys the former, has been
adopted by the Asuras. This, viz., Brahma,
which has been said to have Knowledge
only for its quality, is difficult of attainment
by either the gods or the Asuras,

4f


3


PARVA, 321

18. It should be known that the quali-
ties of Goodness, Darkness, and Ignorance
befong to the gods and the Asuras. Good-
ness is the quality of the gods ; while the
two others belong to the Asuras.


19. Brahma transcends all those quali- .
ties, It is pure Knowledge. [tis immor-
tality. It is pure effulgence. It is unde-
caying. Those persons of pure souls who
know Brahma attain to the highest end.


20. One having knowledge for his eye
can say this much with the help of reason
and analogy. Brahma which is indestruc«
tible can be comprehended by only withe
drawing the senses.and the mind. *


CHAPTER CCXVII.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA.)—=
Contizued. -


Bhishma said :—


1. ‘He does not know Brahma who
does not know the four topics, namely,
dreams, dreaniless sleep, immanent, and
transcendent Bralima, as also what is Mani-«
fest (vts., the body), and what is Unmani-
fest (the intelligence-soul), which the great
Rishi (Narayana) has described as Tattwam
(pure principle). ;

2. That which is manifest is subject to
death. That which is unimsnifest trans-
cends death, The Rishi Narayana has
described the religion of inclination,» =.


3. Upon that depends the entire uni-
verse with its mobile and immobile crea»
tures. The religion of disinclination again
leads to the unmanifest and eternal Beahma.


4. The Creator (Brahman) has described
the religion of inclination.- Inclination
indicates re-birth or return. Disinclination
on the other hand, indicates the highest
eud. . :


5. The ascetic who wish to discriminate
exactly between good and evil, wo is
always bent on cenceiving the nature of
the Soul, and who devotes: himself to the
religion of disinclination, attains to what
Ligh eud.


6—7. One who wishes to accomplish
this, should Enow both the Unmanifest dnd
Purusha of which [ shall speak now. ‘Jhat,
again, which is different from both tlhe
Unmanifest and Purusha,;* and whith
transcends them both, and which is dis-
tinguished from ail beings, should be
particularly seen by an intelligent men,
Both Prakriti and Purusha are without
beginning and without end. Both are ine
capable of being known by their likes.


322


“8. Both are eternal and indestructible.
“ Both are greater than the greatest. ‘They
are similar in these. There are points of
dissimilarity again between them.


g. Prakriti is‘ endued with the three


qualities. Itis also engaged in creation,
The true attributes of Kshetrajna (Purusha
or the Soul), are different.


to. Purusha apprehends all the changes
of Prakriti (but cannot be apprehended
himself.) He transcends allt qualities.
As regards Purusha and the Supreme Soul
again, both of them ¢annot be comprehen-
deds Again for their both being without
qualities by which they can be distinguish-
ed, both are greatly distinguished from all
else.


-lr. A person puttiug on a, turban has
his head circled with three folds of a piece
of cloth.


12. Similarly the embodied Soul is in-
vested with the three qualities of Goodness,
Darkness, .and Ignorance. But though
thus invested, the Sou} js nog identical with
those qualities. * | :

13. Hence these tour-topics, which are
covered by these four considerations,
should ‘be understood. One who undere
stands all this is never stupefied when he
tries to form conclusions,


14. He who wishes to secure high pros-
perity should become ptré in mind, and
practising austere practices regarding the
body aud the seitses, should devote himself
to yoga without seeking. for! fruits.


15. ‘The universe is permeated by yoga
power secretly passing through every part
of it and lighting it up brightly. ‘The sun
and the moon shine in the sky of the heart
on account of yoga power. -

16. Theresuk of yoga is. Knowledge,
Yoga is spoken of. highly in the world.
‘Whatever acts destroy Darkness and Igno-


rance form yoga in respect of its real cha--


racter.


17., Brahmacharyya and abstention from
injury fprm yoga of the body ; while res-
training of mind and words form: yoga of
the mind. : .

18. The food which is acquired by
begging from, twice-born persons conver-
sant with tha ritual is distinguished from
all other food. By taxing that food abste-
miuusly, one’s sins begotten of Durkness
are dissipated,


1g. Living upon such food a Yogin finds
his senses gradually withdrawn from their
objects. Hence, he should take only that
quantity of food whiclt is barely necessary
for the support of his body,”


MANHABHARATLA,


-2e, Knowledge which one acdutres gtaa
dually by mind devoted to yoga should be
made one’s own on the verge of death bya
feréible stretch of power.


21. The embodied Soul, when divested
of Darkness, assumes a subtile form with
all the senses of perception and moves
about in space. When his mind becomes
untouched by acts, he, on account of


such renunciation, becomes merged in
Prakriti.
22. After the destruction of this gross


body, one who through absence of care+
lessness escapes from all the three bodies,
succeeds in attaining to Liberation. The
birth and death of creatures is always
brought about by Avidya (Ignorance.)


- 23. When knowledge of Brahman ori-
ginates, the person no longer feels the pincls
of necessity. ‘Those, bowever, who believe
what is the reverse of truth are men whose
understandings: are always busy: with the
birth and death of; all existent things.


24. Keeping their bodies by the help of
patience, withdrawing theis hearts by the
help of their understanding, and withdraw-
ing themselves from the world of senses,
some Yogins worship the senses for their
subtility.

25. Some of them, with mind purified
by yoga, proceeding according to the scrip-
tures and reaching the highest, succeed in
knowing, it by the help of the understanding


‘and live in that whieh is the highest and


which without resting on any. other thing
rests on itself, ‘


26: Some adore Brahma in images.
Bre adore Him as devoid of qualities.
Some again and again realise the highest
Divinity which has been described to be
like a flash of lightning and whichis again
indestructible. ; la


27. Others who have consumed their
gins by penances, attain to Brahman in
theend, All these great persons atiain to
the highest end.


28. With the eye of  seripture one
should: mark the subtitle attributes of these
several farms, as distinguished by attributes,
of Brahma that are adored by men.
The Yogin who has gone above the neces-
sity of depending on the body, who has
renounced al} attachments, and whose
mind is devoted to.yoga abstraction, should
be considered as another instance of-Inft-
nity, as the Supreme Divinity, or as hat
which is Unmanifest< . | ee


tL


. 29; ‘They, whose hearts. are given to the
acquisition of. knowlege succeed first in
disassociating themselves for .the: world of
mortals, Afterwards, by senouncing attach.
¢


SHANTI PARVA,,


ments they partaké of the naturaof Brahma
and at last attain to the highest end.


30. ‘Thus persons conversant with the
Vedas have described the religion that
brings on the attainment of Brahma, They
who follow that religion according to the
extent of their respective knowledge all
succeed in acquiring the highest end. *


3t. Those persons who can acquire a
knowledge which is incapable of being
shaken and which makes its possessors
shorn of all sorts of attachments acquire
different high regions after death and be-
come emancipate according to the extent
of their knowledge.


32. Those pure-hearted persons who
have acquiced contentmentifrom knowledge,
and who have renounced all desires and
attachments, gradually approach in res-
pect of their nature nearer and nearer to
Brahma which is unmanifest by nature,
which is divine, and without birth and
death.


33. Realising -that Brahma lives in
their souls, they become themselves immut-
able and have never to come back to the
Earth). Acquiring that supreme, indes-


tructible and eternal state they leave in,


happiness. ‘he knowledge of this world
is this; (The erring persons consider) it
existing. (Persons'who have overcome igno-
rance think that) it does notiexist. The whole
universe, fettered by desire, is révolving
like a wheel.


35. As the fibres of a lotus-stalk over-
spread themselves into every part of the
stalk, likewise the fibres of desire, which
are without beginning or end, spread
themselves over every part of the body,


36. As a weaver drives his threads into
a cloth by means of his shuttle, similarly
the threads that constitute the .fabric of
the universe are woven by the shuttle of
Desire.


37. He who understands the changes
of. Nature, Nature herself, and Purusha,
becomes freed from Desire and acquires
Liberation, :


38. The divine Rishi Narayana, that
retuge of the universe, for the sake: of
mercy ‘towards all creatures, distinctly
laid down these means for the acquisition
of immortality.’


323 |
CHAPTER CCXVIIE.


(MOKSH ADHARMA PARVA.—
Continued. :


Yudhisthira asked :—


1. “ Byacting how, O you who are con-
versant with all courses of conduct, did
Janaka the king of Mithila, versed in the
teligion of Liberation, succeed “in acquiring |
Liberation, after casting off all worldly
enjoyments ?”


Bhishma said :—


2. ‘Regarding it is cited the following
old narrative of the particular conduct by
which that king, a master of all courses of
conduct, succeeded in acquiring the highest
happiness.


3. There was a king in Mithila of the
name of Janadeva of Janaka’s race. He
was ever engaged in thinking of the courses
of conduct’ that might lead to the attain-
ment of Brahma.


4. One hundred preceptors always used
to live in*his palace, describing to him the
vario@s courses of duty followed by people
who had adopted the various modes of
life.. ‘

-§. Well read in the Vedas, he was note.
very well satisfied with the speculations of
his instructors’ ontthe naturé of the Soul,
and in their teachings of his extinction upon
the dissolution -of the body or of' re-birtly
after death,


6. Oncé upon a time & great ascetic
named Panchashikha the son of Kapila,
having roamed over the whole world, arrived
at Mithila.


7. Having’ made conclusions about the
diverse duties connected with renunciation,
he was above all pairs of opposites, and had
no doubts. ne :


8. He’ wars considered as the'foremost
of Rishis. Living wherever he pleased,
he wished to place before the reach of alt
men eternal happiness that is.so difficult
of attainment, .


g. It appeared that he roamed, amazing
the world, having put on the form of none
else than that great Rishi, that, lord of
creatures, whom the followers of the
Sankhya doctrine knew by the. name, of
‘Kapila. | ;

10. He was the greatest of all the


‘disciples, of: Asuri and was called the un-


dying. He had perfofmed a _ mental
Sacrifice lasting for a thousand:years.- - >


11—12,. He was firm in mind, and had
performed all the rites and saccifices that


432° MAHABHARATA


22. He atso described that Delusion
which beget the practice of religion, and
acts, and their fruits, and which is highly -
untrustwofthy, destructible, unsteady, and
uncertain,


23. Scepties say that when death is seen
directly by all, they -who hold, on accouut
of their faith in the scriptures, that some-
thing distinct Trom the body, called the
Soul, exists, are necessarily defeated it
argument.


24. They also hold that one’s death is
the extinction of one’s Soul, and that sorrow,
decrepitude, and ,disease indicate (partial)
death of the Soul. te who holds owing te
error, that the Soul is distinct from the body
and exists after the loss of body, entertains
an unreasonable opinion.


25. If that .is considered as existent
. which does not really exist in the world,
then it may be mentioned that the king,
being known so, is really never subject to
decrepitutde or death. But ‘is he, there-
fore, to be really believed to be beyond
decrepitude and death ?


26. When the question arises whether
an object exists or not, and when that whose
existence in asserted presents a}! the signs
of non-existence, what is that upon whiclr
Ordinary people depend in settling the
affairs of life?


27. Direct evidence is the basis of both
inference and the scriptures. ‘The scrip-
turescan be contradicted by direct evi-
dence. As to inference its evidence is not
much. ‘


are enjoined in the scriptures and that lead
to the attainment of Brahma. He knew
{uli well the five sacs that cover the Soul.
He was devoted to the five acts regarding
the adoration of Brahma, and had the five
qualities. Known by the vameof Pancha--
shikha, he had approached one day a large
assembly of Rishis foHowing the Sankhya
doctrines and enquired of them about the
highest object of human acquisition, namely,
the Unmanifest or that upon which the five
sacs rest, :


13. For acquiring a knowledge of the
Soul, Asuri had enquired of his preceptor.
Ou account of the lattec’s instructions and
of his own penances, Asuri understood the
distinction between the body and the Soul
and had gained celestial vision.


14. In that assembly of ascetics, Asuri
described the Immutable, One, and Indes-
tructible Brahma which is seen in various
forms. -


-13, Panchashikha became a disciple of
Asuri. He lived on human milk. ‘There.
was.a certain Brahman lady named Kapila.
She was Asuri’s wife. .


- 16. Panctiashikha was accepted by® her
as a son and he used to suck her breasts.
For this, he came to be known as the son of
Kapila and hisunderstanding became fixed
on Brahma.


17. The divine Rishi said to me, all
this, regarding the circumstances of his
birth and those about his becoming the son
of Kapila. The latter also told me about
thelomniscience of Panchashikha,


18. - Knowing fully all the forms of duty,

Panchashikha, after having himself gained

- high knowledge, (came to Janaka} and

knowing that that king had equal reverence

for ail his preceptors, began to startle those

hundred preceptors (by a very sensible ex-
position of his doctrine),


28.. Do not reason on inference only
whatever may be the subject. There is
nothing else called individual soul than this
body.


29. The capacity to produce leaves,
flowers, fruits, roots and bark lies in a
banian seed. The grass and water that‘is
taken by a cow produce milk and butter,
substances differing in nature from that
of the causes. Various substances when
allowed to decompose in water for sometime
produce spirituous liquors whose nature is
quite different from that of those substarfces
producing them. Likewise, . from the vital
seed in produced the body and its attributes,
with ,the understanding, consciousness,
mind, and other qualities. ‘I'wo pleces of
wood, rubbed together, beget fire. Coming
in contact with the rays of the Sun, the
stone called Suryakanta begets fire. Any
solid metal, heated in fire, dries up water
when coming in_ contact with it. Likewise,
the material body produces the mind and its
attributes of perception, memory, imaguia-
tion, etc. As the loadstone moves iron,


19. Marking the genius of the son of
Kapila, Janaka became excéedingly attach-
edto him, and abandoning his hundred
preceptors, began to follow him.


20. Then Kapila’s son began to dis-
course to Janaka, who had according to the
ordinance bent his head to him and who
was fully competent to understand the saye’s
instructions, upon that great religion of
Liberation which is explained in Sankhya
treat.ses. :


at. Describing first of all the miseries
of birth, he spoke next of the miseries of
(religious) acts. Having finished that topic
he explained the miseries of ali states of
existence ending even with that in the high
region of the Creator. .


SHANTI PARVA,


likewise tlie senses are controlled by the
mind. i

jo. Thus do the sceptics reason, who
are, however, mistaken. ‘he disappearance
(of animation) upon the body becoming
lifeless means death. he supplication of
the gods by the very men who deny the
separate existence of the Soul is another
good argument (for the proposition that
the Soul is separate from the. body.)
Another argument against the sceptic is
that his proposition argues a destruction of
acts.


31. These that have been mentioned,
and that have material forms, cannot pos-
sibly be the causes (of the immaterial Soul
and its immaterial accompaniments), The
identity of immaterial things with objects
that ace material cannot be comprehended.


32. Some hold that there is re-birth
which is caused by Ignorance, the desire
for acts, cupidity, carelessness, and bent
towards other vices.


33. They say that Ignorance is the soil.
Acts form the seed that is placed in that
soil. Desire is the water that causes that
seed to grow. la this manuer they ex-
plain ce-birth.


* 34. They hold that ignorance being
ingrained in an imperceptible way, one
mortal body being destroyed, another
originates at once from it; and that when
it is consumed by the help of knowledge,
the destruction of existence itself follows,
or the person attains to what is ‘called
annihilation.


35- This opinion also is mistaken, It
may be asked that when the being that
is thus re-born is a different one in its
Nature, birth, and objects of virtue and
vice, why ,should it then be considered to
-be identical with the being that was?
Indeed, the only inference that can be
made is that the entire chain of existences
of a particular being is not really one of
connected links,


*36. Then, again, if the being that is
the outcome of a re-birth be really differ-
ent from what it was in a pristine exist-
ence, it may be asked what satisfaction is
to a person from the exercise of the spirit
of charity, or from the acquisition of know-
ledge or of ascetic power, since the acts
performed by one are to bear fruits
upen another person in another state of
existence.


37. Another refutation of the doctrine
would be that one in this life may rendered
miserable by the acts of another in a

-ipristine life, or having become miserable
may. again become happy. By witnessing


325,


however, what actually ‘takes place in the
world, a proper conclusion may be drawn
regardingthe unseen,


38. The separate Consciousness that is
the outcome of re-birth is different from
the Consciousness that had preceded:
it in a pristine existence. ‘Fhe way, how-
ever, in which. the appearance of that:
separate Consciousness is explained by that
theory is not at all consistent or reasonable.
The Consciousness was the very opposite of
of eternal, being only transitory, extend+
ing as it did till dissolution of the body.
That which had an end canwot be considere.
ed as the cause for the.production of a second
Consciousness appearing after the end. If
again, the very loss of the previous Con-
sciousness be considered as the cause of
the production of the second Conscious~.
ness, then when the death of a human body
is caused by a heavy bludgeon, a second
body would originate from the body that
is thus deprived of animation,


39. Again, their doctrine of annihilas—
tion is subject to the objection that extinc-
tion will become a revolving phenomenon
like that of the seasons, or the year, or the
yuga, or heat, or cold, or agreeable or dis-
agreeable objects. aes :


40. If for avoding these objections, the
followers of this doctrine hold the existence
of a Soul that is permanent and with which
each new Consciousness is attached, ‘they
again subject themselves to the new objec-
tion that that permanent substauce, by being
overcome with decrepitude, and with death
that causes destruction, may in time be
itself weakened and destroyed. If the sup-
ports of a palace are weakened by time,
the mansion itself is sure to fall down in
the end. 7


41, The senses, the mind, wind, blood,
flesh, bones, one after another, meet with
destruction and enter each into its own
productive cause.


42. If again the existence of an eternal
Soul is hetd which is immutable, which is
the refuge of the understanding, conscious-
ness, and other similar attributes, and
which is dissociated fram ail these, such
an assertion is subject to a serious objection
for then all that is usually done in the world
would be meaningless, especially with refer-
ence to the attainment of. the fruits of
charity and other religious acts, All the
injunctions in the Shrutis regarding those
acts, and all acts connected with the conduct
of men in the world, would be equally mean-
ingless, for the Soul being dissociated from
the understanding and the mind, there is no
one to enjoy the fruits of good acts and
Vedic tites.. . ;


326


2


43.. Fhus various sorts -of' speculations
arise in the mind. Nothing can settle whe-


ther this opininion is right or that is right. +:


44. Reflecting on ‘these opinions, parti-
cular persons follow particular lines of
specluation.. ‘Fhe understandings of these,
directed to particular theories become
inanversed: and are at fast entirely lost in
them. :

45. Thus allmen are made miserable
by pursuits good or bad. Bringing thenr
back to the right path, the Vedas-alone,
guide them along it, tile grooms conducting
their elephants. © — ; es fe re


45. Many men, with weakened minds,.


seek objects of great happiness. ,,Mhese,
however, have soon to meet with a larger
quantity of sorrow, and. then, alienated
by force. from their coveted meat, they
gubject themselves to the sway of death.


46. What has one,. who.-is subject to
destruction and whosé life. is fickle, to .do
with kinsmen, and friends. and wives and
‘other like possessions ?, He -who meets
death after having relinquished all these,
passes easily out of the world and has never
to return. ;


Ls t t

47~49. Earth, ether, water, heat,.and
wind, always keep. up. and nourish the
body. Thinking of this, how can one feel
anyattachment for his body? Indeed, the
body, which is subject.to destruction, has no
happiness iu it.—Having heard these words
Panchashikha that were shorn jof ,decep-
tion, and delusion, highly salutary, and
treating of the Soul, king Janaka. became
filled with: wander,, and. prepared himself
to address the Rishi once more.’


Saini


CHAPTER. GCXIX,


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).— -
(Continued.) . a

Bhishma said:
x. ‘Thus instructed by the great Rishi
Panchashikha, Janadeva of the family of
Janaka, once more asked him about the


subject of existence or non-existence-after
death.


Janaka said :— _

2. O illustrious one, if no-person, ree
tains any knowledge after- departing from
this state of existence, .if, indeed, this is
true, what then is the difference ‘between
Ignorance and Knowledge? What do-we
gain then by knowlédge and what do we
lose by ignorance ?


t


MAHABHARATA.


4. See, O forennrast of the twice-born, that
if liberation be such, theq all religions acts
and vows terminate only in annihilation 2?
Of what use would then the distinction be
between heedfulness and heedlessness.


4. 4£ Liberation means dissociation from
all objects of pleasure or an association
with obiects; that are not lasting, why
should then men cherish a desire for action
or having set themselves to action, continue
to find out the necessary means for the
accomplishment of desired ends? What
then is the truth.


| Bhishma said :—

5. Seeing the king enveloped in thick
darkness, stupefied by error, and become
helpless, the, learned ~Panehashikha put.
his mind at. rest, by once more address,
ing himrthus.

6. In Liberation the consummation is
not. Extinction. Nor is that consummation.
any kind of Existence. What we see isa
union of body, senses, and mind. Existing
independently as atso depending on one
another, these go on acting.


zg. The ingredient that form the body
are water, ether, wind, heat, and earth.
These exist together according to their
own nature. They become separated again
according to their own nature.


1.8. Ether, wind, heat, water and earth,—
these five objects in a state of union form
the body.- The body is not one element.


: g. Intelligence; stomach? heat, and the
vital airs, called Prana, etc., that are alt
wind,--these. three’ are the organs of
action. ‘The senses, the objects of the
senses, the power: by. which they, become
capable of, being. perceived, the faculties
by which they succeed in parceiving them,
the. mind, the.vital airs called Prana, Apana
arid the rest, and. the various juices and
humonts that are the results of the digestive
organs, flow from the three organs already
named. — :


.:10,, Hearing, touch, taste, vision, and
scent,—these are the five senses. They
have derived their attributes from the mind
which is their cause. .


“a1. The mind, which is as an attribute
of Chit, bas three states, v7s., pleasure,
pain ‘and absence-of both..pleasure and
pain. .

12. Sound, touch, form, taste,- scent,
and the objects to which they are: attached
these till the time of | one’s death are
causes for the’ production of one’s know,
ledge. ~ x oo on :

‘13. Upon the senses. depend: all acts
{leading to heaven), .as:also renunciation


SHANTI PARVA.
e


(leading to the attainment of Brahma), and
also the ascertainment of truth regarding
all topics of enquiry. The learned say that
ascertainment (of truth) is the highest end
of existence, and is the root of Libera-
tion; and regarding Intelligence, they Say
that it leads to Liberation and Brahma. ©


14. That person who considers this
union of perishable attributes as the Sout,
feels, on,account of such imperfect know-
ledge, unending misery. :


18. Those persons, who, however, regard
all worldly objects as not-Soul, and who on
that account cease to have any affection or
attachment for them, have never to suffer
any misery, for sorrow, in their case, stands
in need of some foundation be da which to
depend. t £

16. About it there is the unrivalled
branch of knowledge which treats of Re-
uunciation. Itis called Samyagvadha. 1
shall describe it to you. Listen to it for the
yake of your Liberation. : ;


17. Renunciation of acts is (laid down)
for all persons whojseek Liberation earnestly.
They, however, who have not been instruct-
ed correctly have to bear a heavy load of
sorrow,


18. Vedic sacrifices and other rites exist
for renunciation of wealth and other earthly
objects. For renunciation of all enjoyments,
exist vows and fasts af various sorts, For
renunciation of pleasure and. happiness
exist penances and yoga., Renunciation of
everything, is the highest: kind of senuncia-
lion. bis, Ree


12 This that I shall. presently describe
to. you is the one, path pointed out by, the
learned for that renunciation of everything.
They who follow that path succeed. in
driving off ail sorrow. ‘hey, however,
that deviate from it suffer nishtcae and
misery. ;


20. First speaking ‘of the five orgais F
knowledge having the mind’ for the ‘sixth,
and all‘of which live in the understanding,
Ishall describe the five organs of action
i strengihsfor their sixth,


The two, hands forms tthe, two organs
ot action. ‘The two Jegs are two organs for
moving from one place to another. The
Jgexual organ is for Both pleasure and ‘the
continuation of the'species.’ The —lower
channel, leading ftom’ the ‘stomach’ down.
wards, is the organ fot purging off’ of, all
used- -up matter. '


2.


lbh ‘Ff -


2a... The organ: fot spanking exists forthe
expression of sounds. These five organs of
action belong to.the mind. ' ‘Phese ‘aré the

_ ‘elevert: organs ‘of knowledgé ‘and of actionic


427


One should speedily cast off the mind with
the understanding.

23. In the act: of hearing, three causes
must exist simultaneously, o7s., the two ears,
sound, and the mind. ‘fhe same ifs the case
with the preception of touch; thesame witl
that of form; the same with that of taste


: and smell.


24. These fifteen attributes are necessary
for the several kinds of preception. In cons'
sequence of them, every man beconies - cone’
scious of three separate things regarding
those"preceptions, i


2g. There are again three chats (of
mental perceptien, vig., those that appertain
to Goodness, thoge that belong to Darkness,
and those that belong to Ignorarice, With
thenpare cénnected three kinds of consci-
ousness, including all ‘feelings and emo~.
tions, =


26. Pleasure, satisfaction, joy, happi-
ness, and tranquillity, originating in the
| mind from any perceptible cause or in the.
absence of any apparent cause, appestain
to the quality of Guodness.

27. Discontent, regret, grief, cupidity,
and vindictiveness, having mo cause or
occasioned by any perceptible cause, aré the ~
marks of the quality of Darkness.


, 28. Wrong judgment, stupefaction,
arelessness, dreams, and sleepiness, how-
ever, caused, appertain. to the. quality of
Ignorance.


"2Q.. Whatever state, of . consciousness
exists,. regarding .either -the body or the
mind, united with joy or satisfaction, should
he considered as due to the eoaueliy of
Goodness.


30. Whatever state’ of ccntcicusness
exists united with any feeling of discon-
tent or'depression should be considered ds
the ‘outcome: of the quality of Darknesst


31. Whatever state, of abe bedy er. the
body or.the mind, ¢xists with certo or-cares
lessness, is the outcome of Ipnorance which
is inc omprehensible and inexplicable.


*-32. The organ’ of hearing rests on either;
it is either itself (under limitations) ;° Stund
has-that' organ: for its refuge. “Iii pet-
ceiving sound,- one ‘may ‘hot imiiedistely
acquire a knowledge, of the organ of hgar-
ing ‘and’ of ether. But ‘when ‘scund_ is
perceived, the organ of hearing and ethe.e
do not long remain unknown, 5


33.‘ The, same fs the casé with the skin’
the eyes,. the tongue, and the rose, forming
the filth, They exist ia touck,eform, daste,
and smell. They form the facyity, of pers
ception Ard they are the mind.


328
¢


34. Each doing its own particular fune-
tion, all the five organs of action and the
five others of knowledge exist sintultaneous-
ly, and upon che union of the ten dwells the
mind as the eleventh and upon the mind
the understanding as the twelfth.


35. If it be said that these twelve do
not exist simultaneously, then the conse-
quence would be that there would be death

-in dreamless sleep. But as there is no death
in dreamless sleep, it must be admitted that
these twelve exist simultaneously as cegards
themselves but separately from the Soul.
The co-existence of those twelve with the
Soul that is ordinarily spoken is oily a
common form of speech with the vulgar for
ordinary purposes of the wurld.


36. The dreamer, on account of the
Appearance of past sensual impressions,
becomes; conscious of his senses in their
subtile forms, and endued as he already is
with the three qualities, he considers his
senses as existing with their respective
objects and, therefore, acts and moves
about with an imaginary body after the
manner of his own self while awake.


37. That dissociation of the Soul from
the understanding and the mind with the
senses, which speedily disappears, which
has no stability, and which the mind causes
to arise only when influenced by Ignorance
is happiness that partakes, as the learned
say, of the nature of [ynorance and is exe
perienced in this. gross body only.


38. Over the felicity of Liberation also,
the felicity, vis., which is created by the
inspired teaching of the Vedas and in
which no one sees the slightest .mark of
sorrow,—the same indescribable and truthe
concealing darkness seems to spread itself.


39. Like to what occurs in dreamless sleep,
in liberation also, subjective and objective
existences, which have theie oripin ia one’s
acts, are all discarded. [0 some, that are
possessed by {ynorance, these exist, firmly
grafted with them. They never approach
others who have transcended Avidya and
have acquired knowledge.


40. Those who know
the charactee of Soul and not-Soul,. say
_that this sum total of the senses, etc.,)
is body. That existent thing which rests,
upon the mind is called Soul.


4t. When such is the case, and when
all creatures, on account of the well-known
cause, exist, due to a state of union between
Soul and body, which of these two then is
destructible, and how can that which is said
to be eternal, suffer destruction ?


42. As emall civers falling into larger
- ones ,lose theic forms and names, and the


thoroughly well”


MAHABHARAIA,


Jarger ones lose their forms and names
and the larger ones falling into the ocean
fose their forms and names too, similarly
takes place that form of extinction of life
called Liberation.


43- Likewise, the individual Soul which
is characterised by qualities, is recceived
into the Universal Soul, and when all its
attributes disappear, how can it be differntly
mentioned 7? ;


44. One who is conversant. with that
understanding which brings on Liberation
and who carefully seeks to Know the Soul,
is never sullied by the evil fruits of his acts
even as a lotus leaf though dipped in
water is never soaked by it.


45. When one becomes freed from the
very many strong fetters, Gccasioned by
affection for children and wives and love for
sacrifices and other rites, when one renoun-
ces both joy and sorrow and tratscedens
all attachments, one then attains to the
highest end and entering into the Universal
Soul becomes immersed in it.


46. Whenone has understood the in-
junction of the Shrutis that lead to correct
conclusions (about Brahma) and has prac
tised those auspicous virtues which the
same and other scriptures teach, one may
lie down at ease, disregarding the fears of
decrepitude aud death. When bott merits
and demerits disappear, and the fruits, in
the form of joy and sorrow, originating
therefrom, are destroyed, men, unattached
to everything, seek refuge at first with
personal Brahma, and then behold imper-
sonal Brahma in their understandings.


47. Incourse of its [downwards descent
under the influence of ignorance individua
soul lives (within its cell formed by acts)
tike a silyworm living within its cell made of
threads woven: by itself. Like the freed
sik-worm again that quits its cell, in-
dividual soul also abandons its house form-
ed by its acts. THe final result, is that its
sorrows are then dissipated like a clump of
earth falling violently upon a rocky mass.


. 48 As the Rurw deer casting off its
hoid horns or the snake easting off slough
passes on without arresting any notice,
similarly a person who is unattached re-
nounces all his sorrows.


49. As a bird leaves a tree that is about
to fall down upon a water and sits ona
(new) resting place, similarly the person
freed from attachments renounces bothy joy
and sorrow and dissociated even from his
subtile and subtiler forms attains to that
end which is full of the bighest prosperity.


50. Seeing his city burning in a fire,
theic own ancestor Janaka, the king of


SHANTI) PARVA.


Mithila himself proclaimed,—'In this fire
nothing of mine is burning,’


5t. Having heard these words capable of
giving immortality and uttered by Pancha-
shikha, and arriving at the truth after care-
fully reflecting upon everything that the
latter had said King Janadeva cast off his
sorrows and lived on in the enjoyment of
great happiness.


42. He who reads this discourse, O
king, that deals with emancipation and who
always reflects upon it, is never pained by
any misfortune, and freed from sorrow,
attains to liberation like Janadeva_ the
king of Mithila after his meeting with
Panchashikha,’


: meee


CHAPTER CCXX.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued.


Yudhisthira said :—

1. “By doing what does one gain
happiness, and what is that by doing which
one meets with misery? What also is
that, O Bharata, by doing which one
becomes freed from fear and sojourns here
successfully.””


Bhishma said :—


2. “ The ancients who had their minds,
directed to the Shrutis, spoke highly of the
duty of self-control for all the castes in
general, but for the Brahmanas in especial.


3. One who is not self-controlled never
enjoys success in religious rites. Religious
rites, penances, truth,—-all these depend
upon self-control.


4. Self-control increases one’s energy.
Self-control is said to be sacred. ‘The man
of self-control becomes sinless and fearless
and acquires great results.


5. One who is self-controlled sleeps
happily and wakes happily. He lives
happily in the world and his mind always
remains cheerful,


6. Every sort of excitement is quietly
controtled by -self-control. One who | is
not self-contcolied fails in a similar en-
deavour. The self-controlled man sees his
numberless foes (such as lust, desire, and
anger, etc.’) as if these dweil in a separate
body.

7. Like tigers and other carnivorous
animals, persons shorn of self-control al-
ways strike all creatures with fear. For con-
trolling these men, the Self. create (Brahma)
greated kings.


42


329°


8. In all the modes of life, the practice
of self-control is distinguished above alt
other virtues. The fruits of self-control are
much greater than those obtainable in alf
the modes of life.


o—11. I shail now describe the charace
teristic marks of those persons who value
self-control highly, ‘hey are nobility, calm«
ness of nature, contentment, faith, forgive
ness, invariable simplicity, the absence of
talkativeness, humility, reverence for elders,
benevolence, mercy for all creatures, frank~
ness, abstention from talk upon kings and
men in authority, from ali false and useless
topics, and from applause and censure of
others. The self-controlled man becomes
desirous of liberation and, quietly bearing
present joys and griefs, is never overjoyed
or depressed by prospective ones.


12. Shora of vindictiveness and all sorte
of guile, and unaffected by praise and @ga«
sure, such a man is well-behaved, has good
manners, is pure of soui, has fortitude, and
is a complete master of his passions,


13. Gaining honors in this world, such a
man in after life goes to heaven. Making
all creatures gain what they cannot acquire
without his help, such a man rejoices and
becomes happy.


14. Devoted to universal benevolence,
such a man never feels animosity for any
one. Tranquil like a calm ocean, wisdom
feels his soul and he is ever cheerful.


15. Endued with intelligence, and de«
serving of universal reverence, the self«
controlled man never fears any creature and
is feared by no creature in return.


16. That man who never rejocies even
at large accessions and never feels sorrow
when overtaken by misfogtune, is said to be
endued with contented wisdom, Such a
man is said to be self-controlled. Indeed,
such a man is said to be a twice-born
man,


17, Well-read in the scriptures and gifts
ed with a pure soul, the man of self-con«
trol, performing all those acts that are done
by the good, enjoys their high fruits,


78. The wicked men, however, never
fotlow the path of benevolence, forgiveness,
tranquillity, contentment, sweetness of .
speech, truth, liberality, and comfort.


ig—20. They follow the path of fust,
anger, cupidity, envy of others, and boast~
fulness. Grecamina lust and anger, prace
tising the vow, of Brahmacharyya and be-
coming a complete masier of his senses, the
Brahman, practising patiently the austerest
penances, and observing the most rigid
restraints, should live in this world, calmly


| waiting for his time like one seeming {g


3390


have a body though fully knowing that he is
not subject to destruction.”


CHAPTER CCXXI.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA)—=
Continued,


Yudhisthira said :—


t. ‘ The three twice-born classes, who
perform sacrifices and other rites, come-
times eat the remnants, consisting of meat
and wine, of sacrifices in honor of the gods,
from motives of obtaining children and
heaven. What, O grandfather, is the nature
of this act 2?”

Bhishma said :—

2. ' Those who eat forbidden food with-
out performing the sacrifices and vows or-
dained inthe Vedas are known as wilful
men, ‘Those, on the other hand, who eat
such food in the observance of Vedic sacri-
fices and vows and actuated by the desire of
fruits in the shape of heaven and children,
ascend to heaven but drop down on the ter-
mination of their merits.”


Yudhishthira said :—


3. “Commen people say that fasting is
enance. Is fasting, however, really so, of
i$ penance something different ?/


Bhishma said :— .


4. “ People really consider fast, measured

. by months or fortnights or days, an penance.

Fhe good, however, hold that such is not

penance. On the other hand, fast is an

obstacle to the acquirement of the know-
ledge of the Soul,


‘5. The renunciation of acts and humility
form the highest penance. It is superior to
all kinds of penance. He who performs such
penance is considered as one who is always
fasting and wivo is always leading a life. of
Brahmacharyya.

6. Sach a Brahman will become a Muni
always, a deity, and sleepless forever, and
one engaged iw the pursuit of virtue only,
even if he lives in a family.


7. He will becomea vegetarian always,
and purefor ever. He will become an eater
always of ambrosia, and an worshipper
always of gods and guests.


8. Indeed, he will be considered as one
always living on sacrificial residue, as one
ever devoted to the duty of hospitality, as
One aiways full of faith, and as one always
adoring gods and guests,


MAHABHARATA,


Yudhishthira said :—

g. ‘How can one practising such penatiéé
come to {be known as one who is always
fasting or as one who ever follows the vow
of Brahmacharyva, or as one who always
lives upon sacrificial residue, or as one who
always worships guests.” -


Bhishina said :~


to. ‘ He will be considered as one who
is always fasting if he eats orice during the


| day atd orice during the night at the fixed


hours without


eating anything in the
interim.


f1. Such a Brahmana, by always speak-
ing the truth and by following always wis-
dom, and by going to his wife only in her
Season and never at other times, becomes a
Brahmacharin.


12. By never eating meat of animals not
killed for sacrifice, he will become a strict
vegetarian. By always becoming charitable
he will become ever pure, and by abstaining
from sleep during the day he will becomé
One who is always awake.


13. Know, O Yudhisthira, that the man
who eats only after having fed his servants
and guests becomes an eater always of am-
brosia.


t4. That Brahmana who never eats till
gods and guests are fed, acquites by such
abstention, heaven itself.


18. Heis said to live’ tpon sacrificial
residde who eats only what remains after
feeding the gods, the Pitris, servants and
gttests, ;


16: Such men acquires nAumberless
blessed regions in pext life. The gods
and the Apsaras with Brahman himself,
come (o their homes,


17, They who share theit fecd with the
gods and the Pitris pass theit days always


-happily with their sons and grandsons, and.


at last, leaving off this body, acquire a very
high end.”


CHAPTER CCXXIE.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).4
Continued.


Yudhisthira said :—
¥. ‘In this wortd, O Bharata, good and
bad acts attach themselves to man for the
purpose of producing fruits for enjoyment of
endurance.
2. Is man, however, to be regarded as
their doer or is he not 9 be gonsidered so?


SHANTI


My mind is full of doubts regarding this
question. I wish to hear this fully from you,
O grandfather,”


Bhishma said :-—


3. ‘ Regarding it, O Yudhisthira, is cited
ie old discourse between Prahlada and
ndra, .


4—7. The king of the Daityas, v7z.,
Prahlada, was unattached to all worldly
objects. Mis sins had been dissipated.
Ot respectable parentage, he was endued
with great learning, Free from stupefica-
tion and pride, ever pervaded by the quality
of goodness, and devoted to various vows, he
considered praise and censure in the same
light. Endued with self-control he was
then passing his time in an empty room,
Conversant with the origin and the destruc-
tion of all created objects mobile and im-
mobile, he was never angry with things that
displeased him= and never rejoiced at
the acquisition of agreeable objects. He


considered equally gold and a clod of
earth,
7. Earnestly studying the Soul and ac-


quiring Emancipation, and firm in know-
ledge, he had acquired firm conclusions
about truth,


8. Acquainted with what is supreme and
what is not so among all things, omniscient
and of universal sight, as he was seated one
day in a solitary room with his senses under
complete control, Shakra approached him,
and desirous of awakening him, said these
words :—


9. Oking, Isee all those qualities per-
manently living in you by which a person
acquires the esteem of all.


10, Your understanding seems to be
like that of a child, free from attachment
and aversion, You know the Soul. What,
do you think, is the best means by which a
knowledge of the Soul may be acquired.


tr. You are now bound in fetters, fallen
off from your former position, brought under
the sway of your foes, and divested of pros-
perity. Your present circumstances are
such as may well give room to grief. Yet
how is it, O Prahlada, that you do not
grieve.


12. Is this owing, O son of Diti, to the
acquisition of wisdom or is it on account of
your fortitude? Behold your calamities, O
Prahlada, and yet you appear like one that
is happy and tranquil.


13. Thus urged by Indra, the king of the
Daityas,endued with firmness and witli fixed
conclusions about truth, replied in these
sweet words showing great wisdom.


PARVA, a3r


Prahlada said 3


14. ‘Hewho does not now tne origin
and the destruction of all created objects, is,
on account of such ignorance, stupefied.
He, however, who knows these two things,
is never stupefied.


15—16. All kinds of entities and non-
entities come into being or cease on ac-
count of their own nature. No kind of
personal exertion is necessary [for their
production]. In the absence of personal
exertion it is clear that no personal agent
exists for the production of all this that we
perceive. But though the person never
does anything, yet through the influence
of Ignorance a consciousness regarding
agency overspreads itself on it.


17. He who regards himself as the doer
of good good or bad acts possesses a vile
wisdom. Such a person is, in my opinion,
does not know the truth.


18—19. -If, O Shakra, the being known
as person were really the actor, then all
acts undertaken for his own benefit would
certainly be successful. None of those acts
would be futile. Persons struggling their
utmost to avoid what is not desired and
to bring about what is desired are not to
be seen. What becomes then of personal
exertion ? ,


20. In the 'case of some, we see that
without any exertion on their part, what is
not desired is not brought about and what
is desired, is done, ‘This then must be the
result of Nature.


at. Some extraordinary persons again
are seen, for though possessed of superior
intelligence they have to seek wealth from
Others that are vulgar in features and
gifted with little intelligence.


22. Indeed, when all qualities, good or
bad, enter a person impelled by Nature,
what is there for one to boast (of his sube-
rior possessions) ? .

23. Alithese come from Nature. This
is my settled belief. Even Liberation and
knowledge of self, in my view, originate
from the same source.


24. ‘In this world all fruits, good or
bad, that attach themselves to persons, are
considered as the outcome of acts. I shall
now describe fully the subject of acts.
Hear me. i

25. Asacrow, while eating some food,
announces the presence of that food by its
repeated cawing, similarly all our acts only
proclaim the indications of Nature.

26. He who is acquainted with only the
metamorphoses of Nature but not with
Nature which is supreme and exists by


333


herself, feels stupefication no accaunt of his
ignorance. He, however, who understands
the difference between Nature and her
metamorphoses is never stupefied.


27. All things originate from Nature.
On account of one’s certain conviction
about it, he would never be affected by
pride or arrogance.


28, When I know the origin of all the
ordinances of mortality and when I am ac-
quaijnted with the instability of all objects,
1 cannot, O Shakra, indulge in grief. All
this is endued with an end.


29. Without attachments, without pride,
without désire and hope, freed from all
fetters, and dissociated from everything,
I am passing my time happily, seeing
the appearance and disappearance of all
Created objects.


30. For one who is wise, who is self-
controlled, who is contented, who is without
desire and hope, and who sees all things
with the light of self-knowledge, no trouble
or anxiety exists, O Shakra.


31. I have no liking or aversion for
either Nature or her changes. I do not
see any one now who is my enemy nor any
one who is mine own.


32. I do not, O Shakra, at any time
seek either heaven, or this world, or the
nether regions, It is not the fact that there
is no happiness in understanding the Soul.
But the Soul, being dissociated from every-
thing, cannot enjoy happiness. Hence I
desire nothing.’ ,


Shakya said :—


33. Tetl me the means, O Prahlada,
by which this kind of wisdom may be ac-
quired and by which this kind of tran-
quillity may be made one’s own. I pray
-you.’


Prahlada said :-—


34. ‘By simplicity, by carefulness, by
pucifying the soul, by controlling the pas-
sions, and by waiting upen élders, O
Shakra, a person acquires liberation.


35. Know this, however, that one gains
wisdom from Nature, and that the acqutsi-
tion of tranquillity also is owing to the same
cause. Indeed, everything else that you see
is due to Nature. ;


36. Thus addressed by the king of the
Daityas, Shakra became filled with wonder
and lauded those words, O king, with a
cheerful heart.


37. The king of the three worlds then,
having adored the lord of the Daityas,
took his leave and proceeded to his own
quarter.’ ”


-MAHABHARATA.


CHAPTER CCXXIIIL.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA}).—
Continued,


Yudhisthira said :—


1. ‘Tell me, O grandfather, by adopting
what sort of intelligence may a king, who
has been divested of prosperity and crushed
by Time’s heavy bludgeon, still live on this
Earth.”


Bhishma said :—


2. ‘Regarding it is cited the old dis-
course between Vasava and Virochana’s
son Vali.


3. After having defeated all the Asuras,
one day Vasava went to the Grandfather
and joining his hands bowed to him and
enquired after the whereabouts of Vali.


4. Teli me,O Brahman, where may I
now find that Vali whose wealth continued
undiminished even though he used to dis-
tribute it as largely as he wished.


5. He was the god of wind. He was
Varuna. Howas Surya. He was Soma.
He was Agni that used to warm all erea«
tures. He became water. 1 do not find
where he now is. Indeed, O Brahmana,
tell me where I may'find Vali now.


6. Formerly, it was he who used to fight
up all the cardinal points and toset. Shak-
ing off idleness, it was he who used to pour
rain upon all creatures at the proper season.
I do not now see that Vali. Indeed, tell me,
O Brahman, where 1 may find that king of
the Asuras now.


Brahman said :—


7 ‘You should not, O Maghavat, thus
enquire after Vali now! One should not,
however, speak a falsehood when he is ques-
tioned by another, I shall tell you the
whereabouts of Vali.


8. O husband of Sachi, Vali may now
have taken his birth among camels or bulls
or asses ot horses, and having become the
foremost of his species may now be living
in an empty room.’


Shakra said :—


g- ‘If, O Brahman, I happen to meet
with Valiin an empty room, shall 1 kill
him or spare him? Tell me how 1 shall
act!’

Brahman said :—

10. ‘Do not, O Shakra, injure Vali!
Vali does not deserve death. You should,
on the other hand, O Vasava, seek instruc
tion from him about morality, O Shakra, as
you wish,’


3 SHANTI! PARYVA. .


Bhishma said :—

tr. ‘Thus addressed by the divine Crea-
tor, Indra travelled over the Earth, seated
on Airavata in great splendour.

12. He succeeded'in meeting with Vali:
who, as the’Creator had said, was living


in an empty room, clothed in the form of |


an ass,’


Shakra said :—


13. ‘You are now, O Danava, born as
an ass living on chaff. This your birth is
certainly a low one. Do you or do you not
grieve for it ?


14. I see what I had never seen before»
vig., yourself brought under the control
of your enemies, divested of prosperity
and friends, and shorn of energy and
prowess.


15. Formerly you used to march through
the worlds, with your train consisting of
thousands of carriages and thousands of
kinsmen, and to move along, burning every-
body with your splendour and disregarding
us all.


16. Considering you as their protector
the Daityas lived under your sway!
Through your power, the Earth used to
yield crops without waiting for tillage.
To-day, however, I behold you overtaken
by this dire calamity! Do you or do you
not grieve for this.


17. When formerly you used with pride
beaming on your face, to divide on the
eastern shores of the ocean your vast
wealth among thy kinsmen, what then was
the state of your mind 2?


18. Formerly, for many years, when
shining with splendour, you used to sport,
thousands of celestial damsels used to dance
before you, ,


19. All of them were decorated with
garlands of lotuses and all had companions
bright as gold. What, O king of Danavas,
was the state of your mind then and what
is it now.


20. You hada very large golden um-

. brella set with jewels and gems, Full forty»

two thousand Gandharvas used in those
days to dance before you.


a1. In your sactifices you had a very
large stake made entirely of gold. On
such occasions you used to give away milli-
_ ons and millions of kine. What, O Daitya,
was the state of your mind then ? -


22. Formerly, engaged in sacrifice, you
had gone round the whole Earth, following
the rule of the hurling of the Shamya.
‘What was the state of your mind then?


i darkness of a cave.


333


23. I do not now see that golden jar of
yours, wor that umbrella of yours, nor those
fans. 1 behold not also, O king of the
Asuras, that garland which was given to
you by the Grandfather.’ |


Vali said :—


24. ! You do not behold now, O Vasava,
my jar and umbrella and fans. You do
not sée also my garland, that was given by
the Grandfather.


25. Those valuable possessions of mine
about which you ask, are now buried in the
When my time comes
again, you will, forsooth, behold them
again. .

26. This conduct of yours, however, does
not become your fame or birth. Yourself
enjoying prosperity, you wish to mock me
that am sunk in adversity.

27. They who aequired wisdom, and
have won contentment therefrom, they who
are of tranquil souls, who are virtuous and
good among creatures, never grieve in
misery nor rejoice in happiness.

28. Guided, however, by a vulgar intel-
ligence, you are bragging, O Purandara.
When you will become like me you will not
then give vent to speeches like these.’


CHAPTER CCXXIV.
(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—


Continued.


Bhishma said :—

1, “Again, laughing at Vali who was
sighing like a snake, Shakra addressed
him for saying something more painful
than what he had said before.


Shakra said :—


2. ‘Formerly, attended by a train con-
sisting of thousands of vehicles and kins-
men, you used to march, burning all the
worlds with your splendour and disregard-
ing us all. :


3. You are now, however, deserted by
both kinsmen and friends. -Beholding
this miserable conditions of yours, do you
ot do you not indulge in grief 7?

-.4 Formerly all the worlds were under
your sway and great was your joy. 1 ask,


do you or you not grieve now, for this loss
of your splendour ?


Vali said :—
5. ‘Regarding all this as transitory,n
due, indeed, to the course of time,—I do


334


_not,Q Shakea, grieve. These things have
anend,


6. These bodies of creatures, O king
of the celestiats, are all transitory, ‘Phere-
fore, O Shakra, | do not grieve. Nor is
this form due to any fault of mine.


7. The animating principle and the
body come into existence simultaneously,
for‘their own nature,
and meet with destruction together,


8. Having obtained this form of birth
{ have not been enslaved by it for good.
Since £ know this, I have no eause for
sorrow.


9g. As the finaf place of all rivers is the
ocean, so the end of all embodied creatures
is death, ‘hose persons that know this
well are never stupefied, O holder of the
thunder-bolt,


1o. They, however, who, overwhelmed


with Darkness and loss of judgment, do


not know this, they whose understanding is
lost, sink under the load of misfortune,


ut. A person winsa keen understanding,
succeeds. in dissipating all his sins, A
sinless person acquires the quality of Good-
ness, and having acquired it becomes
cheerful,


12. They, however, that deviate from
the quality of Goodness, and go througlr
repeated re-births, are ebliged to indulge
in sorrow and grief, led on by desire and
the objects of the senses.


13. I neither dislike nor like success or
defeat, regarding the attainment of all ob-
jects of desire, life, or death, the fruits of
_action that are represented by pleasure
or pain, .

14. When one kills another, he kills
only that other’s body. That man who
thinks that it is he whokills another, is
himself killed. Indeed, both of them do
not know the truth, vza., he who kills and
he who is killed.


15. O Maghavat, that person, who
having killed or defeated any one brags of
his manliness, should know that. he is not
the actor, but that the act has been per-
formed by another who is the real agent.


16. When it is asked that who js it that
brings about the creation and the destruc-
tion of things in the world, it is generally
thought that some person has caused it.
Khow, however, that the person who is
so known has a creator.


17. Earth, light or heat, ether, water,
and wind form the fifth—-from these do all
creatures originate.
what sorrow can I feel ?


Yhey grow together, |


(When I know this) |


MAHABHARATA.


18—19g. One whois endued with great
learning, one who is not much learned, one
who is strong, one who is destitute of
strength, one who is beautiful, and one who
is very ugly, one who is lucky, and one
who is not blessed by fortune, are alk
carried away by Time, which is too deep
to be measured by its own energy. When
I know that I have been defeated by lime,
what sorrow can I feel.


20. One that burns anything burns a
thing that has been already burnt. One
who kills, only kills a victim already killed.
One who is destroyed, has been beforeg
destroyed. Athing that is acquired by a
person is what is already arrived and in-
tended for his acquirement.


21. This Time is like an ocean, There
is no istand init. Its other shore is beyond
reach, Ets boundary cannot be seen, ‘Think-
ing even deeply, I do not see the end of
this continuous stream that is the great
ordainer of aH things and that is, forsooth,
celestial.


22. Hf £ did not know that it is Time
which destroys all creatures, then, perhaps,
I would have experienced the emotions of
joy. pride and anger, O husband -of
Shachi.


23. Have you come here to condemn me,.
having come to: know that I am now as-
suming the form of an ass that lives upom
chaff and that is now passing his days ina
lonely spot renrote from the dwellings of
men.


24. Tf I wish, even now F can assume
various dreadful forms, seeing any one of
which you would immediately fly away
from my presence.


25. Et is Time that gives every thing and
again takes away everything. Itis Time
that ordains all things. Do net, OShakra,
brag of your manliness.


26. Formerly, O Purandara, whenever,
I used to be angry everything used to
become agitated. E know, however, QO
Shakra, the eternal attributes of all things.
in the world.


27. Do you also know the truth. Do
not allow yourself to be filled with wonder.
Prosperity and its origin are not under.
one’s control.


28. Your mind is like that of a child,
It is the same as it was before. Open your
eyes, O Maghavat and acquire an under-
Standing which is sure and true.


2g. In days gone by, the gods, men,
the Pitris, the Gandharvas, the Nagas, and
the Rakshasas, were all under my contrel.
You knew this, O Vasava,


SHANTI


36-31. Haying. their tinderstandings
Overcome by ignorance, all creatures use
to flatrer me, sayifig,—Salutations to that
cardinal point where Virochana’s son Vali
may now be living, O husband of Sachi.
I do fot at all grieve when I think of
that honor, I am not sorry for this fall of
mine. My understanding is very strong
here, viz., that I will abide by the sway
of the Ordainer,


32. Itisseen that some ore of nobly
born highly beautiful and powerful, lives in
misery, with all his counsellors and friends.
This happens because it has beea §0 or-
dgined.

33. Likewise, some one born in an igno-
ble race, devoid ef knowledge, and with
‘even a stain on his birth, is seer, O Shakra,
to live happily with all his counsellors and
friends. Uhis also happens because of it
éhas been so ordained.


34. An auspicious and beautiful woman,
O Shakra, is seen to pass her life misera-
bly, Likewise, an ugly woman with every
inauspicious mark is seen to live in great
happiness,


35. That we have now become sois not
owing to any act of ours, O Shakra. That
you are now 50 is not owing, O holder of the
thunderbolt, to any avt of yours?


36. You have not done anything, O you
of a hundred sacrifices, for which you are
now enjoying this prosperity. Nor have |
done anything for which I have now been
shorn of prosperity. Prosperity and adver-
sity come in succession.


37. I now see you blazing with splendour,
eudued with prosperity, possessed of beanty,
placed at the head of all the gods, and thus
roaring at me. :


38, This would never be but for the
Time standing near after having attacked
me. Indeed, if Time had not attacked me
{ would have to-day slain you with only a
biow of my fists albeit you are armed with
the thunder. ;


39. ‘This, however, is not the time for
disptaying. my prowess. On the other hand,
the time that has come when I should con-
duct myself with peace and tranquillity.
It is Time which establishes all things.
‘Time acts upon all things and brings about
their final consummation.


40. I was the adored king of the Dana-
vas. Consuming ail with my energy, I
used to roar in strength and pride. When
Time has attacked even myself, who is
there whom he will not attack,


_ 41. Formerly, O king of the gods,
singly L bore the energy of all the twelve


PaRVA. 338
iMustrious Adityas with yourself amongst
them. 7

42: Yt was I that used to bear tip water
and then to shower it as rain, O Vasava!
It was I who used to give both light and
heat to the three worlds.


43. It was I who used to protect and it
was { that used to destroy. It was | wha
gave and it was I whd took. it was [ who
used to bind and it was I who tsed to una
bind. In all the worlds 1 was the one
powerful master.


44. That sovereign control which I had,
O king of the godsy is now zone. Iam
now attacked by the forces of Time. Those
things, therefore, aré no longer seen to
shine in me.


45. [ am not the actor. You are not
the actor. None else, O husband of Sachi,
is the doer. It is Time, O Shakra, that
protects or destroys all things. :


46, Persons well-read in the Vedas say
that Time is Brahma. The fortnights and
months are his body. That body is clothed
with days and nights as its dresses. The
seasons are his senses. The year is his
mouth, ; a


47. Some people, on account of their
superior intelligence, say that the entire
universe should be conceived as Brahma.
The Vedas, however, teach, that the five
sacs that Gover the Soul should be known as
Brahma,


48. Brahma is deep and inaccessible like
a deep ocean, It is said that it has neither
beginning net end, and that it is both in-
destructible and destructible.


49. Though it is by nature without attri«
butes yet it enters all existent objects and
as such is clothed with attributes. Those
Persons who know truth consider Brahma
as eternal,


50, Through the force of Ignorance,
Brahma makes the attribute of materiality
to invest the Chit or Soul whichis imma-
terial spirit. Materiality, however, is not
the true attribute of the Soul.


51. Brahma in the form of Time is the
refuge of all creatures. Where can you go
transcending that Time ? Time or Brahma,
indeed, cannot be shunned by running nor
by standing still. - j .


52—54. All the five senses cannot per-
ceive Brahma, Some have said that
Brahmn is Fire; some that he ig Praja-
pati, some that heis the Seasons; some that
he is the Month; some that he is the Fort
night; some that he is the Days; some
that he is the Hours; some that he is the
Morning ; some that he is the Noon; some


336


that he is the Evening, and some that he is
the Moment. Thus various people speak
variously of him, who is one. Know that
he is Eternity, under whose control exist all
things,

55. Many thounsands of [ndras have
gone away, O Vasava, each of whom was
endued with great strength and prowess.
Similaely you atso, O lord of Shachi, shall
have to pass away.


56. The omnipotent Time will destroy
you too, © Shakra, who are endued with
swelling might and that are the chief of
the deities, when your hour comes,


57. ‘ime carries away all things.
Therefore, O Indra, do not brag! ‘Time
cannot be quieted by either you or me or
by those gone before us.

58. ‘This kingly prosperity which you
have acquired and which you consider in-
comparable, had formerly been possessed
by me. It is unsubstantial and unreal, She
does not live long in one place.


59- Indeed, she had lived in thousands
of Indras before you, all of whom, again,
were, very much superior to you! Unstable
as she is, leaving me she has now ap-
proached you, O king of the gods.

6a. Do not, O Shakra,- brag again!
You should become tranquil! Knowing you
to be full of vanity, she will very soon
leave you,’


—


CHAPTER CCXXV.


\
(MOKSHADHA RMA PARVA),—
Continued.


Bhishma said :—


t. “After this, thef god of a hundred
sacrifices saw-the goddéss of Prosperity, in
her own embodied, but shining, form, issue
out of the body of the great Vali.


2. Bekolding the goddess blazing with
radiance, the illustrious chastiser of Paka,
addressed Vali thus with eyes expanded in
wonder.


Shakra said :—


. ‘O Vali, who is this one, thus shining
effulgently, thus adorned with a crown, thus
adorned with golden bracelets on her upper
arms, and thus emitting a halo on ali sides
on account of her energy that is issuing
out of your body.’


Vali said :—


4. ‘I da not know whether she is an
Asura woman ora celestial one, or a human


MAHABHARATA.


one. You may or may not ask her yours
self. Do what pleases you.’


Shakra said :—


5- ‘O You of sweet smiles, who are you
who are so effulgent and adorned with
plumes that thus issue from the body of
Vali! I do not know you, kindly teil me
your name.


6. Who, indeed, are you that thus stand
here as Maya herself, shining with your
own splendour, after having left the lord
of the Daityas? O, tell me this as I ask
you.’

Shree said :—

9. ‘Virochana did rot know me. His
son this Vali knows me not. ‘he learned
called me by the name of Dusshaha (borne
with difficulty), Some knew me by the
name of Vidhitsa (desire for action).


8. Ihave other names also, O Vasava!
They are Bhuti, Lakshmi, and Shree (pros+
petity). You know me not, O Shakra, nor
does any one among the gods know me.’


Shakra said ‘—
9. ‘O lady who is difficult of being borne,


| why do you jleave Vali now after having


lived in him for along time? Is it owing
to any act of mine or is it owing to any act
of Vali’s.’


Shree said :—


to. ‘Neither the Creator nor the
Ordainer governs me. It is Time that takes
me from one place to another. Do not, O
Shakra, disrespect Vali.’


Shakra said :—


ir, ‘Why O goddess adorned with
plumes, do you leave Vali? Why also do
you approach me? Tell me this, O you of
sweet smiles !


Shree said :—


, 12. ‘1 reside in truth, in gifts, in good
vows, in penances, in prowess, and in virtue |
Valt has fallen off from all these.


13. Formerly he was devoted to the
Brahmanas. He was truthful and had
mastered his passions. Latterly, however,
he began to entertain feelings of animosity
towards the Brahmanas and _ touched
clarified butter with impure hands.


14. Formerly he was always used to
perform sacrifices. At last, blinded by
ignorance and possessed by Time he began
to brag before all persons, saying that his
adorations towards me were ceaseless.

15. Leaving him I shall henceforth, O
Shagra, live in you! You should bear m
vigilantly, and with penances and prow es%


SHANT1 PARVA,


Shakya said :—

16. ‘O you who live in lotuses, there is
not a single person among gods, men, and
all creatures, that can bear you for ever !’


Shree said :—
17, ‘Truly, O Purandara, there is none


among gods, Gandharvas, Asuras, or
Rakshasas, who can bear me for ever !’


Shakra said :—

18. ‘O auspicious lady, tell me how I
should behave so that you may live in
me perpetually. I shall, forsooth, obey your
commands. You should answer me truly,'


Shree said :—


19. ‘O King of the deities, 1 shall tell
you as to how I may be entitled to live in
you perpetually. Divide me into four parts
according to the Vedic injunction,’


Shakra said :—

2t. ‘Tf shall give you habitations accord-
ing to their strength and power in bearing
you. As teyards myself, U shali always
take care, O Lakshmi, that [ may not
offend you in any way.


21, Amongst men, the Earth, that
mother of all things, bears them all. She
shall bear a fourth part of yourself, I
think she has the strength to do so.’


Shree said :—


22, ‘Here, I give up a quarter of myself.
Let it be placed on the Barth. Do you,
next, make a proper distribution, O Shakra,
for my second quarter,’


Shakra said :—

23. ‘The waters, among men, in their
Yiguid form, do various services to men.
Let the waters bear a fourth part of your
person. They have the strength to bear a
fourth part of you person. ‘They have the
strength to bear a portion of yours,’


Shree said :—


24. ‘I give up another quarter of mine
that is to be placed in the waters. Do you,
next, O Shakra, assign a proper place for
my third quarter,’


|
}
Shakra said :— |


25. ‘The Vedas, the sacrifices, and the
gods are all established in Fire. Fire will
bear your third quarter, when it is placed
therein,’ '

Shree said:
26. ‘tere I give up my third quarter


43


337


which is te be placed in Fire. Do you,
O Shakra, after this, assign a proper place
for my last quarter !’


Shakra said :—~

27. ‘Chey who are good among mew
devoted to Brahmanas, and truthful ia
speech, may bear your fourth quarter. The
good have the power to it.’


Shree said :—
28. ‘Here, I give up my fourth quarter
that is to be placed among the good. My


portions thus given to different creatures,
do you continue to protect me, O Shakra.’,


Shakra said :—
29. ‘Listen to my words. I have thus
distributed you among different creatures.
‘Those among creatures that will offend you
shall be punished by me.—The king of the
Daityas, viz., Vali, thus left by Shree, then
said,
Vali said :—
30. At present the Sun shines equally im
the east, west, north and south. :


31. When, however, withdrawing hime ,
self from all quarters, the Sun will shine
only upon the region of Brahman that is
situate in the middle of Sumeru, then will
again take place a great battle between the
gods and the Asuras, and in that fight &
shall certainly defeat all of you.


32. When withdrawing himself from alf
quarters, the Sun will shine fixedly upon
only the region of Brahman, then will again
take place a great battle between the gods
and the Asuras, and in that fight I shall
certainly defeat all of you. | ;


Shakra said -~


33. Brahman has commanded me, say#
ing that [| should never kill you. It 1s,
therefore, O Vali, that I do not burl my
thunderbolt upon your head.


34. Go wherever you like, O king of the
Daityas! O great Asuras, peate to you
No time will come when the Sun will shine
from only the meridian.


38. The Self-create has before this or=
dained the laws which regulate the Sun’s
motions. Giving light and heat to all crea«
tures, he shines continually.

°36. For six months he travels ina north
ward course and then for the other six ina
southward course. he Sun travels by these
courses, creating winter and summet for all
creatures.’


Bhishma said :—


37. _‘* Thus addressed by Indra, O Bha«
rata, Valithe king of the Daityas proceeded-


338


towards the south,
towards the north,


38. After having listened to the wrong
of Vali which were marked by no pride,
the thousand-eyed Indra then ascended the
Skies.”


Purandara proceeded


CHAPTER CCXXVI.
- ‘(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—


Continued,


Bhishma said :—

1. “Regarding it is also cited the old dis-
course between him of a hundred Sacrifices
and the Asura Namuchi, O Yudhisthira.


2. When the Asura Namuchi, who
knew well the birth and the death of all
creatures, was sitting, shorn of prosperity
but undisturbed at heart like the huge
‘ocean in perfect stillness, Purandara ad-
dressed him these words :—


Namuchi said :—

3. ‘Fallen off from your place, fettered
with cords, brought under the influence of
“your enemies, and shorn of prosperity,
do yeu, O Namuchi, grieve or live cheer-
fully,’

‘4. ‘By indulging in such sorrow as cannot
be avoided one only wastes his body any
‘cheering his enemies. Then, again, no one
can lighten another’s sorrow by putting any
portion of it upon oneself, For these
reasons, O Shakra, [ donot grieve. All
“this that you see has one end.


5. Indulgence in sorrow. mars personal
beauty, prosperity, life, and virtue itself, O
. king of the gods.


6. Forsooth, suppressing that sorrow
which comes upon oneself and which is
begotten by a weak mind, one endued with
true knowledge should reflect in his mind
of that which yields the highest good and
which lives in the heart itself,


y. When one sets his mind upon what is
. for one’e highest good, forsooth, the result
‘that allhis objects are accomplished.


8. There is One Ordainer, and no second.
His sway extends over even the embryo.
Controlled by the great Ordainer I go on as
He moves me on, like water running along
a downward path.


g. Knowing what is existence and what
liberation, and understanding also that the
latter is superior to the former, I do not,
however, try to attain to it, Doing virtue
ous and sinful acts I goon as He moves
me on.


MAHABHARATA,


ro. One gets those things that are ofe
dained to be got. That which is to happen
actually takes place.


11. One has repeatedly to live in such
wombs in which one is placed by the
Ordainer. He has no ghoice in the
matter,


+2: That person never feels himself
stupefied, who when placed in any parti-
cular condition, accepts it as that which he
was ordained to be placed in. :


13. Men are affected by pleasure and
pain that come by turns in Time. There is
No personal agency in this matter. In this
lies sorrow.


14. Who is there amongst Rishis, gods,
great Asuras, persons fully conversant with
the three Vedas, and hermits living in the
forest, whom calamities do not approach ?
Those, however, who know well, the Soul
and the not-Soul never fear calamities.


15. The wise person, naturally standing
immovable like Himavat, never yields to
anger ; never allows himself to be addicted
to the objects of the senses; never suffers
pain in sorrow or rejoices in happiness.
When overwhelmed with even great afflice
tions, such a!person never grieves,


16. That person is, indeed, a great man
whom even great success cannot gladden
and even great calamities cannot stupefy,
and who bears pleasute and pain, and
that which is between them both, with an
unaffected mind.


17. A person should always be cheerful
and not Sorry into whatever condition he
may fall, thus should a person remove his
increasing sorrow which is born in his mind
and that is (if not removed) sure to give
pain. ;

18. That concourse of learned men en-
gaged in the discnssion of. the ethics of
botisthe Shrutis and the Smritis is not a
good assembly,—indeed, that does not
deserve to be called so,—entering which a
wicked man is not stricken withfear, That
man is the foremost of his sex, who having
made a proper enquiry after righteousness
acts according to the conclusions to which
he arrives,


1g. The acts of a wise man are not
easily understood. A wise man is never
stupefied when afflictions overtake him,
Even if he falls away from his position like
Gautama in his old age, on account of the
direst calamity, he does not allow himself
to be stupefied.


20. Cana person by Mantras, strength,
energy, wisdom, prowess, behaviour, con-
| duct, or wealth, acquire that which has not


SHANTI PARVA,


been ordained to be acquired by him?
What sorrow then is there if a person
cannot acquire that which he seeks at
heart.


2t. Before I was born, the ordainers
had ordained what | am to do and _ suffer,
Iam fulfilling what was thus ordained for
me. Whaat then can death do to me.


22. One gets only what has been or-
dained. One goes whence he was ordained
to go. Those sorrows and joys only are
obtained that are ordained so.


23. That man who, knowing this well,
does not allow himself to be stupefied, and
who is contented with both happiness and
misery, is considered as the toremost of
his sex.”


CHAPTER CCXXVIE.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued. .


Yudhisthira said :—


1. “What, indeed,’ is good for a man
who is sunk in dire distress, consequent ou
the loss of friends or kingdom, O king.


2. In this world, O foremost of Bharata’s
race, you are the greatest of our instructors!
I ask you this. You should telt me what
I ask.”


Bhishma said :—


3. ‘Fortitude is of the greatest good,
O king, for one who has been deprived of
sons and wives and pleasures of every sort
and wealth, and who has been plunged
into dire distress. The budy is never
emaciated of one who is always endued
with fortitude,


4. Want of sorrow carries happiness
with it, and also health which is a superior
possession, Again, on account of this
health, one may acquire prosperity.

5. That wise man, O sire, whe always
follows righteous conduct succeeds in ac-
quiring prosperity, patience, and persevere-
ance in the accomplishment of all his
objects.


6. Regarding it is cited the old dis-
course between Vali and Vasava, O
_ Yudhisthira,


7. After the battle between the gods
and the demons in which a large number
of Daityas and Danavas fell, had come
to a close, Vali became king. He was
deceived by Vishnu who once more es-
tablished his supremacy over all the worlds.


339°


g


more invested with the sovereignty of the
celestials. ake my

8. After the celestial administration had
thas been re-established, and the four
orders of men had been re-established in
performance of their respective duties, the
three worlds once more swelled with pros-
perity, and the Self-create became glad of
heart.


g~—10. At that time, accompanied by
the Rudras, the Vasus, tte Adityas, the
Ashwins, the celestial Rishis, the Gandhare
vas, the Siddhas, and other superior orders
of beings, the powerful Shakra seated on
his four-tusked prince of elephants, called
Airavata, marched through all the worlds.


11, One day, while thus engaged, the
holder of the thunderbolt saw Virochana’s
son Vali within a certain mountain cave on
the sea-shore. Seeing the king of Danavas,
he came near him.


12. Seeing the king of gods, v7z., Indra,
thus seated on the back of Airavata and
surrounded by the several orders of the
celestials, the king of the Daityas displayed
no signs of sorrow or agitation, mo

13. Seeing Vali unmoved and fearless,
Indra also addressed him from the back of
his king ef elephants, saying,— es


.14. How is it, O Daitya, that you are so
unmoved? Is it owing to your heroism or
to your having waited reverentially upon
elders? Is it owing to your mind having
been purified by penances? ‘To whatever
cause it may be due, this mood of mind is .
surely very difficult to attain,

15. Hurled from the highest position, you
are now shorn of all your possessions and
have been brought ander the sway of yout
enemies. O Virochana’s son what is that
by adopting which you do not grieve al-
though it is time for grief.


16. Formerly, when you were the king
of your own order, you enjoyed matchless
pleasures. Now, however, you are short of
your riches and jewels and sovereignty.
Tell us why you are so unmoved,


u
17. You were ere this a god, seated on
the throne of your father and grandfathers,
Finding yourself deprived torday by your
enemies, why do you not grieve ? -


18. You are fettered with’ Varuna’s
noose and hast been struck with my thun-


derbolt. Your wives and riches have been
taken away. Tell us why you do not
grieve.


19. Shorn of prosperity and fallen away
from affluence, you do not grieve. This,


The god of a hundred sacrifices was once | indeed, is something very remarkable!


?


340


Who else, O Vali, then one like you, could
dare live thus after being shorn of the sove-
reignty of the three worlds ?


-20. Hearing without any pain these and
other cutting words that Indra said asserting
the while his own superiority over him, Vali
the son of Virochana fearlessly answered
him thus,


Vali said :—

22.° When calamities have assailed me,
O Shakra, what do you gain by such brag
now ? To-day I see you, O Purandara, stand
before me with the thunder-bolt upraised
in your hand. ;


22. Formerly, however, you could not
behave so. Now you have somehow gained
that power. Indeed, who else save you
could give vent to such cruel words ?


24. That person who, though able to
punish, shows mercy towards a heroic
enemies defeated and brought under his
control, is indeed a great man,


24. When two persons fight, victory
is indeed doubtful. One of the two surely
becomes . victorious, and the other is


defeated.


25. O king of gods, tet not your nature
be so. Do not think that you have become
the king of all creatures after having
defeated all with your might and prowess.


26. That we have become so is not, O
Indra, the result of our acts, That you
Jhave become so, O holder of the thunder-
bolt, isnot the result of any act of yours.


27. ‘What I am now you will be in time.
Do not disregard me, thinking that you
have performed a highly difficult feat.


28. A person gets happiness and misery
one after another in course of ‘Time. You
have, O Shakra, gained sovereignty of the
universé in course of Time but not by
virtue of any particular merit in you.


2g. It is Time’ that leads me on in his
course, That same time leads you aiso on-
ward. It is, therefore, that I am not wha-


you are to-day, and you also are not what


‘we are,


go. Dutiful services to parents, respec-
ful adoration of deities, due practice of any
good quality,—none of these can confer
happiness on any one.


3t. Neither knowledge nor penances,
nor gifts, nor friends, nor kinsmen, can
save one who is afflicted by Time.


32. Even by a thousand means, “men
“cannot avert an impending danger. In-
telligence and strength are useless in such
cases, pCR Aes ot


‘


. 39:
wit in future become the kings


MAHABHARATA.


33- None can save men who are
afflicted by Time’s course. Because, ()
Sbakra, you consider yourself as the actor
therefore it is the root of all sorrow.


33- Hf the seeming performer of an act
is the real actor thereof, that doer then
would not himself be the creation of some
one else (viz., the God). Therefore, because
the seeming doer is himself the ‘creation ot
another, that another is the Supreme Being
superior to whom there is nothing else.


35. Helped by Time I had defeated
you. Helped by ‘Time you have defeated
me. itis lime which moves all beings.


36. O Indra, because your intelligence
is very mean you do not see that destruction
awaits all things! Some, indeed, respect
you as one who has acquired by his own
acts the sovereignty of the universe.


37. But, how can one like us who know
the course of the world, grieve for having
been fafflicted by Time, or allow our under-
standing to be stupefied, or give way to
the influence of error 2?


38. Even when we are possessed by
Time, coming in contact with a calamity,
shall my understanding or that of one like
me allow itself to be destroyed like a
wrecked vessel at sea.


Myself, yourself, and all those who
of the
deities, shall have, O Shakra, to follow
the way along which hundreds of Indras
have gone before you.


40. When your hour will be full, Time
will surely destroy you Ike me,—who are
now so invincible and who now shine with
matchless splendour.


41. In Time’s course many thousands


“of Indras and of gods have been swept off


cycle after cycle. ‘lime, indeed, is irresis-


tible.


42. Having secured your present posi-
tion, you think too much of yourself, even
as the Creator of all beings, the divine and
and eternal Brahman.


43. Many before you had attained to this
position of yours. With none did it last
for ever. On account of a foolish under-
standing, you consider it immutable and
eternal.


44. You trust in that which is not worthy
of trust. You consider that to be eternal
which i$ not eternal. O king of the gods,
one whois possessed and stupefied by Time
really considers himself thus.


45. Actuated by folly you consider your
present regal prosperity as yours, Know,
however, that it is not permanent either
for me or for you or’ for others. © <


_ they


SHANTI


46. It had belonged to numberless per-
sons before you. Passing over them it has
now become yours, It will say with you,
O Vasava, for sometime and then prove
its fickleness, Like a cow leaving one
drinking ditch for another, it will surely


leave you for somebody else, _


47. So many kings have gone before you
that I venture not to calcalate them. In
the futyre also, O Purandara, numberiess
sovereigns will rise alter you.


48. 1 do not see those kings now that
had formerly enjoyed this Earth mith her
trees, plants, gems, living creatures, waters
and mines.-


49—~55. Prithu, Aila, Maya, Bhima,
Naraka, Shamvara, Ashwagrivg, Puloman,
Swarbhanu, whose standard was of immea-
surable height, Prahrada, Namuchi, Da.ak-
sha, Vipprachitti, Virochana, Hrinisheva,
Suhotra, Bhuriban, Pushavat, Vrisha,
Satyepsu, Rishava, Vahu, Kapilashwa,
Virupaka, Vana, Karttashwara, Vahni,
Vishwadangshtra, Nairiti, Sankocha, Vari-
taksha, Varaha, Ashwa, Ruchiprabha,
Vishwajit, Pratirupa, Vrishanda, Vishkara,
Madhu, Hiranyakashipu, the Danava Kai-
tabha, and many others that were Daityas
and Danavas and Rakshasas, these and
many more not named, of remote and re-
moter ages, great Daityas and foremost of
Danavas, whose names we have heard,—
-indeed, many foremost of Daityas of former
times,—-have passed away, leaving the
Earth. All of them were possessed by Tinne.
Yime proved more powerful than all of
them. .


56. All of them had adored the Creator
in’ hundreds of sacrifices. You are not
the only person that has done go. All of
them were given to righteousness and ail of
them always celebrated great sacrifices.


57. Allofthem were capable of , passing
through the welkin and all were heroes that
never retreated from the battle-field. All

.of them had very strong bodies and all had
arms resembling heavy bludgeons.


58. “All of them were adepts in hundreds
of illusions, and all could assume any form
liked. We have never heard that
having undertaken a battle any of them had
ever met with defeat,


59. All observed the vow of truth, and
all of them sported_as they wished. Devo-


- ted to the Vedas and Vedic rites, all of


. them were endued, with great learning.
60. Endued with great might, all of them
-had gained the highest prosperity and
affluence. . But none of those great kings

_ had the pride of sovereignty, :


61, All of them were liberal, giving to


PARVA. 348


each what each deserved, All of them be>
haved properly and duly by.ail creatures.


62. All of them were the offspring of
Daksha’s daughters. Gifted with great
strength, all werc lords of the creation.


Burning all things with their energy, all of
them shone greatly. Yel all of them were
carried away by lime.


63. As regards you, O Shakra, it fs
elear that when you shall have, after enjoy-
ing the Earth, to leave her you will not be
able to control your grief,


64. Relinquish this desire for objects of
affection and enjoyment, Relinquisir this
pride begotten by prosperity, It you act
thus, you will then be able to bear the


grief consequent on the loss of $ove-
reignty.
65. When the hour of sorrow comes, do


not give way to it. Likewise, when-the
hour of joy comes, do not rejoice. Not
thinking of both the past and the future,
live contentedly with the present. _


66. When Time that never sleeps came
upon me that had always been mindful of
my duties, bend your heart to the ways of
peace, O Indra, for that same Time wilf
very sooti meet you.


words, and you seem determined to terros
rise me. Indeed, finding me calm, you
think very highly of "you.


68. Time had first attacked me. It is
even now behind you. J was at first defeat
ed by ime. It was therefore that you did
afterwards succeed in defeating me for
which you are bragging thus.


69. Formerly, when I used to become
angry, what person was there on Earth who
could stand before me in battle? Time
however, is stronger. He has overwhelmed
me. Itis therefore, O Vasava, that you
are able to stand before me. ‘Those thous
sand celestial years, over which your reigt
extends will surely come to an end,


7o. You will then fall, and your limbs
will become as miserable as mine now
even though 1 am endued with great


energy. I have failen away from the high
place that is occupied by the king of
the three worlds. You are now the real
Indra an heaven.


71. By virtue of Time’s course, you are
now an object of universal adoration in this
chatming world of living beings. Can you
say what is that by having done which you
have become Indra to-day and what also is
‘that by having dene which we have fallen
off froin the position we had occupied.


67. You cut me tothe quick with your -


342


72—73. Time is the one creator and
destroyer. Nothing else is cause. By en-
countering any of these, vis., decline, fail,
Sovereignty, happiness, misery, birth, and
death a learned person neither rejoices nor
grieves. You, Q Indra, know us. We also,
O Vasava, know you,


74. Why then do you brag thus before
me, forgetting, O shameless one, that it is
Time that hag made you what you are ?
You yourself saw what my prowess was in
those days.


75-77. The energy and might I used
to display in all my battles, prove it clearly.
The Adityas, the Radras, the Saddhyas, the
Vasus, and the Maruts, O lord of Shachi,
were all defeated by me. You know it well
yourself, O Skakra, that in the great battle
between the gods and the Asuras, the
assembléd gods were speedily routed by me
by the fury of my attack, Mountains with
their forests and the denizens, were re-
peatedly hurled by us.


78. 1 broke on your head, many
Mountain summits with craggy edges.
What, however, can | do now? ‘Lime can-
not be resisted.


79. If it were not so, do not think that I
would not bave dared to kill you with that
thunderbolt of yours witheven a blow of my

fist. The present, however, is not the hour

when [ should display my prowess. ‘Fhe
present hour issuch that L should remain
silent and tolerate everything... It is there-
fore, O Shakra, that [ put up with all this
insolence of yours. Know, however, that I
am tess able to bear insolence than even
you.


80. You are bragging before one who,
his time being full, is surrounded on all
sides by Time’s conflagration and fettered
Strongly in ‘Lime’s cords.

81. There stands that dark individual
who cannet be resisted by the world.
There he of fierce form; stands, having
bound me like» an inferior animal bound
with ropes.


82. Gain and loss, happiness and misery,
lust and anger, birth and death, captivity
and release,—these all one meets in Time’s
course.


83. Tam not the actor. Youare not the
actor. He is the actor who, is omsipotent.
Time ripens me like a fruit that is ona
tree,


84. There are certain acts by doing
which one person enjoys happiness in
Time’s course. By doing those very acts
another reaps misery in the course of
Time,


-O Shakra, that I do not grieve.


MAMABHARASA.


85. Conversant as FE am with the virtues
of Time, F should not grieve when it is
Time that has attacked me. It ts therefore,
Grief
can do us no good. he grief of one
that indulges in grief never dissipates his
calamity. On the other hand, grief des-
troys his power. Itis therefore that E do
not grieve.


87. Thus addressed by the kings of the
Daityas, the god of a hundred sacrifices,
vig., the powerful and thousand-eyed chas-
tisec of Paka, checked his anger and said
these words.”


Shakra said:—


88. ‘Seeing this uppraised arm of mine,
equipt with the thunderbolt, and those
nooses of Varuna, who is there whose un-
derstanding is not moved, including the
very Destroyer himself who brings about
the death of all beings.


89. Vour understanding, however, so
firm and so endued with visions of the truth*
has not been moved. O you of invincible
prowess, verily you are unmoved to-day on
account of your fortitude,


go. Seeing all things in this universe as
transient, who is there in it, endued with
body, that would venture to place confi-
dence on either his body or all the objects
of his desire ?


gt. Like yourself I also 'know that this
universe is not eternal, and that it has been
thrown into Time's fire that is dreadful
though hidden from the view, that is per-
petually burning, and that is indeed
endless.


92. Every one is attacked here by Time.
Nothing among subtile or gross beings can
escape from Time’s sway. All things are
being cooked in Time’s pot. :

93. *Fime has no master. Time is ever
vigilant. ‘Fime is always cooking every
thiag within itself. Noone who has once
entered the kingdom of Time which is per-
petually going on, can escape therefrom.


94. All embodied beings may be care-
less of Time, but Time 3s careful and is
wide awake behind them. No one has
ever been seen to have driven off Time
from him,


95. Ancient eternal and the embodi-
ment of Justice, Time is always equal about
all living creatures. Time cannot be shun-
ned and there is no retrogression in its
course, :


96. Like a usurer summing up his in-
terest, Time sums up its subtile portions
represented by kalas, lavas, kashthas,
kshanas, months, and days and nights.


SHANTI PARVA,


7. Like the current of a river washing
away a tree whose roots it can get at Time,
approaching him who says,—‘This 1 will do
to-day but this 1 will do tomorrow-—=sweeps
him away.


98. Time carries away one and men
say—'E saw him a little while before! How
has he died ?’


99. Wealth, comforts, rank, prosperity,
all are destroyed by Time. Approaching
every living creature. Time takes away
his life. All things which haughtily raise
their heads hight are sure to crumble
down.


100. What is existent is only another
form of the non-existent. Every thing is
transitory and unstable. It is difficult to
arrive at such a conviction.


tot. Your understanding, firm and en-
dued with true vision, is unmoved. You
do not, even in your mind realise what you
were sometime before.


102. Attacking the universe, powerful
Time cooks. it within itself and sweeps
away every thing without caring for age
or ortherwise, ‘Iherefore, one who is being
dragged by Time is unconscious of the
noose put round one’s neck.


103. People, wedded to jealousy, vanity,
cupidity, lust, anger, fear, desire, vareless-
ness, and pride, allow themselves to be
stupefied,


104. You, however, know the truth of
existence. You are learned and endued
with wisdom and penance. You see Time
as clearly like an emblic myrobalan on the
palm of your hand, ,


tos. O son of Virochana, you know
full weil Time’s conduct! You are well
versed in all branches of knowledge. You
are of purified Soul and a perfect master of
your passions. You area favourite of all
wise persons,


to6. With your understanding you
have fully understood the entire universe.
Though you have enjoyed every sort of
happiness, you were never attached to any-
thing, and hence you have not been sullied
by anything, .

107. The qualities of Darkness and
Ignorance do not soil you, for ‘you have
conquered your senses. You wait only
upon your soul which is divested of both
joy and sorrow.


108. I feel mercy for you, because you
are the friend of all creatures, without
animosity, and your heart being full of
traequillity.

109. 1 do not wish to afflict an enlight-


3 y


343


ened person like you by keeping him in
chains. Abstention from injury {is the
greatest religion. 1 feel mercy for you.


tro, Thosé nooses of Varuna, with
which you have been fettered, will loosea
in Fime’s course on agcount of the mis
conduct of men. Blessed be you, O great
Asura.


tr1—114. When the daughter-in-law
will make the ayed mother-in-law work,
when the son, through delusion, will order
his Father to work for him, when Shudras
will have their feet washed by Brahmanas
and know fearlessly the women of twice-
born ones, when men will know forbidden
women, when the refuse of houses will
begin to be carried upon plates and vessels
made of white brass, and when sactrificial-
offerings intended for the gods will begin
to be carried upon impure vessels, when
all the four castes will transyress all restric
tions, then these fetters of yours will begin,:
one by one, to loosen,


115. You have no fear from us. Wait
quietly. Be happy. Be shorn of all
sorrow. Let your heart be cheerful. -May-
you sot suffer from illness.


116. Having said these words to him,
the divine Indra, having the prince o
elephants for his vehicle, left that place.
Having defeated aif the Asuras, the king of
the gods rejoiced greatly and became the
sole master of all the worlds,


117. The great Rishis lauded that lord
of all mobile and immobile creatures.
The Fire-God once more began to carry
the libations of clarified butter that were
poured into his visibie form, and the great
god took charge of the nectar that was
placed to his care.


118. Lauded by the foremost of
Brahmanas engaged in sacrifices, the lord
Indra, shining with effulgence, his anger
quelled and his heart tranquillised, became
glad, and returning to his own abode in
heaven, began to pass his days in great-
happiness,” :


CHAPTER CCXXVIII. —
_ 4


{MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued,


Yudhishthira said :-—

1. ‘ Tell me, O grandfather, the marks
of future greatness and future degeneration
of a person,”


444


Bhishma said :—

2. ‘ Blessings to you,
indicates the symptoms of one’s future
prosperity and future fail.

3. Regarding it ts cited the old dis-
course between Shree and Shakra. Listen
ta it, O Yudhisthira.


4—§. The yreat and energetic ascetic
Narada, whose effulzence is as immeasur-
able as Brahma itself, with sins all dissi-
pated, capable of seeing througt the
power of his penances both this and the
other world at once, and the equal of the
celestial Rishis living in the region of the
Creator, roamed at his pleasure through
the three worlds, - :


6. One day, tising up early in the
morning, he wished to perform his ablutions
and for that purpose went to the river
Ganga as she issued out of the pass called
Dhruva, and plunged into the stream.


7. At that time the thousand-eyed
Indra alsa, the folder of the thunder-bolt,
and the destroyer of Shamvara and Paka,
Came to the very shore where Narada was.


8. Yhe Rishi and the god, both of
whom had perfectly controlled theic minds,
finished their ablutions, and having com-
pleted their silent recitations, sat together.


They spent the hour in reciting and
listening to the excellent narratives told by
the great celestial Rishis describing many
good and high deeds. Indeed, with rapt
attention the two were engaged in such
lively discourse on ancient history.


to. While sitting there they saw the
rising Sun casting his thousand rays right
before him. Seeing the full orb, both of
them stood up and lauded hin.


lr, Just at that Lime they saw in the
sky, in a direction opposite to that of the
‘rising star of day, some luminous object,
resplendent as burning fire which seemed to
be a second star of day. And they saw,
O Bharata, that that luminous object was
gradually approaching them both.


12. Riding upon  Vishnu's vehicle
adomned with Gadurae and Surya himself,
that object shohe forth with matchless
splendour, and seemed to light up the
three woslds. »

‘


13. The object they beheld was none
Other than. Shree herself, attended, by
many Apsaras giftcd with splendid beauty.
Indeed, she looked like a large solar cise
herself, effulgent like fire.


14. | Decorated with ornaments that
.appeared like veritable stars, she wore d
wreath cesembling a garland of pearls,


the mind itself:


MAHABHARATA


REP


Indra saw that goddess called Padma living
in the midst of lotuses.


15. Getting down from her foremost of
cars, that peerless lady began to approach
towards the lord of the three worlds and
the celestial Rishi Narada.


16—17. Followed by Narada, [ndra also
proceeded towards that lady. With joined
hands, he offered himself up to her,and
versed as he was with all things, he adored
her with unsurpassed reverence and
sincerity. The adorations over, the king
of gods, O king, addressed Shree thus,


Shakra said :—


18, ‘O you of sweet smiles, wha, indeed,
are you and for what lave you come here
O you of fair brows, whence do yeu come
and where will you go, O auspicious lady ?!


Shree said :

19. ‘In the three worlds full of auspi-
ciousness, all creatures, mobile and immo-
bile, try with theic whole hearts to gain a
companionship with me.


go. I am that Padma, that Shree adorned
with lotuses, who originated from the lotus
that blooms at the touch of the rays
of the Stin-God, for the prosperity of all
creatures,


ar. [ am called Lakshmi, Bhuti, and
Sree, O killer of Vala! [Fam Baith, [ am
Intelligence, lam Affluence, lam Victory,
and [ am [mmutability.


22. I am Patience. [ am Success, and I
am Prosperity. [am Swaha, lam Swadha,
tam Reverence, and | am Fate, and [| am
Memory.


23. I live at the van and on the
standards of victorious and ‘virtuous kings,
as well as in their homes, cities, and
kingdoms.


24. JT always five, O killer of Vala, with
those foremost of men, the heroes longing
for victory and unretreating from battle.


25. I also tive for ever with persons - who
are steadfastly attached to virtue, who are
highly intelligent, who are devoted to
Brabma, who are truthful in speech, who
are possessed of humility, and who are
liberal.


26. Ecrmerly I lived with the Asuras on
‘account of their being full of truth and
merit. Seeing, however, that the Asuras
have assumed adverse natures, I have left
them and wish to live in you.’


Shakra said :-—


27. 'O you of fair face, for what conduct
of the Asuras did you live with them?


SHANTI PARVA,


What did you see there for which you have
come here, having left the Daityas and the
Danavas?


Shree said :-—


28. ‘fam devoted to those who follow
the duties of their own order, to those who
never fall away from patience, to those who
take a pleasure in walking along the path
leading to heaven.


2g. I always live with those who are
famous for liberality, for study of the scrip-
tures, for sacrifices, for other scriptural
rites, and for adoration of Pitris, gods,
preceptors, elders, and guests.


30. Formerly the Danavas used to keep
their houses clean, to keep their women in
control, to pour libations on the sacrificial
fire, to wait dutifully on their preceptors, to
control their passions, to be obedient to
the Brahmanas, and to be truthful in
speech. x


31. They were full of faith; they kept
their anger under control; they practised
the virtue of charity; they never envied
others ; they used to maintain their friends
and advisers, and theic wives they were
never jealous.


31. Formerly they never attacked’ one
another, filled with anger. They were ail
contented and never felt pain on seeing
other people’s affluence and prosperity.


33. Vhey were all charitable and econo-
mical; of respectable conduct, and endued
with mercy. hey were full of mercy,
endued with simplicity of conduct, steadfast
in faith, and had their passions under com-
plete control.


34. They used to keep their servants
and counsellors contented, and were grate-
ful and sweet-speechede They used to
serve every one according to his position
and honor, They had shame. They were
of rigid vows.


33. They used to perform their ablutions
On every sacred day. ‘They used to smear
themselves properly with perfumes and
sacred unguents. They used to adorn their
persons duly. Whey used to observe fasts
and penances, were trustful, and utterers of
Vedic hymns.


36.. The Sun never rose while they lay-|.


asleep. ‘They never slept, when the Moon
went away.’ They always abstained


curds and pounded barley.. <


37. They used every morning to look'at:
clarified butter and other auspicious articles’
and with senses controlied they used’ to./
recite the Vedas and. adere Brahmanas .


with gifts.
44


from’


345
38. Their topic was always Virtuous,
and they never accepted gifts. ‘They.
always went to sleep at midnight and
never slept during the day, :


39. ‘They always used to take pleasure
in showing mercy for the distressed, the
hetpless, the aged, the weak, the. sick,
and women, and enjoyed ail theie proper
ties by sharing these with them. ae


40. They always used to assure and:
cheer up the agitated, the cheerless, the
anxious, the terrified, the diseased, the,
emaciated, the robbed, and the afflicted.


41. They followed virtue and never in~ +
jured one another. They were ready and
well-disposed for every kind of action,
‘They used to serve and wait reverentially
upon elders and aged individuals.


42. . They duly adored Pitris, gods- and
guests, and ate every day what was left
after pleasing these. They were firmly dee,
voted to truth and penances.


43- None amongst them ate singly atyy.
food that was good, and none had known.
other people’s wives. They treated all.
creatures as to their own selves. page vate


44. They never allowed the emission of
the seminal fluid into empty space, into:
inferior animals, into forbidden wombs, or
On sacred days, 4


- 43. They were always famous for gifts,’
for cleverness, for simplicity, for hopeful»
exertion, for humility, for friendliness, for *.
forgiveness.


46. And, O powerful one, truth, charity,’ :
penance, purity, mercy, sweet speeches,
and absence of animosity towards friends, +
-~all these always lived in them. :


47. Sleep, idleness, fretfulness, envy,
want of foresight, discontent, melancholy, .
cupidity, never attacked them.


44. On account of the Danavas being “'
famous for these good qualities, | lived with’.
them from the begianing ef the creation .
for many cycles. . -

49. Times were changed, and that chang
brought about an aiteration in the charac«
ter of the Danavas. I saw that virtue and
morality left then: and that they began to .
give way to lust and anger. ;

go. Persons of inferior attainments, be-
gan to cherish animosities towards elders.
possessed of -superior . qualifications, and


“while ahe latter, endued with virtue and,
> merit, used to discourse on proper topics
in the midst: of assemblies, the former bes .
‘gan to ridicule‘or' laugh at them,


51. When reverend elders’ canie,. the. ,
younger individuals, seated at thei gase,


346
refused to worstiip the former by rising up
and saluting them respectfully.


; 52. Inthe presence of fathers, sons be-

gan to exercise power. Not receiving
‘wages persons accepted service and shames
lessly proclaimed the fact.


53. Those amongst them who coufd
amassing great wealth by doing unrighte-
ous and censurable deeds came to be res-

" pected.


54. During the night they began to cry
aloud. ‘Their homa fires ceased to send up
bright flames. Sons began to govern their
fathers and wives lorded over husbands.


88. “Mothers, fathers, aged seniors, pre-
ceptors, guests and guides ceased to get
respect for their exalted position. People
ceased to rear with love their own offspring
but began to leave them.


56. Without distributing the fixed por-
tion in atms and reserving the fixed portion
for offering itto the gods, every one ate
what he had. Indeed, without offering
their articles to the gods in sacrifices and
without sharing them with the Pitris, the
gods, guests, and reverend elders they
appropriated them to their own use
shamelessly.


57. Their cooks no longer cherished any
consideration for purity of mind, deed, and
word, They ate what had been feft une,
covered. -


58. Theic corn lay scattered in yards,
being devastated by crows and rats. Their
Milk remaived in an open place and they
began to touch clarified butter with hands
unwashed after eating.


59. Their spades, domestic knives,
basxets and dishes and cups of white brass,
and other utensils lay scattered in their
houses.


Lad
60. Their housewifes did not look after
these. They no longer cared for the re-
pairs of their houses and walls. Tethering
their animals they did not give them food
and drink,


6t. Discegarding children that only
looked on, and without having fed Cheir
depen tants, the Danavas ate what they
vad.


62. They began to prepare payasa and
kticata and dishes of meat and cakes and
shashkuli for their own selves, and began
20 eat the flesh of animals nut slain in
sacrifices,


.63. They used to sleep even after sun-
aise. They slept in the mornings. Day
and mght, disputes and quarrels raged in
avery house,


MAHABHARATA


64. Those who were not respectable
amongst them no longer showed any fes
pect for them deserving of the same while
the latter were seated in any place. Devia-
ting from their fixed duties, they ceased ta
respect those who had returned into the


+ forest for teading a life of peace and divine


meditation. Intermixture of castes freely
teok place among them. They cared not
for purity of body or mind.


65. Brahnvanas, fearned in the Vedas;
did not receive any respect among them,
Those again who were ignorant of the
Richs were not condemned or punished.
Both, namely, those who deserved respect
and those who were unworthy of the same,
were treated equally.


66. Their servant gicls became wicked,
and began to wear golden necklaces and
Other ornaments and fine dresses, and used
to remain jn their houses or go away be<
fore their very eyes.


67. They began to derive great pleas
sure from sports and plays in which their
women were dressed as men and their
men as women.


68. ‘Those of their ancestors who were
very rich had made gifts of wealth to
worthy persons. The descendants of the
donors, even when in’ affluence began to
take back, for their unbelief, those gifts.


69. When difficulties were anticipated
for the fulfilment of any object and friend
sought the advice of friend, that purpose
was frustrated by the latter even if he had
any slightest self-interest to fulfill by
£. ustrating it.


qo. Even ‘amongst their better classes
have appeared traders and dealers in
goods, bent upon misSappropriating others.
The Shudras began ‘to practise penances.


gt. Some have begun to study, without
fixing any cules for regulating their hours
and food. Other have begun to study,
making useless rules. Disciples have re-
frained from rendering obedience and ser-
vice to preceptors. Preceptors again have
come to treat disciples as friends.


72. Fathers and mothers are tired with
work, and do not enjoy festivities. Aged
parents having no power over sons, have
been compelled to beg their food of the
fatter. %


73. Amongst them, even wise persons
well-read tin the Vedas, and resembling
the ocean itself in gravity, have begun to
follow agriculture and similar callings
Hliterate and ignorant persons have begur
to be fed at Shraddhas.


74. Disciples instead of approaching


SHANTi PARVA.


preceptors, every morning, for making
dutiful enquiries, for determing what acts
are to be performed, and for seeking com-
missions which they are to discharge, pre-
ceptors wait upon them to perform all those
functions. Set


v5. Daughter-in-law, in the presence
of their husbands’ mothers and fathers,
rebuke and chastise servants and maids,
and calling their husbands lecture and
rebuke them.


76, Fathers, with great care, try to keep
sons in good humour, or, through fear, dis-
tributing their wealth among children, live
in misery and affliction.


77. Even the friends of the victims,
seeing thelatter deprived of riches in fire
or by robbers or by the king, have begun
to jecr.


78. They have become ungrateful and
athestical and sinful and have begun to
commit adultery with the wives of their
receptors, They have begun to take for-
bidden food. They have transgressed all
bounds and restraints. They ‘have be-
come shorn of that splendour which had
“made them famous before,


79. Qa account of these and other
marks of wicked conduct and the change
of their former nature, I shall not, O king
of the gods, live among them any longer.


80. Ifhave, therefore, come to you of
my own accord. Receive me with rever-
ence, © lord of Sachi! Respected by you,
O king of the gods, I shatl receive honor
from all other gods.

81. There where I five the seven other
goddesses with Jaya for the eighth, who
fove me, who are ivseparably associated
with me, and whe depend upon me, wish
to live.


82. They are Hope, Faith, Intelligence,
Contentment, Victory, Advancement, and
Forgiveness, She who is the eighth, vzs.,
jaya, occupies the foremost place amongst
them, O chastiser of Paka.


83. Having left the Asuras, all of them |


and myself have come to your kingdom.
We shall henceforth live among the gods
who are given te righteousness and faith. ~


84. After the goddess had said so, the
celestial Rishi Narada, and Vasava the
killer of Vitra, for pleasing her, offered
her a joyful welcome,


85. The Wind-God—that friend of Agai,
then began to blow gently through the sky,
carrying sweet odors, refreshing all crea-
tures with whom he came into contact, and


contributing to the pleasure of every one


of the senses,


$47


86. All the gods, (hearing the news)
gathered together in a pure and desirable
spot and waited there for seeing Maghavat
seated with Lakshmi beside him.


87. Then the thousand-eyed king of the
gods, accompanied by Shree and his friend
the great Rishi, and riding upon a splendid
car drawn by green horses, came into that
concourse of the celestials, receiving honor
from all.


88. Observing a sign that the holder of
the thunder-bolt made and which Shree
herself approved of, then the great Rishi
Narada, whose prowess all the gods knew,
welcomed the approach of the goddess
there and announced it as highly aus-
picious.

89. Heaven’s sky ‘became clear and
bright and began to shower ambrosia upon
the region of the self-create Grand-father.
The celestial kettle-drums, though struck
by none, began to beat, and all the car-
dinai points, becoming clear, seemed ablaze
with splendour,


go. Indra began to pour rain upon
crops that sprouted up at its. proper season.
No one then disgressed the path of righte-
ousness. The Earth was bedecked with
many mines filled with jewels and gems,
and the chanting of Vedic recitations and
other sweet sounds swelled up on the oc
casion of that success of the gods.


9t. Human beings, gifted with firm
minds, and alf following the sacred path
trodden by the righteous, began to find
pleasure in Vedic and other religious
rites and acts. Men, Celestials, Kinnaras
Yakshas and Rakshasas, all became ene
dued with prosperity and cheerfulness,


‘92. Not a flower,—what to speak of
fruits,—-dropped untimely frog a tree even
if the Wind-God shookit with force. All
the kine began to give sweet milk whens
ever milked by men and cruel and harsh
words were not given vent 4o by any one,


93- They who, seeking ‘advancement,
appear before assemblies of Brahmanas,
and read this description of the glorifica-
tion ef Shree by all the gods headed by
Indra,—deities competent to grant every
wish.—succeed in acquiring great pros-
peritys

4. These then, O king of the Kurust
are the foremost marks of prosperity and
adversity. Requested by you, I have told
you all. You should new act according to
the instructions conveyed herein, undere
standing them after careful reflection.”


pment


348
CHAPTER CCXXIX.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued.


Yudhisthira said :— -


1. “By what nature, what course of
duties, what. knowledge, and what energy,
does one succeed in attaining to Brahma
which is immutable and is beyond the
reach of nature.’


Bhishma said :—


2. “Qne who practises. the religion of
renunciation, who eats sparingly, and who
‘has fiis senses under complete control,
can attain to Brahma which is immutable
_and which is above nature.


3. Regarding it is cited the old dis-
course between Jaigishavya and Asita.
© Bharata. ,


_ 4. Once ona time Asita-Devala address-
ed Jajgishavya who was endued with great
wisdom and fully acquainted with the
traths of duty and morality.


Devala said :—


5. You are not pleased when lauded,
you do’not give way to anger when blamed
or censured. What, -indeed, is your
wisdom? Whence have you -got it?) And
what, indeed, is the refuge of that
wisdom ? :


Bhishma said :—


6. Thus accosted by Devala, the pure
Jaigishavya of austere penances, said
those words of great import, fraught with
full faith, and deep significance.


Jaigishavya said :—

7. O foremost of Rishis, I shall tell you
of what is the hivhest end, that which is
the supreme goal, that which is tranquility,
:@s regarded by all pious persons. -


8. They, O Devala, who treat equally
those who praise them and those who blame
them, they who conceal their own vows and
good acts, they ‘who never indulge in
vilifications, they who never say even what
is, good when it is calculated to injure
(instead of, producing any benefit), they
who do .not desire to retaliate injury are
said to be wise men.


10. They never grieve for what is yet
tocome. ‘They are “concerned with only
what is present and: act as they should.
They never grieve for the past or even
recollect it. he 3

tr. Esadued with power and controlled
minds, they do at. their pleasure, in the


MAHABHARALIA.


way in which it should be done, what they
should do, O Devala, if solicited respect-
fully thereto.


¥2. Of mature knowledge, of great
wisdom, with anger under complete con-
trol, and with their passions subjugated,
tley never commit an injury to any one in
thought, word, or deed.


13. Shorn of envy, they never injure
others, and gifted with self-control, they
are never pained on seeing other people’s
prosperity,

14. Such men never indulge in exagge-
rated speeches, or Jaud others, or speak
ill of them. ‘Fhey are again never in-
fluenced by praise and censure showered
on them.


15. They are tranquil regarding all
their desires, and are engaged in the well-
being of all creatures. hey never give
way to anger or indulge in joy, or injure
any creature.


16. Loosening all the Inots of their
hearts, they pass on very happily. ‘Ihey
have no friends nor are they the friends
of others.


17. They have no enemies nor are they
the enemies of other creatures. Indeed
men who ean live in this way can pass their
days in perpetual happiness.


18 O foremost of twice-born ones,
they who acquire a knowledge of the rules
of morality and righteousness, and who
observe those rules in practice, acquire
joy, while they who deviate from the path
of righteousness are afflicted by anxieties
and sorrow,


“19. 1 now follow the path of righteous-
ness. Decried by others, why shall { be


“annoyed with them, or lauded by others,


why shall 1 be pleased ?


20. Let men get whatsoever objects
they please from whatsoever callings they
pursue. Praise and censure cannot secure
my advancement or the reverse.


2t. Hewhohas urderstood the truths
of things, becomes pleased with even dis-
regard as if it were nectar. ‘The wise man
is indeed annoyed with regard as if it were
poison. ;


22. He who is freed from all short-
comings sleeps fearlessly both here and
hereafter eyen if insulted by others. On
the other hand, he who insults him, meets
with destruction, 2 --


23. ‘The wise men wfio seek to attain
tothe highest end, succeed in obtaining
it following such a conduct. ; :


24, The man who has controlled all his


SHANTI PARVA, .


“senses is considered to have performed
all the sacrifices. Such a person attains
to Brahma, which is eternal and which is
above the reach of nature.


25. The very gods, the Gandharvas,
the Pishachas, and the Rakshasas, cannot
‘attain to the end of one who has attained
to the highest end.”


———ae


CHAPTER CCXXX.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA),—
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—~—


1. ‘What man is there who is dear to
all, who pleases all persons, and who is
gifted with every merit and every ac-
complishment ? ”


Bhishma said :—

2. ‘About it I shall recite to you the
words that Keshava, asked by Ugrasena,
said to him on a former occasion.


Ugrasena said :-—

. All persons seem to be auxious to
describe of the merits of Narada. 1 think
that celestial Rrshz must really be endued
with kh sort of merit. I ask you tell
me this, Keshava.


Vasudeva said :—


4. O chief of the Kukuras, listen to me
as I describe shortly those good qualities
of Narada which | know, O king! Narada
is as well-read in the scriptures as he is
good and pious in his conduct.


_ 5. And yet, he is not proud of his
conduct, which makes one’s blood so hot.
It is for this that he is adored everywhere.


6. Discontent, anger, levity, and fear,
do not exist in Narada. He is free from
procrastination, and endued with courage.
For this he is adored everywhere.


7. Narada deserves the respectful
adorations of all. He never retracts his
words through desire or cupidity. For


this he is adored everywhere,


8. He is fully conversant with the
knowledge of the soul, bent on peace,
endued with great energy, and a master
of his senses. He is free from guile, and
truthful in words. For this he is adored
with respect everywhere.

‘9. He.is distinguished by energy, fame,
intelligence, knowledge, humility, birth,
by penances, and years. For these he i
everywhere adored with respect, ne


-kind of science,


+349


to. Heis of good conduct. He dresses
and houses himself well..’ He eats pure
food. Helovesall. He is pure in body
and mind. He is sweet-speeched, He is
free from envy and malice. For this he
is adored everywhere with respect.


_ Ir. He is, forsooth, always employed in
doing good to alt people. No sin is in
him. He never rejoices at other people’s
misfortunes. For this he is adored every-
where with respect.”


12. He always tries to conquer? all
earthly desires by listening to, Vedic recitae
tions and attending to the Puranas. He
is a great renouncer and he never dis-
respects any one, For this he is adored
everywhere with respect.


13. He considers all equally; and,
therefore, he has no one whom he Joves
and none whom he hates. He always
speaks what is pleasant to the hearet.
For this he is adored everywhere with
tespect.


14. He is endued with grent learning
in the scriptures. His conversation is
varied and charming. His knowledge and
wisdom are great. Heis free from cupte
dity. He is free also from deception. He
is large-hearted. He has conquered anger
and cupidity. ° For this hé is adored eyery=
where with respect. i -

15. He has never, fallen out with any
one for any subject of profit or pleasure,
All faults have - disappeared from him.
For this he is adored everywhere with
respect. ; eae

16. His devotion (to Brahma) is firm.
His soul is blameless. fie is well-versed
in the Shrutis, He is free from cruelty,
He is above the influence of delusion or
faults. For this he js adored everywhere
with respect.


17. He is unattached to all objects of
attachment {for others). For all that he
seems to he attached to ali things. He
does not suffer long from the influence of
any doubt. For this he is everywhere
adored with respect.


18. He has no longing for objects of pro+
fit and pleasure. He never speaks highly
of his own self. He is shorn of malice. He
is mild in speech. Therefore be is every-
where adored with respect. © “


tow

19. Hesees the hearts, different from

one another, of all men, without blaming

any of-them. He is well-versed in all
matters relating to the origin of things.


20. He never disregards or hates any
He lives according to his


own standard:of tnorality. He never


35?


passes time idly, He has controlled his
-soul. Therefore he is everywhere adored
with respect.


at. He has worked hard in subjects
worthy of hard application. He tas ac-
quired knowledge and wisdom. He is
never satiatea with yoga. He is always
attentive and ccady for work. He is ever
careful. For this he is everywhere adored
with respect.


22. He «oes not feel shame for any defi-
ciency of his, He is very attentive. He is
always engayed by others for doing what is
for their behoof. He never divulges the
secrets of others. For this he is everywhere
adored with respect,


23. He is never puffed up with joy at the
time of making even valuable acquisitions.
Heis never pained at losses. His under-
standing is firm and fixed. His mind is un-
attached to all things. Therefore he is
everywhere adored with respect.


24. Who, indeed, is there who will not
love him who is thus endued with every
merit and accomplishment, who is expert
in all things, who is pure in body and mind,
who is perfectly anspicious, who is well-
versed with the course of time and the
opportuneness it affords for particular acts,
and who is well-acquainted with all agree-
able things ?'


CHAPTER CCXXXI,


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued.


Yudhisthira said :—


1. “wish, O Kuru hero, to know what
the origin and what the end is of all crea-
tures; what the nature of their meditation
$s and what their acts; what the divisions
of time are, and what is the spare of human
existence in the respective cycles.


2. I wish also to know fully the truth
about the genesis and the conduct of the
world; the coming of creatures into the
‘world and their exit. Indeed, whence their
creation and destruction ?


* 3. Obest of virtuous persons, if you
wish to favor us, do tell us this about which
Task you.


4- Having heard before this the excel-
tent discourse of Bhrigu to the twice-born
sage Bharadwaja, which you cid recite, my
understanding, shurn of ignorance, has ‘be-
come gteatiy altached to yoga, and with-
drawn from worldly objects rests upon


heavenly purity, Il ask you about the, sub-.


MAHABHARATA.


ject, therefore, once more. You should


describe it to me fully.”


Bhishma said :—


6. ‘Regarding it 1 shall recite to you an
old narrative of what the divine Vyasa said
to his son Shuka when the latter had asked
the former.


7—8. Having studied the measureless
Vedas with all their branches and_ the
Upanishads, and desirous of leading a life
of celibacy on account of his having ac-
quired excellence of religious merit, Shuka
put these very questions, about which his
doubts had not been removed, to.his father
Dwaipayana, who had removed (by study
and contemplation) all doubts regarding
true duties.


Shuka said :—


9g. You should tell me wha the Creator
is of ali beings, as fixed by a knowledge of
time, and what the duties are of a Brahe
mana !


Bhishma said —


to. The father, having a knowledge of
both the past and the future, conversant
with all duties and gifted with omniscience,
thus described the subject to_his sen, who
had questioned him.


Vyasa said :—

11. Only Brahma, who is without bee
gining and without end, unborn, effulgent,
above decay, immutable, indestructible, in«
conceivable and transcending knowledge,
exists before the Creation.

12—13. The Rishis, measuring time,
have given particular names to particular
portions. Five and ten winks of the eye
make what is called a Kashtha. ‘Thirty
Kashthas make what is called a Kala.
‘Lhirty Kalas, with the tenth part of a Kala,
make a Muhurta, Thirty Muburtas make
upone day and night. Thirty days and
Rights form a month, and twelve months
form a year.


14. Persons well-read in mathematical
science say that a year is made up of two
solar motions, vigs., the northern and the
southern. -


15. The sun makes the day and the
night for men. The night is for the sleep
of _ living creatures, and the day is for
work.


16. A month of human beings is equal
toa day and night of the departed manes,
That division consists in this: the light
half of the month is their day which is for
work; and the dark fortnight is their night
for sleep. .


SHANTI


t%. A year (of men) is equal toa day
and night of the gods. This divisian con-
sists in this: the half year for which the
sun travels from the vernal to the autumnal
equinox is the day of the gods, and the
half year for which the sun moves from
the latter to the former is their night.


18. Calculating by the days and nights
of human beings about which I have told
you, I shail speak of the day and night
of Brahman and his years.also,


1g. I shall, in their order, tell you the

number of years, that are for different
urposes calculated differently, in the
Krita, the Treta, the Dwapara, and the
Kali yugas.

20. Four thousand celestial’ years is
the duration of the first or Krita age. The
morning of that cycle consists of four hun-
dred years and its evening is of four hun.
dred years.


21. Regarding the other cycles, the
duration of each gradually decreases by
a quarter in respect of both the principal
period with the minor portion and the
conjoining portion itself.


22. These periods always keep up the
never-ending and eternal worlds. They
who know Brahma, O child, regard this
as Immutable Brahma,


23. in the Krita age all the duties exist
in full, along with Truth. Men of that
age never acquired knowledge or object
through unrigtiteous or forbidden means.

24. In the other cycles duty, as laid
down in the Vedas, is seen to gradually
decline by a quarter in each. Sinfulness
multiplies by theft, untrath, and deception.


25. In the Krita age, all persons are


free from disease and achieve their objects, |


and ail live for four hundred years. In
the Treta, the period of life decreases by
@ Quarter,


26. We have heard that, in the suc-
ceeding yugas, the words of the Vedas,
the periods of life, the blessings and the
fruits of Vedic rites, all decrease gradually,


27, The duties set down for the Krita

ga are of one kind, ‘hose for the ‘Jreta

fre othetwise. Those for the Dwapara

are different. And those for the Kali are

otherwise. Thisisin accordance with the

decline which marks every succeeding
. cycle,

28. In the Krita, Penance is the fore- |
most. In the Treta. Knowledge is foremost.
\n Dwapara, Sacrifice has been said to be
the foremost. In the Kali yuga, only
Gilt is sanctioned. 7


29. The learned say that these twelve


PARVA, st


‘ thousand celestial years form what is calle


edacycle, A thousand such cycles form @
single day of Bratman.


. 30. The same isthe duration of Brahe
man’s night. With the beginning of Brahe
man’s dav the universe begins to come into
being. During the period of universal dise
solution the Creator sleeps, in Yoga-medi-
tation. When the period of sleep expires,
He awakes. ‘


31. What is Brahman's day covers a
thousand such cycles. His night also
covers a thousand similar cycles, They
who know this are said to know the day
and the night.

32. On the expiry of His night,
Brahman, waking up, modifies the in-
destructible intelligence by causing it to
be overlaid with ignorance. He then causes
Consciousness to spring up, whence origi-
nates Mind which is at one with the
Manifest.’”


intommante


CHAPTER CCXXXH.


(MOKSHADHARMA’ PARVA).=«
Continued, :


Vyasa said:— —

1. “Brahma is the effulgent seed from
which existing as it does by itself, has
Oginated the entire universe consisting


| of two kinds of being, vis., the mobile and


the immobite,


2. At the dawn of His day, waking up,
He creates with the aid of Avidya this
universe. Mahat or the principle of Greate
ness at first springs up. That Mahat
is speedily changed into Mind which is the
soul of the Manifest. ,


3-4. Overwhelming the Iotelligence,
which is effulgent, with Ignorance, Mind
creates seven great entities, Urged by the
desire of creating, Mind, which is far-
reaching, which has many courses, and
which has desire and doubt for its leading
signs, begins to create various kinds of
objects by modifications of itself, Ether
first’ originates from it. Know that its”
property is Sound. a

5- From Ether, by modification, origin«
ates the bearer of all scents, v¢s., the pure,
and powerful Wind. lt is said to possess
the property of ouch.

6. From Wind also, by modification, _
originates ‘Light endued with effulgence.
Beautiful and called also Shukram, % is
thus created, possessing the attribute of
Ferm, ;


352 MAHABHARATA.


7. From light, by modification, originates
Water having taste for its attribute. Prom
‘Water originates Earth having Scent for its
attribute. These are said to represent
primary creation.


8. These, in succession, acquire the attri-
butes of the immediately preceding ones
from which they have originated. Each
has not only its own special attribute but
éach succeeding one has the attributes of
all the previous ones. '


g. If anybody, perceiving Scent in Water,
were from ignorance to say that it belongs
to Water, he would make a mistake, for
Scent is the attribute of Earth though it
may exist in Water and also Wind.


19. These seven kinds of entities, pos-
Séssing various kinds of energy, at first
existed separately from one another. They
could not create objects without all of them
acting in a body.


it, All these great entities coming to-

ether, ‘and mixing with one another, form

the constituent parts of the body which are
called limbs. =~


12, On account of the combination of
those limbs,—the sum-total, invested with
form and having sixteen constituent parts,
becomes what is called the body, (When
the gross body is thus formed), the subtile
principle of greatness, with the unexhausted
remnant of acts,'then enters that combina-
tion called the gross body,


13. The original Creator of all beings,


then having by His Maya divided Himself, |


enters that subtile form for overlooking
everything. And because he is the origi-
nal Creator of all beings he is called the
lord of all beings,


14-15. Ft is he who creates all beings
mobile‘and’ immobile.’ After} having thus
assumed the form of Brahman, he creates
the worlds iof the -gods,: the Rishis, the
Pitris, and men; the rivers, the seas and
the oceans, the cardinal poimts, countries
and provinces, hills and moyntains, and
large trees, human beings, . Kinnaras
Rakshasas, birds, animals domestic and
wild, and snakes,


16—17.. He creates both kinds of mobile


and immobile ; and those that are destruc- [


tible and those that are industructible. Of
these created objects each gets those attri+
butes which it had during the previous
Creation; and each ebtains repeatedty the
same attributes at every subsequent Crea-
tion. Having a formed character by either
injuciousness or. peacefulness, mildness .or
fierceness,frighteousness or,unrighteousness,
truthfulness, oc untruthfulness, each crea-
ture, at every new creation, gets that


Particular attribute which it had got bes
fore. For this the particular attribute ats
taches to it.


18. Itis the Ordainer himself who attaa
ches variety to the great entities to the ob-
jects of the senses and to size or bulk of
existent matter, and settles the relations
of creatures with those various entities.


19... Of men who had devoted themselves*
to the science of things, there are,some wha
say that, in the production of effects, Exer-
tion is supreme. Some learned persons
hold that Destiny is supreme, and some
that it is Nature which is the agent.


zo. Others hold that Acts flowing from
Exertion and Destiny, produce effects,
helped by Nature. Instead of considering
any of these as alone powerful for the pro-
duction of effects, ‘they say that it is the
union of all three that produces all effects.


21. About this subject, some say that
such is the case ; some, that such is not the
case; some, that both of these are not the
case; and some that it is not that the res
verse of both are not. ‘These, of course,
are the contentions of those who depend om
Acts, with reference to objects. They, how-
ever, whose see the truth consider Brahma
as the cause.


22. Penance is the greatest good for
living creatures. The roots of penance are
tranquillity and self-control. By penance
one acquires all things that he longs for in
his mind.


23. By penance one attains to that Being
who ereates the universe. He who thus
succeeds in attaining to that Being becomes
the powerful lord of all beings.


24. It is by penance that the Rislis can
read the Vedas without interruption. In
the beginning the Self-create caused those
éexcelfent Vedic sounds, that are embodi-
ments of knowledge and that have neither
beginning nor end. From those sounds’
have spruug all sorts of actjons,


25. The names of the Rishis, all things


I uhat have been created, the varieties of


form seen in things, and the course of
all actions, have all originated from the
Vedas. :


26. Indeed, in the beginning the Su-
preme Lord of all beings, created all
things from the words of the Vedas. Truly,
the names of the Rishis, and all else that


-has been created, are seen in the Vedas.


Upon the expiration ‘of his night, the In-

create Brahman creates, from models that

existed -before, all things which are, of |
course, well-made by Him. °


27. In the Vedas has been described


‘the subject’ of-the Soul's Liberation, along’


SHANTI PAKVAs


with the ten means formed by study of the
Vedas, adoption of the domestic mode of
life, penances, observance of all duties,
common to all the modes of life, sacrifices,
performance of all acts leading to pure fame,
meditation which is of three kinds, and that
kind of Liberation called success (Siddhi)
attainable in this lifé.


28. That incomprehensible Brahma
which has been described in the words of
the Vedas, and which has been described
more clearly in the Upanishadas by those
who have an insight into the Vedas, can be
realised by gradually following the prac-
tices referred to above.


29. This consciousness of duality,
fraught again with that of pairs opposites,
is born only of acts in which he is engaged
to a person who thinks he has a body. That
person, however, who has attained to
Liberation, aided by his knowledge, drives
off by force that consciousness of duality.


30. Two Brahmas should be known, 77z.,
the Brahma represented by the Vedas and
and. that which is beyond the Vedas and
is supreme. One who is conversant with


Brahina represented by sound succeeds in |


attaining to Brahma that is Supreme.


31. The destruction of animals is the
sacrifice sanctioned for the Kshatriyas.
The growing of corn is the sacrifice sanc-
tioned for the Vaishyas. Serving the three
other orders is the sacrifice sanctioned fot
the Shudras. Penance is the sacrifice sanc-
tioned for the Brahmanas.


32. In the Krita age the performance
of sacrifices was not required. Such per-
formance became necessary in the Treta
age. In the Dwapara, sacrifices have
begun to fall off. In the Kali, the same
is the case with them.


33. Inthe Krita age, worshipping only
one Bralima, men regarded the Richs, the
Samans, the Yajushes, and the rites and
sacrifices that are performed from motives
of advantage, as all different from the
object of their worship, and practised only
Yoga by means of penances.


34. In the Treta age, many powerful
men flourished who governed all mobile
and immobile objects.


35. Accordingly, in thatage, the Vedas,
and sacrifices, and the distinctions bet-
the several orders, and the four modes of
life, existed in a body. On account, how-
ever, of the decrease in the period of fife
in Dwapara, all these, it that age, fall off
from that compact condition.


36: In the Kali age, all the Vedas be-
come sO Scarce that they are not seen by


45


353


men. Afflicted by iniquity, they become
extinct along with the rites and sacrifices _
laid down in them.


ed . -
37. The righteousness which is seen in
the Krita age is now seen in such Brahma-
nas as are of purified souls and as are
devoted to penances and the study of- the


| scriptures,


38. As regards the other cycles, it ig
seen that without at once giving ‘up
the duties and-acts that are consistent
with righteousness, men, observing the
Practices of their respective orders, and
conversant with the ordinances of the
Vedas, are led, by the authority of _the
scriptures, and from motives of advantage
and interest to perform sacrifices and vows
and_sojourns to sacred waters and places.


39. As in the rainy reason a farge
variety of new objects of the immobile
order are caused to come into being by
the showers that fall from the clouds, so
many new kinds of duty or religious ob«
servances are brought about in each new
cycle. . :


40. As the same phenomena reappeat
with the reappearance of the seasons, so,
at each new Creation of the same attributes
appear in each new Brahman and Hara,


41. Ihave, before this, spoken to you
of Time which is without beginnig and
without end, and which-ordains this variety
in the universe. It is that Time which
creates and destroys all creatures,


42. All the numberless creatures which
exist subject to pairs of opposites and
according to their respective natures,
have Time for their refuge. It .is Time
that puts on those forms and it is Time
gvhich upholds thent. “a


43. I have thus described to you, O son,
the topics about which you had asked, viz.,
Creation, Time, Sacrifices and other rites,
the Vedas, the real actor in the universe,
action, and the results of action.”


aD


CHAPTER CCXXXIII.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARYA).—
Continued, —


Vyasa said :—


1. "J shall now tell you how, when his
day is gone and his night comes, he with~
draws all things to himself, or how the
Supreme Master, making this gross unis
verse exceedingly subtile, merges every<
thing into his Soul.


~


354


a. When the time for utiiversal dissolu-
tion comes twelve Suns, and Agni with
his seven flames, begin to burn. ‘Wrapt by
those flamés, the entire universe, begins to
blaze forth in a huge fire.


3- All things mobile and immobile that
-are on the Earth first disappear and merge
into the substance of which this planet is
formed.

4. After all mobile and immobile objects
have thus disappeared, the Earth, shorn


of trees and herbs, looks nude like a tor- |


toise shell.


5 Then water ¢akes up the attribute
of earth, utz., scent. When earth becomes
shorn of its principal attribute, that element
is about to be destroyed.


6. Water then prevails. Surging into
big billows and rearing dreadfully only
water fills this space and moves about or
stands still.


q._ Then the attribute of water is taken
by Heat, and losing its own attribute, water
emerges in that element.


8. Dazzling flames of fire, ablaze all
around, hide the Sun that is in the centre
of ether. Indeed, then, ether itself, full of
those flames, burns inva vast fice.


9. Then Wind comes and takes the
attribute, vis., form, of Heat or Light,
which thereupon is extinguished, yielding
to Wind, which, possessed of great power,
begins to be awfully agitated.


to. Obtaining its own attribute, vs.,
sound, the Wind begins to move upwards
and downwards and transversely along all
the ten points.


11. Then Space takes the attribute, vis., |


sound, of Wind, pwpon which the latter is
extinguished and enters into a state of ex-
istence resembling that of unheard or un-
,uttered sound.


12. Then Space is all that remains, that
element whose attribute, vis., sound, exists
in all the other elements, shorn of the
attributes of form, and taste, and touch,
and scent, and without shape of any kind,
like sound in its unmanifest form of exist-
ence.


13- Then sound, which is the attribute
of space, is swallowed up by Mind which is
the essence of all manifest things. Thus
Mind which in itself is unmanifest with-
draws all that is manifested by Mind.


* This withdrawal of manifest Mind into un-


manifest Mind, is called the destruction of
the external universe.


14. Then the Moon having made Mind
withdraw its attribute into itself, swallows
itup. When, Mind, ceasing to exist, thus


MAHABHARATS


enters into the Moon, the other attribute?
of Creator are all that remain.


tg. This Moon which is called also des
termination, is then, after a very long time,
brought under Creator’s sway, the reason
being that that determination has to per-
form a very difficult work, vis., the destruc
‘tion of the faculties that are employed in the
process of judgment. When this has been
done, the condition reached is said.to be
of high knowledge.


16. Then time swallows up this Knows
ledge, and as the Shruti says, Time itself, in
its turn is devoured by Might or Energy.
Might or energy, however, is (again) de-
voured by Time, which last is then brought
under her sway by Knowledge.


17. Possessed of Knowledge, the Creator
then swallows up non-existence itself into
his Soul. That is Unmanifest and Supreme
Bratma. That is Eternal, and that is the
Highest of the High.


18, Thus all existent creatures are with«


| drawn into Brahma.


1g. Truly has this, which should be
conceived (with the aid of the scriptures)
and which is a topic of Science, been thus
said by Yogins endued with Supreme Souls,


| after actual experience.


20. Even thus does Unmanifest Brahma
tepeatedly practise the processes of Crea<
tion and Destruction, and even thus are
Brahman’s Day and Night each consisting
of a thousand Yugas.


ee


CHAPTER CCXXXIV.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued,


| Vyasa said:—


1. I have described to you fully that
which you had asked me about the Creation
of all beings. Listen to meas J tell you
now what the duties are of a Brahmana.


2. The rituals of all ceremonies for
which sacrificial fees are sanctioned, begin-
ning with birth-rite and ending with Sama-
vartana (return from preceptor’s house}
depend for their performance upon a pres
ceptor well-versed in the Vedas.


3. Having read all the Vedas and
having showed submission towards his pre
ceptor while living with him, and having
paid the preceptor’s fee, the youth should
return home with a perfect Knowledge of
all sacrifices,


SHANTI PARVA,


4. Obtaining the permission of his pre-
ceptor, he should follow one of the four
modes of life and live in i duly satisfying
its duties till he renounces his body.


gs. He should either live like a house-
holder with wives and engaged in creating
offspring, oc live the life of celibacy or in
the forest in the company of his preceptor,
or follow the duties of a Yati.


6. A house-holder’s life is said to be the
root of all the other modes of life. A self-
controlled house-holder who has mastered
all his attachments to worldly objects al-
ways becomes successful. -

7. By procreating children, by gaining
a knowledge of the Vedas, and by cele-
brating sacrifices, a Brahmana satisfies
the three debts he owes. He should then
enter the other modes of fife, having puri-
fied himself by his acts.


8. He should live for good in that place
which he ‘may ascertain ta be the most
sacred spot on earth, and he should try,
in all matters leading to fame, for attaining
to an eminent position, ,


g- The fame of Brahmanas increases
through austere penances, through mastery
of the various branches of knowledge,
through Sacrifices, and through gifts.


10.
gions of the righteous as long as his deeds
or the memory thereof exists in this world.


ir, A Brahmana should teach, study,
officiate at other people’s sacrifices, and
offer sacrifices himself. He should not give
away uselessly or accept other people’s
gifts uselessly. ;


12, Profuse wealth, that may come
from one who is assisted in a sacrifice,
from a pupil, or from marriage of a daugh-
ter, should be spent in the celebration of
asacrifice, or in making gifts. Wealth
coming from any of these sources should
never be enjoyed by a Brahmana alone.


13. For a Brahmana living like ‘a house-
holder, there is no means save the acceps
tance of gifts for the sake of the gods, or
the Rishis, dr the Pitris, or the preceptor,
or the aged, or the diseased, or the hungry.


14, One should make gifts from his
own stock, including even cooked food,
more than he can fairly afford, to those
who are persecuted by unseen foes, or
those who are trying to the best of their
power to acquire Knowledge.


1s. There is nothing that cannot be
given to a deserving person. The good
and the wise deserve to have even the
best of horses, called Uchchaishravas, be-
longing to Indra himself,


Truly, a person enjoys endless re- |"


q


355


16, Of high vows, Satyasandha, having,
with due humility, offered his own life
for saving a Brahmana, ascended to hea-
ven, j

17. Sankriti’s son Rantideva, having
given only lukewarm water to the great
Vashistha, ascended ta heaven and re-
ceived great honors there.


18. Atri’s royal and highly intelligent
son Indradamana, having given various ~
kinds of wealth to a deserving person,
acquired various regions of felicity in the
next world.


19. Ushinara’s son Shivi, having given
away his own limbs and his dear son for
the sake of a Brahmana, ascended to
heaven from this world.


20. Having given away his very eyes
to a Brahmana, Pratarddana, the king
of Kasi, enjoyed great fame both here
and hereafter.


21, Having given away a very beauti-
ful and costly umbrella, with eight golden
ribs, King Devavriddha proceeded to-
heaven with all the denizens of this king-
dom.


22. Having given instruction to his
disciples on the subject of Impersonal
Brahma, Sankriti of Atri’s race, endued
with great energy, proceeded to the regions
of great felicity.


23. Having given to the Brahmanas -
eleven Arvudas of kine, Amvarisha of
great prowess, proceeded to heaven with
all the denizens of his kingdom.

24. By giving away her ear-rings,
Savitri, and, by giving away his own body,
king Janamejaya both proceeded to high
regions of felicity.

25. By giving away various kinds of
gems, a fine palace, and many beautiful
women, Yuvanashwa the soa of Vrisha-
dabha ascended to heaven.


26. Nimi, the king the Videhas, gave
away his kingdom, Jamadagni’s son
(Rama) gave away the whole Earth; and
Gaya gave away the Earth with all her
towns and cities, to the Brahmanas.


27. Once when the clouds {ceased to
pour, Vashishtha, resembling Brahman
himself, kept alive all creatures like Praja-
pati (by his power and kindness).


28. By ‘giving away his daughter to
Angiras, Karandha’s son Marutta of puti-
fied soul, quickly ascended to jheaven,


29. Brahmadatta, the king ‘of the Pan.
chalas, possessed of great intelligence, by
giving away two costly jewels called Nidhi
and Shankha to some of the foremost of


356


the Brahmanias, acquired many regions
offelicity, “ e- ‘

30. Having ‘given his own dear wife
Mayadanti ta thé great Vashistha, King
Mitrasaha ascended to heaven with that
wife of his.


at. The royal and highly illustrious
sage Sahasrajit, having cast off his own
dear life for the sake of a Brahmana,
ascended to regions of great happiness.


2. Having given to -Mudgala a golden
pa acé furnished with every object of com-
ort and use, king Shatadyumna ascended


to heaven.


33. The king of the Shalwas, named

yutimat, endued with great prowess, gave
to Richika his entice kingdom and ascend-
ed to heaven. ;


34, By giving away his slender-waisted
daughter to Hiranyahasta, the royal sage
Madirashwa, ascended to regions esteemed
of the very gods, :

'35. By giving away his daughter Shanta
to Rishyarshringa, the highly powerful
royal sage Lomapada ,obtained the fruition
of all his wishes.


‘36. _ By giving away a luudred thousand
kine with calves, the highly energetic king
Prasenajitascended to excellent regions of
happiness,’


» 37. These and many others, endued
with great and well-ordered souls, and
having theic senses under control, ascend-
ed, by means of gifts and penances, to
heaven. :


38. Their fame will last as long as the
Earth herself will exist. All of them have,
by gifts and sacrifices and procreation of

. Children proceeded to heaven.


tires


CHAPTER CCXXXYV.


(MOKSHADHARMA' PARVA).—
Continued.


Vyasa said:—~


1. The three-fold knowledge which oc-
curs in the Vedas and their branches
should be required. ‘hat knowledge is to
be ‘got from the Richs, the Samans, and the
sciencés called Varna and Akshara. There
are, besides, the Yajushes and the Athar-
vans. The Divine Being lives in the six
sorts of acts indicated in these.


2. They who. are well-read in the in-
junétions of the Vedas, who have tnow-
lédge of the Soul, who are attached to the

uality of Goodness, and who are highly


MAHABHARATA.


blessed, succeed in understanding the ott*
gin and the end of all things,

3. A Brahmana should follow the duties
laid down in the Vedas. He should do


-all his warks like a good man of controlled


soul. He should acquire his livelihood
without injuring any creature.


4. Having derived knowledge from the
good and wise, he should govern his pas«
sions and desires. Well-vers-d in the scrip-
tures, he should follow those duties which
have been laid down for him, and do alk
works in this world guided by the qualities
of goodness. Living even like a house-
holder, the Brahmana should perform: the
six acts already spoken of.


5. With his heart full of faith, he should
adore the deities in the five well-known
sacrifices. Possessed of patience, ever
vigilant, having self-control, conversant
with duties, with a purified soul, divested
of joy, pride, and anger, the Brahmana
should never sink in langour.


6. Gifts, study of the Vedas, sacrifices,
penances, modesty, guilelessness and self-
control,—these increase one’s energy and
dissipate one’s sins.


7. One gifted with intelligence should
be abstemious in diet and should conquer
his senses. Indeed, having subdued both
lust and anger and having dissipated all
his sins, he should try to attain Brahma.


8. He should adore the Fire and Brah-
manas, and bow to the gads. He should
avoid all sorts of inauspicious talk, and all
acts of unrighteous injury.


9. This preliminary course of conduct
is first sanctioned fora Brahmana. Subse-


quently, when knowledye comes, he should


begin work, for success lies in works,


to. The Brahmana who is gifted with in-
telligente succeeds in crossing over the river
of life that is so difficult to cross and so
furious and terrible, having the five senses
for. its -@aters, cupidity for its origin, and
anger for its mire.


11. Heshould never overlook the fact
that Time stands behind him in a threaten-
ing mien,—Time who is the great stupefier
of all things, and who is armed with a very
great and irresistible force issuing from
the great Creator himself.


_ 42, Formed by the current of Nature,
the universe is being ceaselessly carried
along.


13—16. The powerful river of Time,
ovecspread with eddies formed by the
years, having the-months for. its waves and
the seasons for its current, the fortnights
for its fluating straw and grass, and the


SHANTI


4


tise and fall of the. eyelids for its froth, the
days and the nights for its water, and


desire and lust for its dreadful croco-
diles, the Vedas and sacrifices for its
rafts, and the righteousness of crea-


tures for “its islands, and Profit and
Pleasure for its springs, ‘T'ruthfulness of
Speech and Liberation for its shores, bene-
volence for the trees floating along it, and
the Yugas for the lakes along its course,—
the powerful river of Time,—which has
an origin as inconceivable as* that, of
Brahma itself, is ceaselessly ¢arrying away
all beings created by the great Ordainer
towards the abode of Yama.


17- Wise and patient persons always
succeed in crossing over this dreadful river
byjengaging the rafts of knowledge and wis-
dom. What, however, can insensiate fools,
destitute of similar rafts, do ?


18, It is reasonable that only he that is
wise should succeed in crossing this river
and not the man of little understanding.
The former sees from a distance the merits
and faults of everything.


19. The man, however, of weak and
little understanding, and whose soul is
full of desire and cupidity, is always
stricken with doubt. Hence the man
shorn of wisdom never succeeds in cross-
ing over that stream. He also who sits inac-
tively, can never cross it over,


20 The man shorn of the raft of wisdom,
in consequence of his having to bear the
heavy burden of great faults, sinks down,
One that is seized by the crocadile of
desire, even if endued with knowledge,
can never make knowledge his raft.


a1. For these reasons the wise and
intelligent man should try to float over
the stream of Time. He, indeed, succeeds
in keeping ghimself afloat who knows
Brahma.


22. One born in a noble family, abs-
taining from the three duties of teaching,
officiating at other’s sacrifices, and accep-
ting gifts, and doing only the three other
acts, vz., studying, sacrificing, and giving,
should, for those reasons, try to float over
the river. Such a. man is sure to cross it
over helped by the raft of wisdom.


23. One who is pure in conduct, who
is self-controiled and observant of good
vows, whose soul is under restraint, and
who is endued with wisdom, certainly
gains success in this and the other world,


24. The Brahmana living like a house-
holder should conquer anger and envy,
practise the virtues already named, and,
adoring the gods in the five sacrifices, eat
after having fed the gods, Pitris, and guests,


PARVA, - 357.


25. He ‘should perform those duties
which are observed by the good ; he should,
do ail his acts like a self-contralled person }
and he should without injuring any crea-"
ture, ,earn his livelihood by following a
course which is not censurable.


260-27. One who is well-read in the
truths of the Vedas and the other branches
of knowledge, whose conduct is like that
of a person of well-governed soul, who
is gifted with a clear vision, who follows.


the duties of his order, who does not, by


his acts make an intermixture of ' duties,
who follows the ebservances laid down
is the scriptures, who is full of faith, who
is self-controlled who is endued with
wisdom, who is shern:of envy and malice,
and who.is well conversant with the differ-
ences between righteous and_ iniquity,
succeeds in overcoming all his difficulues, >


28. That Brahmana. who is gifted with.
fortitude, who is always careful, who is
self-controlled who is conversant with
righteousness, whose soul. is under res-,
traint, and who has gone over joy, pride,
and anger, has never to tanguish in grief. ;


29.
laid down


This is the course of conduct
in days of yore for a
Brahmana. He should try to acquire
Knowledge, and do all the scriptural
acts. By living thus, he is sure to acquire
success. :

30, One who is not gifted ‘with clear
vision, does wrong even when one wishegto
do right. By even exercising his judyment;
such a person, does such acts of virtue ag
are wrong. ;

3t. Desiring to do what is right one
does what is wrong. Likewise desiring to
do what is wrong, one does wiiat is tight.
Such a person is a fool." Not knowing the
two kinds of acts, one has to go througt
repeated ve-births and deaths,


CHAPTER CCXXXVI, .


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA*
: Continued,


Vyasa said :—


1. If Liberation is sought for, then knows
ledge should be acquired. For a person
who is carried up and down along
the stream of Timz or life, Knowledge
is the raft by which he ean reach the
shore. -

2. Those wise men who have acquited
fixed conclusions of the nature of the soul
by the help of wisdom, are able to assist


358


the ignorant in crossing the river of time or
life with the raft of knowledge. The ignce
rant, are unable to save either themselves
or others, .


3. He who has freed himself from desire
and all other faults, and who has freed
himself from all attachments, should attend
to these twelve requirements of Yoga, v7s.,

_ place, acts, affection, objects, means, des-
truction, certainty, eyes, food, suppression,
mind and survey,


4. Hewho wishes to acquire superior
Knowledge, should, by the help of his un-
derstanding, restrain both speech and
mind. He who wishes to have tranquillity,
should, by the help of his knowledge,
govern his soul.


5—6. Whether he becomes merciful or
cruel, whether he becomes conversant with
all the Vedas or ignorant of the Richs,
whether he becomes pious and observant of
sacrifices or the worst of sinners, whether
he becomes eminent for power and wealth
or sunk into misery, that person who directs
his mind towards these, is sure to cross
the ocean of life which is so difficult to
cftoss over.


7- Without speaking of the results of
the attainment of Brahma by Voga, it may
be said that he who engages himself to
only enquire after the Soul rises above the

. necessity of observing the acts laid down in
the Vedas.


8—11. The body with individual soul
within it is an excellent car.. When sacrifices
and religious rights are made its upastha,
shame, its varutha, Upaya and Apaya, its
kuvara, the vital air called Apana, its aksha,
the vitaljair called Prana, its yuga, know-
ledge and the span of existence its points
for tieng the horses, carefulness, its beauti-
ful vandhura, the assumption of good con-
duct, its nemi, vision, touch, scent, and
hearing, its four horses, wisdom, its nabhi,
all the scriptures, its pratoda, certain know-
ledge of the scriptural sayings, its driver,
the soul, its firmly-seated rider, faith, and
self-control, its fore-runners, renunciation,
its inseparable companion following behind
and bent upon doing it good, purity the
path along which it goes, meditation, its
goal, then may that car reach Brahma and
shine there effulgently.


12. I shall -now tell you the speedy
means that should be followed by the
person who would get ready his car in
such a way for passing through this forest
of the world in order to reach the goal
formed by Brahma that is above decre-
pitude and destruction. .


_ 13. To fix the mind upon one thing at a
time is called Dharana, following proper


MAHABHARATA.


vows and restraints, the Yogin practises
in all seven kinds of Dharana, There
are, again, as many sorts of Dharanas
originating out of these, upon subjects
which are near or distant.


14. Through these the Yogin by and
by, fords over Earth,, Wiad, Ether, Water,
Fire, Consciousness, and Understanding.
After this he gradually lords over the
Unmanifest.


15. I shall. now describe to you the
conceptions in their order that are realised
by particular individuals amongst those
who practise Yoga according to the rules
and ordinances sanctioned for them. I
shall tellyou also of the nature of the
success of Yoga undertaken by him who
looks within his own self.


16. The Yoyin who casts off his gross
body, following the instructions of his pre-
ceptor, sees his soul displaying the follow-
ing forms on account of its subtility. To
him, in the first stage, the sky appears to
be filled with a subtile substance like fog.


17. Such becomes the form of the Soul
which has been separated from the body,
When this fog disappears, a second form
is seen.


18. For then the Yogin sees within him-
self, in the sky of his heart, the form of
Water. After the disappearance of water,
the form of Fire appears.


19. When this disappears, the form
that is seen that of Wind as effulgent as a
well-tempered and highly polished weapon.
Gradualéy the form shown by Wind be-~
comes like that of the thinnest gossamer.


20. Then having gained whiteness, and
the subtilety of air, the Brahman’s soul
attains the supreme whiteness and subtilety
of Ether.


2t. Listen to me, as I tell you the re-
sults of these various conditions when
they take place. That Yogin who has
been able to. conquer the element of Earth,
acquires by such mastery the power of
Creation.

22-23. Like a second Prajapati posa-
essed of a nature which knows no distur-
bances he can, from his own body, create
all sorts of creatures. With only his foe,
or with his hand or feet, that person can,
alone, make the entire Earth tremble who
has conquered the Wind. Even this is
the attribute of the Wind as said in the
Shruti. The Yogin who has conquered
Ether, can exist beightly in Space on ac-
count of his having attained to uniformity
with that element, and can also disappeat
at will,


c


‘+


SHANTI PARVA,


24. By mastering over Water, one can |
Grink up rivers, lakes, and oceans. By
mastering over Fire, the Yogin becomes so
effulgent that his form cannot be spied.
He becomes visible only when he puts out
the fire within him. When the Yogin
succeeds in destroying the consciousness of
Ego, these five elements come within his
control.


*

25. When the Understanding, which is
the soul of the five elements and of the
consciousness of Ego, is conquered, the
Yogin acquires Omuipotence, and Omni-
science.


.26. For this, the Manifest is fused into
the Unmanifest or Supreme Soul from
which the world comes into being and be-
comes what is called Manifest,


27. Listen now to me fully as I explain
the science of Unmanifest. But first of all
listen to me about all that is Manifest as
explained in the Sankhya system of philo-
sophy.

28. In both the Yoga andthe Sankhya
systems, twenty-five subjects of knowledge
have been treated in nearly the same way.
Here me as [ describe theic chief charac-
teristics.


29. What is Manifest is possessed of
those four attributes, véz., birth, growth
decay and death.


30. What does not possess these attri-
butes is said to be Unmanifest. Two Souls
are mentioned in the Vedas and in their
auxiliary sciences,


gi. The first is endued with the four at-
tributes already mentioned, and ha$a long-
ing for the four-fold objects of life. This
soul is called Manifest, and it is born of
the Unmanifest. It is both Intelligent and
not-Intelligent,


32. I have thus told you of Sattwa
{inect matter) and Kshetrajna (immaterial
spirit), Both kinds of Soul, as said in the
Vedas, become attached to objects of the
senses,


3338. The doctrine of the Sankhyas
is that one should stand aloof or dissociated
from objects of the senses, That Yogin
who is freed from attachment and pride,
who transcends all pairs of opposites such
as pleasure and pain, heat and cold, etc.,
who never yields to anger or hate, who
never speaks an untruth, who though, cen-
sured or struck still shows friendship for the
slanderer or the striker, who never thinks of
injuring others, who restrains these three,
vis., spéech, acts, and mind, and who treats
all creatures equally, succeeds in approa-
ching the presence of Brahman. That per-


son wno has no desire for earthly objects,


359 ©


who is not unwilling to take what comes,
who is dependent on earthly objects so far ag
they ate required for susrsiolig life, who is
free from cupidity, who has driven off all
sorrow, who has-controlled his senses, who
performs all necessary acts, who does not
care for beauty and dress, whose senses are
all collected, whose purposes are fever left
sindone, whotreats all creatures like friends,
who considers equally a clod of earth and a
lump of gold, who is equally disposed to«
wards friend and enemy, who is endued
with patience, who treats praise and blame
equally, who is free from longing for all
objects of desires who practises Brahma-
charyya, and who is firm and steady in all
his vows and observances, who cherishes
no malice or envy for any creature in the
universe, is a Yogin who according to
the Sankhya system succeeds in acquiring
Liberation.


39. Hear now of the way and the
means by which a person may acquire
Liberation through Yoga. That person who
moves and acts after having transcended
the power that follows the practice of Yoga
succeeds in acquiring Liberation.


40. Ihave thus described to you those
topics, vis., Liberation according to the
Sankhya system and that according to the
Yoga system) which are dissimilar if the
speaker be disposed to treat them as such.
Thus can one get over all pairs of ops
posites, Thus can one attain to Brahma,


ed


CHAPTER CCXXXVII.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued.


Vyasa said:—

1. Carried up and down in life’s ocean,
he that is capable of meditation catches
the raft of Knowledge, and for achieving
his Liberation adheres to Knowledge itself.


Shuka said :-—


2. What is that Knowledge? Is it that
learning by which, when error is gone, the
truth reveals itself? Or, is it those duties
consisting of acts to be done or achieved,
by the help of which the object sought for,
may be understood or attained? Or, is it
those duties, called absention from acts
by which an extinction of the Soul is to be-
sought? Do tell me what it is, so that by
its help the two, vzg., birth and death, may
be avoided.


Vyasa said :—


3- That fool who, believing that all this:
exists by its own Nature without, in sooth,


360
an efernal foundation, satisfies by such in-
struction the aspirations of disciples, de-
feating by his dialectical ingenuity the


reasons the latter might urge to the con-
trary, Succeeds not in acquiring any truth.


. 4 They again, who fitmly believe that
all Cause is due to the Nature of things,
cannot acquire any truth by even listening
to learned men or the Rishis.


5. T little-witted men who stop (in
theic spechlations), having adopted either
of these doctrines, those men who regard
Nature as the Cause never succeed in ac-
quiring any benefit for themselves,


6. This belief in Nature (as the pro-
ducing and the sustaining Cause), ori-
ginating as it does froma mind labouring
under the influence of error, causes the
destruction of the person who cherishes it.
Hear of the truth regarding these two
doctrines which hold {1) that things exist
by their own Nature and (2) that they
ow accordingly from others that are
different from; and that precede, them.


‘>


and


7. Wise men take to agriculture
and


tillage, and the acquisition- of crops
of vehicles, seats, carpets and houses.


8. They also look to the laying of
pleaswre-gardens, the construction of spaci-
ous palaces and the preparation of medi-
cines for all sorts of diseases.


g. It is wisdom (which consists in the


application of means) which brings about the
fruition. of objects. It is wisdom which
gains beneficial results. It is wisdom
witich enables kings to exercise and enjoy
sovereignty although they are endued with
attributes equal to those of persons over
whom they rule,


to. Itis by wisdom that the difference
is made between the high and the low
among beings. It is by wisdom that the
superior and the inferior ones among
created objects are made out. It is wisdom
or knowledge which is the greatest refuge
of all things,


tt. All the sorts of created things have
four kinds of birth. They are viviparous,
oviparous, vegetables, and those born of
’ filth. :


12. Mobile creatures should be regarded
superior to the immobile. It is reasonable
that intelligence which differentiates (all
-non-intelligent matter), should be consider-
ed superior to (non-intelligent) matter.


13. Mobile creatures,. whose number is
, legion, are of two sorts, v¢z., those that are
‘many legs and those that have two. The
b latter, however, are superior to the former.


MAHABHARATA.


14. Bipeds, again, are of two sorts, viz:,
those that live on land and those that are
otherwise. Of these, the former are superior
to the latter. The superior ones eat various
sorts of cooked food.


15. Bipeds moving on land are of two
sorts, viz., middling or intermediate, and
those that are foremost. Of these, the
middling or intermediate are considered as
superior (to the former) for their observing
the duties of caste.


--46,. The middling or intermediate ones
are said to be of two sorts, wzg., those who
are conversant with duties, and those who
are otherwise. Of those, the former are
superior for they can discriminate between
what should be done and what should not.


17. Those conversant with duties are
said to be of two sorts, vzg., those who are
acquainted with the Vedas and those who
are otherwise. Of those the former are
superior, for the Vedas are said to live in
them,


18—19. Those who are acquainted with
the Vedas are said to be of two sorts, viz.,
those who lecture on the Vedas and those
who are otherwise. Of these the former,
who are well-read in the Vedas, and are
conversant with the duties and the rites
ldid down in them, and the fruits of those
duties and rites, are superior for their
declaring all those duties and rites. Indeed,
ail the Vedas, with the duties laid down in
them, are said to emanate from them.


20. Preceptors of the Vedas are of two
sorts, @#z., those who are conversant with
the Self and those that are otherwise. Of
these the former are superior on account of
theic knowledge of Birth and Death.


21. Duties, again, are of two kinds, (viz.,
Pravritti and Nivritti}. He whois conver-
sant with duties is said to be omniscient
or endued with uuiversal knowledge. Such
aman isa Renouncer. Such a man is firm
in the fulfilment of his objects. Such a
man is truthful, pure and endued with
prowess.


22. The gods know him asa Brahmana
who is devoted to knowledge of Brahma.
Such a man is versed: also in the Vedas
ie earnestly given to the study of the

elf.


23. They who have true knowledge see :
their own self as existing both in and
out. Such men, O child, are truly twice


_ born and such men are gods,


24. ‘This world of beings depends upon
these, and in them exist this whole universes
There is nothing eaual to their vreatness,


SHANTI PARVA.


$§. Transcending birth, and death, and
distinctions and all acts, they are the fords
of the four kinds of creatures, and are the
equals of the Self-create himself,


io


CHAPTER CCXXXVIIL.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued.


- Vyasa said :—

1. These then are the obligatory acts
taid down for Brahmanas. One gifted with
knowledge, always attains to success by
going through (the prescribed) acts.


2. If no doubt is entertained about acts,
then acts done are sure to lead to success.
The doubt we speak of is whether acts are
obligatory or optional.


3. About this ff acts, are ordained for
man for gaining knowledge, they should be
_ tonsidered as obligatory, I shall now des-
tribe them by the light of inferences and
experience, Hear me.


4« Regarding acts some men hold that
Exertion is their root. Others say that
. Necessity is their cause. Others, again,
hold that Nature is the cause,


5. Some hold that acts are the outcome
of both Exertion and Necessity. Some
hold that acts originate from Time, Exer-
tion, and Nature. Some hold that of the
three, one only is the cause. Some hold
that all three-combined are the cause.


6. Some persons who perform acts say,
with respect to all objects, that they exist,
thatthey do net exist, that they cannot be
said to exist, that they cannot be said not
to exist, that it is not that they can-
not be said to exist, and lastly, that it is
not that they cannot be said not to exist.
These then are the diverse views enter-
tained by men. The Yogins, however, see
Brahma as the universal cause.

7. The men of the Treta, the Dwapara,
and the Kali Yugas, are filled with doubts.
The men, however, of the Krita Yuga, are
given to penances, endued with tranquil
souls, and observant of righteousness.

8. In that age all men consider the
Richs, the Samans, and the Vajushes as

‘jdentical, despite their seeming diversity.
Analysing desire and hatred, they adore
only penance,

9. Given to the practice of penances,
firm in them, and rigid in their observance,
one acquires the fruition of all desires by
penances alone,


46


36t


10 By penance ove acquires to that
position, by becoming which one creates the
universe. By penance one becomes that
by which one becomes the powerful master
of ali things.


11, That Brahma has been expounded
in the injunctions of the Vedas. For all
that, Brabma cannot be conceived by
even those who are conversant with those
declarations. Once more has Brahma been
described in the Vedanta. Brahma, howe
ever, cannot be seen by means of acts.


£2. The sacrifice ordained for Brah-
manas consits in recitation), that for Ksha-
triyas consists in the destruction of (clean)
animals for the satisfaction of the gods;
that for Vaishyas consits in the rearing of
crops and the keep of domestic animals ;
and that for Shudras in menial service of
the three other castes. ‘


13. By observing the duties sanctioned
for him, and by studying the Vedas and
other scriptures, one becomes a twice-born
one whether one does any other deed or
net, he hecomes a Brahmana by becoming
the friend of all creatures. ‘


14. In the beginning of Treta, the
Vedas and sacrifices and the distribution of
caste and the several modes of life existed
in full, On account of the duration of life
belie decreased in Dwapaca, those suffer
ecline,


15. In the Dwapara age as also in
the Kali, the Vedas become of doubtful
interpretation. Towards the close of Kali
again, it is doubtful if they ever can be
seen by the eye.


16. In that age, the duties of the rés~
pective castes disappear, and men become
possessed by sin; the juicy attributes of
kine, of the earth, of water, and of herbs,
disappear,


17. Through (universal) sin the Vedas
disappear, and with them all the duties
laid down in them, as also the duties of the
four modes of life. They who follow the
duties of their pwn order become afflicted,
and all mobile and immobile objects suffer


a change for-the worse,


18. As the rain from the sky causes all
products of the Earth to grow, likewise the
Veda developes all its auxilliaries.


19. Forsooth, Time assumes variou¢
shapes. It has neither beginning nor
end. It is Time which creates all crea
tures and again devours them. I have
already spoken of it to you.


20. Time is the origin of all creatures ;
itis Time which makes them grow; Time
is their destroyer; and lastly itis Time


362


which is their rufer, Subject to pairs of op-
posites, innumerable sorts of creatures rest
on Fime, actording to their own natures.


nna


CHAPTER CCXXXIX.
(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—


Continued,


Bhishma said:— .

1. ‘Thus addressed by his father, Shuka,
highty praising these instructions of the
great Rishi, began to ask the following
question regarding the import of duties
which brings on Liberation.


Shuka said :—.

2 By whst means does a wise man
well-read in the Veads, observant of sacri-
fices,and shorn of malice attains to Brahma
which is in¢apable of being apprehended by
either direct evidence or inference, and in-
¢apable of being described by the Vedas.

3. Asked by me, tell me by what
means can Bratma be known. [fs it by
penance, by Brahmacharyya,. by renuncia-
tion of everything, by intelligence, by help
of the Sankhya philosophy, or by Yoga ?

4. Whatare the means and what sort
of singleness of purpose may men. acquire


senses? You should explaia all this to
me [ ‘
Vyasa said :—

5. ‘Noman achieves success by any


ether means save the acquisition of know-
fedge, the practice of penances, the control -


of the senses, and renunciation of every-
thing.


6, The great elements (five in number) ;


represent the first creation of the Self- and touchy: and <form:


create, They have been very targely- put
jn embodied creatures living in the world
of life.


yz. The bodies of all embodied creatures |


are ‘originated from earth. Their humours
originate from water. Their eyes originate
from light. Prana, Apana, (and other
vital breaths,) depend on the wind. And,
tastly, all unoccupied apertures within
them originate from Space, .


8. Vishnu is in the feet (of living crea-
tuces). Indra is in their arms. Within the
-stomach hes Agni, desirous of eating. The
-points of the horizon are in the ears, the
organ of hearing.
goddess of learning, is in the tongue.


9. The ears, skin, eyes, tongue, and


| standing tives, has no real existence.


; thé Soul, as surrounded by six and


Speech, which is the }


MAHABHARATA,


nose forming the fifth, are the senses of
knowledge. These exist for apprehending
. their respective objects. ‘


10. Sound, touch, form, taste, and scent
for the fifth, are the objects of the (five}
senses. These should always be consi-
dered as distinet from the senses,


it. Like the charioteer driving his wel?
trained horses along the paths he likes,
} the mind, moves the senses. The mind, in
its turn, is moved by the Understanding
sitting in the heart.


12. The mindis the lord of all these’
senses employing them in theic functions
and guiding or controlling them. Like-
wise, the Understanding is the lord of
the mind,


13. The senses, the objects of the
senses, the attributes of the objects of
Nature, understanding, mind, the vital aire
and individual soul dweJl in the bodies of
all embodied creatures.


14. The body within which the Under-
The
body, therefore, is not the seat of the
Understanding. Nature (Prakriti), endued


| with three qualities, is the refuge of the _


Understanding which exists only in the
form of-a sound. ‘The Soul also is not the
refuge of the Understanding. It is Desire
which creates the Understanding. Desire,


| however, never creates the three qualities.
regarding both, vte., the mind and the |


15. The wise man, capable of control-
ling his senses, sees the seventeenth, o7s.,
ten
qualities, in his own Understanding by


the help of the mind.


16. The Soul cannot be seen with the
help of the eye, or with that of all the


.senses, Getting over alt, the Soul car
| be seen By only the Hght of the mind’s
. lamp. :


17. Shorn of the properties of sound
without taste and
smell, indestructible and without a body


| and without senses, it is nevertheless seer


within the body,


18. Unmanifest and supreme, it lives
in all mortal frames, Guided by the pre-
ceptor and the Vedas, he who sees it here-
after becomes Brahma’s self.


19. The wise see impartially a Brah~
mana gifted with knowledge and disciples,
a cow, an elephant, a dog, and a Chandalav


20. Transcending all things, the Souk
lives.in all creatures, mobile and immobile.
Inéeed, all things are permeated by it.


_ 2p. Wher a living creature sees his
own Soul in all things, and all things iv


{ } ;


SHANTI PARVA.


his own Soul, he fis said to attain to
Brahma.


22. One occupies the Supreme Soul
proportionate to what is occupied.in one’s
own soul by Vedic sound. He who can
always realise the identity of all things
with his own self, forsooth, acquires immor+

- tality.

23. Eventhe geds are stupefied in the
path of that trackless man who forms the
soul of all creatures, who is engaged in
the well-being of all creatures and who
wishes to attain,to the final refuge (of all
things).

24. Indéed, the road whichis followed
by men of knowledge is as invisible as
that of birds in the sky or of fish in water.


25. ‘Time, by its own power, cooks all
entities within itself, No one, however,
knows. That in which Time, again, is itself
cooked.


26. That does not take place above, |


or in the middle or below, or in transverse
ec in any other direction. That is no
tangible thing and cannot be found in
any place.


27. All these worlds exists within That.
There is nothing in these worlds which
exists out of That. Even if one goes on
ceaselessly with the motion of arrow shot
off the bow-string, even if one goes on
with the speed of the mind itself, one
would not still get at the end of that which
is the cause of all this. ‘There is nothing
grosser than that.


29. His hands and feet are everywhere.
His eyes, head,’ and face are everywhere,
His ears are éverywhere in the universe,
He exists occupying all things.


30. That is minuter than the minutest,
and is the heart of allthings. Though ex-
isting, that is still imperceptible.


31. Indestructible and destructible,—
these are the dual forms of the (Supreme)
Self. The existence it shows in all mobile
and immobile entities is destructible ;
while the existence it shows in Chaitanya is
celestial, immortal, and indestructible.


32. Though the master of all existent
beings both mobile and immobile, though
inactive and shorn of attributes, it enters
nevertheless the well-known house of nine
doors and becomes engaged in, action.


33. Wise men who can see the other
shore hold that the Supreme Soul becomes
endued with the attribute of action on ac-
count of motion, pleasure and pain, variety
of form, and the nine well-known poss-
essions. ’


34. That ix destructible Soul which is


363


said to be endued with the attribute of ac-
tiots is nothing else than that indestructible
Seul which is said to beinactive. A learn--
ed person, by attaining to that indestruce
tible essence, gives up fer ever both life
and birth,


5 aespemmnemed


CHAPTER CCXL.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).=
Continued.


Vyasa said :—

1. O excellent son, accosted by you, 1°
have told you truly what the answer to your *
question should be according to the doc»
wine of Knowledge as explained in the
Sankhya system,


2—5. Listen now to meas I explain to
you all that should be done according to
the Yoga doctrine. . The unision of intel+
lect and Mind, and all the Senses, and the -
all-prevading Soul is said to be the high-
est kind of Knowledge, That Knowledge
should be gained by one who is of a tran-.
quil mind, who has governed his senses,
who is capable of seeing the Soul, who
takes pleasure in (such) meditation, who |
is gifted with intelligence and purety in acts. |
One should try to gain this Knowledge by
abandoning those five obstacles of Vice:
which ate known to the wise, namely, |
desire, anger, cupidity, fear, and sleep.
Anger is conquered by ely of dis-
position. Desire is defeated by giving up‘
all purposes. - ©

6, By meditating with the help of the.
understanding upon topics deserving medi-
tation one, gifted with patiencé, succeeds in
relinquishing sleep. By steady endurance
one should govern his organs of generation -
and the stomach. One should protect his .
hands and feet by his eyes.. *


7. One should protect his eyes and ears
by the help of his mind, and his mind and
speech by his acts. One should avoi
by earefulness, and pride by atte the
wise. ; oo

8. Controlling procrastination, one should
by these means subdue these obstacles of
Yoga. One should pay his adorations to
fice and the Brahmanas and should bow his '
head to the gods, ;

. One should avoid all kinds of un;
holy conversation and malicious speech
and words which pain. other minds.
Brahma is the effulgent seed. It is again,
the essence of that seed. fig which pres
ceeds all this, oN


364


to—1tt. Brahma became the eye, in the
form of this mobile and immobile universe,
of allelements that were born. Medita-
tion, study, gift, teuth, modesty, simplicity,
forgiveness, purity of body, purity of cor.
duct, and subjugation of the senses, these
increase one’s energy which dissipates
his sins.


12. By treating impartially all creatures
and by living contentedly upon what is
gained easily and without exertion one ac-
quires the fruition of. all his objects and
succeeds in gaining knowledge.


13. Purged of all sins, gifted with
energy, sparing in diet, with senses under
complete control, one should, after having
subdued his desire and anger, try to attain
to Brahma,


14. Uniting firmly the senses and the
tind with gaze fixed inwards, one should,
in the silent hours of evening or those
before dawn, fix his mind upon the under-
Standing.


18. If even ont of the five senses of a
human being be kept ungoverned all his
wisdom escapes through it like water
through a hole not made up at the bottom
of a leathern bag.


16, The mind in the’ first instance
should be controlled by the Yogin like a
fisherman trying at the commencement to
make that oné atmong the fish powerless
from which he anticipates the greatest
danger to his nets. Having first governed
the mind, the Yogin should then proceed
to subdue his ears, then his tongue, and
then his nose,


17. Having controlied these, he should
fix them on the mind. Then withdrawing
the mind from all purposes. he should
Settle it on the understauding.


18—19. Indeed having governed the five
Senses,the Yati should fix them on the
mind. When these with the mind for the
sixth become concentrated in the under-
standing, and thus centred remain steady
and firm then Brahma becomes perceptible


i mokeless blazing fire or the effulgent
aes


20. Indeed, one then beholds in him-
self his own soul like lightning in the fir-
mament. Everything then appears in it
and it appears. in everything on account
of its infinitude.


at. Those great Brahmanas, who are
possessed of wisdom; who.are endued. with
fortitude, who are possessed of high know-
ledge and who. are ehgaged jn the well-
being of all creaturss, succeed in saying it.


-22, Practising austere vows, the Yogin,
whe acts thus for six months seated by


MATIABIIARATA


himself on a fonely spot, becomes at one
with the Indestructible,

23—42. Acquiring by Yoga annihila-
tion, extension, power to present different
shapes in the same person or body, celestiat
scents, and sounds, and sights, the most
agreeable sensations of taste and touch,
pleasurable sensations of coolness and
warmth, equality with the wind, power to
understand the meaning of scriptures and
every work of genius, living with celestial
damsels, the Yogin should not care for
them and merge them all in the Under-
Standing,


25. Restraining words and the senses
one should practise Yoga after dusk and
before dawn, seated on a mountain summit,
or atthe toot of a huge tree or with a tree
before him.


26. Controlling all the senses within the
heart, one should, with faculties concen«
tred, think on the Eternal and Indestruc-
tible like a man of the world thinking of
wealth and other valuable properties. One
should never, while practising Yoga, with-
draw his mind from it,


27. One should with devotion pursue
those means by which he may control the
restive mind. One should never suffer
himself to fall away from it,


28. With the senses.and the mind with
drawn from everything else, the Yogin
should repair to empty caves of mountains,
to temples consecrated to the gods and to
empty houses or apartments, for living
there.


29. One should not mix with another in
either speech, act or thought. Disregard-
ing all things and eating very sparingly
the. Yogin should regard equally objects
acquired or lost.


30. He should treat equally one who
praises and one who censures him. He
should not seek the good or the evil of one
or the other.


gt. He should not rejoice at an acquisi-
tion or be sorry at a failure or loss. ‘lreat-
ing all beings equally he should imitate
the wind. F


32. Brahma, as represented by sound,
appears very clearly unto one whose mind
is thus turned to itself, who leads a pure
life, and who sees all things equally, indeed
unto one who. is ever engaged in Yoga
thus for even six months,


33. _ Seeing all men stricken with anxiety
the Yogin should regard a clod of earth,
A piece of stone, anda lump of gold with
an equal eye. Indeed, he should with-
draw himself from this path, cherishing a


SHANTI PARVA.


hatred for it, and never allow himself to
be stupified.

34. By following the path indicated
above, even a person of an inferior caste,
oc a woman, will surely acquire the
highest end,


35. Hewho has subdued his mind sees
in his own self, by the help of his owa
understanding the Increate, Ancient, Un-
deteriorating, and Eternal Brahma. —That
which cannot be attained to except by con-
trolled senses,—That which is subtiler than
the most subtile, and grosser than the
most gross, and which is Emancipation’s
self
Bhishma said :—

36. ‘By ascertaining from the precep-
tors and by themselves reflecting with their
- minds upon.these words of the great Rishi
“.spoken-so -properly wise persous become
atone. with Brahma himself, till, indeed,
._ the time when the universal dissolution sets
in that swallows up all existent beings.’


—


CHAPTER CCXLI.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA),—
Continued.


Shuka said :—


1. ‘The injunctions of the Vedas are
twofold. They once lay down the com-
mand,—Do all acts,— They again declare
renounce acts.—I ask—where do persons
goby the help of Knowledge and where
by the help of acts.


2. I wish ta hear this. Do tell me this.
Indeed, these injunctions about knowledge
and acts are dissimilar and even con-
tradictory.


Bhishma said :~


3~4. Thus addressed, the son of Para-
sara said to his son:—I shalt explain to
you the two paths, viz., the destructible and
the indestructible, resting respectively
upon acts and knowledge. Listen with
rapt attention, O child, to meas I point out
to you the place which is reached by one
with the help of knowledge, and that other
place which is reached with the help of
acts. The difference between these two
places is as great as the endless firma-
ment.


s. The question which you have asked
me has given me much pain as an atheistic
talk gives to a religious man.


6. These are the two paths upon which


-ed.


365


the Vedas are settled: the duties (acts) in-
dicated by action and those based on re-
nunciation described so beautifully.


7. By acts a living creature is destroy
By knowledge, however, he becomes
free. Therefore, Yogins, who see the other
side of the oceau of life, never perform
acts.


8. Through acts one is compelled to
talse rebirth, after death with a body com-
posed of the sixteen ingredients. Through
knowledge, however, one becomes meta-
morphosed into that which is Eternal, Un-
manifest, and Immutable.


9 Little-witted persons speak highly
of acts. On account of this they have to -
assume bodies ceaselessly.


to. Those men, who have keen percep-
tions about duties and who have attained
tothat high understanding, never speals
highly of acts even as persons, who depend
for their deinking water upon the supply
of streams never speak highly of wells and
tanks,


1114. The fruit of acts consists of
pleasure and pain, of existence and non-
existence. By knowledge one attains to
that where there is no occasion for grief ;
where one becomes freed from both birth
and death; where one is not subject to de-
crepitudé; where one gets over the state of
conscious existence; where is Brahma
which is Supreme, Unmanifest, immutable,
ever-existent, imperceptible, above the
reach of pain, immortal, and transcending
destruction; where all become freed from
the influence of ali pairs of opposites.as also
of wish or purpose. Reaching that stage,
they regard everything equally, become


‘universal friends and devoted to the well-


being of all creatures, There isa huge
gulf, O son, between one given to know-
ledge and one given to acts.


15. Know that without suffering des-
truction, the man_ of knowledge exists for
ever like the moon on the last day of the
dark fortnight existing in a subtile form.


16. The great Rishi has described this
mere fully. Regarding the man given to
acts his nature may be inferred from seeing
the new moon which appears like a bent
thread in the sky. :


17. Know, O son, that the man of acts
is born again with a body with eleven ele-
ments for its component parts which are the
results of modification, and with a subtile
from which represents a total of sixteen.


48. The god who resides in that (mate-
rial) form, like a drop of water on a lotus
leaf, should be known as Kshetrajaa (Soul)


366."


which is Eternal and which gets over by
Yoga both the mind and the under-
standing.


19. Goodness, darkness, and ignorance
ate Che qualities of the Understanding.
‘The understanding is the attribute of the
individual ‘soul living within the body.
The individual soul, in its turn, emanates
from the Supreme Soul.


-g0. The body with the soul is said to be
the attribute of mmdividual soul. It is indi-
vidual soul which acts and causes all bodies
to live. He who has created the seven
worlds is said by those who are acquainted
with what is Kshatra to be above indivi-
dual soul,


CHAPTER CCXLIL.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA.—
Continued,


Shuka said :—


1. Ihave now understood that there are
two kinds of creation, viz., one universal
emanating from the (universal) Soul. The
other consisting of the senses wittr their
objects, originates from the power of the
Understanding. ‘This last transcends the
other and is considered to be the foremost.


2. I wish however, to once more hear of
that path of righteousness which runs in
this world, regulated by the virtue of ‘ime
and according to whigh all good men form
their conduct


3. Inthe Vedas there are.both kinds of
Saying, do acts. and avoid acts. How
shall I sueceed in determining which of
the two is right? You should explain this
clearly. .


4. Having acquired through your ins-
tructions, a thorough knowledge of the
course of conduct of human beings, having
purified myself by the practice of only
righteousness, and having cleansed my
understanding, I shall, after renouncing
my body, see the indestructible Soul,


Vyasa said :—

5. The course of conduct that was first
laid down by Brahman himself was duly
followed by the wise and pious persons of
yore. viz., the great Rishis of ancient , times.


6—8. The grcat Rishis conquer all the
worlds by the-practice of celebacy. Seek-
ing all things which are good for himself,
by fixing the mind on the understanding,
practising severe austerities, by living in
forest and living -on fruits and roots, by


MAHABHARATA.


treading on sacred spots, by practising unis
versal benevolence, and by begging alms
at the prpper time from the huts of hermits
when these become smokeless and the


sound of the husking rod is hushed a person


attains to Brahma,


g. Abstaining from flattery and from
bowing your head to others, and avoiding
both good and evil, live in the forest alone
appeasing hunger by any means that pre-
sents itself before you.


to. The saying of the Vedas are, in the
opinion of the ordinary persons, contradic-
tory. Whether this is authoritative or that.
isso, when there is this conflict, how can
they be considered to be spiritual,


it. LT wishto hear this: how can both
be considered as authoritative. How in-
deed, can liberation be obtained without
violating the ordinance regarding the obli-
gatory character of acts. ,


Bhishma said :—

12, ‘hus addressed the son of Gandha-
vali, viz., the Rishi, praising these words
of his highly energetic son, replied to him
as follows.


‘Vyasa said:


13. One who is a Brahmacharin, one
who lives like a house-holder, one who isa
hermit and one who lives like a mendicant,
all reach the same high end by duly satis-
fying the duties of their respective modes
of life. :


14. Or if one, and the same person,
shorn of desire and aversion, follows (one
after another) all these four modes of life
according to the ordinances that have been
laid down, he is certainly gratified (by such
conduct) to understand Brahma.


15. The four modes of life form a lad-
der or flight of steps. That flight attaches
to Brahma. By ascending that flight one .
reaches the region of Brahma.


16, For following the fourth mode of life °
the Brahmacharin, cotversant with the
distinctions of duty and shorn of malice, '
should Ilve with the preceptor or his pree °
ceptor’s son,


17-18. While living in the preceptor’s-
house, tre should seek bed after the precep-
tor has gone to his and rise therefrom
before the preceptor rises from his. He.
should do all such acts again which a dis-.
ciple as alsoa_ menial servant should do.
Doing these he should humbly stand by
his preceptor. Skilled in every kind of .
work, he should act like a menial servant, °
doing every act for his preceptor, :


SHANTI


1g. Having performed all acts, he
should study, sitting at the feet of his pre-
ceptor, with anxious desire to learn. He
should always behave with simplicity,
avoid evil speech, and take lessons only
when his preceptor asks him for it.


20. Becoming pure in body and mind,
and acquiring cleverness and other virtues
he should now and then speak what is
pleasant. Controlling his senses he should
look at his preceptor without curiosity.


21. He should never eat before his pre-
ceptor has eaten; never drink before his
preceptor has drunk; never sit down before

-his preceptor has sat down ; and never go
to bed before his preceptor has gone.


_ 22. He should gently touch his pre-
ceptor’s feet with palms, the right foot with
the right hand and the left foot with the
left.


23. Reverentially saluting the precep-
tor, he should say to him :—O illustrious
_ one, teach me! FE shalt do this, O illustrious

one! This I. have already done, O twice
‘ born one. t am ready to do whatever else

your reverend self may be pleased to
command,


. 24. Having said all this, and having
duly offered himself (thus), he shoutd
perform whatever acts of his preceptor
wait for doing and having-completed them
inform the preceptor once more that they
have been done,


25. What scents or tastes the Brahma-
charin may abstain from while actually
leading a life of celebacy may be used by
him after his return from the preceptor’s
house. ‘This ts according to the ordinance.


_ 26. Whatever observances have been
laid down in full for Brabmacharins shoutd
all be regularly practised by him. He
should be always at the beck and call of
his preceptor,

27.
this way to the best of his powers, the
disciple should, from that mode of life,
enter into the others and practise the
duties of each,


28. Having (thus) spent a fourth part
of his life in the study of the Vedas, and
observance of vows and fasts, and having
given the preceptor his fee, the disciple
should, according to the ordinance, bid
adieu and return home for becoming a
house-holder.

29. Then, having married according
to the ordinances, and having carefully
established the domestic fire, he should,
observing all the vows and fasts, become a
house-holder and pass the second period
of life,


Having pleased his preceptor in.


PARVA. 367


CHAPTER CCXLII.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).
Continued.


Vyasa said :—-

1. Performing meritorious vows, the
house holder, for the second period of his
life, should tive in his house, having mare
ried according to the ordinance and
having establisl:ed a fire.


2. Four kinds of conduct have beer
enunciated by the learned for the domestic
mode of life. The first consists of keeping
grain in store sufficient to last for three
years. ‘Fhe second is of keeping a store
to last for one year. :


3. The third is of providing for the day
without thinking for the merrow. The
fourth consists of collecting grain like a
pegion. Of these each one is superior in
merit to its predecessor as has been laid
down by the seriptures,


4. Observing the first kind of conduct
a householder may practise all the’ six
well known duties, He who observes the
second kind of conduet showd pérform
three only of these duties, namely learning,
giving and taking. -He who follows: the
third kind of conduct should practise only
two of the duties (vie, learning, and

iving). The householder practising the
ourth mode of life should observe only one
duty (vis, reading the scriptures.


g. The duties of the hquseholdér are alt
considered as highly meritorious. The
householder should never ¢ook any food
only for his owt use; nor should he kift
animals (for food) except in sacrifices. ~


6. If a householder’ wishes to slay (for
food), or to eut down a tree (for fuel), he
should do both the acts aecording to the
ritual laid down wm the Yajur for that
much is due to both animate and manimate
Creation, The householder should never
sleep during the day, or in the first or the
last part of the night.

7. He should never take two meals bet~-


ween morning and evening, and should
never call his wife te bed except in her


season. In his house no  Brahmana
sheuld be allowed to remain unfed or
unadored,


- 89. He should always adore such
guests who present sacrificial offerings,
who are cleansed by Vedic learning, who
observe excellent vows, who are high-born
and conversant with the scriptures, who
follow the duties of their own order, who
are self-controlled, mindful of all religious
acts, and devoted to penances. The


368


scriptures hold that what is offered to the
gods and the departed manes in sacrifices
and religious rites, is meant for the service
of guests like these.


torr, In this mode of life, the scrip-
tures hold that a portion of the food, should
be given to every creature, to one, who
for the sake of show, keeps his nails and
beard, to one who from pride shows what
his own (religious) practices are, to one
who has unduly abandoned his sacred
fire, and even to one who has injured bis
preceptor. A house holder should give
(food) to Brahmacharins and Sanyasins,


12-413. ‘Phe house-holder, should every
day eat Vighasa and ambrosia. Mixed
with clarified butter, the remains of the food
which is offered in sacrifices, make ambro-+
sia. That householder who eats after having
fed his servants, is said to eat Vighasa.
The food, which remains after the servants
have been fed, is called Vighasa, and that
which is left after the presentation of
sacrificial offerings, is called amrita.


14. A householder should be content
with his own married wife. He should be
self-controlled. He should avoid malice
and control his senses. ,


15-16. He should never fall out with
his sacrificial priest, ordinary, and precept-
or, with his maternal uncle and guests and
dependants, with the aged and the young,
with these who suffer from diseases, with
those who practise as physicians, with kins-
nen, relatives, and friends, with his parents,
with women who belong to his own pater-
nal family, with his brother and son and


wife, with his daughter, and with his
servants,
17. By avoiding quarrels with these, the


householder becomes purged of all sins.
By conquering such disputes, he succeeds
in conquering all the blessed regions, There
is no doubt in this.


18. The ‘preceptor is able to take one
to the regions of Brahman. The father
can take to the regions of Prajapati. The
guest is powerful enough to lead to the
region of Indra, The priest has the power
to take to the regions of the celestials.
Female relatives on the father’s side have
power over the regions of the Apsaras,
ahd blood relatives over the regions of the
Vishvedevas.


1g. Relation by marriage and collateral
-kinsmen have power over the several
quarters of the horizon (vis., north, &c.)
and the mother and the maternal uncle
have power over the Earth. The old, the
young, the afflicted, the worn out have
power over the firmament.


MAHABHARATA,


20. The eldest brother is like a fathet
(to all his younger brothers). The wife
ahd the son are one’s own body. One's
menial servants are his shadow. The
daughter is an object of great love.


21. Therefore a househoulder, gifted
with learning, observant of duties and
endued with endurance, should bear with«
out excitement or anxiety every sort of
aunoyance and even censure from the lasts *
named relatives.


22. No pious householder should do
any act, out of consideration for money.
There are three courses of duty attached
to the domestic mode of a life. OF these
every succeeding one is more meritorious
than the preceding one. ‘6


23. The same rule of merit holds good
regarding the four modes of life also vis.,
every succeeding one is superior to-the one
preceding it. é


24. One seeking prosperity, should pers
form all those duties and rites that have
been laid down in the scriptures regarding
those modes. = :


25. That kingdom becomes prosperous
where these highly deserving persons dwell
vis., those who live like houselolders ac«
cording to the Kumbhadhanya method,
they who live according to the Uncha
method, and they who live according to
the Kapoti method.


26. That man, who cheerfully fives like
a householder, observing those duties, sucs
‘ceeds in sanctifying ten generations of
his ancestors above and ten generations
below.


27. A householder, duly observing the
duties of domestic life, acquires what gives
in the end happiness, equal to what takes
place in the regions attained’ by great kings
andemperors. Even such is the end of
thosewho have controlled their senses.


28. Heaven has been ordained for all
great householders. That heaven is filled
with charming cars for each. Even that
is the charming heaven described in the
Vedas.


29. The regions of heaven form the high
mead for all householders of controlled
minds,

go. The Self-born Brahma ordained
that the domestic life, should secure heaven,
and since it has been so ordained, a person,
by gradually following the second mode of


life, obtains happiness in heaven.


31. After this comes that high and
superior mode of life, called the third, for
those that are desirous of renouncing their
bodies, Svperior to that of householders


SHANTTI PARVA.


histhe life of hermits,-who reduce their
bodies into skeletons overlaid with dried
skins. Listen as I describe to this subject
to you further more.”


CHAPTER CCXLIV.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued,


Bhishma said :—


1. ‘ You have been told what the duties


of a householder are as ordained by the
wise. Listen now, O Yuditisthira, to the
next class of duties.


» 2. Gradually leading off the domestic
mode, one should enter the third mode
which is good. It is the mode which is
followed by persons who living with their
wives pain themselves by means of austeri-


ties. - It is the mode followed by those who_


live in forest as hermits.


. 3. Biessed be you, O son, listen to the
duties observed by those who follow this
mode of life in which are set forth the prac-
tices of all men and all modes of life. List-
en, indeed, to the duties of these who live
in sacred spots and who have adopted this
mode after proper consideration.


Vyasa said :—

4. When the householder sees his body
wrinkled and hair white on his’ head, and
children of his children, he should then re-
tire into the forest.


5. He should pass the third portion of
his life as Vanaprastha. He should wor-
ship those sacred fires to which he had .at-
tended while a householder. Desirous of


performing sacrifices, he should also wor- .


ship the gods,


6. Observing vows.and being sparing in
diet, he should eat only once, during the
sixth part of the day. He should be
always careful. Adoring his fires, he
should keep some kine, serving them duti-
fully. He should perform all the rituals of
a sacrifice,


7, He should live upon rice and wheat
which grows indegencusly, and upon other
sorts of grains, growing wildly. He should
eat the remnant after feeding guests. In
the third mode of life, he should make
offerings of clarified buttet in the five cele-
brated Sacrifices,


8. Four- courses of conduct have been
Jaid down for the Vanaprastha mode of
life. Some gather only what is necessary


47


369


for the day. Seme store up things for a
month, :


9. Some cdllect grain and other neces«
saries sufficient to last for twelve years.
Hermits may act thus for adorine zi ts
and performing sacrifices.


1o. They should during the rains, ex-
pose themselves to rain and yo -te water
during the autumn. Tn summer, thev
should sit in the midst of four fires with the
sun burning overhead. ‘Phroughout the
year, however, they shouid be sparing in


diet.


11. They should sit and sleep on the
naked earth. They stand on only their
toes. They should be satisfied with .the
bare earth and with small mats of grass.
They perform their ablutions morning,
noon, and evening.


12. Some amongst them use only theie
teeth for cleaning grain. Others use only
stones for the same. Some amongst them
drink, only during the light fortnight, boil-~-
ed very lightly, gruel of wheat (or other
grain). -

13. Others drink similar gruel only
during the dark fortnight. Some eat what
only comes of itself. -Some practising rigid
vows, live upon only roots, some upon only
fruits, some upon only flowers, duly folow-
ing the method followed by the Vaikhana~
shas,


14. These and various other observances
are practised by those wise and pious men.
The fourth mode of life is based upon the
Upanishads.


15. The duties prescribed for it may be
observed in all the modes of life équally.
Differing from the others this mode comes
after domestic and forest life.


16—18. In this very cycle, O son, many .
learned Braimanas knowing. the truths of
all things, have been known fo observe this,
mode. Agzstya, the seven Rishis Madhu-
ehchhandas, Aghamarsiana, S2 ikrjti,Sudi-
vatandi who lived whithergoever he pleased
and was Content to take what camé (with-
out ever seeking for anything), Aboviryyva,
Kavya, Vandya, the learned Medhatithi,
the highly energetic Karmanirvaka, and
Shunyapala who had worked hard (for ace
quiring Yoga power), were the authors of
this course of duties, and themselves prace
tising them, have aii gone to heaven,


19~—21. Many great Rishis, O son, who
had the power to see immediately the fruits
of their asceti¢é merit, those numberless ag-
cetics who pass by the appellation of Yaya~
varas, many Rishis of very vustere penan-
ces and endned with accurate knowledge
about distinctions of duty, and many chez,


370


MAHABHARATA:


Brahmanas too numerous to mention, | and leave off Vedic stitdy and the sacred


adopted the forest mode of life. The Vai-
khanasas, the Valikhilyas, the Saikatas,
all of whom were given to austere penances,
who were firm in virtue, who had controlled
their senses, and who used to see the fruits
of their penances immediately, adopted this
tmode of life and finally went to heaven,


22—23. Freed from fear and not count-
ed with the stars. and planets, these have
become visible in the sky as luminaries.
When thejfourth or last part of life is got at,
and when one is weakened by decrepitude
and possessed by disease, one should leave
off the forest mode of life. Performing a
sacrifice capable of being completed in a


single day and in which the sacrificial fee }


should be everytning he has, he should
himself perform his own funeral rite.
Withdrawn from every other object, he
should devote himself to his own sell, taking
pleasure in himself, and depending afso on
sis own self, He should put up alt his sa-
crificial fires (thenceforth) upon his ownself,
and sever all sorts of bonds and attaclr-
ments. :


25--z6. He should altways celebrate
such sacrifices and rites as are completed
in a single day. When, however, from
performance of the (ordinary) sacrifices of
sacrificers, the Sacrifice in Self begins,
then for liberation “he should sacrifice his
own self in the three fires. Without finding
fault with his food he should take five or
six mouthfuls, offering them duly to the five
_ airs uttering Mantras of the Yajur-
veda.


27,
like a forest recluse, ohe should shave off
his hair and bristles and pare off, his nails,
and having purified himself by acts, pass
into the fourth and the last holy mode
of life.

28. That twice-born one who enters the
foucth mode of life, giving pledges of assue
rance to all creatures, succeeds in acquir-
ing many effulgent regions hereafter and
ultimately attains to the Infinite.


29. OF excellent disposition and con- |


duct, with sins all putged off the person
who ts conversant with his own self never
wishes to perform any act for either this or
the other world. Shorn of anger, error,
anxiety and without frrendship, such a
person lives in this world like one-having
nothing to do with it.


30. One in the (observance of Sannyasa)
should not be unwilling in satisfymg the
duties included in Yama and those also
tat wale behind them. Such a person
should live energetically. according to the
ordinanees laid down for his own mode,


| Of life.


Practising austerities while living.


thread which marks his birth. Given to
righteousness and having his senses under
complete control, sucly a person endued
with knowledge of self, attains, forsooth, ta
the end for which he tries.


gr. After the third is the fourth mode
It is very superior, and has num-
berless high virtues. [In merit it reigns
supreme over the three other modes of life.
It is said to occupy the very highest place.
Listen to me as I describe the duties belung-
ing to that mode which is very supreme
and which is the high refuge of alk,


—=


CHAPTER CCXLV.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA),.—
Continued.


Shuka said :—

1. While living satisfying duly the
duties of the forest life, how should one;
who tries to attain’ to. That which is the
highest object of kwowledge, set lis soul on!
Yoga according to the best of his power ?


Vyasa said :—

2. Having acquired purity by the
practice of the first two modes of life, vis ,
Brahmacharyaya and domesticity, ore
should, thereafter, set his mind on Yoga iv
the third’ mode of life” Listen now witir
rapt attention to what should be done for
attaining to the highest objectof acquisi-
tion.


Having conquered alk shortcomings
of the mind or heart by easy means im
the practice of the first three modes of life,
one should pass into the best and the high-
est of aH the modes, vés., Sannyasa or


| Renunciation.


4. Do you then pass your days, having
acquired that purity, Listen also to me.
Qne should, atone and without anybody
tohelp him or bear him company, practise
Yoga for achieving success.


5. One who practises Yoga without any
one in his company, who sees everything ag
a repetition of his own self, and who’ never
discards anything, never falls away frou
Liberation. Wihtout keeping the sacrificial
fires and without a fixed dwelling, such a
person should enter a village for only
begging his food.

6. He should provide himself for the
day without keeping any thing in store tor
the morrow. He should practise penances, -

k heart fixed on the Supreme, Eating


SHANTI PARVA,


tittle and that even under proper restric-
ions, We should not take more than one
meal in a day.


7. The other marks of a mendicant are
the human skull, pretection under trees,
rags for wearing, companionless soligude,
and indifference to all creatures.


8. That person into whom words enter
like terrified elephants into a well, and
from whom they never return to the
speaker, is fit to lead this mode of life
which has Liberation for its end.


The mendicant should never mind
the evil deeds of any person. He should
never hear vilifications of others. He
should especially guard against reviling a
Brahmana. :


1o. He should always say only what is
pleasant to the Brahmanas. When any-
thing is said against him, he should remain
perfectly silent. Such silence is


medical treatment prescribed for him.


11. That person for whose single self
the spot he occupies becomes like the eas-
tern sky, and who can regard as perfectly
lonely a spot teeming with thousands o
men and things, is considered by the gods
to be a true Brahmana.


12. The gods know him for a Brahmana
who puts on whatever comes by the way,
who lives upon whatever he gets, and who
sleeps on whatever spot he finds.


13. The gods regard him as a Brah-
mana who fears company like a snake;
the full measure of gratification (from foods
and drinks) as of hell; and women asa
corpse.


14. The gods know him as a Bralhimana
who is never glad when honored and
never angry when insulted, and who has
given assurances of mercy to all creatures.


the


15. One following the last mode of_ life
should not regard death with joy. Nor
should he regard life with joy. He should
only wait for his hour like a servant wait-
rg for his master’s command.


16. He should purify his heart of all


shortcomings. He should purify his speech
of all faults, We should purge himself of
allsins. Shorn as he is of enemies what


fear can attack him.


17. He who fears no creature and
whom no creature fears, can have no fear
from any quarter, freed as he is from every
form of mistake.


18. As the foot-prints of all other crea-
tures moving upon legs are engulphed
within those of elephants, likewise all ranks
and conditions are absorbed within Yoga.


37t


19. Similarly, every other duty and:
observance is encompassed within the one:
duty of abstention from injury. He who
avoids injuring othee creatures, lives an
eternal life of joy.


20. One who abstains from injury, who
regards all creatures impartially, ‘who is
devoted to truth, who is gifted with forti-
tude, who has his senses under restraints,
and who extends protection to all beings,
attains to a peerless end.


21. The state of death cannot tran-'
scend such a person who is content with’
self-knowledge, who is shorn of fear,’
desire and expectancy. On the other hand,
such a person conquers death.


22. The gods know him for a Brahmana,
who is freed from attachments of evéry
kind, who practises penances; who lives
like space which while containing every-
thing is yet unattached to all things, who
has nothing which he can call his own, who
leads a lonely life, and who possesses
equanimity of soul.


23. The gods regard him as a Brah.
mana whose life is for the practice of righte-
ousness, whose righteousness is for the
behoof of them who wait dutifully upon’
him, and whose days and nights exist only’
for acquiring religious merit. ~


24. The gods regard him as a Brah-
mana who is shorn of desire, who never,
struggles [for worldly emoluments}, who
never lowers his head to any one, who
never flatters another, and who is shorn of
all sorts of attachment.


25. AH creatures are filled with plea-
sure at the prospect of happiness or miser-
able at the prospect of grief. The man of
faith, therefore who should feel sorry at the
prospect of afflicting other creatures, must
abstain absolutely from all acts.


26. The gift of assurances of harmless-
ness to all creatures is supestor in point of
merit all other gifts. He who, at the beg-
inning, promises abstention from injury,
acquires Liberation whence is the assurance
of harmlessness to all creatures. = 3


27. That man who does not put into his.
open mouth even the five or six mouthfuls
which are sanctioned for the forest recluse,.
is said to be the navel of the world, and
the refuge of the universe. The fire ac-
cupies the head and other limbs, as also
the acts good and bad, :


28. Such a man, who performs a sacri-
fice in his own self, makes a libation of his”
senses and mind into the fire which Kves.
within the limited space. of his own heart.
On account again of his pouring such a
libation into such a fire within’ his owa


374


self, the universe with all creatures includ-
ing the very celestials, becomes pleased.


29. They, who know the Sentiency which
is endued with effulgence, which is covered
with three sheaths, which has three qualities
for its characteristics, to be Ishwara par-
taking of that which is highest, vzs., the
nature of the Supreme Soul, are respected
of all the worlds. ‘The very gods with all
human beings applaud their merits.


30. He who succeeds in seeing in the Soul
which lives in his owa body all the Vedas,
ether and the other objects of perception,
the rituals of the scriptures, all those entities
which are perceptible in sound only, and
the superior nature of the Supreme Soul,
adored of the very gods as the foremost
of all beings.


gt. He who sees in the Soul which lives
within his body that foremost of beings
which is not attached to the Earth, which
is immeasurable in even the limitless sky,
which is made of gold, which is begotten
of the egg and lives within the egg, which
is equipped with many feathers, and which
has two wings like a bird, and which is
rendered effulgent by many rays of light, is
adored of the very gods as the foremost of
all beings.


32. The very gods adore him in whose
understanding is set the wheel of Time,
which is constantly revolving, which knows
no deterioration, which devours the span of
existence of every cceature, which has the
six seasons for its naves, which is equipped
with twelve radii consisting of the twelve
months, which bas excellent joints, and to-
wards whose gaping mouth goes on this
universe.


33- The Supreme Soul is the huge un-
consciousness of dreamless sleep. That
Unconsciousness forms the body of the
universe. It pervades all created things.
Sentiency occupying a portion of that capa-
cious unconscfousness, pleases the gods.
These last, being pleased, gratify the open
mouth of that unconsciousness.


34. Endued with effulgence as also with
the principle of eternity, Sentiency is with-
outa beginning. It wins ‘infinite regions of
eternal happiness. He whom no creature
fears, has never to fear any creature,


35. He who never does anything blame-
mable and who never censures another,- is
said to be a truly twice-born one. Sucha
man succeeds in seeing the Supreme Soul.
He whose ignorance has been removed
and whose sins have been washed away,
never enjoys either here or hereafter the
happiness that is enjoyed by others.


36. A person following the fourth mode


i


MAHABHARATA.


of life wanders on the Earth like one not
attached to anything. Such a person is
shorn of anger and error. Such a person
regards equally a clod of earth and a lump
of gold. Such a man never keeps anything.
in store for his use. Such a person has no
frien€s and enemies. Sucha person does
not care praise or blame, and the agree-
able and the disagreeable.


moines


CHAPTER CCXLVI.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued.


Vyasa said :—


1. Lhe Sentiency is endued with alf
those entities which are modifications of
Nature. These do not know the Soul hut
the Soul Knows them all.


2. Like a good driver going on with the
help of strong, well-trained, and very good
horses along the paths he chooses, the Soul
acts with the help of these, called the
senses, having the mind for theic sixth.


3. The objects of the senses are superior
to the senses themselves. ‘The mind is
superior to those objects. ‘Che understand-
ing is superior to the mind. Mahat or the
principle of greatness is superior to the
understanding.


4. Superior to Mahat is the Prakriti.
Superior to the Prakriti is Brahma. There
is nothing superior to Brahma. That ts
the highest limit of goodness and the
highest end.


'5. The Supreme Soul is hidden in every
creature. It is not so manifest that ordé-
nary men can see. Only Yogins with sub-
tile vision see the Supreme Soul with the
help of their keen and subtile understand-
ings.

6—7. Merging the senses having the
mind for theie sixth and all the objects
of thé senses into the inner self by the help
of the understanding, and meditating upon
the three states of consciousness, vig, the
object thought, the act of thinking, and the
thinker, and abstaining by contemplation
from every kind of enjoyment, replenishing
his mind with the knowledge that he is
Brabma’s self, laying aside at the same
time all consciousness of power, and there-
by making his Soul perfectly tranquil, the
Yogin attains to immortality, -

8. ‘That person, however, who becomes
the slave of all his senses and whose ideas
of right and wrong have been confounded,
already subject as he is to death, actually
meets with death by such surrender of self,


SHANTI


9g. Destroying all desires, one should
drown the yross understanding into one’s
subtile Understanding. Having thus
drowned the gross into the subtile Under-
standing, one is sure to become .a second
Kalanjara mountain.”


to. By purifying his heart, the Yogin
gets over both righteousness and its oppo-
site. By purifying his bears and by living
in his own true nature, he acquires the
highest happiness.


1. The sign of that purity of heart is
that one who has acquired it experiences that
state of unconsciousness which is similar to
that-of dreamless slumber. The! Yogin who
has acquired that state lives like the steady
flame of a lamp which burns in a place
where the atmosphere is perfectly still.


12. Being sparing in diet, and having
purified his heart, that Yogin who applies
his Soul to the Soul, sees (the Soul mn the
Soul.


13. This topic, O son, intended for your
instruction, is the essence of all the Vedas.
The truths expounded in it cannot be
understood by the help of inference alone
or by that of mere study of the scriptures.
One must understand it bimself by the hetp
of faith.


14. By churning the riches contained in
all religious works and in all topics based on
truth, as also the ten thousand Richs, this
ambrosia has been acquired.


1s. As butter from.curds and fire from
wood, so this has been raised for the sake
of my son,—this which forms the know-
ledge of all truly wise men.


16. This topic, O son, fraught with solid
instruction, is intended for Brahmana who
ihaving studied the Vedas, have become
house-holders. It should never be delivered
to one. who is not of tranquil soul, or one
is not self-controlled, or who one. who has
not practised penances.


17. It should not be delivered to one
who is not conversant with the Vedas, or
one who do not’ humbly wait upon his
preceptor, or one who is not _ shorn of
malice, or one who is not possessed of sin-
cerity and candour, or one who is of reck-
less conduct.


18. It should never be delivered to one
whose intellect has been consumed by dis-
putation, or one who is vileor.low. This
topic containing the quintessence ot duties,
should be communicated to that person,
however, who is possessed of fame, or who
deserves praise, or who is of tranquil soul,
or possessed of ascetic merit, toa Brahma-_
na whois such to one’s som or dutiful dis-


PARTA, 373
ciple, but on me aceount-should it be delf<
vered to others. 2

20. lf any person gives away the entire
Earth with ali her treasures, to one conver-
sant with truth, the latter should still con+
sider the’ gift of this knowledge as very
much superior to that gift. ;


21. I shall now describe to you a sube
ject which is a greater,mystery than this,
a subject connected with tire Soul, which is
above the ordinary understandings of hu-
man beings, which has been seen by the
foremost of Rishis, what has been treated
in the Upanishadas, and which forms the
topic of your inquiry.

22. Tell me what, after this, is in your
mind? Tell me in what you have still any
doubt? Listen, forhere | am,-O son,
seated before you! Upon what, indeed,
shall I once more discourse to you.


beac


CHAPTER CCXLVIL,


_(MOKSHADHARMA : PARVA) em
Continued,


Shuka said:—

1. O illustrious one, O foremost of
Rishis, once again describe to me fully the
subject bearing on soul. Tell me what, in
deed, is spiritual topic and whence does: it


| come?


Vyasa said :—

2. That, O son, which is considered as
spiritual with reference ta human’ beings,
I shall dow mention to you, and listen to
the explanation I give.


3. Earth, water, light, wind, and enti-
ties are the great principles. which form the
Component parts of all creatures, and
though really one are yet considered dif-
ferent like the waves of the ocean.


4. Like a torteise extending out its
limbs and withdrawing them again, the
great elements, by living in innumerable
small forms, go through transformations.


3. All this universe of mobile and im-
mobile objects has for its component parts
these five elements. Everything, regard-
ing creation and destruction, is referrible
to this fivefold elements, -


6. These five elements are in all exis-
tent things. The Creator of all things,
however,-has made an unequal distribu.
tion of those elements for serving different
ends.


fo,


374
Shuka said :—


How can one understand that un-
equal distribution in the various objects of
tthe universe? Which amongst them are
the senses and which the attributes? How
thay this be understood ?


Vyasa said. :—

.8. I shall explain this to you properly,
off after another. - Listen with rapt atten-
tien tothe subject as I explain how what lL
have said actually takes place. .


g. Sound, the sense of hearing, and
all the cavities within the body,—these
three originate~from ether. The vital
airs, the action of the limbs, and touch are
the attributes of the wind.


to. Eorm eyes and the digestive fire
within the stomach, originate from light.
‘Taste, tongue, and alf the humours,——these
three originate from water.


tr. Scent, nose, and the body,—these
three,—form theattributes of earth. These
then, as I have explained to you,.are the
changes of the five (great) elements in con-
nection with the senses.


12. Touch is said to be the attribute of
the wind; tasteof water; form of light.
Sound originate from ether, and scent ie
the property of earth.


13. Mind, Understanding, and Nature,
these three, originate fram their own pre-
vious states, and acquiring a.position higher
than thejattributes, do not get over those
attributes.


14. As the tortoise extends its limbs
and withdraws them once again within it-
self, so the Understanding creates the senses
and once again wittidraws them into itself.


15. The consciousness of ego which
arises about what is above the soles of the
feet and below the crown of the head, is
mainly due to the action of the Under-
Standing,


16. It is the Understanding which is
transformed into the (five) attributes. It is
the Understanding also which is trans-
formed into the (five) senses with the mind
for the sixth, Where are the attributes
when the Understanding is nowhere ?

17.
mind is called the sixth.
standing is called the seventh.
is the eighth.


18 The eyes and the other senses are
for only receiving impressions of form, etc.
‘The mind exists for doubting. The Un-
derstanding determines those doubts. ‘The
Soul is said to only see every work without
mingling with them.


There are five senses in man. The
‘The Under-
The Soul


MAHABIARATA.


19. The qualities of goodness, darknes¢
and ignoramce originate from their ows
counterparts. These exist equally in all
creatures. These are called qualities and
should be known by the actions they pro-
duce. a


20, Regarding those actions, all such
States of cheerfulness or joy, of tranquillity
and purity which one becomes conscious of
in oneself, should be known as due to the
quality of goodness.


2t. All such states of sorrow in either the
body or the mind, should be considered as
due to the influence of the quality of dark-
ness,


22. All such states of stupefaction whose
cause cannot be determined (by either
reason or inward light), should be known
as due to the action of Ignorance.


23. Delight, cheerfulness, joy, equani-
mity, contentment of heart, due to any
known cause or originating otherwise, are
all effects of the quality of goodness.

24. Pride, false speech, cupicity, stupe-
faction, vindictiveness, whether originating
from any known cause or otherwise, are
characteristics of the quality of darkness.


25. Stupefaction of judgment, care-
lessness, sleep, lethargy, and indolence,
from whatever cause these may originate,
are to be regarded as the characteristics of
the quality of Ignorance,


CHAPTER CCXLVIII.
-(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—


Continued, ee


Vyasa said :—

“1. The mind creates innumerable ideas.
The: Understanding, differentiates things,
and ascertains their true nature. The
heart discriminates which is pleasant and
which unpleasant. There are the three
forces which produce acts.


2. The objects of the senses are superior
tothe senses, The mind is superior to
those - objects. The Understanding is
superior to mind. The Soul is considered
as superior to Understanding.


Ordinarily the Understanding is a
man’s Soul. When the Understanding,
by itself, forms ideas (of objects) within
itself, tt is then called Mind. .

4. The senses being different from one
another, the Understanding presents differ-
ent aspects on account of its different
modifications. When it hears, it becomes


SHANTI: PARVA.


the organ ot hearing, arid when it touches,
it becomes the organ of touch.


§. Likewise, when it sees, it becomes the
organ of vision, and when it tastes, it be-
comes the organ of taste; and when it
smells, it becomes the organ of scent. It
is the Understanding which appears under
different guises by modification.


6. These modifications of the Under-—


standing are called the senses. ‘I'he invisible
Soul is placed over them as their presiding
chief. Living in the body, the Understand-
ing exists In the three states (of qualities),


7. Sometimes it acquires cheerfulness,
sometimes it yields to grief; atid sometimes
its condition becomes such that it is united
with neither joy nor sorrow.


8. The Understanding, however, whose
chief function is to create elements, trans-
tends those three states as the ocean, the
king of rivers, stands against the powerful
currents of the rivers that fall into it.


9g. When the Understanding desireg for
anything, it is called by the name of Mind.
The senses, again, should all be considered
as contained within the Understanding.


10.
bearing impressions of form, scent, etc.,
should all be controlled.


11. When one sense becomes subordi-
nate to the Understandin the latter,
though really not different, enters the Mind
in the form of existent things. Such is the
case with the senses one after another with
reference to the ideas that are said to be
apprehended by them.


12, All the three states which exist, oz¢.,
Sattwa, Rajas, and ‘Tamas, attach to those
three (vis., Mind, Understanding, and
Consciousness), and like the spokes of a
car-whee) acting for their attaghment,
to the circumference of the wheel, they fol-
lew the various objects.


13. The mind must convert the senses
into a lamp for removing the darkness
which .obstructs the knowledge of the
Supreme Self. Vhis knowledge which is
gained by Yogins with the help of the
especial instrument of Yoga, is acquired


without any particular exertion by men who:


abstain from worldly objects.


14, The universe is of this nature.
The man of knowledge, therefore, he-
conies never stupefied. Such a man never
gtieves, never rejuices, and is shorn of
euvy.


15. The soul cannot be seen} with the
help of the senses whose fature is to roam
about among all objects of desire. Even
pious men, whose senses are pure, Cannot


The senses, which are engaged in.


nc


375.


see the soul with their help -what ‘thes
should be said of the vicious. whose senses
are impute.


16. When, however, a person, with the
help of his mind, ficmly holds thei¢ reins, it
is then that his Soul sees self like ai
object coming in view eon account of the
light of a lamp,


17. As all things are seen when the
darkness that covers them is removed, so
the soul becomes manfiest when the darks
hess that covers it is dispelled.


18. As a water fowl, though floating
on the water, is nevet drenched by it, simia
larly the Yogin of freed soul is never sul-
lied by the imperfections of the tchiee
qualities.

19. Likewise, a wise man by even en-
joying all earthly objects without being at«
tached to any of them, is never affected by
shortcomings of any kind,


ze. He who avoids acts: after having
performed then properly, and takes de-
light in the one really existent, vzs., the Soul ,
who has formed himself the soul of all
created beings, and who keeps. himself
aloof from the three qualities, acquires an
understanding and senses which are ‘créa-_
ted by the Soul. The qualities cannot
apprehend the Soul. ‘Fhe Soul, however
apprehends them always.


22, The Soul is the witness which sees
the qualities and duly works them up.
Mark this difference between the Under-
standing and Ghe Soul both of which are
highly subtile. *


23. Oneof them creates the qualities.
The other does not create them. Though
they are different fron each other by nature,
they acre, however, always united. ,


24. The fish residing in the water is
different, from the element in which it resi-
des. But as the fish and the water forming
its residence are always united, likewise the
quality of goodness and the individual soul
exist in a state of unidn. ‘The goat begot-
ten of a rotten fig is really not the fig but
different from it. As the gnat and the
fig are seen to be united with each other,
so are the qualities of goodness and the ins”
dividual Soul. ’


25: Asthe blade in a clump of grass.
theugh , distitsct from the clump, exists in
a State of union with it, so these two,
though different from each other and each
exists in its owu self, are to be seen ina
state of prepetual union.


——<
ee


376-
7 CHAPTER CCXLIX.
(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA.).
Continued.


Vyasa said :—

1, The objects by whith one is encircled
are created by the (idernauting: Without
being connected with them, the Soul stands
aloef, lordiuig over them. The Understand-
fuig creates all objects. The three princi-
pal qualities are continually being trans-
formed. ‘Fhe Soul, gifted with power, lords
over them all, without, however, mingling
with them. ;


2. The objects created by the Under.
Standing partake of its own nature. Like the
threads created hy .the spider, the objects
created by the Understanding partake of
the nature of the Understanding.


3. Some hold that the qualities, when
dene away with by Yoga or knowledge,
do not cease to exist, “‘Phey hold this be-
cause when once gone, the marks only of
their return are tot perceived. Others
hold that when destroyed by knowledge,
they are at once destroyed never to return.


4. Meditating duly upon these two
opinions, one should try his best according
to the way one thinks proper. It is by this
way that one should acquire eminence and
take refuge in his own Soul alone.

5. ‘The Soul is without beginning and
without end. Understanding his Soul
properly man should move and act, with-


out yielding to anget, without indulging in_


joy, and always shorn of envy.


6. Cutting by this means the knot that is
in his heart, created by the faculties of the
Understanding, which is hard (to cut), but
which can be destroyed by knowledge,
one should live happily, without yielding
to grief, and with his doubts removed,


7. Know that they who mix in worldly
affairs, are as distressed in body and mind
as persons ignorant of the art of swimming
when they fall from the land into a vast
and deep tiver,


. 8. Being conversant with the truth,
the learned man, however, is never dis-
tressed, for he feels like one walking over
firm land. Indeed, he who perceives his
Soul to be such, wiz., as full of conscious-
ness which has knowledge alone for its
mark, is never distressed.


g. By thus knowing the origin and
end of all creatures, and by. thus appre-
hending their distinctions, a person suc-
ceeds in acquiring high felicity.


to. This knowledge--is the possession
of a Brahmana in particular by virtue


MAHABHARATA. .


of his birth. Knowledge of the Soul, and
happiness like above,;are each fully suffi-
cient to lead to Liberation.


-1r. By gaining such knowledge one
really becomes learned. What else is the
mark of a person of knowledge? . Having
gained such knowledge, the wise men
consider themselves successful and become
liberated. ‘Those things which produce
fear to men shorn of knowledge do not
do so to those who are gifted with know-
ledge. There is no end higher than the
eternal end which is acquired by a learned
person,


13. One sees with aversion all earthly
objects of enjoyment which are, of course,
full of shorcomings. Again seeing others
pursue such objects with pleasure, anothet
Js filled with sorrow. But they who are
conversant with both objects, 'vfs, that
which is fictitious and that which is not so,
are never grieved and are truly happy.


14. What a man does without expecta-
tion of fruits dissipates his acts of a pris+
tine life. The acts, however, of such a pere
son both of this end and his pristine life
cannot lead to Liberation. On the othet
hand, such destruction of former acts and
such acts of this life cannot bring what is
disagreeable (viz., hell.) even if the wise
man engages in acts.


ee


CHAPTER CCL.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA)—
Continued.


Shuka said i—


1. May your reverend self describe what
is the foremost of all duties, indeed, of that
duty than which no higher one exists in this
world. :


Vyasa said :—

2. Ishall now describe to you duties
having a very ancient origin and laid down
by the Rishis, duties which are superior to
all. others. Listen to me with rapt atten
tien. :

3. The maddening senses should care- -
fully be governed by the understanding
like a father checking his own in experienc-
ed children liable to fall into. various evil. .
habits. ; :

4. To withdraw the mind and the senses
from all unworthy objects and their due.
concentration (upon higher objects) is the
highest penance. That is the highest of
all duties. Indeed, that is said to be the
highest duty. ova > °


SHANTI


& Directing, by the help of the under-
Standing, the senses having the mind for
their sixth, and without, thinking of worldly
Objects which create innumerable kinds of
thought, one should live contented with his
own self,


6. When withdrawn from the fields
where they generally run loose, the senses
and the mind return fore living in their
proper abode, it is then that you will see
a your own self the Eternal and Supreme

oul,


7. Those great Brahmanas who are en-
ued with wisdom succeed in seeing that
Supreme and Universat Sou! which resem-
bles a blazing fire in effulgence.


8—9. Asa large tree enveloped with
numberless branches and filled with many
flowers and fruits, does not know in which
part it has flowers and in which it has
fruits, similarly the Soul, as modified by
birth and other qualities, does not know
whence it has come and whither it is to go.
There is, however, an inner Soul, which
sees every thing, :


to. One sees the Soul with the help of
the lamp of knowledge. Seeing, therefore,
yourself with your ownself, cease to regard
your body as yourself and acquire omni-
Science.

11. Purged of all sins, like a snake that
has cast off its slough, one acquires high
intelligence here and becomes free from
every anxiety and the obligation of acquir~
ing a new body.

12. Having its current spread in vari-
ous directions, dreadful is this river of Jife
carrying the world onward in its course,
The five senses are its crocodiles, The
mind and its objects are the shores.


13. Cupidity and bewilderment of judg-
mentare the grass and straw that float
on it, blocking its bosom. Lust and anger
are the dreadful reptiles which live in it.
Truth forms the landing stage by its miry
banks. Falsehood forms its surges, and
anger its mire.


14. Originating from the Unmanifest,
rapid is its current, and incapable of being
crossed by persons of impure souls. Do
you, with the help of the understanding,
cross that river having desires for its
alligators.


15. The woridly concerns form the
ocean towards which that river runs.
Genus and species form its unfathomable
depth that none can understand. OQOne’s
birth, O child, is the source from which
that stream originates. Speech forms its
eddies. .

16. Only men endued with learning,

“wisdom, and understanding succeed in


48


PARVA- 377


crossing it which is so difficult to cross.
Crossing it, you will free yourself from every
attachment, acquiring a tranquil heart,
knowing the Soul, and becoming pure ia
every way.

17—18. Depending then on a purged
and elevated understanding, you will suce
ceed in becoming Brahma’s self. Having
estranged yourself from every worldly at-
tachment, having acquired a purified Soul
and conquering every sort of sin, look you
upon the world like a person looking from
the mountain summit upon creatures creep~
ing below on the Earth’s sarface! With-
out being subject to anger or joy, and
without making any cruel wish, you will
see the origin and the destruction of all
created objects. .


19. Wise men consider such an act
to be the foremost of all things. Indeed,
this act of crossing the river of life is consi«
dered by the foremost of pious persons, by
ascetics conversant with the truth, to be
the greatest of all acts that one can per«
form,


20, This knowledge of theall-pervading
Soul should be délivered to one’s son. It
should be inculcated unto one who is af
controlled senses, who is honest in conduct,
and that is docile or submissive. :


21. This knowledge of the Soul, which
I have just explairied to you, O child, and ,
the evidence of whose truth is supplied b
the Soul itself, is, indeed, the greatest of al
mysteries, and the very highest knowledge
which one can acquire.


22. Brahma has no sex,—mate, a female,
or neuter, It is neither sorrow nor happi-
ness. Its essence the past, the future, and
the present.


23. Whatever the sex may be, male or
female, the person who acquires the know-
ledge of Brahma hath never te go _ through
re-births, This duty (of Yoga) has been
described for acquiring Liberation from te-
birth,


24. These words which I have used for
answering your question lead to Liberation
in the same way as the various other opi-
nions held by various other sages who have.
described this subject. [ have explained
the subject to you in the manner in which
it should be explained. Those opinions
sometimes yield fruit and sometimes not,


25. ‘Threfore, OQ good child, when
asked by a contented, meritorious, and
self-controlled son or disciple, a preceptor
should, with a delighted heart, explain, ac-
cording to their true import, these instruc«
tions which I have delivered for your benefit
my son,


—a


————


378


CHAPTER CCLE °


(MOKSHADHARMA PARYA).—
Continued,


Vyasa said :—


t. One should not show any liking for
Scents and tastes and other sorts of enjoy-
ment. Nor should one accept ornaments
and other articles giving the enjoyment ot
the senses of scent and taste. One shou!i
not seek honouc and achievements and
fame. Even this is the conduct of a Brah-
mana endued with vision.


2. He who has mastered all the Vedas,
having served dutifully bis preceptor and
practised the vow of celibacy, he who
knows-all the Rigs, Yajuashes, and. Samans,
is not a twice-born persom


3. One who treats all creatures Hke
his kinsman, and one whois acquainted
with Brahma, is said to be the master of
ail the Vedas. One who is shorn of desire,
never dies. Itis by such a conduct and
such a bent of mind that one becomes a
truly twice- born one,


4. Having performed only various serts
of religious rights and various sacrifices
completed with sacrificial presents, one
does not gain the dignity of a Brahmana if
he is devoid of mercy and has mot rewoun-
ced desire.


5. When one ceases to fear all creatures
and when all creatures cease to feac him,
when one never desires for anything ar
entertains hatred for anything, then he is
said to acquire the dignity of Brahma.


6. When one abstains from injuring
all creatures in thought, words, and act,
then be is said to acquire the dignity of
Brahma. ‘


7- There is only one kind of fetter in
this word, vis., the chain of desire, and no
other. One who is freed from the chain
of desire acquires the dignity of Brahma.


8. Shorn of desire like the Moon emer-
ged from clouds, the wise man, purged of
all stains, lives patiently. expecting his
time.


g. That person tto whose mind ali
sorts of desire enter Tike various rivers
‘fallig into the ocean without being able to
increase its limits by their discharge, ac-
quires equanimity, but not he who cherish-
es desire tor all worldly objects.


ro. Such a person becomes happy for
the fruiticn of all his wishes, and not he
who entertains desire for worldly objects,
The latter, even if he acquires heaven, has
to fall away from ite


MAHABHARATA.


tr. The Vedas have truth for theit of<


ject. Feuth has the mastering of the senses


of the
Charity


for its object. The subjugation
senses has charity for its object.
has penance for its object.


12. Penance has renunciation for its re~
condite object. Remunciation has bappi-
ness for its object. rlappiness has heave
for its object. Heaven tas tranguillity for
its object.


13 For the sake of contentment you
should desire to acquire a serene under-
standing which is a valuable possession,
indicating Liberation, and which, scorchiny
sorrow ard all objects or doubts together
with thirst, destroys them entirely in the
fong run.


14. One endued with those six qualities,
vig., cotitentment, sorrowlessness, treedon
from fetters, peacefulness, cheerfulness,
and freedom frou envy, is sure to become
full or complete.


15. ‘They who, transcending all con-
sciousness of body, know the Soul which
lives within the body and which is unders
stood by only wise persons with the help
of the six entities when endowed with only
the quality of goodness, aird with the help
atso of theother three, succeed in attain<
ing to Liberation.


16, The wise man enjoys endless bea~
titude by understanding the Soul which
ceigns within the body, which is shorn of
the attributes of birth and death, whictt
exists in its own true nature, which bein
uninvested with attributes requires no act
of purification, and which is identical with
Brahma.

17. The pleasure which a man enjoys
by governing his mind from roving in
all directions and fixing it entirety on the
Soul i8 such that its like cannot be ac-
quired by one through any other means. ,


¥8. He is said to be a qualified master


_of the Vedas who is conversant with-what


gratifies one whose stomach is empty,
which pleases one who is angry, and which


| invigorates one wliose limbs are dry.


1g. Suspending his senses that have
been properly checked from. unworthy in-


L dulgence, he who lives in Yoga meditation,


is said to be a Brahmana. Such a person


| is said to acquice his joys from the Soul.


20. Regarding one who lives after
having destroyed desire and devoting him-
self to the highest subject of existence, it
should be said that his happiness is conti-
nuously increased like the lunar disc,


2t. Like the Sun removing darkness,
happiness removes the sorrows of that


SHANTI PARVA.


Vagin who gets over hoth the gross and
the subtile elements, as also the intellectual
principle and the Unmanifest.


22. Decrepitude and death cannot at-
tack that Brahimana who has got beyond
the sphere of acts, who has gone the des-
truction of the qualities themselves, and
whois no longer attached to earthly ob~
jects.

23. Indeed, when freed from everything,
the Vogin, lives in a state transcending
both attachment and hatred, he is said
to be, even in this life, above his senses and
all their objects.

24. That Yogin, who having gone
above Prakriti attains to the Highest
Cause, becomes freed from the obligation
of a re-birth on account of his having
Altained to that which is the highest.”


CHAPTER CCLIIL


{MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued.


Vyasa said :—

tr. A qualified preceptor should, first
of all, describe the most capacious subject
of spirituality, that has been explained in the
previous chapter, to a disciple who wishes
to enquire after Liberation after having
transcended all pairs of opposites and
performed the concerns of both profit and
religion.

2. Ether, wind, light, water, and
@acth as the fifth, and existence and non-
existence and time, exist in ali living
ereatures having the five for their com-
ponent ingredients.


3. Space is unoccupied interstice, The
organs of hearing consist of space. One
knowing the science of elements endued
with form should knew that ether has sound
for jts attribute.


4. Wind is the essence of the feet. The
vital airs are made of wind. Wind is the
essence of the sense of touch, and touch is
the attribute of wind.


5. Heat, the digestive fire in’ the stormsach,
light that manifests all things, the heat of
the body, and eye as the filth, are all of
light which has form of various colors for
its attribute.


6. Solubility, and alf kinds of liquid
matter partake of water. Blood, marrow,
andall else that is cool, have water for
their essence. The tongue is the sense of
taste, and taste is known as the attribute of
water. R


379


7. All solid substances partake of earth,
as aifso bones, teeth, nails, beard, the
hairs on the body, hair, nerves, sinews, and
skin,


7 :

8. The nese is known as the organ of
smell, The object of that sense, viz., scent,
is known as the attribute of earth, ‘


‘9. Each subsequent element partakes of
the attribute or attributes of the preced-
ing one in addition to its own. The (three)
supplementary entities exist in all living
creatures. The Rishis thus described the
five elements and the effects and qualities
emanating from or belonging to thein,


19, The mind is the ninth, and the
understanding is the tenth. The Soul,
which is infinite, is the eleventh. it is con-
sidered as the highest of all.


11, The mind has doubt for its essence.


} The understanding discriminates and pro-


duces certainty. ‘The Soul becomes known
as Jiva or individual soul when invested
with body through the consequences of acts.


ra. That man who regards all living
creatures as unsullied though endued with
all these enlities having time for their
essence, has never to poyosm acts moved
on by error,


CHAPTER CCLIIL


{MOKSHADHARMA PARVA),—
Continued,


Vyasa said :—


a, Those who are well-read in the scrips
tures see, with the help of acts laid down
in the scriptures, the Soul which is-encased
in a subtile body and is highly subtile and
which is dissociated from the gross body
in which it lives,


2. As the rays of the Sun which move
in dense masses through every part of the
sky, cannot be seen by the naked eye though
their existence can be perceived by reason,
likewise, existent beings freed from gross.
bodies and moving in the universe are
above the reach of human vision.


As the shining solar disc is seen re«
flected in the reflected water so the Yogin
sees reflected within Bras bodies the
existent self.


4. All those souls again that are encased |
in subtile forms after being alienated
from the gross bodies in which they lived,’
are perceptible to Yogins, who have con-
trolled their senses and who are gifted
with knowledge of the soul. Indeed,
helped by their own souls, Yogins see’
those invisible beings.


380


5~6. Whether asleep or awake, during
the day or in the night, and ducing the
night or in the day, they who practise
Yoga after renouncing all the creations of
the understanding the passion engendered
by acts, and the power which Yoga begets,
succeed in keeping their subtile form under
complete control.


7. The individual soul which lives in
such Yogins, always endued with the
seven subtile principles, moves in all
blissful regions, freed from decrepitude and
death. I say ‘always,’ and ‘treed from
death, as in common parlance, for, in sooth,
that subtile form is also terminable.


8. That man, however, who is under the
influence of his mind and understanding,
differentiates, even in his dreams, his own
body from that of another and experiences
both pleasure and pain.


g. Really, even in his dreams he enjoys
’ happiness and suffers misery; and yielding
to anger and cupidity, suffers all sorts of
calamities,

to. In his dreams he acquires great
riches and feels highly satisfied: performs
meritorious acts, and Sees as he does when
he is awake,


11. It is wonderful to mark that indi-
vidual sout which has to lie within the
uterus and amid muctr internal heat, and
which has to pass there full ten months, is
not digested and destroyed like food within
the stomach.


12. Men possessed by the qualities of
Darkwess and Ignorance neyer succeed in
seeing within the gross body the sentiency
which is a portion of the Supreme Soul
of transcendent effulgence and which lies
within the heart of every creature.


13. They who learn Yoga for the pur-
pose of obtaining a knowledge of Self suc-
ceed in getting over the inanimate and
gross body, the imperceptible subtile body,
and the casual body which is not destroyed
on the occasion of even the universal des-
truction. :

14. Of the duties taid down for the
various modes of life including the fourth
mode, these which | have described, which
have Yoga for their foremost, and which in-
dicate a complete stoppage of all operations
of the Mind and the Understanding, have
been laid down by Shandilya.

15. Having comprehended the seven
subtile principles, having comprehended
also the Supreme Cause of the universe
with the six attributes, and lastly having
understood that the universe is only a
modificatfon of nesciénce endued with the
three qualities, one succeeds in seeing
high Brahma.”


peg


MAHABHARATA,


CHAPTER CCLIV.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA)—
Continued.


Vyasa said :—


t. There ts a wonderful tree in
heart of man, called Desire.
of the seed called Error. Angec and Pride
form its large trunk. The desire for work
is the hollow ground around its foot.


2. Ignorance is the root of that tree,
and carelessness is the water which nourish-
es it. Envy forms its leaves. ‘The evil
acts of pristine lives supply it with vigor.


3. Loss of judgment and anxiety are
its twigs; grief forms its huge branches :
and fear is its sprout. Thirst which seems
agreeable, forms the creepers which twine
round it on all sides,


4. Avaricious men, fettered in chains of
iron, sitting around that fruit-producing
tree, worship it, in expectation of its fruit.


5. He who, subduing those chains, cuts
down that tree and seeks to renounce both
sorrow and joy, succeeds in attaining to
the end of both.


6. That foolish wight who nourishes
this tree by enjoying the objects of the
senses is destroyed by those very objects
like a poisonous pill destroying the patient
to whom it is given.


7. However, by the help of Yoga, a
clever man forcibly cuts off with the sword
of concentration, the far-reaching root of
this tree,


.

8. One who understands that the end
of all acts performed from the desire of
fruit is re-birth or chains that bind, suc-
ceéds in getting over all sorrow.


the
It is born


9. The body is compared to a city.
The understanding is its mistress. The
mind living within the body is the minister
of that mistress whose chief duty is to
decide.


to. The senses are the citizens who are
employéd by the mind. For maintaining
those citizens the mind shows a strong in-
clination for various sorts of acts. Two
great faults are seen in those acts, namely,
Darkness and Ignorance.


t1. Upon the fruits of those acts depend
those citizens along with the chiefs of the
city. The two faults live upon the fruits of
those. acts which are done by forbidden .
means. 7


12. Such being the case, the wnder-
standing, which of itself is unconquerable,


i goes down to a state of equality with the


SHANTY


mind, Then againthe senses, moved by
the stained mind, lose their own firmness,
13. Those objects again to acquire which
the understanding tries, produce grief and
ultimately meet with destruction. ‘Those


objects, after destruction, are remembered :


by the mind, and accordingly they afflict
the mind even after they are lost.


14. The understanding is also afflicted,
for the mind is saidto be different from
the understanding only when the mind is
viewed regarding its chief function of get-
ting impressions about whose certainty it
is no judge. In sooth, however, the mind
is identical with the understanding. ‘The
quality of Darkness which is in the under-
standing then overwhelms the Soul itself
that lies over that understanding sullied
by Darkness like an image upon a mirror,


15. It is the mind that first becomes
united with darkness. Having united itself,
it attacks the soul, the understanding, and
the senses, and surrenders them to Rajas.”


CHAPTER CCLV.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued.


Bhishma said :—


I—2. ‘*Do you, O son, O sinless one,
listen once more, with feelings of great
pride, to the words- given vent to by the
Island-born Rishi on the subject of the
enumeration of the principles. Like a
blazing fire, the great Rishi said these
words to his son who took after a fire
wrapped in smoke. Instructed by what
he said, I also, Q son, shall again explain
to you that certain knowledge.


3. The properties of earth are immo-
bility, weight, hardness, productiveness,
scent, density, capaeity to absorb all sorts
of scents, cohesion, habitableness, and that
attribute of the mind which is called
patience.


4. The properties of water are coolness
taste, moisture, liquidity, softness, agree-
ableness, tongue, fluidity, capacity to be
congealed, and power to melt all earthy
products.


5. The properties of fire are irresistible
energy, inflammability, héat, capacity to
soften, light, sorrow, disease, speed, fury,
and upward motion, :


6. The properties of the wind are touch
that is neither hot nor cool, power to help
the organs of speech, independence,
strength, celerity, power to help all kinds


PARYA, 38r
of discharge, power to raise other objects,
breaths inhaled and exhaled, life, and
birth. :


7. The properties of space are sound,
extension, capacity of being enclosed,
absence of refuge, power of being unmani-
fest, capacity for modification, incapacity
for resistance, material cause for producing
the sense of hearing, and the unoccupied
parts of the human body.


8. These are the fifty properties, as
declared, which form the essences of the
five elementary entities.


g. Patience, reasoning, remembrance,
forgetfulness or error, imagination, endu-
rance, inclination towards good, inclination
towards evil, and restlessness,--are the
properties of the mind.


to. Destruction of both good and evil
thoughts, perseverance, concentration, de-~
cision, and ascertainment of all things
depending upon direct evidence, form the
five properties of the understanding.”


Yudhisthira said :—


ir ' Howcan the understanding be said
to have five properties? How again, can
the five senses be described as properties,
Explain to me, O grandfather, all this
abstruse topic.”


Bhishma said :—

12. ‘ The understanding is said to pos-
sess altogether sixty properties, for the
understanding includes the five efe~
ments. All those properties exist in the
Soul. The Vedas say, O son, that the
elements, their properties, are all created
by Him who is above alt decay, These
entities, therefore, are not eternal.


13. The theories contradicting the Re.
velation which have in the previous Verses,
O son, been placed before you, ate all
defective in the eye of reason. Minding,
however, in this world all that I have said
to you about the Supreme Brahma, do
you after acquiring the power which the
knowledge of Brahma offers, seek to ace
quire tranquillity of heart.’’ :


—
CHAPTER CCLVI.
(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA),—
Continued.
Yudhisthira said :—


1. ‘' These kings who lie on the Earth’s
surface amid their respective armies, these °
princes of great power, are now all de-
prived of life,


33a


a. Every one of these powerful kings
was endued with strength equal to that
of ten thousand elephauts. Alas! these
have ail been killed by men equally
powerful aud strong.


3. 1 do not see any one else that could
Kil any of these men in battle. Ali of
them were gifted with great prowess, great
energy, and great strength.


4. Highly wise, they are now lying dead
on the naked earth, About them, however,
that{are deprived of Jife, the word that is
used is that they are dead.


s. All these highly powerful kings are
said to be dead. On this subject a doubt
ties in my mind. Whence. is life and
whence is death.


6. Who is it that dies? Whence is
death? Why does death take away living
creatures. O grandfatiser, tell me this,
Y you who are uke a god.”


Bhishma said :—


7. “In days of yore, in the Krita age,
O son, there was a king ‘of the name of
Atukampaka. His cars, elephants, horse
and men having been reduced in number,
he succumbed to the power of his enemies
in battle. :


8. His son, named Hari, who was like
Narayana himself in strength, was in that
battle killed by his enemies along with all
his followers and troops,


g. Stricken with grief consequent on the
death of his son, and himself brougit
under the control of enemies, the king
devoted himself thence to a life of peaceful-
ness. One day, while. wandettng listlessly
he met the sage Narada on the Earth,


10. The king told Narada all that had
taken place, vis., the death of his son in
battle and his own capture by his enemies.


tr. Having heard him Narada, endued
with wealth of penances, then recited to
him the following narrative for removing
his grief consequent on the death of his son.


Narada said :—


12. Listen now, O king, to the following
fong narrative which had taken place. |
myself heard it formerly, O king !


13. Endued with great energy, the
Grandfather, at the time of the creation of
the universe, created a large number of
living beings. These multiplied greatly,
and none of them died. :

14. There was not a part of the universe
which was not overcrowded with living
creatures, O you of great glory! Indeed,
O king, the three worlds appeared to swell


MAHABHARATA.


with fiving beings, and became, as it were,
breathless.


15. Ther, O king, the Grandfather
thought as to how he should destroy tne
surplus population. Thinking of the matter,
the Self-create, however, could not decide
by what means the destruction of life was
to be performed.


16. Thereupon, O king, Brahman gave
way to anger and in consequence of his
anger a fire issued out of his body. With
that fire born of his anger, the Grandfather
burnt all the quarters of the universe,
O king,


17. Indeed, that fire. begotten of the
Divine Lord’s anger, O king, burnt Heaven
and Earth and the Sky and the whole
Universe with all its mobile and immobile
beings.


18. Truly, when the Grandfather thus
became angry, all mobile and iminobile
beings began to be consumed by the irre-
sistible power of that anger.


19. Then the divine and sacred Sthanu,
that destroyer of hostile heroes, that lord
of the Vedas and the scriptures, filled with
pity, tried to please Bralima.


20-21. When Sthanu came to Brah-
ma out of feelings of benevolence, the
great God addressed him, saying,—you
deserved boons at my hands! What desire
of yours shall I fulfill? I shall du you good
by doing whatever you wish.


CHAPTER CCLVII.


- (MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued.


Sthanu said :—


1. Know, O lord, that my prayer to
you is in behalf of the created beings of
the universe! These beings have been
created by you. Do not be angry with
them, O Grandfather.


2. By the fire born of your anger, O
illustrious one, all the created beings are
being burnt. Seeing them placed in such
acondition, I am filled with compassion,
Do not be angry with them, O maker of
the universe,


3- .The lord of all created beings said,
I am not arigry, nor is it my desire that all
the created beings should perish. It Is
only for lightening the load of the Earth .
that destruction is desireable.


4 The goddess Earth, suffering from
the load of creatures, requested me, O
Mahadeva, for destroying them, especially


SHANTI


a§ she appeared to sink under their load
into the water.


5. When after exercising my intelli-
gence even for a long time I could not
. find out the means by which to bring about
the destruction of this overgrown popula-
tion, it was then that | was possessed by
tre. *


Sthanu said :—


6. Donot give way to anger, U lord of
the celestiats, about the destruction of
living creatures! Be pleased! Let not
these mobile and immobile beings be
destroyed.


7—8. All tanks, all sorts of grass and
herbs, all immobile beings, and all the
four divisions of mobile creatures, are
being consumed. ‘The whole universe is
about to be shorn of beings. Be pleased,
O divine lord! O you of pious soul tris is
the boon that I seet at your hands,


g. If destroyed, these creatures would
not return. ‘lherefore, let this eneryy of
yours be neutralised by your own energy.


to—11. Moved by pity for all created
beings, find some means so that, O Grand-
father, these living creatures may not be
consumed! Oh, let not these living crea-
tures die with even their descendants thus
destroyed! You have appointed me to pre-
side over the Consciousness of all hving
creatures, Q Lord of ali the lords of the
universe.


12. All this mobile and immobile
creatures, O lord of the universe, originated
from you. Pacifying you, O yod of gods,
1 beg of you that living creatures may
repeatedly come back into the world,
undergoing repeated deatlis |


Narada continued :—


13. Hearing these words of Sthanu,
the divine Brahma of controlled speech
and mind himself suppressed that energy
of his within his own heart.


14. Suppressing that fire that had beer
destroying the aniverse, tbe illustrious
Brahma, worshipped of all, and endued
with illimitable power, then arranged for
‘both birth and-death of all living creatures.


15—16. After the Self-ereate had with-
drawn and suppressed that fire, there
came out, from all the pores of his body,
a lady dressed in robes of black and red,
with black eyes, black palms, wearing a
pair of charming earsrings and bedecked
with celestial ornaments.


-17. Having originated from Brahman’s
body, the lady sat onhisright. ‘he two
foremost of gods thereupon espied her,


PARVA, 383

18. Then, O king, the powerful Self-
create, the prime Cause of all the wortds,
saluted her and said,—O Death, kill these
creatures of the universe.


1g. Filled with ire and resolved to ens
compass the destruction of created beings,
I have calléd you. Do you, therefore,
begin to destroy all creatures foolish or
learned.


20. O lady, kill all created beings with-
out any exception. At my command you
will acquire great prosperity.

21. Thuis addressed, the goddess Death,
adorned with a garland of lotuses, began
to think sorrowfully and shed profuse tears,


22. Without suffering her. tears, howe
ever, to fall down, she held them, O king,
in her joined-hands, She then solicited the
Self-born, moved by tue desire of doing
good to mankind,


Sims


CHAPTER CCLVIIL


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued.


Narada said :-—~


i, The lady having large eyes, controle
ling her grief by self-exertion, addresse
the Grandfather, with joined hands and
bending low like a creeper, ©


2. And she said,—How, O foremost of
speakers, shalf a lady like me who has
sprung from you proceed to perform such a@
terrible feat“a feat, whiclr fs sure to
terrorize all living creatures.


3. I fear to do any thing that is inis
quitous | Do you find outa holy work fot
me. You see that fam frightened. Ob,
took upon me mercifully. :


4 1 shalt not be abfe to cut off living
creatures,-ittfants, youths, and ederly
ones,—who have done me no injury
O jord of all creatures, I bow to you, be
pieased with me-


5. I shalb not be able to cut off dear sons,
loved friends and brothers and mothers
and fathers! If these perish their surviving
relatives will surely curse me, Thinking
of this | am filled with fear.


6 The tears of the sorrow-strickea
survivors will burn me for good. I am
very much afraid of them. -} seek your
protection.

7. Allsinful creatures will have to sink
into hell. seek to please you, O boon-
giving god! Extend to me your favours
O poweriul lord,


334


8. LIseek the satisfaction of this wish,
© Grandfather, of all the worlds. O fore-
most of all the gods, I seek, through your
grace, permission to practise austere
penances.


The Grandfather said :—


9. O Death, I have selected yott for
the destruction of all creatures! Go, and
begin the task of killing all. Do not think
thus.


to. This must surely take place. It
Cannot be otherwise. O sinless one, O
fair lady do you satisfy the order I have
given. >


t1. Thus addressed, O you of mighty
arms, the lady called Death, O conqueror
of hostile cities, did not utter a word, but
humbly stood there with her eyes turned
towards the powerful Lord of all creatures.


12. Brahma addressed her again and
again, but the lady appeared to be herself
deprived of life. Seeing her thus, the god
of gods, that lord of lords, became silent.


13. Indeed, the Self-credte by an effort
of his will, became pleased. Smiling the
Jord of all the worlds then looked at the
universe.


14. We have heard that when that
unconquered arid illustrious lord controlled
his anger, the lady (called Death) went
away from his side.


15. Leaving Brahrma’s side without
having promised to bring about the des-
truction of living creatures, Death speedity
went, O king, to the sacred spot known
by the name of Dhenuka.


16. There the goddess performed aus-
tere penances for fifteen billions of years,
Standing upon one foot.


17—19. After she had practised such
highly severe austerities in that place,
the highly energetic Brahma once more
said to her,—Do you satisfy my com-
mand, O Death !—Disregarding this order,
the lady once more practised auste-
rities standing upon one foot for twenty
billions of years, O giver of honors! And
once more, O son, she lived in the forest
with the deer for another long period of
ten thousand billions of years.


20-—21. And once more, O foremost of
men, she passed twenty thousand years,
living upon air only. Once apyain, O king,
she observed the excellent vow of silence
for eight thousand years, passing the whule
period in water. Then that maiden, O best
of kings, went to the river Kaushuki.


22, There she began to pass her days


MAHABHARATA.


water and air. After this, O king, tha
blessed niaiden proceeded ta the Ganges
and thence to the mount Meru.


23—24. Actuated by the desire of doing
good to all living creatures; she stdod
perfectly motionless there like a piece of
wood. Going thence to the summit of
Himavat where the gods had celebrated
their great sacrifice, she stood there for
another hundred billions of years, standing
upon only the toes of her feet, with thé
object of pleasing the Grandfather with
such ani act of austerity.


25. Going there the Creator and Des«
troyer of the universe again addressed her,
saying,—What are you doing, O daughter !
Satisfy those words of mine!


26. Addressing the divine {Grandfather,
the maiden once more said,—I am unable
to destroy living creatures, O god! I seek
to please you.


27. Frightened at doing the prospect of
iniquity as she then was and employéd
in soliciting the Grandfather to excuse
her for disobedience the Grandsire silenced
her, and once more said to her;,—


28. No sin shall visit you, O Death!
Do you, O auspicious maiden, begin the
task of destroying living creatures! What
{ have said, O amiable girl, cannot be
falsified.


2g. Eternal virtue shall now live in you.
Myself and all the gods shall always be
busy with seeking your well-being.


30. I grant you this other wish that is
in your heart! Living creatures shall be
possessed by disease, and shall not censure
you.

3t. You will become a male in all malé
beings, a female in all female beings, and
a eunuch in all those who are so.


32. Thus addressed by Brahma, O
king, the maiden at last said, with joined
hands to that great and undecaying lord
of all the gods:—I am unable to satisfy
your order.


33. The great God again said to her,
O Death, do you kill men! |


34. I shall so ordain that you will not
commit any sin by doing this, O auspicious
lady. The tears that I see fall from your
eyes, and which you still hold in joined
hands, shall take the form of terrible
diseases and even they shall destroy men
when their time comes,


35. When the end of living creatures
arrives you will send Desire and Anger
iogether against them. You shall reap
immeasurable merit. You will not commit
sin, being yourself perfectly equal in your


observing another vow, living upon only , conduct,


SHANTI PARVA, |


“385


48. By doing this you willonly observe { Righteousness ? Whence also does Rightex


righteousness instead of committing sin.
Do you, therefore, mind the work in hand,
and addressing Desire and Anger begin to
Kill all living creatures.


7:
bocne afraid of Brahma’s curse and
answered him, saying,—Yes! Thencefor-
ward she began to send Desire and Anger
at the last hours of living creatures, and
through their agency to kill them. |


38. Those tears that Death had shed
are the diseases by which the bodies of men
ere possessed. At the destruction, there-
fore, of living creatures, one should not,
understanding with the help of the intelli-
gence, give way te grief.


39. As the senses of all creatures dis-
appear when they are in dreamless slumber
and retura once more when they awake,
similarly, upon; the dissolution of their
bodies, all human beings have to go into
the other world and return thence to this,
O foremost of kings,


40. The element called wind, which has
terrible energy and mighty prowess and
deafening roars, acts as the life in all
living creatures. When the bodies of Jiving
creatures are destroyed, that wind, passing
from the old performs various functions in
various new bodies. Therefore the wind is
Called the lord of the senses and is superior
to all other elements forming the gross
body.

4t. The gods, without any exception,
have to take birth as mortal creatures on
Earth. Likewise, all mortal creatures also,
succeed in acquiring the dignity of gods.
‘Therefore, O foremost of kings, do not
grieve for your son. Your son has gone
to heaven, and is enjoying great happiness
there,

42. It was thus, O king, that Death was
created by the Self-Create and it is in this
way that she kills duly all living creatures
when their time comes, ‘The tears she bad
shed became diseases, which when their

last hours come, snatch away ail beings
gifted with life,”


eden


L


CHAPTER CCLIX.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA)—=
Continued.


Yudhisthira said :—


-4.—2. ‘All men who live on this Earth,
are filled with doubts regarding the nature
of righteousness, Who is this that is called


49


Thus addressed, that lady, Death, |


ousness come? ‘Sell me this, O Grand«
father! Is Righteousnéss for this world og
for the next world? Or, is it for both
here and hereafter? Tell me this, O grand«
father 2?”


Bhishma said :-

3. “The practices of the good the Smritis;
and the Vedas, are the three marks of
righteousness. Besides these, the learned
have said that the object (of doing works)
is the fourth mark.


4. The Rishis of old have said what acts
are righteous and also classified them as
superior or inferior in point of merit. The
rules of righteousness have been sanc«
vonee for the conduct of the affairs of the
world.


§. dn both the worlds, here and here«
after, righteousness begets happiness as itd
fruit. A sinful person, unable to acquire
merit by. subtile ways, becomes sullied with:
sin only. ’

6. Some hold that sinful ‘wights car
never be purged of their sins. In times of
difficulty a person by even speaking an
untruth acquires the merit of speaking the
truth. Soa person who performs a sinful
act acquires by that very means the .merit
of having done a pious act. Gonduct is
the refuge of righteousness, Helped by
it you should know what righteousness is.


g. The very thief, stealing others’
things, spends them in acts of seeming
virtue. During anarchy, ‘the thief takes
great pleasure in approaching, what belonga
to others, . ; :


~ 8 When ethers, however, rob him of
what he has gained by robbery, he then
seeks a king. Ateven such a time, when
he is highly indignant for his rights of pra<
perty being violated, he secretly bankers
after the riches of those who are contented
with their own,


9. Fearlessly and without a doubt in his
mind he goes te the king’s palace, with a
mind purged ef every sin, Within even
his own treart he does not see the mark of


| any evil act.


10. To speak the ttuth is merito-ious,
There is nothing superior to truth. Every«
thing is supported by truth, and everything
@epends upon truth,


11. Even the sinful and dreadful persons
swearing to keep-the truth amongst them-
selves, do-away withall grounds cf quarrel
and in a body perform their (sinful) deeds,
depending upon truth. If they behaved
falsely towards. one another, they would;
for sooth, be destroyed,


386


__ tay One should not take other's proper-
ties, Thatis an eternal duty, Powerful
men consider it as one that has been intro-
duced by. the weak,

13, When, however, ill luck overtales


these men they then approve of this in-
junction, Again, they who surpass others


in strength or power do not necessarily be-'


come happy.

14. Therefore, do rot evér think of doing
awrong act. One Behaving in this way
has no fear of dishonest men or thieves, or
the king. Not having injured any. one,
such a man lives fearlessly and witir a pure
heart.

15. A thief fears every body, like a deer
driven from the forest into the midst of an


inhabited village. He considers other people |


as sinful as himself,

16. A pitre-hearted person ‘is always
filled with cheerfulness and has no fear
from any where. Such a person never
sees his own misconduct it: other persons,


17. Persons who do good to all creatutes
have said that charity ‘is ‘another high
duty, The rich people think: that this
duty has been laid down: by the poor.

18 When, however, these wealthy men
become poor on account of some bad turn


of fortune, they then appreciate the prace |.


tice of charity. Men who are highly rich
do not necessarity experience happiness,


1g. A person should never do that to
ethers which he does not like to be done
to him by others, knowing how painful it is
to himself.

20. What can a man seeking another
man’s wife say to another man? [tis seen,
however, that even'such a man, when he
sees his wife with another person, becomes
unable to forgive the act.


21. Wow can a person who wishes to
Wimself take breath think of preventing
another by a murderous act frem doing
the same? Whatever wishes one cherishes
about his own self, one should certainly
cherish regarding another,

22. With his surplus riches he should
temove the wants of the poor. ‘Therefore
the Creator ordained the practice of multi-
plying one’s wealth. :

23. Qne should walk along that road
by proceeding along which he may hope to
meet with the gods; or, at such times when
wealth is acquired, the duties of sacrifice
and gift are highly spoken of. ;


24. The sages have said that righteous-
ness consists in the performance of objects
by means of agreeable méans. See,
Vudhisthira, that thig is the standard that


MANABU ARATA.


has been upheld in pointing out the marks
of virtue and sin. ;

a5. In days of yore the Creator ordaine
ed virtue gifting it with the power of hofd-
ing the world together. The excellené
conduct of the good, is subjected to res-
teaints for acquiring virtue which depends
upon many delicate considerations,


26. The marks of virtue have now been
described to you, O best of Kuru’s race
Do not, therefore, at any time think of
doing. a wrong act.’


eee


CHAPTER CCLX.


‘(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA)—
Continued,


Yudhisthira said :—

1. ‘You say that virtue or duty depends,
upon delicate considerations, that it is
marked out by the conduct of the good,
that it is fraught with, restraints, and that
its characteristics are also contained in the
Vedas. it appears to me, however, that I
have a certain inward lighte by virtue of
which kean differentiate between right aud
. wrong by inferences.


2, Numbertess questions which I had
wished to ask you have all beer answered
by you. There ig one question, however,
that f shall just now put. Itis not promp~
ted, O king, by desire of mere discussion.


3. Alt these embodied creatures, it
seems, take birth, exist, and renounce their
bodies, of their own nature. Duty and its

opposite, therefore, cannot be determined,
O Bharata, by study of the scriptures
alone,


q. The duties “of a rich person are. of
one sort, Those of a person who has fallen
into distress'are of a.other sort. How ean
duty in the time of poverty be determined
by reading the scriptares alone ?


The acts of the good, as you have
said, form virtue. Vhe good, however, are
to be known by their acts. The definition,
therefore, has at. the tottom a begging of
the question, and the result is that what is
meant by conduet ef the good remains un«
settled.


6. It is seen that some ordinary man
commits sin while apparently achieving
virtue. Some extraordinary person again
may be seen who achieves virtue by come
mitting acts which are seemingly sinful.

7—8. Then, again, the proof has been.
given by even those who are well-conver-
sant with the scriptures themsebyes, for we


SHANTI PARVA,


have heard that the ordinances of the
Vedas disappear gradually in every succes-
sive cycle. The duties in the Krita age
areof one sort. Those inthe Treta are
of another sort, and those in the Dwapara
are of a different sort. ‘The duties in the
Kali age, again, are entirely of a different
character. It seems, therefore, that duties
have been sanctiened for the respective
cycles according tothe powers of human
beings in the different ages.


9. When, therefore, all the declarations
in the Vedas +do not suit equally all the
ages, the saying thatthe Vedas are true
is only a popular parlance given vent to
for popular satisfaction. From the Shrutis
have eriginated the Smritis whose range
is very wide.

to. If the Vedas be considered aufhori-
tative everywhere, then the Smritis also
would be considered authoritative, for
the latter are based on the former. But
when the Shrutis and the Smritis con-
tradict each other, how can either be autho-
ritative. °


ir, Then, again, it is seen, that when


some wieked wights of great power cause
certain portions of religious acts to be
stopped, these are destroyed for ever.


tz. Whether we know it or not, whether
we are able to determine it or not, the
course of duty is sharper than the edge of
a razor and grosser than even a mountain.


13. Virtue at first appears in the form
ef the romantic house of vapour seen in
the distant sky. When, however, it is
examined by the learned, it disappears.


14. Like the small ponds at which cattle
@rink or the shallow canals along culti-
vated fields, that dry up very soon, the
eternal practices laid down in the Smritis,
falling ind discontinuance, at last dis-
appear for good.


15. Amongst good men, some are seen
te become hypocrites by allowing themselves
to be moved by desire. Some become so,
desiring by others. Many others ‘tread in


the same path, moved by various other


motives of a similar nature.


16. It cannot be gainsaid that such acts
are righteous. Fools,-again, hold that vir-
-tue is an empty sound among those called
good. They ridicule such persons and con-
sider them as men bereft of reason.

17, Many great men, again, neglecting
the duties of theic own order, follow those
of the Kshatriyas. No such conduct, there-
fore, is to be seen, which is for universal
benevolence.


18. By a certain action, one becomes
really meritorious, The same actions pre-


y


387
vent another from the acquisition ef merit.
Another, by performing these actions at his
pleasure, it is.seen, remains unchanged.


19. Thus that action by which one
reaps merit, obstructs another in the ac-
quisition of merit. One may thus see that
all actions are not peculiar in,motive and
character.


20. it seems, ‘therefore, that only that
which (he learned of -old denominated


‘righteousness is righteousness to this day;


and through that course of conduct the
distinctions and limitations have become
eternal,”’


CHAPTER CCLXI.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued.


Bhishma said :—


1. “Regarding it is cited the old conver~
sation of Tuladhara with Jajali on the sub-
ject of virtue. There was once a Brahmana
named Jajali who:lived ina certain forest,
like a forest-recluse.


2. Practising austere penances, he pro«
ceeded at a certain time towards the sea«
shore, and arrived there began to ptactise
the most austere penances.


3. Observing many vows and restraints
his food restricted by fast, his body clad in
rags and skins, bearing matted locks on his
head, his entire body smeared with filth
and clay, that intelligent Brahmana passed
many years there, speechless.


4. Highly energetic that regenarate
ascetic, O king, while living within the
waters, travelled through all the worlds with
the speed of the mind, desirous of seeing
al things.

s. Having seen the whole Earth bound<
ed by the ocean and aderned with rivers
and lakes and forests, the ascetic one day,
while sitting under the water, began ta
think thus :—

6. In this world of mobile and immobile
creatures there is none who can equal me!
Who can travel with me among the: stars
and planets in the sky and live again within
the waters! a

7. Unseen by the Rakshasas while he
said this to himself, the Pishachas said ta
him,-You should not say se! ;

8. There is a man named Tuladhara
highly illustrious and doing the business o,
buyiag and selling. Even he, O best of


388


7


twice-born ones; is not worthy ef saying |


such words as you say !


Jajali of austere penances replied to them,


saying,—I shall see that famous Tuladhbara


who is endued with such wisdom


16, When the Rishi said this, those
superhuman beings raised him from the sea,
and said to him,—O best of twicée-born one,
go along this road! :


11, Thus addressed -by those beings,
Jajali went onwards with a depressed heart,
Arrived at Baranasi he met Tuladhara
whom he addressed thus.


Yudhisthira said:— :

12. ‘What, O sire, ‘are those difficult
feafé which Jajali had performed before for
which he had acquired such great succses 2
You should describe them to me.”


Bhishma said :—

13. “ Jajali had practised penances of the
geverest austerities. He used to perform
ablutions morning and eveniug.


so = ?
14. Carefully serving his fires, he was
given to the study of the Vedas. . Well
conversant with the duties laid down for
hermits, Jajali, seemed to shine with efful-
gence,


15. Hecontinued to live in the forest,

tformitig penances, But he never took

imselt for one who had acquired any
metit by his acts. During the rains he
slept under the opeft sky. In autumn he
sat in water. :


16, In summer he exposed himself to
the sun and the wind. Still he never took
himselffor one who had acquired any merit
by such acts. He used to sleep on various


sorts of painful beds and also‘on the naked


farth.


17. On one occasion that ascetic, while
standing under the sky during the rainy
season, received on his head repeated show-
ers from the clouds, 7”


18. Hehad to pass through the forests
again and again. Partly with exposure to
the rains and partly with the -filth they
caught, the jocks of that pure Rishi became
entangled and interwined with one another.


‘tg. At one time’ abstaining entirely
from food and living upon air alone, that


great ascetic, stood in the forest like a’


wooden post. Unmidved at heart, he ‘stoc
there, without once moving an inch, :


20. While he stood there unmoved like a
wooden post, O Bharata, a pair of Kulinga
birds, O king, built their nest on his head.


9. Thus addressed by those beings, | @mong his matted locks with


F energy,


MAHABHARATA,


at. Filled with pity, the great Rishis-
allowed those birds in building their nest
pieces of.
grass.

2a> And as the ascetic stood there like a
wooden post, the two bieds lived on his head
happily and confidingly.

23. The rainy season passed away and
autumn set in, Actuated by desire, the
couple approached each other according: to


} the law of the Creator, and with perfect


confidence laid their eggs, O king, on the
head of that Rishi. .


Of rigid vows and eridued with’

the ascetic knew it. Knowing
even what the birds had done, Jajali did
not move. Bent strongly upon acquiring
merit, no act involving the slightest injury”
to others could meet with his approval.


25. Going away and returning every
day from, and to his head, the birds happi-
ly and trustfully lived there, O powerful
king,

26. When in the course of time the eggs


24.


| became mature and young ones came out,


they began to grow up in that nest, for
Jajali moved not in the least.


27. Firmly observing his vows, the.
tighteous Rishi continued to hold and pro«
tect those eggs by standing on that very...
at perfectly motionless and immersed in_

oga meditation. :


28 Incourse of time the young ones
grew and became endued with wings. Tha,
Muni knew that the young Kulingas had
grown up so.

29. That foremost of intelligent men,
of austere vows, one day saw those young,
ones and became filled with pleasure. ;


30. Seeing their young ones endued :
with wings, the parent birds became very.


r)


| happy and continued to live in the Rishi’s.


head with them. in perfect confidence. .


3%. Thelearned Jajali saw that when:
the young birds had wings they flew to the.
air every evening and came back to his
head without having gone far, He still:
stood motionless there. :


32. Sometime after he saw that, left by
their parents, they went out alone and:
came back again alone. Jajali did not still.
move, :


33- Some time after, the young birds‘
going away in the morning spent the while
day out of his. sight but returned in the!
evening for living in the nest. }


‘34. Sometime after, leaving their nest,
for five days at a time, they returned on tha
sixth day. Jajali still did not move. ~


J


SHANT! PARVA. -


389


35. Subsequently, when they gained. head for going here and therein seatch of


their full strength, they left him andidid not
return at all even after many days.


36. At last, at another time, leaving him,
they did not come even after a month.
Then, O king, Jajali left that place.


37. When they had thus gone*away? for
ever, Jajali wondered much, and thought
that he had gained ascetic success, Then
pride entered his heart.


38. Ever observing vows, the great
ascetic, seeing the birds thus leave him
after having been brought up on his head,
thought highly of himself, and became filled
with joy. ;

39. Ue then bathed in a river and pour-
ed libations on the sacred firé, and wor-
shipped the rising Sun,


40. Having thus made‘ those chataka
birds, grow on his head, Jajali that fore-
most of ascetics, began to strike his arm-
pits and cry loudly through the sky-~I
have acquired greatmerit.


41. Then an unseen voice arose in ‘the
sky and Jajali heard these words :~You
are not equal, O Jajali, to Tuladhara in
righteousness. i


42. Highly wise, that Tuladhara lives
- at Baranasi. Even he is not competent to
say what you say, O twice-born one!


43. Hearing these words, Jajali became
possessed by anger and desirous of meeting
with Tuladhara, O king, began to roam
ever the whole Earth, observing tlie vew of
silence and passing the night where he met
with evening.

44. After a long time he reached the
city ;jof Baranasi, and saw ‘Tuladhara
engaged in selling miscellaneous articles.

'45. Assoon as the shop-keeper Tyla-
dhara saw the Brahmana arrived at his

place, he cheerfully stood up and adored
the guest with proper salutations.


- Tuladhara said :—


46. Forsooth, O Brahmana, I know that
you have come to me. Listen, however,
O foremost of twice-born ones, to what
I say! °

47. Living en a low land near the sea-
shore you had practised very hard penan-
ces. But you had no consciousness of
having acquired religious merit,

48 When yeu had at last acqnired
ascetic success, certain birds were born on
your head. You took great caré of the
little creatures. .


49. When at last those birds became
winged and when they began to leave your


food, it was then that, fer your having thus:
assisted at the birth of those Chatakas, yeu
beyan to feel pride, O Brahmana, thinking,
you had acquired great merit.


50. Then, O foremost of twice-born ones,
you heard in the sky a voice that spoke
of me. Lhe words you had heard filled
you with anger and for that you have come
here! Yell me, what wish of yours shall I
fulfil, O best of Brahmanas.”


L ooneemal


CHAPTER CCLXI.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA),—
Continued. :


Bhishma said :—~


1. Thus accosted by the intelligent
Tuladhara 0a that occasion, the highly ine.
telligent Jajali, that foremost of ascetics,
said these words to him :—


Jajali said :—

2. You sell all sorts of juices and scents,
O son of a trader, as also (barks and leaves
of) huge trees and herbs and their fruits
and roots,


3. But how have you gained this stabi-
lity of understanding? How have you
gained this knowledge? © you of great
intelligence, tell me all this fully.


Bhishma continued :-—


4. Thus accosted by that highly famous
Brahmana, Tuladhara of the Vaishya caste,
well acquainted with the truths ef morality
and contented with knowledge, described =
to Jajali who had practised severe penances,
the ways of morality. :


Tuladhara said :~-

5. O Jajali, 1 know, with all its myste--
ries, morality, which is eternal. It is no--
thing else but that ancient morality which
every body knows, and which consists of -
universal friendliness, and bengficence to,
all creatures.


6. The highest form of morality consists
in a living which is foanded upon a total
harmlessness towards all creatures of tipon
the smallness of such harm. [live accords
ing to that mode, O Jajali..

7-8. This my house hath been made”
with wood and grass cut by other people’s
hands. Lacdye, the roots of Nymphoa-
lotus, filaments of the lotus, various sorts-of :
good scents, and many kinds of liquids, O;
twice-born Rishi, with the exception of


390


wines, { purchase from other people and sell
witheut cheating.


He, O Jajali, only knows morality or

-tighteousness is, who is always the friend of

all creatures and who is always engaged in

’ the behoof of all creatures, in thought, word,
and deed.


to. I never beg of any one, I never
fall out with any one; I never hate any
one. I never desire for anything. I regard
equally allthings and all creatures. See, O
Jajali, this is my vow.

1x. My scates ace perfectly even, O
Jajali, as cegards all creatures.


12, Wneither praise nor blame the deeds
of others, -considering this variety in the
world, O foremost of Brahmanas, as the
variety seen in the sky.

13. Know, O Jajali, that I regard
equally all creatures, O highest of intelli-

ent men, I perceive no difference between
a clod of eaeth, a piece of stone, and a lump
of gold. -


tm. As the blind, the deaf, and they who
are bereft of reason, find consolation for
the loss of their. senses, likewise, I find
consolation by their example.


.15. As they who are possessed by de-
ptopionde, they who are afflicted by disease,
and they who are weakened and emaciated,
do'not like any sort of enjoyments, similar-
ly, L feel no inclination for wealth or plea-
sure or enjoyments. |

16. Then only a person attains to Brah-
ena when he fears nothing and is not feared
himself, when he cherishes no desite and
does not hate anything,


17. Then only a person attains to
Brehma when he does not behave sinfully
towards any creature in thought, word, or
deed.


18, There is no past, no future. There

is no morality or virtue. He who is not

_an object of fear with any creature
“ acquires a state in which there is no fear.


19. On the other hand, that person who
for bis harsh words and bad temper, is
troublesome to all creatures like death itself,
certainly attains to a state full of fear.


20. I follow the practices of great-and
benevolent men of advanced years who with
their children and grand children live ob-
serving duly the ordinance laid down in the
scriptures.


a1. The eternal Vedic practices are en-
tirely abandoned by one who allows himself
to be stupefied by some mistakes that he
may have marked in the conduct of those
who are admittedly good and wise, One,


MAHABHARATA,


however, who is gifted with learning, or one
who has controlled his senses, or one who
has strength ef mind, acquires liberations
by virtue of that very conduct.


22. That wise man who, .Waving con-
trolled his senses, follows with a heart
purged off all desire of injuring others, the
conduct of the good, is} sure, O Jajali, to
acquire the merit of righteousness.


23. -In this world, as in a river, a piece
of wooed that is beingicarried away by the
current, is seen to come into contact (for
some time) with another piece which is
being likewise carried away. There on the
current, other pieces of wood that had been
collected together, are seen to again sepa-
rate from one another. Grass, sticks, and
cowdung cakes are seen to be joined to-


gether. This union is merely accidental
and not brought about by any = set
design, :


25. He, whom no ereature fears, is him-
self, O ascetic, never frightened by any
creature.


26. He, onthe other hand, O learned
man, whom every creature fears like a wolf,
becomes himself filled with fear as aqua-
tic animals when compelled to leap on
oe shore from fear of the roaring Vadava

te, :


27. This practice of universal harmless-
ness has thus originated. One may follow
it by every means inhis power. He who
has a following and he who has riches, may
seek to adopt it. It is sure to bring on
prosperity and heaven. ;


28. On account of their power to remove
the fears of others, men having riches and
followers are considered as foremost by the
learned, Those, who seek common-place
happiness, practise this duty. of universal
harmlessness for the sake of fame; while
they, who are truly skilled, practise; the
same for attaining to Brahma.


29. Whatever fruits one enjoys by
penances, by sacrifices, by making chari+
ties, by. speaking the truth, and by seeking
wisdem, may all be acquired by practising
the duty of harmlessness,


30. Tat person who declares to all
creatures the assurance of harmlessness
acquires the merit of all the sacrifices and
at last acquires fearlessness for himself as
his meed. There is no duty superior to
thie duty of not injuring other creatures.


3t. He whom, O great ascetic, no crea
ture fears in the least, does not himself feac
any creatures,


32. He whom every body fears like a
snake lying in ones bed-room, never acs


SHRANT?


quires any merit in this world or in the
next.


33. The very cetestials, in their search
alter it, become bewildered inthe track of
that person who rises above al states, the
person, vis., who himself is the soul of all
creatures and who considers all creatures
as identical with his own self,


* 34. Of all gifts, the promise of harm-
lessivess to all creatures is the greatest, ft
tell you truly, believe me, O Jajali.


35. One who performs acts at first ac-
quires prosperity, but then he once more
meets with adversity.


36. Seeing the destruction of (the merits
of) acts, the wise do not speak highly of
them.


37. There is no duty, O Jafali, that is
not done by some motive (of happiness).
Duty, however, is very subtile. Duties
have been ordained in the Vedas for both
Brahma aud heaven.


38. The subject of duties is full of
secrets and mysteries. tis so subtile that
one cannot understand it fully. Amongst
various conflicting ordinances, some suc-
ceed in understanding duty by observing
the acts of the good.


39—~40. Why do you not destroy them
who emasculate bulls and bore their noses
and make them bear heavy loads and bind
them and put them under various sorts of
restraint, and who eat the flesh of living
creatures after killing them. Men are seen
to acquire men as slaves, and by beating,
by binding, and by otherwise subjugating
them, make them work day and night.
‘These people are not ignorant of the pain
that is caused by beating and chains.


- 42, All the gods live in every creature
who have the five senses. The Sun, the
Moon, the God of Wind, Brahman, Vital
Airs, Kratu and Yama, (these live in living
creatures),


43- There are men who maintain them-
selves by trading'in living creatures. Wien
they acquire a living by such a sinfut trade,
what scruples have they in selling dead
carcases? The goatis Agni. ‘She sheep


is Varuna. ‘The horse is the Sun. Earth
is the god Virat.
- 44. The cow and the calf are Soma.


The man who sells these can never acquire
success. But what fault is there in seHing
oil, clarified butter, honey, or drugs, O
twice-born one ?


45—46. There are many animals which
grow up in ease and comfort in places free
from gnats and hiting insects. Knowing


that their mothers love them dearly, men


‘| mother !


PARYA, 96%.
persecute them in various ways, and lead
them into mire full of biting insects. Many.
beasts of burden ate oppressed with heavy
loads. Others, again, are made to lati»
guish for the treatment not sanctioned by
the scriptures,


47. I think that such acts of injury done
to animals are the same as feeticide,
People corisider the calling of agriculture
as sinless, That prefession, however, if
again fraught with cruelty. ‘


48, The iron plough wounds the soi
and many creatures which live there. Look,
© Jajali, at those bullocks yoked to the
plough.

4g. Kine are called in the Shrutis the
Undestructible. -‘That man commits a great
iniquity who kills a bull or a cow.

50. In ancient times, many Rishis with
controlled senses addréssed Nahusha, say<
ing, You have, O king, killed a cow which
is regarded in the scriptures like one’s
You have also kifled a bull,
which is declared to be like the Creator
himself, :


gt. You have committed a sin, O
Nahusha, and we have been greatly pained
atit!—For purifying Nahusha, however,
they divided that sin, intoa hundred aad
one parts and metamorphosing the pieces
into diseases cast them anrong all creas
tures,

52. Thus, O Jajali, did those highly«
blessed Rishis cast that sin on all living
creatures and addressing Nahusha who
had committed feeticide, said,—We shalt
not be able to pour fibations in your sacrix
fice! Thus said those great Rishis and
Yatis [conversant with truth, having learnt
by their ascetic power that king Na
sesh had not committed the sin intention<
ally.


54. These, O Jajali, ate some of the
wicked and deeadiul practices of this world.
You do them because they are practised by
all men from days of yore, and not because
they are approved of your purified under-
standing.

3g. One should perform his duty guided
by reasons, instead of blindly following the
conduct of the world. Listen now, O Jaja-
li, how I treat him who injures and him who
praises me. ,


56. Lregard both of them equally. I
have none whom I like and none whom f
dislike. The wise speak highly of sucha
course of conduct as consistent with duty or
teligion. 7


y


: #
57. The Yatis also follow this course of
conduct, which is consistent with reasons,


aga


The righteous always observe it with eyes
having purified vision.


CHAPTER CCLXIII.
(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA,).—


Continued,


Jajali said :—

1. This dug which you, O holder of
scales, describe, shuts the deor of heaven
against all creatures and puts a stop to the

. Very means of thei¢ livelihood.


_ 2. From agriculture comes food. That
food gives maintenance even to you. With
the help of animals, crops and herbs,
human beings, OU trader, can maintain
themselves,


3. From animals and food sacrifices
originate. Your doctrines are atheistical.
This world wilt come to an end if the
means by which life is upheld have to be
given up.


Tuladhara said :-—


4.1 shall now desctibe the topic of
the means of livelihood. — am net, O
Brahmana, an atheist. do not. speak
against Sacrifices. The man, however, is
yey tare who .is truly an adept in Sacri-

ce.


_5. I bow to that Sacrifice which is laid
down for Brahmanas. 1 bow also ta them
who are adepts in that Sacrificé. Alas,
having abandoned the Sacrifice that is or-
dained for them, the Brahmanas have
begun to perform Sacrifices that are for
Kshattiyas.


6. Many persons of faith, O twice-born
one, who hanker after wealth, without
having understood the true meaning of the
sayings of the Shrutis, and proclaiming
things that are in sooth false but that have
the show of truth, have introduced many
sorts of Sacrifices, saying,—


7. This should be given away in this
Sacrifice. This other thing should be given
away in this other Sacrifice. The first of
this is very praiseworthy.—The result,
however, of all this, O Jajali, is that theft
and many evil acts originate.


8. Itshould be known that only that
sacrificial offering which was gained by
faic means can please the deities. There
are abundant proofs in the scriptures that
the adoration of the gods may be done with
bows, with libations poured on the fire, with
recitation or chaunting of the Vedas, and
with plants and herbs,


.their children


MAHABHARATA.


men get wicked childret;
rom ‘their religious acts. Covetous ment
beget covetous children, and contented
men beget contented children.


10, If the sacrificer and the priest allow
themselves to be guided by desire- of fruit,
their children take the stigma. If, however,
they are not moved by the desire of fruit,
become tho same. From
Sacrifices originate children like clear water
from the sky.


It. The libations poured on the sacrifi-
cial fire get up to the Sun. From the Sun
originates rain. From rain comes food.
From food are born living creatures.


12. In days of yore men religiously
given to Sacrifices used to attain therefrom
the fruition of all their wishes. The Earth
gave crops without cultivation. The bless-
ings of the Rishis produced herbs and
plants,


13. The men of ancient times never
celebrated Sacrifices from desire of fruit¢
and never considered themselves as bound
to énjoy those fruits. Those who somehow
or other celebrate Sacrifices, doubting their
efficacy, are born in theic next lives as dise
honest, wily, and greedy men greatly cove-
tous of wealth. That man who by the help
of false reasoning show all the authoritative
scriptures as fraught with evil, is certain to
go, for such a sinful deed, into the regions
of the sinful. Such a man is surely possess
ed of a sinful soul, O foremost of Brahmas
nas, and always cremains here, shorn of
wisdom.


16, That man whe consider those acts
as bounden which have been laid down in
the Vedas and directed to be performed
every day, who is filled with fear if he fails
to perform them any day, who considers all
the essentials of Sacrifices as identical wittr
Brahma, and who never considers himself
as the actor, is truly a Brahmana.


17. Tf the acts of sucha person remain
incomplete or if their completion is hindered
by all unclean animals, even then those acta
are, as we have heard, of supreme efficacy.
If, however, those acts are performed from
desire of fruit then expiation would become
necessary. i


9. Sinful


18. They, who seek the acquisition of the
highest object of life, who do not hanker
after earthly riches, who do not care for
future provision, and who are shorn of
envy, follow the course of truth and practise
self-control as their Sacrifice.


19. They who know the distinction
between body and soul, who are given ta
Yoga, and who meditate on Qm, always
succeed in pleasing others.


SHANTI PARVA,


20,
soul of all the gods, lives in him who is
conversant with Brahma. When, there-
fore, such a man eats and is pleased, alt
the gods, O Jajali, become pleased and are
contented, .


21. As one who is satisfied with all sorts
of taste feels no desire for any particular
taste, similarly one who is pleased with
knowledge has eternal gratification which
to him is a source of perfect happiness.


22. Those wise men who are the refuge
of righteousness and whose joy is in righ-
teousness, are persons who have certain
knowledge of what is duty and what is
otherwise. One endued with such wisdom
always. considers all things in the universe
as emanating from his own self,


23-24. Some who are gifted with know-
ledge, who try to reach the other shore (of
this ocean of fife), and who have faith,
succeed in going to the region of Brahman,
which yields great blessings, is highiy
sacred, and inhabited by pious men,—a
region which is freed from sorrow, whence
no body returns, and where there is no agi-
tation or pain,


25. Such men do not hanker after
heaven. They do not worship Brahma in
costly Sacrifices. ‘hey trade the path of
the virtuous. The Sacrifices they celebrate
are performed without injury to any crea-
ture, :


26. These men consider trees, herbs,
gtuits and roots as the only sacrificial offer-
ngs. Grecds priests who seek riches, never
ioficiate at the sacrifices of these (poor)
-men.


27. These regenerate men, although all
their acts have been done, still perform
sacrifices for doing good to all creatures
making their own selves as_ sacrificial
offerings.


28. .Therefore, greedy priests officiate at
the Sacrifices of only those misguided
persons who, without trying to attain to
Liberation, seek for heaven. ‘Those, how-
ever, who are really good, always try, by
performing their own duties, to cause
others to go to heaven. Looking at both
these kinds- of conduct, O Jajali, I have
come to regard all creatures impartially.


29g. Gifted with wisdom, many leading
Brahmanas. celebrate Sacrifices. By per-
forming those Sacrifices, they walk, O great
ascetic, along the path wended by the gods,


30. Of one class of Sacrificers there is
return (from the region where they go),
Of those, however, who are truly wise there
.is no return, Although both classes of
sacrificers, O Jajali, wend the path trodden


52


The universal Brahma, which is the


393-


by the gods, yet such is the difference
between their ultimate ends.


3t. On aécount of the success of the
purposes such men form in their minds,’
bulls, without being forced thereto, willingly
set their shoulders to the plough for help~
ing the cultivation and to the yoke for
dragging their cars, and kine pour forth
milk from udders without being touched
by human hands,


32. Creating sacrificial stakes by their
will-force, they celebrate many kinds of -
Sacrifice with profuse presents. One wha
is of such a purified soul may kill a cow.


33. They, therefore, who are otherwise,
should celebrate Sacrifices with herbs and
plants. Because Renunciation has such
merit, there I have kept it in view in speaks
ing to you.


34. The gods consider him a Brahmana
who has cast of all desire of fruit, who
does not exert for worldly acts, who never.
bows down his head to any one, who never
praises others, and who is gifted with
strength though his acts have all been
weakened.


35. _ What, O Jajali, will be the end of
him who does not recite the Vedas to others,
who does net celebrate Sacrifices, who doea
not make gifts to Brahmanas, and who fol~
lows a calling in which every sort of desira
is indulged? By duly respecting, however,
the duties which belong to Renunciation,
one is sure to attain to Brahma,


Jajali said :-—

36. We had never before, Oson of a
trader, heard of these subtle doctrines
of ascetics who perform only mental Sacrie
fices. These doctrines are very difficult
tounderstand. It is, therefore, [ ask you
{about them). The sages of yore were
not followers of these doctrines of Yoga.
Hence, the succeeding sages have not
mentioned them.


37. If you hold that only men mene
tally bent like brutes fail to achieve sacri«
fices in the soil of the Soul, then, O son
of a trader, by what acts would they
succeed in securing their happiness? Tell
me this, O youof great wisdom. I hava
great faith in your words.


Tuladhara said :—


38. Sometimes sacrifices celebrated by
some persons do not become sacrifices.
These men, it should be said, do not
deserve performing any sacrifice. Regard
ing the faithful, however, only one thing,
vig., the Cow, is fit for upholding all sacti«
fices by means of full libations of glarified


394


butter, milk, and curds, the hair at end of | hereafter.


her tail, her horns, and her hoofs.


39- In ‘celebrating sacrifices, however,
according to the mode I have-mentioned,
one may convert Faith into his married
wife, for dedicating such offerings to the
gods. By duly honoring such sacrifices,
one is sure to attain to Brahma,


“40. Excluding all animals, the rice-ball
is a worthy offering in sacrifices. All rivers
areas sacred as the Saraswati, and all
mountains are sacred.


4%. O Jajali, the Soul is itself a sacred-
shrine. Do not roam about on the Earth
for visiting sacred places! A person, by
following these duties, and by seeking to
acquire merit accordiny to his own ability,
undoubtedly succeeds in getting blessed
regions hereafter,


Bhishma continued :—

42. These are the duties, “3 Yudhishe
thira, which Tuladhara spore highly of —
duties} which are consistent with reason,
and which are always followed by the good
and the wise.


CHAPTER CCLXIV.


MAHABHARATA.


Those acts, however, that injure
others, destroy faith, and faith being des<
troyed, brings ruin on the destroyer.


7. The sacrifice of those who regard
equally both acquistion and non-acquisition,
who are endued with faith, who are self
controlled, who have tranquil minds, and
who celebrate ‘sacrifices from a sense of
duty yield fruits.


8. Faith in Brahma is the daughter of
the Sun-God, O twice-born one. She is the
protectress and the giver of good birth.
Faith is superior to the merit begotten by
recitations and meditation.


9. An act vitiated by faulty speech is
saved by Faith. An act sullied by defect
of mind is saved by Faith. But neither.
speech nor mind can save an act which is
sullied by want of Faith.


to—11. Men who know the past recite
in this connection the following verse sung
bv Brahman. The gods regard as equal the
offerings in sacrifices of a person who is
pure but wanting in Faith, and of another
who is impure but wanting in Paith, and of
another who is impure but has Faith. After
mature considération the gods have consi-
dered equal the food, again, of a person
conversant with the Vedas but miserty in
conduct, and that of a usurer who is liberal


1 in conduct.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued.


Tuladhara said :— ;

1. See with your awn eyes, O Jajali,
who, amongst the good or otherwise, have
followed dis path of duty which I have
svozen of! You will understand properly
how the truth stands.

2. 'See, many birds are roving in the
sry! Amongst them are those who were
brought up on your head, as also many
hawks and many others of different kinds.


3. See, O Bratrmana, those birds have
got their wings and legs for entering their
respective nests. “Call them, O twice-born
one,


4. There, those birds, treated affection-
ately by you, are showing their love for you
who are theie father! Forsooth, you are
their father, O Jajali! Do you call your
children! .


Bhishma continued :—


5. Then those birds, summoned by Jajali,
answered according to the dietates of that
religion which preaches abstention from
injury to any creature.


6. All acts that are done without injuring
~any Creature come to use both here and


12—13. The supreme Lord of alt
creatures, then told them that they had
committed a mistake. The food of a liberal
person is purified by Faith. he food,
however, of the person who has Faith is
fost for such want- of Faith. The food
of a liberal usurer can be accepted but not
the food of a miser.


14. Only one person in the world, vzz.,
he who has no Faith, is unfit to make offer-
ings to the gods. ‘I'he food of only such-a


man is unfit to be eaten. This is the
opinion of men who know duties,
15. Want of Faithis a great sin, Faith


is a purjfier of sins. Like a snake casting
off its slough, the man of Faith succeeds ia
shaking off all his sins.


16, The religion of abstention with Faith
is superior to aH sacred things. Abstaining
from all shortcomings of conduct, he who
follows Faith, becomes purified.


17, What need has such a person of
penances, or of conduct, or of endurance?

very man has Faith, Faith, however, is of
three sorts, vzs., as partaking of the nature
of the qualities of goodness, darkness, and
ignorance, and according to the nature of
Faith which one has, one is named.


18. Persons gifted with goodness and
endued with insight inte the true impor


SHANTI


of morality have thus described the subject
of duties. We have, on enquiry, got all
this from the sage Dharmadarshana.


1g. O you of great’ wisdom, adopt
Faith, for you will then acquire what is
superior. He who believes (in the sayings
of the Shrutis), and who acts according to
their sense, is, indeed, of righteous soul. O
Jajali, he who follows his own path is surely
‘a Superior person.


Bhishma said :—


2o—21. After a short time Tuladhara
and Jajali, both of whom had been gifted
with great wisdom, ascended to heaven and
played there in great happiness, having
reached their respective places wen by their
respective deeds. ‘Tuladhara had spoken
many truths of this sort.


22. That great person understecd this
religion perfectly. These eternal duties
were accordingly declared by him.


23. O son of Kunti, having heard these
words of Tuladhara of celebrated energy,
the twice-born Jajali betook himself to
tranquillity, In this way many truths of
deep sense were spoken by Tuladhara,
illustrated by examples for instruction.
What other truths do you wish to hear ?


CHAPTER CCLXV.


"(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued.
Bhishma said :—
1. Regarding it is‘cited an old discourse


of what was recited by king Vicharakhu
through pity for all creatures.


a—~3. Seeing the mangled body of a bull,
and hearing the highly painful groans of
the kine in a cow-killing sacrifice, and ob-
Serving the cruel Brahmanas collected
there for assisting at the ceremonies, that
king said these words :—Prosperity to all
the kine in the worjd!—When the slaughter
had begun, these words expressive of a
blessing were uttered :—


4. And the king further said,—Only
those who transgress fixed limits, who are
shorn of intelligence, who are atheists and
sceptics, and who desire the acquisition of
celebrity by sacrifices and religious rites,
speak highly of the destruction of animals
in sacrifices. :


5. The pious Manu has spoken highly
of harmlessness in all acts. Indeed, men
kill animals in sacrifices, actuated only by
the desire of fruit. :


PARVA, 395°


6. Hence, guided by authority one con-
versant (with the scriptures) should practise
the true course of duty which is highly sub-
tile. Harmlessness to all creatures is the
highest of all duties.


7. Living near an inhabited place and,
practising rigid vows, and disregarding the
fruits of Vedic acts, one should give up the
life of a house-holder, adopting that of Re~
nunciation. Only they who are mean are
actuated by the desire of fruit.


8. Mentioning respectfully sacrifices and
trees and sacrifictalstakes, men do not eat
tainted meat. This practice, however, is
not worthy of praise.


g. Knaves have introduced wine, fish,
honey, meat, alchohol, and preparations of.
tice and sesame seeds. Thejuse of these
is not sanctioned in the Vedas. ~


1o. The hankering after these originates
from pride, error of judgment, and cupi-<
dity. ‘The3:Brahmanas realise the presence
of Vishnu in every sacrifice,


11-12. His adoration, it has been laid
down, should be made with sweet Payasa.
(The leaves and flowers of) such trees as
have been mentioned in the Vedas, what«
ever act is considered as worthy and what-
ever else is held as pure by persons of
pure hearts and purified natures and
those eminent for knowledge and _ holiness,
are well worthy of being offered to the
Supreme God. and not unworthy of His ac<
ceptance,”’


Yudhishthira said :—


13.‘ The body and afl sorts of dangers
and calamities continually fight with each
other. How, therefore, will a person who
is absolutely free from the desire of injuring
and who on this account will not be able
to act, succeed in maintaining his
body ?” .


Bhishma said :—~
14. ‘One should, when able, acquire
merit and act in such a way that his body
may not languish and suffer pain, and that
death may not come.” ane


CHAPTER CCLXVI.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).-—=
Continued, :


Yudhishthira said :— -
1. “You, O grandfather, are our highest

preceptor in the matter of all acts which

it is difficult to perform, JI ask, how should


396


one judge of an act regarding one’s obliga-
tion to do it or of abstaining from it? Is it
to-be judged fquickly or with delay 2”


Bhishma said :—


“@ “Regarding it is cited the old dis-
course of what took place regarding Chira-
karin born in the race of Angirasa.


3. Twice blessed be the man who thinks
long before he acts! One who thinks long
before he acts is surely possessed of great
intelligence. Such a man never offends in
an act.


4. There was once ahighly wise man
by name Chirakarin, who was the son of

autama, ‘Thinking for along time upon
every aspect of proposed acts, he used to
do all he had to do


5. He passed by the name of Chiraka-
rin because he used to think long upon all
matters, to remain awake for a long time,
to sleep for a long time, and to take a long
time in performing such acts.


6. But stilf he passed for an idle man.
He was also considered as a foolish person,
by every person of a light understanding
and shorn of foresight.


q. Ona certain occasion, seeing an_act
of great fault in his wife, the father Gau-
tama, passing over his other children, com-
mianded in anger this Chirakarin, saying,—
kill this woman !


8. Having said these words without
much thought, the learned Gautama, that
foremost of persons engaged in the practice
of Yoga, that highly blessed ascetic, left
or the forest.


« 9. Having after a long while assented to
‘it, saying,—So be it,—Chirakarin, on ac-
count of his very nature, and owing to his
habit of never performing any act without
much thought, began to think for a long
while.


10. How shall l obey the order of my
father, and yet how avoid killing my
mother 2? How shall 1 avoid sinking, like a
wicked man, into sin in this plight in which
contradictory duties are dragging me into
Opposite directions ? F


rt. Obedience to the orders of the father
forms the highest merit. The protection of
the mother again is a clearduty, ‘he con-
dition of a son is fraught with depen-
eee How shall I avoid being affected by
sin


12, Who is there that can.be happy
after having killed a woman, especially his
mother? Who again can acquire prospe~
rity and fame by disobeying his own
father,


MAHABHARATA.


13. Regard for the father’s order is oblie
gatory. The protection of my mother is
equally a duty. How shall I so act that
both obligations may be satisfied?


14. The father puts his own self within
the mother’s womb and takes birth as the
son, for continuing his practices, conduct,
name and race.


15. Ihave been begotten as a son by
both my. mother and my father. Knowing
as | do my own birth, why should I not
have this knowledge ?


16. The words spoken by the father
while performing the initial rite consequent
upon bicth, and those that were spoken by
bim on the occasion of the subsidiary
rite ace sufficient (evidence) for settling the
respect due to him and, indeed, confirm the
respect actually paid to him.


17. On account of his bringing up the
son and instructing him, the father is the
son’s foremost of superiors and the high-
est religion. The very Vedas sanction it
as certain that the son should consider what
the father says as his highest duty.


18. The son is only a source of joy to
his father. The father is all in all to a son,
The body and all else that the son has he
has got from the father alone.


19. Hence, the commands of the father
should be obeyed without ever questioning
them inthe least. The very sins of one
who obeys his father are cleansed.


20. The father is the giver of all articles
of enjoyment, of fall articles of food, of
instructions in the Vedas, and of all other
knowledge of the world, ‘The father is the
performer of such rites as Garbhadhana
(the ceremony for the attainment of puberty
by the wife,) and Simantonnayana (the
ceremony performed by the husband in


the fourth, sixth, or eighth, month of
gestation.
21. The father is religion, The father is


heaven. The father is the highest penance,
The father being pleased all the gods are
pleased.


22. Whatever words are spoken by the
father, become blessings that attach to
the son.. The words of joy that the father
utters purify the son ofj all bis sins.


23. The flower is seen to drop down
from the stalk. The fruit is seen to drop
down from the tree. But the father, in
whatever difficulty he may be, moved by
parental affection, never leaves the son.


‘24. These then are my thoughts upon
the réspect due from the son to the father.
The father is not an ordinary object to the
son, I shall now think upon the mother,


he


SHANT! PARVA.


25. Of this the mother is the principal
cause of those union of the five elements
in me due to my birth as a human being,
as the fire-sticks of fire.


26. The mother is as the fire-stick
about the bodies of all men. She is the
medicine for all sorts of calamities. The
existence of the mother grants protection
to one; the reverse deprives one of all
protection.


27. The man who, though shorn of
prosperity, enters his house uttering the
words—O mother!—does not suffer from
grief. Nor does decrepitude ever attack
Mum.


28. A person whose mother exists, even
if he has sons and grandsons and even if
he is a hundred years old, looks likea child
of two.


29. Able or disabled, lean or robust, the
son is always protected by the mother.
None else, according to the Scripture, is the
‘son’s protector.


30. When his mother leaves him then
does the son become old, then does he
become stricken with grief, then does the
world leok empty in his eyes.


31. There is no shelter like the mother.
There is no refuge like the mother. ‘There
is no defence like the mother. There is no
one dearer than the mother.


32. For having borne him in her womb
the mother is theson’s Dhatri. For having
been the principal cause of his birth, she is
his Janani. For having reared his young
limbs, she is called Amva. For giving
birth to a child possessed of courage, she is
called Virasu.


33. For peeing and looking after the
sh


son, she is called Shushru. ‘She mother is
one’s own body. What rational man is
there who would kill his mother to whose
care only his own head did not lie on the
Street like a dry gourd?


34. When husband and wife unite them-
selves for procreation, the desire for a son
is cherished by both, but about its fruition.
more depencs upon the mother than on
the father.


35. The mother knows the family in
which the son is born and the father who
has begotten him. From the time of con-
ception the mother begins to show affection
to her child and find joy in him. On the
other hand, the Scriptures hold that the
issue belong to the father only,


36. If men, after taking wives and
pledging themselves to acquire - religious
merit without being dissociated from them,


397


seek union with other people’s wives, they
then cease to deserve respect.


37. The busband, because he maintains
the wife, is called Bhartri, and he is called
Pati, because he protects her. When he
fails to discharge these two functions, he
ceases to both Bhartri and Pati.


38. Then again woman can commit no
fault. It is man only who commits faults.
By committing an act of adultery, the man
only becomes sullied with sin.


It has been said that the husband is
the highest object with the wife and the
highest god to her. My mother resigned
her sacred person to one who came to her
in the shape of ber own husband.


40. Women can commit no sin. It is
man who becomes sullied with sin. Indeed,
on account of the natural weakness of the
sex as shown in every act, and their liability
to solicitation, women cannot be considered
as offenders,


4t, Then again the sinfulness is evident
of Indra himself who made the recollection
of the request that had been made to him
in days of yore by woman. ‘There is no
doubt that my mother is sinless.


42. She whom 1 have been ordered té
kill is a woman, That woman is again
my own mother. She occupies, therefore,
a place of greater respect. ‘The very beasts
which are irrational, know that the mother
should not be killed.


43. The father must be known to bea
combination of all the gods together. The
mother, however, is a combination of all
mortal creatures and all the gods.


44. On account of his habit of reflects
ing long beforé acting, Gautama’s son
Chirakarin, by thinking thus, passed a long
time, After many days, his father Gautama’
came back,


45. Gifted with great wisdom, Medhatithi
of Gautama’s race, practising penances, re+
turned, convinced, after having meditated
for that long time, of the impropriety of
the punishment he had ordered to be ine
flicted upon his wife.*~..__ :


46. Burning with grief and shedding
profuse tears, for repentance had come to
him on accouut of the wholesome effects of
that calmness of temper which is caused by
a knowledge of the scriptures, he said :—


47. The lord of the three worlds, v72.,
Purandara, came to my asylum, in the
guise of a Brahmana asking for hospitality,


48. He was received by me with be«
coming words, and welcomed and. presented
in due form with water to wash his feet and


398


the usual offerings of the Arghya.
gave him the rest he had asked for,


49. I further told him that I had ac-
quired a protector in him, [I thought that
such conduct on my part would make him
treat me as a friend. When, however, not-
withstanding all this, he misbehaved him-
self, my wife Ahalya could not be consider-
ed to have committed any sin.


50. It seems that neither my wife, nor
myself, nor Indra himself who while pass-
ing through the firmament had seen my
wife, could be held to have committed any
sin. The blame really isthe result of the
carelessness of my Yoga power.


51. The sages have said that all cala-
mities originate from envy, which, in its
turn, springs from mistaken judgment. By
that envy, also, I have been dragged from
where | was and plungéd into an ocean of
sin.

52. Alas, I have killed a woman,—a
woman who is again my wife—one, who, on
account of her sharing her husband’s mis-
fortunes passed by the name of Vasita,—
one, whe was called Bharyya owing to my
obligation for maintaining ber. Who is
there who can save me from this sin 2


53- Acting carelessly I ordered the great
Chirakarin! If on the present occasion he
proves true to his name then may he save
me from this sin,


54. Twice blessed be yon, O Chiraka-
tin! If on this occasion you have delayed
accomplishing the work, then are you truly
worthy of your name!


55. Saveme, and your mother, and the
penances I have won, as ‘also your own
self, from grave sins :—Be you truly a Chi-
takarika to-day!


56. Ordinarily, on account of your great
wisdom you take a long time for reflection
before performing any act. Let not your
- conduct be otherwise to-day! Be you atrue
Chirakarika to-day !


57. Your mother had expected your
coming fora long time. For a long time
did she carry you in her womb. O Chira-
karika, let your habit of reflecting Jong
before acting yield beneficial results
to-day!


58. Perhaps, my son Chirakarika is
delaying to-day, anticipating the sorrow it
would dause me! Perhaps, he is sleeping
over that order, bearing it in his heart. Per-
haps, he is delaying, anticipating the grief it
would cause both him and me, and think.
ing upon the circumstances of the case !—


59. Repenting in this way, O king, the


I also, great Rishi


MAHABHARATA.


Gautama then saw his son
Chirakarin sitting near bim.


69. Seeing his father return to their.
house, the son Chirakarin, laden with grief,
cast away the weapon and bowing his head
began to pacify Goutama.


61. Seeing his son prostrated before him
with bent head, and seeing also his wife
almost petrified with shame, the Rishi be-
came filled with great joy.


62. From that time the great Rishi,
living in that solitary hermitage did not
live separately from his wife or his careful
son.


63. Having made the command that
his wife should be killed he had gone away
from his asylum for accomplishing some
object of hisown. Since then his son had
stood in an humble manner, weapon in
band, for satisfying that command on his
mother,


64. Seeing that son prostrated at his
feet, the father thought that, filled with fear,
he was asking for pardon for the offence he
had perpetrated in taking up a weapon.


65. The father praised his son for a
long time, and smelt his head for a long
time, and embraced him for fa long time,
and blessed him, uttering the words—Do
you live long.


66. Then, filled with joy‘and contented
withi what had taken place, Gautama, O
you of great wisdem, said to his son.


67. Blessed be you, O Chirakarika!
Do you always think long before acting!
By your delay in carrying out my com-
mand you have to-day made me happy for
ever!


68. That learned and best of Rishis then
saying these verses upon the subject of the
merits of such cooljmen as think for a long
time before doing any work,—


69. Ifit be the death of a friend, one
should perform it after along time. If one
has to give up a project already begun, he
should do it after a long time. A _ friend«
ship that is contracted after a long exami-
nation lasts for a long time.


7o. In yielding to anger, to arrogance,
to pride, to disputes, to sinful deeds, and in
performing ,all disagreeable works, he who
delays long, deserves praise !


7t. When the offence is not distinctly
proved against a relative, a friend, a ser=
vant, or a wife, he who thinks long before
inflicting the punishment, is praised.


72. Thus, O Bharata, was Gautani«
’ pleased with his son, O_you of Kuru’s race,


SHANTI PARVA,


or that act of delay on the latter’s part in.


satisfying the former’s order,


73. Inalldeedsa man should, in this
wise, think for a long time and then settle
what he should do. By acting thus one is
Sure to avoid grief for a long time.


74—75. That man who nurses his anger
fora long time, who thinks long before doing
any work, never does any act which pro-
duces repentance. One should wait for a
long time upon the aged, and sitting near
them show them respect. One should sa-
tisty his duties for a long time and be
engaged for a long time in determining
them.


76. Serving for a long time the learned,
and reverentially serving for a long time
those who are geod in conduct and keeping
one’s soul for a long while under proper
control, one succeeds in enjoying the respect
of the world for a long time.


77. One instructing others on the snb-
ject of religion and duty, should, when ask-
ed by another for information on those sub-
jects, take a long time to think before
giving an answer. He will not then
repent.


78. Regarding Gautama of austere
penances, that Rishi, having worshipped
the gods for a long while in that asylum
of his, at last went up to heaven with
his son.” ;


CHAPTER CCLXVIL.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued,


Yudhisthira said:


x, ‘'* How, indeed, should the king pro-
tect his subjets without harming anybody ?
I ask you this, O grandfather, tell me, O
foremost of good men!”


Bhishma said :—


2. “Regarding it is cited the old conver-
sation between Dyumutsena and king
Satyavat.


3. We have heard that upon a certain
number of individuals having been brought
out for execution at the command of his

. father, prince Satyavat gave vent to certain
words that had never before been said by
any body else.


4. Sometimes virtue assumes the form
of sin, and sin assumes the form of virtue.
lt can never be possible that the destruction
of_individuals can ever be a virtuous act. —


‘


399


Dyumutsena said :-— —


. Hf the sparing of those who should
be killed, be virtue, if robbers be spared, O
Satyavat, then all distinctions (between
virtue and vice) would disappear.


6. ‘This is mine,’—‘This is not his’—ideas
like these will not prevail in the Kali age,
(lf the wicked be not punished) the affairs
of the world will cometoanend, H you
know how the world may go on, then des+
cribe it to me.


Satyavat said :—


7. Yhe three other castes should be
placed under the control of the Brahmanasy
Hf those three castes be kept within the
limits of virtue, then the subsidiary caste
(that have sprung from intermixture) will
imitate their practices,


8. Of them those who will violate
(these commands) shall be reported to the
king.— This one does not care for my come
mands !—upon such a complaint being lode
ged by a Brahmana, the king should punish
the offender,


g. Without destroying the body of the
offender the king should punish him as. or-
dained by the Scriptures. ‘The king should
not act otherwise, neglecting to think pro-
perly upon the character of the offence and
upon the science of morality.


10. By killing the wicked, the king kills
a large number of innocent men. See, by
kiting a single robber, his wife, mother,
father, and children are all kitled. When
injured by a wicked person, the king
should, therefore, think seriously on the
question of punishment.


11. Sometimes a wicked man is seen to
imbibe good conduct from a pious person.
It ts séen that ‘good children spring from
wicked persons,


12-15. The wicked, therefore, should
not be uprooted. The extermination of the
wicked is not quite of a piece with eternal
practice. By punishing them gently, by
depriving them of alltheir riches, by chains
and imprisonment, by disfiguring them
they may be made to expiate their
offences. Their. relatives should not be
punished by the infliction of capital senten«
ces on them. If in the presence of the
priest and others, they give themselves up
to him from desire of protection, and swear,
saying,—O Brahmana,.we shall never
again commit any sin,=they would then be
discharged without any punishment, This
is the command of the Creator himsélf,.
Even the Brahmana who puts on a


400


deer-skin and the wand and has his head
shaved, should be punished.


16. If great men_ transgress, their
punishment should be proportionate to their
greatness. As regards them who offend
again and again, they should not be let
off without punishment as on their first
offence. :


Dyumatsena said :—


17. As long as those limits within which
men should be kept ‘are not outstripped,
so long are they known by the name of
virtue.


“148. If they who transgressed those limits
were not punished with death, those’ barri-
ers would soon be destreyed. Men of more
ancient times were capable of being govern-
ed easily.


19. They were very truthful. They
were little bent upon quarrelling, They
seldom gave way to anger, or, if they did,
their anger never became ungovernable.
In those days mere disapproval of offence
was sufficient punishment. After this came
the punishment represented by harsh words
or censures.


20. Then came the punishment of fines
and forfeitures. In this age, however, the
punishment of death is in vogue. Wicked-
ness has increased to such an extent that by
killing one others cannot be controlled.


2t. The robber has no connection with
men, with the gods, with the Gandharvas,
and with the Pitris. What is he to whom ?
He is not ary body to any one, This is the
saying of the Shrutis.


22. The robber takes away the orna-
ments of dead bodies from cemeteries, and
consumes from men afflicted by spirits.
That man is a fool whe would enter into
any agreement with those miscreants or
exact any oath from them,


Satyavat said :—


23. If you cannot make honest men
of those rogues and in saving them by
means other than destruction, do you then
root them out by celebrating some sacrifice.


24. Kings practise severe penances for
the sake of enabling their subjects to grow
prosperous in their callings. When thieves
and robbers increase in their territories
they become ashamed. They, therefore,
perform penances for putting down thefts
and robberies and making their subjects
live happily.


25. Subjects can be made honest by
being only terrorized. Good kings never
kill the wicked from motives of retributien,


MAHABHARATA,


Good kings succeed in ruling their sub


jects properly with the help of good
conduct.
26. Ifthe king act properly, the high


class subjects imitate him. ‘The inferior
people, again, imitate their immediate
superiors. Men are so formed that they
imitate those whom they consider as their
betters.


27. That king who, without controlling
himself, seeks to govern others (from evil
ways) becomes an object of ridicule with all
men on account of his being engaged in the
enjoyment of all worldly pleasures as a
slave of his senses,


_28. That man who, through pride or
mistaken judgment, offends against the
king in any way, should be governed by
every means. It is by this way that he is
prevented from committing fresh offences.


29. The king should first control his
own self if he mean to control other offen-
ders. Heshould punish sufficiently even
his friends and near relatives.


30. In that kingdom where a wicked
offender is not sufficiently punished, offences
increase and virtue decreases forsooth.


31-32. Formerly, a Brahmana, endued
with mercy and knowledge, taught me this.
And, O son, [ have thus been instructed by
also our grandfathers of olden days, who
gave such assurances of harmlessness to
people, actuated by pity. Their words
were,—In the Keita age, kings should go-
vern their subjects by adopting harmless
ways.


33. In that Treta age kings should act
according to ways that follow virtue lessen-
ed by a fourth part. In the Dwapara age,
they act according to ways conforming with
virtue decreased by half, and in the age
following, according to ways conforming
with virtue decreased by three-fourths.


34. When the Kali age begins, through
the wickedness of kings and on account
of the nature of the age itself, fifteen parts
of even that fourth portion of virtue disap-
pear, asixteenth portion thereof being all
that then remains.


35. If, O Satyavat, by adopting the way
mentioned first, confusion sets in, the king,
considering the span of human life, the
strength of human beings, and the nature
of the time that has come, should giv
punishments. ‘


36. Indeed, Manu, the son of the Self-
create, has, through pity for human
baings, indicated the way .by means of
which men may follow knowledge for the
sake of Liberation.””


SHANTI PARVA,


CHAPTER CCLXVHL


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued.


Yudhishthira said:—

1. “You have already explained to me
O grandfather, how the religion of Yoga,
which produces six well-known attributes,
may be adopted and practised without
injuring any creature. Describe to me, O
grandfather that religion which produces
enjoyment and Liberation.


2. O these two, both “of which lead to
the same end, which is superior ?”


Bhishma said :—


3- ‘Both courses of duty are highly
sacred. Both are extremely difficult of
performance. Both yield high fruits, Both
are practised by those who are admittedly
good.


4. I shall now describe to you on the
authoritativeness of both these duties, for
removing your doubts about their true
meaning. Listen to me with rapt attention.


5. Regarding it is cited the old discourse
between Kapila and the cow. Listen to
it, O Yudhishthira.


We have heard that in days of yore
when the god Tashtri cameto the palace
of king Nahusha, the latter, for satisfying
the duties of hospitality, was on the point
of slaying a cow in accordance with the
true, ancient, and eternal injunction of the
Vedas. ‘


7~8. Seeing that cow tied for slaughter,
Kapila of liberal soul, ever following
Sattwika duties, always engaged in con-
trolling his senses, endued withtrue know-
ledge, and sparing in diet, having gained
an excellent understanding that was cha-
racterised by faith, perfectly fearless, bene-
ficial, firm, and ever directed towards truth,
uttered,—Alas, ye Vedas !—At that time a
Rishi by name Syumarashmi, entering the
form of that cow, addressed the Yati Kapi-
la, saying,—=Silence, O Kapila!


g. Af the Vedas are censurable, whence
have those other duties come to be regard-
ed as authoritative.


to, Men given to penances and endued
with intelligence, and who have the Shrutis
and knowledge for their eyes, consider the
injunctions of the Vedas, which have been
declared through and compiled by the
Rishis, to be the words of God himself.


11, What cana person say regarding
the contents of the Vedas when these are
the words of the Supreme Being himself,
who is shorn of the desire of fruit, who


5r


of
is without the fever, who is addicted


to nothing, and who is shorn of all exer=
tion,


Kapila said :—
12. I do not censure “the Vedas. I do
not wish to disparage them. We have


heard that the different classes of duty laid
down for the different modes of life, ail lead
to the same end.


13. The Sanyasin attains toa high end.
The hermit also attains to a high end.
Both the other two, also, viz., the house«
holder and the Brahmacharin, attain to thea
same end.


14. All the four modes of life have al«
ways been considered as Deva-yana waySe
The respective strength or weakness of
these, are represented by their respective
superiority or inferiority, has been declared
in the character of their respective ends,


1§. Knowing these, perform acts which
lead to heaven and other blessings,—this ig
a Vedic declaration.—Do not perform acts,
~this also is another obligatory declaration
of the Vedas. ei


16. Jf abstention from acts produces
merit, then their performance must ‘be
highly reprehensible. When the scriptures
say this, the strength or wealness of par<
ticular sayings must be very difficult to des,
termine,


17, Ifyou know of any class of duty
which is superior to the religion of harma-
lessness, and which depends upon direct
evidence instead of that of the scriptures,
do you then describe them to me.—-_ :


Syumarashmi said :— :

18. One should celebrate sacrifices from
desire of heaven’~-we always hear this
Shruti. Thinking first of the fruit, one
makes preparations for sacrifice.

1g. Goat, herse, sheep, cow, all sorts of
birds, domestic or wild, and herbs and
plants, constitute the food of living creas
tures. We have heard this.


zo. Food again ought to be taken day
after day morning and evening. Again the
Shruti says that animals and gcain form
the limbs of Sacrifice.


zt. The Lord of the universe created
them along with Sacrifice. The powerful
Lord of all creatures made the gods celee
brate sacrifices with theit help.


22, Altogether seven (domestic) and
seven (wild) animals are declared fit for
sacrifice. Instead of all being equally fit,
each succeeding one is inferior to the pre-
ceding one. The Vedas again say that


402


the whole universe is appointed for sacri.
fice. The Vedas have appointed Purusha
for the same purpose.


23. This again has been sanctioned by
amen of ancient times. What learned man
is there who does not select, according to his
own power, individuals from among living
crcatures for sacrifice ?


-34. The inferior animals, human beings,
trees and herbs, all desire for the attain-
ment of heaven. ‘There is no means, how-
ever, except sacrifice, by which they can
‘acquire the fruition of that desire.


. 25—29. The deciduous herbs, animals,
‘trees, creepers, clarified butter, milk, curds,
meat and other selected things land, the

oints of the horizon, faith, and time which
‘forms the twelfth, the Richs, the Yajushes,
the Samans, and the sacrificer himself form-
ing the sixteenth, and Fire which should be
known as the householder,—these seven-
teen are said to be the limbs of Sacrifice.
Sacrifice, the Shruti says, is the root of the
world and its movement. With . clarified
butter, milk, curds, dung, curds mixed with
milk, skin, the hair in her tail, horns, and
hoofs, the cow alone is able to supply all
‘the necessaries of sacrifice. For particular
sacrifices are sanctioned particular ones,
Ritwijas) and presents together sustain
Sacrifices. . By collecting these things to-
gether, people celebrate sacrifices.

“go. This Shruti, quite of a piece with
the truth, is heard that all things have been
created for the celebration of Sacrifice. It
wasjthus that alt men of yore undertook the
celebration of sacrifices.


31. Regarding -that person, however,
who'celebrates sacrifices, because of the be-
lief that sacrifices should be celebrated not
for the sake of fruit or reward, it is seen
that he does not injure any creature or
treat any one with hostility, or engage in
the performance of any worldly work.


32. The things named above as the
limbs of sacrifice, and those that have been
mentioned as. necessary in sacrifices and
that are indicated in the ordinances, al!
maintain one another when used according
to the approved ritual. 7


- 33. see alsothe Smritis compield by
the Rishis, into which the Vedas have been
introduced. Learned men regard them as
authoritative on account of theie following
the Brahmanas.


34. Sacrifices have the Brahmanas for
their progenitor, and truly they- depend
upon the Brahmanas. The whole universe
depends upon (sacrifice, and sacrifice de-
pends upon the universe, '


MAHABHARATA,


35. The syllable Om is the root from
which the Vedas have originated. He has
no fear about next life in all the three
worlds, who has uttered for him the syl-
lables ‘Om, Namas, Swaha, Sadha, and
Vashat, and who has according to his
means, celebrated sacrifices and other
rites. The Vedas and sages crowned with
ascetic success, and the foremost of Rishis
declare thus.


37. He, indeed, is a Brahmana in whom
are the Richs, the Yajushes, the Samans,
and the expletives necessary for completing
the rythm of the Samans according to the
rules laid down in Vedic grammars.


38. You know, O worshipful Brahmana,
what are the fruits of Agnihotra, of the
Somassacrifice, and of the other great
sacrifices.


39. I, therefore, hold that one should
sacrifice and assist at other people’s sacri-
fices, without any hesitation whatsoever.
One who eelebrates sacrifices leading to
heaven (such as Yotishtoma, etc.,} acquires
great rewards in the next world the form of
heavenly bliss.


40. This is certain, ozs., that they who
do not celebrate sacrifices have neither this
world nor the next. ‘Fhey who are really
conversant with the sayings of the Vedas
consider both kinds of declarations as
equally authoritative. 3


CHAPTER CCLXIX.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA)—
Continued.


Kapila said :—

1. Seeing that all the fruits that can be
gained by acts are instable instead of being
eternal, Yatis, by adopting self-control and
tranquillity, attain to Brahma through the
path of knowledge. There is nothing ia
any of the worlds that can stand in theie
way.

2, They are freed from the influence of
all pairs of opposites. They never offer
their salutation to anything or to any
creature. They are above all the fetters of
want. Wisdom is theirs, They are purged
of every sin. Pure and stainless they live
and rove about.


3. They have, in their own understand-
ings, formed. fixed conclusions regarding all
destructible objects and at a life of Renun-
ciation. Devoted to Brahma, and already
at one with Brahma, they have taken refuge
in Brahma.


SHANTI


4. Gelting over grief, and freed from
thequality of darkness, theic acquisitions
areeternal. When the high end of these
men is within reach of attainment, what
need has one for performing the duties of
the domestic mode of life.


Syumarashmi said :—


5. If, indeed, that be the highest object
of acquisition, if that be truly the highest
end then the importance of the domestic
mode of life becomes clear, becausejwithout
the domestic mode no other mode of life
ever becomes possible.


6. Indeed, as all living creatures live
on account of their dependence on their res-
pective mothers, similarly the three other
modes of life exist on account of their de-
pendence upon the domestic mode.


7. The householder who lives like a
householder, celebrates sacrifices and prac-
ises penances. Whatever is done by any-
ody for acquiring happiness has for its
root the domestic mode of life.


8. All living creatures consider the pro-
creation of offspring as a root of great
happiness. The procreation of children,
however, becomes impossible in any other
mode of life.


9. Every sort of grass and straw, all
plants and herbs, and others of the same
class growing on hills and mountains, have
the domestic mode of life for their root.
Upon these rests the life of living creatures.
And since nothing else is seen than life,
domesticity may be regarded as the refuge
of the entire universe.


10. Who then speak$ the truth who says
that domesticity cannot bring on the ace
quisition of Liberation? Only those who
have no faith and wisdom and penetration,
only those who bave no reputation, who are
idle and toil-worn, who have misery in
their lot on account-of their pristine deeds,
only those who are destitute of prea see
the profusion of tranquillity in a fife of
mendicancy. :


12, The eternal and unfailing (Vedic)


403


giving away kine and other animals for
helping him to cross the river that divides
this world from that of Yama, in that of
sinking the funeral cakes in water, Vedic
Mantras are necessary.


15. Then again the three classes of
Pitris, vzs., the Archishmats, the Varhi-
shads, and the Kravyads, approve of the
necessity of Mantras about the dead, and
Mantras are regarded as powerful causes,


16. When the Vedas proctaim this so
loudly and when again human beings are
.said to owe debts to the Pitris, the Rishis,
and the gods, how can any one attain to
Liberation. ,


17. This false doctrine (of incorporeal
existence called Emancipation), seemingly
consistent with truth, but subversive of the
real meaning: of the injunctions of the
Vedas, has beer introduced by learned
“men shorn of prosperity and eaten up by
idleness. _


18. That Brahmana who celebrates
sacrifices according to the injunctions of the
Vedas, is never seduced by sin. Through |
sacrifices, such a person acquires high re«
ec of happiness along with the animals

e has killed in those sacrifices, and himself,
pleased by the acquisition of all his wishes
succeeds in pleasing those animals by ful-
filling their wishes. coe th

19. By neglecting the Vedas, by guile,
or by deception, one never succeeds in at«
taining to the Supreme. On the other
hand, itis by practising Vedic! rites that
one succeeds in attaining to Brahma,


Kapila said:—.

20. There are the Darsha, the Paurna-
masha, the Agnihotra, the Chaturmashya,
and other rites which’ an intelligent man
should perform. Eternal merit, consists ia
their performance,


, at. Those that have adopted the San-
yasa mode of life, who abstain from all
acts, who are endued with patience, who
are cleansed, and who are conversant with
Brahma, succeed by such knowledge of


PARVA,


distinctions are the causes that keep up the~ Brahma in satisfying the debts to the godg,


three worlds. That Illustrious person. of
the highest caste who is conversant with

. the Vedas, is adored from the very date of
his bicth. -


13. Besides the celebration of Garbha-
ahana, Vedic Mantras become necessary
for enabling persons of the twice-born
classes to perform all their acts regarding
both this and the other world. ;


14. In cremating his body in the attain-
-ment of a second body, in that of his drink
nd food after such attainment, in that of


falso the Piwris and the Rishis), described
to be so |very fond jof libations poured in.
sacrifices. :
22. The very gods become stupefied in
finding out the path of that pathless person
who forms himselfgthe soul of all creatures
and who regards all creatures impartially.


23. Through instructions delivered by
the preceptor one knows that which lives
within this body to be of a four-fold nature,
having besides four doors and four mouths.
In consequence of two_arms the organ, of


1


404


speech, the stomach, and the organ of plea-
sure, the very duties fare said to have four
@oors. One should, therefore, do his best
to keep those doors under control.


24. One should not gamble with dice.
One should not appropriate others proper-
ties. One should not officiate at the sacri-
fice of a person of a mean birth. One
should not, yielding to anger, smite another
with hands or feet. That intelligent man
who acts thus is said to have his hands and
feet well-governed.


25. One should not make loud abuse or
tensute. One should not speak useless
words, One should forbear from knavery
and feom accusing others. One should ob-
serve the vow of truthfulness, be sparing of
speech, and always careful. By acting
thus one will have his organ of speech well-
poverned, :


26. One should not abstain entirely
from food, One should not eat too much.
One should give up covetousness, and
always: seek company of the good. One
should eat only so much as is necessary for
keeping life. By acting thus one. succeeds
in properly governing the- door represented
by his stomach.

27. One should not, O hero, out of lust
take another wife when he has a wedded
wife. One should never call a woman to
bed except in her season. One should


. confine himself to her own married spouse


without seeking union with other women.
By acting thus one is said to have his
organ of pleasure properly governed.


a8. That wise man is truly a regenerate
person who has all his four doors, vig., the
Organ of pleagmre, the stomach, the two
arms (and two feet), and the organ of
Speech, preperly governed. :


2g. Everything becomes useless of that
person whose doors are not well governed.
O what avail are the penances of such a
man? Of what avail are his sacrifices ?
‘What can be gained by his body ?


30. The gods consider him a Brahmana
who has cast off his upper garment, who
sleeps on the naked earth, who makes his
arm a pillow, and whose heart is endued
with tranquillity.

31. That person who, given to contemn-
plation, singly enjoys all the happiness that
married couples enjoy, and who pays no
attention to the joys and griefs of others,
should’ be known as a Brahmana,.

32. That man who properly understands
all this as it really is and its various meta-
morphoses, and who knows what the énd is
of all created objects, is known'by the gods
as a Brahmana, i


MAHABHARATA.


33. One who entertains no fear from
any creature and from whom no creature
has any fear, and who forms himself the
soul of all creatures, should be known as a
Brahmana.


34. Without having gained purity of
heart which is the true end of all religious
acts such as gifts and sacrifices, men of
foolish understandings do wot succeed in
acquiring a knowledge of what is necessary
in making one a Brahmana even when ex-
plained by preceptors. Shorn of a know-
ledge of all this, these men desire fruits of
a different sort, vig., heaven and its joys.


35--37- Unable to practise even 4
small part of that good conduct which
has descended from remote times, which
is eternal, which is characterised by cer-
tainty, which enters as a thread in all
our duties, and by following which men
of knowledge belonging to all the modes
of life convert their respective duties and
penances into dreadful weapons for killing
the ignorance and evils of wortdliness,
men of foolish understandings regard
acts which yield visible fruits, which are


_fraught with the highest power, and that


are deathless, as fruitless after all and as
deviations not sanctioned by the scriptures,
In sooth, however, that conduct, comprising
practices the very opposite of those that are
seen in times of distress, is the very essence
‘of carefulness and is never affected by lust
and anger and other passions of a similar
nature, °


38. About sacrifices again, it is very
difficult to determine all their particulars,
If ascertained, it is very difficult to follow
them in practice. If practised, the fruits
which they beget are terminable. Mark
this well.


Syumarashmi said :—


-39. The Vedas sanction acts and dis-
allow them. Whence then is their autho-
tity when their injunctions thus contradict
each other? Renunciation of acts, again,
yields great benefit. Both these ways have
been laid down in the Vedas. Do you
describe to me this subject, O Brahmana.


Kapila said :—

40. Adopting the path of the good (vzz.,
Yoga), do you in even this life realise its
fruits by the direct evidence of your
senses! What, however, are the palpable
results of those other objects which you
pursue ? ©


Syumarashmi said :—

4t. O Brahmana, I am Syumarashmi
by name! I have come here for gaining
knowledge, Desirous of doing good te


(


SHANT! PARVA,


myself I have begun this conversation in all
simplicity and not from desire of argu-
mentation.

oO


42. This doubt has filled my mind.

‘ jNustrious one, stove it to me! You have
said that they who adopt the path of the
good, (vis., Yoga), by which Brahma is
attained, realise its fruits by the direct
evidence of their senses. What, indeed, is
that which can be realised by the direct
evidence of the senses and which is followed
by yourselves ?


43. Avoiding all sciences that have dis-
putation only for their highest object, I
have so studied the Agama as to have duly
understood their true import. By Agama lI
understand the injunctions of the Vedas.
1 also include in that word those sciences
based on logic which have for their object
the explanation of the real meaning of the
Vedas.


44. Without avoiding the duties sanc-
tioned for the particular mode of life which
one may follow, one should follow the prac-
tices laid down in Agama. Such obser-
vance of the practices laid down in Agama
gives one success. On account of the cer-
tainty of the conclusions of Agama, the suc-
cess which the latter brings on may be
said to be almost realisable by direct
evidence.


45. Asa boat, that is tied to another
bound for a different port, cannot take its
Passengers to the port they wish to reach,
so ourselves, dragged by jour acts due to
past desires, can never cross the eternal
river of birth and death. Describe to me
this subject, O illustrious one! Teach me
as a preceptor teaches a disciple.


46. No one is seen among men who has
perfectly renounced all earthly objects, nor
one who is perfectly contented with oneself,


nor one who has gone over grief, nor one who ©


‘is perfectly free from disease, Ror one who
is absolutely free from the desire to act, nor
one who has an absolute distaste for com-
panionship, nor one who has entirely ab-
stained from acts of every sort.


47. Even men like yourself are seen to
yield to joy and indulge in grief as persons
like ourselves. ‘Like other creatures the
senses of persons like yourselves have their
functions or objects. :


48.
determine the question of happiness, con-
sists pure happiness for all the four castes
and all the four modes of life who and
which have the same basis.


Kapila said :—
49. .Whatever may be the Shastras ac-


Tell me, in what then, if we are to.


t


408


ordinances laid down in it for regulating
those acts never become fruitless. What-
ever again the school of opinion according
to which one may act, one is sure to attain,
to the highest end by only following the
duties of self-control or Yoga,


50. Knowledge helps that man in cros~
sing (over the river of life and death), wha
follows.knowledge. ‘Vhat conduct, however,
which men follow after deviating from the
path of knowledge, pains them,


. §t. It is clear that. ye are endued with
knowledge and dissociated from every
earthly object that may produce pain. But
have any of you at any time, succeeded in
gaining that knowledge by which every-
thing is capable of being seen as at one
with one Universal Self. .


52. Without a correct understanding of |
the scriptures, some there are, fond only of
argumentation who, on account of being
overwhelmed by desire and hatred, become
the slaves of pride and arrogance.


53. Without having correctly under.
stood the meaning of scriptural sayings, |
these robbers of the scriptures, these de-
predators of Brahma, actuated by arro-'
gance and mistake, refuse to pursue tran-
quillity and practise self-control.


54. These men see fruitlessness on.
every side, and if they succeed in acquiring
the power of knowledge they never give it:
to others for rescuing them. ~ Made up en-.
ticely of the quality of ignorance, they have
ignofance only for their refuge.


55. One becomes subject to all the cha-,
racteristics of that nature which one imbibes. -
Accordingly, of him who has ignorance for:
his refuge, the passions of envy,'lust, anger, »
pride, falsehood, and vanity, continually :
grow, forone’s qualities have one’s nature
for their root.


56. Thinking in this way and seeing
these faults, Yatis, who seek the highest
end, follow Yoga, leaving both good and ill,


Syumarashmi said :—

57- O Brahmana, all that I have said is.
strictly according to the scriptures. It is,.
however, very true that without a correct
understanding of the meaning of the scrip-
tures, one does not feel inclined to obey
what the scriptures really say.


58. Whatever conduct is consistent with .
equity, is conformable with the scriptures.
Even that is what the Shrutisays, Like-
wise, whatever conduct is inconsistent with
equity is incompatiblefwith the scriptures.
This also is held by the Shruti.


59. It is certain thatno one can do a


”


cording t9 which one performs the acts, the - scriptural act by violating the scriptures,


406.


That which is against the Vedas is unscrip-
tural, ‘he Shruti says this.


‘60. Many men, who believe only what
Girectly appeals to theie senses, see only
this world, They dé not see what the
scriptures declare to be faults. They have,
accordiigly, like ourselves, to yield to grief.
Those objects of the senses which concern
men like you are the same with which other
living creatures are concerned.


61—62. All the four castes of men and
all the four modes of life, however different
their duties, seek the same single end.
You are gifted with unquestioned talents
and abilities. For determining that parti-
cular conduct which is well calculated to
fulfill the desired end, you have by describ-
ing to me the Infinite, (Brahma), filled my
soul with tranquillity. As regards oursel-
ves, on account of our inability to under-
staad ithé Soul we are deprived of a correct
understanding of tfie reality. .Our wisdom
is concerned with low things, and we are
Covered with thick darkness.


63-64. Only he who is givento Yoga,
who has satisfied all his duties, who -is
capable of roving everywhere depending
only on his own body, who has brought his


soul under perfect restraint, who has ‘gone


above the requirements of the science of
morality and who disregards the whole
world, can transgress the declarations of
the Vedas regarding acts, and say that
there is Liberation.


65-—66. For one, however, who lives in
the midst of relatives, this course of con-
duct is highly difficult to follow. Gift,
study of the Vedas, sacrifices begetting
children, simplicity of conduct, when by
doing even these no one attains to Libera-
tion, fie on him who seeks to attain to it.
and on Liberation itself that is sought! It
appears that the fabour spent upon ac-
quiring it is all fruitless.

67. One is charged with atheism if he
disregards the Vedas by not doing the acts
they declare. O illustrious one, I wish to
hear forthwith about that which comes
in the Wedas after the injunctions about
acts.

68. Do tell me the truth, O Brahmana!
1 sit at your feet. as a disciple. Teach
‘me kindly! I wish to know as much
about 4Liberation as is known to you, O
learned ote! :


MAHABNARASA.


CHAPTER CCLXX.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—~
Continued.


Kapila said :—

1. Fhe Vedas are considered as an
authority by all. People never disobey
them. Brahma is of two kinds, gis.,
Brahma as represented by sound, and
Brahma as Supreme.


2. One conversant with Brahma of sound
succeeds in attaining to Supreme Brahma,
Beginning with the cites ef Garbhadhana,
that body which the father creates with the
help of Vedic Mantras is purified (after
birth) by Vedic Mantras.


When the body} has been purified
with purificatrry rites, the owner thereof is
called a Brahmana and becomes a vessel fit
for receiving knowledge of Brahma. Know
that the meed of acts is purity of heart
which only brings on Liberation. 1 shall
now speak to you of that.


4 Whether purity of heart has been
acquired or not, is what can be Known to
the person himself who has acquired it. It
can. never be known withthe help of either
the Vedas or inference. ‘They who have no
expectations, who discard every sort of
tiches by not keeping anything for future
use, who are not covetous, and who are free
from every sort of affection and aversion,
celebrate sacrifices believing only that
their performance is a duty, To make
gifts to deserving persons is the end of all
riches.


6—8. Never addicted at any time to
sinful deeds, observant of rites sanctioned
by the. Vedas, capable of fructifying all their
wishes, gifted with certain conclusions
through pure knowledge, never giving way
to anger,—never indulging in envy, free
from pride and malice, firm in Yoga, of une
sullied birth, unsullied conduct, and unsul-
lied learning, given to the behoof of all
creatures, there were in days of yore many
men living like househofders and thoroughly
devoted to the their own duties, there were
many kings also of the same accomplish-
ment, devoted to Yoga, and many,Brahma-
nas also of the same character.


g. They treated all creatures equally
and were gifted with perfect sincerity.
They had contentment, certainty of know-
ledge. The rewards of their rcighteous-
ness were apparent, asd they were pure in-
conduct and heart. They were endued
with faith in Brahma of both forms.

10. At first making their hearts pure,
they duly observed all vows. They ob«
served the duties of rightequsness gn even


SHANT! PARVA.


occasions of distress and great difficulty,
without deviating in any particular.


it. Uniting together they used to cele-
brate meritorious acts. In this they found
great happiness. And inasmuch as they
never transgressed, they had never to per-
form any expiatory rite.


12. Depending upon the true course of
virtue, they became gifted with irresistible
energy. They never followed their own
understandings while acquiring merit but
followed the injunctions of the scriptures
alone for thatend. Accordingly they were
never guilty of guile in performing acts of
righteousnees.


13. On account of their observing unit-
edly the perfect ordinances of the scriptures
without following the rites laid down in the
alternative, they were never compelled to
perform any expiation.


14. There is no expiation for men who
follow the ordinances laid down in the
scriptures. The Shruti says that expiation
exists for only men who are weak and uns
able to follow the absolute provisions of the
sacred law.


18. Many Brahmanas of this kind in
days of yore, devoted to the celebration of
sacrifices, of profound knowledge of the
Vedas, endued with purity, good conduct
and fame.


16-22. They always adored Brahma in
the sacrifices, -and were free from desire.
Endued with learning they got over all the
bonds of life. The sacrifices of these men,
their Vedic knowledge, theic acts performed
according to the ordinances, theie study of -
the scriptures at the proper hours, and the
wishes they formed, freed as they were
from lust and anger, observant as they were
of pious conduct and acts despite all diffi-
culties,'famous as they were for performing
the duties of their own castes and mode of
life, purified as their souls were on account
of their very nature, characterised as they
were by thorough sinéerity, devoted as
they were to tranquillity, and attentive as
they were to their own practices, were at
one with Infinite Brahma. This is the
eternal Shruti we have heard. The penan-
ces of men who were so noble, of men whose.
conduct and acts were so difficult of obser-
vance and accomplishment, of men whose
wishes were crowned with success on ac+s
count of the strict satisfaction of their duties,
became potent instruments for the destruc-
tion of all worldly desires. The Brahma-
nas hold that that Good Conduct, which is

wonderful, whose origin may be traced to
very old times, which is eternal, and whose
marks are unchangeable, which differs from
the practices which even the good follow


407


in times of distress and represents their
acts in other situations, which is at one with
carefulness, over which lust, anger, and
other evil passions have no control, and on
account of which there was no transgrese
sion in all mankind, subsequently became
divided into four sub-divisions, agreeing
with the four modes of life, by persons un-
able to follow its duties in minute detail
and entirety.


23. By properly following that course of
Good Conduct after sdoption of the San-
yasa mode of life, the good attain to the
highest end. They also who become forest
tecluses, reach the same high end.-


24. They also who obsetve the domestic
mode of life, attain to the highest end ; and
lastly, those who lead the Brahmacharyya
mode, attain to the same end. Those
Brahmanas are seen to shine inthe sky as
luminaries shedding beneficent rays of light
all around,


23. Those countless Brahmanas have
become stars and constellations set in thejr
fixed roads. By virtue of contentment
they have all acquired Infinity as the
Vedas say.


26. Ifsuch men have to return to the
world through the wombs of living: creas
tures, they are never sullied by sing which
have the unexhausted remnant of pristine
deeds for their originating cause,


27. Indeed, one who has lived like a
Brahmacharin and served dutifully his
preceptor, who has arrived at fixed conclu-
sions, and who has devoted himself to Yoga
thus, is truly a Brahmana. Who else is
worthy of being called a Brahmana ?


28-30. When acts alone settle whe is a
Brahmana and who is not; acts must be
held to point out the happiness or misery
of a person. About those who have by
conquering all evil passions acquired purity
of heart, we have heard the eternal Shruti
that, on account of the.Infinity which they
acquire and of the knowledge of Brahma
{they acquire through the declarations of
Shrutis), they see everything as Brahma.
The duties followed by those pure-hearted
men, who are shorn of desire, and who have
Liberation only for theit object, for acquisi-
tion of the knowledge of Brahma, are
equally sanctioned for all the four castes
and alt the four modes of life. That
knowledge is always gained by Brahmanas
of pure hearts and controlled soul.


31. One whose soul is for Renunciation
based upon contentment, is considered as
the refuge of true knowledge. Renun-
ciation, wherein exists the knowledge lead-
ing to Liberation, and which is highly
necessary for a Brahmana, is eternal,


408


- 32, Renunciation is sometimes found
mixed with the duties of other modes, But
whether existing in that state or by itself,
one practises it according to his power.
Renunciation is the root of great benefit to
every sort of person. Only he who is
weak, fails to pursue it. That pure-heart-
ed man who secks to attain to Brahma be-
comes saved from the world,


Syumarashmi said :—

33-34. Of them who are given up to
encement they who make gifts, they who
celebrate sacrifices, they who are given to
the study of the Vedas, and they who follow
the life of Renunciation ‘after having ac-
quired and enjoyed riches and all its plea-
sures, when they depart from this world,
who is it who gets the foremost place in
heaven? [ask you this, O Brahmana!
Do you tell megtruly.— :


Kapila said :—

35. Those who live like householders
are surely auspicious and gain every sort of
‘excellence. They are unable, however, to
-enjoy the happiness of Renunciation.} Even
you may see this.


Syumarashmi said :—

36. You depend upon knowledge as the
means. Those who live like householders,
havefiplaced their faith ‘in acts. It has,
however, been said that the end of all
modes of fife is Liberation,


37. No difference, therefore, is seen
between them about either their superiority
‘or inferiority of power. O illustrious
one, do you, then, clear out the mystery
and enlighten me.


Kapila said :—

38—39. Acts onfy purify the” body.
Knowledge, however, is the highest end.
When all defects of the heart are cured,
and when the happiness of Brahma be-
comes established in knowledge. benevo«
lence, forgiveness, tranquillity, mercy,
truthfulness, and open-mindedness, absten-
tion from injury, absence of pride, modes-
‘ty, renunciation, and abstention from work
are acquired.


40. These form the path of Brahma.
By those one acquires the Highest. A


wise man when he acquires these quatities, -


understands that the cure of all defects of
the heart ts the result of acts.


41. That, indeed, is considered as the
highest end which is acquired by Brah-
manas gifted with wisdom, withdrawn from
all acts, possessed of purity and the surety
of knowledge. ;


ae ee ee


MAHABHARATA,


42. One who acquires a knowledge of
the Vedas, of that which is taught by the
Vedas, and the details of acts, is said to be
conversant with the Vedas. Any other
man is only a bag of wind.


43. One who is master of the Vedas,
knows everything, for everything is esta-
blished on the Vedas. The present, past,
and future all exist in the Vedas.


44. This is the one conclusion of all the
scriptures viz., that this universe exists and
does not exist. ‘Io the man of knowledge
this is both _existent and non-existent.
To him this all is both the end and the
middle.


45—46. This truth depends*upon all the
Vedas, vis., that when complete Renun-
ciation takes place one acquires what is
sufficient. Then, again, the highest content=
ment follows and depends upon Liberation,
which is absolute, which exists as the soul
of all mortal and immortal things, which
is well-known as such universal soul, which
is the highest object of knowledge as being
at one with all mobile and immobile objects,
which is full, which is perfect happiness
which is without duality, which is the fore-
most of all things, which is Brahma, which
is Unmanifest and the cause also of the
Unmanifest, and which is without any sort
of decay.


47- Power to control the senses, forgive
ness ‘and abstention from work owing to the
absencejof desire,—-these three are the’cause
of perfect happiness. With the help of
these three qualities, men having under-
standing for their eyes, succeed in reaching
that Brahma which is increate, which is the
supreme cause of the universe, which is un-
changeable, and which is beyond destruce
tion. I bow to that Brahma, which is at
one with him that knows it.”


CHAPTER CCLXXI.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued.


Yudhisthira said :—

1. “The Vedas, O Bharata, describe
Religion, Profit, and Pleasure. Tell me,
however, O grand-father, the attainment
of which is considered as superior.”


Bhishma said :—

2. About it I shall recite to you the
ancient discourse of the benefit. which
Kundadhara in days of yore had conferred
upon one who was devoted to him,


SHANTI PARVA,


4%. Once ona tine a Brahmiana shorn
at riches tried to win virtue, actuated by
the desire of fruit. He continually thought
of riches for employing it in the celebration
of sacrifices. For gaining his end he en-
gaged in the practice of the austerest pen=
ances.


4. Determined to achieve his object, he
began to adore the gods with great devo-
tion. But he failed to acquire riches by
such adoration of the gods.


‘5. Hethereupon began to think aside,—
What is that god, hitherto not worshipped
by men, who may be forthwith favorably
disposed towards me?


6. While thinking thus with a cool mind,
he saw stationed before him that retainer
of the gods, viz., the Cloud called Kunda-
dhara,


7. Assoon as he saw that mighty-armed
being, the Brahmana’s feelings of devotion
were excited, and he said to himself,—This
one will surely give me prosperity! Indeed,
his form indicates it.


8. He lives near the ‘gods. He has not
as yet been worshipped by other men.
He will surely give me profuse riches
without any delay !


9g: The Brahmana then, having deter-
mined thus, adored that Cloud with in-
cense, perfumes and garlands of flowers
of the most superior kind, and with various
sorts of offerings.


10. Thus adored, the Cloud became
very soon pleased with his worshipper,
and uttered these words of benefit to that
Brahmana :—


- 11. The wise have Jaid down expiation
for one guilty of Brahmanicide, or of drink-
ing alcohol, or of stealing, or of neglecting
all meritorious vows. ‘There is no expiation,
however, for one who is ungrateful. °


12, Expectation has achild named Sin.
Anger, again, is considered to be a child
of Envy. Cupidity is the child of Deceit.
Ingratitude, however, is barren.


13. Afterthis, that Brahmana, stretched
onabed of Kusha grass, and penetrated
with the energy of Kundadhara, saw all
living beings in a dream,


14. Indeed, on account of his absence
of passion, penances, and devotion, that
Brahmana of purified soul and standing
aloof from all enjoyments saw in the night
that effect of his devotion to Kundadhara.


15.. Indeed, O Yudhishthira, he saw
- the great and highly effulgent Manibhadra
Stationed in the midst of the gods, en-
gaged in giving his orders,


§2


409


16, There the gods seemed to be en-
gaged in granting kingdoms and: riches
to men, induced by their good deeds, and:
in taking them away when men deviated
from goodness,


17. Then, O foremost of Bharata’s race,
the highly effulgent Kundadhara, bending
himself low, laid himself down on the
ground before the gods in the presence of
all the Yakshas.


18 At the command of the gods the
Manibhadra said to the prostrate Kunda-
dhara,—What does Kundadhara want ?


19. Thereupon Kundadhara replied,—
If, indeed, the gods are gratified with me,
there, that Brahmana respects me greatly.
I pray for some favor being shown to him,
something, that may bring him happiness.


20. Hearing this, Manibhadra, ordered
by the gods, once more said to the highly
intelligent Kundadhara.


21—22, Rise, Rise up, O Kundadhara ;
Your prayer has borne success! Be you
happy! If this Brahmana seeks fichés,
let as much wealth be given to him, ‘as
he wishes, At the command of the gods
I shall give him immeasurable riches.


23. Then, thinking upon the fleeting
and unreal character of the humanity,
Kundadhara set his heart, O Yudhisthira,
upon inclining the Brahmana to penances.


24. Indeed, Kundadhara said,—I do
not, O giver of riches, beg for wealth on -
behalf of this Brahmana, I desire the
bestowed of another favor upon him.


25. Ido not pray for this devotee of
mine mountains of pearls and gems, or
even the whole Earth with all her riches.
I wish, however, that he should be virtuous,


26. Let his heart find pleasure in virtue !
Let him have virtue for his support. Let
virtue be the foremost of all his objects.
This is the favor which I am inclined to
give my support. a
Manibhadra said :—

27. The fruits of virtue are always
kingdom and happiness of various sorts.
Let this one enjoy those fruits, always freed
from all sorts of physical sufferings.


Bhishma said :—


28. Thus addressed, the highly illustri-
ous Kundadhara, repeatedly prayed for
virtue alone for that Brahmana. ‘The gods
were highly pleased at it,


Then Manibhadra said :—


29. The gods are all pleased with you
as also with this Brahmana. This one shal}
become a virtuous man. He shall devote
his mind to virtue. -


410


30. The Ctoud, Kundadhara, became §


pleased, O  Vudhisthira, at thus having
been successful in gaining his wish. The
boon. that he had got was one that could
not be acquired by anybody else.


31. The Brahmana then saw scattered
around him many fine fabrics of cloth.
Without caring for them at all, the Brah-
mana came to disrelish the world.


The Brahmana said :—


“32. When this one does not attach any
value to good deeds, who else will? 1 had
better go to the forest for leading a life of
righteousness.


Bhishma said :—


33. ‘Cherishing a distaste for the world,
and through the grace also of the gods,
that foremost of Bralmanas entered the
forest and began to practise the austerest
of penances. ;


"34. Livisg upon such fruits and roots
as remained after serving the gods and
guests, the mind of that twice-born one,
O king, was firmly set upon virtue.


35. By and bye the Brahmana, leaving
off fruits and roots, began to use leaves
of trees as his food. Then leaving off
‘teaves, he took to water only as his subsis-
tence.


36. Thereafter he passed many years
by living upon air only. All this time,
‘however, his strength did not decrease.
This seemed highly wonderful.


37. Devoted to virtue and engaged in
the practice of the severest austerities, after
a long time he gained spiritual vision.


38. He then thought, saying to himself,
—If, being pleased with anybody I give him
riches, my speech would never be untrue,


39. Witha face lighted up by smiles,
he once more began to practise severer
austerities.


40. And once more, having gained
(higher) success, he thought that he could
by his-will force, then create the very
highest objects. If, pleased with any person
whatsoever I -give him even sovereignty,
he will immediately become a king, for
my words will never be falsified.


41. While he was thinking thus, Kunda-
dhara, actuated by his friendship for the
Brabmana and no less by the ascetic suc-
ess which the Brahmana had gained, ap-

~peared before him, O Bharata.


_ 42. Meeting with him the Brahmana
offered him adorations according to the
ebservances ordained. The Brahmana,
however, felt some surprise, O king.


MAHABHARATA.


43. Then Kundadhara addressed the
Brahmana, saying, you have now got am
excellent and spiritual eye! See with this
vision of yours the end which is attained
by kings, and see all the worlds besides.


44. The Brahmana then, with his spiri-
tual vision, saw from a distance thousands
of kings sunk in hell.


Kundadhara said :—


45. After having adored me with devo-
tion you had got sorrow for your share,
what then would have been the good done
to you by me, and what the value of my
favour,


46. Look, look, for what end do men
seek the gratification of carnal enjoyments !
The door of heaven is closed to men.


Bhishma said :—


47. The Brahmana then saw many
men living in this world, embracing lust,
anger, avarice, fear, pride, sheep, ptocras-
tination, and activity.


Kundadhara said :—


48. All human beings are enchained
with these. The gods are afraid of men.
These vices, at the order of the gods, mar
and disconcert on all sides.


49. No man can become virtuous unless
allowed by the gods. You have become
competent to give away kingdoms and
riches through your penanees !


Bhishma said :—

50. Thus addressed, the pious Brahma-
na, bending his head to that Cloud, laid
himself low on the ground, and said,~—You
have, indeed, done me a great favour !


5t. Unconscious of the great Jove shown
by you towards me, 1 through the in-
fluence of desire and avarice, could not
show goed will towards you. :


Then Kundadhara said :-—


52. That foremost of twice-born ones,
+I have forgiven you!—and having em-
braced him with his arms disappeared there
and then.

53. The Brahmana then travelled through
ali the worlds, having acquired ascetic suc-
cess through the favour of Kundadhara.


54. Through the power gained from
virtue and penances, one acquires power
to pass through the skies and to fructify all
his wishes and purposes, and finally attain
to the highest end.


55. Thé gods, Brahmanas, Yakshas, and,


jall good men and Charanas always adore


SHANTI PARVA.


the virtuous but never the rich given up to
the indulgence of their desires,


56. The gods are truly pleased with
you since your mind is devoted to virtue,
{n riches there may bea very little happi-
mess but in virtue the extent of happiness
is very great.”


CHAPTER CCLXXII.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA)—
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


1. “OF all sorts of sacrifices, all of which,
of course, are said to have but one object,
tell me, O grandfather, what that sacrifice
is which has been ordained for only the
sake of virtue and not for the acquisition
of either heaven or riches,”


Bhishma said :—


2. “Regarding it! shall relate to you
the history, formerly recited by Narada,
of a Brahmana who for celebrating sacri-
fices, lived like a beggar,


Narada said :—


3. In one of the foremost of kingdoms
that was known for virtue, there lived a
Brahmana. Devoted tv penances and living
like a wretched beggar, that Brahmana
was earnestly engaged in worshipping
Vishnu in sacrifices.


4. Hehad Shyamaka for his food, as
also Suryaparni and Suvarchala and other
kinds of potherbs that were bitter and
distasteful. For .his penances, all these
tasted sweet.


. Not injuring any creature, and lead-
ing the life of a forest recluse, he acquired
ascetic success. With roots and fruits, O
scorcher of foes, he used to worship Vishnu
in sacrifices that were intended to bestow
heaven upon him.


6—7. The Brahmana, whose name was
Satya, had a wife namely Pushkaradharini.
She was pure-minded, and had emaciated
herself by practising many austere vows.
She did not, however, approve of the conduct
of her husband. Summoned, however, to
sit by him as his wife (in a sacrifice), she
feared to incur his curse and, therefore,
comported herself with his conduct. The
garments that covered her body consisted
of the plumes of peacocks.

8—10. Although reluctant she stifl cele-
brated that sacrifice at the command of her
husband who ha


become its Hotri. ‘In }


alr
that forest, near to the Brahmana’s her-
mitage, lived. a neighbour of his, zz, the
virtuous Parnada of Shukra’s race, having
assumed the form of a deer. He addressed
that Brahmana, whose name was Satya.
in open words and said to him:—You
would be acting very improperly, if this
sacrifice of yours were accomplished being
defective in Mantras and other particulars
of ritual! I, therefore, ask you to kill and
cut me into pieces for making libations
therewith on your sacrificial fire! Do this
and becoming blameless go to heaven !


11. Then the presiding goddess of the
solar disc, viz., Savittci, came to that sacri-
fice in her incarnate form and insisted upon
that Brahmana in doing what he was
desired by that deer todo, The Brahmana
said to that goddess, however, who thus
insisted,—I shall not kill this deer who lives
with me in this same neighbourhood!


12, ‘Thus addressed by the Brahmana,
the goddess Savitiri desisted and entered
the sacrificial fire from desire of seeing the
nether world, and wishing to avoid the
ihe of other short-comings in that sacri-

ce.


13. The deer then, with joined hands,
again begged of Satya for that. Satya,
however, embraced him in friendship and
sent him away,;—Go !


14. At this, the deer seemed to leave
that place. But after he had gone eight
steps he came back and said,—Verily, do
you killme! Truly do I say, killed by you
I am sure to attain to a pious end!


15. 1 give you (spiritual) vision. Be-
hold the celestial Apsaras and the hand-
some cars of the great Gandharvas!


16, Seeing (that spectacle) for along
time, with longing eyes, and seeing the
deer and thinking that living in heaven
can be acquired by only slaughter, he
approved (of it).


17. It was Dharma himself who had
become a deer that lived in that. forest for
many years. Dharma provided for his
salvation and advised him, saying,—-This
(destruction of living creatures) is not ac-~
cording to the ordinances about Sacrifice.


18. The penances, which had been of
very great measure, of that Brahmana
whose mind had cherished the desire of
killing the deer, diminished greatly on ac-
count of that thought itself. The injuring
of living creatures, therefore, is no part fo
sacrifice. -


1g. Then the illustrious Dharma, him-~
self assisted that Brahmana, by acting as


412


the priest, to perform a sacrifice. The
Brahmana, after this, on account of his
penances, attained to the same state of
mind with his wife.


20, Abstention from injuty isthe religion
which is perfect about its rewards. ‘The
religion of cruelty is only so far beneficial
that it leads to heaven. I have described to
you the religion of Truth which, indeed, is
the religion of those who utter Brahma,”


ae


CHAPTER CCLXXIII.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued.


Yudhisthira said:—

1.. “By what means does a man become
sinful, by what does he acquire virtue, by
what does he acquire renunciation, and by
what does he acquire Liberation.”


Bhishma said :—


2. "You know all duties. This question
which you have put to me is only for con-
firmation of your conclusions. Listen now
fully to Liberation, and Renunciation, and
Sin, and Virtue.


3. Perceiving any one of the five objects,
desire runs after it at first. Indeed, obtain-
ing them within the pale of the senses, O
foremost of Bharata’s family, desire or
hatred originates.


4. One then, for the sake of that object,-
tries and’ begins acts that require much
labour, One tries his best for enjoying
again and again those forms and scents that
appear very sweet,


5. Gradually, attachment, hatred, greed
and errors of judgment originate,


6. The mind of one possessed by greed
and mistake and affected by attachment
and hatred is never bent to virtue. One
then begins with hypocrisy to do deeds
which are good,


78. Indeed, with hypocrisy one then
tries to acquire virtue, and with hypocrisy
one likes to acquire riches. When one suc-
ceeds, O son ot Kuru’s family, in acquiring
riches with hypocrisy, one gives his heart
to such acquisition wholly. Itis then that
a person begins to do sinful acts, despite
the admonitions of well-wishers and the
wise, to all whom he makes reasonable
answers conformable to the scriptural in-
junctions. :


g. Begotten of attachment and mistake,
his sins, of three sorts, rapidly multiply for


MAHABHARAIA.


he thinks sinfully, speaks sinfully, and acts
sinfully.


to. When he clearly begins to commit
sin, the good notice his wickedness. ¢ Those,
however, who are sinfully disposed contract
friendship with him. :


31, Hecannot acquire happiness even
here. Whence then would he succeed in
acquiring happiness hereafter? Itis thus
that one becomes sinful. Listen now to me
as I describe to you one who is righteous.


12. Such a man, seeking, as he does, the
well-being*of others, succeeds in acquiring
good for himself, By doing duties which
are fraught with other people’s well-being,
oes at last to a highly agreeable
end.


13—14. He who, helped by his wisdom,
succeeds beforehand seeing the faults re-
ferred to above, who is skilled in determin-
ing what is happiness and what is sorrow
and how each is engendered, and who waits
respectfully upon the good, makes progress
in acquiring virtue, both on accouut of
his habit and such companionship of the
good, ‘The miud of sucha _ person finds
pleasure in virtue, and he lives on, making
virtue his stay.


15. If he wishes to acquire riches, he
wishes only such wealth as may be gained
in righteous ways.


16. In fact, he waters the roots of only
those objects in which he sees merit. Thus
does one become righteous and make


friends with the good.


17—18. On account of his acquisition
of friends, of riches, and of children, he
sports happily both here and hereafter,
The mastery that a living being acquires
over sound, touch, taste, form, and scent,
O Bharata, represents the fruit of virtue.
Remember this. Having acquired the
fruit of virtue, O Yudhishthira, such a
than does not yield to joy.


19—-20. Without being satisfied with
such fruits of virtue he follows Renuncia-
tion, led on by the eye of knowledge,
When, having gained the eye of knowledge
he ceases to find pleasure in the gratifica-
tion of desire, in taste and in scent, when
he does not allow his mind to run towards
sound, touch and ferm, it is then that he
succeeds in freeing himself from desire.
He does not, however, even then renounce
virtue or righteous acts.


at. Seeing then all the worlds as being
subject to destruction, he tries to renounce
virtue and tries to attain to Liberation by
the (well-known) means.


SHANTI


a2. Gradually renouncing all sinful
deeds he follows Renunciation, and be-
coming righteous-souled succeeds at last in
acquiring Liberation.

23. I have now told you, O Son, of that
about which you had asked me, vis., the
topics of Sin, Righteousness, Renuncia-
tion, and Liberation, O Bharata.


24. You should, therefore, O VYudhish-
thira, follow virtue under all citcumstances.
Eternal is the success, O son of Kunti, of
you who follow righteousness.”’


CHAPTER CCLXXIV.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA.).-~=
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


t. “You have said, O grand-father, that
Liberation is to be acquired by means and
not otherwise. I wish to hear duly what
those means are.”


Bhishma said :-—~


2. ‘'O you of great wisdom, this enquiry
which you have made me and which is
connected with a subtle topic, is really
worthy of you, since you, OQ sinless one,
always try to accomplish all your objects
by the application of means.


3. That state of mind which one feels
when he makes an earthen jac for his use,
disappears after the jar has been com-
pleted, Likewise, that cause which makes
persons who regard virtue as the root of
advancement and prosperity ceases to act
with them who seek to acquire Liberation.


4. That path which leads to the
* Eastern Ocean is not the path by which
one can go to the Western Ocean. ‘There
is only one path which leads to Liberation.
Listen to me as I describe it to you in
detail, :


' §- One should, by practising forgive-
ness, root out anger and by renouncing all
purposes, root out desire. By practising
the quality of goodness one should conquer
sleep.

6—7. By carefulness one should keep
off fear, and by contemplation of the Soul
one should conquer vital airs. One should
remove by patience desire, hatred, and
lust; and ercor, ignorance, and doubt, by
study of truth. By pursuit of kaowledge
one should avoid inquiry after uninteresting
things.

8, By frugal and easily digestible food

a


PARVA. 413
one should dispell all disorders and diss
eases. By contentment one should remove
greed and stupefaction of judgment, and all
earthly concerns should be avoided bya
knowledge of the truth.


g- By practising benevolence one should
conquer sin, and by regard for all creatures
one should gain virtue. One should avoid
expectation by thinking that it is connected
with the future; and one should renounce
riches by abandoning desire itself.


to. The intelligent man should cast off


affection by thinking that everything is


fickle. He should control hunger by prace
tising Yoga. By practising benevolence
one should keep off all ideas of ego, and
remove all sorts of craving by adopting
contentment. '


11. By exertion one sheuld subdue pro-
crastination, by certainty all kinds of doubt,
by taciturnity loquaciousness, and by
courage every sort of fear.


12. Speech and mind are to be cone
trolled by the Understanding, and the
Understanding, in its tura, by the eye of
knowledge. Knowledge, again, is to be |
controlled by the knowledge of the Soul,
and finally the Soul is te be controlled by
the Soul.


13. This last is acquired by those who
are of pure acts end endued with tran.


-quillity of soul, the means being the sub-


jugation of those five obstactles of Yoga of
which the learned speak.


t4—15. By renouncing ‘desire, anger
covetousness, fear and sleep, one should
controling speech, practise the: observances
favorable to Yoga, vis.,. contemplation,
study, gift, truth, modesty, candour, for-
giveness, purity of heart, purity of food,
and the subjugation of the senses.


16. By these one’s energy is increased
sins are removed, wishes crowned with
success, and knowledge gained.


17. When one becomes purged of sins
and possessed of energy and abstemious
in diet and the master of his senses, one
then, having conquered both desire and
anger, seeks to attain to Brahma. ©


18—19. The avoidance of ignorance, the
absence of attachment, freedom from desire
and anger, the power that is acquired by
Yoga, the absence of pride and haughti-
ness, freedom from anxiety, absence of
attachment to anything like home and
family,--these form the path of Liberation,
That path is delightful, stainless, and pure,
Likewise, the control of speech, of body,
and of mind, when practised from the


414


absence of desire, forms also the path of
Liberation. ”


CHAPTER CCLXXV.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued.


Bhishma said :—


t. ‘Regarding it is cited the old dis-
course that took place between Narada,
and Asita- Devala.


-2. Once on atime Narada, seeing that
forernost of intelligent men, viz., Devala
of venerable years, seated at his ease,
asked him about the origin and the des-
truction of all creatures.


Narada said :—

3. Whence, O Brahmana, has _ this
universe, consisting of mobile and immobile
objects, been created? When, again, the
alleembracing destruction sets in, into
whom does it merge! Let your learned
self describe this to me.


Asita said:— -~

4. Those from which the Supreme Self,
wher the time comes, actuated by the desire
of existence in various forms, creates ali
creatures, are said by persons conversant
with objects to be the five essential prin-
ciple. ;

5. Time, movedby the Understanding,
creates other objects from them. He who
says that there is anything else save these,
says the untruth.


6. Know, O Narada, that these five are
eternal, indestructible, and without begin-
ning and without end. With Kala as their
sixth, these five essential ingredients are
naturally possessed of great power.


7. Water, Ether, Earth, Air, and
Fire,—these are those five prineipal ele-
ments. Forsooth, there is nothing higher
or superior to these. ;


8. The existence of nothing else can be
inferred by any one agreeably to the con-
clusions of the Shratis ‘or arguments drawn
from reason. If any one does held the
existence of anything else, then his asser-
tion would, in sooth, be useless. Know that
these six form all others. That of which
are all these is called non-existent,


9. These five, and Kala. (or Jiva), the
effects of past acts, and Ignorance,—these
eight eternal essences are the causes of the
birth and destruction of all creatures,


MAHABHARATA.


1o, When creatures are destroyed it is
into these that they merge; and when
they are born, it is again from them that


they doso. Indeed, after destruction, a
creature resolves itself into those five
elements,


11. His body is made of earth; his ear
is made of ether; his eye has light for its
cause, his lifeis of aic, and his blood is
of water.


12. The two eyes, the nose, the two
ears, the skin, and the tongue, are the
senses. These, the learned hold, exist for
perception of their various objects.


13. Seeing, hearing, smelling, touching:
and tasting are the actions of the senses.
The five senses, are connected with five
objects in five ways. Know, by the in-
ference of reason, their similitude of attri-
butes,


14. Form, scent, taste, touch, and sound,
are the five properties that are perceived
by the five senses in five different ways.


15. These five properties, viz., form,
scent, taste, touch, and sound, are not
ceally perceived by the sezses, but it is
the Soul that apprehends them through
the senses.


16. That which is called Faculty is
superior to all the senses. Superior to
Faculty is Mind. Superior to Mind is
Understanding, and superior to Under-
standing is Soul.


17. At first a living creature perceives
vatious objects through the senses. With
Mind he reflects over them, and then with
the help of Understanding, he arrives at
certainty of knowledge. Endued_ with
Understanding, one arrives at certainty of
conclusions regarding objects perceived
through the senses.


18, The fiye senses, Faculty, Mind, and
Understanding,—these are regarded as or-
gans of knowledge by those conversant
with the spiritual science.


19. The hands, the feet, the anus, the
membrum virile, the mouth, form the five
organs of actions.


20, The mouth is spoken of as an organ
of action because it contains the instrument
of speech, and that of eating. The feet
are organs of locomotion and the hands
for doing various sorts of work.


21. Theanus and the membrum virile
are two organs which exist for evacuation,
The first is for evacuation of stools, the
second for that of urine as also of the
ysemen when one feels the influence of
desire.


SHANTI
22. Besides these, there is a sixth organ
of action. It is called muscle. ‘These then


are the names of the six organs of action ac-
cording to the books written on the subject.
I have now described to you the names of
all the organs of knowledge and of action,
and all the attributes of the five elements.


23. When on account of the organs
being fatigued, they cease to discharge
their respective functions, the owner of
those organs, their action being suspended
is said to sleep.


24. If whenthe action of these organs
is stopped, the action of the mind, does not
cease, but on the othe hand the mind conti-
nues to act, that state of Consciousness is
called Dream.


25. During wakefulness there are three
states of the mind vis., that connected with
Goodness, that with Darkness, and that
with Ignorance. In dream also the mind
is connected with the same three states.
Those very states, when they appear is
dreams, connected with pleasurable actions,
are spoken highly of.


26—27. Happiness, success, knowledge,
and absence of attachment are the marks
of the quality of Goodness. Whatever
states are experienced by living creatures,
as shown in acts, during their hours of
wakefulness, reappear in memory during
their hours of sleep when they dream, The
passage of our ideas as they exist. during
wakefulness into those of dreams, and that
of ideas as they exist in dreams into those
of wakefulness, become directly perceptible
in that state of consciousness which is
called dreamless sleep, That is eternal,
and that is desirable.


28. There are five organs of knowledge,
and five of action; with muscular power,
mind, understanding, and faculty, and with
also the three qualities of goodness, dark-
ness and ignorance, the number, it has been
said, comes up to seventeen. The eigh-
teenth in the calculation is he who owns
the body. Indeed, he who lives in this
body is eternal.


29. All those seventeen (with Avidya or
nescience as eighteenth) living in the
body, exist attached to him who owns
the body. When [the owner disappears
from the body, those eighteen cease to
live together in the body.


30. Or, this body made up of the five
principal elements only a combination.
‘The eighteen attributes, with him that
owns the body, and counting stomachic
heat numbering twentieth, form that which
is known as the Combination of the Five.


gt. There is a Being called Mahat


?


PARVA. Ats

(principle of greatness) which, with the help
of the wind (called Prana), keeps up this
combination containing the twenty things
that have been named, and in the matter
of the destruction of that body the wind is
only the instrument in the hands of that
same Mahat.


32. Whatever creature is born is
resolved once more into the five principal
elements upon the exhaustion of his
merits and demerits; and moved again
by the merits and demerits acquired in
that life enters into another body resulting
from his deeds.


33. His habitation always resulting
from nescience, desire, and acts, he
migrates from body to body, leaving off
one after another repeatedly, urged on
by Time, like a person feaving house after.
in succession,


34. The wise, gifted with certainty of
knowledge, do not yield to grief upon
seeing this. Only the’ foolish, erroneously
supposing relationships indulge in grief
on seeing such changes of habitation.

35. This individual soul is no one’s
relation ; there is none again that may be.
said to belong to him. He is always alone,
and he is himself the creator of his own
body and his own happiness and misery.


36. This individual is never born, fior
does he ever die. Freed from the fetters
of body, he succeeds sometimes in acquir-
ing the highest end, —


37. Deprived of body, because freed
through the dissipation of acts from bodies
that are the ovtcome of merits and de-
merits, individual at fast attains to
Brahma, ‘


38. For the dissipation of both merits
and demerits, Knowledge has -been de-
scribed as the cause in the Sankhya school.
Upon the dissipation of merit and demerit,
when individual soul attains to the status
of Brahma, the learned behold the attain-
ment of individual soul to the highest
end,’ °


CHAPTER CCLXXVI.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued,


Yudhisthira said :—


3, “ Cruel and sinful as we are, alas, we
have killed. brothers and fathers and
grandsons and relatives and friends and
sons,


416


2. How, O grandfather, shall we retnove
this thirst for riches. Alas, through that
thirst we have committed many sinful
deeds.”


Bhishma said :—

3. ‘Regarding it ig cited the old narra-
tive of what was said by the king of the
Videhas to the enquiring Mandavya.


The king of the Videhas said :—


4. I have nothing, yet { live in great
happiness. If the whole of Mithila be
reduced to ashes nothing of mine will be
‘burnt down. eae ’


5. Tangible possessions. of what value
they may be, are a source of sorrow to men
of knowledge; while properties of even
little value attract the foolish.


6. Whatever happiness is in this world,
owing to the gratification of desire, and
whatever celestial happiness exists of high
value, do not form even a sixteenth part
of the feticity that accrues from the disap-
pearance of desire.


7- As the horns of a cow grow with
the groweth of the cow itself, similarly the
thirst for riches multiplies with increasing
acquisitions of wealth.


8. The object for which one feels an
attachment, becomes a source of pain to
him when it is lost. .


9- One should not. entertain desire.
Attachment to desire brings. on sorrow.
When riches have been acquired, one should
devote it to Virtuous purposes. One should

. even then relinquish desire.


to. The man of knowledge always con-
siders other creatures like unto himself.
Having purified his soul and gained sucess,
he casts off everything here. —


11. By shaking off both truth and false-
hood, grief and joy, the agreeable and dis-
agreeable, fearlessness and fear, one ac-
quires tranquillity, and becomes free from
anxiety.


t2, That thirst which cannot be shaken
off by men of foolist’ understanding, which
does not decrease with the decline of the
body, and which is considered as a dread-
ful disease, one who succeeds in shaking
cff is sure to find happiness.


12, The virtuous man by seeing his own
conduct has become bright as the moon and
free from every sort of evil, succeeds in
happily acquiring great fame both here and
hereafter.


14. Hearing these. words of the king,
the Brahmana became filled with joy, and


MAHABHARATA,


speaking highly of what he heard, Manda-
vya followed the path of Liberation."


CHAPTER CCLXXVIL.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).-—=
Continued,


Yudhisthira said :—

x. “‘Yime, which is a terror to all crea-
tures, is rolling on. What is that source of
good for which one shouldtry? ‘Tell me
this, O grandfather,”


Bhishma said :—

2. ‘Regarding it is cited the old dis-
course between father and son, Listen to
it, O Yudhisthira.


3. Once ona time, O son of Pritha, a
twice-born person devoted to only the
study of the Vedas had a very intelligent
son who passed by the name of Medhavin.


4. Himself a master of the religion of
Liberation, the son one day asked his father
who was not conversant with that religion
and who was engaged in following the Vedic
precepts, this question.


The son said :—

5. What should an intelligent man do,
O father, knowing that the life of men runs
speedily away? Tell methis truly and in
due order, O father, so that, guided by
youc instructions I may undertake the ac-
quisition of virtue,


The father said :-—


6. Having read the Vedas all the while
following the duties of Brahmacharyya, O
son, one should then desire for children
for the sake of rescuing one’s departed
manes. Having established his fire ther
and performing the sacrifices that are or-
dained, one should then retire into the
forest and then become a hermit.


The son said :—


7. When the world is thus attacked ov
all sides, and when such irresistible things


-| are falling on all sides, how can you speak


so calmly ?


The sire said :—

8. How is the world attacked ?-By
what is it besieged? What are those
irresistible things that are falling on all
sides? Do you frighten me with your
words ?-—~ a


SHANTI.


The son said :—


9: The world is attacked by Death.  It-
is attacked by Decrepitude. - Days and
Nights are continually falling. Why do
you not take care of these ?


10, When 1 know that Death does not
wait here for any one how can I possibly
wait thus covered in a sheath of [Ignorance
and attending to my affairs?


tr. When with every night the period of
a man’s existence wears away, when, in-
deed, one’s position is similar to that of a
fish in a pool of shallow water, who can be
happy ?

12. Death meets one in the very midst
of his affairs, before the attainment of his
objects, finding one as careless as a person
while plucking flowers.


13. What is kept for being done tomor-
row should be done to-day; and what one
thinks of doing in tbe afternoon should be
done in the forenoon. Death does not wait
for a man whether he has, or has not done
his acts.


14. Do to-day what is for your behoof !
See that Death, who is irresistible, may
not overcome you. Who knowsthat Death
will not come to one this very day ? |


15. Before a person’s acts are done,

Death drags one away. One should, there-

. fore, begin to practise virtue while he is still
young, for life is uncertain.


16. By acquiring virtue one is sure to
“acquire eternal happiness both in this world
and inthe next. Overpowered by folly one
is up and doing on behalf of his sons _and
wives.

17—23. By performing deeds good or
bad, one pleases his people. Death seizes
him possessed of sons and animals, and
with mind given to them, and runs away
like a tiger carrying away a sleeping deer.
While still engaged in acquiring various
objects of desire, and while still unsatiated’
with their enjoyment, Death attacks him
and runs away like a she-wolf seizing a
sheep and running away with it.—-‘This has
been done,—this remains to be done,—this
other is half done’—one may say thus, but
Death, not caring for a person’s desire
to finish his unfinished acts, seizes and
drags him away. Death seizes and carries
away one who has not yet gained the
fruit of what he bas already done, amongst
those attached to action, one busied with
his field or shop or house. Death seizes
and carries away the weak, the strong,
the wise, the bitave, the idiotic. the learned,
or. him who has not yet obtained the grati-
fication of any of his desires. Death, decre-
pitude, disease, sorrow, and many things


53


PARVA, qry
of a similat nature, cannot be shunned
by mortals. How then, O father, can
you sit so at your ease? Assoon as an’
embodied creature is born, Decrepitude
and Death come and possess him lor his
destruction.


24—25. All forms of existence, mobile
and immobile, are possessed by these twos
When the soldiers, which constitute Death’s
army, march, nothing can resist them, ex+
cept that one thing, vez., the power of ‘Truth,
for in Truth alone Immortality lives. ‘The
joy which one feels of living in the midst of
men is residence of Death.


26. The Shruti says that what is calted
the forest is the true fold for the deities,
while the joy one feels in living in the
midst of men is, as it were, the fetter for
binding the dweller. :


27~—29. The pious cut it and escapes
The sinful can notcut it. He who does not
injure other creatures in thought, word,
and deed, and who never injures others
by taking away their means of liveli«
hood, is never injured by any creature,
Therefore, one should practise the vow
truth, be steadfastly devoted to the vow of
truth, and should wish for nothing but the
truth. Governing all his senses and ree
garding all creatures impartially, one
should defeat Death with the help of-
Truth. Both Immortality and Death are
in the body.


30—32.. Death comes from folly, and
Immortality is acquired by Truth. Tran-
scending desire and anger, abstaining from
injucy, I shall adopt Truth, and happily
acquiring what is for my behoof avoid
Death iike art Immortal. Engaged in
the Sacrifice that is formed by Peace, and
employed also in the Sacrifice of Brahma,
and controlling my senses, the Sacrifices I
shall perform are those of speech, mind,
and deeds, when the sun enters his norther«
ly course. How ¢an one like me celebrate
an Animal Sacrifice which is full of
cruelty. : :


33- How can one like me, endued witlt
wisdom, perform like a cruel being, a
Sacrifice of destruction after the manner
of what is sanctioned for the Kshatriyas,—«
a Sacrifice which produces only fickle res
wards. In myself have I been begotten by
my own self. O father, without seekin
to procreate progeny, 1 shall rest aysell
on my own self!


34—35. shall celebrate the Sacrifice
of Self, I require no children to rescue
me. He whose words and thoughts are
always well-governed, he who has Penances
and Renunciation, and Yoga, is sure to
acquire everything through these, There


48


is wo eye like Knowledge. There is no
seward like Knowledge,


36. There is no. sorrow like attachment.
There is no happiness like Renunciation,


37. For a Brahmana there can be no
wealth like living in solitude, an impartial
eye for all creatures, truthfulness of speech,
steady observance of good conduct, the
“total abandonment of the rad (of chastise-
ment), simplicity, and the gradual absten-
tion from ali acts.


38. Why do you require riches, relatives,
friends, and wives? You are a Brahmana
and you have death to encounter! Search
your owa Self which is concealed in a cave.
Where have your grandfathers gone and
where your father too ?


Bhishma said :—


39. Hearing these words of his son, the
father acted in the way that was pointed
out, O king! Do you also act similarly,
devoted to the religion of Truth.”


‘


CHAPTER CCLXXVIIL


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued,


Yudhisthira said :—


1, ‘*What should be a man’s conduct,
what his acts, what his knowledge, and to
what must he he devoted, for attaining to
Brahma’s place which is above Nature and
which is unchangeable ?”’


Bhishma said :—

2. One who is devoted to the religion of
Liberation, abstemious in diet, and the
master of his senses, attains to that high
place which is above Prakriti and is un-
chargeable.


3. Retiring from his home, considering
equally gain and loss, governing the senses
_and disregarding all objects of desire even
when they are ready (for enjoyment), one
should follow the life of Renunciation.


4. Neither with eye, nor with word, nor
in thought, should one disparage another.
Nor should one speak ill of any person
either in or out of his hearing.


5- One should refrain from injuring
any creature, and fact observing the
cotirse of the Sun. Having come into
this life, one should not treat with un-
friendliness any creature,


6. One should disregard disgraceful
speeches, and never in pride consider


MANABHARATA.


himself as superior to another. Wher
sought to be angered by another, one
should still give vent to agreeable speeches.
Even when spoken ill of one should not
calumninate in return.


7. One should not act in a Friendly or an
unfriendly manner inthe midst of human
beings. One should not go about many
houses in his round of mendicancy. Nor
should one go to any house having
obtained a previous invitation.


8. Even when filled with filth, one
should, firmly following his duties, refrain
from addressing unpleasant words to such
men. One should be merciful. One should
not return an injury. One should be fear-
less; one should not speak highly of
himself,


g@ The man of controlled senses should
beg alms in a householder’s house whetr
the smoke has ceased to rise from it, when
the sound of the husking rod is heard no
more, whenthe hearth-fire is gone, whetr
all the inmates have taken their food, or
when the hour for setting the dishes is
over.


to—11. He should be, satished with
only as much as is hardly necessary for
keeping the body and soul together. Even
that much of food which yields gratification
shouid not be sought by him. When he
fails to get what he wants, he should not
cherish discontent. Suecess, again, in ob-
taining what he wants, should not elate him.
He should never wish for such things as are
sought by ordinary men. He should never
take his meals at any body’s house when
respectfully invited thereto. One like him
should hate any thing that is presented
with honor.


12. He should never find fault with the
food put before him, nor should he speak
highly of its merits. He should seek a bed
and a seat that are removed from human
habitations.


‘13. The places he should seek should
such as an abandoned house, the foot of a
tree, a forest, or a cave. Without making
his practices to be known by others, or
concealing their real nature by appearing
ott sae others, he should enter his own

elf.


14. By association with Yoga and dis-
sociation from company, he should be per-
fectly calm, steadily fixed, and uniform,
He should not acquire either merit or de-
merit by means of acts. + ;


15. He should be always pleased, welt
contented, of cheerful countenance and
senses, fearless, always engaged in mental


Gz


SUANT? PARVA.


recitation of sacred Mantras, silent, and a
follower of a life of Renunciation.


16. Seeing the repeated formation and
dissolution of his own body with the senses
‘that originate from and resolve into the pri-
mary elements, and seeing also the coming
and departure of (other) creatures, he should
become shorn of desire and léarn to see
all things impartially, living upon both
cooked and uncooked food. Abstemious
in diet, and controlling his senses, he gains
tranquillity of Self by Self.


17. One should govern the impulses, of
words, of the mind, of anger of envy, of
hunger, and of lust. Given to penances
for purifying his heart, he should never
allow the censures (of others) to pain his
heart,


18. Becoming neutral, one should live,
fegarding praise and censure as equal.
This, indeed, is the holiest and the highest
path of Renunciation.


19. Endued with great soul,
Sannyasin should control his senses from
all things and stand aloof from all attach-
ments. He should never go to the places
visited by him and the men known to bim
while he lived otherwise. Agreeable to al!
creatures, and without a fixed dwelling,
ie eee be given to the contemplation
of Self, :


20. Heshould never mingle with house-
holders and hermits. He should eat such
food as he may get without effort. He
should never allow
heart.


21. Such a life of Renunciation brings
on Liberation to those that are wise. , The
practice of these duties isa great burdeu
to those, however, that are fools. The sage
Harita declared all this to be the path by
which Liberation can be acquired.


22, He who leaves his home, having
assured all creatures of his perfect harm-
lessness, acquires many bright and eternal
tegions of felicity.”


the


joy to possess his


—


CHAPTER CCLXXIX.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued, ;


Yudhishthira said :—


x. ‘All men describe ourselves.as highly
fortunate. In sooth, however, there 1s no
person more wretched than ourselves,


2-—3, Though respected of all the world,
O best of the Kurus, and though we have
een born among men, O -grandfather,


419


having been begotten by the very gods,
yet when so much sorrow has come to us,
it appears, O reverend chief, that birth
in an embedied form is the root of all
sorrow! Alas, when shalll we adopt a life
of Renunciation which dissipates sorrow ?


4—5. Sages of rigid vows freed from the
seventeen (¢.e., the five vital airs, mind,
understanding, and the ten organs of know-
ledge and action), from the five short-
comings of Yoga (wvig., desire, anger,
covetousness, fear,“and sleep), which form
the chief causes {for subjugating man to
repeated re-birth), and from the other eight,
{vtz., the five objects of the senses and the
three qualities), have never to incur re~
birth. When, O scorcher of enemies, shall
we [succeed in renouncing sovereignty for
adopting a life of Renunciation.”


Bhishma said :—

6. “Everything, O great king, has an
end. Everything has limits assigned to it!
Even re-birth, it is well known, has an end.
In this wortd there is nothing unchange-
able.


7. You think, O king, that this portion
is afault. That it is not true, regarding
our present subject of discussion. You,
however, know virtue, and have readiness.
It is certain, therefore, that you will go
to the end of your sorrow in time. :


8. Individual with body, Q king, is not
the author of his merits and demerits.
On the other band, he becomes covered
with the Darkness that is begotten. by his
merits and demerits.


—~10.
of 2s own) assumes the color of the sub-
stances which it has seized and tinges the
different points of the horizon, similarly
Individual Soul, though himself colorless,
assumes a color on account of its being
enveloped by Darkness and variegated
by the fruits of action, and passes from
body to body.


11. When Individual Soul succeeds in
removing by means of Knowledge the
Darkness which covers him in consequence
of Ignorance, then Immutable Brahma
becomes manifest.


12, The Sages say that return to Im-
mutable Brahma cannot be attained by
Acts. Yourself, others in. the world, and
the gods too, should respect them who have
acquired Liberation. All the great Rishis
never desist from culture of Brahma.


13. Regarding it is cited that discourse
which was recited (by Sukra), in days of
old. Listen, O king, with rapt attention
to the course of conduct that was followed


Asthe wind (having no colour -


#


‘


420


by the Daifya Vritra after he was shorn
of all his prosperity.

14. Depending only upon his. intelli-
ence, he did not grieve in the midst of
is enemies, although he had been defeated,

although he was friendless, and although he
was deprived of sovereignty, O Bharata!


15, When in days of old Vritra was
reft of sovereignty, (his preceptor) Ushanas
said to him, [ hope, O Danava, that on
account of your defeat your cherish no
grief. :


Vritra said :—

16. Forsooth, having understood, by
the help of trutts and penances, the coming
and gaing of all living creatures, I have
ceased to grieve or joy. ;

17. Urged by Time creatures sink help-
legsly in hell. Some again, the sages hold,
goto heaven. All these pass their time
happily. :

18. Passing their fixed time in heaven
and hell, and with some portion of their
merits and demerits unexhausted, they
again and again take birth, moved by
‘Time.

19. Fettered by the bonds of Desire,
Creatures pass through numbecless inter-
mediate lives and fall helplessly into hell.


zo. 1 have seen that creatures come
and go even thus. The lesson taught in
the Scriptures is that one’s acquisitions
tally with his acts.


21-23. Creatures are born as men or as
intermediate animals or as gods and go
to hell. Having acted in pristine lives ta
such a way as to deserve them, all creatures
subject to the ordinances of the Destroyer,
expetierice happiness and misery, the
agreeable and the disagreeable. Having
enjoyed the measure of happiness or misery
commensurate with their acts, creatures
always return by the old path, which is
measured by the measure of acts. Then
the illustrious Ushanas said to the Asura
Vritra who was thus ta}king of the highest
refuge of the creation, saying,—-O intelli-
gent Daitya, why, O child, do you utter
such foolish rhapsodies ?


Vritra said :—

24. ‘You and also other sages know
full well the severe penances which I. prac-
tised from greed of victory.


25. Appropriating various scents and
various sorts of tastes that other creatures
had for enjoying, I swelled up with. my
own energy, assatling the three worlds.


26.


Decked with numberless effulgent.


MAHABHARATA,


rays I used to pass through the skies ins
capable of being defeated by any creature
and fearing none.

27. I acquired great prosperity through
my penances and lost it again through
my own deeds. Depending on my fortitude,
however, I.do not grieve for this change.


28—29. Desirous of fighting the great
Indra, the great ruler of the celestial region,
I beheld in that battle the illustrious Hari,
the powerful Narayana, He who is called
Vaikuntha, Purusha, Ananta, Shukla,
Vishnu, Sanatana, Munjakesha, Harish-
mashru, and the Grandsire of all crea-
tures.


30. Forsooth, there is still a residue of
the rewards of that penance represented by
a sight of the great Hari! On account of
this unspent residue that I have become
desirous of asking you, O illustrious one,
about the fruits of action.


31. -Upon which order (of men) has
been placed high Brahma prosperity? In
what manner, again, does high prosperity
fall off ?


32. From whom do creatures originate
and live? Through whom again do they
act? Whatis that great Fruit by acquir-
ing which a creature succeeds in living for
good as Brahma ?


33. By what Act or by;what Knowledge
can that fruit be acquired ? You should,
O learned Brahmana, expound these
to me!


34. Described by me, O foremost of
kings, listen, with rapt attention, O best of
men, with all your brothers, to what the
sage Ushanas then said after he had been
thus addressed by that king of Danavas,


‘CHAPTER CCLXXX.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA),—
Continued,


Ushana said :—

1. I bowto that divine and illustrious
and powerful Being who holds this Earth
with the sky in his arms.


-2. I shall speak to you of the pre-emi-
nent greatness of that Vishnu whose head,
O best of the Danavas, is that Infinice
place,

“3- While they were thus talking with
each other there came to them the great
sage Sanatkumara of pious soul for the
purpose of removing their doubts.

€


SHANTI PARVA.


4. Adored of the king of Asuras and the
sage Ushanas, that foremost of sages sat
down on a rich seat.


5. After the highly wise Kumara had
been seated, Ushanas said to him,—Des-
cribe to this king of the Danavas the pre-
eminent greatness of Yishnu.—


6. Hearing these words, Sanatkumara
said to the following, fraught with grave
sense, upon the pre-eminent greatness of
Vishnu to the intelligent king of the
Danavas.


7. Listen, O Daitya, to everything re-
garding the greatness of Vishnu. Know, O
destroyer of foes, that the entire universe
depends on Vishnu.


8. O you of mighty arms, it is He who
creates all creatures mobile and immobile.
In course of ‘Time it is He, again, who
withdraws all things and in Time it is
He who once more sends them from
Himself,


9. Into Hari all things merge at the
universal dissolution, and from Him all
things again come forth. Men having
scriptural learning cannot get him by such
lore. Nor can He be acquired by Penan-
ces, nor by Sacrifices. The only means
by which He can be acquired is by con-
trolling the Senses,


to. Not that saerifices are absolutely
useless towards such an end. For a person,
by relying upon both external and internal
acts, and upon his own mind, can purify
(them) by his own understanding. By
such means, One can enjoy Infinity in the
world. :


11—12. As a goldsmith purifies the
Gross of his metal by repeatedly putting
it into the fire with very great efforts of his
own, similarly Individual Soul succeeds in
purifying himself by his course through
hundreds of births. Some one may be seen
to purify himself in only one life by great
efforts. ; ;


. 13. As one should with care remove
Stains from his body before they become
thick, similarly one should with great
efforts, wash off his sins. ;


14.' By mixing only a few flowers with


them, grains of sesame cannot be made to-


renounce theic own smell, Similarly, one
cannot, by purifying his heart only a little,
succeed in seeing the Soul.


15. When, however, those grains are
perfumed repeatedly with the help of a
large quantity of flowers, it is then that
they cast off theic own smell and assume
that of the’ flowers with which they are
mixed, :


42t


16. Similarly, faults, in the form of ate
tachments to. all our environments, are
removed by the understanding in course of
many lives, with the help of a large quantity
of the quality of goodness, and by means
of efforts born of practice. '


17. Listen, O Danava,'by what means
creatures attached to acts and those un-
attached to them get at the causes bringing
on their respective states of mind.


18. Listen tofme with rapt attention. I
shall in their due order, describe to you, O
powerful Danava, as to how creatures fol-
low action and how they give up action.


19. The Supreme Lord creates all crea-
tures mobile and immobile. He is begin-,
ingless and endless. Unendued with attri-
butes of any sort, he assumes attribues.
He is the universal Destroyer, the Refuge
of allthings, the supreme Ordainer, and
pure Intelligence.


20. .In all creatures it is He who lives as.
the mutable and the immutable. It is
He who, having eleven modifications for.
His essence, drinks this universe wih His’
rays. °

21. Knowthat the Earth is His feet.
His head is formed by Heaven: - His arms,
O Daitya, are the several points of the
horizon. ‘The intermediate space is His
ears, :


22. The light of His eye is the Sun, and
His mind is’ in the Moon, His Under-
standing lives always in Knowledge, and
His tongue is in Water.


23. O best of Danavas, the Planets are
in the midst of His brows. ‘The ‘stars and
constellations originatej from the light of
His eyes. The Earth is in. His feet, O
Danava.


24. Know also that the qualities of
Rajas, Tamas, and Sattwa are of Him.
He is the fruit of all the modes of life, and
He it is who should be known as the fruit
of alt religious acts. .


25. The Highest and Immutable, He is
also the fruit of abstention from all work.
The Chechandas are the hair on His body,
and Pranava is His word.


26. The various orders (of men) and the
modes of life are His refuge. His mouths
are many. Duty is putin his heart. He
is Brahma, He is the highest Righteous-


ness; He is existent and He is non-
existent.
27. Ue is Shruti. He is the scriptures,


He is Sacrificial vessels. He is the sixteen
sacrificial priests. He is all the Sacrifices,
He is the Grandfather (Brahman), He is


€


422


Vishnu, He is the two Ashwins, and he is
Purandara,


28, Heis Mitca, Heis Varuna, He is
Vama, He is Kuvera—the lord of riches,
Although the Ritwijas seem to see Him as
separate, He is, however, known to them as
ene and the same. Know that this entire
universe is undec the control of One divine
Being.

29. The Veda that is in the soul, O
king of Daityas, regards the unity of
various creatures. When a living creature
tealizes this unity- on account of true
knowledge, he is then said to attain to
Brahma.


30. The period of time during which one
cteation exists or owing which it ceases to
exist is called a Kalpa. Living creatures
exist for a thousand millions of such
Kalpas. Immobile creatures also exist for
an equal time. The period for which a
particular creation exists is measured by
many thousands of lakes, O Daitya !


31. Conceive a lake that is one Yojana
in width, one Krosha in depth, and five
hundred Yojanas in length. Imagine
many thousands of such lakes.


32. Try then to dry up those lakes by
taking from them, only once a day, as much
water as may be taken wp with the end of a
single hair. The number of days that would
be neccessary to drying them up perfectly
by this process forms the period that is
required by the life of one creation from its.
beginning to the time of its destruction,


33. The highest Evidence says that
creatures: have six colors, v7s., Dark,
Tawny, Blue, Red, Yellow, and White.
These colors are produced by mixtures in
various degrees of three qualities of
Rajas, Tamas, and Sattwa. Where
Tamas prevents Sattwa falls below the
mark, and Rajas remains the same, the
result is the color called Dark. When
Tamas prevails as before, but the relations
between Sattwa and Rajas, are changed the
result is the color called Tawny. When
Rajas prevents, Sattwa goes down, and
Tamas remains the same, the result is the
color called Blue. When Rajas prevents as
before and the proportion change between
Sattwa and Tamas, the result is the inter-
mediate color called Red. That color is
more agreeable. When Sattwa prevents
Rajas falls down and Tamas keeps on
the same, the result is the color called
Yellow. It yields happiness. When Sattwa
prevails and the proportion is changed
between Rajas and Tamas,’ the result is the
color. called White. It yields great happi-
HESS.


MAHABHARATA.


34. The White is the foremost color.
{tis sinless on account of its being free
from attachment and aversion. Itis without
grief, and free from the exertion necessary
by desire for action. Hence, White, O
king of Danavas, brings on Liberation. O
Daitya, having undergone  thousands-.of
births derived through the womb, Indivi-
dual Soul attains to success.


35. ‘That success is the same end which
the divine Indra declared after having
studied many sacred scriptural books and
which has for its essence the apprehension
of the Soul. ‘She end again that creatures
obtain depends on theic color, and color,
in its turn, depends upon the character of
the Time that sets in, O Daitya.


36. The stages of existence, O Daitya,
through which individual soul must pass


are not unlimited. Tney are fourteen
hundreds of thousands in number. In
consequence of them individual soul,


ascends, stays, and falls down as the case
may be.


37- The end that is acquired by an in-
dividual soul of darle color is very Jow, for
he becomes addicted to acts leading to hell
and then has to rotin hell. The learned
say that on account of his wickedness, the
continuance of an individual is measured
by many thousands of Kalpas.


38. Having passe many — Itundred
thousands of years in that stage, Individual
Soul then attains to the color called Tawny.
In that condition he lives in perfect help-
lessness. At last when his sins are spent
his mind, shaking off all attachments,


‘ cherishes Renunciation.


39-- When Individual Soul becomes
endued with the quality of goodness, he
then dispels everything connected with
Darkness by the help of his intelligence,
and exerts (for acquiring what is for his
good). As the outcome of this, Individual
Soul attains to the color called Red.. If
the quality of goodness, hawever, be not
acquired, Individual Soul then travels in a
round iof re-births in the world of men,
having attained to the color called Blue.


‘40. ‘Having attained to that end, and
having been afflicted for the duration of
one creation by the fetters of his own acts
Individual Soul then attains to the color
called Yellow (or becomes a Deity). Exist-
ing .in that {condition for the period of a
hundred Creations, he then leaves it to ree
turn to it once more.


4t—42, Having acquired the’ Yellow
color, Individual Soul exists for thousands
of Kalpas, sporting 2s a Deity. Without,
however, being emancipated, he has to
live in hell, enjoying or enduring the ‘fruits


SHANTI PARYA,


of his acts of past Kalpas and passing
through nine and ten thousand courses.
Know that Individual Soul then becomes
freed from the hell as represented by


heaven. Similarly Individual Soul escapes
other births.
43—44. Individual Soul sports for


tmany long Kalpas inthe world of Devas.
Falling thence, he once more becomes a
man. He then lives in that condition fdr
the period of a hundred and eight Kalpas.
He then attains once more to the status of
a Deity. If while born as a man he falls
through Kala, he then sinks into the Dark
color and thus occupies the very lowest of
all stages of existence. { shail tell you,
now, O foremost of Asuras, how Individual
Soul succeeds in bringing about his Liber-
ation.


48. Desirous of Liberation, Individual
Soul relying apon seven hundred kinds of
acts every one of which is permeated—by
a predominence of the quality of goodness,
gradually passes through Red and Yellow
and at last attains to White, Arrived


here, Individual Soul! travels through se-_


veral most adorable regions which have the
Eight well-known regions of felicity be-
neath them, and all the while follows that
pure and effulgent form existence which is
Liberation. ;


46. Know that the Eight which are
identical with the Sixty hundreds, are to
those who are highly effulgent, only crea-
tions of the mind. ‘Che highest object of
acquisition with one who is of White color,
is that condition which is above the three
other states of consciousness, viz. Wake-
fulness and Dream and Dreamless sleep,


47. As regards that Yogin who cannot
renounce the joy that Yoga-power begets,
he has to live (in one and the same body)
for one hundred Kalpas in auspiciousness
and after that in four other regions. Even
that is the highest end ef one bolonging
to the sixth color, and who is Unsuccessful
though crowned with Success, and who has
gone above all attachments-and passions,


48. That Yogin, again, who deviates
from Yoga practices lives in the celestial
region for a hundred Kalpas with the
unspent residue of his pristine deeds, and
with the seven (viz., the five senses of
knowledge and mind and understanding)
purged of all stains on account of their
predisposition towards the quality of good-
ness. After that period, such a person has
to come. to the world of men where he
. acquires great eminence.


49. Returning from the world of men,
he departs for attaining to new forms of
life that run ‘higher and higher in the up-


423


wards scale, While engaged in this, he
passes through seven regions for seven
times, his power being always multiplied
on account of his mental concentration and
the re-awakening from if.


go. The Yogin who wishes for final
Liberation suppresses by Yoga- knowledge
the seven, and continues to live in the
world of life, shorn of attachments; and
taking those seven for certain means of
grief, he renounces them and attains after-
wards to that state which is Indestructible
and Infinite. Some, say that that is the
region of Mahadeva; some of Vishnu ;
some, of Brahman; some, of Cesha; some,
of Nara; some, of the effulgent Intelli-
gence; and some, of the All-pervading.


51. When universal dissolution sets in,
those persons who have succeeded in cont-
pletely destroying by Knowledge their
gross and subtle and casual bodies, always
enter into Brahma, All their Senses alsa
which have action for their essence and
which are not at one with Brahma, merge
into the same.


52. When the time of universal disso-
lution sets in, those Individual Souls who
have acquired the position of Devas and
who have an unspent residue of the fruits
of acts to enjoy or endure, return to. those
stages of life “in the- subsequent Kalpa
which had been theirs in the pristine one.
This is owing to the likewess of every
successive Kalpa to every previous one,


53. Those again whose acts, at the time
of universal dissolution, have been ex-
hausted by enjoyment or endurance of their
fruits, descending from heaven, are born
among men, in the subsequent Kalpa, for
without Knowledge one cannot dissipate
his acts in even a hundred Kalpas. All
superior Being again, gifted with similar
powers and similar forms, revert to their
respective destinies at a new creation after
a universal dissolution, ascending and
descending precisely in the same way as
during the creation that is dissolved.


54. . As regards, again, the person who
knows Brahma, as” long as he continues
to enjoy and endure the unspent resi-
due of his deeds of pristine Kalpas, it is
said that all creatures and the two pure
sciences live in his body. When his In-
telligence becomes purified by Yoga, and
when he practises restraint, this perceptible
universe appears to him as only his own
fivefold senses, :


55. Enquiring with a purified mind,
individual soul attains to a high and pure
end. Thence he attains to-a spot which
knows no destruction, and thence attains


424


to eternal Brahma which is so difficult of
acquisition.

56, Thus, O you of great pdwer, I have
described to you the greatness of Nara-
yana.

Vritra said :—

57. 1 see, these your wotds are per-
fectly consonant with the truth, When
this isso, | have no grief. Having heard
your words, O you of great mental powers,

have become freed from sorrow and sin
of every sort.


58. O illustrious Rishi, O holy one, I
see this wheel of Time, endued with great
energy, of the most effulgent and Infinite
Vishnu, has been setin motion. Eternal
is that station from which all sorts of
creation originate. That Vishnu is the
Supreme Soul. He is the foremost of
Beings. In Him this entire universe lives.


Bhishma continued :—


59. Having ‘said these words, O son
of Kunti, Viitra renounced his life-breaths,
uniting his soul (with the Supreme Soul),
and attained to the highest station.


Yudhisthira said :—

60. ‘Tell me, O grandfather, whether
this Janarddana (Krishna) is that illustrious
and powerful Lord of whom Sanatkumara
spoke to Vritra in days of yore.”


Bhishma said :—

61. “The Highest Deity, gifted with
six attributes is at the Root. Staying there,
the Supreme Soul, with his own energy,
_ creates all these various existent things.


62. Know that this Keshava who knows
no decay is from His eighth part. Gifted
with the greatest Intelligence, it is this
Keshava who creates the three worlds with
an eighth portion,


63. Coming immediately after Him
who lies at the Bottom, this Keshava who
is eternal, changes at the end of each
Kalpa, He, however, who lies at the Root
and who is gifted with great might and
power lies in the waters when universal
dissolution sets in Keshva is that Creator
of pure Soul who passes through all the
eternal worlds.


64. Infinite and Eternal as He is,
He fills all space and passes through the
universe. Freed as He is from all limita-
tions such as the possession of attributes
would imply, he allows himself to be
invested with ignorance and awakened to
Consciousness, Keshava of Supreme Soul
creates all things. In Him rests this
wonderful universe fully.”


~~


MAHABHARATA,


Yudhisthira said :—


65. *‘O who are conversant with the
highest object of knowledge.) I think
that Vritra beheld beforehand the excel-
lent end that awaited him. It is for this,
O grandfather, that he was happy and did
not sucumb to grief.


66, He whois of White color, who has
taken birth in a pure or stainless family,
and who has attained to the rank of a
Saddhya, does not, O sinless one, return.
Such a person, O grandfather, is freed


from both hell and all intermediate
stations.

67. He, however, O king, who has
acquired either the Yellow oc the Red


color, is seen sometimes to be overwhelmed
by darkness and fall among the order of
Intermediate creatures.


68. As regards ourselves, we are greatly
afflicted and attached to objects which
produce sorrow. Alas, what will be ouc
end? Will it be the} Blue or the Dark
which is the lowest of all colors.”


Bhishma said :—


69. ‘sYe are Pandavas! you have been
born in a stainless family. You are of rigid
vows. Having sported happily in the celes-


‘tial regions, you shall return to the world


of men. 2


7o. Living happily as long as the crea.
tion lasts, all of you at the next new crea-
tion will be admitted among the gods, and
enjoying all sorts of happiness you will
at last be coloured among the Siddhyas!
Let no fear be yours. Be you cheerful.”


CHAPTER CCLXXXI.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


t. “How great was the love of virtue
possessed’ by Vritra of incomparable
energy, whose knowledge was incomparable
and whose devotion to Vishnu was so
great.

2. The position occupied by Vishnu of
immeasurable energy is difficuk, of being
perceived. How, O foremost of kings, could
Veitra comprehend it?


3. You have described Vritra’s acts. I
too have heard you in full faith. Because,
On account of my seeing that, One point is
unintelligible that my curiosity has been
roused for asking you again,

«


SHANT!


4. How, indeed, was Vritra, who was
virtuous, devoted to Vishnu, gifted with


knowledge of truth derivable from a just |


comprehension of the Upanishads and
Vedanta, defeated by Indra, O foremost
of men.


5. O king of the Bharatas, remove this
my doubt! Indeed, tell me, O foremost
of kings, how Vritra was defeated by
Shakra.


6. O grandfather, O you of mighty
arms, tell me fully how the battle took
place. Great is my curiosity to hear it.”


Bhishma said :—

. “In days of yore, Indra, accompani-
ed by the celestial army, proceeded on his
car, and saw the Asura Vritra stationed
before him like a mountain,


8. He was full five hundred Yojanas in
height, O chastiser of enemies and three
hundred Yojanas in circumference.

g. Seeing that form of Vritra, which
was incapable of being defeated by the
three worlds united together, the celestials


became stricken with fear and full of
anxiety. :
to. Indeed, suddenly beholding that


huge form of his enemy, O king, Indra
was paralysed in the lower extremities,


11, Then, on the eve of that great
battle between the gods and the demons,
there arose loud peals from both sides,
and drums and other musical instruments
were beaten and blown.


12, Seeing Indra stationed before him,-
O you of Kuru’s race, Vritra felt neither
awe nor fear, nor was he disposed to
collect all his energies for the battle.


13. Then the battle took place filling
the three worlds with fear, between Indra
the king of the gods and Vritra of great
energy.


14—1§. The entire sky was covered by
the warriors of both sides with swords, axes,
lances, darts, spears and heavy clubs and
rocks of various sizes and bows of loud
sound and various sorts of celestial
weapons and fires and burning brands,


16—17. All the deities led by the Grand-
father, and all the highly-blessed Rishis,
cameto see the battle, on their best. of
cars; and the Siddhas, also, O foremost
of Bharata’s family, and the Gandharvas,
with the Apsaras, on their own beautiful
and foremost of cars, came there,


18 Then Veitra, that foremost of vir-
tuous persons, speedily overwhelmed the


sky and the king of gods with a thick


shower of rocks.
-34


PARVA, 425

19. Thereat, filled with ire the celestials
dispelled with their showers of arrows that
thick down-pour of rocks showered by
Vritra in battle, :


20. Then Vritra, QO foremost of Kurus,
endued with mighty strength and large
powers of illusion, stupefied the king of
Ulusion, :


21. When the god of a hundred sacri«
fices, thus afflicted by Vritea, was possessed
by stupefaction, the sage Vashishtha res
tored him to his senses by chanting Samans.


Vashishtha said :—~


22, You are the foremost of the gods,
O chief of the gods, O destroyer of
Daityas and Asuras! The strength of the
three worlds lies in you! Why, then, G
Shakra, do you languish so!


23.” See, there are Brahma and Vishnu,
and Shiva, that lord of the universe, the
ili@strious and divine Soma, and all the |
great Rishis.


24. Do not, O Indra, yield to weakness,
like an ordinary mortal! Firmly deter-
mined on battle, kill your enemies, O king
of the gods,


25. There, that ford of all the worlds,
vig., the Three-eyed (Shiva), worshipped
of all the worlds, is seeing you! Shake off
this stupefaction, O king of the gods. -


26. There, those twice-born Rishis,
headed by Vrihaspati, are lauding you for
your victory, in celestial hymns,


Bhishma said :—


27. While the highly energetic Vasava
was thus being restored to senses by -the
great Vashishtha, his strength became
greatly increased.


28. The ilustrious punisher of Paka
then, depending upon his intelligence, had
recourse to high Yoga and with its help
removed these illusions of Vritra.


2g. Then Vrihaspati, the son of Angi«
ras, and those greatest of Rishis endued
with great prosperity, seeing the prowess
of Vritra, went to Mahadeva, and moved
by the desire of benefiting the three worlds,
urged him to kill the great Asura.


30. The energy of that illustrious lord
of the universe thereupon assumed the
nature of a fierce fever and entered the
body of Vritra the lord of Asuras.

31. The illustrious and divine Vishnu,
worshipped of all the worlds, bent upon pro
tecting the universe, entered the thunder-
bolt of Indra, :


32-33. Then the highly intelligent
Vrihaspati and Vashishtha of great energy


426


and ail the other foremost of Rishis, going
to the God of hundred sacrifices, viz.,
the boon-giving Vasava, the worshipped
of all the worlds, said to him kill forthwith
Veitra, O powerful one.


Maheshwara said :—

34. There, O Shakra, stands the great
Vritra, accompanied by a great army.
He is the soul of the universe, capable of
gaing everywhere, gifted with great powers
of illusion, and highly illustcious.


35. This foremost of Asuras is, there-
fore, incapable of being defeated by even
the theee-worlds im a body. Helped by
Yoga, do you kill him, O king of the
celestials. Dao not neglect him.


36-37. O king of the celestials, Vritra
had practised, for full sixty thousand
years, the severest penances for acquiring
strength. Brahma gave him the boons he
had prayed for, vzs., the greatness that be-
longs to Yogins, large powers of iHusion,
enough of might, and superabundant
energy. ‘


38. I give you my energy, O Vasava!
The Danaya has now lost his coolness.
Do you, theréfore, kill him now with your
thunderbolt,


Shakra said :—


39. Before your eyes, O- foremost of
gods, } shall, through your favour kill with
iny thunderbold this invincible son of Diti.


Bhishma said :—


40. When the great Asura or Daitya
was possessed by that fever, the gods and
the Rishis, filled with joy, sent up loud
cheers.


41. At the same lime drums, and conchs
of loud blare, and kettle-drams and tabors
in thousands began to beat and blow.


. 42. Suddenly all the Asuras lost in a
body their memory. At that moment their
powers of illusion, also, disappeared.


43. Knowing the enemy to be thus
possessed, the Rishis and gods lauded both
Shakra and Ishana, and began to urge the
former.


44. The form that Indra assumed on
the eve ot the battle, while seated on his
car and while his praises were being tauded
by the Rishis, became such that none could
look at it without dread.


MAHABHARATA.


CHAPTER CCLXXXIE.


(MOKSHADHRAMA PARVA).—~
Continued,


Bhishma said :—

1. Hear me, O king, F describe the
symptoms that appeared on the body of
Vritea when he was possessed by that
fever.


2. The heroic Asura’s mouth began to
send out flames of fire. He became greatly
pale. FHfisjbody began to tremble all cver.
His breath became hard.


3. His hairs stood erect. His memory,
O Bharata, went out of his mouth in the
shape of a dreadful, and auspicious
jackal. Burning and blazing meteors drop-
ped on his right and left.


4. Vutures, Kankas, and cranes yelled
fierce cries, as they moved over Vritra’s
head.


5. Then, im that battle, Indra, worship-
ped of the gods, and armed with the
. thunderbolt, looked hard at the demon as
the latter sat on bis car.


6. Possessed by that dreadful fever, the
powerful Asura, O king, yawned and utter-
ed inhuman cries,


7. While the Asura was yawning, Indra
discharged his thunderbolt at him. Endued
with great energy sand resembling the fire
that destroys the creation at the end of
the cycle, that thunderbolt overthrew in a
anoment Veitra of gigantic form.


8. The gods on all sides cried aloud
when they saw Vritra killed, O foremost
of Bharata’s race.


9. Having killed Vritra, Maghavat, that
enemy of the Danavas, of great entered
heaven with gthat thunderbolt pervaded by

Vishnu


to. Just then, O you of Kuru’s family,
the sin of Brahmanicide, fierce and dread-
ful and striking all the worlds with fear,
came out of the person of the killed Vritra.


11—13. Of terrible teeth and dreadful
t countenance, hideous for ugtiness, and dark
and tawny, with hair dishevelled, and
dreadful eyes, O Bharata, with a garland
of skulls round her neck, and looking
| like Incantation inearnate, O foremost of
Bharatas, bathed in bloed, and clad ir
rags and barks of trees, O you of righteous
soul, she came out of Vritra’s body. OF
such dreadful form and countenance, O
king, she sought the holder of the thunder-
. bokt. .
| 14. A little while after, O you of Kuru’s
; face, the killer of Vritra, for the behoof


SHANTI PARVA.


of the three worlds, was proceeding to-
wards heaven.


15. Seeing {ndra of great energy thus
proceeding on his mission, she caugtt the
king of the gods and from that moment
stuck to him. -


16. When the sin of Brahmanicide thus
stuck to his body and filled him with terror,
{ndra entered the fibres of a fotus-stalk
and lived there fof many years.


17. Butthe sin of Brahmanicide followed
him closely. Indeed, O son of Kuru,
sieged by her, Indca became shorn of all
his energies.


18. He tcied much for driving her from
him, but all those attempis proved useless.


tg. Seized by her, O foremost of
Bharata’s race, the king of the gods at last
presented himself before the Grandfather
and adored him by bending low his head.


zo. Knowing that Indra was possessed
by the sin of Brahmanicide, Brahman
began to think, O best of the Bharatas,
{of the measures for freeing him).


21—22,
of great arms, addressed Brahmanicide in
sweet words as if from the desire of pacify-
ing her, and said.—O amiable one, let the
king of the gods, who is a favorite of mine,
be freed from you. ‘Tell me, what shall
I do for you? What wish of yours shall
1 satisfy ? :


Brahmanicide said :—


23. When the Creator of the three
worlds, when the illustrious god worshipped
of the universe, has been pleased with me,
I consider my wishes as already fulfilled,
Let my residence be now fixed.


‘The Grandfather at last, G you


24. Desirous of preserving the worlds,
this rule had been laid down by you, It
was you, O lord, who had introduced this
important rule.


25. As you have been pleased with me,
O righteous Lord, O powerful Master of
all the worlds, I shall surely leave Shakra !
But grant me an abode to live in.


Bhishma said :—

26. The Grandfather replied to Brah-
manicide, saying,—So be it !—Indeed, the
Grandfather found out means for removing
Brahmanicide from the body of Indra.


27—~28. The Self-sprung'thought of the
great Agni. The latter immediately appear-
‘ed before Brahman and said:—O illus-
trious and divine Lord, O defeatless one,
1 have appeared before you. You should
say what I shall have to do,


437


Brahman said :—

29. Ishall divide this sin of Brahmani-
cide into several parts. for freeing Shakra
from her, do you take a fourth portion ot
that sin.


Agni said :—

30. How shall { be saved from her,
O Brahman? © powerful Lord, do you
appoint the way. I wish to ‘know the
means fully, © worshipped of all the
worlds.


Brahman said :—


31—32. That portion of Brahmanicide
which you will take upon yourself shall im-
mediately enter into, and leaving you shall
live in, that man who, overwhelmed by the
quality of darkness, will abstain from offer~-
ing you as an oblation, when he seés you
in your blazing form, seeds, herbs, and
juices. O carrier of oblations, let the fever
of your heart be dispelled. ;


Bhishma said :—

33. “Thus addressed by the Grand-
father, the eater of oblations and sacrificial
offerings accepted his order. A fourth of
that sin then entered his body, O king.


34. The Grandfather then summoned
the trees, the herbs, and all sorts of grass
to him, and begged them to take upon
themselves a fourth of that sia.


35—36. Addressed by him, the trees
and herbs and grasses became: as much
moved as Agni had been at the command
and they replied to the Grandfather, say~
ing, How shall we, O Grandfather of ail
the worlds, be ourselves saved from this
sin? You should not afflict us that have
already been assailed by the fates.


375 O god, we havealways to bear
heat and cold and the showers driven by
the winds, besides the cutting and tearing.


38. We are willing, O Lord of the
three worlds, to take at your order this sin
of Brahmanicide. .May you point out the
means of our rescue, .


Brahman said :—

39. This sin that you shall take, shall
assail the man who through ,stupefaction
of judgment will cut or tear any of you
on a full-moon day. '


Bhisma said :—


40. Thus addressed by the great
Brahman, the trees, herbs and grasses
worshipped the Creator and then went
away without waiting there.


428


41—42. The Grandfather of all
worlds then sent for the Apsaras and
pleasing them with sweet words, O
Bharata, said—This foremost of ladies,
WB., Bramanicide, has come out of Indra’s
body. Begged by me, do you take a
fourth part of her into your own body.


' The Apsaras said :—

43. O Lord of all the gods, at your
command we are fully willing to take a
portion of this sin. But, O Grandfather.
our compact is that you do think of the


means by which we ourselves may be
rescued from this.
Brahman said :—

44. Wet the fever of your hearts be


removed. The portion of this sin that you
will take upon yourselves shall teave you
and immediately possess that man who
will seek cohabitation with women in their
menses.


Bhishma said :—


45. Thus addressed by the Grand-
father, O foremost of Bharata’s race, the
various clans of the Apsaras, with delighted
hearts repaired to their respective places
and began to sport in joy.


46. The illustrious Creator of the
three worlds, gifted with great ascetic
merit, then thought of the Waters which
immediately came to him.


47—48. Arrived before Brahman of
great energy, the Waters bowed tohim
and said :—We have come before you, O
chastiser of enemies, at your behest! O
powerful Master of all the worlds, tell
us what we are to do.


Brahman said :—


49. ‘This dreadful sin has possessed
Indra on account of his having killed


Vritra. Take you a_ fourth part of
Brahmanicide. ‘
The Waters said :—


50. Let it be as you order, O master
of all the worlds. You should, however,
O powerful Lord of ours, concert
means by which we may be rescued from
this,


5t. You are the Lord of all the gods,
and the supreme refuge of the universe.
Who else is there whom we may worship
so that he may save us from distress.


Brahman said :—

52-53. This one shall forthwith go to,
and thenceforth live in, that man who
stupefied by bis understanding and regard-


the


the ;


MAHABHARATA.


ing you lightly will throw into you phlegm
and urine and excreta. It is this, verily
do I say to you, that your rescue shall be
brought about.


Bhishma said :—

54. Then, leaving the king of the deities,
the sin of Brahmanicide, O Yudhishthira,
proceeded to the abodes that were settled
fore her at the Grandfather’s behest.


55 It was thus, O king, that Indra had
become attacked by that dreadful sin. With
the Grandfather’s permission Indra then
resolved to celebrate a Horse-sacrifice.


56. We have heard, O king, that Indra
having been thus possessed by the sin of
Brahmanicide afterwards became cleansed
of her through that Sacrifice.


57. Regaining his prosperity and killing
thousands of enemies, that Vasava acquired
great joy, O lord of Earth.


58. From the blood of Vrita, O son of
Pritha, were born high-crested cocks.
Therefore, those fowls are unclean (as food)
for the twice-born ones, and those fascetics
that have undergone the rite of initiation.


59. Under all circumstances, O king,
do. you encompass what is agreeable to


the twice-born, for these, O king, are
known as gods on Earth,
6o. It was thus, O Kuru chief, that


the powerful Asura Vritfa was killed by
Shakra of great eners’y’ by the help of


.subtle intelligence and through the appli-


cation of means.


.61. You will, also, O son of Kunti, un-
vanquished on Earth, become another
Indra and the killer of all your enemies.


62. Those men who, on every Parva
day, will recite this sacred narrative of
Veitea inthe midst of Bralmanas shall
never be sullied by any sin,

63. Ihave now ‘recited to you oue of
the greatest and most wonderful feats of
Indra about Viitra. What else do you
“wish to hear?”


CHAPTER CCLXXXHI.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).-=
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


1. ‘'O grandfather you are endued with
great wisdom and thoroughly grounded
in every branch of learning. From. this
very narrative of the destruction of Vritra
the wish has arisen in my mind of asking
you a question,


SHANTI PARVA.


2. Youhave said, O king, that Vritra
was stupefied by Fever, and that then, O
sinless one, he was killed by Vasava with
the thunderbolt.


3. How did this Fever, O you of great
wisdom, originate, O lord, I wish to hear
fully of the origin of Fever.”


Bhisma said :—


4. ‘Listen, O king, to the origin, known
all over the world, of Fever! I shall
describe fully this topic, fully explaining
how Eever first came into existence, O
Bharata.


5. In days of yore, Oking, there was
a summit, named Savitri, of the mountains
of Meru. Adored of all the worlds, it. was
endued with great effulgence and adorned
with every sort of jewels and gems...  ~


6. That summit was immeasurable in
extent and no one could go there. On that
mountain summit the divine Mahadeva
used to sit shiningly as ifon a bed-stead
adorned with gold.


q—t1. Sitting by his side, the daugh-
ter of the king of mountains shone in
brilliance. The great gods, the Vasus of
immeasurable energy, the great Ashwins,
those foremest of physicians, and king
Vaishravana attended by many a Guhyaka,
—that king of the Yakshas, endued with
prosperity and power, and having his
abode on the summit of Kailasa,—ail
waited upon the great Mahadeva. And
the great sage Ushanas, and the foremost
of Rishis headed by Sanatkumara, and
the other celestial Rishis headed, by
Angiras, and the Gandharva Vishwavasu,
and Narada and Parvata, and the varions
clans of Apsaras, all came there to wait
upon the king of the uniyvecse.


12. A pure and auspicious air carrying
various sorts of perfumes, blew thefe. The
trees that stood there were adorned with
the flowers of all seasons.


13. A large number of Vidyadhbaras,
Siddhas and ascetics, too, O Bharata, went
there for waiting upon Mahadeva, that
Lord of all creatures.


14-15. Many ghosts also, of various forms
and aspects, and many fearful Rakshasas
and powerful Pishachas, of various forms,
mad with joy, and armed with various
sorts of uplifted weapons, forming the
train of Mahadeva, were there, every one
of whom looked like a blazing fire in


energy.


16. The illustrious Nandi stood there
obeying the great god, shining with his
own energy and armed witha lance that
resembled a flame of fires


429


17. Ganga, also, that foremost of alf
Rivers and originating from all sacred
waters in the universe, waited there in her
embodied form, O son of Kutu, upon that
illustrious gods.


18. Thus worshipped by the celestial
Rishis and the gods, the illustrious Maha-
deva of great energy lived on that sum-
mit of Meru. ;


19. After sometime had gone away,
the Prajapati Daksha began to celebrate
a sacrifice according to ancient rites.


20. All the gods in a body headed by
Sakra, resolved to repair to that sacrifice
of Daksha.


2t. We have heard that the great gods
ordered by Mahadeva, mounted their celes-
tial cars resembling the fire or the Sun in
sheen, and proceeded to that spot whence
the Ganges is said to issue. :


22-23. Seeing the deities depart, the ex-.
cellent daughter of the king of mountains,
addressed her divine husband, wz., the
Lord of all creatures, and said, O illustri-
ous one, who are those gods headed by
Shakra going? © you who Itnow the truth,
tell me truly, for a great doubt has
possessed my mind.


Maheshwara said :—

24. O highly blessed lady, the excellent
Prajapati Daksha is worshipping the gods
in a Horse Sacrifice! “hese dwellers of
heaven are going there.


Uma said :—

25. Why, O Mahadeva do you not go
to that Sacrifice? What objection is there
of your going to that place ?


Maheshwara said :—


26. O highly blessed lady, the gods in
days of yore made a compact by virtue of
wich no share was allotted to me of offer-
ings in all Sacrifices.


27. According to that arrangement, O
fair one, the gods do not give me, follow-
ing the old custom, any share of the sacri-
ficial offerings !


Uma said :—

28, O illustrious one, among all gods,
you are the foremost in prowess. In metit,
in energy, in fame, and in prosperity you
are second to none, and ypu are, indeed, .
superior to all, ;


29. On account, however, of this dis-
ability regarding a share [ am filled with
great grief, O sinless one, and a tremour


| fills me from head to foot.


430
Bhishma said :—


. 30 Having said these words to her
consort, the Lord of all creatures, O
monarch, the goddess Parvati remained
silent, her heart burning the while in grief,


3t. Then, understanding what was in
her heart and what her thoughts were (for
wiping off that disgrace), Mahadeva ad-
deessed Nandi, saying,—Wait here.


32-~34. Summoning all his Yoga powers,
that Lord of all lords of Yoga, that god
of gods, that holder of Pinaka, possessed
of great energy, quickly proceeded to the
place accompanied by all his dreadiul
followers and destroyed that Sacrifice. Of
these followers of his, some yelled, and
some laughed terribly, and some, O king,
extinguished the fires with blood; and
some, having dreadful faces, pulling up the
sacrificial stakes, began to whiil them.
Others began to devour those that were
celebrating the Sacrifice.


35. [hen thus afflicted on every side,
that Sacrifigeasstumed the form ot a deer
OOS ne 9 RT
and tried to fly away theough the firmanent.
RTT 2A Naa Semanterry

36. Learning that the Sacrifice was
running away in that form, the powerful
Mahadeva begani'td pursue Bien with bow
and arrow,

37- On account of the ire which then
filled the heart of that foremost of all gods,


possessed of matchless energy, a dreadful
drop of sweat appeared on his forehead.


38. When that drop of sweat fell down
on the Earth, there immediately. appeared
a blazing fire resembling the conflagration
that appears at the end of the cycle.


39. From that fire came out a dreadful
being, O king of very short stature, having
blood-red eyes and a green beard.


40. His body was covered all over with
haic like a hawk’s or an owl’s and his hair
stood erect. Of dreadful form, his com-
plexion was dark and his dress blood-red.
Like a fire burning a heap of dry grass or
straw, that Being of high energy speedily
consumed the embodied form of Sacrifice.


4t. Having performed that feat, he then
rushed towards the gods and the Rishis
that had gathered there. The gods filled
with fear, fled on all sides.


42. The earth shook with that Being’s
tread, O king.


43. Exclamation of ‘Oh’ and ‘Alas’
arose throughout the universe. Marking
this, the powerful Grandfather, appearing
before Mahadeva, addressed him thus.


Brahman said :— :
44. O powerful one, the deities will


MAHABHARATA,


henceforth give you a share of the sacri«
ficial offerings! © Lord of all the gods,
let this anger of yours be withdrawn by
you.


45. O scorcher of enemies, there, those
gods, and the Rishis, on account of your
anger, O Mahadeva, have become greatly
agitated.


46. This Being, also, that has originated
from your sweat, O foremost of gods, shalt
walk among creatures, O righteous-souled
one, under the name of Fever.


47- O powerful one, if the energy of
this Being remains intact, then the entire
Earth herself will not be able to bear him,
Let him, therefore, be divided into many
pacts.


48. When Brahman had said _ these
words, and when his proper share was
appointed of the sacrificial offerings, Maha-
deva replied to the Grandfather of great
energy, Saying,—So be it.

49. Indeed, the holder of Pinaka, viz.,
Bhava, smiled and became filled with joy.
And he accepted the share that the Grand-
father settled the offerings in sacrifices.


50. Knowing the constituents of every-
thing, Mahadeva then divided Fever into
many parts, for the peace of all creatures.
Listen, O son, as how he did this.


51—53- The heat in the heads of
elephants, the bitumen of mountains, the
moss that floats on water, the slough of
snakes, the sores that appear in the hoofs


‘of bulls, the barren tracts of Earth fult


of saline matter, the dulness of vision of
all animals, the diseases in the throats of
horses, the crests appearing on the heads
of peacocks, the eye-disease of the koel,
each of these was named Fever by the
great Mahadeva.


54. This is what we have heard. The
liver-disease also of sheep, and the hiccup
of parrots are also known as forms of
Fever. To this must be added the. toil
that tigers suffer, for that also, O righteous
king, is known as a form of Fever.


55. Besides these, O Bharata, amongst —
men, Fever, enters all bodies at the time
of birth, of death, and on other occasions.


56. This Fever is known to be the
dreadful power of Maheshwara. We has
authority over all creatures and should,
therefore, be respected and adored by all.

57. It was by him that Vritra, that
foremost of virtugus persons, was possesse
when he yawned. It was then that Shakra
discharged his thunderbolt at him.


58. The_ thunderbolt, entering the body
of Vritea, O Bharata, divided him-in two


t


SHANTI PARVA.


parts. Divided in two by the thunderbolt,
the great Asura endued with great Yoga
powers, went to the region of Vishnu of
xreat energy. -

. Ie was on account of his devotion
to Vishnu that he had succeeded in over-
whelming the whole universe. And it was


owing to his devotion to Vishnu that he.


ascended, when killed, to the region of
Vishnu,


60. Thus, O son, while describing the
story of Vritra have [ recited to you fully
the narrative of Fever! What else shalt
1 describe to you?


61. That man who will read this account
of the origin of Fever with rapt attention
and cheerful heart shalt become free from
disease and shall always have happiness
for his lot. Filled with joy he shall have
all his wishes gratified. ’


CHAPTER CCLXXXIV,


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued. :


Janamejaya said :—

1. How, O Brahmana, was the Horse-
sacrifice of the Prajapati Daksha, the son
of Prachetas, destroyed during the time of
Vaivaswata Manu? (


z. Understanding that the goddess
Uma had become filled with ire and grief,
the powerful Mahadeva, who is the soul
of all things, yielded to anger. How,
again, through his grace, was Daksha
enabled to gather again the divided limbs
of that Sacrifice ? I wish to know all this,
Telit me all this, O Brahmana, truly as it
took place.


Vaishampayana said :—

3. In days -of yore Daksha made
arrangements for celebrating a Sacrifice
on the breast of Himavat in that sacred
region inhabited by Rishis and Siddhas
where the Ganges comes out of the moun-
tains.


45. Over-grown with trees and cree-
pers of various sorts, that place abounded
with Gandharvas and Apsaras. Sur-
rounded by numbers of Rishis, Daksha,
that best of virtuous men, that progenitor
of creatures, was attended by the denizens
of the Earth, the sky, and the celestial
region, with their hands joined together in
respect.


6—10. The gods, the Danavas, -the


43%


the Rakshasas, the two Gandharvas named
Haha and Huhu, Tumvuru and Natada,
Vishwavasu, Vishwasena, the Gandharvas
and the Apsaras, the Adityas, the Vasus,
the Rudras, the Saddhyas, the Maruts,
all came there with Indra for sharing in the
Sacrifice. The drinkers of heat, the drinkers
of Soma, the drinkers of smoke, the
drinkers of sacrificial juice, the Rishis, and
the departed manes,came there with the
Brahmanas. These, and many other living
creatures belonging to the four orders, v7g.,
viviporous and oviparous and filth-born
and vegetable, were invited to that Sacri-«
fice. The gods also, with their wives res-
pectfully invited thereto, came en their
celestiat cars and seated thereon shone
like burning fires.


11. Seeing them, the Rishi: Dadhichi
became filled with grief and anger and
said,—‘ This is neither a Sacrifice nor a
meritorious cite of religion, since Rudra is
not worshipped in i¢,


1a. You are certainly exposing your-
selves to death and chains! Alas, how une
favorable is the time! Stupefied by mistake
you do not see that destruction awaits you !
A terrible calamity will overtake -you ia
course of this great Sacrifice! You are
blind to it.


1314. Having said these words, that
great Yogin saw the future with eyes of
contemplation. He saw Mahadeva, and his
divine consort, wg, that giverof excellent
boons, with the great Narada sitting be-
side the goddess. Conversant with Yoga,
Dadhichi became highly pleased, having
ascertained what was about to take place,


15—16. All the gods and others that .
had come there held the same opinion,
regarding the omission to invite the Lord
of all creatures. Dadhichi alone, desirous
of leaving that place then said,—By
adoring one who should not be adored, and
by refusing to adore him who should be
adored, a man incurs the sin of homicide
for ever.


17, I have never before spoken an une
truth, and an untruth I shall never speak.
Here in the midst of the gods and the
Rishis I say the truth. : ”


18. The Protector of all creatures, the
Creator of the universe, the Lord of alt,
the powerful master, the taker of sacrificial
offerings, will soon come to this Sacrifice
and you all shall behold him,


Dhaksha said :—


19. We have many Rudras armed
with lances and having matted locks on


Gandharvas, the Pishachas, the Nagas, | their heads. Lhey are eleven in number.


432


I know them all, but [do not know who
this Maheshwara is.


Dadhichi said :—

20, This seems to be the advice of all
that are here, namely, that Maheshwara
should not be invited. As, however, I do
not see any god that can be said to be
superior to him, I am sure that this pro-
posed Sacrifice of Daksha will surely be
destroyed.


Daksha said :—


21. Here, in this golden vessel, in-
tended for the Lord of all Sacrifices is the
sacrificial offering sanctified by Mantras
and according to the ordinance. I wish
to make this offering to Vishnu who is
peerless. He is powerful and the Master of
all, and to Him should sacrifices be offered.


Vaishampayana continued :—~


Meanwhile, the goddess Uma, sitting
with her spouse, said these words.


Uma said :—~


22, What are those gifts, what those
vows, and what those penances, that I
should practise by means of which my
illustrious consort may be able to geta
half or a third share of the offerings in
sacrifices.


23. To his wife who was moved with
grief and who tepeated these words the
illusteious Mahadeva said with a delighted
face. You do not know me, O goddess!
You do not know, O-you of delicate limbs,
and low .belly, what words are proper to
be said to the Lord of Sacrifices.

24. Olady having large eyes, I know
that it is only the sinful, who are sliorn

' of contemplation, that do not understand
me. Itis through your power of illusion
thatthe gods headed by Indra and the
thtee worlds all become stupefied.

25.
thee praises in Sacriftces. It is to me that
the Saman-singers sing their Rathantaras.
It is to me that Brahmanas knowing the
Vedas celebrate their Sacrifices. And it is
to me that the the Addharyus offer the
shares of sacrificial offerings. .


The goddess said :—


26. Persons of even ordinary powers
applaud themselves and brag before their
wives. There is no doubt in this.


The holy one said :—


27- O Queen of all the gods, I do not
certainly speak highly my own self. See


now, O lady of slender waist, what I do. |


It isto me that the chaunters offer j-


MAHABHARATA.


Look at the Being that 1 will create, O
you of the fairest complexion, for destroying
this Sacrifice, O my beautiful wife !


28. Having said these words to his
wife Uma, who was dearer to him than his
own life, the powerful Mahadeva created
from his mouth a dreadful Being whose
very sight could make one’s hair stand
erect. ‘The blazing fires that came out
from his body rendered him highly dreadful
to look at. His arms were many and in
each was a weapon that filled the beholder
with awe.


2g. That Being, thus created, stood
before the great god, with joined palms
and said,—What order shall I] have to
fulfill? Maheswara answered him, telling,—«
Go and destroy the Sacrifice of Daksha.


go. Thus commanded, that Being of
leonine powers who had come out from
the mouth of Mahadeva wished to destroy
the Sacrifice of Daksha, without display-
ing all bis energy and without the help
of any one else, for removing the anger
of Uma.


31. Urged by her anger, the wife of
Maheshwara, herself assuming a dreadful
form known by the name of Mahakali,
proceeded in the company of that Being
who had come out from Mahadeva’s mouth,
for beholding with her own eyes the act
of destruction which was her own. That
powerful Being, then started having gained
the permission of Mahadeva and having
bowed his head to him.


32. In energy, strength, and form, he
took after Maheshwara himself who had
created him. Indeed, he was the living
embodiment of (Mahadeva’s) anger.


33. Of great might, energy, courage
and prowess, he passed by the name of -
Virabhadra—that dispeller of the goddess’a
anger. He then created from the pores
of his body a large number of spirits knowa
by the name of Raumyas..


34. Those dreadful spirits, endued with
terrible energy and prowess and resembling
Rudra himself, rushed with the force of
thunder to that place where Daksha was
making preparations for his sacrifice, moved
by the desire of destroying it, Having
dreadful and gigantic forms, they were
hundreds and thousands in number.

35- They filled the sky with their con-
fused cries and shrieks. That noise filled
the dwellers of heaven with fear. — toe

36. The very mountains were riven and
the Earth shook. Whirlwinds began to
blow. The Ocean rose in a surge.

37- The fires that were lighted refused
to blaze up. Vhe Sun became dimmed.


SHANTI


The Planets, the stars, and constellations,
and the Moon, no longer shone. es


38. The Rishis, the gods, and human
beings, looked pale. A universal darkness
covered the Earth and sky. The insulted
Rudras began to put fire to everything.


39. Some amongst them of terrible form
began to smite and strike. Some tore up
the sacrificial stakes, Some began to
grind and other’ to crush.-


40. Gifted with the speed of wind or
thought, some began to tush close and far.
Some began to break the sacrificial vessels
and the divine ornaments. The scattered
fragments covered the ground like stars
bespangling the firmament.


41-42. Heaps of excellent dishes, of
bottles of drink, and of edibles there
Were that looked like mountains. Rivers
of milk ran on all sides, with clarified
butter and porridge for theic mire, creamy
curds for their water, and_ crystalised
suyar for {their sands. Those rivers had
all the six tastes. There were lakes of
treacle that looked highly beautiful.


43—44. Meat of various sorts, of the
best quality, and other edibles of various
sorts, and many excellent sorts of drink,
and several other sorts of food that might
be licked and sucked, began to be eaten by
those Spirits with various mouths. And
they began to cast off and scatter those
food in all directions. On account of
Rudra’s anger, every one of those gigantic
Beings appeared like the all-destructive
cycle-fire.


45. Agitating the celestial troops they
made them tremble with fear and fly
away on all sides. Those dreadful spirits.
sported with one another, and seizing the
celestial damsels shoved and hurled them
on all sides,


46. Of terrific deeds, those Beings,
urged on by Rudra’s anger very soon burnt,
that Sacrifice although it was protected
with great care by all the gods.


47. They sent up loud roars which filled
every living creature with fear. Having
torn off the head of Sacrifice they began
to cry aloud in joy.


48, Then the gods headed by Brahman,
and that progenitor of creatures, “v7s.,
Dhaksha, joining their hands in -reverence,
addressed that powerful Being, saying;x~
« Tell us, who you are.


Virabhadra said :—

‘ag. ‘Lam neither Rudra nor his consort
the goddess Uma. Nor have I come here
for partaking of the food. Knowing the fact.
of Uma’s anger, the powerful Lord who is


55


PARVA,. 433
the Soul of all creatures has. yielded ta
anger.


go. { have not come here for seeing
these foremost of Brahmans. I have not
come here impelled by curiosity. Know
that I have come here for destroying tis
Sacrifice of yours.


§t. I am known by the name of
Virabhadra and I have originated from the
anger of Rudra. ‘This lady who is cailed
Bhadrakali, has originated from ,the anget
of the goddess. We have both been sent
by that god of gods, and we have accord«
ingly come here.


52. O foremost of Brahmanas, seek the
protection of that Lord of the gods, the
consort of Uma! It is better to incur even
the anger of that foremost of gods than to
obtain boons from any god.


53. Hearing the words of Virekiiadra,
Daksha, that foremost gf all pious men,
bowed down unto Maheshwara and sought
to please him by uttering the following
hymna,


54. ‘I throw myself at the feet of the
effulgent Ishna, who is Eternal, Immutable;
and Indestructible ; who is the foremost of
all gods, who has a high soul, who is the
Lord of all the universe.’ :


60—61. His praises having thus been
hymned, the great god, Mahadeva, sus
pending the two vital airs~Prana and
Apana—by shutting his «nouth properly,
and casting his eyes graciously-on all sides,
appeared there. Having many eyes, that
conqueror of all enemies, that Lord of even
the gods of all gods, suddenly arose from
within the pit in which was kept the sacci«
ficial fire.


62. Endued with the effulgence of a
thousand Suns, and looking like another
Samvartaka, the great god smiled gently
(at_Daksha) and jaddressing him, said,—
‘What, O Brahmana, shall I do for you ?’


63. At this time, the preceptor of all the
gods worshipped Mahadeva with the Vedic
verses contained in the Moksha sections,
Then that progenitor of all creatures, vz.,
Daksha, joining his’hands in respect, filled
with dread and fear, highly moved and
with face and eyes bathed in tears, address~
ed the great god in the following words :—~


Daksha said :—


64~—66. ‘If the great god has been
pleased with me,—if, indeed, I have be-
come an object of favor with him,—if tam
worthy. of kindness,—if the great Lord of
all creatures is ready to grant me boons,—
then fet all these articles of mine that have
been burnt, eaten, drunk, swallowed, dese
troyed, broken, and polluted,—let all these


434


articles, collected in many long years, and
with great care and exertion, prove useless !
Let these articles be of use to me! Even
this is the boon I pray for! The illustrious
Hara, the tearer of Bhaga’s eyes, said to
him,— Let it be as you say!’ These were
the words of that iHustrious progenitor of all
creatures, that god of three eyes, that pro-
tector of virtue.


68. Having -gained that boon from
Bhava, Daksha knelt down to him and
adored that god having the bull for his
emblem by uttering his thousand and eight
names.”


CHAPTER CCLXXXV.


{MOKHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued.


Yudhisthira said :—

1, ‘You should, O sire, tell me those
names by which Daksha, that progenitor
of creatures, worshipped the great god, O


sinless one, a respectful curiosity urges me


to hear them.”


Bhishwa said :—


2. “jHear, O Bharata, what the names,
both secret and public, are of that god
of gods, that god of extraordinary feats,
that ascetic of secret yows.”


Daksha said :—


3. I bow to you, O Iord of all the gods
of gods, to the destroyer of the forces of
the Asuras! ,You are the paralyser of the
strength of. the king of gods himself! You
_are worshipped by both gods and Danavas,


. You are thousand-eyed, you are
fierce-eyed, and you are three-eyed ! You
are the friend of the king of the Yakshas,
your hands and feet extend in all directions
to all places. Your eyes also and head
mouth are on all sides.


‘5. Wour ears too are everywhere.in the
universe, and you are yourself everywhere,
O Lord! You are shaft-eared you are large
eared, and you are pot-eared ! VYouare the
receptacie of the Ocean,


._ 6, Your ears are like those.of thé ele-
phant, or of the bull, or like extended
palms. Adoration to you. You have a
hundred stomachs, a hundred revolutions,
and a hundred tongues. I bowtoyou. ?


7. The utterers of the Gayatri sing
your praises in uttering the Gayatri, and
the worshippers of the Sun worship you
in adoring the Sun, The Rishis consider


MAHABHARATA.’


you as Brahman, as Indra, and as the sky
above.


8. O you of mighty form, the Ocean
and the Sky are your two forms. All the
gods live in your form as kine dwell withia
the fold. -


9. In your body I see Soma, Agni, the
king of the Waters, Aditya, Vishnu, Brah-
man, and Vrihaspati.


1o. You, O ilfustrious one, are Cause
and Effect and Action and Enstrament of
everything unreal and real, and you are


| Creation and Destruction,


§1. I bow to you who are called Bhava,
Sarva, and Rudra, I bow to you who are
the giver of boons.


12, I bow always to you who are the
Lord of all creatures. Salutations to you
who are tha slayer of Andhaka.


13. Salutations to you who have three
matted locks, to you who have three heads,
te you who are armed with atr excellent
trident; to you who have three eyes and
who are, therefore, cated Tryamvaka and
Trinetraf Salutations to you who are the
destroyer of the triple city !


14. Salutations to you who are called
Chanda, and Kunda; to you who are the
(aniversal) egy and also the bearer of the
(universal) egg ; to you who are the holder
of the ascetic’s stick, to you who have ears
everywhere, and to you who are ealled
Dandimunda.


15. Salutations to you whose teeth and
hair are turned upwards, to you who are
stainless and white, and who are stretched
all over the universe; to you who are red,
to you who are tawny and to you who have
a blue throat.


16. Salutations to you who are of ins
comparable form, who are of dreadful forny,
and who are highly auspicious! To you
who are the sun, who have a garland of
sans round your neck and who have stan-
dards and flags bearing the device of the
sun.


17. Salutations to you who are the Lord
of spirits and ghosts, to you who are bull-
necked, and who are armed with the bow;
to you who crush all enemies, to you who
are the personification of chastisement, and
to you who are clad in leaves and rags.


18. Salutations to you who have gold
in your stomach, to you whoare accoutered
in golden mail, to you who are gold-crested,
to you who are the lord of all the gold in


| the world.


1g. Salutations to you who have been
worshipped, who are,worthy of adorations,
and who are still being adored; to you


SHANTI PARVA,


who are all things, wh o devour all things,
and who are the soul of all things.


20. Salutations to you who are the Hotri
{in sacrifices), who are the (Vedic) Mantras
uttered (in sacrifices), and who own white
flags and standards. Salutations to you
who are the navet of the universe, who are
both cause and effect in the form of the
five primal elements, and who are the
coverer of all covers.


2i. Salutations to you who are calted
Krishanasha, who are of thin limbs, and
who are thin. Salutations to you who are
always cheerful and who are the personi-
fication of sounds and voices.


22. Salutations to you who are about
tn be stretched on the Earth, who are
already stretched, and who stand erect.
Salutations to you “who are fixed, who are
running, who are bald, and who have
matted locks on your head.


23. Salutation to you who are fond of
dancing and who beat puffed cheeks con-
verting the mouth into a drum. Salutations
to you who are fond of lotuses that blow
in rivers, and who are always fond of sing-
ing and playing on musical instruments.


24. Salutations to you who are the
eldest-born, who are the foremost of all
creatures, and who are the crusher of the
Asura Vala. Salutations to you who are
the Master of ‘Time, who are the personi-
fication of Kalpa; who are the embodiment
of all kinds of destruction great and small.


25. Salutations to you who laugh dread-
fully and as loud as the beat of a drum,
and who practise dreadful vows! Saluta-
tions for ever.to you who are fierce, and
who have ten arms,


26. Salutations to you who are armed
with bones and who are fond of the ashes
of funeral pyres, Salutations to you who
are dreadful, who are horrible to look at,
and who are an observer of dreadiful vows
and practices.


27. Salutations to you who have an ugly
mouth, who have a tongue resembling a
scimitar, and who have large teeth. Salu-
tations to you who are fond of both cooked
and uncooked meat, and who consider the
gourded Vina as highly dear,


28. Salutations to you who make rain,
who help the cause of virtue, who are
identifiable with the form of Nandi, and
who are Righteousness’s self! Salutations
to you who are ever moving like wind and
the other forces, who are the controller of
all things, and who are always engaged
in cooking all creatures.


29. Salutations to you who are the fore-
most of all creatures, who are superior,


435


and who are the giver of boons. Saluta-
tion to you who have the best of garlands,
the best of scents, and the best of dresses,
and that givest the best of boons to the
best of creatures.


30. Salutations to you who are attached,
who are freed from all ‘attachments,
who are of the form of Yoga-contempla-
tion, and who are bedecked with a gartand
ot Akshas. Salutations to you who are
united as cause and disunited as effects,
and who are the form of shadow and of
light. :


31. Salutations to you who are amiable,
and who are rightful, and who are exceed+
ingly so. Salutations to you who are aus-
picious, who ate tranquil, and who are most
tranquil.


32. Salutations to you who have one
leg and many eyes, and onty.one head ;
to you who are fierce, to you who are
satisfied with little offerings, and you -who
are fond of equity.


33. Salutations to you who are the
maker of the universe, and who are ever
united with the attribute of tranquillity.
Salutations to you who carry a bell fright-
ening the enemies, who are of the form of
the jingle made by a ‘bell, and who are of
the form of soynd when it is not perceptible
by the ear.


34. Salutations to you who are like a
thousand bells jingfed together, and who
are fond of a garland of bells, who are
like the sound that the vital airs make,
who are of the form of all scents and of
the confused noise of boiling liquids,


35. Salutations to you who are above
three Huns, and who are fond of two
Huns.
tranquil, tand who live under the shade of
mountain trees.


36. You are fond of the heart-flesh of
all creatures, who purify all sins. and who
are of the form (of sacrificial offerings.
Salutations to you who are of the form of
Sacrifice, who are the Sacrificer himself,
who are the Brahmana into whose mouth
is poured the saerificial butter, and who
are the fire into which is poured the butter


‘inspired with Mantras.


37- Salutations to you who are of the
form of (sacrificial) priests, who have your
senses under contro], who are made of the
quality of Goodness, and who have also the
quality of Darkness, Salutations to you
who are of the form of the banks of Rivers,
of Rivers themselves, and of the lord of
all Rivers, (vés., the Ocean).


38—40. Salutations’to you who sre the


Salutations to you who are greatly |


giver of food, who are the lord of all food,


436


-and who are at one with him who takes
food! Salutations toe you who have a
thotsand heads and a thousand feet; to
you who have a thousand tridents uplifted
in your hands, and a thousand eyes!
Salutations to you who are of the form af
the rising Sun, and who are of the form
of achild, who are the protector of atten-
dants all of whom are like children, and
. who are, besides, of the form of children’s
toys. Salutations to you who are old, who
are covetous, who are already agitated, and
who are about to be agitated.


41. Salutations to you who have locks
.of hair carrying the current of the Ganges,
and who have locks of hair resembling
blades of Munja grass! Salutations to you
who are pleased with the six acts, and
who are given (o the performance of the
three acts.


42. Salutations to you wha have allotted
the duties of the various modes of life.
Salutations to you who should be praised
in sounds, who are of the form of sorrow,
and who are of the farm of deep and con-
fused noise.


43. Salutations ta you who have eyes
both white and tawny, as also dark and
red, Salutations to you wha have con-
quered yout vital airs, who ace of the form
of weapons, who rivet all things, and who
are greatly lean.


44. Salutations to you who always des.
cribé Religion, Pleasure, Profit, and Libera-
tion. Salutations to you who are a Sankhya,
who are the foremost of Sankhyas, and
who are the promulgator of the Sankhya-
Yoga.

45. Salutationsto you who. have acar
and who are without a car. Salutations to
you who have the junction of fout roads
for your car; to you who have the skin of
a black deer for your upper garments, and
who have a snake for the sacred thread.


46. Salutations to you who are Ishana,
who are of body as hatd as adamant, and
who are of green locks. Salutations to you
who have three eyes, who are the husband
of Ambika, who are manifest, and who are
Unmanifest.


47. Salutations to you who are Desire,
vate the Giver of all desires, who are the
. Killer of all desires, and who are the dis-
criminator between the pleased and the
not pleased. Salutations to you who are
all things, the Giver of all things, and
the Destroyer of all things.
to you who are the colors which appear in
the evening sky.

48. Salutations to you who are of great
Strength, who are of mighty arms, who are
@ mighty Being, and who are of great


Salutations |-


MAHABHARASLA.


effulgence. Salutations to you who look
like a huge mass of clouds, and who are
the embodiment of eternity. Salutations
to you who are of well-developed body,
who are of emaciated limbs, who bear,
matted locks on your head, and who are
clad in barks of trees and skins of animals.


49. Salutations to you who have matted
locks as effulgent as the Sun or the Fire,
and who have barks and skins for your
raiment. Salutations to you who are en-
dued with the effulgence of a thousand
Suns, and who are ever engaged in pen-
ances,


5. Salutations to you who are the
excitement of Fever and who have matted
locks drenched with the waters of the
Ganges having hundreds of eddies. Salu-
tations to you who again and again re-
volve the Moon, the Yugas, and the clouds.


51. You are food, you are he who eats
that food, you are the giver of food, you
are the growee of food, and youare the
maker of food, Salutations to you who cook
food and who eat cooked food, and wha
are both wind and fire.


52. O Lord of all the lords of the gods,
you are the four orders of living creatures,
vis., the viviparous, the oviparous, the
filth-born, and vegetables.


$3. You are the Creator of the mobile
and the immobile universe, and you are
their Destroyer. O foremost of all persons
conversant with Brahma, they who know
Branma consider you as Brahma.


54. The Brahmavadins say that you
are the Supreme root of Mind, and the
Refuge upon which Ether, Air, and Light
rest. You are the Richs and the Samans,
and the syllable Om.


55. O-foremost of all gods, those Brahma-
vadins who sing the Samans always sing
you when they utter the syllables Hayi+
Hayi, Huva-Hayi, and Huva-Hoyi.


"56. You are made up of the Yajushes,,

of the Richs, and of the offerings poured
on the sacrificial fire. The hymns of the
Vedas and the Upanishads worship you.


57- You are the Brahmanas and the
Kshatriyas, the Vaishyas, and the Shudras,,
and the other castes formed by inter-
mixture. You are the masses of clouds
which appear in the sky; you are Light«
ning ; and you are the roar of thunder,


58. You are the year, you-are the
seasons, you are the month, and you are
the fortnight. You are Yuya, you are
the time represented by a twinkle of the
eye, you are Kashtha, you are the Constel-


‘lations, 'you are the Planets, you are


Kala.
¢


SHANTI PARVA.


§9. You are the tops of alltrees, you
are the highest summits of all mountains,
You are the tiger among the lower animals,
you are Garuda among birds, and you
are Ananta among snakes.


60. You are the ocean of milk among
alloceans, and you are the bow among
instruments for hurling weapons. You are
the thunder among weapons, and you are
Truth among vows.


61. You are Aversion and you are
Desire: you are attachment and you are
stupefaction (of judgment): you are For-
giveness and you are Unforgiveness, You
are Exertion, and you are Patience: you
are Cupidity;: you are Lust and you are
Anger: you are Victory and you are
Defeat.


62. You are armed with mace, and you
‘are armed with arrow: you are armed with
the bow, and you carry the Khattanga
and the Jharjhara in your hands. You
are he who cuts down and pierces and
smites. You are he who leads (all creatures)
and he who gives them pain and grief.


63- You are Righteousness marked by
ten virtues; you are Wealth or Profit of
every sort; and you are Pleasure! You
-are Ganga, you are the Oceans, you are
the Rivers, you are the lakes, and you are
the tanks.


64. You are the thin creepers, you are
the thicker creepers, you are all kinds of
grass, and you are the deciduous herbs.
You are all the lower animals and you are
the birds. You are the origin of all ob-
jects and acts, and you are that season
which yields fruits and flowers,


65. You are the beginning and you are
the end of the Vedas; youare the Gayatri,
and you are Om.


‘66. You are Green, you are Red, you
are Blue, you are Dark, you are of Bloady
color, you are of the color of the Sun,
you are Tawny, you are Brown, and you
are Dark-blue,


67. You are colorless, you are of the
best color, you are the maker of colors,
and you are peerless. You are of the
name of Gold, and you are fond of Gold.


68. You are Indra,.you are Yama, you
are the Giver of boons, you are the Lord
of riches, and you are Agni. You are the
Eclipse, you are the Fire called Chitra-
a you are Rahu, and you are the

un.


69. You are the fire upon which sacri-
ficial butter is poured. You are he who
pours the butter. You are He in honor of
whom the butter is poured, you are the
butter itself that is poured, and you are


437


the powerful Lord of all. You are those
sections of the Brahmans who are called
Trisuparna; you are all the Vedas; and
you are the sections called Shatarudriya in
the Yajushes.


7o. You are the holiest of holies, and
the auspicious of all auspicious things.
You quicken the inanimate body. You are
the chit that lives in the human ‘body.
Invested with qualities, you are liable to
Desteuction, “You are individual soul, that
is He who is never liable to destruction
when uninvested with attributes. You ‘are
full yet -you are liable to decay and death
in the form of the body which is individual
soul’s encasement.


qt. You are the breath of life, and you
are quality of Goodness, you are Darkness,
you are Ignorance, and you are not subject
to mistake. You are the vital airs called
Prana, Apana, Samana, Udana, and
Vyana.


72. You are the opening of the eye and
the shutting of the eye.. You are Sneezin
and you are Yawning. Yow are of re
eyes which are ever turned inwatds. You
are of large mouth and large stomach.


73. The hairs of your body are like
needies. Your beard is green. Your hair
is turned upwards. You are swifter than
the swiftest. Vou are master of the
principles of music both vocal and inss
trumental, and fond of both vocal and
instrumental music.


74. You are a fish moving in the waters,
and you are a fish caught in the net, You
are full, you are fond of sports, and you
are of the form of all quarrels and dis
putes. You are lime, you are bad time,
you are premature time, and you are over+
Mature time. :


75. You are the killing, you are the
razor, and you; are what is killed. You
are the auxiliary and you are the adver~
sary, and you are destroyer of both auxt-
liartes and adversaries. You are the time
when clouds appear, you are of large teeth,
and you are Samvartaka and Valahaka.


76. You ate manifest in a shining form.
You are concealed for being invested with
illusion. You are He who links creatures
with the fruits of their acts, You have a bell
in your hand. You sport with all mobile
and immobile things. You are the cause
of all causes. You are Brahma, you are
Swaha ; you are the holder of the rod, your
head is bald, and you are he who has his
words, deeds, and thoughts under res-
traint,

You are the four cycles, you are
H the four Vedas, you are he from whom the


438


four fires have emanated. You are the
ordainer of all the duties of the four modes


of tife. You are the maker of the four
Orders.
78. You are always fond of dice. You


are cunning. You are the king of the
various clans of Spirits,jand their ruler. You
are bedecked with red garlands and dressed
in red robes. You sleep on the mountain-
breast, and you are fond of the red color.


79. You are the artizan: You are the
foremost of artists; and it is you from
whom all asts have originated. You are the
tearer of the eyes of Bhaga; you are
Fiecce, and you are the destroyer of the
teeth of Pushan,


80. You are Swaha, vou are Swadha, you
are Vashat, you are Salutation’s form, and
you are the words ‘Namas-Namas’ uttered
by all worshippers. Others know not
your observances and penances. You are
Pranava ; you are the sky bespangled with
countless of stars. >


81. You are Dhatri, and Vidhatri, and
Sandhatri, Vidhatri, and the refuge of all
things in the form of the Supreme cause,
and you are independent of all Refuge.
You are conversant with Brahma, you are
Penance, you are ‘Truth, you are the
soul of Brahmacharyya, and you are
Simplicity.

82. You are the soul of all creatures,


and you are the Creator of all creatures,


you are absolute Existence, and you are the
Cause whence the Past, the Present, and
the Future, have originated. You are
Earth, you are sky, and you are Heaven.

fou are Eternal, you are Self-controlled,
and you are the great god. ;


83. You are initiated, and you are not
inittated. You are forgiving ; youare un-
- forgiving ; and you are the chastiser of the
rebellious. You are the lunar month, you
are the cycle, you are Destruction, and you
are Creation.


84. You are Lust, you are the seminal
fluid, you are subtile, you are gross, and
you are fond of garlands made of Karni-
kara flowers. You have a face like that of
Nandi, you have a terrible face, you have a
beautiful face, you have an ugly face, and
you are without a face.


85. You have four faces, you have many
faces, and you havea fiery face when en-
gaged in battles, You are Narayana, you
are unattached to all things like a bird, you
are Ananta, and you are Virat.


86. You are the: destroyer of sin, you
are called Mahaparshwa, you are Chan-
dadhara, and you are the king of the spirits,
You lowed like a cow, you were the protec


MAHABHARAIA.


or of kine, and you have the king of bu\\s
fo" your attendant.


87. You are the protector of the three
worlds, you are Govinda, you are the
director of the senses, and you are in-
capable of being apprehended by the
senses, You are the foremost of all
creatures, you are fixed, you are immobile,
you tremble not, and you are of the form
of trembling.


88. You are incapable of being resisted,
you are the destroyer of all poisons, you
are incapable of being borne, and you are
incapable of being excelled, you cannot be
made totremble, you cannot be measured,
you cannot be defeated, and you are
victory,


89. You are of quick speed, you are
the Moon, you are Yama, you suffer une
grudgingly, cold, heat, hunger, weakness
and disease. You are all mental agonies,
you are all physical diseases, you are the
curer of all diseases, and you are those
diseases themselves which you cure.


go. You are the destroyer of my Sacri-
fice which had tried to escape in the form of
adeer, You are the coming in and going
out of all diseases. You have a high crest.
You have eyes like lotus-petals. You live
in the midst of lotuses.


gt. You carry the ascetic’s staff in your
hands. You have the three Vedas for your
three eyes. Your chastisements are fierce
and severe. You are the destroyer of the
egg. You are the drinker of both poison and

re, you are the foremost of all gods, you
are the drinker of Soma, you are the lord
of the Maruts.


92. You are the drinker of Ambrosia.
You are the Lord of the universe. You
shine in effulyence, and you are the
Lord of all the shining ones. You guard
against poison and death, and you drink
milk and Soma. You are the foremost of
the protectors of those that have fallen off
from heaven, and you protect Brahman
himself. .


93. Gold is your seminal fluid. Vou are
male, you are female, you are.neuter, You
are an infant, you ave a youth, you are old
in years with your teeth gone, you are the
foremost of Nagas, you are Shakra, you
are the Destroyer of the universe, and you
ace its Creator.


94. You are Prajapati,. and you are
worshipped by the Patriarchs, you are the
supporter of the universe, you have the
universe for your form, you are gifted with
great energy, and you have faces turned
powards all directions. The Sun and the


“SHANTI PARVA.


Moon are your two eyes, and the Grand-
father is your heart. You are the Ocean.
‘The goddess of learning is your speech,
Fire and Wind are your might. You are
Day and Night. You are all acts includ-
ing the opening and the shutting of the eye.


95. Neither Brahman, nor Govinda, nor
the ancient Rishis, can understand your
greatness, O auspicious god,


96. Your subtle forms cannot be seen
by us. Rescue me and, O, protect me as
the father protects his own begotten son.


97- O protect me! I deserve your pro-
tection! [I bow to you, O sinless One!
Vou, O illustrious one, are full of mercy
for your devotees. I am always devoted
to you.


98. Let him be always my protector
who stays alone on the other side of the
ocean, in a form while it is difficult to
apprehend, and overwhelming many thou-
sands of persons,

99. I bow to that Soul of Yoga who is seen


in the form of an effulgent Light by persons
that have their senses under restraint, who


are endued with the quality of Goodness, |


who have regulated their breaths, and who
have conquered sleep.


1oo. I bow to him who has matted locks,
who carries the ascetic’s staff in his hand,
who has a body having along abdomen,
who has a water bowl tied to his back, and
who is the Soul of Brahman.


tor. I salute Him who is the soul of
water, in whose hair are the clouds, in the
joints of whose body are the rivers, and
tn whose stomach are the four oceans.


102. I seek the protection of Him wlio,
when the end of the cycle sets in, devours
all creatures and lies down on the wide
sheet of water that covers the universe.


103. Let him who entering Rahu’s
mouth drinks Soma in the night and who
becoming Swarbhanu devours the Sun also,
protect me,


104. The gods who are mere infants
and who have all originated from you after
Brahman’s creation, enjoy their respective
shares. Let them enjoy those offerings
made with Swaha and Swadha, and let
them enjoy pleasure from those presents.
I salute them.


105. Let those Beings who are tiny
like the thumb and who-live in all bodies,
always protect and please me.


106, I always salute those Beings who
living within embodied creatures make
the latter cry in grief without themselves
crying in grief, and who gladden’ them
without thenselves being glad.


439


1oj—-tto.- { always salute those Rudra
who live in rivers, in oceans, in hills and
mountains, in mountain-caves, in the roots
of trees, in Cowpens, in dreary forests, in
the junction of roads, in roads, in open
squares, in banks, in elephast-sheds, in
stables, in caresheds, in deserted gardens
and houses, in the five principal elements,
and in the cardinal and subsidiary points.
4 salute them again. and again who live in
the space amidst the Sun and Moon, as
also in rays of the Sun and the Moon, and
them who live in the nether regions, and
them who have followed the path of Renun-
ciation and other superior practices for the
sake of the Supreme. ;


111. I always salute them who are
without number and measure, and who


have no form, those Rudras, who are
‘gifted with infinite attributes.
-412, Since you, QO Rudra, are the


Creator of all creatures, since, O Hara,
you are the Master of all creatures, and
‘since you are the indwelling spirit of all
creatures, therefore, you were not,invited
by me.


113. Since you are He who is wor+
sipped in all sacrifices with poe gifts,
and since it is you who are the Creator of
all things, therefore, I did not invite you.


114. Or, perhaps, O god, overpowered

by your subtle illusion [ failed to invite
) you.

115. Be propitiated with me, blessed he
yourself, O Bhava, with me possessed by
the quality of darkness. My Mind, my
Understanding, and my intellect all live
in you, O god !— 5

116—117. Hearing these adorations,
that Lord of all creatures, viz., Mahadeva,
stopped. Indeed, highly pleased, the illus-
trious god addressed Daksha, saying,—O
Daksha of excellent vows, I have been
pleased with these adorations of yours. You
need not swell: the chorus of my adoration
any longer! You shall have my compani-
onship.; ;


118. Through my grace, O progenitor
of creatures, you will acquire the fruit of
a thousand horse-sacrifices, and a hundred
Vajapeyas. .

119. Once more, Mahadeva, that tho-
rough adept in speech, addressed Daksha
and said to him these words fraught with
great consolation :—Be yu the foremost
of all creatures in the world,


tzo. You should not, O Daksha, en-
tertain any feelings of grief for these inju-
ries put on your Sacrifice. It has been
seen that in former cycles tool had to


.{ destroy your Sacrifice.


440


tat. O you of excellent vows, I shall i the attendants of Mahadeva.


grant you again sonte more boons. Take
them from mie. Removing this cheerless-
hess that overspreads your face, hear me
with rapt attention,


122, With the help of reasonable argu-
ments; the gods and the Danavas have
formed from the Vedas tonsisting of six
branches and from the philosophers of
Sankhya and Yoga a creed by virtue of
which they have practised the austerest
penantes for many long years.


124. The religion, however, which I
have farmed is peerless, and. productive of
benefits on every side, Men in all modes of
life can practise it. {t brings on Libera-
tion. It may be acquired in many years or
through merit by persons’ who have con-
trolled their senses. It is shrouded in
mystery, Those who have no wisdom con-
sider it as censurable,


124. It is opposed to the duties sanc-
tioned for the four orders of men and the
four modes of life, and agrees with those
duties in only a few particulars. ‘Those
who are welleskilled in the science of con-
clusions can understand its fitness; and
they who have gone above all the modes of
life can adopt it.


128. todays of yore, O Daksha, this
auspicious religion called Pashupata had
been found out by me. The proper obser-
vance of that religion produces great
benefits.


126. May you get those, O highly blessed
one! Renounce this fever of your heart !—
Having said these words, Mahadeva, with
his consort (Wma) and with all his attend-
ants disappeared from the view of Daksha
of gréat prowess.


127. He who would recite this hymn
that was first sung by Daksha or. who
would listen to it. when sung by another,
would nevet suffer from the smallest evil
and would gain a long life.


128. Indeed, as Shiva is the foremost of
all the gods, sois this hymn, consonant with
ethe Shrutis, is the foremost of all hymns.


129. Persons seeking fame, kingdom,
‘happiness, pleasure, profit and riches, and
Jearning, should listen with devout feelings
to the recital of this hymna.


130. One suffering from disease, one
distressed by pain, one plunged into melan-
choly, one assailed by thieves or by fear
and one under the displeasure of the king
about his charge, becomes freed from fear
by reciting this hymn.

131. By listening or reciting this hymn,
One, even in this earthly body of his,


MAHABHARATA.


One gaind
energy and fame, and becomes purged of
all sin.

132. Neither Rakshasas, nor Pishachas,
nor ghosts, nor Vinayakas make disturs
bances in the house where this hymn is
recited,


133. That woman, again, who listens ta
this hymn with pious faith, observing the
practices of Brahmacharyya, gains worship
as a goddess in the family of her father
and that of her husband.


134. All the acts of that person become
always successful who listens or recites with
rapt attention to the whole of this hymna.


135. On account of the recitation of
this hymn all the wishes one cherishes ia
his mind and all the wishes he speaks out
become successful. ;


136. That man. gains all objects o
enjoyment and pleasure and all things that
are desired by him, who, practising self-
control, makes, according to proper rites,
offerings to Mahadeva, Guha, Uma, and
Nandi, fand thereafter utters forthwith
their names, in proper order and with


devotion.


137. Such a man, after death, ascends
to heaven, and is never born among tha
intermediate animals or birds. ‘Shis wag
said by the powerful Vyasa the son of
Parashara.”’


——


CHAPTER CCLXXXVI.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—=
Continued,


Yudhisthira said :— !

1. “Tell me, O grandfather what is
the spiritual science of man and whence
does it originate.”


Bhishma said :—


2. ‘Helped by the spiritual science, one
may know everything. It is, again,
supetict to all things. I shall, with the
help of my intelligence, explain to you
that spiritual science about which you
asks me. Listen, O son, to my explana-
tion.


3. Earth, Wind, Ether, Water, and
Light forming the fifth, are the great eles
ments. These are the origin ahd the des
truction of all creatures.

4. The bodies of living creatures, O
foremost of Bharata’s race, are the result of
the combination of the virtues of these five.


acquires equality with the spirits who are | Those virtues repeatedly come into being


€


SHANT1


and repeatedly merge into the Supreme
Soul.

5. From those five primal elements are
€reated all ereatures, and into those five
great elements all creatures resolve them-
selves, again and again, like the number-
less waves of the Ocean rising from the
pieaal and merging into that which causes
them.


6. Asa tortoise stretches forth its legs
and withdraws them again into itself, so
the numberless creatures originate from
(and enter) these five great essences.


7. Verily, sound originates from ether,
and all dense matter is the attribute of


Earth. Life springs from Wind. ‘Taste
is from Water. Form is the property of
Light. ;


8. The entire mobile and immobile uni-
verse is thus the outcome of the combina-
tion of these five great essences. When
Destruction sets in, the infinite variety of
creatures cesolve themselves into those five,
and once nore, when Creation begins, they
originate from the same five.


g. The Creator puts in all creatuces the
same five great elements in proportions
that He thinks fit.


10. Sound, the ears, and all cavities,—
these three,—have ether for their cause.
‘Taste, all watery or juicy substances, and
the tongue, are the properties ot Water.

11. Form, the eye, and the digestive
fire in the stomach, are the properties of
Light. Smell, the organ of smelling, and
the body, are the properties of Earth.


12. Life, touch, and action are the pro-
perties of Wind. I have thus explained to
you, O king, all the properties of the five
principal elements.


13. Having created these, the Supreme
God, O Bharata, united with them the
qualities of Goodness, Darkness, and Igno-
rance, Time, Consciousness of functions,
and Mind forming the sixth.


14. What is called the Understanding
lives in the interior of what you see above
the sotes of the feet and below the crown
of the head. . .

15. In man there are five senses. The
sixth (sense) is the Mind. ‘The seventh is
ealled the Understanding. The Kshetrajna
or Soul is the eighth.


16. The senses and the Actor should be
determined by apprehension of their res-
pective functions. Yhe states called
Sattwa, Rajas, and ‘lamas, depend upon
the senses for their formation.


17. The senses exist for simply catch-


ing the impressions of their respective


56


PARVA. 441
objects, Doubt is the function of the
Mind. The Understanding is for’ ascer-


tainment. The Soul is said to be only an
inactive witness. 3


18. Sattwa, Rajas, Tamas, Time, and
Acts, O Bharata, these attributes govern
the Understanding. The Understanding
is the senses and the five attributes.


19. When the Understanding is not,
the senses with the mind, and the five
other attributes, cease to be. That by
which the Understanding sees is called the
eye. When she smetts, she becomes the
organ of smell; and when she tastes the
various objects, she ts called tongue.


20. When again she feels the touch of
the various objects, she becomes the organ
ef touch. It is the Understanding that
becomes modified variously and frequently.
When the Understanding wishes for any-
thing, she becomes Mind.


2. The five senses ‘with the Mind,
which separately form the foundations (of
the Understanding), are the creations of
the Understanding. hey are called In-
driyas or organs. When they become
stained, the Understanding also beconres
sultied.


22—23. The Understanding, fiving in
individual Soul, exists in three states. Some-~
times she rejoices, sometimes she grieves,
and sometimes she exists in a State which js
neither pleasure nor pain. Having for her
essence these states, of Sattwa, Rajas, and
Yamas), the Understanding passes through
these three stares.


24. As the lord of rivers, wig., the
Ocean, always keeps within his bounds,
so the Understanding, which exists united
with the (three) states, exists in the Mind.


25—28. When the state of Rajas is
awakened, the Understanding becomes
changed into Rajas. Delight, joy, gladness,

| happiness, and contentment, these wher
somehow excited, are the properties of Sat-
twa. Heart-burnning, grief, sorrow, discon
tentment, and unforgiveness, artsing from
particular causes, are the outcome of Rajas.
ignorance, attachment and mistake, care
léessness, stupefaction, and terror, mean-
hess, cheerlessness, sleep, and procrastina-
tion, these, when engendered by particular
Causes, are the properties of ‘Vamas,


29. Whatever state of body or mind,
either joy or happiness, arises, should be
considered as due to the state of Satiwa.


30. Whatever, again, is full of sorrow
and is disagreeable to oneself, should be
considered as originating from  Rajas.
Without undertaking any such act, oue
should iura his attention to it.


442


31. Whatever is full of error or stupe-
faction in either body or mind, and is
inconceivable and mysterious, should be
known as being outcome of Tamas.


32. Thus have I explained to you that
all things in this world live in the Under-
standing. By knowing this one becomes
wise. Woaat else can be the characteristics
of wisdom ?


33. Know now the difference between
these two subtile things, vis., Understand-
ing, and Soul. One of these, vts., the
Understanding, creates qualities. ‘The
other, z.e., the Soul, does not create them.


34. Although they are, by nature, dis-
tinct from each other, yet they always dwell
in a state of union. A fish is different from
the water in which it lives, but the fish and
the water exist together.


38. The qualities cannot know the Soul.
The Soul, however, knows them. ‘Fhe
gnorant regard the Soul as existing in a
state of union with the qualities like quali-
ties existing with their possessors. Chis,
however, is not the case, for the Soul is
only an idle spectator of everything.


36. The Understanding has no refuge.
That which is called life originates from
the effects of the qualities coming together.
Others, acting as causes, create the Under-
standing that lives in the body. No one
can apprehend the qualities in the true
nature or form of existence.


37. The Understanding, as already said,
creates the qualities. “Ihe Soul simply sees
them. This union between the Waders
standing and the Soul is eternal.


38. The Understanding living within,
perceives all things through the Senses
which are by mature inanimate and un-


apprehending. In sooth, the senses are
only like lamps. ;
39. This is their nature. Knowing this,


one should live cheerfully, without giving
way to either grief or joy. Such a man is
_ above the influence of pride.


40. Owing to her nature, the Under- |


standing creates all these attributes, asa
spider weaves threads. These qualities
should be known as the threads the spider
weaves,


41. When destroyed, the qualities do
not cease to exist; only, their existence
becomes invisible. When, however, a thing
is beyond the range of the senses, its
existence (or otherwise) is understood by.
inference. This is the opinion of some
persons. Others hold that with destruc-
tion the qualities cease to be,..


; by Knowledge as his sole means.


MAHABHARATA,


42. Solving this hard problem of the
understanding and reflection, and removing
alt doubt, one should renounce sorrow and
live happily.

43. As men not knowing the bottom
become distressed when they fall! upod
this Earth which is like a river filled witlr
the waters of stupefaction, so is that man
pained who falls away from that state in
which there ts a union with the Under<
standing.


44. Learned men, however, conversar
with spiritual science and armed with
fortitude, are never afflicted, because they
can go to the other end of those waters,
Indeed, Knowledge is a pood vessel.


45. Men of knowledge have not to
meet those fears which terrify them that
are shorn shorn of knowledge. Regarding
the righteous, none of them attains to alr
etrd which is superior to that of any other
person amongst them. In faet, the righte-
ous display an equality abvut it.


46. Regarding the man of Knowledge,
whatever acts have been done by him in
pristine times out of Ignorance) and what-
ever sinful acts he does, he gestroye bor
Then,
again, upon the attainment of Knowledge
he ceases to commit these two evils, v7s.,
blaming the wicked acts of others and
doing any wicked acts him self under the
influence of attachment.”


CHAPTER CCLXXXVIL.


(MOKHARDHAMA PARVA).—
Continued.


Yudhisthira said :—

1, ‘Living creatures always dread sor
row and death. Tell me, O grandfather,
how the occurrence of these two may be
warded off.”


Bhishma said :—

2. ‘Regarding it,O Bharata, is cited
the old discourse between Narada and
Samanga. ;


Narada said :—


_3- You salute your elders by prostra-
ting yourself on the ground till your chest
touches the ground. You appear to be


| engaged in crossing (the river of life) with


your hands, You appear to be always free


| from sorrow and greatly cheerful,


4. 1 do not see that you have the least
anxiety. You are always content and


SHANTI PARVA.


happy, and you appear to play happily like
a child, ;


Samanga said :—

5. O giver of honors, { know the truth
about the Past, the Present, and the Future.
Hence I never become dispirited.


6. IT know also what the commencement
of acts is in this world, what, of their fru'ts
and how different are those fruits. Hence
I never give way to sorrow.


7. You see, O Narada, the illiterate,
the destitute, the prosperous, the blind,
idiots and madmen, and ourselves also,
all live.


8. These five by virtue of their pristine
deeds. The very gods, who are freed from
diseases, exist by virtue of their pristine
deeds. ‘The strong and the weak, all, live
by virtue of their pristine deeds. It is
proper, therefore, you should regard us with
respect.

g. The masters of thousands live. The
masters of hundreds also live. They who
are overwhelmed with sorrow live. ‘See,
we too are living.


ro. When we, O Narada, do not yield
to grief, what can the practice of the duties
or the observance of acts do to us? And
since all joys and sorrows do not terminate,
they are, therefore, unable to agitate us
at all.


tt. Indeed, the very root of wisdom, is
the freedom of the senses from mistake.
It is the senses which produce error and
grief. One whose senses are subject to
mistake can never be said to have acquired
wisdom.


12, ‘That pride which a man, subject to
etror, entertains, is only a form of the error
to which he is subject. As regards the
man of ecror, neither this world nor the
next is for him. It should be remembered
that griefs do not last for ever and that
happiness cannot be acquired always.


13. One like me would never adopt
worldly life with all its changes and pain-
ful incidents. Such a one would not care for
objects of enjoyments, and would not think
at all of the happiness which they yield,
or, indeed, of the griefs that come on.


14. One capable of depending on his
own self, would never hanker after the
possessions of others; would not think of
‘unfair gains, would not feel overjoyed at
the acquisition of even immense riches ; and
would not give way to sorrow at the loss
of riches.


1g. Neither friends, nor riches, nor high
birth, nor sacred leacning, noc Mantras,’


443


nor ‘energy, can succeed in saving one from
sorrowin the next world. It is only by
conduct that one can acquire happiness
there,


16. The Understanding of the man who
is not acquainted with Yoga can_ never be
directed towards Liberation. One unac-
quainted with Yoga can never gain happi-
ness. Patience and the determination to
shake off sorrow, these two mark the set-
ting in of happiness. :

17. Anything agreeabfe brings on plea-
sure. Pleasure induces pride, Pride, again,
produces sorrow. For these reasons, I
avoid all these.


18. Grief, Fear, Pride,—these that stupe.
fy the heart, —and also Pleasure and Pain,
I see as witness since my body is endued
with life and moves about.


19. Knowing both riches and pleasure,
and thirst and mistake, | wander over the
Earth, freed from grief and every sorto
anxiety of heart.


20. Like one that has drunk nectar I
have no fear, either in this world or in the
next, of death, oc sin, or cupidity, or any-
thing of that sort.


21. 1 have gained this knowledge, O
Brabmana, as the outcome of my severe
and indestructible penances, Therefore, O
Narada, even when it comes to mé, cannot
affect me.”


—_—_—


CHAPTER CCLXXXVIL


(MOKSHADHAMA PARVA).—
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


1. "Tell me, O Grandfather, what is
for the behoof of oné who is not acquainted
with the truths of the scriptures, who is al-
ways in doubt, and who abstains from self-
control and the other practices the object
whereof the knowledge of the Soul.”


Bhishma said :—

2. ‘ Adoring the preceptor, always ree
verentia ly attending the aged, and listen-
ing to the scriptures,—these are said to be
of supreme benefit.


3. Regarding it is cited the old dis-
course between Galava and the celestial
Rishi Narada.


4. Once ona time Galava, desirous of
securing what was for his behoof, addressed
Narada freed from error and fatigue, well-
read in scriptures, pleased with knowledge


444


a thorough master of his senses, and with
soul devoted to Yoga, and said,—


5. see, O Ascetic, those virtues by the


possession of which a person is respected in
the world, live permanently in you. .


6. You are freed from error and, there-


fore, you should remove the doubis that
fill the minds of men like ourselves who
are subject to error and who are unacquain-
ted with truths of the world.


9. We do not know ou duties, for the
injunctions of the scriptures create an in-
clination for Knowledge simultaneously with
the inclination for acts. You should des-
eribe these subject to us.


8. O iHustrious one, the different modes
of life approve different courses of con-
ducty—'"This is beneficial,’—‘This is bene-
ficial,’—-the scriptures exhort us often in
this way.


9. Seeing the followers of the four modes
of life, who are thus exhorted by the scrip-
tures and who fully approve of whai the
scriptures haye sanctioned for them, thus
travelling in various courses, and behold-
ing that ourselves also are equally content
with our own scriptures, we cannot uuder-
stand what is truly wholesome,


“10.
opinion, thea what is truly beneficial would
have become clear. On account, however,
of the scriptures being multifarious, that
which is truly beneficial is filled with
mystery.

11. For these reasons, that which is truly
beneficial, appears to as full of confusion.
Do you, then, O ilfustrious one, describe to
me the subject. I have come to you (for
this). Instruct me. ~


Narada said :—

12. The modes of life four in number,
O child! All of them serve the object for
which they have been designed; and the
duties they declare differ frum one another.
Learning them first from competent pre-
ceptor's, reflect upon them, O Galava,


13. ‘See, the. merits of those modes of
life, as described, ate varied in their form,
divergent in their matter, and contradic-
tory in their observances.


14. When seen with gross vision, all the
Ashramas do not exhibit their true intent!
Others, however, having subtle sight, see
their highest end.


15-16. That which is truly and, without
any doubt, wholesome, 97s., good offices to
friends, and suppression of enemies, and
the acquisition of the three-fold objects of
life, has been described by the wise to be


Tf the scriptures were all of one |


MAHABHARATA,


supreme excellence. Abstention, from sin-
ful deeds, righteous disposition, good con-
duct towards the good and pious,—these,
forsooth, constitute excellence,


17. Mildness towards all creatures,
sincerity of conduct, and sweet words,—
these, Iorsooth, constitute excellence.


18. A just distribution of one’s riches
among the gods, the Pitris, and guests,
and adherence to servants,—these, forsooth,
constitute excellence.


1g Truthfulness of speech is excellent,
Vhe knowledge of truth is, however, very
difficult of acquisition. I hold that as
truth which is highly beneficial to creatures.


20. ‘The absence of pride, the suppress-
sion of carelessness, contentment, living
by one’s own self,—these form the supreme
excellence,


2u. The study of the Vedas, and
their branches, according to the well-
known cules, and all enquiries and parsuits
leading to the acquisition of knowledge,—
are, forsooth excellent.


22. Qne wishing to acquire what is
excellent should never enjoy to excess
sound and form and taste and touch and
scent, and should not enjoy them for their
sake alone,


23. Walking in the night, sleep during
the day, indulgence in idleness, villany,
pride, excessive indulgence and total absten-
tion from enjoyment in objects of the
senses, should be shunned by one desirous
of acquiring what is excellent.


24. One should not seek self-elevation
by putting down others. Indeed, one
should, by his merits only, seek superiority
over persons who are distinguished but
nevec over those who are inferior.


25. Men having no real merit and filled
with a sense of self-admiration depreciate
men of real merit, by mentioning their own
virtues and riches.


26. Puffed up with a sense of their own
importance, these men, when none stops
them, consider themselves to be superior
to men of real distinction. |


27. One having true wisdom and reat
merits, wins’ great fame by abstaining from
speaking ill of others and from indulging
in self-praise,


28. Flowers shed their pure and sweet
odour without speaking of their own exe
cellence. Likewise, the effulgent Sun
scatters his shining rays in the sky in per
fect silence.


29. Similarly those men shine in the
world with celebrity who by the help of


SHANTI


abeir intelligence, renounce thesé and
similar other faults and who do Mt blaze
forth their own virtues.


30. The fool can never shine in the
world by speaking out his own praise. The
man, however, of real merit and learning
acquires celebrity even if he be hidden in
& pit.

gt. Evil words, uttered with what
strength of voice, die out. Good words,
uttered, however softly, shine forth in the
wartld,


32.
the multitude of words, of little sense, that
fools filled with vanity give vent to show
theic hearts.


33. For these reasons men try to acquire
wisdom of various sorts. it appears to me
that of all acquisitions that of wisdom is
the most precious.


34.
asked ; nor should one speak when one is
asked improperly. Even if endued with
intelligence and knowledge, one snould $.i'1
sit in silence like an idiot.


35. One should seek to
honest men given to righteousness and
liberality and the observance of the duties
of their own order.


36. One desirous of acquiring what is
excellent should never live in a place where
people make a confusion of theic respective
duties.


37 A_ person may be seen to live w


As the Sun shows his fiery form so


One should not speak until one is


live among


abstains from all works and who. is well-
content with whatever Httle is gained
without exertion. By liviag amid the
righteous, one succeeds in acquiring pure
virtue, Similarly one by living amid the
sinful, becomes sullied with sin.


38. As the touch of water or fire or the
rays of the moon immediately carry the
sensation of cold or heat, similarly the
impressions of virtue and vice create happi-
ness or misery.


39. ‘Those who eat Vighasa eat without
marking the flavours of the foods placed
before them. hey, however, who eat care-
fully marking the flavours of the duties
prepared for them, should be knowa as
persons still tetteced by the bonds of action.


40. The pious man should leave that
‘place where a Brahmana describes duties.
to disciples desirous of acquiring know-
ledge, as based on reasons, of the Soul, but
who do aot reverentially enquire after such


knowledge.


4t. Who, however, will leave that place
where exists fully that conduct between
disciples and preceptors which is consistent,


PARYA. 445


with what has been sanctioned by the
scriptures ?


42. What learned man who cares fo
his respect will live there where people
tatk about the faults of the learned even
when such have no foundations to stand
upon ?


43. Who is thete that will not leave that
place, like a garment whose end has caught
fire, where covetous men tries to break
down the limits of virtue 7 .


44 One should remain and live in that
nlace, among good men of pious disposi-
tion, where persons possessed of humility
are engayed in fearlessly practising the
duties of religion. ;


45- One should not dwell there where
men practise the duties of religion for the
sake of wealth and other worldly pure
poses, for the people of that place are all
to be considered as sinful.


46. One should fly away quickly from
that place, as if from a room in which there
is a snake, where the inhabitants, desirous
of acquiring the means of life, are engaged
in the practice of sinful deeds.


47. One desirons of what is wholesome,
should, from the beginning, avoid that act
for which one becomes stretched, as it were,
on a bed of thorns and for which one
becomes invested with the desires born of
the pristine deeds.


48. The pious man should leave that
kingdam where the king and king’s officers
exercise equal authority and where people
eat before feeding their relatives.


49 One should live in that country
where Brahmanas having a knowledge of
the scriptures are fed first; where they
always practise religious duties, and where
they are engaged in teaching disciples and
officiating at the sacrifices of others.


50. One should unhesitatingly live in
that country where the soun¢s Swaha,
Swadha, and Vashat are duly and conti-
nuously uttered.


51. One should leave that kingdom,
like poisoned meat, where one sees Brah-
manas compelled to follow unholy practices,
by want of the means of life.


32, With a contented heart and cone
sidering all his wishes as already gratified,
a pious man should live in that ‘country
whose denizens gladly give away before
even they are asked, -


53- One should live and move about,
among good men devoted to pious acts, in
that country where the wicked are punished, ,
and where respect and good offices are


446


done to those who are of controlled and
purified souls.


54—55. One should unhesitatingly live
in that country whose king is given to virtue
and which the king rules virtuously, cast-
ing off desires and possessed of prosperity,
and where severe punishment is inflicted
on those who subject self-controlled men
to the consequences ‘of their anger, on
those who treat wickedly the righteous, on
those who commit acts of violence, and on
the cavetous.


56. Kings endued with such a disposi-
tion, secure the prosperity of those who live
‘in their kingdoms when prosperity is on
the point of leaving them. :

57. I have thus told you, O son, in
answer to your enquiry, what is beneficial or
excellent. No one can describe, on account
-of its exceedingly high character, what is
beneficial or excellent for the Soul.


58. Many and high will the excellences
be, through the performance of the duties
laid down for him, of the man who for
earning his livelihood ducing the time of
his stay im this world, acts in the way indi-
cated above and who devotes his soul to
the well-being of ail creatures.”


a


CHAPTER CCXXXIX.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


t. “ How, O grandfather, should a king
like us act in this world, keeping in view
the great object of acquisition? What
attributes, again, should he always possess
so that he may be liberated from attach-
ments.”


Bhishma said :—

2. ‘' T shall in this connection recite to you
the old narrative that was uttered by
Arishtanemi to Sagara who had sought his
advice.


Sagara said :—

3- What is that good, O Brahmana, by
doing which one may enjoy happiness here?
How, indeed, may one avoid grief and
agitation ? I wish to know all this.


Bhishma said :—

4. Thus addressed by Sagara, Arishta-
nemi of Tarkshya’s race, conversant with
all the scriptures, considering the enquiries
as deserving fully of his instructions, said
these words i


4 duly


MAHABHARATA,


5. The happiness of Liberation is true
happiness in the world. ‘The ignorant man
knows it not, attached, as he is, to children
and animals and possessed of riches and
corn.


6. The understanding that is attached
to worldly objects and the longing mind
baffle ail skilful treatment. The igno-
rant man who is bound in the fetters of
affection cannot acquire Liberation.


7. 1 shall now describe to you all the
fetters which originate from the affections.
Hear them with attention. Indeed, they
can be heard with profit by one who is
endued with knowledge.


8. Having procreated children in due
time and married them when they become
young men, and having found them to be
competent for earning their livelihood, do
you free yourself trom aJl attachments and
tove about happily.


g. When you find your dear consort
grown old in years and attached to the son
she has given birth to, do you leave her iu
time, keeping in view the highest object
of acquisition,


to. Whether you get a son or not,
having, during the first years of your life,
enjoyed with your senses the objects
thereof, liberate yourself from attachments
and rove about in happiness.


ty. Having satisfied the senses with
their objects, you should suppress the
desire of further indulging them. Libera-
ting yourself from attachments, you should
rove in happiness, contenting yourself with
what is got without exertion and previous
calculation, and looking impartially to-
wards all creatures and objects.


12. Thus, O son, have I told you briefly.
Hear me now, for I shall tell you fully, the
desirability of the acquisition of Libera-
tion.


13. Those persons who live in this world
shorn of attachments and fear, succeed in
acquiring happiness. ‘hose persons, how-
ever, who are attached to wortdly objects,
forsooth, meet with destruction.


14. Worms and ants are engaged in the
acquisition of food and are seen to die in
the search. They who are shorn of attach-
ments are happy, while they who are
attached to worldly objects meet with
destruction,


15. If you wish to acquire Liberation
you should never place your thoughts on
your relatives, thinking,—How shall these
live without. me?


16, A living creature takes bicth by


SHANTI PARVA,


himself, and, grows by himself, and ac-
quires happiness and misery, and death by
himself,


17. In this world people enjoy and
obtain food and cloth and other acquisitions
acquired by either their parents or them-
selves. This is the result of the acts of
pristine lives, for nothing can be had in
this life which is not the result of the
past.


18. All creatures live on the Earth,
protected by their own acts, and acquir-
ing their food as the result of what’ is
ordained by Him who allots the fruits
of acts.


tg. Aman is but a lump of clay, and
always depends completely on their forces.
A man, being thus so weak, what rational
motive can one have for protecting and
feeding his relatives 7


zo. When your relatives are carried
away by Deathin your very presence and
despite your utmost efforts to save them, that
circumstance alone should awaken you.


21. Inthe very life-time of your rela-
tives and before own duty is completed of
feeding and protecting them, you may
yourself die and leave them.


22. After your relatives have been
carried away from this world by death,
you cannot know what becomes of them
there,—that is, whether they are happy or
miserable. This fact ought to awaken you.


23. When on account of the fruits of
their own acts your relatives can maintain
themselves in this world whether you live
or die, thinking of this you should do what
is for your own well-being.


24. When such is the case, who in the
world is to be considered as whose? Do
you, therefore, think of acquiring Liberation,
Hear now what more I shall say to you.


2g. That man of firm Soul is, forsooth,
liberated who has conquered hunger and
Ihirst and such other states of the body, as
also anger and cupidity and error.


26. That man is always liberated who
does not forget himself, through folly, by
indulging in gambling and drinking and
concubinage and the chase.


27. That man whois really affected by
sorrow for being compelled to eat every day
and every night for maintaining life, is
said to be cognisant of the faults of life.


28. One who, as the outcome of care-
ful reflection, considers his repeated births
as due to sexual congress with women, is
held to be freed from attachments.


29. That Tran is certainly Liberated who
3


447


knows truly the nature of the birth, the
destruction, and the acts of living creatures,


30. That man becomes certainly freed
who seeks only a handful of corn, for the
support of life, from amidst millions upon
milltons of carts loaded with grain, and
who finds no difference between a shed of
bamboo and reeds and a palace.


31. That man becomes certainly freed
who seeks the world as afflicted by death,
disease and famine.


32. Indeed, one who sees the world
as such succeeds in becoming contented}
while one who fails to see the world in
such a light, meets with destruction. “Phat
man who is contented with only a little, is
considered as freed,


33. That man who sees the worid to
consist of eaters and edibles, and who is
never affected by pleasure and pain be-
gotten by illusion, is considered as liberated.


34. That man who considers a soft bed
on a fine bed-stead and the hard ground as
equal, and who considers good shali sice
and hard thick tice as equal, is liberated.


35- ‘That man who considers linen and
cloth made of grass as equal, and . who
considers cloth of silk and barks of trees
as the same, and who sees no difference
between clean sheep-skin and unclean
leather, is liberated.


36. That man who considers this world
as the result of the combination of the five
principal elements, and who acts in this
world, keeping this notion foremost, is
liberated.


37. That man who considers pleasure
and pain in the same light and gain and
loss as equal, and victory and defeat
as the same to whom like and dislike are
the same, and who is unmoved under fear
and anxiety, is perfectly liberated.


38. That man who considers his body
which has so many inperfections, to be only
amass of blood, urine and excreta, as also
of disorders and diseases, is liberated.


39. That man becomes liberated who
always reeollects that this body, when
possessed by decrepitude, becomes assailed
by wrinkless and white hairs and leanness
and_ paletess of complexion and a bending
of the form.


40, Yhat man who considers his body .
as subject to loss of power, weakness of
sight, deafness, and loss of strength, is
liberated.


41. That man who knows that the very
Rishis, the gods, and the Asuras are beings
that have to depart from their respective
spheres to other regions, is liberated. ~ 7


448


‘42. That man who knows that thousands
of kings possessed of even great power
have died, succeeds in becoming liberated.


43. That man who knows that in this
world the acquisition of objects is always
hard, that pain is profuse, and that the
maintenance of relatives is always painful,
becomes liberated.


44. Seeing the abtindant faults of chil-
dren and of other men, who is there that
would not worship Liberation ?


45. That man who, enlightened by the
scriptures and the expetience of the world,
seeS évery human concern in this wotld to
be unreal, becomes liberated.


46. Remembering these words of mine,
do you act like one who has become
liberated, whether it is a life of domesticity
that you would lead or pursue Liberation
without allowing your understanding to be
confounded,


47. Hearing these words of his with
attention, king Sagara, acquired those
virtues which yield Wberation And conti-
nued, with their help to rule big subjects.”


CHAPTER CCXC.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued.


Yudhisthira said :-—


i. “This curiosity, O sire, is always {


living in my mind. © grandfather of the
Kurus, | wish to hear everything about it
trom you!


2 Why was the celestial Rishi, the great
Ushanas, called also Kavi, engaged in
doing what was agreeable to the Asuras
and disagreeable to the gods.

3. Why was he engaged in diminish-
ing the energy of the gods? Why the
Danavas always fought with the foremost
of the gods,


4. Endued with the effulgence of an
immortal, why did Ushanas obtain the
name of Shukra? Wow also did he ac-
quire such superior excellence? ‘Tell mc
ull about these things. re.

5. Though highly energetic, why ean
he not go to the centre of the sky? 1 wish,
O grandfather, to learn everything about
all these matters.’”


Bhishma said :—
6. “Listen, O king, attentively to all
$his as it actually took place. O sinless oue,


MAHABHARATA,


I shall describe these macters to you as F
have heard and understood them.


z. Of firm vows and respected by all,
Ushanas, that descendant of Bhrigu’s race,
became engaged in doing what was dis-
agreeable to the gods for some good cause.


8. The royal Kuvera, the chief of the
Yakshas and the Rakshas, is the lord of
the wealth of Indra, that master of the
universe.


9. The great ascetic Ushanas, crowned
with Yoga-success, entered the person of
Kuvera, and depriving the lord of wealth
of his liberty by means of Yoga, robbed
him of all his riches. :


10. Seeing his riches taken away from
him, the lord of wealth became highly
displeased. Filled with anxiety, and his
anger also being worked up, he went te
that foremost of gods, vis., Mahadeva.


t1. Kuvera reported the matter to
Shiva of great energy, that first of gods,
fierce and amiable, and endued with vari-
ous forims.


He said :—

12. Ushanas, having  spirttualised
himself by Yoga, entered my bady and
depriving myself of liberty, has taken
away all my riches. Having by Yoga en-
tered my body he has again left it.


13 Heasing these words, Maheshwara
of Supreme Yoga-powers became filled
with ire. His eyes, O king, became blood-
red, and taking up his lance he waited.


14. Having taken up that foremost of
weapons, the great god began to say,—
Where is he? Where is he ?—Meanwhile,
Ushanas, having learnt the purpose of


| Mahadeva from a distance, waited silently.


15. Having learnt the fact of the
anger of the great Maheshwara of superior
Yoga- power, the powerful Ushanas begar
to think as to whether he should go to


| Maheshwara or fly away er remain where


he was.


16. Thinking, with the help of iis


| severe penances, of the great Mahadeva,


Ushanas, of soul crowned with Yoga-
success, put hiniself on the point of Maha-


| deva’s lance.


17. Understanding that Ushanas, whose
penances had been crowned with succese
and whoj had converted himself into the
forny of pure Kuowledge, was staying at
the point of bis lance, the bow-armed
Rudra, bent that weapon with his hand.


18. When the fierce-armed and power-
ful Mahadeva of great energy had thus
€


SHANTI PARVA.


bent his face that weapon carie to be


‘called from that tihe by the name of
inaka,
19. The lord of Uma, seeing Bhargava


thus brought upon the palm of his hand,
opened his mouth. The chief of the gods
then threw Bhargava into his mouth and
‘swallowed hit up.


20. The powerful and great Ushanas
‘of Bhrigu’s race, entering the stomach of
Maheshwara, began to wander there.’’


Yudhisthira said :—


21. “How, O king, could Ushanas
wander within the stomach of that foremost
{god] of superior intelligence? What also
did that great god do while the Brahmana
was within his stomact:.””


Bhishma said :—

22. ‘ Phen Mahadeva of severe vows,
entered the waters and remained there like
fan immovable woodeu stake, O king, for
willions of years.

23-24. His Yoga penances of the aus+
terest type having been over, he rose from
ihe great lake. ‘hen that prime god of
the gods, vis., the eternal Bealman, ap-
proached him, and enquired after the pro-
gress of his penances and well-being. The
vod having the bull for his embiem answer-
ed, saying,—My penances have been weil
practised,


25. Of inconceivable soul, endued with
great intelligence, and ever devoted to
the religion of truth, Shankara saw that
Ushanas within his stomach had become
greater on account of those penenances
of bis.

26. That foremost of Yogins, (vis.,
Ushanas), rich with that wealti of penances
atid the wealth (of Kuvera), shone brightly
jn the three worlds, gifted with great
energy.

27. After this, Mahadeva armed with
Pinaka, that soul of Yoga, once more be-
gan to practice Yoga-meditation, Ushanas,
however, however, stricken with atxiety,
began to roam within the stomach of the
great god,

28. The great ascetic began to sing the
praises of the god from where he was,
desirous of finding an outlet for escape.
But, having stopped all his outlets, Rudra,
prevented him from coining out,


29. The great ascetic Ushanas, however,
O chastiser of enemies, from within Maha-
deva's. stomach repeatedly addressed the
god, saying,-Show nre your kindness,


30. To him Mahadeva said,—Go out
57


449


through my urethra !—He _had.closed .up
all other outlets of his body.


_ 31. Closed on all sides and unable to
find out the outlet pointed out, the ascetic
began to roam hithec and thither, burning.
all the while with Mahadeva’s energy. ~


32.- At fast he found the -outlet .and
came out through it. .On account of this
incident he passed by the name vof Shukca,
and it is for this he also. became wunable to
attain the central point of the sky.


+33. Seeing him come out of his stomacls
aud shining brightly with energy, Bhava,
filled with anger, stood with lance uplifted
in his hand.


34. The goddess Uma then interposed
and forbade the angry lord of all creatures,
wvis., her consort, to kill the -Brahmana.
And on account of Uma’s having thus.pre-
vented her lord from fulfilling his parposes
the ascetic Ushanas became the son of the
goddess.


The goddess said :—

‘This Brahmana no longer -deserves
to be killed by you, He has become.my
son. O god, one who comes out of your
stomach doves not deserve to be_killed
by you.


Bhisma said :— pe oe

36. Pacified _by these words of his wife,
Bhava smiled and said repeatedly these
words, O king, vis.,—Let this one go
wherevet he likes. : ,

37. Bowing to the boon-giving. Mahadeva
and also to his wife the. goddess"Uma, :the
great ascetic Ushanas, gifted with superiac
intelligence, proceeded to the place--he’
chose.

38. Ut have thus desertbed to you, “O
chief of the Bharatas, the story of the great
Bhargava about which you had asked me."


SS anAnneenal


CHAPTER CCXCI.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—«
Continued,


-Yudhishthira said :—


1. “O you of great arms, tell me, aftet
this, what is beneficial for us. O grand-
father, [ aim never satiated with your words
which seem to me like ambrosia.


2. . What are those good acts, O best of
men, by doing which a man succeeds in
obtaining what’ is for his greatest -good,
both in this world, and in the next, O giver
vf boons,” <a


459


Bhishma said :—

3. * Regarding it § shall describe to you
what the celebrated king Janaka had en-
quired, ity days of yore, of. the great
Parashara.


4. What is beneficial for all ereatures
both in this world and the next? Do
you teft me what should be known, by ali
about it.


5. Thus accosted Parashara, endued
with great ascetic merit and conversant
with the ordinances of every religion, said
these words, desirous of fayouring the king.


Parashara said :—


6. Virtue acquired by acts is of supreme
benefit both in this world and the next,
The sages of old have said that there is
nothing higher than virtue.


7. By accomplishing the sacred duties
a man becomes honored in heaven, the
virtue, again, of embodied creatures, O best
of kings, consists in the ordinances on the
subject of acts. All good men -belonging
to the ‘several modes of life, fixing their
faith on. virtue, perform their respective
duties. :


8. Four modes of life, O child, -have
been laid down in this wold. Wherever
men live the means of maintenance come
to them of themselves.


9. Doing by different. means virtuous or
sinful acts, living creatures, when dissolved
into their five constituent elements, attain
to various ends,


10. As vessels of white brass, when
steeped in fiquified gold or silver, get the
hue of these metals, so a hving ¢reature,
who is entirely dependant upon the acts
of his pristine lives, takes his color from
the nature of those acts.


at. Nothing can originate without a
seed, No one can acquire happiness with-
out having performed acts capable of bring-
ing on happiness, When one’s body is
dissolved, hé succeeds iv acquiring happi-
ness. only on account of the good acts of
pristine lives,


52, ‘Lhe sceptic argues, O child, say-
ing,—I do not see that anything in this
world is the result of destiny or the virtuous
and sinful deeds of pristine lives. In-
ference cannnot settle the existence or oper-
ation of destiny. ‘he gods, the Gandhar-
vas and the Danavas have become what
they are on account of their own nature.


13. People never recollect in their next
fires the acts done by them in pristine
oms. For explaining the acquisition of
{ruits 1 any particular life people seldom


MAHABHARATA.


name the four sorts of acts alleged to have
been performed in pristine lives.


14. The declarations having the Vedas
for their authority have been made for
guiding the conduct of men in his world,
and for tranquillizing the minds of men.
These, O child, cantvot represent the say-
ing of truly wise men.


15. This opinion is wrong. In sooth,
one acquires the fruits of whatever among
the four sorts of acts one does with the
eye, the mind, the tongue, and muscles.


16. As the fruit of his acts, O' king,
a person sometimes acquires happiness
wholly, sometimes misery in the same way,
and sometimes happiness and misery united
together. Whether virtuous or sinful, acts
are never destroyed.


17. Sometimes, O child, the happines¢
consequent on good acts remains concealed
and covered in such a way that it does not
shew itself in the case of the person who
is sinking in life’s ocean till his sorrows
disappear.


18. After sorrow has been dissipated,
one begins to enjoy (the fruits of) his good
acts. And know, O king, that upon the
exhaustion of the fruits of good deeds,
those of. sinful ones begin to throw thenr-
selves.


19. Self-controt, forgiveness, patience,
energy, contentment, truthfulness, modesty,
abstention from injury, freedom from the
evil practices called Vyasana, and clever-
ness,—these yield happiness.


20. No creature is perpetually subject
to the fruits of his good or bad acts. The
wise man should always try to collect and
concentrate his. mind.


2r. One never has to enjoy or endure
the good and bad deeds of another. In-
deed, one enjoys and endures the fruits of
only those acts that he does oneself.


22. The petson who renounces both
happiness: and misery walks along a parti-
cular path, Those men, however, O king,
who allow themselves to be attached to all
worldly objects, walk along an entirely
different path.


23 A person should not himself do that
act which, if done by another, will bring
censure on him. Indeed, by doing an act
that one censures in others, one meets with
ridicule. :


24-25. A Kshatriya shorn of courage,
a Brahinana who takes every sort of food,,
a Vaishya shorn of exertion, a Shudra who
is idle, a learned person without good con-
duct, one of high birth but shorn of righte-
aus conduct, a Brahmana fallen away from


SHANTI PARVA.


truth, a woman whois unchaste and wicked, |


a Yogin endued with attachments, one that
cooks food for his own self, an ignorant
person employed in making a discourse, a
kingdom without a king, and a king who
cherishes no love for his subjects and who
is shorn of Yoga,—these all, O king, are
deserving of pity,


CHAPTER CCXCIL


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
: Continued.


Parashara said :—


t. That man, who, having got this car,
ets., his body endued with mind, goes on,
restraining with the reins of knowledge the
horses of the objects of the senses, should
certainly be ;considered as an intelligent
one.


2. The homage hy a person whose mind
depends on itself and who has renounced
the means of livelihood, is worthy of high
praise,—that homage, namely, O twice
born one, which is the result of instructions
received from one who has succeeded in
getting over acts, but not acquired from the
mutual discussion of met in the same state
of progress.


3. Having got the allotted period of fife,
O king, with such difficulty, one should
wot diminish it. On the other hand, man
should always try, by righteous deeds, for
his gradual advancement.


4. Among the six different colors that
individuat Soul attains at different periods
of his existence, he who falls away froma
superior color deserves blame and censure.
Hence, one who has acquired the result of
good deeds should acc in jsuch a way as
to avoid all acts sullied by the quality of
Darkness.


5: Man attains to a superior color by
pious deeds. Unable to acquire a superior
color for such acquisition is highly difficult,
@ person, by doing sinful-deeds anly kills
bimsetf. :


6. All sinful deeds that are perpetrated
unconsciously or in ignorance are destroyed.
by penances. A sinful deed, however, that
is committed knowingly, yields much
sorrow. ;


9. ence, one should never’ commit
sinful deeds which have for their fruit only
sorrow,


8, The intelligent man would never do
a sinful act even if it produce the great-


45t


est advantage, just as a person who is pure
would never touch a Chandala. .. ,


g. How miserable is the fruit  behotd
of sinful deeds. Through sin the very
vision of the sinner becomes perverse, and
he mistakes his body and its unstable ac-
companiments for the Soul,

10. That foolish man who does not suc.
ceed in following Renunciation in this. world
becomes stricken with great grief when he
goes to the next world.


11. An uncolored cloth, when dirty, can
be purified, but not a piece of cloth which
is dyed with black ; se, O king, listen to me
with care, is it the case with si.


12, That man who, having knowingly
perpetrated a sin, acts righteously for
expiating that sin, has to enjoy and endure
the fruits of his good and bad deeds
separately.


13. The Brahmavadins fold, under the
authority of what has bern sanctioned in
the Vedas, that all acts of infury commit-
ted in ignorance are wade pood by virtuous.
acts.


14. Asin, however, that is committed
knowingly is never repaired by righteous~
ness, Thus the twice-born Brahmavadins
who are conversant with the scriptures of
Brahman.


1s. But I hold that whatever acts are
done, be they righteous or sinful, be they
done Knowingly or otherwise, they rémain |
till their fruits are enjoyed or endured.


16. Whatever acts are done by the
mind with full deliberation, yield, according
to theit grossness or Subtility, fruits which,
ace gross or subtile, és


17, Those acts, however, O you of
tighteous soul, which are fraught with
great injury, if done in ignorance do, for-.
sooth, produce consequences which lead to’
hell, with this difference that are dispro-
portionate in point of gravity to the acts
that produce them.


18. As to those acts of the gods ,or
repeated ascetics, a pious man should never,
do their like or,. informed of them, should
never censure them.


19, That man, who, reflecting with his
mind,’ O king, and ascertaining bis own
ability, performs pious -deeds, forsvatt,
acquires what is for bis well-being.


20. Water poured into an unbaked
pitchers gradually becomes less and. less
and finally disappears altogether. f kept,
however, in a baked vessel, it remains with-
out its quantity being decreased. Similarly,
acts done without thought with the help. of


4527


the* understanding do not become whote-
some; while acts done with judgment re-
nrain with unmitigated excellence and pro-
duce happiness as their result.


Z1—22, Ifinto a vessel containing water
other’ water be poured, the original water
increases in quamtity; so all acts done
with judgment, be they just or otherwise,
only increase one’s stock of virtue.

a3. <A king should subjugate his enemies
and all who seek to assert their superiority,
and” he should properly rule and protect
his'subjects. One should ignite his sacred
fires and pour libations on them in various
sacrifices, and retiring into the woods-in
either his middle or old age, should live
ahece’


24. Gifted with self-control, and ‘pos-
sessed of righteous conduct, one should
regard aff creatures: as his ownself, One
should again respect: his superiors. By
the practice of truth and of good conduct,
O king, one is sure Co acquire-happiness.


ee amad


CHAPTER’ CCXCHEL.


- (MOKSHADHRAMA: PARVA),—
Continued,’


Parashara said :—’

x. Nobody in this world does gand ta‘
another. Nobody makes gifts to others,
All persons are seen to act for theit own
selves. *


2." People are seen to abandon their
very parents and their uterine brothers
when these cease to love them. What need
be said’¢hen of relatives of other grades.


“g. Gifts to a distinguished person and
acceptanc¢e of the gifts made by a distin.
guished person both produce equal merit.
OF these two acts, however, the ntaking of
a gift is superior to the acceptance*there-
of, :


4. That wealth which is gained by fair
means and is multiplied by fair means,
should be protected with care for the sake
of acquiring virtue. This is an accepted
truth.


5 One desirous of gaining virtue,
should never gain riches by means invol-
ving injary to others. One should perform
his acts according to his power, without
zealously seeking riches.


6. By giving water, whether cold or
heated by fire, with a devoted mind, toa
(thirsty) guest, according to the best of his
night, one acquires the merit-of the act of
giving food to a bungry man.


MAHABHARA HBA.


7. The great Rantideva acquired success”
in all the wortds by adoring the ascetics.
with offerings of only roots and fruits and
leaves.


8 The royal son of Shivi also acquired
the highest regions of happiness by having
pleased the Sun-god along with his com-
panion with offerings of the same sort.


. All men, by being born, become
indebted to gods, guests, servants, Pitris,
and their own selves. Every one should,
therefore, do his best for satisfying those,
debts.


To. One frees oneself from his debt to the
great Rishis by studying the Vedas. One
satisfies his debts tothe gods by celebra-
ting sacrifices. By performing the rites of
the Shraddha one satisfies the debts to the
Pitris. One satisfies the debt to his fellow.
men by doing good to them.


tt. One satisfies the debts he owes to.
one’s own self by listening toa Vedic recita-
tfons and reflecting on their meaning, by.
eating the remnants of sacrifices, and by.
supporting his body. One should duly:
perform all the acts, from the beginnjng,
that he owes to his servants.


12. ‘Fhongh shorn of wealth, men are
seen to attain to success by great exertions.
Ascetics by duly adoring the gods, and by.
duly pouring libations of clarified butter on
the sacred fire, have been seen to acquire
ascetic success,


13. Richika’s son became the son of
Vishwamitra. By worshipping the gods
who have shares in sacrificial offerings,
with Richs; (he acquired success in aftec
life).

14. Ushanas~ became Shukra by having
pleased the god of gods. Indeed, by sing+
ing the praises of the: goddess (Uina}, he
sports jn the sky, in great effulgence.


13+-17. Then, again, Asita and Devala,
and Narada and Parvata, and Kakshivat,
and Jamadagni’s son Rama, and landya
possessed of purified soul, and Vashishtha,
and Jamadagni, and Vishwamitra, and
Atri, and Bharadwaja, and Harishmashru,
and Kundadhara, and “Shrutashravas,—
these great Rishis, by worshipping Vistny
with concentrated minds with the help of -
Richs, and by penances, acquired success”
through the grace of that great god gifted
with intelligence.


18. Many undeserving: men, by wore
shipping that good god, won great dis-
tinction, Owe should not seek far advance-
ment by committing any wicked or censure
able deed.


19. That- wealth which acquired by fai
means is true weaith. Fie on that wealth


SHANTY PARVA,”


however, which ‘is acquired by unfair
means. Virtue is eternal. It should never,
in this world, be renounced, from desire of
riches,


20. That pious person who keeps his.
sacred fire and offers his daity adorations
to the gods is considered as the foremost
of righteous persons. Alt the Vedas, O
foremost of kings, are established on the
three sacred fires.


2t. That Brahmana is said to possess
the sacred fire whose acts exist in full. It
is better to at once leave off the sacred fire
than to keep it, abstaining from acts,


22. The sacred fire, the mother, the
father who has begotten, and the preceptor,
© foremost men, should all be duly attended
and served with humility.


23. Thatman, who, renouncing all feel-.
ings of pride, humbly attends upon and
serves them who are venerable for age,
who is endued with learning and shorn of
lust, who regains all creatures equally with
an eye of love, who has no, riches, who is
tighteous in his acts, and who is shorn of
the desire of inflicting any kind of injury,
that truly respectable man is adored in this
world by the good and pious,


——e


CHAPTER CCXCIV.
(MOKSHADHRAMA PARVA).—


Continued.


Parashara said :—


1. The towest order, it is preper, shoutd
derive their maintenance from the three
other orders. Such service, rendered with
love and respect, makes them pious.

2.
not engaged in service, he should not still
engage himself in any other occupation.


Truly, he should take up service as his


accupatior.


3- In my opinion, it is proper for them
to’ mix, under all circumstances, with good

men’ devoted to virtue, but never with the
wicked:


4. As in the Eastern hills, jewels and
metals blaze with greater effulgence on
account of their nearness to the Sun, so
the lowest order shines on account of their
association with the good.

5. A piece of white cloth assumes that
color with which it is dyed. Such’ is the
case with Shudras,

6. Therefore, one should also attach
- him to all good qualities but never ta bad-


If the ancestors of any Shudra were”


| Being called Dhatri


453


qualities, ‘Fhe life of human beings in this’
world is fickle and transitory.

pe That wise man who, in happiness as,
also in misery, acquires only what 1s good,
is considered as a true observer of the
scriptures,


& That man who is gifted with intelli-
gence. would never do an act which is
alienated from virtue, however great may
the advantages be of that act. Indeed,
such an act is not considered as truly.
wholesome.


9. Fhat lawless king who, taking thous’
sands of kine from their lawful ownees,
gives them away acquires. no, fruit save,
an empty sound. On the other hand, he


commits. the sin, of theft.


The Self-create. at first created. the
held in universak
esteem. Dhatri created a son who was
engaged in, maigtaining all. the worlds.


11. Adoring that god, the Vaishya en-
gages for the medns of his ‘support,’ in,
agriculture and the tending, of cattle. ‘The
Kshatriyas should undertake the task of
Protecting all the othee classes. The Brahe:
manas should only enjoy.


12. As regards the Shudras, they should:
take up the task of humbly and honestly.
collecting together the articles that are to,
be offered in sacrifices, and in cleaning.
altars and other places where sacrifices are
to. be celebrated. If each order acts in,
this way, virtue weuld not suffer any,
decrease, -


13. Hf virtue is preserved in its full, alk
creatures inhabiting the Earth would be’
happy. Seeing the happiness of all creatures,
on Barth, the gods in Reaves become filled:
with gladness. ,


14—15, ‘Hence, that king, who, accord-
ing tothe duties ‘laid down for his order,
protects the other classes, becomes worthy’
of respect. © Similarly, the -Brahmana who
is employed in studying the scriptures, the.
Vaishya who is engaged in acquiring
tiches, and the Shudra. who is always en~
gaged in serving the three other classes,
with rapt attention, become objects of re-
vetence, By acting in other ways, O king,
each order ig said to deviate {rom virtue,


16. Keeping aside gifts by thousands,
even twenty cowries that one may give,
painfully, having acquired them lEbseousiye
will yield great benefit.


10.


37. Those persons, O king, who make
gifts to Brahmanas after respecting them
duly, reap excellent fruits proportionate to’
thase gifts.


8. That gift is highly: valued which


454


MAHABHARATA.


the donor males after seeking out the , such circumstances cap never pass for


donee and respecting him properly,
gift is middling which the donor makes
upon being prayed for it. .

19. That gift, however, which ig made
contemptously and without any respect, is
sajd to.be very inferior, ‘Ihig is what the
truthful sages say.

29, While sinking in this ocean of life,
man shquid always try to cross that ocean
by: warioys means, Indeed, he should so
exert himself that he might be released
from the fetters of this. world.


at. The Beahmana shines by self-con-
trol ; the Kshatriya by victory ; the Vaishya
by riches; while the Shudra always shines
in glory through clever serving.


——


oe


CHAPTER CCXCV.
(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—


Continued,


Parashara said :—
_t—2. Inthe Brahmana, wealth gained
by acceptance of gifts, in the Ksharriya


that acquired by: victory in battle, in the |
Vaishya that acquired by performing the |


duties laid down for his order, and in the
Shudra that acquired by serving the three
other orders, however small it may be, is
worthy of praise, and when spent for the
acquisition of virtue yields great benefits.
The Sbudra is said to be the cpnstant
secvitor of the three othec orders.


3. l€the Brahmana, when hard-pressed
for a living, performs the duties of either
the Kshatriya or the Vaishya, he does’ not
fall off. from virtue. When, however, the
Brahmana performs the duties of the lowest
order, then does he certainly fall off.


4. When the Shudra is unable to, secure
his living by service of the three other
orders, then tt is lawful for him, to, folow
trade, tending of cattle, and the practice of
the mechanical arts,

5—~6. Appearance on the stage and dis-
gutsing oneself in various forms,. exhibition
of puppets;. the sale of spirits and meat,


and trading in iron and leather, should |:


never be adopted for purposes of a living
by one who had never before been engaged
in those callings every one of which is
regarded as censurable in the world. We
have heard that if oné engaged in them can
renounce them, he acquires great merit.

7. When one who has become success-
ful in life acts sinfully on accotnt of his
mind being filled with pride, his acts under


That f authority,


8. It is heard. in the Purans that for-
merly mankind were self-controlled, -that
they valued virtue greatly, that the prac-
tices they followed for livelihood were all.
agreeable to propriety and the injunctions
laid down in the scriptures; and that the ,
only punishment that was necessary for
chastising, them when they did wrong was
merely the deprecation of their deeds.


9. At the time ot which we speak, O.
king, Virtue, aad nothing else, was much
praised among men. Having achieved
great progress in virtue, men in those days
adored’ onty all good qualities that they
saw.


10. The Asuras, however, QO child, could
not bear that virtue which prevailed in the
world. Multiplying the Asuras entered
the bodies of men.


11, Then was pride generated in men,
which is so destructive af victue. From
pride originated arrogance, and from arra-
gance originated anger,

12., When men thus became overwhelm-
ed with anger, modesty and shame dis-
appeared from them, and then they were
possessed by carelessness,


13. Afflicted by carelessness, they could
no longer see as before, and as the conse-
quence thereof they began to assail one
another and thereby gain riches without
any-compunction. ~


14. When men became such, the punish
ment of mere depreciation on transgressors,
could produce no effect. Men, showing na,
respect for either the gods or Brahmanas,
began to indulge their senses to their fill.


15. At that time the godsrepaired to,
that foremost of gods, viz., Shiva, possess~
ed of patience, of multiform aspect, and.
endued with the foremost of qualities and,
sought his. protection, ?


16. The gods gave him their con-
joined energy, and therenpon the great
. god, with a. single arrow killed on the
| Barth those three. Asuras, viz., Desire,
Anger, and Cupidity, who were stay-
‘ing in the sky, along with. their very.
- dwellers.


17. The dreadful king of those Asuras, '
endued with terrific prowess, who bad
i struck the gods with terror, was also killed,
. by Mahadeva armed with the lance.


18. When this king of the Asuras was.
killed men once more gained their proper
Natures, and once more began to study
the Vedas and the other Scriptures as in
| days of yore. e


SHANT! PARVA.


455


ty. Then thé seven ancient Rishié carfie | desite, and when alt Darkness is removed!


forward and installed Vasava as the king
of the gods and the ruler of heaven. And
they took vpon themselves the task of hold-
ing the rod of punishment over mankind.


_ 20. After the seven Rishis carhe king
Viprithu and many other kings, all belong-
ing tothe Kshatriya order for separately
ruling separate classes of human beings.


zt. ‘here were, lh those ancient tinted,
certain elderly men from whose minds all
wicked feelings did not disappear.


22. Hence, on account of that wicked
$tate of their minds and of those incidents
connected with it, there appeared many
kings of dreadful prowess who bexan to
perform only such acts as were fit for
Asuras.


23. Those human beings, who are very
foolish follow those wicked acts, establish
them as authorities, and practise théeny to
this day.

24. Therefore, O king, I say, you, having
reflected properly with the help’ of the
scriptures, that one should avoid all acts
that are fraught with injury or malice and
try to acquire a knowledge of the Soul.


25. The man endued with wisdom would
not seek riches for the petformance of
religious rites by unfair and immoral ways.

ealch acquired by sucly means can never
yield benefits.


26 Doyou, then, become a Kshatriya


of thiskind! Oo you restrain your senses,
be kind to your fiiends, and cherish, accord-


ing to the duties of your order, your sub-:


jects, servants, and children:


27. Through the union of both pros-
perity and adversity, there arise: friend-
ships and enmities. Thousands and thou-
sands of existences are continually re-
volving, and in every mode of individuat
Soul's existence these must take place.


28. Therefore, be attached
qualities of every sort, but never to faults.
Such is the nature of good qualities that
i? che most foolish person, shorn of every


virtue, hears hiriself praised for any good:


quality, he becomes filled with joy.


29. Virtue and siw exist, O king, only:


among men. “These do not: exist among
other creatures,


30. One should, therefore, whether in
need of food and other necessaries of life
or above such need, be of virtuous dis-
position, acquire knowledge, .always con-
sider all creatures as his own self, and
abstain totally from inflicting any kiod of
injury.


3t. When one’s min@ becomes shorn of


to good


froni it, it is them that one acquires what
i8 duspicious.


CHAPTER CCXCVI.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).-«
Continued,


Parashara said :—


1. I have now described to you the
ordained duties of a householder. 1 shat
now describe to you the ordinances about
penances, Hear me as I describe that.
subject.


2, It is generally seen, O king. that
on account of sentiments fraught with
Darkness and Iynorance, the sense of mine
begotten by attachment, originates in’ the
heart of the householder.


3. Becoming a householder, one acquires
kine, fields, wealth of diverse sorts, wives
children, and servants,


4. One who follows this mede of life,
cominually casts lis eye upon -these ob-
jects. Under these circumstances, one’s
attachments and aversions multiply, and
one ceases to consider unreal possessions
as eternal and indestructible, .


5. When a person becomes possessed
by attachment and aversion, and gives way
to the control of worldly objects, the desire
of enjoyment then seizes him, originating
from carelessness, O king.


6. Considering that person as blessed:
who has the Jargest share of enjoyments in
this world, the man devoted to enjoyment
does not, on account of his attachment
thereto, see that there is any other happi-
ness save what depends upon the gratifica-
on of the senses. :


7. ‘Overwhelmed with cupidity that
originates from such attachment, he then
tries to multiply the number of his rela-
tives and‘attendants, and for pleasing these
latter he tries to increase his wealth by
every means itv his’ power. ;

8. Filled with affection for children, such
a person then commits, for thé sake of


_ atquiring; riches; evil’ deeds,and yields to


grief if. bis wealth be lost. : ;


9. Having acquired honors and always
guarding against the defeat of his plans,
be follows such means as‘ would satisly his
desire of enjoyment. At last he meets with
desttuction as the inevitable result of th


: Py


conduct he follows.


10. It is well known, however, that true


456


happiness is theirs who are endued with
intelligence, who are Brahmavadins, who try
to perform only auspicious and beneficial
acts, and who abstain from all acts which
ae Optionat and originate from desire
only.


11. From loss of all such objects in
which are centred our affections, from loss
of riches, O king, and. from the oppression
of physical diseases and mental anguish,
a person falls into despair.


12. From this despair originates an awak-
ening of the soul. From such ati awaken-
itig proceeds stiidy of the Scriptures. From
contemplation of the meaning of the Scrip-
tures, QO king, one sees the Value of
penance.


13. A person endued with the knowledge
of what is ésseiitial and what. aécidental,
O king, is very rare,-a man who tries td
practise petiances, under the conviction that
the happiness ore enjoys from the posses-
sion of such agreeable objects as wives
and children britigs on ultimately. atisery.


tq. Penances, O cliild, are for all.. They
are ordained for even the lowest drder of
then, Penances lead the self-controlled
than who has mastered all his senses to the
way to heave, -

15. tt was through ‘pettances that the
powerful Lord of all creatures, O king,
practising vows at particular intervals,
Created all existent objects, .

16—17. ‘The Aditya's, the Vasus, the
Rudras, Aghi, the Ashiwins, the Maruts,
the VishwedeVas, the Saddhyas, the Pitris,
the Maruts, the Yakslias, the Rakshasas,
the Gandharvas, the Siddhas and the other
inhabitants of heaven, and indeed, all other
celestials whatever, Q child, have all be-
come successful through their penances,


18. Those Brahmanas whom Brahaian
created at the béginniny, succeeded through
their penances in honoring not the Earth
alone but the heaven also in which they
moved about at pleasure.


19. In this world of mén, they who
are kings, and those others who are house-
holders bora in high families, have all
become what they are on account of their
pénarices.


20. The sitken dresses they put on the
excellent ornaments that decorate . their
persons, the animals and vehicles they ride,
and the seats they use ate all the outcoine
of their penances.


_ 21, Thousands of many charming and
beautiful damsels, that they enjoy, and
their residence in palaces, are all on account
vf their penances,


MAHABHARAFA,


.22. The righteous enjoy various sort3
‘of costly beds and sweet viands.

23. There is nothing in the three worlds,
O scorcher of enemies, that penances cans
not bring it. Even those who are shorn of
true knowledge acquire Renunciation theit
penanices.

24. Whetliér in cich circumstances or
miserable, a person Should renounce cupi-
dity, meditating on the scriptures, with the
help of his mind atid understanding, O
Best of kings. :

'25. Discontent produces misery, Cupi-
dity brings on stupefaction of the senses.
The senses being stupefied, one’s wisdoni
is lost like knowledge ot kept up by con-
tinued application.

26. When one’s wisdom is lost, he can=
Hot discriminate what is proper from what
is improper. Hence, when one’s happiness
is destroyed he should practise the austerest
of penances,

.27. What is agreeable is called happi-
ness. What is disagreeable is called misery.
Happiness is the outcotie of penances prac-
tised. When they are not practised, the
outcome is niisery. Sée the fruits of prac-
tising and abstaining from penances.

28. By practisiig pure penances, people
always enjoy auspicious Consequences of
every sort; enjoy all good things, and
acquite great farite. ;
_29. He, however, who, by abandoning
(pure penances), tindertakes petiances froni,
desire of feuit, suffers from many disagree-
able consequences, and disgrace atid sorrow
of all sorts, as, the fruits thereof, all of


which originate from worldly possessions.


go. Despite the desirability of pracs
tising virtue, penances, and gifts, the desiré
for doing all sorts of forbidden acts origi-
nates in hig tind. By thus perpetrating
various sorts of sinful deeds, he goes té
hell.


gr. That jerson, O btést of ten, who,
in bath happinesss and misery, does deviate
from the duties ordained for him, is said
to have the scriptures for his eye,


32. Itis said that the pleasure one gets
from the gratification of bis senses of touch,
tongue, sight, smell, aid hearing, O king;
lasts only so lotig as an arrow shot off thé
bow takes in falling down upon the Earth.

38- Upon the términation of that pleas
sure, which is fickle, one suffers the most
acute pain. It' is only the senseless that dd
not Speak highly of happiness of Livera:
tion which Is peerless.

34. Seeing the misery cotisequent upon
the gratification of the senses, the. wise


oy


SHANTI


GtiltIvate the virtties of tranquillity and Self-
tontrol for the purpose of acquiring Libera-
tion. On account of their righteous conduct,
riches and pleasure can never succeed in
afflicting them.


35. Householders may, without any
compunction, enjoy riches and other poss-
essions which are acquired without Exer-
tion. About the duties of their order, I
think, they should satisfy them with the
help of Exertion.


36. The practice of those who are
honored, who are born in high families,
and who have their eyes always turned
towards the meaning of the Scriptures, is
incapable of being followed by those who
are sinful and who have uncontrolled
minds.


37- All acts that ate done by man under
the influence of pride, meet with destruc-
tion. ‘Therefore, there is no other act, for
the respectable and the truly righteous, in
this world to do than penance.


38. As regards, those householders,
however, who are addicted to acts, they
should, with their whole hearts, perform
acts. Following the duties of their order,
O king, they should with diligence and
assiduity celebrate sacrifices and other
religious rites.


39. Indeed, as all rivers, male and
female, go in the end to the Ocean, so men
belonging to all the other o:dets have the
householder for their refuge. :


CHAPTER CCXCVIIL


(MOKHADHARMA PARVA).,—~
Continued.


Janaka said :—


1. Whence, O ereat Rishi, does this
difference of color arise among men of the
different orders ? 1 wish to know this.
‘Tell me this, O foremost of speakers.


2. The Shrutis say that the offspring one
begets is his own self. Originally sprung
from Bratman, all the inhabitants of the
Earth should have been Brahmanas. Sprung
from Brahmanas, why have men beyun to
perform works distinguished from those of
Brahmanas. ,


Parashara said :—

3—4. It is as you say, Oking! The
offspring begotten by one is none else
than the begetter himself. Because men
have deviated from penance, this distribu-
tion into classes of different colors. has


58 :


PARVA. 457
taken place. When the soil and the seed
1s good, the offspring produced becomes
meritorious. If, however, the soil and seed
are infetior, the offspring that will be born
will be inferior.


§. Persons well read in the scriptures
know that when the Lord of all creatures
began to create the worlds, some creatures
originated ftom his month, some from his
arms, some from his thighs, and some from
his feet, :


6. Those who came out of his mouth,
O child, were called Brahmanas. ‘Those
who originated from his arms were called
Kshatriyas, Those, O king, sprang from
his thighs were the rich class called the
Vaishyas. And, lastly, those who were
born of his feet were the serving class, vis.,
the Shidras.


3y. Only these four orders of men, O
king, were thus created, ‘They who belong
to classes besides these are said to have
Originated from an intermixture of these.


8—g. The Kshatciyas called Atirathas,
Amvashthas, Ugras, Vaidehas, Shwapa-
kas, Pukkasas, Stenas, Nishadas, Sutas,
Magadhas, Ayogas, Karanas, Vratyas,
and Chandalas, OQ monarch, have all
originated from the four original castes by
intermixtuce with one another.


Janaka said :—


10. When all have originated from
Brahman alone, how did human _ beings
become divergent of race? O best of
ascetics, numberless diversity of races is
seen in this world.


tt. How could men devoted to penances
acquire the dignity of Brahmanas, though
of indiscriminate origin? Indeed, those
born in pure wombs and those in impure,
all became Brahmanas.


Parashara said :—


tz. O king, the status of great persons
who succeeded in purifying their souls by
penances could not be regarded as affected
by their low births,


13. Great Rishis, O monarch, by beget-
ting children in indiscriminate wombs, gave
them the dignity of Rishis by means of
their power of asceticism.


14—16. My grandfather Vashishtha,
Rishyashringa, Kashyapa, Veda, Tandya,
Kripa, Kakshivat, Kamatha, and others,
and Yavakrita, O king, and Drona, that
foremost of speakers, and Ayu, and
Matanga and Datta, and Drupada, and
Matsya,—all these, O king of the Videhas,
gained their respective positions through
penance as the means.


458


t7. Originally only four families arose,
O king, viz., Angiras, Kashyapa, Vashish-
tha and Bhriga.
. 18 On account of acts and behaviour,
O. king, many other families ¢ame into
existence in time. The names of those
families have originated from the penances
of those who have. founded thent, Good
people use them.


Janaka said :-~


19. Telt me, O holy one, the especial
_ duties of the several castes. elt me also
what their common duties are. You know
everything,


Parashara said :+-

go. Taking gifts, officiating at the
sacrifices of others, and the teaching of
pupils, O ling, are the especial duties of
the Brahmanas. The protection of the
other castes ig the speciaf duty of the
Kshatriya.


21, Agriculture, ¢atthe-tending,
trade are the duties of the Vaishyas. While
service of the oe) twice«born classes is
the duty, O king, of the Shuadras,


92. E have now tokd you what the
a duties are of the four castes, O
ing.
what the common duties are of all the four
castes, ‘

23-~24.
injury, carefulness, giving to others what
is due to them, Shraddhas in honor of
departed manes, hospitality to guests,
truthfulness, subjugation of anger; con-
tentedness with one’s own married wives,
Purity, freedom from maliee, knowledge of
Self, and Renuynciation,—these duties, O
king are common to all the castes.


25. Brahmanas, Kshatriyas, and Vai:
shyas,—these are the three twice-born
orders. They have all an equal right to the
Performance of these duties, O foremost of
men.


26. These three castes following the
duties other than those sanctioned for
them, suffer indignity, O king, as they go
up and acquire great merit by taking for
their model some righteous individual of
their respective chasses who duly satisfies
his own duties.


27. Vhe Shudra never falls down; nor
is he worthy of any of the rites of re-
generation. The course of duties origina-
ting from the Vedas is not his. He is not
interdieted, however, from practising the
thirteen duties which are common to alk
the castes.


and [|


"and birth, are sources of demerit.


Compassion, abstention from |:


MAHABHARATA.


28. O king of the Videhas, Brahmanag


‘learned in the Vedas, O king, regard a


(virtuous) Shudra as equal to Brahmad
himself. 1, however, O king, regard


| such a Shudra as the effulgent Vishnu of
| the universe, the foremost one in all the


worlds.


29. Persons of the lowest caste, desiring
to root out the evil passions, may follow
the conduct of the good; and, while so
acting, they may acquire great merit by
performing all rites that lead to advances


| ment, omitting the Mantras which are to
| be uttered by the 'other castes while per-


forming the self-same ceremonies.
30. Wherever persons of the lowest


“¢aste follow the conduct of the good, they


succeed in acquiring happiness on account
of which they are able to pass their time


Fin happiness both im this world and the


next.


Janaka said :—

31. Y great ascetic, is man sullied by
his deeds or is he stained by the order or
class in which he is born? A doubt has
arisen in my mind. You should expound
this to me.


: Parashara said :—
Hear, now, O child, as § tell you |


Forsooth, O king, both, v¢s., acts


32.
Listen:


now to their difference,
33. ‘That mat who, though sullied by


‘birth, does not commit sin, abstains from
: sin notwithstanding birth and acts.


34. H, however, a person’ of superior
birth perpetrates censurable deeds, such
acts pollute him. Hence, of the two, visi,
acts and-bitth, acts pollute man.


Janaka said :—

33. What are those righteous acts itt
this world, © best of all twice-born ones, the
accomplishment of which does not inffict


| any injury upon other creatures ?


Parashara said :-—

36. Hear from me, O king, about what
you ask, vig., those acts free from’ injury
which alway réscue mans


37-38. Those who, keeping aside their
domestic fires, have freed themselves fronr
all worldly attachments, become freed fronr
all anxieties. Gradually getting up step
by step, in the path of Yoga, they at last
see the stage of highest happiness, Gifted
with faith and humility, always practising
self-control, possessed of keen intelligence,
and abstaining from: all acts, they acquire


| eternal happiness,


SHANTI


2g All classes of men, O king, by
duly doing virtuous acts, by speaking the
trath, aad by abstaining from sin, in this
world, go up to heaven. There is no doubt
in this.


CHAPTER CCXCVIHIIE.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).
Continued.


Parashara said :—~


1. The father, the friends, the precep-
tors, and the wishes of the preceptors of
men who are shorn of devotion, are unable
to give to those men the merits derivable
from devotion. Only they who are firmly
devoted to such elders, who speak what is
agreeable to them, who seek their well-
being, and who are submissive to them in
conduct, can acquire the merit of devotion.


2. The father is the highest of gods
with his children. {t is said that the
father is superior to the mother. ‘The ac-
quirement of Knowledge is considered as
the highest acquisition. They who have
subjugated the objects of the senses, acquire
what is highest,


3. That Kshatriya prince, who going to
the battle-field, receives wounds aiid fiery
arrows shooting in all directions and burns
therewith, certainly goes to regions which
are unattainable by the very gods and,
acrived there, enjoys the happiness of
heaven in perfect contentment.


4 A Kshatriya should not; O king,
strike one who is fatigued, or one who is
terrified, for one who has been disarmed, or
one who is weeping, or one who is reluc-
tant to fight, or ons who is unequipt with
mail and cars and horse and infantry, or
one who has ceased to exert in the fight, or
one who is ill, or oné who cries for quarter,
or one who is of tender years, or one who
is old.


.5» A Kshatriya should, in battle, fight
one of his order, who is equipt with mail
and cars and herse and infantry, who is
ready for battle, and who is a compeer.


6. Death at the hands of one who is
equal or of a superior is praiseworthy, - but
not that at the hands of one that is low,
or of one who is a coward, or of one who
isawretch. This is well known.

7. Death at the hands of one who is
sinful, oc of one who is of low birth and
wicked conduct, O king, is infamous and
leads to hell.

8. One whose lease of life has run out,
cannot be saved by any body. Likewise,


PARYVA,


one whose lease of life has not run out can
never be killed by any one.


9. One shouid prevent his affectionate
elders from doing to him such acts as are
done by menials, as also all such acts as
can injure others, One should never wish
to extend his own life by taking the lives of
others.


10. When they sacrifice their lives, it is


lJandable for all householders observing the”


duties of men living in sacred ptaces to
give up their lives on the banks of sacred
rivers,


11. When one’s lease of life is over, his
body dissolved into the five elements.
Sometimes this occurs suddenly and some
times it is brought about by (natural)
causes.


12.
destroys it himself, becomes invested with
another body of a similar nature. Though
set on the path of Liberation, he yet be-
comes a traveller and acquires another
body like a person going from one room
into another, 2


459°


He who, having obtained a body,


13. About such a man’s attainment of a -


second body the only cause is his acci+
dental death.
That new body which embodied creatures
obtain, comes into existence and becomes
attached to Rudras and Pishachas.


14—15. Learned men, conversant with
spiritual science say that the body is a
compound of arteries and sinews and bones
and much repulsive and impure matter
and a compound of essences, and the senses
and objects of the senses born of desire,
all having an outer cover of skin close to
them. Shorn of beauty and other ac-
complishments, this compound, through
force of the desires of a pristine life,
assumes a human form.

16. Left off by the owner, the body


becomes inanimate and motionless. In+
deed, when the principal ingredients return


to their respective natures, the body is


mixed up with the dust. .


17.
body reappears under circumstances deter
mined by its deeds.” Indeed, O king of


the Videhas, under whatever circumstances.
this body is dissolved, its next birth, deter- -


mined by these circustances, is seen to
enjoy and endure the fruits of all its pris-
tine deeds.


18, Individual Soul after dissolution of
the body it inhabited, does not, O king,
take birth in a different boy at once.


19. It roves through the sky for some-
time like a spacious cloud. Getting a new


There is no segond cause. —


Caused by its union with deeds, this


460


receptacle, O king, it then takes birth
again,

29. The soul is above the mind. The
mind is above the senses. Mobile creatures,
again, are focemost of ail created objects.


2%. Atongst mobile creatures the two
legged ones are superior. Amongst two-
legged creatures, those that are twice-burn
are superior,


22, Amongst those that are twice-born
they whto are endued with wisdom are
superior, Amongst them who are endued
with wisdom they that have succeeded in
acquiring a Rnowledge of the soul are
superlor. Amongst those who are endued
with a knowledge of the soul, those who are
endued with humility are superior.


23. Death follows birth in all men.
This is settled. Creatures, influenced by
the qualilies of Goodness, Darkness and
Ignorance, pursue acts which have an end.


24-25. That man is considered as
righteous who meets with dissolution’when
the Sun js in the northern declension, and
at a time and under a constellation both
of which ate sacred and auspicious, He
is righteous who, having purified himself
of all sings and performed all his acts
according to the best of bis might and
having abstained from giving pain to any
man, meets with death when it comes.


26. The death that one meets with by
taking poison, by hanging, by burning, at
the hands of robbers and at the teeth of
animals, is said to be an infamous one.


27. Those men who are righteous never
meet with such or similar deaths even if
they be afflicted with mental and physical
diseases of the most painful sort.”

28—29. The lives of the pious, O king,
piercing through the Sun, ascend into the
regions of Brahman. ‘The lives of those
who are both righteous and sinful rove in
the middle regions. The lives of those
who are sinful sink into the lowest depths.
There is one only enemy (of man) and not
another. That enemy is at one with
Ignorance, O king. Overwhelmed by it,
one is led to prepetrate frightful and ex-
ceedingly cruel deeds,


go. That enemy for resisting which one
should display his energy waiting upon the
aged according to the duties laid down in
the Shrutis,—-that enemy which cannot be
overcoine except by steady endeavours,—
meets with destruction, O king, only when
it is crushed by the arrows of wisdom. |


gt. The man desirous of acquiring merit
should at first study the Vedas and prac-
lise penances, becoming a: Brahmacharin,
He should next, becoming a householder,


MAHABHARATA,


perform .the usual Saccifices. Establishing
his race, he should then enter the forest,
controlling his senses, and desirous of
acquiring Liberation.

32. One should never emaciate himself
by abstaining from every enjoyment. Of
all births, that of a human being is pre-
ferable even if one has to become a Chan-
dala.


33- Indeed, O king, that order of birth
(vis., humanity) is the foremost, since by
becoming a human being one succeeds in
rescuing his self by meritorious acts.

34. Men always perform righteous acts,
O lord, guided by the authority of the
Shrutis, so that they may not deviate from
the status of humanity.


35. That man who, having been born


_as aman that is so difficult of attainment,


indulges in. malice, disregards righteous-
ness and gives way to desire, is certainly
betrayed by his desires.


36—37. That man who regards all
creatures impartially guided by affection,
considering them worthy of being cherished
with loving aid, who disregards all sorts
of wealth, who offers them consolation,
gives them foud, addresses thetn in sweet
words, and who rejoices in their happiness
and grieves in their sorrows, has never to
suffer misery in the next world,


38. Repairing to the Saraswati, the
Naimisha forest, the Pushkara lake, and
the other sacred spots on Earth, one should
make gifts, practise renunciation, render
his aspect amiable, O king, and purify his
body with baths and penances.


39. Those men who meet with death
within their houses should have their bodies
cremated. ‘Their bodies should be taken
to the crematorium on cars and there they
should be burnt according to the rites of
purification that have been laid down in
the scriptures,


40. Religious rites, beneficial ceremonies,
the performance of sacrifices, officiation
at the sacrifices of others, gifts, the doing
of other meritorious deeds, the performance
according to the best of his power, of all
that has been ordained in the case of his
deceased ancestors,-—all these one does
for benefiting his own self.


41. The Vedas with their six branches,
and the other scriptures, O king,fhave been
created for the behoof of him who is of
pure deeds.


Bhishma continued :—

42. All this was said by that great
sage to the king of the Videhas, O king, in
days of yore for bis well-being.


SHANTI PARVA.


CHAPTER CCXCIX.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).-—
Continued.


Daksha said :—


t. Once again Janaka, the king of
Mithila, asked the great Parashara gift-
ed with certain knowledge regarding all
duties.


Janaka said :—

2, What yields good ? What is the best
path (for living creatures)? What is that
which being done is never destroyed ?
What is that spot going where one has not
to return? Tell me all this, O you of great
intelligence.


Parashara said :—


3. Dissociation is the root of what is the
root of what is good. Knowledge is the
greatest path. Penances practised are never
destroyed. Gifts also, made to worthy per-
sons, are not lost.


4. When one, snapping the fetters of
sin, begins to take pleasure in virtue, and
when one makes that highest of all gifts,
vig., the promise of all harmlessness to ail
creatures, then does one acquire success.


5. He who gives away thousands of
kine and hundreds of horses, and who pro-
mises harmlessness to all creatures re-
ceives in return the promise of harmlessness
from all.


6. One may live in the midst of all sorts
of riches and enjoyment, yet, if blessed
with intelligence, one does not live in them ;
while he who is shorn of intelligence lives
wholly in objects of enjoyment which are
even unsubstantial,


jz. Sin cannot attach toa wise man as
water cannot drench the leaves of the lotus,
Sin sticks more firmly to him who is with-
out attachment as lac and wood stick firmly
to each other,


8. Sin, which cannot be dissipated ex-
cept by endurance of its fruits, never leaves
the doer. The doer, when the time comes,
has to suffer the consequences thereof.


9g. They, however, who are of purified
souls and who realise the existence of
Brahma, are never afflicted by the fruits of
their deeds.


1o. Careless in about one’s senses of
knowledge and of aetion, one who is not
conscious of his wicked deeds, and whose
heart is attached to both good and bad,
becomes afflicted with great fear.


11. One who at all times becomes en- |


461


tirely freed from attachments and who
completely subdues the passion of anger,
is never sullied by sin even if he fives in
the enjoyment of worldly objects, -


12. As a dyke set across a river, if not
washed away, makes the waters thereof to
swell up, so the man who, without being
attached to objects of pleasure, creaes
the dyke of virtue whase materials consist
of the limitations set down in the scriptures,
has never to wane away. On the other
hand, his merits and penances increase.


13. As the pure gem absorbs and
attracts to itself, according to the natural
law, the rays of the Sun, so, O foremost
of kings, does Yoga proceed by help of
rapt attention.


14. As sesame seeds, for being always
with sweet-scented flowers, become in res-
pect of quality very sweet, so the quality
of Goodness arises in men proportionate to
the extent of their association with persons
of purified souls,


15. When one becomes desirous of living
in heaven, he abandons his wives and
riches and rank and velsicles and various
sorts of good deeds. Indeed, when one
gets such a bent of mind, his understands
ing is said to be dissociated from the ob-
jects of the senses. ;


16. That man who, with understanding
attached tothe objects of the senses, be-
comes Llind to what is for his real well-
being, is dragged by his heart which runs
after all earthly objects, like a fish by the
bait of meat. ;


17. Like the body that is made up of
different limbs and organs, all mortal
creatures exist depending upon one another.
They are weak like the pith of the bannana
plant. They sink in the world’s ocean like
a boat,


18. There is no fixed time for the
acquisition of virtue. Death waits for no
man. Whea man is constantly running
towards the jaws of Death, the doing of
pious deeds is proper at all times,


19. Like a blind man who, with atten-


‘tion, can move about his own house, the


wise man, with mind fixed on Yoga, can
proceed along the road.


20. It has been said that death origi-
nates from birth. Birth is subject to the
control of death. One unacquainted with
the course of the duties of Liberation re-
volves like a wheel between birth and death,
unable to free himself from that fate.


21. One who walks along the road re-
commanded by the understanding acquires
happiness both in this world and the next.
Many of them are fraught with misery ;


452


while the Few yield happiness. Fruits
represented by Nescience form the Many.
Renunciation yields the soul’s happiness.


22, As the lotus stalk quickly leaves the
mire attached to it, so the Soul can quickly
renounce. the mind. 5


23. lt is the mind that at first inclines
the Soul to Yoga. The latter then merges
the former iuto itself. When the Soul
gains success in Yoga, it then sees itself
uninvested with qualities.


24. Engaged amid the objects of the
senses, one who considers such engagement
to be his employment falls away from his
true employment on account of such devo-
tion to those objects.


25. The soul of the wise man acquires,
through its pious deeds, a state of great
happiness in heaven, while that of the man
who is not endued with wisdom sinks very
low or is born among _ intermediate
creatures.


26. As a liquid substance, if kept in a
baked earthen pot, does not escape there-
from but remains undiminished similarly,
one’s body with which one has practised

enances enjoys (without rejecting) all ob-
jects of pleasure.


27. Verily, that man who enjoys earthly
objects can never be liberated. That man,
however, who réenounces such objects, suc- |
coe in enjoying great happitess here-
after,


28. Like one suffering from blindness
and, therefore, incapable of seeing his
way, the sensualist; with soul confined in
an opaque Case, seems to be surrounded by
a mist and cannot see (the true object).


29. As merchants, going across the sea,
make profits according to their capital,
so creatures, in this world of men, attain to
ends poportionate to their respective deeds.


go. Like asnake devouring air, Death
walks in this world made up of days and
nights in the form of Decrepitude and
devours all creatures. :


31. A creature, when born, enjoys or
suffers the fruits of deeds done by him in
his pristine lives. here is nothing agree-
able or disagreeable which one enjoys or
suffers without its being the result of the
deeds one has done in his previous lives,


32. Whether lying or proceeding,
whether sitting idly or engaged in his
business, in whatever state a man may be,
his pristine deeds good or bad, always
approach him.


33. One who has gone to the other end
of the ocean, wishes not to cross the sea


MAHABHARATA,


for returning to the bank whence he had
sailed.


34. As the fisherman, when he wishes,
raises with the help of his chord his boat
sunk in the waters, similarly the mind by
the help of Yoga contemplation, raises indi-
vidual Soul sunk in the world’s ocean and
unliberated from consciousness of body.


35. Asall rivers running towards the
ocean, join it, so the mind, when engaged in
Yoga, becomes united with primal Nature.


36. Men whose minds become fettered
by various bonds of affection, and who are
sunk in ignorance, meet with destruction
like houses of sand in water.


37. That embodied creature wha con+
siders his body as only a house and purity
as its sacred water, and who walks along
the road of the understanding, acquires
happiness both in this world and the
next.


38. The Many yield misery; while the
Few yield happiness. The Many are the
fruits represented by the Nescience. Re-
nuneiation produces the soul’s benefit.


39. One’s friends who originate from his
determination, and one’s kinsmen whose
attachment is due to selfish reasons, one’s
wives and sons and servants only devour
his riches.


40. Neitheir the mother, nor the father,
can confer the slightest benefit upon him
in the next world. .Gifts form the diet upon
which he can live. Indeed, one is compel-
led to enjoy the fruits of his own deeds.


41. The mother, the son, the father,
the brother, the wife, and friends, are like
lines drawn with gold by the side of gold
itself.


42. All acts, good and bad, done in
pristine lives, visit the doer. Knowing that
everything enjoys or suffers at present is
the outcome of his pristine deeds, the soul
makes the understanding move on differ-
ent directions,


43. Depending on earnest endeavour and
equipped with proper aids, he who under-
takes to accomplish his tasks never meets |
with failure.


44. As the rays of light ne ver abandon
the Sun, so prosperity never leaves him
who has firm faith.


45. That act which a man of pure soul
does with faith and earnestness, with the
help of proper means, without pride, and
with intelligence, becomes never lost.


46. A creature obtains from the very
time of his residence in the mother’s womb
ali his own acts good, and bad that were


SHANTI! PARVA.


&éGuired by him in his pristine lives; Death,
which is irresistible, helped by ‘Time which
encompasses the destruction of life, takes
all creatures to their end like wind scatter-
ing the dust of sawed timber.


47. Tlirough acts good and bad done
by himself in his pristine lives, man ac-
quires gold and animals, and wives, and
children, and honor of birth, and costly
possessions, and his entire affluence.


Bhishnia continued :—

48. Thus addressed agreeably to the
truth by the sage, Janaka, that foremost of
pious men, O king, heard everything the


Rishi said and acquired great happiness
from it.


CHAPTER CCC,


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued.


Yudhisthira said :—


1. O grandfather,. learned men praise
truth, self-control, forgiveness and wisdom.
What is your opinion about these virtues ?


Bhishma said :—


2. Regarding it I shall recite to you
an old narrative, O Yudhisthira, of the
discourse betwee the Sadhyas and a
Swan.


g. Once on a time the uncreate and
eternal Lord of afl creatures, assuming the
form of a golden Swan, passed through the
three worlds till in course of his ramblings
he came upon the Sadhyas.


The Saddhyas said :—


4. O lord, we are the gods called
Sadhyas. We like to question you. Indeed,
we would ask you about the religion of
Liberation. Wou are well acquainted
with it.

5. We have heard, O bird, that you
are endued with great learning, and elo-
quent and wise of speech. O bird, what
do you think is the highest of all objects ?
O great one, in what does your mind find
pleasure ?


6. Do you, therefore, O foremost of
birds, instruct us as to what that one act
is which you consider as tle foremost of
all acts, aud by doing which, O king of
bicds, one may soon be freed from all
fetters.


| The essence of Truth is self-control.


| is superior to one who does.


463


The Swan said :—

7. O wectar-drinking ones, I have heard
that one should follow these, vig., penatices,
self-control, truth, and subjugation of the
mind. Losing atl the knots of the heart,
one sliould also bring under his control
both what is pleasant and what is un-
pleasant.

8. One should sot cut the vitals of
others. One should not uttér cruel words.
One should never receive scriptural lectures
from a mean petson. One should never
utter such words as pain others; as miaké
others miserable, and as lead to helt.


9g. Wordy arrows fall from the lips.
Pierced therewith one butms always. Those
arrows do not cut any other part than the
very vitals of the person aimed. Hencé
he who is a Jearned man, should never aim
them at others,

10. If a person deeply cuts a wise nian
with wordy arrows, the wise man should
remain gilent. The man who, though
sought to be angered, rejoices without
giving way to anger, takes away from the
provoker all his merits.

11. That man of virtuous soul, who, full
of joy and shorn of malice, control his
burning ire which, if indulged, would lead
him to speak ill of others and verity becom¢
his enetny, takes away the merits of othérs.


#2. As for myself, I never-answer ia |
another speaks iil of-me, If attacked,
always forgive the assault. The righteous
hold that forgiveness, truth, sincerity and
compassion are the foremost (of alf vitues).


13. ‘Truth is the essence of the Vedas*
The


essence of self-control is Liberation. Thi


| is the teaching of all the seriptures.


14. [I know that person as a Brahmana


F and Muni who governs the rising impulse
| of speech, the impulse of anger appearing
| in the mind, the impulse of thirst, and the


impulses of the stomvach and the organ of
pleasure.

15. One who does not give way to anget
One who
practises renunciation is superiot to one
who does not. One who possesses the
virtues of manhood is superior to one whe
has them not. One who has knowledge
is superior to one who has not got it.


16. Assailed with harsh words, one should
not assail in return. Indeed, one who,
under such circumStances, renounces anger,
succeeds in burning the assailer and takiag
away all his merits,


17. That person who when attacked with
harsh words, does not utter a harsh word


464


in ceply, who when lauded does not say
what is pleasant to him who praises, who
is gifted with such fortitude as not to strike
in retdrn when struck and not to even wish
evil to the striker, finds his company always
sought after by the gods.


_ 18 A sinful man should be forgiven as
if he were righteous by one who is insulted,
struck, and calumenated. By acting in
this way one gains success,


1g, Though all my objects have been
fulfilled, yet 1 always wait respecttulty on
the righteous. I have no thirst. My anger
has been suppressed. Seduced by cove-
tousness I do not deviate from the path
of virtue. I do not also approach any one
with prayers for riches.


20. If cursed { do not curse in return.
1 tnow that self-control is the door of
immortality. | disclose to you a great
mystery, There is tio position that is
superior to that of huthanity.


21. Breed from sia like the Moon from
misty clouds,*the wise man, shining in res-
plendence, acquires success by patiently
Waiting for his time.


22, A petson of controlled soul, who
becomes the object of worship with all by
becoming the foremost of the pillars of the
universe, and to whom only agreeable
words are addressed by all, acquires the
companionship of the gods.


23. Revilers never speak of the merits
of a person as readily as they speak of his
demerits.


24. That person whose speech and mind
are properly controlled and always devoted
to the Supreme, gets ‘the fruits of the

edas, Penances, and Renunciation.


25, ‘The wise man should never revile
(in ceturn) those who have no merit, by
speaking out their dispraise and by insults.
He should not extol others and should
never injure themselves.


26. The wise and learned man considers
revilement as nectar. Reviled, he sleeps
without anxiety. ‘The reviler, on the other
hand, meets with destruction.


29. The sacrifices that one celebrates
angrily, the gifts one makes in angrily, the
penances one practices angrily, and the
Offerings and libations one makes to the
sacred fire angrily, are such that their merits
ace robbed by Yama. The toil of an
angry man becomes entirely futile.


28. Ye foremost of immortals, that
petson is said to be conversant with virtue
whose four doors, vzs., the organ of genera-
tion, the stomach, the two arms, and speech,
are well governed.


MAHABHARATA.


2g. That person who, always practisin,
truth and self-control and sincerity an
mercy and patience and renunciation, be-
comes devoted to the study of the Vedas,
does not covet others’ possessions, and pur-
sues what is good with a_ singleness of
Purpose, succeeds in going to heaven.


go. Like a calf sucking all the four teets
of its dam's adders, one should devote him-
self tothe practice of all these virtues.
do not know whether anything exists moré
sacred than Truth..


31. Having walked among both human
beings and the gods, I say that Truth is the
only means for reaching heaven even as a
ship is the only means for crossing deep.


32. A person becomes like those with
whom he lives, and like those whom he res-
pects, and like to what he wishes to be.


33. If a person waits respectfully on
him who is good, or him who is other-
wise, if he waits respectfully on a sage
endued with ascetic merit or ona thief,
passes under his control and gets his
color like a piece of cloth catching the dye
in which it is washed.


34. The gods always talk with those who
are, good and wise. They, therefore, never
entertertain the desire for even seeing the
enjoyments in which men take pleasure.
The person who knows that all objects of
enjoymert are subject to changes, has few
rivals, and is superior to the very Moon and
the Wind.


35. When the Purusha that lives in
one’s heart is pure, and walks in the path of
the righteous, the gods take a pleasure in
him.


36. The gods shun from a_ distance
those who are always devoted to the gratt-
fication of their senses of pleasure and the
stomach, who are given to thieving, and
who. always indulge in harsh words, even if
they expiate their offences by performing
the proper rites.


37. The gods ate never gratified with
one of mean soul, with one who observes
no restraint in the matter of food, and with
one who is of sinful deeds. On the other
hand, the gods associate with those men
who observe the vow of truth, who are
grateful, and who are engaged in the
practice of virtue.


38. Silence is better than speech. To
speak the truth is better(than silence. To
speak, again, truth what is connected with
virtue is better than to speak the truth.
‘To speak what, besides being true and
righteous is agreeable, is better than to
speak truth connected with virtue. ;

c


SHANTI


Phe Saddliyas said :—


1.39. By what is this world covered ?


Why does one fail to shine? For what


cause do people renounce their friends ?
Why do people fail to go to heaven.

The Swan daid:- i,
.40. ‘The world is covered by Ignorance.
Men fail to, shine on account of malice.
People renounce friends, actuated by covets


ousness. Men fail to attain to heaven on
account of attachment, _


The Saddhayas said :—

41. Who alone among the Brahmanas
is always happy? Who alone amongst
ibis can practise the vow of silence though
iving in the midst of many? Who alone
amongst them,. though weak, is still con-
sidered as strong? And “who alone
amongst them does not quarrel,


The Swau said :—

42. He alone amongst the Brahmanas
who is endued with wisdom is always happy.
He alone amongst the Brahmanas who ts
endued with wisdom, suceeeds in practising
the vow of silence, though living in’ the
midst of many. He alone amongst the
Brahmanas who is endued with wisdom,
though actually weak, is considered as
strong, He alone amongst them who has
wisdom succeeds in avoiding quarrel.


The Saddliyas said:— __ a

43. Wherein lies the divinity of. the
Brahmanas? In what their purity? In
what theic impurity 2? And in what their
status of humanity ?


The Swan said :—
44. The divinity of the Brafimanas con-
sists in the study of the Vedas. Their purity is
in their vows and observances. Jn obloquy is
their impurity. [n death is their humanity,
Bhishma said:—,

45. Thus have I recited to you the
excellent discourse between the Saddhyas
(and the Swan), The body is the origin
of acts, and existence or individual Sout is
truth.”


CHAPTER CCCI.
(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued.

& aes ‘3 bah ores F

Yudhishthira said :— .
.t., ‘You, should. explain to mé,.O site,
what the difference is between the Sankbya


59


PARVA. 405
and the Yoga systems of philosophy. F Oo
foremost one of Kuru’s race, you knew
everything is known, O-you who are con-
versant with all duties,”


Bhishmia did: ;

2. ‘The followers of Sankhya praise the
Sankhya system and the Yogins praise the
Yoga system. For fixing the superiority of
their respective systems, each calls his own
system to be better, ae:

_3-. Wise men devoted to Yoga point out
proper and very good reasons, O crushee
of enemies, for, showing that one, who does
not believe in the existence of God cannot
acquire Liberation.

4—§. Those twice-born ones, again, whd
are believers in the Sankhya doctrines, for-
ward good reasons for slowing that a
person by acquiring true knowledge of all
objects, becomes dissociated from afl eartlity
objects, and, after death, it is plain,
becomes liberated and that it cannot be
otherwise. Men of great wisdom have
thus expounded the Sankhya philosophy of
Liberation.


6. When teasons are thus equally placed
on both sides, those are assigned on that
side which one is otherwise inclined to
follow as one’s own, should be accepted. Ini-
deed, those words that are said on that side
should be considered as wholesome. . Good
men may be found on both sides, Persons
like you may adopt either Opinion.

7. The evidences of Yoga are addressed
to the direct perception of, the senses;
those of .Sankhya are based ow the scrip~
tures. Both systems of philosophy are
approved by me, O Yudhishthira.


8. I agree with both those systems of
science, O king, so do the good and wise,
lf practised duly according to the. insteuc-
tions laid down, both would, O king, make
@ person acquire the highest end.


g In both systems purity is equally
recommended as also mercy towards ail,
creatures, O sinless one, In both, again,
the observance of vows has been equally
sanctioned. Only the scriptures which
point out their paths are different,”


Yudhishthira said:—

10. “lf the vows, the purity, the merey,
and the fruits thereof recommendedjin both
systems be the same, tell me, O grand.
father, why then are not their scriptures -
the same?”


Bhishma said:-
11. “By renouncing through the help of
Yoga, these five iaults, vtz,, attachment,


466


tarelessness, affection, lust and anger one
acquires Liberation. :

12, As large fishes, breaking through
the net, pass into their own element, simi-
larly, Yogins, become purged of all sins
and acquire the happiness of Liberation.


13. As powerful animals
through the nets in which hunters catch
them, enjoy the happiness of freedom, so
_ Yogins freed from all fetters, attain to the
pure path that leads to Liberation.

14. Truly, O king, breaking through
the fetters born of cupidity, Yogins, gifted
with strength acquire the sinless aud aus-
picious and high path of Liberation.


15, Feeble animals, O king, entangled


in nets, are, forsooth, destroyed. Such is.


the case with persons shorn. of Yoga
power,

16, As weak fishes, O son of: Kunti,
fallen into the net, become entangled in it,
so, O king, men shorn of Yoga pewer meet
with destruction.


17—18. As birds, O chastiser of enemies,
when entangled in the fine nets of fowlers,
meet with their destruction, but if they are
strong effect their eseape, similarly, it is
the case, with Yogins, O chastiser of
enemies, fettered by the bonds of action,
they that are weak, meet with destruction,
vile they who are strong break through
them. :


19. A small and weal fire, O king, is
put out when large logs of timber are
placed upon it. So the Yogin who is weak,
O king, encounters ruin.


20, The same fire, however, O king,
when it becomes strong, would burn with
the help of the wind the entire Earth.


2t. Similarly, the Yogin when grown in
strength, burning with energy, and endued
with tpower is capable of ‘seorching the en-
tire Universe like the Sun that rises at the
time of the universal dissolution.


22. Asa weak man, O king, is ¢arried
away by acurrent, so is a weak Yogin
helplessly carried away by objects of the
senses, .


23. An elephant withstands a powerful
current. Similarly, a Yogin, having ac-
quired Yoga- power withstands all objects of
the senses,


24. Independent of ail things, Yogins,
gifted with Yoga-power and other lordly
powers, enter into the very fords of creation,
the Rivhis, the gods, and the great Beings
in the universe.


25. Neither Yama, nor ‘the Destroyer,
nor Death, himself of terrible power, when
irate, ever succeeds “in lording over the


breaking.


MAHABHARATA.


Yogin, O king, who és gifted with int.
measurable energy.

26. ‘The Yogin, acquiring Yoga-power,
can create thousands of bodies and witl
them walks over the Earth.


27. Some amongst them enjoy objects
of the senses and again practise the aus-
terest penances, and once again, like the
Sun withdraw themselves from such pens
ances,


28. The Yogin, who is gifted with
strength and whom fetiers bind not, cer
tainly succeeds in acquiring Liberation.


ag. I have now deseribed to you, O
king, on all these powers of Yoga. I shall
once more tell you what the subtile powers
ef Yoga are with theie marks.


30. Hear, -O chief of Bharata’s race,
the subtile marks of the meditation and
the ecncentration of the Soul.


31. As a bowman who is careful and
attentive succeeds in striking the aim. so
the Yogin with absorbed soul, forsooth, ac-
quires Liberation.


* 32—33. As a- man, fixing his mind ov
a vessel full of some tiquid carefully ascends
a ffight of steps, so the Yogin, fixed and
absorbed in his soul, purifies it and makes
it as effulgent as the Sun.


34-—-35- As a boat, O son of Kunti,
who is tossed on the bosom of the sea is
very soon taken by a careful boatman to
the othee shore, so the man of knowledge,
by fixing his soul in concentration, acquires
Liberation, which is so difficult to acquire;
after renouncing his body, O king.


As a careful charioteer, O king,
having yoked good horses takes- the car-
warrior to where he likes, ever so the
Yogin, QO king, ‘careful in concentration,
soon attains to the highest spot like am
arrow shot off the bow reaching the objeet
aimed at,


gt. The Yogin who stays immovablty
after having entered his self into the sout,
dissipates his sins and gets at that indes-
tructivle spot which is the possession of
those who are pious.


39—41. That Yogin who, earefully prac-
tises high vows, properly unites, O king,
his sentiency with the self Soul ii the navel,
the throat, the head, the heart, the chest,
the sides, the eyé, the ear, and the nose,
burns all his mountain-like acts. good and
bad, and having recourse.to excellent Yoga,
acquires Liberation,”


Yudhisthira said :—
42. “You should tell me, O' grandfather,
what the kinds of diet are by taking which,


SHANI!


and what the things are by ‘conquering
which, the Yogin, O Bharata, gains Yoga-
power.”'


Bhishma said :—


43. ‘Engaged, O Bharata, in subsist-
ing upon broken grains of rice and sodden
cakes of sesame, and abstaining from oil
and butter, the Yogin gains Yoga- power.


44. By subsisting for a long time on
powdered barley unmixed with any liquid,
and by taking only one meal a day, the
Yogin, of purified soul gains Yoga-power.


45. By drinking only water mixed with
milk, first only once during the day, then
once during a fortnight, then once during
a month, then once during three months,
and then once during a ‘whole year, the
Yogin gains Yoga-power.

46. By abstaining entirely from meat,
© king, the Yogin of purified soul acquires
power. eg


47—~49 By subjugating lust, and anger,
and heat, and cold and rain, and fear, and
grief, and the breath, and all sounds that
are agreeable to men, and objects of the
senses, and the uneasiness, so difficult to
conquer, that is created by abstention from
sexual connection, and thirst which is so
terrible, O king, and the pleasures of touch
and sleep, and procrastination that is al-
most unconquerable, O best of kings, great
Yogins, shorn of attachments, and endued
with great wisdom, helped by their under-
Standings, and equipt with wealth of con-
templation and study, cause the subtile soul
to stand in all its glory.


59. Fhis high path of learned Brah-
manas is highly difficult to tread. No one
can walk along this path with ease. ©


51. That path is like a dreadful forest
which is full of numberless snakes and
crawling vermin, with pits everywhere,
without water for Satisfying one’s thirst,
and full of thorns, and inaccessiblé on that
account.


52. Indeed, the path of Yoga is like 4
road along which no food is available,
which runs through a desert having all its
trees burnt down in a fire, and which is
unsafe for being infested with bands of
robbers. Very few young men can pass
safely through it. -


53. Like such a path few Brahmanas
can walk along the Yoga-path. with ease
and comfort. That man who, having
followed this path, ceases to go forward
is considered as guilty of many faults,


54. Men of purified souls, O king, can


PARVA, 467
which is fike the sharp edge of a razor.
Persons of impure souls, however, cannot
Stay on it.


55. When Yoga-contemplation is dige
turbed or otherwise obstructed, it can never
take the Yogiiy to an auspicious end even
as a vessel which is without a captain can-
not take the passenger's to the other shore.


56. That man, O son of Kanti, who prac-
tises Yoga-contemplation according to due
rites succeeds in renouncing off both birth
and death, and happiness and sorrow,


57. All this that1 have told you has
been stated in the various} treatises on
Yoga. The highest fruits of Yoga are
seen in persons of the twice-born order,


58—61. That highest fruit is oneness with
Brahma. The great Yogin, endued with
greatness, can enter into, and ¢ome out
of, at his will, Brahman himself who is the
lord of all gods, and the boon-giving
Vishnu, and Bhava, and Dharma, and
the six-faced Kartikeya, and the (spiritual)
sons of Brahman, the quality of Darkness
that is productive of much pain, and that
of Ignorance, and that of G.rwdness which
is pure, and Nature which is the highest,
and the goddess. Siddhi whe is the wife:
of Varuna, and all sorts of energy, and
all-enduring patience, and the bright lord
of stars in the sky with the stars twinkling
all around, and the Vishwas, and the
snakes, and: the Pitris, and all the moun-
tains and hills, and the great and terrible
oceans, and all the rivers, and the clouds
charged with rain and serpents, and trees,
and Yakshas, and the cardinal and sub-
sidiary points of the horizon, and the
Gandharvas, and alj] male persons and alt
female ones also.

62. This topic, O king, about the Su-
preme Being of mighty energy shoufd be
considered as auspicious. ‘he Yogin has
Narayatia for his soul. Lordig over alt
things, the great Yogin is capable of crea-
ting all things.”


Se emmanaaanal


CHAPTER CCCIE.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued.
Yudhisthira said :—

1. UO king, you have duly described
to me, in the proper way, the path of Yoga
which is approved by the wise, like a loving
preceptor to his pupil.

2. Task now about the principles of


Stay with ease upon Yoga-contemplation \ the Sankhya philosophy. Do you describe
’


‘


468


those principles fo mein full, You know
whatever knowledge exists in the three
worlds.” ;


Bhishma said :—

3. Hear now what the subtile principles
are of the followers of the Sankhya doctrine
all of whom haye a clear knowledge of the
soul, ‘Those printiples have been laid
down by all the great and powerful Yatis
having Kapila for their first.


4. In that doctrine, O king no errors
are seen. Its merits are manifold. In fact,
there is no fault in it.


5—17. Comprehending with the help of
knowledge that all objects exist with faults,
with which human beings, Pishachas, Rak-
shasas, Yakshas, snakes, Gandharvas, and
Pitris and those who are wandering in the
intermediate orders of being, and great
birds, and the Maruts and royal sages and
regenerate sages and Asuras and Vishwe-
devas and the celestial Rishis and Yogins
invested with supreme power and the
Peajapatis and Brahman himself are en-
waged, and understanding truly what the
highest limit of a man’s life in this world,
and perceiving also the great-truth, O fore-
most of orator, about whiat is called happi-
ness here, and having a perfect knowledge
of what the miseries are that befall when
the hour comes all those who are concerned
with (transitory) objects, and knowing full
well the misertes of those who have fallen
Into the intermediate orders of being and
ef those who have sunk into hell, per-
ceiving all the merits and all the shorty
comings of heaven, O Bharata, and all the
demerits of the declarations of the Vedas
and all the excellencies thereof, recognising
the faults and merits of the Yoga and the
Sankhya systems of philosophy, realizing
also that the quality of Goodness has ten
properties, that of Darkness has nine, and
that of Ignorance has eight, that the
Understanding has seven properties, the
Mind has six, and Ether has five, and
once more conceiving that the Under-
standing has four properties and Ignorance
has three, and Darkness has two and
Goodness has one, and truly undertaking
the path that is followed by all objects
when destruction befalls them and what the
course is of self-knowledge, the Sankhyas,
endued with knowledge and experience and
exalted by their perceptions of causes,
and ‘acquiring thorough auspiciousness, at-
tainto the happiness of Liberation tike the
rays of the Sun, or the Wind, taking cefuge
in Ether. i oar


18—19. Vision is attached to form; the
sense of scent to smells; the ear to sound;


MAHABHARATA.


The Wind has for its refuge Ether. Stupe-
faction has Darkness for its refuge. Cupi-
dity has the objects of the senses for its
refuge.


20. Vishnu is attached to (the organs of)
motion, Indra is attached to (the organs
of) strength. The god of fire is attached to
fire is attached to the stomach. Earth is
attached to the Waters. The Waters have
fire for their refuge. ; in


2t. Heat attaches itself to the Wind;
and the Wind has Ether for its refuge; and
Space has the principle of greatness for its
refuge; and the principle ‘of greatness has
the Understanding for its basis. :


22. The Understanding has its refuge in
Darkness; Darkness has Ignorance for its
refuge; Rajas is founded upon the quality
of goodness and quality of Goodness 15
attached to the Soul. ~ an ;


23. The Soul has the glorious and
powerful goodness Narayana for its refuge.
That glorious god has Liberation for bis
refuge. Liberation is independent of all
refuge.


24—52. Knowing that thisibody, that is
endued with sixteen possessions, is the
result of the quality of goodness, unders-
tanding fully the nature of the © physical
organs and the consciousness that lives
within it, recognising the one existent Being
that lives in the body, vis., the Soul, whicli
stands aloof from every physical concern
which is affected by no sin, realisingjthe
nature of that second object, vig, the acts
of persons attached to the objects of the
senses, understanding also the nature of the
senses and the sensual objects which have
theie refuge in the Soul, ‘appreciating the
difficulty of Liberation and the scriptures
describing it, knowing fully the nature
of the vital airs called Prana, Apana,
Samana, Vyana, and Udana, as also thé
two other breaths, wis, the one going
downward and the other going upward,
indeed, knowing those seven vital airs or-
dammed to perform seven different functions,
ascertaining the nature of the Patriarchs
and the Rishis and the numberless higir
paths, of virtue or rightéousness, and the
seven Rishis and the innumerable royal
Rishis, O scorgher of enemies, and the great
celestial Rishis and, the other twice-born
Rishis effulgent like the Sun, seeing all these
losing their power in course of many lon
ages, O king, hearing of the destruction at
even of all the powerful beings in the
universe, understanding also the inauspi-
cious end thatis got, O king, by creatures
of sinful deeds, and the miseries endured by
those that fall into the river Vaitarani in


(he tongue to juices; and the skin to touch. | the kingdom of Yama, and the inauspicious


SHANTI PARVA.


wanderings of creatures through various
wombs, and the nature of their residence
jn the filthy uterus in the midst of blood
and water and phlegm and urine and
faeces, all of had smell, and then in bodies
that originate from the union of blood
and the vital seed, of marrow and sinews,
full of hundreds of nerves and arteries and
forming an impure palace of nine doors,
understanding also what is for his own
well-being, what those various combinations
are which produce good, seeing the abomi-
nable conduct of creatures whose natures
are characterised by Darkness, Goodness
or Ignorance, O chief of Bharata’s race,—
conduct that is censured, in view of its
incapacity to acquire Liberation by the
followers of the Sankhya doctrine who
understand fully the Soul,
swallowing up of the Moon and the Sun
by Rahn, the falling of stars from their
fixed positions and the diversions of con-
stellations from their orbits, knowing the
separation of all united objects, and the
diabolical conduct of creatures in devour-
ing one another, seeing the absence of all
intelligence in the infancy of human beings
and the deterioration and destruction of
the body, marking the little attachment
creatures have to the quality of Goodness
on account of their being overwhelmed by
anger and stupefaction, seeing also only
one among thousands of human beings
determined ‘to struggle after the acquisition
of Liberation, understanding the difficulty
of acquiring Liberation according to what
is [mentioned in the scriptures, marking the
hankering that creatures shew for all un-
attained objects and their comparative in-
difference to all objects that have been
acquired, marking the wickedness that pro-
ceeds from alt objects of the senses, O king,
and the repulsive bodies, O son of Kunti,
of dead persons, and the residence, always
fraught with sorrow, of buman beings, O
Bharata, in houses, knowing the end of
those terrible and degraded men who be-
¢ome guilty of killing Brahmanas, and of
those wicked Brahmanas who are given
to the drinking of alcohol,'and the equally
sad end of those who visit the wives of
their preceptors, and of those men, O
Bedale it who do not properly respect
their mothers, as also of those who have no
reverence and worship to offer to the gods,
‘understanding also, with the help of that
knowledge, the end that befalls all | perpe-
trators of wicked deeds, and the various
ends that befall those who have taken birth
among the intermediate orders, ascertain-
ing the various declarations of the Vedas,
the courses of seasons, the fading of years,
of months, of fortnights, ‘and of days, seeing
directly the waxing and the waning of the
Moon, seeing the rising and the ebbing


seeing the:


469


of the seas, and the decrease of wealth and
.its increase once more, and, the separation
of united objects, the lapse of cycles, the
destruction of mountains, the drying up
of rivers, the deterioration of the several
orders and the end also of that deteriora-
tion taking place repeatedly, seeing the
bicth, decrepitude, death,‘ and sorrows of
creatures, knowing truly the faults relating
to the body and the sorrows. which human
beings suffer from, and the changes to
which the bodies of creatures are subject,
and understanding all the faults which
attach to their own souls, and alse all the
inauspicious faults that attach to their own
bodies.” ~


Yudhishthira said :—


53. “OO ‘you of immeasurable energy,
what are hiss faults which you see in one’s
body? You should explain this doubt to
me fully and truly,”


Bhishma said :—


54. ‘ Listen, oO killer of enemies, the
Sankbyas ‘or followers of Kapila, who ace
conversant with all paths and gifted with
wisdom, say that there,are in all five faults,
O powerful one, in the human: “body.


55. They are Desire, Anger, Fear, Sleep,
and Breath.


56. These faults are seen in the bodies
of all embodied creatures. They who are
gifted with wisdom cut the root of anger.
with the hetp of Forgiveness. Desire is
cut off by renouncing all purposes,


57. By cultivation of the quality of Good-
ness (Sattwa) sleep is conquered and Fear.
is conquered by cultivating carefulness,
Breath is conquered by restriction of diet,
O king,


58—64. ‘Fruly understanding qualities
by the help of hundreds of quatiues and
faults by hundreds of faults, and various
causes by hundreds of causes, determining
that the world is like the froth of water, co-
vered by hundreds of illusions flowing from
Vishnu, like a painted palace, and as un-
substantial as a reed, seeing it to be like,
a dark pit, or as unreal as bubbles of water,
for the years that compose its age are as
fleeting as bubbles, seeing it exposed to
immediate destruction, bereft of happi-
ness, having certain ruin for its end and
from which it can never escape, sunk in
Darkness and Ignorance and utterly help-
less like an elephant sunk in mire,—noting
all this—this the Sankbyas, O king, gifted
with great wisdom, renouncing all affection
arising from one’s relations towards one’s
children, by the help, O king, of that ex-
tensive and alt: embracing knowledge whic


@


aq


thei¢ system advocates, and cutting off
quickly, with the weapon of knowledge and
the bludgeon of penances, O Bharata, all
inauspicious smells begotten of Darkness
and all scents of a like nature originating
from Ignorance and all auspicious scents
arising from Goodness and all pleasures of
the touch born of the same three qualities
and attaching to the body, indeed, O


1


Bharata, aided by the Yoga of kunow- |


ledge, these Yatis crowned with success,—
eross the Ocean of life. hat dreadful
Ocean has sorrow for its waters. Anxiety
and grief form its deep lakes. Disease and
death are its huge alligators, The great
fears that strike the heart at every step are
its huge snakes.


65+ 72. The deeds begotton by Ig-
nora ce are its tortoises. Those begot-
ten oy Darkness are its fishes. Wisdom
forms the raft for crossing it. The affec-
tions cherished for objects of the senses
are its mire. Decrepitude forms its region
of grief and trouble. Knowledge, O
chastiser of enemies, is its island. Acts
form its great depth. Truth is its shores,
Pious abservances form the verdant weeds
floating on its bosom. Envy forms _ its
rapid its rapid and powerful current. The
various sentiments of the heart form its
mines, The various sorts of gratification
are its valuable gems. Grief and fever are
its winds. Misery and thirst are its power-
ful eddies, Painful and fatal diseases are
its huge elephants. The assemblage of
bones form its flights of steps, and phlegm
is its froth. Gifts are the — pearl-banks.
The lakes of blood the corals, Loud
laughtet forms its roars. Various sciences
are its impassability. ‘Tears are its brine
Renunciation of company forms the bigh
refuge. Children and wives are its un-
numbered leeches, Friends and kinsmen
are the cities and towns on its shores.
Abstention from injury, and Truth, form
its boundary line. Death is its storm-
wave. The knowledge of Vedanta is the
island. Acts of mercy towards all crea-
tures form its life-buoys, and Liberation
is the costly acticle offered to those going
on its waters in search of merchandise.
Like its prototype with its equine head
sending out flames of fire, this ocean too
has its fiery dread. Having got over the
liability, that is so difficult to get over, of
living within the gross body the Sankhyas
enter into pure ether.


73. The Sun-God then bears, with his
fays, those pious men who practise the
Sankhya doctrines. Like the fibres of the
lotus-stalk carrying waters to the flower into
which they all converge, t:e Sun-God,
dcinking all things from the universe, con-
veys them to those good and wise men.


MATIABHARATA,


74-—~76. Their attachments all dissipated,
possesed of energy, endued with wealth of
penances, and crowned with success, these
Yatis, O Bharata, are carried by that wind,
which is subtile, cooling, fragrant, and
sweet to the touch, O Bharata! In fact,
that wind which is the best of the seven
winds, and which blows in regions of great
happiness, conveys them, O son of Kunti,
to that which is the highest end in ether.
Then ether into which they are carried,
O king, conveys them to the highest-end
of Darkness.


77. Darkness then carries them to the
highest end of Goodness. Goodness then
bears them, O you of pure soul, to the
Supreme and powerful Narayana.


78—79. The ‘powerful and pure-souled
Narayana at last, through himself, carries
them to the Supreme Soul. Having reach-
ed the Supreme Soul, those pure persons,
who have Geconis the body of Brahman,
attain to immortalily, and they have never
afterwards to come back from that position,
Q kingt Thatis the highest end, QO son
of Pritha, which is acquired by those great
men who have got over the iwfluence of alt
pairs of opposites.”


Yudhishthira said :—


80. "O pure one, have those persons of
firm vows, after they have acquired that
excellent position which is fraught with
power and happiness, any recollection of
theic lives including birth and death ?


81. You should tell me properly what
the truth is in this respect. ©O you of
Kuru’s race, I do not think it proper to
ask any one else but you.


82-83. Following the scriptures relating
to Liberation, I find this great fault in the
subject. If, having attained to that high
state, the Vatis continue to live in con.
sciousness, it would appear, O king, that
the religion of work is superior. If, again,
consciousness djsappears from the liberated
state and one who has become liberated
only resembles a person sunk in dreamless.
slumber, then nothing can be more im-
proper than to say that there is really no,
consciousness in Liberation.” _


Bhishma said:

84. * However difficult
answer it, the question which you have
asked, Q son, is proper. Verily, the ques-
tion is of such a nature that even the highly
learned men become stupefied in answering,
it, O chief of Bharata’s race.


i may be to


85. For all that, bear what the truth is
as explained by me. The great followers
‘i


SHANTI PARVA,


cf Kapila have set their keen understand-
ings on this point.


86. The senses of knowledge, O king,
placed in the bodies of embodied creatures,
are engaged ig their respective functions of
perception. ‘They form the instruments of
the Soul, for it is through them that that
subtile Being perceives.


87. Disassociated from the Soul, the
senses are like pieces of wood, and are,
forsooth, destroyed like the forth that is
seen on the bosom of the ocean.


88. When the embodied creature, O
scorcher of enemies; goes into sleep together
with his senses, the subtile Soul then roves
among all objects like the wind through
ether,


89. The subtile Soul, during sleep con-
tinues to see and touch all objects of touch,
O king, and get other perceptions, as well
as when it is awake.


90. On account of their inability to act
without their director, the senses, during
slumber, all become extinguished in their
respective places like snakes shorn of
poison,


gt. At such’ times, the subtile Soul,
repairing into the respective places of all
the senses, forsooth, performs all their func-
tions.


92—95- All the qualities of Goodness,
all the attributes of the Understanding,
O Bharata, as also those of Mind, and
Ether, and Wind, O you of righteous soul,
and all the attributes of liquid substances,
of Water, O Partha, and of Eaith,—these
senses with these qualities,—-O Yudhisthira,
which stick to sentiences, are along with
the individual Soul itself, overwhelmed by
the Supreme Soul or Brahma. Acts also,
good and bad, overwhelm that individual
Soul. Like disciples attending: their pre-
ceptor with respect, the senses too wait
upon the individual Soul.


96. When the individual Soul, teran-
scends Prakriti, it acquires Brahma that is
changeless, that is highest, that is Nara-
yana, that is beyond all pairs of opposites,
and that is above Nature,


97. Freed from both merit and demerit,
the individual Soul, entering the Supreme
Soul which is shorn. of all attributes, and
which is the home of all auspiciousness,
does not return thence, O Bharata.


98. These remains, O son, only the mind
with the senses, -O Bharata. ‘lhese’ have
to return once moré at the appointed time
for satisfying the command of their great
Master.


99. Soon after, O json. of Kunti, cast


47t


off the Yati striving after Liberation, gifted
ashe is with knowledge and desirous as
He is of quality, succeeds i attaining to
that peace of Liberation which one-enjoys
without the body.


too. The Sankhyas, QO king, are gifted
with great wisdom. They acquire the
highest énd by means of this kind of know-
ledge. There is no knowledge that is equal
to this.


tot. Do not givé way to any sort of
doubt. ‘the Knowledge which is described
in the system of the Sankhyas is considered
asthe highest. That knowledge is immu-
table and is eternal. It is eternal Brahmas


102. Ithasno beginning, middte, and
end. It is above all pairs of opposites. [t
is the cause of the creation of the universe,
lt stands fully. It is without decrease of
any kind. Itis uniform, and everlasting,
Thus are its praises recited by the wise.


103. From it originate creation and
destruction and all metamorphoses. ‘The
great Rishis speale of it and praise it in
the scriptures.


10g. All learned Brahmanas and all the
gods and all pious men consider it as oris
ginating from Brahma, Supreme, Divine,
Infinite, Immutable, and Uudeteriorating.


tos. All Brahmanas, again, who are at
tached to objects of the senses worship and
applaud it by ascribing to jt attributes
that belong to illusion, ‘The same is the
opinion of Yogins well observant of pen-
ances and meditation and of Sankhyas
of great insight.


106. The Shrutis say, O son of Kunti,
that the Sankhya system of philosophy is
the form of that Formless One. he cog«
nition have, O chief of Bharata’s race, been
said to be the knowledge of Brahma.


107. ‘There are two kinds of creatures
on Earth, O king, viz., mobile and immo-
bile. Of these, those that are mobile are
superior.


108, That high knowledge, O king,
which is in persons conversant with Brahma,
and that which isin the Vedas, and that
which is seen in other seriptures, and that
in Yoga, and that which may be seen in
the various Puranas, are all, O monarch,
to be found in Sankhya philosophy.


tog. Whatever knowledge is seen to
exist in great histories, whatever knowledge
is, O king, in the sciences about the acqui-
sition of riches as-approved by the wise,
whatever other knowledge: c¢xisis in this
world,—all these;—originate, O great king,
from the high knowledge that is among the
Sankhyas,


472


tto, Tranquillity of soul, high power,
all subtile knowledge of which the scrip-
tures speak, penances of subtile force, and
all sorts of happiness, O Kitig, have all been
duly ordained in the Sankhya system.


Tit, Failing to acquire, O son of Pritha,
that complete knowledge which is recom-
mended by their system, the Sankhyas
attain to the dignity of gods and pass many
years in happiness. Ruling over the celes-
tials as they will, they fall, upon the expi-
ration of the fixed petiod, amony leartied
Brahinanas and ,VYatis.


112. Renouncing this body, those twice-
born ones that follow the Sankhya system
enter into the superior state of Brahma like
tlie gods entering into the sky by devoting
themselves wholly to that worshipful system
which is theirs and whichis adoted by all
wise men.


113. Those twice-born ones who are
given to the acquisition of that knowledge
which is recommended in the Sankhya
System, even if they fail to acquire emi-
hence, are never seen to fall among inter-
mhediate Creatures; or to sink into the state
of sinful men,

irq. That great person who is fully
éonversant with the vast, high, ancient,
ocean-like, and immeasurable Sattkhya
System who is pure and liberal and agree-
able, beconies; O king, equal to Narayana.


115. I have now told you, O god aniong
tien, the truth about the Sankhya system.
It is the embodiment of Narayana, of the
lriiverse as it exists from antiquity, When

the time of Creation comes, He causes the
Creation to come into being, and when the
time comes for destruction. He swallows up
everything. Having withdrawn everything
into his own body he goes to slumber,—
that inner Soul of the wniversé.”


CHAPTER CCCXXXIIL.
‘(MOKHARDHAMA PARVA).—


Continued.


Yudhisthira said :—

ft. * What-is that which is ¢alled Un-
decaying and by acquiring which to one
has to return? What, again, is that which
is called Decaying, and by acquiring which
one has to return once more ?


2. O destroyer of enemies, I ask you the
distinction that exists, O you of mighty
arms, between the Decaying and the Un-
decaying ones for understanding them both
truly, O delighter of the Kurus.


MAHABHARALA.,


. 3. Brahmanas conversant with the
Vedas, speak of you as an Ocean of know.
ledge. Highly blessed Rishis and Yatis of
great souls do the same.


4. You have very few days to live,
When the Sun turns from his southern
solstice for entering into the northern, you
will attain to youc high end.


5. When you will leave us, from whom
shall we hear of alt that is wholesome for
us? You are the lamp of Kuru’s race,
Indeed, you are always shining with the
light of knowledge.


6. O perpetuater of Kru’s race, I wish;
therefore, to hear all this from you. Listen-
ing to your discourses which are alway$
sweet like nectar, my curiosity, without
being satiated, is always increasing.”’


Shishma said :—


j. ‘shall, regarding it, relate to you
the old discourse that took place between
Vashishtha and king Karala of Janaka’s
Tace.


8. Once on a time when that foremost of
Rishis, vig.,  Vaishishtha, effulgent like
the Sun, was seatéd at his ease, king
Janaka asked him about that highest know-


ledge which is for our supreme behoof,


g—1n A perfect adept in that depart-
ment of knowledge which is about the Soul
and gifted with sure conclusions about al
branches of that science, as Mairtravaruni,
that foremost of Rishis, was seated, the
king, approaching him with joined hands;
asked him in humble words, well said and
sweet and shorn of all controversial spirit,
this question—O holy one, I wish to hear
of Supreme and Eternal Brahma by attains
ing to which men of wisdom have not to’
feturn,


12. I wish also to know that which is
éalled Destructible and That into whict’
this universe goes when destroyed. Indeed,
what is That which is said to be indestruc-
tible, auspicious, wholesome and free from
all sorts of evil.


Vashishtha said :—
13. Hear, O king, as to how this uni-
verse is destroyed, and of That which was


never destroyed and which will never bé
destroyed ai-any time.


14. Twelve thousand. years make a cy cle.
Four such cycles, taken a thousand times,
make a Kalpa which measures one day of
Brahman.

15-17. Brahnian’s night also, O king,
is of the same measure. When Brahman
himself is destroyed, Shambhu of formless
soul and to whom the Yoga attributes of


SHANTI PARVA,


fightness, heaviness, etc., naturally sticle,
awakes, and once more creates that First
of all creatures, possessed of huge propor-
tions, of infinite deeds, endued with form,
and at one with the universe. ‘That Sham-
bhu is otherwise called Ishana. He is pure
Effulyence, and is above all decay, having
his hands and feet stretching on all sides
with eyes and head and mouth everywhere,
and with ears also in every place. That
Being exists, possessing the eutire universe.


18. The eldest-born Being is called
Hiranyagarbha. This holy one has heen
talled the Understanding. In the Yoga
scriptures, He is called the Great, atid
Viriachi, and the Unborn,


19. In the Sankhya system, He is des-
cribed by diverse names, and considered
as having Iufinity for his Soul. Of various
forms and constituting the soul of the
universe, He is considered as One and
indestructible, .


20. The three worlds of numberless in-
BZredients have been created by Him with-
out help from any source and have been
overwhelmed by him. On account of His
manifold forms, He is said to be of uni-
versal form.


at. Undergoing changes He creates
Himself by Himself. Gifted with great
energy, He first creates Consciousness and
that Great Being called Prajapati endued
with Consciousness.


22, The Manifest is created from the
Unmanifest. ‘his is called by the learned
the Creation of Knowledge. The creation
of (Virat}) aud Consciousness, by Hiranya-
garbha, is the Creation of Ignorance.


23. Allotment of attributes and the des-
truction thereof, called respectively by the
names of Ignorance and Knowledge by
persous learned in the Shrutis, then arose,
tefercing to this, that, or the other of the
uhree. ; ;


24. Know, O king. that the creation of
the elements from Consciousness is the
third. In all kinds of Consciousness is the
foucth creation which originates {rom modi-
fication of the third.


25. This fourth creation consists of
Wind and Light and Ether and Water and
Earth, with their properties of sound, touch,
form, taste, and scent. |


26. This aggregate of ten arose, for-
sooth, at the same time. he fifth creation,
O king, is that which has originated, from
combinations of the principal elements.


27. This comprises the ear, the skin,
the eyes, the tongue, and the nose forming
the fifth, and speech, and? the two hands,


60


473


and the two legs, and the lower canal, and
the organs of generation.


28. The first five of these form the organs
of knowledge, and the last five the organs
of action. All these, with mind, arose
simultaneously, O king.


29. These form the twenty-four topics
thac exist in the forms of all living crea-
tures. By understanding these properly,
Brahmanas endued with insight into the
truth have never to give way to sorrow.


30—34. In the three worlds a combi-
nation of these, called body, is possessed
by all embodied oes Indeed, O
king, a combination of those i, known as
such in gods and men ahd Danavas, ia
Yakshas and spirits and Gandharvas, and
Kinnaras and great snakes, and Charanas
and Pishachas, in celestial Rishis arm
Rakshasas, in biting flies, and worms, and
gnats, and vermin born of filth and rats,
and dogs and Shwapakas and Chaineyas
and Chandalas and Pukkasas, in elephants
and horses and asses and tigers, and trees,
and kine. Whatever other creatures exist
in water or ether or on earth, for there is
no other place in which creatures exist as
we have heard, have this combination.


35. All these, O sire, included within
the class called Manifest, are seen to be
destroyed day after day. : Hence, all crea-
tures begotten by union of these twenty-
four are said to be destructible,


36. This then is the Indestructible.
And since the universe, which is made up
of Manifest and Unmanifest, is destroyed,
therefore, it is said to be Destructible.


37- The very Being called Mahan who
is the first born is always spoken of as an
instance of the Destructible. I have now
told you, O king, all that. you had asked
me,


38. Above the twenty-four topics al-
teady referred to is the twenty-filth called
Vishnu. ‘Nhat Vishnu, on account of the
absence of all qualities, is not a topie
though as that which permeates all the
topics, he has been called so by the wise.


39- Since that which is destructible has
caused all this that is Manifest, therefore,
all this is gifted with form. The twenty-
fourth, which is Nature, is said to lord ever
all this. The twenty-fifth, which is Vishnu,
is formless and, therefore, cannot be said
to lord over the universe, .


40. Yt is "that Unmanifest, which, when
endued with body lives in the hearts of all
creatures having body. As regards eternal
Consciousness, ‘although he is shorn of attri-
butes and without form, yet he assumes all
forms, : =


474


4t. Uniting with Nature which has the
attributes of birth and death, he also
assumes the attributes of birth and death.
And jon account of such union he becomes
an object of perception and though in
reality jshorn of all attributes yet he comes
to be invested therewith.


42. It is in this way that the Soul, be-
coming united with Nature and invested
with Ignorance, undergoes changes and
becomes conscious of Self, -


43. Uniting with the qualities of Good-
ness, Darknes and Ignorance, he becomes
atone with various creatures belonging to
various orders of Being, on ‘account of his
forgetfulness and his waiting upon Igno-
tance,


44. On account of his birth and death
orignitating from the fact of his living in
union with Nature, he thinks himself to be
no other than what he apparently is. Know-
ing himself as this or that, he follows the
qualities of Goodness, Darkness and Igno-
rance. :


45. Under the influence of Ignorance, he
comes by various kinds of conditions which
are affected by Ignorance. Under the influ-
ences of Darkness and Goodness he attains
likewise to conditions which are affected
by Darkness and Goodness.


- 46. There are three colors in all, viz.,
White, Red, and Dark, All those colors
belong to Nature. .


47. Through Ignorance one goes to hell.
Through Darkness one attains to the status
of humanity. Through Goodness people
ascend to the regions of the gods and
partake of great happiness. :


48. By sticking to sin continuously one
sinks into the intermediate order of beings.
By acting both virtuously and sinfully one
comes by the status of humanity. By
acting only righteously, one attains to the
status of the gods.


49. In this way the twenty-fifth, ofs.,
(the Indestructible), the wise say, by union
with the unmanifest, becomes changed into
(destructible). By means of knowledge,
however, the Indestructible appears in His
true nature.


CHAPTER CCCIV.
(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued.


Vashishtha said :—


é f

t. Thus on account of his forgetfulness
the Soul follows Ignorance and acquires
thousands of bodies ons after another.


MAHABHARATA,


2. He attains to thousands of birtlis
among the intermediate orders and some-
times among the very gods on account
his union witb qualities.


3. From the status of humanity he goes
to heaven and from heaven he returns ta
humanity, and from humanity he sinks into
hell for many long years.


4. As the worm that make the cocoon
does itself. completely on all sides by means
of the threads it weaves itself, so the Soul,
though in reality above all qualities, invests
himself on ali sides with qualities.


5—7. Though above both happiness
and misery, it is thus that he subjects him-
self to happiness and misery. It is thus
also that, though above all diseases, the
Soul considers himself to be afflicted by
headache, opthalmia, toothache, affections
of the throat, abdominal dropsy, burning
thirst, enlargement of glands, cholera,
vitiligo, leprosy, burns, asthma, phthisis,
epilepsy,. and various other diseases from
which embodied creatures suffer,


8. Considering himself, through error,
as born among thousands of creatures in
the intermediate orders of being, and some-
times among the gods, he suffers misery
and enjoys the fruits of his good deeds.


9—15- Invested with Ignorance he
considers himself as dressed sometimes in
white cloth and sometimes in full dress of
four pieces, or as lying on floors or with
hands and feet contracted like those of
frogs, or as ‘seated upright in the position
of meditation, or as clad in rags or as lying
ot sitting under the canopy of heaven or
within palaces built of bricks and stone or
on rugged stones or on ashes or bare
stones or on the naked earth or on beds or
on battle-fields or in water or in mire or on
wooden planks or on various sorts of beds ;
er, moved by desire of fruit, he considers
himself as clad in a piece of cloth made of
grass or as totally naked or as dressed in sills
or in skin of the black antelope or in cloth
made of flax or in sheep-skin or in tiger
skin oc in lion-skin or in hemp fabric, oc
in barks of birch or in cloths made of the
produce of prickly plants, or in vestures .
made of threads woven by worms or of
tattered rags or in various other sorts of
cloth too numerous to mention. The soul
considers himself also as wearing various
sorts of ornaménts and gems, or as eating
various sorts of food. :


16--20. He considers himself as some
times eating at intervals of one night, or
once at the same hour every day, or a$
at the fourth, the sixth, and the eighth
hour every day, or as oncein six or seven
or eight nights, of as once in ten or twelv


SHANTI PARVA.


days, or as once, in a month, or as eating
only roots, or fruits, or as living upon air
or water alone, or on cakes of sesame husk,
or curds or cowdung, or the urine of the
cow or potherbs or flowers or moss or raw
food, or as living on fallen leaves of trees
orfruits that have dropped down and lie
scattered on the ground, or various other
sorts of food, moved by the desire of ac-
quiring ascetic success.


21—25. The Soul considers himself as
following the observance of Chandrayana
according to the rites laid down in the scrip-
tures, or various other vows and obser-
vances, and the courses of duty laid down
for the four modes‘of life, and even prohi-
bitions of duty, and the duties of other
subsidiary modes of life set down the four
principal ones, and even various kinds of
practices that distinguish the wicked and
sinful. The Soul considers himself as en-
joying lonely places and _ the. charming
shades of mountains and the cool vicinity
of springs and fountains, and solitary river
banks and secluded forests, and sacred
pilgrimages, and Jakes ‘and waters remote
from the busy haunts of men, and lonely
mountain caves giving the accomodation
that houses and palaces affurd. The Soul
consider himself as reciting of different
kinds of secret {Mantras or as- observing
different vows and jrules and varidus. sorts
of penances, and- sacrifices of many sorts,
and rites of diverse sorts.


26. The Soul considers himself as fol-
lowing sometimes the ways of traders and
merchants and the practices. of Brahmanas,
Kshatriyas, Vaishyas and Shudras, and
gifts of various sorts to those who are poor
or blind or helpless. :


27. On account of his being invested
with Ignorance, the Soul adopts the differ-
ent qualities of Goodness, Darkness and
Ignorance, and Kighteousness and riches
and pleasure.


28—29. . Under the influence of N ature,
the Soul, undergoing changes himself, ob-
serves and follows and practises all these
and considers himself as such. Indeed,
the Soul considers himself as employed in
the utterance’of the sacred Mantras Swaha,
Swadha and Vashat, and in saluting those
he considers as his elders; in officiating
in the sacrifices of others, in teaching
pupils, making gifts and accepting them ;
in celebrating sacrifices and studying the
scriptures, and doing all other acts and
rites of this sort.


30. The Soul considees himself as con-
nected with birth and death and quarrels
and destruction. All these, the learned
say, form the path of acts good and bad.


?


475


31—34. Itis the goddess Nature wha
causes birth and death. When the time
comes for Universal Dissolution, all exis«
tent objects and qualities aref'withdrawa
by the Supreme Soul which then exists
alone like the Sun withdrawing at evening
all his rays; and when the time comes
for Creation He once more creates and
spreads them out like the Sun shedding
his rays when morning comes. Thus the
Soul, for the sake ,of sport, repeatedly
considers himself invested with all these
conditions, which are his own forms and
qualities infinite in number, and agreeable
to himself. It is thus that the Soul, thougl
really above the three qualities, becomes
attached to the path of acts and creates
by modification Nature invested with the
conditions of birth and death and at once
with all acts and conditioas which are
characterised by the three qualities of
Goodness, Darkness, and Ignorance. Ar-
rived at the path of action, the Soul consi-
ders particular acts as possessing particular
characteristics and productive of particular
ends.


35.. O king, the whole of .this universe
has ,been blinded by Nature and all things
have been variously: overwhelmed (through
Nature by ,the qualities of Darkness and
Ignoraiite. :

. 36,, -It is on account of the Soul being
invested by . Nature that these pairs of
opposites, productive of happiness and woe,
again and again come. It is on account of
this Ignorance {that Individual Soul cons
sidets these sorrows to be his and imagines
them as following him. ~ :


°37+38. Andeed, O king, through that
Ignorance it is that Individual Soul imagines
he should anyhow cross those sorrows, and
that he should, going into the regions of
the gods, enjoy the. happiness that awaits
all his good deeds. ft is throuzh [ynor-
ance that he thitks he should enjoy ani
suffer these delights and'these miseri¢s here
in this world, ;


39. Uhrowgh Ignorance Endividual Sout
‘things, —I should secure my happiness. By
continually doing good deeds, | miy enjoy
happiness in this life ull its close and I shalt
be happy in all my future lives.


40. ‘Through, again, the evil deeds [ do
in this life | may suffer unending misery,
Vhe status of humanity is full of great
misery, for from it one sinks into hell.


41—43. From hell, it will take many
lony years before I can return to the status
of humanity. Fciom humanity | shallattain.
tothe status of the gods. From that
superior status I shall have to,retarn to,
‘humanity and thence to sink into hell once


476


more. One who always cons{ders this
combination of the principal elements and
the senses, with the reflection of conscious-
ness in it, to be thus invésted with the
characteristics of the Soul, has again and
again to walk among gods and human
‘beings and to sink into hell. Being always
invested with the idea of mineness, Indivi-
dual Soul has to go through a round of
such births.


44-~47. Millions upon millions of births
have to be gone through by Individual Soul
jn the sucécessive forms he assumes, all of
which are liable to death. He who does
acts in this way, which are all full of good
and bad fruits, has in the three worlds to
assume Successive forms and to enjoy and
suffer fruits corresponding therewith, It is
Nature that causes good and bad acts;
and it is Nature that enjoys and suffers the
fruits thereof in the three worids. Indeed,
Nature follows the course of acts. The
status of the intermediate beings, of hu-
manity, and of the gods, all originate from
. Nature. Nature has been said to be shorn
of all qualities. Her existence is proved
by her acts.
48—5r. Similarly, Soul, thongh without
attribuies himself, has. his existence proved
by the acts which the body does when it
receives his reflection, Although the Soul
is not subject to changes of any kind, and
is the active principle that sets Nature in
motion, yet entering a body which is united
with the senses of knowledge and action, he
considers all the acts of those senses as his
own. ‘The five senses of knowledge begin-
ning with the ear, and those of action
beginning with speech, uniting with the
qualities of Goodness and Darkness and
Ignorance, become engaged in numerous
objects, Individual Soul imagines that it
is he who does the deeds of his life and that
the senses of knowledge and action belong
to him, although in reality he has no senses.
Indeed, though having no body, he ima-
gines that he has a body. Though shora
of qualities, he considers himself as endued
therewith, and though above ‘Time, ima-
gines himself to be under Time’s control.


52. Though having no understanding,
he still considers himself as endued with it,
and though above the four and twenty
topics, considers himself as one included
among them. Though deathless, he still
considers himself as subject to death, and
though motionless regards himself as
having motion,


5.3 Though not prssessed of a material
body, he stilt considers himself as possessed
of one; and though unborn, he still re-
pards himself as having birth. Though
above penances, he still considers as en-


MAHABHARATA.


gaged in penances, and though he has no
end he still considers himself as liable to
attain to ends.


54. Though not gifted with motion and
birth, he still considers himself as endued
with both, and though above fear, still con-
siders himself as subject to fear. Though
Indestructible, he still considers himself
Destructible. Invested with Ignorance, the
Soul thus thinks of himself.


CHAPTER CCCV.


{MOKSHADHRAMA PARVA),—
Continued.


Vashishtha said :—


1. It is thus, on account of his Ignore
ance and his association with others who
are invested with Ignorance, that Indivi-
dual Soul passes through millions and
millions of births every one of which has
dissolution in the end,


2. On account of his transformation
into Intelligence invested with Ignorance,
Individual Soul goes to millions of abodes,
every one of which is liable to end in des-
truction, among intermediate beings and
men and the gods.


3-4. On account of Ignorance, Indivi-
duai Soul like the Moon, has to wax and
wane thousands and thousands of times.
This is truly the nature of Individual Soul
when invested with Ignorance, Know that
the Moon has in reality full sixteen por-
tions, Only fifteen of these are subject to
increase and decrease. ‘The sixteenth re-
mains constant, After the manner of the
Moon, [Individual Soul too has full sixteen
portions. Only fifteen of these, appear
and disappear. The sixteenth is subject
to no change.


5. Invested with Ignorance, Individual
Soul repeatedly and continually;takes birth
in the fifteen portions, named above. With
the eternal and immutable portion of Indi-
vidual Soul the principal elements become
united and this union takes place re-
peatedly.


6. That sixteenth portion is subtile. It
should be known as Soma. It is never
upheld by the senses. On the other hand,
the senses are upheld by it. ‘


7. Since those sixteen portions are the
cause of the birth of creatures, creatures
can never, O king, take birth without their
help. Tchey are called Nature. The des-
truction of Jiva’s lialibity to be united with
Nature is called Liberation,


SUANTS


8—10. The Principle of Greatness,
which is the twenty-fifth, if it regards that
body of sixteen portions called the Un-
manifest, has to assume it repeatedly. On
account of not knowing That which is
stainless and pure, and for its devotion to
what is the outcome of a combination of
both Pure and Impure, the Soul, which is,
in reality, pure, becomes, O king, Impure.
Indeed, on account of its devotion to Ignor-
ance, Individual soul though characterised
by Knowledge, becomes repeatedly associa-
ted with Ignorance. .


11, Though, O king, free from error of
every sort, yet on account of its devotion
to the three qualities of Nature, it becomes
endued with those attributes.


CHAPTER CCCVI,


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued.


Janaka said :—


1. O holy one, it has been said that the
relation between male and female is like
that which exists between the Indestructible
and the Destructible.


2. Without a male, a female can never
conceive. Without a female, a male also
can never create a form.


3. Qa account of their union with each
other, and each depending upon the quali-
ties of the other, forms are seen to spring
up. This is the case with all orders of
being.

4. Through each other’s union for pur-
poses of (sexual) intercourse, and through
each depending upon the qualities of the
other, forms (of living creatures) flow in
seasons. I shall tell you the indications
thereof.


5. Hear what the qualities are which
belong to the father and what those are
which belong to the mother. Bones, sinews,
and marrow, O twice-born one, we know,
originate from the father.


6. Skin, flesh, and blood, we hear, ori-


ginate from the mother. ‘Even this, O fore- -


most of twice-born ones, is what may be
read of in the Veda and other scriptures.


. Whatever is read as said in the
Vedas and in other scriptures is considered
as authority. The authority, again, of the
Vedas and other scriptures, is eternal.

Seg. If Nature and Soul be always
united together in this way by each oppos-
ing and each depending on the other’s
qualities, I see, O holy one, that Libera-


PARVA. 477


tion cannot exist. You, O holy one, are
gifted with spiritual vision so that you see
all things as if they are present before your
eyes. if, theretore, there be any direct
evidence of thé existence of Liberation, do
speak of it to me,


to. We are desirous of acquiring Libe-
ration. Indeed, we wish to acquire hat
which is auspicious, bodiless, not subject
to decrepitude, eternal, beyond the percep-
tion of the senses, and having nothing
superior to it.


Vashishtha said :—


1r. What you say about the charac-
teristics of the Vedas and the other scrip-
tures is even so. You understand those
marks in the way in which they should be
understood.


12. You only understand arighh the
texts of the Vedas and the other scriptures.
You are not, O king, truly conversant with
the real meaning of those texts.


13. That person who remembers merely
the texts of the Vedas and the other scrip«
tures without understanding the true sensa
or meaning of those texts, remembering
them fruitlessly. .


14. Indeed, one who remembers a work,
without understanding their meaning, is.
said to carry an useless load. .He, however,
who understands the true meaning of a
treatise, is said to have studied that work
to purpose. :


15. Asked about the meaning of a text,
one should communicate that meaning
which he has understood by a careful
study,


>

16. That person of dull intelligence who.
refuses to explain the meanings of texts in_
the midst of an assemblage of the learned,
that person of foolish understanding, nevec
succeeds in explaining the meaning aright.

17. An ignorant wight, going to explain
the true meaning of treatises, incurs ridi-
cule. Even those endued with a knowledge
of the Soul have to incur ridicule on such
occasions.


18. Listen now to me, O king, as to
how the subject of Liberation has been
explained among the great persons conver-
sant with the Sankhya and the Yoga Sys«
tems of Philosophy.


19. That which the Yogins behold is
exactly what the Sankhyas strive after to
attain. He who sees the Sankhya and the
Yoga Systems to be one and the same is
said to be gifted with intelligence.

20. Skin, flesh, blood, fat, bile, marrow, _
and sinews, and these‘senses, which you
were speaking to me, exist.


478


ar. Objects originate from objects; the

senses from the senses. From body one
,acquires a body, as a seed is obtained from
seed, 2

22. When the Supreme Being is with-
out senses, without seed, without matter,
without body, He must be divested of all
qualities ; and on account of His being so,
how, indeed, can He have qualities of any
kind? :

23. Ether and other qualities originate
from the qualities of Goodness, Darkness,
and Ignorance, and disappear in the end in
them. ‘Thus the qualities arise from Nature
and disappear in Nature. .

24. Skin, flesh, blood, fat, bile, marrow,
bones, and sinews,—these eight, that are
made of Nature, know, O king, may some-
times be produced by the vital seed alone
(of the male). :


a5. The Individuat Soul and the universe
are said to both partake of Nature charac-


terised by the three qualities of Goodness,’


Darkness, and Ignorance. ‘The Supreme
Soul-is different from both the Individual
Soul and the universe.


26. Asthe seasons, though having no
forms, are nevertheless inferred from the
appearance of particular fruits and flowers,
similarly, Natuce, though formless, is in-
ferred from the Principles of Greatness and
the rest that originate from. it:


27. Thus, from the existence of.‘ Con+
sciousness in the body, the “Supreme Soul,
shorn of all qualities whatever: and per-
fectly stainless, is: inferred. -


28. Without beginning and destruction,
without end, the seer of all things, and aus+
picious, that Soul, only of account of its
Oneness with the body and other qualities,


comes, ta be taken as invested with
qualities, a. an
29. ‘Fhose persons who are. truly eon- |


versant with qualities know that only objects
endued with qualities can have attributes
but that Ehat which is above all qualities
can have none.


30. When the Individual Soul conquers
all qualities born of Nature and which it
assumes under mistake, only then does it
see the Supreme Soul.


3I1—33- Only the highest Rishis can-
versant with the Sankhya and the Yoga
Systems know that Supreme Soul. which
Sankhyas and Yogins and believers in all
other Systems say is beyond the Unders-
tanding, which is considered as Knower
and endued with the highest wisdom on
account of its renouncing all consciousness
of identification with Nature, which is above
the attribute of Ignorance or Error, which


MAHABHARATA.


is Unmanifest, which is beyond all attri.
butes, which is called the Supreme, which
is dissociated from all attributes, which
ordains all things, which is Eternal and
Immutable, which overrules Nature and
all her attributes, and which, getting over
twenty-four topics of enquiry, forms the
twenty-fifth.


34. When men of knowledge, who stand
in fear of birth, of the several: states of
living consciousness, and of death, succeed
in knowéng the Unmanifest, they succeed
in understanding the Supreme Soul at the
same time. ;


35. An’ intelligent man considers the
unity otf the-Individual Soul with the
Supreme Soul as consistent with the scrip-
tures and as perfectly -correct ; while the
man shorn of intelligence considers the two
as different from each other. ‘this forms
the distinction between the man of intelli-
gence and the man that is shorn of it,


36. The characteristics of both the Des-
tructible and Indestructible have now been
said to-you. The indestructible is Onenness
or Unity, while multiplicy or variety is said
to be the Destructible,


37- When one begins to study and
understand properly the twenty-five topics
of enquiry, one then understands that the
Oneness of the Soul is consistent with the
scriptures and its multiplicity is what is
opposed to them.


38.. These are the several characteristics
of. what is included in the list of topics or
principles created and. what is above that
list. “Fhe wise have said that the list of
topics aumbers only twenty-five.

. 39.. That which is above the topics is
beyond that number and forms the twenty-
sixth.: The study oc comprehension of


Created. things according to their aggre-


gates (of five) is the study and comprehen.
sion of topics, Above these is [hat which
is eternal.


..: CHAPTER CCCVII.


(MOKSHADHRAMA PARVA).—
- Continued.


Janaka said :—

a.. You have, O foremost of Rishis, said
that Unity.is the attribute of that which js.
Indestructible and variety or multiplicity
is the attribute of what is known as Destruc~
tible. I have not, however, clearly under.
stood the nature of these two. Daubts.


_are still in my mid


SHANTI


4. Ignorant men consider the Soul as
eridued with multiplicity. They, however,
who are endued with knowledge and
wisdom consider the Soul to-be one and the
same, I, however, have a very dull un-
destanding. | am, therefore, tunable to
understand how all this can take place.


3- I have almost forgotten the causes
also that you have attributed to the unity
and the multiplicity of the Indestructible
and the Destructible on account of the
restlessness of my understanding.


4—~5. I, therefore, wish to hear you once
more discourse to meon those subjects of
unity and multiplicity, on-him who jis gifted
with knowledye, on what is shorn of. know-
ledge, on (ndividual Soul, Knowledge,
Iyzuorance, Indestructible, Destructible, and
on the Sankhya and the Yoga systems, in
detail and separately and agreeably to the
truth,


Vashishtha said :—


6. LI shall tell you what you ask. Listen,
however, to me, O king, as [ explain to you
the practices of Yoga separately.


q- Contemplation, which forms an obli-
gatory practice with Yogins, is theie high-
est power. Those conversant with Yoga
say that that Contemplation is of two
sorts. 3


8. One is the concentration of the mind,
and the other is called Pranayama (suppres-
sion of vital airs). Pranayama is said to
be real; while concentration of mind is un-
substantial it. ‘


g. Excepting the three times when a
man passes urine and stools and eats, one
should devote his entire time to contem-
plation.


to—1tt. Withdrawing the senses from
their objects by the help of the mind, one
gifted with intelligence, having made one-
self pure, should, according to the twenty-.
two modes of transmitting ~ the Prana
breath, unite the Individual Soul with That
which is above the four and twentieth topic
which is regarded by the wise as living in
every part of the body and as above decay
and destruction.


12. It is by means of those twenty-two
modes that the Soul may always be known.
It is ceratin that this practice of Yoga is
his whose mind is never possessed by evil
passions. It is not any other person’s,


13—14. Freed from all attachments,
abstemious in diet, and controlling ali the
senses, one should fix his mind on the Soul,
ducing the ficst and the last part of the
night, after having, O king of Mithila,
stopped the functions of all the senses,

1


PARYVA. 479


quieted the mind by the’ understanding,
and assumed a posture as motidnless as
that of stone. ~


13. When men of knowledge, conver-
sant with the cules of Yoga, become as
fixed as a stake of wood, and as immovable
as a mountain, then they are said to be
in Yoga.


16—17., Whan one does not hear, and
smell, and taste, and see; when one does
not feel any touch; when one’s mind is
perfectly free from every purpose; when
one is not conscious of any thing, when one
cherishes no thought, when one becomes
like a piece of wood, then is he called by
the wise to be in perfect Yoga.


18. At such a time one shines likea
lamp that burns in a place where blows no
wind; at such a time one becomes. freed
even from his subtile form, and perfectly —
at one with Brahma. When ene acquires
such progress, he has no longer to ascend -
or to fall among intermediate beings.


19 When persons like’ourselves say that
there has been a complete wentifi: ition ‘of
the Knower, the Known, and Kn vledge,
then is the Yozin said to see the Supreme
Self. ‘

20. While in Yoga, the Supreme Soul
shows itself in the Yogin’s heart like a-
burning fire, or like the ‘bright Sun or like
the lightning’s spark in the firmament.


2t—~-22, That Supreme Soul which is


_Unborn and which ig the essence of nectar,


which is seen by great Brahmanas gifted
with intelligence and wisdom and conver-
sant with the Vedas, is subtiler than what
is subtile- and greater than what is great.
That Soul, though living in all creatures,
is not seen by them. ~ :


23. The Creator of the worlds, He is
seen only ‘by a person gifted with wealth of
intélligence when helped by the lamp of
the mind. He lives onthe other shore of
thick Darkness and is above the Ish wara.


24. Persons conversant with the Vedas
and endued with omniscience caft Him the
the remover of Darkness, stainless, above
Darkness, and with and without attributes.


25. This is what is called the Yoga of
Yogins. Whatelse is the mark of Yoga?
By such practices. do Yogins succeed in
seeing the Supreme Soul that is above
destruction and decay. e


26. This much that I have told you in
detail is about the Science of; Yoga. -1 shall
now describe to you that Sankhya_ philo-
sophy by which the Supreme Soul is seen
through the gcadual destruction of mis-
takes.


480


27. The Sankhyas, whose System is
built on Nature, say that Nature, which is
Unmanitest, is the foremost. From Nature
they say, O king, the second principle
called Greatness is produced.


28. We have heard that from Greatness
originates the third principle called Con-
sciousness, The Sarikhyas blessed with
sight of the Soul say that from Caonscious-
ness originate the five subtile ‘essences of
sound, form, touch, taste, and scent.


- 29. All these eight they call by the
name of Nature. The changes of these
eight are sixteen in number, They are
the five gross essences of ether, light, earth,
water, and wind, and the ten senses of
action and of knowledge inctuding the
mind, 2


3o.
path and conversant with all its ordinances
and dispensations consider these twenty-
four topics as including the whole range
of Sankhya enquiry.


31. What is produced becomes merged
in the producing cause. Created by the
Supreme Soul one after another, these
principles are destcoyed in a reverse order.


32. Atevery new Creation, the quali-
ties start into being in the fatecal order,
and (when Destruction comes) they merge
in a reverse order, like the waves of the
ocean disappearing in the ocean from
which they originate.


33. O best of kings, this is the
manner in which the Creation and the
Destruction of Nature takes place. The
Supreme Being is all that remains when
Universal destruction takes place; and it
is He wha ‘assumes various forms when
Creation begins.


34. This is even so, O king, as ascer-
tained by men of knowledge. It is Nature
that causes the Over-presiding Soul to
thus assume diversity and revert back to
unity. Nature also herself has the same
marks,


35- One fully conversant with the nature
of the topics of enquiry knows that Nature
also assumes the same sort of diversity
and unity, for when Destruction comes
she reverts into unity and when Creation
takes place she assumes diversity of form.


36. , The Soult makes Nature, which
contains the principles of production or
growth, assume various forms. Nature is
called Kshetra (or soil). Above the twenty-
four topics or principles isthe Soul which


is Great. It presides over that Nature or
Kshetra.
37- Hence, O great king, the foremost


Yatis say that the Soul is the Presider. |


‘Wise men devoted to the Sankhya_


MAHABHARATA,


Indeed, we have heard that on account


-of the Soul’s presiding over all Kshetrast,


He is called the Presider.


38. And because He knows that Un-
manifest Kshetra, He is, therefore, also
called Kshetrajna. Aud because also the
Soul enters into Unmanifest Kshetra (viz.,
the body), therefore is He called Purusha.


39. Kshetra is something quite different
from Kshetrajoa, Kshetra is Unmanifest.
Lhe Soul, which is above the twenty-four
principles, is called the Knower.


40. Knowledge and the objects known
are different from each other. Kunowledye,
again, has been said to be Unmanifest,
while the object of knowlege is the Soul
which jis above the twenty-four principles.


4t. The Uamanifest is called Kshetra,
understanding, and also the supreme Lord ;
while Purusha, which is the twenty-fifth
principle has nothing superior to it and
is not a principle, ‘


42. This much, O king, is an account
of the Sankhya philosophy. ‘he Sankhyas
call Nature the cause of the universe, and
merging all the grosser principles into the
‘Intelligence behold the Supreme Soul.


43. Rightly studying the twenty-four
topics along with Nature, and determining
theie ‘true natuce, the Sankhyas succeed
in seeing. That which is the twenty-fouc
topics or principles.


44. Individual Soul in reality
very Soul which is above Nature and
‘the four and twenty topics. When he
succeeds in knowing that Supreme Soul
by dissociating himself from Nature, he
a becomes at one with the Supreme

al. :


45, I have now told you everything
about the Sankhya System truly. Those
who are conversant with this philosophy
acquire tranquillity.

46. Indeed, as men whose understand-
ings are subject to error directly . perceive
all objects of the senses, so men freed
from error have directly known Brahma.


47. They who ‘acquire that state have
never to return to this world after the
dissolution of their bodies; while as re-
gards those who are said to be liberated
in this life, power, conceutration, and inrmu-
tability, become theirs, on account of their
having attained to the nature of the
Indestructible.


is that


48. They whosee this universe as many
are said to see incorrectly. These men are
blind to Brahma. O chastiser of enemies,
such persons have again and again to
return to the world pnd assume bogies.


SHANTI


49 They who are convetsant with alt
hat has been said above become endued
with omniscience, and accordingly when
they pass from this body no longer become
‘subject to the subjection of any more
physical frames.


50. Ali things, have been said to be the
Yesult of the Unmanifest. The Soul, which
fs the twenty-fifth, is above all things.
They who know the Sout have no fear of
toming back to the world.


bniinmante


CHAPTER CCCVIIE.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).=
Continued.


Vashishtha said :—

1. IT have thus described you the
Sankhya Philosophy. Lister now to me
as I telf you what is Vidya (Knowledge)
and what is Avidya (Nescience), one after
the other.


2. The learned say that that Nature
which is subject to Creation and Destruc- |
tion, ts called Avidya; while Purusha
(Soul), who is freed from the attributes of
Creation and Destruction and wha is above
the twenty-four topics or principles, is calted
Vidya.

3. Listen to me first as { tell you what
is Vidya among successive sets of other
things, as explained in the Sankhya Phito-
sophy.

4. Among the senses of knowledge and
those of action, the senses of knowledge
are said to form what is known as Vidya,
Of the senses of knowledge and their
objects, the former form Vidya.


5. Of objects of the sensés and the
mind, the wise have said that the mind
forms Vidya. Of mind and the five sub-
tile essences, the five subtile essences form
Vidya. ;

6. Of the five subtife essences and Con-
sciousness, Conscinusness forms Vidya.
Of Consciousness and Greatness the latter
O king, is Vidya,

7. Of allthe principles beginning with
Greatness, and Nature, it is Nature, which
is unmanifest and supreme, that is called
Vidya. Of Nature, and that calfed Creator
which is Supreme, the latter should be
known as Vidya. ;

8. Above Nature is the twenty-fifth
(Soul) who should be known as Vidya.
Of all Knowledge, that which is the Object
of Knowledge bas been said to be the
Unmanifest, O king.


61


PARVA. 481


9 Again, Knowledge has been said to
be Unmanifest, and the Object of know-
ledge to be what is above the four and
twenty. Once more, Knowledge has been
said to be Unmanifest, and the Knower is
what is above the four and twenty. {f have
now told you what is truly the meaning of
Vidya and Avidya.


to. Listen now to me as I tell you that
has been said about the Indestructible and
the Destructible. Both Individual Soul and
Nature have been said to be Indestructible,
and both of them have been said to be
Destructible.


11. I. shalt tell you the reason of this
correctly as I have understood it. Both
Nature and Individual Soul are without
beginning and.without end. Both of them
are considered as supreme,


. 12, Those: who are endued with know-
ledge say that both are to be called princi-
ples. On account of its attributes of
Creation. andj Destruction, the Unmanifest
is called Indestructible.


13. That Unmanifest becomes repeated-
ly modified for the purpose of creating the
principles, ;

14. And because the pwinciples begin-
ning with Greatness are produced by
Purusha (Soul) as weil, and because also


Purusha and the Unmanifest mutually
depend upon each othér, therefore ‘is
Purusha also, the twenty-fifth, called


Kshetra.


15. When the Yogin withdraws and_
merges all the principles into the Unmani-
fest Soul (or Brahma), then the twenty-
fifty (vtg., Soulor Purysha) also, with al |
those principles, disappears into it. ve


16—17. When the principles become
merged each into its creator, then the one
that remains is Nature. When Soul, too,
O son, becomes merged into his own pro-
ducing: cause, then Nature with all the
principles in it becomes subject to des-
truction and attains also to the condition
of being without attributes on account of
her dissociation from all the principles.


18, Thus it is that Soul, when his know-
ledge of Soil disappears, becomes, by his
nature, shorn of qualities. We have heard
it. a

19. We he becomes destructible he then
assumes attributes. When, however, he
gains his own real nature, he then suc-
ceeds in understanding his own condition
of being really shorn of qualities.


20. By shaking off Nature and hegin<
ning to realise that he is different from
her, the intelligent Soul then comes to be
regarded as pure and stainless. :


452


2t. When Individual Soul ceases to

exist in a state of union with Nature, then

_ does he become at one with Brahma. When,

however, he exists united with Nature,

he then, O king, seems to be different from
Brahma.


22. Indeed, wher Individual Soul shows
no affection for Nature and her principles,
he then succeeds in seeing the Supreme and
having once seen Him wishes not to lose
that happiness.


23. When the Knowledge of truth comes
to him, Individual Sout begins to lament
thus :—~Alas, how foolishly have I acted
by falling through ignorance into this frame
composed of Nature like a fish entangled
in a net.


24. Alas, through [gnorance, I have
migrated from body to body like a fish
from water to water thinking that ‘water
alone is the element in which it can dwell.


25. Indeed, like a fish that does not
know anything else than water to be its
element, I also have never known anything
else than children and wives to be my
own !


26. Fie on me that, through ignorance,
am repeatedly passing from body to body
in forgetfulness.


27 The Supreme Sovl alone is my
friend. I can make friendship with Him.
Whatever be my nature and whoever I may
be, I am capable to be tike Him and can
become at one with Him.


28. I see my similarity with Him. I
am, indeed, like Him. Heis pure, It is
clear that I am of the same nature.

2g. Through Ignorance ‘and stupefac-


‘tion, have become associated with Inani-
mate Nature. Though really shorn of at-


MAHABHARATA.


turning away from the Supreme Soul I
become of my own accord attached to her.


34. On account of that attachment, my-
self, though without form in reality, had to
live in various forms. Indeed, though with-
out form by nature I become endued with
forms on account of my notion of Egoism,
and thereby insulted and distressed.


35-37. On account of my idea of mine-
ness concerning the results of Nature, | am
forced to take birth in various orders of
Being. Alas, though really shorn of
Egoism, yet on account of affecting it, what
various evil acts have been perpetrated
by me in those orders in which I was born
while I remained in them with a soul that
had lost all knowledge! Ihave nothing
to do with him who, with essence made up
of consciousness, divides herself into many
pieces and who tries to unite me with
them. It is only now that I have been

’ awakened and have understood that I am

by nature without egoism and without that
consciousness which creates the forms of
Nature that invest me all around.


38. Renouncing Egoism which I always
have asain her and whose essence
is made up of consciousness, and leaving
Nature herself, | shall take refuge in Him,
who is auspicious.

39. shall be united with Him, and not
with Nature which is inanimate. If 1 unite
with Him, it will do me good. I have no
similarity of nature with Nature.


40. The twenty-fifth (vzz., Individual
Soul), when hejthus succeeds in understand -
ing the Supreme, becomes able to cast off
the Destructible and at one with the In-
destructible and which is the essence of all
that is auspicious.


4t, Shorn of qualities in his true nature


hachments, I have passed .this long time in} and in reality Unmanifest, Individual Soul


‘a state of attachment with Nature,


30. Alas, by her was I so long controlled
without having been able to know it. Vari-
ous are the forms,—high, middling, and
jow,—that Nature assumes. Oh, how shall
I like in those forms ?


31.-How shall I live conjointly with
her? Onaccount of my ignorance I repair
= her companionship. I shall now be
xed, P


32. FT shall no longer keep her company.
For having passed so long a time with her,
I should think that I was so tong imposed
on by her, for myself being really freed
from change, how could I keep company
with one who is subjeet to change.


330


She cannot be held responsible for
this,


The responsibility -is mine, since -


becomes invested with what is Manifest
and assumes qualities. When he succeeds
in seeing what is without qualities and
which is the origin of the Unmanifest, he
becomes, O king of Mithila, atone with
the same.


42. I have ’now told you the charater-
istics of the Indestructible and the Des-
tructible, according to the best of my
knowledge and according to what has been
explained in the scriptures,


43. 1 shall now tell’ you, according to
what I have heard, as to how Knowledge
that is subtile, pure and certain, otiginates.
Dotyou listen to me.


44. I have already described to you,
what the Sankhya and the Yoga Systems
are as expounded in their respective serip-
tures, Verily, the science that has beea


SHANTI! PARVA.


explained in Sankhya treatises is at one
with what has been laid down in the Yoga
scriptures,


45. The knowledge, O king, which the
Sankhyas preach, is capable of awakening
every one. In the Sankhya scriptuces,
that Knowledge has been explained very
clearly for the behoof of disciples.


46. The learned say that this Sankhya
System is very extensive. Yogins have
respect for that System as also for the
Vedas,


47+ In the Sankhya System no topic or
principle above the twenty-fifth is admitted.
That which the Sankhyas consider as their
highest principle has been duly described
(by me).

48. In the Voga philosophy, it is said
that Brahma, which is the essence of know-
ledge without the second, becomes the In-
dividual Soul only when - invested with
Ignorance. Inthe Yoga Scriptures, there-
fore, both Brahma and Individual Soul are
spoken of,


ee


CHAPTER CCCIX.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
: Continued.


Vashishtha said :—


1. Listen now to me as I describe to you
the Buddha (Enlightened or the Supreme
Self) and Abuddha (Individual Soul) which
is the dispensation of the qualities. As-
suming many forms the Supreme Soul, be-
coming Individual Soul, regards all those
forms as real.


2. On account of such transformations
{ndividual. Soul fails to understand the
Supreme Soul, for he has the three qualities
and creates and withdraws into himself
what he creates.


3. Ceaselessly for his sport, O king,
does Individual Soul undergo changes and
because he is capable of understanding the
called action of the Unmanifest, therefore
he is the Comprehender.

4. The Unmanifest' or Nature can at
no time comprehend Brahma which is reall
without qualities even when it shows itself
with .qualities. Hence is Nature called
Unintelligent.


s. There is a declaration of the Shrutis
that if ever Nature does succeed in know-
ing the twentyfifth, she then,becomes at one
with the Individual Soult who is united with
her. On account of this Individual Soul
er Parusha, who is not manifest and which

* -?


483.


in his real nature is not subject to changs s,
comes to be called as the Unawakened or
Ignorant. y


6—7. Indeed, because the twenty-fifth
can comprehend the Unmanifest, he is,
therefore, called Comprehender, He can-
not, however readily, comprehend the
twenty-sixth, which is pure, which is Knows
ledge without duality, which is -immcasur~
able, and which is eternal. The twenty-
sixth, however, can know both the
Individual Soul and Nature, numbering
the twenty-fifth and the twenty-fourth res
pectively.


8. O you of great effulgence, only wise
men know that Brahma which is Unmani-
fest, which is in its real nature to all that is
seen and unseen, and which, O son, is the
one independent essence in the universe,


When Individual Soul considers him-
self different from what he truly is, it is only
then that he fails to know the Supreme
Soul and himself and Nature with which
he is united.


to. When Individual Soul succeeds in
understanding Nature then he is said to
be restored to his true nature and then
does he attain to that high understanding
which is pure and stainless.


11.)When|Individual Soul succeeds, O fore-
most of kings, in attaining to that excellent
understanding, he then attains to that Pure
Knowledge which is called: the twenty-sixth
(or Brahma). He then casts off the Un-
manifest or Nature which has the attributes
of Creation and Destruction. j


12. When Individual Soul knows Nature
which is unintelligent and subject to the
action of the three qualities of Goodness,
Darkness and Ignorance, he then becomes
shorn of qualities himself. On account of
his thus understanding the Unmanifest,
he succeeds in acquiring the nature of the
Supreme Soul, :


13. .The tearned say that when he is
freed from the qualities and united in
nature with the Supreme Soul, then does
Individual Soul become at one with thar
Soul. The Supreme Soul, is calied the Real
as wellas Not Real, and is ubove decay and
destruction.


14. Ogiver of honors, the Sow, though
it has.the body for its resting place, yet it
cannet be said to have acquired the nature
of those principles. The wise say that
there are five and twenty principless. in all.


15. Indeedg, O son, the Soul is not to be
considered as possessed of any of the
principles. Endued with Intelligence, it is
above the principles, It renounces quickly


484


even that principle which is the mark of ,
Knowledge. -


16. When [Individual Soul comes to
regaid himself as the twenty-sixth which is
divested of decay and destruction, it is
then that, forgooth, he succeeds by his own
force in attaining to similarity with the
twenty-sixth.


17. Though awakened by the twenty-
sixth which is Pure Intelligence, Individual
Soul still becomes subject to Ignorance.
This is the cause of Jiva’s multifariousness
as explained in thelShrutis and the Sankhya
scriptures,


18. When Individual Soul, who- is
endued with consciousness, loses al! Cons-
ciousness of a distinct or individual Self,
then does he, losing his multifariousness,
resume nis Oneness.


19. Oking of Mithila, when Individual
Soul, who is found to be in union with happi-
ness and misery and who is seldom free
from the consciousness of Self, Becomes
identified with the Supreme [Soul which
transcends understanding, then does he
become [reed from virtue and vice.


20. Indeed, when Individual Soul
attaining to the twenty-sixth which is Un-
born and Powerful and which is shorn of
all attachments, succeeds in comprehend-
it thoroughly, he himself becomes possessed
of power and entirely renounces the Un-
manifest or Nature.


21—22. For understanding the twenty-
sixth, the twenty-four principles seem to
Individual Soul to be unreal, [ have thus
told you, O sinless one, according to the
indications of the Shrutis the nature’ of the
Unintelligent, and of Individual Soul, as
also of that which is Pure Knowledge,
agreeably to the truth. Guided by .the
scriptures,. variety and oneness are thus to
be understood. :


23. The difference between the gnat
and the Udumvara, or that between the
fish aud water, illustrates the difference
between the Endividual Soul and the
Supreme Soul.


24. The Multiplicity and Oneness of
these two are to be understood thus. This
is called Liberation, vss., this comprehen-
sion of oneself as something distinct from
Vuintelligent or Unmanifest Nature,


25. The twenty-fifth, which kives in the
bodies of living creatures, should be libera-
ted making him know the Unmanifest or
the Supreme Soul which is above the
understanding. - '

26. Indeed, ‘that twenty-fifth is capable
ef acquiring Liberation in this way only
and net through any other means. Though


MAHABHARATA.


insooth different from the body in which he
lives for the time being, he partakes of the
nature of that body on account of bis union
with it.

27. Uniting with what is Pure, he be-
comes Pure. Uniting with the Intelligent,
he becomes fIntelligent. By uniting, O
foremost of men, with one‘that is Liberate,
he becomes Liberated.


28. By uniting with one who is shorn of
all attachments, he becomes freed from all
attachments, By uniting with one striving
after Liberation, the himself partaking of
the nature of his companion, jstrives after
Liberation.


29. By uniting with one of pure acts, he
becomes pure and of pure acts and endued
with blazing effulgence. By uniting with
one of pure soul, he becomes of pure souk
himself,


30. | By uniting with the One indepen~
dent Soul, he becomes One and Indepen-=
dent. Uniting with One that is dependent
on One’s Own Self, he attains to the same
nature and acquires Independence.


31. O monarch, I have duly told you alk
this that is perfectly true. Candidly have
§ described to you this subject, vis., the
Eternal, Pure and Prime Brahma.


32. You may communicate this high
knowledge, capable of awakening the soul,


{ to that person, O king, who though not a


master of the the Vedas is, nevertheless,
humble and has a keen desire for acquir-
ing the knowledge of Brahma.


33- Et should never be given to one wha
speaks falsehood, or one who is cunning or
roguish, or one who has no strength of
mind, or one who is of crooked understand~
ing, of one who is jealous of men of know-
ledge, or one who pains others, Listen ta
me as —§ say who they are to whom this
knowledge may safely be given.


34—35. It should. be given to one wha
has faith, or one who has merit, or one who
does .not speak ill of others, or one wha
is given to penances from the purest of
motives, or one whois endued with know-
ledge and wisdom, or one who performs
sacrifices and other cites laid down in the
Vedas, or one who has a forgiving nature,
or one who feels compassion on and does
good to all creatures; or one who is fond
of living in privacy and solitude, or one
who is fond of performing ail acts laid
down in the scriptures, or ene who does not
like to quarrel, or one who is endued with
great learning,.or one having. wisdom, of
one possessed of forgiveness and self<
control and tranquillity of soul.


SHANT! PARVA,


36. This high knowledge of Brahma
should never be given to one who has not
such qualifications. it has been said that
by giving this knowledge to one who is not
considered a werthy recipient, no advan-
tage or good fruit ean arise.


37. This great knowledge shéuld never
be given, even if he gives in exchange the
whole Earth full of gems and riches of
every sort, to one that is not observant
of any vows and restraints. Forsooth,
however, O king, this knowledge should
be imparted to one who has conquered his
senses. : -


3%. O Karala, do not entertain any fear
since you have heard all this regarding
high Brahma from the to-day! I have
described to you duly the high and holy
Brahma that is without beginning and
middle, and that is capable of cemoving alt
kinds of sorrow.


39. Seeing Brahma whose sight is capa-
ble of doing away with both birth and
death, O king, which is full of auspicious-
ness, which removes all fear, and which
yields the highest benefit, and having
acquired this essence of ait knowledge,
renounce all error and stupefaction to-day,


40o—~41. 1 had acquired this knowledge
from the eternal Hiranyagarhha himself,
O king, who communicated it to me for
my having carefully pleased that. great
Being of very superior Soul. Asked by
you to-day, § have, O king, communicated
the knowledge of eternal Brahma to you,
just as I had myself gained it from my
teacher. Indeed, this great knowledge
which is the refuge of all persons conver-
sant with Liberation has been giyen to you
exactly as.f had it fram Brahman himself.”


Bhishma said :—

42.
Brahma, just asthe great Rishi had said,
by attainirg to which the Fwenty-filth (En-
dividual Soul) has never to return.


43- On account of his nat knowing truly
the Supreme Soul which is not subject to
decay and death, Individual Soul is obliged
to frequently return to the world. When,
however, [ndividual Soul succeeds in
acquiring that high knowledge, he has no
longer to return,


44. Having heard it, O king, from the
celestial Rishi, I bave, O son, given to
you that gréat knowledge which yields the
highest good. ‘


45. This knowledge was acquired from
Hiranyagarbha by the great Rishi Va-
_shishtha. From that foremost of Rishis,
vig., Vashishtha, it was acquired by
Narada,


“T have thus told you of high


425


‘46. From Narada ! have acquired that
knowledge which is truly at one with the
eternal Brahma. Having heard this dis-
course of great import, couched in excellent
words, do sot, O foremost of the Kurus,
give way any longer to. grief.

47. That man who knows the Destructi-
ble and the Indestructible, becomes freed
from fear. He, indeed, O king, is come
pelled to entertain fear who is shorn of: this
knowledge.


48. On account of Ignorance, the man
of foolish soul hath repeatedly to retura
to this world. Indeed, after death he
has to be born in thousands and thousands
of orders of Being, every one of which
meets with Death in the end. .


49. Now in the world of the gods, now


| among men, and now among intermediate


otders of Being, he has to appear again
and again. H in course of time he succeéds.
in crossing that Ocean of Ignorance in.
which he is sunk, he then succeeds int
avoiding completely re-birth and attaining


| to oneness with the Supreme Soul.


50. The Ocean of Ignorance is dreads
ful. Ft is bottomless and called the Une
manifest. O Bharata, day after day, crea~
tures are seen to fall and sink in that


| Ocean,


gt. Since you, O king, have been freed
from that eternal and limitless Ocean of
lgnorance, you have, therefore, Jbecome


| freed from Darkness and also Ignorance,’*


ame


CHAPTER CCCX..


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).-— -
Continued.


Bhishma said :—

1. “Once ona time a king of Janaka’s
family while roaming in the uninhabited
forests in pursuit of deer, saw a superior
Brahmana or Rishi of Bhrigu’s race.


2. Bowing with his head to the Rishi
who was seated at his ease, king Vasuman
sat near htm and with his permission put
to. him this question —


O holy one, what yields the highest
benefit, both in this world and in the next,
to man who has an unsuitable body and
who is the slave of his desires ?


4. Duly cespected by the king; and thus
questioned, that great Rishi endued with
ascetic merit, then said these words to bim
these words to him which were highly bene-
ficial.


486
The Rishi said:—


5 If you seek both here and hereafter
what is agreeable to your mind, do you
then, with controlled senses, abstain from
doing what is disagreeable to all creatures.


_ 6. Virtue is beneficial to them that are
good: Virtué is the refuge of the good.
rom virtue have originated the three
worlds with theic mobile and immobile
creatures. i


gz. O-you, who are eagerly desirous of
enjoying all agreeable objects, how is it
that you are not yet satiated with objects
-of desire? Yousee the honey, O you of
Aas understanding, but ace blind to the
all.


8. As one desirous of acquiring the
fruits of knowledge, should busy himself
‘with the acquisition of knowledge, so ane
desirous sof acquiring the fruits of Virtue
should be busy with the acquisition of
‘Virtue,


9. IE a wicked man, from desire of
‘virtue, tries to dg a pure and stainless act,
the fulfilment of his desire becomes im-
possible. ff, on the other hand, a good
‘an, moved by the desire of acquiring
virtue, tries to do an act that is even diffi-
cult its accomplishment becomes easy for
lim.


to. If, while living in the forest, one acts
in such a way as to enjoy all the pleasures
of living amongst men in towns, oné comes
to be regarded not as a forest recluse but
as an inhabitant of towns. Likewise, if one
while living in towns, acts in sucha way
as toenjoy the happiness of a forest life,
one is regarded not as a inhabitant af
towns but as 9 forest ‘recluse.


x1. Ascertaining the merits of the re-
figion of Karma and that of Abstention
therefrom,'do you, with concentrated senses,
be devoted to the practices of virtue in
thought, word, and deed.

12, Judging of the propriety of time
and place, purified by the observance of
vows and other purifying rites, and soli-
cited, do you, without malice, make large
gilts to the good.


13. Acquiring riches by faig% means, one
should give it away to worthy persons,
One should make gifts, renouncing anger ;
and having made gifts one should never
yield to sorrow nor proclaim those gifts
with his own mouth.


14. The Brahmana who is full of mercy,
who is pure, who has his senses under
control, who is truthful in speech, who is
full of candour, and whose birth is pure,
has been considered as a ,person deserving
of gifts, ? :


MAHABHARATA,


15. A person is said to be pure in birth
when he is born of a mother who ,has only
one ;husband fand who is of the same caste
with him. Indeed, such a Brahmana,
knowing . the three Vedas, ws., Rich,
Yajush, and Saman, endued with learn-
ing, only abservant of the six duties, has
been considered as deserving of gifts.


16. Virtue becomes sin, and sin becomes
virtue, according to the nature of the doer,
of time, and of place.


17. Sin ‘is renounced tike the filth on
one’s body,—a litle with a little exertion,
and a greater quantity when the exertion
is greater.


18. A. person, after clearing his bowels,
should take clarified butter, which acts
most beneficially on his system. Likewise,
when one has freed himself of all faults
and busies himself with ‘the acquisition of
virtue, that Virtue in the next world, brings
on the highest happiness.


19. Good and evil thoughts are in the
minds of all creatures. Withdrawing the
mind from evil thoughts, it should always
be bent towards good thoughts.


20. One should always respect the prace
tices of his own caste. Do you try, there-
fore, to act in such a way that you may have
faith in the practices of your own caste.


23. O you who are endued with an im-
patient soul, follow the practice of patience.
O you of a foolish understanding try to be
possessed of intelligence. Shorn of tran-
quillity, try to be tranquil, and shorn of
wisdom as you are, try to act wisely.


22. He whois in the company of the
righteous, succeeds, by his own energy, in.
acquiring the means of doing what is bene-
ficial for him both here and hereafter.
Verily, the root of that benefit is unflinch-
ing firmness. —


23. The royal sage Mahabhisha, foc
want of this firmness, fell from heaven,
Yayati, also, though his merits had become
exhausted succeeded in regaining regions.
of happiness through his firtnness.


24. WYouare sure to acquire great in-
telligence, as also what is for your highest
good by seeing virtuous and learned
persons endued with ascetic merit.


Bhishma continued :—
25. ‘Hearing these words of the sage,
king Vasuman, having a good disposition,
withdrawing his mind from the pursuits.
of desire, set it upon the acquisition of
virtue.” :


1
area


SHANTI PARVA.


CHAPTER CCCXI.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).->
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


t—2. “You should, O grandfather, des-
cribe to me what is freed from duty and
its reverse, what is freed from every doubt,
what is above birth and death, as also
virtue and sin, what is auspiciousness,
what is eternal fearlessness, what is Eternal
and Indestructible, and Immutable, what
is always Pure, and what is ever free from
exertion.”


Bhishma said :—


. ‘O Bharata,freferring to this matter I
shallzrecite to you the old discourse between
Yajnavalkya and Janaka. Once ona time
fhe famous king QDaivarati of Janaka’s
race, tully understanding the meaning of all
‘questions, put this question to Yajnavalkya,
that foremost of Rishis.


Janaka said :—


5. OG regenerate Rishi, how many kinds
of senses are there? How many kinds also
are there of Nature? What is the Un-
manifest and highest Brahma? What is
higher than Brahmana? What is
Birth and what Death? What are the
limits of Age? You should, O foremost of
Brahmanas, describe all these subjects to
me who seek your favour,


6. IL am ignorant while you are an
Ocean of knowledge. Hence, { ask you.
Verily, I wish to hear you describe all
these subject,


Yajnavalkya said :—

8. Hear, O king, what I say in answer
to these questions of yours. [ shall give
you the high knowledge which Yoyins
prize, and especially that which is pos-
sessed by the Sankhyas.


g. Nothing is unknown to you. Still
you ask me. One, however, whois ques-
tioned, should answer. ‘Ihis is the eternal
practice. .


10. Eight principles have been called
by the name of Nature, while sixteen have
been called changes. Of Manifest, there
are seven. These are the views of those
persons whoare conversant with the spiri-
tual science.


11~—13. The Unmanifest, Greatness,
Consciousness and the five subtile elenents
of Earth, Wind, Ether, Water, and Light,
——these eight are known by the name of
Nature. Listen now to the enumeration of
those called changes. They are the ear, the


437


1 skin, thejeye, the tongue’ and the nose; and
sound, touch, form, taste, and scent, as
also speech, the two arms, the two feet, the
lower duct (within the body), and the


| organ of pleasure.-


14. The ten commencing with sound, and
originating from the five great principles,
are called Vishesha. ‘rhe five senses of
knowledge are called Savishesha, O king
of Mithila.


15. Persons conversant with the spiri+
tual science consider the Mind as the six»
teenth. This is agreeable to your own


views as also to those of other learned men.


well acquainted with the truths about prins
ciples.

16. From the Unmanifest, O king, ori+
ginates the Greatness. The learned say
this to be the first creation relating to
Nature,


17. From Greatness, oO king of men,:


originates Consctousness. ‘This bas been


designated the second creation having the '


Understanding for its essence.


18. From Consciousness has originated
the Mind which is the essence of sound
and the others that are the qualities of
ether and the rest. This is the third crea-
tion, relating to Consciousness.


19. From Mind have originated the
great - elements, O king! ‘This is the
fourth creation called mental.

20. Persons conversant with the princi-
pal elements hold that Sound and Touch
and Form and Taste and Scent are the fifth
creation, relating to the Great elements.


2t. The creation of the Ear, the Skin,
the Eye, the Yongue, and the Scent, forms
the sixth and is considered as having for
: Nee pe:
its essence multiplicity of thought,


22. The senses that come after the Eat
and the others then originate, O king,
This is called seventh creation and relates
to the senses of Knowledge.


23. Then, O king, come the vital air
that rises upwards and those that go down+
wards. This is the eighth creation and is
called Arjjava (straight).


24. Then come those vital airs which
move transversely in the lower parts of the
body and also that called Apana passing
downwards. This, the ninth creation, is
also called Arjjava, O king.


25. These nine kinds of creation, and
these principles, O king, which are twenty-
four in number, are described to you ac«
cording to what has been laid down in the
scriptures,


.


488


26. After this, O king, listen to me as
I tell you the durations of time as said by
the learned regarding these principtes or
aitribates,


CHAPTER CCCXIL.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued.


Jajnavalkya said :—

1. Listen to me, O foremost of men, ag
1 tell you what the duration -of time is
about the Supreme Purusha, ‘Ten thousand
Kalpas are said to form a single day of his.


2. The duration of his night is equal.
When his night passes, he awakes, O king,
and first creates herbs and plants which
form the sustenance of all embodied crea-
tures, . :


3. He then ‘creates Brahman who origi-
nates from a golden egg. That Brahman,
is the form of all created things, as we have
heard,


4. Having lived for one wliole year
within that egg, the great ascetic Bralinan,
talled also Prafapati_ came out of it and
¢reatéd the whole Earth, and the Heaven
above.


" g, The Lord then, te fs seen In the
Vedas, O king, placed the sky between’
Heaven and Earth, .


- 6 Seven thousatid and five hundred
Kalpas form the day of Brahman.


7. Persons conservant with spiritual
science hold that his night also is of an
equal duration. Brahman, called Great,
then creates Consciousness called element
and endued with excellent essence.


8. Before creating any physical bodies
out of the ingredients calied the chief ele-


ments, Mahan or Brahma, endued with.


penances created four others called his sons.
They are the fathers of the original fathers,
O best of kings, as we have heard.


9g. We have also heard, O king, that the
senses (of knowledge) along with the four
inner faculties, have originat from the
Pitris, and thatthe entire universe of mobile
and immobile Beings has been filled with
those Great elements.


ro. The powerful Consciousness created
the five elements. These are Earth, Wind,
Ether, Water, and Light as the fifth.


it. This Consciousness from whom
originates the third creation, has five thou-
sand Katpas for his night, and his day is
of equal duration


MAHABHARATA,


1a. Sound, Touch, Form, Taste, ahd
Scent,—these five are called Vishesha,
‘They inhere into the five great elements,


13—14. Allcreatures, O king, continually
permeated by these five, seek one another's
companionship, become subservient to oné
another, and challenging one another, get
over one another; and actuated by those
immutable and seductive principles, crea-
tures kill one another and rove in this world,
entering into numerous intermediate orders
of Being.


15. Three thousands of Kalpas form
their day, Their night also is the same.


16. The Mind roves over all things, O
king, guided by thé Senses. ‘The Senses
do not perceive anything. It is the Mind
that perceives through them.


17. The Eye seés forms when helped
by the Mind but never by itself. When
the Mind is distracted, the Eye cannot see
fully even. the object before it.


18. It ts commonly said that the Senses
perceive. ‘This is not true, for it is the
Mind that perceives through the Senses.


19. When the activity of the Mind, is
stoppéd, the activity of the Senses is also
stopped. One should thus consider the
Senses to be under the control of the Mind.


go. Indeed, the Mind is said to be the
Lord of all the Senses. O you of great fame;
these are all the twenty elements in the
Universe.


—_


CHAPTER CCCXIII.


‘“(MOKHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued,


Yajnavalkya said :—

1. IL have, one after artothet; told you
the order of the creation, ‘with their tota
number, of the various principles, as also
the extent of the duration of each. Hear
as I tell you of their destruction.


2. Listen to me how Brahman, who is
eternal and undeteriorating, and who is
without beginning and without end, re
peatedly creates and destroys all created
objects.


3) When his day expires and night
comes, he seeks sleep. At sucha time the
unmanifest and holy one moves the Being
called Maharudra, who is conscious of his
gteat powers. ;

4. Urged by the unmanifest, that Being,
assuming the form of the Sun of hundreds
of jthousands of rays, divides himself into a
dozen parts each resembling a burning fire.


SHANTI


. Hethen consumes with hig energy,
© king, without any loss of time, the four
sorts of created beings, viz., viviparous,
‘oviparous, filth-born, and vegetable.


6. Within the twinkling of the eye all
mobile and immobile creatures being thus
destroyed, the Earth becomes on all sides,
bare as a tortoise shell.


7. Having burnt everything on the face
of the Earth, Rudra of incomparable might,
then quickly fills the bare Earth with

ater, possessed of great force.


8. We then creates the cycle-fire which
‘dries up that Water. The Water disappear-
ing, the preat element of Fire continues to
blaze dreadfully.


g—10. Thea tomes the powerful Wind
‘of immeasurable force, in his eight forms,
who devours speedily that blazing fire of
transcendant force, possessed of severi
flames, and at one with the heat that exists
in every creature. Having devoured that
fire, the Wind passes in every direction,
upwards, downwards and transversely.


11. Then Space of immeasurable exist-
ent fdevours that Wind of transcendant
powér. Then mind cheerfully devours that
immeasurable Space. .


12. Then that Lord of alf creatures, v7s.,
Consciousness, who is the Soul of every-
thing, devours the Mind. Consciousness
{in his turn, is devoured by the Great Soul
who is conversant with the Past, the Prée-
sent, and the Future.


13. The tn¢omparable Universe is then
devoured by Shambhu, that Lord of ail
things in whom exist the lordly powers of
Anima, Laghima, Prapti, etc., and who is
considered as the Supreme and pute Efful-
gence that is Immutable.


14. His hands and feet extend over
every part; his eyes and head and face
are everywhere, his ears reach every place,
and he exists possessing all things,


15. He is the heart of alf creatures;
He measures a digit of the thumb. That
Iafinite and Supreme Soul, that. Lord of all,
‘thus devours the Universe.


16. After this, what remains is the Un-
deteriorating and the Immutable One who
is without shortéoming of any sort, who
is the Creator of the Past, the Present; and
the Future; and who is perfectly faultless.


1y. I have thus, O king, duly told you
of Destruction. I shall now describe to
you the subjects of Adhyatma (Spiritual),
Adhibhuta (Elemental) and Adhidaivata
(Accidental),


62


PARVA, 489


CHAPTER CCCXIV.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).-
Continued,


Yajnavalkya said :—

1. Brahmanas well-read in the subjects
of enquiry speak of the{two feet.as Spiritual,
the act of walking as Elemental and Vishnu
as Accidental.

2. The lower duct is Spiritual; its func«
tion of throwing out the excreta is Elemene
tal, and Mitra (Surya) is the Accidental.


The organ of generation is called
Spiritual. Its agreeable function is called
Elemental and Prajapati is its Accidental.


4. The hands are Spiritual; thei func.
tion as represented by acts is Elemental;
and Indra is the Accidental of those limbs,


5. The orgadt ‘of speech are Spiritual;
the words uttered by them are Elemental ;
and Agni is their Accidental. ;

6. The eye is Spiritual; vision or form
is its Elemental, and Surya is the Acciden-
tal of that organ.


g. The ear is Spiritual; sound is Ele«
mental; and the points of the compass are


its Accidental,


8 The tongue is Spiritual; taste is its
Elemental ; and Water is its Accidental.

g. The sense of scent is Spiritual; odor
is its Elemental; ‘and Earth is its Acci«
dental.

to. The skin is Spiritual; touch is its
Elemental; and Wind js its Accidental,


11. ‘Mind has been called Spiritual that
with which the Mind is employed is Ele«
mentals and thé Moon is its Accidental.


12. Consciousness is Spiritual; convice
tion in one’s oneness with Nature is its Ele-
mental; and Mahat or_Buddhi is its Acci-«
dental.

13. Buddhi is Spiritual; that which is
to be understood is its Elemental ; and Soul
is its Accidental,


14. T have thus truly expounded ‘to you,
© king, with its details taken individually,
the power of the Supreme in the beginning,
the middle, and the end, O you, who are
fully conversant with the natute of the
original principles.


15. Nature, cheerfully and of her own
accord, as if for sport, O king, produces, by
undergoing changes herself, thousands and
thousands of combinations of her original
quatities. ==


16. As men can light thousands of
lamps from but a single lamp, similarly


49¢


MAHABHARATA.


Nature, by change, multiplies into thou-! self by himself into hundreds and thousands


sands of existent objects the (three) quali-
ties of Purrsha.


17—=20. Patience, joy, prosperity, satis-
faction, brightness of all faculies, happi-
ness, purity, health, contentment, faith,
liberality, mercy, forgiveness, firmness,
benevolence, equanimity, truth, satisfaction
of obligations, mildness, modesty, calmness,
external purity, simplicity, observance of
obligatory rites, dispassionateness fearless-
ness of heart, disregard for good and evil
as also for pristine deeds,—appropriation of
objects only when acquired by gift, the
absence of cupidity, regard for the interests
of others, mercy for all creatures,—these
have been saidto be the characteristics
of the quality of Goodness.


21—24. The characteristics of the quality
of Darkness are pride of personal beauty,
assertion of supremacy, war, disinclination
to give, absence of mercy? enjoyment and
enduring of happiness and misery, pleasure
in speaking iN of others, habit of quarrelling,
pride, discourtesy, anxiety, hostilities, sor-
row, appropriation of others’ properties,
shamelessness, crookedness, disunion,rough-
ness, lust, anger, B ore assertion of supe-
riority, malice and calumny. These origi-
nate from the quality of Darkness. T shalt
‘now tefl you of qualities which originate
Ignorance. ;


25. They are stupefaction of judgment,
obscuration of every faculty, darkness, blind
darkness. Darkness means death, and
blind darkness means anger.


- 26--28. Besides these, the other marks
of Ignorance are greediness for food, cease-
less appetite for both food and drink, taking
pleasure in scents and dresses and sports
and beds and seats and sleep during the
day and calumny and alt sorts of acts
proceeding from carelessness, taking plea-
sure, in dancing and instrumental and
vocal music, and aversion for every sort
of religion. These, indeed, are the char-
acteristics of Ignorance.


CHAPTER CCCXV.


‘(MOKSHADHRAMA PARVA).— -
Continued. —


Yajnavalkya said :—
1. These three, O foremost of men, are


the qualities of Nature. These belong to
all things of the universe.


2, The Unmanifest Purusha endued
with the six Yoga qualities transforms him-


-be seen existing together and


and millions and millions of forms,


3. Tlrose that are conversant with the
Spiritual science say that to the quality
of Sattwa is assigned a high, to Rajas a
middling, and to Tamas, a low place in
the universe.


4. Bythe help of unmixed virtue one
acquires a high end. Through virtue mixed
with sin one acquires the status of hu-
manity. While through unmixed sin one
is visited by a vile end.


5. Listen now to me, O king, as I speale
to you of the intermixture of the three
qualities of Sattwa, Rajas and Tamas.


6. Sometimes Rajas is seen mixed with
Sattwa. Tamas also exists with Rajas.
With Tamas may also be seen Sattwa.
Also Sattwa and Rajas and Tamas may
‘ in equal
parts. They then form the Nature.


7. When the Purusha becomes endued
with only Sattwa, he acquires the regions
of the gods. Endued with both Sattwa
and Rajas, he is born as a man.


8. Endued with Rajas and: Tamas, he
is born the intermediate order of Being.
Endued with all three, wiz., Sattwa and
Rajas and Tamas, he becomes a man.


g. Those great persons who are above
both victue and sin, attain, it is said, ta
that place which is eternal, immutable,
undecaying, and immortat.


to. Men of knowledge go by very supe-
tior births and their place is faultless and
undecaying, transcending the perception
of the senses, free frony ignorance, above
birth and death, and full of Hght that
removes all sorts of darkness.


11. You had asked me about the nature
of the Supreme living in the Unmanifest,
Purusha). I shal telf you. Hear me, O
king. Even when living in Nature, He is
said to live in His own nature without
partaking of the nature of Prakriti.


12. Nature, O king, is inanimate and
unintelligent. When presided over by
Purusha (Soul) then only can she create
and destroy. :


Janaka said :— .


13. Both Nature and Soul, O you of
great intelligence, are without beginning
and without end. Both of them are with+
out end. Both of them are without form.
Both of them are undeteriorating,


14. Both of them, again, cannot be
comprehended. How then, O foremost of
Rishis, can it be said that one of them is
inanimate and unintelligent? How, is the


SHANTI PARVA.


toher said to be animate and intelligent ?
And why is the latter called Kshetrajna
(Soul).


15. You, O foremost of Brahmanas, are
a master of the entire religion of Liberation.
I wish to hear fully of the religion of
Liberation.


16—17. Do you describe to me then
the existence and Oneness of Soul, of his
separateness from Nature, of the gods
which attach to the body, of the place to
which embodied creatures go when they
die, and that place to whieh they may
ultimately, in course of time, be able to
£0. ;

18. Tell me, also, of the Knowledge
expounded in the Sankhya system, and of
the Yoga system separately. You also
speak of the predicaments of death, O best
of men. All these subjects are well known
re you even as an emblic myrobalan in your

aad.


ED


CHAPTER CCCXVI.


. (MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).~
Continued.


Yajnavalkya said :—

1. That which is without qualities, O
son, can’ never be explained by assigning
qualities to it. Listen, however, to meas {
explain to you what is endued with qualities
and what is devoid of them.


2. Great Munis conversant with the
truth about principles say that when Soul
seizes qualities like a crystal catching the
reflection of a red flower, he is said to be
possessed of qualities; but when freed from
qualities lize the crystal freed from reflec-
tion, he is seen in his real nature, which is
as above ail qualities.


+ 3. Unmanifest Nature is by her nature
endued with qualities. She cannot transcend
them. Shorn of intelligence by nature she
becomes attached to qualities.


+ 4 Unmanifest Nature cannot know any-
thing, while Purusha,
endued with knowledge,—There is nothing
higher than myself, the Soul is always
conscious of it. 7

‘5. Therefore the tunmanifest Nature,
although by nature inanimate and unintelli-
gent, still becomes animate -and intelligent
on account of her union with the Soul who
is Eternal and Indestructible instead of
remaining in her own nature owing to her
destructibility.


by his nature, is’


Fag


6. When Soul, throttgh ignorance, re«
peatedly becomes associated with qualities, -
he fails to understand his own real nature
and therefore he fails to acquire Libera-
tion.


7. On account of the Soul’s Supremacy
over the principles that originate from,
Nature he is said to partake of the nature
of those principles. On account also of
his agency in the matter of creation, he is
said to possess the quality of creation.


8. On account of his agency in the
matter of Yoga, he is said to possess the
quality of Yoga. For his Supremacy
over those particular principles known by
the name of Nature, he is said to possess
the character of Nature.


9g. For his agency in the matter of creat-::
ing the seeds, he is said to partake of the
nature of those seeds. And because he
causes the several principles er qualities
to come into being, he is, therefore, said
to be subject to decay and destruction.


10. On account, again, of his being the
witness of everything, and on account, also,
of there being nothing else than he, as
also for his consciousness of oneness with
Nature, Yatis enduéd with ascetic success,
conversant with the spiritual science, and
freed from ‘fever of every sort, consider
him as existing by - himself without a_
second, immutable, unmanifest, unstable, -
and manifest, : _


‘Ir. This is what we have heard. Those
Sankhyas, however, that depend upon-
Knowledge only and the practice of mercy’
for all creatures, say that it is Nature
which is One but souls are many.


12. Asa matter of fact, Soul is different
from Nature which though unstable, still
appears as stable: Asa blade of-reed is
different from its outer cover, so is Soul |
different from Nature.


13. Indeed, the worm that lies within
the Udumvara should be known as differ.
ent from the Udumvara. Though existing
with the Udumvara, the worm is not to
be considered as forming a part of the
Udumvara,


14. ‘The fish is separate from the water
in which it lives, and the water is separate
from the fish that livesin it. Though the
fish and water exist together, yet it is
never drenched by water.


15. The fire that lies in an earthen:
saucepan is separate from the earthen
saucepan, and the saucepan is separate
from the fire it contains. Although the
fice exists in and with the saucepan, yet it
is not to be considered as constituting any


! pact of it,


492


16. The fotus-leaf that ties affoat on a
piece of water is separate from the piece
of water on which it floats. Because it
exists with water it does not form a portion
of the water.


17. The eternat existence of those ob-
jects in and with those mentioned, is never
correctly understood by ordinary mortals.


18. They who see Natuce and Soul in
any other light are said to possess an in-
correct vision. It is certain that they have
repeatedly to sink into dreadful hell.


1g. I have thus told you the philosophy
of the Sankhyas, that excellent science by
which all things have been correctly deter-
mined. Ascertaining the nature of Soul
and Nature in this way, the Sankhyas ac-
quire Liberation.


20. I have also tofd you of the systems
of those others who are conversant with the
great principles of the universe. EF shalt
now describe to you the science of the
Yogins,


oo


CHAPTER CCCXVE.


(MOKHARDHAMA PARVA).—_
Continued,


Yajnavalkya said :—

1. I have already spoken to you of the
science of the Sankhyas. Hear now as I
truly describe the science of the Yogins as
heard and seen by me, O best of kings...


2. There is no Knowledge like that of
the Sankhyas. There is no power like that
of Yoga, These. two. prescribe the same.
practices, and both are considered as.
capable of leading to Liberation.


3. Those men who are not blest with
intelligence consider the Sankhya and the
Yoga systems to be different from each
other. We, however, O king, regard them
as one and the same, according to the
conclusion to.which we have arrived,


4, What the Yogins have in view is the
very same which the Sankhyas also have
in view. Hewhosees both the Sankhya
and the Yoga systems to be one. and the
same is to be considered as truly conver-
sant with the principles that, ordain the
universe, ‘


5. Know, O king, that the vital airs and
the senses are the chief instruments for
practising Yoga. By only regulating those
vital airs and the senses, Yogins go every-
where at their will,


MAHABHARAFA.


6. When the gross body is destroys
ed, Yogins, gifted with subtile bodies pos-
sessed of the eight Yoga powers wander
over the universe, enjoying all sorts of
happiness, O sinless one.


7. The wise have, in the _ scriptures,
spoken of Yoga as giving eight sorts of
power. They have spoken of Yoga as gifted
with eight hmbs.


8. Indeed, O king, they have not spoken
of any other sort of Yoga. It has been
said that the practices of Yogins, excellent
as these are of two sorts. Those two sorts,
according to the characteristics described
in the scriptures, are practices endued with
attributes and those freed from attributes.


9. The cencentration of the mind to-
gether with the regulation of the vital airs,
O king, is one sort. The concentration of
the mind along with subjugation of the
senses, is af another sort. ‘The first kind
of Yoga is said to be that possessed of
qualities ; the second kind is said to be
that freed from qualities,


to. Fhen, again, Regulation of the
Vital air is Yoga with qualities. In Yoga
without qualities, the mind, freed from
its functions, should be fixed. Only
the regulation of the vital air which is
said to be endued with qualities should,
in the first instance, be practised, for,
king of Mithila, if the vital air be exhaled
without mentally thinking upon a definite
image, the wind in the neophyte’s, systeo.
will increase to his great injury.


ir. In the ficst period of the night,
twelve ways of suppressing the vital ais
are recommended, After sleep, in the last
period of the night, other twelve ways, of
doing the same have been laid down.

12. Forsooth, one endued with tran-


quillity, of controlled senses, living in retives
ment, rejoicing in one’s own self, and fully


‘conversant with the meaning: of the scrip=


tures, should fix his Soul.


1314. Removing the five faults of the
five senses, viz., (withdrawing them. from
their objects of) sound, form, touch, taste,
and scent, and removing those conditions
called Pratibha and Apavanga, O king,
ofthe Mithilas, alt the senses should be,
fixed upon the mind.


15. The mind should then be fixed
on Consciousness, O king ; Consciousness
should next be fixed on Intelligence, and
Buddhi should then be fixed on Nature.


16—17. Fhus merging these one after
another, Yogins meditate on the Supreme
Soul which is One, which is freed from
Darkness, ‘which is Immutable and In-
finite and Pure and without defect, and


SHANTI! PARVA.


without blemish, who is Eternal Soul,
who is unchangeable, who is Indivisible,
who is without decay and death, who is
everlasting who is above decrease. and which
is Immutable Brahma.


18. Listen now, O king, to the marks
of one thatisin Yoga. Ali the marks of
cheerful contentment that are his who is
sleeping in contentment are seen in the
person, that is in Samadhi.


19. The person in contemplation, the
wise hold looks like the fixed and upward
flame of a lamp that is full of oil and that
burns in a spot where there is no air.


20. He is like a rock which is incapable
of being moved in the least by even a
heavy downpour from the clouds.


at. He is incapable of being moved by
the sound of conchs and drums, or by
songs, or the sound of hundreds of musical
instruments beat or blown together. Even
this is the characteristic of one in contem-
plation.


22-24. As a man of cool courage and
determination, while going up a flight of
steps with a vessel full of oil in his hands,
does not spill even a drop of the liquid if
terrified and threatened by persons armed
with weapons, so the Yogin, when his mind
has been concentrated and when he sees the
Supreme Soul in contemplation, doet not,
on account of the entire stoppage of the
functions of his senses at such a time, move
in the slightest degree. Even these should
be known to be the marks the Yogin while
he is in contemplation.

25. While in contemplation, the Yogin
sees Brahma which is Supreme and Im-
mutable, and which is situated like a burn-
ing Effulgence in the midst of thick Dack-
ness.


26. It is by this means that he acquires,
after many years, Liberation after re-
nouncing this inanimate body. Even this
is what the eternal Shruti says.


27. This is called the Yoga of the
Yogins. What else is it? Knowing it,


they who are gifted with wisdom consider’


themselves as crowned with success.


CHAPTER CCCXVIIL.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA)—
Continued.


Jajnavalkya said :—

I. Listen now to me, with attention, O
king, as to what the places are to which
those who die have to go. If the Individual


1


' 493


Soul escapes through the feet, it is said that
the man goes to the region of Vishnu,


2. If through the calves, it has. been
heard ..by us that the man goes to the
regions of the Vasus. If through the
knees, he acquires the companionship of
those gods who are called Sadhyas. ‘


3. If through the lower duct, the man
acquires the regions of Mitra. If through
the posteriors, the man returns to the
Earth, and if through the \thighs to the
region of Patriarch.


4. If through the flanks, the man ac-
quires the regions of the Maruts, and if
through the nostrils, to the region of the
Moon. If through the arms, the man goes
to the region of Indra, and if through the
chest, to that of Rudra,


5. If through the neck, the man goes to
the excellent region of that foremost of
ascetics known as Nara. If through the
mouth, the man acquires the region of the
Vishwedevas, and if through the ears; to
the region of the gods presiding over the
several points of the horizon.


6. If through the nose, the man acquires
the region of the Wind-god; and if
through the eyes, to the region of Agni.
If through ths brows, the man goes to the
region of the Ashwins; and if through the
forehead, to that of the departed manes.


7. T€through the crown of the head,
the man goes to the region of the powerful
Brahman, that foremost of the gods. 1
have thus told you, O king ,of Mithila, the
several places to which men go according
tothe manner in which their individual
souls escape from their bodies,


8. I shall now tell you the presaging
marks, as laid down by the wise, of those
who have but one year to live.


9. One who, having previously seen the
fixed star called Arandhati, cannot see if,
or that other star called Dhruva, or one
that sees the full Moon or the flame of a
burning lamp to be broken towards the
south, has-but‘one year to live.


to. Those men, O king, who can no
longer behold their own images reflected
in the eyes of others, have but one year
to live,


11. One who being gifted with lustre
loses it, or being endued with wisdom loses
it, —indeed, one whose inward and outward
nature is thus metamorphosed,—has but six
months more to live.


12. He who disregards the gods, or falls
out with the Brahmanas, or one who being
naturally of a dark color becomes pale of
hue, has but six months more tolive.


494
13. One who sees the lunar disc full of
holes like a spider's web, or one who sees


the solar disc to have similar holes, has but
One week more to live.


14. One who, when smelling sweet
scents in places of worship, perceives them
to be as offensive as the smell of dead
bodies, has but one week more to live.


15. Thé depression of the nose or of
the cars, the discolor of the teeth or of the
eye, the loss of all consciousness, and the
lass also of all animal magnetism, are
symptoms indicating death that very day.


16. Hf; without any ostensible cause
tears suddenly flow from one's left eye,
and if vapours be seen to issue from his
head, itis a sure mark that the man will
die before that day is over.


17. Knowing all these presaging symp-
toms, the man of putified soul should day
ane night unite his soul with the Supreme

oul, :


18—-to. Thus should ke go on till the
day comes for his death. If, however,
instead of wishing to die he wishes to live
in this world, he cenounces all enjoyments,
—O king, and fives on in abstinence. He
thus conquers death by uniting bis Soul
with the Supreme Soul.


19. Indeed, the man. who is gifted with
knowledge of the Soul, O king, follows the
practises recommended by the Sankhyas
and canquers death by uniting his Sout
with Supreme Soul.


20. At last, he acquires what is entirely
indestructible, which is without birth, which
is auspicious, and immutable, and eternal,
and stable, and which is incapable of being
acquired by men of impure souls.


CHAPTER CCCXIX.
(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA)—


Continued.


Yajnavalkya said :—

1. You have asked me, O king, of
that Supreme Brahma which lives in the
Unmanifest. Your question relates to a
deep mystery. Listen to me with rapt
attention, O king.

2. Having behaved humbly according
to the ordinances laid down by the Rishis
I obtained the Yajushes, O king, from the
Sun-god. -

3—4. With the hardest penances I
formerly adored the heat-giving god.
sinless one, pleased with me, the power-


| my mouth.


MAHABHARATA.


ful Sun, addressed me, saying,—O re.
generate Rishi, pray for the boon you
covet, however difficult it may be of acqui-
sition. I shall, with cheerful mind, grant
it to you. It is very difficult to make me
grant grace.


Bowing ta him with my head, f
addressed that foremost of heat-giving
luminaries thus,—I have no knowledge of
the Yajushes. I wish to know them forth-
with,


6. The holy one, thus solicited, told
me,—TI shall grant you the Yajushes. Made
up of the essence of speech, the goddess
of jearning Saraswati will enter into your
person.


gq. The god then ordered me to open
I did as. I was commanded.
The goddess Saraswati then entered into
my body, O sinless one.


8. Atthis, { began to burn. Unable
to suffer the pain [ plunged into a river.
Not understanding what the great Sun
had done for me for my well-being, I be-
came even angry with him,


g.. While I was burning with the energy
of the goddess, the holy Sun told me.—Do
you suffer this burning sensation for only
alittle time. That will soon come to an
end and you will be cool.


to. Indeed, I became cool. Beholding
me restored to ease, the Maker of light
said to me,—The whole Vedas, with its
appendix, together with the Upanishads,
will appear in you by inward light, O twice-
born one.


11. You will also edit the entire Sata-
pathas, O foremost of twice-born ones.
After that, your understanding will turn
to the path oF Liberation.


12. You will also acquire that end
which is desirable and which is coveted
by both Sankkyas and Yogins. Having
said so, the divine Sun proceeded to the
setting hills.


13. Hearing his fast words, and after
he had departed from where I was, I came
home in joy and then remembered the ©
goddess Saraswati.


14, Thought of by me, the auspicious
Sarawati appeared immediately before my
eyes, adorned with all the vowels and the
consonants and having placed the syllable
Om in the van. : :


15. I then, actording to the ordinance,
offered to the goddess the usual Arghya,
and dedicated another to the Sun, that
foremost of all heat-giving gods. - Doing
this duty I took my seat, devoted to bath
those gods. ;


SHANTI PARVA,.


16. Thereupon the entire Satapatha

ramanas, with all their mysteries and
with all theic abstracts as also their ap-
pendices, appeared of themselves before
my minds-eye, at which 1 became filled
with great joy.

17. I then taught them to a hundred
competent disciples and thereby did what
was disagreeable to my great maternal
uncle (Vaishampayana) with the disciples
round him.


18. Then, shining in the midst of my
disciples like the Sun himself with his rays,
I took the management of the Sacrifice, of
your noble father, O king.


19. In that Sacrifice, a quarrel arose
between me and my maternal uncle as to
who should be allowed to take the sacrificial
fee that was paid for the recitation of the
Vedas. In the very presence of Devala,
I took half of that fee.


20. Your father and Sumanta and Paila
and Jaimini and other ascetics all agreed
to that arrangement.


a1. I had thus got from the Sun the
five times ten Yajushes, O king. _ I then
studied the Puranas with Romaharshan.-


22—23.. Keeping before me_ those
Mantras and the goddess Saraswati, I then,
O king, helped by the inspiration of the
Sun, set myself to compile the excellent
Satapatha Brahmanas, and succeeded in
performing the task never before under-
taken by any one-else, ‘That path which I
had wished to take, has been taken by me
and [ have also taught it to my disciples.


24. Indeed I gave to my disciples the
whole of those Vedas with their abstracts.
Pure in mind and body, all those disciples
‘have, on account of my instructions, be-
come filled with joy.


25. Having established this knowledge
consisting of fifty branches which I had
acquired from the Sun, [ now meditate on_
the great object of that knowledge (vzz.,
Brahma).


26—28. The Gandharva Vishwavasu, a
master of the Vedanta Shastra, desirous, O
king, of ascertaining what is good for the
Brahmanas in this knowledge and what
truth is in it, and what is the excellent
object of this knowledge, once catechised
me. He put to me altogether twenty-four
questions, O king, regarding the Vedas.
Finally, he put to me a question, numbered
twenty-fifth which relates to ratioscination,
Those questions are as follow:—What is
universe and what is not-universe? What
is Ashwa and what Ashwa? What is
Mitra? What is Varuna?


those attributes.


495


29. What is Knowledge? What is the
Object of knowledge? What is Unintelli-
gent? What is Intelligent? Who is Ka?
Who is endued with the principle of
change? Who is not endued with the
same? What is he that devours the Sun
and what is the Sua? What is. Vidya and
what is Avidya ?


30. What is Vedya and what Avedya ?
What is Immobife and what Mobile?
What is without beginning, what is In-
destructible, and what is Destructible?
These were the transcendental questions
put.to me by that foremost of Gandharvas.


3t. After king Vishwavasu, that fores
most of Gandharvas, had asked me these
questions one after another, | answered
them duly,


32. At first, however, I told him,—Wait
for a short time, till I reflect on your ques~
tions !—the Gandharva agreed to it, and
sat in silence.


33. I then thought once again of the
goddess Saraswati in my mind. The replies
then to those questions naturally originated
in my mind like butter from curds.


34. Keeping in view the high science of
inferential ratioscination, I churned with
my mind, O monarch, the Upanishads and
the supplementary works relating to the
Vedas.


35. 1 then expounded to tim the
fourth science !that deals with Liberation,
O foremost of kings, and on which | have
already discoursed to thee, and which is
based upon the twenty-fifth, vis., Indivi«
dual Soul.


36, Having said all this, O king, ‘to king
Vishwavasu, I then addressed him, say-
ing,—Listen now to the answers that I give
to your several questions,


37. I now deal with the question which,
O Gandharva, you ask, vis.,—what is
Universe and what is Not-universe ?—The
Universe is Unmanifest and _ original
Nature endued with the principles of birth
and death which are terrible,


338—39. Itis, besides, possessed of the
three qualities on account of its producing
principles all of which are fraught with
That which is Not-uni-
verse is Purusha shorn of all attributes.
By Ashwa and Ashwa are meant the
female and the male. Similarly, Mitra is
Soul, and Varuna is Nature.


40. Knowledge, again, is said: to be
Nature, while the object to be known is
called Soul. The Ignorant and the Know-
ing or Intelligent are both Soul without
attcibutes, ni“?


496


t,
is piateee with change, and who is unendu-
ed therewith. [ answer, Kah is Soul. That
which is endued with change is Nature.
He who is not endued therewith is Soul.


42, Likewise, that which is called the
unknowable is Nature; and that which is
called Knowable is Soul.


43. You have asked me about the
Mobile and the Immobile. Hear my answer
That which is mobile is Nature, which,
undergoing changes, forms the cause of
Creation and Destruction. ‘he Immobile
is Soul, for without himself undergoing
changes he assists at Creation and Des-
. truction.


44—45. What is Knowable is Nature ;
while what is Unknowable is Soul. Both
Nature and Soul are said to be unintelli-
gent, stable, indestructible, unborn and
eternal, according to the decision of the
philosophers who Know the - spiritual
science. —


46. On account of the indestructibility of
Nature in the matter of Creation, Prakriti,
which is unborn, is considered as not sub-
ie to decay or destruction. Soul, again,
is indestructible and unchangeable.


47. The qualities of Nature are des-
tructible, but not Nature herself. The
learned, therefore, cali Nature indestruc-
tible. By undergoing changes Natute works
as the cause of Creation, The results
‘appeat and disappear, but not original
Nature. Hence also is Nature called
indestructible. Thus have I teld you the
conclusions of the fourth Science based on
the principles of inference and having
Liberation for its end.


_ 48. Having acquired, by the science of
inference and by serving preceptors, the
Richs, the Samans, and the Yajushes, all
the obligatory rites shoud be observed and
all the Vedas read with reverence, O
Vishwavasu.


49—50. O foremost of Gandharvas, they
who study the Vedas with all their branches
but who do not know the Supreme Soul
from which all things originate and into
which all things merge when destruction
sets in, and which is the one object whose
knowledge the Vedas seek to preach,—
indeed, they who have no acquaintance
with what the Vedas seek to establish—
study the Vedas uselessly and carry their
burthen of such study in vain.


51. If a person seeking butter churns
the milk of the she-ass, without finding
what he seeks he simply finds a substance
of foul smell like ordure.


52. Similarly if one, having read the


You have asked what is Kah, who”


MAHABHARATA,


t Vedas, fails to know what is Nature and


what is Soul, one only proves his own foolish-
ness of understanding and carries a useless
load.


53. One should, with devoted attention,
think on both Nature and Soul, so that he
may avoid repeated birth and death,


54. Thinking upon the incident of one’s
repeated births and deaths and avoiding
the reliyion of acts which merely yield des-
tructible results, one should follow the’
eternal religion of Yoga.


55. O Kashyapa, if one continuously
reflects on the nature of the Individual Soul
and its connection with the Supreme Soul,
he then succeeds in divesting him of alt
attributes and in seeing tlre Supreme Sout.


56. The Eternal and Unmanifest
Supreme Soul is considered by men of
foolish understandings as distinct from the
Individual Soul. They are really wise
who see both these as truly one and the
same.


57. Frightened at repeated births and
deaths, the Sankhyas and Yogins considec
the Individual Soul and the Supreme Soul
to be one and the same.


Vishwavasu theu said :—

58. You have, O foremost of Brahntanas,
said that Individual Soul is indsttuctible
and truly undistinguished from the Supreme
Soul. ‘This, however, is difficult to unders-
tand. You should once more explain thig
subject to mie. :

§9—63. I have heard discourses on this
subject from Jaigistiavya, Asita, Devala,
the regenerate sage Parashara, the intelli-
gent Varshaganya, Bhrigu, Panchashikha,
Kapila, Shuka, Gautama, Arshtisena, the
great Garga, Narada, Asuri, the intelligent
Paulastya, Sanatkumara, the great Shukra,
and my father Kashyapa. Subsequently 1
heard this from Rudra and the intelligent
Vish warupa several of the gods, the Ritris,
and the Daityeas. Ihave gained al! that
they say, for they generally describe that
eternal object of all knowledge.


64. E wish, however, to heat what you
say on those subjects with the help of your
intelligence. You are the foremost eof all
persons, and a learned lecturer on the
scriptures, and gifted with great intelli+
gence.


65. There is nothing which you do not
know. You are an ocean of the Shrutis, as
described, O Brahmana, in the world of
both the gods and the departed manes.


66. The great Rishis living in the region
of Brahma say that Aditya himself, the


SHANTI


&tetial lord of all/2,Juminaries,
pretéptor.

67. O Yajnavalkya, you have acquired
the entire science, O Brahmana, of the
Sankhyas, a8 also thé scriptures of the

ogins in particular.

67. Forsooth, you are enlightened, fully
conversant with thé mobile and immobile
universe. I wish to hear you describe that
knowledge, which is compared to clarified
butter having solid grains.


is your


Yajnavalkya said :—~

69. You are, O foremost of Gandharvas,
capable of comprehending every knowiedge.
As, however, you ask me, do you hear me
then explain to you according as { myself
have obtained it from my preceptor.


70. Nature, which is unintelligent, is
apprehended by Individual Soul, however,
cannot be apprehended by Nature, O
Gandharva.


yt. In consequence of Individual Soul
being reflected in Nature, the latter is
called Pradhana by Sankhyas and Yogins
conversant with the original principles as
Jaid down in the Shrutis.


72. O sinless one, the other, seeing, sees
the Nature and the Soul; not seeing, it Sees
the Supreme Soul. =


73. The Souls thinks that there is no-
thing higher than itself. In sooth, however,
though seeing it does not see the Supreme
Self which sees it,


74. The wise should never think that
the Nature is at one with the Soul which
has a real and independent existence. The
fish live in water. It goes there impelled
by its own nature,


75—76. As the fish, though living in
the water, is to be considered as separate
from it, similarly is the Soul to be appre-
hended, ¢.é, though the Sout exists ina
state of contact with the Nature, it is, how-
ever, in its real nature, Separate from, and
independent of Nature. When overwhelmed
with the consciousness of Self, and when
unable to understand its identity with the
Supreme Soul, on account of the illusion
that covers it, of its co-existence with
Nature, and of its own tanner of thinking,
the Individual Soul always sinks down, but
when freed from such consciousness it goes
upwards.


77. When the Individuat Soul succeeds
in apprehending that it is one, and Nature
with which it lives is another, then only
‘does it, O twice-born one, succeed in seeing
the. Supreme Soul and attaining to the
condition of Oneness with the universe.


63


PARVA,


479


78. The Supreme is one, O king, and
the Individual Soul is another. On account
of the Supreme overlying the Lndividua
Soul, the wise consider both to be one and
the same, - :


79—82. For thesé reasons, Yogins and”
followers of the Sankhya system of philo-
sophy, terrified by birth and death,
blessed with sight of the Supreme Soul,
pure in body and mind, and devoted to
the Supreme Soul, do not welcome the
Individual Soul as indestructible. When
one sees the, Supreme Soul and losing afl
consciousness of individuality becomes at
one with the Supreme, he then becomes
omniscient, and possessed of such omni-
science he becomes freed from the obliga-
tion of ce-birth. {f have thus described to
you truly, O sinless one, about Nature
which is unintelligent, and Individual Soul
which is gifted with intelligence, and the
Supreme Soul which is gifted with. omni-
science, according to the marks laid lown
inthe Shrutis. That man who does not
see any difference between the knower and
the known, and between knowledge and
the known, is both Kevala and. not-Kevala,
is the original cause of the universe, is,
a individual Soul and the Supreme
oul, i


Vishwavasu said:—- 7
83. O powerful one, you have duly and
adequately expounded what is the origin of


| all the gods -and which (produces Libera-


tion. “You have said what is true and
excellent. May you enjoy inexhaustible
blessings, and may youc mind be ever


united with intelligence.


Yajnavalkya said :—


84. Having said those words, the king
of Gandharvas proceeded towards heaven,
shining in resplendence of beauty, Before
leaving me, the great one duly honored me
by going round my body, and I found him,
highly pleased. : oe


85. He inculcated the science he had
learnt from me to those celestials that live
in the regions of Brahman and other gods,
unto those who live on Earth, to algo tha
dwellers of the nether regions, and to then
who had adopted the path of Liberation,
16) king.


86. The Sankhyas are devoted to the
practices of their system. The Vogins are
devoted to the praétices of their system.
‘There are others who are desirous of ac~
quiring Liberation. To these flatter this
science yields palpable fruits.


87. O foremost of kings, Liberation
originates from Knowledge. Without


498


Knowledge it cat never be acquired. The
wise have said it, QO king. Hence, one
should try his best for acquiring true
Knowledge in al! its particulars, by which
one. may succeed in freeing oneseli from
birth and death.


88. Acqiiring khowledge froma Brah-
mana of a Kshatriya or Vaishya or even
a Shudra who is of tow birth, one having
faith should always show respect for-such
knowledge. Birth and death cannot attack
one whio has faith,

89. All orders of men are Brahimands.
AlV originate from Brahman. Ali men
utter Brahma. Helped by an trderstand-
ing that is derived from and directed to
Brahma, I preach this science treating of
Nature and Soul. Indeed, this whole uni-
verse is Brahma.

90, From the mouth of Brahman origi-
nated the Brahmanas; from his arms,
arose the Kshatriyas; from his navel, the
Vaishyas ; and from his feet, the Shudras.
All. the orders should not be considered: as
differing from one another.


gt. Actuated by Ignorance, all men
theet with death and go; O kimg, by birth
which is the cause of acts, -Shorn of
Knowledge, all orders of men, dragged by
terrible Ignorance, falt into varied orders
of being on account of the principles that
Griginate srom Nature.


92. Therefore, all should, by every
means, try to acquire Knowledge. f have
told you that évery person is entitled to
took for its acquisition. One whio is endued
with Knowledge is a Brahmana. Others,
are possessed of knowledye. Hence, this
science of Liberation is always open to
then. all, The Wise, O kiug, have said
this.


93- The questions you had put to me,
have all been answered by me according
to: the truth. Bo-you, therefore, renounce
all grief. Go you to the other end of this
enquiry. Your questions were good. Bless-
ings on your head for ever. :


Bhishma said :—


yt. Thus instructed by the intelligent
Yajnavalkya, the king of Mithila became
filled with joy.

93—95. ‘The king honored that foremost
of ascetics by going round his body, Dis-
missed by the king, he left his court. King
Daivarati, having acquired the knowledge
of the religion of Liberation, took his seat,
and touching a million of kine and a
quantity of gold, of gems and jewells, gave
tiem away toa number of Brahmanas.


97. Installing his son in the sovereignty


MAHABHARATA.


of the Videhas, the old King began to lead
the life of a Yati.


98. ‘faking no notice of all ordinary
duties, the king began to study the science
of the Sankhyas and the Yogins in full.


‘99—1!00. Considering himself to the In-
finite, he begam to reflect on only the
Eternal and Independent One. He re-
nounced all ordinary duties, Virtue and
| Vice, Truth and Falsehood, Birth and
Death, and all other thines relating to the
ptinciples produced by Nature.


tor. Both Sankhyas and Yogins, ac-
cording to the teachings of their sciences,
consider this universe as the outcome of
the action of the Manifest atid the Un-
manifest.


1oz. The fearned say that Brahma is’
. freed from good and evil, is self-depend-
ent, the highest of the high, Eternal, and!
Puré. Do you, therefore, O king, become
Pure.

103—104. The giver, the receiver of the
: gift, the gift itself, and that what is order-
ed to be given away, are all to be deemed
fas the unmanifest Soul. The Soul is the’
Soul’s possession. Who, therefore, can be
a stranget to one? Do you think always
in this way. Never think othetwise.:


tos. He who does not know what is:
.Naturé possessed of qualities and what is
| Soub transcending qualities; only he, not
possessed as he is of knowledge, repairs’
to sacred waters and celebrates sacrifices.


106. Not by study.of the Vedas; not by
: penances, not by sacrifices, O'son of Kuru}.
can one acqire the status of Brahma.
Only when one succeeds in apprehending:
the Supreme or Wnmanifest, he | is--rese-
| pected.

107. They who wait upon Mahat ac-
quires the regions of Mahat. ‘hey who:
wait upon Consciousness, go tod the spot’
that belongs to Consciousness. ‘They who:
wait upon what ishigher, acquire bighet
: places, |
; 108; Those persons, learned in the scrip-
f tures, who succeed in apprehending Eternal
} Brahma which is higher than Unmanilest
Nature, ean acquire that. which is above
birth and death, which is free from quali-
ties, and which is both existent and non-
existent.

tog: FE got all this Knowledge fron
Janaka. The latter had got it from Yajna-
valkya. Knowledge is very Superior, Sacri-
fices cannot compare with it. With the
help of Knowledge one succeeds in crossing
the world’s ocean which is beset with diffi-
culties and dangers. One can never cros$
that ocean by means of sacrifices,


SHANTI


tro. Birth and death, and other obs-
tacles, O king, men of knowledge say, one
cannot get over by ordinary exertion. Men
acquire heaven through sacrifices, penances,
vows, and observances. But they have
again to drop down therefrom on the Earth.


t1t. Do you, therefore, worship with re-
verence that which is Supreme, most pure,
blessed, stainless, and sacred, and which
is above all states. By apprehending Soul,
O king, and by celebrating the Sacrifice
which consists in the acquisition of Know-
ledge, you will really be wise.

112, In former time, VYanavalkya did
that good to king Janaka which comes
from a study of the Upanishads. The
Eternal and Immutable Supreme was the
subject which the great Rishi had des-
eribed tothe king of.Mithila. It enabled
him to attain to that Brahma which is
auspicious and immortal, and which is
above all sorts of sorrow.” =


CHAPTER CCCXX,


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued,


Yudhishthira said :—


as. “Having acquired great power and
great riches, and having obtained a long
period of Jife, how may one succeed in
shunning deathj?]


2. By which of these means, v¢z.,
penances, or the perforinance of the various
acts; or by knowledge of the Shrutis, or
the application of medicines, can one suc.
ceed in avoiding decrepitude and death.”


Bhishma said :—


3. “Regarding it is cited the old narra-
tive of Panchashikha who was a Bhikshu
in his practices and Janaka.


4. Once ona time, Janaka, the king- of
the Videhas, questioned the great Rishi
Panchashikha, who was the foremost of al!
persons conversant with the Vedas and
who had all his doubts removed about the
object and meaning of all duties.


The King said :— :

5. By what conduct, O holy one, may
one get over Decrepitude and Death? fs
it by penances, or by the understanding,
oc by religious practices, or by study and
knowledge of the scriptures,

6. Thus addressed by the king of the
Videhas the learned Panchashikha, conver-
sant with all invisible things, answered,


PARYA., 499


saying, Nothing can prevent two (viz.
decrepitude and death) ; mor is it true that
these cannot be prevented under any
circumstances,


7. Neither days,'nor nights, nor months,
cease to go on. Only that man who,


‘though transitory, follows the eternal path


succeeds in avoiding birth and death.


8. Destruction overtakes ‘all creatures.
All creatures seem to be ceaselessly borne
along the endless current of time. ‘Shose
that are borne along the endless current of
time which is without a vessel and which
is infested by those two powerful alligaiors,
vis., decrepitude and death, sink down
without anybody coming to their, help.


g. As one is swept along that current,
one does not find any friend for help and
one does not feel any interest for any one
else,


to. One meets with wives and other
friends only on his road. One had never
before enjoyed this sort of companionship
with any one for any length of time.


13. Creatures, as they are carried along
the current of time, become. again and
again are drawn towards one another like
clouds ; moved by the wind meeting one
another with loud noise.


12. Like wolves, decrepitude and death
are devourers of-all creatures. ‘Indeed, they
devour the strong and the weak, the short
and the tall.


13. Among creatures, therefore, which
are all so fickle only the Soul exists eter-
nally. Why should he, then, rejoice when
creatures are born and why should he
grieve when they die.


14. Whence have f come? Who amI?
Where shalil go? Whoseam!? Before
what do J rest? What shall Ibe? Why
then do you grieve for what ?


15. Who else than you will see heaven
Or hell? Hence, without throwing aside
the scriptures, one should make gifts and
celebrate sacrifices. sos


CHAPTER CCCXXL
(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—


Continued.


Yudhisthira said :—
1. ‘ Without ging up the domestic
mode of life, O royal"sage of Kuru’s race,


. who ever acquired Liberation which is the


annihilation of the Understanding?) Bo


| tell me this.


500


2. How may the gross and the subtile
form be renounced? Do you also, O grand-
father, tell me what the supreme excellence
of Liberation is."


Bhishma said :—

3. ‘Regarding it is cited the old dis-
course between Janaka and Sulabha, O
Bharata!


4. Formerly there was a king of Mithila,
of the name of Dharmadhyaja, of Janaka’s
race. He was, given to the religion of
Renunciation, j


5. He was well conversant with the
Veda, with the scriptures on Liberation,
and with the scriptures dealing with royal
duties, Governing his senses, he ruled this
Earth,


6. Hearing of his good conduct in the
world, many wise men, well-conversant with
wisdom, O foremost of men, wished - to
imitate him.


7- Inthe same golden age, a woman by
name Sulabha, belonging to the -mendi-
cant order, practised the duties of Yoga
and travelled over the entire Earth,


8. In course of her wanderings over the
Earth, Sulabha heard from many ascetics
of different places that the king of- Mithila
was given to the religion of Liberation.


g. Hearing this report about king
Janaka and desirous of learning whether it
was true or not, -Sulabha became desirous
of seeing Janaka, -


10. Abandoning, by her Yoga powers,
her former body and features, Sulabha
assumed the mest perfect features and
peerless beauty.


., tt. In the twinkling of an eye and with
the speed of the quickest arrow the fair-
browed lady having eyes like lotus-petals
went to the capital of the Videhas.


12. Arrived at the metropolis of Mithila
having a large population, she adopted the
guise of ‘a mendicant and appeared before
the king.


13. The king, beholding her delicate
form, became filed with wonder and en-
guired whe she was, whose she was, and
whence slie came,


14. Welcoming her, he assigned her an
“excellent seat, honored her by offering
water to wash her feet, atid pleased her
with excellent refreshments.


15. Refreshed duly and pleased with
the rites of hospitality offered to her,
Sulabha, the female mendicant, urged the
king, who was encircled by his ministers
and seated in the midst of learned scholars,


MAHABHARATA.


(to speak out his fidelity tothe religion of
Liberation).


16. Doubting whether Janaka had suc-
ceeded in acquiring Liberation by folttowing
the religion of Renunciation, Sulabha,
gifted with Yoga-power, entered the under-
standing of the king by her own under-
standing.


17. Controlling, by means of the rays
of Jiyht that came out from her own eyes,
the rays issuing from the eyes of the king,
the lady, desirous of ascertaining the truth,
bound up king Janaka-with Yoga fetters,


18. Priding himself upon his own invin-
cibleness and defeating the intentions of
Sulabha, that best of kings seized her reso-
lution with his own resolution.


19. The king, in his subtile form, had no
royal umbrella and sceptre. ‘The lady
Sulabha, in hers, was without the three-
fold stick. Both staying then in the same
form, thus conversed with each other.
Listen to that conversation as it took place
between the king and Sulabha.


Janaka said :—

20. O holy lady, to what course of
conduct are you given? Whose are you?
Whence have you come? After finishing
your business heré, where will you go ?


21. No one can, without questioning,
determine another's proficiency in the
scriptures, or age, or order of birth. You
should, therefore, .answer these questions
of mine, when you have come to me.


22. Know thatI am truly shorn of all
vanity about my royal umbrella and scep-
tre. I wish to know you thoroughly. You
are deserving, 1 think, of my respect.


23. Do you hear me as I describe to
you Liberation, for there is none else who
describe to you that subject. Hear me also
as I tell you who that person is from whom
in days.of yore I acquired this distinguish-
ing knowledge.


24. TY am the ‘beloved disciple of the
great and venerable Panchashikha, be-
longing to the mendicant order, of Para-
sara’s family.


25. My doubts have been removed and
Iam fully conversant with the Sankhya
and the Yoga systems, and the ordinances
about sacrifices and other rites, which form
the three well known paths of Liberation,


26. Wandering over the Earth and fol-
lowing the path that is pointed out by the
scriptures, the learned Panchashika for-
merly lived happily in my abode for four
months during the rains, |


SHANTt


27. That foremost of Sankhyas des-
cribed t» me, according to the truth, and
i) an intelligible manner suited to my
understanding, the several kinds of means
for acquiring Liberation. He did not, how-
ever, order me to give up my kingdom.


28. Freed from attachments, and fixing
my Soul on Supreme Brahma, and un-
affected by companionship, | live, prac-
tising in all its minute details that three-
fold conduct which is laid down in treatises
on Liberation.


2g. Renunciation isthe highest means
Prescribed for Liberation. Renunciation,
by which one becomes freed, emanate from
Knowledge.


30. From Knowledge originates the en-
Geavour after Yoga, and through that
exertion one acquires knowlegde of Self.
Through knowledge of Self one gets over
joy and grief. ‘Phat enables one to tran-
scend death and acquire great success.


31. That high intelligence has been
acquired by me, and accordingly I have got
over all pairs of opposites. Even in this
life I have been freed from stupefaction
and have got over all attachments,


32. As a soil, saturated with water and
soltened thereby, causes the seed to sprout
forth, similarly, the acts of men cause
rebirth.


33—34. As a seed, fried on a pan or
otherwise, becomes unfit to sprout forth
akhough the power for sprouting lies there,
similarly my understanding having been
freed from the productive principle formed
by desire, by the instructions of the holy
Panchashikha of the mendicant order, - it
no longer gives its fruit in the form of
attachment to the objects of the senses.


35. I never experience love for my wife
or hate for my enemies. Indeed, I keep
aloof from both, marking the fruitlessness
of attachment and anger.


" 36. 1 regard both persons impartially,
viz., him who smears my ‘right hand with
sandal-paste and him who wounds my
left.


37- Having attained my object, 1 am
happy, and consider in the same light a
clod of earth, a piece of stone, and a lump
of gold. I am shorn of all attachments,
though am engaged in ruling a kingdom.
On account of all this I am better known
over all bearers of triple sticks. |


38. Some foremost of men who are
conversant with the subject of Liberation
say that Liberation has a triple pet Some
consider Knowledge having all,things of
the world for its object as the means of


l .


PARVA. 50%


Liberation. Some hold that the total re-+
nunciation of acts is the meats thereof.


39. Another class of persons conversant
with the scriptures on Liberation say that
Knowledge is the only means. Others,
vis., Yatis, gifted with subtile vision ; hold
that acts form the means.


40. The great Panchashikha, discard-
ing both the opinion about. knowledge and
acts, considered the third as the only
means or path of Liberation.


41. Hf house-holders be endued with self-
restraint, and control over the senses, they
become the equals of Sannyasins. If, on
the other hand, Sannyasins be endued with
desire and aversion and wives and honor
and pride and affection, they become like
householders.


42. If one can acquire Liberation by
means of knowledye, then may Liberation
exist in triple sticks. Why then may
Liberation not exist in the umbrella and
the sceptre as well, especially, when the
reason in taking up the triple stick and the
sceptre is the same.


43- One becomes attached to all those
things and acts which are necessary for him
for the sake of his own self for particulae
reasons,


44. If a person, seeing the faults of the
domestic mode of life, renounce it for
adopting another mode,‘he cannot, for such
rejection and adoption, be considered as
ene who is at once freed from all attach
ments. :


45. Sovereignty is” fraught with thé re
warding and the punishing of others. ‘The
life of a mendicant is equally fraught with
the same. When, therefore, mendicants are
like kings in this respect, why would men-
dicants only, acquire Liberation, and not
kings ? ; 2

46. Notwithstanding the possession of
sovereignty, therefore, one becomes purged
of all sins by means of knowledge alone,
living in Supreme Brahma. :
47. The putting on of brown cloths,
shaving of the head, bearing of the. triple
stick, and the water-pitcher, these are the
external signs of one’s mode of life. These
are useless in helping one to acquire Li-
beration.


‘48. When, despite the adoption of these
emblems of a particular mode of life,
Knowledge alone becomes. the cause of
one’s Liberation from sorrow, it would. ap-
pear that the adoption of mere emblems
is absolutely useless.


49. Or, if, seeing the mitigation of sor-
row in it, youhave adopted these emblems


goa MAHABHARA FA.


af Sanyasa, “why then should not the miti- 61. I donot know whether you belong
gation of sorrow be seen in the umbrella | tomy owa family or do not belong to it.
and the sceptre which I use. As regards yourself also, you do not know


59. Liberation does not exist in poverty; | Whol am. If you are of my own gotra,
nor is bondage to be seen in siches. One | YOU have by entering into my body, pro-
acquires Liberation through Knowledge duced another evil,—vis.. of unnatural
only, whether one is poor of tich, ; union.


51. For these reasons, know that lam | .. 62. If, again, your husband be alive and
living in a state of freedom, though out- living in an distant place, your union with
earaly engaged ia the enjoyment of. reli- | ME has produced the fourth evil of sinfui-
gion, wealth, and pleasure, in the form of | "€53 for you afe not one whom I may
kingdom and wives, which form a field of | !awfully marry.
bondage. : 63.1 Do you commit all these sinful deeds,
~ 2. have cut off the fetters formed | actuated by the motive of performing a
by kingdom and riches, andthe bondage particular object? Do you do these from
of attachments, with the sward of Renun- } 'gnorance or from perverted intelligence.
Giation whetted on the Stone of the scrip- 64. If, again, on account of your evil
tures describing Liberation. : natyre you have thus become thoroughly
. As regards seff then, I tell you independent or unrestrained in your
weer have Moone. heed in this way conduct, I tell you that if you have any
mendicant lady, I entertain an affection knowledge of the Scriptures, you will uns
for you. _ But that should pot prevent me derstand that everything you have done
from telling ‘you that yout conduct does has been productive of evil.
not tally, with the practices of the mode of 65. A third fault touches you on account
life, which yoy haye adopted. of these acts of yours, a fault that is des.
54- Your formation of the body is highly | tructive of peace of mind. By trying
@elicate. You have beauty. You have an + © show your superiority, the indication of
exceedingly shapely form. You are young. | 3 wicked woman is seen in you.
You have all these, and you’ have also 66. Desirous of asserting your victory
subjugati. n of the senses. & doubt it verily. as you are it ern myself alone whom you
. Youhave stopped u ny body for | Wish to defeat, for it is [plain that you wish
seeing ay to dl ea ” an ; ceally to win a victory over even the whole of my
iberated or not, This act a yours does f court.
mot tally with that mode of fife whose em- 67, By looking thus towards all these
blems you carry. meritorious Brahmanas, it is clear that you
56. The triple stick is. unfit for a wish to humiliate them all and. glorify yours
Yogin who has desire, As regards yourself, self, . ;
you do not adhere tg your stick. As re- 68. Stupefied by your pride of Yogas
gards those who, are freed, they should | power that has been born of your jealopsy,,
protect themselyes from fall, p you have caused a union of your unders.
: : standing with mine and thereby have really
57. Listen now to meas. to. what your | mingled together nectar with poison :
trangsression has been on account of your {. —* ‘ : ;
contact with me and your having entered 69, The union, again, of man, and
into my gross body with, the help of your | voman, when each seeks. the other, is sweet
understanding. ° as nectar. That association, however, of
: mea’ ang womar when the latter, herself
f coveting, cannot get an individual of the
Opposite sex that does not seek her, is,,
t instead of being a merit, only a fault that
. ig as noxious as poison, :


58. Why have you entered into my
kingdom, or my palace? At whose sign
have you entered into. my heart.


59. You belong to the foremost of all
the orders, being, as you are, a Brahbmana
woman. As.regards myself however, 1 am
a Kshatriya. ‘There ig no union for us
two, Do not help to cause an, intermixture
of races.


‘+70, Do not continue to. touch me.
Know that Lam righteous. Do you act,
according. to. your own scriptures. Your
enquiry, viz., whether. 1 am or Tam not
liberated, has been finished.


A

qt. You should, not conceal from. me alli
your secret motives. You should not who
thus disguise yourself, conceal from me
» what your object is, that.is, whether this,
“call. of yours has been. prompted by the.


C
‘


60. You follow the duties that lead to
Liberation. lama householder, This act
of yours, therefore, is another evil. you, have
committed, for it produces an unnatural
union, of two opposite modes of life.


SHANT! PaRVA.


desire of accomplishing somé object of
your own ar whether you have comie for
accomplishing the object of some other
king.

rm 72. One should never appeat deéceitfully
before a king; nor before a Bratmana {
hor before his wife when that wifd is pos-
sessed of every \wifely virtue. Those who
appear in deceitful guise before these threé
very soon meet with destruction,


73. The power of kings consists iti their
Sovereignty. ‘The powet of Brahmanas
well-versed tn tite Vedas is id the Vedas.
Women hold a high power on account of
their beauty and youth and blessedness.


74. ‘These are powerful in the possession
of these powers. He, therefore; who
seeks to accomplish his own object should
always approacis these three with sincerity
and open-mindedness, Insincerity and
deceit cannot yield success.


75. You should, therefore, inform me of
the order to which you belong by birth, of
your learning and conduct and disposition
and nature, as also of the object with which
you have come here.


Bhishma said:—-

76. Though chastised by the king, ty
these unpleasant, iumproper, and ill-applied
words, the lady Sulabha was not at) all
abashed.


77. After the king had said these
words, the beautiful Sulabha then gave
vent to theffollowing words iw reply whicly
were mote handsome thar her persoii.


a

Sulabha said :—

_ 78 O king, speech should always be
free from the nine verbal faults and che
nine faults of judgment. It should also,
while setting forth the meaning with cléear-
ness, ibe possessed of the eigliteen well-
known merits.

79. Ambiguity, ;
tauits and merits of premises and conclu.
sions, weighing the respective stréngth or
weakness of those faults and imecits, estab
Kishment of the conclusion, and the element
of persuasiveness or otherwise that belongs
to the conclusion thus arrived at,—thesé
five characteristics belonging to the sense—~
form the authoritativeness of what is said.

80.
these requirements beginning with ambi-
guity, one after another, as f explain them
according to the combinations. re


81. When knowledge résts on difference*


of the objects to be known being different
from one another, and when the under-


standing rests upon many points one after
x D


j


determination of the


Listen now to the characteristics of |


503


another’, the combination of Wotds is said
to be sullied by ambiguity.

82. By ascettainment called Sankhya,
ig mieant the dé&teriminatioi; by étimina-
tion, of faults dr inerits, adupting tentative
méanihgs. ;

83. Krama,' or weighing the relative
strength or weakness of the faults or niérits;
consists iff settling the propriety of the
ptiority of subsequence of ihe words uséd
in a senteticé, ‘This is the theaning of thé
word Krama as held by persons who can’
explain sentences or texts.


84. Conclusion is the fihal determina-
tion after this examination of what has bee
said on thé subjects of religion, pteasure,
profit, and Liberation; in respect of what
it particularly is that has been said in thé
text.

8s: The sorrow begotten by wish of
hatred multiplies itself greatly. The cons
duct; O king, that one follows iti such @
matter is called Prayofanami.

86. Take it for granted; O king, at my
word, that these marks of Ambigaity and
the others, when oécurring together, make
a complete and intelligible sentences


87—8g. ‘The wotds 1 shalt atteé wilt
have sense, be free from ambiguity, logical,
free fromy tautology, smooth, certain, freé
from bombast, agreeable; or sweet, truthfuly
not in¢onsistent with the three-fold objects
of lifes refined not ellipticat or imperfect;
shorn of harshness or difficulty of compres
hension, characterised by due order, not
far-fetched in’ sense, corrected with one
another as cause and effect, and éacly
havitig a specific object.

go.. J shall wot tel! you anything, ac<
tuated by desire of anger or fear or cupi»
dity or abjectness ,or deceipt or shanie at
mercy or pride.
. gt. When the speaker, the héarér, and
the words said, perfectly agree with oné
another in course of a speech, then does
the sense or meaning come out very clearly.

gz. Wheti about what is to be said, the
speaker does not caré for the understand-
ing of the hearer by utteting words whose
meanitig is understood by him’self, then,
however good those words may be, they
cannot be comprehended by the hearer.


9% ‘That speaker, again, who, without
caring for his owit meaning, uses words that
are of excellent sound and sense, creates
only erroneous impressions in the mind of
the hearer. Such words it such matters are
certainly fauity. c


o4; That speaker, however, who uses
wards that are, while ex cessing lis aun


Boa


imeanilp; iitelligibie ta the hearet as well,
fis a true speaker. No other mati deserves
the name. ; &

93. You should, therefdre, O king, héar
with capt atténtion these words of mitie,
fraught witti tieaniig arid eiidded with
Wealth of sound. :

96. You have asked mie who [ aii,

hose 1 am, Whence I am coming, etc.

isteri now to me, O king; with full coitid,
aa I aiiswee these questions of yours.

97. As lat and wood, as graiiis of dust
ahd drops of water, exist mixed up wher
brought together; go are tlie existetices of all
creatures.


98. Sotind, touch; taste, fortii, arid sceiit,
these, and the senses, though different iit
their essences, exist yet in a State of unison
like lac and wood.


og. It is agaih well known that nobddy
ie any of these, saying, who are you?

ach of ther algo has no knowledge ejther
of itself or of the others.


. 100. ‘The eye tantiot seé itself. The
ear cannot hear itself. che eye, again,
cannot satisfy the functions. of any of the
other senses, or can atiy of the senses
Batisfy the functiois of any sense except
its own.


tot. If ail of them even combine to-
gether, even then they cantict know their
own selves as dust and watec mingled
together cannot know each other though
existing together. In order to perfor
their respective functions, they await the
contact of external objects.


tod. The eye, form, and light, form the
three requisites of the action called Seeing.
‘Yhe same holds good about the action of
the other senses and the ideas Whitli is
their resttlt. :


103. Then, again, between the functions
of the senses and the ideas which are their
tesult, the mind is ah entity quite separate
from the senses and is considered to have
an action of its own. With its aid one dis-
tinguishes what is existent from what is
hon-existent for arriving at certainty.


104. With the five senses of knowledge
and five senses of action, the mind makes
a total of eleven. The twelfth is the
Understanding, When doubt originates
about what is to be known, the Under-
standing comes forward and sets at rest all
doubts,


10g. After the twelfth, Sattwa Is an-
otber principle numbering the thicteenth.
Wah its aid creatures are ‘distinguished as
possessing more of it or less of it in their
constitutions, :


MAHABHARATA.


106. After this, CoiSciousness (of self}
js an other principle. lt helps one to
apprehence sell as distinpiisted from what
is not self.

109. Desire is the fifteenth principle,
O king. ‘The whole universe.

fo8. The sixteenth principle is Avidya
or nescience. ‘To it aré attached the seven-
teenth and the eighteenth principles called
Nature and Manifestation.


tog. Happiness and sorrow, dectepitude
and death, gain and loss, the agreeable and
the disagreeable,—these form the nine-
teenth principle and are called pairs of
opposites.

itd. Beyond the tiineteenth priticiple i8
another, vzs:, Time, called the twentieth.
Know that the births and deaths of all
creatures are owing td the action of this
twentieth principle.

li1—12 ‘These. twenty exist together.
Besides thése, the five Great ptimary ele-
ments, and existence dnd non-existence;
bring up the niimber to twenty-severt.
Beyond these, there are three others;
tathed Vidi, Shukrd, aiid Vala, that make
the nuthbet thirty.


112, That in which theSe thirteen ptid-
ciples occtir is Said td be body.

t13. Some per3otis regard tinmanifest
Nature to be the souréé or cause of these
thirty principles. The Kanadas of gross
vision consider the Mauifest to be their
cause.|


t14—t15.- Whether ihe Unmanifest or
the Manifest be their cause, or whether thé
two be considered as. their catise, or,
fourthly, whether the four together be the
cause, they that are conversant with spiri-
tual science behold Nature aS‘the causé
of all creatures.


116. That Nature which is Unmanifest,
becomes manifest in the form of thesé
principles. Myself, yourself, O king, and
allothers that are gifted with body, aré
the result of that Nature.


117. Embryonic conditions are dite td
the mixture of the vital seed and blood,
On account of insemination the result which
first appears is called by the name of
‘ Kalala.””


118. From ‘ Kaiala’ originates bubble:
From * Vudvuda’ originates what is called
*Peshi”’ From ‘ Peshi’ that stage origi-
nates in which the various limbs are seet.
From this last stage appear nails and hait..


119. When the ninth month is gone,
O king of Mithila, the creature takes its
bicth so that, its sex being known, it is
called a boy or girl. : ee


SHANTI PARVA,


iad. When the creature comes out of
the womb, the form it presents is such that
its nails and fingers seem to be of the
color of burnished copper. The next stage


is called infancy, when the form that was.


Seen at the time of birth becomes meta-


morphosed.


121. From infancy youth is reached, and
rom youth, old age. As the creature ad-
vances from one stage into another, the
form shown inthe previous stage becomes
changed. :


122. The constituent elements of the
body, which serve various functions in the
general economy, undergo change every
moment in every creature. Those changes,
however, are so minute that they cannot
be marked. ‘


123. The birth of particles, and their
death, in each successive stage, cannot bé
marked, O king, even as one cannot mark
the changes in the flame of a burning
lamp.


124125. When such is the state of the
bodies of all creatures,—z.e., when what
is called the body is changing continually
like the rapid motion of a house of good
mettle,—who then has come whence or
not whence, or whose is it oc whose is it
not, or whence dpes it not arise? What
connection does there exist between crea-
tures and their own bodies ?


126. As fire is generated from the con-
tact of flint with iron, or from two sticks
of wood when rubbed against each other,
so are creatures created from the combi-
nation of the (thirty) principles aircady
named.


427. Indeed, as you yourself see your
own body in your body and as you yourself
see your soul in your own soul, why is it
that you do not see your own body and
your own soul in the bodies and souls of
others.


128. If it is true that you see an identity
with yourself and others, why then did you
ask me who [ am and whose? ,


129. If it is true that you have, O king,
beeti freed from the knowledge of duality
which says—this is mine and this other
is not mine,—then what use is there with
such questions as Who are you, whose
are you, and whence do you come 7


130. What marks of Liberation can’ be
said to take place in that king who acts as
others act towards enemies and allies and
neutrals and in victory and truce and war ?


73t. What marks of Liberation are in
him who do not know the true nature of
the three-fold, objects (of life as shown in


6a


508


seven ways in all acts and who, on that
account, is attached to that three-fold ob-
jects ?.

132. What marks of Liberation exist in
him who cannot look impartially on the
agreeable, on the weak, and the strong ?
Unworthy as you are of it, your pretence
to Liberation should be suppressed by youc
counsellers.


133. Tunis your attempt to acquire Liber-
ation is like the use of medicine by a
patient who indulges in all sorts of forbid=
den food and practices. :


134. O chastiser of enemies, thinking of
wives and other sources of attachment, one
should see these in his own soul. What
else can be considered as the indication
of Liberation. .


135. Listen now to me as I speak fully -
of these and certain other minute sources
of attachment belonging to the four well-
known acts to which you are still fettered
though you profess yourself to have adopted
the religion of Liberation.


136. That man who thas to rule the
entire world must, indeed, be a single king
without a second. He is obliged to live in
only a single palace,


137. In that palace he has again only
one sleeping room. In that room he has¢
again, only one bed on which at night he
is to lie down. : .


138. Half that bed again he is obliged
to give to his Queen. This may serve as
an example of how little the king’s share
is of all he is said to possess.


139- This is the case with his objects
of enjoyment, with the food he eats, and
with the dresses he puts on. He is thus at.
tached to a very limited share of all things<
He is, again, attached to the duties of re-
warding and punishing.

140. The king always depends on others.
He enjoys avery small share of all he is
supposed to possess, and to that small share
he is compelled to be attached, In the
matter also of peace and war, the king is
not independent ? ;


141. In the matter of women, of sports
and other sorts of enjoyment, the king’s
inclinations are greatly limited. In the
matter of taking advice and in the assem+
bly of his councillors what independence
can the king be said to have?


142. When, indeed, he passes orders on
other men, he is said to be perfectly in-
dependent. But the moment after, in the
several matters of his orders, his independ-
ence is limited by the very men whom he
has ordered.


506


143. If the king wishes to sleep, he can-
not satisfy his desire, resisted by those who
have something to do with him. He must
sleep when allowed, and while sleeping he
is compelled tq wake up for attending to
those who have urgent business with him.


144. Bathe, touch, drink, eat, pour
libations of the fire, celebrate sacrifices,
speak, hear,—these are the words which
kings have to hear from others and hearing
them have to serve those that utter them.


~145. Men come in numbers to the king
and pray to him for gifts. Being, however,
the protecter of the ‘general treasury, he
cannot make gifts even to the most worthy.


146. It he makes gifts, the treasury
becomes exhausted. If he does not, dis-
Appointed solicitors regard him inimically.
He becomes vexed and as the outcome of
this, misanthropy possesses his mind.


147. If many wise and heroic and rich
men live together, the king’s mind begins
to be filled with distrust. Even when there
is no cause of fear, the king fears those
who always wait upon and adore him,


148. Those I fhave mentioned, O king,
also find fault with him. See, how the
king’s fears. may originate from even
them.


>149. Then again all men are kings in
their own houses. Afl men, again, tn their
own houses are householders. Like kings,
© Janaka, all men in their own houses
punish and reward.


150. Like kings others also jhave sons
and wives and their own selves and trea-
suries and friends and stores. In these
respects the king does not differ from other
men.


t5t. The country is ruined,—the city is
burnt by fire,—the foremost of elephants is
dead, at all this the king grieves like others,
Viule thinking that these impressions are all
owing to ignorance and’mistake.


152. The king is seldom freed from
mental sorrows caused by desire and aver-
sion and fear. Me is generally afflicted
also by headaches and various other di-
seases,


153. The king is’ afflicted by all pairs
of opposites. He is alarmed at everything.
Indeed, beset with enemies and obstacles
as kingdom is, the king, while he enjoys
it, passes sleepless nights.


1§4. Sovereignty, therefore, is blessed
with a small share of happiness. The
‘misery with which it is full is very great.
itis as unreal as burning flames fed by
straw or the bubbles of froth seen on the
surface of water,


MAHABHARATA.


155. Who is there that would like to
obtain sovereignty, or having acquired
sovereignty can hope to acquire tranquillity?
You know this kingdom and this palace
as yours.


156—157. You think also this army, this
treasury, and these counsellers as yours.
Whose, however, in sooth are they, and
whose are they not? Allies, ministers,
capital, provinces, punishment, treasury,
and the king,—these seven which form the
limbs of a kingdom exist, depending upon
one another, like three sticks standing with
one another’s help. The merits of each
are shown by the merits of the others.
Which of them can be said to be superior
to the rest? 3


158. Some particular ones are regarded
as superior to the rest when some tmpor-
tant purpose is served through their agency,
Superiority, for the time being, is said to
belong to that one whose efficacy is thus
seem.


159. The seven limbs already mentioned,
O best of kings, and the three others,
forming ten, supporting one another, are
said to enjoy the kingdom like the king
himself.


160. That king who is gifted with great
energy and who is firmly attached to
Kshatriya duties, should be satisfied with
only a tenth part of the produce of the
subject’s field,


¥60. Other kings are seen to be satis-
fied with léss than a tenth part of such
produce.


161. There is no one who possessed
the kingly office without some one else
possessing it in the world, and there is no
kingdom without a king. If there be no
kingdom, there ean be no virtue and if
there be no virtue, whence can Liberation
arise,


162, Merit of the most sacred and the
highest order is associated with kings and
kingdoms, By ruling a kingdom well, a
king acquires the merit of a Horse-sacrifice
with the whole Earth given away as sacri-
ficial gift. t

163. O king of Mithila, I can mention
hundreds and thousands of faults like these


‘that belong to kings and kingdoms.


164. Then, again, when { have no reat
connection with even my body, how then
can | be said to have any connection with
the bodies of others? You cannot charge
me with having tried to engender an inter-
mixture of castes.


165. Have you heard the religion of
Liberation in in @ll its bearings from the


SHANTI PARVA.


Rips of Panchashikha, together with its
means, its methods, its practices, and its
conclusion ?


166. If you have prevailed over all your
bonds and freed yourself from all attach-
ments, may [ ask you, O king, why you
Preserve your connections still with this
umbrella and those other appendages of
coyalty.

167. I think that you have not listened
to the scriptures, or, you have Hstened to
them without any advantage, or, perhaps,
you have listened to some other books look-
ing hike the scriptures.


168. It appears that you are endued
with only worldly Knowledge, and that like
an ordinary man of the world, you are
bound by the fetters of touch and wives
and mansions and the like,


169. If it be true that you have keen
freed from all fetters, what harm have I
done you by entering your body with only
my Intellect ?


170. The practice with Yatis is to live
in uninhabited or deserted abodes. What
harm then have I done to whom by enter-
ing youc understanding which is indeed
shorn of true knowledge ?


171. I have not touched you, O king,
with my hands, or arms, or feet, or thighs,
QO sinless One, or with any other part of
the body.


172. You are born ina great family.
You have modesty. You have foresight.
Whether the act has been good or bad, my
entrance into your person has been a
private one, concerning us two only. Was
it not unfair for you to proclaim that
private act before all your ministers.


173. Allthése Bralimanas deserve respect.
They are foremost of preceptors. You also
are worthy of their respect, being their king.
Doing them respect, you are entitled to
receive reverence from them.


174. Thinking on all this, tt was not
proper for you to proclaim before these
foremost of men the fact of this union
between two persons of Opposite sexes, if
indeed, you are really acquainted with the
rules of propriety about speech.

175. Oking of Mithila, { am living in
you without touching you at all even like
a drop of water on a lotus leaf that rests
on it without drenching it in the least.


175. Hf, despite this, you still feel my
touch, how can it be believed that through
the instructions of the mendicant Pancha-
shika, your knowledge has become disasso-
ciated from the sensual objects.


176, You have, it ig evident, deviated


7


_ 807


from the domestic mode’ of life, but you
have not yet acquired Liberation that is
so difficult to acquire. You live between
the two, pretending that you have reached
the goal of Liberation.


178. The contact of one that is liberated
with another that has been so, or of Soul
with Nature, cannot lead to an intermine
gling which you fear.


197. Only those who consider the Soul
to be at one with the body, and who think
the several orders and modes of life to be
ceally different from one another, commit
the mistake of supposing an intermingling
to be possible. My body is different from
yours. But my soul is not different from
your soul, When I am able to realise this,
I have not the least doubt that my under~
standing is really aot living in’ yours,
though | have entered into you by Yoga.


180. A potis carried in the hand. In
the pot there is milk. On the milk is a
fly. Though the hand and pot, the pot
and milk, and the milk and the fly, exist
together, yet they are all different from
each other.


181. The pot does not assume the nature
of-the milk. Nor does the milk partake
the nature of the fly. ‘he condition of
each in dependent of itself, and can
never be changed by the condition of that
other with which it may for the time being
exisi.

182. Similarly, color and _ practices,
though they may exist together with and
in a person that is liberated, do not really
belong to him. How then can an inter-
mingly of orders be possible on account
of this union of myself with you.


183. Then, again, | am not superior to
youin color, Nor am La Vaishya, nora
Shudra. Lam, O xing, of the same caste
with you, born of a pure family.


184. There was a royal sage named
Pradhana. It is clear that you have heard
of him. Iam born in his family, and my
name is Sulabha.


185. Inthe sacrifices performed by my
ancestors, the foremost of the gods, viz,
Indra, used to come, accompanied by
Drona, Shatashringa, and Chakradwara.


186. Born in such a family, it was found
that no fitting husband could be found
for me. Instructed then in the religion
of Liberation, | wander over the Earth
alone, practising asceticism.


187. fam not a hypocrite with regard to
the life of Renunciation { follow; I am not
a thief that appropriates others’ properties.
lam not a confuser of the practices of ihe


508


different castes. I am firm in the practices
of the mode of life | follow.


188, Iam firm and steady in my vows.
I never utter any word without thinking
of its fittess. I did not come to you, without
having thought properly, O king !

189. Having heard that your under-
standing has been purified by the religion
of Liberation, I came here from desire of
some good. Indeed, it was for enquiring
of you about Liberation that I had come.

190. I donot say so for glorifying my-
self and humiliating my opponents, But
I say it, out of sincerity only, What I
say is that he who is liberated never vaunts
that intellectual superiority which one
shows by logical discussions for the sake
of victory. He, on the other hand, is
really liberated who devotes himself to
Brahma, that sole seat of peace.


rgt. As a person of the mendicant order
lives for 6nly one.night in an empty house,
similarly, I shall live for this one night in
your body.


192. You have honored me with both
words and othee offers that are due from
a host toa guest. Having slept this one
night in your body, O king of Mithila,
which is as it were my own chamber now,
to-morrow F shall go.


Bhishma said :—

193. Hearing these words fraught with
excellent sense and with reason, king
Janaka could not reply thereto.


ene


CHAPTER CCCXXII.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued.


Yudhisthhira said :—


1. How was Shuka the son of Vyasa,
in days of yore, won over to Renunciation 7
1 wish to hear you recite the story. My
curiosity about it is irrepressible.


2. You should, O you of Kuru’s race,
describe to me on the conclusions about the
Unmanifest, the Manifest, and of the Truth
(or Brahma) that is in, but unattached to,
them, as also of the acts of the self-create
Narayana, as they are known to you.


Bhishma said :—


3. Seeing his son Shuka living fear.
lessly as ordinary men do in practices that
are regarded innocent by them, Vyasa
taught him the entire Vedas and then dis-
coursed to him one day in the following
manner,


MAHABHARATA.


Vyasa said :—

t. Oson, becoming the master of your
senses, do you conquec extreme cold and
extreme heat, hunger and thirst, and the
wind also, and having controlled them, do
you practise virtue.


5. Do you duly observe truth and
sincerity, and freedom from anger” and
malice, and self-control and penances, and
the duties of benevolence and mercy.


6. Rest you on truth, firmly devoted to
virtue, renouncing all sorts of insincerity
and deceit. Do you support your life on
the remnants of food after feeding gods
and guests.


7. Your body is as fickle as the froth
on the surface of water. ‘Vhe Individual
Soul is sitting unattached in it as a bird on
ateee. The companionship of all agree-
able objects is transitory, Why then, O
son, do you sleep in such forgetfulness ?


_ 8. Your enemies are careful and awake
and ever-ready (to assail you) and always
watchful of their opportunity. Why are
you So foolish as not to know this ?


9. As the days are going one after
another, the period of your life is being
decreased. Indeed, when your life is being
continually shortened, why do you not run
to preceptors ?


10. Only they who have no faith; set
their hearts on worldly things that have
the only effect of increasing flesh and blood.
They do not care for the next world. ,


ir. Those men who are stupefied by
erroneous understandings show a hatred
for virtue. The man who follows those
misguided persons that have taken to de-
vious and wrong paths is afflicted equally
with them.


12. They, however, who are contented,
devoted to the scriptures, gifted with high
souls, and possessed of great might, follow
the path of virtue. Do you wait upon
them wifh respect and seek instruction from
them.


13. Do you act according to the instruc-
tions received from those wise men whose
eyes are set upon virtue. With under-
standing purified by such instructions and
made superior, do you then control youc
heart which is ever ready to deviate from
the right course.


14. They who always think about the
present, who fearlessly consider the to-
morrow as something quite remote,——they
who do not observe any restrictions a bout
food,—are really senseless wights who fail
to understand that this world is only a field .
of probation, © :


“SUANT! .PARVA,


15. Going to the flight of steps formed
by Virtue, do you ascend those steps one
after another. At present you are like a
worm which weaves its cocoon round itself
and thereby coses up all means of escape.


16. Do you shun unhesitatingly, the
athiest who trausgresses all restraints, who
is situated like a house by the side of a
dreadful and encroaching current, and who
Seenas to stand like a bamboo with its head
erect in pride.


17. Do you with the raft of Yoga cross
the ocean of the world those whose five
senses constitute its waters, having Desire
and Anger and Death for its fierce mons-
ters, and birth for its votex.


18. {Do you cross, with the raft of Virtue,
the world that is affected by Death and
afflicted by Decrepitude, and upon which
the thunder-bolts formed by days and
nights are falling incessantly. :


19. When Death is seeking you at
every moment, it is certain that Death may
get you for his victim at any time. Whence
will you get your rescue.


20. Like the she-wolf snatching away a
lamb, Death snatches away one who is still
engaged in acquiring wealth and still un-
satisfied in the enjoyment of pleasures.


21. When you are destined to enter into
the dark, do you hold up the blazing lamp
of righteous understanding and whose
flame has been sufficiently kept.


22. Getting by various forms one after
another in the world of men, a creature
acquires the status .of Brahmanhood with
great difficulty. You have acquired that
status. Do you then, O son, try to main-
tain it.

23. A Brahmana has not been born
for the gratification of senses. On the
other hand, his body, for being subjected
to mortification and penances in this world
so that heamay enjoy peerless happiness in
the next world. ,


24. The status of Brahmanhood is ac-
quired by long-continued and austere
penances. Having gained that status one
should never waste his time in the grati-
fication of his senses. Always engaged in
penances and self-control and desirous of
what is for your. well being, do you live
and act, devoted to peace and tranquillity.


25. The life, of every man, is like a
horse. ‘The nature of that horse unmani-
fest. The elements form its body. Its


nature is highly subtile. Kshanas, and
Trutis, and Nimeshas are the hair on its
body. The twilights form its shoulder-
joints. The lighted and the dark fort-
nights form its two equally powerful eyes.


‘taken before Yama at his behest,


509


Months are its other fimbs. That horse is
running ineessantly.


26. If your eyes be not blind, seeing
then that horse continually moving forward
in its invisible course, do yos set your
heart on virtue, after hearing what your
preceptors have to say about the next
world.


27. They who deviiste from virtue and
who aet carelessty, who always show malice
towards others and take to evil ways, are
obliged to take bodies in the regions of
Yama and suffer various afflictions on
account of their various sinful deeds.


28. That king who is given to virtue
and who protects and punishes the good
and the wicked with discrimination, ac-
quires the regions of the men of righteous
deeds. By doing various goed acts, he
acquires such happiness as is faultless and
as is incapable of being attained to by
going through even thousauds of births.


29. Dreadful dogs, crows of iron beaks, °
flocks of ravens and vultures and other
birds, and blood-sucking worms, attacks
the man who disobeys the commands of
his parents and preceptors when he goes to
hell after death. _


30. That sinfyl wretch whd, on account
of his carelessness, transgresses the ten
boundaries that have been fixed by the
Self-create himself, is obliged to pass his
time in great misery in the wild deserts
situated in the dominions of Death.


31. That man who is sullied with cupi-
dity, who is fond of falsehood, who always
takes pleasure in deception and cheating,
and who does injuries to others by practt«
sing hypocrisy and deception, has to go
to deep hell and suffer great misery-and
afflictions for his acts of iniquity. '


32. Such a man is compelled to bathe
in the broad river called Vaitarant whose
waters are scalding, to enter into a forest
of trees whose leaves are as sharp as
swords, and then to lie down on a bed of
axes. He has thus to pass his days in
dreadful hell in great misery,


33- You see only the regions of Brah-
man and other gods, but you cannot see
what is the highest. Alas, vou are ever
blind also to what brings Death on its
train ?


34 Follow the path of Liberation. Why
do you delay? A frightful terror, destruc
tive of your happiness, is be: re you: Do
you take prompt measutes for acquiring
Liberation.


35. Soon after death you are sure to be
For


510


- acquiring happiness in the next world. try


to acquire virtue by the practice of difficult


' and austere vows.


36. The powerful Yama does not care
for the sufferings of others, very soon takes
the lives of all persons, that is, of yourself
and your friends. ‘here is none capable
of resisting him.


37. Very.soon the wind of Yara will
blow before you. Very soon will you
be taken alone to that fearful presence.
Do yoy then achieve what will be for.your
behoof there.


. 38. Where now is that Death-wind
which ‘will blow before you very soon?
Very soon will the points of the horizon,
when that time arrives, begin to whirl


' before your eyes.


39. O son, soon will your Vedas dis-


‘appear from you as you go helplessly into


that dread presence. Do you, therefore,
think of Yoga abstraction which is endued
with great excellence.


40. Do you fry to attain that one only
treasuse so th.t you may not have to grieve
at the recollection of your pristine deeds
good and bad all of which are marked by
mistake.


41. D-crepitude very soon weakens your
body and robs you of your strength and
limbs and beauty. Do you, therefore, seek
that one only treasure.


42. Very soon the Destroyer, having
Disease as his charioteer, will with a strong
hand, for taking your life, pierce and break
your body. Do you, therefore, practise
austere penances.


43- Very sgon will those terrible wolves
that live within your body, attack from all
sides. Do you try, therefore, to achieve
acts of righteousness,


44. Very soon will you, all alone, see a
thick darkness, and very soon will you see
golden trees on the. top of the hill. Do
you, therefore, hurry to achieve acts of
righteousuess,


45. Very soon will those evil companions
and enemies of yours, (vzs., the senses),
dressed as friends swerve you from correct
vision, Do you, then, QO son, try to achieve
that which is of the highest good.


46. Do you acquire that wealth which
has no fear from either kings or theives,
and which one has not to renounce even at
Death. .


47. Acquired by one’s own deeds, that
wealth has never to be distributed among
partners. Each enjoys that wealth which
each has acquired for himself.


MAHABHARA fA.


48. O son, give that to others by which
they may be able to live in the. next world,
Do you also try to acquire that wealth
which is indestructible and durable.


49. Do not think that you should first
enjoy all sorts of pleasures and then try te
acquire Liberation, for before you are
Saliated with enjoyment you may meet with
Death. Do you, in view of this, hasten to
do acts of goodness.


50. Neither mother, nor son, nor rela-
tives, nor dear friends even when begged
with honors, accompany the man that dies.
One alone has to go to the regions of
Yama. :


51. Only those deeds, good and bad,
that one did before death follow the man
who goes to the other world.


52. The gold and gems that one has
acquired by good and bad means do not
do any good to a man after death.


53. There is no witness, of men who
have gone to the next world, better than
the soul, of all acts done and undone in
life.


54. The Yogins when they enter the sky
of their hearts, see by Yoga-intelligence
that the destruction of the body sets in
when Individual Soul enters into the wit-
ness- Chaitanya,


55. Even here, the god of Fire, the
Sun, and the Wind,—these three live in
the body. These, seeing as they do all
the practices of one’s life, become his wit-
nesses.


56. Days and Nights,—the former
marked by the virtue of showing all things
and the latter marked by the virtue of
concealing all things,—are running conti-
uually and touching all things. Do you,
therefore, satisfy the duties of your own
order.


57- The road in the other world is full of
many foes and of many r®pulsive and
terrible insects and worms, Do you take
care of your own acts, for only acts will
accompany you along that road.


58. There one has not to share his deeds
with others, but every one enjoys or suffers
the fruits of those acts which every one has
himself performed.


59. As Apsaras and great Rishi’ ac-
quires fruits of great happiness, similarly
men of righteous deeds, as the fruits of their
respective righteous deeds, acquire in the
other world cars of transcendent bright-
ness that go everywhere at the will of the
riders. ‘


60, Men of pure deeds and purified


|} souls and pure birth acquire in the next


SHANTI PARVA.


world fruits commensurate with their own
righteous deeds in this life.


61. By walking along the high road
formed by the duties of domesticity, men
acquire happy ends by acquiring the region
of Prajapati or Vrihaspati or of him of a
hundred sacrifices.


62. I can give you thousands and thou-
sands of instructions. Know, however,
that the powerful cleanser keeps all foolish
persons in the Dark.


63. You have passed twenty-four years.
You are now full twenty-five years of age.
Your years are passing away. Begin now
to husband virtue. .


64. The Destroyer
error and carelessness will very soon
deprive your sensés of their respective
powers. Do you, before that takes place,
hasten to discharge your duties, relying on
your body alone.


65. When it is your duty to go along
that road in which your self only shall be in
front and yourself only in the rear, what
need then have you with either your body
orfyour wife and children ?


66. When men have to go alone and
without companions to the region of Yama,
it is clear that in view of such a situation
of terror, you should try to acquire that one
only treasure,


67. ‘The powerful Yama, not caring for
the sufferings of others, snatches away the
friends and relatives of one’s race by the
very roots. There is no one who can resist


that lives within


him. Do you, therefore, seek to acquire
virtue.
68. 1 impart to you these lessons, O son,


that are all at one with the scriptures {
follow. Do you observe them. by Jacting
according to their sense.


69. He who maintains his body by
performing the duties laid down for his own
order, and who makes gifts for acquiring
whatever fruits may attach to such acts,
becomes freed from the consequences be-
getten by ignorance and error.


70. The knowledge which a man of
pious deeds acquires from Vedic sayings
leads to omnuiscience.


object of human aquisition. Instructions,
given to the grateful, become beneficial.


71. The pleasure that one takes in living
amidst the dwellings of men is truly a fast-
binding cord. Snapping that cord, men
of righteous deeds goto regions of great
happiness. Wicked men, however, cannot
break that fetter. =


That omniscience |
is atone with the science of the highest —


Lee


72. What use have you of riches, O
son, or of relatives, or Of children, since
you have to die? Do you engage in seek.
ing for your soul which is hidden ina cave.
Where have all your grandlathers gone?


73. Do that to-day which you would
keep for to-morrow. Do that in the fore-
noon which you would keep for the after-
noon. Death does not wait for any one,
to see whether one has or has not done
his task.


74. Following the body after one’s death,
one’s relatives and kinsmen and fridpds
return placing it on the funeral pyre. Do
you unhesitatingly shun those men who
are sceptics, who are destitute of mercy,
and who are given to wicked ways, and.
do you try to. seek, without listnessness
or apathy, that which is for your greatest
good, ;

76. When, therefore, the world is thus
assailed by Death, do you, with your whole
heart, achieve virtue, helped all the while
by unswerving patience,


77. ‘That man who is well conversant
with the means of acquiring Liberation and
who duly satisfies the duties of his order,
certainly acquires great happiness in the
next world:


78. There is no destruction for you
who do not recognise death in the attain-,
ment of a different body aud who do not
deviate from the path of the pious. He
who increases the stock of virtue is truly
wise. He, on the other hand, who devis-
ates from virtue is said to be a fool.


79. One whois engaged in the accom-
plishment of good deeds, attains to heaven
and other rewards as the fruits of those
acts; but he who is addicted to wicked
deeds has to sink in hell, ,


80. Having acquired the status of hus
manity, so difficult of getting, that is the
stepping stone to heaven, one should fiz
his soul on Brahma so that he may. not
fall away once more. .


81. That man whose understanding,
directed to the path of heaven, does not
deviate thereform, is considered by the
wise as truly a man of virtue and when he
dies his friends should indyige in grief. ° ‘


82. That man whose understanding is
not firm and which is directed to Brahma
and who has attained to heaven, becomes
freed from a great fear.


83. They who are bora in asylums of
ascetics and who die there, do not acquire
much merit by abstaining all their life from
enjoyments and the indulgence of desire.


ata


84. He, however, who though possessed
of objects of enjoyment renounces them and
practices penanees, succeeds in acquiling
everything. The fruits of the penances
‘of such a mau are, I think, much greater.


85. Every one had and will have in this
world mothers and fathers and sons and
wives, by hundreds and thousands, Who,
however, were they and whose are we ?


86. 1 am quite alone. I have no one
whom I may call mine. Nor do 1 belong
to any one else, I do not see that per-
son whose I am, nor do I see him whom I
may call mine. ‘


87. They have nothing to do with you.
You have tiothing to do with them, All
Creatures take birth according to their
pristine deeds. You also shall have to go
hence determined by your own deeds.


B8. It is seen in this world that the
friends and followers df petsons in affluence
behave towards them with devotion. ‘The
friends ahd followers, however, of the poor
fall away during even thedife-time of the
poor,


89. Man commits numerous evil deeds
for the sake of his wife. From those evi!
deeds he suffers ructi distress both in this
world and in the next.


go. The wise man sees the world of fife
Gevastated by the deeds performed by
every living being. Dotyou, therefore, O son,
act accorditg to all the instructions I have
delivered to you.


ot. Seeing this world to be only a field
of action, the man endued with true vision,
should, from desire of happiness in the
hext world, do acts that are good.


92. Exerting his irresistible power, Time
cooks all creatures, with the help of his
ladle formed by months and seasons, the
sun for his fire, and days and nights for
his fuel, they being the witnesses of the
fruits of every act done by every creature.


93. For what object is that wealth which
is not given away and which is not en-
joyed? For what purpose is that strength
which is not used in resisting or subjugate.
ing one’s enemies? For what purpose is
that knowledge of the scriptures which does
trot move one to deeds of virtue? And for
what purpose is that soul which does not
contcol the senses and abstain from evil
deeds?


Bhishma said :—

93. Having heard these wholesonie words
spoken by the Island-born (Vyasa), Shuka,
leaving his father, proceeded to seek a pre-
ceptor who could teach him the religion of
Liberation,”


MAHABHARATA.


CHAPTER CCCKXitl.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).=
Continued,


Yudhisthira said :—

1. “If there is any efficacy in gifts, id
sacrifices, in penances well done, and in
dutiful services done to preceptors and
other reverend elders, do you, O grands
father, speak of the same to me.”


Bhishma said :—


2. “An understanding associated with
evil, makes the mind fallinto gin. In this
state one stains his deeds, and then falls
into great distress.


3. Those who are of sinful deeds, have
to take birth as persons of very poor cir-
cumstances. They pass from famine td
famine, from pain to pain, from fear to fear.
They are more dead than those whoare
dead.


4. Possessed of affluence, persons having
faith, who are self-controlled, and who aré
devoted to righteous deeds, go from joy td
joy, from heaven to heaven, from happiness
to happiness.


5. The unbelievers have to pass, with
groping bands, through regions full of
beasts of prey and elephants and pathless
teacts full of snakes and robbers and other
causes of fear, What miote teed be said
of these?


6. They, on the other hand, who have
reverence for gods and guests, who aré
liberal, who have respect for good men, and
who makes gifts in sacrifices, have for
theirs the path that belongs to men of puti-
fied and subdued souls.


7- Those who are fidt pious should not
be counted among men even as grains
without kennel are rot counted among
grain and as cockroaches ate not counted
among birds.


8. The acts that otie does, follow him
even when he runs fast. Whatever acts
one does, lie down with the doer when the
doer lays himself down.


Q. Indeed, the sins one commits, si
when the doer sits, and run when he cuns
The sin acts when the doer atts, and, if
deed, follow the doer like his shadow.


to. Whatever the acts one does by
whatever means and under whatever cir-
cumstances, are sure to be enjoyed and
suffered by the doer in his next life.


11. From every side Time is always
dragging all creatures, following the rule
about the distarce to which they are thrown


(


- SHANT! BARVA.


aid which
deeds,

12. As flowers and fruits, witliout being
compelled, never aliow their proper time to
pass away -without making their appear-
ance, so the atts one has dorie itt past life

‘ appear at the proper time.


i3. Honor and dishonor, profit ard Ioss.
destruction and growth, are seen to set in,
No one, can resist them. None of them is
everlasting for it must disappear in the
end.


14. The sorrows one suffers is the out-
come of his deeds. The happiness one
enjoys originates from his deeds. From
the time when one lies within the mother’s
womb one begins to enjoy and suffer his
pristine deeds.


35. Whatever acts good and bad ore
does in childhood, youth, or old age, one
enjoys and suffer their consequences in his
next life in similar ages,


16. As the calf recognises its dam even
when the latter may stand among thousands
of her kind, similarly the acts done by one
in his past life come to him in his next life
although he may live among thousands of
his species.


17. Asa piece of dirty cloth is whitened
by being washed in water, simitarly the
righteous, purified by continuous exposure
tothe fire of fasts and penances, at last
acquire eternal happiness,


18. O you of great intelligence, the
desires and purposes of those whose sins
have been purged off by long-continued
penances well-performed, become fruitful.


19. The path of the righteous cannot
be discerned even as that of birds in the
sky or that of fishes in the water.


20. There is no need of speaking ill of
others; nor of reciting the instances of
their failure. On the other hand, one
should always do what is delightful, Sweet,
and beneficial to his own self.”


CHAPTER CCCXXIV.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—

1. ‘* Tell me, O grandfather, how the
great Shuka of austere penances took birth
asthe son of Vyasa, and how did he suc-
ceed in acquiring the highest success ?

2. Upon what woman did Vyasa, having
asceticism for bis wealth, beget that son of


65


is comimensuraté with their


513


his? We do not khow who was Shuka’s
tMother, nor do we know anything of the
birth of that gceat ascetic.


-3. How was it that, when he was a
tere boy, his mind becante bent to the
knowledge of the subtile? Indeed, in this
world no second person can be seen in
whom such marks could be seen at so early
an fa


4. I wist to hear all this in full, O you
of great intelligence. [ am never satiated
with hearing your excellent and nectar-like
words.


§. Tell me, O grandfather, in their due
ordet, of the greatness, and the know-
jedge of Shtuka and of his union with the
(Supreme) Soul !’’


Bhishma said :—~


6. “The Rishis did not make merit
depend upon years of decrepitude or riches
or ftiends. They said that he amongst
them was great who studied the Vedas,


zg. Ait this that you have asked has
penances for its root, That penance,
again, O son of Pandu, originates from
the subjugation of the senses.


8. Forsooth, one incurs fault by letting
loose his senses, tis only by ‘controlling
them that one succeeds in acquiring suc-
cess,


g. The merit of a thousand Horses
sacrifices or a hundred Vajapeyas is not
equal to even a sixteenth part of the merit
of Yoga.


to. I shall, now, recite to you the cir+
cumstances of Shuta’s birth, the fruits he
acquired of his penances, and the foremost
end he achieved. These are the topics
which persons of uncleansed- souls cannot
understand, *


tt. Once onatime on the summit of
Meru adorned with Karnikara flowers,
Mahadeva sported, in company of his fole
lowers, the terrible spirits.


12. The daughter of the king of moun-
tains, vzz., the goddess Parvati, was also
there. There near that summit, the Island«
born (Vyasa) practised extraordinary aus-


terities.


13. O best of the Kurus, given to the
practices of Yoga, the great ascetic, with-
drawing himself by Yoga into his own Soul,
and engaged in concentration, practised,
many austerities for the sake of a son,


14. The prayer he offered to the great
God was,—O powerful one, let me have a
son that will have the might of Fire and
Barth and Water and Wind and Ether,


514


15. Engaged in the austerest of penances
the Island-born Rishi begged of that great
God, who cannot be approached by persons
of impure souls, by his Yoga.

16. The powerful Vyasa remained there
for a hundred years, living on air alone,
engaged in
Mahadeva, the lord of Uma.

17—18. There were alt the twice-born
Rishis and royal sages and the Regents of
the world and the Sadbyas along with the
Vasus, and the Adityas, the Rudras, and


the Sun and-the Moon, and the Maruts,.


and the Oceans, and the Rivers, and the
Ashwins, the Deities, the Gandharvas, and
Narada, and Parvata, and the Gandcharva


Vishwavasu, and the Siddhas, and the
Apsaras. ; :
19. There Mahadeva; called aiso Rudra,


sat, adorned with an excellent garland of
of Karnikara flowers, and effulgent like
the Moon with his rays.


20. In those delightful and celestial
forests populous with gods and heavenly
Rishis, the great Rishi remained, engaged
in high Yoga-contemplation, for getting
a son.

2. His strength suffered no decrease,
nor did he feel any pain. Thereat the
three worlds were much surprised.


22. While the Rishi, gifted with im-
measurable energy, sat in Yoga, his matted
locks, on account of his energy, were seen
to blaze like flames of fire.


23. 1 heard of this from the illustrious
Markandeya. He used always to recite to
me the acts of the gods.


24. It is for this that the matted locks
of the great Vyasa, thus .enblazed by his
energy on that occasion, seem to this day
to be gifted with the hue of fire.


25, Pleased with such penances and
such devotion, O Bharata, of the Rishi,
the gceat God resolved to grant him his


wish.


26. Smiling with pleasure, "the three-
eyed god addressed him and said,-O
island-born one, you will have a son after
your heart.


27. Endued with greatness, he shall be
as pure as Fice, as Wind, as Earth, as
Water, and as Space.


28. He will be conscious of his being
Brahma’s self; his understanding and souf
shall be devoted to Brahma, and he shall
completely depend upen Brahma so as to
be at one with it. :


worshipping many-formed


MAHABHARATA.


CHAPPFER CCCXXV.


(MOKSHADHRAMA PARVA).—~
Continued.


Bhishma said :—

¥. “Having got this high boon from the
great God, the son of Satyavati, was one
day engaged in rubbing his sticks for
making a fire.


2. While thus engaged, the illustrious
Rishi, O king, saw the Apsara Ghritachi,
who, on account of her energy, was thery
possessed of great beauty.


3 Seeing the Apsara in those woods,
the illustrious Rishi Vyasa, O Yudhisthira,
became suddenly possessed by'desire,


4. The ‘Apsara, seeing the Rishi’s heart
smitten with desire, changed herself into a
she-parrot and came to that spot.


5. Although he saw the Apsara dis-
guised Jin another form, the desire that
had arisen in the Rishi’s heart spread
itself over every part of his body.


6. Inviting all his patience, the ascetic
tried to suppress that desire. With all
his efforts, however, Vyasa could not controF
his agitated mind. On account of the in-


| eVitability of what was to take place the


Rishi’s heart was drawn by Ghritachi’s
beauty.


7 He tried his best for making a fire
for suppressing his emotion, but despite all
his effurts his vital seed came out.


8 That best of twice-borri ones, how-
ever, O king, continued to rub his stick
without feeling any scruples for what had
taken place. Krom the seed that fell, wae
born a son to him called Shuka.


On account of this incident about
his birth, he came to be called by the name
of Shuka. Indeed, it was thus that that
great ascetic, that foremost of Rishis and
highest of Yogins, was born from the two
sticks, ‘


to. As in a sacrifice a blazing fire
spreads its effulgence all around when
libations of ctarified butter are poured
upon it, similarly did Shuka take his birth,
blazing with effulgence om account of his
own energy,


tt, Assuming the excellent form and
hue of bis father, Shuka, O son of Kuru,
of purified Soul, shone like a smokeless
fire.


12. O king, coming to the breast of
Meru, in her own embodied form, the fore-
most of rivers, vis., Ganga, bathed Shuka
with ber waters,


SHANTI


13. There fell from the sky, O son ot
Kuru, an ascetic’s stick anda dark deer
skin for the use, O king, of the great
Shuka.

#4. The Gandharvas sang repeatedly
and the various clans of Apsaras danced;
and celestial kettledrums of toud sound
began to beat.


15. The Gandharva Vishwavasu, and
Tumvuru, and Narada, and those other
Gandharvas called by the names of Haha,
and Huhu, eulogised the birth of Shuka.


16. There the regents of the world
headed by Indra, as also the gods and the
celestial and the regenerate Rishiis.


17. The Wind-god poured there showers
of celestial flowers.

18. The entire universe, mobile and
immobile, became filled with joy.

1g. The great and the jhighly effulgent
Mahadeva, accompanied by the Goddess,
and moved by affection, came there and
soon after the birth of the Muni’s son
invested him with the sacred thread,


20. Shakra, the king of the gods, gave
him, from affection, a celestial pitcher of
of excellent form, and some _ celestial
dresses.


2t. Thousands of Swans and Shata-
patras and cranes, and many parrots and
Chasas, OQ Bharata, wheeled over his
head.

22. Highly effulgent and intelligent
Shuka, having obtained his birth from the
two sticks, continued to live there, prac-
tising many vows and fasts.


23. As soon as Shuka was born, the
Vedas, with all their mysteries and all
their abstracts, came for living in him,
O king, even as they live in his father.


24. For all that, Shuka, selected Vrihas-
pati, who was a master of all the Vedas
together with their branches and commen-
taries, for his preceptor, remembering the
universal practice. “a

25—26. Having read all the Vedas toge-
ther with ali theic mysteries and abstracts,
as also all the histories and the science of
polity, O powerful king, the great ascetic
returned home, after giving his preceptor
the tuition-fee. Adopting the vow of celi-
bacy, he then began to practise the aus-
terest penances, concentrating all his atten-

tion thereon.


27. Even in his childhood, he became
an object of reverence with the gods and
Rishis for his knowledge and penances.


28. The mind of the great ascetic, O
king, found pleasure ia the three modes


| superiority while living with him.


PARVA. §15
of life, keeping in ~view, as he did, the
Religion of Liberation.”


wa


- CHAPTER CCCXXVI,


(MOKHARDHARMA 1 PARVA).<«
Continaed.


Bhishma said:-  , ;
1—2. ‘Thinking of Liberation, Shuk
approached his father, and possessed as he
was of humility and desirous of acquiring
his highest good, he saluted his great pre-
ceptor and said,—You are well-versed in
the Religion of Liberation. Do you, Q illus-
trious one, describe it to me, so that [I may
enjoy supreme tranquillity of mind, O


powerful one.


3, Hearing these words of his son, the
great Rishi said to him,—Do you study,
OQ son, the Religion of Liberation and all
the various duties of life.


4. At the command of bis father, Shuka,
that foremost ‘of all righteous men, master-
ed all the books on Yoga, O Bharata, as
also the Science of Kapila,


5—6, When Vyasa saw his son to be
endued with the resplendence of the Vedas,
and the energy of Brahma, and fully con-
versant with the Religion ‘of: Liberation, he
addressed him, saying,—Go you to Janaka
the king of Mithila, The king of Mithila
will tell you everything for your Libera=
tion, ;

7. Bearing the command of his father,
O king, Shuka, proceeded to Mithila for
enquiring of its ging about the truth of
duties aad the Refuge of Liberation.


8. Before he started, his father further
told him,—Do you go there by that path
which ordinary human beings follow. Do
not ;have recourse to your Yoga-power for
proceeding through the skies.—At this
Shuka was not at all surprised,


g. He was further told that he should
proceed there with simplicity and not fram
desire of pleasuce.—Along your §$way do
not seek for friends and wives, since friends
and wives are causes of attachment to the
world. ;

10. Although the king of Mithila is one
in whose sacrifices we officiate, still you
should not indulge in any feeling - of
You
should live under his’ direction and in
obedience to him. [le will remove your
doubts.


11. That king is well versed in all duties
and well aoquainted with the Scriptures on


4


516


Liberation. He is one-for whom PF officiate
iu sacrifices. You should, unhesitatingty,
do what he orders.


- 12, Thus instructed, the pious Shuka
proceeded to Mithila on foot although he
was able to go through the skies over the
whole Earth with her seas,


13—14. Crossing many hills and moun-
tains, many rivers, many waters and lakes,
and many woods and forests full of beasts
of prey and other animals, crossing the two
insular continents of Meru and Hari suc-
cessively and next the continent of Hima-

~ vat, he came at last to the continent known
by the name of Bharata.


15. Having seen many countries in-
habited by Chins and Huns, the great
ascetic at last reached Aryavarta.


16. In obedience to the commands of
his father and bearing them constantly in
his mind, he gradually passed along his
way on the Earth like a bird passing
through the air.


17. Passing through many charming
towns and populous cities, he saw various
kinds of wealth without waiting to observe
them.


18, On his way he passed througn many
charming gardeus and planes and many
sacred waters.


19. Before much time had passed he
reached the country of the Videhas that
was protected by the virtuous and great
jJanaka,


20. There he saw many populous
villages, and many kinds of food and drink
and viands and houses of cowherds swell~
ing with men and many herds of cattle,


21. He saw many fields abounding with
paddy and barley and other grain, and
imany lakes and waters inhabited by swans
and cranes and adorned with beautiful
lotuses,


a2. Passing through the Videha country
full of rich people, he arrived at the de-
lightful gardens of Mithila rich with many
sorts of trees,


23. Abounding with elephants and
horses and cars, and peopled by men and
women, he passed through them without
caring to see the things that were presented
to his eye.


24. Bearing that caution in his mind
and continually thinking of it, Shuka of
cheerful soul and taking delight in internal
survey only, reached Mithila at last.,


25. Arrived at the gate, he gent word
through the guards. Gifted with
quillity of mind, devoted to contemplation


tran--


MAHABHARATA.


and Yoga, he entered the city, having
obtained permission,


26. Proceeding along the principal! street
abounding with rich men, he reached the
king’s palace and entered it without any
hesitation.


27. The gate-keepers prevented him
with harsh words. Ihereat, Shuka, withe
out any anger, stopped and waited.


28. Neither the sun nor the long dis-
tance he had walked had tired him in the
least. Neither hunger, nor thirst, nor the
exertion he had made, had weakened him.
The heat of the Sun had not scorched or
pained or distressed him in any way.


2g. Among those porters there was one
who felt mercy for him, seeing him staying
there like the midday Sun in his efful-
gence.


30. Adoring him in due form and salute
ing him properly, with joined hands he
conducted him to the first chamber of the
palace.


gt. Seated there, Shuka, O- son,
began to think of Liberation only. Gifted
with equality he considered impartially a
shaded spot and one exposed to the Sun’s
vays.


32. Soon after, the king’s minister,
coming to that place with joined hands,
conducted him to the second chamber of
the palace.


33. That: chamber led to a_ spacious
garden which formed ja part of the inner
apartments of the palace. It looked like
a jsecond Chaitraratha, Beautiful pools of
water were here and there at regular intere
vals. Delightful trees, alt of which were
in their flowering season, were in that
garden.


34. Bevies of damsels, of celestial
beauty, were in attendance. The minister
led Cuka from the second chamber to that
charming spot. Commanding those ladies
to give the ascetic a seat, the minister, left
him there.


35- Those well-dressed damsels were
of beautiful features, possessed of excellent
hips, young in years, clad in red dresses of
fine texture, and decked with many orna-
ments of burnished gold.


46. They were well-skilled'in sweet con-
versation and-maddening revelry, and con-
summate mistresses of the arts of dancing
and singing. Always opening their lips
with smiles, they were like the very Apsaras
in beauty.


37- Well-skilled in all the acts of dalli-
ance,capable of reading thejthoughts of men


‘upon whom they wait, endued with every


t


SHANTI PARVA,


accomplishment, fifty damsels, of a very
high order and of easy virtue, surrounded
the ascetic. :


38. Presenting him with’water for wash-
iny his feet, and adoring him respectfully
with the offer of usual articles, they pleased
him with excellent viands agreeable to the
season.


39. After he had eaten, those damsels
then, one after another, singly conducted
him through the grounds, showing him
every object of interest, O Bharata.

49. Sporting.and laughing and singing,
those ladies conversant with the thoughts
of all men, entertained that ascetic of
noble soul.


4t. The pure-souled ascetic born in the
fire-sticks, performing all his duties un-
hesitatingly, having all his senses under
complete control, and a thorough master
of his anger, was neither pleased nor
angered at all this.


42. Then those foremost of beautiful
women offered him an excellent.seéat. —


43: Washing his feet and other limbs,
Shuka said his evening prayers, sat on that
excellent seat, and began to think of the
object for which he had come there.


44. In the first part of the night, he
gave himself to Yoga. The powerful
ascetic, passed the middle part of the night
in sleep. _

45- Very soon waking up from his sleep,
he performed the necessary rites of clean-
sing his body, and though surrounded by
those beautiful ladies, he once again devot-
ed himself to Yoga.


46. It wasin this way, O Bharata, that
the son of the Island-born Krishna passed
the latter part of that day and the whole of
that night in the mausion of king Janaka.”


CHAPTER CCCXXVIL.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
eras Continued.


Bhishma said :—


1, ‘The next morning, king Janaka, O
Bharata, accompanied by his minister and
the whole household, came to Shuka,
preceded by his priest.


2. Bringing with him rich seats and
various sorts of jewels and gems, and
bearing the ingredients of the Arghya on
his own head, the king approached the son
of his reverend precaptor.- -


5'7


3-4. The king, taking with his owa
hands, fram the..hands of bis priest, that
seat adorned with many gems, covered
with an excellent sheet, beautiful in all its
parts and dearly costly, presented it with
great respect to his preceptor’s son Shuyka.


s. After the son of Krishna had taken
his seat on it, the king adored him accord.
ing to prescribed rites. At first offering
him water to wash his feet, he then pre
sented him the Arghya and kine.


6—7. The ascetic accepted that wor-*
ship offered with due rites and Mantras,
That foremost of twice-born ones, having
thus. accepted the worship offered by the
king, and taking the kine also that were
presented to him,‘then saluted the king,
gifted with great energy, he next enquired
-after the king’s welfare and prosperity.


8. Indeed, O king, Shuka asked about
the welfare of the king’s followers and
officers also. Receiving Shuka’s permissiog,
Janaka sat down with all his followers. —


: Having a high soul and possessed of
high birth, the king with joined hands, sat
down on the bare ground and enquired
after the -well-being ;and unabated pros-
perity of Vyasa’s son, .

to. The king then asked his guest the
object of his visit. *


Shuka said :—


11. Blessed be you, my father told me
that bis client, the king of the Videhas,
known all over the world by the name of
Janaka, is well-versed in the Religion of
Liberation.


12. He ordered me to come to him
forthwith, if I had any doubts to be solved
in the Religion of either Action or Renun-
ciation. He gave me to understand that
the king of Mithila would remove all my
doubts. :


13. I have, therefore, come here at the
command of my father, for-the purpose
of recieving jnstruction from you. You
should, O foremost of all righteous persons,
instruct me!‘


14. What are the duties of a Brahmana,
and what is the essence of those duties that
have Liberation for their object. How, also,
is Liberation to be acquired. [Is it to be
acquired by the help of Knowledge or by
that of Penances ?


Janaka said :—-

15. Hear what the Duties are of a Brah-
mana from the time of his birth. After
his investiture, OQ son, with the sacred
thread, he should give his attention to the
study of the Vedas,


§18


16. By practising!penances and duti-
fully secving his preceptor, and observing
the duties of Brahmacharyya, O powerful
one, he should satisfy the debt he owes to
the gods, and the Pitris, and renounce all
matice.

17. Having fead the Vedas with close
attention, and controlled his senses, and
having given his preceptor the tuition-fee,
he should, with the order of his preceptor,
return home. :


” 18. Coming back home, he should fol-
low the domestic mode of iife and marry a
wife, confine himself to her, and live free-
ing himself from every sort of malice, and
having established his domestic fice.


1g. Living as a householder, he should
procreate sons and grandsons. After that,
he should retire to the forest, and continue
to adore the same fires and entertain
guests with cordial hospitality.


20. ‘Living virtuously in the forest, he
should, at last, establish his fire in his‘soul,
and freed from all pairs of opposites, and
renouncing all attachments, he should pass
his days in the anchorite-mode of life,
which is otherwise called the mode of
Brahma,


Shuka said:~-


21. If one acquires an understanding
cleansed by study of the scriptures and
true conceptions of all things, and if the


heart succeeds in freeing itself permanently | o¢“oig by king Vayati, and remembered,


from the effects of all pairs of opposites,
is it still necessary for such a person to


and Vanaprastha.


22. This is what I ask you. You shoyld
tell me. Indeed, O king, do tell me this
according to the true meaning of the
Vedas.


Janaka saidi—

23. tis impossible to acquire Libera-
tion without the help of an understanding
purified by the study of the scriptures and
without that true conception of all things
which is known by the name of Vijnana,
again, without that cleansed understanding,
One cannot get a Preceptor.


24. The Preceptor is the helmsman, and
Knowledge is the Boat. After having got
that Boat, one becomes Succeseful. Indeed,
having crossed the Ocean, one may re-
ounce both.


25. For preventing the destruction of
all the worlds, and for preventing the des-
truction of deeds, the duties belonging to


MAHABHARATA.


the four modes of life were practised by
the wise of ofd.


26. By renouncing acts, good and bad,
according to this order of acts, one suc-
ceeds, in course of many births, in acquire


ing Liberation.


27. That man who, through penances,
peactised in many births, succeeds in ac-
quiring purified mind and understanding,
and soul, certainly becomes able to ace
quire Liberation in even the very first
mode,


28. When, having acquired a cleansed
understanding, Liberation becomes his, and
on account thereof he becomes possessed
of knowledge of all visible things, what
desirable object is there to attain by follow-
ing the three other modes of life?


29. One should always renounce faults
produced by the qualities of Rajas and
Tamas. Following the path of Sattwa, one
should see Self by Self.


30 Seeing one’s Self in all creatures
and all creatures in one’s *Self, one shoald
live like acquatic animals living in watec
without being drenched by it.


3t. He who succeeds in getting over
all pairs of opposites and resisting their


- influence, succeeds in renouncing ali attach.
| ments, and acquires infinite happiness in


the next world, going there like a bird


' soaring into the sky from below.


32. Regarding it, there is‘a saying sung


O sire, by all persons conversant with the


fallow onecatior anotiiee, the. three modes | Scriptures dealing with Liberation.


of life called Brahmacharyya, Garahastya,


33. The effulgent ray exists in one’s
Soul and not anywhere else. It exists
equally in all creatures. One can see it
himself if his heart be given to Yoga.


34. When a person lives in such a way
that another is not filled with fear on seeing
him, and when a person is not himself filled
with fear on [seeing others, when a person
ceases to ‘cherish desire and malice, he is
then said to attain to Brahma, :


35. When a person ceases to cherish a
sinful attitude towards all creatures in
thought, word, and deed, he is then said
to attain to Brahma.


36. By controlling the mind and the
soul, by ronouncing malice that stupefies
the mind, and by throwing off desire and
stupefaction, one is said to attain to
Brahma.


37- When a person assumes an equality
of attitude about all objects of hearing and
vision, as also about all-tiving creatures,
and gets over all pairs of opposites, he is
then said to attain to Brahma, ,

C


SHANTI PARVA,


38—dg. When a person régatds im-
partially praise and dispraise, gold and
iron, happiness and misery, heat and cold,
good and evil, the agreeable and tha dis-
agreeable, life and death, he is theri said
to attain to Brahma,


40. One following the duties of the
tmendicant order should restrain his senses
and the mind like a tortoise withdrawing
its outstretched limbs.


41. Asa house covered with darktiess,
is capable of being seen with the help of a
lighted lamp, similarly can the soul be seen
with the help of the lamp of the under-
Standing. ;


42. O foremost of intelligent persons,
Isee that all this knowledge that I am
imparting to you, lives in you. Whatever
else should be known by ohne desirous of
learning the Religion of Liberation, is al-
ready known to you.


43. O regenerate Rishi, | am convinced
that through the {mercy of your preceptor
and through the instructions you have re-
ceived, you have already transcended all
objects of the senses.


44. O great ascetic, through the grace
of your father, I have acquired omni-
science, and hence I ,have succeeded in
knowing you.


45- Your knowledge is much greater
than what you think it to be. Your percep-
tions, also that result from intuition, are
much greater than what you think them
tobe, Your power also is much greater
than you are conscious of.


46. Whether in consequence of your
tender age, or of the doubts you have not
been able to remove, ar of the fear that is
due to the pnattainment of Liberation,
you are not conscious of that Knowledge
due to Intuition, although it has originated
in your mind.


47. After one’s doubts have been ‘re-
moved: by persons like us, one succeeds
in opening the knots of one’s heart, and,
then, by a righteous endeavour, one ac-
quires, and becomes conscious of, that
Knowledge.


48. As regards yourself, you ‘are one
that-has already acquired knowledge. Your
jutelligence is steady and tranquil, You
are free from covetousness. For all that,
© Brahmana, one never succeeds, without
endeavour in attaining to Brahma, which
is the highest object of acquisition,


49. You see no difference between
happiness and misery. You are not cove-
‘tous. You have no desire fqr dancing and
song. You have no attachments.


sig


go. You have tid attachment to friends:
You have no fear in things which fill with
fear. O blessed one, I see that you con-
sider equally a lump of gold and a clod of
Earth. ;

gi. Myself and othet petsoris eudyed
with wisdom, see you established in thé
highest and indestructible path of peace.


-§2. © Brabmana, you discharge the
duties of Brahmana and enjoy thé fruit
which should jbe his, and which is at oné
with the essence of the object represented
by Liberation. What else have you te
enquire of me?”


es
CHAPTER CCCXXVIII.
(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).~<=
Continted,


Bhishma said :—

1. “Having heard these words of a
Janaka, Shuka of purified soul and settle
conclusions began to stay in his Soul by his
Soul, having of course seen Self by Self.


2. His object being fulfilled he became:
happy and tranquil, and without further
questioning Janaka, he proceeded north-
wards to the mountains of Himavat with
the speed of the wind and like the wind.


3-4. Those mountains were full of
various clans of Apsaras and echoed with
many soft sounds.} Filled with thousands of
Kinnaras and Bhringarajas, it was adorn-
ed, -besides, with many, Madgus and Khan-
jaritas and many Jivajivakas of variegated
color,


5. And there were many peacocks also
of gorgeous hues, uttering their shrill but
melodious cries,


6. Many bevies of swans also, and
many flights of ghaddened coils, too,
adorned the place. The king of birds,
vis., Garuda, lived on that summit cons-
tantly.

q7- The four Regents of the world, the
gods, and variqus classes of Rishis, used


always to come there from .desire of doing ~


good to the world. ,


8 It was there that the great Vishnu
had practised the severest penances for the
object of getting a son. :

Q—ir. It was there that the commander.
in-chief of the gods named Kumara, in his
younger days, disregarding the three worlds
with alf the inhabitants, threw down his
dart, piercing the Earth therewith, Throw-
ing down his dart, Skanda, addressing. the


£20


universe; said,—lf there bé aliy person
who is superior to me in might; or who
holds Brahmianas to be dearer, ot who can
equal mein devotion to the Bralwiiaias and
the Vedas, or who is endued with energy
like me, let him dtaw tip this dart of at
least shake it !—Hearing this challenge, the
three worlds became stricken with anxiety;
and ail creatures asked one another; say-
ing,—who will raise this dart ?


12, Vishnu saw all the gods and Asuras
and Rakshasas to be gteatly troubled in
mind.


13.' He thought of what should be done
under the circumstances. Without being
able to bear that challenge regarding the
hurling of the dart, he directed his eyes to-
wards Skanda, the son of the Fire-god.


14. The pure Vishnu caught hold of
the burning dart with his left hand, and
began to shake it.


1s. When the datt was being thus
shaken by the highly powerful Vishnu, the
whole Earth with her mountains, forests,
and seas, shook with the dart.


16. Although Vishnu was fully capable
to raise the dart, still he contented himself
with only shaking it. In this, the powerful
Jord only kept the honor of Skanda intact.


7. Having shaken it himself, the
divine Vishnu, addressing Prahlada, said,
see the mightof Kumara! None else in
the universe can raise this dart.


18. Unable to bear this, Prahlada
determined toraise the dart. He caught
it, but was unable to shake it at all.


1g. Uttering a loud cry, he dropped
down on the hill-top in a swoon. Indeed,
the son of Hiranyakashipu dropped down
on the Earth.


20. Going towards the northern side of
those grand mountains, Mahadeva, having
the bull for his embtem, had practised the
austerest penances.


21. The asylum where Mahadeva had’


practised those austerities is encompassed
on all sides with a burning fice, Unap-
proachable by persons of impure souls,
that mountain is known by the name of
Aditya,

22. There isa fiery girdle alt around
it, fof ten Yojanas in width and it is incap-
able of being approached by Yakshas and
Rakshasas and Danavas.


23. The illustrious God of Fire, endued
with mighty energy, lives there in embodied
form, engaged in removing all obstacles
from the side of Mahadeva of great wisdom
who remained there for a thousand celestial
years, standing on one foot.


MAHABHARATA.


24. Living on the side of that foreniost
of mountains, Mahadeva of great vows
scorched the gods greatly.


25. At the foot of thase mountains,
in a retired spot, Parashara’s son of great
ascetic merit, ws., Vyasa, Waught the
Vedas to his disciples.


26. Those disciples were the highly
blessed Sumanta, Vaishampayana, Jaimini
of great wisdom, and Paila of great ascetic
merit.


27. Shuka went to that charming asy-
fum where his father, the great ascetic
Vyasa, was living surrounded by his
disciples.


28. Seated in his asylum, Vyasa saw
his son approach like a burning fire of
scattered flames, or resembling the Sun
himself in effulgence. :


29. As Shuka approached, he did not
seem to touch the trees or th: rocks of the
mountain. Perfectly dissociattt=from all
objects of the senses, and engaged in Yoga,
the great ascetic came; resembling in speed
an arrow shot off a bow.


Zo. Born on the fire-sticks, Shuka ap-
proaching his father, touched his feet.
With due formalities he then accosted the
disciples of his father.


gt. With great cheerfulness he then
described in full to his father all the pare
ticulars of his conversation with king
Janaka.

32. After the arrival of his powerful son,
Vyasa, the son of Parashara, continued to
live there on the Himavat, engaged in
teaching his disciples, and his son,

33. One day as he was seated, his dis-
ciples, all well-readin the Vedas, having
their senses under control, and gifted with
tranquil souls, sat themselves around him.


34. All of them had perfectly mastered
the Vedas with their branches. Alt of
them were observant of penances. With
joined hands they addressed their preceptor
in the following words.


The disciples said :—

35- We have, through your favour, beer
endued with greatienergy. Our fame, also,
has spread. There is one favour that we
pray you to grant us.


36. Hearing these words of theirs, the
twice-born Rishi answered them, saying,-—«
Ve sons, tell me what that boon is which
you want:me grant you.


37-—~38. Hearing: this answer of their

preceptor, the disciples became filled with

joy. Bending theic heads_ once more low
C


SHANTI PARVA,


ta their preceptor, atid joining their hands,
all of them simultaneously, said, O king,
these excellent words :—-If our preceptor
has been gratified with us, then, O best of
Sages, we are sure to be successful. :


39. We alf solicit you, O great Rishi,
to grant us a boon. Do you show -us
favour. Let no sixth disciple succeed in
acquiring fame.

40. We ate four:
forms the fifth.
only us five!
pray for.


4i—42. Hearing these words of his dis-
ciples, Vyasa, the son of Parashara, en-
_dued with great intelligence, well conver-
Sant with the meanings of the Vedas,
endued with a pious soul, and always
engaged in thinking of objects that grant
benefits on a person in the next world, said
to his disciples these righteous words,
fraught with fgreat benefit :—The -Vedas
should always be given to him, whois a
Brahmana, or to him who is desirous of
listening to Vedic instructions, by him who


Our preceptor’s son
Let the Vedas shine in
This is the: boon that we


eagerly wishes to acquire a residence in |


the region of Brahman.


43. Do ye multiply. Let the Vedas
spread. ‘he Vedas should never be given
to one who has not formally become a
disciple. Nor should they be givey to one
who does not observe good vows. Nor
should they be given for living in one who
is of one impure soul.


44. These should be known as the proper
accomplishments of persons who can be
accepted as disciples. No science should
be given to one without a proper examina-
tion of one’s character.


45. As pure gold is tested by heat,
cutting, and rubbing, similarly disciples
should be tested by their birth and accom-
plishments.


46. Yeshould never give disciples tasks
to which they should not be set, or tasks
which are full of dangers. One’s know-
ledge ‘is always proportionate to his under
Standing and diligence in study.

47. , Let all disciples master all difficul-
ties, and let all of them be crowned with
success. Ye are compétent to expound
the scriptures to persons of all the castes.
Only ye should, while delivering instruc-
tions address a Brahmana, first of all.


48. .These are the rules about the study
of the Vedas. This again is considered
asahigh task. The Vedas were created
by the Self-create for the purpose of prais-
ing the gods therewith. ~


49. That man who, through stupefac-.
Hon of intellect, speaks jll of a-Brahmana


ps


gat


well-read.in the Vedas, is certain to meet
with humiliation or aceount of such evil-
speaking. a aay

so. He who, disregarding all rules-of
virtue, seeks knowledge, and he who,-dis«
regarding the rules of virtue, communi-
cates knowledge, both of them fall off and
instead of ‘that love which should exist
between preceptor and disciple, such ques-
tioning and such communication are ‘sure
to create distrust and suspicion... 5”


: 5r. EF have now: told: you everything
about the way in which the Vedas should
be studied and taught. Ve should treat
your disciples thus, remembering these ins«
fructions.”


- sug


CHAPTER CCCXXIX.
(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA):=


Continued. .


Bhishma said :— —

1. “ Hearing these words of their pre+
ceptor, Vyasa’s disciples. gifted with great
energy, became filled. with jey and em-
braced one anothers : ;


_2. Addressing one another, they said,—
We will remember and act according to
what has been said by our illustrious pre
ceptor in view of our future well-being.

3—4. Having said this to one another
with gladdened hearts, the disciples of
Vyasa, who were consummate masters of
words, once more addressed their preceptor
and said,—Ifjit pleases you, O powerful one,
we wish to get down from this mountain
to the Earth, O great ascetic, for the object
of sub-dividing the Vedas, oe


§—6. Hearing’ these words of his disci»
pies, [the powerful son of Parashara, replied
them in these wholesome words which were
fraught, besides, with virtue and profit,—
You may go to the Earth or to the regions
of the gods as ye like. You should always
be careful, for the, Vedas are such that they
are always liable to be misunderstood.


7. Permitted by their preceptor of truths
ful speech, the disciples left hin after going
round him and bowing their heads to him.


8. Descending upon the Earth they


celebrated the Agnishtoma and other sacri-


fices ; and they began to officiate at the
sacrifices of Brahmanas and Kshatriyas
and Vaishyas. ;

9. Happily spending their days in the
domestic mode of life, they were treated
by the Brahmanas with great reverence,


522


Possessed of great ‘fante and prosperity,
they were éngaged in teaching and officia-
ting in sacrifices.


to. After his disciples had departed,
Vyasa remained in his hermitage, with
only his son in his company. Passing his
days in anxious thoughtfulness, the great
Rishi, endued with wisdom, kept silent,
sitting in a retired corner of the asylum.


11. At that time Narada of great ascetic

merit came there for seeing Vyasa, and

. addressing him, said these words of sweet
sound,


Narada, said :—

12. O twice-born Rishi of Vashistha’s
family, why are Vedic sounds’silent now?
Why are you sitting silent and alone, en-
gaged in meditation like one engrossed in
thought ?


13. Alas, destitute of Vedic sound, this
mountain haé lost its beauty, as the Moon
shorn of splendour when passessed by Rahu
or covered with dust.


‘14. Though inhabited by the celestial
Rishis, yet shorn of Vedic sounds, the
mountain no longer appears beautiful now
but resembles a village of ‘Nishadas.-


15. The Rishis, the gods, and the
Gandharvas, too, no longer shine as_before
on account of being deprived ef Vedic
sound.


16—17. Hearing these words of Narada
the Island-born Krishna answered, say-
ing,—O Great Rishi, O you who are con-
versant with the sayings of the Vedag, all
that you have said is agreeable to me, and
you should say itto me! You are omni-
scient. You have seen everything. Your
‘curiosity knows all things. ;


8. You know every thing in the three
worlds. .Do you, then, O twice-born Rishi,
order me. O, tell me what | am to do. -


19. Tell me, Otwice-born Rishi, what
should now be done by me. Separated
from my disciples, my mind has become
very dispirited.


Narada said :—

20. ‘The fault of the Vedas is the sus-
pension “of their recitation. ‘Ihe fault of
the Brabmanas isftheie non-observance of
vows. The Vahika*race is the stain of the
Earth. Curiosity is the fault of women.

2t. Po you with your intelligent son
recite the Vedas, and do you with the
echoes of Vedic sounds remove the fears of
the Rakshasas.


Bhishma continued :—~
22, Heating these words of Narada,


MAHABHARATA.


Vyasa, the best of all persons knowiig-
duties and firmly devoted t6 Vedic reci-
tation, became filled with joy and answered
Narada, saying,—So be it.


23. With his son Shuka, he began ta
recite the Vedas in a loud sweet voice,
observing all the rules of ortheopy and, as
it were, filling the three worlds with
that sound.


24. One day as ‘father and son, who
knew well the ordinances of duties, weré
engaged in reciting the Vedas, a violent
wind arose as if moved by the gales that
blow on the bosom of the ocean.


25. Understanding from this incident
that the hour was not suited to saered
recitation, Vyasa immediately ordered his
son to stop the recitation. Shuka, thus
forbidden by his father, became filled with
curiosity.


-26.° He asked his father saying,—O
twice-born one, whence is this Wind ? You
should tefl me everything about the conduct
of the Wind.


27. Hearing this question of Shuka,
Vyasa became filled with wonder. He
answered Shuka by telling him that that
was an omen which showed that the recitas
tion of the Vedas should be stopped.


28. You have acquired spiritual vision,
Your mind too has, of itself, become purged
off all impurities. You have been freed
from the qualities of Darkness and Igaor-
ance. You live now in the quality of Good-
ness.


zg. You see now jyour Soul with your
Soul as one sees his own shadow in #
mirror. Stayirtg {yourself om youc own
Soul, do you reflect on the Vedas.


go. The path of the Supreme Soul is
ealled the path of the gods. The path that
is made up of the quatity of Ignorance is
called the path of Pitris. These are the
two paths in the world hereafter. By
one, people go to heaven. By the other
people go to hell.


gt. The winds blow, -on
surface and ia the ‘sky. ‘here are seven
courses in which they blow. Listen to me
as I describe them one after another.


32. The body has the’ ‘senses. The
senses are ruled over by the Sadhyas and
many great beings of yreat strength.
‘Fhese gave birth to an invincible som
named Samana,


33. From Samana originated a son
called Udana. From Udana_ originated
Vyana. From Vyaua arose Apana, and
lastly from. Apana originated the wind
called Prana.


the Earth’s


SUANTI


34. That invincible scorcher of all


enemies, vts., Prana, became barren. { ;


s hall now recite to you the different func-
tions of those winds,


35. The wind is the root of the various
functions of all living creatures, and be-
cause living creatures are enabled to live
by it, therefore is the wind called Prana
(or life). -


. 36. That wind which is the first in the
above number and which is known by the
name of Pravaha (Samana) drives, aleng
the first course, masses of clouds born of
smoke and heat.
and coming into contact with the water in
the clouds, that wind shows itself in efful-
gence among the darts of lightening.


37- The second wind, called Avaha
blows witha loud noise. It is this wind
that make Soma and the other luminaries
rise and appear. Within the body that
wind is called Udana by the wise.


38—39. That wind which drinks up
water from the four oceans, and having
sucked it up gives it to the clouds in the
sky and which, having given it to the
clouds, presents them to the gods of rain,
is third in the number and known by the
name of Udvaha,


40—41. That wind which supports the
clouds and divides them into various parts
which melts them for pouring cain and once
more solidifies them, which is perceived as
the sound of roating clouds, which exists
for the preservation of the world by itself
assuming the form of the clouds, which
carries the cars of all celestials along the
sky, is known by the name of Samvaha.
‘The fourth in the number, it is gifted with
great strength so that it is capable of
rending the very mountains,


42. The fifth wind has great force and
speed. It is dry and roots out and breaks
down all trees. Existing with it, the clouds
are called Valahaka,


43——~44. That wind causes portends of
‘many sorts and creates roaring sounds in
the sky. It is known by the name of
Vivaha,. :


45- The sixth wind carries all celestial
waters in the sky and prevents them from
falling down. Keeping the sacred waters
‘of the celestial Ganga, that wind btows
‘preventing them from having a downward
Course.


46. Obstructed by that wind fron a
distance, the Sun, which is really the ‘root
of athousand rays, and which. lights up
the world, appears as a tuminous body of
but one ray.


Passing through the sky,’


PARVA. 513 -


47. “Through the action of that wind,
the Moon, after wating increases again till ;
he shows his full disc. ‘That wind is known,
O foremost of ascetics, by the name of
Parivaha,


48—51. That wind which takes away
the life of fall living creatures when the
proper times comes, whose path is followed
by Death .and Surya’s son Yama, which
becomes the source of that immortality
which is acquired by Yogins of subtitle
sight who are always engaged in Yoga-_
meditation, by whose help the thousands ,


|of grandsons of Daksha, that lord of


cfeatures, by his ten sons, succeeded in
days of yore in reaching the ends of the
universe, whose touch enables one to ace
quire Liberation by freeing hi uself from the
obligation of returning to the wosld,—that
wind is called by the name of Paravaha.
The foremost of all winds, it cannot be re-
sisted by any body.


52. Wonderful are these winds all of
whom are the sons of Diti. Capable of
going everywhere and upholding alt
things, they blow all around you without
being attached to you at aay time.


53- This, however, is greatly wonder-
ful, viz., that this foremost of mountains
should thus be suddenly shaken by that
wind which has begun to blow.


54. ‘This wind is the breath of ,Vishnu's
nostrils, When moved with speed, it be-
gins to blow with great vehemence at which
the whole universe becomes agitated.


55. Hence, when the wind begins to
blow with ¢violence, persons knowing the
Vedas do not recite the Vedas. The
Vedas are a form of wind. Ff uttered with
vehemence, the external wind becemes
agitated. - :


56. Having said these words, the power-
ful son of Pacashara ordered his son to go
on with his, Vedic recitation. He then lef¢
that place for plunging into thegwaters-of
the celestial Ganga.”


CHAPTER CCCXXX.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued.


Bhishma said :-—


i. ' After Vyasa had left the spot,


| Narada. passing through the sky, came


to Shuka engaged in studying the scrip-
tures. ~The celestial Rishi came fer the
object of asking Shuka the meaning. of


certain parts of the Vedas.
i


524


2. Seeing the celestial Rishi Narada
afrived at lis asylum, Shuka adored him
by offering him the Arghya according to
the rites faid down in the Vedas.


3. Pleased with the honors conferred
upon him, Narada addressed Shuka, say-
ing.— ‘Tell me, O foremost of pious men,
how, O dear child, may I {accomplished
what is for your highest good.


_ 4 Hearing these words of Narada,
Shuka said to him, O Bharata, these
words :—-You should instruct me about
what may be beneficial to me!


Narada said :—


5. Iu days .of yore the illustrious Sanat-
kumara had said these words to certain
Rishis of purified souls who had gone to
him for enquiring after the truth.


6. There is no eye like that of know-
ledge. There is no penance like the prac-
tice of truth, There is no sorrow like
attachment. There is no happiness like
renunciation.


7. Abstention from sinful deeds, steady
practice of virtue, good conduct, the due
Observance of all religious. duties,—these
form the highest good.


8. Having acquired the status of hu-
manity which is mixed With sorrow, he who
becomes attached to it, becomes stupefied :
such a man never succeeds in freeing him-
self from sorrow. Attachment is a mark
of sorrow.


The understanding of a person who
is attached to earthly object becomes more
and more entangled in the net of stupefac-
tion. The man who. becomes entangled in
the net of stupefaction comes by sorrow
both in this world and in the next. .


io. Ofie should, by every means in his
power, control both desire and anger if
one tiies to acquire what is. for his good,
Those jtwo originate for. only destroying
his good.


11. One should always protect his
penances from anger, and his prosperity
from pride. One should always protect his
knowledge from honor and dishonor, and
his soul from error,


12. Mercy is ‘the highest virtue. For-
giveness is the highest power. The know-
ledge of self is the hjghest knowledge,
There is nothing higher than truth.


13. It is always meet te speak the truth.
It is better again to speak what is whole-
some than to speak what is true. I hold
that that is truth which is filled with the
greatest benefit to all creatures,


MAHABHARATA.


14. That man is said to be truly learned
and truly endued with wisdom who re-
nounces every act, who never indulges m
hope, who is perfectly dissociated from all
worldly surroundings, and who has re-
nounced everything that belongs to the
world,


15—16. That person who, without being
attached thereto, enjoys all objects of
sense with the help of senses which are
completely under bis control, who is en-
dued with a tranquil soul, who is never
moved by joy or sorrow, who is engaged
in Yoga-meditation, who lives with the
gods presiding over his senses and
dissociated also from them, and who,
though gifted with a body, never considers
himself as identifiable with it, becomes
liberated and very soon acquires what is
his highest good.


17. One who never sees others, never
touches others, never talks with others,
soon, O ascetic, acquires what is for his
highest good.


18. One should not injure any creature.
On the other hand, one should treat ;with
friendliness to all. Having acquired the
status of humanity, one should never treat
inimically to any one.


19. A perfect disregard for all (worldly)
things, perfect contentment, abandonment
of hope of every sort, and patience,—these
form the highest good of one who has
governed his senses and acquired a know-
ledge of self."


20. Renouncing all attachments, O child,
do you master all your senses, and thereby
acquire happiness both in this world and
in the next. :


21. They who are free from cupidity
have never to suffer any sorrow. One
should, therefore, renounce all cupidity
from one’s soul. By renouncing cupidity,
O amiable and blessed one, you will be
able to liberate yourself from sorrow and
pain.


- 22. One who wishes to conquer - that
which is unconquerable should hve giving
himself up to penances, to self-control, to
taciturnity, to a subjugation of the soul,
Such a person should live in the midst of
attachments without being attached thereto,


23. That Brahmana. who lives in the
midst of attachments without being attached
to them and who always lives in seclusion,
very soon acquired the highest happiness.


24. That man who lives alone in happi-
ness in the midst of creatures who are seen
to find pleasure in leading lives of sexual
uuion, should be known to be a person


SHANTI PARVA.


$25:


whose thirst has been satisfied by know- ; Alas, how will you go along that way


ledge. It is well known that that man
whose thirst has been satisfied by know-
ledge has never to grieve.


25. One acquires the status of the god
by means of good deeds; the status of
humanity by means of acts which are good
and bad; while by acts which are purely
wicked, one heiplessly talls down among
the lower animals.


26: Always attacked by’ sorrow and
decrepitude and death, a living creature is
being cooked in this world. Do you not
know it?


27. You generally consider that to be
beneficial which is really injurious; that
to be certain which is really uncertain ; and
that to be desirable and good which is un-
desirable and not good. Alas, why do you
not form a correct apprehension of these ?


28. Like a silkworm that covers itself in
its own cocoon, you are continually cover-
ing yourself in a cocoon made of your own
numberless deeds born of stupefaction and
mistake. Alas, why do you not form a
_ correct apprehension of your situation ?


29. No need of attaching yourself to
earthly objects. Attachment to earthly
objects produces evil. ‘The silk- worm that
forms a cocoon round itself is at last des-
troyed by its own deed.


30. Those persons who become attached
to sons and wives and relatives meet with
destruction in the end, as wild elephants
sunk in the mire of a lake are by and by
weakened till overtaken by Death.


31. See, all creatures that allow them-
selves to be dragged by the net of affection
become subject to great grief as fishes on
land, dragged thereto by means of large
nets.


32. Relatives, sons, wives, the body it-
self, and all properties amassed with care,
are unsubstantial and of no use in the next
world, Only acts, good and bad, that one
does, follow him to the other world.


33- When it is certain that you shall
have to go helplessly to the other world,
leaving behind all these things, alas, why
do you then allow yourself to be attached
to such worthless unsubstantial things, with-
out attending to what forms your real and
durable weaith 7? :


34. The path which you shall have to
pass through is without resting places of
any sort. There is no support along that
way which one may catch for maintaining
oneself. The country through which it
passes is unknown and undiscovered. It
is, again, covered with thick darkness.

b)


without being supplied with the necessary
expenses?


35-. When you shall go along that road,
nobody will follow you. Only your deeds,
good and bad, will follow you when you
shall leave this world for the next.


36. One seeks the real abject by means
of learning, acts, purity and great knows
ledge. When that foremost of objects is
acquired, one becomes liberated.


37. The desire that one feels for living
in the midst of human dwellings is like a
binding fetter. They that are of good
deeds succeed in snapping that fetter and
freeing themselves. Only men of wicked
deeds do not succeed in breaking them.


38—39. The river of life is dreadful
Personal beauty or form forms its banks.
The mind is the speed of its .current.
Touch -forms its island. Taste forms its
current. Scent is its mire. Sound is its
waters. That particular part of it which
leads towatds heaven is beset with great
difficulties. Body is the boat by which
one must cross that river. Forgiveness is
the oar by which it ig to be moved. ‘ruth
is the ballast that keeps that boat steady.
The practice of virtue is the rope that
is to be put to the mast’ for ‘dragging that
boat along difficult waters. Charity or gift
forins the wind that moves the sails of that
boat. Gifted with swift speed, it is with
that boat that one must cross the river of
life. :


40. Renounce both virtue and vice, and
truth: and falsehood. Having renounced
truth. and falsehood, do you cast off that.
by which these are to be shaken off, - ;


41. By casting off all. purpose, do you
renounce virtue; do you cast off sin also
by renouning’ all’ desire. With the help
of the understanding, do you resounce
truth and falsehood; and, at last, do you
renounce the understanding itself by knaw-
ledge of the highest subject. a


42-43. Do you renounce this body
having bones for its pillars ; sinews for its.
binding strings and cords; flesh and: blood
for its outer plaster; the skin for its outer
case; full of urine and feces and, there-
fore, sending forth a bad smell; exposed to.
the attacks of decrepitude and sorrow;
forming the seat of disease and weakened
by pain; predominated by the quality of
Darkness; not permanent or durable; and
which serves as the habitation of the in-
dwelling creature, 7


44. — This entire universe of matter, and
that which is called Mahat or Buddhi, are
formed of great elements. (hat whick +


$26


called Mahat is due to .the action of the
Supreme.


45. ‘The five senses, the three qualities
af lamas, Sattwa, and Rajas,—these make
Up seventeen.


46. These seventeen, which are known
by the name of the Unmanifest, with all
those that are called Manifest, vis., the
five objects of the five senses, with Consci-
ousness and the Understanding, constitute
the well-known twenty-four.


47. When endued with those twenty-
four possessions, one comes to be called by
the name of Jiva or Individual Soul.


48. He who knows the three-fold objects
as also happiness and sorrow and life and
death, truly and in alt their details, is said
to know growth and decay. All objects of
knowledge, should be known by and by.


49. All objects that are perceived by
the senses are called Manifest. Whatever
objects are above the senses‘and are appre-


hended by means only of their marks are {


said to be Unmanifest.


. 50 By controlling the senses, one
acquires great gratification, lke a thirsty
and parched traveller at a sweet shower of
rain. Having restrained the senses one
sees one’s soul spread out for embracing
all objects, and all objects in one’s soul.


5t. Having its roots in knowledge, the
power is never lost of the man who (thus)
sees the Supreme in his soul,—of the man,
who always sees all creatures in allt
conditions,


32. He who, by the help of knowledge,
gets over all sorts of pain begotten of mis-
take stupefaction, never catches any evil by
coming into contact with all creatures.


" 53—55. Such a man, his understandin
being fully shown, never finds fault with
the course of conduct that prevails in the
world, One conversant with Liberation
says that the Supreme Soul is without
beginning and without end; that it takes
birth as all creatures; that it resides in
the Individual Soul; that it is inactive,
and without form. Only that maa who
meets with grief on account of his own


misdeeds, kills numerous creatures for the [


purpose of preventing that grief. On ac-
count of such sacrifices, the performers
have ta go through reebicths and have
necessarily to perform numberless deeds on
all side. 7


56. Such a man, blinded by mistake, and
considering that to be happiness which is
really a source of grief, is continually ren-
ered unhappy like a sick person who eats
bad food.


-the object of removing your sorrow.


| becomes attached.


MAHABHARATA,


57- Such a man is presced and grinded
by his deeds like any substance that is
churned, Fettered by his deeds he ob-
tains re-birth, the order of his life being
determined by the character of his deeds.


58. Suffering many kinds of torture, he
passes through a repeated round of re-
bitths like a wheel that turns ceaselessly.
You have, however, snapped asunder alk
your fetters. You abstain from all deeds.


59. Possessed of omniscience and the
master of all things, may you be success-
ful, and ‘do you become freed from all
existent objects, Through subjugation of
their senses and the power of thei¢e
penances, many persons, having destroyed
the fetters of action, acquired great suc~
cees and uninterrupted happiness.


CHAPTER CCCXXX!.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).——
Continued,


| Narada said -—


1. By listening to such sacred scriptures,
as -bring about tranquillity, as remove
grief, and as yield happiness, one acquired
(a pure) understanding, and, having ac«
quired it, obtains to great happiness.


2. A thousand causes of sorrow, a hun«
dred causes of fear, from day to day, at~
tack one who is shorn of understanding
but mot one who is endued with wisdom
and learning.


3. Do you, therefore, listen to some old
narratives as I recount them to yon, for
If one
can sul jugate his understanding, he is sure
to acquire happiness.


4. By accession of what is undesirable
and dissociation from what is agreeable,
only men of little intelligence yield ta
mental sorrow.


5. When things are passed, one should
not gtieve, thinking of their merits. He


| who thinks of such past things with, affec~


tion can never liberate himself.


6. One should always try to find out
the faults of those things to which one
One should always.
consider such things to be fraught with
much evil. By doing so, one should soon.
free him therefrom.


7. Fhe man who grieves for what is
past, cannot acquire either riches or reli-
gious merit or fame. What exists no
longer cannot be acquired. When such
things go away, they do nat return.

¢


SHANT} PARVA,


-§. Creatutcs
sometimes lose earthly objects.
fn this world can be grieved by all the
events that befall him.


9. Dead or lost, he who grieves for
what is gone only gets sorrow for sorrow.
Lustead of one sorrow, he gets two.


to. Those men who, seeing the course
of tife and death in the world with the help
of their intelligence, do not shed tears, are
said to see properly. Such persons have
never to shed tears.


ir. When any such calamity comes,
which creates either theie physical or mental
grief, as is incapable of being prevented
by even his best endeavours, one should
cease to think on it with sorrow.


1z. Not to think of it isthe penacea
for sorrow. By thinking of it, one can
never remove it; on the other hand, by-
thinking upon sorrow, one only increases it.


sometimes acquire and


13. Mental sorrow should be destroyed
by wisdom ; while physical sorrow should
be removed by medicines, This is the power
of knowledge. One should not, in such
pallets: act like men of lithe understands
ngs.


14. Youth, beauty, life, hoatded riches,
health, association with those that are
loved, these all are fickle. One endued
. with wisdoin should never covet them.


15- One should not lament individually
for a sorrowful incident that, concerns an
entire community. Instead of indulgence
in grief when it comes, one should try ‘to
avert it and apply a remedy as soon as he
finds the opportunity for doing it.


16. There is no doubt that in this life
misery is much greater than that of happi-
ness. There is no doubt in this that all
men show attachment for objects of the
senses and that death is consideted as
disaggreeable.


17. That man who renounces both joy
and sorrow, is said to attain to Brahma.
When such a man dies, men of wisdom
never indulge in any grief for him.


18. There is pain in spending wealth.
There is pain in protecting it. There is
pain in acquiring it. Hence, when one’s
wealth is lost, he should not grieve for it.


19. Men of little understandings, in
their efforts to acquire different grades of
wealth, lose their contentment and at last
die broken+hearted. Wise men, however,
are always contented,


20. All combinations are sure to end in
dissolution. All things that are high are
@estined to fall down and become low.

> :


No man |


$29.


Union is sure to end in disunion, and lilé
is certain to end in death.


21. ‘Thirst.can never be satiated. Cons
tentment is the greatest happiness. Hence,
wise men regard Conteiitment as the thos
valuable wealth, j


22. One’s lease of life is running conti-
nually. it stops not in its course for even
a single moment. When one’s body itself
is not durable, what other thing Is there
which one should consider as durable


23. Those persons who, meditating on
the nature of all creatures aiid, concluding
that it is beyond the grasp of the mind,
direct thele attention to the highest path,
and, starting, acquire a fair progress in it,
have not to indulge in sorrow.

24. Like a tiger seizing and running
away with its prey, Death seizes and runs
away with tlre man, who is engaged in such
occupation and which is still riot satiated
with objects of desire and enjoyment.


25. One should ‘always try to liberate
himself from sorrow. One should try to re
move sorrow by beginning his work with
cheerfulness, that is without indulging in
sortow, having freed himseli frottt a parti-
culat sorrow, one should act in such a way
as to keep sorrow at a distance by abstain+
ing from all shortcomings of conduct.


26. he rich and the poot alike find
nothing in sound ard touch and form and
scent and taste, alter the immediate enjoy-
ment thereof.


27. Before utiiot, treatures never suffer
sorrow. Hence, one who has not deviated
from his original nature, never grieves
when that union comes to an end.


28. Une should control his sexual ap-
petite and thé stomach with the help of
patience. One should protect his hands
and feet with the help -of the eye. One’s
eyes and ears and the other senses should
be protected by the mind. One’s mind
and speech should be govetned with the
help of wisdom, ; i


29. Renouncing love and affection fot
Persons that are known as well as fr those
that are unknown, one should act with
humility. Such a persots is said to be
endued with wisdom, and such a one surely
finds happiness.


30., That man who is pleased with his
own Soul, who is given to Yoga, who
depends upon nothing out of self, wha
is without cupidity, and who acts without
the help of anything but his self, succeeds
in acquiring happiness.


Create eal


428


‘CHAPTER CCCXXXI.


- (MOKHADHARMA PARVA).—
‘2, | Continued.
Narada said :—
“t. When the changes of happiness
‘and sorrow appear or disappear, they can-
hot be prevented by either wisdom or policy
‘or exertion.
2,’ Without suffering himself to deviate
from his true nature, one should try his
est for protecting his own Self. He who
makes such care and exertion, has nevet
to perish. Considering Self as something
dear, one should always try to rescue him=
self from decrepitudé. death, and disease.


: 3, Mentat and physical ailments afflict
the body, like keen-pointed arrows dis-


charged from the bow by a strong bowmian. -


4. The body. of a person who is tor-
tured by thirst, who is moved by agony,
‘who is perfectly helpless, and that is des}-
ous of prolonging his life, is dragged
‘towatds destruction.


8. Days and hights.are contisually run-
hing, carrying away in their current the
periods of life of all human beings. Like
currents of rivers, these flow ceaselessly
without ever returning.


6. The continued succession of the
lighted and the dark fortnights is des-
ttoyed all mortal creatures without stop-
ping for even a moment in this work.


/._Rising and setting day after day,
the Sun, who is himself undecaying, is
perpetually cooking the joys and sorrows
of all men.


8. The nights are continually going
away, taking with them the good and
bad incidents that befall man, that depend
on destiny, and that are unexpected by
him. .


_g If the fruits of man’s deeds were not
dependent on other cjrcumstances, then
one, would acquire whatever object lie would

_ long for.


to. Even men of controlled senses, of
cleverness, and of intelligence, if destitute
‘of acts, mever succeed in acquiring any
fruits.


it. Others, though shorn of intelligence
and accomplishments of any sort, and
who are really the lowest of men, are seen,
even when they do not wish for success,
‘ to be crowned with the fruition. of all their
desites. ,


12, Some one else, who is always ready
to injure all creatures, and who is engaged


MAHABHARATA.


in imposing on ali tué we. .4, 18 seen té
languish in happiness,


13. Some one who sits idly, acquires
great prosperity ; while another, by work-
ing €atnestly, tis seer to miss desirablé
fruits almost within his reach.


14. Do you ascribe it as one of the
faults of man! The seminal fluid, origina-
ting in one’s nature from sight of oné
person, goes to another person.


15. When given to the womb, it some-
times produces an embryo and sometimes
fails. When sexual intercourse fails, it
resembles a mango tree that puts fortha
great many flowers without, however, pro-
ducing a single fruit.


16. As regards some men who aré
desirous of having offspring and who, fot
the fruition of their object, work earnestly,


they fail to procreate an embryo in thé
womb.
17. Some person, again, who fears the


birth of an embryo as one fears a snake of
deadly poison, finds, a long-lived son born
to him and who seems to be his own self
return to the stages through which he has
passed. 0 Se


18. Many persons with strong desire
for children, and cheerless on that account,
after sacrificing to many gods and prac-
tising severe austerities, at last beget
children, duly borne for ten long months,
that prove to be veritable wretches of their
race.


19. Others, who have been obtained
by virtue of such blessed rites ‘and obser-
vances, at once acquires riches and grain
and vatious other sources of enjoyment ac-
quired and accumulated by their forefathers.


20. In an act of sexual intercourse, when
two persons of opposite sexes come into
centact with one another, the embryo takes
birth in the womb, like a calamity attack-
ing the mother,


at. Wery soon aftet the Suspension of
the vital airs, other physical forms possess
that embodied creature whose gross body
has been destroyed but whose deeds have
all beén performed with that gross body,
made of flesh and phlegm.


22. Upon the destruction, of the body,
another body which is as much destructible
as the one which is destroyed, is kept ready
for the burnt and destroyed creature even °
as one boat goes to another for transferring
to itself the passengers of the other.


23. By sexual intercourse, a drop of
the seminal fluid that is inanimate, is cast
into the womb. Il ask you, through whose
or what care is the embryo kept alive ?


SHANTI


24. That part of the body «into whieh
the food that is eaten goes and where it is
digested, is the place where the embryo
lives, but it i8 not digested there.


25. In the womb, amid urine and faces,
one’s sojourn is governed by Nature. The
born creature is not free in the matter
of residence therein or escape therefrom.
In fact, in these respects, he is pecfectly
helpless.


26. Sorte embryos fall from the womb.
Some come out alive. While as regards.
some, they are destroyed in the womb,
after being quickened with life, on account
of some other bodies being ready for them.


27. That man who, in an act of sexual
intercourse, injects the seminal fluid, ob-
taing from it a son or daughter. ‘he
offspring thus obtained, when the time
comes, takes part in a similar act of sexual
intercourse. '


28. Wher the lease of a person’s life
ends, the five primal elements of his body
attain ¢o the seventh and the ninth stages
and they cease to be. Lhe person, however,
suffers no change.


29. Forsooth, when persons are attacked
by diseases as little animals assaifed by
hunters, they then lose the power of rising
up and moving about.


30. If when men are attacked by
diseases, they wish to spend even immense
riches, physicians with their best efforts fail
to lessen their sufferings.

31. Evén physiciatis, who ate well-
skilled and expert in their science and well-
equipt with excellent medicines, ate them-
selves attacked by disease like animals
assailed by hunters,


32. Even if men drink many asttingents
and various sorts of medicated ghee, they
are seen to be broken by decrepitude like
trees by stoug elephants.


33. When‘animals and birds and beasts
of prey and poor men are attacked by
diseases, who treats them with medicines?
Indeed, these are not seen to be ill,


34 Like farger animals attacking’
smaller ones, diseases are seem to attack
even dreadful kings of fierce energy and
invincible prowess.


- 35- All men, deprived of the power of
even uttering cries of pain, and overwhelm-
ed by error and grief, are seen to be car-
ried away along the dreadful current into
which they have been thrown,


\ 36. Embodied - creatures, even when
trying ta conquer nature, ate unable to
conquer it with the ’help of wealth, of


67


-soveteign power, of of- the


PARVA, §49


austerest


penances.


37. Tf alt attempts ‘men make were
successful then men would never die, would
hever be subject to decrepitudé, would


_hever meet with any disagreeable thing,


and@ lastly would have all
fructified.


38. All men desire to acquire gradual
Superiority of position. ‘fo satisly this -
ish they try their very best. The resutt,
owever, does not agree with their wish...


Even men who are perfectly careful,
who ate honest, sand brave: arid endued
with prowess, are.seen td worship men in-
toxicated with the pride of wealth and -with
even alcoholic stimulants.


go. Some wien are seen whose calamities
vanish before even these are seen: by them,
Others there are who are seen to possess
no riches but who are free from misery of
every sort.

41. A gteat disparity is seen about .the
fruits that wait upon: conjunctions of acts.
Some’ are seen to carry vehicles on’ theic
shoulders, while some are seen te ride on
them.


42. All met are desirous of tiches and
prosperity. few only have cars dragged
in their processions. : Some theré are who
cannot get a singlé wife when their first
married ones are dead; while others have:
hundreds of wives. °


43. Misery and happiness are the twa
things which exist side by side. Men’ have
either misery of happiness. See this is a
subject of wonder! Do not, however,
allow yourself to be stupefied by error. at
such a sight. z


44. Renounce both virtue and sin! Re-
nounce also truth and falsehood!. Having
renounced both truth and falsehood, do you
then cast off that with whose help you shalf
cast off the forirer,


45. O best of Rishis, I {have now told
you what is a great mystery! With th
help of such instructions, the gods succeed-~
ed: in leaving the Earth for becoming the


their wishes


' dwellers of heaven,


46. Hearing these words of Nadrnida,
Shuka, gifted with vreat intelligence and
possessed of tratquillity of mind, reflected
upon the drift of the iusttuctions’ hd
received; but could not determine any
thing.

47. He utiderstood that one suffers great
misery on account of children and wives;
that one has to work hard for the. acquisi-
tion Of science and Vedic lore, -He, there


530


fore, asked {himself, saying,—-What is that
situation whieh is eternal and which is free
from all sorts of misery but in whiclr there
is great prosperity? ~~

43. Thinking for a moment upon the
course ordained for him, Shuka, who was
well acquainted with the beginning and
the end of al) duties, determined to attain
to the highest end which is full of happi-
ness; ;


"49. He questioned himself, saying,—

How shall I, cutting off all attachments and

becoming perfectly free, acquire that ex-

cellent end? How, indeed, ‘shall I acquire

that excellent situation whence there is no

oe into the ocean of various sorts of
irth, :


59. I wish to come by that condition
of existence whence there is no returr! Re-
nouncing all kinds of attachments, arrived
at certainty by mental retrospection, I shall
acquire that end.


51. I shalt acquire that situation in
which your Soul will have tranquillity, and
when I shall be able to live for good with-
out being subject to decrepitude or change.


52. It is, however, certain that that high
end cannot be acquired without the help
of Yoga. Oue who has-acquired the state
of perfect knowledge and enlightenment
never comes by low attachments through

eeds.


53. I shalt, therefore, have recourse to
Yoga, and renouncing this body which is
my present residence, # shall change my-
self into a wind and enter that mass of
effulgence which is represented by the sin.


54. When Individual Soul enters that
mass of effulgence, he no longer suffers
like Shoma who, with the gods, upon the
exhaustion of merit, drops down on the
Earth and having once more acquired
sufficient merit returns to heaven.


55. The Moon is always seen to deerease
and once more increase. Seeing this de-
crease and increase that go on repeatedly,
1 do not wish to have a form of existence
in which there are such changes,


56. The Sun warms all the worlds by
means of his rays. His disc never suffers
any diminution. Remaining unchanged,
he drinks energy from all things. Hence,
I wish to go into the Sun of blazing efful-
gence.


57. There ¥ shall live, invincible by all,
and in my inner soul freed from alt fear,
having renounced this body of mine in the
solar region.


58—s9. I shall enter with the great
Rishis the unbearable energy of the Sun.


| great Rishi became highty pteased.


MAHABHARATA,


I declare to all creatures, these trees,
these elephants, these mountains, the Earth
herself, the several cardinal points, the
sky, the gods, the Danavas, the Gandhare
vas, thé Pishachas, Wragas, and the
Rakshasas, that I shall enter all creatures
in the world.


60, Let all the gods with the Rishis,
witness my Yoga power to-day.—Having
said these words, Shuka, informed the illuse
triows Narada of his intention.


61. Obtaining Narada’s permission,
Sbuka then went to where his father was.
Arrived before him, the great Muni, viv.,
the great and Fsland-born Krishna, Shuka
circumambulated him and addressed him
the usual enquiries.


6z. Hearing of Shuka’s intention, we
Ad-«
dressing him the great Rishi said,—O son,
O dear son, do you stay here to-day so
that I may see you for some time for grati-
fying my eyes.

63. Suka, however, paid no heed to that


| request. Freed from affection and all doubt,


he began to think only of Liberation, and
set his heart on the journey.


64. Leaving his father, that foremost
of Rishis then went to the spacious breast,
of Kailasa which was inhabited by num«
bers of ascetics crowned with success.”


CHAPTER CCCXXXIII.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA),«
Continued,


Bhishma said :—~


1. “Having got upon the summit of the
mountain, O Bharata, the son of Vyasa
sat down upon a level place free from
blades of grass and secluded.j


2. According to the direction of the
scriptures and to the ordinances laid down,
that ascetic, who Knew the suceessive pro-
cesses of Yoga, held his soul first in one
place and then in another, beginning from


| his feet and proceeding through all the


limbs.


3. Then when the Sun, had not risen
long, Shuka sat, with his face turned to-
wards the East, and bands and feet drawn
in an humble posture.


4. In_ that spot where the intelligent
son of Vyasa sat prepared to practise
Yoga, there were no flocks of birds, no
sound, and no sight that was repulsive o¢
fearful, c


SHANTI PARYA.


531


He then saw his own Soul freed from [ went silently, his face turned towards ive


all attachments. Seeing that highest of all
things, he laughed in joy.
@ He once more set himself? to Yoga
for acquiring the path of Liberation. Be-
coming the great mastet] of Yoga he got
over the element of ether.


+ He then went round the celestial
Rishi Narada, and informed him of the
fact of his having begun to practise the
highest Yoga.


Shuka said :—


8. I have succeeded in seeing the path
{of Emancipation). { have addressed my-
selftoit. Blessed be you, O you having
penances for your wealth. I shall through
your favour, O you of great splendour, ac~
quire an end that is highly desirable.


Bhishma said :—


9g. Having received the order of Narada,
Shuka the son of the Island-born Vyasa
saluted the celestial Rishi and once more
set himself to Yoga and ,enteced the
element of ether.


so. Ascending then from the breast of
the Kailasa mountain, he soared into the
sky. Capable of passing through the sky,
the blessed Shuka of fixed conclusion, then
made himself at one with the element of
Wind.


it. As that foremost of twice-born ones,
effulgent like Garuda, was passing through
the skies with the spced of the wind or
thought, all creatures directed’ their eyes
towards him.


12. Gifted with the splendour of five or
the Sun, Shuka then considered the three
worlds as one Brahma, and went along
that lengthy path.


13. Indeed, all creatures, mobile and
immobile, cast their eyes upon him as he
went with rapt attention, and a tranquil
and fearless soul.


14. All creatures, according to the ordi-
mance and according to their power, adored
him with respect. The celestials poured
showers of celestial Rowers upon him.


1§. Seeing him, all the tribes of Apsaras
and Gandharvas became filled with wonder.
The Rishis also, that were crowned with
success, became equally surprised.


16. And they asked themselves,—Who
is this one who has acquired success by his
penances? With fooks withdrawn from
sis own body but turned upwards, he is
delighting us all with his glances.


”


- 17. Of highly righteous soul and cele-
brated throughout the thtee worlds, Shuka


East and look directed towards the Sun.
As he went, along he seemed to fill the
entire sky with an ail-pervading noise.


48. Seeing him coming in that way, alt.
the tribes of the Apsaras, struck with fear
QO king, became filled with surprise.


19. Headed by Panchachuda and others,
they looked at Shuka with eyes expanded
by surprize. And they asked one another,
saying,-What god is this one who has
acquired such a highend? Forsooth, he
comes here, freed from all attachments and
desire, ;


20. Shuka then went to the Malaya
mountains where Urvashi and Purvachitti
used to always live.


21-—22. Bothiof them, seeing the energy
of the son of the great twice-born Rishi,
became filled with wonder. And they said,
—Wonderful is this concentration of attea-
tion of a twice-born youth who was accuse
tomed to the recitation and study of the
Vedas! Soon will he pass through the
entire sky like the Moun. It was by dutiful
service and humble miuistrations towards
his father that he gained this excellent
understanding.


23. He is firmly devoted his father,
endued with austere penances, and is very
much loved by his father. Alas, why has
he been dismissed by his inattentive father
to go along a way whence no one returns,


24—25. Hearing these words of Urvashi,
and attending to their meaning, Shuka,
that foremost of all persons conversant
with duties, looked on all sides, and once
more saw the entire sky, the whole Earth
with her mountains and waters and forests,
and also all the lakes and rivers.


26. All the gods atso, of both sexes,
joining their hands, paid respect to the son
of the Iskand-born Rishi and looked at him
with wonder and reverence.


_ a7—~28. Shuka, addressing all of them,
that foremost of all pious men, said these
words,—If my father follow me and re-
peatedly call after me by my name, do alt
of you in a body return him an answer for
me. Moved by the affection all of you
have for me, do you satisfy this request of
mine! ‘

29-30. Hearing these words of Shuka,
all the points of the horizon, all the forests,
all the seas, all the rivers, and ali the
mountains answered him from all sides,
saying,--We accept your command, O
twice-born one! It shall be as you say!
It is thus that we answer the words spoken
by the Rishi.”


532
CHAPTER CCCXXXIV.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued,


Bhishma said:~

“4. “Having spoken in this way, the
twice-born Rishi of austere penances, wiz.,
Shuka, lived on his success, renouncing the
four sorts of faults.


2. Renouncing also the eight kinds of
Tamas, he dismissed the five kinds of
- Rajas. Gifted with great intelligence, he
then. renounced ‘the attribute of Sattwa.
All this seemed extremely wonderful.


3, He then lived in that eternal station
which is shorn of attributes, freed from
every indication, that is, in Brahma, shin-
ning like a smokeless fire.


4. Meteors began to shoot. The points
of the liorizon seemed to be ablaze. The
Earth trembled. Atl these phenomena
seemed extremely wonderful.


5. The trees began to throw off their
branches and the mountains their summits.
Loud peats were heard that seemed to rive
the Himavat mountains.


6. The Sun seemed at that moment to
be shorn of effulgence. Fire refused to
burn forth, The fakes and rivers and seas
were all moved.


7. Vasava’ poured showers of rain of
exceHent taste and smell..:A pure breeze


began to blow, carrying excellent perfumes. |


8. Shuka, as he went through the sky,
saw two beautiful summits, one belonging
to Himavat and another to Meru. These
were side by side with each other. One of
them was made of gold and was, there-
fore, yellow; the other was white, being
made of silver, :


g. Each of them, O Bharata, was a
hundred Yojanas in height and of the same
breadth, Indeed, as Shuka went towards
_the north, he beheld those two beautiful
summits.


10. With a fearless heart he dashed
against those two summits that were close
to each other. Unable to bear the force,
the summits were suddenly’ rent in two
parts.


11—12, The spectacle, O monarch, was
extremely wonderful to look at. Shuka
pierced through those summits, for they
were unable to stop his onward course, At
this a loud noise was made in heaven by
the. dwellers thereof. :


13. The Gandharvas and the Rishis
also and others who lived in that mountain


MAHABHARATA,


sent up loud cheers at the sight of the
mountain being rent in two and Shuka .
passing through it. Indeed, O Bharata,
a loud noise was heard everywhere at that
moment, saying,—Excellent, Excellent.


14. He was worshipped by the Gandhar-
vas and the Rishis, by Yakhas and
Rakshasas, and by all tribes of the Vidya-
dharas,


15. The entire sky became covered with
celestial flowers showered from heaven at
that moment {when Shuka thus cut through
that impenetrable barrier, O king.


16. The pious Shuka then saw froma
high region the extremely beautiful celestial
river Mandakini, running below through a
region adorned by many flowering groves
and forests.


17. In these waters many beautiful
Apsaras were playing. Seeing Shuka
who was bodiless, those naked aerial beings
felt no shame. .


18, Learning that Shuka had under-
taken his great journey, his father Vyasa,
filted with affection, followed him behind
along the same aerial path.


19. Meanwhile Shuka, passing through
that region of the sky which is above the
region of the wind, showed his Yoga-power
and identified himself with Brahma.

20. Following the subtile path of high
Yoga, Vyasa of austere penances, reached
within the twinkling of the eye that place
whence Shuka first started.


21. Proceeding along the same way,


Vyasa. saw the mountain summit rent in


two parts and through which} Shuka has
passed. Meeting the Island-born ascetic,


} the Rishis began to describe to him the


achievements of his son.


22. Vyasa, however, began to lament,
loudly naming his son and causing the
three worlds to resound with the noise he
made, ;


23. Meanwhile, the pious Shuka, who
had entered all things, had become the
soul of ali things, and had acquired omni-
presence, answered his fathers by uttering
the monosyllable Bao in the form of an
echo.


24. Thereat, the entire universe of
mobile and immobile creatures, uttering
the monosyllable Buo, echoed the answer
of Shuka. ;


25. Thereforward, when sounds are
made in mountain-caves or on mountains
breasts, the latter, as if in answec to Shuka,
still echo them.


26, Having renounced all the attributes


‘of sound, etc, avd showing his Yoga~


SHANTI PARVA,


power in the manner of his disappearance,
Shuka in this way acquired the highest
station. ;


27. Seeing that glory and power of his
son of immeasurable energy, Vyasa sat
down on the breast of the mountain and
began to think of his son sorrowfully.


28. Seeing the Rishi seated there, the
Apsaras ‘who were sporting on the. banks
of the celestial river Mandakini, became
all moved with shame and dispirited.


29. Some of them, to hide their naked-
ness, plunged into the ‘river, and some
entered the groves hard by, and some
quickly took up their clothes, at seeing the
Rishi.

30. Seeing these movements, the Rishi
understood that his son had been liberated
from all attachments, but that he himself
was not freed therefrom. At this he be-
came filled with both joy and shame,


31. As Vyasa was seated there, the
auspicious god Shiva, armed with trident,
sucrounded on all sides by many gods and
Gandharvas and worshipped of all the
great Rishis, came there.


32. Consoling the Island-born Rishi
who was burning with grief on account of
his son, Mahadeva said these words to
him :—

33. You had formerly solicited from me
a son endued with .the energy of Fire,
of Water, of Wind, and of Ether.


34. Procreated by your penances, the
son that was born to you was of that very
sort. Proceeding from my favour, he was
pure and full of Brahma-energy.


35. Hehas acquired the highest end,—
aa end that is, which none can acquire who
has not completely mastered his senses, nor
by even any of the gods, why then, O twice-
born Rishi, do you grieve for that son?


36. As long as the hills will last, as long
as the acean will last, so long will the fame
of your son continue.


37. Through my favour, O great Rishi,


you will see in this world a shadowy form.


resembling your son, moving by theside
and never leaving you for a single moment!
38. Thus favoured by the illustrious
Rudra himself, O Bharata, the Rishi saw a
shadow of his son by his side. He came
back from that place, filled with joy at this,
I have now ‘told you, O chief of
Bharata’s race, everything regarding the
birth and life of Shuka about which you
had asked me.


qo. The celestial Rishi Narada and the
great Yogin Vyasa had again and again


‘who. is the Pitri


533


told all this to me in days of yore when-the
subject was suggested in course of conver-
sation. e


41. That person ‘devoted to tranquillity
who hears this sacred history directly con-
nected with the subject of Liberation is
sure to-acquire the highest end.” ~ ;


CHAPTER CCCXXXV.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA)—-
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


1. "If a man be a_ house-holder og
Brahmacharin, a hermit or a mendicant,
and if her wishes to acquire success, what
god should be worship ?, els


2. Whence can he surely acquire heaven
and whence that which is of the highest
benefit? According to what -ordinanceg
should he perform the Homa in honor. of
the gods and the departed manes ?


3. What is the end to which one goes
when he becomes Liberated ? What is the
the essence of Liberation? What should
one do, so that he, having attained to
heaven, would not have .to drop down,
thence ? j :


- 4. Whois the God of the gods? And
of the Pitris? Wha, is
He who is, superior to him who js the God,
of the gods and the Pitri of the Pitris ?,
‘Fell me all this, O Grandfather ?”’ :
Bhishma said :~— rae
*O you who are well acquainted, with,
the art of questioning, this question which
you have put to me, O pure one, is ofe which


-is enveloped in deep mystery, One cannot


answer it with the help of logic even if one


were to try for a hundred years.


6. Without ‘the favour of Narayana,,
O king, or an acquisition of high know-,
ledge, this question of yours cannot he
answered. Though this subject is filled with
deep mystery, [ shall yet, O destroyer of
enemies, explain it to you ? .


7. Regarding it is cited the old ‘dise.
course between Narada and the Rishi
Narayana.


8—9. I heard it from my father that iy
the golden age, O king, during the epoch
of the Self-create Manu, the eternal Nara~
yana, the Soul of the universe, was born,
as the son of Dharma in a quadruple form,
zig., as Nara, Narayana, Hari, and the
Self-create Krishna. -  - :


534


fo. Amongst them all, Narayana and

Nara practised severest austerities by going

to the Hinmalyan retreat Known by the

. Name of Vadari, and riding on their golden
cats.


11. Each of those cars had eight wheels,
and was made up of the five primal ele-
ments, and supremely beautiful. Those ori-
ginal regents of the world who had taken
bicth as the sons of Dharma, became
extremely emaciated in body on account of
the austerities they practised. Indeed, for
those austevities and for their energy, the
very gods were unable to look at them.


12. Only that god to whom they were
kind could see them. ae:


13. Forsooth, with his heart given to
them, and moved by a longing desire to
see them, Narada dropped down on
Gandhamadana from a summit of the high
mountains of Meru and walked over all
the world.


14. Endued with great speed, he at
last went to that spot whereon was situate
the retreat of Vadari. Moved by curiosity
he entered that retreat at the hour of
Nara’s and Narayana’s performing their
daily rites,


15. He said to himself,—This is truly
the retreat of that Being in whom are
placed all the worlds including the gods,
the Asuras, the Gandharvas, the Kinnaras,
and the great snakes. ;


16. There was only one form of this
great Being’ before. That form took birth
in four forms for the multiplication of the
race of Dharma which have been reared
by that god.


- 17. How wonderful it is that Dharma

_ has thus been honored by these four great
gods, vis., Nara, Narayana, Krishna and
Hari.


18. In this spot Krishna and Hari lived
formerly. ‘The other two, however, vis.,
Nara and Narayana, are now living here
performing penances for the object of in-
creasing their merit. ,


19. hese two are the highest refuge of
the universe. What can be the nature of
the daily rites these two perform? They
are the fathers of all creatures, and the
iNustrious gods of all beings. Gifted with
* great intelligence, what is that god whom
these two adores? Who are those Pitris
whom these two Pitris of alt beings worship.


20. Thinking of this mentally, and filled
with devotion towards Narayana, Narada
suddenly sppeared before those two gods.


ar. Afterthose two gods had finished
their adorations to their deities and the


MAHABHARATA.


Rishis, they looked at the celestial Rishi
arrived at their asylum. The latter was
honored with those eternal rites that are
laid down in their scriptures,


22. Seeing that extraordinary conduct
of the two original gods in themselves
adoring other deities and Pitris, the illus-
trious Rishi Narada took his seat there,
well pleased with the honors he had re-
ceived.


23. With acheerful soul he looked at
Narayana, and bowing to Mahadeva he
said these words.


Narada said :—


24. In the Vedas and the Puranas in
the auxilliary and sub-auxilliary treaties,
you aresung with respect! You are un-
born and eternal! You are the Creator!
You are the mother of the universe! You
are the embodiment of Immortality and
you are the foremost of all things. The
Past and the Future, indeed, the entice
universe has been placed on you.


25. The four modes of life, O lord, of
which the domestic is the first, continually
sacrifice to you who are of diverse forms.


26. You are the father and the mother
and the eternal preceptor of the universe.
We know not who is that god or that Pitri
to whom you are sacrificing to-day.


The Holy one said :—

27. This topic is one regarding which
nothing should be said. ‘It is an ancient
ministery. Your devotion to me is very
greet, Hence, O twice-born one, [ shall
lescribe it to you according to the truth.


28—29. That which is minute, which is
inconceivable, unmanifest, immobile, dura-
ble dissociated from the senses and the
Objects of the senses, fas well as the (five)
elements,—that is cailed the in-dwelliag
Soul of all existent creatures. That is
known by the name of Kshetrejna. Tran-
scending the three qualities of Sattwa,
Rajas, and Tamas, that is cegarded as
Purusha in the scriptures.


30, From Him has originated the un-
manifest, O foremost of twice-born ones,
endued with the three qualities of Sattwa,
Rajas, and Tamas. hough really un-
manifest, she is called indestructible Nature
and lives in all manifest forms.


3t. Know that from her we two have
originated. That all-pervading Soul, which
is made of all existent and non-existent
things, is worshipped by us. Even He is
what we adore in all those rites that we
perform in honor of the gods and the de-
parted manes, co


SHANTI


41, Thete-is no higher god, or Pitri
than He, O twice-born one! He should be
known as our Soul, It is Him that we
adore.


33. ‘This course of duties followed by
men has, O twice-born one, been laid down
by Him. It is His ordinance that we should
duly perform ail the rites laid down re-
garding the gods and the departed manes.


34—36. Brahman, Sthanu, Manu;
Daksha, Bhrigu, Dharma, Yama, Marichi,
Angiras, Atri, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu,
Vashishtha, Parameshthi, Vivaswat, Shoma,
Karddama, Kroda, Avak, and Krita,—
these twenty-one persons called Patriarchs,
were first born. Al! of them obeyed the
eternal law of the Supreme God.


37. Observing all the rites, in full, that
were laid down in honor of the gods and
the departed manes, all those foremost of
twice-born ones acquired all those objects
which they sought.


38. The bodiless dwellers of Heaven,
itself bow to that Supreme God and through
His favour they acquire those fruits and
that end which He ordains for them..


39: This is the injunction of the scrip-
tures that those persons who are freed from
these {seventeen attributes, who have re-
nounced all facts, and who are divested of
the fifteen elements which form the gross
body, are said to be Liberated.


40. The. ultimate end of the Liberated
is called by the name of Kshetrajna. He
is considered as both possessed of, and
freed from, all the attributes.


41. He can be apprehended by Know-
ledge alone. We two have originated from
_ Him. Knowing him in that way, , we


worship that eterna] Soul of all things.


42. The Vedas and all the modes of
life, though marked by diversities of
opinion, all adore Him with devotion. ht
is He who, inclined to show favour, con-
fers on them high ends fraught with happi-
ness. .


43. Those persons in this world who,
filed with His spirit, become fully and
conclusively devoted to Him, acquire much
higher end, for they succeed in entering
Him and becoming merged in his Self.


44. I have now, O Narada, described
to you what is highly mysterious, moved by
the{love I bear for you four devotion to me.
Indeed, on account of that devotion which
you profess towards me, you have succeed-
ed in listening to this my discourse.”


————


PARVA. 535


CHAPTER CCCXXXVI.


(MOKSHADHRAMA PARVA).—
Continued.


Bhishma said :—


1. “Addressed by Narayana, that fores
most of beings, in these words, Narada,
the foremost of men, then said these words
to Narayana for the behoof of the world.


Narada said :—

2. Let that object be fulfilled for which
you, O Self-born Being, have taken birth
in four forms in the house of Dharma! I
shalt now go for seeing your original
nature,


3. 1 always adore my elders. I have
never given out the secrets of others. O
lord of the universe, I have studied the
Vedas carefully. I have practised austere .
penances. 1 have never spoken a false
hood,


4. As laid down in the scriptures, 1!
have always protected the four that should:
be protected. I always treat impartially
friends and enemies. Wholly and surely .
given to Him, that first of gods, vis., the:
Supreme Soul, } incessantly worship Him. .


5—6. Having purified my soul by these '
specially meritorious acts, why shall 1 not
succeed in seeing that Infinite Lord of the -
universe 7—Hearing these words of Para~
meshthi’s son, Narayana, that protector
of the scriptures, said to him, saying,—Go, .
O Narada !-«Before sending him away,
however, the great god adored the celestial |
Rishi with those rites and ceremonies which
have been laid down in the scriptures by
himself. Narada also duly honored the
ancient Rishi Narayana. After such honors
had been exchanged, the son of Paras
meshthi left that spot. .


7. Endued with high Yoga-power, ;
Narada suddenly soared into the sky and
eached the summit of the mountains of,
Meru. Proceeding to a secluded spot on that
summit, the great ascetic took rest fora
short time.


8. He then cast his eyes towards the
north-western direction and saw an exs.
ceedingly wonderful spectacle. ‘Cowards
the north, in the ocean of Milk, there isa
large island named the White Island.


9. The learned say that its distance
from the mountains of Meru is greater
than thirty-two’ thousand Yojanas. The
inhabitants of that realm have no senses.
They live without food. Their eyes are
winkless. They always send forth excellent
perfumes,


$30


10. Their complexions aré white, They
are purged off of all sins. They blast the eyes
of these’ sinners ‘that look atthem. Their
bones and hodies are as hacd as adamant.
They consider honor and dishonor equally.
They all look as if they are of divine
origin. All of them are endued with aus-
picious marks and great strength.


tt, Their heads seem to be like um-
brellas, ‘Their voices are deep like that of
the clouds. Each of them-have four testes.
The soles of theic feet have hundreds of
lines. They had sixty white teeth; and
eight small ones, ‘They. had many tongues.
With those tongues they seemed to lick the


very Sun whose face is turned towards all


sides.


12, Indeed, they seemed to be capable
of devouring that great god from whom
has origninated the entire universe, the
Vedas, the duties. and the ascetics possess-
ing the quality of tranquillity.”
Yudhisthira said =
13. “O grand-father, you have said that
thasé beings have. ne-senses, that they do
not eat anything for maintaining. their
lives; that their eyes are winkless ; and
that they always emit excellent perfumes.
1 ask, how were they born? What also is
the superior end which they acquire?


¥4. O chief of Bharata’s race, are the
characteristics of those men that become
liberated the same as those by which the
inhabitants of the White Island are dis-
tinguished ? :


15. Do you remove my doubts! The
curiosity I feel is very great, You are the
repositoty of all histories and narratives.
Asjregards ourselves, we entirely depend on
you for knowledge and instruction.”


Bhishma said :—

16. ‘This narrative, O king, which ft
have heard from ‘my father, is extensive,
I shall now recite it to you. Indeed, it is
considered as the cream of all narratives.


“17. There was, in days of yore, a king
on Earth, Uparichara, by name. He was
known to be the friend, of Indra the king of
gods. He was devoted ta Narayana called
also by the name of Hari.


18. He used to discharge all the duties
laid down in the scriptures. Ever devoted
to his father, was always ready for action.
He acquired sovereignty of the world on
account of a boon he had obtained from
Narayana.


19. Following the Satiwata ritual that
had been declated in days of yore by the
Sun Limself, kind Uparichara used-to adore


MAHABHARATA,


the God of gods, and after his worship wag
over, to adore the Grandfather of the
universe.


go. After adoring the departed manes,
he adored the Brahmanas. He then divided
the offerings among those who depended
on him. With the remnant after serving
those, the king satisfied his [own hunger.
Given to truth, the king abstained from
doing any injury to any creature.


2t. With his entire soul, the king was
devoted to that God of gods, vis., Janard<
dana, who is without beginning and middle
and end, who is the Creator of the universe,
aud who is without decay of any sort.


22. Seeing the devotion to Narayana
of that destroyer of foes, the divine king
of -the- gods himself shared with him his
Own seat and bed.


23. His kingdom and riches and wives
and animals were all considered by him as
obtained from Narayana. He, therefore,
offered all his belongings to- that great
god. .


24. Adopting the Sattwatta ritual, king
Uparichara, with concentrated soul, ased
to perform all his sacrificial-acts and obser-
vances, both optional and obligatory.


25. Many foremost’ Brahmanas, well
conversant with the Pancharatca ritual,
used to eat before all others the food offer-
edto the god Narayana im the palace of
that illustrious king, * . -


26. As tong as that destroyer of enemies
continued to rule his kingdom ptously, no
falsehood ever escaped his lips and no
evil thought ever entered his mind.

27-30. With his limbs he tever per
petrated even the slightest crimg. The
seven celebrated Rishis, vig., Marichi, Atri,
Angiras, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, and
Vashishtha, who passed by the name of
Chitra-shikhandins, uniting together on the
breast of that foremost of mountains, v7z.,
Meru, promulgated an excellent work on”
duties and observances which were con-
sistent with the four Vedas. The contents
of that work were uttered by seven mouths,
and formed the best compendium of human
duties and observances. Known, as already
stated, by the name of Chitra-Sikhandins,
those seven Rishis form the seven elements,
and the Self-born Manu, whois the‘eighth
in the number, formed’ original Nature.
These eight keep up the universe, and
it was these eight who “promulgated the
treatise referred to.


13. With their senses and minds under
complete subjugation and ever given to
Yoga, these eight ascetics, with concentra-
ted souls, fully know the Past, the Present


SHANTI PARVA,


andthe Future, and are devoted to the
Religion of ‘Truth.


32. This is good,—This is Brahma,—
This is highly beneficial.—reflecting thus
in their minds, those Rishis created the
worlds, and the science of morality and
duty that governs those worlds.


33. In that work the authors discoursed
von Religion and Profit and Pleasure, and
subsequently on Liberation also. The vari-
ous restrictions and limitations were also
jaid down in it for the Earth as also for
Heaven.


34. They wrote that work after having
adored with penances the powerful and
illustrious Narayana called also Hari, for
a thousand divine years, in company with
many other Risbis.


35. Pleased with their penances and
adoration, Narayana ordered the goddess
of speech, vis., Saraswati, to enter into
the bodies of those Rishis. The goddess,
for the behoof of the worlds, did what she
was ordered.


36. On account of the entrance of the
goddess of speech into their bodies, those
Rishis, well conversant with penances,
succeeded in composing that foremost of
works in respect of words, sense and
reason.


37. Having composed that work sancti-
fied with the syllable Om, the Rishis first
‘of all read it to Narayana, who heard-them
from kindness. :


38-39. The illustrious and bodiless Nara-
yana became highly pleased with what he
heard. That foremost of all Beings then
addressed those Rishis in an incorporeal
voice and said,—Excellent is this work
that you have composed containing a hun-
dred thousand verses. The duties and
observances of all the worlds will originate
from this your work.


40. Perfectly following the four Vedas,
wrg., the Yajushes, the Richs, the Samans,
and the Atharvans of Angiras, this work
ef yours will be an authority in all the
worlds with regard to both Work and Re-
nunciation.


41. According to the authority of the
scriptures I have created Brahman from the
attcibute of Grace, Rudea from my Anger,
and yourselves, ye Brahmanas, as repre-
senting the elements,


42—44. The Sun, and the Moon, Wind,
and Earth, and Water and Fire, all the
stars and planets ard constellations, all
else that is called by the name of creatures,
and utterers of Brahma, all live and act
in their respective spheres and are all res-
pected as authorities. This work which


68


537


you have composed shail be regarded by
all persons, as a work of the highest authou
tity, Thisis my order. Guided by this
treatise, the Self-create Manu .simself will
declare to the world its duties and obsere
vances. .


45. When Ushanas and Vrihaspati will
be born, they also will promulgate theit
tespective work on morality and religion,
euced by and quoting from this your
work,


46—47. After the publication of his
work by the Self-born Manu and of that
by Ushanas, and after the publication of
the work also by Vrihaspati, this science
composed by you will be acquired by king
Vasu. Indeed, ye foremost of twice-born
ones,that king will acquire this knowledge
of this work from Vrihaspati.


48. Filled with all good thoughts, that
king will become deeply devoted to me.
Guided by this work, he will perform all his
religious deeds and observance.


49. Verily, this work composed by you
wili be the foremost of all works on morality
and religion. Excellent as it is, this work
is full of instructions for acquiring both
Riches and Religiqus merit, and is full of
mysteries,


50. For the publication of this treatise,
you will be progenitors of an extensive
family! King Uparichara also will become
endued with greatness and prosperity.


51. Upon the death, however, of that
king, this eternal work will disappear from
the world. I tell you all this,


52. Having said these words to all those
Rishis, the invisible Narayana left them
and_went to some place that was not known
to them. ©


53. Then those progenitors of the world,
those Rishis who conferred their thoughts
on the worldy ends, duly promulgated that
work which is the eternal origin of all
duties and observances,


54. Subsequently, when Vrihaspati was
born in Angiras’s family in the golden age,
those seven Rishis charged him with the
task of promulgating their work which was
consistent with the Upanishads and the
several branches of the Vedas.


55. They themselves who were upholders
of the universe and the first promulgators
of duties and religious observances, then
went to the place they chose, determined to
practise penances,”


538


CHAPTER CCCXXXVIL.


(MOKHARDHARMA§ PARVA).—
Continued.


Bhishma said :—

1, “Then, upon the expiration of the
great cycle, when the celestial priest
Vribaspati was born in the family of Angi-
ras, all the gods became very happy.


-2, The words Vrihat, Brahma, and
_ Mahat all carry the same significance. The
celestial priest, O king, came to be called
“ Vrihaspati because he was gifted with all
these accomplishments.


3. King Uparichara, otherwise called
Vasu, became a disciple of Vrihaspati and
soon became the greatest of his disciples.
Admitted as such, he began to: study from
his, preceptor that science which was com-
posed by the seven Rishis who were known
by the name of Chitrashikhandins.


4. With soul purified by sacrifices and
other religious rites, he governed the Earth
like Indra ruling the Heaven.


5 The illustrious king celebrated a
reat Horse-sacrifice in which his preceptor
tihaspati became the priest offering
libation.


» 6—g. The sons of prajapati themselves,
vis., Ekata, Dwita, and ‘I'rita: became the
priests watching the proceedings. There
were others also who became Sadasyas in
that ‘sacrifice, is., Dhanusha, Raivya,
Arvavasu, Paravasu, the Rishi Medhatithi,
the great Rishi Tandya, the blessed Rishi
Shanti, Vedashiras the foremost of Rishis,
vis., Kapila, who was the father of Shali-
‘hotra, the first Kalpa, Tittirj the elder
brother of Vaishampayana, Kanwa, and
Devahotra, forming in ail sixteen.


to. In that great sacrifice, O king, all
the necessary articles were collected. No
animals were killed in it. The king had
ordained it so. .


11. He was full of merey. Of pure and
liberal mind, he had renounced all
desire, and was well-conversant with all
tites. The necessary articles of that sacri-
fice were the productions of the forest.


t2, The ancient God of gods (viz.,
Hari), became highly pleased with the king
‘on account of that sacrifice. Incapable of
being seen by any one else, the great God
appeared before his worshipper.


13. Accepting by taking its seent, the
share offered to him he himself took up
the Purodasha (clarified butter with cakes
of powdered barley). The great God took


MAHABHARATA.


up the offerings without being seen by
anyone. —

14. At this, Vrihaspati became angry.
Taking up the ladle he hurled it violently
at the sky, and began to shed tears in
anger.


15. Addressing king Uparichara he
said,— Here, £ place this as Narayana’s
share of the sacrificial offerings! Forsooth,
he shall take it before my eyes.”


Yudhishthira said :—


16. “In the great sacrifice of Uparichara,
all the gods appeared in their respective
forms for partaking of the sacrificial offer
ings and were seen by all, Why is it that
the powerful Hari only acted otherwise
by invisibly taking his share ?


Bhishma said :—

17. ‘When Vrihaspati yielded to anger,
the great king Vasu and all his Sadasyas
sought to pacify the great Rishi.


18. With cool heads, all of them said to
Vrihaspati,-—You should not yield to anger.
‘In this golden age, this anger to whiclr
you have yielded should not be the charae-
teristic of any one.


19. The great god for whom the share
of the sacrificial offerings was designed by
you, is himself free from anger! He is
incapable of being seen either by ourselves
er by you, O Vrihaspati.


20. Only he can see Him to whom He
becomes gracious !—Then the Rishis Ekata,
Dwita, and Trita, who were all coversant
with the science of morality and duties
compiled by the seven Rishis, addressed
that assembly and began the following
narration.


21. Wearethe sons of Brahman, be-
gotten by his will, Once on a time we
went to the north for the acquisition of our
highest good. *


22. Having practised penanees for thou-
sands of years and acquired a great ascetic
merit, we again stood on only one foot like
fixed rods of wood. ;


23. The country where we practised
these austerest of penances, lies to the
north of the mountains of Meru and on the
shores of the ocean of milk. -


24. The object we had in mind was how
to see the divine Narayana in his own
form. Upon the termination of our penances
and after we had performed the final ably-
tions, we heard an incorporeal voice, O
powerful Vrihaspati, deep like that of the
clouds and exceedingly melodious and
filling the heart with joy.


“SHANTI PARVA.


The voice said :—


25. Ye Brahmanas, you have performed
well these penances with cheerful souls!
Devoted to Narayana, you try to know
how you may succeed in seeing that god of
great power. E


26. On the northern shores of the ocean
of milk there is an island called White
Island. The men that dwelt in that island
have complexions as white as the rays
of the Moon and that are devoted to
Narayana.


27. Worshippers of that foremost of all
Beings, they are devoted to Him with their
whole minds. They. all enter that eternal
and illustrious god of a thousand rays.


28. They are shorn of senses. They do
not live on any sort of food. Their eyes
are winkless. Their bodies always emit a
sweet smell. Indeed, the inhabitants of
White Island believe and adore only one
God. Go there, ye ascetics, for there I have
revealed myself,


29. All of us, hearing these invisible
words, proceeded by the way said to the
country described.


30. Eagecly desirous of seenig Him
and our hearts full of Him, we reached
that large island called White Island.
Arrived there, we could see nothing.
Indeed our vision was blinded :by the
energy of the great god and accordingly
we could not see Him. :


3t. At this, the idea, due to the grace
of the great God Himself, sprung in our
minds that one who had not practised
sufficient penances could not soon see
Narayana.


32. Under-the influence of this idea we
Once more began to practise some severe
austerities, suited to the time and place,
fora hundred years. Upon the termina-
tion of our vows, we saw a number of men
of auspicious marks.


33. All of them were white and looked


like the Moon and were endued with every”


sort of bJessedness. ‘heir hands were al-
ways joined in prayer. The faces of some
were turned towards the North and of some
to the East, They were engaged in silently
‘meditating on Brahma.


34. The recitation performed by those
great persons was a mental Yapa. On
account of their hearts, haying been entire-
ly fixed upon Him, Hari became highly
gratified with them. ,


35. The effulgence that came out of the
persons of those men resembled, O fore-
most of ascetics, the splendours which the


539


sun assumes when the time comes for the
dissolution of the universe.


36. Indeed, we thought that that Island
was the seat of all Energy. Alt the
denizens were perfectly equal in energy.
There was no supetiority or inferiority there
among them.


37. We then suddenly saw once more a
light arise that seemed to be the concen-
trated effulgence of a thousand Soas, O
Vrihaspati.


38. The denizens in a body, ran towards
that light, with hands joined in reverential
attitude, full of joy, and uttering the one
word Salutation.


39. We then heard a very foud noise
uttered by all of them together. It
appeared that these men were engaged in
offering a sacrifice to the great God,


40. As regards ourselves, we were
sudddenly deprived of our senses by his
Energy. Shorn of vision and strength and ..
all the senses, we could not behold or feel.
anything. ; : ‘

41. We only heard a loud sound uttered
by the collected denizens. It said,—Victory
to you, O you having eyes like lotus- petals !
Salutation to you, O Creator of the uni-
verse. ;


42. . Salutation to you, O Hrishikesha, O
foremost of Beings, O}First-born ! This was
the sound we heard, uttered. distinctly and
in accerdance with the ryles of orthoepy.


43. Meanwhile, a fragrant and pure
breeze blew, carrying perfumes. of celestial
flowérs, and of certain herbs and plants
that were necessary on the occasion,


44. Those men, gifted with great devo-
tion, having hearts full of reverence, con+
versant with the ordinances laid down in
the Pancharatra, were then adoring. the,
great god with mind, word, and deed. :


45, Forsooth, Hari appeared in that
place whence the sound we heard origina-
tde. As regards ourselves, stupefied by His
illusion, we could not behold tis. .


46. After the breeze had cessed and the
sacrifice had been over, our hearts became
suuicken with anxiety, O foremost one of
Angiras’s race,


47. As we stood among those. thousands
of men all of whom were of pure birth, no
one honored us with a glance or a nod.


48. Those ‘ascetics, all-of whom were
cheerful and filled with devotion and who
were all practising the Brahma-frame of
mind, showed no feeling for us.


49. We had been greatly tired. Our
penances had emaciated us, At that time,


540


a bodilegs Being addressed us from the
sky and said to us these words :—


50. These white men, who are divested
of all external senses, are competent to see
(Narayana). Only those foremost of twice-
born persons whom these white{men honors
ed with their looks, can see the great God.


52. Go;hence, ye Munis, to the place
from where you have come! That great
Deity is* incapable of being ever seen
by one who has no devotion.


53. incapable of being seen on account
of his dazzling effulgence, that illustrious
Deity can bejseen only by,those persons who
succeed, in course of long time, in devoting
themselves wholly and solely to Him. O
foremost of twice-born ones, you-have a
great duty to perform.


54. After the expiration of: this the
golden age, when the Treta age comes in
course of the Vivaswat cycle, a great cala-
mity will befall the worlds. You Munis,
you shall then have to help the gods.


55. Having heard this wonderful words
that were sweet as nectar, we soon returned
to the place we desired, through the favour
of that great Deity.


56. When with the help of even such
austere penances and of offerings devoutly
given in sacrifices, we could not see the
great Deity, how, indeed, can you expect
to see Him so easily ?


57. Narayana is a Great Being. He
is the Creator of the universe. He is wor-
shipped in sacrifices with offerings of clari-
fied butter and other food dedicated with
the help of Vedic Mantras. He has no
beginning and noend. He is Unmanifest.
Both the gods and the Danavase adore
Him.

58. Induced by these words spoken by
Ekata and approved by his companions,
wvis., Dwita and Trita, and solicited also
by the other Sadasyas, the great Vrihas-
pati {terminated that sacrifice after duly
offering ,the accustomed adorations to the


gods,


59. Having completed his great sacri-
fice, king Uparichara, also, began to rule
his subjects piously.
his body, he ascended to heaven. After
sometime, through the curse of the Brah-
manas, he dropped down from those happy
regions and sank deep into the bowels of
the Earth,


60. King Vasu, O foremost of kings,
was always devoted to the true religion.
Although sunk deep into the bowels of the
Earth, his devotion to virtue did not de-
@rease.


At last, renouncing:


MAHABHARATA.


Or. Ever devoted to Narayana, and
ever reciting sacred Mantras having Nara-
yana for their god, he once more ascended
to heaven through Narayana’s favour.


62. Getting up from the bowels of the
Earth, king Vasu, on account of the very
highest end that he attained, proceeded
toa spot which is even higher than the
region of Bratman himse.f,””


CHAPTER CCCXXXVIIL


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


x. ‘When the great king Vasu was s¢
wholly devoted to Narayana, why then did
he drop down. from heaven and why again
had he to sink beneath the .surface of
Earth ?”


Bhishma said :—~

2. ‘Regarding it is cited an old dis-
course, O Bkarata, between the Rishis and
the gods.


3. Once on atime, addressing many
foremost of Brahmanas the gods said ta
them that sacrifices should be performed .
by offering up Ajas as victims. The word
Aja means the goat and no other animal,


The Rishis said :—

4. The Veda declares that in sacrifices
the offerings should consist of seeds, Seeds
are called Ajas. You should not kilt
goats.


5. O gods, that cannot be the religion
of good and pious people in which the
destruction of animals is sanctioned. This,
again, is the golden age. How can animals
be killed in this epoch of righteousness ?


Bhishma said :— -


6. While this conversation was going.
on between the Rishis and the gods, that
foremost of kings, vis., Vasu, was seentto
come that way. Gifted with great prog-
perity, the king was coming through the
sky, accompanied by his troops and vehicles
and animals. .


7. Seeing king Vasu coming there
through the skies, the Brahmanas address-
ing the gods, said,—This one will dispell
our doubts.


8. He celebrates sacrifices. He is
liberal in making gifts. He always seeks
the well-being of all creatures. How,


indeed, will the great Vasu speak other-
wise, “


SHANT! PARYA.


g- Having thus spoken each other, the
gods and the Rishis quickly approached
king Vasu and asked him, saying,—O


king, with what should one celebrate
sacrifices ? :
10. Should one sacrifice with the goat


or with herbs and plants? Do you remove
this doubt of ours! We select you as our
judge in this matter.


11. Thus accosted by them, Vasu joined
his hands in humility and said to them,—
Teil me truly, ye foremost of Brahmanas,
what opinion is held by you individually in
this matter ?


The Rishis said :—

12. The opinion held by us, O king,
is that sacrifices should be celebrated with
grain! he gods, however, hold that
sacrifices should be celebrated with animals.
Do you judge between us and tell us which
of these opinions is correct. .


Bhishma said :—


13. Learning the opinion of the gods,
Vasu, moved by partiality for them, said
that sacrifices should be celebrated with
animals,


14—15. At this answer, all the Rishis,
effulgent like the Sun, became very angry.
Addressing Vasu who was seated on his car
and who had supported the deities, they
said to him,—Since you have unfairly sided
with the gods, do you fall down from
heaven! From this day, O king, you shall
lose the power of passing through the sky !
Through four curse, you shall sink deep
below the surface of the Earth.


16. After the Rishis had said these
words, king Uparichara immediately drop-
ped down, O king, and went down a hole
in the Earth. At the command, however,
he Narayana, Vasu’s memory did not leave

im,

17. To the good fortune of Vasu, the
gods, pained at the curse imprecated on-
him by the Brahmanas, began to think
anxiously as to how that curse might be
removed.


They said :—

18. This great king has been cursed for
our sake. We, dwellers of heaven, should
unite together for doing what is good to
him in return for what he has done to us.


19—20. Having speedily determined this
in their minds with the help of reflection,
the gods went where king Uparichara was.
Arrived before him,, they addressed him,
saying,~~You are devoted to the great God
of the Brahmanas (vz., Narayana)! That


543


great Lord of both the gods and the
Asuras, pleased with you, will save you
from the curse that has been imprecated
upon you.

2r. It is proper, however, that the great
Brahmanas should be honored. Verily,
O best of kings, their penances should
bear fruits,


22. Indeed, you have already fallen
down from the sky on the Eartht We
wish, however, O best of kings, to show
you a favor.


23. As long as you, O sinless one, will
live in this hole, so long you will receive
(due sustenance). ;


24. You will get those streaks of clari-
fied butter which Brahmanas with concen-
trated minds pour in sacrifices along with
sacred Mantras, and which are called by
the name of Vasudhara ! Indeed, weakness.
or distress shall not affect you,

25. While living, O king of kings, in
the hole of the Earth, neither hunger nor
thirst shall assail you for you’ will drink
those streaks of clarified butter called
Vasudhara, Your energy also shall con
tinue unabated. By virtue of this our boon
that we grant you, the God of gods, v#s.,
Narayana, will be pleased with you, and
He will take you -hence to the region of
Brahman.


26. Having eranted these boons to the
king, the dwellers of heaven, as also all
those Rishis having penances ,for wealth,
returned each to his respective place.


27. Then Vasu, OjBharata, began to
worship the Creator of the universe and to
recite silently those sacred Mantras that
had come out of Narayana’s mouth in days
of yore. as


28. Although living in a pit of the
Earth, the king still adored Hari, the Lord
of all the gods in the well-known five~
Sacrifices that are ‘celebrating five times
every day, O destroyer of enemies.


29. On account of these adorations of
his, Narayana, otherwise called Hari, be-
came highly gratified with him who thus
showed himself to be entirely devoted to
Him. who entirely depended upon Him as
his sole cefuge, aud .who had completely
mastered his senses.


30. The illustrious Vishnu, that giver of
boons, then addressed the fleet Garuda,
that foremost of birds, who waited upon’
Him as his servant, and said these desirable
words.


3t. O foremost of birds, O you who
are highly blessed, listen to what I say!
There is a great king named Vasu who is


542


of zighteous seul and rigid vows! Through
the anger of the Brahmanas, he has drop-
ped into a pit of the Earth.


32. The Beahmanas have been suffi-
ciently honored. Do you go to that king
now,


33. At my behest, O Garuda, go to that
foremost of kings, wiz., Uparichara, who
is now living in a hole of the Earth and
incapable of any longer passing through
the sky, and bring him up forthwith into
the sky. ,


34. Hearing these words of Vishnu,
Garuda, spreading his wings and going
with the speed of the wind, entered that
pit in the Earth in which king Vasu was
residing. -
- 35. AW ona sudden taking the king up,
the son of Vinata soared into the sky and
there released the king from his beaks.


36. ~At that moment, king Uparichara
once more acquired his divine form .and re-
entered the region of Brahman.


37. It was in this way, O son of Kunti,
that that great king first dropped down
through the curse of the Beahmanas for a
faulty speech, atid once more got up to
heaven at the behest of the great God
(Vishnu).

38. Only the powerful Lord Hari, that
foremost of all Beings, was devoutly
adored by him. It -was for this devout
worship that the-king succeeded very soon
in freeing himself from the curse impre-
cated upon him by the Brahmanas and in
regaining the blessed regions of Brahman.


Bhishma said ;—
39. 1 have thus told you everything
regarding the origin of the spiritual sons
of :Brahman. Listen to me _with rapt
attention, for I shail mow describe to you
how the celestial Rishi Narada had pro-
ceeded in days of yore to White Island.”


CHAPTER CCCXXXIX.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continuéd.


Bhishma said :—

- 14. ‘Arrived at: the spacious kingdom
called White Island, the illustrious Rishi
saw those same white men effulgent like the
sun.


2. Adored by them, the Rishi wor-
shipped them inreturn by bending his
head and respecting them in bis mind.


MAHABHARATA.


Desirous of seeing Narayana, he began to
live there, attentively engaged in the silent
recitation of Mantras sacred to him, and
practising the most difficult vows.


3. With rapt mind, the twice-born Rishi,
with arms upraised, stood in Yoga, and
then sang the following hymn to the Lerd
of the universe, Him, vtz., who is at once
the soul of attributes and divested of all
attributes.


Narada said :—


4. ‘Salutation to you, O God of gods,
O you that are freed from all acts] You
are he who is divested of all attributes,
who isthe Witness of all the worlds, who
is called Soul, who is the foremost of all
Beings, who is Infinite, who is called
Purusha, who .is the great Purusha, who
is the foremost of all Purushas, who is
the soul of the three attributes, who
is called the Foremost, who is Amrita
(nectar), who is called Immortal, who is
called Ananta (Sesha), who is Space, who
is without beginning, who is both Manifest
and Unmanifest as existent and not-exist-
ent things, who is said to have his home in
‘Truth, who is the first of gods (Narayana),
who is the giver of riches, who is at one
with Daksha and other Lords of the Crea-
tion, who is the Ashwatha and other big
trees, who is the four-headed Brahman,
who is the Lord of all- created Beings,
who is the Lord of Speech, who is the
Lord of the universe, who is the all-perva-
ding Soul, who is the Sun, who is the
breath called Prana, whois the King of
the waters, whe is at one with the King,
who is at one with the Regents of the
quarters, who is the refuge of the universe
when it is dissolved in the final destruction,
who is unrevealed, who is the giver of the
Vedas to Brahman, who is at .one with
the sacrifices and Vedic studies acquired
by Brahmanas with the help of their bodies,
who is at one with the four principal orders
of the gods, who is every one of those four
orders, who is endued with ,effulgence, who


‘is endued with great effulgence, who is he


to whom ‘the seven largest: offerings in
sacrifices are presented with the Gayatri
and other sacred Mantras, who is Yama,
who is Chitragupta and the other atten-
dants of Yama, who is called the wife of
Yama, who is that order of the gods called
Tushita, who is that other order called
Maha-Tushita, who is the Death, who is
desire and all diseases that have been
created for helping the advent of Death,
who is health and freedom from disease,
who is subject to desire and passions, wha
is free from desire and passions, who is
Infinite as shawn in species and forms, who
is he who is puf.ished, who is he who is


SHANTI PARVA,


the punisher, who is all the lesser sacrifices,
who is all the larger sacrifices, who is all


the priests, who is the origin of all sacrifices,


who is fire, who is the very heart of all
sacrifices, who is he that is sung in sacri-
fices, who takes those shares of the sacri-
ficial offerings which are presented to him,
who is the embodiment of the five sacrifices,
wha is the maker of the five divisions of
time, who is incapable of being understood
except by those scriptures which are talled
Pancharatra, who never shrinks from any-
thing, who is undefeated, who is only Mind,
who is known only by name, who is the
Lord of Brahman himself, who has finished
all the vows and observances mentioned in
the Vedas, who is the swan, who is the
great swan, who is the foremost of swans,
who is the foremost of all sacrifices, who is
Sankhya-yoga, who is the embodiment
of the Sankhya philosophy, who lives in
all Individual Souls, who lives in every
heart, who lives in every sense, who
floats on the ocean-water, who lives in
the Yedas, who lies on the lotus, who is
the Lord of the universe, and whose
troops go on all sides for protecting
his worshippers! You take birth as all
creatures! You are the origin of the
‘universe! Your mouth is fire! You are
that fire which passes through the waters
of the ocean, coming out all the while from
an Equine head! You are the sancti-
fied butter which is poured into the sactri-
ficial fire! You are the car-driver! You
Vashat! You are the syllable Om! You
are Penances! You are Mind! You are
the Moon! You purify the sacrificial
butter! You are the Sun! You are the
Elephants which are stationed in the four
cardinal points! You light up the cardinal
points of the compass. You light up the
subsidiary points also! You are the Equine
head! You are the first three Mantras
of the Rig Veda! You are the protector
of all the castes! You are the five fires!
You are He who has thrice lighted the
‘sacrificial fire called Nachi! You are the
refuge of the Vedas, having six limbs!
You are the foremost of those Brahmanas
who are engaged in singing the Samans
in sacrifices and other religious rites. You
are Pragjyotish, and you are he who
sings the first Saman! You are the ob-
server of those vows which depend upon
-the Vedas and which are observed by
singers of Samans. You,are the embodi-
ment of the-Upanishad called by the name
‘ef Atharvashiras. You are he who is the
subject-matter of the five foremost of scrip-
tures! You are called the preceptor who
subsists only onthe froth of water. You
are a Valikhilya. You are the embodi-
ment of him who has‘not deviated from
Yoga, You are the embodiment of cor-


544


{ rectness of judgment or reasoning. You
are the beginning of the cycles, you are
the middle of the cycles, and you. are their
end! You are Akhandala. You are the two
Rishis Prachina-garbha and Kaushika {
You are Purusthuta, you are -Puruliuta,
you are the designer of the universe. You
have the universe for your form. Infinite
are your motions. our bodies are in-
finite! You are without end and without
beginning, and without middle. .Your
middle is unmanifest. Your end is un
manifest. You have vows for your resi-«
dence, You live inthe ocean. You have
your home in Fame, in Penances, in Self-
control, in Prosperity, in Knowledge, in
grand feats, and in Everything belonging
to the universe! You are Vasudeva. te
are!the grantor of every wish. You are the
monkey that carried Rama on _ his should-
ers. You are the great Horse-sacrifice,
You partake of offerings made in great
sacrifices! Youare the grantor of boons,
of happiness, of wealth. ‘You are devoted
to Hari! You are Restraint of the senses.
You are ‘vows and observances. You are
mortifications, you are severe mortifica-
tions, you are very severe mortifications,
You are he who practises vows and reli-
gious and other pious rites. You are freed
from all mistakes. You ate a Brahma-
charin. You took birth in the womb of
Prishni. You are he from whom have
originated all Vedic rites and acts. You
are unborn, You pervade all things. Your
eyes are on all things. You must not be
apprehended by the senses. You are not
subject to decay. You are endued with
great power. Your body is inconceivably
vast. You are holy, you are very holy.
You are golden. You are vast. You are
beyond the range of logic or argument.
You are unknowable. You are the fore-
most of Causes. You are the Creator
of all creatures and you are their des-
treyer. You are the possessor of great
powers of illusion. You are called
Chittrashikhandin. Wou are the givet of
boons. You partake of the sacrificial offer-
ings. You have acquired the merit of all
sacrifices,‘ You are he who has been freed
from ail doubts. You are omnipresent.
You are of the form of a Brahmana. You
are fond of Brahmanas. You have the
universe for your form. Your form is very
huge. You are the greatest friend, ou
kind to all your worshippers. You are the
great god of the Brahmanas. I am your
devoted disciple. I am desirous of seeing
you. Salutations to you who are of the
form of. Liberation.”


544
CHAPTER CCCXL.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA),~
Continued,


Bhishma said :-—

1. “Thus sung with names that were
not known to others, the Divine Narayana
having the universe for his form appeared
before the ascetic Narada.


2. His form was somewhat purer than
the moon and differed from the moon in
some'particulars. He somewhat resembled
a burning fire in complexion. The powerful
Lord was somewhat of the form of Vishti. «


3. He looked in some respects like the
feathers of the parrot, and in some a collec-
tion ofpure crystal. He resembled in some
respects a hill of antimony and in somea
mass of pure gold.


4. His complexion somewhat resembled
the coral when ficst formed, and was some-
what white. That complexion resembled
in some respects the color of gold and in
some that of the lapis dazuius.


5- It resembled in some respects the
color of the blue lapis lasulus and in some
that of sapphire. [It resembled in some
Ls page the color of the peacock’s neck,
and in some that of a string of pearls.


6. Bearing these various sorts of hues
on his body the eternal Deity appeared
before Narada. He had a thousand eyes
and was endued with great beauty. He
had a hundred heads and a hundred feet.


7. He had a thousand stomachs and
a thousand arms. He seemed to be still
inconceivable to the mind. With one of
his mouths he uttered the syllable Om and
then the Gayatri following Om.


8. With mind under complete mastery,
the great God, called by the names ol
Hari and Narayana, by his other mouths,
many in number, uttered many Mantras
from the four Vedas which are known by
the name of Aranyaka,


9. The Lord of all the gods, the great
God who is worshippes in sacrifices, beld
in his hands a sacrificial altar,a Kaman-
dalu, a few white gems, a pair of shoes,
a bundle of Kusha blades, a deer-skin, a
tooth-stick, and a little burning fire.


10. With acheerful heart, that foremost
of twice-born one, wzz., Narada, controlling
speech, bowed tothe great God and wor-
shipped Him.


ir. The first of all the gods, who is
free from decay, said the following words
to him whose head was still bent low in
veneration,


MAHABHARATA.


The Holy One said :-—


12..:The great :Rishis, Ekata, Dwita,
and Trita, came to this country from desire
of seeing me.


13. Their wishes, however, were not ful-
filled. Excepting those who are devoted to
with wholly andjsolely, no else can see me.
As regards you, you are verily the foremost
of au persons devoted to me with all their
souls.


14. These are my bodies, the best ones
that I assume. These were born, O
twice-born one, in the house of Dharma.
Do you worship them always, and do you
perform those rites that areglaid down in the
ordinances in connexion with thet worship.


15. O Brahmana, do you ask of me
the boons you wish! I am pleased with
you to-day, and 1 appear to you now in my
universal form as freed from decay and
deterioration |


Narada said :—


16. Since, O holy one, I have to-day
succceeded in seeing you, I think that
I have acquired forthwith the fruits of my
penances, O God, of my self-restraint, and
of all the vows and observances that I have
practised,


17. This, indeed, is the highest boon
you have granted me for you have appeared
before me to-day, O Eternal Lord! You,
O holy one, have the universe for your eye |
You are the Lion. Your form is identifi-
able with everything! Possessed of power
you, O Lord, are vast and infinite.


Bhishma said :-—


18. Having thus appeared before Narada
the son of Parameshthi, the great God
addressed that ascetic and said,—Go hence,
O Narada, and do not delay!


19. These worshippers of mine, having
nroon-like complexions, are divested of all
senses and do not live upon any kind of
food. They are, again, all Liberated t
With minds wholly concentrated upon me,
people should think of me. Such wor-
shippers will never meet with any ob-
stacles,


20. These men have all acquired ascetic
success and are highly blessed. In days
of yore they became entirely devoted to me.
They have been freed from the qualities
of Darkness and Ignorance. Forsooth,
they are competent to enter me and be-
come merged into my Self, : ;


21—25. He who cannot be seen with
the eye, touched with the sense of touch,
smelt with the sense of scent, and who is
beyond the sense of taste, He whom the

€


SHANTI! PARVA.


three qualities of goodness, Darkness, and-


¥gnorance do not touch, who permeates all
things and is the one Wuness of the
universe, and wha is described as the Soul
of the entire universe, and who is described
as the Soul of the entice universe, He who
is not destroyed upon the destruction of
the bodies of all created things, who is
unborn and unchangeable and eternal, who
is freed from all qualities, who is indivisible
and entire, He who is above the twenty-
fouc topics of enquiry and is considered the
‘Twenty-fifth, who is called by the name of
Purusha, who is inactive, and who is said
to be apprehended by Knowledge alone,
He into whom the foremost of twice-born
ones enter and become liberated, He is
the eternal Supreme Soul and is known
by the name of Vasudeva.


26. See, O Narada, the greatness and
power of that God! He is never affected
by good or bad deeds.


27. Swattwa, Rajas, and Tamas, are
said to be the three (original) qualities.
These live and act in the bodies of all
creatures.


28. The {ndidividual Soul, called
Kshetrajna, enjoys and suffers the action
of these three qualities. He, however, is
above them and they cannot touch Him.
Freed from these qualities, He is again
their enjoyer and sufferer. Having created
them Himself, He is above them all.


29. O celestial Rishi, the Earth, which
is the cefuge of the universe, disappears
into water. Water disappears into Fire and
Fire into Wind. :


30. Wind disappears-into Ether, and
Ether into Mind. Mind is a great creature,
and it disappears into Unmanifest Nature.


_3t. Unmanifest Nature, O Brahmana,

disappears into inactive Purusha (Soul).
There is nothing higker than Purusha
(Seoul) which is Eternal.


32. There is nothing among mobile and
immobile things in the universe which is
Immutable, except Vasudeva, the eternal
Purusha,


33-34. Endued with great power, Vasu-
deva is -the Soul of all creatures. Earth,
Wind, Ether, Water,,and Fire forming the
fifth, are primal elements of great power.
Mingling together they form the tbody.
Possessed of subtife prowess and invisible
to all eyes, O Brahmana, the powerful


Vasudeva then enters that combination of *


the five principal elements called body.
Such entrance is called his birth, and
taking birth He makes the, body move
about and act.


69


$48


35. Without a Gombination of the five.
principal elements, no bedy can ever be.
formed.


36. Without, again, the entrance of
individual Soul into the body, the mind .
living within it cannot cause it move and
act. He that enters the weet is possessed
of great power and is called Individual. He
is known also by other names, oiz., Shesha
and Sankarshana.


37- He who takes his rise, from that
Sankarshana, by his own acts, Sanate
kumara, and in whom alt creatures merge
whem the universal dissolution sets in, is
the Mind of all creatures and is called by
the name of Praddyumna.


38. From Him originates He who is
the Creator, and who is both Cause and
Effect. From this last, everything, viz.,
the mobile and immobile universe, origi-
nates. This one is called Aniruddha. He
is otherwise called Ishana and He is mani«
fest in all deeds.


39. That illustrious one, viz., Vasudeva,
who is caited Kshetrajna, (Soul) and who
is freed from qualities, should, O king of
kings, be known as the powerful Sankar-
shana, when He takes birth as (Individual
Soul).

40. From Sankatshana originates Pra
ddyumna who is called ‘‘Mind-begetton.”
From Praddyumna is He whg is Aniruddha. |


He is Consciouness, He is Ishwara
(Supreme Lord). .
4t. It is from me that the entire mobile


and immobite universe originates. It is
from me, O Narada, that the indestructible
and the destructible, the existent and the
nonexistent, originates.


42, They who are devoted to me enter
into me and become liberated. I am known
as Purusha. Without acts, I am the
‘Twenty-fifth, .


43. Getting over qualities, 1 am entire
and indivisible. Iam above all pairs of
opposite and shorn of all attachments.
‘This, O Narada, you will fail to unders
stand. You see meas having a form. If
I wish, i can dissolve this form in a
moment, Iam the Supreme Lord and the
Preceptor of the universe.


44. What you see of me, O Narada, is
merely an illusion of mine. I now appear
to be possessed of -the attributes. of alf
created things. You are not competent to.
know me.


45. 1 have shown to you duly my four-
foid form. 1 am, O Narada, the doer, I
am Cause, and | am Effect.


546


46. I am the sume-total of all. living
creatures. All living creatures have their
refuge in me, Do not think that you have
seen the Individual Soul. -

47. I pervade all'things, O Brahmana,
and am the inner Soul of all creatures.
When the bodies of all creatures, however,
are destroyed, F am not destroyed. :


48. Those highly blessed men who,


having acquired ascetic success, become.


entirely devoted to me, become freed fron

the qualities of both Darkness and Ignor-

ance and succeed, therefore, in entering
me, O great ascetic. ;


e
49. He called Hiranyagarbha, who is
the beginning of the world, who. has four
faces, who cannot be understood with the
hetp of the Nirukta, who is otherwise called
Brahman, who is an eternal god, is engaged
in looking after many of my works,” '


50. The god Rudra, born of my anger,
originated from my forehead. See, the
eleven Rudras are increasing on the, right
side of my. person.


51—52. The twelve Adityas are on the
left. side of my person.
Vasus, those foremost of gods, are in my
front, and see, Nasatya and Dasra, those
two celestial physicians, are in my rear.
See also in my body all the Prajapatis and
see the seven Rishis also.


53., See also the Vedas, alf the Saeri-
fices numbering by hundreds, the Amrita
(nectar), and all the (medicinal) herbs and
plants, and Penances, and vows and obser-
vances of various sorts.


54. See also in me the eight attributes
of power,'vzs., those particularly called the
Lordly powers, living aH together in my
body in their wnited and embodied form.
See also Shree and Lakshmi, and Kirti,
and the Earth with her hump.


55. See the goddess Saraswati, that
mother of the Vedas, living in me! See,
O Narada, Dhruva, that foremost of lumi-
naries ranging in the sky.


56. See also all the Oceans, those re-
ceptacles of water, and lakes, and rivers.
See, also, O best of men, the four foremost


ones amongst the Pitris in their embodied |


forms. See also, Hving in me, the three
qualities (of Sattwa, Rajas, and Tamas)
which are formless. |


57. The acts done in honor of the
departed mane are superior to those done
in honor of the gods. f am thie Pitri of the
both the gods and the Pitris, and am
existing from the beginning.


58. Becoming the Equine-head FE pass


hrough the Western and the Northern


See the eight,


Pp A


MAHABHARATA.


ocean and drink sacrificial libations duly
poured with Mantras and solid sacrificial
food offered with respect and devotion.


59. In ancient times } created Brahman
who himself worshipped me in sacrifices.
Pleased with him on that account I granted
him many excellent boons.


60. said to him thatin the beginning
of the cycle he would be born to me as
my son, and the sovereignty of all the
workds would he enjoy, and various names
will be given to diverse objects on account
of the Ahankara, 7.e., egoism, coming into
existence.


61. I also told him that none would ever
violate the limits and boundaries he would
lay down, and, further that he would be
the giver of boons to persons who would
solicit him for the same.


62. FE further assured him that he would
be an object of worship with a}l the gods
and Asuras, all the Rishis and Pitris, and
the various ereatures forming the creation.


63. 1 also gave him to understand that
I would always appear for performing the
business of the gods and that for that F
would allow myself to be commanded by
him even as a son by his father.


64. Granting these and other highly
agreeable boons to Brahman of great
energy on account of my being propitiated
with him J adopted the course dictated by
Renunciation.


65. The highest Renunciation is the
annihilation of all duties and acts. Hence,
by adopting Renunciation one should.act-
in complete happiness.


66. Learned preceptors, with settled
conclusions deduced from the truths of the
Sankhya philosophy, have spoken of me
as Kapila endued with the power of know-
ledge, Hving within the effulgence of the
Sun, and concentrated in Yoga.


67. Im the Vedas ¥ have been repeas


_tedly hymned as the illustrious Hiranya-


garbha. [fn the Yoga-Shastras, O Brahe


| mana, ¥. have been spoken of as one who


finds pleasure in Yoga.


68. 5 am eternal. Assuming a form
that is manifest, I live at present, in the
sky. Atthe end of a thousand cycles, I


| Shall once more-withdraw the universe into


myself,


69. Having withdrawn. all creatures,
mobile and immobile, into myself, { shall
exist all alone with Knowledge only as. my.
companion. :


7o. After the lapse of ages.I shall again
create the universe, with the help of that '
t &


SHANTI PARVA.


Knowledge. My fourth [form creates the
tu destructible Shesha.


qt. That Shesha is called by the name
of Sankarshara. Sankarshana creates
Praddyumna. From Praddyumna I take
birth myself as Aniruddha. I create (my-
self) repeatedly.

72. From Aniruddha originates Bra-
hman. The latter is born from Aniruddha’s
navel. From Brahman originate all mobile
and immobile creatures. —


73. Know that Creation originates in
this way repeatedly at the beginning of
every cycle. Creation and _ destruction
succeed each other like sunrise and sunset
fa this world.


74~75. Then, again, as Time, gifted
with great energy, forcibly brings back the
Sun after his disappearance, similarly I
shall, assuming the form of a boar and
displaying my strength, bring back the
Earth with her belt of seas to her own
position for the behoof of .all creatures
when she becomes submerged in water.
§ shall then kill the son of Diti, named
Hiranyagarbha, elated with pride of
strength.


76. Assuming the form then of a Man-
lion, I shall, for doing good: to the gods,
kill Hiranyakasipu, the son of Diti, who
will be a great destroyer of sacrifices.


97. Virochana will have a powerful son
named Vali. The entire universe consisting
of gods, Asuras, and Rakshasas will not be
able to kill that great Asura? He_ will
hurl Shakra from the sovereignty of the
universe.


78. When after defeating the Lord of
Shachi, that Asura will possess the sover-
eignty of the three worlds, I shall take
bicth in Aditi’s womb, by Kashyapa, as the
twelfth Aditya.


79. I shall restore it to Indra of im-
measurable splendour, and replace the
gods, Q Narada, in their respective
Stations.


80. Asregards Vali, that foremost of
Danavas, who is to be unslayable by all the
gods, I shall cause him to live in the nether
regions. :

81. Inthe Treta age I shall take birth
as Rama in {the race of Bhrigu, and root
out the Kshatriyas who will become proud
of their strength and riches.

82. Towards the end of Treta and the
beginning of Dwapara, I sball take birth
as Rama the son of Dasharatha in
ikshaku’s race.


‘83. At that time, tha two Rishis, viz.,
the two sons of ‘Praiapali, called by the


547
names of Ekata and Dwita, will on account
of the injury done by them to their brother


Trita, have to take birth as monkeys, losing
the beauty of the human form.


84. Those monkeys that shall take birth
in the race of Ekata and Dwita, shall be-
come endued, with great power and? mighty
energy and will equal Shakra himself in
power. All those monkeys, O twice-born
one, will become my allies for, performing
the work of the gods.


85. I shall then kill ‘the dreadful king
of the Rakshasas, that [wretch of Pulastya’s
race, viz., the fierce Ravana,Jthat thorn of
all the wogids, together with all his children
and followW€rs,


86. At the junction the Dwapara and
the Kali ages, I shall again appear in the
world taking birth in the city of Mathura
for the purpose of killing Kansa,


87. There, after killing numberless
Danavas that will be as thorns in the side
of the gods, I shall take up my residence im
Kushasthali at the city of Dwaraka.


- 88. While living in that city I shall kil
the Asura Naraka the'chief of the Earth,—
him, that is, who will do an injury to Aditi,
as also some other Danavas of the names
of Muru and Pitha.


29. Killing also another foremost of
Danavas, vz, the kill of Pragjyotisha, I
shall transplant that delightful city fur-
nished with various kinds of wealth into
Dwaraka.


I shall then defeat the two gods
adored of all-the deities, zvi., Maheshwara
and Mahasena, who will become fond of
the Danava Vana and do him various good
offices and who will try their best for that
worshipper of theirs. ,


gt. Defeating next the son of the
Danava Vali, viz., Vana, who will be poss+
essed a thousand-arms, I shall next destroy
all the inhabitants of the Danava city
called Saubha.


92. I shall next, O foremost of Brah«
manas, bring about the death of Kala-
yavana, a Danava who will be endued
with great power on account of his being
equipt with the energy of Gargya.


93- A proud Asura will appear as a king
at Girivraja, of the name of Jarasandha,
who will fall out with all the other kings
of the world. His death will be brought
about by me through some one else guided
by my intelligence,


9405. I shall next kill Shishupala in


-the sacrifice of king Yudhishthira the son of


Dharma, into which sacrifice all the kings


548


of the world will bring tribute. In some
of these works, only Arjuna, the son of
Vasava, will become my assistant.


96—98. I {shall place Yudhishthira with
all his brothers in his ancestral king-
‘dom, People wilt calf me and Arjuna as
Narayana and Nara, when, endued with
power, we two, putting forth our strength,
shall kil! a large number of Kshatriyas,
for doing good to the world. Having
lightened the load of the Earth according
to our pleasure, I shall merge all the
principal Sattwatas, as also Dwaraka, my
favourite city, into my own self, recollecting
my all-embracing” Knowledge.


99. Having four forms, I Ht, in this
way, petform many feats of great prowess,
and attain at last to those regions of happi-
ness created by me and honored by all the
Brahmanas. :


100. Appearing in the forms of a swan,
-a tortoise, a fish, O foremost of twice-born
ones, I shall then appear as a boar, then
as a man-lion,' then fas a dwarf, then as
Rama of Bheigu’s (race, then as Rama the
son of Dasharatha, ‘then as Krishna the
scion of the {Sattwata race, and lastly as
Kalki.


101, When the Vedas disappeared from
the world, | brought them back. The
Vedas, were re-created by me in the Krita
age.

102, They have once more disappeared
or may only be partially heard here and
there in the Puranas, Many of my best
incarnations also in the world have become
facts of the past. ;


103—104. Having secured the good of
the worlds in those’ forms in which I
appeared, they have re-entered into my
own Nature. Brahman (the Creator) him-
self never saw me in this form of mine,
which you, O Narada, have seen to-day
on account of your entire devotion to me. [
have now said to you,}who are devoted tome
wholly, everything, O Brahmana. I have
described to you my ancient appearances
- and future ones also, O best of men, to-
gether with all their mysteries.


Bhishma said :—


105. ‘The holy and illustrious god, of
universal and immutable form, having said
these words to- Narada, disappeared there
and then. ;


106. Having won the high favor that
he had solicited, Narada also, gifted with
great energy, then proceeded in ail haste to
the retreat called Vadari, for seeing Nara
and Narayana.


‘107--108. -This great Upanishad quite


MAHABHARATA,


of a piece with the four Vedas, and the
Sankhya-Yoga, and called by him by the
name of the Pancharatra Scriptures, and
recited by Narayana himself with his own
mouth, was repeated by Narada before a
large audience in the residence of Brahman
(his sire) in exactly the same way in which
Narayana had recited it and in which he
had heard it from his own lips.”


Yudhishthira said :—


109. ‘' Was not. Brahman, the Creator
of all things, acquainted with this wonder-
ful discourse of the glory of Narayana
gifted with intelligence that he heard it
from the lips of Narada?


110. Is the illustrions Grandfather of
all the worlds any way different from or
inferior to the great Narayana? How then
is it that he was unacquainted with the
power of Narayana of great energy ?’*


Bhishma continued :—


11t. “ Hundreds and thousands of great
cycles, hundreds and thousands of Creations
and Dissolutions, O king of kings, have
been over and become events of the past.


‘112. In the beginning of every Creation,
Brahman, endued with great power and
who creates all things, is remembered (by
Narayana), Brahman knows well, O king,
that Narayana, that foremost of all gods
is very much superior to him.


113—115. He knows that Narayanafis
the Supreme Soul, that He is the Supreme
Lord, that He is the Creator of Brahman
himself. - Narada recited this very ancient
narrative which is perfectly consistent with
the Vedas, to that assembly of Rishig
crowned with ascetic success that came to
the abode of Brahman. The gods Surya,
having heard that narrative from those
Rishis crowned with ascetic success, repeat-
edjit to the sixty-six thousands of Rishis,
Ofking, of purified souls, that follow in his
train. . ' : i


116. Andthe Sun, the deity that im-
parts heat to all the worlds, repeated that


| narrative to those Beings also, of puri-,


fied souls, that have been created (by,
Brahman) for always travelling in the van
of the Sun. : :


117, The greatf Rishis who follow in the
Sun’s train, O son, repeated that excellent
narrative to the. deities assembled on the
breast of Meru. -


118. That best of ascetics, v¢z., the re-
generate Asita, then, having heard thé
narrative from the gods, repeated it to the

i


Pitris, O king of ‘kings.


SHANTI


11g. I heard it from my father Shantanu,
O son, who recited it to me formerly. My-
self having heard it from my father, I have
repeated it to you, O Bharata.

120. Gods and ascetics, they who have
heard this excellent old narrative which
is a Purana, al] worship the Sugreme Soul.


121, This discourse, belonging to the
Rishis and thus handed down from one to


another, should not, O king, be communi-.


cated by you to any one who is not a
worshipper of Vasudeva.


122. This narrative, O kiag, is really
the cream of the hundreds of othee dis-
courses that you have heard from me.


123. In days of yore, O king, the gods
and the Asuras, in a_ body, churned’ the
Ocean and raised the Ambrosia. Similarly
the Brahmanas, in a body in days of yore,
churned all the scriptures and raised this
narrative, which resembles nectar.


124—125. He who frequently reads this
narrative, and he who frequently listens to it
with rapt attention, in a secluded spot, and
filled with devotion, succeeds, being pos-
sessed of lunar complexion, in living in the
spacious insular continent known by the
name of White Island. Forsooth, such a
man succeeds in entering into Narayana
of a thousand rays.


_ 126. By listening to this narrative from
the beginning, a sick person becomes freed
from his disease. The man who simply
desires to read or listen to this discourse,
gets the fruition of all his wishes. By read-
ing or listening to it. ‘The devoted wor-
shipper acquires the high end reserved for
devoted worshippers.


127. You also, O king, should always
adore and worship that foremost of all
Beings. He is the father and the mother
of ail creatures, and He is an object of
reverence to the entire universe.


128. Let the illustrious and Eternal God
of the Brahmanas, viz., Janarddana of
He intelligence, be pleased with you, O
Yudhisthira of mighty arms,


Vaishampayana said :—

129. . Having listened to this best of dis-
courses, O Janamejaya, king Yudhisthira
the just,'and all his brothers became de-
voted to Narayana.

130, And all of them, O Bharata,
silently meditating upon Narayana (from
that day), uttered these words for His
glorification, viz., Victory to that holy and
illustrious Being.

131, He, again, who is our best of pre-
ceptors, viz., the Island-born Krishna, de-
voted to penances, sung} uttering the word

)


PARVA, 549


Narayana,’ that great Mantra which is
worthy of being recited silently.


132. Passing through the sky to the
Ocean of milk, which is always the abode
of nectar, and adoring the great God there,
he returned to his own hermitage,


Bhishma continued :—


132e Ihave now recounted to you the
discourse that was recited by Narada.
That narrative has come down from person
to person from very ancient times. 1 heard
it from my father who formerly recounted
it to me.


Suta said :—


134. I {have now told you all that
Vaishampayana recounted to Janamejaya.
Having listened to Vaishampayana’s nar-
ration, king Janamejaya duly satisfied all
his duties according to the scriptural ordi-
nances, a


135. You have all practised very severe
penances and observed many high and
excellent vows. Living in this sacred forest
of Naimisha, you are. foremost of | all
persons conversant with the Vedas.


136. Ye foremost of‘ twite-born ones,
you all have come to this great sacrifice
of Shaunaka. Do you all worship that Eter-
nal and Supreme Lord of the universe in
excellent sacrifices,. properly pouring liba-
tions of clarified butter to the fire with the
help of Mantras and dedicating the same
to Narayana. As for myself, 1 heard this
excellent discourse which has come down
from generation to generation, from my
father who recited it to me formerly.


CHAPTER CCCXLI,


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA)~
Continued.


Saunaka said :—

1. How is that illustrious god, viz., the
powerful Narayana, who is a master of the
Vedas and their branches, at once the doer
and the enjoyer of sacrifices ?


2. Endued with forgiveness, he has
adopted, again, the Religion of Renuncia-
tion. Indeed, itis that holy and powerful
one who has himself laid down the duties
of Renunciation. ; ;


3. Why then has he made many of the
gods the takers of shares in sacrifices
which, of course, are all due to the Reli-
gion of Action, Why has he again created


55°


some with an opposite disposition, for they
follow the ordinances of the Religion of
Renunciation.


4.. Do you, O Suta, remove this doubt
of ours. This doubt seems to be eternal
and is filled. with great mystery. You
have heard ail discourses on Narayana,
which are consistent with the (other) scrip-
tures.


Sauti said :—~_


5 Oexceltent Saunaka, I shall recount ‘


to you what Vaishampayana, the disciple
of the intelligent Vyasa, said when qnes-
tioned on these very topics by king Janame-
jaya.

6. Having heard the discourse on the
glory of Narayana who is the Soul of all
embodied creatures, Janamejaya, gifted
with great intelligence and wisdom, asked
Vaishampayana about these very topics.


7. The whole world of Being, with
Brahman, the gods, the Asuras, and human
‘beings are seen tobe deeply attached to
acts which yield prosperity.


8. Liberation has, © twice-born one,
been described by you to be the highest
happiness and to consist of the cessation
of .existence. They who being shorn of
both merit and demerit, become liberated,
succeed, we hear, in entering the great
God of a thousand rays.


It seems to be, O Brahmana,f{that the
eternal religion of Liberation is highly
difficult of observance. Turning away from
it, all the gods have become enjoyers of
the libations of clarified butter poured with
Mantras on sacrificial fires and other offer-
ings presented to them by similar means,


to—11. Then, again, Brahman, and
Rudra,the powerful Sakra the killer of Vala,
the Sun, the Lord of the stars, the Wind-
god, the god of fire, the god of the Waters,
Infinite Space, the Universe too and the
rest of the dwellers of heaven,—these, it
seems, do not know the way of securing
an annihilation of conscious existence that
is encompassed by one’s own efforts.


12. Hence, perhaps, they have not
followed the path which is certain, indes-
tructible, and immutable. Hence, perhaps
turning away from that path, they have
adopted the Religion of Action which leads
to conscious existence that is measured by
time.


13. This, indeed, is one great defeat of
those who are wedded to acts, for all their
rewards are for the time being. This doubt,
O twice-born one, exists in my heart like a
dagger! Tear it out by recounting to me


MAHABHARATA.


some discourses of old on this subject.
Great is my curiosity to listen to you.


14. Why, O twice-born one, have the
gods been said to be taker3 of their res
pective shares of sacrificial offerings pre-
sented to them with the help of Mantras
in sacrifices of various kinds? Why,
again, are the dwellers of heaven wore
shipped in sacrifices?


15. And, O best of ‘twice-born ones to
whom do they, who partake of offerings in
sacrifices performed to ,their honor, them.
selves make offerings when they perform
great sacrifices?


16. The question you have put to me,
O king, relates to a deed mystery. No
man can quickly answer it who has not
practised penances, and who is not acquain+
ted with the Puranas.


17. I shall, however, answer you by
teciting to you what my preceptor the
Island-born Krishna, otherwise called
Vyasa, the great Rishi who has divided the
Vedas, had said to us on a former occasion
when questioned by us.


18. Sumanta, and Jaimini, and Paila’
of firm vows, and myself as the fourth, and
Shuka as the fifth, were disciples of the
illustrious Vyasa.


19. We, five in all, endued with self-
control and purity of observances, had
completely mastered anger and controlled
our senses. Our preceptor used to teach
us the Vedas having the, Mahabharata for
their fifth,


20—-21. Once on a time, on the breast
of that foremost of !mountains, gvis., the
delightful Meru, inhabited by Siddhas and


.| Charanas while we were engaged in read-


ing the Vedas, this very doubt sprang in
our minds, that has been given vent to
by you to-day. We, therefore, asked out
preceptor about it. It heard the answet
that our preceptor made. I shall now re-
count that answer to you, O Bharata.


22. Hearing the words that wéré
addressed to him by his disciples, that re-
mover of all sorts of darkness represented
by ignorance, vzs., the blessed Vyasa the
son of Parashara, said these words :—=}


23. I have practised the austerest of
penarices. Ye best of men, I am _ full
conversant with the Past, the Present, an
the Future.


24. On account of those penances of
mine and of the control under which I
kept my senses, while I lived on the shores
of the ocean of milk, Narayana became
pleased with me. As the result of the
great God’s gratification, this omnisciencé
about the Past, thi Present, and Future;


SHANT! PABYA,


hat was desired by- me, sprang in my
mind.

25. Listen now to me as I describe to
you, in due order, this great doubt that
has perplexed your minds. [ have,_with the
eye of knowledge, seen, all that took place
in the begiuning of the zon.

26. He whom both the Sankhyas and
the Yogins call:by the name of the Supreme
Soul, comes to be regarded as the fore-


the unmanifest or Pradhana by, the
earned. ‘
27. From the powerful Unmanifest


Sprang, for the creation of all the worlds,
he that is called Aniruddha. That
Aniruddha is known among all creatures
by the name of the Great Soul.


28. Itis that Aniruddha who, becoming
manifest, created the Grandfa®her Brah-
man. Aniruddha is known by another
name, viz., consciousness, and is gifted
with every sort of energy,


29. Earth, Wind, Ether, Water, and
Fire numbering the fifth—these are the
five Great Creatures that have originated
from @onsciousness.'


30. Having created the Great Creatures
he then created their qualities, Combi-
ning the Great Creatures, he then created
various embodied Beings. Heac me as I
describe them to you.


3t. Marichi, Angiras, Atri, Pulastya,
Pulaha, Kratu, the great Vashistha, and
the Self-create Manu,—these should be
known as the eight elements. Upon these
depend all. the worlds.


32. Then the Grandfather of all the
worlds, viz., Brahman, created, for the
success of all. creatures, the Vedas with
all their branches as also the Sacrifices
with their limbs. From these eight ele-
ments have originated this vast universe.


33. Then originated Rudra from the
principle of anger.j ‘Taking birth, he created
ten others like him. ‘These eleven Rudras
are called by name of Vikara-Purushas,


34. The Rudras, the Prakritis, and the
several celestial Rishis, having come into
existence approached Brahman, with the
object of upholding the universe and its
work.

35- Addressing the Grandfather, they
said,—We have been created, O holy one,
by you, O youof great power. Tell us,


O Grandfather, which of us should be |


vested with what jurisdiction.


36. What jurisdictions have been created
by, you. for, supervising what particular


55!
affairs? Which of us should, gifted with
what sort of consciousness, shall take
charge of which of these? .
37- Do you ordain also to-each of us
the measure of strength that. we are to


| have for satisfying the duties of our res»


pective jurisdictions.--Thus addressed by
them, the great god replied to them in, the.
following way.


| Brahman said :—


most Purusha on accouut of his own: deeds. |,
From Him originate Prakriti that is called |.


38. You have done well, ye gods, in
speaking to me of this matter. Blessed be
you all! Iwas thinking of this very sub-
ject that has drawn your attention.


39. How should the three worlds be
maintained and kept. agoing 2 How should
your strength and mine be taken advantage
of for the accom plishment of that object,


4o. Let all of us, leaving this place,
go that unmanifest and foremost of Beings
who is the witness of the world, for seeking
his protection. He will tell us what is for
ouc behoof.


41. After this, those gods and Rishis,
with Brahman, went to the northern shores
of the ocean of milk, desirous of doing
good to the three worlds.’


42. Arrived there, they began to prac
tise those austere penances that are said
by Brahman in the Vedas. ‘Those aus-
terest of penances are known by the name


‘of Mahaniyama.


43. They stood there with mind fixed,
immovable as stakes of wood, and with


_ eyes upturned and arms raised upwards,


44. For a thousand divine years they
were engaged in those severe penances.
At the conclusjon of that time they heard
these sweet words in harmony with the
Vedas and their branches,


The Blessed and Holy One said:—


45. Ye gods and Rishis having asceti-
cism for wealth with Brahman in your
company, honoring you all with welcome,
1 say to you these words.


46. I know what is in your hearts!
Verily, your thoughts are for the behoof
of the three worlds. I shall multiply your
energy and strength, investing the same.


_ with disposition for work.


47. Ye gods, well have you practised
these penances from desire of worshipping.
me. Ye foremost of Beings, enjoy now
the excellent fruits of those austerities
which you have practised.


48. This Brahman is the Lord of all
the worlds, - Gifted with power, he is the
Grandfather of all creatures. You also


552°


are foremost of gods. Do you all, with
concentrated minds, celebrate sacrifices for
my glory. :

49. fn those sacrifices which you will
perform, do ye always give mea part of
the sacrificial ‘offerings. I shall then, ye
lords of creation, assign to each of you your
respective'spheres and ordain what will be
for your behoof. .


-Vaishampayana said :
50. Hearing these words® of that God
of gods, all those gods and great Rishis


and Brahman became filled with such [


delight that the hair on theic bodies stood
erect.


51. They immediately made arrange-
ments for a sacrifice in honor of Vishnu
accor@ing to the Vedic ordinances. In
that sacrifice, Brahman himself assigned a
portion of the offerings to Vishnu.


52. Similarly the gods and the celestial
Rishis also, dedicated simitar portions each
to the great God. The portions, thus
offered with great respect to Vistnu, were
about both the quantity and the quality
of the asticles used, according to the ordi-
nances taid down foc the Krita age.

- §3-
man, in that sacrifice, worshipped the great
God as one ‘having the complexion of the
Sun, as the foremost of Beings, situate
beyond the reach of Ignorance, vast, per-
vading ail things, the Supreme Lord of
all, the giver of boons, and endued with
power. Ot


54. Thus worshipped by them the boon-
‘ giving and-great God, invisible and’ bodi-

less, addressed those assembled celestials
from heaven and said to them :—

$5: :
cated by you in this sacrifice. | an pleased
with alb of you. I shall confer rewards
on you that will, however, be fraught with
ends from where there will be returi

56. This. shall be your
characteristic, ye gods, from this day, on
account of my favours and kindness for
you. Celebrating sacrifices in every cycle,
with Jarge presents, you will become en-
joyers of fruits born of Action.


57. We gods, those men also that. will
celebrate sacrifices, according tothe Vedic
ordinances, will give to all of you, shares:
of their sacrificial offerings.


58. Inthe Veda-sutras F make him the
receiver of a share like that which he has
himself offered one in this sacrifice.


59. Created to superintend the affairs
of your respective jurisdictions, de you up-


i foremost of
| respective jurisdictions, engage yourselves


. iT . . ~ i ‘
The gods and the Rishis and Brah E all persons versed in the Wedas.


L they wilt become the preceptors of the
! Vedas.
' Action, for they have been intended to de-
‘vote themselves to the act of procreating
' children.


T have received the offerings dedi-


distinctive >


MAHABHARATA.


hold the worlds according to yout strength
as dependent on the shares you receive int
those sacrifices. *


60. Indeed, receiving strength from
those rites and observances that will be in
vogue in the several worlds, originating
from the fruits of action, do ye continue to
uphold the affairs those worlds.


61. Strengthened by the sacrifices that
will be celebrated by men, ye will streng-
then me. ‘These are the thoughts that F
cherish for you all.


62z. It is for this that I have created the
Vedas and sacrifices and plants and herbs.
Duly served with these by human beings


| on Earth, the gods wilt be pleased.


63. Ye foremost of gods, till the end
of this zeon, \I have ordained your creation,


| making your constitutions depend upon


the result of the religion of Action. Ye
eings, do ye then, about your


in seeking the welfare of the three worlds.


64. Marichi, Angiras, Atri, Pulastya,
Pulaha, Kratu, and Vashistha,—these sever


| Rishis have been created by the fiat of the
r will,


65. These will become the foremoft of
tn fact,


They will follow the Religion of


66. ‘This is the eternal path: of creatures
engaged in acts and observances. ‘The -
powerful Lord who is charged with the


r Creation of aH the worlds is called Ani»
- tuddha.


67—68. Sana, Sanatsujata, Sanaka,
Sanandana, Sanatkumara, Kapila, and


k Sanatana,—these seven Rishis are known’:


as tle spiritual sons of Brahman. Their
knowledge comes to them:of itself. These’
seven follow the Religion of Renunciation, ,


69: They are the foremost of all persons
conversant with Yoga. They have a prow
found knowledge of the Sankhya philo-
sophy. ‘They are teachers of the scriptures
on duty and it is they who introduce the
duties of the Religion of Renunciation: and:
cause them flow’ in the worlds.


7o. - From Nature has sprung Conscious


ness.and the three great qualities. Tran
| scending Nature is called Soul.
Ji~~Z2. That Soul is myself. The path


of those who follow acts is fraught with re-
turn. One cannot, by that path, reach the
place whence there ig no return. Different
Greatures have been Ireated with different


SHANTI


objects. Some are intended for the Path
tof Action and some for that of Renuncia-
tion. One enjoys the reward, according
to the path that he follows. This Brah-
man is the Jord of all the worlds. Endued
with power, it is he who creates the uni-
verse.


73. He is your mother and father, and
he is your grandfather. At my behest, he
will grant boons to all creatures.


74. His son Rudra, who has originated
from his brow at his behest, will, gifted
with power, uphold all created beings.


75- Go ye to your respective jurisdic-
tions, and seek, according to the ordi-
nances, the welfare of the world! Let
all the scriptural acts flow in all the worlds.
Let there be no delay in this.


76. Ye foremost of gods, do ye ordain
the acts of all creatures and the ends that
they are come by. Do ye also set the
limits of the lives of all creatures.


77. This present cycle that is going on
is the foremost of all epochs and should be
known by the name of Krita. In this
cycle living creatures should not be killed
in the sacrifices that may be celebrated.
It should be as I ordain and let it not be
otherwise.


78. In this age, ye celestials, virtue will
flourish in full. After this age will come
the cycle called Treta. The Vedas, ‘in
that cycle, will lose one quarter. Only
three of them will exist.


79. In the sacrifices that will be cele-
brated in that age, animals, after dedica~
tion with the help of sacred Mantras, will
be killed. As regards virtue, again, it will
lose one quarter; only three quarters
thereof will cemain,


80. On the termination of the Treta,
will come the mixed Yuga known by the
name of Dwapara. In that cycle, virtue
will lose two quarters and only two quarters
thereof will remain.


81; Upon the termination of Dwapara,
the cycle that will set in will be called
Tish, and it will come with Kali walking in
the van. Virtue will lose full three quarters.
Only a quarter thereof will exist in all
places. ‘


82. When the. great God said these
words, the gods and the celestial Rishis
addressed him and said,—-If only a fourth
part of virtue is to exist in that age in every
place, tell {us, O Holy-One, where shall we
then go and what shall we do?


The Blessed and Holy One said :—
83. Ye foremost of ods, ye should, in
: da


PARVA. 553


that age, go to such places where the
Vedas and Sacrifices and Penances and
Truth and Self-Control, accompanied by
duties fraught with mercy for all creatures,
will still continue, Sin will never be able
to affect you at all.


Vyasa said :—

84. Thus commanded by the great
God, the gods with all the Rishis bowed
their heads to him and then proceeded to
the places they desired.


- 85. After the celestiats had left -that
place, only Brahman remained there, desic-
ous of seeing the great Deity then living
in the form of Aniruddha.

86. The foremost of gods then appeared
before Brahman having assumed a form
that had a huge equine head. Carrying a
pitcher and the triple stick, he appeared
before Brahman, reciting the Vedas with
all their branches. . |


87—88. Seeing the great Deity of im-
measurable energy in that form with an
equine head, the powerful Brahman, the
Creator of all the worlds, moved by the
desire of doing good to his Creation, adored
that boon-giving Lord with his head down
and stood before him with hands joined in
respect. The great Deity embraced Brah-
man and then told him these words,


The Holy One said :—


89. Do you, O Brahman, duly think
of the courses of acts which creatures should
follow, You are the great ordainer of all
created Beings, You are the Master and
the Lord of the universe. Placing this
burthen on you I shall soon be free fro
anxiety. .

go. At such times, however, when it will
be difficult for you to accomplish the work
ot the gods, I shall then appear in incar-
nate forms perceiving the gravity of the
emergencies,


or. With these words, that grand form
with. the equine head vanished then and
‘there. Having recéived his behest, Brah-
man too proceeded speedily to his own
region.


92. It is for this, O Blessed One, that the
eternal lotus-navelled Deity became the
accentor of the first share offered in
sacrifices and henceit is that He is called
the eternal upholider of all Sacrifices.


93- He himself adopted the Religion of
Renunciation, the end after which those
creatures seek who are desirous of eternal
fruits. He laid down at the same time the
Religion of Action for others, with the view
of giving variety to the universe,


3554


94. He is the beginning, He is the
middle, ‘and He is the end of all created
Beings. He is their Creator and He is
the actor and He is the act. Having with-
drawn the universe inte Himself at the end
of the cycle, He enters into sleep, and
awakening at the beginning of another
cycle, He once more creates the universe,


95. Do you all bow to ‘that IHustrious
One who is gifted with 4 high soul and who
is above the three qualities, who is Unborn,
whose form is the universe, and who is the
abode or refuge of all the dwellers of
heaven.


96. Do you bow to Him who is the
Supreme Lord of all creatures, who is the
Lord of the Rudras, who is the Lord of the
Adityas, and of the Vasus as well.


97- Do you bow to Him who is the
Lord of the Ashwins, and the Lord of the
Maruts, who is’ the Lord of all Sacrifices
laid down in the Vedas, and the Lord of
the Vedangas.


- 98 Bow Him who always lives in the
Ocean, and who ig called Hari, and
whose hair is like the blades of the Munja
_grass. Bow to Him who is Peace and
Tranquillity, and who gives the Religion of
Liberation to all creatures. ~


99- Bow to Him who is the Lord of
Penances, of all kinds of energy, and of
Fame, who is ever the Lord of Speech and
the Lord of all the Rivers also.


100. Bow to Him who is called Kapa-
rddin, whois the Great Boar, who is the
Unicorn,-and’ who is: endued with great
intelligence; who is the Sun, who assumed
the well-known form with the equine head ;
and who is always shown in a fourfold
form.


tor. Bow to Him who is unrevealed,
who is capable of being apprehended by
knowledge only, who is both indestructible
and destructible. ‘he supreme Deity, who
is immutable, permeates all things.


102. Heis the Supreme Lord who can
be known with the help of the eye of
Knowledge alone, It was thus that, helped
by the eye of Knowledge, | saw, in days of
yore, that foremost of gods. :


103. Asked by you, I have told you
everything in full, ye disciples, and do you
act according to my words and dutifully
serve the Supreme Lord called Hari. Do
you sing His praises in’ Vedic words and
adore and worship Him also according to
due rites.


Vaishampayana said :—
1o4, lt was thus that the compiler of the


MAHABHARATA.


Vedas, gifted with great intelligence, dise
coursed to us, accosted by us on that occae
sion. His son, the highly pious Shuka,
and all his disciples listened,to him while he
delivered that discourse.


105. Our preceptor, with ourselves, O
king, then worshipped the jgreat Deity
with Richs extracted from the four Vedas.


106. I have thus told you everything
about what you had asked me. It was
thus, O king, that our Island-born precep-
tor discoursed to us.


107—~108. He, who, having uttered the
words— I bow to the holy Lord,’—frequent-
ly listens, with rapt attention, to this dis-
course or reads or recites it to others, be-
comes gifted with intelligence and health,
and possessed of beauty and strength. If
ill, he becomes freed from that illness ; if
fettered, freed from his bonds. ‘The man
who has desires gets (by this) the fruition
of all his desires, and easily acquires a long
life also.


109. A Brahmana, by doing this, be-
comes conversant with all the Vedas, and
a Kshatriya becomes crowned with success.
A Vaishya, by doing it, makes great profits,
and a Shudra enjoys great happiness.


11o. A sonless man obtains a son. A
maiden gets a desirable husband. A
woman who has conceived, gives birth to
a son,


111. A barren woman conceives and gets
many sons and grandsons. He who recites
this discourse on the way succeeds in pass-
ing happily and without any obstacles along
his way. In fact, one acquires whatever
objects he cherishes, if one reads or recites
this narrative. ad


112, Hearing these words of the great
Rishi, fraught with ‘certainty of conclusion.
and containing a recital of the attributes
of that great one who is the foremost of all
beings, hearing tlfis narrative of the great
assembly of Rishis and other dwellers of
heaven,—men who are devoted to the
Supreme Deity derive great happiness.


CHAPTER CCCXLII.


' (MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued.


Janamejaya said :—

1—2. O Holy One, you should tell me
the meanings of those various names utter-
ing which the great Rishi Vyasa with his
disciples sang the praises of the illustrious
killer of Madhu. (1- wish to hear those


SHANTI PARVA.


names of Hari, that Supreme Lord of all
creatures. Indeed, by hearing of those
names, I shall be sanctified and cleansed
like the bright autumnal moon.


Vaishampayana said :—

3. Listen, O king, to what the meanings
are of the various names, due to attributes
and acts, of Hari as the powerful Hari
himself of cheerful soul explained them to
Phaiguna.


4. That killer of hostile heroes, viz.,
Phalguna, had at one time asked Keshava,
enquiring after the meanings of the some
of the names by which the great Keshava
is worshipped,

Arjuna said :—

5. O Holy One, O Supreme ordainer
of the Past andthe Future, O Creator of
all Beings, O Immutable one, O Refuge of
all the worlds, O Lord of the universe,
O Remover of the fears of all persons.


6—7. [ wish to hear from you in detail,
O Keshava, the meanings of all those
names of yours, O God, which have been
mentioned by the great Rishis in the Vedas
and the Puranas on account of various
acts of yours! None else than you, O Lord,
is capable to explain the meanings of those
names.


The Holy One said :— -:


8—g. In the Rigveda, in the Vajurveda,
in the Atharvans and the Samans, in the
Puranas andthe Upanishads, as also in
the works on Astrology, O Arjuna, in the
Sankhya treatises, in the Yoga Scriptures,
and in the treatises also on the Science of
Life, many are the names that have been
mentioned by the great Rishis.


10. Some of those names refer to my
attributes and some of them refer to my
deeds. Do you hear, with rapt attention,
O Sintess One, what the meaning is of each
of those names referring to my acts.


. tt. AsT recite them to you. It is said
that in days of yore you formed half my
body. Salutations to Him of great glory,
Him, viz., that is the Supreme Soul of all
embodied creatures.


12. . Salutations to Narayana, to Him
that ,is at one with the universe, to Him
who is above the three qualities, to Him,
that is, again, the Soul of those qualities.
From His grace has originated Brahman,
and from His anger has arisen Rudra.


13. He is the source whence have origi-
nated all mobile and immobile creatures.
O foremost of all pefsons gifted with


Sattwa (Goodness), the attribute of Sattwa


| Narayana also adored.


— 553


: ; . ’
consists of eighteen” qualities. That attri-
bute is Supreme Nature having fot her
soul the Sky and Earth ‘and succeeding
by her creative forces in keeping up the
universe.


14. That Nature is at one with the
fruit of all acts. She is also the pure Chit.
She is immortal, and invincible, and is
called the Soul of the universe. Front her
proceed all the changes of both Creation
and Destruction.


15. Divested of sex, She or He ts: the
penances that people practise. He is both
the sacrifice that is performed and the
sacrificer who celebrates the sacrifice; He
is the ancient and the infinite Purusha.
He is otherwise called Aniruddha and is
the source of the Creation and the Destruc-
tion of the universe.


16. When Brahmana’s night was pass-
ed, through the grace of that Being of great
energy, alotus made its appearance first,
O you having eyes like lotus petals.


17—18. Within that Jotus was born
Brahman, originating from Aniruddha’s
grace. Towards the evening of Brahman’s
day, Anicuddha became filled with anger,
and as aconsequence of this, there origi-
nated from his forehead a son called Rudra
gifted with the power of destroying every-
thing. These two, viz., Brahman and
Rudra, are the foremost of all the gods,
having originated respectively from the |
Chéerfulness and the Anger (of Ani-
ruddha). Ss

19. Acting according to Aniruddha’s
directions, these two gods Create and
Destroy. Although capable of granting
boons to all creatures, they are, however,
in their‘own work, (viz, Creation and Des-
truction), merely instruments iw the hands
of Aniruddha.


20. ‘ Rudra is otherwise called Kaparddin.
He has matted flocks on his head, some
times shows a bald head. He loves to
live in the midst of crematoriums which
form his home. He practises the austerest
vows. He is a Yogin of mighty power
and energy. . '


2t. He is the destroyer of Daksha’s
sacrifice and the tearer of Bhaga’s eyes.
O son of Pandu, Rudra should be known
to have always Narayana for his Soul.


22. If that god of gods, viz., Maheswara,
be adored, then, O Partha, is the powerful


23. Iam the. Soul, O son of Pandu, of
all the worlds, of all the universe. Rudea,
again, is my Soul. It is for this-:that |
always worship him.


556


24. I€ Edo not worship the auspicious
and boon-giving Ishana, nobody would
then worship my own self. -


25. The ordinances I set are followed
by all the worlds. ‘Those ordinances should
always be worshipped, and it is, therefore,
that I worship them. se


26.. He who knows Rudra knows myself,
and he whe knows myself knows Rudra.
He who follows Rudra follows me. Rudra
38 Narayana. Both are one; and one is
shown in two different forms.


29. Rudra.and Narayana, forming one
petson, pervade all displayed things and
cause them to act. No one else than Rudra
is capable to grant me a boon, O son of
Pandt.


28. Having settled thisin my mind, I
worshipped in days of yore the ancient and
powerful Rudra, for getting the boon of

- ason. In worshipping Rudra thus, I wor-
shipped my own self.


29. Vishnu never bows his head to any
god except his own self. It is therefore
that I worship Rudra.


30. All the gods, including Brahman and
Indra and the gods and the great Rishis,
worship Narayana, that foremost of gods,
otherwise called by the name of Hari.


3t. Vishnu is the foremost of all Beings
past, present, or future, and as such should
always be worshipped with respect.

32. Do you bow your head to Vishnu.’
Do you bow your head to Him who gives:
‘protection to all. Do you bow, O son of
Kunti, to that great boon-giving god, that
foremost of gods, who eats the offerings
made to him in sacrifices. :


33. 1 have heard that there are four
kinds of worshippers. Among them all,
they that are devoted to me wholly and
Mo not worship any other god, are the
foremost. I am the end they seek, and
though engaged in deeds, they never seek
the fruits thereof,


34. The three remaining classes of my
worshippers are those who seek the fruits
of.their acts. ‘hey acquire regions of great
happiness, but then they have to drop
down therefrom upon the exhaustion of
their merits. Those amongst my worship-
pers, therefore, who are fully ,awakened
obtain what is foremost,


35- Those who are awakened and whose
conduct shows such enlightenment, may
be engaged in worshipping Brahman or
Mahadeva or the other gods who live in
heaven, but they succeed at least in getting
to myself,


| creatures wish to attain to at the end.


MAHABHARA EA,


36. I have thus told you, O Partha,
what the destinctions are between my wor-
shippers.

37- Yourself, O son of Kunti, and my-
self are known as Nara and Narayana.
Both of us have taken human bodies only
for the purpose of lightening the toad of
the Earth.


38. Iknowthe different sorts of Yoga
that rest on the Soul. I know who lam
and whence I am, O Bharata. I know
the Religion of Renunciation, and all that
contributes to the prosperity of creatures.


39. Eternal aslam, I am the one sole
Refuge of allmen. ‘The waters have been
called by the name of Nara, for they ori-
ginated from Him called Nara. And since
the waters, in former times, were my
refuge, I am, therefore, called by the name
of Narayana.


40. Taking the form of the Sun I cover
the universe, with my rays. And _ because
I am the home of all creatures, therefore,
am I called by the name of. Vasudeva.


4t. I am the end of all creatures and
their father, O Bharata. I pervade the
entire sky and the Earth, O Partha, and
ny splendour transcends every other splen-
our.


42. whom alt
And
because I overwhelm all the universe, I


am called by the name of Vishnu.


43. Desirous of acquiring success through
control of their senses, people seek to ob-
tain to me who am heaven and Earth and
the sky between the two. For this am %
called Damodara,


44. The word Prishni_ includes food, the
Vedas, water, and nectar. ‘hese four are
always in my stomach. Hence am | called
Prishuigarbha.

45. The Rishis have said that once on
atime when the Rishi ‘Trita was thrown
into a well by Ekata and Dwita, the dis-
tressed ‘Trita invoked me, saying,—O
Prishnigarbha, do you save the fallen rita.


46. ‘That foremost of Rishis, vig., Trita,
the spiritual son of Brahman, having called
on me thus, was saved from the pit. .


47. The rays that come out of the Sun
who gives heat to the world, from the
blazing fire, and from the Moon, form my
hair. Hence do foremost of learned Brah-
manas call me by the name of Keshava.


I am He, O Bharata,


48. The great Utathya having iropreg =
nated his wife disappeared from her side-
theough an iilusion of the gods. The


younger brother Yrihaspati then appeared
before that great ofe’s wife,


SHANTI PARVA,


49—51. To that foremost of Rishis who
had gone there for holding sexual inter-
course, the child in the womb of Utathya’s
wife, O son of Kunti, whose body had
already been formed of the five principal
elements, said,—O giver of boons, I have
already entered into this womb. You
should not attack my mother !—Hearing
these words of the unborn child, Vrihaspati
became filled with anger and imprecated
a curse on him, saying,—Since you obstruct
me thus when I have come here from desire
of the pleasures of sexual ‘union, therefore
shall you, through my curse, be visited by
blindness.


52. Through this curse of that foremost
of Rishis, the child of Utathya was born
blind and remained so for a longtime. It
was, therefore, that that Rishi, in days of
yore, passed by the name of Dirghatamas.


53. He, however, acquired the four
Vedas with their eternal limbs and sub-
sidiary parts. After that he frequently
invoked me by this secret name of mine.
Indeed, according to the ordinance as laid
down he repeatedly called me by the name
of Keshava.


54—55. Through the merit he acquired
by uttering this name repeatedly, he be-
came cured of his blindness and then
passed by the name of Gotama. This
name of mine, therefore, O Arjuna, is
productive of boons to them who utter it
among all the gods and the great Rishis.
The god of fire and Shoma, blending to-
gether, become transfused into one and the
same substance. {t is, therefore, that the
entire universe of mobile and immobile
creatures is said to be pervaded by those
two gods.


56. In the Puranas, Agni and Shoma
are spoken of at possessing natures that
had one and the same result. The gods
also are said to have Agni for their mouth.
It is on account of these two beings gifted
with natures leading to the same result that
they are said to be deserving of each other
and upholders of the universe.”


CHAPTER CCCXLIUIE


(MOKHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued,


Arjuna said :—

1, How did Agni and Shoma, in days
of yore, attain to uniformity with regard
to their original nature? This doubt bas
arisen in my mind. Dojyou remove it, O
slayer of Madhu.


557
The Holy One said :— ;


2. I shall recite to you,-O son of Pandu,
an ancient story of events arising from my
own energy. Do you listes to it with con-
centrated mind, -


3. When four thousand divine cycles
elapse, the dissolution of the universe sets
in. The Manifest disappear into the Un-
manifest. All creatures, mobile and im-
mobile, meet with destruction. i


4. Fire, Earth, Wind, all disappear.
Darkness covers the universe which
comes one endless expanse of water.


5. When that infinite expanse of water
only exists tike Brahma without a second,
itis neither day nor night, Neither aught
nor naught exists; neither manifest nor un~
manifest.


6. When such is the state of thé ani.
verse, the foremost of Beings, viz., the
Eternal and Immutable Hari originates
from Ignorance, that combination of the
qualities belonging to Narayana, that is
indestructible and immortal, that is with.
out senses, that is inconcéivable and un-
born, that is Truth’s self fraught with
mercy, that is endued with: the form of
existence which the rays of the gem ealled
Chintamani have, that causes various Kinds
of inclinations to flow in diverse directions,
that is divested of the principles of hosti-
lity. dnd decay, and mortality and decay,
that is formless and all-pervading, and that
is endued with the principle of unjversak
Creation and of Eternity without beginning,
middle, or end. ‘There is authority for
this assertion. ‘


g. The Shruti deckares;—Day was not.
Night was not. Aught was not. Naughe
was not. in the begianing there was only
Ignorance,


8. She was of the form of the universe,
and she is the night of Narayana of uni«
versal form. ‘This is the meaning of tbe
word of Tamas,


g. From that Purusha thus born of
‘Tamas and having Brahma for his parent,
came into existence the Being called Brah-
man, Brahman, wishing to create creatures.
caused Agni and Shoma to originate from
his.own eyes. Afterwards when creatures.
were to be created, the created* persons
came out in their due order as Brahmanas
and Kshatriyas. He who came into being
as Shoma was none else than Brahma; and
they that were born as Brahmanas were
alt Shoma in scoth. He who came into
Being as Agni was none else than Kshatra.
The Brahmanas became gifted with greater
energy than the Kshatras. If you enquire
about the reason thereof, the answer is that


558


MAHABHARATA,


this superiority of the Bratimanas to the ! the universe, first created the Brahmanas,


Kshattiyas is an attribute which is mani-
fest to the whole world. It occurred as
follows. The Brahmanas represent the
eldest creation amongst men. None were
created before who were superior to the
Brabmanas. He who offers food into the
mouth of a Brahmana is considered as
pouring libations into a burning fire. I
say that having arranged things thus, the
creation of creatures was accomplished by
‘Brahman. Having established all created
Beings in their respective positions, he
keeps us the three worlds. There is a
similar declaration in the Mantras of the
Shrutis. +


to, You, O Agni, are the Hotri in sacri-
fices, and the benefactor of the universe.
You are the benefactor of the gods, of men
and of all the worlds. . ;


tr. There is other authority also for
this—You are, O Agni, the Hotri of the
universe and of sacrifices. You are the
instrument through which the gods and
men do good to the universe.


tz, Agni is truly the Hotri and the per-
former . of sacrifices. Agni-is again the
Brahma of the sacrifice. : :


13. No libations can be poured into the
sacrificial fire without uttering Mantras;
there can be no penances without a person
to perform them ; the worship of the gods
and men and the Rishis is done by the
libations poured with Mantras. Hence, O
Agni, you have been considered as the
Hotri in sacrifices. You are, again, all
the other Mantras that have been de-
claced with regard to the Homa rites of
men, The duty of the Brahmanas is to
officiate for others in the sacrifices they
perform. The two other castes. viz., Kshat-
ras and Vaishyas, that are included within
‘the twice-born class, have not the same
duty, laid down for them. Hence, Brah-
manas are like Agni, who uphold -sacri-
fices. The sacrifices strengthen the gods.
Thus, strengthened the gods fructify the
Earth. But the result that may be gained
by the foremost of sacrifices may as well
be done through the mouth of the Brah-
manas,

¥4. That learned man who offers food
intothe mouth of a Brahmana is said to
pour libations into the sacred fire for plea-
sing the gods,


15. In this way the Brahmanas have
come to be considered as Agni. They who
are endued with learning worship Agni.
Agni is, again, Vishnu. Entering all crea-
tuces, he upholds their vital airs.

16. Regarding it there is a Verse sung
by Sanatkumara.


The Brahmanas become immortal by study-
ing the Vedas, and go to heaven by virtue
of such study. The intelligence, speech,
acts and observances, faith, and the
penances of the Brahmanas keep up both
the Earth and the heaven like slings of
strings upholding bovine nectar.


17. There is no duty higher than Truth.
There is no one more worthy of respect
than the mother. There is none more
efficient than the Brahmana for conferring
happiness both in this world and the next.


18. The inhabitants of those kingdoms
where Brahmanas have no certain means
of maintenance become very wretched.
There the oxen do not carry the people or
draw the plough, nor do cars of any kind
bear them. There milk kept in jars is
never churned for producing butter. On
the other hand, the dwellers become shorn
of every prosperity, and follow the ways of
robbers,


19g—57. In the Vedas, the Puranas, the
histories, and other authoritative writings,
it is said that the Brahmanas, who are the
souls of all creatures, who are the creators
of all things, and who are at one with all
existent objects, originated from the mouth
of Narayana, Indeed, it is said that the
Brahmanas first issued of that great boon-
giving god’s mouth when he had controlled
his speech as a penance. The Brahmanas
are distinguished “above the gods and
Asuras,.since they were created by myself
in my indescribable form as Brahma as T
have created the gods and the Asuras and
the great Rishis and placed them in their
respective situations and have to punish
them occasionally, On account of his
amorous assault on Ahalya, Indra was
cursed by Gautama, her husband, through
which Indra got a green beard on his face.
Through that curse of Kaushika, Indra lost
also, his own testicles which loss was after-
wards compensated by the substitution of
the testicles of aram. When in the sacri-
fice of king Sarjjati, the great Rishi
Chyavana wanted to make the twin Ashwins
sharers of the sacrificial offerings, Indra
objected.. Upon Chyavana’s insisting, Indra
tried to hurl his thunderbolt at him. The
Rishi paralysed Indra’s arms. Enraged
at the destruction of his sacrifice by Rudra,
the great Rishi Daksha once more began to
practise severe austerities, and attaining to
high power caused something like a third —
eye to appear on the forehead of Rudra.
When Rudra became ready for the des-
truction of the triple city belonging to the
Asuras, the preceptor of the Asuras, vzz.,
Ushanas, provoked heyond patience, tore


Brahman, in creating | a matted lock from his own head and hurled


SHANTI PARVA.


it at Rudra. From that matted lock of
Ushanas originated many serpents, Those
serpents began to bite Rudra, at which his
throat became blue. During a_ period,
long gone by, at the time of the Self-
born Manu, it is said that Narayana
had seized Rudra by the throat and hence
did Rudra’s throat become blue. On
the occasion ‘of churning the Ocean for
ambrosia, Vrihaspati of Angiras’s family
sat on the shores of the Ocean for perform-
ing the rite of Puruscharana. When he
took up a little water for the purpose of
the initial rinsing, the water seemeed to him
to be very muddy. At this Vrihaspati be-
came angry and cursed the Ocean, saying,—
Since you continue to be so dirty without
caring for the fact of my having come to
touch you, since you have not become clear
and transparent, therefore from this day
you shall be tainted with fishes and sharks
and tortoises and other aquatic animals!
From that time, the waters of the ocean
have become filled with various sorts of sea-
animals and ‘monsters. Vishwarupa, the
son of Tashtri, formerly became the priest
af the gods. He was, on his mother’s side,
connected with the Asuras, for his mother
was the daughter of an Asura. While
publicly offering to the gods their shares of
sacrificial offerings, he privately offered
shares thereof to the Asuras. The Asuras,
headed by their king Hiranyakashipu, then
went to their sister, the mother of Vishwa-
rupa, and begged a boon from her, saying,
Your son Vishwarupa by Tashtri, other-
wise called Trishiras, is now the priest of
the gods. While he gives to the gods their
shares of sacrificial offerings publicly, he
gives us our shares of the same privately.
On account of this, the gods are being
advanced ‘and we are being weakened.
You should, therefore, influence him that he
may take up our cause !—Thus addressed
by them, the mother of Vishwarupa went
to her son who was then living in the
Nandana forest (of Indra) and said to
him,—How is it, O son, that you are en-
gaged in advancing the interests of’ your
enemies and weakening that’ of your
maternal uncles? You should not act in
this way. Thus begged by his mether,
Vishwarupa thought that he should not
disobey her words, and as the result of


that thought he went over to the side of-


Hiranyakashipu, after having paid proper
respects to his mother. Upon the arrival of
Trishiras, king Hiranyakashipu dismissed


bis old Priest, viz, Vashishtha the son of.


Brahman, and appointed Trishiras to that
office. Enraged at this, Vashishtha cursed
Hiranyakashipu, saying,—Since you dis-
miss me and appoint another person as
your Priest, this Sacrifice of yours shall not
be completed, and some Ifeing, the like of


559


whom has not existed before, will kill you !
On account of this curse, Hiranyakashipu
was killed by Vishnu in the form of a man-
lion. Vishwarupa, having taken up the side
of his maternal relations, began to practise
severe austerities for advancing them.
Moved by the desire of making him swerve
from his vows, Indra sent to him many
handsome Apsaras, Seeing those celestial
nymphs of transcendent beauty, the heart
of Vishwarupa became moved. -Within a
very short time he became greatly attached
to them, the celestial nymphs said to him
one day,—-We shall not tarry here any
longer, In fact, we shalt return to that
place whence we came! ‘he son of Tashtri
replied—-Where will you go? Stay with
me. I shall do you good! Hearing him
say so, the. Apsaras rejoined,«We are
celestial nymphs called Apsaras. We
chose in days of old the illustrious and boon-
giving Indra of great power !—Vishwarupa
then said to them,—-This very day I shalt
so ordain that all the gods with Indra at
their ‘head shall cease to be !—-Saying this,
Trishiras began to recite mentally certain
sacred Mantras of great efficacy. By virtue
of those Mantras he began to increase itt
energy. With one of his mouths he began to
drink all the Soma that Brahmanas devoted
Sacrifices poured on their sacred fires with
due rites. With a second mouth he began
to eat all the food. With his third mouth
he began to drink up the energy of all the
gods headed by Indra. Seeing him swel-
ling with energy in every part of his body
that was strengthened by the Soma he wag
drinking, all the gods then, with Indra in
their company, went to the Grandfather
Brahman. Arrived at his presence, they
addressed him and said,—All the Soma
that is duly offered in the sacrifices cele+
brated everywhere is being drunk by
Vishwarupa. Weno longer get our shares.
The Asuras are being advanced, while
we are being weakened!. You should,
therefore, ordain what is for our behoof !
After the gods ceased, the Grandfather
replied—The great Rishi Dadhichi of.
Bhrigu’s race is now engaged in practi-
sing Severe austerities. Go, ye gods, to him
and Solicit a boon from him. , Do ye so
arrange that he may renounce his body! -
With his bones let a new weapon be made
called the Thunder-bolt !--Thus_ instructed
by the Grandfather, tne gods proceeded to
that place where the holy Rishi Dadhichi
was practising austerities. The gods, headed
by Indca, addressed the sage, saying,—O
Holy One, your austerities, we trust, ate
being well performed and uninterrupted !—
The sage Dadhichi said,~-Welcome to all of
you! Tell me what I should do for you! I
shall certainly do what you will say !—-They
then told him,—You should renounce your


360


MAHABHARATA,


body for benefiting all. the worlds!—Thus | the position of Indra, I deserve to enjoy


rayed, the sage Dadhichi,.who was a great
agin and who considered happiness and
misery equally, without being at all di-
spirited, concentrated his Soul by his Yoga-
power and renounced his body. When his
Soal left its temporary tenement of clay,
Dhawi, taking his bones, created a dread-
ful weapon called the Thunder-bolt. With
the Thunder-bolt thus created of the bones
ofa Brahmana, which was impenetrable
by other weapons and irresistible and per-
meated by the energy of Vishnu, Indra
struck Vishwarupa the son of, Tashtri.
Having killed the son of Tashtri -thus,
Indra cut off the head from the body.
From the lifeless body, however, of Vishwa-
_rupa, when it was pressed, the energy
that was still living in it gave birthtoa
powerful Asura named Vritra.. Vitra be-
came the enemy of Indra, but Indra killed
him also with the Thunder-bolt. On ac-
count of the sin being thus doubled of
Brahmanicide, Indra became stricken with
a great fear and as the consequence thereof
he had to relinquish the sovereignty of
heaven. He gntered a cool lotus-stalk that
grew inthe Manasa lake. On account of
the Yoga power of lightness, he became
very minute and entered the fibres of that
lotus-stalk. When the king of the three
worlds, the husband of Shachi, bad thus
disappeared from sight through fear of the
sin of Brahmanicide, the universe became
kingless. The qualities of Darkness and
Ignorance attacked the gods. The Man-
tras uttered by the great Rishis lost all
efficacy. Rakshasas appeared on all sides.
The Vedas were about to disappear, ‘The
denizens of all the worlds, having no king,
fost their strength and began to falt an
easy prey to Rakshasas and other evil
Beings. Then the gods and the Rishis,
in a body, made Nahusha, the son of
Ayush, the king of the three worlds and
duly crowned him as such. Nahusha had
on his forehead full five-hundred luminaries
of great effulgence, which had the virtue
of defeating every creature of energy.
Thus equipt Nahusha continued to govern
heaven. ‘The three worlds were restored
to theic normal state. The inhabitants of
the universe Once more became happy and
cheerful. Nahusha then said,—Everything
that Indra used to enjoy is before -me.
Only, his wife Shachi is not by !~-Having
said this, Nahusha proceeded to where
Shachi was and, addressing her, said,—
O blessed lady, I have become the king of
the gods! Do you accept me !—Shachi
replied, saying,—You are by nature, of a
pious conduct. You belong, again, to the
trace of Shoma. You should not attack
another person’s wife !—Nahusha, thus


addressed by her, said,—I now occupy


the dominions and all the precious posses-
sions of Indea. There is no sin in wish-
ing to enjoy jyou. You were Indra’s and,
therefore, should be mine !—Shachi then
said to him,—f am observing a vow that
has not yet been finished. After perform-
ing the final ablutions I shall come to you
within a few days! Taking this promise
from Indra’s wife, Nahusha left her. Mean-
while Shachi, stricken with pain and grief,
anxious to find her lord and assailed by
her fear of Nahusha, went to Vrihaspati.
At the first sight Vrihaspati took her
to be stricken with anxiety. He imme-
diately took to Yoga-meditation and learnt
that she was intent upon doing what
was necessary for restoring her husband to
his true position. Vrihaspati then address-
ed her, saying, —Equipt with penances and
the merit that will be yours on account of
this vow that you are observing, do you
invoke the boon-giving goddess Upashruti !
Invoked by you, she will appear and show
you where your husband is living !=-While
observing that very austere vow, she in-
voked with the help of proper Mantras the
boon-giving goddess Upashruti. Invoked
by Shachi, the goddess appeared before
her and said,—I am here at your command!
Invoked by you, I have come! What wish
of yours shall I satisfy——Bowing to her
with the head down, Shachi,—O blessed
lady, you should show me where my huse
band is! You are Truth! You are Rita!—
Thus addressed, the goddess Upashruti
took her to the lake Manasa. Arrived
there, she pointed out to Shachi her lord
Indra living within the fibres of a lotus-
stalk. Seeing his wife pale and emaciated,
Indra became highly anxious. And the
king of heaven said to himself,—Alas,
great is the sorrow that has befallensme !
I have fallen off from the position that is
mine! This my wife, stricken with grief
on my account, finds out my lost self and
comes to me here !—Having thought tis,
Indra addressed his dear wife and said,—
In what condition are you . now ?—She
answered him,—Nahusha asks me to be-
come his wife. 1 have obtained leave from
him, having fixed the time when I am to
goto him!—Indra then said to her,—Go
and say to Nahusha ;that he should come
to you on a car never used before, vis., one
to which some Rishis should be yoked, and
aviving at yours in that state he should
marry you! Indra has many beautiful and
charming vehicles, All these have borne
you. Nahusha, however, should come on
such a vehicle that Indra himself had never
used! Thus advised by her husband,
Shachi left that place with a joyous heart.
Indra also once fnore entered the fibres of
that lotus stalk. . iSecing the queen of Indra


_SHANT! PARVA.


return to heaven, Nahusha addressed her
saying,—The time you had fixed is over !—
Shachi said to him, as directed by Indra.
Yoking a number of great Rishis to the
car he rode, Nahusha started from this
place for coming to where Shachi was
living. The foremost of Rishis, viz., Agastya
born within a jar, of the semen of Maitra-
varuna, saw those foremost of Rishis in-
sulted by Nahusha in that way. Nahusha
struck Him with his foot. Agastya said to
him,—Wretch, as you are doing a highly
improper act, do you fall down on the
Earth! Be changed into a snake and do
you continue to live in that form as long
as the Earth and her hills continue !—As
soon as these words were uttered by the
great Rishi, Nahusha dropped down from
that vehicle. ‘Phe three worlds once more
became kingless. ‘lhe gods and the Rishis
then in a body proceeded to where Vishnu
was and appealed to him for encompassing
the restoration of Indra. Approaching him
they said,—O holy one, you should rescue
Indra wha is overwhelmed by the sin of
Brahmanicide'!—-The boon-giving Vishnu
replied to them, saying,—Let Shakra per-
form a Horse-sacrifice in honor of Vishnu.
He will then be restored to his pristine”
position !—The gods and Rishis began to
search for Indra, but when they could not
find him they went to Shachi and said to
her,—O blessed lady, go to Indra and
bring him here !—Requested by them
Shachi once more went to the lake Manasa,
rising from the Jake, Indra came to Vrihas-
pati. The celestial priest Vrihaspati then
made arrangements for a great Horse-sacri-
fice, substituting a black antelope for a
good horse every way fit to be offered up in
sacrifice. Causing Indra, the lord of the
Maruts, to ride upon that very house
Vrihaspati led him to his own place. The
lord of heaven was then worshipped with
hymns by all the gods and the Rishis. He
continued to rule in heaven, purged off of
the sin of Brahtnanicide which was divided
into four parts and ordained to live in
woman, fire, trees, and kine. It was thus
that Indra, strengthened by the energy of a
Brahmana, succeeded in killing bis enemy
it was thus that Indra once more regained
his position: j

_ In days of ydre, while the great Rishi
Bharadwaja was saying his prayers by the
side of. the divine Ganga, one of the three
feet of Vishnu, when he assumed his three-
footed form, reached that place. Seeing
that strange spectacle Bharadwaja attacked
Vishnu with a handful of water, upon which
Vishnu’s bosom received a (mystic mark).
Cursed by that forethost: of Rishis, viz.,
Bhrigu, Agni was obliged to become a
devourer of all things. {


qt


561


58. Once ona time, Aditi, the mother
of the gods, cooked some food for her sons.
She thought that, eating that food and
strengthened by it, the gods would succeed
in killing the Asuras. After the food had
been cooked, Vudha, having finished the
observance of an austere vow, came before
Aditi and said her,—Give me alms! Though
thus solicited Aditi gave him none, think-
ing that no one should eat of the food she
had cooked before her sons, the gods, had
first taken it. Enraged at the conduct of
Aditi who thus Ffefused to give him alms,
Vudha who was Brahma’s self through the
austere vow he had finished, cursed her,
saying that as Aditi had refused him alms
she would have a pain in her womb when
Vivaswat, in his second birth in the womb
of Aditi, would be born in the form of an
egg. Aditi reminded Vivaswat at that
time of the curse of Vudha, and it is, there-
fore, that Vivaswut, the god who is wor-
shipped in Shraddhas, coming -out of the
womb of Aditi, passed by the name of
Martanda.


59. Thé Prajapati Daksha begat sixty


daughters. Amongst them, thirteen were
bestowed {by him upon Kashyapa; ten
upon Dharma; ten upon Manu; and


twenty-seven upon Shoma. Although all
the twenty-severi who were called Naksha-
tras and conferred upon Shoma were equal
in beauty and accomplishments, yet Shoma
became more attached to one, viz., Rohini,
than the rest. Filled with jealousy, the rest
of his wives, leaving him, went to their
father and informed him of this conduct of
their husband, saying,—O holy one,
although all of us are equalin beauty, yet
our husband Shomais wholly attached ta
our sister Rohinil~Enraged at this re-
presentation of his daughters, the celestial
Rishi Daksha cursed Shoma, saying, that
thenceforth the disease phthisis should
attack his son-in-law and live in him.
Through this curse s Daksha, phthisis
attacked the powerful Shoma and entered*
into his person. Attacked by phthisis
thus Shonia came to Daksha. ‘ne latter
addressed him, saying,—I have cursed you
because of your unequal conduct towards
your wives. Fhe Rishi then said unto
Shoma,~—You are being reduced by the
disease phtlisis that has attacked you,
There is a sacred. water called Hiranya-
sarah in the Western ocean. Going to that
sacred water, do you bathe there !—Ad-
vised by the Rishi, Shoma went there.
Arrived at Hiranyasarah, Shoma bathed
in that sacred water. Performing his ob-
lations, he purged himself off of the sin,
And because that sacred water was
illumined (abhasita) by Shoma,
fore was it from that day called by thg


‘


theres ©


562


name of Prabhasa. On account, however,
of the curse imprecated upon him in days
of-yore by Daksha, Shoma, to this day,
begins to decrease from the night of the
full moon till his total disappearance on the
night of the new moon whenee he once
more begins to increase till the night of
full moon, The brightness also of the
lunar disc from that time got a stain, for
the body of Shoma, since then, has come
ta show certain black spots. Im fact, the
splendid disc of the mopn has, from that
day, come to show the mark of a hare,


60. Once on a time; a Rishi name
Sthulashiras was practising very severe
austerities on the northern breasts of the
mountains of Meru. While engaged in
those austerities, a pure breeze, full of all
sorts of delicious perfumes, began to blow -
there and fan his body. Scorched as his
body was by the very severe austerities he
was practising, and hving as he did upon
air alone to the exclusion of every sort of
food, he became highly pleased at that
delicious breeze which blew around him.
While he was thus pleased with the deli-
cious breeze that fanned him, the trees
around him, showed their flowers for
making a display and extorting his praise.
Displeased at this conduct of the trees
which was the outcome of jealousy, the
Rishi cursed them, saying,~-Henceforth,
ye shall not be able to put forth your
flowers at all times, e


61. In days of yore, for doing good to
the world, Narayana was born as the great
Rishi Vadavamukha. While practising
severe austerities on the breast of Meru,
he called the Ocean to his presence. ‘Mhe .
Ocean, however, disobeyed his command.
Engaged at this, the Rishi, with the heat
of his body, solidified the waters of the
Ocean and made them as saltish in taste
as the human sweat. ‘Fhe Rishi further
said, your waters will henceforth be mot
drinkable. Only when the Equine-head,
roving within you, will drink your waters,
they will be as sweet as honey!—lHt is for
this curse that-the waters of the Ocean
fo this day are saltish and are drunk by
no one else than the Equine-head.


62. The daughter; named Uma, of the
Himavat mountains, was sought by Rudra
in marriage. (Ater Himavat) had pro-
mised the hand of Uma to Mahadeva the
great Rishi Bhrigu, approaching Himavyat,
said €0 him—Give this daughter of yours
to me in marriage !—Himavat replied to
him,—Rudra is the bridegroom already
selected by me for my daughter !—Enraged
at this reply, Bhrigu said—Since you re-


fuse my suit for the hand of your daughter |-were lost on the
and insult me thus, you will no longer | nether regions.


MAHABHARATA.


contain jewels and gems !—To this day, on
account of the Rishi’s words, the mountains
of Himavat have not any jewels and gems,
Such is the glory,of the—EBrahmanas.


63. It is through the favour of the Brahe
manas that the Kshariyas are able to
possess the eternal and jundecaying Earth
as their wife and enjoy her. ‘Ihe power
of the Brahmanas, again, is made up of
Agniand Shoma. The universe is kept up
by that power and, therefore, is upheld by
Agni and Shoma united together,


64. It is said that the Sun and the
Moon are the eyes of Narayana. The
rays of the Sun form my eyes. Each of


them, viz., the Sun and the Moon, give
strength and heat to the universe respec
tively.

65. And because of the Sun fand the
Moon thus warming and strengthening the
universe, they are considered as the Harsha
(joy) of the universe. It is on account of
these acts of Agni and Shoma that keeps
up the universe that J pass by the name of
Hrishikesha, O son of Pandu! Indeed,
lam the boon-giving Ishana the Creator
of the universe.


66. Through potency of the Mantras
with which libations of clarified butter are
poured on the sacred fice, 1 take and ap-
propriate the share of the offerings made
in sacrifices. My complexion also is of that
foremost of gems ealled Harit. It is for
noe reasons that I pass by the name of

ari.


67. I am the substantial residence of
all creatures and am considered by persons
well-versed in the scriptures to be at one
with Truth or Nectar, I am, therefore,
called by learned Brahmuanas by the name
of Ritadhama,


68. When in days of old the Earth
became submerged in the waters and was
not seen, I discovered her and raised hee
from the Ocean. Therefore the gods wore
shipped me by the name of Govinda.


69. Shipivishta is a name. Fhe word
Shipi means a° person who has no hair on
his body. He who pervades all things in
the form of Shipi passes by the name of
Shipivishta.

qo. The Rishi VYashka, with quiet sout,
in many a sacrifice invoked me by the
name Shipivishta. It is, therefore, that
eame to bear this secret name.


71. Having adored me by the name of
Shipivishta, the highly intelligent Yashka,
succeeded in restoring the Niruktas which
ee and sunk into the
q


SHANTI
72. 1 was never born. I never take
birth. Nor shall I ever be born. £ am


the Soul of all creatures. Hence I pass
by the name of Aja (unborn).


73. Uhave never uttered anything mean
orobscene. The divine Saraswati who is
Truth, who is the daughter of Brahman
and is named Rita, represents my speech
and always lives in my tongue.


74. The existent and the non-existent
have been merged by me in my Soul.


The Rishis living in Pushkara which is |


considered as the residence of Brahmana
called me by th® name of Truth.


75-76. Ihave never swerved from the
quality of Goodness, and know that the
quality of Goodness has emanated from
me. In this birth also of mine, O Dhanan-
jaya, my ancient quality of Goodness has
not left me so that in even this life, estab-
lishing myself on Goodness, I began to
perform acts without ever wishing for their
fruits. Purged off of aff sins as I ‘am by
virtue of the quafity of Guodness which is
my nature, [ can be seen by the help of
that knowledge only which flows from
adoption of the quality -of Goodness. I
am reckoned also among those who follow
that quality. For these reasons am I known
by the name of Sattwata.


77. Ltillthe Earth, taking the form of
a large ‘plough-share of black iron. And
because my complexion is dark, there-
fore, am I called by the name of {Krishna,


78. Ihave united the Earth with Water,
Ether with Mind, and Wind with. Fire.
Therefore am I called Vaikuntha.


79. Thecessation of separate conscious
existences by identification with Supreme
Brahma is the highest stage fora living
agent to acquire. And since I have never
swered from that condition, | am, therefore,
called by the name of Achyuta.,


80. The Earth and the sky are known
to extend on all sides. And because I up-
hold them both, therefore, am I called by
the name of Adhokshaja.


8t. Persons well-versed in the Vedas
and engaged in interpreting the words
used in those scriptures worship me in
sacrifices by calling upon me by the same
name, :

82. In days of yore, the great Rishis,
while practising severe austerities, said,—
No one else in the universe, save the power-
ful Narayana, is capable of being called
by the name of Adhokshaja.. ;

83. Clarified butter which keeps up the
fives of afl creatures in the universe forms
ay effulgence; [t is, therefore, that Brah-
mahas well-versed in tje Vedas and pos-


PARVA. 363 |
sessed of concentrated souls call me by the
name of Ghritarchis..


84—85. There are three well-known in-
gtedients of the body. They have their
origin in action, and are called Bile,
Phiegm, and Wind. ‘The body is called a
union of these three. AH living creatures
are kept up by these three, and when these
three become weakened, living creatures
also become weakened. It is, therefore, that
all persons welt-vetsed in the scriptyres of
the science of Life call me by the nante of
Tridhata, a. & -


86. The holy Dharma ts knows among
all creature by the name of Vrisha, O
Bharata! Hence it is that lam called the
excelient Vrisha in the Vedic lexicon called
Nighantuka.


87. The word 'Kapi’ signifies the fore-
most of boars, and Dharma is otherwise
kaown by the name of Vrisha, It is, there-
fore, that that lord of all creature, vis.,
Kashyapa, the common father of the gods
and the Asuras, called me by the name
Veishakapi.


88. The gods and the Asuras have never.
been able to know my beginning, my ,
middfe, or myend. {t. is, therefore, that I
am sung as Anadi, Amadhya, Anaata. [
am the Supreme Lord, gifted with power,
and I am the eternal witness of the
universe.


89. I always hear words that are pure
and holy, O Dhananjaya, and never. catch
anything that js sinful, Hence am I called
by the name of Shuchishravas.


go. Putting on, in days of yore, the form
of a boar with a single tusk, QO increaser


“of the joys of others, I raised the sub-


merged Earth from the bottom of the ocean.
Therefore am I called by the name of
Ekashringa


ph While I put on the form of a power-
ful boar for this purpose, | had three bumps
on my back. Indeed, on account of this
pecullarity of my form at that time that [

ave come to be called by the name of
Trikakud (threeehumped).


92. Those who are well-versed in the
science of Kapila call the Supreme Soul
by the name Virincha. That Virincha is
otherwise called the great Prajapati (ar
Brahman). Verily, fam at one with Him
called Virincha on account of my impart-
ing animation to all living creatures, for I
am the Creator of the universe.


93. The preceptors of Sankhya philoso-
phy, who have settled conclusions, call me
the eternal Kapila living in the midst of-
the solar disc with but Knowledge for my
companion,


564

94. On Earth I-am known to be at one
with Him who has been sung in the Vedic
hymns as the effulgent Hiranyagarbha and
who is always adoréd by Yogins. ;


95. I am considered as the embodied
form of the Rich Veda consisting of twenty-
one thousand verses. Persons well-versed
in the Vedas also call me the embodiment
of the Samans of a thousand branches.
Thus do learned Brahmanas who are my
devoted worshippers and who are few in
number sing me in the Aranyakas.


96. In the Adhyaryus I am sung as the
VajursVeda of fifty-six and fifteen and
thirty branches.


97. Learned Brahmanas well-versed in
the Atharyans consider me as identical
with the Athatvans consisting of five
Kalpas and all the Krityas,


98. All the sub-divisions of the different
Vedas with their branches, and all the
verses that compose these branches, and all
the yowels that occur in those verses, and
all the rules of pronunciation, know, O
Dhananjaya, are my work,


‘99, O Partha, He who rises and who
gives various gods, is none else than myself.
I am He who is the repository of the
science of syllables and pronunciation tkat
is treated of in the supplemental! parts of
the Vedas.


1oo—102. Following the path pointed
out by Vamadeva, the great Rishi Panchala,
through my favour obtained from that
eternal Being the rules of the division of
syllables and words, Indeed, Galava,
born ‘in the Vabhravya race, having
acquired high ascetic success and obtained
a boon from Natayana, compiled the rules
about the division of syllables and words
and those about emphasis and accent in
utterance, and appeared as the first
scholar who became conversant with those
two subjects. Repeatedly thinking of the
sorrow of birth and death, Kundarika and
king Brahmadatta attained to that pros-
perity which is acquired by persons devoted
to Yoga, in course of seven births, through
my favour.


103. In days of yore, O Partha, I was,
for some reason, born as the son of Dharma,
O: Kuru-chief, and owing to such birth of
mine I was celebrated under the name of
Dharmaja.


104. Ltook bicth in two forms, azz., as
Nara and Narayana. Riding on the car
that helps the performance of scriptural
and other duties, | practised, in those two


forms, eterna! austerities on the breast of.


Gandhamadana. ,
105. At that time the great sacrifice of


MAHABHARATA,


Daksha took place. Daksha, however, in
that sacrifice of his, refused to dedicate a
share to. Rudra, O Bharata, of the sacri-
ficial offerings.


106. Moved by the sage Dadhichi,
Rudra destroyed that sacrifice. He hurled
a flaming dart.


107. That dart, having consumed all
the articles of Daksha’s sacrifice, came
with great force towards us at the retreat
of Vadari.


108. With great violence that dart then
dropped upon the chest of Narayana.
Attacked by the violence of that dart, the
hair on the head of Narayana became
green. In fact, of account of this change
in the color of my hair { came to be called
by the name of Munjakesha.


tog. Driven off by an exclamation of Hun
which Narayana uttered, this dart, losing
its power, returned to Shankara’s hands,


tro. At this, Rudra became greatly
enraged and as the outcome thereof he
rushed towards the Rishis Nara and Nara-
yana gifted with the power of severe
austerities.


tit, Narayana then seized the rushing


Rudra with his hand by’ the throat.
Caught by Narayana, the lord of the
universe, Rudra’s throat changed color


and became dark. From that time forth,
Rudra came to be called by the name of
Shitikantha.


112. In the meantime Nara, for des-
troying Rudra, took up a blade of grass:
and inspired it with Mantras. The blade
of grass, thus inspired, was converted into
a powerful battle-axe.


113. Nara suddenly hurled that battle-
axe at Rudra but it broke into pieces. For -
that weapon thus breaking -into pieces, I
came to be called by the name of Khanda- :
parashu. a


Arjuna said :—

114. In that. battle capable of encom-
passing the destruction of the three worlds,
who acquired the victory, O Janarddana,.
do you tell me this.


The Blessed and Holy One said :—


115. When Rudra and Narayana thus.
fought. all the universe became suddenly
stricken with anxiety, ;


116. The god of fire ceased to accept
libations of even the purest clarified butter
duly poured in.sacrifices with the help of
Vedic Mantras. The Vedas no longer
shone by inward fight in the minds of the
Rishis of putified ates


‘


SHANTI


117. The quality of Darkness and Igno-
tance possessed the gods, The Harth
shook. The vault of the sky seemed to


divide in two parts.


118, All the luminaries became deprived
of their effulgence. The Creator, Brahman,
himself dropped from his seat. The Ocean
himself became dry. The mountains of
Himavat became riven.


119—120, When such dreadful portents
appeared everywhere, O son of Pandu,
Brahman, attended by all the gods and the
great Rishis, soon come to the piace where
the battle was going on. The four-headed
Brahman, capable of being understood
with the help of only the Niruktas, joined
his hands and addressing Rudra, said :—=


121. Let good happen to the three
worlds. Throw down your weapons, O
lord of the universe, for doing good to the
world,


122—123. That which is indestructible,
immutable, suprente, the origin of the
universe, uniform, and the supreme actor,
that which ts above all pairs of opposites,
and inactive, has, chosing to be shown, been
pleased to assume this one blessed form.
This Nara and.Narayana have taken birth
in the race of Dharma.


124. The foremost of all gods, these two
are observers of the highest vows and
gifted with the severest penances. Through
some reason best known to Him I myself
have originated from the quality of His
Grace,


125—127. Eternal as you are, for you
have ever existed since all the past crea-
tions, you too have originated from His
anger, With myself then, these gods, and
all the great Rishis, do you worship this
displayed form of Brahma and let peace
be to all the worlds forthwith!—Thus ad-
dressed by Brahman, Rudra immediately
renounced the fire of his anger and began
to please the illustrious and powerful
Narayana. Indeed, he soon placed him-
self at the disposal of the worshipful, boon-
giving, and powerful Narayana,


128. That boon-giving god who has his
anger and the senses under control, be-
came soon pleased and reconciled with
Rudra.


129. Well-worshipped by the Rishis, by
Brahman, and by ali the gods the great
God, the Lord of the universe, otherwise’
called by the name of Hari, then addressed
the illustrious Ishana and said these
words :— .


"430. He who knows yoy knows me. He
who follows you follows me ! There is no


PARVA. 565


differecg between you and me.
never think otherwise,


131. . The mark made by your lance on
my chest will frem this day put on the
form of a beautiful whirl, and the mark “of
my hand on your throat will also assume a
beautiful shape on account of which you
shall, from this day forth, be called by the
name of Shreekantha.


The Blessed. and Holy One said :—


132—133. Having mutually caused such
marks on each other’s body, the two Rishis
Nara and Narayana thus made friends
with Rudra and sending away the gods,
once more began to practise penances with
a tranquil souls. I have thus told you,
O son of Pritha, how in.that battle which
occurred in days of yore between Rudra
and Narayana, the latter got the victory.


1%4. 1 have told you the many secret
names by which Narayana is called,! and
what the meanings, O Bharata, are of those
names, which, as I have told you the.
Rishis have bestowed upon the great God. :


135. In this way, Oson of Kunti, as-
suming various forms dol! rove at will,’
through the Earth, the région of Brahman
himself, and that other high and eternal
region of happiness called Goloka.


136. Protected by me in the great battle, '
you have acquired a great victory.


137. .That Being whom, at the time of
all your battles, you saw stalking in your
van, know, O son of Kunti, is no other than
Rudra, that god of gods, étherwise called ~
by the name of Kaparddin,


138. He is otherwise known by the name
of Kala and should se Known as‘one that:
has originated from my anger. The enemies
whom you have killed were all, in the first
instance, killed by him.


139. Do you bend your head to that
god of gods, that lord of Uma, gifted with
immeasurable power. With concentrated
soul, do you bend your head to that illustri-
ous Lord of the universe, that indestructible
god, otherwise called by the name of Hari.


140. He is none else than that god who,
{ have repeatedly said to you, has origi-
nated from my anger, You have before
this, heard, O Dhananjaya, of the power
and energy which live in him.


‘Do you


566


CHAPTER CCCXLIV. -


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA),.—
Continued.


Saunaka said :—


1. O Sauti, excellent is this discourse’


which you have recounted. Verily, these
ascetics, having heard it, have all been
filied with surprise.


2. -It is said, O Sauti, that a discourse
that has Narayana for its subject is more
fruitful of merit than sojourns to all the
’ sacred retreats and ablutions performed in
‘all the sacred waters on the Earth.


3. Having listened to this discourse of
yours }that has Narayana for its theme,
that is sacred and capable of purifying one
of every sin, all of us have certainly be-
come holy.


4. Worshipped of all the worlds, that
illustrious and foremost of gods is incapable
of being seen by the gods with Brahman
numbering among them and all the Rishis.


5. That Narada was able to see of
Narayana, otherwise called Hari, was
owing, O son of Suta, to the especial
favour of that divine and powerful Lord.


6. When, however, the celestial Rishi
Narada had succeeded in seeing the
Supreme Lord of the universe as residing
in the form of Aniruddha, why did he
again proceed so speedily (to the retreat of
Vadari) for seeing those two foremost of
gods, wiz., Nara and Narayana? Do you,
O Sauti, tell us the reason of Narada’s
conduct.


Sauti said :—

7—8. During the continuance of his
Sacrifice, Janamejaya, the royal son of
Parikshit, taking advantage of an interval
in the sacrificial rites, and when all the
learned Brahmanas were resting, O
Shaunaka, that king of kings, addressed
the grand-father of his grand-father, vzz.,
the Island-born Rishi ‘Krishna, otherwise
called Vyasa, that ocean of Vedic learning,
that foremost of ascetics gifted with power,
and said these words, :


Janamejaya said :—

g. After the celestial Rishi Narada had
come back from White-Island, reflecting,
as he came, on the words spoken to him
by the holy Narayana, what, indeed, did
that great ascetic next de?


10. Arrived at the retreat known by the
name of Vadari on the breast of the
Himavat mountains, and seeing the two
Rishis Nara and Narayana who were


MAHABHARATA.


practising severe austerities at that place,
how long did Narada live there and what
were the subjects of conversation between
him and the two Rishis ?


tt. This discourse on Narayana, that
is really an ocean of knowledge, has been
raised by your intelligent self by churning
that vast history caHed Bharata which cone
sists of a hundred thousand Verses.


t2—13. As butter is raised from curds,
sandal- wood from the mountains of Malaya,
the Aranyakas from the Vedas, and
ambrosia from all the medicinal herbs,
similarly, O ocean of austerities, has this
discourse that is like ambrosia and that has
Narayana for its object, been raised by
you, O Brahmana, from various histories
and Puranas existing in the world.


14. Narayana is the Supreme Lord.
Illustrious and gifted with great power,
He is the soul of all creatures. Indeed,
O foremost of twice-born ones, the energy
of Narayana is irresistible,


15. At the end of the zon, all the gods
having Brahman for their foremost, allt
Rishis with the Gandharvas, and all things
mobile and immobile, enter into Narayana.


16—-21. I think, therefore, that there
is nothing holier on earth jor in heaven
and nothing higher than Narayana. A
sojourn to all the sacred places on Earth,
and ablutions performed in all the sacred
waters, do not produce so much merit as a
discourse that has Narayana for its subject.
Having listened to this discourse from the
beginning,—this discourse on Hari, the
lord af the universe, which dissipates all
sins, we feel that we have been purged off
of all our sins, and sanctified entirely.
Nothing wonderful was done by my an-
cestor Dhananjaya, whose was the victory in
the great battle on Kurukshetra, for it
should be remembered that he had Vasu-
deva for his friend. I think that that person
could have nothing unttainable in the three-
worlds, who~ had for his friend Vishnu
himself, that great Lord of the universe !
Highly fortunate and commendable were
those ancestors of mine, since they had
Janarddana himself for superintending their
temporal and spiritual prosperity. Wor-
shipped of all the worlds, the holy Narayana
is capable of being seen with the help of
austerities alone.


22. They, however, succeeded in seeing
Narayana adorned with the beautiful mys-
tic mark. More fortunate than my ances-~
tors was the celestial was the Rishi Narada
the son of Prameshthi.


23. Indeed, I think that Narada, who
is above all desfruction, was gifted with
great energy, for going to White-Island


SHANTI PARVA,


the had sticceeded in seeing the person of
Hari.


24. Indeed, it is clear that the sight
- he had got of the Supreme Lord was owing
to only the favour of that Being. Fortu-
mate was Narada inasmuch as he had
succeeded in seeing Narayana as existing
in the form of Aniruddha.


25. Having seen Narayana in that
form, why did Narada hasten once more to
the hermitage of Vadari for seeing Nara
and Narayana! What was the reason, O
ascetic, of this step taken by Narada?


26—28. How long also did Nacada the
son ‘of Prameshthi, after his return from
White Island and arrival at Vadari and
meeting with the two Rishis Nara and
Narayana, reside there, and what conver-
sation had he with them? What did those
two great and foremost of Rishis say to
him? You should tell me all this.


Vaishampayana said :—

29. Salutations to the holy Vyasa of
incomparable energy. Through his favor ;
# shall recite this narrative having Nara-
yana for its theme.


30-31. Arrived at White Island
Narada saw the immutable Hari. Leav-
ing that place, he speedily went, O king, to
the mountains of Meru, remembering those
weighty words which the Supreme Lord had
saidto him. Arrived at Meru he became
filled with wonder at the thought, O king,
of what he had done.


32. And he said to himself,—' How
wonderful is it! The journey I have done
is a long one! Having gone to sucha
distance, | have returned safe and sound !’
From the mountains of Meru he then went
towards Gandhamadana.


33. Passing through the skies he spee-
dily got down upon that extensive retreat
known by the name of Vadari. There he
saw those ancient gods, v7z., those two
foremost of Rishis, (called Nara and Nara-
yana),” performing penances, observing
bigh vows, and depending upon their own
selves.


34. Both of those adorable persons bore
on their chests the mystic marks called
Shreevatsa, and both had matted locks on
their heads. And an account of the efful-
gence with which they illumined the world
they seemed to surpass the very Sun in
energy.


The palms of each. bore the mark
talled the swan’s foot. The soles of their
feet bore the mark of the discus, Their
chests were very broad, their arms ex-
tended to their knees, 4


85.


~ §67


Each of them had four shoulder

Each of them had sixty teeth and
four arms. ‘The voice of eact was as deep
as the roaring of the clouds. ‘Their
faces wete highly beautiful, their foreheads
broad, their brows fair, their cheeks well
formed, and their noses aequitine,


37. The heads of those two gods were
large and round, resembling open ume
brellas. Endued with these marks, they
were cefttainly very superior persona in
appearance,


38-~39. Seeing them Nara became filled
with joy. He saluted them with cespect
and was saluted by them in return. ‘They
seceived the celestial Rishi, saying ‘ Wel+
come,’ and made the ordinary enquiries.
Seeing those two foremost of Beings,
Narada began to think within himself,—~
‘These two foremost of Rishis that are -res-
pected by all creatures seem to be very
like, in appearance, to those persons, wor-
shipped of all beings, whom I have seen in
White-Island.


40. Thinking thus, he went round them
both and then sat down on the excellent
seat made of Kusha grass that had been
offered to him.


41. After this, those two Rishis. that
were the abode of penances, of famous
deeds, and of energy,—those ascetics that
were gifted with tranquillity of heart and
self-control, pecformed their morning rites.


42. They then, without anxious hearts,
adored Narada with water to wash his feet
and the usual. articles of the Arghya.
Having performed their morning rites and
the observances necessary for receiving
their guest, they sat down on two seats
made of wood.


36.


joints,


43. When those two Rishis sat, that
place began to shine with peculiar beauty
even as the sacrificial altar shines with
beauty on account of the sacred fires when
libations of clarified butter are poured
upon them.


44. Then seeing Narada refreshed from
fatigue and seated at his ease and well-
pleased with the rites of hospitality he had
received, Narayana said these words.


Nara and Narayana said ‘—


45. Have you seen in White Island
the Supreme Soul, who is eternal and
divine, and who is the high source whence
we have originated.


Narada said :—


46. I have seen that beautiful Being
whois immutable and who has universe


568


for hisform! In His tive all the worlds,
and all the gods with the Rishis.


47~-48. Even now 1! see that Being in
seeing you two who are eternal. hose
marks and indications that characterise
Hari himself of unmanifest form, charac-
terise you two who are endued with mani-
fest forms. Verily, I see both of you by the
side of that great God. :


49. Dismissed by the Supreme Soul, I
have come here to-day.


go. In energy, fame and beauty, who
else in the three worlds can equal Him
than you two who have been born in the
race of Dharma. a


51. He has told me the entire list of
duties referring to Soul, tle has also told
me of all those incarnations. which he will,
in the future, have in this world.


52. The inhabitants, of White Island
whom I have seen, are all shorn of the five
senses that the ordinary persons” have.
All of them are of awakened souls, endued
as they are witly true knowledge. They
are, again, entirely devoted to the foremost
of Beings, véz.,the Supreme Lord of the
universe, They always engaged in
adoring that great God, and the latter
always sports with them,


53. The holy and Supreme Soul is
always fond of those who are devoted to
him. He is fond also of the twice-born
ones. Always fond of those who are
devoted to Him, He sports with those
worshippers of His.


54. Evjoying the universe, pervading
everything, : the illustrious Madhava is ever
affectionate towards his worshippers. He
is the Actor; he is the Cause; and He is
the Effect. He is gifted with omnipotence”
and immeasurable, effulgenee.


55- He is the Cause whence afl things
proceed. He is the embodiment of all
the scriptural injunction. He is the em-
bodiment of all themes. He is endued
with great fame.

, 56. Uniting Himself with penances, He
has lighted Himself with a splendour which
is said to represent an energy that is higher
than (whacis in) White Island. Of soul
purified by penances, He has ordained
Peace and Tranquillity in the three worlds.


57. With such an auspicious under-
standing, he observes a very superior vow
which is the embodiment of holiness. The
Sun warms not and Shoma does not
adorn the region where he lives practising
austerest penances. There the wind blows
not.


58. Having made an altar measuring


‘MAHABHARATA.


eight fingers’ breadth, the illustrious Crea
tor of the universe is practising penances
there, standing on one foot, with arn
upraised, and with face directed toward
the East.

59—6t. Reciting the Vedas with  theie
branches, he is practising the severest
austerities. Whatever libations of clarified
butter or meat are poured on the sacri-
ficial fire according’ to the ordinances of
Brahman, by the Rishis, by Pashupati
himself, by the rest of the principal gods,
by the Daityas, the Danavas, and the
Re baiaeat all reach the feet of that great
god,


62. Whatever rites and religious acts
are performed by persons whose souls are
entirely given to him, are all received by
that great God on his head,


63. No one is dearer to him in the
three worlds than those persons who are.
enlightened and possessed of great souls.
Dearer even than those persons is one who
is entirely devoted to him.


64. Dismissed by him who is the Su-
preme Soul, I am coming here. This is
what the illustrious and holy Hari has
himself said to me. . F shall henceforth Jive
with you two, devoted to Narayana in the
form of Anirudhha,


CHAPTER CCCXLV.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA)—~—
Continued.


Nara and Narayana, said :—


tr. You deserve very high encomiums,’
and highly favored have you been, since
you have seen the powerful Narayana him=
self. None else, not even Brahman him-
self who has sprurg from the primal lotus,
has been able to see him.


2- That foremost of Purushas, gifted
with power and holiness, is of Gnmanifest
origin.and incapable of being seen, These
words that we say to you are very true, 0
Narada ! :


3. There exists no one in the universe’
who is dearer to him than one that wor-
ships him with devotion. It is, therefore,
O best of twice-born ones, that he showed’
himself to you!

4. No one can go to that realm where
the Supreme Soul resides practising pen-
ances, except we two, O foremost of twice-
born ones.


5. On accoury: of that place being ador-
ned by Him, its' splendour resembles the


SHANT! PARVA.


effulvence of a thousand Suns €olletted
together.


6. From that illustrious Being, O Brah-
mana, from Him who jis the origin of the
Creator of the universe, O foremost of all
persons gifted with forgiveness, originates
the attribute of forgiveness which attaches
to the Earth. ;


7. It is from that illustrious Being
whose attributes are for the good of ai)
beings, that Rasa (Taste) has flown. ‘The
attribute of Rasa belongs to the waters
which are, again, liquid. :


8 + Itisfrom Him that Heat or Light |


has flown, having the attribute of Form
or vision for its soul. It belongs to the
Sun on account of which the Sun becomes ,
able to shine and give heat. .

, 1d” fore-


9 Itis from that illustrigna, } aioe
most of Beings that Tagg eye ses origk-


!


nated. It belongs Wing moves about in


count of whichcducing the sensation of
the | ial 8


q om that powerful Lord of
erse that Sound has arisén.
“Ether, which, therefore, exists

wt and unconfined.


™

it. It is from that illustrious Being that
Mind, which pervades all Beings, has
originated. It belongs to the Moon, on
account of which the Moon has ‘come to
be invested withthe attribute of showing
all the things.


12. Yhat spot where the divine Nara-
yana, that eater of the libations and other
offerings made in sacrifices lives with
Knowledge alone for his companion, has,
in the Vedas, been called’ by the. name of
the productive cause of all things known
as Sat. :


13. The path that is theirs, O foremost
of twice-born ones, that; are stainless and
that are freed from both virtue and sin,
is fraught with auspiciousness and happi-
ness.


14. The Sun, who is the remover of the
darkness of all the worlds, is said to be.
the door. Entering the Sun, the bodies of
such persons become consumed by his fire.
They then become invisible for after that.
they cannot be beheld by any one at any
time.


13. Reduced into invisible atoms, they. :


then enter into Narayana. Passing out
from him also, they enter into the form of
Aniruddia, . :


16—18. Losing all
altogether and change
they then enter into Pradyumna.


72


ye ysical attributes
into ‘mind -alone,
Passing


569


out of Pradyumna, those foremost of twice-
born ones, including both those who are
conversant with Sankhya philosophy and
those who are devoted to the Supreme God,
then enter Sankarshana who is otherwise
called Individual! Sout. After this, divested
of the three primal qualities of Goodness,
Darkness, and Ignorance, those foremost of
twice-born ones Speedily enter the Supreme
Soul otherwise catled Kshetrajna and which
itself is above the three primal qualities. .
Know that Vasudeva is He called Kevte-
trajna. Verily should you know at, that
Vasudeva is thé residence-dt original re-
fuge of all things in 2“ universe, cee

19. Only 89 whose minds are concen-
trated. WO observe all sorts of restraint,
-. ose senses are restrained, and who are
devoted with-their whole souls, succeed in
entering Vasudeva.


20. We two, O foremost of twice-born
ones, have taken birth in the house of
Dharma. Living in this charming and
spacious hermitage, we are practising the
austerest penances. : :


t , a
2t. We are. thus employed, O twice-
born one, moved by the desire of benefit-
ing those manifestations .of the Supreme
‘God, dear to all the celestials, that will
appear in the three worlds. ;


22. In accordance, one after another;
with such ordinances as aré extraordinary
and as apply to us two only, O best of .
twice-born ones, we are duly observing all
excellent and high vows fraught with the
austerest penances. ° og


23. You, O celestial Rishi having pen-
ances for your wealth were seen by us in
White Island when you were there. Having
met. with Narayana, you have formed a
particular resolution, 3% ;


24. In the three worlds consisting of
mobile and immobile Beings, there’ is
nothing that we do not know. Of good or
evil that will ‘occur or bas occurred or is
occurring, that God of gods, O great
ascetic, has informed you.


Vaishampayana continued :—

. 25. Having heard these words of Nara
and Narayana both of whom were prac-
-Using the austerest penances, the celestial


Rishi:Narada joined his hands in respect
and became entirely devoted to Narayana.


2627. . He passed, his time in mental. —
recitation, with due observances, number-
less sacred Mantras that are approved by
Narayana, Adoring the Supreme Deity
Narayana, and Worshipping those two
ancient Rishis ‘also that had taken birth
in the house of Dharma, the illustrious


570


Rishi Narada, gifted with. great energy,
continued to live, thus engaged, ir that re-
treat, called Vadari, on the breast of
Himavat, belonging to Nara and Nara-
yana, for a thousand divine years.


CHAPTER CCCXLVI.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARYA).-=
: Continued.


Vaishampayiona said :—~

1. On one occasion; while ‘living in the
hermitage of Nara and Narayana, Narada
the son of Prameshthi, having. dur, per.
formed the rites and observances in hohu.
of the gods, began to perform thereafter
the rites in honor of the departed manes, -


2—3. Beholding him thus prepared, the
eldest son of. Dharma, vis., the powerful
Narayana, addressed him, saying,—Whom
are you adoring, O foremost of twice-born
ones, by these rites and the observances in
connection with the gods and the departed
manes. O foremost of all persons gifted
with intelligence, tell me this, agreeably
to the scriptures. What is this that you are
doing? What also are the fruits desired
by you of those rites which you are per-
forming.


Narada said:—


4. You said to me-formerly that rites
and observances in honor of the gods{should
be performed. You {said that {the rites in
honor of the gods form the highest sacrifice
and are equivalent to the worship of the
Eternaland Supreme Soul.


§. Thus instructed, I always sacrifice
in honor of the eternal and immutable
Vishnu through these rites that 1 perform
in ene the gods. [Et is from that
Supreme Deity that Brahman, the Grand-
father of all the worlds, sprang in days of
yore. — :

6. That” Brahman, otherwise called
Prameshthi, filled with cheerfulness, caused
my father (Daksha) to come into being.
I was the son of Brahman, created before
all others, by bis will,

7. © righteous and illustrious one, FE
am performing these -rites in honor of the
departed manes for the sake of Narayana
and according to those ordinances that
have been ordained by himself.
trious Narayana is the father, mother, and
grandfather.


8. I all sacrifices performed in honor
of the departed manes, it is that Lord of


The ilfus--


MAHABHARATA.


the universe who is worshipped. On oné
oceaston, the gods, who were,father, taught
their children the Shrutis.


g. Having lost their knowledge of the
Shrutis, the father had to acquire it agam
from those sons to whom they had com-
municated it. On account of this incident,
the sons, who had thus to communicate


| the Mantras to their father, acquired the


status of fathers.


10. Forsooth, what the gods did on that
occasion is well known fo yotr two. Sons
and fathers had thus to adore each other.


11. Having first spread some blades of
Kusha grass, the gods and the departed
manes placed three funeral cakes thereon
and thus adored each other. I wish to know,
however, the reason why the departed
ores ,in days of yore acquired the name


7 a
Nara and Na.—.ang eaid :—~
12, The Earth, inv. | ; sth
her belt of seas, disappeared™.OF yore, wit
Govinda, taking the form of the view,
boar, raised her up. stig
13. .Having replaced the
former position, that foremost ol
his body smeared with water a.
began to do what was necessary


‘Yeo


‘world and its inhabitants.


14—15... When the Sen reached the
meridian, and the hour, therefore, came for
saying the morning prayers, the powerfut
Lord, suddenly shaking off three balls of
mud from his tusk, placed them upon the.
Earth, O Narada, having previously spread
thereon certain blades’ of grass. The
powerful Vishnu dedicated those balls of
mud to his own self, according to the rites
laid down in the eternal ordinance,


‘16-17. Regarding the three balls of
mud that the powerful Lord had shaken


off from his tusks as funeral cakes, he then,
‘with sesame seeds that arose from the heat


of his own body, himself performed the rite
of dedication, sitting with face turned
towards the East. That foremost of gods
then, moved by the desire of establishing


- rules of conduct for the inhabitants of the


three worlds, said these words.


Vrishakapi said :—~—

48. I am the Creator of the worlds. I
am determined to create those that are to
be called departed manes.—Saying these
words, he began to think of those high
ordinances that should regulate the rites
to be performed in honor of the departed
manes. ;


19. While thus doing, he beheld that


SHANTI


the three balls of mud, shaken off his tusk,
had fallen towards the South. He then
said to himself,—These balls, shaken off
my tusk, have fallen on the Earth towards
the south of her surface! Led by this, I
declare that these should be known hence-
forth by the name of departed manes.


20. Let these three that are of no parti-
cular shape, and that are only round, come
to be considered as Pitris in the world!
Thus do I create the eternal Pitris.


2t. Tam the father, the grandfather and
the great grandfather, and I should be
considered as living in these three Pindas.


32. There is no one that is superior to
me. Who is there whom I myself; may
adore with cites? Who, again, is my
father in the universe? I myself am

2


grand-father, :
23—24. Lam, indeed, the arsfid-father
cause! Having


d the father © m th
said hea? *, that God of gods, vis.,


He calle ~-tShakapi, offered those funeral
2 oo wa tearned Brahmana, on the breast
ithe Varaha mountains, with elaborate
rites, By those rites He adored His own
self, and having finished the adoration,
disappeared there and then.


25. Hence the Pitris are called Pinda.
This is the root of the designation.
According to the words given vent to by
Vrishakapi at that time, the Pitris receive
the worship offered by all.


26—27. ‘They who celebrate sacrifices
in honor of and adore the departed manes,
the gods, the preceptor or other reverend
senior, guests arrived at the house, kine,


superior Brahmanas, the goddess Earth,.


.and their mothers, in thought, word, and
deed, are said to adore and sacrifice to
Vishnu himself. Entering the bodies of
all existent creatures, the illustrious Lord
is the Soul of all things.


28. Unaffected by happiness or misery,
His attitude towards all is equal. Gifted
with greatness, and of great soul, Nara-
yaua has been said to be the soul of all
things in the universe.


CHAPTER CCCXLVII,


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued, —


Vaishampayana said:

1. Having heard these words of Nara
and Narayana, the Rishi Narada became
filled with devotion towards the Supreme
Being. Indeed, with his whole soul he
gave himself up to Narayana,


PARVA,


in the hermitage of Nara and
having seen the
heard the excellent discourse having Nara-
yana for its theme, the celestial Rishi
went to his own hermitage on the breast of
Himavat. -


Pandavas.
energy. O perpetuate
Pandavas, having 3+
on Naraya

in soo?


| sout of alt beings.


57%


2. Having tived for a full thousand years
Narnyana,


immutable Hari, and


3.. Those foremost of ascetics, vfs.


Nara and Narayana, however, continued
to live in their charming. hermitage o»
Vadari, practising the severest austeritier


4, You are born in the race eh” 4
You. are of he
Surable
@ race of the
Hed ;to this discourse
, the beginning, you have,
en purged off of all your sing
ur soul bas been sanctified.
5.. Neither, thig world nor the next
world is for him, O best of kings, wha
hates instead of loving and respecting the
immutable Hari.


6.° The ancestors of that person who


‘hates Narayana,-who is the foremost of


s otherwise called


gods, and
into hell for good,

7. O foremost of mén, Vishnu is the
How, then.can Vishnu
be hated, for in hating him one would hate
his own self,


Hari, sins


8. He who is our preceptor, vf3., the
Rishi Vyasa, the son of Gandhavati, has
himself recited this narrative to us about
the glory of Narayana, that glory which
is the highest and which ‘is immutable. I
heard it from him and have recited it to
you exactly 4s | heard it, O sinless one,


g. This religion, with its mysteries and
its abstract of details, was won by Narada,
O king, from that Lord of the universe,
vis., Narayana himself.


to. Even such are the particulars of
this great religion. I have, before this, O
foremost of. kings, explained it to you in the
Hari-Gita, with a brief reference to its
ordinances.


ti. Know that the [sland-born Krishna,
otherwise called Vyasa, sis Narayana on
Earth. Who else than he, O foremost of
kings,: could compile such a work as the
Mahabharata ? Who else than that power-
ful Rishi could describe the diverse kinds
of duties and religion for the observance
and adoption of men.


12, You are bent upon celebrating a
great sacrifice. Let that sacrifice of yours
be ¢elebrated! Having listened to the
various: kinds of duties and religions; let


your Horse-sacrifice ge on,


572


Sauti said :—
13. Having heard this great discourse,
that best of kings began all those rites that
‘are laid down in- the ordinance, for the
completion of his great sacrifice.
14. Accosted ‘by ‘you, O Shaunaka, I
have duly recounted to you and all these
Rishis who inhabit. the Naimisha forest,
) that great discourse having. Narayana for

its theme. ;
“© 13, ‘Formerly Narada had recounted it
{ my ‘preceptor before many Rishis and


iN


tons of Pandu and in the presence of
she. ~ed Bhishma also.
Krisho


~.Mne god Narayana is the
16, The Suprew.,.. ~<t_of Rishis,- and


Lord of all the ford eee i
of the three worlds. He i ta, ~ holder of


Earth herself of huge proportions~ , “te ds
the receptacle of the Shruti’s ‘and of the.
quality of humility. Heis the great recep-

tacle of all those ordinances that should be

practised for acquiring tranquillity of heart,

as also of all those who go by the name

of Yama. He is always accompanied: by

‘the foremost of twice-born ones. Let that

great god be your refuge,


17. Hari ever does what is agreeable
and beneficial to the dwellers of heaven.
He is always the killer of such Asuras..
He is the receptacle of penances. He is
endued with great fame. He is the killer
of the Daityas known by the name of
Madbu and Kaitabha, He is the ordainer
of the ends that are gained by persons ac-
quainted with and observant of soriptural
and other duties. He removes the fears
of all persons. He takes the foremost of
those offerings which are offered in sacri+
fices. He is your refuge and- protection.


18. He is endued with attributes, He is
freed from attributes. He.is endued with
four-fold form. He shares the merits origi-
nating from the’ dedication of tanks and
the observance of similar religious rites.
Undefeated and gifted with great power,
it is He who always ordains the end, ap-
proachable by the Soul alone, of Rishis
of pious deeds. :


19. He is the witness of the worlds.
He is unborn, He is the one ancient Puru-
sha. Endued with*olar complexion, He
is the Supreme Lord, and He is the refuge
of all. Do ‘all of you bow your heads to
Him since He who originated trom the
waters (viz., Narayana himself) bends his
-head to Him. .


zo. He is the origin of the universe,
He is that Being who is called Eternal.
He is Minute. He is the refuge upon
whom all things depend. He is the one
Being who is immutable. The Sankbyas


MAHABHARATA,


and Yogins, of controlled souts, hofd hin
who is eternal in their understanding.


CHAPTER CCCXLVILI.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).~—«
Continued.


Janamojaya said :— :

1. I heard from you the glory of the
divine and Supreme Soul. [ have heard
also of the birth of Supreme God in the
house of Dharma, in the form of Nara and
Narayana.
' a 1 have also heard from you the origitt
‘of the Pinda (funerat cake),ffrom the mighty
‘Boar, Lhave heard from you about those
gods and Rishis that were ordained for the
res ~~4on of Action and of those that were
ordaine~ "Sor the Religion of Renunciation.
3 You wre alsoy
described to us otne: ! ; Wan: hace
said alsoto usof that huge~ - swith thr
Enquine head, of Vishnu, that eate. V1, {2¢
libations and other offerings made in Sacrs.
fices the form, viz, that appeared ir
the great ocean on the North-East: That
form was seen by the illustrious Brahman,
otherwise known by the-name of Para-
meshthi.


5. What, however, were the real features,
and what the energy, the like of which
among all great objects had never appeared
before, of that form which Hari, the up-
holder of the universe, showed at that
time.


6. What did Brahman do, O ascetie,
after having beheld that foremost of -gods,
him whose lke had never been witnessed
before, him who was of’ incomparable
energy, him who had the Equine head,
and: him who.was Sacredness itself ?


7. ©O twice-born one, this doubt has
occurred to us with respect to this ancient
subject of knowledge. O -you of foremost
intelligence, why did the Supreme Deity
put on that form and show himself in it to
Brahman? - :

8. You have, forsonth, sanctified us by
describing to us these various sacred
topics. Hire ‘

Sauti said :—

t shall recount to you that ancient
history, which is quite of a piece with the
Vedas, and which the illustrious Vaisham-
payana recited to the son of Parikshit on
the oc¢asion of the great Snake-sacrifice.


10. Having heard the account of the
\ Sreat form of wach that bad a horse-


ay


“wice-born one,


SUANTI


head, the royal son of Parikshit too had
entertained the same doubt and put the
same questions to Vaishampayana.


Janamejaya said :—

1. ‘Tell me, O best of men, why did
Hari appear in that powerful form, having
a horse-head and which Brahman, the
Creator, saw on the shores of the great
northern Ocean on the occasion referred to
by yourself ?


Vaishampayana said :—

12, All existent objects, O king, in
this world, are the outcome of a combina-
tion of the five principal elements, a com-
bination due to the intelligence of the
Supreme Lord.


13. The powerful Narayana, end
with infinity, is the Supreme 2°
Creator of the Boivers?: He is, | nS
Soul of all things, and the giver, <, d of
Shorn of qualities, he isye~ Posse eSO


them: - 7° best of kings, to me

14. Listery you, how the Destruction of

I recay’ is encompassed. At first, the

went of Earth becomes merged in

ter and nothing then is seen except one
‘expanse of Water on all sides.


45. Water then merges into, Fire, and
.4ire into Wind. Wind then merges into
ther, and Ether, in its-turn, merges into
Minds '

. 16. Mind merges into the Manifest:
The Manifest merges into the Unmanifest
(or Nature), The Unmanifest (or Nature)-
merges into Purusha (Soul) and Purusha
‘merges irito the Supreme Soul (or Brahma).

17, Then Darkness covers the universe,
and nothing ‘can be seen. From that
primal Darkness originates Brahma. Dark-
ness is primeval and immortal.


18. Brahma that originates from prime-


val Darkness develops into the idea of the.


universe, and assumes the form of Purusha.
Such Parusha is called -Aniruddha. Shorn
of sex, it is called otherwise by the name
of Pradhana. — a


19. Thatis also known by the name of
Manifest, or the ‘combination of the three
qualities, O best of kings! He exists with
Knowledge alone for his companion. ‘That
illustrious and powerful Being is otherwise
called by the name of Vishwaksena or
Hari. :

20." Entering into. Yoga-sleep, he lays
himself down on the waters. He then


thinks of the Creation of the Universe of
various phenomena and qualigies.


| The Vedas are my great strength !


§73


21. While engaged in thinking of Crea
tion, he{ recoliects his own great qualitjes.
From this originates the four-faced Brah-
man representing the Consciousness of
Aniruddiha. , pee he


22. he itlustrious Brahman, otherwise
called Hiranyagarbha, is the Grand-father
of all the\ worlds. Having eyes like lotus
petals, he}takes birth within the Lotus that
originates |from (the navel of) Aniruddha,


23. Sea\ted on that Lotus, the illustrious,
powerful, ancl eternal Brahman of wonder-
ful form saw ‘that the waters were oP ci
sides. ~ , :


24—25. Followingy the.guality of Good-
ness, Brahman, otheste called Paramesh-
thi, then bega» +*Create the’universe. In the

imeval F-otus that was effulgent like the

0 drops of water had been thrown
Narayana that were fraught with great
merit. The illustrious Narayana, without
beginning and without end, and aboye des-
truction, cast his eyes on those two drops
of water, — ge: ;

26. One of those two drops of water,
every beautiful and ‘bright, looked like a
drop of honey. From-that drop originates,
at the behest of Narayana, a Daitya of the
name of Madhu made up. of the quality of
Ignorance. The other drop. of water
within the Lotus was very hard. From it
originated the Daitya Kaitabha made up of
the quality of Darkness. sti;

27. Endued thus with the qualities of .
Ignorance and Darkness, the twa Daityas
possessed of might and armed.with maces,
immediately after theic birth, began, to rove
within that huge primevat Lotus.

28. They saw within it Brahman of
incomparable effulgence, engaged in creat-
ing the four Vedas, each gifted with the
most charmifig form.

29. Those two foremost of Asuras,
having bodies, seeing the four Vedas,
suddenly seized: them in the very presence
of their Creator. : :

30. Having seized the eternal Vedas,
the two powerful Danavas, quickly dived
into the ocean of waters which they saw
and, proceeded to its bottom. .

gr. Seeing the Vedas forcibly taken
away from him, Brahman became stricken
with grief. Robbed of the Vedas thus,
Brahman then addressed the Supreme
Lord in these words.


Brahman said :—

32. The Vedas form my great eyes!
fhe
Vedas are my great refuge! The. Vedas


PARVA. |


bare my high Brahma,


574


33. All the Vedas, however, have been
by force taken away ifrom me by the two
Danavas! Depcived of the Vedas, the
worlds I have created have beco ‘ covered
with darkness,


34. Without the Vedas, hew shall I
succeed in starting my Creation? Alas,
Sees is the grief 1 suffer for the/loss of the
edag.


"35. My heart is aching, It Jhas become
the seat of a great sorrow. Who is there
«who will save *nre from thiis ocean of grief
“in'wehich 1 am sunk for” the loss 1 have
suffered #~ Who is therr who will bring me


a b Arccalh tipon lost + Who is there who


36. While Brahman Was~

words, O best of kings, the ?¥ng Ahese
suddenly arose in his mind, O foremose,,
intelligent persons, for singing the praises
of. Hari in these words. The powerful
Brahman then, with hands joined in rever-
ence, and seizing the feet of his progenitor,
sang this highest of hymns in honor of
Narayana.


Brahman said :—

37. \ ‘bow to you, O heart of Brahman!
I bow to you who has been bora before
me! You are the origin of the universe!
You are the foremost of all abodes. You,
oO gaheene one, are the ocean of Yoga
with all its branches.


38. You are the Creator of both what is
Manifest and what is Unmanifest! You
travel the path of great auspiciousness !
You are the consumer of the universe. You
are the inner self of all creatures, You
are without any origin.


39—40. You are the refuge of the uni-
verse. You are jself-create, for you have
no origin. As for myself, I have originated
from your Cheerfulness. From you have I
derived my birth. My first birth from you,
which is considered sacred by all twice-
born ones, was due to your will. My
second birth in days of yore was from your
eyes. :

4%. Through your favour, my third birth
was from your speech. My fourth bicth,
O powerful Lord, was from your ears.


42. My fifth birth, excellent in all ways,
was from your nose, O Lord. My sixth
birth was, through you, from an egg.


43. Thisis my seventh birth. It has
taken place, O Lord, within this Lotus.
At each Creation I take birth from you as
your son, O you who are shorn of the three
qualities. :


44. Indeed, O lotus-eyed one, 1 take
birth as your eldest son, made up of the


MAHABHARATA.


1 foremost of three qualities, Sattwa. You
are endued with that nature which is
Supreme. You originate from yourself.


45. 4 have been created by you. The
Vedas are my eyes. Uence, I am above
Time. Those Vedas, which form my eyes,
have been taken away from me. I have,
therefore, become blind. Do you awake
from this Yoga-sleep. Give me back my
eyes. fam dear to you and you are dear
to me.


46. Thus landed by Brahman, the illus.
‘trious Purusha, with face turned towards
every side, then renounced his sheep, re-
-solved to recover the Vedas. Applying his

Yoga- power, he put on a second form.
. 47. His body, having an excellent nose,
same as bright as the Moon. He
“-an equine head of great fustre,


Fee C
Vedas,. ,ad which was the abode of the


48. The sn, ; —
constellations, becavith all its tuminaries and
head. His locks of hair the crown of his


‘flowing, and had the sheen ere long and


rays. ase soy


49. The regions above and below,
came his two ears. The Earth became
forehead. The two rivers Ganga
Saraswati became his two hips. ‘The &
oceans hecameé his two eye-brows. \


"

50. Fhe Sun and the Moon became his »
twoeyes. The twilight became -his nose.
The syllable Om became his memory and
intelligence. The lightning became his
tongue.


St. The Soma-drinking departed manes
became, it is said, his teeth. The two
regions of happiness vis., Goloka and
Brahmaloka, became his upper and lower
lips. The dreadful night after universal
destruction, and that is above the three
qualities. became his neck.

52. Having put on this form endued
with the equine head and having various
things for its various limbs, the Lord of


| the universe disappeared then and there,
F and went to the nether regions,


53. Having reached those regions he
began Yoga. Adopting a voice governed
by the cules of the science called Shiksha,
he began to chant Vedic Mantras.


54. His pronunciation was distinct and
reverberated through the air, and was
sweet the sound of his voice filled the
nether region from end to end. Gifted
with the properties of all the elements, it
yielded great benefits.


55- The two Asuras, making a compact
with the Vedas about the time when they


SHANTY PARVA,


Would return to take thet up again, threw
them down in the nethet region, and ran
towards the spot whence thise sounds
seemed to come.


836. Meanwhile, O king, the Supreme
Lord with the equine head, otherwise
called Hari, who was himself in the nether
region, took up all the Vedas.


57. Returning to where Brahman was
living, he gave the Vedas to him. avirig
restored the Vedas to Brahman, the Su-
preme Lord once more returned to his own
nature. The Supreme Lord also established
his form with the horse-head in the Nortti-
Eastern region of the great ocean, Having
established him who was the abode of the
Vedas, he once more became the horse-
headed fort that he was.


59. The two Danavas Madhu and
Kaitabha, not finding the person tne


whom thoge se 7-4


, sp en's
a the of yes around
“eat


_-«eon which they bad
tas Was vacent.
-roceeding quickly those two fore
et of powerful Beings, rose from the
ether region,


6t. Returning to where the’ primeval
Lotus .was that had given them birth, they
saw the powerful Being, the original
Creator, living in the form of Anicuddha of
fair complexion and endued with a moons
like splendour. :


62. Of immeasurable prowess, he was
under Yoga-sleep, his body stretched on
the waters. and occupying a space.as vast
as itself. :


63. Highly effulgent and endued with
the pure quality of Goodness, the body of
the Supreme Lord lay on the excellent
hood of a snake that seemed to throw out
flames of fire for the resplendence attach-
ing to it. :


64—65. Seeing the Lord thus lying, the
two foremost of Danavas roared out a loud
laugh. Having the qualities of Darkness
and Ignorance, they. said,—‘ This is that
Being of white complexion. He is now lying
asleep. Forsooth, this one has brought the
Vedas away from the nether region.


66. Whose is he? Whoishe?. Why
is he thus asleep on the hood of a snake ?’
Saying these words, the two Danavas
awakened Hari from his Yoga-sleep.


67. The foremost of Beings, (vis.,
Narayana), thus awakened, understood
that the two Danavas intended to fight
with him. Seeing the two foremost of
Asuras prepared to battle le him, he also
wished to satisfy that desire of theirs.


57§


68. Thiereupon !aii encouiter took place
betweeri those two arid (Narayana. ‘The
Asuras Madhu and Kaitabha were em-
bodiments of the qualities of Darkness and
Ignorance. Narayana killed them both fot
pleasing Brahman. He thence passed by
the riame of Madhusudana (slayer of
Madhu).


69. Having brought about the destrucs
tion of the two Asuras and restored the
Vedas to Brahman, the Supreme Being re
thoved the sorrow of. Brahman; et

jo. Helped then by Hari and -cststed
by the Vedas, Brahman creed” all the
worlds with theie mob’ and immobile
creatures, aot

qt. Aftee- this, Hari, giving to the
Granpdsather intelligence of the foremost


_—ver regarding the Creation, disappeared


there and then for going to the place he
had come from.


72. It was thus that Narayana, having
assumed the form equipped with the horses
head, killed the two Danavas Madhu and
Kaitabha.. Once more, however, he assum
ed (the same form for making the Religion
of Action to prevent the universe. |


73- Thus did. the blessed Hari assyme.
in days of yore that grand form having the,
horse-head, This, of all his forms, endued
with power, is celebrated, as the most
ancient. ; oa eat

74. That person who frequently listens
or mentally recites this history of the as
sumption by Narayana of the form with.
the horse-head, will never forget his Vedic
or other learning.


78. Having worshipped with the. aus+
terest penances the illustrious god with the
horse-head, the Rishi Panchala acquired
the science of Krama by going along the .
path pointed out by the god (Rudra),


75. U have thus recounted to.you, O king; re
the old fstory of Hayashiras, agreeable to
the Vedas, about which you had asked me. _


977. Whatever forms the Stipreme Deity .
wishes to assume with a view tothe gov- .
erning of the affairs of the universe, he
assumes immediately by his. own. inherent .
powers. :


78.. The Supreme God, endued: with.
every prosperity, is the] receptacle of the
Vedas. He is the receptacle of Penances .
also, The powerful Hari is Yoga. He is
the embodiment of the Sankhya philosophy.
He {is that foremost Brahma of which we
hear. ;


79. Truth has Narayana for its refuge.
Rita has Narayana for its soul. The Re-
ligion of Renunciation in which there is


576


no return, has Narayana for its high
region. ;

80, The other Retigion: which has Action
for its root, has equally Narayana for its
soul, The foremost of all the qualities that


belong to the element. of ‘Earth is’ scent.


Scent has Narayana for its soul.

81. The properties’ of Water, O'king,
are called: the ‘Tastes. ‘hese: Tastes‘ have
Narayana‘ .for theie soul. The foremost
property of Fire is‘ form: Form also has

atayena for its soul.

82. Touch," -which is the -property of
Wind; is also said te .have Narayana for its
soul. Sound, which is @>roperty of Air,
has, like the others, Narayana Y>r its soul.

83. Mind: also, which is the prope-.,, of
Nature, has Narayana _for'
Time which is’ measured by the motion
of the celestial luminaries has similarly
Narayana for its soul. - :

84. The ‘presiding’ gods of' Fame, of
Beauty; and'of Prosperity,'‘have the same
Supreme Deity for their soul. Both the
Sanhkhya philosophy and- Yoga have Nara-
yana for their’ soul.


85. The Supreme Being ‘is the .catise of
allthis; as‘Soul. He is,;-again, the cause
of everything, as Nature:

86. His the basis on which all things
depend. He is the doer or agent, and He
is the cause of that' variety in the universe,
He is the various: kitids of power which
actin ‘the universe.' Fifthly; he is that all-
controlling: unseen powec of which ‘people
speak, ; :


87. Those’ engaged in investigating the
several subjects of enquity with thé help of
such reasons’ as’ are uf wide application,
consider Hari tobe at one’ with the five’


reasons téferred to above and as ‘the’ final |


refuge of all things.


83—89. Indeed, the powerful Narayana,
endued with the highest Yoga-power, is the
one subject of (enquiry), Keshava_ per-
fectly knows thé thoughts of men including
Brahman‘ and' the’ great Rishis,' of those
that'~aré’ Sankhyas‘ and’ Yogins, of
those that aré Yatis, and of those,
generally, that are conversant with the
Soul; but- none of these’can know: what
his thoughts are. ; ty Ease


ga~-9t. Whatever: acts are, performed
in honor of the gods or. the departed manes,
whatever gifts are made, whatever penances
are performed, have Vishnu fer their
refuge,—Vishnu whois -established ‘upon
his own supreme ordinances. . He is named


Vasudeva because ‘of his. being the adode-


of all creatures.


its sour


Janamejaya sie.


MAHABHARAIA.


92. He is immutable. He is Supreme.
He is the foremost of Rishis, He is endued
with the highest power. He is said ta be
abone the three qualities. As Time assumes
marks when it manifests itself in the form
of successive seasons, so He, though really
shorn of qualities, assumes qualities (for
manifesting Himself).


93. Even the high-souled do not succeed
in understanding his motions. Only those
foremost of Rishis who have knowledge for
their Souls, succeed 1 seeing in their hearts
that Purusha who is above all qualities.


CHAPTER CCCXLIX.


‘MOKSHADHAIRMA PARVA).—
Foy . Cong baa EI a
Thy


1. The illustrious Hari Gee. |
to them who are whole-mindedty-~
ed to him. He accepts yalso all adorat.
that is offered to Him according to thé
ordinance,


2. Of. those persons who have freed
themselves from desire, and that are shorn
of both merit and demerit, you have spoken
of the Knowledge they attain, as handed
down from preceptor to preceptor, as the
end they acquire. | .


3. Such persons always acquire that
end which is the fourth, v2s., the essence
of the foremost of Purushas or Vasudeva ,—
through the three others. ‘Those persons,
however, who .are devoted to Narayana
with their whole minds at once acquire the
highest end. -

4. Forsooth, the Religion of Devotion is
superior (to that of Knowledge) and is very
dear to Narayana. These, without pass«


_ ing through the three successive stages at


once attain to the immutable Hari.
8~6. The end that is attained by Brah-


| manas, who, practising due observances,


study: the Vedas with the’ Upanishads


‘according to the rules laid ‘down for such


study, and by those who follow the Religion
of Yatis, is inferior, I think, to that
attained by persons devoted whole-minded-_
ly to’ Hari. Who’ first’ promulgated this
Religion of Devotion 2? Was it ‘some god or
some Rishi who declared it. .


7. What are the practices of those who
are said to be devoted with their whole
minds ? When did those practices begin?
[ have doubts ‘en those subjects. Do you
dispell them. Great is my.curiosity to hear
you explain the several points.


”


SHANTI PARVA,


Vaishampayana said :~

“When the diverse detachments
of the Pandava and the Kuru armies were
drawn up in battle array’and when Arjuna
became dispirited, the holy one himself
explained the question of what is the end
and what is not the end attained by
persons of different characters. I have
before this recited to you the words of the
holy one. It is difficult to understand the
religion preached by the holy one on that
occasion. Men of impure souls cannot
apprehend it at all.


to. Having created this religion in days
of yore, utz., in the golden age, in perfect
accordance with the Samans, it is borne, O
king, by the Supreme Lord, vts., Nara-
yana, himself,


11, This very subject was ushered by
the highly blessed Partha to Narada in ‘o¢
midst of the Rishis and in the" ee".
Krishna and Bhishma. a the Island-born


12. My preceptor, warada said.’ Re-
Krishna heard ,wtelestial Rishis, O best
ceiving it &y preceptor gave it to me in
of kie* ae way in which he had got
e celestial Rishi. I shall now
> ‘to you, O king, in the same way
wx tas been received from Narada.
sen, therefore, to me.
13—14. In that cycle when the Creator
rahman, O king, took his birth in the
¢ 4ind of Narayana and came out from the
lratter’s mouth, Narayana himself, perform-
ed, O Bharata, his divine and ancestral
rites in accordance with this religion, Those
Rishis who live upon the froth of water
then got it from Narayana. ;
15. From the froth-eating Rishis, this
religion was gained by the Rishis, named
Vaikhanasas. From the Vaikhanasas
Shoma got it. Afterwards, it disappeared


~ from the universe.


16. After the second birth of Brahman,
viz., when he originated from the eyes of
Warayana, O king, the Grandfather (that
is, Brahman) then received this religion
from Shoma.


17—18. Having received it thus, Brah-
man gave this religion, which has Narayana
for its soul, to Rudra. In the golden age
of that ancient Kalpa, Rudra, devoted to
Yoga, O king, communicated it to all those
Rishis called Valikhilyas. ‘Through the
illusion of Narayana, it once more dis-
appeared from the universe. -


19. In the third birth of Brahman which
was from the speech of Narayana, this
religion once more sprang up, king,
from Narayana himself.


73


' feet.


577


20. Then a Rishi named Suparna ace
quired it from that foremost of Beings.


21. The Rishi Suparna used to recite
this excellent religion, three times during
the day. Therefore it passed by the name
of Trisauparna in the world.


22—23. This religion has been referred -
toin the Rigveda. The duties it enjoins
are extremely difficult of observance. From
the Rishi Suparna, this. eternal religion
was acquired, O foremost of men, by the
wind god, that sustainer of the lives ot aif
Creatures in the universe. The~god of
wind communicated it te sich Rishis as
live upon the remnants ‘of sacrificial. offers
ings after feeding suests and others. ;

24. Ere those Rishis this excellent.

eli-i-- Was acquired by the great Ocean.
x, once more disappeared from the universe
and became merged into Narayana. |


25. Inthe next birth of the great Brah-
man when he originated from the ear of
Narayana, listen, O king, te what tools
place in that zon. :

26. The illustrious Narayana, otherwise
called Hari, when he was’ bent upon
Creation, thought of a Being who would
be powerful enough to create the universe.

27. While thinking of this, a. Being
originated from his ears capable to create
the universe. The Lord of all. called him
by the name of Brahman.


28. Addressing: Brahman, the Supreme
Narayana said,-Do you, O son, create
all kinds.of creatures from your: mouth and
O-you of excellent vows; I shall do
what will be good for you, for I shall im-
part to you both energy and strength
eynecient to make you competent for this
work,


29. Do you receive also from me this
excellent religion known by the name of
Sattwata, Helped by that religion 'do you
create the golden age and ordain. it duly.


. dow ea $s
30—32. Thus addressed, Brahman bowed
his head to the illustrious, Harimedhas and
received from him that foremost of all reli-.
gions with all its mysteries and abstract of
details, together with the Aranyakas,—the.
religion which originated from the mouth of
Narayana. Narayana then instructed Bra-
hman of incomparable energy in that reli-
gion, and addressing him, said,—You are
the creator of the duties that are to be ob-
served in the respective cycles !—Having
said this to Brahman, Narayana disappear-
ed. and went to that place which is beyond
the reach of Ignorance, where the un-
manifest resides, and which is known by
the name of acts without desire of fruits,


578


43.- After this, the boon-giving Brah-
man, the Grandfather of the wortds, created
the different worlds with all their mobile
and immobile creatures.


34. The age that first began was highly

auspicious and came to be called by the
name of Krita. In that age, the religion
of Sattwa existed, in the entire universe.


35- With the help . of that primeval
religion of virtue, Brahman, the Creator
of ali the worlds, adored the Lord of all

ne gods, vis., the powerful Narayana
otherwis2? called Hari.


36. For the -“ropagation then of that
religion and desirc¢ of benefiting the
worlds, Brahman then ‘nstructed that
Manu who is known by wu, name of
Swarochish in that religion. 5


37. -Swarochish-Manu, that Lora “OP we
the worlds, that foremost of all persons
gifted with power, then cheerfully gave the
knowledge of that religion to his own son,
O king, who was known by the name of
Shankhapada.


38. The son of Manu, vis.,Shankhapada,
‘impartéd the knowledge of that religion
to his own son Suvarnabha who was the
Regent of the cardinal and subsidiary
pons: When, upon the expiration of the
Krita Yuga, the Treta came, that religion
once more disappeared from the world.


" 39-40. In a subsequent birth of Brah-


man, O best of kings, vis., that which |


was derived from the nose of Narayana,
O Bharata, the illustrious and powerful
Narayana or Hari having eyes like lotus
petals, himself sang this religion in the
presence of Brahman. Then the son of
Brahman, created by his will, viz., Sanat-
kumara, studied this religion.


41. From Sanatkumara, the Prajapati
Virana, in the beginning of the Krita age,
© foremost of Kurus, obtained this religion.


. 42-43. Having studied it in this way,
Virana taught it to the ascetic Raivya.
Raivya, in his turn, gave it to his son of
pure soul, good vows, and great intelligence
viz., Kukshi, that righteous Regent of the

~ cardinal and subsidiary points. After this,
that religion born of the mouth of Nara-
yana, once more disappeared from the
world,


44. In the next birth of Brahman, viz.,
that which he derived from an egg which
originated from Hari, this religion once
more issued from the mouth of Narayana.


45. It was received by Brahman, (8)
king, and practised duly in all its details by
him. Brahman then gave it, O king, to
those Rishis who are known by the name
of Vachishada.,


MAHABHARATA,


46. F:iom the Varhishadas it was
acquired by a Brahmana well-versed in
the Sama- Veda, and known by the name
of Jeshthya. And because he was well«
versed in the Samans, therefore was he
known also by the name of Jeshthya-
samavrata- Hari.


47. From the Brahmana known by the+
name of Jeshthya, this religion was obtained
by -a king of the name of Avikampana.
After this, that religion, derived from the
powerful Hari, once more disappeared from
the world.


48—49. During the seventh birth of
Brahman from the lotus, O king, that
sprang from the .navet of Narayana, this
religion was once more preached by Nara-
yana himself, to the Grandsire of. pure


soul, the Creator of al) the worlds, in the
a inning of this Kalpa. ‘The Grandfather
ie favs of yore to Daksha.

eldest of all xu in his turn, gave it to the


monarch, viz., Adityons of his daughters, O
to Savitri. . From Adityvho i is seniorin age


51. In the beginning of ‘tHvaswat got it.
Vivaswat gave the knowledge of *- “aga,
gion to Manu. Manu, for the “~e
and support of all the worlds, th
it to his son Ikshaku. «


52. Promulgated by Ikshaku, that ré,
gion overspreads the whole world. Whe
the universal destruction sets in, it will onc
pag return to Narayana and be merged
in Him.


53. The religion which is followed and
practised by the Yatis, has, O best of kings,
been described to you before this in the
Harigita, with all its ordinances in brief,


54. The celestial Rishi Narada got it
from that Lord of universe, viz., Narayana
himself, O king, with all its mysteries and
abstract of details.


55- Thus, O king, this foremost of re-
ligions is primevaljand eternal. Incapable
of being understood easily and highly
Gifficult of being practised, it is always
upheld by persons pervaded by the quality
of goodness,


56. It is by means of acts that are well-
performed and done with a perfect know-
jedge of duties,—acts, that is, m which
there is nothing of injury to any creature,
—that Hari the Supreme Lord became
pleased.


57- Some persons worship Narayana as
endued with only one form, visz., that of
Anicuddha. Some worship Him as endued
with two forms, vis., that of Aniruddha and
Pradyumna. Some adore Him as having
three forms, viz.. Aniruddha, Pradyumna


SHANT? PARVA,


and Sankarshana. A’ fourth section adore
him as having four forms, viz., Aniruddha,
Pradyumna, Shankarshana, and Vasudeva.


58. Hari is Himself the Kshetrajna
(Soul). He is’ without parts. He is the
Individual Soul in all creatures, getting


over the five primal elements.


¢ §9. Heis the Mind, O king, that directs
and governs the five senses. Gifted with
the highest intelligence, He is the Ordainer
of the universe, and the Creator thereof.


60. He is both active and inactive, He
is both Cause and Effect. He is the one
immutable Soul, whe sports as He likes, O
king.

6t. Thus have [ recounted to you the
Religion of Devotion, O best of kings,
which cannot be comprehended by persons
of impure souls but which I acquired,
through the favour of my preceptor. «ing,


62—63. Persons are very rary pe Nara-
who ate devoted whole-mintace, the world
yana. If, O son of ‘*te20ns, who are full
had been full af-7* Who are possessed of the
of universal po % soul, and who are always


- ood to others,’ then the

oe ave begun and all men
¥ : : ,

‘id have undertaken W rks: without desire


fruit,


h
bis. It was even t
that foremost of twice-bds
illustrious Vyasa, my pee
versed in ali duties, descrle f Devo-
Vudhishthira the just this celigie Rit : und
tion, in the presen: of mar. '% BI Hirt
inthe hearing of Krishna, * ai : 1 Rishi
He had got it fro th ‘iba eis isnt
Narada having penancest Bp weaas


;. 1

66. Those persons wha. Cre whole-minc «
edly devoted to Naraya \’4 succeed in
attaining to Narayana in the end, that
greatest of gods, identical (with Brahma,
pure in complexion, effulgent } ike the moon,
and immutable.


us, O king, that
ones, vis, the
ceptor, well-
bi to king


Janamejaya said :— Kiss

67. 1 see that those twice-born ones
whose] souls have been awakened, practisé-
various kinds of duties. Why it it that
other Brahmanas do not practise those
oe but observe other kinds of vows and
rites


Vaishampayna said :—

68. Three kinds of disposition, O king,
have been created about all embodied
creatures, viz., that which appertains to the
the quality of goodness, that which apper-
tains to the quality of Darkness, and lastly
that which appertains to the quality of

Ignorance, O Bharata.


579


69. As regards embodied creatures, O
perpetuator of Kuru’s race, that person is
the foremost who follows the quality of
Goodness, for, O foremost of men, it is
certain that he will acquire Liberation.


7o. It is with the help of this very
quality of Goodness that one endued there~
with succeeds in understanding the person
who is conversant with Brahma. As re-
gards Liberation, it is entirely dependent
upon Narayana. Hence it is that Libera-


tion is considered as made up of the quali
of Goodness. alien
qt. By thinking of the most of
Beings, the man who is gecavéted whole-mings.
dedly to Narayane+~s4ins great wisdom.
_persons who are possessed
of bec oy who follow the practices of
wand the Religion of Liberation,—
ose persons whose thirst has been satisfied


-~always find that Haci favors them with
the fruition of their desire.


73- That man subject to birtly (and
death) upon whom Hari casts a kind eye
‘should be known as gifted with the quality
of Goodness and devoted to the acquisition
of Liberation. ‘ye


74. The religion followed by a person
who is devoted whole-mindedly to Narayana
is considered as similar or equal in merit
to the system of the Sankhyas. ;


75. By following that religion one.
acquires the highest end by attaining to
Liberation which has’ Narayana for its
soul. That person upon whom Narayana
looks with mercy succeeds in becoming
awakened. :


76. No one, O king, can become
awakened : through his own wishes, Uhat
nature which partakes of both Darkness
and Ignorance is said to be mixed..


977. Hari. never casts a kind eye upon
the person subject to birth who has such a
mixed nature and who has, on that ‘account
the principle of Action in him.


78 ‘ Only Brahman, the Grandfather
of the worlds, cares for the person who is’
subject to birth and death because of his
mind being overwhelmed with the two in-
ferior qualities of Darkness and Ignorance.


79 Forsooth, the gods and the Rishis
ace endued with the qualities of Goodness,
O best of kings! But then they who are
divested of that quality in its subtile farm
are always considered to be of mutable.
nature.


o


t
Janamejaya said :—
89. How can one who is subject to change


succeed in attaining to that foremost of


580


Beings? Dotell me all ‘this, which is, no
doubt, known to you! Do you describe to
me also of Renunciation in due order.


Vaishampayana said :—

81. When it becomes able to abstain
entirely from acts, the twenty-fifth, t.e., the
Individual Soul, succeeds in attaining to
the foremost of Beings which is highly
subtile, which is invested with the quality
of Goodness, and which is fraught with
athe essences smybolised ,by the three letters
otehe alphabet (vis., A. U. and M.)


82. The Senkhya system, the Aranyaka-
Veda, and the’®sycharatra scriptures, are
all identical and : los. parts of one whole.
This is the religion of tse who are de-
voted whole-mindedly to Narang —the
religion that has Narayana for its Soa,


83. As waves of the ocean, rising fron
the ocean, rush away from it only to return
to it:in the long, run ‘so various sorts of
knowledge, originating from Narayana, re-
turn to Narayana in the end.


84 Ihave thus explained to you, O son


of Kuru’s.race, what the religion of Good-
ness is. If you be qualified for it, O
Bharata, do you practise that religion duly.


85.° Thus did the highly-blessed Narada
explain to.my preceptor,—the Island-born
Krishna—the eternal and immutable course
called Ekanta, followed by the Whites as
also by Yatis.


86. Pleased with Dharma’s son Yudhis-
thira, Vyasa imparted this religion to.king
Yudhisthira the just who was endued. with
great intelligence. Derived from my. pre-
ceptor I have also communicated it to you.


87. O best of kings, this religion is,
for these reasons, highly difficult of prac-
tice. Others, hearing it, become as much
stupefied as you have allowed yourself
to be. ; }

88. It is Krishna who. is the protector
of the universe and its beguiler. It is
He who is the destroyer and the cause,
O king.


~


CHAPTER CCCL.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
: Continued.


Janamejaya said :~

1. The Sankhya System, the Pancha-
ratra Scriptures, and the |Aranyaka- Vedas,
—these different systems of knowledge or
religion,—O twice-born Rishi, are current
_in the world,


MAHABHARATA.


2. Do all these systems preact
course of duties, or are the course
preached by them, O ascetic, difi
one another? Accosted by me, de
cribe to me on Renunciation in dt


Vaishampayana said :—
3. I bow to that great ™

remover of Darkness, +

bore to Parashara int’

who is endued witt

great liberality of s’


4. The learnec
of the Grandftat
the sixth forr”
the foremost
with the pc"
son of nis |
of Narayan
‘ordinary ci:
~ “Se.unde


5. by
power aad®
as his son. Very,
born and ancient ation
receptacle of the Vedas. “


Janamejaya said :—

6. O. best of jtwice-porn, ches, it,
you who said before this that the Rite.
Vashishtha had a son named Shaktri and
that Shaktri had a’son named Parashara,
and that Parashara begot a son named the
Island-born;"* -ishna gifted with great as-
cetic merit. ‘


7. Youtée. «jagain that Vyasa is the
son of Narayana. 1 ask was it in some
former birth that Vyasa of great energy
had orignated from Narayana? O you of
great intelligence; do tell me of that birth
of Vyasa from Narayana!


Vaishampayana said :—

8. Desirous of understanding the mean.
ing of the Shrutis, my preceptor, that:sea
of penances, who is greatly devoted to the
observance of all scriptural duties and the
acquisiton of knowledge, lived for some-


_ time in a particular region of the Himavat


mountains. t


g—to. Gifted with great intelligence, he
became fatigued with his penances on ac-
count of the great strain on his energies
made by the composition of the Mahabha-
rata. At that time, Sumanta and Jaimini
and Paila of fiirm vows and myself as the
fourth, and Shuka his own son, were his
disciples. All of us, O king, seeing the
fatigue our of preceptor, waited dutifully
upon him, engaged in doing all that was
necessary for removing that fatigue of his,


SHANTI


tr. Surrounded by these disciples of his,
Vyasa shone on the breast of the Himavat
‘mountains like the Lord of all the goblins,
vis., Mahadeva, in the midst of those
ghostly attendants of his.


. 12 Having recapitulated the Vedas
with all their branches as also the mean-
ings of all the Verses in the Mahabharata,
one day, with rapt attention, all of us
approached our preceptor who, . havin
mastered his senses, was at time engag
in thought.


13. Availing ourselves of an interval in
the conversation, we asked that foremost
of twice-born ones to explain to us the
meanings of the Vedas and of the Verses
in the Mahabharata and describe to us
the events as well of hisown birth from
Narayana.


14.. Conversant as he was with all sub-
jects of enquiry, he at first_ desctibéd “the
the interpretations of the Shras narrate
Mahabharata, and then br tegarding his
to us the followua.
birth from Nas


a we

Vyasexsten, ye disciples, to this foremost

ae eens: to this best of histories that

oncerns the birth of a Rishi. Belonging

» the Krita age, this discourse has become

dnown to me through my penances, ye
twice-born ones,


16—17. On the occasion of the seventh
creation, viz., that which was due to the
primeval Lotus, Narayana, gifted with the
austerest penances, getting over both good
and evil, and possessed of peerless splen-
dour, at first created Brahman, from his
navel. After Brahman had come into
being, Narayana addressed him, saying,—


18. You have originated from my navel.
Gifted with power af creation, do you be-
gin to create diverse kinds of creatures,
rational and irrational. :


19-26. Thus addressed by his Creator,
Brahman, with mind stricken with anxiety,
felt the difficulty. of his task and became
reluctant to do what he was ordered to do.
Bowing his head to the boon-giving and
illustrious Hari, the Lord of the universe,
Brahman said these words to him,—I bow
to you, O Lord of the gods, but I ask
what power have I to create various
creatures? [ have no wisdom. Do you
ordain what should be ordained in view of
this.


21. Thus addressed by Brahman, the
Lord of the universe, viz., Narayana, dis-
appeared there and then from Brahman’s
view. The foremost of all being gifted with


PARVA, 581


intelligence, viz:, the Su
thought of Intelligence.


22. Possessed of ‘form’ that resembled
the form of Hari ‘himself, Intelligence
immediately appeared before the powerful
Hari. Himself above all Yoga, Narayana
then, with Yoga, applied the goddess of
Intelligence properly.


23. The illustrious and powerful and
immutable Hari, addressing the goddess
of Intelligence who was gifted with activity |
and goodness and all the power of Yas)
said to her. these words :~» ae

“24. For the accompish: atOf the worke


; aS do you enter into
OF ccreatieg a cad chiss by the Supreme


Introence immediately entered
he ae ene
When Hari saw that Brahman


preme Lord, then


Bra
«5


“had become united with Intelligence, He


once more addressed him, saying,—-Do
now create various creatures.

26—27. Replying to Narayana by utter
ing the word—Yes,—Brahman reverently
accepted the order of his progenitor,
Narayana then disappeared from‘ Brah~
man’s view, and in a moment repaired to
his-own place known by the name of Light
or Effulgence. Coming back to His own
disposition, Hari resolved Himself into His
one universal nature.
28—~29. After ‘the’ work of Creation,
however, had been.done by Brahman,
another thought arose ‘in the mind of
Narayana. Indeed, He thought thus :—
Brahman, otherwise called Parameshthi,
has created all these creatures, consisting
of Daityas and Danavas and Gandharvas
and Rakshasas. The helpless Earth-has
become loaded with the weight of creatures.


30. Many among the Daityas..and
Danavas and Rakshas on Earth will become
gifted with great strength. Possessed of
enances, they will at various times succeed
in acquiring many excellent boons,


yous


31. Elated with pride and power on
account of those boons that they will suc+
ceed in acquiring, they will oppress and
afflict the gods and the Rishis endued with
ascetic power.


32. Itis, therefore, proper that I should
now and then lighten the burden of the
Earth, by assuming various forms one after
another as occasion would require.


33. I shall perform this task by punish-
ing the wicked and supporting the righte-
ous. The Earth, which is the embodiment
of Truth, will succeed in bearing her
burden of creatures.


582


34. Assuming the form of a powerful
shake I myself have to uphold the Earth
in empty space. Supported by me thus,
she will support the entire universe of
ereatures mobile and immobile. Incar-
nated on the Earth, therefore, in different
forms, 1 shall have to save her at such
times from danger.


35. Having {thought thus, the illustrious
Killer of Madhu created various forms in
his mind in. which to appear from time to


e for performing the proposed task.
“3 \gsuming -the form of a Boar, of a
Man-lion, >»<a, Dwarf, and of human


beings, I shall stippsess or kill such enemies
of the gods as will ome wicked and
ungovernable. , 25

. After this, the Prime Créaty,. o¢
Gnlcaten once more uttered the ae the


Buo, causing the atmosphere to resounu< |.


with it. From this syllable of speech arose
a Rishi named Saraswat.


_ 38, The son, thus born of the Speech
of Narayana, also passed by the name of
Apantara-tamas. Endued with great
power, he was fully conversant with the
past, the present, and the future. Firm in
the observance of vows, he was truthful in
speech. .


~ 39. .To that Rishi who, after birth, had
bowed his head to Narayana, the latter,’
who was the original Creator of all the
gods and possessed of immutable nature,
said those words :—You should bestow your
attention on the distribution of the Vedas,
O foremost of all persons gifted with
intelligence.


40. Do you, therefore, O ascetic, do
what I command you!—In obedience to
this command of the Supreme Lord from
whose Speech the Rishi Apantaratamas
came into being, the latter, in that Kalpa
which-is named from the Self-born Manu,
distributed and arranged the Vedas.


4t. For that act of the Rishi, the illys-
trious Hari became pleased with him, as
also-for his well-performed penances, his
vows and observances, and his control of
the senses or passions.


42. Addressing him, Narayana said,—
At each cycle of Manu, O son, you will
act thus about the Vedas. You shall on
‘account of this act of yours, be immutable,
OU twice-born one, and incapable of being
excelled by any one.


43, When the Kali age will set in,
certain princes of Bharata’s line, named
Kauravas, will take their birth from you.
They will be celebrated over the Earth as
gteat princes ruling over powerful king-
doms. ;


MAHABHARATA,


- 44. Born of you, dissensions will break
out among them for theie destruction at
one another’s hands during: your absence,
O foremost of twice-born ones.


45. In that age also, gifted with austere
penances, you will divide the Vedas into
various Classes, {ndeed, in that dark age,
your complexion will become dark.


46. You will made various kinds’ of
duties to flow and various kinds of know-
ledge also, Although gifted with austere
penances, yet you shall never be able to
free yourself from desire and attachment
to the world. .


47. Your son, however, will be freed
from every attachment like the Supreme
Soul, through the favour of Madhava. It
will not be otherwise.


reer He — learned Brahmanas
ve..the mind-begotten son of the
great inher, viz., Vashishtha gifted with
penances, ice and like an ocean of
that of the Suirhos~ splendour excells
progenitor of a famity~ NE, will be the
Rishi of the name of Parayhich a great
with mighty energy and prowess; _endued
his birth, That foremost of persotis,take
ocean of Vedas, that habitation of penances,
will become your father. : :


50, You shali take your birth as the son
of a maiden living in the house of her
father, through an act of sexual union with
the great Rishi Parashara,


*St——52. You will entertain no doubts
about the meanings of things past, present,
and future. Gifted with penances and
instructed by me, you will see the incidents
of thousands and thousands of ages long
past away. You will see through thousands
and thousands of ages also in the future.


53. You shall in that birth, see me, O
ascetic,—me who am without birth and
death,—incarnated on Earth armed with
the discus. All this will happen to you,
O ascetic, through the merit that you will
acquire for your continued devotion to me.
These words of mine will never be other
wise. P ‘ ’


54. You'shall be one of the foremost 6f
creatures. Great shall be your fame. ‘The
Sun’s son Shani (Saturn) will, in a future
cycle, take birth as the great Manu of that
period. ee

55. During that period, O son, you shall,
as regards merits, be superior to even the .
Manus of the several periods. Forsoeth, .
you will be so through my favour.

56. Whatever exists in the world is the
result of my exertion, [he thoughts of
others may not tally with their deeds. As


ian


{
»


SHANTI


repards myself, however, 1 always ordain


what I think, without the least obstacle,
57-~58.-


he that was born as
through the behest of Hari.
have I taken birth as
Krishna- Dwaipayana,
race of Vashishtha..


59-


part of Narayana himself.
60.


61. Ye sons, actuated by my greswith
for yourselves who are devaks} “everything
reverence, 1 have {”-xnow from me,
about what you wistewi days gone by and


viz., my first-~tibsequent to it.

that other*” :

nat calnpa jana said :—

62. I hav,{ thus described to you, O
ting, the cird mstances about the former
irth of our revered precepton{ viz., Vyasa


# unsullied mind, as asked bysyou! List-
8 me once again !


63. There are various kinds of religion,
2 royal sage, who go by various names
ich as Sankhya, Yoga, the Panch-ratra,

qdas, and Pashupati.
*% The promulgator of the Sankhya
“an is said to be said to be the great

«t Kapila, ‘The primeval Hiranyagar-
wha, and none else, is the promulgator of
the Yoga system. :

65. fhe Rishi Apantaratamas is said
to be the preceptor of the Vedas, some cali
that Rishi by the name of Prachina-gar-
bha. ra


- 66. The religion known by the name of
Pashupata was promulgated by the Lord of
Uma, that lord of all creatures, viz., the
cheerful Shiva, otherwise known by the
name of Shreekantha, the son of Brahman.


67. The illustcious- Narayana is himself
the promulgator of the religion, contained
in the Pancharatra Scriptures. In ail
these religions, O foremost of kings, it is
seen that the powerful Narayana is the
one sole object of exposition, According
to the scriptures of these religions and. the
extent of knowledge they contain, Nara-
yana is‘the one sole object of adoration they
preach, Those persons whose visions, O


Having said these words to the
Rishi Apantaratamas, otherwise called by
the name ot Saraswat, the Supreme Lord
sent him away, saying to him,—Go !|—I am
Apantaratamas
Once more
the celebrated
a delighter of the


I have thus told you, my dear dis-
ciples, the circumstances of my own pris-
tine birth which was due to the favour of
Narayana in so much that I was a very


Yeé foremost of intelligent persons,
I practised, in days of yore, the austerest
penances, with the help of;the higlest abs-

traction of the mind. ae


PARVA, 583

king, are blinded by darkness, cannot
understand that Narayana is the Supreme
Soul pervading the entire universe. :


Those wise persons whe are the
authors of the scriptures say that Nara-
yana, who is a Rishi, is the one object of
respectful adoration in the universe, 1 say
that there is no other being like Him.


jo. The Supreme God, called by the
name of Hari, lives in the hearts of those
who have succeeded in removing all douhts.
Madhavajnever lives in the hearts of shoe
who are under the sway of donbt_ 2h “ihe
“would dispute away everytbi~ a. ;
help of false logic. .


gt. They whiires, who are duly obs:
Pancharatt#duties laid down therein, and
servan! whole-mindedly devoted to Nara-
wha succeed in entering into Narayana.


72. The Sankhya and the Yoga Systems
are eternal. All the Vedas, again, O
king, are eternal, ‘The Rishis, in all these
systems of religion, have said that this
universe existing from ancient times is
Narayana’s self.


73- You should know that whatever acts,
good or bad, laid down in the Vedas and
occurring iny{c-ven and Earth, the sky
between, and the waters, are all made by
that ancient Rishi Narayana.


conversant with the


CHAPTER CCCLI.


(MOKHADHARMA PARVA),—
Continued, ,


Janamejaya said :—

1. O twice-born one, are there many
souls or is there only one? Who, in the
universe, is the foremost of Souls? What,
again, is said to be the source of all thing?


Vaishampayana said :—


2. In the Sankhya and the Yoga Sys-
tems many are: the Souls spoken of, O
preceptor of Kuru’s. race, those who follow
these systems do. net wish to assert that.
there is but one Purusha in the universe.

3—4. Similarly in scriptures in which
the many Souls are said to have one origin
in the Supreme Soul, it: may be said that
this entire universe is at one with that one
Soul of superior attributes. I shall explain
this now, after bowing to my preceptor
Vyasa, that foremost of Rishis, who is
conversant with the soul, endued with


| penances, self-controlled, and worthy of res-


pectlul adoration,


54


5. This speculation on Purusha, O king,
occurs in all che Vedas. - 3
to be at one with Rita and Truth. The
foremost of cae viz., Vyasa, has thought
upon it.


6. Having accupied themselves with re-
flection on what is ‘called the spiritual
science, various Rishis,J]OQ king, having
Kapila. for their first, have declared their
Opinions on this subject both eperely and
particularly.


‘Through the favour of Vyasa of


¥ . shall explain to you what
in brief on this question


of the Oneness 6


8 Regarding it —.
course between Brahman,
Three-eyed Mahadeva.

9.
there is a very huge mountain of great
” effulgence like that of gold, known, O king,
by the name of Vaijayanta.

to.’ ‘Going there all alone, from his own’
abode of great splendour and happiness,
the illustrious god Brahman used very often
to pass his time, engaged in chickcing: en
the course of spiritual science.


11. While the four-headed Brahman of
great intelligence, was seated there, his son
Mahadeva, who kad’ ori inated froin his
forehead, met him one day in course ,of
his travel through the universe.


12. In days of yore, the Three-eyed
Shiva endued with power and high Yoga,
while proceeding along the sky, saw Brah-
man seated on that mountain and, there-
fore, dropped down’quickly on its top.


the old dis-


13. With a cheerful heart he appeared
before his progenitor and adored his feet.
Seeing Mahadeva prostrated at his feet,
Brahman took him up with his left hand,


14. Having thus raised Mahadeva up,
Brahman; that powerful and one Lord of
all creatures, then addressed his son, whom.

_ he met after a long timé in these words.


The Grandfather said :—


1516. Welcome are you, O you of
mighty arms! By good luck I see you
after such a long time before me. I hope,
O son, that everything is cight with your
penances, and your Vedic studies and re-
citations. You always observe the austerest
penances. Hence I ask you about the pro-
gress and well-being of those penance of
yours.


Rudra said :—
17. QO Illustrious One, througis~your
grace, all is well with my eenences and


It is. well known:


In the midst of the Ocean of farts, *


caittemest of mountains,
but be weighty,


MAHABHARATA, ©


Vedic studies., It is all right, again, wht
the universe.


18. I saw ‘your illustrious self a long
while ago in your own home of happiness
and effulgence! I am coming thence to
this mountain that is now thé habitation
of your feet. *


19. My mind is filled up with great
curiosity for your thus coming into
such a_ secluded spot from your usual
religion of happiness and splendour. There
must be great reason; QO Grandfather, for
such an act.


20—21. Your own foremost of abodes is
free from the pains of hunger and thirst,
and inhabited by both gods and Asuras, by
Rishis of great splendour, as also by
Gandharvas and Apsaras, Leaving such
a spot of happiness, you live alone in this
The cause of this


Brahman@a..
22. This forem i
Vaijayanta; is al Pek paountsiay alles
with concentrated mind, 1 meanbode. -Here,
one universal Soul of infinite propon.en the
a
Rudra said :— fy
23. Self-create you are. Many are the .
Souls that have been created by you.
Others again; OQ Brahman, are . bein
created by you. The Infinite Soul, hows
ever, of whom you speak, is one and single


24. Who ‘is that foremost of Souls, ¢
Brahman, that is being meditated by you!
Great is my curiosity about it.’ Do y?
kindly femove the doubt that has possex
my mind ! ‘i


¥


Brahman said :—


25. O son, many are those Souls of
whom you speak. The one Soul, however,
of whom 1 am | thinking, transcends all
Souls and is invisible,


26. The many Souls that exist in the
universe constitute the basis upon which
that one Soul stands ; and since that one
Soul is said to be the source whence all the
innumerable Purushas have originated,
hence all the latter, if they succeed in di-
vesting themselves of attributes, become
competent to {enter into that one Soul who
is at one with the universe, who is supreme,
who is the foremost of the foremost, who
is eternal, “and ,who is himself divested of
and is above all qualities,


SHANTI


CHAPTER CCCLI.
(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).=
Continued.


Brahman said :— . _

1. Listen, O son, as to how that Soul
is indicated. He is eternal and immutable.
He is undecaying and immeasurable. He
pervades all things. ,


-2. O best of all creatures, that sout can-
not be seen by you or me, others. Those
who are enduded with the understanding
and the senses but shorn of self-control
and tranquillity of soul cannot see him. The
Supreme Soul is said to be one that can be
seen with the help of knowledge alone.


3. Though shorn of body, He lives in
every body. Though living, again, in


bodies He is never touched by the acty


done by those bodies,

4 He is my ips
inner soul, ne
living within


a$ your
er soul..lt Witness
® om creatures and
wg their acts. No one
engaged in mpprehend him at any time.


can graspoffiverse is the crown of his
. si universe is his arms. The
1 ss is his feet. The universe is his
The universe is his nose. Alone

d single, he passed through all bodies,
unrestrained by any limitations on his will
and as best as;it likes him.


6. Keshetra is another name for body.
And because he knows all bodies as also
all good and bad acts, therefore, he, who is
the soul of Yoga, is called by the name of
Kshetrajna. :


9~9. No one succeeds in perceiving
how he enters irito embodied creatures and
how he goes out of them. According to the
Sankhya mode, as also with the help of Yoga
and the due observance of the ordinances
prescribed by it, f am engaged in thinking
of the cause of that Soul, but, alas, I am
unable to comprehend that cause, excellent
as itis. I shall, however, according to the
extent of my knowledge describe to you
that eternal Soul and bis Oneness and
supreme greatness. The learned speak of
him as the one Soul. That one eternal
Being deserves the appellation of the great
Supreme Purusha.


1o. Firé is an element, but it may be
seen to burn up in a thousand places under
thousand different circumstances. The
Sun is one and single, but his rays extend
over the wide universe. Penances are of
various kinds, but they have one common
origin whence they: have originated. The
Wind is one, but it blows in various forms


74


PARVA. 585
in the world. The great Ocean is the one
parent of all the waters in the world seen
under vacious ‘circumstances. Shorn of
qualities, that one Soul is the universe
shown in infinitude. Originating from him,
the infinite universe enters into that one
Soul again who is above all qualities, when
the time for its destruction comes.


. 11. By renouncing the consciousness of
body and the senses, by renouncing all
acts good and bad, by refiouncing both


truth and falsehood, one succeeds
divesting oneself of qualities. oa
12, The person who reati8?7tijat incon<
ceivable Soul and coms.énends his subtife
existence in the fours6id form of Aniruddha,
Pradyumna, © arshana, and Vasudeva,
and whe sr"account of such comprehen.
siow ~CQuires perfect tranquillity of heart,
~cceeds in entering into, and identifying
himself with, that one auspicious Soul.

13. Some persons endued with learning
speak of Him as the Supreme Soul. Others
hold Him as the One Soul. A third
ary of learned men describe Him as the

oul,


14 The truth is that He who is the
Supreme Soul is always shorn of qualities.
He is Narayana. He is the Universal Soul,
and He is the One Purusha. He is never
affected by the fruits of deeds as the leaf
of the lotus is never drenched by the watec
one may throw upon it.


15. The acting Soul is different. That
Soul is sometimes engaged in acts and
when it succeeds in renouncing acts ac-
quires Liberation or identity with the
Supreme Soul.


16. The acting Soul is endued with the
seventeen possessions. Thus is it said that
there are innumerable kinds of Souls in -
due order.


17. In sooth, however, thete is but one
Soul. He is the abode of all the ordinances
in the universe. He is the highest object
of knowledge. Heis at once the knowet
and the object to be known. He is at once
the thinker and the object of thought. He
is the eater and the food that is eaten. He
is the smeller and the scent that is smelled.
He is at once he that touches and the
object that is touched.


18. He is the agent that sees and the
object that is seen. He is the hearer and
the object that is heard. He is the con-
ceiver and the object conceived... He is
pessessed of qualities and is free from
them. He is that, O son, which is named
Pradhana (Nature), enduring, eternal, and
immutable.


1g. He it is who creates the prime


586 MAHABHARATA,
ordinance about Dhatri himself. Learned | duties adopted by him to the exéfusiun of


Brahmanas call Him hy the name of
Aniruddha. Whatever acts, of excellent
merits and blessings, originate in the world
‘from-the Vedas, have been caused by Him.


20, All. the gods, and all the Rishis,
gifted with tranquil souls, occupying their
places on the altar, dedicate to Him the
first share of their sacrificial offerings.


21. JI, that am Brahman, the primeval
Master of all creatures, have come into
g from Him, and you have sprung from
me has originated the universe


ue


mer le and immobile creatures,

with ae, O son, with. their

and all the

mysteries. He }
22. Divided into four ee


ruddtia, Pradyumna, Sankat&, eee
“‘Vasudeva), He sports as He pleasm<, tat
illustrious and divine Lord is such, aware
ed by His own knowledge. :


23. I have thus answered you, O' son,
according to your quéstions, and according
to the wey in which“the matter is explained
in the Sankhya System and the Yoga
Philosopy.” ;


CHAPTER CCCLIII.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued.


Sauti said :—~ ;

1. “After Vaishampayana had explained
to king Janamejaya is this way the glory
of Narayana, be began to describe another
subject by reciting the question of Yudhish-
thira and the answer that Bhishma gave in
the presence of all the Pandavas and the
Rishis as also of Krishna himself. Indeed,
Vaishampayana began by saying what
follows.”


Yudhisthira said.:—~ ;

‘* You have, O grandfather, described to
us the duties belonging to the Religion of
diberation. You should now tell” us
what the foremost duties are of persons
belonging to the several modes of life.”’


Bhishma said :—

2. ‘The duties ordained with regard to
every mode of life are capable, if well per-
formed, of leading te heaven and the high
fruit of Truth. Duties have many doors,
and none of the practices enjoined by them
fails to produce the desired effect.


3. Whoever adopts a class of duties
with steady and firm faith, praises the


a
“ascetic.


the rest, O chief of Bharata’s race,

4. This particular subject, however,
which you wish me to describe was in days
of yore the subject of conversation between
the celestial! Rishi Narada and the king
of the gods, vis., Indra.


. The great Rishi Narada, O king,
adored of all the world, has been crowned
with success. He wanders through all the
worlds unimpeded, lke the all- pervading
wind itself,


6. Once upon a time he went to the
abode of Indra. Duly honored by the
king of the gods, he sat close to his host.


_7- Seeing him seated at his ease and
free from exhaustion, the/husband of Shachi
addressed him, saying,—O great Rishi, is
there any thing wonderful that has been
“een by you, O sinless one?


~~twice-born Rishi, crowned with
aah * 53, you ‘alk about moved b

t atch by

saad Hee ane RS ns ad Nerse of mobile
9 O cteatial Cn, Np things,

the urtiverse which you do-ke is nothing in


you tell me, therefore, of tn oe ‘Do
event which you-may have seen, rful,
of, or felt. a ~
_-to. Thus questioned, Narada, that &
most of speakers, O king, then began -
recite to the king of the gods the exter
sive history that follows. :


¥3, Listen now to me as [ recount that
story which Narada told before Indra. F
shall describe it in the same way in which
the celestial Rishi had described it, and
for the same purpose that he had ia view.”


4
CHAPTER CCCLIV.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).~
_ Continued.


Bhishma said :—

1. “In a beautiful town called! by the
name of Mahapadma which was situate
on the southern side of the river Ganga,
there lived; O best of men, a Brahmana
of concentrated Soul.


2. Born in the family of Atri, he was
amiable by nature. All his doubts had
been removed and he was well conversant
with ghe path he was to follow. Ever-
practising the duties of religion, he had
a complete hold over his passion. Always
contented, he was the perfect master of his
senses. ;


SHANTI


3. Given to penances and the study of
the Vedas, he was respected by all good
men, He acquired riches by fair means and
his conduct in all things tallied with the
mode of life he led aud the order to which
he belonged.


‘4. The family to which he belonged was
large ‘and famous. ‘He had many kinsmen
and relatives, and many children and wives.
His conduct was always respectable and
faultless,


5. Observing that he had many chifdren,
the Brahmana began to perform religious
acts 6n a large scale. His religious obser-
vances, O king, were according to the
customs af his own family.


6. The Brahmana thought that there
were three kinds of duties laid down for
observances. ‘There were, first, the duties


ordained in the Vedas about the order in-


which he was born and the mode of life }°
was leading. ‘There were, second: the
duties sanctioned in the script °5 775+
those especially called the D’="Mashastras,


And, thirdly, there wer, bs ae arated
eminent and rev :


ta
eNRough. riot laid down either
have followegr the Seriptures.


ib th Z 7
nye e Which of these duties should I follow?
a of them, again, followed by me,
aikely to produce my benefit? Which,
eed, should be my refuge ?—Thoughts
.e these always troubled him. He could
not solve his doubts. ;


8. While troubled with such thoughts,
a Brahmana of concentrated soul and ob-
servant of a very.superior religion, came
to his house as a guest.


g. The house-holder duly respected his
guest according to those ordinances of
worship that are laid down in the scrip~
tures. Seeing his guest refreshed and seat-
2d at ease, the host addressed him in the
following words.


CHAPTER CCCLV.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA),—
Continued.


The Brahmana said :—


1. QOsinless One, I have become greatly
attached to you on account of the sweet-
ness of your conversation. You have be-
come my friend. Listen to me, for I wish
‘to say something to you.

2. O foremost of Brahmanas, making
over the duties of a house-holder to my
son, I wish to satisfy the highest duties of


PARVA, 587
man. What, O twice-born one, should be
my path ?


3. Relying upon the soul, I wish to
acquire existence in the One Soul. Alas,
fettered by the bonds of attachment, I have
not the heart to actually perform that,task.


4 And since the best portion of my life
has passed away as a house-holder, I wish
to devote the remaining part of my life in
acquiring the means of defraying the ex-
penses of my journey in respect of the
time to come, :

5. The desire has originate “eat
mind of crossing the ocean, »<qné world.
Alas, whence shall nthe vessel of:
celigion{? wee

6—7. Hge-<ig that the very gods are
persecute’ and made to suffer the fruits
of #+.it deeds, and seeing the rows of


ama’s standards and flags floating over


the heads of all creatures, my heart fails
to derive pleasure from the various objects
of pleasure with which it comes into con-
tact. Seeing also that the Vatis depend
for their maintenance upon alms obtained
in course of their rounds of mendicancy,
I have no respect for the religion of the
Yatis as well. Omyreverend guest, do
you, helped by that religion which is found-
ed upon the basis of intelligence and reason,
make me observe} a particular course of
duties and observances.


Bhishma said :~

8. Gifted with great wisdom, the guést
hearing this‘’speech of his host which was‘
consistent with virtue, said these sweet
words in a melodious voice,


The Guest said :—


9. [also am confounded about this sub-
ject. Thesame thought occupies my mind.
{ am unable to arrive at certainty of
conclusion. Heaven has many doors.


10. There are some that speak highly
of Liberation, Some twice-bern persons
praise the fruits acquired by the perfor-
mance of sacrifices. Some there are who
take refuge in the forest mode of life.


| Some, again, follow the domestic mode


of life.


tr. Some depend upon the merits ate
tainable by an observance of the royal
duties. Some depend upon the fruits of
that culture which consists in the controf
of the soul. Some think that the merits
originating from a dutiful obedience to
preceptors and seniors are efficacious.
Some follow control of speech. :


12. Some, by waiting dutifuly upon their
mothers and fathers, have gone to heaven,


588


Some have ascended to heaven. by prac-


tising the duty of mercy, and some by


practising Truth.


13. Some rush to battle, and sacrificing
their lives, have attained to heaven. Some
again, acquiring success by practising . the


vow called Unccha, are following the pat!
of heaven.


14.


the study of the Vedas. Endued with


auspiciousness and wedded to.such study,
men, gifted with intelligence, and


recut souls, and having their senses
under pers ete control, attain to heaven.
15. Others~snarked by simplicity and


these
-


truth, have been” knved by wicked men.
Gifted with pure souls, su~h. men of truth
and simplicity, have become ~.-<«gected in-
habitants of heaven.

16. In this world, it is seen, that m. <
go to heaven through a thousand doors of
duty, all standing wide open. My under-
Standing has been troubled by your ques-
tion, like a cloud before the wind,


S  namanaama


CHAPTER CCCLV}.


{MOKHARDHARMA PARVA).—
Continued,


The Guest said :—


1. For all ttiat, O Brahmana, 1} shalt
try to instruct you duly. Listen to.me as
I recount to you what I have heard from
my preceptor.


2. In that place whence in course of a
former creation, the wheel of virtue was
Set in motion, in that forest which is known
by the name of Naimisha, and which is
Situate on the banks of the Gomati, there
is a city called Nagapura.


3. There, in that region, all the gods,
assembled together, had in days of yore
celebrated a grand sacrifice. There the
foremost of earthly kings, Mandhatti,
defeated Indra, the king of the gods.


4. A powerful Naga, of righteous soul,
lives in the city that stands in that region.
That great Naga is known by the name of
Padmanabha or Padma.


5. Walking in the three-fold path (of
acts, knowledge, and adoration), he pleases
all. creatures in thought, word, and deed.


6. Thinking upon all things with great
care, he protects the virtuous and punishes
the wicked by following the four-fold policy
of conciliation, creating dissensions, making
gilts or giving bribes, and using force.


Some have givea themselves up to.


‘=. attendants.


MAHABHARAFA,


7. Going there, you should put to hina
the questions you wish. He will show you
truly what the highest religion is.

8. That Naga is always fond of guests.
Gifted with great intelligence, he is well
conversant with the Scriptures. He pos-
sesses all desirable virtues the like of which
are not to be seen in any other person,


g. By nature he does those duties which
are performed with or in water. He is givets
to the study of the Vedas. He is .endued
with penances and self-control He has.
great riches.


10. He celebrates sacrifices, makes gifts,
abstains from doing injury, and practises.
forgiveness. His conduct is in every way’
good. Truthful in speech and shorn of
malice, his conduct is good and his.senses
are under proper control.


1t, He eats after feeding all his guests
ii He is kind of speech.

re *-.~ knowledge of what is good and
what IS >. ~«le and right and what is cen«


pane ue thes an account of what he
es and what N€ ~ -os undone. He never


acts with hostility tow 4 ‘
is always engaged in doing , “1% pene
all creatures. He belongs t6 a teu? whic'
is as pure and stainless as the way .;)
lake in the midst of the Ganges. .


CHAPTER CCCLVII. '


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued.


The Host replied :—


1. I have heard these words of yours,
that are so consoling, with as much satise
faction as is experienced by a person;
heavily loaded when that load is taken off.
his head or shoulders.


2—4. The pleasure which a traveller
who has made a long journey on foot feels
when he lies down on a bed, that which a
person feels when he finds a seat after
having stood for a long time for want of
room, or that which is felt by a thirsty
person when he finds a glass of cool water,
or that which is felt by a hungry man when
he finds good food set before him, or that
which a guest feels when a dish of desirable
food is placed before him at the proper
time, or that which is felt by an old man’
when after long coveting he gets a son, or’
that which is felt by one when meeting with :
a dear friend or relative about whom he’
had become highly anxious, resembles that
with which I have been filled on account of,
these words given vent to by you.


SHANTI PARVA.


5. Like a person with upturned look I
have heard what has fallen from your lips
and am thinking upon their meaning. With
these wise words of yours, you have truly
instcucted me!


6. Ves, £ shall do what you have order-
ed me todo. You may go tomorrow early
in the morning, passing the night happily
with me and removing your fatigue by such
rest.


7. See, the rays of the divine Sun have
been partially dimmed and the god of day
is going in his downward course !


Bhishma continued :—


8. Hospitably treated by that Bra-
hmana, the learned guest, O destroyer of
enemie, passed that night in the company
of his host.


g. indeed, both of them passed the
night happily, conversing, a4" *" aces F
each other on the subje- saieaes
the fourth mode of lit weny ase


2 . -stSation that

So engrossing” ~4* ar it were day.
the night ra ~img came, the guest was
10, Whene rites by the Brahmana,
adored wit!Gpon doing what was consi-

who wx im to be benefical for himself,
da’ Having dismissed his guest, the
ftuous Brahmana, determined to achieve
is purpose, took leave of his kinsmen and
elatives, and started in due time for the


ibode of that foremost of Nagas, with heart
irmly directed towards it. f


‘CHAPTER CCCLVIII.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued,


Bhishma said :—

1. Proceeding by many charming
forests and lakes and sacred waters, the
Brahmana at last acrived at the asylum of
a certain ascestic.


2. Going’ there, he enquired of him, in
proper words, about the Naga of ‘whom he
had heard from his guest, and instructed
by him he pursued his journey.


3. With a clear idea of the object of his
journey, the Brahman then reached the
house of the Naga. Entering it duly, he
announced his arrival in proper words,
saying,—Ho! who is there! I ama Bra-
hmana come here as a guest !


4. Hearing these words, the chaste wife
of the Naga, endued with great beauty and


589


devoted to the observance of all duties,
showed herself. ;


5. Always attentive to the duties of hos-
pitality, she adored the guest with due rites,
and welcoming him, said,—What can | do
for you ?


The Brahmana said :—


6. O lady, Lam sufficiently honored by |
you with the sweet words you have said
unto me.. The fatigue of my journey has
also been removed. I wish, O blessed lady,


to see your excellent husband. at
7... This is my great object, eA
one object of my desire 7s the


reason that I have~ aie tS. «» for this
house of the Nas-~ e to-day to the
” _7 wegour husband, :


sm J
The W*, of the Naga said :—
"+, Reverend Sir, my husband has gone
«0 ‘drag the car of the Sun for a month,
O tearned Brahmana, he will return in


fifteen days, and will, forsooth, appear
before you.


I have thus told you the.reason of -


my husband’s absence from home. Be that


as it may, what else is there that I can do -


for you? ‘fell me this.


The Brahmana said :—


10. O chaste lady, I have come here
with the object of seeing your husband.


O reverend dame, I shall live in the adja- ;


cent forest, waiting for his return,


11. When your husband returns, do.


kindly tell him that I have arrived at this
palace actuated by the desire of seeing
him.
return when that event takes place.

12. O blessed lady, | shall, till then,
live on the banks of the Gomati, waiting
for his retucn and living‘restricted diet.


13. Having said this repeatedly to the


You should also inform me of his


wife of the Naga, that foremost of Brahe :
manas went to the banks of the Gomati -


for living there till the time of Naga’s


return. : :


CHAPTER CCCLIX.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).=<«
, Continued. :


Bhishma said :-—


1, These Nagas of that city became
greatly distressed when they saw that that
Brahmana, devoted to the practice of
penances, continued to live in the forest,
entirely abstaining from food, in expectas
tion of the arrival of the Naga king,


- o~


590 , MAHABHARATA,


2. AM the kinsmen and relatives of the + 13. ‘Phe assembled Nagas, thus address-
great Naga, including his brothers and | ed by the Brahmana, were sent away by
children and wife, assembling tegether, | him, whereupon, O foremost of men, they
went to the spot where the Brahmana was | returned to their respective quatters,
living.

3» Arrived on the banks of the Gomati,
they saw that twice-born ‘one seated ina
solitary place, abstaining from food of every CHAPTER CCCLX.
sort, observant all the while of excellent


vows, and engaged in silently reciting cer- (MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
tain Mantras. Co ti soo
ontinued,


— Approaching the Brahmana and


~him due adorations, the kinsmen j id :—
olcring. , Bhishma said:
~-af tl
and rela. es iad Paks said x0 1. Upon the expiry of full fifteen days,


him these candia.. * d the Naga king (Padmanabha), having
O Brahmana fa. asceticism, for | finished his task of dragying the cat of the

your riches, that is the $&. day of your} Sui and obtained the latter’s permission,

arrival kere, but you speak no ,* about | returned to his own house,

your food, O twice-born one Yo _ «xe


devoted to virtue. a—3. Seeing him return, his wife ap-


psached b'~ quickly for washing his feet


6. You have come to us. We too are ee ‘ }
here in attendance upon you. It is abso- simile, Z Nite ea mney oe
futely necessary that we should do the tasks, she tin pec ae Naga then
duties of hospitality by you. We are all } pofreshed from Tate ii dutiful
relations of the Naga king with whom you | and chaste wile, saying, }: miyedest
have business. wife, that during my absen.. &y,' have at


_7- Roots or fruit, leaves, or water, or | neglected to adore the gods ~ + guests
rice or meat, O best of Brahmanas, you | according to the instructions I ‘ga.


“ou,

should take for food. and accarding to the ordinances laid ao.”
8. For your living in this forest under |” the scriptures.

such circumstances of total abstention from 4. I hope, without yielding to that im-


food, the whole community of Nagas young | pure understanding which is natural to
and old is ‘being aggrieved, since this your | persons of your sex, you have, during my
_ fast implies negligence on our part to dis- | absence from home, been firm in the obser-
charge the duties of hospitality. vance of the duties of hospitality. I trust
that you have not gone beyond the barriers


We have none amongst us who has :
9- 8 of duty and virtue.


has been guilty of Brahmanicide. None
of us has been guilty -of Brahmanicide. : sa,

None of us has aver Tost | a son immediately The Wife of the Naga said —

after birth. No one has ever fost a son 5. The duty of disciples is to wait
immediately after birth. No one has .been | respectfully upon their preceptor for doing
born in our race who has eaten before | his bidding; that of Brahmanas is to study
serving the gods or guests or relatives | the Vedas and bear them in memory; that


arrived at his house, of servants is to obey the commands of
: their masters; that of the king is to pro-
The Brahmana said :— tect his people by supporting the good and
10. On account of- these solicitations of | Punishing the wicked.
you all, | may be considered to have broken 6. It is said that the duties of a
my fast. Eight days remain when the | Kshatriya are the protection of all creatures
king of the Nagas will return, from wrong and oppression.


it. Lf, on the expiry of the eighth night 7. The- duty of the Shudra is to serve
ea the king of the Nagas do wot come | with humility persons of the twice-born
back, I shall then break this fast by eating. | orders, viz, Brahmanas and Kshatriyas
Indeed, this vow of abstajning from all and Vaishyas. The religion of the house-
food that I am observing is on account of | holder, O king of the Nagas, consists in
my respect for the Naga king. doing good to all creatures,


12. You should nat grieve for what I 8. Frugality of fare and observance of
am doing. Do you all return to whence | vows in due order, form merit (for persons
you came. This my vow is on his account. | of all classes) on account of the connection
You should not do anything on account of | that exists between the senses and the
which this my vow may be broken, ~ | duties of religion.


SHANTI PARYVA,


* g.. Who ami? Whence have I came ?
What are others to me and what am I to
others ?—these are the thoughts to which
the mind should ever be given by him who
leads that course of life which leads to
Liberation.


to, Chastity and obedience to the hus-
band form the highest duty of the wife.
Through your instructions, O king of the
Nagas, I have learnt this well.


11. I, therefore, that am well versed in
my duty, and that have you for my husband
imyou who are devoted to virtue,*-O, why
shall 1, falling off from the path of duty,
tread along the path of disobedience and
sin?

12, During your absence from home,
adhe adorations to the gods have not suffered
in any respect, I have also, without the_
slightest negligence, performed the dut-
of hospitality towards persons arr + 4S
guests in yourhouse. ©  ~-~

i ~~ srahmana has
cot Naren Ae ype given out his ob
ject to me. H wes to See you,

14. Lj on the banks of the Gorhati,
he is -dsly expecting your return. Of
i ws, that Brahmana is silting there,
in the recitation of Brahma.


si N king: of the Nagas, I have made
17s


a prom\se to him that I would send you to
him as soon as yoy tyguld return to your
house. :


_ 16, Hearing these words of men, O
best of Nigas, you should go there. O
you who hear with your eyes, you should
grant to tka twice-born person the object
that has bro ight himihere.””


—


CHAPTER ‘:CCCLXI.


(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA),—~
Continued,


The Naga said :—


rt, O you of sweet smiles, for whom
have you taken that Brahmana? Is he
really a human being or is he some god
that has come here if the disguise of a
Brahmana ?


2, QO you of great fame, who is there
among mem who would be desirous of seeing
me or that would be competent for the
purpose ? Can a human being, desiring
to see me, leave such a command with you
about sending me to him for paying hima
visit at the place where he is living ?


3. Amongzst the- gods and Asuras and
celestial Ristiis, O amiable lady, the Nagas


got


are endued with great energy. Having,
great speed, they are endued again with
excellent fragrance.


4. They derseve to be adored. They
are capable of granting boons. Indeed,
we too deserve to the followed by others. I
tell you, O lady, that we cannot be seen
by human beings.


The Wife of the Naga King said :-—

. Judging by his simplicity and cans. ~
deve {ee hat that Bralinain is rot
any god who lives on air. O yos-~“r great
anger, I also know this, via inat he ress
pects you with all his }-*art. ;

6. He seeks th - accomplishment of some
object that. -uepends upon your help, As”
the birt~ called Chataka, which is fond of
raix, Waits in earnest expectation of a
-snower, so is that Brahmana waiting is
expectation of a meeting with you.


7. Let no calamity befall him on ac-
count of his inability to obtain a sight of
you. No person born like you in a respect
able family can be considered to remain
respectable by neglecting a guest atrived
at his house.

8. Renouncing that anger which is
natural to you, you should go and see that
Brahmana. You she:uid not allow yourself
to be consumed by disappointing that
Brahmana. :


9. The king” or the prince, by refusirig


} to wipe the tears of persons who come to


him from hopes of relief, commits the sid
of fceticide. By abstaining from speech
one acquires wisdom.


10, By practising gifts one aGquires great
fame. By observing truthfulness of speech,
one acquires the gift of eloquenee and
comes to be respected in heaven.


11. By giving away land one acquires
that high end which is ordained far Rishis
leading the sacred mode of life. By ace
quiting riches through fair means, one
succeeds in acquiring many desirable fruits.


12. By doing in full what is good for
oneself, one can avoid going te hell, This
is what the righteous say. *

The Naga said :—

13. I had no arrogance. On account,
however, of my birth, my pride was consi-
derable. Of anger which is born of desire,
O blessed Iady, I have none. It has alf
been consumed by the fire of your excelent
instructions.


14. E do not see, O blessed lady, any
darkness that is thicker than anger.g,On
account, however, of thé Nagas having
excess of anger, they have become ob_*-{s
of reproach with all persons.


592


15. By yielding to the influence of anger,
the ten-headed Ravana of great prowess,
became the rival Shakra and was for that
reason killed by Rama in battle.


16. Hearing that the Rishi Rama of
Bhrigu's race had entered the inner
apartments of their palace for bringing
away the calf of the Homa cow of his
father, the sons of Karttaviryya, yielding
to anger, took such entry as an insult to
gir royal house, and as the result thereof,
¢ with destruction at the: hands of


tttaviryya of great
thousand-eyed
£ his having


~.

17. Indeedy-..
strength, resembling,
Indra himself, on acc. —
yielded to anger, was kilfee
Rama of Jamadagni’s race.


18. Verily, O amiable lady, at
words I have controlled my anger, ts.
enemy of penances, that destroyer of all
that is beneficial for myself.

1g. I praisé my own self greatly since,
O large-eyed one, I am fortunate enough
to have you as-my wife,—you who are
. possessed of every virtue and who have
inexhaustible merits,


20. I shall now proceed to. that spot
where the Brahmana is living. [ shall cer-
tainly address that Brahmana in proper
words, and he shail certainly go hence, his
wishes bing done,


CHAPTER CCCLXIL.


\
(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued.


Bhishma said ;-—


1. Having said these words to his dear
wife, the king of the Nagas proceeded to
that place where the Brahmana was sitting
in exposition of an interview with him. As
he went, he thought of the Brahmana and
wondered as to what the business could be
that had brought him to the Naga city.


2. Arrived before him, O king of men,
that foremost of Nagas, devoted by his
nature to virtue, addressed his guest in
‘sweet words, saying,—O Brahmana, do not
give way to anger. I address you in peace !
Do not be angry! For whom have you
come here? What is your object ?


4. Coming to ‘you, I ask you in love, O
twice-born one! Whom.do you worship in
this retired spot on the banks of theGomati ?


The Brahmana said :—
‘ §. Know that my !name is. Dharma-


_” ranya, and that I Wave come here for see- \


MAHABHARATA,


ing the Naga Padmanabha, O foremos”
all twice-born persons! With him I”
some business !


6. 1 have heard that he is not a


and that, therefore, | am not now ne
present habitation. Like a Chataka’
in expectation of the clouds, I anf?
for him whom 1 consider as dear’


7. For removing all evil fror


bringing about what is good to
engaged in reciting the Vedas /
and am in Yoga and pass"
happily !


The Naga’said:— ,


8. Indeed, your cor”


Pious you are and é
being of all pious persr.
sed Brahmana, eve’


10. Having heatd™n.
you are here, I have toc
twice-born one, for seeing you Ny


1r. When you have come her
certainto return hence with y —,
fulfilled. You should, O foremost of twics
born persons, employ me to any task with
ail confidence ! z


12, All of us have {certainly been purs.
chased by you with your merits, since you \
disregarding what is for your own good,
has employed your time in seeking the well-
being of ourselves !


| The Brahmana said :— 5


13. O highly blessed Naga, I have come
here, actuated by the desire of seeing you!
I have come here, ignorant as I am with
all things, for asking you about something,
O snake !


14. Relying on'the Soul, I wish to attain
to the Supreme Soul which is the end of ;
the Individual Soul. 1 am neither attached °
to, nor dissociated from, the world.


15. You shine with the effulgence of
your own merits covered by fame,—with an
effulgence that is as sweet as that of the
moon.

16. O you who subsist on air on]
you first answer a question that I y¥-
put to you! Afterwards I shall ir’
of the object with which I have +


SHANTI PARVA.


SLX.
Kk parvay—
sed.


L:—


againg the one-wheel-
According to vour turn,
fibe to me anything won-


§9}


who seemed to shine with effulgence thi
was equal to that of the Sun himself.


13. Making all the worlds shine up wit
his glory and filling them with his energy,
he came, as I have already told you. te
wards the Sun, tending the sky, as it were,
for passing through it.


14. The rays that came out of his bod)


,‘tnay have seen in those | seemed to resemble the blazing -effulgence


ai which you pass,

gaid :— :

vine Sun is the refuge or home

s wonders. Ail the creatures
the three worlds have sprung’

£


-berless Munis, crowned with
cess, together with all the gods,
tays of the Sun like birds perch-
branches of trees, :


‘at, again, can be more wonderful
‘that the powerful Wind, emanat-

the Sun, takes refuge in his cays
ce yawns over the universe 7


fat can be more wonderful than
wice-born Rishi, that the Sun,


of libations of clarified butter poured into
the sacrificial fire. On account of bhi
energy and splendour he could not be look-
ed at. His form seemed to be indescribable,
Indeed, he appeared to us to be like a
second Sun.

15. As soon as he came near, the Sun
extended his two hands. For honoring the
Sun ‘in return, be also extended his right-
hand. :

16. The fatter then, piercing through
the sky, entered into the Sun’s disc. Minge
ling then with the Sun’s energy, lre see:ined
to be changed inte the Sun’s self. :

17. When-the two energies thus met
together, we were so confounded that we
could not any longer make out which was
which, Indeed, we could not make out


sthe Wind into many parts from | who was the Sun whom we bore on his ¢ar,
doing good to all creatures, creates | and who was the Being that we had seen


t falls in the rainy season?


What cah be more wonderful than
at the Supreme Soul,
lisc, himself bathed in burning efful-
‘looks upon the universe ?


What can be more wonderful than
it the Sun has a black cay which
‘§ itself into clouds charged with rain
vurs showers of cain when the season


What can be more wonderful than


coming through the sky.


18. Filled with confusion, we then


from within the | addressed the Sun, saying,-O illustrious


onepwho is this Being ‘who has mixed him-
self witht you and has been changed into
your second self. ;


ee


CHAPTER €CCLXIV. '
(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—
Continued, :


hat drinking ‘up for eight months the | Surya said s—


he pours down, he pours it down again
ze tainy season ?


3. This Being is not the god of the fire ;
he is not an Asura, Nor is he a Naga.


In certain rays of the Sun, the Sout | He is.a Brahmana. who has attained to


he universe is said to live.


From Him | heaven on account of hie having been


the seed of all things, and it is He | crowned with success. im the observance of


¥ supports the Earth with
4 immobile creatures.


fo. What can be more wonderful, O
‘hmana, than this, that the foremost of
cushas, eternal and mighty-armed, en-
2d swith §«‘great ‘effulgence, eternal,
fd without beginning and without end,
tes in the Sun ? :


1. Listen, however, to one thing I shall
Nl you now. It is the wonder of wonders.
have seen it in the clear sky, on account
f my nearness to the Sun.


all her mobile |. the vow called Unccha.


2. This person had lived upon fruit and
roots and upon: the fallen leaves of trees,
He had sometimes lived upon water, and
sometimes upon air alone, passing his days
with concentrated soul.

3, The god Mahadeva had been /pro-
pitiated by him with constant recitation of
the Samhitas. He had tried to perform
those deeds which lead to heaven. Through
the merits of those acts he has now attained
to heaven.

4. Without riches and without desire of


12, In former times, one day at the any kind he had observed the vow called


our of noon, while the Sun was shining in
iT his glory and giving heat to everything,
we saw a Being coming towards the Sun,


75


Unccha with regard to his food. This learn.
ed Brahmana, ye Nagas, had been devoted.
to thé goud of all creatures,


594


5. Neither gods, nor Gandharvas, nor
Asuras, nor Nagas, can be considered as
superior to those creatures who attain to
this excellent end of coming into the solar
disc. Even such, O twice-born one, was
the wonderful incident that } saw on that
occasion. ‘

6. That Brahmana, whe was crowned
with success by the observance of the
Unccha vow and who thus obtained an end
that persons crowned with ascetic success
gain, to this day, O twice-born one, goes
round the Earth, staying in the disc of the
Sun.

Pu ee
CHAPTER CCCLXV.
(MOKSHADHARMA PARVA).—


% ee
Continued. *


The Brahmana said :—


1. Forsooth, this is highly wonderful, O
Naga. I have been highly pleased by
listening to you.
that are fraught with subtile meaning, you
have shown me the way I am to follow.


2. Blessed be you, 1 wish to depart
hence, O best of Nagas. You should re-
member me now and then and enquire after
me by sending your servants. a


The Naga said :—


3. The object that brought you here is


still in your mind,;for you have -not as yet,


given it out to me. Where then will you
go? Yell me, O twice-born one, what


should be done by me,‘ and what that ob-"


ject is which brought you here.


4. After the fulfilment of your business;
whatever it is, expressed or unexpressed in
speech, you may depart, O foremost of
twice-born persons, saluting me.and dis-
missed by me cheerfully, O you of excel-
lent vows,

5. You have conceived a friendship for
me. O twice-born Rishi, you should not
depart from this ‘place after having only
seen me, yourself sitting under the shade
of this tree. ;

6. You have become dear to me and I
have become dear to you. All the persons
in this city are yours. What objection then,
O sinless one, you have to pass some time
in my house ?


The Naga said :—

7. itis even'so, O you of great wisdom,
O Naga, who have acquired a knowledge
of the Soul. It is very true that the gods
are not superior to you in any respect.

8. He that is yourself is verily myself,
as he that is myself is truly yourself. My-
self, yourself, and afl other creatures, shall
ali have to enter into the Supreme Soul.


By these words of yours.


MAHABHARATA,


g. A doubt hh
king of Nagas, i
means for acquiring’
doubt has been rene
for I have learnt th
vow. 4,

to, E shall hence folly
is sovery efficacious in pts
consequences, That, O b
become my certain conclusion,
good reasons. .1 take your lea
to you. My object has been dd


CHAPTER CCCLX
(MOKSHADHARMA PA
Continued. 4


Bhishma said:— ’

3. Having saluted that foremos
in this way, the Brahmana, firmly,
to follow the Unccha mode of
O king; #0 Chyavana of Bhrigu’s
desire of being formally instructed
tiated in that vow.


2. Chyavana performed ine {
rites of the Brahmana and for

tiated him into the Unccha mod
The son of Bhrigu, O king, ree
history to king Janaka in his palace,
Janakay in his turn, dessribed it
celestial Rishi Narada of high{soul.


g~4. The celestial Rishi Narad
of pure acts, going on one occasion
house of Iudra the king of the gods!
to Indra this history upon being:
by him. :

5. The king of the gods, having ac
it thus from Narada, recited this
history’ to an assembly of all the fos
Brahmanas, O king. 4

6. On the occasion, again, of my dt
ful ight with Rama of Bhrigu’s race
celestial Vasus, O king, had recited
history to me.


3. Asked by ‘you, O foremost of
men, I have recited this history that is,
cellent and sacred and endued with gt
merit. a 4


8. You had asked me about that wi
forms the highest duty, O king. This hist
is my answer to your query. A brave nt
he was, O king, who followed the pract
of the Unceha vow in this way, with
desiring for any fruit. f


9. Firmly resolved, that Brahmana, ig
tructed by the king of Nagas in this wi
about his duty, followed the practice
restraint and self-control, and living ‘up.
such food as was allowed by the Unceot
vow, proceeded to another forest,’ ”

Ee


FINISH SHANTI PARVA,


"A PROSE ENGLISH TRANSLATION
"ORF


THE MAHABHARATA.


(TRANSLATED LITERALLY FROM THE ORIGINAL SANSKRIT TEXT).


ANUSHASANA: PARV AI
VOL. XIITs «


EDITED & PUBLISHED BY.
MANMATHA NATH DUTT, (Stair) M.A, MBAS.


RECTOR KESHUB ACADEMY j


Author of the English Translations of the Ramayana, Vishnu Puranam,
Srimaa-Bhagavatam, Kamandakiya, Nitisara, Bhagavad-Gitay,.
and many other works.


40, Nayan Chand Duét's Street, Calcutta.


CALCUTTA:


Printzp sy H.+C. Dass, Exysrum Press,
40, Nayan Chand Duté Street.


1905.


ANUSHASANA PARVA:
CONTENTS,


Cwarter I.—Yudhishthica’s despondency
at the death of his relatives, ‘Ihe story of
Mrityu, Goutami, ‘ala, the fowler, the
serpent. Bhishma describes that the soul is
not the cause of aur deeds—p. 1.

Cuaprer Il,—The story of Sudarshana }
and Oghavati. tow death was. conquered
by a houseliolder—p. 4.

Cuarrer [1f.—The story of Viswamitra
as being promoted from a Kshatriya to a
Brahmana—p. 7,

Carter 1V.—The deseendants of Vish-
Wamitra—p. 8.

Cuarter V.—The merits of mercy and
the marks of devout men. The story of
Vasava and the great Suka—p, 10.


Cwaprer VI.—Exertion and. destiny— |
Which is more powerful. Conversation
between Brahman and Vashistha—p. tt.

Cuaprer Vil—The fruits of good deeds
wp. 13.

CumarTer VIIL,—Persons worthy of ador-
ation—p, 15.


’ Cuarter 1X,—The end of persons who


fail to make gifts to the Brahmanas after
having promised them. The story of the
jackal and ape—p. 16.


CuHarter X.-—-Whether any sin is com-


mauted if a person give instructions to af
‘Fhe story of a Brahmana


low‘Taste person.
and a Shudra—p. 17.


Cuarrer X1.—Fhe kind of person in |,


whom prosperity dwells. The conversation
between Rukshmini and the goddess Sree—
P. 21.

CuHarrer XIf —Whether man or woman
gets greater pleasure from an act of union—
p. 22.

Cuaprer XUL.—The means for passing
happily through this world and the next—
P. 24.


€Cuarrer X1V.—AMl the names of Sham- |


bhu.
RB. 24. :
Cuarrer XV.—Shiva gives boens to
Krishna—p. 43.
CaarrER XVI meThe story of Tandi—
Pr 43


The duties of husband and wife—


any Bt


Carrer XVII.—Yoga and the hames


‘of the great God—p. 47.


Caarrer XVEL.—The Hymn of Mahesh-
oP 59:
Nelsons XIX—XXI.—~The declaration


y about Joint duties on the oecasion cf @
persea’s marriage. ‘The discourse between
pcmaeabee and Disha—p. 63.


* Cuarren XXIL—The proper object of
gifts—rp., 67.

Cuarrer XXIUIT.—The rites for ies
deities and departed manes on the occasion
of the Shraddhas—p. 72,

Cuaprer XX1V.—The circumstances un-
der which a person becomes guilty of Brah-
| minicide without actually killing him—p. 77+

Crarrer XXV.—The merits of ablution
in sacred water—p. 77.


Cnarrer XXVI>Countries, provinces,


‘Mountains and sivers most sanctified-—p. 80.


Caperee XXVIL—How can a man of
ther caste acquire the dignity of a
; Brah matla—p. 85.

Cukbrers’ XX VIII—XXIX.—The story
of Indta and Matanga on. the subject—
p. 87.

CHaprer XXX.—Hiow Vitahavya be-
came a Brahmana—p. 89

Cuaprern XXXi.—Men worthy of
homage. The discourse between Narada
‘and Vasudeva—p. 92.

CHAPTER XXXIL—Merits. of persons
“granting protection to living creatures—
P. 93-,

Cuapres XXXI.—The deed. by which
| a king succeeds in enjoying both this world
‘and the next—p. 95,

Cuarrers XXXIV—-XXXV.—The ado-
ration of the Brahmanas—p. 96.

Cuaprer XXXVI.—The conversation
between Shakra and Shamvara on the satne

» 99.


oe
| ~ Cuaptér XXXVIL—Which of the three


is the proper party to make gifts, w/z, one
who is a thorough stranger, or one who
is living with and known for a long time,
or one who comes from a long distanct—w
Pp. 100,


at


Caserers XXXVII-—XXXIX.—The
disposition of women —p. 101.

Cuarrers XL—XLUL—The creation of
woman and the object theveol. The story
of Vipula and Devasharman—p. 103. .

Cuasrprer XLIV.—The rites of marriage
and all the particulars thereof—p. Ito.

CuarteR XLV.—How a maiden after
she is left off by a man after promise, should
be treated. She inheritance of a person’s
property, who has daughters—p, 113.

Crarter XLVI.—-The duties of
towards women—p. 114.

Cuarrer XLVEI.—The rutes of marriage
and the law of inheritance—p. 115.

Cuarter XLVEI.The duties of per-
sons boru in mixed castes—p. 118.

Cuaprer XLIX.—The position of sons—
Pe t2t.

‘Cuapters L+-LI.—The-nature of com-
passion andipity, The -discourse between
Nahusha and Chyavana++p. 123.


nten


Cuaprers LII—LViE—The ‘history of |


Jamadagni—p. 126.

Currer LVEIi.—The rewards of the
planting of trees and the digging of.tanks—
p. 136.

Caaprer LIX.—A: description of the
gifts wirich “folows the gives - ‘to the next
world—p. 138.

Cuaprerk LX.—~The preference Oe gist
© one who Solicits and to one who does not-
—p. 140, +,

Cuaprer LXI.—The rewards _ of gifts i in
“his world and in the next—p. r4i.

Cuarrer LXIL.~—A! description of
“best of all gifis—p. 142,

Cuaprer LXIIL—The- fruits of gifts to
Brahmana. and others. The replies of
Narada—147.

Cnarrer LXEV.—The ordinances of the
gift of food—p. 14g.

Cuaprer LX V.—The gift of gold—p. 150.

Cuarrer LXV1.— ‘The merits of the gift
of a paic of sandals toa “Brahmana. The
gifts of sesame, land, kine, gold, &c.,—
Pp» I5t.

Cuaprer LXVIl.—~The merits of ‘the
gifts of drink—p. 154.

Curaprrer LX VIILL—The gifts of sesame
and lamps—p. 155. ;

Caarrer LXIX.—The gifts of earth,
Vedic mjunctions on the objects of gift—
p. 156.

Craprer LXX.—The bistaey of _ king
Negra—p. 157.


the


CONTENTS.


CHApTer LXXI.—The merits of the guft
of kine. ‘The discourse between Rishi
Uddataki and Nachiketa—p. 159

Cuarrerns LXXI—LXXIV.—The end
of persons who make gifts of kine—p. 162.

CHaprer LAXV.—TShe merits of Vedic
studies, vows, teachingthe Vedas, gilts of
knowledge, of the satisfaction of one’s
duties, of serving the parents—p., 166.

Cuarrer LXXVI.—Ordinances about
the gifts of kine—p. 168.

Cuarter LXXVII—LXXX.—The mys«
teries of the gift of kine—p. 169.

Cuarrer LXXXI—Description of sacred
things—p. 175.

Cuarrer LXXXII.—The merits of cows -
dung, The conversation between kine and
the goddess of prosperity—p. 172.

aoe LXXXIIL.—The glory of kine

Aeeae LXXXIV.—An account of gold
and its pifts—p. 180.

Cuaprer LXXXV.-—The Sancti of the
dieties on the subject—p. 183.

Craprer L.XXXVI.—The history of the
destruction of laraka—p. 19>.

CHAPTER LXXXVII—The
about Sheaddha—p, : 1ol.

Cuaprer LXXXVIIL.—Eternal gifts to
the departed manes—192,

Cuarrer LXNXXIX. —Optional Shrad-
dhas—p. 193.


~ Cnarrer XC.—A description of Brah-


ordinances


| manas to whom offers ‘should be made at


the time of Shraddbas—p. 194.

Cuaprers XCI--XCII.—The history and
particular rites of a Sbraddha—p. 196.

CHarrgr XCIU.—Whether a Brah-
mana eating Havya at the invitation of a
ee while sat 5 commits sin—

p- 199.

Cuarrzr XCIV.—The history of oaths
= 206.

Crarrer XCV.—The introduction of um-
.brellas and sandals as gifts of Suraddhas-—-
p- 209.

CuarteR XCVI.~Jamadagni’s attempt
to destroy the Sun—p, 210.

CuarTer XCVIIL.—Duties of the Domes-
tic Mode of Life—p, 214.

Cuarrer XCVITL.—The history re the
gift of light—p. 212,


Crarter XCIX The merits of the
gifts of light, incense, &. The discourse
between Natiusha-and Agastya on the subs
sject—p. 216,


CONTENTS. | iii


CuartEr Cl.—The end of a person steat-
ing a Beahmana’s goods. The conversation
between a Chandala and a_ low-caste
Kohatriya on the subject—p. 218.

Cuaprer Cll—the various ends of
righteous persons after death. The dis-
course between Goutama and Vasava—


Pp. 219.
Cuaaprer CIHIL—The highest penance
described. ‘he discourse between Bhagi- .


ratha and Brahma—p. 223.
Caarrer CIV.—Why a man_ becomes
long-, or short-, lived—p. 225.
Cuarter CV.—Fraternal duties—p. 232.
Caarrzr CVI.—The law of fast—p. 233.


Craprer CVIL.—Ordinances equivalent
to sacrifices for poor men—p. 236.

Caarrer CVIIL.—The foremost
purest of all Tirthas described—p. 241.


Cuapter CIX.—The most beneficial
fruit of all fasts—~p. 242.


and


CuapTgr CX.—The means for acquiring
beauty, prosperity, good temper and happi-
ness—p. 243.

Cuarrer CXI.—The deeds by which
one goes to heaven or heil—p. 243.

CuHarTeR CXI[.—The end of virtue—
p. 248.

CuarTeR CXIUI[.—Non-injury, observ-
ance of Vedic rituals, meditation, controling
Senses, penances, and obedience to the pre-
ceptors,—which of them is preferable p. 250.

CuarrTer CX1LV.—The purification of one
who has injured others—p. 259. .

CHAPTER CX V—Ordinances about meat-
ealing—p. 251.

Cuaprer CXVI.~The merits of abs-
tention from -meat-eating—p. 254.

Cuaprers CXVII—-CXI1IX.—TPhe end of
persons dying in battle-field. The discourse
between Dwaipayana and a worm—p. 256.

CuarteR CXX—CXXII.—Knowledge,
penances .and gifts, which of them is supe-
rior—p. 261.


Cuarrer CXXIIL—The conduct of good
and chaste women—p. 262.

Cuarrer CXXIV.—The efficacy of con-
ciliation and gifts—263.

CrapTer CXXV.—The mystery of duties
and gifts—p. 265.

Cuarprer CXXVI.~Deeds pleasing to
Vishnu—p. 268.


Cuarrer CXXVIL—The
sacred fire—p.- 270.


Cuarter CXXVIII.—The observance of
duties which produces happiness—p, 272.


worship of


Cuarrer CXXIX —The condition
men who know others’ wives—p. 272.
CuarprerR CXXX.—~The mysteries of duty
and religion~p. 273.
Carrer CXXX1i.—The power of the
Pramathas—p. 275.
CHAPTER .CXXXII—The mysteries of
duty described by the elephants—p. 275.
CuarTers CXX XHI—CXXXI1 V.—Duties
as described by Maheshwara and Skanda~—
p. 276.
’ Coaprer CKXXV.~—The law of diet—the
position of various castes about that-—277,


CuarpTer CXXXVI.— he expiation of
a Brahmana disregarding the law—p. 278,

CuapTreR CXXXVII.—TVhe superiority
of charity and devotion—279.

Cuaprer CXXXVIIL—The merits of
“gifts—p, 280,

Cuaprers CXXXIX—~CXLVIH.—Reli-
gion and Profit, which bring on happiness
inthe next world. The history of Rudra
and Uma—p. 281.

Cuaprer CXLIX.—An account of the
One Guod—p. 309.

Cuaprer CL.—The Mantras for succ
in journey, entry into new buildings, a
for propitiating malevolent spirits—p, 321.

Cuaptrer.CLI.—Persons worthy of ado-
ration—p. 324.

- Carrer CLIU—The fruit of the adora~
tion of Brahmanas—p. 325.

Cuarrers CLIL—~CLVIIL—Superiority —
of the Brahmanas over the Elements p. 326

Cuaprers CLVIII—CLIX—The prose
perity following the worship of the Brahe
manas—p. 333- ae

CuapteR CLX.—Shata-Rudrya Maa-
tra—p. 338.

Cuarrer CLXIL.—The Same cont. p. 33

CHAPTER CLXII.—The authority of direct
perception, inference, the science of the
scriptures —p. 341.

CuaprerR CLxUI.—Time for acquisition
of Wealth—p* 344.

Cuarter cCLxiv.—The influence of Time
—P. 344.

CHAPTER CLxV.—The means of happi-
ness. ‘he source of well-being—p. 345.

CHAPTER CLXv1.—The instructions of
Bhisbma~ p. 347.

CuapTER cLxvit.—Yudhishthira comes
to Bhishma—p. 248.


of


CHAPTER CLxv11t,—Death of Bhisma—


P- 359.


THE MAHABHARATA


CIN ENGLISH.)
ANUSHASANA PARVA.


34S


CHAPTER I.
(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).


Having saluted Navayana and Nara the
best of male beings as also Savaswatt, the
goddess of learning let us ery success.


Yudhishthira said :—


1. O grandfather, peace of mind has
been described to be subtile and of various
forms. Ihave heard all your discourses,
but have not still been able to acquire tran-
quillity of mind.

2. Various means of quieting the mind
have been described by you, O sire, but
how can peace of mind be acquired from
only a Knowledge of the different sorts of
tranquillity, when I myself have been the
means of bringing all this about ?


3. Seeing your body covered with arrows
and bad sores, I cannot get, O hero, any
pours of mind, thinking of thé evils I have

jone.


4. Seeing your body, O bravest of th
brave, covered with blood, like a hill covere
with water from its springs, am_perishing
with grief as the lotus in the rainy season.


5. What can be more painful than this,
that, for me, you, O grandfather have been
reduced to this condition by my people
fighting against their enemies on the
battle-field.


6. Other princes also, with their sons.
and kinsmen, have been killed on my
account, Alas, what can be more painful
than this,?

7. Tellus, O prince, what will befall us
and the sons of Dhritarashtra, who, im-
pelled by fate and anger, have done this
hateful act.


8. O king, I think the son of Dhrita-
rashtra is fortunate, because he does not
see you in this condition.


g. But I, who am the’ cause of your
death as well as of that of our friends, am
denied all peace of mind by seeing you on
the naked earth in this miserable plight.


to. The wicked Duryodhana, the most
infamous of his family. has, with all his
soldiers and his brothers, died in battle,
performing Kshatriya duties.


ir. That wicked man does not see you
lying on the ground! Verily, for this
reason, I would prefer death to life.


124-13. O hero who never forsook virtue,
had 1 with my brothers met with death
before this at the hands of our enemies on
the battle-field, I would not have seen you
in this pitiful condition, sd pierced with
arrows! Sulely, O prince, the Maker had
created us to commit evil deeds,


14. O king, if you wish to do me good,


- do you then instruct me in such a way that


I may be purged of this sin. in even
another world.


| Bhishma said :—


15. ‘Why, O fortunate one, do you re.


| gard your soul, which is dependent, to be
the cause of your deeds? Its inaction is


subtle and imperceptible to the sensés.
16—19. Regarding it is cited the old


/ story of the conversation between Mritya
| and Gautami with. Kala and the Fowler


and the serpent. There was, O son of
Kunti, an old lady named Gautami, who
was endued with great patience and peace
of mind. One day she found her son
dead on account of having been bitten. by
a serpent.

26. An angry fowler, named Arjunaka,
bound the serpent with a string and brought
it before Gautami. lle then said to her.—~
This wretched serpent has been the cause
of your son’s death. O blessed lady! Tell
me quickly how this wretch is to be killed!
Shall-I throw'it into the fire or ;shall 1 cur
it into pieces? ‘This infamous killer of a
child should not live longer! ~


Gautami replied :—
21% Do you, O Arjunaka of tittle un-
derstanding, set free this serpent! {t


2 MAHABHARATA.


should not be killed by you. Who is so
foolish as not to care for the inevitable
destiny that awaits him and make him-
self heavy for sinking into sin 7


22. Those who have made themselves
light by performing virtuous deeds, manage
to cross the sea of the world as a ship
crosses the ocean. But those who have
loaded themselves with ‘sin sink into the
bottom, as an arrow thrown into the
water,

23. By killing this serpent, this my boy
will not revive,“and by letting it live, no
harm will be caused to you. Who would go
to the endless regions of Death by killing
this living creature 7 i :


The fowler said :—


24. I know, O lady who know the dif-
ference between right and wrong that
great persons are pained at the miseries
of all creatures. But these words which
you have uttered carry instruction for only
a self-contained person.. Therefore, I must
kill this serpent.


25. Those who valite peace of mind,
attribute everything to the course of Time
as the cause, but practical men soon pacify
their grief. People, through perpetual error,
fear loss of beatitude. . Therefore, O lady,
remove your grief by having this serpent
killed (by me).

Gautami replied :—

26. People like us are never pained.
Good men have their squls always bent on
virtue. The death of the boy was predes-


tined : therefore, I cannot approve of the
destruction of this serpent. ;


27. Beahmanas do not cherish resent-
ment, because resentment leads to pain.
Do you, O goodman, forgive and set free
this serpent out of mercy.


The fowler replied :—


28. Let us acquire great and inexhaus-
tible merit in the next world by destroying


(this creature), as a man gains great merit, |;


and confers it on his victim as well, by
sacrifice upon the altar! Merit is won by
killing an enemy: by killing this despica~
ble creature, you will acquire great and
true merit in the next world.


Gautami replied :—

What good is there in torturing and des-
troying an enemy, and what good is ac-
quired by not setting free an enemy in our
power? ‘Therefore. O you of kind_face,
why should we not forgive this serpent and
try to acquire merit by setting it free.


| O serpent.


| should admit it.


The fowler replied :~


jo. A great number (of creaturey


| should be safeguarded against this one,
| instead of this single creature being pro-


tected. Virtuous men quit the vicious
do you, therefore, destroy the wicked crea-


ture,


Gautami replied -—
31. By killing this serpent, my son, O
fowler, will not regain his life, nor do I see


| that any other end will be attained by its


death : therefore, do you, O fowler, set this


» living serpent free.


| The fowler said :—


32. By§destroying Vritra, Indra got the


best portion (of sacrificial offerings), and


by destroying a sacrifice Mahadeva secured
his share of sacrificial offerings: do you,
therefore, kill this serpent forthwith without
any misgivings whatsoever.


Bhishma said :—
33. Although repeatedly urged on by
the fowler for the destruction of the serpent,


the great Gautami did nor bend -her mind
to that sinful deed. ,


34. Painfully fettered with the cord,
sighing a little and keeping up its compo-
sure with great difficulty, the ‘serpent then
uttered these words slowly, im a human
voice.


The serpent said :—

35. O foolish Arjunaka, what is my
fanit? I have no will of my own, and an»
not povependant ! Death sent me on this
work,


36. By his order have F bitten this child,


' and not out of any anger or option an my


part. Therefore,if there be any sin: in this,
O fowler, the sin is his.


The fowler said :—


37- If you have committed this evil,
urged thereto by another, the sin is your
also as you are an instrument in the act.


38. Asin the making of an earthen pot
the potter’s wheel and rod and other things
are all considered as causes, so are you,
He who is guilty should be
killed by me, You, O serpent, are guilty !
Indeed you contess it.


The serpent said :—~

39. As all these, vzs., the porter’s wheel,
rod, and other things, are not independent
causes, so I am not an independent cause!
Therefore, this is no fault of mine, you


ANUSHASANA PARVA. 3


ai. Vf you hold otherwise, then these
are to be considered as causes working with
one another. For thus working with one


other, a doubt springs up about theic rela-


tion as cause and effect.


42. Such being the case, it is no fault of
mine, sor should | be killed on this account,
nor am I gaifty of any sin! Or, if you
think that there is sin, the sin lies in the
aggregate of causes.


The fowler said :—
43- If you are neither the principal
cause nor the agent in this matter; you are


still the cause of the death. ‘Therefore, I
think you should be killed.


44. If, O serpent, you think that when
an evil deed is done the doer is not impli-
cated therein, then there can be no cause
io this matter: but having done this, you
should surely be killed. What more do
you think ?


The serpent said :—

45. Whether any prime cause exists or
ot, no effect is done without an (interme-
diate) act. Therefore, causation being of
o importance in either case, my act as
the cause stiould be considered in full.


46. If, O fowler, you consider me truly,
to be the cause then the sin of this act of
killing a living being rests on the shoulders
of another who led me to do this.


The fowler said :—

47- Fou don’t deserve life, O foolish one,
why do you then exchange so many words,
@G wretched serpent? You should be
killed by me. You have done a henious
crime by killing this infant. = -


The serpent said :—

48. O fowler, as the priests officiating
at a sacrifice do not gain the merit of the
act by offering oblations of clarified butter
to the fire, so should LI be considered in
this matter.


Bhishma continued :—

49. The serpent directed by Death
having. said this, Death himself appeared
there and addressing the serpent said :—


Mrityu said :—~

50. Guided by Kala,I, O serpent, sent
you on this mission, and neither are you
nor am J the cause of this child’s death.


st. As the clouds are driven hither and
thither by the wind, 1 am, QO serpent,
moved by Kala,


52. Allinfluences of Sattwa, or Rajas,
or Tamas, originate from Kala as they
work in ail creatures. ;


53. All creatures, mobile and immo-


| bile, in heaven, or eacth, are pervaded by


the influence of Kala. The whole universe,
© serpent, is permeated by this same
influence of Kala.


54. All acts in this world and all abs-
tentions, as also all their changes, are


| owing to be influenced by Kala.


55. The Sun, Soma, Vishnu, Water,
Wind, the god of a hundred sacrifices,
Fire, Sky, Earth, Mitra jand Parjanaya,
Aditi, and the Vasus, Rivers and Oceans,
all existent and non-existent objects, are
created and destroyed by Kala.


s56—57. Knowing this, why do you, O
serpent, consider me blameable? If I am
ed ps blamed for this, you are also blame-
able.


The serpent said :—

58. I donot, O Mrityu, blame you, nor
do I set you free frons all blame. I only
say that ]am directed and influenced by
you.


59. If Kala is to be blamed, or, it is not
for me to find the fault. We have no right
to do so. : ;


60. As it is my duty to absolve myseff
from this blame, so it is my duty to see
that Mrityu is not blamed. -


Bhishma continued :— oy
61. Then the serpent, addressing
Arjunaka said, ‘You have heard what
Mrityu has said. Therefore, it is not
proper for you to torment me, who am
innocent, by fettering me with this rope.


The fowler said :—


62. I have heard, you, O serpent, as well
as the words of Mrityu, but these, {O sere
pent, do not set you free from all blame,


63. Mcityu and you are the causes of
this child’s death. I regard both of you
to be the cause and [I do not call that to be
the cause which is not.truly so.


64. Accursed be the wicked and venge-
ful Death that causes misery to the good!
I shall also kill you who are sinful and
engaged in sinful deeds. ;


Mritynu said :—

66. We both are not free, but are depen.
dent on Kala, and are ordained todo our
appointed work, You will not blame us if
you do consider this matter thoroughly.


4 MAHABHARATA.


The fowler said:


66. If you both, O serpent and Mrityu,
depend on Kala, | am curious to know how
pleasure and anger are caused.


Mrityu said :—

67-68. Everything is done under the
influence ef Kala. f have said it before,
O fowler, that Kala is the cause of all and
therefore we both, acting under the influ-
ence of Kala, do out appointed work and,
therefore, O. fowler, we two should not be
blamed by you.


Bhishma said :—


69. ‘Phen Kala arrived there where
ethics were being discussed, and spoke thus
to the serpent and Mrityu and the fowlec
Arjunaka assembled together.


Kala said :—

jo. ‘Neither Mrityu, nor this serpent,
‘nor 1, O fowler, am guilty of the death of
any creature. We are merely the imme-
diate causes of the event. O Arjunaka,
the Karma of this child. was the exciting
cause of our action in this matter.


7t. There was no other cause by which
this child met its death. It was killed by
the result of its own Karma.


72. Ithas met ‘with death as the result
of its pristine Karma. Its Karma has
been the root of: its ‘destruction, We all
are subject to our respective Karma.


73. Karma is a help to salvation as


sons are and Karma also expresses virtue


and vice in man. We impell one another
even acts urge one another.


74 As men make from a lump of clay


whatever they wish to make, so do meu


come by various results out of Karma,


75. Aslight and shadow are connected
with each other, so are men related to
Karma. through theic own deeds.


76. Therefore, neither are you, nor am
I, nor Mrityu, nor the serpent, nor this
old Brahmana lady, ts the cause of this
child’s death. :


77. He himself is the cause here. Upon
Kata, O king, explaining the matter thus,
Gautami, convinced in her mind that men,
suffer according to their actions, spoke thus,
to Arjunaka, ;


Gautami said :—

78. Neither Kala, nor Mrityu, nor the
serpent, is the cause here. This child
has met with death as the result of its own.
Karma.


: devotion,


79. too have so acted that my son has
died. Let now Kala and Mrityu retire
from there, and do you tao, O Arjunaka,
set this serpent free.


Bhishma continued :—


80. Then Kala and Mrityu and the
serpent returned to their respective places,
and Gautami. became consoled in mind as
also the fowler. -


81. Having heard all this, O king, do
you forego all grief, and acquire peace of
mind! Men attain to heaven or hell as
the result of their own Karma.


82. This evil ‘has neither been of your
own creation, nor of Duryodhana’s! That
these king’s of Earth have all been kilted, is
the work of Kala.

Vaishampayana said :— |
83. Having heard all this, the powerful


and pious Yudhisthira became consoled in
mind, and again enquired as follows.


CHAPTER II.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.


Yudhisthira said :—
1. O grandfather, O wisest of men, O


_you who are learned in all the scriptures,


I have heard;this great story, O foremost
of intelligent men!


2. Tam desirous of again listehing to


the recital of some history full of religious


instruction, and you should satisfy me.


3. Oking, tell me if any householder,
has ever succeeded in conquering Death
by the {practice of virtue! Do you recite
this to me in full. :


Bhishma said :~-_

4. This ancient. history, is narrated des-;
cribing the subject of the conquest,. by a
householder, of Death, by the practice of
virtue.


§. The Prajapati Manu had a son, O
king, named Ikshwaku. ‘That king, illus~
trious:as the Sun, begat a hundred sons.


6. His tenth son, O Bharata, was named


' Dashashwa, and this virtuous prince of


infallible prowess. became the king of

Mahismati, ; ‘

7. Dashashwa’s son; O king, was @ pious

ptince whose mind was continually devoted

to the practice of truth and charity and
t « ; i


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


8. He was known by the name of
Madirashwa and ruled the Earth as her
master.


5


22. The king was reluctant to: give his
daughter in) marriage- to the Brahmana


He was continually given to the { who was poor and not of equal rank with


study of the Vedas as also of the science { himseli.


of arms.

g. Madirashwa’s son was the king named
Dyutimat who was ended with great good
fortune and power and strength and energy.


10. Dyutimat’s son was the highly


23. Thereupon Agni disappeared from
hig, great sacrifice. ‘he king, grieved at
heart, then addressed the Brahmanas,
saying,-~ .


24. What sin have I, -ye excellent


devout and pious king who was celebrated | Brahmanas, or you, have committed, that


in all the worlds by the name of Suvira.
His soul was intent on religion and he
possessed riches like another Indra the
King of the gods,


tr. Suvira too had a son who was invin-
cible in battle, and who was the best of
all warriors and known by the name of
Sudurjaya.

12, And Durjaya too, endued with a
body likejthat of Indra, had a son who was
radiant with the effulyence of fire. He was


Agni should disappear from this sacrifice,
as good done to_ wicked men vanishes from
their estimation.


25. Indeed, we have committed a great
iniquity for which Agni has thus disape


peared! Either you have committed the
sin, or I. Do you fully enquire intu the
matter.


26. Then hearing the king’s words, O
foremost prince of Bharata’s tace, the
Brahmanas, controlling speech, sought with


the great king named Duryodhana who was | concentrated facultics the help of the god


one of the foremost of royal sages.


13. Indra used to pour rain profusely |
in the kingdom of this king, who never fled


of fire,


27. The divine carrier ‘of oblations, |
effugent as the autumnal Sun, appeared


from the battlefield and was gifted with | before them, covering his self in glorious


valour like unto Indra himself. ;
14. The cities and the kingdom of this


relulgence. s
28. ‘Fhe great Agni then addressed


king were filled with wealth and gems and | those excellent Bratmanas, saying,—l seek


cattle and various sorts of grains


15. There was no miser in his kingdom
nor any person, afflicted with distress or


the daughter of Duryodhana for my own”
self.


. 129. At this, all those Brahmanas were


suffering from poverty. Nor was there in his |.struek with surprise, and rising on ‘the


kingdom any person who was weak iin body
or afflicted with disease, m


16, This king was very intelligent, mild”
in speech, without envy, a master of his
passions, of a righteous soul, fult of mercy,
gifted with prowess, and not given ‘to

. boasting. .


17. He celebrated sacrifices, and was
selt-controlled and intelligent, devoted:
to Brahmanas and Truth, He never hu
miliated others, and was charitable, and
well-read in the Vedas and the Vedanta.


18. Auspicious and sacred and of coet


morrow, they. told the king what had been’
said by the fire-god. oe


30. Hearing the words of those Brahma-
-vadins, the wise king was delighted
at heart, and said,~-Be itso !~-The oe
sought a boon of the illustrious fire-god'
as the marriage dower.—Do you, O Agai,
be pleased to remain always with us
here !

3t—~32. Be it so !—said the divine Agni
to that king. -For' this reason Agni hag-
always been present in the kingdom of
Mahismati to this day, and was seen by’


waters, the celestial stream Narmada, in | Sahadeva in his conquering expedition to


her own nature, O Bilrarata, courted: him.


ig. He begot upon that river, a lotus.
eyed daughter, named Sudarshana,
was, O king, gifted. with great beauty.


who d
*{| decked with jewels, to the great god, and


the south.


33-36. Then the king gave his.
aughter,-dresséed in new ftaiments and


20. No woman, O Yudhisthira, had'| Agni too accepted, according to Vedic


been born before, who was so very beauti-
ful as that excellent lady the daughter of
Duryodhana.


21. The god Agni himself coucted the


rites, the princess Sudarshana as his bride,.
as he accepts libations of clarified butter at:
sacrifices. Agni was well pleased with her
look, her beauty, grace, character, and
nobility of birth, and thought of begetting


_ beautiful princess Sudarshana, and -assum~.| offspring upon her. And she soon gave
‘ing the. shape of a, Brahmana, Q king, |' birth taa son by Agni, of the name of


sought her hand: frons the; king.


Sudarshana,


6 MAHABHARATA.


37» Sudarshana, also, was, as beautiful
as the full moon, and even in his childhood
he acquired a knowledge of the supreme
and eternal Brahma.


38. There was also a king named
Oghavat, who was the grandfather of
Nriga. He had a daughter named Ogha-
vati, and a son, too, of the name of Ogha-
ratha born to him.


39. King Oghavat gave his daughter
Oghavati, beautiful as a goddess, to the
learned Sudarshana, for wife.


_ 40. Sudarshana, O king, leading the
domestic mode of life with Oghavati, used
to live in Kurukshetra with her.

41. This intelligent prince of fiery
energy took the vow, O lord, of conquering
Death by leading the life of a householder,


42. The son of Agni, O king, said to
Oghavati,—Do you never act against (the
wishes of) those who seek our hospitality.


43- You should ungrudgingly welcome
the guests, even if you have to offer your
own body. .


.44. ©O beautiful one, I always remember
this vow, since for house-holders, there is
no higher virtue than hospitality to guests.

-45- Do you always remember without
ever doubting it, if my words be any autho-
rity with you.

46. O sinless and blessed one, if you
‘have any faith in me, do you never dis-
regard a guest, whether I be at your side

or at a distance from you.


47. Oghavati placing her clasped hands


on her forehead, replied, saying,—I shall |


leave nothing undone of what you. order
me.


48. Then, O king,’desiring to over-reach
Sudarshana, Mrityu began to watch him
for finding out his short comings.


49. Once on a time, when the son of
Agni went out fetch fuel from the forest,
a graceful Brahmana sought the hospitality
of Oghavati with these words.


50. O beautiful lady, if you have any
aith in the virtue of hospitality as laid
ydown for householders, then | would request
you ta extend the rites of ,hospjtality to
me to-day.


51. Thus addressed by that Brahmana,
O king, the illustrious princess welcomed
him according to-the rites laid down in the
Vedas.


52. Having offered him a seat, and
water to wash his feet, she enquired, say-
ing,—What is_your business? What can
I offer you? — ; -


‘to his own asylum,


53 The Brahmana said to her,—My
business is with your bady, O blessed one!
Do you act accordingly without any hesitae
tion whatever.


54. If the duties prescribed for house-~
holders be acceptable to you, da you, O
princess, satisfy me by offering up your
body to me.

55. Though tempted by the princess
with offers of various other things, the
Brahmana, however, did not seek any
thing else than the offer of her own person.


56. Finding him determined, that lady,
recollecting the directions given to her by
her husband, but filled with shame, said to
that excellent Brahmana,—Be it so.


57- Recollecting the words of her hus-
band who was desirous of acquiring the
virtue of house-holders, she cheerfully
approached the twice-born Rishi.


58. Meanwhile, the son of Agni, having
collected fuel, returned to his home.
Mcityu, with his dreadful and inexorable
nature, was always by his side, as one
attends upon his devoted friend.


59. When the son of Pavaka returned
he called out for
Oghavati by name, and repeatedly exe
claimed,—-Where are you gone ?


60. But the chaste lady, devoted to her
husband, being then in the; arms of that
Beahmana, gave no reply to her husband.


61. Indeed, considering herself sullied,
that chaste woman became speechiess,
overcome with shame,


62. Sudarshana,‘addressing her ‘again,
exclaimed,—Where can my chaste wife be?
Where has she gone? Nothing can be
so very important to me than this.


63. Why does not that simple and truth-
ful lady, devoted to her husband, alas,
reply as she used to do before with swee
smiles.


64—~—66. Then that"Brahmana,'who was
within the hut,thus replied to Sudarshana,—
Know, O son of fire, that a Brahmana guest
has. arrived, and though‘tempted by your
wife with various other offers of welcome,
I have, O best of Brahmanas, desired only
her body and this fair lady is engaged in
welcoming me with due rites! You can do
whatever you think proper on this occasion.


67. Acmed with the iron club, death
pursued the Rishi at that moment, desirous
of bringing about the destruction of one
who would, he thought, deviate from his
promise. .


68-69. Sudarshana was struck with
wonder, but- renouncing: all, jealousy and


ANUSHASANA PARVA, ¥


stiger by look, word, deed, or thought, said,
<=sDo you enjoy yourself, O Brahmana!
It is a great pleasure tome! A house-


holder acquires the highest merit by
honouring a guest.
970. The learned say that to the house-


holder, there is no higher merit than what
comes from a guest leaving his house after
having been duly honoured by him.


91. My life, my wife, and all my earthly
belongings, are all dedicated to the use of
my guests! This is the vow that I have
taken.


72. As have truly made this statement,
by that truth, O Brahmana, I shall acquice
the knowledge of Self.


93~—74. O foremost of the -virtuous, the
five elements, vis., fire, air, earth, water,
and sky, and the mind, the intellect and
the Soul, and time and space {and the ten
organs of sense, are all in the bodies of
men, and always witness the good and evil
deeds of men. :


' 95. This truth f have spoken to-day,
and let the gods bless me for it or destroy
me if I have spoken.an untruth,


76. At this, O Bharata, there arose
from all sides, in’repeated echoes, a voice,
crying,—-This is true, this is not false.


77—78. Then that Brahmana came out
of the hovel, and like the wind rising and
covering both Earth and sky. and making
the three worlds echo with Vedic recitations,
and calling that virtuous man by name,
and congratulating him, said :—

79. Ovsinless one, I am Dharma! All
glory to you! I came here, O truth-loving
one, to try you, and [ am well3pleased with
you by knowing you to be virtuous.


80. You have controtled and conquered
Death who always has pursued you, seeking
your shortcomings,


‘St. O best of men, noone in the three
worlds has the power to insult, even with
looks. this chaste lady devoted to her hus-
band, far less to touch her body, me


82. She has been saved from contami-
nation by your virtue and by her own chas-
tity. There can be nothing against what
this proud lady will say.


83. This Brahmavadin, gifted with aus-
tere penances, shall, for the salvation of the
world, be changed into a powerful river. -


$4. And you will acquire all the worlds
in this your body, and because the science
of Yoga is within her control, this highly
blessed lady will follow you with only half
her body,’ and ‘with the other half will she
be celebrated as the river Oghavati,


85. And you will acquire ‘with her aff
the worlds that are acquired by penances. }


86. You will acquire even in this mate-
tial body those eternal and everlasting
worlds from which none return.


87. You -have conquered Death, and
acquired the highest happiness, and by
your own power (of mind), attaining to the
speed of thought, you have transcended the
five elements.


88. By thus following the duties of a
house-holder, you have conquered your
passions, desires, and anger. and this
princess, O best of virtuous men, has, by
serving you, conquered affliction, desire,
illuson, enmity and lassitude of mind.


Bhishma said :— ue
89. Then, riding in a fine chariot drawn
by a thousand white steeds, the glorious
asava approached that Brahmana.
90. Death and Soul, allithe worlds, alf
the elements, intellect, mind, time, and
ether, as also desire and anger, were ail
conquered. ;


gt. Therefore, O best of men, do you
remember that a to householder there is
no gteater. god than the guest.


22. -The learned say that the blessings
of an honoured guest are more fruitful than
the merit of a hundced sacrifices. -


92. Whenever a deserving guest seeks
the hospitality. of a house-holder. and is
not respected by him, he takes away all the
virtues of the latter giving bim his sins,

94. 1 have now recited to you, my son,
this excellent story as to how Death was
conquered in days of yore by a house-


holder.
95. Thefrecital of this excellent story
gives glory, fame, and longevity. The
man who seeks worldly prosperity should
consider it as powerful in removing all evit.
96: And, O Bharata, the learned man
who. daily recites this story of the life of
Sudarshana acquires blessed regions.


eee


CHAPTER HL
(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—


Continued.


Yudhishthira said:—

1. If, O prinee, it is so very difficult for
the other three castes to acquire Brahmanas
hood, how then did the grgat Vishwa-
mitra, O king, though a Kshatriya, acquire


8 MAHABHARATA,


the status of a Brahmana? I desire to
know this, O sire! Therefore, do you
truly describe this matter to me.

3. Osire, by virtue of his austerities,
that powerful man destroyed ik a moment
the hundred sons of the great Vasishtha,


4. While under the influence of ire, he
created numberless evil spirits and Raksha-


‘sas of great vigour and resembling the


great destroyer Kala himself.


5. The great and learned family of
Kushitea, containing hundreds of twice-bornu
sages in it. and highly spoken of by the
Brahmanas, was founded in this world of
men by him.


6. Having been sought tobe killed as
an animalin the great sacrifice of Amva-
risha, Shunashepha of austere penances, the
son of Richita acquired his deliverance
through Vishwamitra.


7. Having pleased the gods at a sacri-
fice Harishchandra became a son of the
wise Vishwamitra. ;


8. For not having honoured their eld-
est brother Devarat, the other fifty brothers
of his were imprecated, and all of them
became Chandalas, . :


9. When abandoned by his friends, and
hanging with his head: downwatds int the
lower revions, Trisanku, the son of Ikstvaku,
was translated to heaven at the pleasare of
Vishwamitra.


to. Vishwamitra had: a@ large river;
named Kaushiki, that was frequented by
celestial Rishis. This sacred and auspici-
ous river was frequented by the celestials.and
twice-born Rishis..

11. For disturbing his devotions, the
famous celestial nymph Rambha, having
fine bracelets, was cursed. and changed
into a rock.


12. From fear of Vishwamitra the glori=
ous Vasishtha, in days of yore, binding
ehimself with creepers, threw himself down
into a river and.again rose released’ from
tis fetters,


13. On eccount of this, that large and
sacred river became thenceforth famous by
the name of Vipasha.


14—1§. He prayed:to the glorious and
powerful Indra who wag pleased with him
and freed him from 4 curse; Remain.
ing on the northern Se of the sky, he
sheds his lustre from @ v cition in the
midst of the seven twice-bois nighis and
Dhruva the son of Uttanpada. :

14. These, and many others are hi. ats
Qa Heecon san of. Kuru,. my curiosits®2"s.
been. kindled in this. respect, because ¢ :


were performed by a Kshatriya.


17. Therefore, O foremost one of
Bharata’s race, do you relate this matter
to me truly! How without renouncing his
body and taking another body of flesh
could he become a Brahmana?


18 Doyou, O sire, truly describe this
matter to mé as you have described to me
the story of Matanga.


1g. Matanga was born as a Chandala,
and could not acquire Brahmanahood, but
how could this man acquire the status of
a Brahmana?


CHAPTER IV.


(ANUSHASANA PARVA).—
Continued.


Bhishma said :—

1. “Listen truly in full, O son of Pritha,
how, in days of yore, Vishwamitra acquired
the status of a Brahmana, as also of a
Brahmana Rishil


2. There was,”O foremost of Bharata’s
descendants, in the family of Bharata, a
king named Ajamida, who celebrated many
sacrifices and was the best of all virtuous
men,

3. Hissoa was the great king named
Jabnu. Ganga. was the daughter of this
great prince,

-4. The far-famed and.equally virtuous
Sindhudwipa was the’ son of this prince.
From: Sindhudwipa sprang the great royal
sage Valakashwa.

5. His son was named Vallabha who
was like a second Dharma, incarnate. His
son was Kushika who was illustrious like
the thousand-eyed Indra.


6. Kushika’s son was the illustrious king
Gadhi. whe, being obildless and wishing
to have. a son born to him, went to the
forest.


7. While living there, a daughter was
born: to: him. She fwas-calied Satyavati,
and she was peerless in beauty on Earth,


8. The illustrious’ son of Chyavana,
known by the name of Richika, of the
family of. Bhrigu, gifted with austere
penances, sought the hand of this lady.


9.. Thinking hiner to-be poor, Gadi, the
destroyer of his enemies, did not bestow
her in’ marriage-upon the great Richika.

to. But when the latter; thus dismissed,
was going away, the excellent king, ad-
dressing: him, said,—If youcan give mea
marriage dower you will have my daughter
as your wife!


ANUSHASANA PARVA,.


Richika said :—


11-12. What dower, O king, shall !
offer you for the hand of your daughter ?
Tell me truly, without any hesitation
whatsoever !—Gadhi said,—O descendant
of Bhrigu, give me a_ thousand horses
quick-coursing as the wind, and possessing
the color of moon-beams, and each having
one ear black.


Bhishma said :—


13—14. Then that powerful son of
Chyavana who was the foremost of Bhrigu’s
family, besought the god Varuna, the son
of Aditi, who was the lord of all the waters.
O best of gods, I pray to youto give me
a thousand horses, all fleet like the wind
and having complexion as effulyent as the
moon’s, but each having one ear black.


15-16. The god Varuna, the son of Aditi,
said to that scion of Bhrigu’s race,—Be
itso! Whenever you will seek, the horses
shall come. As soon as Richika thought
of them, there came from the waters of
Ganga a thousand high-born horses, as
effulgent as the moon.


17. Not far from Kanyakuvja, the sacred
bank of Ganga is still famous among men
as Ashwatirtha on account of the appear-
ance of those horses,


18. Then Richika, that best of ascetics,
pleased in mind, gave those thousand ex-
cellent horses to Gadhi asthe marriage
gift.


19. King Gadhi, stricken with wonder
and fearing to be cursed, gave his daughter,
adorned with jewels, to.that son of Bhrigu.


20. That foremost of twice-born Rishis
accepted her hand in marriage according
to due rites. The princes too was {well-
pleased at seeing herself the wife of that
Brahmana,


2t. That foremost of twice-born Rishis,
O Bharata, was well pleased with her ¢on-
duct and expressed a desire to grant her a
boon,


22. The princess, O excellent king,
communicated this to her mother, The
mother said to the daughter that stood be-
fore her with down-cast eyes,—You should,
O my daughter, secure a favour for me
also from your husband. That sage of
austere penances is competent to grant a
boon to me,—the boon, vzz., of the birth of
a son to me.


24. Then, O king, returning speedily to
her husband Richika, the princess des-
cribed to him all that had been wished for
by her mother,


Richika said :—


25. By my favour, O blessed one, she
will soon give birth to a son gifted with
every virmne May your request be ful-

Hed!


26. Of you too shall be born a powerful
and glorious son who, gifted with virtue,
shall perpetuate my race. ‘Truly do | say
this to you.


27. When you two shall bathe in your
season, she shal] embrace a pepul tree, and
you, O excellent tady, shall embrace a fig
tree, and by so doing you shall have the
fruition of yout desires.


28. O sweetly-smiling lady, both she
and you shall have to partake of these two
sacrificial offerings (chavu) consecrated with
hymns, and then you shall get sons,


29. Thereat, Satyavati, pleased at heart,
told her mother all that had been said by
Richika as also of the two balls of charu,


go. Then the mother, addressing her
daughter Satyavati, said :—O daughter, as
I deserve greater respect from you than
your husband, do you obey my words. .


31. Do you give me the charu, duly
consecrated with hyinns, which your huse
band has given you, and yourselfitake the
one that has been intended for me. rs


32. O sweetly-smiling one of pure cha-
racter, if you have any reverence for my
word, let us change the trees respectively
intended for us,


33- Every one wishes to possess an ex-
cellent and pure son. The illustrious Ri-
chika too must have acted from the same
motive in this matter as will appear in the
long run,


34. Therefore, O beautiful girl, my
heart is bent upon your chavu and tree,
and you too should also try tg secure an
excellent brother for yourself,


35. The mother and the daughter Sa-
tyavati having acted thus, they both, O
Yudhistuira, became big with child.


36. Finding his wife quick with child,
that great Rishi, the descendant of Bhrigu,
became pleased at heart, and addressing
her, said :~


37. O excellent lady, you have not done
well in exchanging the charu as will soon
be seen. It is also clear that you have
changed the trees. ;


38. I had put the entire accumulated
energy of Brahma-in your charu and
Kshatriya energy in the ¢hazw of your
mother.


YO |


39. I had so settled that you would give
birth to a Brahmana whose virtues would
be famous throughout the three worlds, and
that she would give birth to an excellent
Kshatriya.


40-48, But now, Ovexcelfent lady, as
you have changed the order (of the charu
$0}, your mother give birth to an excellent
Brahmana, and you too, O excellent lady,
will give birth to ‘a Kshatriya of dreadful
deeds. Yor have not done well, O lady,
by doing this out of affection for your
mother.


42. Hearing this, O king, the excellent
lady Satyavati, filled with sorrow, dropped
upon the ground like a beawiful creeper
cut in two parts,


43--44. Regaining her senses and bow-
ing ,to her lord with head (bent), the
daughter of Gadhi said to her husband,
that foremost one of Bhrigu’s race,—O
twice-born Rishi, O you who are foremost
amongst those versed in Brahma, have
mercy on me, your wife, who is. thus ap-
peasing you and so order that a [Kshatriya
son may not be born to me,


45,° Let my grandson be such a one as
will be famous for his dreadful feats if it be
your desire, but not my son, O Brahmana!
Do you grant me this favour.


46. Be it so,~said that Rishi of austere
penances to his wife and then, O king, she
gave birth to a blessed son named Jama-
dagni.

47. The famous wife of Gadhi too gave
birth to the twice-born Rishi Vishwamitra
versed in the knowledge of Brahma, by
favour of that Rishi.


48. The highly pious Vishwamitra,
though a Kshatriya, gained the dignity of
a Brahmana and became the founder of a
race of Brahmanas.


49. His sons became great progenj-
tors of many races of Brahmanas who
were given to austere penances, learned in
the Vedas, and founders of many clans,


50-53. The worshipful Madhuch-
chhanda and the powerful Devrat, Akshina,
Shakunta, Vabbra, Kalapatha, the cele-
brated Yajnavalkya, Sthuna of great vows,
Uluka, Mudgala, and the sage Saindha-
vayana, the sllustrious Valfgujangha and
the great Rishi Galava, Ruchi, the cele-
brated Vajra, as also Salankayana,
Liladhya, and Narada, the one known as
Kurchamukha, and Vahuli Mushala as
also Vakshogriva. ‘


54—61. Anghrika, Naikadrik, Shilayu-
pa, Shita, Suchi, Chakraka, Marutan-
tavya, Vataghna, Ashwalayana, and


MAHABHARATA.


Shyamayana, Gargya, and Javali, as also
Sushruta, Karishi, Sangshrutya, and Para
Paurava, and Tantu, the great sage
Kapila, Tarakayana, Upagahana, Asuras
yant, Margama, Hiranyaksha, Janghari,
Bhavravayanj, and Suti, Bibhuti, Suta,
Surakrit, Arani, Nachika, Champeya,
Ujjayana, Navatantu, Vakanakha, Sayana,
Yati, Ambhoruha, Amatsyashin, Shirishin,
Gardhavi, Urjjayoni, Udapekshin, and the
great Rishi Naradin,—these ascetics were
alt sons of Vishwamitra and were versed
in the knowledge of Brahma. O king
Vudhishthira, the greatly austere and
pious Yishwamitra, although a Kshatriya,
became a Brahmana for Richika having
placed the energy of supreme Brahma (in
the chavuz), O foremost prince of Bharata’s
family! E have now described to you, im
full, the story of the birth of Vishwamitra
who was gifted with the energy of the sun,
the moon, and the fire-god.


62. O best of kings, if you have any
doubt about any other subject, please let
me know it, so that I may remove it.”


” CHAPTER V.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


% “QO you who know the truths of
religion, £ wish to hear of the merits of
religion, IF wish to hear of the merits of
mercy, and of the marks of devout men!?
Do you, O sire, describe them to me.’”


Bhishma said :—

2. “Regarding it, this ancient legend,
the story of Vasava and the great Shuka,
is cited as an illustration.


3. Inthe dominion of the king of Kashi,
a fowler, having poisoned arrows with him,
went out of. his village on a hunting
expedition in search of antelopes.


4. Desirous of getting meat, when in a
big forest in pursuit of the chase, he saw a
drove of antelopes near at hand, and shot
his arrow at one of them.


5. The arrow of that fowler of irrestible
arms, shot for the destruction of the ante-
lope, missing its aim, pierced a pawerful
forest-tree, .

6. The tree, pierced with that arrow
covered with dreadful poison, withered
away, shedding its leayes and fruits.

q7- The tree haying thus withered, a
parrot which had ljyed in a hollow of its


ANUSHASANA PARVA, IL


tank all his life, did not leave his nest out
of affection for that lordly tree.


8. Motionless starving, silent and
sorrowful, that grateful and virtuous parrot
also withered away with the tree.


g. The conqueror of Paka (Indra) was
filled with wonder upon seeing that great
and generous bird thus uninfluenced by
misery or happiness and possessing exira-
ordinary resolution.


to. Then Sakra thought,—How could
ahis bird come to pussess such humane and
generous feelings which cannot be seen in
one of the lower anima! creation ?


x1. There is nothing wonderful in the
matter, for all creatures are seen to show


kindly and generous feelings towards
others.
12, Assuming then the shape of a Brah-


mana, Shakra went on the Earth and


addressing the bird, said :-—


13. O Cuka, OU best of birds, the grand-
daughter of Daksha has become blessed
(by having you as her offspring)! I ask
you, why do you not leave this withered
tree?


14. Thus accosted, the Shuka bowed to
him and thus replied :—Welcome to you,
O king of the gods, | have recognised you
by the merit of my austere penances.


15. Wetl-done, well-done!—said the
thousand-eyed god. ‘Then the latter lauded
him in his mind, saying,—O, how wonder-
ful is the knowledge which he possesses.


16. Although the destroyer of Vala
&new that parrot to be of a greatly victu-
ous character and meritorious in action, he
still enquired of him about’ the reason of
his love for the tree.


17-18. This tree is withered and it is
without leaves and fruits, and is unfit to be
the refuge of birds. Why do you then
cling to it? ‘This forest too is vast and in
this wilderness there are numberless other
good trees whose hollows are covered with
deaves and which you can choose freely
and to your heart’s content.


19. O patient one, displaying proper
discrimination in your wisdom, do you leave
this old tree that is dead and useless and
shorn of all its leaves and no longer capable
of any good.


Bhishma said :—

zo—21, Hearing these words of Shakra,
the virtuous Shuka, heaved a deep sigh,
and sorrowfully replied to him, saying,—O
husband of Sachi, and chief of the gods,
the ordinances of the geds should always


be obeyed. Do you hear of the reason of
the thing about which you have asked me.


22. Here, within this tree, was I born:
and here in this tree have all the good
traits of my character been devetoped,
and here in this tree was I protected in my
infancy from the attacks of my enemies.

23. O sinless one, why are you, in your
kindness, interfering with the principle of
my conduct in life? 1 am merciful and
devoutly intent on virtue, and firm in con-
duct.


24. Kindliness of feeling is the highest
test of virtue amongst the good, and this
same merciful and humane feeling is the
source of eternal happiness to the virtuous.


25. Allthe godé ask you to remove their
doubts in .religion, and for this reason,
O lord, you have been elected their king.


26—27. You should not, O thousand-eyed
one, advise me now to leave this tree for
good. When it was capable of good, it
supported my life. How can I leave it.
now? Pleased with these well-meant words
of the parrot, the virtuous destroyer of
Paka, thus said to him:—I am pleased
with your humane and merciful disposition.


28. Do youask a boon of me.—At this,
the merciful parrot craved this boon of him,
saying,—Let this tree revive.


29. Knowing the great attachment of |
the parrot to that tree and great high cha-
racter, Indra, well-pleased, caused the tree
to be quickly sprinkled over with nectar.


30—31. Then that tree became revived
and grand through the penanres of the
parrot, and the latter, too, O great king, at
the end of his life, acquired the companion-
ship of Shakra by virtue of that act of |
mercy,


32. Thus, O king, by communion and
companionship with the pious, people ac-
quire all the objects of their desire even as
the tree did through its companionship with
the parrot,”’


CHAPTER VI.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.
Yudhisthira said :—
1, “OF Exertion and Destiny, tell me


O learned sire who are versed in all the
scriptures, which is the more potent ?


12


Bhishma said :—

2. Yhis ancient story of the conversa.
tion of Vasishtha and Brahman. O Yu-
dhisthira, explain this matter.


In days of yore the worshipful Va-
sishtha enquired of Brahman as to which
among these two,uiz., the Karma of a
Creature acquired in this life, or that ac.
Quired in pristine lives (and called Destiny),
is the more powerful in shaping his life.


4. Then, O king, the great god Brah-
man, who had originated from the pri-
meval lotus, answered him in these sweet
and well-reasoned pregnant words.


Brahmana said: ~


5. Nothing springs into existence with-
out seed, Without seed, fruits do not grow,
From seeds originate other seeds. Hence
are fruits known to be sprung from seeds,


6. According to the good or bad seed
that the husbandman sows in his field,
he reaps good or bad fruits.


7. As. unsown with seed, the soil,
though tilled, becomes fruitless, so, without
personal Exertion, Destiny is of no use.


8. One’s own deeds are like the soil,
aud Destiny is compared to the seed. The
harvest grows from the union of the soil
and seed,


‘Q—I0. It is seen every day in the world
that the doer reaps the fruit of his good
and evil acts; that happiness results from
good deeds, and pain is the outcome of evil
ones; that acts, when done, always fructify;
and that, if not done, no fruit arises,


11. A man of (good) acts gains merits
with good fortune, while an idler loses his
estate, and reaps evil like the infusion of
alkaline matter injected into a wound...


12. By firm application, one acquires
beauty, fortune, and all sorts of riches.
Everything can be
tion: but nothing can be gained through
Destiny only, by a man who lacks personal
Exertion.


13. One attainsto heaven, and all the
objects of enjoyment, as also the fulfillment
of his heart’s desires, by  well-apptied
personal Exertion.


14. All the luminaries in the sky, all the
gods, the Nagas, and the Rakshasas, as
also the Sun and the Moon and the Winds,
have acquired their high status by evolu-
tion from man’s status, by dint =of their
own action,


15. Riches, friends, prosperity coming
dowa from generation to generation, as
also the sweets of life, are difficult of attain-
ment by those who want Exertion.


obtained by Exer-


MAHABHARATA.


16. ‘The Brahmana acquires prosperity
by holy living, the Kshatriya by prowess,
the Vaishya by manly exertion, and the
Shudra by service.

17. The stingy, the impotent, or the
idler do not acquire riches and other
objects of enjoyment. Nor are these ever
acquired by the man who is not active or
manly or devoted to the exercise of reli-
gious austerilies,


18. Even he, the worshipful Vishnu,
who created the three worlds with the
Daityas and all the gods, even He is en-
gaged in austere penances in the heart of
the deep.


19. If one’s Karma bore no fruit, then
all actions would become fruitless, and
depending on Destiny men would become
idlers.


20. He who, without following the human
modes of action, follows Destiny only, acts
in vain, like the woman who has an im-
potent husband,


2t. Yhe apprehension of good or evil
in this world is not so great if Destiny be
unfavorable as his apprehension of the
same in the other world if Exertion be
wanting while here.


22. Man's powers, if properly applied
only follow his Destiny, but Destiny alone
caunot produce any good whee Exection
is wanting.


23. When it is seen that even in the
celestial regions, the position of the gods
themselves is unstable, bow would the gods
maintain their own position or that of others
without proper Karma.


24. Vhe gods do not always approve
of the good actions of others in this world,
for, fearing their own defeat, they try fe
thwart the acts of others.


25. There isa constant rivalry between -
the gods and the Rishis, and if they all
have to go through their Karma, still it
can never be said that there is no such
thing as Destiny, for it is the-latter that
introduces all Karma.


26. How does Karma originate, if Des-
tiny is the principal motive power of human
action? By this means, ‘many virtues are
accumulated in the celestial regions.


27. One’s own self is his friend and his
enemy too, as also the witness of one’s eet
aud evil deeds. © :


28. Good and evil appear through
Karma. Good and evil acts do not produce .
sufficient results.


29. Virtue is the refuge of the gods, and
by virtue everything is acquired. Destiny


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


13


thwarts not the man who has acquired : world, is soon lost to them. Destiny does


virtue and righteousness.


30. In days of yore, Yayati, falling from
his high position fin heaven, descended on
the Earth but was again restored to the
celestial regions by the good deeds of his
pious grandsons,


3t. The royal sage Pururavas, well-
known as the desceridant of Ila, attained
to heaven through the intercession of the
Brahmanas,


32. Saudasa, the king of Koshala,
though dignified by the performance of
‘Ashwamedha and other sacrifices, came by
the status of a man-eating Rakshasa,
through the course of a great Rishi.


33. Ashwatthaman and Rama, though
both warriors and sons of Ascetics, failed to
acquire heaven by virtue of their own
actions in this world.


34. Vasu, though he celebrated a hun-
dred sacrifices, like a second Vasava, was
sent to the nethermost regions, for making
a single false statement.


35. Vali, the son of Virochana, virtuous
bound by his promise, was sent to the
regions under the Earth, by the prowess of
Vishnu, ;


35. Was not Janamejaya, who followed
the foot-prints of Shakra, for slaying a
Brahmana woman, checked and put dowa
by the gods?

27. Was not the twice-born Rishi Vai-
shampayana too, who killed a _Brahmana
in ignorance, and was polluted by the
slaughter of a child, put down by the
gods?


38. In days of yore the royal sage Nriga
became changed into a lizard. He had
made gifts of kine into the Brahmanas at
his great sacrifice, but this did not help
him.


39. The royal sage Dhundhumara was |


possessed by decrepitude even while
engaged in celebrating his sacrifices, and
foregoing all the merits thereof he fell
asleep at Girivraja, ‘

40. The Pandavas too regained their
lost kingdom, of which they had been de-
prived by the powerful sons of Dhrita-
rashtra, not through the influence of the
Fates, but by recourse of their own heroism.


4t. Do the ascetics of rigid vows, and
given to the practice of austere penances,


denounce their curses by the help of any -


supernatural power or only in the exercise
of their own power attained by individual
acts 2° : . fuer


42. If possessed by the wicked, all the
good which is gained with difficulty: in this


the fruits are of good deeds !


not help the man that is full of spiritual
ignorance and avarice,


43. Even as Small fire, when fanned by
the wind, becomes hizhly powerful, so does
Destiny, when helped by individual Exer-
tion, becomes greatly potent.


44. Asby the diminution of oil in the
lamp its light is put out, so does the influ -
ence of Destiny, by the abatement of one’s
acts.


45. Having obtained riches, and woman
and all the enjoyments of this world, the
man who is not hard-working is unable to
enjoy them long, but the great man,
diligant in Exertion, can find riches buried
deep in the Earth and watched over by the
Fates.


46. The good man who is prodigal ig
sought by the gods for his good conduct,
the celestial world being better than the
world of men, but the house of the miser
though full of riches is looked upon by the
gods as the house of the dead.


47. The man who does not exert himself
is never contented in this world, nor ean
Destiny change the course of a man who
has gone wrong. ‘There is no power inhe-
rent in Destiny. As the pupil follows the
preceptor, so does one’s action, guided by
Destiny, follows his own personal exertion.
Where one’s own Exertion is displayed,
there only Destiny shows its hand.


48. O best of ascetics, [ have thus des-
cribed. all the merits of personal Exertion,
having always known in theie true signifi-
cance. :

49. By the influence of Destiny, and by
showing personal Exertion, do men attain
to heaven. ‘The combined help of Destiny
and Exertion, becomes fruitful.” ‘


’ CHAPTER VII.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued, .


Yudhisthira said :—


_1. QO best of Bharata’s family and the

foremost of great men, | wish to know what
Do you en-

lighten me.”


Bhishma said :—
2. “I shall tell you what-you haveasked.


Do you, O Yudhisthira, listen to this which
forms the secret knowledge of the Rishis.


14


3. Listen tome as I explain what the
long coveted ends, are which befall men
after death. ‘Fhe fruits of whatever actions
are performed by creatures in whatever
bodies or forms of existence, are reaped by
the doers while endued with similac bodies.
In whatever states creatures perform good
or evil acts, they reap the fruits thereof in
similar states ph aiceecaing fives. No act
done with the help of the five organs of
sensual perception, is ever lost.


4-7. The five sensual organs and the
immortal soul which is the sixth, are its
witnesses. One should devote his eye (to
the service of others); one should devote
his heart (to the same); one should utter
sweet words; one should also follow and
wotship (one’s guest). ‘Fhis is the sacrifice
with five gifts. "He who offers good food to
the unknown, and tired traveller, fatigued
by a long journey, acquires great merit,


‘8. Those who use the sacrificial platform


as their only bed, obtain. palatial mansions .


and beds (in subsequent births). He who
wears only rags and barks of trees for dress,
gets good apparel and ornaments.


9. One possessed of penances: and
having his soul on Yoga, gets vehicles and-
riding animals. The king who lies down
by the side of the sacrificial fire, acquires
vigor and valour.


10. The man who casts off the enjoy-
ment of all delicacies, acquires prosperity,
and he whe abstains from animal food,
obtains children and cattle. .


at.
downwards, or who lives in water, or who
lives secluded and alone in the practice of
Brahmacharya, acquires all the desired
ends.


12. He who gives shelter to a guest and
avelcomes him with water to wash his feet as
also with food, light and bed, acquires the
merits of the sacrifice with the five gifts.


13. He who on the battle-field, lays
himself down as a warrior on a warrior’s
bed, goes to those eternal regions where all
the objects of desire are fulfilled,


14. Aman, O king, acquires riches who
makes charitable gifts. One gets obedi-
@nce to one’s command by the vow of
silence, all the enjoyments of life by practice
ef austerities, long life by Brahmacharya,
and beauty, prosperity and immunity from
disease by abstaining from injury to others.


x5. Those who’ live on fruits and roots
only, acquire Sovereignty, those who live on
only leaves of trees acquire Residence ia
heaven, ——

16. A man, O king, is said to acquire
happiness, by abstention from food. By


He who lies down with his head’


MAHABHARATA.


eating herbs alone, one gets cows. By
living on grass, one acquires the celestialt
regions,


17. By avoidng all intercourse with his
wife and making ablutions three times a
day and by inhaling the air only for pur-
poses of maintenance one acquires the merit
of a sacrifice. Heaven is gained by the
practice of truth, and nobility of birth by
sacrifices.


18. The Brahmana of pure practices
who lives on water only, and performs the
Agnihotra continually, and recites the
Gayatri, acquires a kingdom. By abstain-
ing from food or by restricting it, one


- acquires residence in heaven.


19. O king, by avoiding all but the
prescribed diet while celebrating sacrifices,
and by making pilgrimage for twelve
years, one acquires a place better than the
abodes reserved for heroes,


20. By reading all the Vedas, one is
immediately freed from misery, and by
practising virtue in thought, one acquires
the heavenly regions.


at. That man{who shakes off the long-
ing for happiness and materia! comforts—
a thirst that is difficult of conquest by the
foolish and which does not abate with the
decline of physical vigour and which clings
to him like a dreadful disease,—is able to
secure happiness.


22. As the young calf is able to recog-
nise its dam from among a thousand cows,
so do the pristine deeds of a man follow
him.


23. As the flowers and fruits of a tree,
unmoved by apparent influences, never miss
their proper season, so does Karma done in
a pristine existence bring about its fruits
in proper time.

24. With age, man’s hair grows gray ;
his teeth become foose; his eyes and ears
too become dim in action; but the onty
thing that does not decline is his desire for
enjoyments.


25~—26. Prajapati is pleased with those
deeds which please one’s father, and the
Earth is pleased with those acts which
please one’s mother, and Brahma is pleased
with those acts which please one’s mother,
and Brahma is adored with those acts that
please one’s preceptor. Virtue is honored
by him who honors these three. The acts
of those who despise these three do not
help them.


Vaishampayana said :—
27. The princes of the line of Kuru


became filled with surprise upon listening
to this speech of Bhishma, All of them


ANUSHASANA PARVA:


became pleased in mind and overpowered
with joy.

28. As Mantras applied for gaining
victory, or the performance of the Shoma
sacrifice made without proper gifts, or obla-
tions poured on the fire without proper
hymns, become fruitless and produce evil
results, so sin and evil results originate
from falsehood.


29. O prince, I have thus described to
you this doctrine of the fruition of good
and evil deeds, as recounted by the Rishis
of old. What else do you wish to hear.’


—


CHAPTER VIII?


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


1, “Who are deserving of adoration?
Who are they to whom one may bow? Who
are they, O Bharata, to whom you would
lower your head? Who, again, are they
whom you like? Tell me all this, O
prince.


a. What is that upon which your mind
turn when affliction overwhelms you.
Do you describe to me what is beneficial
here, that is, in this region of human
beings, as also hereafter.


Bhishma said :—


3. I like those twice-born persons whose
highest wealth is Brahma, whose heaven
is their knowledge of the soul, and whose
penances are formed by their diligent study
of the Vedas. '


4. My heart longs for those in whose
family persons young and old diligently
bear the ancestral burthens. without lan-
guishing under them.


5-7. Brahmanas well-trained in several
branches of knowledge,  self-controlled,
mild-speeched, conversant with the scrip-
tures, well-behaved, possessed of the
knowledge of Brahma, and righteous in
conduct, discourse’ in respectable assem-
blies like flights of swans. ‘hey in a voice
deep as the muttering of clouds give vent
to auspicious, sweet, excellent, and well-
pronounced words, O Yudhishthira. In
the courts of monarchs, they spoke these
words fraught with happiness both temporal

-and spiritual, themselves being received with
honor and attention and served with res-
pect by those kings.

8. Iddeed, my heart longs after them
who endued with knowledge and ajl desir-
able attributes, and honoured by others,


15.


listen to such words when uttered in
assemblies or the courts of kings.

g. My heart, O king, always yearns
after thém who, for the satisfaction of
Brahmanas, O Yudhishthira, give to them,
with devotion, food that-is well-cooked and
clean and wholesome. .


10. Ht ts easy to fight in battle, but not
so to make a gift without pride or vanity.


11. In this world, O Yudhisthira, there.
ate hundreds of brave men and heroes.
While counting them, he who isa hero in
gifts should be considered as superior.


12, O amiable one, if 1 had been even a
vulgar Brahmana |} would have considered
myself as very great, not to speak of one
born in a good family, gifted with righter
ousness of conduct, and given to penances
and learning.


13. There is no one, O son of Pandu,
in this world, -who is dearer to me than
you, OQ chief of Bharata’s frace, but Brae
hmanas are dearer to me than you. ,


14. And since, O best of the Kurus, the
Brahmanas are very much dearer to me
than you, it is by that truth that I expect
to go toall those . regions of happiness
which have been: gained by my father
Shantanu.

ts. Neither my father, nor my grand+
father, nor any one else connected with me
by blood, is dearer,to me than the Brahe
manas,


16. I do not expect any fruit, small o¢
great, from my adoration of the Brats
manas. ; : :


17. On account of what I have done to
the Brahmanas in thought, word, an
deed, 1 do not feel any pain now.


18. People used fo call me as one
devoted to the Brahthanas. ' This address
always pleased me highly. Todo good to
the Brahmanas is the most sacred of all
sacred duties, : :


19. ‘I see many regions of beatitude
waiting for me who have respectfully fol-
lowed the Brahmanas. Very soon shall J
go to those regions for good, O son. ©”


20. In this world, O -Yudhishthira, the
duties of women depend upon their hus-
bands. Toa woman, verily, the husband
is the god and he is the highest end for
which she should try. Asthe husband to


the wife, so are the Brahmanas - to
Kshatriyas.
at. If there be a Kshatriya hundred


years old and a good Brahmana child of
only ten years, the latter should be con-
sidered as a father and the former asa


16 MAHABHARATA,


gon, for among the two, the Brahmana is | make gifts to Brahmanas after having pra-


superior.


‘22.. A woman, in the absence of her
husband, takes his younger brother for her
lord; so the Earth, not having obtained
Brahmana, made the Kshatriya her king.


. 23. Fhe Brahmanas should be pro-
tected like sons and adored like fathers
or preceptors. Indeed, O best of the
Kurus, they served reverentially as people
wait with respect upon theie sacrificial or
Homa fires.


24. The Brahmanas are ‘gifted with
simplicity and righteousness. They are

iven to truth, They are always engaged
in the behalf of all creatures. Yet when
angry they are like snakes of dreadful
venom, They should, for these reasons, be
always waited upon and served with respect
and humility.

25. One should, O  Yudhishthira,
always fear these two, vis... Energy and
Penances. Both these should be shirked
or kept at a distance.


26. The effects of both are quick. There
is this superiority, however, of Penances,
viz., that Brahmanas gifted with Penances,
O king, can, if angry, bill the object of
their anger.

27. Even greatest Energy and Penances,
become neutralised if applied against a
Brahmana who has conquered anger. If
the two,—that is, Energy and Penances—
be set against each other, then both of
them would be destroyed. Again when
Energy, is set against Penances, itis sure
to be destroyed without leaving a remnant.
Penances applied against -Energy cannot
be destroyed completely.

28. As the herdsman, stick in hand,
protects the herd, so should the Kshatriya
always protect the Vedas and the Bra-
hmanas.

29. The Kshatriya should protect all
pious Brahmanas as a father, protects his
sons. He should always look after the
houses of the Brahmanas for finding out
that the means of subsistence may not be
wanting,”


CHAPTER 1X,
(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—


Continued.


Yudhisthira said :—

1. “QO grandfather, O you of great
splendour, what do those men become who,
“through stupefaction of intellect, do not


mised to make those gifts ?

2. O foremost of all righteous persons,
do tell me what the duties are in this
matter. Indeed, what becomes the end of
those wicked men who do not give aftcr
having promised to give.”


Bhishma said :—
3. ‘The person who, after having pro-


‘mised, does not give, be it little or much,


has the motrofication to witness his hopes
frustraeted like the hopes of a enunch about
children.


4—5. Whatever good acts such a person
does between the day of his birth and that
of his death,-O Bharata, whatever libations
he pours on the sacrificial fire, whatever
gifts he makes, O chief of Bharata’s race,
and whatever penances he performs, all
becomes useless.


6. They who are conversant with the
scriptures hold this as their opinion, ar-
riving at it, O chief of the Bharatas, with
the help of a well-ordered understanding.


7, Persons conversant with the scrip-
tures also opine that such a man may be
purified by giving away a thousand horses
with dark ears.


8. Regarding it is cited the old dis-
course between a jackal and an ape.


g. While both were human beings, O
scorcher of enemies, they were intimate
friends. After death one of them became
a jackal and the other an ape.


to, Seeing the jackal one day eating an
animal carcase in the midst of a cremato-
riur;, the ape, remembering his own and
his friend’s pristine birth as human beings,
addressed him, saying,


it, Verily, what dreadful sin did you
commit in your pristine birth on account of
which you are obliged in this birth to feed
in a crematorium upon such repulsive food
as the putrid carcase of au animal ?


12. “Flus addressed, the jackal replied
to the ape, saying,—Having promised to
give toa Brahmana I did not make him
the gift.


13. It is for that sin, O ape, that I have
fallen into this wretched state of existence.
It is for that reason that, when hungry, I
am obliged te eat such food.


Bhishma said :—


14. The jackal then, O best of men,
addressed the monkey and said,——What
sin did yeu commit for which you have
become an ape. :


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


The ape said :—

15. In my former life I used to eat the
fruits belonging to Brahmanas. Hence
have I become an ape. Hence it is clear
that one endued with intelligence and
learning should never take what belongs
to Brahmanas. As one should abstain
from this, one should avoid also all quar-
rels with Brahmanas, Having promised,
one should certainly make the promised
gift to them.


Bhishma said :—


16. I heard this, O king, from my pre-
ceptor while he was discoursing upon the
subject of Brahmanas. I heard this from
that pious person when he recounted the old
and sacred declarations on this topic.


17. I heard this from Krishna also, O
king, while he was discoursing, O son of
Pandu, upon Brahmanas.


18. The property of a Brahmana should
never be taken, They should always be
let alone. Poor, or miserly, or young in
years, they should never be dishonoured.


19. The Brahmanas have always taught
me this. Having promised to make them
a gift, the gift should be made. A supe-
rior Brahmana should never be disappoint-
ed in his expectations.


20. A Brahmana, O king, in whom an
expectation has been raised, has, O king,
been said to be like a burning fire.


a1, That man upon whom a Brahmana
with raised expectations looks, is sure,
O king, to be reduced to ashes as a heap of
straw is’ capable of being consumed bya
burning fire.


22. When the Brahmana, gratified by
the king, addresses the king in delightful
and affectionate words, he becomes, O
Bharata, a source of great good to the king,
for he continues to live in the kingdom
like a physician fighting against various
ills of the body.


23. Such a Brahmana is sure to main-
tain peacefully the sons and grandsons
and animals and relatives and ministers
and other officers and the city and the pro-
vinces of the king.


24, Such is the energy of the Brah-
mana, like to that of the thousand-rayed
Sun himself, on the Earth.


25. Therefore, O Yudhishthira, if one
wishes to come by a respectable or happy
order of being in his next birth, he should,
having made the promise to a Brahmana,
certainly satisfy it by actually making the
gift to him.


3


37


26. By making gifts to a Brahmana
one is sure to acquire the highest heaven.
Verily, the making of gifts is the highest
of deeds that onecan perform.


27. The gods and the departed manes
are supported by the gifts one makes to a
Brahmana. Hence one endued with know-
ledge should ever make gifts to the Bra-
hmanas,


28. O chief of the Bharatas, the Brah-
mana is considered as the highest object
to whom gifts should be made. At no
time should a Brahmana be received with-
out due adoration.”


CHAPTER X.
(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—


Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—

1. “I wish to know, O royal sage,
whether any sin is committed by one wha
from interested or disinterested friendship
delivers instructions to a person of a low
order of birth.


2. O grandfather, | wish to hear this
explained to me in full. The course of
duty is highly subtile. Men are often seen
to be stupefied about that course.


Bhishma said :—

3 About it, O king, I shall recite to you,
in due order, what I heard certain Rishis
say in days of yore.


4. Instruction should not be given to
one who belongs to a tow or degraded
caste, It is said that the preceptor who
delivers instruction to such a person com-
mits great sin.


5. Listen to me, O chief of Bharatas,
as I recite to you, O Yudhishthira, this
incident which took place in days of
yore, O king, of the evil consequences of
imparting of instruction-to a low-born
person fallen into distress,


6. The incident which I shall describe,
took place in the hermitage of certain twice«
born sages which stood on the auspicious
breast of Himavat. There, on the breast
of that king of mountains, was a sacred
asylum adorned with trees of various
kinds.


7. Overgrown also with various species
of creepers and plants, it was the resort of
many animals and birds, Inhabited by
Siddhas and Charanas also, it was highly
delightful on account of the woods that
flowered there at every season,


1%


8. Many Brahmacharins lived there,
and many hermits. Many Brahmanas
lived there, who were highly blessed and
who resembled the sun or the fire in energy
and effulgence.


g- Ascetics of various kinds, observant
of various restraints and vows, as also
others, O king of the Bharatas, who had
gone through initiatory rites and were frugal
in fare and possessed of purified souls,
lived there,


to. Large numbers of Valikhilyas and
many who observed the vow of Sanyasa
also, used to live there. On account of
all this, the hermitagesresounded with the
recitation of the Vedas and the sacred
Mantras uttered by its dwellers.


tr. Once upon a time a Shudra endued
with mercy for all creatures, ventured to
come into that hermitage. Arrived at that
retreat, he was duly honored, by all the
ascetics.


ta. Seeing those ascetics of diverse
classes who were endued with great energy,
-that resembled the gods, and who were
observing diverse kinds of initiation, O
Bharata, the Shudra became highly pleas-
de at heart.


13—14. Seeing everything, O chief of
Bharata’s race, the Shudra felt inclined
to devote himself to the practice of
penances. Touching the feet of the head
of the order,{O Bharata, he said to him,
Through your favour, O foremost of twice-
born persons, I wish to learn the duties of
religion. You should, O illustrious one,
desciibe to me those duties and intro-
duce me into a life of Renunciation.

15.


I am certainly inferior in colour, O
illustrious one, for


tam by caste a Shudra,
O best of men! I wish to wait upon and
serve you here. Be pleased with me who
humbly seek your shelter, ~


‘The Kulapati said :—

16. It is impossible that a Shudra should
Hive here following the life of Renuncia-
tion. If it pleases you, you may stay here
andjserve us,


17. Forsooth, by such service you shall
acquire many regions of great happiness.


Bhishma said :—

18. Thus addressed by the ascetic, the
Shudra began to think in his mind, O
king,—How should .I now act? I have
gteat reverence for those religious duties
which lead to merit.


1g. Let this, however, be settled, that
I shall do what would be for my behoof.
Proceeding to a spot that was distant from


MAHABHARATA,


that hermitage, he made a hut of the twigs
and leaves of trees.


20. Erecting also aj sacrificial platform,
and making a little room for his sleep, and
some platforms for the use of the gods, he
began, O chief of the Bharatas, to lead a
life governed by rigid observances and
vows and to practise penances, abstaining
entirely from speech.


2t. He began to perform ablutions
thrice a day, observe other vows, make
sacrifices to the gods, pour libations on the
sacrificial fire, and adore and worship the
gods inthis way.


22—23. Governing all carna) desires,
living sparingly upon fruits and roots, go-
verning all his senses, he daily welcomed and
entertained all that came to his hermitage
as guests, offering them herbs and fruits
which grew in abundance around. In this


way he passed a very long time in that


hermitage of his.


24. One day an ascetic came to that
Shudra’s asylum for making his aquaint-
ance. The Sudra welcomed and adored
the Rishi with due rites, and pleased him
highly.

25. Possessed of great energy, and a
righteous soul, that gRishi of rigid vows
conversed with his host on many agreeable
subjects and informed him of the place
whence he had come.


26. In this way, O chief of the Bharatas,
that Rishi, O best of men, came into the
hermitage of the {Shudra in numerable
times for seeing him.


27. On one of these occasions the Shudra,
O king, addressing the Rishi, said,—I wish
to perform the rites 'that are ordained for
the Pitris, Do you show me kindness in
this matter.


28. Very well,—the Brahmana said in
reply to him, O' king.


29. Then, purifying himself by a bath,
the Shudra brought water for the Rishi to
wash his feet, and he also brought some
Kusha grass, and wild herbs and fruits,
and a sacred seat, and the seat called
Vrishi.


30—31. The Vrishi, however, was placed
by the Shudra towards the south, with its
head turned to the west. Seeing this and
knowing that it was against the ordinance,
the Rishi addressed the Shudra, saying,—
Place the Vrishni with its head turned
towards the East, and having purified
yourself, do you sit with your face turned
towards the north.—-The Shudca did every~


| thing as the Rishi directed.


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


32—35. Endued with great intelligence,
and practising righteousness, the Shudra
received every direction, about the Sraddha,”
as laid down in the ordinance, from that
Rishi gifted with penances, marking the
manner of spreading the Kusha grass, and
placing the Arghyas, and as regards the
rites to be observed in the matter of the
libations to be poured and the food to be
offered. After the rites in honor of the
Pitris had been finished, the Rishi, was
sent away by the Shudra, whereupon he
returned to his own abode. After a long
time, the whole of which he passed prac-
tising such penances and vows, the Shudra
ascetic died in those woods. On account
of the merit he acquired by those prac-
tices, the Shudra, in his hext life, was born
in the family of a great king, and in time
became possessed of great splendour.
The twice-born Rishi also, when the time
came, paid his debt to Nature.


36. In his next life, O chief of Bharata’s
face, he was born in the family of a priest.
Thus those two, v7s., that Shudra who had
passed a life of penances and that twice-
born Rishi who had out of kindness given
the former some instructions in the matter
of the rites pecformed in honour of the
Pitris, became ce-born, the one as the san
of a royal race and the other as the member
of a priestly family.


37. Both of them began to grow and
both gained great knowledge in the usual
branches of study. Yhe Brahmana became
well versed in the Vedas as also in the
Atharvans. "


38. The re-born Rishi gained great
perfection in all sacrifices ordained in the
Sutras, of the Vedanga which deals with
religious rites and observances, astrology
and astronomy. He took great pleasure in
the2Sankhya philosophy too.


39. Meanwhile, there-born Shudra who
had become a prince, when his father the
king died, performed his last rites; and
after he had purified himself by performing
all the obsequial rites, he was installed by
the subjects ot his father as their king on
his paternal throne.


‘40. But soon after his own installation
as king, he installed the re-born Rishi as
his priest. Having made the Brahmana
his priest, the king began to pass his days
happily.


4142. He ruled his kingdom piously
and protected and maintained all his sub-
jects. Every day, however, the king, see-
ing his priest on the occasion of receiving
benedictions from him as also of the perfor-
mance of religious ‘and other sacred rites,
smiled or laughed loudly. In this way, O


19


king, the re-born Shudra who had become @
king, laughed at seeing his priest on num-
berless occasions. ;
43. The priest, marking that the king
always smiled or laughed [whenever he
happened to look at him, became angry, ~


44. Onone occasion he met the king
in a place wherejthere was nobody present.
He pleased the king by agreeable conver-
sation. ‘

45. Taking advantage of! that moment, -
O chief of Bharata’s race, the priest ad-
dressed the king, saying,—O you of great
splendour, I pray you,toggrant mea single
boon. . °


The king said :—

46. Of -boons, O best of twice-born
persons, | am ready to grant you:a hun-
dred, what do you say ;then of one only ?
From the affection I have for you and the
reverence in which I hold you, there is no-
thing that I cannot give you.


The priest said :-—

47. 1 wish to have only one boon, if, O
king, you have been pleased with me.
Promise that you would tell me the truth,
instead of any untruth,


Bhishma said :—
“"48. Thus addressed by the priest, O
Yudhisthira, the king said to him=-So be -
it! If 1 know what you would ask me, I
shall certainly tell you truly. If, on the.
other hand, I donot know it, I shall not say
anything. ;


The priest said :—

49. Every day, on occasions of receiving
benedictions from me, when, again, [ am
engaged in the performance of religious
rites, on your behalf, on occasions also of
the Homa and other rites of propitiation,
why do you laugh upon seeing me?


50. Seeing you laugh at me on all occa-
sions, my mind shrinks with shame, I
have made you promise, O king, that you
would answer me truly. You should not
tell an untruth. 3 ;

51. There must be some grave reason
for your conduct. Your laughter cannot
be causeless. I have great curiosity to
know the reason, Wo; you speak truly to
me.


The king said :—
52. Whilé you have thus accosted me,
O twice-born one, I am bound to enlighten
you even if the matter be one that should
not be given out to you! I must tell you the


.


20


truth. Do you listen to me with
attention, O twice-born one.


53. Listen, O foremost of twice-born
persons, to me as I give out to you what
took place (to us) in our pristine births. I
remember that birth. Do you listen to me
with concentrated mind.


54. In my former life I was a Shudra
engaged in the practice of severe penances.
You, O best of twice-born persons, were a
Rishi of austere penances.


55. O sinless one, pleased with me, and
moved by the desire of doing me good, you,
O Brahmana, were pleased to give me
certain instructions about the rites I per-
formed in honor of my departed manes,


56. You instructed me about the manner
of spreading the Vrishi and the Kusha
blades and of offering libations and meat
and other food, O foremost of ascetics. On
account of this transgression of yours you
are born as a priest.


57. I have taken birth as a king, O
foremost of Brahmanas. See the changes
that Time encompasses. You have reaped
this fruit on account of your having ins-
tructed me.


58. It is for this reason, O Brahmana,
that I smile at seeing you, O foremost of
twice-born persons. [| do not certainly
laugh at you from desire of disregarding
you. You are my preceptor.


. Tam really very sorry at this
change of condition. My heart burns at
the thought. I cemember our former births,
hence do I laugh at seeing you.


60. Your austere penances were all
destrayed by the instructions you gave me.
Removing your present office of priest, do
you try to regain a superior birth.


61. Do you exert so that you may not
obtain in your next life a birth meaner than
your present one. Take as much riches
as you wish, O learned Brahmana, and
purify your soul, O best of men,


rapt


Bhishma continued :—


62. Dismissed by the king, the Brah-
mana made many gifts, to persons of his
own own order, of riches and land and
villages.


63. He observed many rigid and severe
vows as laid down by the foremost of Brah-
manas. He sojourned to many sacred
waters and made many gifts to Brabmanas
in those places. ~


64. Making gifts of kine to persons of
the twice-born order, his soul became
purified and he succeeded in gaining a
Knowledge of it. Going jto that very


MAHABHARATA.


asylum where he had lived in his former

birth,jhe practised very severe penances,
65. As the result of all this, O foremost

of kings, that Brahmana gained the highest


success. He became an object of respect
with all the ascetics who lived in that
asylum.

66. Inthis way, O best of kings, that


twice-born Rishi fell into great distress.
ThefBrahmana should, therefore, never give
instructions to Shudras.


67. Hence, O king, the Brahmana
should avoid delivering instructions to such
as are low-born), for it was by giving ins-
tructions to a low-born person a Brahmana
came to grief,


68. O best of kings, the Brahmana
should never desire to acqnire instruction
from, or impart instruction to, a person wha
belongs to the lowest order.


69. Brahmanas and Kshatriyas and
Vaishyas, these three orders, are considered
as twice-born. By delivering instruction
to these, a Brahmana does not commit any
sin.

jo. They, therefore, who are good,
should never discourse on any subject, for
giving any instruction, before persons of the
inferior caste. The course of morality is
highly subtile and incapable of being un-
derstood by persons of uncleansed soul.


7. It is for this reason that ascetics
adopt the vow of silence, and, honored by
all, pass through initjation without speaking
a single word, For fear of saying what is
incorrect or what may offend, ascetics never
utter a single word.


72. Even men who are righteous and
endued with every accomplishment, and
truth and simplicity of conduct, have been
known to commit great fsin on account of
words spoken improperly.


73. Instruction should never be given
on anything toany person, If on account
of the instructions given, the instructed
commit any sin, that sin attaches to the
Brahmana who gave the instruction.


74. ‘The wise man, therefore, who wishes
to acquire fmerit, should always act with
wisdom, That instruction which is given
in exchange for money always sullies the
instructor.


75. Requested by others, one should
say only what is correct after determining
it with the help of reflection. One should
give instruction in such a way that one may,
by giving it, acquire merit.


77:
about


I have thus told you everything
instructions. Very often persons


ANUSHASANA PARVA. ar


become plunged into great afflictions on ac-
count of giving instruction. Hence it is
proper that one should abstain from giving
instruction to others.”


CHAPTER XI.
(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—


Continued.


Yudhisthira said :—


1. ‘fell me, O grandfather, in what kind
of man or woman, O chief of the Bharatas,
does the goddess of Prosperity always
live.”


Bhishma said :—

2. ‘About it, I shall describe to you
what took place and what I have heard.
Once on a time, the princess Rukmini put
this question in the presence of Devaki’s
son.

3. Seeing the goddess of Prosperity,
shining with beauty and gifted with the hue
of the lotus, the mother of Pradyumna


having the emblem of Makara on his
banner, filled with curiosity, said these
words.


4. Whoare those beings whom you help
and whom you serve? Who, again, are
those whom you do not serve? O you who
are dear to him who is the lord of all crea-
tures, tell me this truly, Q you who are
equal to a great Rishi in penances and
power.


5. Thus addressed by!the princess, the
goddess of Prosperity, with a face beautiful
hike the moon, and, actuated by grace in
the presence of the deity having the
emblem of Garuda on his banner, said
these words in reply which were sweet and
charming.


Shree said :—


6. O blessed lady, 1 always live with
him who is eloquent, active, attentive to
business, free from anger, given to the
adoration of the gods, endued with grati-


tude, has his passions under complete
restraint, and is high-minded in every-
thing.


7- I never live with one who does not
attend to business, who is an unbeliever,
who causes an intermixture by his lustful
habit, who is ungrateful, who is of impure
deeds, who uses harsh and cruel words,
who is a thief, and who cherishes malice
towards his preceptors and other elders.


8. I never live in those persons who are


honor, who are distressed at every trifle,
and who always indulge in anger. Nor do
[ ever live with those who think in one way.
and act in a different way.


g. I never tive also with him who never
wishes for any acquisition for himself, of
him who is so blinded as to rest satisfied
with the lot in which he finds himself with»
out any exertion, or with those who are
contented with small gains.


to. I live with those who perform the
duties of their own order, or those who are
conversant with the duties of virtue, or those
who are given to the service of the aged, or
those who have their passions under res-
traint, or those that are gifted with purified
souls, or those who observe the virtue of
forgiveness, or those who are able and
prompt in action, or with such women as
are forgiving and self-controlled.


tt. I live with those women also who
are given to truth and sincerity and who
adore the gods. I do not live with those
women also who do not look after house~
hold furniture and provisions scattered all
around the house, and who always utter
words against the wishes of their husbands.


12. I always avoid those women who are
fond of the houses of other people and wha
have no modesty. On the other hand, [
live with those women who are devoted td
their husbands, who are blessed in conduct,
and who are always adorned with orna-
ments and well-clad. :


13. I always live with those women who
are truthful in words, who are handsome
and lovely in appearance, who are blessed
and who are gifted with all accomplish«
ments. L always avoid such women who are
sinful and unclean or impure, who always
lick the corners of their mouths, who have
no patience or fortitude, and who are fond
of dispute and quarreling ; who are indolent
and sleepy and always inclined to lie down,
I always live in conveyances and the ani+
mals that drag them, in maidens, in orna-
ments and good dresses, in sacrifices, in
clouds charged with rain, in full-blown
lotuses, and in those stars that covers the
autumnal sky. I live in elephants, in the
cowpen, in good seats, and in lakes adorn-
ed with full-blown lotuses. :


16. I live also in such rivers as pass by
with sweet murmurs, melodious with the
music of cranes, having banks adorned with
tows of various trees, and resorted to by
Brahmanas and ascetics.


17. I always live in those rivers also
which have deep and extensive waters


gifted with little energy, strength, life, and | rendered turbid by lions and elephants
*


22


plunging into them for bathing or satisfy-
ing their thirst. I live also in angry
elephants, in bulls, in kings, on the throne,
and in good men.


18. I alway live in that house in which
the inmate pours libations on the sacrificial
fire and adore kine, Brahmanas, and the
gods. 1 five in that house where at the
proper time offerings are made, to the
gods, of flowers in course of worship.


1g. I always live in such Brahmanas as
are given to the study of the Vedas, in
Kshatriyas devoted to the observance of
virtue, in Vaishyas devoted to cultivation,
and in Shudras devoted to the service of
the three upper castes.


20. I live, with a heart firm and un-
shaken, in Narayana, in my embodied self.
In Him exists virtue, full and perfect,
devotion to the Brahmanas, and the quality
of goodness.


at. Can I not say, O lady, that I do
not live in my embodied form? That person
in whom I live in spirit increases in virtue
and fame and wealth and objects of
desire.”


CHAPTER XIl. a


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continned. —


Yudhishthira said :—


1. ‘You should, O king, tell me truly
which of the two, vfs., man or woman,
gets the greater pleasure from an act of
unfon with each other. Kindly remove
my doubt about it.”


Bhishma said :—

2. To illustrate this question, the old
discourse between Bhangaswana and
Shakra is cited in this connexion.


3. In days of old there lived a king
name Bhangaswana. He was very pious
and was known as a royal sage. He was,
however, childless, O king, and, there-
fore, made a sacrifice from desire of getting
a son,


4. The sacrifice which that powerful
king celebrated was the Agnishtuta, which
on account of the god of fire being alone
worshipped in it, is always disliked by
Indra. Yet it is the sacrifice that is desired
by men when for the object of getting
children they seek to purify themselves of
their sins,


5 Learning that the king was desirous
Of pecforming the Agnishtuta, the highly


MAHABHARATA.


blessed king of the gods, oiz., Indra, began
from that moment to look for the short-
comings of that royal sage of well controll-
ed soul,


6. Despite all his careful watch Indra,
however, O king, could not find any short
comings on the part of the great king.
Sometime after, one day, the king went on
a hunting expedition,

7. Saying to himself,—This, indeed, is
an opportunity,—-Indra stupefied the king.
The king went alone on his horse, cone
founded, because of the king of the gods
having’ stupefied his senses,


8. Stricken with hunger and thirst, the
king's confusion was so great that he could


not see the cardinal points. Indeed,
stricken with thirst, he began to rove
about.


9. He then saw a Jake that was highly
beautiful and was full of transparent water.
Descending from his horse, and plunging
into the lake, he made his animal to drink,


to. Tying his horse then, whose thirst
had been satisfied, to a tree, the king
plunged into the lake again for doing his
ablutions. To his surprise he found that
he was metamorphosed by virtue of the
waters, into a woman.


11. Seeing himself thus changed in
respect of sex itself, the king became filled
with shame. With his senses and mind
completely agitated, he began to think thus
with his whole heart.


t2—13. Alas, how shall I ride my
horse? How return to my capital? On
account of the Agnishtuta sacrifice I have
got a hundred sons all gifted with great
strength, and all children of my own loins !
Alas, thus changed, what shall I say to
them? What shall l say to my wives, my
relatives and well-wishers, and my subjects
of the city and the provinces ?


14. Rishis versed in the truths of duty
and religion and other matters say that
mildness and softness and susceptibility to
extreme agitation are the characteristics of
women, and that activity, hardness, and
energy are the characteristics of men.
Alas, my manliness is gone! For why has
femininity possessed me? On account of
this change of sex, how shall I succeed in
tiding my horse again ?


16. Having thought thus the king, with
great exertion, mounted his horse and
returned to his capital, changed though he
had been into a woman.


17. Seeing that extraordinary change
his sons and wives and servants, and his
subjects of the city “and the provinces
were extremely amazed,


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


18. Then addressing them all, that
royal sage, that foremost of orators, said,—
I had gone out on a hunting expedition,
accompanied by a large army. Losing all
knowledge of the cardinal points { entered
a thick and dreadful forest, moved by the
fates,


1g. In that terrible forest, 1 became
very much thirsty and lost my senses. I
then saw a beautiful Jake abounding with
fowl of all sorts.


20—21. Plunging into that lake for
performing my ablutions, I was changed
into a woman !—Summoning then his wives
and counsellors, and all his sons by their
names, that best of kings changed into a
woman said to them these words :—Do
ye enjoy this kingdom happily. Abeut
myself, I shall go to the forest, ye sons.


22. Having said thus to his children,
the king went to the forest. Arrived there,
she arrived at a hermitage inhabited by an
ascetic.


23—24. By that ascetic the changed
Monarch gave birth to a hundred sons,
Taking all those children of hers, she
went to where her former children were,
and addressing the Jatter, said, Ye are the
children of my loins while I was a man,
. These are my children given birth to by me
in this state of change. Sons, do you all
‘enjoy my kingdom together, lise brothers
born of the same parents.


25—26. Thus commanded by _ their
parent, all the brothers, in a body, began
to enjoy the kingdom as their joint property.
Seeing those children of the king all
jointly enjoying the kingdom as brothers
born of the same parents, the king of the
gods, filled with anger, began to reflect,—
By transforming this royal sage into a
woman, I have, it,appears, done him good
instead of an injury.


27. Saying this, the king of the gods,
viz., Indra of a hundred sacrifices, asuming
the form of a Brahmana, went to the capital
of the king and meeting all the children
succeeded in creating dissensions amongst
them.


28. He said to them,—Brothers never
remain at peace even when they are the
children of the same father. The sons of
the sage Kashyapa, v7s., the gods and the
Asuras, fell out with each other on account
of the sovereignty of the three worlds.


29. As regards you princes, you are the
children of the royal sage Bhangaswana.
‘hese others are the children of an ascetic,

-The gods and the Asuras are children of
even one common father.


23


30. This kingdom, your paternal pro-
perty is being enjoyed by these children of
an ascetic,—with these words, Indra suc-
ceeded in creating disunion amongst them,
so that they very soon engaged in battle
and killed,each other.


3t. Hearing this, king Bhangaswana,
who was living as an ascetic woman, burn-
ing with grief and began to bewail. ‘The
king of the gods, uis., Indra, assuming the
form of a Brahmana, came where the ascetic
lady was living, and meeting her, said,—O
you having a beautiful face, with what grief
do you burn so that you are thus bewailing ?
Seeing the Brahmana, the lady told him in
a piteous tone.


33. Two hundred sons of mine, O twice-
born one, have been killed by Time, I
was formerly a king, O learned Brahmana
and in that state had a hundred sons.


34. These were begotten by me after my
own form, O best of twice-born persons!
On one occasion I went on a hunting ex-
pedition. Stupefted, I travelled amidst a
thick forest. ,


35. Seeing at last a lake, I plunged into
it. Rising, OQ foremost of Brahmanas, }
found that [had become a woman, Re-
turning to my capital I installed my
sons in the kingdom and then left for the
forest.


36. Changed into a woman, I bore a
hundred sons to my husband who is a
great ascetic. All of them were born in
the:ascetic’s retreat. I took them to the
capital. .

37. My children, through the influence
af Lime, fell out with each other, O twice-
born one! Thus afflicted by- Destiny, I
am bewailing.


38. Indra addressed him in these harsh
words,~-In former days, O lady, you gave
me great pain, for you did perform a sacti«
fice that is disliked by, Indra.


39. Indeed, though I was present, you
did not invoke me with honors. Iam that
Indra, O you of wicked understanding! It
is I with whom you sought hostilities. ~


40. Seeing Indra, the royal sage fell at
his feet, touching them with his head, and
said,—Be pleased with me, O foremost of
gods. The sacrifice of which-you speak
was performed from a desire of offspring.


4t. , You should, therefore, pardon me.
Seeing the transformed king prostrate him-
self thus to him, Indra became pleased with


| him and and wished to give him a boon,


432. Which of your sons, O king, do you
wish, should revive, those whom you gave


24


birth to as a woman, or those who were be-
gotten by you as a man,


43- Joining her hands, the ascetic lady,
answered jIndca, saying.—O Vasava, let
those sons of mine revive who were borne
by me as a woman.


44. Filled with wonder at this reply,
Indra once more asked the lady,—Why do
you cherish less affection for those children
of thine who were begotten by you as a
man ? ;


45. Why is it that you love more those
children that were borne by you in your
changed state? I wish to hear the reason
of this difference in your love. You should
tell me everything,


The lady said :—


49. ‘The affection that is cherished by a
woman is much greater than that which is
cherished by aman. Therefore, O Shakra,
I wish those children to revive that were
borne by me asa woman.


Bhishma said :-—

47. Thus addressed, Indra became
highly pleased and said to her,—O truthful
ney let all your children come back into
ife.


48. Do you take another boon, O fore-
most of kings,—whatever you like, O you
of excellent vows. Do you take from me
whatever dignity you choose, that of wo-
man or of man.


The lady said :— ae

49—-51. LI wish to remain a woman, 8)
Sakra. In fact, I do not wish to become a
man, O Vasava,—Hearing this answer,
Indra once more asked her, saying,—
Why is it, O powerful one, that leaving
aside the dignity of manhood you seek for
that of womanhood? ‘Thus accosted that
foremost of kings transformed into a wo-
man, answered,—In sexual intercourse, the
pleasure that women enjoy is always much
greater than what is enjoyed by men,
Therefore, O Sakra, I wish to continue a
woman.


52. O foremost of the gods, truly do I
say to youthat [ derive greater pleasure
in my present state of womanhood. Iam
quite content with this state of womanhood
that 1 now have. Do-you leave me now, O
king of heaven.


53. Hearing these words of hers, thé
lord of the gods answered,—So be it,—
and bidding her farewell, went to heaven.
Thus. O king, it is known that woman
derives much greater pleasure than men
under the circumstances you have asked.”


MAHABHAna.A.


CHAPTER) XIII.
(ANUSHASANA PARVA).—


Continued,


Yudhishthira said :—


1. ‘*What should a man doin order to
pass happily through this and the other
world. How, indeed, should one act?
What practices should one follow with this
view ?”


Bhishma said :—


2. ‘One should avoid the three deeds
which are]done with the body, the four which
are done with words, {the three which are
done with the mind, and the ten roads of
action,


3. The three deeds which are done with
the body and should be wholly avoided are
the destruction of the lives of other crea-
tures, theft or misappropriation of others’
properties, !and the enjoyment of of other
people’s wives.


4. The four acts which are done with
words, O king, and which should never be
done or even thought of, are evil jconversa=
tion, harsh words, giving other people’s
faults, and falsehood.

5. Coveting the possessions of others,
doing harm to others, and disbelief in the
Vedas, are the three deeds done with the
mind which should always be avoided.


6. Hence, one should never do any evil
deed in speech, body, or mind. By doing
good and evil deeds, one is sure to enjoy
or ‘reap the just consequences thereof,
Nothing can be more certain than this.”


CHAPTER XIV.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA),—
Continued.


Yudhisthira said :-—


1. "O son of the River Ganga, you have
heard all the names of the oLrd of the uni-
verse. ‘Tell us, O grandfather, all the
names that are applied, O powerful one, to
Him who is called Isha and Shambhu.


2. Tell us all those names which are
applied to Him who is called Vabhru or
vast, Him who has the universe for bis
form, Him who is the illustrious Lord of all
the ‘gods and the Asuras, who is called
Shankara, and who has an origin that.is.
unmanifest. Tell us also of the power of
Mahadeva.”


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


Bhishma said :—

3- Lam quite incompetent to recite the
virtues of the highly intelligent Mahadeva,
He prevades all things in the universe and
yet is not seen anywhere.


4. He is the creator of Brahman,
Vishnu, and Indra, and he is their lord.
All the gods, from Brahman to the Pisha-
chas, adore him.


5. Heis above both Prakriti and Pu-
rusha. [tis of Him that Rishis, conversant
with Yoga and possessing a knowledge of
all subjects think and reflect.


6. He is indestructible and Supreme
Brahma. He is both existent and non.
existent. Agitating both Nature and Soul
by His energy, He created therefrom the
universal lord of creatures, ofs., Brahman.


7. Who is there, who is competent to
recount-the virtues of that god of gods, who
is gifted with supreme Intelligence 2 Man
is subj-ct to conception, birth, dec: epitude,
and death.


8. Being such, what man Itke me can
understand Bhava? Only Narayana, O
son, that holder of the conch, the discus,
and the mace, can comprehend Mahadeva.


g. He gifted with knowledge. He is
the foremost of all beings in qualities. He
is Vishnu, because he prevades the uni-
verse. He is irresistible. Gifted with
spiritual vision, He is possessed of supreme
Knergy. He sees all things with the eye of
Yoga.

to. Onaccount of his devotion to the


iflustrious Rudra whom he pleased, O
Bharata, inthe hermitage of Vadari, by


penances, that the great Krishna has
succeeded in overwhelming the entire
universe.


tr. O king of kings, it is through Ma-
heshwara of celestial vision that Vasudeva
has got the qualitiy of universal agree-
ableness,—-an agreeableness which is much
greater than riches.


12. For a full thousand years this
Madhava practised the austerest penances
and at last succeeded in pleasing- the
illustrious and boon-giving Shiva, that
lord of all the mobile and the immobile
universe, °


13. In every new cycle has Krishna
pleased Mahadeva. Jn every cycle has
Mahadeva been pleased with the great
devotion of the great Krishna.


14. Hari, who himself is above all
decay, saw the power of the great Maha-
deva,—that original cause of the univese,
—on the occasion of his penances in the


4


35.


retreat of Vadari undergone for getting a
son.


is.. I do not, O Bharata, see any one
who is ‘superior to Mahadeva. Only Krishna
is competent to explain the names of that
god of gods fully and without creating the
desire of hearing more,


16. This mighty-armed one of Vadu’s
race is alone competent to tell the qualities
of the iltustrious Shiva. Verily, O king,
only he is able to describe fully the power
of the Supreme god,

Vaishampayana said :—

17. . Having said these words, the illus
trious Bhishma, the grandfather of the
Kurus, addressing Vasudeva, said the
following words describing the greatness of
Bhava, O king.


Bhishma said :—


18. You are the Lord of all the gods and
the Asuras. You are iltustrious. You are
Vishnu, because you pervade the entire
universe. You should describe those sub-«
jects connected with Shiva of universal form
about which Yudhisthira has asked me.


19. In days of yore, the Rishi Tandin,
oriyinated from Brahman, recited in Brah-
man's region and before Brahman himself
the thousand names of Mahadeva,


19. Do you recite those names. before
this assemblage of Rishis having asceticism
for their wealth, observant of high vows,
possessed of self-control, and numbering
the Island-born Kristina among them, may
hear you.


21. Do you dis¢ourse the high blessed-
ness of Him who is immutable, who is
always cheerful and happy, who is Hotri,
who is the universal Protector, who ig
Creator of the universe, and who is called
Mundin and Kaparddin. ;


Vasudeva said :—

22. The very gods with Indra, and the
Grandfather Brahman numbering among
them, and the great Rishis also, cannot
understand the course of Mahadeva’s deeds
tryly and full.


23. Even He is the end which all righte-
ous people gain. The very Adityas. who
are gifted with subtile sight, are unable to
see his abode. How then can one who is
merely a man succeed in comprehending
Him?


24. 1 shall, therefore, truly recount to
you some only of the qualities of that illus+
trious killer of Asuras, who is considered a8
the Lord of all sacrifices and vows,


26 °


Vaishampayana said :—


25. Having said these words, the illus-


trious Vasudeva began his discourse on the |
qualities of the great Mahadeva gittcd with |


the highest intelligence, after having puri-
fied himself by touching water,


Vasudeva said :—


: 26. Hear, ye foremost of Brahmanas,
and you Yudhisthira also, O sire, and hear
you too, O River’s son, the names which
are applied to Kaparddin.


27. Hear, ye, how in days of yore. I
gained a sight, so difficult to get, for the
sake of Shamva, Verily, in those days
‘was the illustrious god seen by me on
‘account of Yoga-abstraction. ;


a


28. After twelve years had passed from
the time when Pradyumna, the son of
Rukmini, who is gifted with great intelli-
gence, killed the Asura Shamvarain days
-of yore, my wife Jamvavati addressed me.


29—30. Indeed, seeing Pradyumna and
Charudeshna and other sons born of Ruk-
mini, Jamvavati, desirous of a son, said
these words to me, O Yudhisthira,—


30. Grant me, O you of undecaying
glory, a heroic son, the foremost of power-
ful men, possessed of the most lovely fea-

“tures, sinless, and like your self. And, O,
let there be no delay on your part in grant-
ing this prayer of mine!


31. There is nothing in the three worlds
which you cannot acquire! O perpetnator
of Yadu’s race, you can create other worlds
if only you wish! Observing a vow for
twelve years and purifying yourself, you
hadst worshipped the Lord of all creatures
(vtz., Mahadeva), and then begotten
upon Rukmini the sons that she has got
from you, vis., Charudeshna and Sucharu
and Charuvesha and Yashodhana and
Charushravas and Charuyashas and Pra-
dyumna and Shambhu.


34. O killer of Madhu, do you grant me
a son like those of great prowess whom you
have begotten upon Rukmini.


35. Thus addressed by the princess, I
replied to her having stender waist,—Let
me have your permission, O queen! I
shall certainly obey your command.


37-~40. She answered me, saying,—Go,
and acquire success and prosperity! Let
Brahmana and Shiva and Kashyapa, the
Rivers, those gods who preside over the
mind, the soil, all deciduous herbs, those
Chcahandas who are considered jas bearers.


of the libations poured in Sacrifices, the |_


Rishis, Earth, the Oceans, the sacrificial
presents, those syllables which are uttered
far completing the cadences of Samans,


MAHABHARATA,


the Rikshas, the Pitris, the Planets, the
wives of the gods, the celestial maidens, the
celestial mothers, the great cycles, kine,
Chandiamas, Savitri, Agtt, Savii, te
knowledge of the Vedas, the seasons, the
year, the Kshanas, the Lavas, the Mutur-
tas, the Nimeshas, and the Yugas in suc-
cession, protect you, QO Yadava, and keep
you in happiness, wherever you may live.
Let no danger overtake you on your way,
and tet no carelessness be thine, UO sinless
one.


41—42. Thus blessed by her, I took her
leave, bidding farewell to the daughter of
! the prince of monkeys. Repairing them to
the presence of that toremost of men, viz.,
my tather, of my mother, of the king, and
of Abuka, I informed them of what the
daughter of the king of the Vidyadharas,
in great misery, had said to me. Bidding
them farewell with a sorrowful heart, | thea
went to Gada and to Rama of great power.


43. ‘Fhese two gladly addressed me,
saying,—~Let your penances multiply with-
out any hinderance.


44. Having got the permission of all of
them, I thought of Garuda. He forthwith
came to me and took me to Himavat. Ar-
tived at Himavat, I sent him away.


45. There, on that foremost of moun-
tains, ] saw many wonderful spectacles. I
saw an excellent, wonderful, and agreeable
hermitage for the practice of penances,


46. That charming retreat was the
property of the great Upamanyu who was
a descendant of Vyayhrapada. ‘That re-
treat is spoken highly of and respected by
the gods and the Gandharvas and seemed
to be covered with Vedic beauty.


47—49. It was adorned with Dhavas
and Kakubhas and Kauamvas and cocoas
with Kuruvakas and Ketakas and Jamvus
and Patalas, with’ banjans and Varunakas
and Vatsanabhas and Vilwas, with Saralas
and Kapitthas and Piyalas and Shalas and
Palmyras, with Vadaris and Ingudis and
Punnagas and Ashokas and Amras and
Kovisaras and Champakas and Panashas,
and with various other trees having fruits
and flowers. And that retreat was also
decked with the straight stems of the Musa
Sapienta.


50, Truly, that asylum: was adorned
with various othee sorts of trees and willy
various kinds of fruits forming the food of
various kinds of birds. Heaps of ashes
were thrown in proper places all around,
which enhanced the beauty of the scene,


5r. It was full of Rurus and apes and
tigers and lions and leopards, deer of
various species and peacocks and cats
and snakes. -


ANUSHASANA PARYA.


32. Indeed, large numbers of other
animals also were seen there, as also buffa-
los and bears. Delicious breezes blew,
continually carrying the sweet notes of
celestial nymphs.


53—54. The babblings of mountain rivers
and springs, the sweet notes of winged
chorristers, the gruntings of elephants, the
delicious notes of Kinnaras, and the auspi-
cious voice of ascetics singing the Samans,
O hero, and various other kinds of music,
made that retreat highly charming. The
very imagination cannot conceive another
hermitage as charming as the one [ saw.
There were also large houses in that asy-
jum, intended for the preservation of the


sacred fire, and covered all over with
flowering creepers.
It was bedecked with the river


Ganga of clear and sacred water. Indeed,
the daughter of Jahnu always remained
there. It was decked also with many asce-
tics who were the foremost of all pious
persons, who had high souls, and who re-
sembled fire itself in energy.


56. Some of those ascetics lived upon
air and some upon water. Some were
devoted to the silent recitation of sacred
Mantras. And some were engaged in
purifying their souls by practising the vir-
tues of mercy and the rest. And some
amongst them were Yogins devoted to the
Yoya-meditation. Some amongst them
lived upon smoke only, and some lived
upon fire, and some upon milk. Thus was,
that retreat adorned with maty foremost
“of twice-born persons.


57.’ And some there were amongst them
who had taken the vow of eating and
drinking like kine,—that is, by giving up
the use of the hands at once. And some
used only two pieces of stone for husking
their grain, and some who used ‘their teeth
only for that purpose. And some lived by
drinking only the rays of the moon, and
some by drinking only froth. And some
were following the vow of living like deer.


58. And some there were who lived
upon the fruits of the Ficus religiosa, and
some “who used to lie upon water and
some dressed themselves in rags and some
in animal skins and some in barks of trees.


69. Indeed, I saw various ascetics of the
foremost order observing these and other
painful vows. I wished then to enter that
asylum.


60. Verily, that asylum was honored
and adored by the gods and all great
beings, by Shiva and others, O Bharata,
and by all creatures of pious deeds. Thus


|


a


breast of Himavata, like the lunar dise in
the sky, q


61. The mungoose sported there with
the snake, and the tiger with the deer, like.


{ friends, forgetting their natural enmity,


on account of the energy of those ascetics
of blazing penances and for their being
near to those great ones,


62—64. In that foremost of hermitages,
which was charming to afl creattsres, in-
habited by many foremost of Brahmanag
fully conversant with the Vedas and theic .
branches, and by many great Rishis well-,
known for the difficult vows they practised,
I saw, as soon as I entered, a powerful Rishi .
with matted Incks on head and dressed in
rags, who seemed to shine like fire with his‘
penances and energy. Served by his dis-
ciples ‘and possessed of tranquil soul, that
foreraost of Brahmanas :was young to:
look at.


65. His mame was Upamanyu. He
said to me who bowed to him with my head’
down :+Welcome are you, O you of eyes
like lotus petals! ‘To-day, by this visit of
yours, we see that our penances have fruc-
tifiede. You are worthy of our adoration,
but you worship us still. You are worthy
of being seen, but you wish to see me.


66. Joining my hands I made of him
the usual enquiries regarding the -well-
being of the animals and birds who lived in
his asylum, of the progress of his righteous-
ness, and of his disciples.


67. The illustrious Upamanyu then ad-
dressed me in words which were highly
sweet and delightful—You shall, QO
Krishna, obtain, forsooth, a son like youre
self,


68. Practising severe penances, do you
please Ishana, the Lord of all creatures,
That divine Master called also Adhokshaja, °
sports here with his wife by his side, '


69 O Janarddana,, it was here that the
gods with all the Rishis, in days of yore,
pleased that foremost of gods by their pens
ances and celibacy and Truth and self-'
control, and succeeded in realizing many
high hopes. That illustrions god is verily’
the inexhaustible source of all energies and
penances,


7t. Coming nto existence and with.
drawing once more to himself all things
fraught with g ood and evil, that inconceiva-
ble God whom you seek, O destroyer of
enemies, li ves here with his consort.


72. He who was born as the Danava


named Hiranyakashipu, whose strength was


so great that he could shake the very


addressed, it stood in all its beauty on the ; mountains of Meru, succeeded in getting


28


from Mahadeva the power belonging to all !
the gods and enjoyed it for ten millions of
years,


- 73. He who was the foremost of all his

sons, and who was known by the name of
Mandara, succeeded, through the boon he
had got from Mahadeva, in fighting Shakra
for a miilion of years.


74. The terrible discusjof Vishnu and
the thunderbolt of Indra were both unable
to make the least impression, O Keshava,
in days of yore, upon the body of that great
source of universal misery.


-95. The discus which you carry, O sin-
Tess one, was given to you by Mahadeva,
after he had killed a Daitya who, proud of
his strength, used to live within the waters.


76. That discus, effulgent as fire} was
created by the great god having the bull
for his emblem. Wonderful and irresisti-
ble in energy, it was given to you by that
illustrious god.


77. On account of its blazing energy
‘it was incapable of being looked at by any
person except the holder of Pinaka. It
was, therefore, that Bhava named it Sudar-
shanam. ,


78. From that time it passed by the
name of Sudarshanam in all the worlds.
Even that weapon, O Keshava, failed to
make the least impression on the body of
Hiranyakashipu’s son Mandara, who ap-


peared like an evil planet in the three
worlds.
79. Hundreds of Chakras like you and


thunderbolts like that of Shakra, could not
inflict a scratch on the body of that evil
planet gifted with great might,* who had
acquired a boon from Mahadeva.


80. Afflicted by the mighty Mandara,
the gods fought hard against him and his
companions, all of whom had got boons
from Mahadeva.


81. Pleased with another Danava
named Vidyutprabha, Mahadeva granted
to him the sovereignty of the three worlds.


That Danava remained the king of
the three worlds for a hundred thousand
years.

82. And Mahadeva said to him,.—You


will become one of my attendants.—Indeed,
the powerful Lord further conferred upon
him the boon of a hundred millions of
childeen. The Unborn Lord of all crea-
tures further gave the Danava the region
known_as Kushadwipa for his kingdom,


83. Another great Asura, named Shata-
mukha, was created by Brahman. For a
hundred vears he poured on the sacrificial
fire the flesh of his own body.


‘in the Vedas, forsook


MAHABHARATA.


84. Pleased with such penances, Share
kara said to him,—What can I do for you,
—Shatamukha replied, saying,—-O you the
most wonderful, let me have the power of
creating new creatures and animals.


85. Give alsoto me, O foremost of alt
gods everlasting power.—Ihus addressed
by him, the powerful lord said to him,—So
be it.


86. Concentrating his mind in Yoga,
the Self-create Brahman, in days of yore,
made a sacrifice for three hundred years,
with the object of getting children.


87. Mahadeva granted hima thousand
sous having qualifications proportionate to
the merits of the sacrifice. Forsooth, you
know, O Krishna, the Lord of Yoga, him
who is, who is sung by the gods,


‘88. The Rishi known by the name of
Yajnavalkya is exceedingly virtuous. By
worshipping Mahadeva he has gained great
fame.


89. The great ascetic who ts Parashara’s
son, wig., Vyasa bent on Yoga, has become
famous by worshipping Shankara,


go. The Valikhilyas were on a former
occasion dishonored by Maghavat. Filled
with anger at this, they pleased the illustri-
ous Rudra.


gt. That lord of the universe, that fore-
most one of all the gods, thus pleased by
the Valikhilyas, said to them,—Ye shall
succeed by your penances in creating a
bird which will rob Indra of the Ambrosia.


92. All the waters disappeared through
the anger of Mahadeva on a former occa-
sion. The gods pleased him by celebrating
a sacrifice called Saptakapala, and caused,
through his favour, other waters to flow into
the worlds. Verily, when the three-eyed
god, became pleased, water once more ap-
peared in the world.


93. The wife of Atri, who was well-read
her husband in
anger and said,—I shall no longer live
under that ascetic.


94. Having said these words, she sought
the protection of Mahadeva. Vhrough
fear of her husband Atri, she passed
three hundced years, abstaining from all
food.


95- And all this time she slept on
wooden clubs for pleasing Bhava, The
great god then appeared before her and
then smilingly addressed her, saying,—-You
will have a son,


96. And you will have that son without
the help of a husband, simply through the
favour of Rudra. Forsooth, that son, born
in the family of bis father, shall become


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


known for his merit, and assume a name
after you.


97- The illustrious Vikarna also, O
destroyer of Madhu, full of devotion to
Mahadeva, pleased him with severe pen-
ances and got high and happy success,


98. Shakalya, too, of controlled soul wor-
shipped Bhava in a mental sacrifice that he
celebrated for nine hundred years, O
Keshava.


99. Pleased with him, the illustrious god
said to him,—You will become a great
author. O son, your fame shall be eternal
in the three worlds. 2


too. Your family also shall never come
to an end and shall be adorned by many
great Rishis born in it! Your son will
become the foremost of Brahmanas and
will make the Sutras of your work.


to1. There was a celebrated Rishi
named Savarni in the golden age. Here
in this hermitage, he practised severe pen-
ances for six thoysand years.


The illustrious Rudra said :—


. to2. Lam pleased with you, O sinless
one. Without being subject to decrepitude
or death, you will become an author cele-
brated through all the worlds.


103. In ‘days of yore, Shakra also, in
Baranasi, filled with devotion, Q Janard-
dana, worshipped Mahadeva who has space,
alone for his dress and who is smeared
with ashes as an agreeable unguent.


104. Having worshipped Mahadeva
thus, he acquired the sovereignty of the
celestials. Narada also, in days of yore,
worshipped the great Bhava with devotion
of heart. Pleased with him, Mahadeva,
that preceptor of the celestial preceptor,
said :— :

105. Noone shall equal you in energy
and penances. You will always serve me
with your songs and instrumental music.


106. Hear also, O Madhava, how for-
merly | succeeded in seeing that god of
gods, that Lord of all creatures, O lord.


107. Hear also in full for what object, O
you of great power, [ invoked with control-
led senses and mind that illustrious god
gifted with supreme energy.


108. I shall, O sinless one, tell you fully
all that I succeeded in obtaining from that
god of gods, vés., Maheshwara.


rog. Formerly in the golden age, O son,
there was a Rishi of great fame, named
Vyaghrapada. He was celebrated for his
knowledge and mastery over the Vedas
and theie auxiliaries,


29


tro--1rt. I was born in the son of that
Rishi and Dhaumya was born as my
younger brother. On a certain occasion,
O Madhava, accompanied by Dhaumya,
L arrived at the hermitage of certain Rishis
of purified souls. ‘There | saw a cow
that was being milked. And | saw the
milk and jt appeared to me to resemble
nectar itself in taste,


112, J then came home, and actuated
by childishness, I addressed my mother
and said,—Give me some food prepared,
with milk.


113. There was no milk in the house,
and accordingly my mother was mucly
sorry at my asking for it. My mother took
a piece of cake and boiled it in water, O
Madhava.


114. The water became whitened and
my mother placed it before us, saying that
it was milk and asked us to drink it. I
had before that drunk milk!on one occasion,
for my father had, at the time of a sacrifice,
taken me to the house of some of our great
kinsmen.


115-116. A celestial cow, who delights
the gods, was being milked on that occa-
sion. Drinking hee milk that resembled
nectar in taste, I knew the virtues of milk.
I, therefore, at once understood the subs-
stance that my mother offered me, for milk.
Verily, the taste of that cake, O son, did
not give me any pleasure whatever.


117. Moved by childishness | then ad-
dressed my mother, saying,—TVhis, O
mother, which you have given me is not
any preparation of milk,


118. Filled with grief and sorrow at
this, and embracing me from affection and
smelling my head, O Madhava, she said
to me :—


119. Whence, O child, can ascetics of
purified souls get food prepared with milk ?
Such men always live in the forest and live
upon bulbs and roots and fruits. :


120 Whence shall we, who live by the
banks of rivers which are the resort of the
Valikhilyas, we, who have mountains and
forests for our home,—whence, indeed, O
child, shall we get milk? =,


We, O dear child, live on air and
on water. We live in asvilums in the midst
of forests and woods. We habitually ab-
stain from all sorts of food that are taken
by persons living in villages and towns.
We are accustomed to only such food as
are supplied by the forest products.


121.


122—124. There cannot be any milk, O
child, in the forest where there are no off.
spring .of Surabhi. ‘ Living on the banks of.


30


rivers, or in caves or on mountain-breasts,
or in shrines and other places of the kind,
“we pass our time in the practice of penan-
ces andthe recitation of sacred Mantras,
Shiva being our highest refuge. Without
pleasing the boon-giving Sthanu of unde-
caying glory,—him, who is, who has three
eyes,—whence, O child, can one get food
prepared with milk and good dresses and
other objects of enjoyment in the world ?
Do you devote yourself whole-mindedly, O
dear son, to Shankara,


1254-126. Through his favour, O child,
you are sure to obtain all such objects of
wishes,—Hearing those words of my
mother, O destroyer of enemies, that day,
I joined my hands in respect and bowing
to her, said,—O mother, who is this Maha-
deva? How can one please him ?


127. Where does that god live? How
may he be seen? With what does he be-
come pleased? What also is the form of
Sharva ? How may one succeed in know.
ing him? If pleased, will he, O mother,
appear before me? . = s


128, After I had said these words, O
Kristina, to my mother, she, filled with pa-
rental affection, smelt my head, O Govinda,
her eyes bathed in tears.


129. Gently patting my body, O des-
troyer of Madhu, my mother, adopting a
tone of great humility, addressed me in
the following words, O best of the gods.


My mother said :—


130. It is difficult for persons of impure
souls to know Mahadeva. These men are
incapable of bearing him in their hearts or
understanding him at all. They cannot
retain bim in theic minds. They cannot
seize him nor can they see him.


131. Wise men say that his forms are
manifold. Many are the places in which


he lives. Many are the forms of his
Grace.
132. Who is there who can understand


in full all tne excellent deeds, of Isha, or of
all the forms that he has assumed in days
of yore?

133. Who can describe how Sharva
sports and how he bécomes pleased ?
Maneshwara of universal form lives in the
hearts of all creatures.


134. While ascetics discoursed on the
auspicious and excellent deeds of Ishana, [
have heard from them how, moved by
mercy towards his worshippers, he grants
them a sight of his body.


135. For showing a favour to the Brah-
manas, the dwellers of heaven have recited
for their information the various forms


MAHABHARATA.


which were assumed by Mahadeva in days
of yore. You have asked me about these.
{ shall recite them to you, O son.


My mother said :—


136. Bhava assumes the forms of Brah-
man and Vishnu and the king of the gads;
of the Rudras, the Adityas, and the Ash-
wins ; and of those gods called Vishwe-
devas.


137. He assumes the forms also of men
and women, of Pretas and Pishachas, of
Kiratas and Shavaras, and of all aquatic
animals. ‘That illustrious god assumes the
forms of also those Shavaras who live in the
woods and forests.


138. He assumes the forms of tortoises
and fishes and conchs. He assumes the
forms of those corals which are used as
ornaments by men.


139. He assumes the forms of also
VYakshbas and Rakshasas and Snakes, of
Daityas and Danavas. The illustrious god
assumes the forms of all creatures too which
live in holes.


140, He assumes the forms of tigets
and lions and deer, of wolves and bears
and birds, of owls and of jackals as well.


141. He assumes the forms of swans
and crows and peacocks, of chameleons
and lizards and_ storks. He assumes the
forms of cranes and vultures and Chakra-
vakas,


142. Heassumes the forms of Chasas
and of mountains also. O son, Mahadeva
assumes the forms of kine and elephants
and horses and camels and asses,


143. He assumes the forms of also
goats and pards and various other ani-
mals. Bhava assumes the forms of various
kinds of birds of beautiful plumage,


“444. It is Mahadeva who assumes the
form of the Sanyasin bearing the Danda
(emblem of mendicancy), and also of the
king with the Chhatra and the Brahman
with the calabash. He sometimes be-
comes six-faced and sometimes becomes
multifaced. He sometimes assumes forms
having three eyes and forms having many
heads,


145. And he sometimes assumes forms
having many millions of legs and forms
having numberless stomachs and faces,
and forms gifted with numberless arms and
numberless sides. He sometimes appears.
surrounded by numberless spirits and
ghosts.


146. He assumes the forms of Rishis
and Gandharvas, and of Siddhas and
Charanas. He assumes a form which is .


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


tendered white with the ashes he smeats
on it and adorned with a half-moon on the
forehead. :


147. Adored with various hymns uttered
with various kinds of voice and adored
with various Mantras fraught with enco-
miums, he, who is sometimes called Sharva,
is the Destroyer of all creatures in the
universe, and it is upon him, again, that
all creatures rest as on theic common
basis.


148, Mahadeva isthe soul of all crea-
tures. He pervades all things. He is the
speaker of all subjects. He lives every-
where and should be known as Hving in
the hearts of all creatures in the universe.


149. He knows the desire of every.
worshipper of his. He becomes acquaint-
‘ed with the object with which one pays
him adorations. Do you, then, seek the
Protection of that king of the gods. ~


159, He sometimes rejoices, and some-
times becomes irate, and sometinaes utters
the syllable Hun with a very loud noise.
He sometimes arms himself with the discus,
sometimes with the trident, sometimes with
the mace, sometimes with the heavy mullets,
sometimes with tne scimitar, and sometimes
with the battle-axe.


15t. He assumes the form of Shesha
who keeps up the world on his head. He
has snakes for his belt, and his ears are
decked with ear-rings made of snakes.
Snakes form also the sacred thread he


wears. An elephant skin is his upper
garment.
152. He sometimes laughs and some-


limes sings and sometimes dances most
beautifully. Surrounded by numbertess
spirits and ghosts, he sometimes plays on
musical insteuments. Various are the
instruments upon which he plays, and
sweet the sounds they yield.


153. Hesometimes wanders, sometimes
yawns, sometimes cries, and sometimes
causes others to cry. He sometimes
assumes the guise of a mad man, and
sometimes of a drunkard, and he some-


times utters sweet words.


154. Endued with dreadful
he sometimes laughs loudly, frightening
all creatures with his eyes, He sometimes
sleeps and sometimes remains awake, and
sometimes yawns as he pleases.


155. He sometimes recites sacred Man-
tras and sometimes becomes the god of
those Mantras which are recited. He
sometimes practises penances and some-
times becomes the god for whose adoration
those penances are practised, He sometimes


fierceness,


makes gifis and sometimes receives those


“years, living on air only.


31


gifts ; sometimes disposes himself in Voga
and sometimes becomes the object of the
Yoga of others.


156. He may beseen onthe sacrificial
platform or in the sacrificial stake ; in the
midst of the cowpen or in the fire. He
may not again be seen there. He may be
seen as a boy or as an old man.


157. He sports with the daughters and
the wives of the Rishis. His hair is long
and erect. He is perfectly nude for he
has the horizon for his dress. He has
terrible eyes.


158. He is fair, he is darkish, he is
dark, he is pale, he is of the color of
smoke, and he is red. He has eyes large
and terribte.
covering and he covers alt things.


159. Who is there that can truly under
stand the limits of Mahadeva who is form-
less, who is made up of illusion, who is
of the form of all actions in the universe,
who assumes the form of Hiranyagharbha,
and who is without beginning and end, and
birth.


160. He lives in the heart (of every
creature ), He is the vital air, he is the
mind, and he is the individual soul. He
is the soul of Yoga, and he is called
Yoga. He is the Yoga meditation into
which Yogins enter. He is the Supreme
Soul.. Indeed, Maheshwara is capable of
being apprehended not by the senses but
through only the Soul seizing his existence,


161. He plays on various musical ins«
truments. He is a vocalist. He has a
hundred thousand eyes. He has one
mouth, he has two mouths, he has three


mouths, and he has many mouths,


162. Devoting yourself to him, fixing
your heart upon him, depending upon him,
and accepting him as your one refuge, do
you, O son, worship Mahadeva and ther
all yeur wishes will bear fruits !


163. Hearing those words of my mother,
O destroyer of enemies, from that day my
devotion was direeted to Mahadeva, having
nothing else for its object.


164. I, then, began the practice of the
austerest penances for pleasing Shankara.
For one thousand years I stood on my left
toe.

165. After that I passed one thousand
years, living only upon fruits. The next
one thousand years passed, living upon
the fallen leaves of trees. he next thou.
sand years 1 passed, living upon water
only, -

166. Alter that I passed seven hundred
In this way £


4


He has empty space for his.


r


32


worshipped Mahadeva fora full thousand
divine years.


167—163. After this, the powerful Mahas
deva the Lord of all the universe became
propitiated with me. Desirous of deter-
niining- whether | was solely devoted to him
only, he appeared before me in the form of
Shakra surrounded by all the gods. As the
celebrated Shakra, he had a thousand eyes
on his-body and was armed with the thun-
derbolt,


169. And he rode on an elephant which
was entirely white, with eyes red, ears
folded, the temporal juice trickling down
his cheeks, with trunk contracted, dreadful
to look at, and having four tusks. Indeed
tiding on such ar elephant, the illustrious
king of the gods seemed to shine with his
energy. With a beautiful crown on his
head and adorned with garlands round his
neck and bracelets round his arms, he
came where I was.


171. A white umbrella was held over
his head. And he was served by many
Apsaras, and many Gandharvas sang his
praise. ;

172. Addressing me he said,—O fore-
most of twice-borns, { have been pleased


with you. Beg of me whatever buon you
wish.
173-7174. Hearing these words of


Shakra L was not gladdened. O Krishna,
I answered the king of the gods in these
words,—-I do not wish any boon from you,
or from any other pod. O amiable deity, I
tell you teuly thatit is Mahadeva only from
whom I may ask for boons.


175. ‘rue itis, O Shagra, true are those
words that I say to you. No other words
are at all agreeable to me except those
about Maheshwara.


176. Commanded by that Lord of all
creatures, I am ready to become a worm or
a tree with many branches. If not acquired
through thé favour of Mahadeva’s boons
1 would not accept the very sovereignty of
the three worlds. ;


177, I may be born among the very
Shwapakas but I will still be devoted to the
feet of Hara! Without, again, being de-
voted to that Lord of all creatures, | would
not like to be born in the palace of Indra
himself.


178. If a person has no devotion to that
Lord of the universe,—that Master of the
gods and the Asuras,—-his misecy will not
terminate even if from want of food he has
to live upon only air and water.

179. Those persons who do not like to
live even a moment without thinking of
Mahadeva’s feet, have no necessity of other


MAHABHARATA.


subjects fraught with other kinds, of moras
lity and righteousness. .


180. When the unrighteous or sinful
Cycle comes, one shuould never pass a
moment without devoting his heart upon
Mahadeva. One who has drunk the am-
brosia of the devotion to Hara,  be-
comes freed from the fear of the world.


181. One, who has not acquired the fa-
vour of Mahadeva, can never succeed ta
devote himself to Mahadeva for a single
day or for half a day or for a moment or for
a Kshana or for a Lava.


182. Ordered by Mahadeva I shall
cheerfully become a worm or an insect, but
I do not desire for even the sovereignty of
the three worlds if bestowed by you, O
Sakra.


183. At the word of Hara I would
become even a dog. In fact, that is my
highest wish, If not given by Mahesbwara,
I would not have the sovereignty of the
very gods,


184. 4 donot wishto have this celestial
dominion. I do not desire to have the so-
vereignty of the gods. I do not wish to
have the region of Brahman. Indeed, I do
not wish to have that extinction of individual
existence which is called Liberation and
which is a complete oneness with Brahma.
But I want to become the slave of Hara.


185. As tong as that Lord of all crea-
tures, the illustrious Mahesha with crown
on his head and body white like the lunac
disc, does wot become pleased with me,
so long shall 1 cheerfulty bear all those
misecies consequent upon a hundred re-
petitions of decrepitude, death and birth,
which embodied beings come by.


186. What persons in the universe can
acquire tranquillity without pleasing Rudra
who is freed from decrepitude and death,
who is effulgent like the Sun, the Moon, oc
the Fire, who is the root or original cause of
everything real and unreal ‘in the three
worlds, and who exists as the one indivisible ?


187. If onacceunt of any faults, 1 come
by re-births, 1 shall, in those new births,
devote myself solely to Bhava.


Indra said :—


188. What are your grounds for the
existence of a Supreme Being or for His
being the cause of all tauses ?


Upamanyu said :—

189. I beg boons from Him whom
Brahmavadins have desciibed as existent
and non-existent, manifest andu nmanifest,
eternal or immutable, One and many.


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


too) «6©T: 6Ubeg boons from Him who is
without beginning and middle and end,
who is Knowledge and Power, who is
inconceivable and who is the Supreme
Soul. ot .


. , - }

tgt- I pray for boons from Him whence

is all Power whe has rot been produced by

any one, who is immutable, and who,

though himself not sprung from any seed,
is the seed of all things in the universe.


192. I pray for boons from Him who. js
above the quality of Darkness, who is
blazing Effulgence, who is the essence of
all penances, who is above all our faculties
and which we may devote for the purpose
of comprehending him, and ‘by knowing
whom every one becomes liberated from
grief or sorrow. ,


193. [adore him, O Purandara, who is
conversant with the creation of all elements
and the thoughts of all living creatures,jand
who is the original cause of the existence or
creation of all creatures, who is omni-
present, and who has the power to give
everything. 4

194—195. [| pray for boons from Him
who cannot be comprehended by argument,
who is ‘the object of the Sankhya and the
Yoga systems of philosophy, and who is
above all things, and whom all persons
conversant with the topics of enquiry,
adore, I pray for boons from Him, O Ma-
ghavat, who is the soul of Maghavat him-
self, who is said to be the God of the gods,
and who is the Master of all creatures.


196. I pray for boons from Him who it
was that first created Brahman, that crea-
tor of all the worlds, having filled Ether
(with His energy) and called into being the
primeval egg.

107, Who else than that Supreme Lord
could have created Fire, Water, Wind,
Earth, Space, Mind, and the principle of
Greatness.


198. Teli me, O Shakra, who else than
Shiva could create Mind, Understanding,
Ego, the subtile elements and the senses 2

- Who is there higher than Shiva ?


199. The wise say that the Grandfather
Brahman is the creator of this universe.
Brahtwan, however, got his great power
and prosperity by worshipping and gratify-
ing Mahadeva, that God of gods.

200. That great power, which is in that
illustrious Being who created Brahman,
Vishnu, and Rudra, was derived from
Mahadeva. Tell me who is there who is
superior to the Supreme Lord?


201. Who else than that God of gods
can bestow upon the sons of Diti lordship
and power judging by the sovereignty


5


33°


and the power of oppressing given to
the -foremost of the Daityas and the
Danavas ?


’ row. The cardinal points, Time, the
Sun, ali luminous bodies, planets, wind,
water, atid the -stars and constellations,—
are all from Mahadeva. ‘ell us who-is the
higher than the Supreme Lord? -


‘"203. Who elseis there, than Mahadeva,
in the creation of Sacrifice and the destruc4
tion of Tripura? Who else than Mahadeva
has grinded the enemies, coming into con«
tact with the Daityas and the Danavas?


204. What necessity, O Purandara, is
there of giving vent to tall talks full of sa.
phistry when I see you of a thousand eyes,.
O best of the gods. , ;


205. You who are adored by’ Siddhas.
and Gandharvas and the deities and the
Rishis? O best of the Kushikas, all this is
due to the favour of that God of gods, vis,,
Mahadeva.


206. Know, O Keshava, that this al},
consisting of animate and inanimate crea«
tion with heaven and other unseen creation,
which are in these worlds, and which has
the all-pervading Lord for its soul, has
emanated from Maheshwara and has been
created for enjoyment of the individual
soul,


207. Inthe worlds that ate known by
the names of Bhu, Bhuva, Swah, and
Maha, in the midst of the mountains of
Lokaloka, in the isiands, in the mountaing
of Mera, in all things which produce hap«
piness, and in the hearts of all creatures,
© illustrious Maghavat, lives Mahadeva,
as held by persons conversant with all
the topics of enquiry.


208. If, O Shakra, the gods and the
Asuras could see any other powerful Being
than Bhava, would not both of them, espe
cially;the former when opposed and op-
pressed by the latter, have sought the pros
tection of that Being ? :


20g. In all battles of the gods, the Yale.
shas, the Uragas, and the Rakshasas,
which end in mutual destruction, it is Bhava
who gives to those who meet with des
truction power befitting their position and
acts.


2to. ‘Tell me, who else than Maheshwara
is there for conferring boons upon, and once
more taking them away from, Andhaka
and Shukra and Dundubhi and Mahisha
and many foremost of Yakshas and
Vala and Rakshasas and the Nivata-
kavachas?


211. Was not the seminal fluid of Ma-
hadeva, that Master of both the gods and


34


the Asuras, poured asa libation upon the

re? From that seed originated a moun-
tain of gold. Who else is there whose
seed can be said to be possessed of
such power.


212. Whoelse in this world is described
as having the horizon only for his dress 7
Who else can be said to be a celibate with
vital seed drawn up? Who else is there
who has half his body occupied by his dear
wife. Who else is there who has been able
to subjugate Cupid ?


213. Tell me, O Indra, what other
Being possesses that high region of
supreme happiness which is highly spoken
of by all the, deities? Who else has the
crematorium as his play ground? Who
else is there who is so lauded for his
dancing ? :


214. Whose worship and power remains
unchangeable? Who else is there who
plays with spirits and ghosts. Tell me, O
god, who else tas companions who are
possessed of strength like his own and who
are, therefore, proud of that strength or
powet ?


2t5. Who else is there whose place is
described as unchangeable and adored with
reverence by the three worlds ? Who else
is there who pours rain, gives heat, and
blazes forth in Energy ?


216. From whom else do we get our
precious herbs? Who else upholds all
kinds of riches. Who else sports as much
as he likes in the three worlds of mobile
and immobile things ?


217. O Indra, know Maheshwaraito be
the original Cause. He is worshipped by
Yogins, by Rishis, by the Gandharvas, and
by the Siddhas, with the help of knowledge,
of success, and of the'rités baid down in the
scriptures,


218. He is worshipped by both the gods
‘andthe Asuras with the help of sacrifices
by acts and the ritual laid down in the
scriptures,


touch him for he is above them all. Being


such, I call him the original cause of every- -


thing.


2tg. Heis both grass and subtile. He
ts peerless, He cannot be comprehended
by the senses. He is endued with qualities
and he is shorn of them. He is the lord of
qualities, for they are under his control.
Even such is Maheshwara’s place,


220. He isthe cause of the continuance
and the creation fof the universe). He is
the cause of the universe and the cause also
of-its destruction. He is the Past, the


resent, and the Future. He is the pa ren.


The fruits of action car never


SAHABHARATA,:


of all things.
thing.

221. He is mutable, he is the unmani-
fest, he is Knowledge; heis Ignorance; he
is every deed; he is every omission; he is
virtue; and he is sin. O ShaWra, do } call
Him the cause of everything.


222.. See, O Indra, in the image of
Mahadeva the marks of both the sexes.
That god of gods, #fs., Rudta, that cause of
both creation and destruction, shows in his
form the marks of both the sexes a9 the ond
cause of the creation of the untverse.


223. My mother formerly told me that
he is the cause of the universe and the one
cause of everything. ‘There is no one who
is higher than Isha, O Shakra, If it pleases
you, do you throw yourself on his kindness
and protection.


224. You have evidence, O king of the
gods, of the fact that the universe has ori-
ginated from the union of the sexes. The
universe, you know, is the sum of what has
qualities and what has not them and has
for its immediate cause the seeds of Brah-
man andothers. Brahman and Indra and
Hutasha and Vishnu and all the other gods,
atong with the Daityas and the Asuras,
having the fruition of a thousand desires,
always say that there is none who is higher
than Mahadeva.


225. Moved by desire, I solicit, with
controlled mind, that god known to all the
mobile and immobile universe,—him, who
ts, who has been descrthed as the best and
highest of aH the celestials, and who is
atuspiciousnese itself,—for getting forth with
that highest of all acquisitions, v7s., Libera~
tion.


He is the cause of every


226. What necessity is there, of other
reasons? The great Mahadeva is the
eause of allcauses. We have never heard
that the celestials have, at any time wor-


. shipped the emblem of any other god thar


Mahadeva.


227. If Maheswara be not accepted, telk
me, if you have ever heard of it, who else is
there whose emblem has been adored or is:
being adored by all the celestials?


228. That god is, indeed, the most wor-
shipful of all celestials whose emblem
Brahma, Vishnu, you, O Indra, with all
the other gods, always adore.


229. Brahman has for his emblem the
lotus. Vishnu has for his. the discus.
Indra has for his the thunder-bolt. But
the creatures of the world do not bear any
of the signs which mark these celestials. Ow
the other hand, all creatures bear the signs
which mark Mahadeva and his consork


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


Hence, all creatures must be considered
es belonging to Maheshwara.


- 230. All female creatures, have origi-
“mated from
‘have the mark of femeninity which charac-
teristise Uma;
tures, who have eriginated from Shiva bear
the masculine mark that marks Shiva,
out. That person who holds that there is,
im the three worlds with their mobile and
immobile creatures, any other cause than
the Supreme Lord, and that which is not


marked with the mark ef either Mahadeva |
or his wife, should be considered as very |


weetched and should not be numbered with
the creatures of the universe.
231,
‘the masculme sex should be known to be of
ishana, white every being with the mark of


the feminine sex should be known as be- j


fongimg to Una, This universe of mobile
and immobile creatures is pervaded by two
forms (w7s., male and female).


232. it is from Mahadeva that 1 wish to
get boons. Not getting this, 0 Kaushika,
{ would rather prefer dissolution itself. Go
or remain, O Shakra, as you like, G slayer
of Vala.


233. I wish to have boons er curses
from Mahadeva.
ledge any other god. Nor would I have
my desires fulfilled from any other deity.


234. Having said these words to the
&ing of the celestials, 1 became stricken


with grief thinking that Mahadeva had not |
been propitiated despite my severe auste- |


aides.


eye, however, 1 saw the celestial elephant 1


had seen before me chanyed inte a bull as ;


white as a swan, or the Jasminum pubo-


scons, or a staik of the Jotas, or silver, or the |
ocean'of milk. Of huge body, the hair of ;


its tail was black andthe color af its eyes
was twany like that of honey.


237.


sharp ends, whose hue was a mild red, the
bull appeared +o tear the Earth,


238. ‘The animal was bedecked all over
with ornaments made of the purest geld.
dts ‘face and heofs and aose and ears were
beautiful and its waist too well-formed.


239...€ts @anks were beautiful, and
its neck was very thick. its whole
form was beaatiful to look at. its hump
was charming and seemed to occupy the
whole of its snoulder-joint.


240.
snow-clad ‘mountaia or like a cliff of white


Umma, and hence it is they.


while all masculine crea- |


Every being having the mar of :


No. I shall not acknow- |


its horns were hard as adamant |
and had the hue of gold. With their very |


And it looked like the summit of a |


35


‘clouds in the sky. Upon the back of that
animal I. saw seated the illystrious Maha«
deva with his wife Uma.


241—242. Mahadeva shone like the full-
moon. ‘The fire born of his energy shone in
effulgence like lightning that flashes amid

clouds. It seemed as if a thousand suns
rose there, filling every quarter with a
dazzling splendour. ‘That energy of the
Supreme Lord looked like the Samvartaka
fire which destroys all creatures at the end
of the Yuga.


243. Filled to the Ail with that energy,
the horizon became such that I could not
see anything on any side, Filled with
anxiety £ once more jthought that it could
means ‘


244. That energy, however, did not per-
vade every side for a long time, for seon,
through the illusion of that ged of gods, the
horizon became clear.


245. ithen saw the illustrious Sthanu
or Maheshwara, seated on the back of his
bull, of blessed and sweet appearance and
looking like a smokeless fire,


246. And the great god was accoms
panied by Parvati of perfect features. In-
deed, { saw the blue-throated and great
Sthanu. unattached to everything, that re+

ceptacle ef all sorts of energy or force,
having eighteen arms, aad bedecked with
all sorts of ornaments,


247. Clad in white robes, he wore white
garlands, and had white unguénts smeared
upon his person. His banner, irresistible
in the universe, was white. The thread


] round his body was also white.
235—236. . Within the twinkling of an;


248. He was encircled by companions
all endued with prowess equal to his own,
who were singing or dancing or playing on
various musical instruments,


249. A-crescent. moon, of pale color,
formed his crown, aud put oa his ferehead
it looked tike the moon which rises in the
autumnal sky. Hle seemed to -dazzle with
splendour on account of bis three eyes
which looked like three suas.


250. The gacland, of the purest white,
that was on his body, shone like a wreath -
of lotuses, of the purest white, adorned 7“
jewels and genis. .

251.. ialse saw, O Govinda, the weas
pons, in theie erabodied forms and fraught
with every sort of energy, that belong to
Bhava of peerless prowess.


252. The great god held a rainbow-
colered bow. That bow known as Pinaka
as is in ceality a powerful snat&-.


253. Indeed, that snake of seven heads
‘and huge body, of sharp fangs and virulent


36


venom, of large neck and the masculine sex,
. was twined round,with the cord that served
as its bowstring.


*554—255. And there was an arrow which
shone like that of the sun or of the fire that
appears at the end of the cycle. Verily,
that arrow was the excellent Pashupata, that
mighty and dreadful weapon, which is with-
out a second, indescribable for its power,
and capable of terrorising every creature.
Of huge proportions, it seemed to constant-
ly emit sparks of fire.


256. Having one foot, large teeth, and a
thousand heads and thousand stomachs, it
had a thousand arms, a thousand tongues,
and a thousand eyes. Indeed, it seemed to
continually emit fire.


257. ©O you of great arms, that weapon
is superior to the Brahma, the Narayana,
the Aindra, the -Agneya, and the Varuna
weapons, Indeed, it is capable of neutra-
lising every other weapon in the uni-
Verse.


258. It was with that weapon that the
great Mahadeva had, formerly burnt and
consumed in a moment the triple city of the
_Asuras. With the greatest ease, O Go-
vinda, Mahadeva, using that single arrow,
performed that feat,


259. bat weapon, discharged by Maha-
Geva's arms, can, forsooth, consume in
half the time taken up by a twinkling of the
eye the entire universe with all its mobile
and immobile creatures.


260. In the universe there is no one in-
cluding, even Brahman and Vishnu and the
celestials, who cannot be killed by that
weapon. O sire, I saw that excellent, won-
derful and peerless weapon in the hand of
Mahadeva.


261. There is another mysterious and
very strong weapon which is equal or, per-
haps, superior to the Pashupata. [| saw
that also. It is known in all the worlds as
the Shula of the Shula-armed Mahadeva.


262. Hurled by the illustrious god, that
weapon can rive the entire Earth or dry up
the waters-of the ocean or annihilate the
entire universe, :


263. Formerly Yuvanashwa’s son, king
Mandhatri, that conqueror of the three
worlds, having imperial sway and gifted
with profuse en rgy, was, with all his armies,
killed by means of that weapon. :


264. Gifted with great might and great
energy and resembling Shakra himself in
+ prowess, that wing, O Govinda, was killed
by the Rakshasa Lavana with the help of
this Shula which be had got from Shiva.


MAHABHARATA.


265. That Shula is keen-pointed. High-
ly terrible, it is capable of causing every-
body’s hair stand erect. I beheld it in the
hand of Mahadeva, as if roaring with
anger, having contracted its forehead into
three wrinkles.


266. It resembled, O Krishna, a smoke-
less fire or the sun that rises at the end of
the cycle. The handle of that Shula was
made of a preat snake. Itis really indes-
cribable. It looked like the universal Des«
troyer armed with his noose.


267—268. I saw this weapon, O Govinda,
in the hand of Mahadeva. I saw also
another weapon, vis., that sharp-edged
battle-axe which, was given, formerly unto
Rama by Mahadeva for enabling him to
root out the Kshatriyas. It was with this
weapon that Rama killed in dreadful battle
the great Karttaviryya who was the king of
the entire world.


269. It was with that weapon that
Jamadagni’s son, O Govinda, was able to
root out the Kshatriyas for twenty-one
times.


270. Of blazing edge and highly terri-
ble, that axe was hanging on the shoulder,
adorned with a snake, of Mahadeva.
Indeed, it appeared on Mahadeva’s body
like the flame of a burning fire.


27t. I saw with the highly intelligent
Mahadeva numberles other celestial wea-
pons. I have, however, named only a few
principal ones, O sinless one.


272. On the left side of the great god
stood the Grandfather Brahman seated on
an excellent car to which were yoked swans
fleet-coursing like the mind.


273. On the same side was Narayana
also, seated on Garuda and bearing the
conch, the discus, and the mace.


274. Near the goddes Uma was Skanda
seated on his peacock, bearing his dreadful
arrow _and bells, and looking like another
Fire-God. s


275. Before Mahadeva I saw Nandi
standing armed with his Shula and looking
like a second Shankara.


276. The Munis headed by the Self-
create Manu, and the Rishis having Bhrigu
for their first, and the gods with Shakra at
their head, all came there.


277. All the clans of spirits and ghosts,
and the celestial Mothers, stood surround-
ing Mahadeva and saluting him with
respect. ;


278. ‘Fhe gods were engaged in singing
the praises of Mahadeva in various hymns.
The Grandfather Brahman, uttering @
Rathantara, landed Mahadeva.


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


279. Uttering the Jyeshtha Saman
Narayana also sang the praises of Bhava,
Shakra also did the same with the help of
those foremost of Vedic Mantras, vts., the
Shata-Rudriyam.


280. Verily, Brahman and Narayana
and Shakra,—those three great gods shone
there like three sacrificial fires.


281. In their midst was the illustrious
god like the sun in the midst of his corona,
come from autumnal clouds. -


282. I saw countless suns and moons
also in the sky, O Keshava. I then lauded
the illustrious Lord of everything, the
Great Master of the universe.


Upamanyu said :—


283. I said,—Salutations to you, O illus-
trious one, O you who are the refuge of all
things, O you who are called Mahadeva!
Salutations to you who assume the form of
Shakra, who are Shakra.and who disguise
yourself in the form of Shakra.


283. Salutations to you who are armed
with the thunder, to you who are twany,
and you who are red. Salutations to you
who are always armed with the Pinaka, to
you who always bear the conch and the
Shula. ° :


285. Salutations to you who are clad in
black, to you who are of dark and curly
hair, to you who have dark deer-skin for
your upper garment, to you who preside
over the eighth lunation of the dark fort-
night.


286. Salutations.to you who are of white
hue, to you who are called white, to you
who areclad in white dress, to you wko
have limbs smeared with white ashes, to
you who are ever engaged in white deeds.


287. Salutations to you who are red in
color, to you who are clad ia red dress, to
you who have a red banner with red flags,
to you who wear red garlands and use red
unguents. =


288. Salutations to you who are brown
colored, to you who are clad in brown dress,
to you who have a brown banner with brown
flags, to you who wear brown garlands and
use brown unguents, Salutations to you
who have the umbrella of royalty held over
your head, to you who wear the foremost of
crowns,


289.. Salutations to you who are adorned
with half a garland and half an armlet, to
you who are decked with one ring for one
ear, to you who are endued with the speed
of the mind, to you who are highly efful-
gent.


290. Salutations to you who are the fore-
most of gods, to you whe are the foremost


37


of Munis, to: you who are the foremost of
celestials! Salutations to you who wear
half a wreath of lotuses, to you who have
many lotuses on your body.

29t. Salutations to you' who have half
your body “smeared with sandal paste,
to you who have half your body decked with
garlands of flowers and smeared with frag
ment unguents.


292. 1 bowto you who aré bright-hued
like the Sun, to yeu who are like the Sun,
to you whose face is like the Sun, to you
who have eyes each of which is like the
Sun.


293. I bow to you who are Soma, to you
who are as mild as Soma, to you who bear
the lunar disc, to you who are of funar as«
pect, to you who are the foremost of all
creatures, to you who are adorned with.
most beautiful teeth.


294. I bow to you who are of a dark
color, to you who are of a fair complexion,
to you who have a form half of which is
yellow and half white, to you who have a
body half of which is mate and half female,
to you who are both mal¢ and female.


295—96. J bow to you who have bull for
your vehicle, to you who proceed riding on
the foremost of elephants, to you who are
obtained with difficulty, to you who are
capable of going to places unapproachable
by others. I bow to you whose praises are
sung by the Ganas, to you who are devoted
to the various Ganas, to you who follow the
track that is ‘trod by the Ganas, to thee
who are always devoted tothe Ganasas to
a vow. “


297- I bow to you who are of the com-
plexion of white clouds, to you who have
the splendour of the evening clouds, to you
who are incapable of being described by
names, to you who are of your own form.


298. I bow to you having a garland of
red color, to you who are clad in robes of
red.t


299. I bow to you whose crown is set
with gems, to you who are adorned with a
crescent, to you who wear many beautiful
gems in your diadem, to you who have eight
flowers on your head.


300. I bow to you who have a fiery
mouth and fiery eyes, té you who have eyes
effulgent like a thousand moens, to you wha
are of the form of fire, to you who are beau-
tiful and agreeable, to you who are incon-
ceivable and mysterious,


301. I bow to you who range in the sky,
to you who delight inJiving in pasture-
grounds, to you who walk on the Eatth,


38


to you who are the Earth, to you who
are infinite, to you who are highly aus-
picious, . E

302, I bow to you who are nude, to you
who make a happy home of every place
where you may happen to be for the time
being. { bow to. you who have the universe
for your home, to you who have both Know-
ledge and Felicity for your Soul.


_, 303, ¥ bow to you who always wear a

adem, to you who wear a large armlet, to
you who have a snake for the garland round
your neck, to you who wear many beautiful
otuaments on your body.


304. .| bow to you who have the Sun,
the Moon, and Agni for your three eyes, to
you who have a thousand eyes, to you who
are both male.and female, to you who are
divested of sex, to you who are a Sankhya,
t® you who are a Yogin.


305. I bow to you who are the grace of
those gods who are adored in sacrifices, to
you -who-are the Atharvans, to you who re-
move all sorts of disease and pain, to you
who remove every sorrow.


‘ 306. 1 bow to you who roac as deep as
the clouds, to you who display diverse kinds
of illusions, to you who-lerd: ever the soit
and over the seed that is sown in it, to you
who are the Creator of everything.


307. I bow toyou who are the Lord of
all the deities, to you who are the Master of
the universe, to you who are fleet like the
wind, to you who ace of the form of the
wind, ; ats


308. I bow to you who wear a garland
of gold, to you who play on hills and moun-
tains, to you who are adored by all who are
enemies of the gods, to you who are endued
with fierce speed and energy.


309. I bow to you who cut off one of the
heads of the Grandfather Brahman, to you
who have killed the Asura named Mahisha,-
to you who have three forms, to you who
have every form. :


3to. { bow to you who are the destroyer
of the triple city of the Asuras, to yott who
are the destroyer of (Daksha’s) sacrifice, to
you who are the destroyer of the person of
Kama (the god of love) to you who hold the
rod of destruction. :


git. TE bow to you who are Skanda, to
ou who are Visakha, to you who are the


rod of the Brahmana, to you who are Bhava, -


to you who are Sarva, fo you who ace of
universal form.


312. LT bow to you who dre Eshana, to
you whoa are the destroyer of Bhaga, to you
who are the slayer of Andhska, to you who
ace the universe, to you,who are possessed


MAHABHARATA.


of illusion, to you whe are both conceivable
and inconceivable.


313. You are the one end of all crea-
tures,-you are the foremost, you are the
heart of everything. You are the Brahman
of all the gods, you are the Red and Blue of
the Rudras.


3t4. Youare the Soul of all creatures,
you are He called Purusha in the Sankhya
philosophy, you are the Rishava among all
sacred things, you are the auspicious of the
Yogins which, according to them, is indivi-
sible. -


_ 315. Amongst those who follow the
different modes of life, you are the Llouse-
holder, you are the great Lord amongst
the patriarchs, You are Kuvera among
all the Yakshas, and you are Vishnu
amongst all the sacrifices.


316. You are Meru amongst mountains,
you are the Moon among all luminaries of
the sky, you are Vashishtha amongst
Rishis, yor are the Sun among the planets. |


317. You are the tion among all the
beasts, and the bull adored of all among all
domestic animals.


318. Among the Adityas, you are Vish-
nu (Upendra), among the Vasus, you are
Pavaka, among birds you are Garuda, and
among snakes you are Ananta.


319. Among the Vedas you are the Sa-
mans, among the Yajushes you are the
Shata-Rudriyam, among Yogins you are
Sanatkumara, and among Sankhyas you
are Kapila.


320. Among the Maruts you are Shakra,
among the Pitris you are Devarat, among
all the regions you are the region of Brah-
man, and you are emancipation amongst all
the ends of creatures.


321. Of all. eceans you are the Ocean
of Milk, among all mountains you are
Himavat, among all the castes you are the
Brahmanas, and among all learned Brah-
manas you are he who has undergone the
initiation.

32t. You are the Sun among all things
in the world, you are the destroyer called
Kala. You are whatever else gifted with


superior energy or eminence existing in the
universe,


323. You are endued with supreme
power. This is my certain conclusion.
bow to you, O powerful and illustrious one,
O you who are kind to all your wore
shippers. -


324. I bow to you, O lord of Yogins. I
bow to you, O original Cause of the uni-
verse. Be you pleased with me that am


ANUSHASANA PARVA?


your worshipper, that am very miserable
and helpless.


325. O Eternal Lord,-"do you become
the refuge of this adorer of yours who is very
weak and miserable! O Supreme Lord,
you should pardon me for ail the sins I have
committed, taking mercy on me for my
being yout devoted worshipper.


326. Lam stupefied by you, O Lord of
all the gods, on account of the disguise in
which you appeared before me. O Ma-
heshwara, I did not give you the Arghya or
water to wash your feet. :


327. Having sung thus the praises of
Ishana, I offered him, with great devotion,
water to wash his feet and the articles of
the Arghya, and‘ then, with joined hands
Il resigned myself to him, ready. to carty
out his command.


328. Then, O sire, an auspicious shower
of flowers dropped upon my head, carrying
celestial fragrance and bedewed with cold
water.


329. The divine musicians began to play
on their kettle-drums. A delicious breeze,
fragrant and sweet, began to blow and fill
me with pleasure.


330—331. Then Mahadeva aecémpani.
ed by his wife, and having the bull for his
emblem, having been pleased with me, ad-
dressed the deities assembled there in these
words, filling me with great joy,—Behold,
‘ye gods, the devotion of the great Upaman-
yu. Indeed, steady and great is that de-
votion, and entirely fixed, for it remains
unaltered.


332—333. Thus addressed by the great
God armed with the Shula, the gods, O
Krishna, having bowed down to him iand
joined their hands in respect, said these
words,—O illustrious one, O God of the
gods, O Lord of the universe,{O Lord of all,
let this best of twice-born persons obtain
from you the fruition of all his desires! ~


334. Thus addressed by all the gods
with ‘the Grandfather Brahman. among
’ them, Sharva,: otherwise called Isha and
Shankara, said these words, as if smiling,
to me. :


The illustrious Shankara said :-~
335. O dear Upamanyu, I am pleased
with yeu. See me, O foremost of ascetics !
O learned Rishi, you are firmly devoted
to me and you have been well tested
by me, ;


336. T have been very highly. pleased
with you on account of this your devotion to
Shiva. I shall, therefore, give you to-day
the fruition of your desires. ~


39


337. Thus addressed by the highly wise
Mahadeva, tears of joy came inté my eyes
and my hair stood erect. .


438. Kneeling dowa to him and bowing |
to hitti repeatedly, 1 thesi with a voice that
was suppressed with joy, said to him.


339. © illustrious god, it appears to me
that [I was hitherto dead and that it is only
to-day that I have taken my birth, and that
my birth hasttosday borne fruit, since I am
standing now in the presence of Him who
is the Master of both the gods and the
Asuras ! got


340. Wha else is more praiseworthy
than J, since I am seeing with these eyes of
mine Him of immeasurable prowess whont
the very gods are unable to see without first
paying hearty worship?

341—342. The learned and the wise con-
sider that as the highest of all topics; which
is Eternal, which is distinguished from alt
else, which is unborn, which is Knowledge,
which is indestructible, at one with you,
O powerful ‘and 3 illustrious one, you whe
are the beginning of all the topics, you
who are indestructible ahd challengeless,
you who know all the ordinances, you, who:
are the foremost of Purushas, you who ate
the highest of the highs


343. You who had created from youe
right side the Grandfather Brahman, the’
Creator of all things, you are he who had‘
created from your left-side Vishnu. for
protecting the Creatior. ; ‘


344-~343. Youare that powerfut Lord.
who did create Rudra when the end of the.
cycle came and when the Creation was
once more to be destroyed { That Rudra wha
originated from you destroyed the Creation”
with alt its mobile and immobile beings,
assuming the form of highly powerfirt ‘
Kala, of. the clond Samvartaka, and of the
‘all destroying fire.. Indeed, when the time
for the dissolution of the universe sets in, -
that Rudra stands, ready to swallow up the -
universe. :


346. You are that Mahadeva who is the:
original Creator of the universe with alt its
mobile and immobile creatures. You are
he who, at the end of the afon, ‘stands, —
withdrawing all things into yourself,


347. You are he who pervades alt things,
you are the Soul of all things, you are the;
Creator of the Creator of ail printiptes..
Incapable of being beheld by even’ any
of the gods, you are he who exists, pervad- '
ing all principles, ’


348. If, O Lord, you have been pleased
with me and. if you would grant me boons,
fet this be the boon, O Lord of all the gods,


40


that my devotion to you may remain un- | fruits.


changed.


349. O best of the gods, let me through
your grace, have knowledge of the Pre-
sent, the Past, and the Future.


3g0.. I shall also, with all my kinsmen
and friends, always eat food mixed with
milk, And let your illustrious -self be for
ever present at our gifted hermitage.


351. hus addressed by me, the illus-
trious Maheshwara gifted with supreme
energy, that Master of all mobile and im-
mobile creations, vis., Shiva, adored of all
the universe,then said to me these words,


The Illustrious God said :—


352. Be free from every misery and pain
and be above decrepitude and death. Be
gifted with fame, be endued with great
energy, and spiritual knowledge.


353. You shall through my grace, be
always sought by the Rishis. Be your
behaviour good and righteous. May you
possess all attributes and universal lknow-
ledge. Be you of agreeable appearance.


354—355- Mayyou possess everlasting
youth, and let your energy be like that of
fice. Whenever, again, you may wish for
the presence, which is $0 agreeable to you,
of the ocean of milk, there shall that
ocean appear before you. fo you, with your
friends, always obtain food prepared with
me with the celestial nectar being mixed
with tt,


. 356. After the expiration of an zon
you will enjoy my company. Unuending
shall be youe family and race and kinsmen,

357. O foremost of twice-born ones,
your devotion to me shall be eternal. And,
O best of Brahmanas, I stall always be
present at your hermitage.

358. Live, O son, wherever you like
shorn of anxiety. Thought of by you, I
shall, O learned Brahmana, appear before
you again.

359. Having said these words, and |
granted me these boons, the illustrious
Ishana, effulgent like millions of Suns,
disappeared there and then. :


360. It was even, O Krishna, that I
saw, with the help of austere penances, that
God of gods. I also got all that was said
by the great God endued with supreme
intelligence. op oe eS

"361. See, O Krishna, before your eyes,
these Siddhas living here and these Rishis .
and Vidyadharas and Yakshas and
Gandharvas and Apsaras.


362. See these trees and creepers and


MAHABHARATA.


See them bearing the flowers of
every season, with beautiful leaves, and
spreading a sweet smelljall around.


363. O you of mighty arms, all these
are yvifted with a celestial nature through
the favour of that god of gods, that
supreme Lord, that great Deity.


Vasudeva continued :—


364—365. Hearing these words of his
and seeing, as it were, with my own eyes alt
that he had described to me, I became
filled with wonder. I then addressed the
great ascetic Upamanyu and said to him,
Higuly praiseworthy as you are, O foremost
of learned Brahmanas, for what righteous
man is there except you whose retreat
enjoys the distinction of being honored with
the presence of that God of gods.


366. Will the powerful Shiva, will the
great Shankara, O chief of ascetics, grant
me also a sight of his body and show me
favour ?


Upamanyu said :—

367. Forsooth, O you having eyes like
lotus petals, you will very soon see Maha-
deva as, O sinless one, 1 sticceeded in
seeing him,


_ 368. O you of immeasurable prowess,
I see with my spiritual eyes that you will
in the sixth month from this, succeed in
getting a sight of Mahadeva, O best of all
persons.


369. You, O foremost of the Yadus,
will obtain from Maheshwara and his wife
twenty-four boons. I tell you what is true.


370. Through the favour of that Deity
gitted with supreme wisdom,-I know the
Past, the Future, and the Present.


371—372. The great Hara has favoured
these thousands of Rishis and others. Why
will not the powerful Deity show favour to
you, O Madhava! 1 always like the meet-
ing of the;gods as does one like you, who is
devoted to the Brahmanas, who is full of
mercy and who is full of faith. [ shall give
you certain Mantras. Recite them conti-
nuously. By this you are sure to see
Shankara !


The blessed Vishnu said :—


373. 1 then said to him,—O twice-born
one, through your favour, O great ascetic, I
shalt see the lord of the deities, that grinder
of Diti’s numberless sons.


374. Eight days, O Bharata, passed
there like an hour, all of us being thus


plants yielding all sorts of flowers and { occupied with talk on Mahadeva.


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


375. On the eighth day, 1 underwent
the mitiation according to due ites, at
the hands of that Brahmana. I received
the staff from his hands. [I went through
the prescribed shave. I took up a quantity
of Kusha blades in my hand. I wore rags
for my raiments. I rubbed my person with
clarified butter. 1 puta cord of Munja
grass round my loins.


376. For one month f lived on fruits.
The second month | lived upon water.
Vhe third, the fourth, and the fifth months
1 passed, living upomir only.

377. I stood all the while, upon one
foot, aud with my arms also raised up-
wards, and giving up sleep for all the time.
I then saw, O Bharata, in the sky a light
that seemed to be as dazzling as that of a
thousand Suns,


378. Yowards the centre of that efful-
gence, O son of Pandu, | saw a cloud
Jooking like a mass of blue hills, adorned
with rews of cranes, decorated with many
a grand rainbow, with flashes of lightning
and the fire looking like eyes set on it.


379. Within that cloud was the powerful
Mahadeva, himself of dazzling splendour,
accompanied by his consort Uma. Indeed,
the yreat God appeared to shine with his
penances, energy, beauty, effulgence, and
his beloved consort by his side.


380. ‘The powerful Maheshwara, with
his wife by his side, shone in the midst of
that cloud. ‘he appearance seemed to be
like that of the Sun in the midst of clouds.
with the Moon by his side.


381. The hair on my body, O son of
Kunti, stood erect, and my eyes expanded
with wonder upon seeing Hara, the refuge
of all the pods and the remover of all their
griefs.


382. Mahadeva was adorned with a
Giadem on his head. He was armed with
his Shula. He was clad in a tiger-skin,
had matted locks on his head, and bore
the staff in one’ of bis hands. He was
armed, besides, with his Pinaka and the
thunder-bolt. His teeth were sharp point-
ed.- He was adoined with an excellent
bracelet for the upper arm. His sacred
thread was formed by a snake.


383. He wore an excellent garland of
various colors on his bosom, that hung down
to his'toes. Indeed, I saw him like the high-
ly bright moon of an autumnal evening.

384. Surrounded by various clans of
spirits and ghosts, he appeared like the
autumnal Sun difficult of being looked at
for its dazzling brightness.

385. A thousand and hundred Rudras
stood around that God of controlled soul


6


4t


and white deeds, seated upon his bull, All
of them were employed in singing his
praises,


386. he Adityas, the Vasus, the
Sadhyas, the Vishwedevas, and the twin.
Ashwins praised that Lord of the universe,
by singing the hymns, ,


387. The powerful [ndra and his
brother Upendra, the two sons of Aditi,
and the Grandfather Brahman, al) sang
in the presence of Bhava the Kathantara
Saman,


388—390. Nuinberless masters of Yoga,
all the twice-born Rishis with their children,
all the celestial Rishis, the goddess Earth,
the Sky, the Constellations, the Planets, the
Months, the Fortnights, the Seasons, Night,
the Years, the Kshanas, the Muhurtas, the
Nimeshas, the Yugas one after another,
all the celestial Sciences and branches of
knowledge, and all beings conversant with,
Truth, were seen bowing down that Su-
preme Preceptor, that great Father, that
giver of Yoga.


391—393- Sanatkumara, the Vedas, the
Histories, Marichi, Angiras, Atri, Pulastya,
Pulaha, Kratu, the seven. Manus, Soma,
the Atharvans, and Vrihaspati; Bhrigu, ,
Daksha, Kashyapa, Vashishtha, ,Kashya,
the Cehchandas, Diksha, the Sacrifices,
Dakshina, the Sacrificial Fires, the Havis
poured in sacrifices, and all the articles of |
the sacrifices, were seen by me, O Yudhish-
thira, standing there in theif enibodied
forms. ; :

394-397. All the presiding deities of
the worlds, all the Rivers, all the snakes,,
the mountains, the celestial Mothers, ali
the wives and daughters of the celestials,
thousands upon thousands and millions of
ascetics, were seen to bow down to that
powerful Lord who is the soul of tranquil-
ity. The Mountains, the Oceans, and the
Pcints of the compass also did the same,
the Gandharvas and the Apsaras highly
proficient in music, in celestial songs, san x
and hymned the praises of Bhava who is
full of wonder. ‘The Vidyadharas, the
Danavas, the Guhyakas, the Rakshasas,
and all created beings mobile and im-
mobile were worshipping, in thought, word,
and deed, that powerful Lord. ‘That Lord
of all the gods, wiz., Sarva, appeared
before me, seated in all his glory.


398. Seeing that Ishana had showed
himself to me by being seated in glory
before my eyes, the whole universe, with the
Grandfather and Shakra, looked at me.


399. I. however, had not the power to
look at Mahadeva. The great yod then
addressed me, saying,see, O Krishna,
and speak to me!


42


400. You have worshipped me hundreds
and thousands of times. There ts no one
in the three wotlds who is dearer to me
than you!


4ot. After I had bowed to hint, his wife,
wis. the poddess Uma, became pleased
with me. I then addressed in these words
the great God whase praises are hymned
by all the gads headed by the Grandfather
Brahman.


The blessed Vishnu said :—


402. ‘I saluted Mahadeva, saying,—
I bow'to you, O you whe are the origin
of all things. The Rishis dectare that you
are the master of the Vedas. ‘The pious


hold that you are Penance, you are Sattwa, -


you are Rajas, you are Tamas, and you
are Truth.


403. You are Brahman, you are Rudra,
yeu are Varuna, you are Agni, you are

anu, yen are Bhava, you are Dhatri, you
are Tashtri, you are Vidhatri, you are the
powerful Lord of ail.things, you are every-
where,


404. All beings, mobile and immobile,
have originated from you. You have
created this world with all its mobile and
immobile creations:


405. The Rishis say that you are
superior to the $ensés, the mind, the vital
air, the seven fires, everything efse which
rests upon the al-pervading Soul, and aH
the celestials who are worshipped.


496. You, O illustrious one, are the
Vedas, the Sacrifices, Soma, Dakshina,
Pavaka, Havi, and all other ingredients of
sacrifice, ;


407. The merit of sacrifices, gifts, the
study of the Vedas, vows, practices of res-
traint, Modesty, Fame, Prosperity, Glory,
Contentment, atid Success, are all for ac-
quiring you.

408. Desire, Anger, Fear, Cupidity,
Pride, Stupefaction, and Malice, Pains-and
Diseases, are, O illustrious one, all your
offspring. :

409. You are the acts of creatures, you
are the joy and sorrow of those acts, you
are the absence of joy and sorrow, you are
that Nescience which is the eternal seeds of
Desire, you are the great origin of Mind,
you are Power, and you are Eternity,


‘410. Wouare the Unmanifest, you are
Pavana, you are inconceivable, you are the
thousand-rayed Sun, you are the shining
intelligence, yon ate the first of all the
subjecis, and“you are the support of life.

411—4q12. By the words Greatness, Soul,
Understanding, Brahman, Universe, Sham-
bhu, and Self-create, as well as other


MAHABHARATA.


words seen (in the Vedas), your nature 13
comprehended as being at one with Great
ness and Soul. Knowing you as all this,
the learned Brahmana conquers that Ignor=
ance which is the root of the world.


413. You are the heart of all creatures,
and you are worshipped by the Rishis ag
Soul. Your arms and feet extend to every
place, and your eyes, head, aud face are
everywhere. You hear everywhere in the
universe, and you exist permeating every-
thing.

414. Yeu are th@® fruit of all acts
which are performed in the Nimeshas and
other divisions of time which originate from
the Sun, -


415. You are the original lustre. You
are Male Being Kving in the hearts of alk


things. You are the successful fruits of
Yoga.
416. Understanding and Intelligence


and all the worlds depend upon you. Those
who are given fo meditation, whb are
always busy with Yoga, who are devoted
to or firm in Truth and who have conqueér~
ed their passions, seek you and depend om
you.


417. They who know you as the one
unchangeable, or one who Hives in alk
hearts, or one who is endowed with
supreme power, of one who is the
ancient Male Being, or one who is pure
Knowledge, or one that is the effulgent
understanding, or one that is the highest
refuge of all persons gifted with intelli-
gence, are, indeed, highly intelligent men.
Indeed, such persons reign supreme over
intelligence.


418. By understanding the seven subtite
Principles, by comprehending your six at-
tributes, and by mastering the true Yoga,
the man of knowledge succeeds in entering
into your great self. :


41g. After E had said these words, O
Partha, to Bhava, that remover of grief
and pain, the universe, both modbile and
immobile, roared like a lion.


470. The numberless Brahmans present
there, the gods and the Asuras, the Nagas,
the Pishaehas, the Pitris, the birds, various
Rakshasas, various classes of ghosts and
spirits, and alt the great Rishis, then bowed
down to that great Deity.


421. There then, dropped upon mv head
showers of highly fragrant celestial flowers
and sweet winds blew on the spot.


422. The powerful Shankara then, given
to the behoof of the universe, looked at
the goddess Uma, and the king of the
celestials and myself also, and thus spoke
tO, me.. ,


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


423. We know, O Krishna, that you,
© slayer of foes, are greatly devoted to
as! Do what is for your good. My love
and affection for you is very great.

424. Do you ask for eight boons. f
shall grant them, O Krishna, O best of all
persons. Teti me what they are, O chief
of the Yadavas. Say what you wish. You
will have them, however difficult of attain-
ment they may be.


CHAPTER XV.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.


Krishna said :—


1—2. Bending low my head with a con-
trolled soul to that mass of energy and
effulgence, I said to the great god, with a
joyous heart, these words.—lI ask for these
boons from you, namely, firmness in virtue,
the destruction of enenties ia -battle, the
highest glory, the greatest power, devotion
to Yoya, your nearness, and huadreds upon
hundreds ot children,


3-4. Whereto Shankara said, so be it,
repeating the words I had said. After this,
the mother of the universe, the upholdress
of all things, she who purifies ail things,
‘vis , the wife of Sarva that huge receptacle
of penances, said with controled soul, these
words to me:—The powerful Mahadeva
has granted you, O sinless one, a son who
shall be named Shamva.


5—6. Do you take from me also eight
boons which you choose. I shall, indeed,
@rantthem to you. Bowing heer with my
head bended, 1 said to her, O son of
Pandu,—l pray from you uniform affection
for the Braheaanas, the favour of my father,
a hundred sons, the highest enjoyments,
love for my family, the favour of my myther,
the attainment of tranquility and peace,
and cleveiness in every deed.


Uma said :—

7° i
endued with prowess equal to that of a
celestial, J never say what is untrue. You
will have sixteen thousand wives. Your
love for them and theirs also for you shall
be limitless.


8. From all your kinsmen also, you will
get the highest affection, You will have
a most beautiful person. Seven thousand
guests will daily feed at your palace,


Vasudeva continued :—
9. Having thus granted me boons, both


You will have them, O you who are:


a ne tn ter tt tn nent eh


43


the god and the goddess, © Bharata, dig.
appeared there and then with their asso-
tiates, G etder brother of Bhima.


to. All those wonderfui deeds 1 described
fully, O best of kings, to that highly
energetic Brahmana Upsmanyu. Bowing
down to the great God, Upamanyu said
these words to me. :


Upamanynu said :—

11. There is no god like Sarva. There
is no end or refuge like Sarva. There is
none who can grant so many or so high
boons, There is none who is his equal in
battle.


CHAPTER XVEL
{ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—


Continued.


Upamanyu said :—
1—~2. There was in the golden'cycle, ©
sire, a Rishi named Tandi. With devoted
heart he worshipped with the help of Yogar
meditation, the great God for ten thousand
years. Hear me as I tell you the fruit or
teward he reaped of such wonderful devo-
tion, He succeeded in seeing Mahadeva
an. lauded him by uttering some hymns.


3-6. Thinking, with the help of his
penances, of Him who is the supreme Sout
and who is eternal and undecaying, Tandi
became Stricken with wonder and said
these words,—I seek His refuge whom the
Sankhyas describe and the Yogins think
of as the great, the foremost, the Male
Beiny, the pervader of all things, and the
Lord of all existent objects, who, is the
cause of both the creation and the destruc-
tion of the universe; who is superior to. all
the gods, the Asuras, and the Munis, who
has nothing higher. who is ancreate, who is
the Lord of all things, who has veithee
beginning nor end, and whois gifted with
supreme power, who is possessed of the
highest happiness, and who is effulgent and
sinless, :


7—1t0. After he had said these words,
Tandi, saw before him that ocean of pen-
ances, that great God who is eternal and
undecaying, who is peerless, who is incon- |
ceivahle, who is eternal, and who is without
any change, who is indivisible, who is whole,
who is Brahma, who is above all attributes,
and who is gifted with attributes, who is the
highest delight of Yogins, who is without
decrease, who is called Liberation, who is
the refuge of the mind, of Indra, of Agni,
of the Wind-God, of the entire universe,


44


and of the Grandfather Brahman; who
cannot be compretended by the mind, who
is without change of any kind, who is pure,
who is capable of being apprehended by
the understanding only, and who is imma-
terial as the mind ; who cannot be compre-
hended, who cannot be measured, who is
‘difficult of being attained, by persons of
impure souls, who is the origin of the ani-
verse, and-who is above both the universe
-and the quality of darkness; who is an-
cient, who is Purusha, who is gifted with
effulgence, and who is higher than the
highest.


1t. Desirous of seeing Him who invest-
ing himself with vital airs, lives in the in-
dividual soul, in the form of that effulgence
which is called the Mind, the Rishi Landin,
passed many years practising the severest
austerities, and having succeeded in seeing
Him as the reward of those penances, he
lauded the great God in the following
terms.


Tandi said :—


12. You are the purifier of all purifiers
and the refuge of all, O foremost of all
beings gifted with intelligence! You are
the most dreadful energy of all kinds of
energy. You are the austerest penance of
all penances.


13. You, O powerful one, are the liberal
giver (of blessings. You are the supreme
‘Truth. f bow to you,


14. I bow to you, O you of a thousand
rays, and, O refuge of all happiness! You
are the bestower of that emancipation for
which, O powerful one, Yatis, standing in
fear of birth and death, strive so hard. —


15. The Grandfather Brahman, Indra
of a hundred sacrifices, Vishnu, the
Vishwedevas, the great Rishis, cannot com-
prehend your real nature. How then can
persons like ourselves expect to comprehend
you, :


16. Everything originates from you.
Upon you depends everything. You are
called Kala, you are called Purusha, you
are called Brahma. Celestial Rishis well-
read in the Puranas, say that you are triune.


17. You are Adhi-Purusha, Adhyatma,
Adnibhuta, Adhi-Daivata,  Adhi-Loka,
Adghi-Vijnanam,tand Adhi-Yajna.


18. Wise men, when they succeed in
knowing you that lives in themselves and
that can be known by the very gods, be-
come freed from all fetters and enter into a
state of existence that is above all sorrow.


19. They who do not wish to know you,
are constrained to pass through number-
ess births and deaths. You are the door


MAHABHARATA.


of heaven and of Liberation. You ‘are he
who bring all beings into existence and
withdraw them again into yourself, You
are the great giver.


zo. Youare heaven, you are liberation,
you are desire. You arethe anger which
inspires creatures. You are Sattwa, you
are Rajas, you are Vamas, you are the
nether regions, and you are the upper
regions.


21. You are the Grandfather Brahman,
you are Bhava, you are Vishnu, you-are
Skanda, vou are Indra, you are Savitri,
you are Yama, vou are Varuna, you are
Soma, you are Dhatri, you are Manu, you
are Vidhatri, and you are Kuvera the Lord
of riches.


22. You are Earth, you are Wind,
von are Water, you are Agni, you are
Ether, you are Speech, you are the Under~
standing, you are Steadiness, you are
Intelligence, you are the Acts, you are
truth, you are Untruth, you are existent,
you are non-existent.


23. You are the senses, you are what
is above Nature, you are immutable. You
are superior to existent objects, you are
superior to non-existent objects, you are
capable of being conceived, you are incapa-
ble of being conceived.


24. You are at one with what is
Supreme Brahma, with what is the highest
entity, with what is the end of both the
Sankhyas and the Yogins.


25. Indeed, I have been greatly re-
warded by you to-day on account of your
granting me a sight of your form. I
have attained the end of the righteous. [|
Nave been rewarded with that end which
is prayed for by persons whose understand-
ings have been purified by Knowledge.


26. Alas, so long I was steeped in
Ignorance; for this long time I was an
insensate fool, since [ had no knowledge
of you who are the Supreme Deity, you
who are the only Eternal Entity as known
by all persons.


27. In course of numberless lives have
I at last succeeded in acquiring that Devo-
tion towards you for which you have
shown yourself to me, O you who are ever
inclined to. favour those who are devoted
to you! He who knows you enjoys
immortality,


28. You are always a mystery with the
gods, the Asuras, and the ascetics. Brahma
is concealed in a cave. ‘The very ascetics
cannot see or know him.


29. You are that powerful god who is
the Creator of everything and whose face
is turned towards all directions, You are


N


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


the Soul of al things, you see all things,
you pervade ali things, and you know all
things. :


30. You make a body for yourself.
You bear that body. You are an embo-
died Being. You have a body, and you
are the refuge of all embodied creatutes.
You are the creator of the vital airs, you
possess the vital airs, you are endued with
vital airs, you are the yviver of the vital
airs, and you are the refuge of all beings
endued with vital airs.


31. You are that Adhyatma, which is
the refuge of all pious persons who are
given to Yoga-meditation and conversant
with the Soul and who seek to avoid re-
birth. Indeed, you are that Supreme Lord
who is at one with that refuge.


32. You distribute all ends, happy or
miserable, to all creatures. You ordain the
birth and death for all created beings.


33 Yon, are the powerful Lord who
grants success to Rishis crowned with
success regarding the fruition of their
wishes. Having created all-the worlds
beginning with Bhu, together with alt
the dwellers of heaven, you uphold and
cherish them all, dividing yourself into
your well known eight forms.


34. Everything originates from you. All
things depend upon you. All things, again,
disappear in you. You are the sole Etersal
object.


35- You are that region of Truth which
is sought by the righteous and considered
by them as the highest. You are that
stoppage of individual existence sought by
the Yogins. You are that Liberation which
is sought by persons conversant with the
doul.


36. Beings crowned with success and
having Brahman amongst them have con-
cealed you in a cave for preventing the
deities and Asuras and human beings from
seeing you.


37. Although you live in the heart, yet
are you concealed. Hence, stupefied by
you the deities and Asuras and men cannot
understand you, O Bhava, truly and in all
your details.


38. O you living in all heart you appear
before those persons who succeed in attain-
ing to you after having purified themselves
by devotion. i


39. By knowing you one can avoid both
death and re-birth. You are the highest
object of knowledge. By knowing you no
highee object remains for one to know.


40.


. You are the greatest object of
acquirement,


The person that is truly


45


wise, who by acqtiiring you, thinks that
there is no higher object of acquisition, By
attaining to you who are greatly subtile
and who are the highest object of acquisi-+
tion, the wise man becomes immortal.


41. The followers of the Sankhya sys
tem, well read in their own system of philo-
sophy and possessing a knowledge of the
qualities and of all the topics of enquiry,—
those learned men who reign over the
destructible by. attaining to a knowledge
of the subtile or indestructible,—succeed
by knowing you in freeing themselves from
all fetters.


42. Persons well read in the Vedas con-
sider you as the one object of knowledge
which has been explained in the Vedanta,
‘These men, given to the suppression of
vital airs, always meditate om you and at
last enter into you as their highest end.


43. Riding on the car of OM, those
men enter inter into Maheshwara. You
are the solar door of the celestial road.


44. You are the funar door, of that
which is called the road of the Pitris. You
are Kashtha, You are the points of the
horizon, you are the year, and you are the
cycles.


45. You are the sovereignty of the
heavens, you are the sovereignty of the
Earth, you are the Northern and the
Southern solistices. In days of yore the
Grandfather, Brahman sang your praises.
O you who are called blue and red, by
reciting various hymns and urged you to
create living creatures.


46. Brahmanas conversant with Richs
praise you by uttering Richs, considering
you as unattached to ail things and-as shorn
of all forms. In sacrifices, Adhyaryus, pour
libations, uttering Yajushes in honor of
you who are the sole object of knowledge,


according to the three well-known ways.


47. Persons of purified understandings,
who are conversant. with Samans, sing you
with the help of Samans. ‘Those twice-
born, again, who are cenversant with the
Atharvans, hymn you as Rita, as Truth, -
as the Highest, and as Brahma. You are
the highest cause of the Sacrifice. You
are the Lord, and you are Supretne.


48. The night and day are your organs
of hearing and organ of sight. The fort-
nights and months for your bead and arms.
‘The seasons are your energy, penances are
are your patience, and the year is your
anus, and thighs, and feet. :


49. You are Death, you are Yama, you
are Hutasha, you are Kala, you are gilted
with speed of destruction, you are the.


46


prime cause of Time and you aré eternal |
‘Tinte. ;

_ 50. You are the Moon and the Sun, with
atl the stars and planets and the atmos-
phere that fills space. You are the pole-
Star, you are the constellation called the
seven Rishis, you are the seven regions
beginning with. Bbu.


gt. You are Pradhana and Mahat, you
‘are Unmanifest, and you are this world.
You” are the universe beginning with
Tra'ma and ending with the lowest vege-
table creation. You are the beginning of
all creatures. You are identical with the
existent and the nan-existent.


52. You are the eight Prakritis. You
are, again, above the eight Prakritis.
Every thing that exists, represents a por
tion of your divine Self.


§3. You are the|Supreme Eternal Hap-
iness, You are the end cf all things.
‘You are the highest existence of the
Righteous.


54. You are that state which is freed
from every anxiety. You are Eternal
Brahma. You are that highest state which
forms the meditation of persons well-read
in the anxiliary branches of the Vedas.


-  §§.' You are the highest Kashtha, you
are the highest Kala. You are the highest
Success, and you are the highest Refuge.


56. You are the highest Tranquility.
You are the highest stoppage of Existence.
By attaining to you, Yogins thing that
they have acquired the highest success.


57. You are Contentment, you are Suc-
cess, you are Shruti, and yott are the
Smriti You are that Refuge of the Soul
which Yogins seek, and you are that in-
Gestructible Prapti which men of knowledge
seek,

58. You are, forsooth, that End which is
sought by persons given to sacrifices and
those who pour sacrificial libations, moved
by particular desires, and who make large
presents on such occasions.


§9. You are that high End which those
pee seek who consume and sc rch their

odies with austere penances with conti-
nued recitations, with those rigid vows and
fasts which belong totheir peaceful lives,
and with other means of self-affliction,


60. .O Eternal One, you are the End
of those who are unattached to all things
and who have given up all acts, ;


6t. You, O Eternal One, are that End
of those who seek Liberation from re-birth,
who give up all enjoyments, and who desire
the annihilation of the elements,


MAHABHARATA.


62. You are that high End, O iflustrious
one, which cannot be described, which is
pure, which is the immutable one, and
which is theics who are given to knowledge
and science.


63. These are the five Ends described
in the Vedas and the Scriptures and the
Puranas. tt is through your favour that
persons acquire those Ends, or, if they fail
to attain to them, it is through your favour
being denied to them.


64. It was thus that Tandi, who was a
heap of penances, lauded Ishana. And he
sang also that high Brahma whichin days
of yore was sung by the Creator himself,


Upamanyu said :—

65. Thus lauded by that utterer of
Brahma, viz... Vandi, Mahadeva, that illus-
trious and powerful god who was accom-
panied by his wife Uma, said these words.


Tandi said :—

66. Neither Brahman, nor Indra, nor
Vishnu, nor the Vishwedevas, nor the
great Rishis, know you. Pieased at this,
Shiva said the following words,


The Holy One said :— -


67. You shall be indestructible and
eternal. You shall be freed from all sorrow.
You will have great fame. You will be
gifted with energy. You will get Spirituat
Knowledge.


68. All the Rishis shall seek you, and
your son, through my favour, shall become
the author of Sutras, O foremost of twice-
born ones.


6g) What wishes of yours shall I grant
to-day? Tell me, O son, what do you seek.
—At this, Fandi joined his hands and said,
—O Lord, let my devotion to you be
Steady. —~


Upamanyu said :—

go. Having given to Tandin these boons
and received the adorations of both the
gods and the Rishis, the great Deity dis-
appeared there and then.


“91. When the illustrious Deity, O lord
of the Yadavas, thus disappeared with all
his followers, the Rishi came to my her-
mitage and said to me all that had taken
place. :


72. Do you hear, OU foremost of men,
for your success, ali thase celebrated names
that Tandi said to me.

73- The Grandfather had at one time
recited ten thousand names of Mahadeva.
In the scriptures, a thousand names of the
god occur.


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


974. These names are not known to all.
O you who is above destruction, in days of
‘yore, The Grandfather Beahman uttered
these names for worshipping the yreat
Deity. Having acquired them through the
favour offthe Grandtather, Fandi communi-
cated them to me,


CHAPTER XVI.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued,


Vasudeva said :—

t. Concentrating his mind, O Yudhish.
thira, the twice-born Rishi Upamanyu,
with hands joined together in
uttered this abstract of names beginning
from the very commencement,


. Upamanyu said :—

2. [shall worship that great Deity who
is worthy of the adorations of all creatures,
by uttering those names which are celebra-
ted over all the worlds,—names some of
which were uttered by the Grandfather
Brahman, some by the Rishis, and some of
which occur in the Vedas, and the auxili-
ary sciences.

3. Those names have been used by
eminent persons. hey are, again, true and
fraught with success, and are capable of
accomplishing all the objects of the utterer,
Vhey have been given to Mahadeva by
‘Tandi whose soul was purified by Vedic
leacning and who invented those names
with the help of his devotion.


4. With those names that have been
ultered by many well-known pious persons
and by ascetics conversant with all the sub-
jects 1 shall worship him who is the greatest,
who is the first, who takes to heaven, who is
ready to give benefits upon all Sr EAet:
and who is auspicious.;


§. “Those names have been heard in the
universe, having spread from the region of
Brahman. All of them are fraught with
‘Truth. With those names | shall worship
him who. is Supreme Brahma, who has
been described by the Vedas, and who is
Eternal.

6. I shall now tell you, O chief of Yadu's
race,- those names. Hear them with rapt
attention. You are a devout worshipper
of the Supreme Lord. Adore the illus-
trious Bhava, knowing him above all the

deities.


z.- And because you are devoted to him,
I shall, therefore, recite those names before


respect,


. entertain malice towards


47
you. Mahadeva is Eternal Brahma. No
one even one endned with Yoga is able to
describe, in even a hundred years, the glory
and power of that great Deity in full. Phe
beginning, middle, or end of Mahadeva
cannot be apprehended by the very gods.


g. Such being the fact, who is there, O
Mahadeva, that can recite the qualities of
Mahadeva in full? 1 shall, however;—~
through the favour: of that illustrious su-
preme and perfectly wise Deity, extended
to me for my devotion to him,—récite his
attributes in an abstract of few words
and letters, ;

io. The Supreme Lord is incapable of
being worshipped by any one if he does not
grant his permission to the worshipper. As
for myself, it is only when t become fortu-
nate enough to receive his permission that |
succeed in worshipping him.


1t. 1 shall mention only a few names of
that great God wiho is without birth and
without destruction, who is the original
cause of the universe, who is gifted with
the highest "Soul,and whose origin is une
manitest.


12. Hear, O Krishna, a few names, that
were uttered by Brahman himself, of that
giver of boons, that worshipiul god, that
powerful one who has the universe for
his form, and who is gifted with gd sis
wisdom.


13. “Fhese names that I shall recite ‘ate
taken from the ten thousard names that the,
great Grandfather had uttered in days,
of yore; as clarified butter is extracted from
curds,


14. As gold is “the essence -of vocky
mountains,- as honey is the. essence of
flowers, as Manda is the extract from clarir
fied butter, so have these names been ex-
tracted from and represent the cream of
those ten thousand names that were uttered
by the Grandfather Brahman.


15. his abstract of names can remove
every sin however heinous. It possesses
the merit of the four Vedas. It shoutd be
understood with ¢are, and be kept i the
memory with concentrated soul,


16. It is fraught with auspiciousness.
It brings on advancement. It destroys
Rakshasas. It is a great purifier. It should
be given only to him who ts devoted to the
great Lord, to him who has Faith, to bin
who believes.. It should never be comtmu+
nicated to him who has no faith, him who is
an unbeliever, him who has not conquered
his soul.


17. That creature, O Krishna, who
the illustrious


Mahadeva ‘who is the original cause of


48


MAHABHARATA,


everything, who isthe Supreme Soul, and { being, and to whom all the worlds return


whois the great Lord, has surely to go ta
hell with all his ancestors before arid all
his children after him.


18. This abstract of names that I shall
recite to you is regarded as Yoya+medita-
tion. This is regarded as Yoga. This is
regarded as the highest object of meditae
tion. This is what one should constantly
recite. This is knowledge. This is the
highest Mystery. :

19. If one, even on the eve of death,
recites tt or hears it recited to him, he
succeeds in attaining to the highest end.
This is holy. ‘Fhis is auspicious, this is


fraught with every sort” of benefit, ‘This
is the best of all things,
20. Brahman, the Grandfather of all


the universe, having in days of yore, com-
posed it, gave to it the foremost place
among all excellent hymns.


2t. Since then, this hymn of the great-
ness and glory of the yreat Mahadeva,
which is held inthe highest reverence by
all the guds, is known as the King of all
hymas,


22.


This king of all hymns was first
taken from


the region of Brahman to
heaven, the region of the gods. ‘andi
then got it from heaven. Hence it is
known as the hymn composed by Tandi.


23. From heaven ‘landi brought it
down on, Earth, It is the most sacred of
all sacred things, and is capable of re-
moving all sins however heindus,


24. O you of powerful arms, 1 shall
recite to you that best of all hymns, . This
hymna belongs to him who is the Veda
of the Vedas, and the most ancient of all
ancient objects. °


25. Lo him who is the energy of all
energies, and the penance of all penanges ;
to him who js the most tranquil of all
creatures gifted with tranquility, and who
is whe splendour of all splendours.


26. To him who is regarded as the
most restrained of all creatures who are
_testrained, and him who is the intelligence
of all creatures gifted with intelliyence ;
tohim who is regarded as the god of all
gods, and the Rishi of all Rishis.


27. To him who is regarded as the
sacrifice of all sacrifices and the most aus-
picious of all auspicious things ; to him who
isthe Rudra of afl the Rudras, and the
effulgence of all effulgent things.


28. To him who is the Yogin of all
Yogins, and the cause of all causes; to
him from whom all the worlds come into


when they céase to exist.


29. To him who is the Soul of alt
creatures, and who is called Hara of yvreat
energy. Hear me recite those thousand
and eight names of the great Sharva.


39. Hearing those names, O foremost
of all men, you will yet the fruition of alt
your desires—Om! you are Immonbile,
you are Fixed, you are Powerful, you are
lerrible, you are Foremost, you are Boon-
giving, and you are Superior.

31. Youare the Soul of all creatures,
you are celebrated over all creatures, you
are allthings, youare the Creator of all,
and you are Bhava. You carry matted
locks on your bead. You put on animal
skins for your dress* You havea crest of
matted hair on your head like the peacock.
You are he who has the whole universe
for your limbs. You are the Creator of
all things. You are Hara because you
destroy all things.


32. You are he who has eyes of the
gazelle. You are the destroyer of all
creatures. You are the supreme enjoyer
of all things.


33. You are that Pravriti whence ail
actions originate. You are that Nivirtti or
absteation from acts, you are observant of
fasts and vows you are Eternal, you are
Unchangeable. You live in crematoria,
you possess the six well-known lordly
powers andthe rest, you live the heart of
every creature, you enjoy all things with
the senses, and you ace the grinder of all


, sinful creatures.


34. Youare he who is worthy of salu-
tations of all, you are of great feats, you
are he who has asceticism for his riches,
you'create all the elements at your will, you
conceal your real nature by putting on the
dress of a lunatic.” You, are the Lord of
allthe worlds and -of all living creatures.
You are of immeasurable form. you are of
huge body, you are of the formof Right-
eousness, you are of great fame, you are of
great Soul, you are the Soul of all creatures,
you have the universe foe your form, you
are of vast jaws.


°36. You are the protector of afl the
worlds, you allow your Soul ‘to disappear
behind the dackness of Iynurance. You
are gladness. Wou are he whose car is
borne by mules. Youare he who protects’
individual soul from the thunder of re- birth.
You are adorable. You are obtained by
purity and self-control and vows. You are
again the refuge of all kinds of vows and
ebservances including purity and self-c one
trol.


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


_ 47. Vouare the Divine Architect who
is conversant with every art.
self-create. You are the beginning of all
creatures and things, You are Hiranya-
garbha, the Creator of all things. You are
endless power and happiness. You have
‘a hundred eyes, you have expansive
eyes. You are Soma. You are he who
makes powerful all righteous creatures to
assume glorious forms for shining in the
sky.


38. You are the Moon, you are the Sun
you are the planet Saturn, you are the
descending node (of the Moon), you are
the ascending node, you are Mangala
(Mars), and you are Vrihaspati (Jupiter)
and Shukra (Venus), you are Budha (Mer-
cury), you are the worshipper of Atri’s wife,
you are he who shot his arrow at Sacrifice
when Sacrifice fled from his anger in the
form of a deer. You are sinless.


39. Wou possess penances by which you
can create the universe. You possess
penances by which you can destroy the
universe, You are high-minded. You
satisfy the wishes of all who dedicate thems
selves to you. You are the maker of the
year. You are Mantra. You are the
authority for all acts. You are the highest
Penance,


49. You are given to Yoga. You are
he who inerges himself in Brahman. You
are the great seed. You display what is
unmanifest as this manifest form in which
the universe exists. You have infinite
might, You are he whose seed is gold.
You are omniscient. You are the cause of
all things. You are he who has the seed of
action for the means of going from this
world to the other and the other to this.


* 4t. You have ten arms... You have
winkless eyes. You have'a blue throat.
You are the husband of Uma. You are the
origin: of all the infinite forms that are in
the universe. You are he whose superiority
is due to yourself, You are a hero in power
You are inert matter, You are all the
lopics of enquiry.


42. You are the ordainer and ‘governor
of the topics. You are the chief of those
beings who serve you and are called Ganas.
You cover infinite space. You are Kama
the god of love. You are conversant with
Mantras. You are the highest: Mantra.
You are the cause of the universe. You
are the universal destroyer.


"43. You carry in one of your hands the
calabash. In another you hold the bow.
In another you have arrows. In another
you carry a skull. You carry the thunder+
bolt. You are armed with. the Shataghni.
You ate armed with the sword. You hold


2?


You are.


49°


You are armed with the
Shula (trident). You are worsbipf.l.


44. Wow have the sacrificial l:d’e in one
of your hands. You have beautifiil form,
You are gifted with abundant energy.
You give miost lavishly all that tends to
adorn those who are devoted to you. You
put ona turban on your head. You have’
a beautiful face. You are he who is full of
splendout and power. You are he who is
humble and modest.


45, You are exceedingly tall. You ate
he who has the senses‘ for your rays.
You are the gteatest of preceptors.
You are Supreme Brahma. Vou are he
who took the shape of a jackal (for consol-
ing a Brahmana who, insulted by a rich
Vaishya, had determined to commit sui-
cide, You are he whose objects all become
fruitful of themselves. You are one who
has a bald head. You are one who does
good to alt.


46. You ate unborn.
berless forms, You have ail sorts of fra-
grance on your body, The matted lecks
on your tead had sucked up the Rivet
Ganga when it first dropped from heavert.
You are the giver of sovereignty. You aré
a Brahmacharin without having ever neg-
lected the rigid vow of celibacy. You are
famous for you sexual continence, You
always lie on your back, You live in
power.


47. You have three matted locks on your
head. You are he who is clad in rags.
You are Rudra. You are the celestial
commander-in-chief, and you are all-pers
vading. Youare he whe moves about
during the day. You are he who moves
about inthe night. You are of dreadful
anger. You are endued with effulgence.


48. You are the destroyer of the power
ful-Asura who had ¢ome in the form of ‘ai
infuriate elephant for destroying the sacred
city of Varanasi. You are the destroyer of
Daityas oppressing the universe. You are
Kata or Time which ‘is the universal des-
troyer. You are the supreme ordainer of
the universe. You are a mine of qualifica«
tions. You are of the form of the lion and
the tiger, You are he who is clad in an
elephant skin. :


the battlesaxe,


You have nume


49. You are the Yogin who deceives
Time by getting over its irresistible inftu-
ence. You ate the original sound. You
are the fruition of all desires. You are he
who is worshipped in four ways. You are
a night-ranger.. You are he who walks in
the company of spirits. You are he who
walks in the company of ghostly beings,
You are the Supreme Lord of even Indra.


and the other deities, -


59


50. Vou are-he who has multiplied him- ' of the individual soul.


sell infinitely in the form of all existent and
nonvexistent things, You are the upholder
of Mahat and al! other compounds of the
five primal elements, You are the prime-
val Ignorance or that is known by the
name of Rahu. You are infinite. You are
the supreme End of the liberated. You are
fond of dancing. You are he who makes
ethers dance. You are the friend of the
universe.


51. You are he whose aspect: is calm
and mild. You are endued with penances
which can create and destroy the universe.
You are he who fetters all creature§ with
your illusion. You are he who is above
destruction, You are he who lived on a
meuntain. You are above all bonds and
are unaltached to all things, like Space.
You have a thousand arms. You are vic-
tory, You are that perseverance which
brings on success or victory. You are with-
out idleness or procrastination which inter-
teres with persevering activity.


52. You arebrave. You are fear. You
are he who puta stop to Vali’s sacrifice.
You gratify the desires of all your devotees.
You are the destroyer of Daksha’s sacrifice,
xe are amiable. You are slightly ami-
able.


53. You are exceedingly fierce and rob
all creatures of their energy. You are the
destroyer of the Asura Vala, You are
always cheerful,, You are of the form of
riches which is coveted by all, -You have
never been-defeated. ‘There is none more
worshipful than you. You ate he who
emits deep roars. You are that which is
so deep that no one. can measure it. You
are he whose power and the might of whose
companions and bull have never been
gauged by anybody.

54. You are the tree of the world. You
are the banian, You are he who sleeps on
a banian leaf when the universe, after dise
solution, becomes one infinite sheet of water.
You are he who shows mercy to all wor-
shippers, assuming as you like, the form of
Hari or Hara or Ganesha or Arka or Agni
oc Wind. etc. You have exceedingly sharp
teeth. You are of huge-proportions. You
have a mouth vast enough to swallow the
universe at once.


55. You are he whose followers are wor-
shipped everywhere, Youare he who re-
moved all the fears of the gods when the
prince of elephants had to be captured.
You are the seed of the universe. You
are he who has the same bull for your car-
riers that forms again the emblem on his
banner in battle. You have Agni for your
soul. You are the Sun who has green
horses yoked to his car. You are the friend


MAHABHARATA.


You are he who i¢
conversant with the proper time for the
performance of all religious rites.


56. You are he to whom Vishnu had
paid his aderations. You are Vishnu.
You are the ocean. You are the Mare’s
head that ranges within the ocean, cease-—
fessly emitting fire and drinking the saline
waters as if they were sacrificial butters
You are Wind, the friend of Agni. You
are of tranquil soul like the ocean which
remains at rest and unmoved by the mildest
air, You are Agni that drinks the libations
of clarified buttet poured in sacrifices with
the help of Mantras,


57. You are he whom it is difficult to
approach. You are he whose effulgence
spreads over the infinite universe. You are
expert in battle, You are well conver-
sant with the time when one should engage
in battle so that victory may be won. You
are that science which deals with the
motions of tteaventy bodies. You are of
the form of success or victory. You have
a body for all time.


58. You are a house-holder for you
have a tuft of hair on your head; you are
a Sannyasin for: your head is bald; you
have matted locks on your-head ; you are
known for your fiery rays; you are he
who appears in the sky of the heart encased
in the body of every creature ; you are he
who enters into the brain of every creature ;
you béar the wrinkles of age; you
carry the bamboo flute; you have also the
tabour; you possess the musical instru-
ment called Tali;. you have the wooden
mortar used for busking grain ; you are
he who covecs that illusien which covers
Yama,


59 You are an astrologer because your
understanding is always directed towards
the motion of the wheel of Time which is
made up of the luminaries in the sky ; . you
are the individual soul whose understand-

ing is directed to things that are the out~

come of the qualities of Sattwa, Rajas, and

Tamas; you are that in which all things

merge when dissolutions sets in; .you are

stable and fixed, there being nothing in you

which is subject to change or mutation of

any Sort; you are the Lord of all crea-

tures; your arms extend all over the

great universe ; you appear in numberless .
forms which are but portions of yourself ;

you pervade al} things; you have no

mouth. ,


60. You ace he who frees creatures from
the fetters of the world; you are. easily
attainable ; you are he who appeared with
a golden mail; you are he who appears
in the phallic emblem; you are he who
roams in the forests in seareh of fowls and


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


animals; you are ke who roams over the
entire Earth; you are omnipresent.


61. You are the blare of all the
trumpets blown in the three worlds; you
have all creatures for your relatives! you
are of the form of a snake; you live in
mountain caves; you are at one with the
commander-in-chief of the celestials ; you

“wear garlands of flowers; you are he who
enjoys the happiness which originates from
the possession of earthly objects.


‘61. You are he from whom all creatures
have got their three states of birth, exist-
ence and destruction; you uphold alt
things which exist or occur in the three
stages of Time, viz., the Past, the Present,
and the Future; you ‘yourself free crea-
tures from the effects of all pristine deeds
as well as the present ones and from all the
bonds of Ignorance and Desire; you are
the binder of Asura chiefs; you are the
slayer of foes in battle.


63. You are attainable by knowledge
alone; you are Durvasas; you are he
who is served and worshipped by. all the
righteous ; you are. he who brings about
the fall of even Brahman and the others ;
you are he who gives to all creatures the
one share of joy and sorrow that each de-
serves according to his own deeds; you

‘are peerless; you are well conversant
with the shares which are given and ap-
propriated in sacrifices.


64. You livé everywhere; you wander
everywhere ; you have wretched clothes ;
you are Vasava; you are immortal; you
are at one with the Himavat mountains ;
you are the maker of pure gold; you are
without acts; you uphold in ‘yourself the
fruits of allacts; you ace the foremost of
all upholder,


65. You have bloody eyes; you have
eyes whose vision extends over the infinite
universe ; you have a car whose wheels are
ever victorious; you are greatly learned ;
“you are he who accepts your devotees for
your servants; you are he who restrains
aud subjugates your senses; you are he
who acts; you put on clothes whose warp
and woof are made of snakes.


66, You are Supreme ; — you are he who
is the lowest of the celestials ; you are he
who is well-grown ; you have the musicaf
instrument called Kabala; you are the
giver of every wish; you are the grace
personified in all the three stages of ‘Time,
ais., the Past, the Present, and the Future;
you are endued with power which is always
well spent; you are he who had assumed
the form of Valarama.


67. You are the foremost of all coveted
things, being Liberation or the highest of


st


all ends of creatures ; you ate the giver
of allthings ; your face is tufned towards
all directions ; you are he from whom
various creatures have originated even as
all forms have originated from Space or
are modifications of that primal element ;
you are he who falls into the pit called
body; you are he who is helpless; you
live in the sky of the heart,


68. You are of terrific form ;
the Deity called Anshu; you are the
companion of Anshu and are called
Aditya; you are endued with innumer-
able rays; you are possessed of dazzling
effulzence ; you are fleet like the Wind;
you have speed greater than ‘that of the-
Wind; you are fleet fike the mind;
you enjoy all things, being invested witi
Ignorance,


69. You live in every body; you live
with Prosperity as your companion; you
are he who imparts knowledge and instruc~
tion; you are he whe delivers instruction
silently ; you are he who observes the vow
ef silence; you are he who passes out of
the body for looking at the soul; you are:
he that is well worshipped; you are the
giver of thousands, . ,


qo. You are the king of birds ; you are
the friend who gives aid; you are pos~
sessed of great effulyence; you arejthe Lord
of all created beings; you are he who
excites the appetities ; you are the god of
love; you are of the form of Jevely
women who are coveted by all; you are
the tree of the world; you are the king of:
tiches ; you are the giver of fame,


71. You are god who distributes to all
creatures the fruits of their deeds ; you are
yourself those ,fruits which you distribute ;
you are the most ancient; you are come.
petent to cover with a single footstep of
yours all the three worlds; you are the
dwarf who deceived the Asura king Vali;
you are the Yogin: crowned with success ;-
you are a great Rishi; you are one whose
objects become always successful ; you are
a Sannyasin.


72. You ace he who is adorned with the
marks of the mendicant order; you are
he who is without such marks; you are
he who is above the usages of the mendi-
cant order; you are he who assures ail
creatures from every sort of fear; you
are without any passions; you are the
commander-in-chief of the celestial army ;
you are that Vishakha who sprang from
the person of the celestial commander-in-
chief when fndra hurled his thunder-bolt
athim; you are he who enjoys the sixty .
subjects or heads of objects in the universe ;
yoy are the Masts ©


you are


§2


973- You. are he whois armed with the
thunder-bolt ; vou are infinite ;, you are
the stupefier of Daitya armies on the battle
field; you are he who moves bis car in
circles among his own soldiers and who
makes similar circles among the foes and
devastating them returns safe and sound ;
you. are be who knows the lowest depth
of the world’s ocean; you are Madhu;
you have eyes whose color resembles that
of honey. ;

74. You are he who has taken birth
after Veihaspati; you are he who does
the acts which priests have to do in sacri-
fices; you are he who is always -wor-
shipped by persons of vatious modes of
life; you ace devoted to Brahma; you
roam in the -habitations of men in the
world; you pervade all beings; you are
he who knows truth, ‘ ; .


.75. You know and guide every heart;
you arte he who overspreads the entire
universe; you are he who collects or
stores the goed and bad deeds (of all
cceatures. in order to. distribute the fruits
thereof; you are he who lives during even
the night that follows the universal disso+
lution; you are the holder of the bow
called Pinaka; you live in even the
Daityas whence are the marks of your
arrows; you are the author of prosperity ;
you are the powerful monkey who helped
Vishna in the incarnation of Rama in his
expedition against Ravana.


76. You are the master of those Ganas
who are your associates; you ate each
anember of those various Ganas; you are
he who gladdens all creatures; _ you are
the enhancer of the joys of all; you .take
away the sovereignty and prosperity of
even such high beings as Indra and others ;
you are the universal destroyer in the form
of Death; you are he who lives in the
sixty-four Kalas; you are very great;
you are the grandfather,


77. You are the supreme phallic emblem
which is worshipped by both gods and
Asuras; you are of agreeable and beauti-
ful features; you are he who makes afl
beings comprehend the various sorts of
proofs which exist as evidence of all ideas
and notions; you are the Lord of vision
and the other proofs of all ideas . derived
from the senses; you are the Lord of


Yoga.
-78. You are the Lord of seeds; you
are the original cause of such seeds; you


act in the ways that have been pointed
out in the: scriptures beginning with those
which deal with the Soul; you are he in
whom live power and the other qualities;


MAHABHARATA,


rical works ; you are the treatises called
Mimansa; you are Gautama; you are
the. author of the great work on Grammar
named after the Moon.


79. Youare he who punishes his ene-
mies; you are he whom none can punish ;
you are he whois sincere in all his reli
gious acts and observances; youare he
who becomes obedient to those who are
devoted to you ; you are he who can subdue
others; you are he who foments quarrels
among the gods and the Asuras; you are
he who has created the fourteen worlds 3:
you are the protector and cherisher of all
Beings begining from Brahman and ending
with the lowest forms of vegetable life; you


‘are the Creator of even the five principal


elements ; you are he wha never enjoys
anything.


80. You”are free from decay ; you are
the highest form of happiness; you are
a deity proud of his power; you are


Shakra ; you are the punist:ment described
in treatises on Politics and inflicted on
offenders ; you are the tyranny which pres
vails over the world; you are of pure
Soul; you are stainless ; you are worthy
of adoration; you are the world that
appears and disappear ceaselessly.


81. You are he whose favour is of the
largest measure; you are he who has
good dreams; you area mirroc in which
the universe is reflected ; you are he who
has subjugated of all internal and external
enemy; you Aare the maker of the Veda ;
you are the maker of the sayings contained
in the fantras and the Puranas and which
are embodied in human language ; you are
highly learued ; you are the grinder of
enemies in battle.


82. You are he who lives in the dread.
ful clouds that appear at the time of the
universal dissolution ; you are most terri
ble; you are he who succeeds in subjugat-
ing all persons ard all things; you are
the great Destroyer; you are he who has
fice for his energy; you are he whose
énergy is more powerful than fire; you
are the Yuya-fire that consumes all things;
you are he who is capable of being pleased
by means of sacrificial libations ; you are’
water and othes liquids that are poured in
sacrifices with the nelp of Mantras.


83. You are in the form of the god of
Righteousness, the scatterer of the fruits
of acts good and bad; you are the giver
of happiness; you are always gifted with
effulgence ; you are of the form of fire;
you ate emerald-hued; you are al-
ways presént in the phallic emblem; you


you are the Mahabharata and other histay-| are the soureé of blessedness; you can’


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


never be defeated in the
objects.


84. You are the giver of blessings;
you are of the form of blessedness; you
are he to whom is given a share of sacrificial
offerings ; you are the distributer of sacri-
ficial offerings ; you are gifted with great
speed; you are he who is dissociated from
all things; you are he who is possessed
of the most powerful limb; you are he
who is employed in the act of generation.


°85. You are of a dark hue;
of a white complexion ; you are the senses
of all emhodied creatures ;
feet; you have huge hands; you ace of
huge body; you have wide extending
ame.


86. Wou have a huge head; you are
of huge proportion ; you are of vast vision 3
you are the home of the darkness o
ignorance; you are the Destroyer; .you
are possessed of huge ears ; you have huge
lips; you are he who has vast cheeks.


87. You have a huge nose;. you are
of a vast throat; you have a vast neck;


pursuit of your


you are he who tears the bond of society ; -
you have a vast |


you have a vast chest ;
bosom; you are the inner soul which lives
in all creatures; you have a deer on your
lap.

88. You are he from whom numberless
worlds hang down lite fruits hanging down
from a tree ; you are he who stretches his
his lips at the time of the universal dis-
solution for devouring the universe ; you
are the ocean of milk; you have huge
teeth; you have huge jaws; you have
a huge tongue; you have a huge mouth.


89. You ‘have big nails; ‘you have
large hairs; you have very long hairs;
you have a big stomach; you have matted
locks of great length ; you are ever cheer-
ful; you are of the form of grace; you
are of the form of belief ; you are he who
has mountains for his bow. ~


go. You are he who is full of affection
to all creatures like a parent towards his
childrent; you are he who has no affection ;
you are unvanquished; you are highly
devoted to (Yoga) meditation ; you are of
the form of the tree of the world; you
are he who is marked out by the tree of
the world; you are never satiated with
eating; you are he who has the Wind
for your vehicle for going from place to
place. ;


gt. You are he who ranges over hills
and hiflocks ; you are he who lives on the
mountains of Meru; you are the king of
the celestials ; you have the Atharvans for
your head; you have the Samans for


you are.


you have huge.


53


your mouth ; you have the thousand Richs
for your immeasurable eyes.


92. You have the Yajushes for your feet
and hands ; you are.the Upanishats ; yor
are the rituals ; you are the mobile ; you
are he whose solicitatios are never unful-
filed; you are he who js always bent on
favouring ; you are he who is of beautiful
form.


93. You are of the form of the good
that one does to another; you are that
which is dear; you are he who always
advances towards your devotees ; you are
gold and other precious metals held dear
by all; your effulgence is like that of
burnished gold; youarethe navel; you
are he who makes the fruits of sacrifices
grow; youare of the form of that faith
and devotion which the pious have for
sacrifices ; you are the maker the universe ;
you arethe immobile. ~


94. You are the twelve states through
which a person passes; you are he who
causes fear; you are the beginning of all
things ; you are he who unites Individual
Soul with Supreme Brahma through Yoga;
you are at one with that Yoga which
brings about such a union between the
Individual Soul and Supreme Brahma ;
you are unmaifest ; you are the presiding
god of the fourth age,


93. You are eternal Time; you are
of the’ form of the ‘Fertoise ; you are
adored by the Destroyer himself.


96. You five in the midst compaty ;
you admit your devotees as members of
your Gana; you have Brahman himself
for the driver of your car; you sleep on
ashes; you protect the universe with
asties ; you are he whose body is made of
ashes; you are the tree that grants the
fruition of all wishes; you are of the form
of those who make up your Gana, |


97, You are the protector of the fours
teen regions; you are above all the re-
gions; youare full; you are worshipped
by all creatures ; you are white; you are
he who has perfectly pure body, speech and
mind; you are he who has attained to
that purity of existence which is called
Liberation ; you are he who is incapable
of being sullied by impurity of any sort;
you are he who has been attained to by
the great preceptors of old.


98. You live in the form of Righteous-
ness or duty in the four modes of life; you
are that Righteousness which is of the
form of rites and Sacrifices ; you are of the
form of that skill which the Divine Archi-
tect possesses ; you are he who is worship-
ped as the primeval form of the universe;


D4


you have nuge arms; your lips are of a
coppery color; you are of the form of the
vast waters that ate contained in the
Ocean; you are highly stable and fixed.


99. You are Kapila; you are brown ;
you are allthe hues whose mixture produ-
ces white; you are the period of life;
you are ancient; you are recent; you
are a Gandharva; youare the mother of
the celestials in the form of Aditi; you are
Garuda, the king of birds, born of ‘Vinata
by Kashyapa otherwise called Tarkshya ;
you are capable of being comprehended
easily ; you are of excellent and agreeable
speech. : :


too You are he who is armed with the’
you are he that is desirous of°
you are he who assists others in


battle axe ;
victory ;
the accomplishment of their objects ; you
‘are an excellent friend; you are he who


éarries a lute made of two hollow gourds ; |
you have for |


you are of terrible anger;
your children beings higher than men and
gods; you are of the form of that Vishnu
who floats on the waters after the universal
dissolution ;- you devour all things with
great ferocity ; you are he who procreates
.offspring ; you are family and race, con-
tinuing from generation to generation ;
you are the blare that a bamboo flute
emits ; you are faultless ; you are he whose
limbs are all very beautiful; you: are full
of illusion ; you do good to others without
expecting any return ; you are Wind ;. you
are Fire.


tol. You are the fetters of the world
which bind Individual Soul; you are the
cteator of those fetters ; you are the tear-
ec of such fetters ; you are he who lives
with even the Daityas ; you live with thase
who are the enemies of all acts; you have
huge teeth.and powerful weapons.


102. -You are he who has been greatly
censured ; you are he who stupefied the
Rishis living in the Darnuka forest.; you
are he who did good to even your detrac-
tors, viz., those Rishis living in the Daruka
forest; you are he who removes all fears
and who removing all the fears of those
Rishis gave them Liberation; you are
he who has no wealth ; you are the king
of the celestials ; you are the greatest of
the gods; you are an object of adoration
with even Vishnu ; you are the destroyer
of those who are the enemies of the gods.


103. You are he who ‘lives in the
nethermost region ; you are invisible but
can be comprehended, even as the wind
which though invisible is perceived by
every body; you are he whose know-
ledge extends to the bottom of every-
thing and who know the inner nature
of all things; you are the object which


MAHABHARATA.


is enjoyed by him who enjoys it; you aré
the Ajaikapat among the eleven Rudras ¢
you are the king of the entire universe ;
you are of the form ef all souls in the
universe; you are he whois not subject
to those three qualities ;- you are he who
is above all attributes and is a state of
pure existence which is incapable of being
described with the help of any adjective of
a language.


104. You are the king of physicians
called Dhanwantari; you are a commet ;
you are the celestial commander-in-chief
called Skanda; you arethe king of the
Yakshas, called Kuvera, who is your in-
separable companion and who isthe king
of all riches i the world ; you are Dhatri ;
you are Shakra; you are Vishnu; you
are Mitra; youare fashtri; you are the
Pole Star; you are tiie upholder all things.
You are the Prabhava amongst the Vasus.


‘to5. You are the wind which can go
everywhere ; you are Aryyaman; you are
Savitri; you are Ravi; you are that
ancient. king of great celebrity known by
the name of Ushangu ; you are he who
protects. all creatures in various ways;
you are Mandhatri; you are he from
whom all creatures .originate,


.106. You are he who exists in various
forms; you are he who makes the various
colours exist in the universe; you are he
who upholds ali desires and all attributes ;
you are he who has the Totus on your
navel; you are he within whose womb
are numberless mighty creatures; you’
have a face beautiful asthe moon; you
are wind; you acre fire.


107. You are possessed of great power ;
you are gifted with tranquillity of soul;
you are old; you are he who is known
with the help of Righteousness ; you are
Lakshmi; yott are the maker of the field
of action; you are he who resides in the
field of action; you are the soul of the
field of action; you are the medicine of
the attributes of sovereignty and the others,


108. All things lie in you; you are the-
master of all creatures having life- breaths ;
you are the god of the gods; youare he
who is attached to happiness; you are
existent ; you are non-existent; you are
he who possesses the best of all things.


10g. You are. he who lives on the
summit of Kailasa} you are he who goes
to the mountains of Himavat; you carry
away all things by you like a powerful
current washing away trees and other
objects standing on its banks; you are
the maker of Pushkara and other large
lakes and receptacles of natural water;


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


you are possessed of infinite Knowledge;
you are the giver of infinite bleSsings,

Ito. You are a merchant ;{ you area
earpenter ; you are the tree; you are the
tree called Vakula (Mimusops: Elengi,
Linn); you are the sandal-wood tree
(Santalum aloum, Linn) } you are the
tree called Chcéhada ( Alstonia Scholaris,
syn. Echitis Scholaris, Roxd)} you are
he whose neck is very strong ; you are he
whose shoulder-joint is huge ; .you are not
restless ; you are the principal herbs and
plants with their produce.


1rt. You are he who grants success
upon others regardiug the objects upon
which they bestow their heart} you are
the correct conclusions of both the Vedas
and Grammar; _ you are he who sends eut
leonine roars; you are endued with teonine
fangs; you ride on the back of a lion for
performing your journeys; you have a car
drawn by a lion.


112 You are the truth of teuth; you
are he whose dish or plate is formed by the
Destroyer of the universe ; you are always
engaged in seeking the well-being of the
worlds ;? you are he who saves all creatures
from distress; you are the bird called
Saranga; you are anewswanj; you are
he who is shown in beauty on account of
the crest on your ‘head; you are he who
protects the place where assemblies of the
wise sit for dispensing justice.


113. You are the abode of all creatures ;
you are the cherisher of all creatures;
you are Day and Night; youare he who
is without fault and, therefore, never cen-
sured ; you are the upholder of all crea-
tures; yeu arefthe refuge of all creatures;
you are without birth ; you are existent.


114. You are ever fruitful; you. are
endued with concentration and meditation ;
you are the horse Uchchaishravas; you
are the giver of food; you are he who
upholds the vital airs of living creatures ;


you are gifted with patience; you are
possessed of intelligence ; you are endued
with exertion and cleverness; you are


respected by all; you are the giver of the
fruits of virtue and sin; you are the ché-
risher of the senses; you are the lord of
all the luminaries ; you are all collections
of objects ; you are he whose dresses are
made of cowshides; you are he who re-
moves the sorrow of his devotees.


115. You havea golden arm. you are
he who protects the bodies of Yogins who
seek to enter their own selves ; you are he
.who has reduced all his foes to nothingness ;
you are he the measute of whose gladness
-is very great; you are he who won victory


55


over the god of love who is irresistible ;
you are he who has controlled his senses.


"116. You are the note called Gandhara
in the musical octave; you are he whe
has an excellent and beautiful home; you
aré lie who is ever given to penances ; you
are of the form of cheerfulness and content=
ment; you are he called .vast or infinite ;
you are he in whose honor the foremost of
hymns has been composed = you are he
whose dancing is characterised by big
strides and large leaps ; ‘you are he who
is worshipped reverentially by the various
clans of Apsaras. ;


117. You are he who owns a vast stan-
dards} you are the mountain of Meru;
you are he who roves among all the sum-
mits of that great mountain } you are so
mobile that it is very difficult to catch you;
you are capable of being explained by pre-
ceptors to disciples although you are incas
pable of being described in words; you
are of the form of that instru¢tion which
preceptors give to disciples; you are he
who can perceive all agreeable scents
simultaneously,


118. You are of the form of the porched
gates of cities and palaces ; you are of the
form of the moats and ditches that sur- -
round fortified towns and give the victory
to the besieged garrison; you ate the
Wind; you are of the form of fortified
cities and towns begirt by walls and moats 3
you are the prince of all winged creatures ;
you are of the form of Garuda; you are
he who causes the creation by union of the.
opposite sexes ; you are the foremost ‘of
all in virtues and knowledge; you are
superior to even him who is the foremost of
all in virtues and knowledge; you ate
above all the virtues and knowledge. :


i119. You are eternal and immutable
as also dependent on yourself; you are
the lord and_ protector of the gods and
Asuras-; you are the master and protector
of alt creatures ; you ate he who puts on
a-coat of mail; you are he whose arms’
are competent to grind all enemies; you
are an object of worship with even him who
is called Suparvan in heaven,


120. You are he who gives the power of
bearing or upholding all things; you are
yourself competent to bear all things ; you
are fixed and steady; you are white or
pure; you carry the trident that can des-
troy (all things) ; you give bodies to those
that constantly revolve in the universe of
birth and death; you are more valuable
than riches; you are the ‘tonduct of the
righteous.


121. You are he who had torn the head
of Brahman after due thought; you are


56


MAHABHARATA.


he who is endued with alf those auspicious | are the first three Viigas; you are he


marks which are described in the sciences of
palmistry, padology, phrenology and other
branches of kn owledgertreating of physio
gtuomy, etc., as the indicator of the mental
tendency ; you are that wooden bar whichsis
called the axle of a car and, therefore, you
are he who is attached to the car represent-
éd by the body; you are attached to all
things]; you are gifted with very great power,
. being as you are a hero of heroes.


122. You are the Veda; you are the
Smritis, the Itihasas, the Puranas, and
other scriptures; you are the illustrious
god of every sacred shrine; you are he
who has the Earth for his car; you are
the inert elements that form every creature ;
you are he who gives life into every com-
bination of those inert elements ; you are
the Pranava and other sacred Mantras that
put life into dead matter ; you are he who
casts peaceful looks; you are severely
harsh.


124, You are he in whom exist number-
less precious attribytes and possessions ;
you have a body that is red; you are he
who has all the vast oceans for so many
ponds filled for your drinking ; you are
thé root of the tree of the world ; you are
equisitely beautiful and shines with superior
grandeur; you are of the form of ambrosia
or nectar ; you are both cause and effect ;
you are an ocean of penances.


124. You are he who is desirous of
getting to the highest state of existence ;
you are he who has already acquired that
state; you are he who Is knewn for the
purity of his conduct and acts and observ-
anges; you are he who is possessed of
great fame; you are the ornament of
armies; you are he who is bedecked with
celestial ornaments; you are Yoga; you
are he from whom originates eternal time
measured by Yugas and Kalpas ; you are
he who conveys ail creatures from place to
piace.


125. You are of the form of Righteous-
ness and sin and their compounds; you
are great and without form; -you are he
who killed the powerful Asura that had ap-
proached against the sacred city of Vara-
oasi in the form of an infuriate elephant
of huge proportions; you are of the
form of death; you grant all creatures
fruition of their wishes proportionate to
their merits ; youare approachable ; you
know all things beyond the ken of the
senses ; you know the essences.

126. You are he who continually shines
in beauty; you put on garlands from
neck to the feet; you are Hara having
the Moon for his beautiful eye; you are


whose appearance is always full of advana.
tage to others.


127. You are he who has three eyes;
you are he whose forms are greatly subtile ;
you are he whose ears are bored for putting
on jewelled ear-rings j you are the bearer
of matted locks ;- youare the point which
indicates the nasal sound; you are the
two dots {in the alphabet) which indicate
the sound of the aspirated H ; you have an
excellent face; you are the arrow that is
shot by the warrior for bringing about the
destruction of his enemy ; you are all the
weapons that are used by warriors; you
are gifted with patience capable of beat-
ing all things.

#28. You are he whose knowledge has
originated from the stoppage of all physical
and mental functions; you are he who
appears as Truth on account of the cessa4
tion of all other faculties ; you are that
note which, originating from the region
called Gandhara,-is greatly sweet to the
ear; you are he who is armed with the
powerful bow (called Pinaka); you are
he who is the understanding and the
desires which exist in all creatures, besides
being the supreme upholder of all beings ;
you are he from whom alt acts originate.


129. You are that wind which originates
at the time of the universal dissolution and
which is capable of churning the entire
universe as the staff in the hands of the
dairy-maid churns the milk in the mille- pot ;
you are he who is full; you are be who sees
all things; you are the sound which arisee
from slapping palm against palm; your
palm serves (as the dish or plate whence to
take his food y you have an adamantins
body # you are exceedingly great.


130. You are of the shape an umbrella /
you are he who has an excllent umbrella ;
you are well known to be at one with ail
creatures; you are he who having put
forth three feet covered all the universe
with two and wanted space for the third:;
you-have a bald head ; you are he whose
form is greatly ugly and dreadful; you
are he who has undergone many modifica-
tions and become all things in the universe 7
you are he who-has the well-known badge
of Renunciation, vis., the stick; you are he
who has a Kunda;_ you are he who is in
capable of being attained to by means ef
acts. gn abe os


131. You are he who is atone with the
green-eyed king of beasts; you are of the
form of‘all the points of the compass; you
are he who is armed with the thunder ;
you are he who has a hundred tongues ;


the salt ocean of unineasurable extent; you | you are he whe has a thousand feet and


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


fottgand héads; you are the ford and
ing of the celestials ; you are he who is

tade up of all the gods ; you are the great
ord or preceptor.


132. You ate he who has a thousand
arms} yout are le who is competent to get
the fruition of every wish; you are he
whose protection is sought by every one;
you are he who is the creator of all the
worlds ; you are he who is the great puri-
fier of all from every sin, in the fornt of
Shrines and sacred waters; you are he
who las thtee high Mantras ; you are the
youngest (son of Aditi and [€ashyapa) ;
you are both black and twany.


. 433. You are the maker of the Brah-
mana’s rod; you aré armed with the
Sataghni, the noose, and the dart; you
are le who was bora within the primeval
Yotus } you are he who has a huge womb;
you -are he who has. the Vedas in his
womb; you ate he who ‘takes his tise
front that infinite span: of waters which
appears after the dissolution of the uni-
verse, ef ; . :
134. Vou are he who has the effulgent
fays; you are the creator of the Wedas;
you aré he who studies the Vedas; you are
he who knows the meaning of the Vedas ;
you ate devoted to Brahma; you are the
tefuge of all persons devoted to Brahma j
you are of numberless fornt; you have
immerable bodies; you have itresistibte
prowess.


~ 435. Your wature transcends the three
tthiversal tedencies (of Sattwa, Rajas, and
Tamas); you are the lord of all sentencies
you are fleet like the wind; you are fleet
tike the mind; you are always smeared with
sandal-paste ; you are the end of the stock
of the primeval. lotus; you are he who
‘brought the cefestial eow Surabhi down


from a superior station. to att inferior one by-


taypeecating a curse upon her; you are
that Brahman who was unable to see your
‘ena Ma en ae


136. Yow are adorned with a large’ gar-
fand of Karnikara flowers; you are adorned
‘with a diadem of blue gems; you are the
wielder of the bow called Pinaka; you
re the master of the science of Brahma ;
you are he who has controlled his senses
by the help of your knowledge of Brahma ;
you are he who bearest Ganga on’ your
head; youarethe husband of Uma the
daughter of Himavat. ~


137. You are powerful; you are he
who protects the universe by assuming
“various incarnatious; you are worthy of
adoration ; you are that primeval Being
with the equine head who recited the Vedas
-with a thundering voice; -you are he whose


8.


57


favour is vety great; you ate the gteat
subjugator ;- you are he who has killed al]
his enemies ; you are botly white and
twany. : :

138. You havea gofd-hued body ; yoit .
ate he who is of the form of pure joy ; you
are of a controlled soul; you are the basis
of Ignorance which is called Pradivana and
which, consisting of the three qualities of
Sattwa, Rajas and. Tamas, is the cause .
whence the unjverse has otiginated ¢ you
ate he whose faces are turned to every
direction ; you’ ate he who las threa
eyes ; you. are he who is superior to all’
creaturés,


139. You are the sotf of all mobilé and
inmrobite beings ; you are of the form of tlre
subtile soul; you are the giver of immor-
tality in the form of Liberation as the fruit
of all acts of virtue achieved by creature¢
without the desire of fruits; you are the
preceptor of even those who are the gods of
the gods; you are Vasu the son of Aditi f
youare he who has innumerable rays of
light, who brings forttr the universe, and
who is of the form of that Soara which is
drunk in sacrifices,


1


140. You are Vyasa, the author of the
uranas and other sacred histories ; you
are the creations of Wyasa's’ brain bottr
abridged and unabridged + -you are the
sum-totat of ‘sentiencies; yow are the’
Season; you are the Year; you are the
Month; you are the Fortnight; you ate -
those sacred Days that end or conclude
these periods, ae


141. You-are the Kalas; you ate the
Kashthas ; youare the Lavas; you are’
the Matras; you are the Muhurta and
Aha and Kshapa; you are the Kshanas-;
you are the soil upon which the tree of the
universe stands; you are the seed of
all creatures ; . you are the principle’ of
greatness ; you-are the sprout of sen~


jency,


f42, You are existent; yow are non=
existent ; you are Manifest ; you ara Uns
manifest ; you are the Father; you are’
the Mother; you are the Grandfather ;.
you are the door of Heaven; you are the’
door of the generation of all creatures ;: you'
are the door of Liberation; you are those’
acts of virtue.which lead to the felicity of
heaven. . : wo

143. You ate extinction ; you’ are the
giaddener; you are the region of Truth:;
you are superior to even’ that region’ of
Truth which is attainable by the pious’:
you are he who is the creator of ‘both the
gods.and the Asuras+ - you are the refuge
of both the gods and the Asuras.


Senta


58.


144. You are the preceptor of both the
gods and the Asutas; you are ever vic-
torious ; you areever worshipped by the
gods and the Asuras; you guide the
deities and the Asuras even as te Maha-
matra guides the elephant; you are the
refuge of all the gods and the Asutas,


145. You are the king of both the deities
and the Asuras; you are the leader in
bitile of both the gods and the Asuras ;
you are he who transcends the serses and
shines by himself ;° you are of the fornt of
the celestial Rishis ; you grant boous to the
deities and the Asuras.


149. Wou are he who rules the hearts
of the gods and the Asuras; you are he
into wnom the universe enters; you are
the refuwe of even him who is the ruler of
the: hearts. of both the gods and the
Asuras; you are he whose body is made
up of all the gods ; you are he who has no
Being superior to you of whom tothink ;
you are he who is the inner saul of the
gods; you are he who has originated from
his own self. :


147, Youace of the form of immobile
things; you are he who covers the three
worlds with three steps of his; you ate
possessed of great learning; you are
Stainless ; you are he who is freed from tne
quality of Rajas; you are above destruc.
tion; you arehe in whose honor hymas
should be sung; youare the lord of the
irresistible elephant of Time; you are of
the form ofthat lord of Tigers who is ador-
ed in the country of the Kalingas ; you are
he who is called the lion among the gods ;
you are he who is tle foremost of me.t.


148. You are profoundly wise; you are
she wir) ficst takes a share of the offerings in
sacrifices; you are imperceptible; you
are the collection of all the celestials; you
are he in whom penances prevail; you are
always ia excellent Yoga; you -are auspi-
cious; youare armed with the thunder.
bolt; you are the source whence the wea-
pons called maces have taken their origin.
You are he whom your devotees acquire in
various ways,


149. You are Guha (the celestial com-
mander-in-chief) ; you are the supreme
fimit of bappiness; you are at one with
your creation; you are he who rescues
your creatures from death; you are the
purifier of all including Brahma himself ;
you ace of the form of bulls and other


hharned animals ; you are he who is fond


of mountain summits ; you ace the planet
Saturn; you ace Kuvera the king of the
Vakshas; you are consummate faultless-
ness, >


MAHABHARATA.


rg. You aré he who gives gteditese ;
you are alt the celestiais in a body # you
are the cessation of all things ; you are all
the duties that belong to all the modes of
life; you are he wha has an eye 6n his
forehead ; you are he who sports with the
universe as his marbfe ball; you are of the
fornt of deer; you are gifted with the
energy that is of the form of knowledge and
penance.


15t. You are the master of all imntobile
things; you are he who has restrained his


F senses by various regulations and vows ;


yotr are he whose objects have ali been
fulfilled § ~you are at one with Liberation ;
you are different from him whom we edore ;
you have truth tor your penances j you are
of a pure heart,


152. You are he who Jords over over ail
vows and fasts; you are the highest ;
you are Brahina; you are the -hiphest
refuge of your devotees ; you are above all
fetters ; you ace freed from the corporeal
body ; you are endued with every kind of
Prosperity ; you multiply the prosperity
of your devotees; you are what is con-
tinually undergoing changes,


153. 1 have thus, O Krishna, sang the
praises of the illustrious god by reciting his
names in the order of their importance.
Who is there who can sing the praises of
the lord of the universe, that great Lord of
ali who is worthy of ous adoratoins, worship,
and reverence, whom the very gods headed
by Brahman are unable to praise and whom
the Rishis also fail to sing.


154. Helped, however, by my devotion
to him, and having received his permission,
I have fauded that Lord of sacrifices, that
Deity of supreme power, that foremost of all
creatures gifced with intelligence. .


155. By praising with these names
which increase one’s auspiciousness the
great lord of blessedness, a worshipper of
pau soul and pure heart gains itis own
self, ;


156. These names form a hymn which
supplies the best means of attaining to |
Brahina, With the help of this hymn one-
is sure to acquire Liberation. The Rishis
and the gods all praise the highest deity by
uttering this hymn,


157- Hymned by persons of controlled
soul, Mahadeva becomes pleased with those
who sing bis praises thus. ‘The illustrious
god is always full of mercy towards his
devotees. Gifted with omnipotence, he it
is who gives Liberation to those who adore
him.

158. Those foremost of men who are
endued with faith and devotion, hear and


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


recite for others and utter with respect the
praises of that highest and eternal Lord,
wvig., Ishana, in alt their successive lives and
worship him in thought, word, and deed,
and worshipping him thus at all times, v7s.,
when they are lying or seated or walking or
awake or opening the eyelids oc shutting
them, and thinking of him again and again,
become objects of respect with all their
fellow men and derive great pleasure and
exceeding joy.

162. When a creature becomes purged
of alt his sins in course of millions of births
in various orders of Being, it is then that
devotion originates in his heact for Maha-
deva.


163. [tis by good luck only that undi-
vided devotion to Bhava who is the original
cause (of the universe) fully originates in
the heart of one wha is conversant with
every mode of adoring that great Deity.


164. Such stainless and pure devotion to
Rudra, which has singleness of purpose and
which is simply irresistible in its course, is
seldom to be found among even the gods,
but never among men.


165. [tis through the favour of Rudra
that such devotion originates in the hearts
ot human beings. On account of such
devotion, men, identifying themselves
wholly with Mahadeva, succeeds in ac-
quiring the highest success.


166. ‘The illustrious Deity, who is always
bent uponshowing favour to them who seek
him with humility rescues’ them from. the
world who throw themselves. whole minded-
ly upon him. : :

167. Save the great god who frees crea-
tures from re-birth, all other gods continu-
ally nullify thé Penances of men, for men
have no other source of power that it is as
great as these.


168. It was thus that Tandi of tranquil
soul, resembling Indra himself in glory,
lauded the illustrious Master of all existent
and non-existent things, that geeat Deity
clad in animal skins. :

169. ‘This hymn was borne by Brah-
mana. himself. Indeed, Brahman had
sung it before Shankara, You are a Brah-
mana. You will, therefore, comprehend it
well,


‘470. This is cleansing, and: washes
away allsins. his confers Yoga, Libera-
tion, heaven and contentment.


17t. He who recites this hymn with
rapt devotion to Shankara, succeeds in ac-
quiring that high end which is theirs who
are devoted to the doctrines of the Sankhya
philosophy. .


59


172. That worshipper who recites this
hysmn daily for one year with singleness of
devotion succeeds in acquiring the end that
he desires.

173. This hymn is a’great mystery. [t¢
formerly lived in the breast of Brahman the
Creator. Brahman gave it to Shakra.
Shakra gave it to Death,

-174. Death gave it to the Rudras,
From the Rudras Landi got it. Indeed,
Tandi got it in the region of Braliman as
the reward of his austere penances,


175. Tandi communicated it to Shukea
and Shukra of Bhrigu’s race comrnunicated
itto Gautama. Gautama, again, O des-
cendant of Madhu, communicated it to
Vaivaswata-Manu., ©


176. Manu communicated it to the
highly intelligent Narayana, numbere
among the Sadhyas and held highly deac
by him. ‘The illustrious Narayana, num-
bered among the Sadhyas and endued
with undecaying glory, communicated it to
Yama. ‘


177. Vaivaswat-Yama_ communicated
it to Nachiketa. Nachiketa, O you of
Vrishni’s race, communicated it to Mare
kandeya, ‘


178. From Markandeya, O Janarddana
I got it as the reward of my vows and fasts,
To you, O slayer of enemies, | communi-
cate that hymn unheard by others,


178. This hymn leads to heaven. [t
removes disease and bestows long life.
This is worthy of the highest praise, and is
consistent with the Vedas.


Krishna said :—


179—80. ‘That person, O Partha, who
recites this hymn with a pure heart observ-
ing the vow of celibacy, and with his
senses under restraint, regularly for one
whole year, succeeds in acquiring the fruits
of a harse-sacrifice, Danavas and Yakshas
and Rakshasas and Pishachas and Yatu-
dhanas and Gulhyakas and snakes can do
no harm to him.


—


CHAPTER XVIIL


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA),—
Continued, :


Vaishampayana said :-~

1, After Vasudeva had stopped, the
great Yoyin, os. Krishna-Dwaipayana,
addressed Yudhishthira, saying,—QU -son,


§o


recite this hymn consisting of the thousand
and eight names of Mahadeva, and let
Maheshwara be pleased with you,


2. Formerly, O son, I was engaged in
the practice of penances on the breast of
the mountains of Meru for getting a son.
It is this very hyain that was recited
by me,

As the reward of this, I acquired the
fruition of all my wishes, O son of Pandu.
You will also, by teciting this same hymn,
get from Sharva the fruition of all your
wishes.


4. Aftee this, Kapila, the Rishi who
preached the doctrines of Sankhya, and
who is honoured by the gods themselves,
said,—i adored Bhava with’ great devotion
for many lives. The illustrious god at Jast

“became pleased with me and gave me
knowledge which can belp one in avoiding
re-birth. :


5—7. After this, the Rishi named
Charushirsha, that dear friend of Shakra
and known also as Alamvana’s son and
who is filled with mercy, said,—I, in former
days went to the mountains of Gokarna
and sat myself to practise hard austerities
for a hundred years. As the reward of
those penances, I got trom Sharva, O-son
of king Pandy, a hundred sons, all of
whom were born without the agency of
woman, of well-controlled soul, conversant
with righteousness, gifted with great splen-
dour, free from disease and sorrow, and
endued with lives extending for a hundred
thousand years,


8 Then the ijlustrious Valmiki, addres-
sing Yudhishthira, said,—Once upon a
time, in course of a disputation, certain
ascetics who possessed the Homa-fire con-
demned me as one guilty of Brahmanicide.


'g. As soon as they had condemned me as
such, the sin of Brahmanicide, O Bharata,
possessed me. I then, for purifying myself,
sought the protection of the sinless Ishana
who js irresistible in energy,


_to, | became purged of all my sins.
That remover of all sorrows, wig., the
gestroyer of the triple city of the Asuras,
said to me,--Yoy will acquire great fame
in the world.


11, Then Jamadagni’s son, that fore-
most of all pious persons, effulgent like the
Sun in the midst of that assembly of Rishis
said to the son of Kunti. ' ~~


12. I was possessed by the sin, O eldest
son of Pandu, of Brahmanicide for having
killed my brothers who were all learned
Beahmanas. Purifying myself, I sought
the protection, O king, of Mahadeva.


j with


MAHABHARATA.


13. I sang the praises of the great God
by reciting his names. At this, Bhava be-
came pleased with me, and gave me
battle-axe and many other celestial
weapons.


14. And he said to me,-—you will be
freed from sin and you will be invincible
in battle. Death himself shall not succeed
in overcoming you, for you, will be freed
from disease.


15. Thus did the illustrious and crested
god of auspicious form said this to me,
Yhrough the favour of that god of great
intelligence I got al) that He had said.


16. Then Vishwamitea  said,—I was
formerly a Kshatriya. [ paid my worship
to Bhava with the desire of becoming a
Brabmana. Yhrough the favour of that
great god J succeeded in getting the high
status, that is so difficult to acquire, of a
Brahmana.


17—~18, Then addressing the royal son
of Pandu, the Rishi Asita-Devala said,—-
Formerly O son of Kunti, through the
curse of Shakra, all the merit of my pious
deeds was destroyed. The power, Maha-
deva kindly. gave me back that merit
together with great fame and a long life,


1g. The illustrious Rishi Gritsamada,
the dear friend of Shakra, wha resembled
the celestial preceptor Vrihaspati himself,
addressing Yudhishthira of Ajamidha’s
race said,— .


20—2t. The inconceivable Shakra had
formerly celebrated a‘-sacrifice extending
for a thousand years. While that sacrifice
was going on, I was engaged by Shakra in
reciting the Samans. Varishtha, the son
of that Manu who originated from the eyes
of Brahman, came to that sacrifice and
addressing me, said,—-O foremost of twice-
born ones, the Rathantara is not being
recited properly by you. Sie: °


22. O best of Brahmanas, cease to ac-
quire demerit by -reading [so faultily, and
the help of your understanding
do you read the Samans correctly. O you
of wicked understanding, why do you per-
petrate such sin destructive of Sacrifice.


23—24. Having said these words, the
Rishi Varishtha, whe was very wrathful,
yielded to that passion and addressing me
once more, said,--~Be thoy an animal shora
of intelligence, subject to grief, ever filled
with fear, and an inhabitant of trackless
forests destitute of both wind and water
and abandoned by other animals. Do you
thus pass ten thousand years with ten and
eight hiandced years in addition. :


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


28. That forest in which you will have
to pass this time will be shorn of all holy
&rees and will, besides, be the haunt of
Ruru-deer and lions. Verily, you shail
have to become a cruel deer plunged in
excess of grief.


26—27. As soon as he had said these
words, O son of Pritha, I immediately be-
came changed into a deer. 1 then shought
the protéction of Maheshwara. The great
god said to me,—You will be freed from
disease of every sort, and besides immorta-
lity shall be yours. You will never suffer
from grief. Your friendship with Indra
Shall remain unchanged, and fet ‘the sacri-
fices of both Indra and yourself multiply.


28. The illustrious and puissant Maha-
deva favors all creatures in this way. He
is always the great dispenser and ordainer
of the. happiness and sorrow of all living
creatures.


29. That illustrious god is incapable of
being comprehended in thought, word, or
deed. O son, O you who are the best of
warriors, there is none who is equal to me
in learning.


30. After this, Vasudeva, that foremost
of all intelligent men, once more said,—
Mahadeva of golden eyes was pleased by
me with my penances,


31. Pleased with me, O Yudhishthira,
the illustrious god said to me,—-You will, O
Kcishna, through my favour, become
dearer to all persons than riches which is
coveted by all.

32. You will be invincible in battle.
Your energy shall be equal to that of Fire.
Mabadeva gave me thousands of other
boons at that time.


33« Ina former incarnation I worshipped
Mahadeva on the Manimantha mountain
for millions of years.


34. Pleased with me, the iHustrious god
said to me those words ;—Blessed be you,
do you solicit boons you wish for.


35-36. Bowing him I said these words,
‘malt the powerful Mahadeva has been
pleased with me, then let devotion to him
be unchanged, O Ishana! This is the boon
that 1 solicit —The great God said me,—
Be it so !—and disappeared there and then.


Jaigishavya said :—

37. O Yudhishthira, formerly in the city
of Varanasi, the powerful Mahadeva, find-
ing me out, conferred upon me the eight
attributes of sovereignty !

Garga said :—
38. O son of Pandu, pleased with me,


6r


~.


~ on aceount of a mental sacrifice which { had


performed, the great God bestowed upon
me, on the banks of the sacred river Saras-
wati, that wonderful science, vis., the
knowledge of Time, with its sixty-four


| branches.


39. He also conferred upon mea thou-
sand sons, all posséssed of equal merit and
fully conversant with the Vedas. Through
his favour their periods of life as also mine
have become extended to ten millions of
years.


Parashara said :—


41—~—42. Formerly I pleased Sarva, O
king. I then cherished the desire of get~
ting a son who would be endued with great
ascetic merit, and superior energy, and
addressed to high Yoga, that would acquire
world-wide fame, arrange the Vedas and
become the home of prosperity, that would.
be devoted to the Vedas and the Brah.
manas, and be famous for mercy. Such a
son was desired by me from Maheshwara.


42. Knowing that this was the wish of
my heart, that foremost of gods said to
me,—Through the fruition of that object
of yours which you wish to get from me,
you will have a son named Krishna.


43- In that creation which shafl be
known after the name of Savarni-Manu,
that son of yours shall be reckoned among
the seven Rishis. He shall arrange the
Vedas, and be the propagator of Kuru’s
race. ‘


44. He shall, besides, be the author of
the ancient hjstories and do behoof to the
world. Gifted with severe penances he shall,
again, be the dear friend of Shakra.


45. Freed from all sorts diseases, that
son of yours, O Parashara, shall, besides, be
immortal !—Having said these words, the
great god disappeared there and then,
Such is the good, O Yudhishthira, that I
have got from that indestructible and
immutable God, gifted with the highest
penances and supreme energy. :


Mandavya said :-—~

46—47, Formerly, suspected wrongly of
theft, | was impaled. I then worshipped the
illustrious Mahadeva who said to me,——
Vou shall soon be freed and live for millions
of yours. The pangs due to imprison-
ment shall not be yours,

48—49. You will also be freed from all
sorts of affliction and disease. And since,
O ascetic, this body of yours has originated
from the fourth foot of Dharma, (vés.,
Truth), you will be peerless on Earth. Do —
you make your life fruitful, You will,


on


MAHABHARATA.


withaus any sdstcuction, be able to bathe + Vasudeva said ‘—


in all the sacred waters of the Earth,


so~5t. And after the dissolution of
your body, I shall, O learned Brahmana,
ordain that yon will enj y the pure felicity of
heaven eternally. Having said these words
to me, the worshipful god having the bull
for his carriage, vis., Maheshwara of peer-
less splendour and clad in asimal skin, O
king, disappeared there and then with all
his companions,


Galava said:—


52—53. Formerly f studied from my pre-
ceptor Vishwamitra. Getting his permis-
sion I started for home with the object of
seeing’ my father. My widowed mother
stricken with sorrow and, weeping bitterly,
said to me,—Alas, your father will) never
see his son who, endued with Vedic kuow-


ledge, has been allowéd by his preceptor.


to come home and who, having all the
gtaces of youth, is éndued with self-con-
trol,


54-55. Hearing these words of my
mother, | became stricken with despair
about seeing again my father. [ then
aid my adorations with a rapt soul to
faheshwara who, pleased with me, ap-
peared before me and said,—Your father,
your mother and yourself, QO son, shall all
be freed from death, Go quickly and enter
ue abode; you shall see your father
there,


56. Having got the permission of the


illustrious god, 1 then went home, O Yu-,


dhishthira, and saw my father, O son,
coming out aftee having finished his daily
sactifice.


57- And he came out, having his hands
a quantity of sacrificial-fuel and Kusha
grass ann some fallen fruits. And he ap-
peared to have already taken his daily food
for he had washed himself properly.


58. Throwing down those things from
his hand, my father, with eyes bathed in
tears, raised me, for [ had prostrated my-
self at his feet, and embracing me smelt my
head, O son of Pandu, and said,—By good
luck, O son, are you’seen by me. You
have returned having acquired knowledge
from your preceptor.


Vaishampayana said :—


59. Hearing these marvellous and most
wonderful deeds of the great Mahadeva
sung by the ascetics, the son of Pandu
became amazed,


60. Then Krishna, that foremost of ali
intelligent persons, then’ spoke once more to
Yudhishthira, that sea of virtue, like Vish-
nu speaking ta Pucuhuta,


61—62. Upamanyu, who appeared to
shine like the Sun, said to me,—!hose sin-
ful men who are sullied with impious deeds,
do not suceeed in attaining to Istana.
Having their nature sullied by the qualities
of Darkness and Ignorance they can never
approach the Supreme Deity. It is only
those twice-bora persons who are of puri-
fied souls that succeed in attaining to the
Supreme Deity.


63. Even if a person enjoys every plea-
sure and luxury, yet if he be devoted to the
Supreme Deity he is considered equal to
hermits of purified souls,


64. If Rudra be pleased with a person
he can confer upon him the dignity of
either Brahma or of Keshava or of Shakra
with all the gods under him, or the sove-
reignty of the three worlds. ;


65. Those men, O sire, who adore
Bhava even mentally, succeed in freeing
themselves from all sins and live in the
celestial region with all the gods.


66. A person who raises houses to their
foundations and destroys tanks and lakes,
indeed, who lays waste the entire universe,
does not become stained with sin if he
adores and worships the illustrious threes
eyed god. :

67. A person who is shorn of every aus-
picious mark and whois stained by every
sin, destroys all his sins by meditating upon
Shiva.

68 Even worms, insects and birds, O
Keshava, that devote themselves to Maha-~
deva, are enabled to move about fearlessly.


69. This is my belief that those men
who devote themselves to Mahadeva bee
come, forsooth, treed from re-birth,


qo. After this, Krishna again addressed
Yudhisthira the son of Dharma in the fol-
fowing words,


Vishnu said :—

71—-78. ‘the Sun, the Moon, Wind, Fire,
Heaven, Earth, the Vasus, the Vishwe-
devas, Dhatri, Aryyaman, Shukra, Vrihas-
pati, the Rudras, the Saddbyas, Varuna,
Gopa, Brahman, Shakra, Maruts, the Upa-
nishats that teach a knowledge of Brahma,
Truth, the Vedas, the Sacrifices, Sacrificial
Presents, Brahmanas reciting the Vedas,
Soma, Sacrificer, the shares of the gods in
sacrificial offerings, clarified butter poured
in sacrifices, Raksha, Diksha, all kinds of
restraints in the form of vows and fasts and
rigid observances, Swaha, Vashat, the
Brahmanas, the celestial cow, the foremost
acts of piety, the wheel of Lime, Strengtin,


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


Fame, Self-controi, thie Steadiness of alt
intelligent persons, all acts of goodness and


mtherwise, the seven Rishis, Understanding |


of the foremost order, all kinds of excetlent
touch, the success of all deeds, the various
tribes of the celestials, those beings that
drink heat, those that are drinkers of Soma;


Likhas, Suyamas, ‘Tushita, all creatures |


having Mantras for their bodies, Abha-
sutras, those beings that live upon scents
only, those that live upon vision only, those
that control their speech, those that restrain
their minds, the pure, they who are capable
of assuming diverse forms through Yoga-
power, those célestials who live on touclr,
those celestials who live on vision and those
who live upon the butter poured in sacri-
fices, those beings who can create by their
will the objects they require, they who are
regarded as the foremost ones among the
celestials, and all the other celestials, O
Ajamida, the Suparnas, the Gandharvas,
the Pishachas, the Danavas, the Yakshas,
the Charanas, the snakes, alt that is gross
and all that is subtile, all that is soft and
all that is not subtile, all sorrows and all
joys, all sorrow that comes efter joy
and afl joy that comes after sorrow, the
Sankhya philosophy, Yoga, and that
which is above all objects regarded as
foremost and very superior,~all ador-
able things, all the celestials, and ail
the protectors of the universe who enter-
ing into the physical forces sustain and up-
hold this ancient creation of that illustrious
Deity,—have originated from that Creator
of all creatures.


-99. Allthat I have mentioned ts grosser
than what the wise think of with the help of
Penances. Indeed, that subtile Brahma is
the cause of life. I bow respectfully to
it; Let that immutable and indestructible
Lord, always worshipped by ws, grant us
desirable boons,


80. That person whe, governing his
senses and purifying himself, recites this
hymn, continually for his vow, for one
month, succeeds in acquiting the merit of a
Horse-sactifice.


81. By reciting ‘this hymn the Brah-
mana succeeds in acquiring alt the Vedas j
the Kshatriya becomes crowned with vic-

. tory, O son of Pritha; the Vaishya, in
acquiring riches and cleverness; and the

’ Shudra, in acquiring happiness here and a
good end hereafter’ -

82.. By reciting the best of hynins that
can cleanse every sin and thatis highly
sacred and purifying, highly illustrious
persons set their hearts on Rudra.


83. A man by reciting this best of hymns
sueceeds in living in the celestial region for


03 |


as many yéats as there are potes in his
odys ;


CHAPTER XIX.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA ),#
Continued,


Yudhishthira said :~ =

t. LT ask,O foremost of Blrarata’s rade,
what is the origin of the declaration, about
satisfymg all duties jomtly, which is made
on the occasion of a person's marriage.

2. ts that declaration about satisfying
all duties together, due only to what is laid
down by the great Rishis in days of yore,
or does it refer to the duty of procreating
children from religious motives, or has it
reference to only the carnal pleasure that is
expected from sucli an intercourse of thé
sexes ?


3. Great is the doubt that fills my mind
about. Indeed, I think that the declaration
to which I refer is contray to the natural?
impulses which lead to a union of the sexes.
The union ia this world for performiug
duties together ceases with deatlt and is no
to be seen to exist hereafter,


4. This union for doing alk duties to
gether leads to heaven, But heaven, O
grandfather, is attained to by persons that
are dead. It is seen of a married couple
that only one dies ata time. Where does
the other then remain. Dotell me this. .


5. Men obtain various kinds of fruits by
performing various kinds of duties. The
occupations, again, to which menfollow are
of various kinds. Various, again, are the
hells te which they go on account of such
diversity of duties and acts. ; :


6. The Rishis have said that women, in
particular are false in behaviour, When
human beings are such, and whew women
in particular are described in the Shastras
to be false, how, Osire, can. there be a
union between the sexes for pufposes of
performing all duties together.


7. In the very Vedas one may read that
women are false, The word ‘Duty,’ as
used in the Vedas, appears to have been
coined first for general application. -There+
fore the application of that word to the rites
of marriage is, instead of being correct,
only a form of speech forcibly applied
where it has no application.


8—9. The subject appears to me to be
inexplicable although I thin’ of it always,
O grandfather, O you of great wisdom,


You should explain this to me fully, clearly
and according to the Shruti. In fact, do
you explain to me what it is, what tts
characteristics ate, and the way in which it
has come to pass.


Bhishma said :~ ;

10, Regarding it is cited the ofd dis-
cotirse between Ashtavakra and the lady
known by the name of Disha.


it. Formerly Ashtayakra of austere
petiances, desirous of marriage, begged
the great Rishi Vadanya of his daughter.


12, The name by which the lady was
known was Suprabha. In beauty she was
peerless on Earth.
e¢onduct, and manners, she was superior to
all girls. :


13. By a took only that girl of beautiful
eyes had robbed him of his heart even as
a delightful grove in spring, decked with
flowers, robs the spectator of his heart.


14. The Rishi addressed Ashtavakra
and said,—Yes, I shall give my daughter
to you. Listen, however, tome. Make a
journey to tie sacred North. You will see
many things there.


A shtavakra said :—


15. You should tell me what If shall see
in that cegion, Indeed, I am ready to
carry out whatever command may be Iaid
‘laid spon me by you.


Vadanya said :—


16, Passing over the dominions of the
Lord of ‘Treasures you will cross the
‘Himavat mountains. You will then see
‘the plateau on which Rudra lives. {ft is
‘inhabited by Siddhas and Charanas,


17——18. It. is fall of the companions of
Mahadeva, frolicsome and fond of dance
and possessed of. various faces. It is peopled
with also many FPishachas, O lord, of
‘various forms and all daubed with fragrant
‘powders of various colors and dancing with
‘joyous hearts im accompaniment with
brazen instruments of different kinds. En-
‘eitcled by these who dance with electric
rapidity or refrain at times altogether from
4orward or backward ot transverse motion
ef every sort, Mahadeva lives there.


19. That charming spot on the moun-
fains, we have heard, is the favournte abode
ef the great god. ft is said that that great
god as also his companions: are always
present there.


“20. Jt was there that the goddess Uma
had practised thé severest austerities for


the sake of the usree-eyed god. Hence,


In virtues, dignity,


MAHABHARATA.


it is said, that spot is much Hiked by bott?
Mahadeva and Uma.

2'--22. Formerly there, ofr the sammi€
of the Mahaparshwa mountains, which are’
situate to the north of the mountains sacred
to Mahadeva, the Seasons, and the last
Night, and many gods, and many humar


- beings atso, in their enmrbodied forms, had


worshipped Mahadeva. You will cross
that region also in thy northward journey.


23. You will then see a beautiful and
charming forest blue of color and resem-
bling a mass of clouds. There, in’ that
forest, you will see @ beautiful female
ascetic leoking like the goddess of pros:
perity herself, 7

24, Venerable for age and highly
blessed, she is going through the’ initiatory
rite, Seeing her there yow should duly
adore her with reverence. =


25. Returning to this place after having
seen her, you will take the hand of my
daughter in marriage. [f you can make
this agreement, proceed then on your
journey and do what E order you.


Ashtavakra said :—

26. So be it! I shall do your bidding.
Verily, E shall proceed to that region of
which you mention, O you of righteous:
soul! On your side, you should make your
words truthfaf. . ;


Bhishma sai :—


27. The illustrious Ashtavakra started
on his journey. He proceeded more and
more towards the north and at fast reached
the Himavat mountains _ inhabited by
Siddhas and Charanas.


28. Arrived at the Himavat mountains
that foremost of Brahmanas then reactred
the sacred river Vahuda whose waters pro<
duce great merit, :


29. He bathed in one of the charming
Térthas of that river, which was free fronr
mud, and pleased the gods with obiations
of water. His ablutions being over, he
spread a quantity of Kusha grass. and laid
himself dowry upon it for taking rest for
some time,


go. Passing the night in this way the
Brahmana rose with the day. He ance
more performed his ablutions in the sacred
waters of the Vahuda and then Highted his
homa fire and adored it with the help of
many foremost of Vedic mantras.


31. Hethen adored with the due rites
both Rudra and his wife Uma, and rested
fer some more-time by the side of that lake
in the course of the: Vahuda whose shores


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


he had reached. Refreshed by‘such’rest, he
started from that region and then proceed-
ed towards Kailasa.


32. He then saw a golden gate that
seemed to blaze with beauty. Hesaw also
the Mandakini and the Nalini of the great
Kuvera the Lord of Riches.


33: Seeing tke Rishi arrived there, all
the Rakshasas headed by Manibhadra
who were engaged in protecting that lake
fall of beautiful lotuses, came ont in a body
for welcoming and honouring the illustrious
traveller.


. 34. The Rishi adored in return those
Rakshasas of terrible prowess and asked
them to report, forthwith, his arrival to the
Lord of Riches.


35. Requsted by him to do’ this, those
Rakshasas, O king, said to him,—king
Vaishravana, without waiting for the news,
is coming of his own accord to your pre-
sence.


36. The illustrious Lord of Riches is
well acquainted with the object of this your
jourrey, See him,—that blessed Master,
who blazes with his own energy.


37- Then king, Vaishravana, approach-
ing the innocent Ashtavakra, duly enquired
-about tis welfare, ‘The usual polite enqui-
_vies being over, the Lord of Riches then ad-
dressed the twice-born Rishi, saying,—
You are welcome. Do tell me what do you
want from me. Inform me of it, I shall, O
twice-born one, do whatever you may order
me to accomplish,


39. Do you enter my house as pleases
you. O foremost of Brahmanas. Duly
entertained by me, and after your business
is done, you may go without any obstacles
being placed in your way.


40. Having said these words, Kuvera
took the hand of that foremost of Brahma-
nas and conducted him into his palace.
He offered him his ewn seat as also water
to wash his feet and the present of the usual
ingredients.


41. After the two had been seated the
-Yakshas of Kuvera headed by Manibhadra,
and many Gandhbarvas and Kinnaras, also


salt down betore them.
‘ . a


42. After all of ‘them’ 4ad taken their
seats, the Lord of Riches said,—Under-
standing what your pleasure is, the various
ney of Apsaras will begin their dance.


43. It is proper that I should entertain
you with hospitality and that you should
be served with propricty.—IThus addressed
the ascetic Ashtavakra “said, in a sweet
yoice,—Let the dance go on.


9


a CR A et,


65
44. Then Urvara, Mishrakeshi, Ram-
bha, Urvashi, Alumvustha, Ghritachi,


Chitra, Chitrangada, Ruchi, Manohara,
Sukeshi, Samukhi, Hasini, Prabha, Vidyuta,
Prashami, Danta, Vidyota and Rati,—these
and many other beautiful Apsaras began
to dance. The G ndharvas played on
various kinds of musical instruments,


4j. After such excellent music and
dance had begun, the Rishi Ashtavakra of
austere penances unconsciously pissed 4
full celestial year there in the house of king
Vaishravana,


48. Then king Vaishravana said to the
Rishi, —O learned Brahmana, see a little
more than a yeac has passed away since
your arrival here.


49. This music ana dance, especially
known by the name of Gandharva, isa
stealer of the heart (and of time). Act as
you Jike, or let this go on if that -be your
pleasure.


50. Youare my guest and, therefore,
worthy of worship. This is your house.
Vo you set your commands, We are all
beund to you.


gt. Thus addressed by king Vaishra-
vana, the illustrious Ashtavakra, replied to
him, with a pleased heart, saying,—1 have
been duly honored by you. | desire now, O
Lord of Riches, to go hence. '


52—53- Indeed, I am highly pleased.
All this befits you, O Lord of Riches.
Vhrough your grace, O illastrious one, and
according to the command of the great Rishi
Vadanya, I shall now proceed to my
journey’s end. May you enjoy prosperity.
—Having said these words, the illustrious
Rishi feft -Kuvera’s palace and proveeded
vorthwards,


54. He crossed the Kaitasa aa the
Mandara as also the golden mountains.
Beyond those high and great mountains is
Situate that excellent region whece Maha-
deva dresséd as an. humble ascetic was
living.

55- He went round the spot, with a
‘composed. mind, bending his head in, res«
pect the while. Descending then | on the
Earth, he regarded himself purified ‘for
having seen that holy spot whictt is. the
residence of Mahadeva.,; fe


56.' Having gone round divvabodiiaia
thrice, the ‘Rishi with face turned towatde
the nurth, went on with a joyous ‘beart. i


57. Then he-saw another forest ee
was very delightful, It was adorned with
the fruits and roots of every season, and ig


was filled with the music of bards. ae


66.


MAHABHARATA.


58. There were many charming groves | beautiful ladies, ag also of that paface, the


in the forest. The illustrious Rishi then
saw a beautiful asylum.


59. The Rishi saw also many golden
hills decked with gems and possessed. of
various forms, ‘Therehe saw many lakes
and tanks also.


60. And he saw various other highly
beautiful objects. Seeing these things, the
niind of that Rishi of purified soul became
filled with joy.


61. He then saw a beautiful palace
made of gold and adorned with all sorts of
gems. Of wonderful structure, that palace
surpassed the palace of Kuvera himself in
every respect,


62. Around it there were many hills and
mounts of jewels and gems. Many beauti-
ful cars and heaps of jewels also were seen
there. ;


63. The Rishi saw there the river Man-
dakini whose waters were covered with
numberless ,Mandara flowers, ‘Ihere also
were seen many self-luminous gems, and
the soil all around was decked with dia-
monds of various species.


64. The palace which the Rishi saw
contained many chambers whose arches
were set with various kinds of stones.
Those chambers were adorned also with
nets of pearls interspersed with jewels and
gems of various species.


65. Various sorts of beautiful objects,
capable of stealing the heart and tlre eye
sucrounded that palace. That charming
setreat was inhabited by numberless Rishis.


66. Seeing these beautiful sights all
around, the Rishi began to think of where
he would take shelter. Proceeding then to
the gate of the palace, he uttered these
words :—!

67. Let ‘those that live here know that a
guest has comme.—Hearing the voice of the
Rishi, a number of maidens came out in a
body from that palace. ;


68. They were seven in number, O king,
Of different sorts of beauty, all of them
were highly charming. Every one of those
maidens the Rishi saw stole his heart.


69. The sage could not, with even his
utmost struggles. control his mind. [ndeed,
seeing those maidens of very great beauiy,
his heart lost its balaace. Seeing himself te
nive way to such influences, the Rishi made
a vigorous effort, and greatly wise as he
was, he at last succeeded in controlling


zo. Those ladies then addressed the
Rishi, saying,—Let the illustrious one enter.


twice-born Rishi entered as he was coin=
manded. Eutering the palace he saw atv
old lady, with marks of decrepitude, dressed
i white srabes and adorned with every
kind of ornament. The Rishi blessed her,
saying,—-Good be to you.—The old lady
returned his good wishes in due form.
Rising up, she offered a seat to thé Rishi.


73. Having taken lis seat, Ashtavakra
said,—Let all the ladies go to their respec-
tive quarters, Only let one stay lrere. Let
that one remain here who is endued watt
wisdom and who has tranquillity of heart,
Indeed, let all the others go away as they
litte.


74. Thus addressed, all those damsels
went round the Rishi and then left the
chamber, only that aged lady remaining
there.

75. The day quickly passed and night
came. The Rishi, seated om a splendid
bed addressed the old lady, saying,—O
blessed lady, the night is growing deeper.
Do you go to sleep.


76. ‘Their conversation being thus put
a stop to by the Rishi, the old lady laid her-
self down on ai excellent bed of great
beauty.


977. Soon after, she rose from her bed
and pretending to tremble with cold, left it
for the bed of the Rishi.


#7. Yhe great Ashtavakra welcomed
her courteously, The lady, however, stretch-
ing hec arms, tenderly embraced the Rishi,
O foremost df men,


79. Seeing the Rishi quite oanmoved
and as inanimate as a piece of wood, she
beeatwe very socry atrd begat to convese
with him,


80. There is no pleasure, except that
from desire, which women can derive front
a person of the other sex! F am now under
the influence of lust I seek you-for that
reason. Do you seek me in return.


8:. Be cheerful, O learned Rishi, and
unite yourself with me! Do you embrace
me, O learned one, for § desire you greatly.


82. O yow of righteous soul, this mien
with me is the best and desirable reward of
those severe penances which you had
practised. At the first sight § have become
disposed to seek you. Wu you also seek
me.

83. Alf this riches and every other
precious article that you see here, are
mine. Do you, indeed, become the master
of all this with my person and heart.


84. I shall satisfy every wish of yours !


—Stricken with curiosity about those highly! Do you sport with me, therefore, iv these


ANUSHASANA PARYA.


delizhtful forests, @ Brahmana, which can
grant every wish.


85. 1 shall obey you implicity in every
thing, and you will sport with me according
to your pleasure! All objects of desire that
are human or that belong to heavea shail
be enjoyed by us.


86. There is no other pleasure more
Agreeable to women. Indeed, union with a
‘person of the oppesite sex is the most
desirable object of joy that we can get.


87. When moved by the god of lave
women become very whimsical. Thea
they do not feel any.pain even if they watk
over a desert of burning sand,


Ashtavakra said: -

88. O blessed lady, 1 never approach
another's wife. QOne’s union with asother
man’s wifé is condemned by persons con-
versant with the scriptures on taorality.


$9. 1 am an utter stranger to enjoy-
ments of every kind. Q blessed lady,
now that I have become desirous of
martiage for getting children, lewear by
aruth itself,

oo. Through the help of offspring
righteously got, 1 shall proceed to those
regions of happiness which cannot be
attained without such help. O good tady,
know what is consistent with morality, and
knowing it, desist from your efforts,


’ ‘The lady said :—


gt. The very gods of wind and fire and
water, or the other celestials, O twice-born
one, are uot so agreeable to women as the
god of love, Indeed, women are greatly
fond of sexual waion. :


92. Among a_ thousand women, or
perhaps, among hundreds of thousands,
sometimes only one may be found who is
devoted to her husband.


93- Under the influence of desire, they
gare not fur family or father or mother or
brother or husband or sens or husband's
brother, :


Qt. Seeking what they consider happi-
mess, they destroy the family even as many
‘asivers wash away -the banks that contain
them. ‘The Creator himself had said this,
marking the faults of women.


Bhishmsa said :—


95. The Rishi, bent upon finding out
the taults of women, addressed that lady,
eaying,—-Cease to speak to me thus!
Yearning originates from liking. Tell me
what l-am to do,


67


96. That lady then said in ceturn.—O
illustrious one, you will all see according
te time aud piace. Do you only live kere (for
sometime), G highly blessed one. and I
shall consider myself sufficiently rewarded 4


97-98. ‘Thus addressed by her, the
twicesborn Rishi, Q Yudhishthira, expressed
his resoution to satisfy her request, saying
—I shall live with yost inthis place as long
as I can venture to do so.—~The Rishi thea
seeing that lady possessed by decrepitude,
began to think seriously on the matter.
He appeared to be even pained by his
thoug its. : :

99. The eyes of that foremost of Brah-
manas could not get any. delight from those
parts of that fady’s person whereupon they
were fixed. Qu the other hand, his looks
appeared to be dispelled by the ugliness
of those particular dinabs. ;

ao. This dady is, forsooth, the mistress
of this palace. Has she been made ugly
through some curse? It is not proper that
U should quickly determine the couse of:
this.

tos, Thinking thus in his heart, and
curious to know the reason, the Rishi passed
the cest of that day in anxiety.

102. The lady then addressed hin,
saying,--O ilustcious one, look at the Sua
teddened by the evening clouds? What
service stall 1 do to you.

103. The Rishi addressed her, saying.—
‘Fetch water for my ablation! Having
bathed, 1 shall recite my evening prayers,
controlliag my tougue and the senses,’


ee ermal


CHAPTER XX,


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA),-<
Continued,


Bhishma said :—

t. Thus ordered, the lady said,—~Be
it so !-—~-She then brought oil and a piece of
cloth for his wear during the ablutions,


2; With the ascetic’s permission she
tubbed every part of his body with the
fragrant oil she had brought for bim,


3. The Rishi was rubbed, and when the
process of rubbing was over, he went ta
the room set apart for the performance of
ablations. ‘here he sat upon a new and
excellent seat.


4. After the Rishi had taken his seat
upon it, the old lady began to wash his


68°


body. with her own soft hands whose touch
was highly agreeable. z


—6. One alter another in due course,
the lady helped the Rishi in his ablutions.
Betwéen the lukewarm water with which he
was washed, and the soft hands which were
engaged in washing him, the Rishi of rigid
vows could wot understaid that the whole
night had passed away in the work. Rising
from the bath, the Rishi ‘became highly
surprised, Bes 4 :


7. He saw the Sun cisen above ‘the.


horizon on the East.. He was’surprised at
this atid asked’ himself,—Was it really so
or was it a mistake of the understanding.


8. The Rishi then duly adored the god
of a thousand rays. ‘This done, he asked
the lady as to what he should do, ‘The
old lady prepared some food for the Rishi
sweet to the taste like ambrosia itself.


g. On account of the sweetness of that
food the Rishi could not take much. In
taking that Tittle, however, the day passed
away and evening set in,


to. The old Jady then asked the Rishi
to go to bed and sleep. “An excellent bed
was given to the Rishi and another was
taken by herself, ;


11. The Rishi and the old lady occupied
different beds at first, but when it was mid-
night, the lady left her own bed for that of
the Rishi,


Ashtavakra aid


12. O blessed lady, I am not inclined
for sexual union with one who is the wife of
another. Leave my bed, O good lady.
Blessed be you do, you desist from this of
your own accord,


Bhishma said :—

13. Thus dissuaded by the Brahmana
with the help of his self-control, the lady
answered him, saying,.—l.am my own
mistress! In accepting me. you will
commit no sin,


Ashtavakra said :—


14. Women can never be their own mis-
tresses. ‘his is the opinion of the Creator
himself, vzs., that a woman should never
be indepent.


The lady said :—


15. O learned Brahmana, I am pained


by desire. Mark my devotion to you. You
commit sin by refusing to accept me
lovingly. :


Ashtavakra said :—
16, Vatious shortcomings drag away


MAHABHARATA.


the man who acts ashe likes. As for my-
self, | amJable to govern my inclinations by
self-control. OU good lady, return to your
own bed.


The lady said :—


17. I bowto you. You should show me
your favour. GO sinless one, I prostrate
myself {before syou, do you become my
refuge.


18. If you see sin iniknowing one who is
not your wife, I yield myself to you. Do
you, O twice-born one, accept my hand in
niarriage. ’


1g. You will incur no sin. I tell you
truly. Koow that lam my own mistress.
If there be any sin in this, let it visit me
ovly, My heart is devoted to you. I am
my own mistress. Do you accept me.


Ashtavakra said :—


20. Flow is it, O good lady, that youare
your own -mistress? Tell me the reason
of this. There is not a single woman in
the three worlds who can be considered as
the mistress of her own self,


2t.. The father protects her while she is
atnaiden. ‘The husband protects her while
she is young. Sons protect her when she is
aged. Woman can uever be independent
as long as they live.


The lady said :—

22. I have, since ““my maidenhood
adopted the vow of celibacy. Do not
doubt it. 1am stilla maid. Do you make
me -your wife. O Brahmana, do not kill
this devotion of mine to you.


Ashtavakra said :—


23. As you are inclined to me so am f
inclined to you. There is this. question,
however, that should be settled. It is true
that by givittg way to my inclinations 1.
shall not be considered as acting contrary to
what the Rishi (Vadanya) wishes.


24. This is very wonderful. Will this
lead to what is good? Here is a maiden
adorned with good ornaments and’ robes !


25. Sheis highly beautiful. Why did
decrepitude hide her beauty so long? At
present she looks like a beautiful maiden.
I do not know what form she may assume
hereafter. .


26. I shall never swerve from that cén-
trol which I have over desire and.the othee
passions or from contentment with what I
have already got. Such swerving is not
good. [ shall keep myself united with truth,

. é


1


ANUSHASANA PARVA, 69


CHAPTER XXI. Bhishma said :—
is . 12. Hearing these words of hers, the
(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).— twice-born Ashtavakra joined his hands
Continued. Bs respectfully. He then -begeed the lady for


: if A : her permission to return. Getting the per--
Yudhishthira said :— : inion he sought, he retucned o his on
‘t. Tell me why had that lady no fear of | bermitage.
Ashtavakra’s curse , although Ashtavakra | 13." Resting himself for sometime at
was gifted with great enecgy? How also | home and getting the permission of his *
did Ashtavakra succeed in retutning from | kinsmen and friends, he then, in a proper.
that palace ?’’ acne way, went, O delighter of the Kurus, to the ~ -


er F Brahmana Vadanya. ° ‘
Bhishma, said tne . 14. ~ Welcomed with the usual enquiries *
2, Ashtavakra asked her, saying,—How


by Vadanya the Rishi Ashtavakra, with a
do you change your form so? You should | well-pleased heart, described all that he had
not say anything false. I wish to know | seen,

this. Do you speak truly before a Brah-
mania.


15. He said,ordered by you I pro-
. . | ceeded to the mountains of Gandhamadana,
The lady said :-— In the quarter lying to the north of those ,
3. O best of Brakmanas, wherever you mountains I saw a very superior goddess,


may live, in the celestial region or on Earth, 16. 1 was received by her with courtesy.
this desire of union between the sexes is to | She named you before me, and also instruc-
be observed. O you of infallible prowess, | ted me in various matters. Having listen-
hear with rapt attention, what it all is. ed to her I have returned, O lord.


4. This trial was converted by me, O sin- _1q. The learned Vadanya said to him,—


less one, for examining you aright, O you | take my daughter’s hand according to.

of infallible prowess, you have conquered | due rites and under the proper constella-

all the worlds by the strength of mind. —_—| tions, You are. the fittest bride-groom I
5. Know me as the embodiment of the | can select for the girl.

Northern point of the compass. You have! |, es

seen the lightness of the female, character. Bhishma said :-~

- Even old women are tortured by the desics 18. Ashtavakra said,—So be it!—and.

of sexual union. espouséd the girl, Indeed, having married
6. The grandfather himself and all the | the girl, the highly pious Rishi, became,

gods with Indra have been pleased with | filled with joy.

you. | khow the object for which your 19. Having taken as his wife that beau.

illustrious self has come here. tiful lady, the Rishi continued to live in his
7. O foremost of twice-born persons, you | own hermitage freed from every sort of

have been sent here by the Rishi Vadanya | mental trouble.

—the father of your bride—in order that I

may instruct you. According to the |,

wishes of that Rishi I have already instruct-

ed you. =
8. You will return home safely. Mowe CHAPTER XXII.

journey back will not be toilsome, You a

will get for wife the girl you have chosen.. (ANUSHASANIKA PARVA),.

She will bear you a son, % :


9. Through desire | had solicited you. | wpap; feo
You gave me the very best answer. People Yudhishthira said


of the three worlds cannot get over the; %- Whom have the eternal Beahmanas
desire for sexual union. selected a proper object of gifts? Is ‘a
Brahmana who bears the marks of the’
order of life he follows to be constdered as
such, or is one- divested of such marks to
be so regarded, :


tt. 1 was gratified by the Rishi Vadanya. Bhishma said :— :
in the first instance for your sake, O twice- z. O king it has been said that gifts
born ascetic! For the sake of honoring should be made a Brahmana who follows
him, I have said all this to you, the: duties of his own order, whether he.


Continued,


to. Return to your quarters, having
achieved such merit. What else is there
which you wish to hear (from me) ? 1 shall
truly describe it to you, O Ashtavakra.


7e


bears the marks of Brahmecharyya or not,
for both are faultless, uis., he who bears
such marks and he who is divested of them.


Yudhishthira said :—


‘3. What sin does an impure person
commit if he makes gifts of sacrificial


butter or food or with great devotion, to |


persons of the twice-born order ?


Bhishma said :— :


4. He who has no self-control becomes,
forsooth, cleansed by devotion. Such a
man, becomes purified in respect of every
act.


Yudhishthira said :—


“5. It has been said that a Brahmana
whe is sought for the performance of a
religious rite should never be examined.
The learned, however, hold that while per-
formorming rites for the Pitris, the Beah-
mana who is sought to be engaged, should
be examined.


Bhishma said :—

6. As regards the religious rite for the
deities, these do not yield fruits on account
of the Brahmana whois engaged in doing
them but through the grace of the deities
themselves. Forsooth, those persons who
perform sacrifices acquire the metit of
those acts, through the favour of the
deities.


7. The Brahmanas, O chief of the
Bharatas, are always utterers of Brahma.
‘The intelligent Rishi Markandeya, gave
vent to these words in days of yore.


Yudhishthira said :—


8. Why, O grandfather, are these five
vis., he who is a stranger, he who is gifted
with learning, he who is connected by mar-
riage, he that is enducd with penances,
and he who is devoted to the perform-
ance of sacrifices, considered as proper
persons 7


Bhishma said :—

9g. The first three, vés., strangers, rela-
tives, and ascetics, when endued with these
attributes, vis., purity of birth, devotion to
religious acts, fearning, mercy, modesty,
sincerity, and truthfulness, are considered
as proper persons, The oiher two, vis.,
men of learning and those given to sacrifices
when gifted with five of these attributes,
vis., purity of birth, mercy, modesty, sia-
cecity, and truthfulness, are also considered
aS proper persons.


10. Listen now to me, O son of Pritha,
as I recite to you the opinions of these four


MAHABHARATA,


persons of great energy, viz., the goddes,
Earth, the Rishi Kashyapa, the god of fire,
and the ascetic Markandeya,


The Earth said :—


tt. Asa clod of earth, when thrown into
the great ocean, quickly dissolves away, so
every sort of sin disappears by the three
high qualifications of officiation at sacsi-
fices, teaching, and receiving of gifts.


Kashyapa said :—

12, The Vedas with theie six auxilia-
ties, the Sankhya phisosophy, the Puranas,
and high birth, these cannot rescue a
twice-bora person if he falls away from
good conduct.


Agni said :—

13. The Brahmana who, engaged in
study and considering himself learned,
seeks with the help of his learning to des-
troy the reputation of athers, falls away
from virtue and comes to be regarded as
divorced from truth, Such persons of re
{ractory spirit never acquire regions ef hape
piness hereafter.


Markandeya said :—


14. If a thousand Hores-sacrifices and
Truth were weighed in the balance, 1 do
not know whether the former would equal
even half of the latter in weight.


Bhishma said :—

15. Having spoken these words, those
four persons, each of whom is gifted with
immeasurable energy, wie., the goddess
Earth, Kashyapa, Agni, and Bhrigu’s son
armed with weapons, quickly went away,


Yudhishthira said :—


16. If Brahmanas observing the vow of
celibacy in this world eat, begging the
same, the offerings one makes during fune-
tral rites, | ask, can the Shraddha be consi-
dered well-performed if the performer ac--
tually makes over thase offerings to such
Brahmanas.


Bhishma said :—


17. if, having practised the vow of
Brahmacharyya for the prescribed period
(of twelve years) and acquired proficiency
in the Vedas and their branches, a Brah-
mana himself asks for the offerings made
in Shraddhas and eats the same, he is consi
dered to fall away from his vow. ‘Lhe
Shraddha, however, is not considered as
sullied in any way.


Yudhishthira said :~
18. The wise hold that duty or virtue


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


has many ends and numerous doors. Tell
me; 16) grandfather, what, however, are the
decisions in this matter.


Bliishma said +

19. Abstention from injury to others:
trithfulness, the absetice of anger, mercy,
self-control, and sincerity or candout, O
king, ate the marks of virtue.


Zo. There ate persons who wander over
the Earth, latidibg virtue but without prac-
lising what they preach aad engaged all the
while in sin, O king:


21—~22. He who gives such. persons gold
or gems or kine ot horses has to sink in
hell and there live for ten years, on the
facces of such persons as live upon the
flesh of dead kine and buffalos, of men
called Pukkasas, of others who live ifs the
outskirts of cities and villages, and of men
who give out under the influence of ariger
and folly, the acts and omissions of
others, . :

23. Those foolish men who do not give
a Brahmana observant of the vow of Brah-
macharyya the offerings made in Shraddhas
(unto one’s deceased ancestors); liave to
proceed, © king, into regions of great
misery. :


Yudhishthira said:

24. Teli me, O grand-father, what is
superior to Brahimacharyya? What is the
highest mark of virtue? What is the
highest kind of purity ?


Bhishma said :—

25. ltell you, O son, that abstention
from honey aud meat is even superior to
Bralmacharyya. Virtue lies within boun-
daries. ‘The best mark of virtue is Re-
nunciation. ;


Yudhishthira said :—


26. In what time should one practise
vintue? In what time should wealth be
sought? In what time should pleasute be
enjoyed? O grandfatlier, do teil me this.


Bhishma said :—~


27- One should acquire riches the first
part of his life, Then should one acquire
virtne, and then enjoy pleasure. Une
should not, however, be addicted to any of
these.


28. One should respect the Brahmianas,
worship his preceptor and seniors, show
mercy to all creatures, be of mild disposition
and sweet speech.


29. To utter untruth in a court of justice,


to behave deceitfully towards the king, to,


vas


act falsely towards preceptors and elders,
are considered as equivalent to Brabmani-
cide.


30. One should never do an act of vios
lence to the king’s body. or should one
evet strike-a cow. Both these offences are
equal to the sin of fosticide. :


gt. One should never quit his (Homa
fire. One should also renounce the study
of the Vedas. One should never attack a
Brahmana by words or deeds. All these
offences are equal to Brahmanicide.


Yudhishthira said :—


32. What kind of Brahmanas should
be considered as good? Who are those
Brahmanas by making presents to whom
one may win great merit? What kind of
Brahmanas are they whom one should
feed? Tell me all titis, O grandfather,


Bhishma said :—


33- Those Brahmanas who ate freed
from anger, who are devoted to acts of
virtue, who are firm in Truth, and who
practise self-control, ate considered ds
good. By making gifts to thea one ac-
quires great merit. ;


34- One acquires great mierit by ntaking
presenfs to such Brahmanas as are free
from pride, capable of bearing everything,
firm in the pursuit of their objects, gifted
with mastery over their senses, devoted to
the behoof of alt creatures, and disposed to
be {friendly towards all.


35- One acquires great merit by making
gilts to such Brabmanas as are free from
avarice, as are pure of heart and conduct,
gifted with learning and niadesty, truthful
in speech, and observant of theic own duties
4S sanctioned in the Scriptures,


36. ‘Phe Rishis have declared that Brah-
mana to be a deserving object of gifts who
studies the four Vedas with all their auxi-
liaries and is devoted to the six well-known
duties. One acquires great merit by mak-
ing gifts to Bralunanag endued with such
qualifications.


37. The man who takes gilts to
a worthy Brahmana multiplies his
merit a thousand fold. A single pious
Brahmana gifted with wisdom and Vedic
lore, observant of the duties laid down in
the scriptures, and marked out by purity
of conduct is. capable to resoue a whole
family. ;

38. One should make gifts of kine and
horses and riches and food and other kinds
of articles to a Bralmana who is gifted with
such qualifications, By making such gifts


i


to such psrsons one acquires great happi-
ness in the next world.


39. As I have already told you, even


ene such Brahmana can save the entire
family to which the giver belongs. What
‘need [ say, therefore, O dear son, of the
merit of making giftsto many Brahmanas
of such qualifications? In making gifts,
therefore, one should always select the ob-
ject to whom the gift is to be made.


40. Hearing of a Brahmana gifted with
proper qualifications and respected by all
good people, one should invite him even if
he lives at a distance and welcoming him
when he arrives, one sheuld adore him by
alt means in his power.


CBAPTER XXIII.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA)
Continued,


Yudhishthira said :—

‘a4. L wish you, O grandfather, to tell me
what the ordinances about the rites for the
deities and the departed inanes on occasions


of Shraddhas,


’ Bhishma said:—


_ 2 Having purified oneself and then
performed the well-known auspicious rites,
one should éarefully perform all acts .rela-
ting to the Pitris in the afternoon, |


3. What is given to men should be given

in the midday with love and regard.

- gift which is made untimely is taken by
Rakshasas.


4, Gifts of articles that have been leapt
over by any one, or been licked oc sucked,
or are not given peacefully, or have been
seen by women who are impure for being in
theic season do not produce ay merit.

‘Such gifts-are considered as the portions of
Rakshasas. :


5. Gifts of’ artictes that bave been an-
nounced before many people or from which
, @ part has been eaten by a Shudra, or. that
. have been seen or licked by a dog, form
, portions of Rakshasas.


6. Food. which is: mixed with hair ‘or

- in which there are worms, or which has

been spoiled with spittle or saliva or which

has been looked at by a dog or. into which

tear-drops have fallen or which has been

trodden upon, should be known as forming
the part of Rak&shasas.


_ 7. Food that has been eaten by a person
incompetent to utter the syllahle Om, or


That |


MAHABHARATA.


that has been: eater by a person: bearintd
arnis, O Bharata, or that has been eaten by
a wicked person, should be known as due to
Rakshasas.


8. The food thatis eaten by a person
from which a part has already been eaten
by another, or which is eaten without a part
thereof having been offered to gods and
guests and children, is appropriated by
Rakshasas. Such impure tood, if offered ta
the deities and Pitris is never accept-
ed by them but is appropriated by Rak-
shasas. .


9g. The food that is offered hy the three
twice-born classes in Shtaddhas in which
Mantras are either not utteted or uttered
incorrectly and in which the ordinances laid
down in the scriptures ate not duly per-
formed, if given to guests and other people,
is appropriated by Rakshasas,


to. The food that is given to guests
without having been previously dedicated
to the deities or the Pitris with the help of
libations on the sacred fire, or which has
been sullied on account of a part thereof
having been eaten by a person who is
wicked or of irreligious conduct, should be
known as being due to Rakshasas.


1i. IT have described to you the dues of
the Rakshasas. Listen now to me as I put
down the rules for determining we


Brahmana who is worthy of gifts. ae


12. All Brahmanas that have been ont-
casted, as also Brahmanas who are idiots
and insane, do not deserve to be invited to
Shraddhas in which offerings are made to
either the deities or the departed manes.- -


13. That Brahmanas who is afflicted
with leucoderma, or he who is shorn of
generative power, or he who has got leprosy,


or he who has got phthisis, or he who suffers


from epilepsy, or he who is blind, should
not, O king, be invited.


~


14, Those Brahmanas who practise as
physicians, those who get regular pay for
adoring tne images of gods established by
the rich, or, live upon the service of, the
gods, those who observe vows from pride
or other false motives,.and those who sell
Soma wine, do not deservé to be invited.


15. Those ‘Brahmanas whe are, by pro-
fession, vocalists, or. dancers. or players or


- instrumental musicians, or reciters of sacred


books, or warrtors, and athletes, should nor,
O king, be invited.. ‘ .


16. ‘Those Brahmanas who pour liba-
tions on the sacred fire for Shudras, or who
are preceptors of Shudras, or who are
servant of Shudra masters, sheuld not be
invited. - : :


ANUSHASANA PARVA, 98


49. That Brahmana who is paid for his

Services as a preceptas, or who attends as a

_ Pupil upon the lectures of some preceptor

tor an alloWance paid tg him, does mot de-

serve to be invited, for both of them are
considered as sellers of Vedic learning.


18, ‘That Brahmana who has been once
induced to actept the gift of food in a Shrad«
dha at the very beginning, as also he who
has married a Shudra wife, even if gifted
with every sort of knowledge, should not be
invited, POs , :


1g. Those Brahmanas who have no do-
mestic fire, and they who attend upon
corpses, they who are thieves, and they who
have otherwise degraded themselves, do not
O king, deserve to be invited.


20, Those Bralimanas whose antecedents
are not known or are vile, and they who are
Putrika-putras, should not, O king, be in-
vited on oceasions of Shraddhas,


«-. 9» That:Brahmana who gives. loans. of
money, or he who lives upon the interest of
the loang given by him, or he who lives by
the sale of living creatures, should not, O
king, be invited. :


22. Persons who are henpecked or they
who-live by becoming the paramours of
lirchaste women, or they who do not per-+
form their morning and evening prayers,
seule not, O king, be invited to Shcad-

has,


23. Listen now tome as [ say who
the: Brahmana is who has been ordained
for acts done in honor of the gods and the
departed manes. Indeed, [ shall tell you
what those merits are on account of which
one may becomea giver ora recipient of
gifts in Shraddhas.


24. ‘Those Brahmanas who perform the
-rites and ceremonies laid down in the
scriptures, or they whe are possessed of
iierit, or they who know well the Gayatri,
or they who perform the ordinary duties of
Brahmanas, even if they bappen to take to
pgeiculture for a living, are tapable, O
king, of being invited to Shraddhas.


25. Ifa Brahmana happens to be well-
born, he should be invited to Shtadditas
noiwithstanding his taking up arms for
fighting the battles of others. ‘That Brah-
mata, however, O soi, who happens ta
drive a trade for a living should be
discarded.


26. That Brahmana who potirs libations:


guests arrived at his house; should; O
“kitig, be invited to Shraddhas, =


id


| pride or sin, who


-29.. That Brahmana, O chief of Bhas
tata’s race, who recites the Savitri morning,
noon, and night, or who lives upon charity
begging as much as is‘necessary, who is


observant. of the rites and cremonies laid


down inthe scriptures for persons of his
order, should, O king, be invited to
Shraddhas. © : :


28. That Brahmana who having ac-
quiced riches in the morning becomes
poor inthe afternoon, or who poor in the
morning becomes rich in the evening,
or whois shorn of malice, or is stained by
a minor fault, should, O king, be invited to
Shraddhas.


29. That Brahmana who-is shorn of
is not given to dry -
disputation, or who lives upon aims got in
his rounds of mendicancy from house to
house; should, QO king, be invited to
sacrifices. ; ‘


go. One who does. not ‘observe vows,
ot who is given to untruth, who is a-thief,
or-who lives by the sale of living creatures
or by trade in general, . should be invited
to Shraddhas,.O king, -if he happen to
subsequently drink Soma in a sacrifice,


3r. That man who having acquired
riches by foul or cruel.means subsequently
spends, it in worshipping the gods and
performing .the duties: of, hogpitality, be-
comes worthy, O king, of .being- invited ta
Shraddhas. Se Sigel gle our

32. The riches thatone has Acquired by
the sale of Vedic leatiingsotwhich bas
been acquired .by a:.waman;,or: which has
been gained by meanness, should never be
giveti to Brahmanas or spent in making
offerings to-thé depatted ‘ynates, * ; ’

93... That-"Bralimata, O° chief of Bha-+
tata’s race,, who upon the completion ‘of a
Shraddha that is performed with his’ help,
refuses.to utter the words yukta, commits:
the sin of. swearing falsely in a suit for
land j

34. ‘The tithe for celebrating the Shrad~
dha, © Yudhisthira, is that wheh ohe geéts
A godd’ Brahimana ‘aid curds and clarified
buttet'aind the sacted day of the hew moon
and tie‘meat of wild animals such as deer
and others,.


.35.: Upon the termination of a.Shraddha
peitormed. by a Brahmana the word
Swadcha should be uttered. If performed
‘bya Kshatriya the -words. that should be
mitered are—Let* your departed . manes


m4


every day on the sacred fire; or who lives | Ye pleased.


in a fixed habitation, who is not a thief and |
who performs the duties of hospitality to’ }


36—38. Upon the completion of a
Shraddna_ performed by a Vaishya, ‘O
Bharata, the words that should be ‘attered
are,—Let evetything becorie ‘endless |<


* 74
- Likewise upon the completion of a Shraddha
performed by a Shudra, the word that
should be uttered is Swasti —~As regards
a Brahmana, the Punyahanz declaration
should be accompanied with the utterance
of the syllable Om. In the case of a
Kshatriya, such declaration should be with-
out the utterance of the syllable Om. In
. the acts performed by a Vaishya the words,
instead of the syHable Om, should be—
Let the gods be pleased. Listen now to me
as I tell you the rites that shoutd be per-
- formed,’one after another, as given in the
ordinances. | :


-39. All the rites consequent upon birth,
© Bharata, are necessary ‘in the case of
wll the three castes. A these rites, O
Yudhishthira, inv the case of. both Bra-
hmanas and Kshatriyas as also in that of
Yaishyas, are to be performed with the
help of Mantras.


40, ‘The girdle of Brahmana should be
made of. Munja grass.. That of a Kshatriya
should .be a bowstsing. The Vaishya’s
girdle should be tnade of the Valwaji grass.
“Fhis has been laid down in the scriptures.


4t.- bister now to me as I| explain to
you what korms the merits and demerits
of both givers and recipients of gifts.


42. A Brahnrana violates: his duty by
uttering, an untruth, Such an act on his
part is sinful. -A Kshatriya perpetrates
four-fold and a Vaishya eight-fold the sia
that a Brahmana incurs by uttering an
untruth,


43. A Brahmana shculd not eat else-
where, having been previously invited by
a Brahmana. By cating at the house of
the person by whonr he has been invited
afterwards, he becomes inferior and -even
incurs the sin of the slaughter of an animal
ou occasions other thaty those of sacrifices.


44. So also, if he eats elsewhere after
having been invited by a Kshatriya oc a
Vaishya, he falls away from his posi-
tion and incurs half the sin of the slaughter
of ar animal on occasions ether than those
of sacrifices,


45. That Brahmana, O king, who eats


on occasions of such acts as are performed {i


iy honor of the geds or. the departed


manes by Brahnranas and Kshatityas and.


Waishyas, without having performed his
ablutions, commits the sin ef uttering an
entruth for a cow.


40. That Brahmana, O king, who eats |


on occasions of similar acts performed by /' Bees :
. aS have lost everything in times of universal


persons belonging to three higher castes,
ata time wher le is impure on account of
eiger a biciute or a death -anmvong his cog- |


MAHABHARATA,


nates, and knowing that he is impare of
through temptation, comnrits the sanie sim.


47. He whe lives upon riches acquired
under false pretences like shat of sojourns
to sacred places or who begs the giver
for riches pretending that he would spend
itin religious acts, commits, O king, the
sin of uttering an untruth.


48. That person, belonging to any of
the, three higher castes, O Yudhisthira,
who at: Shraddhas and on other occasions
distributes food with the help of Mantras,
to such Bralrmanas as do not study the


' Vedas or who do not observe vows or: who


have not puvified their conduct, forsooth,
commits sin,


Yudhishthira said :—

49. 1 wish, O grandfather, to know who
those persons are by giving to whom the
things dedicated tothe gods and the de-


‘partedguranes, one may acquire sufficient
: tewards,


Bhishma said :— :
50. Do you, O Yudhishthira, feed those


‘Brahmanas whose wives respectfully wait -
‘for the residue of the dishes of their, hus
i bands like tillers of the soil waiting res-


pectfully for timely showers of rain.


5t. By making: gifts to those Brah-
manas who are always‘ of pure conduct,
O king, who are liberated by abstaining
from all luxuries and even full meals, wha
are given to the observance of such vaws
as lead to the emaciation of the body, and
who approach givers with the object of
getting gifts, one acquires great merit.


52. By making gifts to Bralrmanas who
considers conduct in the tight of food, wha
considers conduct in the Tight of wives and
children, who considers conduct in the
light of strength, who considers conduct
in the light of their refuge for crossing this
world and acquiring happines in the next,
and who beg for riches only wher wealth
is absolutely needed, one acquires great
merit, :

53.. By making gifts to those persons,
O ¥udhishthira, who having lost everything
through theives or oppressors, approach
the giver, one gains great merit.


54. By making gifts to such Brahmanas


‘as beg food from the hands of even a poor


person of their caste who has just get


, Something frony others, one acquires great


merit,
55. By making gifts to such Brahmanas |


distress and as have been deprived of their —
wives on such occasions, and as come te ~


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


givers with ‘solicitations for alms, one
acquires great merit.

56. By making gifts to such Brahmanas
as observe vows, and as place themselves
voluntarily ander painful rules and regula-
tions, according to the Vedic injunctions,
and as come tos licit riches for spending
it upon the rites necessary to complete their
vows and other observances, one acquires
great merit.


37. By making gifts to such Brahmanas
as live at a preat distance from the prac-
tices followed by the sinful and the wicked,
as are shorn of strength for want of ade-
quate support, and as are very poor in
earthly - possessions, one acquires great
merit.

58. By making gifts to such Brahmanas
as have heen deprived of all their posses-
sions by powerful men but as are perfectly
innocent, and as desire to fill their stomachs
with any and every sort of food, one ac
quires great merit. ‘

By making gifts to such’ Brahmanas
as beg on behalfof others performing pen-
ances and devoted to them, and as are
Satisfied with even small gifts, one acquires
great merit. .


60. You have now, O foremast of Bha-
rata’s race, heard what the. scriptural de-
Clarations are. about the acquisition of great
merit by the making of gitts. Hear from
me now of those acts that lead to hell or
heaven. ’


61, They, O Yudhishthira, that speak
an untruth on occasions other than those
when such-untruth.is necessary for serving
the purpose of the preceptor ar. for giving
the assurance of safety to a person in fear
of his life, sink in hell. :

62. They who fravish: other peaple’s
wives, or have sexual intercourse with them,
or. assist at{such sinful acts, sink in tell,

63. ‘They who reb others of their righes
or destroy the riches and properties of other
people, or trumpet the shortcomings of
other people, sink in hell. ;

64. They who: spoil tanks. used by
cattle


break down bridges and causeways, and
who pull down dwelling-houses, have tv Sink
in hell. ; :
65. They who lead astray and. cheat
helpiess women, or girls, or aged dames,
or such women as have been frightened,
have to sink in hell. a


66. They who destroy the means of
other peopie’s: subsistence, they -whe-reot
culthe habitations of ether people, they


fot . satisfying ‘thirst, whe injure:
buildings used for public meetings, who _


75


who rob others of their wives, they wlio
sow dissensions among friends, and they’
who destroy the &opes of other people, sink -
in hell. ;

67. They who trumpet forth the faults
of others, they who break down bridges
or éauseways, they who live by foltowing
other people’s calling and they who are un-
grateful to friends for services received,
have to sink in hell. :


68. They who have no faith in the
Vedas and show no respect for them, they
who break the vows made by themselves or '
make others to break them, and they who
paleway from their status through sin, sink
in hell,


69 «They who follow improper conduct
they who take exorbitant rates of interest,’
and they who make unduly large profits on
sales, have to sink in hell.


jo. They who are given to gambling,
they who unhesitatingly perform wicked -
acts, and they who are given to killing’
living creatures, have to sink in hell.


gt. ‘They who make the masters dismiss
the servants that are hoping for rewards or
are in the enjoyment of wages or salacies or
waiting for returns in respect of valuable
serVices already done, have to sink in hell.


72. Yhey who themselves eat without
offering portions thereof to their wives or
their sacred fires or their servants or theie’
guests, and they who do not perform the-
rites laid down in the scriptures for honour -
ing the departed manes and deities, have
to sink in hell.


73. They who sell the Vedas, they wha
find fault with the Vedas, andjthey who:
reduce the Vedas into writing, have all
to sink in hell.


74. They who are out of the limit of tha
four well-known modes of life, they wha
follow to practices interdicted by the
Shrutis.and the scriptures, and they wha
perform wicked or sinful deeds or wita.
do not pelons to their order of birth, have
to sink in hell, :


at


756" Bhey who live by selling hair, they:
‘who live by selling poisons, and they wha
jive by selling mile, have to sink in hell,


76. They who put ‘impediments in the’
path of Brahmanas and kine and maidens,”
O Yudhishthica, have to sink in hell.” :


-.99.. They who sell ‘weapons, they wha?


‘forge weapons, they who make arrows, and
| they who make bows; have to sink in hell,


Bo age “They whe-obstruct paths and roads


‘with stones atid: thorns ‘dad: holes: have -to--
sink in hell. .


76


179. They-who renounce preceptors and.
servants and loyal followers without any
offence, O foremost of Bhacata’s race, have
to sink in helf.


80. ‘They who set bullecks to work when
the animals have not come of age, they who
bore the noses of bullocks and other ani-
mals for controlling them the better while
engaged in work, and they who keep ani-
mals always tethered, have to sink in hell.


81. . Those kings who do not protect
their subjects while forcibly collect from
them a sixth shate of the produce of their
fields, and they who, though able and
possessed of resources, abstain from mak-
ing gifts, have to sink in hell. 7


82. They who. renounce persons gifted
with forgiveness, selfycontrol and wisdom,
or those with whom they have associated
for many years, when these are no longer
of service to them, have to sink in hell.


°83. Those men who themselves eat with-
out giving parts of the food to children,
aged men and servants, have to sink in
hell,


84. Ali these men numbered above have
to go to hell. Listen now to me, O fore-
most of Bharata’s. race, as I tell you wha
those men ate who ascénd to heaven.


85. The man who transgresses against a
Brahmana by obsteucting the adoration of
gods, suffer from the loss of all his children
and animals. ;


86. Those men, QO Yudhishthira, who
petform the duties laid down in the scrip-
tures for them, practising the virtues of
charity, self control and truthfulness, go to
the celestial region.


87. Those men who having acquired
knowledge by making obedient, services to
their preceptors and performing austere
Ppenances, are unwilling ‘to accept gifts,
succeed in ascending to heaven.


88. Those men: who save people from
fear and sin and who remove the.obstacles
fying in the way of what they wish to


accomplish and poverty and the sufferings.


of disease, succeed in ascending to heaven,


89. Those men who are gifted with a
forgiving disposition, who are endued with
patience, who are ready to perform all
righteous rites, and who are of pure con-
duct, succeed in ascending to heaven.


, 90 Those men who astain from honey
and meat, who abstain from sexual inter-
course with the wives of other people, and
who abstain -from’ wines and spiritous
liquors, succeed in ascending to heaven.


gf. Those men whe help in the establish-
ment of asylumns for ascetics, who be-


, MAHABHARATA


come founders of families; O Bharata, who
open up new countries for purposes of
dwelling and implant towns and cities,
succeed in ascending to heaven.


92. Those men who distribute cloths
and ornaments, as also food and drink, and
who help in marrying others, succeed in
ascending to heaven.


93. Those men who have abstained from
all sorts of injury or harm to all creatures,
who can endure everything, and who have
made themselves the refuge of ali creatures
succeed in ascending to heaven.


94. Those men who wait humbly upor
their parents, who have controlled their
senses, and who are affectionate towards
their brothers, succeed in ascending to
heaven.


95. Those men who master their senses
though they are rich in worldly possessions,
endued with robust constitution and gifted
with youthful vigour, succeed in ascending
to heaven,


96. Those men who are kind even to-
wards the offenders who are of mild dis-
position, who have an affection for all who
are of mild behaviour; and who contribute
to the happiness of others by rendering
them every kind of service in hymitity,
succeed in ascending to heaven, ;


97. Those men who protect thousands
of people, who make gifts to thousands of
people, and who rescue thousands of people
from distress, succeed in ascending to
heaven, : ; 7 :


98. Those men who make “gifts of gold
and of kine, O foremost of Bharata’s race,
as_also of conveyances and animals, suc
ceed in ascending to heaven.


99: Those men who give away such
articles as are necessary it marriages, aS
also servants and maids, and cloths and:
robes succeed in ascending to heaven, —


100. Those men who make - public
pleasure-houses, gardens, wells, ‘resting-
houses, and buildings for public meetings,


and tanks for enabling ‘cattle and men to


satisfy their thirst, ‘and fields for ecultiva-
tion, © Bharata, succeed in ascending to
heaven. : nM


tot, Those men who give houses and
fields and pepulated villages’ to persons
that want them, succeed in ascending to
heaven. ae,


102. Those men who having themselves
manufactured drinks of sweet taste and
seeds and paddy or rice, give them to
othess, succeed in ascending to heaven.


103. Those men whe having -been born
in families high ot low beget hundreds of


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


children and. live long lives, practising
mercy and keeping anger under complete
control, succeed in ascending to heaven.


tog. 1 have thus explained to you, O
Bharata, what the rites are in honor of
the deities and the departed manes which
are performed by people for the sake of
the other world, what the ordinances ate
about making yilts, and what the views
are of the Rishis of former times about
both the-artictes of gift and the manner of
givieg them.


eee


CHAPTER XXIV.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—~:
' Continued. ;


Yudhishthira said :—


t. O deseéndant of Bharata’s race, you
should answer this question of mine truty
and in detail: ‘What are those circume
stances under which a person may become
guilty ‘of Beahmanicide without actually
killing a Brakmana.. ..


Bhishma said :—


2. Formerly, O king, I had one day
requested Vyasa to explain to me this vety
suvject. | shall now describe to -you what
Vyasa told ime on that occasion. Do you

‘Hsten to it with rapt attention.


3. Going to Vyasa, I addressed him
saying,—You, O great ascetic, are the
fourth in descent from Vaishishtha! Do
you explain to me this. What are those
circumstances undée which one becomes
guilty of Brahmanicide without actually
killing a Brahmana 2?


4. ‘Thus addressed by me, the own-
begotten son of Parashara, O king, an
adept in the science of morality, gave me
the following answer at once excellent and
fraught with certainty. 7


“gs. You should know that man as guilty
of Brahmanicide who having of his own
accord invited a Brahmana of pious con-
dact to his house for giving him alms ‘then
refuses to give anything on the pretence of
there being nothing ie the house.


6. You should, O Bharata, know that
man as guilty of Brahmanicide who des-
troys the means of living of a Brahmana
well-read in the Vedas, and. all -their
branches, and who is shorn of attachments
to worldly creatures and goods..


97. You should, O king, know that man
to be guilty of Brahmanicide who puts im-


es


. pediments in the way of thirsty king. while


engaged in satisfying that, thirst. *.


& You should take that man as guilty.
of Brahmanicide who, , without studying
them, finds fault with the Sieuti¢ that have -
come down from preceptor to pupil for
ages and ages together, or with those
scriptures that have beea composed by the
Rishis. i


You should know that man as guilty: :
of Brahmanicide who does not confer upon
a suitable bridegroom his daughter endued
with beauty and other excellent qualities.


10. You should know that foolish and’
sinful wightought to be guilty: of Brahmaut-
cide who pains the Brahmanas to the very
core of their hearts. : oo


11. You should know that man to be
guilty of Brahmanicide who robs the blind, —
the lame, aud idiots. :


1z. You should know. that man. to be
guilty of Brahmaticide who sets fire ta the
hermitages of ascetics, or to forests or to
a village ora town,


CHAPTER XXV.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—.
Continued,


Yudhishthira said :—

1. It has been said that sojourns to
sacred waters is full of merit; that abli-
tions in such waters is meritorious; and:
that listening te the excellence of such.
waters is also meritorious. I wish to hear
you expatiate on this subject, O grande_
father. | eet


2. You should, O chief of: Bharata’s ,
race, mention to me the sacred waters
existing on this Earth. F wish, O. you of
great power, to hear you describe to me
this subject. ; .


Bhishma said :—

-2 O you of great splendour, Angiras :
thus enumerated the sacred waters on. thes
Earth. Blessed be you, you should Kster
to it, for you will then acquire great merits.> .


4—5. Once on a. time approaching the
great and learned Rishi Angiras gifted witl,,
tranquillitv, of soul, while he was.living in
a forest, Gautama of rigid vows: questioned,


-him;. saying,—O illustrious one, I have


some doubts regarding the merits of sacred
waters and shrines. [I wish to hear you’
describe that subject. Da you, therefore,
O ascetic, describe ittome, «© ;


7%


6.’ Whar merit. are xequired by a
person regarding the next world, by bath-
ing in the sacred waters on the Earth, O
you of yreat wisdom ? Do you explain to
me this truly and dccording to the ordi-
nance. ‘ ;


Angiras said :— _

7. A person by bathing for seven days
successively in the Chandrabhaga or the
Vitasta whose waters are always seen to
dance in waves, fasting all the while, is
sure to become purged of ‘all his sins and
endued with the mecit of an ascetic.


8. There are many rivers in the country
called Kashmira. All these fall into the
great river called Sindhu (indus). By
bathing in these rivers one is sure to
become gifted with good character and
to ascend to heaven aftee leaving this
world, : ;

9.. By bathing in Pushtara, Prabhasa,
aad Naimisha, and the ocean, and Devika,
and Indramarga, and Swarnavindu, one is


sure to ascend where, seated of: a celestial


car, one is sure be filled with joy on being
worshipped by the Apsaras.


10. By bathing in the waters of Hira-
nyavindu with x concentrated ‘mind and
respeciing that sacred river, and bathing
next at Kusheshaya and Devanta, one be-
comes purged of all one’s sins.


tt. Going to Indratoya.near the -Moun-
tains of Gandhamadana and next to Kara-
toyasin the country called Kuranga, one
should fast for three days and then bathe
in those sacred waters with a concentrated
heart and pure body. By doing this, one
is sure ta acquire the merit of a Horse.
sacrifice.


12, Bathing in Gangadwara and Ku-
shavarta and Vilwaka in the Blue moun-


tains, as also in Kanakhala, one is sitre to -


becoine purged of all one’s sins and then
ascend to heaven; °


13.
control his anger, devotes ene-self to truth
and practises mercy towards all creatures,
and then bathes in the Lake of Waters, one
is sure to acquire the merit of a Horse-
sacrifice.


“14. That part where Bhagirathi-Ganga

flows northwards is known as the union of
heaven, Earth, and the nether regions.
Fasting for one month and bathing in
that sacred ‘Tirtha which is acceptable
to Maheshwara, one cau see the deities. ©


1s. One who gives oblations of water to
his departed manes at Saptaganga and
‘Stiganga and Indramarga, obtains am-


Tf one becomes a Brahmacharin and


MAMABITARATA.


brosia for feod if one has go stil] to through
re-birth.


16. The man who in a pure state of
body and mind performs his daily Agni-
hotra and fasts for one menth and then
bathes in Mahashrama, is sure to acquire
success in one month.


t7. By bathing, after a fast of three days
and purifying the mind of all evil propene
sities, in the large lake situate in Bhrigus
tunga, one becomes purged ot even the sin
of Brahminicide,


18. By bathing in Kanyakupa and pers
forming one’s ablutions in Valaka, one
wins great fame among even the celestials
and shines in glory.


19. Bathing in Devika and the lake
known by the name of Sundarika as also
in the Tirtha called Ashwini, ‘one acquires,
in next life, great personal beauty. :


‘20. By fasting for a fortnight and bath-
ing in Mahaganga and Krittikangaraka,
one becomes purged of all his sins and
ascends to heaven,


21. Bathing ia Vaimanika and Kinki-
nika, one acquires the power of going
everywhere at will and becomes an object
of great respect in the celestial region of the
Apsaras. ve one ;

22. [fa person, controlling his anger,
and observing the vow of Brahmacharyya
for three days, bathes in the river Vipasa
at the hermitage called Kalika, he is sure
to get over re-birth. . :


23. Bathing in the asylum that is sacred
tothe Krittikas and offering oblations of
water to the departed manes, and then
pleasing Mahadeva, one becomes pure in
body and mind and ascends to heaven.


24. If one, fasting for three days with a
purified body and mind, bathes in Mata-
pura, one becomes freed from the fear of
all mobile and immobile animals as alse of


4 all'two-feeted animals,


25. By bathing in the Devadaru forest
and offering oblations of water to the de-
parted manes and living there for seven
nights with a pure body and mind, one
acquires the region of the celestials on de-
parting from this world.


. .26. Bathing in the waterfalls at Sharas-
tamva and Kushastamva and Dronashar-


mapada, one is sure to acquire the region of
the Apsaras where one .is dutifully served |
by those super-human beings. .


27. ff one, fasting bathes’at Chitrakuta
and Janasthana-and the waters of Manda-
kini, one is sure to be gifted with regal
prosperity,


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


$8. By going tothe retreat of Shyama
and living there for a fortnight and bathing
th the sacred water that hes there, one
acquires the power of disappearing at witl.


..29. Going to the tirtha [aushiki and
living there with a pute heart and abstain-
ing from all food and drink for three days,
ove acquires the power of living in the
Nappy region of the Gandhbarvas,


30. Bathing in the charming tirtha
Gandhataraka and living there for one
month, abstaining afl the while from food
and drink, oe acquires the power of dis-
appearing at pleasure and, then in twenty-
one days of ascending to heaven,


31—32. - He who bathes in the lake Ma-
tanga is sure fo acquire success.in one night.
He who bathes in Analamva or the eternal,
Andhaka, or in Naimisha, or the tictha
talled Swarga, and offers oblations of
water ta the departed manes, controlling
his senses all the while, acquires the mrerit
of a human sacrifice.


33- Bathmg in Gangahrada and the
tittha Utplavana and daily offering obla-
tions of water there fora full month to the
departed manes, one acquires the merit of #
Horse-sacrifice.


34. Bathing in the confluence of the
Ganga and the Yamuna as also at the.
fittha in the Kalanjara mountains and
offering every day oblations of water to the
departed mranes fot a futl nyonth, one ac-
quires the nrerit of ten Hor'se-sacrifices,


35—30. Bathing in the Shashth? lake
One acquires merit much greater than what
appertains to the gift of food. ‘Yen thou-
sand tirthas and thirty millions of other
lirthas come to Prayaga, O chief of Bha-
tata's race, inthe month of Magha. He
who bathes in Prayaga, with a controlled
mind and observing rigid vows all the while,
the month of Magha, beconres purged of
all his sins, O chief of Bharata’s race,
and attains to heaven,


37- Bathing in the tirtha that is saéred
to the Maruts, as also in that which is
situate in the retfeat of the departed manes,
in and also in that which is known by the
name of Vaivaswata, one becomes purged
of all one’s sins and as pure and sauctified
as a tirtha. :


38. Going to Brahnrasaras as to the
Bhagirathi and bathing there and offer-
ing oblations to the departed manes every
day for a fulf month, abstaining from food
all the while, one is sure to go to the
region of Soma.


39. Bathing in Utpataka afd then in
Ashtavakra and offer ng oblations of water
to the depaited mancs every day for twe'ye


| might.


79


days successively, abstaining af the white
from’ food, one acquires the merits of #
Horse-sacrifice. :

40. Bathing in Ashniaprishtha - and
Niravinda mountains and Kraunchapadi,
—~all three in Gaya—one beconres purged
of the siw of Brahmanicide. A bath ity thie
first place purifies one of a single Brahma


nicide; a bath in the setond cleanses one
of two similar offences; and a bath iw the


thitd cleanses one of three sucht offences, |
41. Bathing in Kalavinga, one. gets 2

large quantity of water: A man, by bathing

in the city of Agni, acquires such meri as


entitles hiny to live at nis next bivelt in the


city of Agni’s daughter. ; :
* 42. Bathing in Vishala iv Karavirapura
and . offering eblations _ of. waters, to’ tits
departed nvanes, and performitg his ablu-
tions in Devahrada too, one becontes at one
with Brahnva and shines in' glory a¢ sucl’,


43. Bathing in Punaravatra-Nanda as
also Mahananda, . a man of controlled
senses and universal mercy goes to’ the


celestial garden of Nandand and served


there by the various tribes of Apsaras. . ,
44. Bathing with concentrated souwt ‘in


the tirtha of Urvashi which is situate i the


river Lobitya, on the day of full moor of
the month of Kartika, one acquires the
merits of Pundarika sacrifice, |


4§. Bathing in Ramahrada “and offers.


ing oblations“of water te the departed


manes in the river Vipasha (Beas), and


‘fasting for twelve days, one becomes purgéd:,


of alt sins.
46. Bathing it the ftirtha called Mahg-


hrada withja purified heart and after fasting


for one uvontlY, one is sure tu acquire the
status of the sage fanvadagni. |

. 47. By exposing oneself to heat in the
tirtha called Vindhya, a person given to
truth and endued with compassion’ for alt
creatures should thew practise austere
penaices, actuated by frontility. By so
doing, he is sure to acquire ascetic success .
in course of a single month.


48. Bething in the Narmada as also the
tirtha named Surparaka, fasting {for a
fafl fortnight, one is sure to become in one’s,
next birth a prince of royal blood. ‘


49. TE one proceeds with controlled senses
and a concentrated soul to the tirtha known
as Jamvomarga, one is sure to acquire
success itr thte course of a single day and


§0. . By going to Chandalikashrama and
bathing i the tirtha called Kokamukha,
having lived for sometime. ou  potherbs
alone and wun sags for zaiments eng is


me) ‘


MAHABHARATA: °


sure to pét ten beautiful maidens aschis |'to acquire Sticcess and prétiéed to thie


aives.


5t. Ore who lives by the side of the
Rirtha’ known by the name of Kanyahtada
has never ‘to visit the -regions of Yariia,
‘Such a perso 18 sttre to ascend to the re-


‘gions of ‘happiness belonging to the
telestials,
84, One’ who bathes with Cotttrolled


“senses on the day of the itew micon in the
tirtha known by tlie name of Prabhasa, is
Sure, O you of mighty arms, of acquiring
ssuccess and immortality simultaneously.


§3., Bathing in the tirtha known by the
‘name ‘of Ujjanaka whith is situate in the
retreat of Arshtisena’s son, atid next in
Ahe'tirtha which issituate in the retreat of
Pinga, ‘one is gure to. be purged of all
Wis sins,

* Fasting for three days ahd ‘bathing
in the tictha known as Kulya and reciting
“the sacred Mantras of Aghamarshana, one
“acquires the merit of a Horse-sacrifice.

55. Fasting for one night and bathing
th Pindaraka, one’ becorties pitrified on the
hext day and acquires ‘the merit of an
Agnishtoma sacrifice:

‘56. One who goes to Brahmiasata which
As adorned by the woods called Dharma-
tanya owe becortes purged of all-one's sins
and acquires the imerit of ‘the Pundarika
_ Sacrifice.


$7. Bathing in the waters of the Mainaka


“mountain and reciting mortiing and evening,


prayers there and living at the spot for a
month controllirig desire, ote acquires the
_merit of.all the sacrifices,


.58. Starting for Kalodaka and Nandi-
“kunda ahd Uttara-manasa, and reaching
a spot that is a huhdred Yojanas remote
“from any of them,-one Deromes purged of
‘the sir of fosticide. -”


gg. One who succeeds in seeiiig the
image af. Nandishwara, becomes purged
_of all sins. Bathitig in the tittha called
“'Swargamarga one is sute to proceed to
the regions of Brahman.


60. ‘The celebrated Himavat is sacred.
: That king of mountaitis is the father-in-law
“of Shankara. He is a mine of all jewels and
gems and is the tesort of the Siddhas and
“Charanas,


61-62. That twice-borh persoh who is
as master-of the Vedas and who, considet-
ing this life to be exceedingly unstable;
rencunces his hody on those mountains,
abstaining from ali food and drink actord-
ing to the rites laid down in the. sctiptures,
atier having worshipped the:gods and bent
his hezd in worship of the asestics, is sure


eternal regions of Brahman.


63. There is nothing whith dne cannot
get who lives itt a tittha; restraining -lust
and controlling ariget on attount of puclt
tesidence.


64. For the purpose of going ta alf tha
tirthasin the world, one should -mentally
think of those difiongst them which aré.
almost inaccessible or sojourns td whichgarg.-
attended with great difficulties,


63. Sojotirns tottirthas yields the merits:
of sacrifices. ‘[hey are competent to purify,
everybody of sin. Fraught- with greatjgood,
they. are capable of ‘leading t™ heaven.
The subject is truly a great fiystery, ‘The
very gods sliotild bathe in tirthas. ‘Ta
them also they are sin-purifying.

66. ‘This discourse. on tirthas should be
delivered to Brahmanas, and tesuch honest
ot pious pefsons as are bent upon gaining
what is for their own behoof. It should
also be retited in thé hearing of one’s
well-wishers and friends and of one's dbe+
dient and devoted disciples.

67. Angiras endued with great asceti¢
merit, had delivered this discoursé. ta
Gatitama. Angiras himself had got it
from the the highly intelligent Kashya pa.


68. The great Rishis consider this diss
course as deserving of constatt repetition.


luis the foremost of all surifying things. If


one recites it regtilarly every day, he is
sure to become putged of every sin and


catter this life to proceed to’ heaven.


69. .Otie who listens to this discatirse
recited in. his hearing,—this discourse; vig¢.;
of Angiras, which is regarded as a
mystery,is sure ta-attain in one’s next
life to birth in a gead family and, what is
fitore, otte would have the ‘memor y of the
pristine existenee,


CBAPTER XVI.


{ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).
_ Continued.


Vaishanipayatia said =

1—2z. Equal to Vrihaspatl in intelli-
gence and Brahman himself in forgiveness,
resembling Shakra in prowess and the Sun
in energy, ‘Bhishma the’son of Ganga, of
infinite might, had been defeated in batde
by Arjuna. Accompanied by his brothers
and many other pecple, king mae tant


wasked him these questions,


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


3. The old hero was lying on a bed
coveted by heroes, in expectation of that
sacred moment when he could take leave
ef bis body. Many great Rishts had come


there for seeing that foremost one of
| Bharata’s race.
-4-—6. Amongst them were = Atri,


Vashishtha, Bhrigu, Pulastya, Pulaha, and
Kratu. There were also Angiras, Gotama,
Agastya, Sumati of well-rcestrained soul,
Vishwamitra, Sthulashivas, Samvarta, Pra-
mati and Dama. ‘There were also Vrihas-
pati, Ushanas, Vyasa, Chyavana, Kashyapa,
Diruva, Durvasas, Jamadagni, Markan-
deya, Galava, Bharadwaja, Raibhya Yava-
krita and Trita,


7. VYhere were Sthulaksha, Shavalaksha,
Kanwa, Medhatithi, Krisha, Narada, Par-
vata, Sudhanwan, Ekata and Dwita.


8. ‘Shere were also Nitambhu, Bhuvana,
Dhaumya, Shatananda, Akritavrana, Rama
the son of Jamadagni and Kacha.


g.—10. All these great Rishis came
* there for seeing Bhishma lying.on his bed.
of arrows. Yudhishthira with his brothers
duly adored those great Rishis who had
come there, one after another in proper
order. Kecéiving that adoration, those
foremost of Rishis sat themselves down
and beyan to converse with one another.


11. ‘Their conversation related to
Bhishina, and was highly sweet and agree-
able. Hearing that talk of theirs about
himself, Bhishina became filled with joy
and considered himself to be already in
heaven.


12, Having obtained the leave of
Bhishma and of the Pandava princes, those
Rishis then disappeared before the very
sight of all the bebolders.


13. The Pandavas bowed again and
again and offered their adorations to those
highly-blessed Rishis even after they had
made themselves invisible.


14. ‘They then cheerfully waited upon
the son of Ganga even as Brahmanas
versed in Mantras wait with respect upon
the rising Sun. : ;


15. The Pandavas saw that the points
of the compass shining on account of the
energy of their penances, and became filled
with wonder at the spectacle.


16. Thinking of the high blessedness
and power of those Rishis, the Pandava
princes began to discourse on the subject
with their grandfather Bhishma. -


Vaishampayana said :—
17, Alter that conversation was over,
rf


81.


the pious Yudhishthira, the son of Pandu,
touched Bhishma’s feet with his head and
then resumed his questions about mocality
and virtue.


Yudhishthira said :—

18. Which countries, which pravinces,
which hermitages, which mountains, and
which rivers, O grandfather, are the fore~
most in sanctity.


Bhishma said :—


19. Regarding it is cited the old conver.
sation between a Bralimana in the obser-
vance of the Shila and the Unccha vows, O

| Yudhishthira, and a Risti crowned with
ascetic merits,


20--21. Once on a time, a foremost per-
son, having travelled over this entire Earth
adorned with mountains, arrived at last in
the house of a foremost person living tike
a householder in accordance with the Shila
vow, ‘Lhe latter welcomed his guest with
due rites, Received with such hospitality,
the happy Rishi passed the night happily
in the house of his host,


22. The next morning the Brahmana in
the observance of the Shila vow, having
finished all his morning acts and rites and
purified himself duly, gladly approached
his guest crowned with ascetic success,


23. Meeting with each other and seated .
at their ease, the two began to take on
agreeable subjects of the Vedas and the
Upanishads.

24. Yowards the conclusion of the dig--
course, the Bratinana in the observance
of the Shita vow respectfully addressed the
Rishi crowned with. success. Gifted with
intelligence, he put this very question which
you, O Yudhishthira have put to me,


The poor Brahmana said :—


25. What are those countries, what are

| those provinces, what those herimitages,
what those mountains, and what those”
rivers, that should be considered’ as the
foremost in sanctity ? Do you describe this


to me.
The Rishi said :—

26. ‘These countries, those provinces,
those retreats, and -those mountains,


should be considered -s the foremost in
sanclity through which or by the. side of
which that foremost of all rivers, viz,
Bhagirathi, flows.


= 27. The end which a creature can ate
tain by penances, by Bratinacharyya, by
Sacrifices, or by practising Renunciation,
one js Sube Lo aliai by only living by the


82


side of the Bhagirathi and bathing in its
sacred waters,


28. Those creatures whose bodies have
been sprinkled: with the sacred waters of
Bhagirathi or whose bones have been laid
in that sacred stream, have not to fall
away from heaven at any time.


29. Those men, O learned Brahmana,
who use the waters of Bhagirathi in all
their acts, surely go to heaven after death.


30. Even those men who, having com-
mitted yarious sinful deeds in the first part
of their lives, live in after years by the
side of Ganga, succeed in attaining to
_a@ very superior ¢nd.

3. Hundreds of sacrifices cannot yield
that merit which men of controlled souls
are capable of acquiring by bathing in the
‘sacred waters of Ganga.


32. A person is respected and adored
in the celestial region for as long a period
as his bones lie in the channel of Ganga.


33- Even as the Sun, when he rises at
the dawn of day, shines, having removed
the darkness of night, likewise the person
who has bathed in the waters of Ganga is
seen to shine, purged of all his sins.


34. The countries and the points of the
compass which are destitute of the sacred
waters of Ganga are like nights without
the moon or trees without flowers.


35. Indeed, a world without Ganga is
like the different castes and modes of life
when they are shorn of virtue or like sacri-
fices without Soma,


36. Forsooth, countries and points of the
compass which are without Ganga are lke
the sky without the Sun, or the Earth with-
out mountains, or the etherial region with-
out air.


37. All the creatures in the three worlds,
if served with the sacred waters of Ganga,
derive a pleasure the like of which they
cannot derive from any other source.


38. He who drinks Ganga water which
has been heated by the Sun’s rays, derives
merit much greater than that which belongs
to the vow of living upon the wheat or
geains of other corn picked up from cow-
dung.

39. It cannot be said whether, he who
pertorms a thousand Chandcayana rites
for purifying his body and he who drinks
the water of Ganga, are equal.

40. It cannot be said whether one
who stands for a thousand years on one
foot and one who lives for only a mouth by
the side of Ganga are equal.


41. Que who lives permanently by the


‘MAHABHARATA.


side of Ganga is superior in merit to one
who lives for ten thousand cycles with head
hanging downwards.


42. As cotton, when it comes into con-
tact with fire, is burnt off without a residue,
so the sins of the person that has bathed in
Ganga become perfectly consumed.


43. There is no end superior to Ganga
for those creatures who, with hearts afflicted
by sorrow, seek to attain to ends which
may remove that sorrow of theirs.


44. As snakes become shorn of their
poison as soon as they see Garuda, so one
becomes puryed of all his stus as soon as he
sees the sacred river Ganga.


45. They who do not enjoy fame for
virtue and they who are addicted to deeds
of sinfulness, have Ganga for their fame,
their protection, their means of safety, their
refuge or cover.


46. Many wretched men who commit
various sins of a heinous nature, when they
are about to sink inte hell, are rescued by
Gang a in the next world.


47. They, O foremost of intelligent
men, who plunge every day in the sacred
waters of Ganga, become the equals of
dee Munis and the very deities headed by
ndra.


48. Those wretched men who are desti-
tute of humility or modesty of behaviour
and who are greatly sinful, become righte-
ous and good, O Brahmana, by living by
the side of Ganga,


49. As ambrosia is to the deities, as
Swadha is to the Pitris, as Sudha is to
the Nagas, so is Ganga-water to human
beings.

50. As children stricken with hunger,
solicit their mothers for food, similarly do
people desirous of their highest good seek
Ganga.


51. As the region of the self-create
Brahman is said to be the foremost of all
places, so is Ganga said to be foremost of
all rivers for those who desire te bathe.


52. As the Earth and the cow are said
to be the chief sustenance of the celestials,
so is Ganga the chief sustenance of all
living creatures,


53. As the celestials srpport themselves
upon the ambrosia that is in the Sun and
the Moon and that is offered in various
sacrifices, so do human beings support
themselves upon Ganga-water. |


54. One besmeared with the sand taken
from the shores of Ganga considers oneself
as an inhabitant of heaven, adorned with
Celestial unguents,


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


8s, He who bears on his head the mud
taken from the banks of Ganga looks
effulgent like the Sun himself bent on
removing the surrounding?darkness. ;


56. When the wind which is moistened
with the particles of Ganga-water touches
one’s body, it cleanses him immediately of
every sin. .

57. A person afflicted by calamities and
about to sink under their pressures, finds all
his calamities removed by \the joy which
originates in his heart on seeing that sacred
tiver,


58. By the sweet notes of the swans and
Kokas and other aquatic fowl that play on
her breast, Ganga challenges; the very
Gandharvas and by her high banks the
very mountains on the Earth.


59. Seeing her surface teeming with
swans and various other aquatic fowl, and
having banks adorned with pasture lands
with kine grazing on them, the celestial
region herself loses her pride.


60, The high happiness which one
enjoys by living on the banks of Ganga,
can never be his who is living even in the
celestial region.


61, I have no doubt in this that the
person who is afflicted with sins perpetrated
in words and thought asd act, becomes
cleansed on seeing Ganga.


62. By seeing that sacred river, touch-
ing it, and bathing in its waters, one res-
cues his ancestors to the seventh degree,
and his descendants to the seventh degree,
as also other ancestors and descendants,


63. By hearing of Ganga, by wishing to
‘go to that river, by drinking ts waters, by
touching those waters, and by bathing in
them, a person rescues both his paternal
ard maternal families.


64. By seeing, touching, and drinking
the waters of Ganga, or by praising them,
hundreds and thousands of sinful men be-
come purged of all their sins.


65. They who wish to make their birth,
life, and learning, successful, should go to
Ganga and please the departed manes and
the celestials by offering them oblations of
water.


66. The merit that one acquires by
bathing in Ganga is such that the like of it
is incapable of being acquired through the
acquisition of sons or riches or the per-
formance of meritorious acts.


67. Those who, although physically
able, do not seek to see the sacred Ganga,
are, forsooth, comparable to persons suffer~
ing from congenital blindness or those who


83


are dead or those who are benumbed
through palsy or lameness.


68. What man is there who would not
respect this sacred river that is adored by
great Rishis knowing the Present, the Past,
and the Future, as also by the very gods
headed by Indra ?


69. What man is there who would not
{seek the protection of Ganga whose pro-
| tection is sought by hermits and houses:

holders, by Yatis and Brahmacharins
alike ?


qo. The virtuous man with controtled
mind, thinks of Ganga at the time when his
vital airs are about to leave his body, suc-
ceeds in acquiring the highest end.


71. That man who lives by the side of
Ganga up tothe time of his death, wor~
shipping her teverentially, becomes freed
from all fear of sin and of kings.


72, When that highly sacred river
dropped from the sky, Maheshwara held it
on his head. It is that very river which is
worshipped in heaven.


73. ‘The three regions, are beautiful by
the three courses of this sacred river. The
man who uses the waters of that rivee be-
comes certainly successful.


74 As the solar ray is to the gods in.
the celestial region, as the moon is to the
departed manes, as the king is to human
beings, so is Ganga to all rivers.


75- One who becomes bereaved of
mother or father or sons or wives or riches
does not feel that grief which one feels
when he becomes bereaved of Ganga.


76. One does not get that joy through
acts that lead to the region of Brahman, or
through such sacrifices and rites that lead
_to heaven, or through children or riches,
which one get from seeing Ganga,


77. The pleasure that men derive from °
seeing Ganga is tantamount to what they
derive from seeing the full moon,


78. Vhat man becomes dear to Ganga
who worship her with deep devotion, with
mind wholly fixed upon her, with a respect
that refuses to take in any other object
within its sphere, with a feeling that there
is nothing else in the universe worthy of
Similar adoration, and with a steadiness
that knows no decrease.


79. Creatures who live on Earth, in the
sky, or in the celestial region,—indeed, even
beings who are very superior,—should
always bathe in Ganga. Indeed, this is the
foremost of all duties of the righteous,


80. The fame of Ganga for sanctity has
spread over the entire uniyerse, since she


84


carried all the sons of Sagara, who had
been reduced to ashes, from here to the
celestial region.


81. Men who are washed by the bright,
beautiful, high, and rapidly moving waves,
raised by the wind, of Ganga, become
purged of alt their sins and resemble in
splendour the Sun with his thousand rays.


82. Those men of tranquil souls who
have renounced their bodies in the waters of
Ganga whose sanctity is as great as that of
the butter and other liquids poured in Sac-

‘yifices and which are capable of giving
merits equal to those of the greatest of sac-
rifices, have certainly attained td a station
equal to that of the very gods. .


83. Indeed, Ganga, having fame and vast
extent and at one with ‘the entire universe
and respected by the deities headed by
Indra, the Munis, and tuman beings, is
competent to grant the fruition of all their
wishes to them who are blind, to them who
are idiots, and to them who are destitute of
all things.


84. They “who seek refuge with Ganga,
that protectress of all the universe, that
flows in three currents, that is filled with
water at once highly sacred and sweet as
honey and prodnctive of- every sort of good,
have succeeded in acquiring the beatitude
of Heaven,


85. ‘That mortal who live by the side of
Ganga and sees her every day, becomes
purified by ber sight and touch. To him
the gods give every sort of happiness here
and a high end hereafter.


86. Ganga is regarded as competent to
rescue every creature from sin and lead
him to the happiness of Heaven. She is
held to be at one with Prishni the mother of
Vishnu. She is identical with the Word
or Speech. She is very remote and can not
be easily attained. She is the embodiment
of auspiciousness, and prosperity. She is
capable granting the six well-known attri-
butes beginning with lordship or power.
She is always bent upon showing her grace.
She is the displayer of all things in the
universe, and she is the great resort of all
creatures. ‘Thosé who seek her protection
in this life have surely acquired heaven.


87. The fame of Ganga has spread all
over the sky, and Heaven, and Earth, and
all the points, cardinal and subsidiary, of
the compass. By using the waters of that
foremost of rivers, mortal creatures always
become crowned with high success.


88. That person who, himself seeing
Ganga, points her out to others, finds that
Ganea rescues him from re-birth and cone
fers Liberation on him. Ganga held Guha,
the conmander-in-chief of the celestial


MAHABHARATA.


army in her womb. She bears the most
precious of all metals, azz, pold, also in
that womb of hers. Vhey who bathe in
her waters every day in the morni g,
succeed in obtaining tle three-fot! ot-
jects, vig., Virtue and Worldy Profit and
Pleasure. hose waters are, again, equat
in point of sanctity to the butter that is
poured with Mantras on the sacrifical fire.
Capable of purging one from every sin,
she has descended from the celestial region
and her carcent is held iv high regard by
every one.


89. Ganga is the daughter of Himavat,
the wife of Hara, and the ornament of both
tleaven and Earth. She is the bestower
of everything auspicious, and is competent
to give the six well-known attributes bepin-
ning with lordship: or power. Indeed, O
king, Ganga is the one object of great
sanctity in the theee worlds and confers
merit upon all.


90. Truly, O king, Ganga is Virtue in
liquefied form. She is energy ina tquid
form over the Earth. She is gifted with the
splendour or power that betongs to the
butter. that is poured with Mantras on the
sacrifical fire. She is always ado:ned with
large waves as also with Brahmanas who
may at all times be seen making their
ablations in her waters. Falling fron
Heaven, she was held by Shiva on his head.
‘The very mother of the heavens, she has
originated from the highest mountain for
cunning over the plains and conferring the
most valuable benefits on all creatures of
the Earth.


gt. She is the highest cause of all
things; she is perfectly pure. She is as
subtile as Brahma. She is the hest bed
for the dying. She takes creatures speedi-~
ly to the celestial region. She carries a
large volume of water. She confers great
fame onall. She is the protectress of the
universe. She is at one with every form,
Sheis very much coveted by persons crown-
ed with success. Indeed, Ganga is the path
to that celestial region of those who have
bathed in her water.


92. The Brahmanas consider Ganga as
being equal to the Earth in forgiveness,
and in the protection and upholding of
those who live by her ; further, as equalling
Fire and the Sun in energy and splendour ;
and, lastly, as always equalling Guha him-
self in the matter of showing favours to the
true-born class.


93. Those men who, in this life, even in
their minds seek that sacred river which is
lauded by the Rishis, which has come out
of the feet of Vishnu, which is very ancient,


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


and which is highly sacred, succeed in go-


ing to the regions of Brahman,


o4. Fully convinced that children and
other belongings, as also regions possessed
of every kind of happiness, are transitory
or frail, men of subdued souls, are
desirous of acquiring that everlasting station
which is at one with Brahma, always pay
their adorations to Ganga yith that respect


and love which are due from a sontoa
mother.
95. The man of purified soul who is


desirous of acquiring success should seek
the protection of Ganga who is like a cow
that gives ambrosia instead of ordinary
mils, who is prosperity’s self, who is en-
dued with omniscience, who exists for all
creatures, who is the source of, all sorts of
food, who is the mother of all mountains,
who is the refuge of all pious persons, who
is immeasurable in power and energy, and
who charms the heart of Brahman himself,


96. Having, with austere penances,
pleased all the gods with the Supreme Lord
(Vishnu), Bhagiratha brought Ganga down
on the Earth. Going to her, men always
succeed in freeing themselves from every
sort of fear both here and hereafter,


97. Observing with the help of intel-
ligence, 1 have mentioned to you only a
small portion of the merits of Ganga. My
power, however, is inadequate to speak of
all the merits of the sacred river, or, indeed,
to measure her power and sanctity;


98 One may, displaying his best powers,
count the stones of the mountain Meru or
measure the waters of the ocean. But one
cannot count all the merits of the waters of
Ganga.


g9.. Hence, having listened to these
particular merits of Ganga which I have
uttered with great devotion, one should, in
thought, word, and deed, respect them with
faith and devotion.


100. On account of your having listen-
ed to those merits which [ have recounted,
you are sure to fill all the three regions
with fame and acquire a measure of
success that is very large and that is diffi-
cult of being won by any. other person. In-
deed, you will, soon after that, sport in joy
in many a region of great happiness creat-
ed by Ganga herself for those that respect
her.


10!
to those who are devoted to her in humble-
ness of heart. She unites those who are so
devoted to her with every kind of happiness.
I pray that the highly-blessed Ganga may
always inspire your heart and mine with
the attributes of virtue,


Ganga always extends her favour.


85


Bhishma said :-—


1oz. The learned ascetic gifted with
high sonl and great slendour, and crowned
with success, having in this manner des-
cribed to that poor Brahmana observing
the Shila vow, on the subject of the infinite
merits of Ganga, then ascended the sky.


103, The poor Brahmana observing
the Shila vow, .awakened by the words of
that ascetic crowned with sticcess, duly
sought refuge with Ganga and acquired
great success,


‘104. Do thou also, O son of Kunti, seek
Ganga with great devotion, for you will
then, as the reward thereof, acquire great
and excellent success,


Vaishampayana said :—


105. Hearing this discourse from Bhishma


of the praise of Ganga, Yudhishthira


with his brothers became filled with great -


joy.

106. That person who recites or hears
recited this sacred topic of the praise of
Ganga. becomes purged of every sin.


CHAPTER XXVII.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


1. You, O grandfather, are endued with
wisdom and knowledge of the scriptures,
with conduct and behaviour, with various
kinds of excellent attributes, and also with
years.


2. “You are superior to others in intel-
ligence, wisdom and penances. 1 shall,
therefore, O you the foremost of all righte-
ous men, wist to ask you questions about
virtue.


3-4. There is not another man, O king,
in all the worlds, who is worthier of being
accosted on such topics. O best of kings,
how may one, if he happens to be a
Kshatriya or a Vaishya or a Shudra,
succeed in acquiring the dignity of a Brah-
mana ? You should tell me the means. Is
it by the most austere penances or by
religious -acts, or by knowledge of the
sctiptures, that a person belonging to any


of the three inferior castes succeeds in ac- ~


quiring the dignity of a Brahmana? Do
tell me this, O grandfather, —
Bhishma said :—


5- The dignity of a Brahmana, O Yu-
dhishthira, cannot be acquired by a person


86


belonging to any of the three other castes.
That dignity is the highest with respect to
all creatures. 7


6. Passing through numberless orders
of existence by undergoing repeated births,
one at last, in some birth, becomes born as
a Brahmana.


7. Regarding it is cited an old history,
O {Vudhishthira, of a conversation between
Matanga and a she-ass.


8. Once on a time a Brahmana obtain-
ed a son who, though procerated by a
person belonging to a different caste, had,
however, the rites of infancy and youth
performed according to the ordinances laid
down for Brahmanas. The chiid passed
by the name of Matanga and was endued
with every accomplishment,


9. His father, wishing to celebrate a sac-
rifice, ordered him, O destroyer of enemies,
to collect the articles required for the, act.
Having received the conrmand of his father,
he started for the purpose, riding on a
quick-coursing car, drawn by an ass.


to. It so happened that the ass yoked to
that car was very young. Instead, there-
fore of being reined, the animal bore away
the car near its dam, viz., the she-ass that
had brought it forth. Matanga,. dissatis-
fied -with this, began to strike the animal
with his goad on its nose,


tr, Seeing those marks of violence on
her child’s nose, the she-ass, full of affec-
tion for him, said,—Vo not grieve, O child,
for this treatment! A Chandala is driving
you. :

12.
mana,
friend of all creatures.
also of all creatures and their culer,
he punish any creature so cruelly.


There is no harshness in a Brah-
‘The Brahmana is -said to be the
He is the teacher
Can


13. This fellow, however, is of sinful
deeds. He has no mercy to show to even
such a young creature. He is simply
proving the order of his birth by behaving
thus, The nature which he has derived
from his father forbids the growth of the
sentiments of pity and kindness which are
natural to the Brahmana.


14. Hearing these harsh words of the
she-ass, Matanga speedily came down from
the car and addressing the she-ass, said,—
Teli me, O blessed dame, by what fault is
my mother stained ?


15. How do you know that I am a
Chandala? Do you answer me forthwith.


16. How, indeed, do you know that I
ama Chandala? How have L lost the dig-
nity of a Brahman? O you of great wisdom


|


MAHABHARATA,


tell me all- this fully, from beginniug to
end,


The she-ass said :—


17. You were begotten upon a Brah-
man oman worked up with desire, by a
Sha ‘following the calling of a barber,


You are, therefore, a Chandala by birth,
You have not the dignity of a Brahmana.


Bhishma said :—


18—19. Thus addressed by the she-ass
Matanga returned home. Seeing him
return, his father said,—! had engaged you
in the difficult task of gathering the requi-
sites of my intended sacrifice! Why have
you returned without having accomplished
your charge? Is it that you are not alk
cight ?


Matanga said :—~

20. How can he who belongs to no deff-
nite order of birth, or to low caste be re-
garded as all right and happy? How, O
father, can that person be happy whose
mother is impure.


21. OQ father, this she-ass, who seems to
be more than a human being, tells me that
I have been begotten upon a Brahman
woman by a Shudra. I shall, for this
reason, practise the severest penances,


22. Having said these words to his
father, and firmly resolved upon what he
had said, he went to the great forest and
began to practise the austerest of penances.


23. Beginning those penances for the
purpose of happily acquiring the dignity of
a Brahmana, Matanga began to scorch
the very gods by the severity of his asce-
ticism,,

24. The king of the celestials, u7s.,
Indra, appeared to him thus practising pen-
ances and said,—-Why, O Matanga, do you
pass your time in such grief, abstaining
from all sorts of human enjoyments.

25. 1 shall give you boons. Do you
name the boons. Do not delay, but tell
me what is in your mind. Even if it be
unattainable, I shall yet bestow it on you.


Matanga said:—:


26. Desirous of acquiring the dignity of
a Brahmana | have begun to practise these


penances. After having obtained it, {
shall go home. Even this is the boon I
pray for.


Bhishma said :-—

27. Hearing these words of his, Puran-
dara said to him,—The dignity of a Brah-
mana, O; Matanga, which you wish to
acquire, Gannot be won by you,


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


“28. It is true, you wish to acquire it, bit
then it cannot be won by persons of impure
souls. QO you of foolish understanding,
you are sure to meet with destruction if you
persist in this pursuit. Desist, therefore,
from this vain attempt forthwith.


29. This object of your desire, vfs., the
dignity of a Brahmana, which is the fores
most of everything, cannot be even acquired
by penances. Therefore, by coveting that
foremost dignity, you will surely meet with
destruction.


30. One born asa Chandala can never
acquire that dignity which is considered as
the most sacred among the celestials and
Asuras and human beings.


CHAPTER XXVIII.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.


Bhishma said :—

1. Thus addressed by Indra, Matanga
of restrained vows and_ well-controlled
soul, stood for a century of years on one
foot, O you of unfading glory.


2. Highly illustrious Shakra once more
appeared before him and addressing him,
said,—The dignity of a Brahmana, O child,
is unattainable, Although you covet ‘it, it
is impossible for you to obtain it.


3. O Matanga, by coveting that very
great dignity you are sure to meet with
destruction. Do not, O son, betray such
tashness. This is not a righteous path for
you to follow. ‘


4. O you of foolish understanding, it is
impossible for you to obtain it in this world,
Verily, by coveting that which is unattain-
able, you are sure to meet with destruction.
forthwith,


5. Ll am_ repeatedly forbidding you.
By trying, however, to attain that high
dignity by the help of your penances,
despite my repeated admonitions, you are
sure to meet with destruction.


6. From a brute life one gains the status
of humanity. If born as a human being,
he is sure to be born as a Pukkasha or a
Chandala,


7. Verily, one having taken birth in
that sinful caste, o72., Pukkasha, one, O
Matanga, has to wander in it for a very
long time,


87


8. Passing a period of one thousand
years in that order, one js next born as a
Shudra. In the Shudra order, again, one
has to wander for a long time.


g. After thirty thousand years one is
born as a Vaishya. ‘There, in that order, -
one has to pass a very long time.


to; After°a time that is sixty times
longer than what has been stated as the
period of Shudra birth, one becomes a
Kshatriya. In the Kshatriya order one has
to pass a very long time.


s


11. After a time that {fs measured by
multiplying the period last referred to by
sixty, one is born as a fallen Brahmana.
In this order one has to wander fer a long
period.


12, After a time measured by multi-
plying the period last named by two
hundred, one is born in the race of such a
Brahmana as lives by the profession of
arms. There, in that order, one has t
wander for a long period,


13. After atime measured by mutftiply~
ing the period last named by three hun-
dred, one is born in the race of a Brah-
mana that is given to the recitation of the
Gayatri and other sacred Mantras.


14. There, in that order, one has to
wander for a long period. After atime
measured by multiplying the period last
named by four hundred, one is born in the
race of such a. Brahmana who knows the |
entire Vedas and the scriptures. There,
in that order, one has to wander for a very
long period.


15. While wandering in that existence,
joy and grief, desire and hatred, vanity
and evil speech, seek to enter into him and
make a wretch of him.


16. If he succeeds in subjugating those
foes, he then acquires a high end. If, on
the other hand, those enemies succeed ‘in
subjugating him, he falls down from that
high position like a person falling down on
the geound from the high top of a palmyra
tree.


17. Knowing this for certain, O
Matanga, that I say to you, do you name
some other boon, for the status of a Bra«
hmana is incapable of being acquired by
you.


88


CHAPTER XXIX.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued,


Bhishma said: _

1. Thus addressed by Indra, Matanga
refused to hear what he was cominanded.
On the other hand, with regulated vows
and purified soul, he practised austerer
penances by standing on one foot for a
thousand years, béing deeply engaged in
Yoga-meditation,

2. After a thousand years kad passed
away, Shakra once more came to see him.
Indeed, the destroyer of Vala and Vritra
said to him the same words.


Matanga said :—


3- Ihave passed these thousand years,
standing on one foot, withsoul engaged
in meditation, and in the observance of
the vow of celibacy. Why is it that f
have not yet succeeded it acquiring the
dignity of a Brahmana ?


Shakra'said ‘—

4-5. One born as. a Chandala cannot,
by any means, acquire the dignity of a
Brahmana.
other boon so that all this labour of yours
may not prove futile! Thus addressed by
the king of the celestials, Matanga became
filled with grief. He went to Gaya, and


passed there a century of years, standing


all the while on one foot,


6. On account of the observance of such
Yoga which was extremely difficult to bear,
he became very much emaciated and his
arteries and veins became swollen and
visible. Hewas reduced to only skin and
bones. We have heard that that righteous
person, while practising those austerities
at Gaya, dropped down on the ground
from sheer exhaustion.


_.7+ Seeing him falling down, the lord and
giver of boons, engaged in the behoof of
all creatures, viz, Vasava, speedily came
to that spot and held him fast.


Shakra said :—


8. It seems, O Matanga, that the dig-
nity of a Brahmana which you seek is
ill-suited to‘you. That dignity is incapable
of being acquired by you. Indeed, in your
case, it is beset with many dangers.


9. A person by adoring a Brahmana
acquires happiness; while, by abstaining
from such worship, he gets grief and
misery. The Brahmana is, as regards alt
creatures, the giver of what they prize or


Do you, therefore, name some’


MAUABHARATA,


| covet and the protector of what they al-
ready have.


to. It is through the Brahmanas that
the departed manes and the deities become
pleased. ‘he Brahmana, O Matanga, is
said to be the foremost of all created Beings.
The Brahmana grants ali objects which
are desired and in the way they are desired.


11. Passing through numberless orders
of Being and undergoing repeated re-births,
one succeeds in some subsequent birth in
acquiring the dignity of a Brahmana.


12. That dignity is really incapable of
being obtained by persons of impure souls.
Do you, therefore, relinquish the idea:
Do you name some other boon. The parti-
cular boon which you seek is incapable of
being granted to you.


Matanga said :— :

13. Suricken as I am-with grief, why,
O Shakra, do you afflict me further 2 You
are striking one that is already dead, by
this conduct. I do not pity vou who
having acquired the dignity of a Brahmana
fail to retain it.


14. If, O you of a hundred sacrifices,
the dignity of a Brahmana be -really un-
attainable by any of the three other castes,
alas, men do not adhere’ to it who have
succeeded in acq tiring that high status ?


15. ‘Those who having won the dignity
of a Brahmana that, like wealth, is so diffi-
cult to acquire, do not seek to keep it up,
must be considered asthe most wretched
in this world, Indeed, they are the most
sintul of all creatures.


16. Forsooth, the dignity of a Brah-
mana is highly difficult to attain, and
being attained, is difficult to maintain.
It is capable of removing every sort of
grief. Alas, having got it, meu do not
always seek to keep it up.


17. When even such persons are consi-
dered as Brahmanas, why is it that 1, who
am pleased with my own self, who am
superior to all pairs of opposites, who am
dissociated from all worldly objects, who
am observant of the duty of mercy towards
all creatures and of self-control of conduct,
should not be considered worthy of that
dignity ? ;


18. How unfortunate | am, O Purandara,
that through the sin of my mother I have
been reduced to this plight, although 1 am
hot unrighteous in my conduct ?


19. Forsooth, Destiny is incapable of
being warded off or conquered by individual
exertion, since, © lord, I am unabie to
acquire, despite these persistent attempts


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


of mine, the object for "the acquisition of
which I am trying.

20. When such is the case, O rightéous
one, you should grant me some other boon
if, indeed, I have become worthy of your
favour or if 1 have a little of merit !


Bhishma said :—

21. The destroyer of Vala and Vritra
then said to him,—Do you name the boon !
Thus urged by the great Indra, Matanga
said the following words :—


Matanga said :—


22. Gifted with the power of assuming
any form at will, let me be able to jotirney
through}‘the skies and let me enjoy what-
ever pleasures I may wish for. And let
me also have the willing worship of both
Beahmanas and Kshatriyas.


23. I bow to you by bending my head,
O god! You should do that also by
which my fame, O Purandra, may live
eternally in the world !


Shakra said :—

24. You will be celebrated as the deity
of a particular measure of verse and you
will get the worship of alt women. Your
fame, O son, stall become peerless in the
three worlds.


25. Having granted him these boons,
Vasava disappeared there and then. Ma-
tanga also, renouncing his life-breaths, ac-
quired a high place.


26. You may thus see, O Bharata, that
the dignity of a Brahmana is very high.
That dignity is incapable of being acquired
here as said by the great Indra himself.


CHAPTER XXX.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


1. Ihave heard this great description,
O perpetuater of Kuru’s race. You,
foremost of eloquent meén, have said that
the dignity of a Brahmana is greatly diffi-
cult of acquisition,

2. Itis heard, however, that in former
times the dignity of a Brahmana had been
acquired by Vishwamitra. You, however,
O best of men, tell us that that dignity is
incapable of being won.


3. I have also heard that formerly
king Vitahavya had succeeded in acquiring


12


89


tHe dignity of a Brahniana. O powerful
one, I wish to hear, O- son of Ganga, the
story of king Vitahavya’s promotion.

4. Byavhat acts didthat best of kings
sticceed in acquiring the dignity of a Brah-
mana? Wasit through some boon or was
it through the virtue of penances? You
should tell me everything.


Bhishma said:—  .-

§. Hear, O king, how the highly illus
trious royal sage Vitahavva succeeded for-
merly in acquiring the dignity ‘of a Brah-
mara that is so difficult to attain and
that is held in such high esteem by all.the
world.


6. While the great Manu in days
yore was employed in ruling righteously his
subjects, he obtained a son of righteous
soul who become celebrated under the name
of Sharyati.


7. In Sharyati’s family, O monarch, two
kings were born, viz., Hathaya and Fala+
jangha. Both of them weresons of Vatsa,
O foremost of victorious kings.


8. Haihaya, O monarch, had ten wives,
Upon them he begat, O Bharata, hundred
sons all of whom were heroes who never
returned from the battle-field.


g. Allof them resembled one another in
features and prowess, All of them were
gifted with great strength and all of them
were possessed of great skill in battle.
They all studied the Vedas and the science
of weapons thoroughly.


to. In Kashi also, O monarch, there
was a king who was the grandfather of
Divodasa. The foremost of victorious
men, he passed by the name fof Haryya-
shwa.


tt. The sons of king Haihaya, O chief
of men, invaded the kingdom of Kashi, and
advancing to the country that lies between
the rivers Ganga and Yamuna, fought a
battle with king Haryyashwa and killed hint
Tr rt.

12, Having killed king Haryyashwa
thus, the sons of Haihaya, those great car
warriors, fearlessly returned to their own
charming city in the country of the
Vatsas.

13. Meanwhile Haryyashwa’s son Su-
deva, who looked like a celestial in spien«
dour and who was a second god of virtue,
was installed on the throne of Kashi as its
king.

14. The delighter of Kashi, the righte«
ous-souled prince ruled his kingdom for


‘ some time when the hundred sons of Viti+


havya once more attacked his territories
and defeated him in battie,


gg


*


=


15. Having defeated king Sudeva thus,
the victors returned to their own city.
After this, Divodasa, the son of Sudeva,
became installed on the throne of “Kashi as
its king.


16. Understanding the prowess of those
great princes, 273,, the sons of Vitihavya,
king Divodasa, gifted with great energy,
rebuilt and fotified the city of Baranasi at
the command of Indra.


17-18. The territories of Divodasa were
full of Brahmanas, Kshatriyas, Vaishyas
and Shudras. And they teemed with all
sorts of articles and provisions, and were
adorned with prosperous shops and marts.
"Yhose territories, O best of kings, extended
northwards from the banks of Ganga to
the southern Banks of Gomati, and re-
sembled a second Amaravati (the city of
Indra).


19. The Haihayas once again, O Bha-
rata, attacked that foremost of kings as he
ruled his kingdom.


20. The powerful king Divodasa gifted
with great splendour, issuing out of his
capital, gave them battle. The engage-
ment between the two parties terrible like
the encounter in days of old between the
celestials and the Asuras.


21. King Divodasa fought the enemy
for a thousand days at the end of which,
having lost a Jarge number of followers and
animals, he became greatly distressed.


22. King Divodasa, O king, having. fost
his army and seeing his treasury exhausted,
left his capital and fled away.


23. Going to the charming hermitage of
the wise Bharadwaja, the king, O chastiser
of foes, joining his hands in respect, sought
the Rishi’s protection,


24—25. Seeing king Divodasa before
him, the eldest son of Vrihaspati, a¢z,
Bharadwaja of excellent conduct, who was
the monarch’s priest, said to him,—What is
the reason of your coming here? Vell me
everything, O king! [ shall do that which
is agreeable to you, without any scruple.


The king said :—

26. O holy one, the sons of Vitahavya
have killed all the children and men of my
house. I only have escaped with Hfe,
totally discomfited by the enemy. [| seek
refuge with you.


27. You should, O holy one, protect
me with such affection as you have fora
disciple! Vhose princes of sinful deeds
have killed my whole family, leaving myself
only alive.


MATIABBARATA.


Bhishma said :—

28. Bharadwaja of great energy said to
him who pleaded so piteously,—Do not
fear! Do not fear! O son of Sudeva, let
your fears be gone.


29. FE shall perform a_ saerifice, O
monarch, in order that you may have a son
through whom you will be able to smite
thousands upon thousands of Vitahavya’s
Party.

3. After this, the Rishi performed a
sacrifice with the object of bestowing a son
ow Divodasa. As the result thereof, to
Divodasa was born ason named Pratard-
dana.


31. As soon as he was born, he grew
into a child of full three and ten years, and
quickly mastered the entire Vedas and the
whole science of arms.


32. Helped by his Yoga powers, the
highly intelligent Bharadwaja had entered
into the prince. Indeed, colleeting all the
energy of the objects of the universe,
Bharadwaj caused it to enter the body of
prince Pratarddana,


33. Casing his person im shining mait
and armed with the bow, Pratarddana, lis
praises lauded by bards and the celestial
Rishis, shone resplendent like the Sun.


34. Mounted on his car and with the
scimitar tied to his belt, he shone lixe a
burning fire. With scimitar and shield and
whirling his shield, as he went, he proceed-
ed to the presence of his father.


35. Seeing the prince, the son of Sudeva,
vizs., king Divodasa, become filled with joy.
Indeed, the old king thought the sons of
his enemy Vitahavya as already killed.


36. Divodasa then installed his son
Pratarddana as the heir-apparent, and
considering himself crowned with success
became highly happy.

37. After this, the old king commanded
that chastiser of foes, viz., prince Pradard-
dana, to march against thé sons of Vita-
havya and kill them in battle.


38. Gifted with great prowess, Pratard-


dana, that subjugator of hostile cities,
speedily crossed Ganga on his car and


proceeded against the city of the Vita-
havyas.
39. Hearing the clatter of the wheels of


his car, the sons of Vitahavya, riding ow
their own cars that looked like fortified
citadels and that were capable of destroy~-
ing hostile vehicles, issued out of their city.


40. Coming out of their capital, those
foremost of men., vzs., the sons of Vita-
| havya, who were all skilful warriors cased


>


ANUSHASANA takVA,


in mail, rushed with uplifted weapons to-
wards Pratarddana, covering him with
showers of arrows.


41. Surrounding him with numberless
cars, O Vudhishthira, the Vitahavyas
poured upon Pratarddana showers of
- weapons of various sorts like the clouds
pouring torrents of rain on the breast of
Himavat,


42. Baffling their weapons with his
own, prince Pratarddana gifted with great
energy killed them all with arrows that
resembled the thunder-bolt of Indra.


43. Their heads cut off, O king, with
hundreds and thousands of broad-headed
arrows, the warriors of Vitahavya dropped
down with blood-dyed bodies like Kinshuka
trees felled on every side by woodmen with
their axes. 7


44. After all his warriors and sons had
been killed in battle, king Vitahavya fled
away from his capital to the hermitage of
Bhrigu.

45. Indeed, arrived there, the royal
fugitive sought refuge with Bhrigu. The
Rishi Bhrigu, O monarch, assured the
defeated king of his protection,


46—47. Pratarddana followed in the
footsteps of Vitahavya. Arrived at the
Rishi's hermitage, the son of Divodasa
said in a loud voice, Ho, listen, ye disciples
of the great Bhrigu that may happen to
be present! I wish to see the sage. Go
and inform him of this.


48. Knowing that it was Pratarddana
who had come, the Rishi Bhrigu himself
came out of his hermitage and adored that
best of kings according to due rites.


49. Addressing him then, the Rishi
said,—Tell me, O king, what is your busi-
ness! The king, at this, informed the
Rishi of the reason of his arrival.


The king said :—
50. King Vitahavya has come hete, O
‘Brahmana! Do you surrender him. His
sons, Q Brahmana, had destroyed my
family. : f
st. They had devastated the territories
and the wealth of the Kashis. Those
hundred sons, however, of this king -ptoud
of his power, have all been killed by me.


52.—55. By killing that king himself I
shall to-day satisfy the debt I owe to my
father !——To him that foremost of righteous
men, o7g., the Rishi Bhrigu, stricken with
mercy, replied by saying,—There is no
Kshatriya in this hermitage. They who
are here, are all Brahmanas !—Hearing
these words of Bhrigu, that must, he


yt


>

thought, be consonant with truth, Pratard-
dana touched the Rishi’s feet slowly and,
filled with joy, said,—By this, O holy one, 1
am, forsooth crowned with success, since
this king becomes divested of the very
order of his birth on acceunt of my
prowess 1 Give me your permission, O
Brahmana, to leave you, and let mé Solicit
you to pray for my well-being.


5657. This king, O founder of the
family that goes by your name, becomes
divested of the very-order of his birth, oa
account of my might! Dismissed by the
Rishi Bbrigu, king Pratarddana then left
that hermitage, and went to the place he
had come from, having, in the way I have
described, vomited forth the poison of
speech even as a snake vomits forth its
real poison. Meanwhile, king Vitahavya,
acquired the dignity of a twice-born sage
by virtue of the worth only of Bhrigu.


58. And he acquired also a complete
mastery of all the Vedas through the same
cause. Vitahavya ‘had a son named
Gritsamada who in beauty of person was a
second Indra.


59-60. Once on a time the Daityas
afflicted him much, taking him for none
else than Indra. With regard to that great
Rishi, there is this foremost of Shrutis in the
Richs, viz., There where Gritsamada is, O
Brahmana, he is held in high respect by all
twice-born persons! Gifted with great
intelligence, Gritsamada became a twice-
born Rishi in the observance of Brahma-~
charyya.


61. Gritsamada had a regenerate son
of the name of Sutejas, Sutejas had a
son of the name of Varchas, and the son
of Varchas was known by the name of
Vihavya.


62. Vihavya had a own-begotten son
who was named Vitatya, and.Vitatya had
a son of name Satya, Satya hada son of
name Santa.


63. Santa had a son, ozs., the Rishi
Shravas. Shravas begot a son named
fama. Lama begot a son named Prakasha
who was a very great Brahmana.


64. Prakasha had ason named Vagindra -
who was the foremost of all silent reciters
of sacred Mantras. Vagindra begot a son
named Pramati who was a perfect master
of all the Vedas and their auxiliaries.
Pramati begot upon the Apsara Ghritachi
ason who was named Ruru. :


65. Ruru begot a son upon his wife
Pramadvara. That son was the regenerate
Rishi Shunaka. Shunaka begot a son who
is named Shaunaka.


92

66. Tt was thus, O foremost of mo-
narchs, that king Vitahavya, though a
Kshatriya by the order of his birth, ac-
quired the dignity of a Brahmana, O
chief of Kshatriyas, through the grace of
Bhrigu. ;


67. I have also told you the genealogy of
the race that originated from his son Grit-
samada, What else would you ask ?


CHAPTER XXXI,


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


1. What men, -O chief of Bharata’s
race, are worthy of homage in -the three
worlds? ‘Tell me this in detail, I am
never satiated with hearing you describe
these topics.


Bhishma said :—


2. Regarding it is cited the old discourse
between Narada and Vasudeva.


3—4. Seeing Narada on one occasion
adoring many foremost of Brahmanas with
joined hands, Keshava addressed him,
saying,-Whom do you worship? Whom
amongst these Bralmanas, O holy one, do
you worship with so great respect? If it
is capable of being heard by me, I wish
then to hear it. Do, O foremost of righte-
ous men, tell me this.


Narada said :—


5. Hear, O Govinda, as to who those
are whom I am adoring, O grinder of
enemies. What other pecson is there in
the world who is worthier than you to hear
this ?


6. adore them, O powerful one, who
constantly worship Varuna and Vayu and
Aditya, and Prajanya and the deity of Fire
and Sthanu and Skanda and Lakshmi aud
Vishnu, and the Brahmanas, and the lord of
speech, and the Moon, and the Waters, and
the Earth, and the goddess Saraswati.


8. O foremost of Vrishni’s race, I
always adore those Brahmanas who are
endued with penances, who are conversant
with the Vedas, who are always given to
Vedic study, and who are possessed of
great worth.


9. @ powerful one, I bow down my
head to those persons who are freed from
boastfulness, who perform with an empty
stomach, the rites in honor of the deities,


MAHABHARATA.


who are always contended with what they
have, and who are gifted with forgiveness,


to. L adore them, OQ Yadava, who are
performers of sacrifices, who are forgiving
in nature, and _ self-controlled, who are
masters of their own senses, who worship
truth and virtue, and who give away land
and kine to good Brahmanas.


tt. I bow to them, O Yadava, who are
devoted to the observance of penances, who
live in forests, who Jive upon fruits and roots
who never store anything forjthe morrow,
and who perform all the acts and rites laid
down in the scriptures.


12. I bow to them, O Yadava, who feed
and cherish their servants who are always
hospitable’ to guests, and who eat only the
residue of what is offered to the deilies,


13. I worship them who have become
irresistible by studying the Vedas, who are
eloquent in discoursing on the scriptures,
who are observant of the vow of Brahma-
charyya, and who are always devoted to the
duties of officiating at the sacrifices of others
and of teaching disciples.


14. Ll adore them that ars endued with
mercy towards all creatures, and who study
the Vedas till their backs are heated by the
Sun.


15. I bow te them, O Yadava, who try
to acquire the grace of their preceptors,
who labour in the acquisition of their Vedas,
who are firm in the observance of vows,
who wait, with dutiful obedience, upon their
preceptors and seniors, and who are free
from malice and envy.


16. I bow to them, O Yadava, who are
observant of excellent vows, who practise
silence, who have knowledge of Brahma,
who are firm in truth, who are givers of
libations of clarified buitec and oblations
of meat.


17. I bow to them, O Yadava, ‘who live
upon eleemosynary alms, who are emaciated
for want of adequate food and drink, who
have lived in the houses of their preceptors,
who are averse to and destitute of all enjoy~
ments, and who are poor in Earthly pos-
sessions.


18. I bow to them, O Yadava, who have
no affection for things of this Earth, who do
not quarrel with others, who do not clothe
themselves, who have no wants, who have
become irresistible through the acquisition of
the Vedas, eloquent in the exposition of
virtue, and that are utterers of Brahma.

1g. I bow to them who are given to the
practice of the duty of mercy towards all
creatures, who are firm in the observance
of truth, who- are self-controlled, and wha
are peaceful in their conduct.


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


20. 1 bow to them, O Yadava, who are
devoted to the worship of gods and
guests, who are observant of the domestic
mede of life, and that follow the practice of
pigeons about collecting their food.


2. I always bow to those persons, who
while doing all their works have an eye on
the three-fold objects of life, and who are
* observant of truth and righteous behaviour.


22. I bow to them, O Keshava, who are
conversant with Brahma, who are gifted
with knowledge of the Vedas, who are at-
tentive to the three-fold objects of life,
who are free from cupidity, and who are
righteous in their behaviour.


23. I bow to them, O Madhava, who
live upon water only, or upon air alone, or
upon the residue of the food that is offered
to deities and guests, and who practise all
sorts of excellent vows.


24. I always adore them who have no
wives, who have wives and the domestic
fire, who are the refuge of the Vedas, and
who are the refuge of all creatures in the
universe.


25. I always bow to those Rishis, O
Krishna, who are the creators of the
universe, who are the elders of the universe,
who are the eldest members of the race
or the family, who are dispellers of the
darknes of ignorance, and who are the best


of all persons in the universe. “


26. For these reasons, do you also, O
scion of Vrishni’s race, adore every day
those twice-born persons of whom I speak.
Worthy as they are of reverent worship,
they will, when adored, confer happiness on
you, O sinless one.


27. Those persons of whom I speak are
always givers of happiness in this world as
weil as in the next. Respected by all, they
move about in this world, and, if adored
by you, are sure to grant you happiness.


28. They who are hospitable to all
persons who come to them as guests, and
who are always devoted to Brahmanas and
kine as also to truth, succeed in crossing
all calamities and impediments.


29. They who are always devoted to
peacefulness of conduct, as also they who
are shorn of malice and envy, and they who
are always attentive to the study of the
Vedas, succeed in crossing all calamities
and impediments. .


30. They who bow to all the deities,
they who follow one Veda as their refuge,
they who are possessed af faith and are
self-controlled, succeed in crossing all cala-
mities and impediments.


93


31. They who adore the foremost of
Brahmanas with reverence and are firm in
the observance - of excellent vows and
practise the virtue of charity, succeed in
crossing all calamities and impediments.


32. They who are engaged in the practice
of penances, they who are always observant
of the vow of celibacy, and they whose
souls have been purified by penances, suce
ceed in crossing all calamities and im-
pediments.


33. The who are devoted to the worstrip
of the gods and guests and dependants
as also of the departed manes, and they
who eat the residue of the food that is offer-
ed to deities, departed manes, guests and
dependants, succeed in crossing all cala-
mities and impediments.


34. They who, having lighted the domes-
tic fire, duly keep it burning and adore it
with reverence, and they who have duly
poured libations in Soma-sacrifices, suc-
ceed in crossing all calamities and. ime
pediments,


35. They who behave properly towards.
their mothers and fathers and preceptors
and other elders even as you, O foremost
of the Vrishnis, do behave, (succeed itn
crossing al} calamities and impediments !)-~.
Having said these words, the celestial Rishi
ceased speaking.


Bhishma continued :—

36. Foc these reasons, do you also, O
son of Kunti, always adoré with reverence
the deities, the departed mates, the Brah-
manas, and guests arrived at your palace,
and as the outcome of such conduct you
are sure to acquire a desirable end !


CHAPTER XXXII.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


1. O grandfather, O you of great
wisdom, O you who are conversant with
all branchés of knowledge, I wish to hear.
you discourse on topics connected with
duty and Virtue,

2. Tell me truly, O chief of Bharata’s
race, what the merits are of those persons
who grant protection to living creatures, of
the four castes when these pray for pro-
tection.


Bhishma said :—
3. O Dharma’s son of great wisdom


ot


and wide-spread fame, listen to this old
history regarding the great merit of grant-
ing protection to others when protection is
humbly sought.


4. Once on atime, a beautiful pigeon,
pursued by a hawk, dropped down from
the skies and sought the protection of the
highly-blessed king Vrishadarbha.


5. The pure-souled, king beholding the
pigeon take refuge in his lap from fear,
comforted him, saying,—Be comforted, O
bird! You have no fear!


6. Whence have you taken such great
fright? What and where have you done
it in consequence of which you have lost
your senses in fear and are more dead than
alive ?


7. Your c¢otor, O beautiful bird,
resembles that of a fresh-blown blue lotus.
Your eyes are of the hue of the pomegra-
nate or the Ashoka flower! Do not fear.
I command you, be comforted !


8. When you have sought my protec-
tion, know that no one will have the courage
to even think of catching you, who have
such a protector to take care of your body.


g. I shall, for your sake, give up to-day
the very kingdom of the Kashis and, if
necessary my life tod! Be comforted,
therefore, do no fear, O pigeon.


The hawk said :—


10. This bird has been ordained to
be my food. * You should not, O king,
protect him from me! I have pursued this
bird and have got him. Indeed, with great
exertion have | got at him at last.


11. His flesh and blood and marrow and
fat will be of great good to me. This bird
will be the means of pleasing me greatly,
Do not, O king, place yourself between him
and me in this way.


12. I have been possessed by a terrible
thirst, and hunger is knawing my bowels.
Release the bird and cast him off. I am
unable to bear the pains of hunger any
longer.


13. I pursued him as my prey. See,
his body is bruised and tornéy me with
my wings and talons. Look, his breath
has become very weak. You-should not,
O king, protect him from me!


14. In the exercise of that power which
properly belongs to you, you are, indeed,
competent to interfere in protecting human
beings when sought to be destroyed by
human beings. But you have no power
over a sky-ranging bird stricken with
thirst,


MAHABHARATA.


15. Your powec may extend over your
enemies, your servants, your relatives, the
disputes that take place between your
subjects. Indeed, it may extend over-every
part of your dominions and over also your
own senses. Your power, however, does
not extend over the sky.


16. Displaying your prowess over such
enemies as act against your wishes, you |
may establish your cule over them. Your
rule, however, does not extend over the
sky-ranging birds. Indeed, if you have
been desirous of acquiring merit (by pro-
tecting this pigeon), it is your duty to look
at me also!


Bhishma said :—


17- Hearing these words of the hawk,
the royal sage became stricken with
wonder. Without disregarding these words
of his, the king, desirous of attending to
his comforts, replied to him, saying the
following words.


The king: said :—

18. Let a bovine bull or boar or deer or
bufflao be dressed to-day for your sake {
Do. you satisfy your hunger on such food
to-day. -

19. Never to leave one who has sought
my protection is my firm vow. See, OU bird,
this bird does not leave my lap!


The hawk said :—


20--21. I donot, O king, eat the flesh
of the boar or the ox or of any of the
various kinds of fowl, What need have I
of food of this or that kind? My business
is with that food which has been eternally
ordained for beings of my order? Hawks
feed on pigeons,—this is the eternal ordi-
nance.


22. O sinless Ushinara, if you feel such
affection for this pigeon, do you then give
me flesh from your own body, of weight
equal to that of this pigeon.


The king said :—

23-25. Great is the favor you show me
to-day by speaking to me thus. Yes, [ shalj
do what you bid.—Having said this, that
best of kings, began to cut off his own flesh
and weigh it in a balance against the
pigeon. Meanwhile, in the inner apart-
ments of the palace, the queen, adorned with
jewels and gems, hearing what was taking
place, uttered exclamations of woe and
came out, stricken with grief.


26. On account of those cries of the
ladies as also of the ministers and servants,
a noise deep as the muttering of the clouds
arose in the palace. The sky that had


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


been very clear became covered with thick
cicuds on all sides.


27—28. The Earth began to tremble, as
_ the consequerice of that act of truth which
the monarch did. The king began to cut
off the flesh from his sides, from his arms,
and from his thighs, and quickly fill one of
the scales for weighing it against the pigeon.
For all that, the pigeon continued to weigh
heavier.


29. When at last the king -beeame a
skeleton of bones, without any flesh, and
covered with blood, he wished to give up
his whole body and, therefore, ascended
the scale in which he had placed the flesh
that he had previously cut off.


_ 30. <At that time, the three worlds,
headed by Indra, came to that spot for
seeing him. Celestial kettle-drums and
various other drums were struck and played
upon by invisible beings belonging to the
sky.

31. King Vrishadarbha was bathed in a
shower of nectar that was poured upon him.
Garlands of celestial flowers, of sweet fra-
xtance and touch, were also showered upon
him copiously again and again.


32. The deities and Gandharvas and
Apsaras in large bands began to sing and
dance around him even as they sing and
dance around the Grandfather Brahman.


33- The king then ascended a celestial
car that excelled a mansion made entirely
of gold, that had aeches made of gold and
gems, and that was adorned with columns
made of lapis lazuli. ;


34. Through the merit of his: act, the
royal sage Shivi proceeded to eternal
Heaven. Do you also, O Ynadhishthira,
act thus towards those who seek your pro-
tection.


35- He who protects those who are
devoted to him, those who aré attached to
him from love and affection, and those who
depend upon him, and who has mercy for
all creatures, succeeds in acquiring great
happiness hereafter.


36. That king who is of righteous con-
duet and who is observant of honesty and
integrity, succeeds by his acts of sincerity
in acquiring every valuable reward,


37. The royal sage. Shivi, of pure soul
and gifted with great wisdom and unbaffled
prowess, that king of the Kashis, became
celebrated over the three worlds for his vir-
tuous deeds. . :


38. Anybody who would protect in the
same way a seeker for protection, would
certainly acquire the same happy end, O
best of the Bharatas,


$5


39, He who recites this history of the
royal sage Vrishadarbha is sure to become
purged of every sin, and the person who
bears this history recited by another is sure
to acquire the same result.


i etmeeniae


CHAPTER XXXII}.


( ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.


Yudhishthira said:—


1. Which act, O grandfather, is the
foremost of all those that have been laid
down for a king? What is that act by
doing which a king succeeds in enjoying
both this world and the next, r


Bhishma said :-— :

2. Even this, viz., the worship of the
Brahmanas, is the foremost of all those
deeds, O Bharata, which have been laid
down for a king duly installed on the throne,
if, indeed, he is desirous of acquiring great
happiness.


3. Even this is what the foremost of alf
kings should do. Know this well, O chief
of Bharata’s race. The king should always
adore with reverence all righteous Brahe
manas possessed of Vedic learning.


4. The king should, with bows, sweet
speeches and gifts of ali articles of
enjoymefit, adore alt Brahmanas endued
with great learning who may live in his
city or provinces.


5. This is the foremost of all acts laid
down for the king. Indeed, the king
should always keep his eyes fixed on this.
He should protect and cherish these, even
as he protects his own self or his owt
children.


6. The king should adore with greater
reverence those amongst the Brahmanas
who maybe worthy of it. When such men
are freed from all anxiety, the whole kings
dom shines in beauty.


7» Such individuals are worthy of ado-
ration. The king should bow his head to
such individuals. Indeed, they should be
honored, even as one honors his father
and grandfather. ‘The course of conduct
followed by men, depends upon them as
the existence of all creatures depends upon
Vasava.


8. Having prowess incapable of being —
baffled and gifted with great energy, such
men, if enraged, are capable of reducing

| the entire kingdom to ashes by only their


96


will, or by acts of incantatioi, or by other
means.


9. £ do not see anything that ean
destroy them. Their power seems to be
uncontrolled, being capable of reaching to
the last end of the universe. When angry,
their Jooks fall upon men and things like
a burning flame of fire upon a forest.


to. The most courageous men are struck
with feat at their name. Their virtues and
powers are extraordinary and immeasur-
able. Some amongst them are like wells
and pits with mouths covered by grass and
creepers, while others resemble the sky
shorn of clouds and darkness. .


11. Some amongst them are of dreadful
dispositions. Some are as mild and soft
in disposition as cotton. Sonte amongst
them are very cunning. Some amongst
them are given to the practice of penances.


12. Some amongst them are employed
in agricultusal pursuits. Some amongst
them are engaged in the keep of kine.
Some amongst them live upon eleemosynary
alms. Some amongst them are even
theives. Some amongst them are fond of
creating quarrels and disputes; Some,
again, amongst them are actors and
dancers,


13. Some amongst them are competent
to perform all feats, ordinary and extra-
ordinary. The Brahmanas, O chief of
Bharata’s race, are of various aspects and
conduct,


14, One should always sing the praises
of thé Brahmanas who are conversant with
all duties, who are righteous of conduct,
who are given to various kinds of acts,
and who are seen to derive their sustettance
from various callings.


15. The Brahmanas, O king, who are
highly blessed, are older in respect of
theig origin than the departed manes, the
deities, human beings, the Snakes, and the
Rakshasas.


16. These twice-born persons are in-
eapable of being defeated by the deities or
the departed manes, or the Gandharvas
or the Rakshasas, or the Asuras or the
Pishachas,


17. The Brahmanas are competent to
make him a god, that is nota god, They
can, again, divest one who isa deity of
his status as such. He becomes a king,
whom they wish to makea king. He, on
the other hand, is crushed whom they do
not love or like.


18. I tell you truly, O king, that those
foolish persons, forsooth, meet with des-
truction who calumniate the Brahmanas
and utter their dispraise. 3


MAHABHARATA,


1g. Expert in praise and dispraise, and
themselves the origin or cause of other
people’s fame and ignominy, the Brah-«
manas, O king, always become angry with
those who seek to injure others.


20. That man whom the Brahmanas
praise succeeds in becoming prosperous.
That man who is censured and renounced
by the Brahmanas soon meets with discom-
fiture.


zt. It is on account of the absence of
Brahmanas from among them that the
Shakas, the Yavanas, the Kamvojas and
other Kshatriya tribes have become fallen
and degraded into Shudras.


22—23. The Dravidas, the Kalingas,
the Pulindas, the Ushinaras, the Kolisarpas,
the Mahishakas, and other Kshatriyas,
have, on account of the absence of Brah-
manas from among their midst, become
degraded into Shudras. Defeat from them
is preferable to victory, O foremost of vice
torious persons.


24. One killing all other living creatures
in this world does not commit a sin so
heinous as that of killing a single Brah-
mana. The great Rishis have said that
Brahmanicide is a heinous sin.


25. One should never utter the dispraise
or calumny of the Brahmanas. Where
the dispraise of Brahmanas is uttered, one
should sit with face hanging down or leave
that place.


26. ‘That man has not as yet been born
in this world or wilf not take birth here
who has been or will be able to pass his
life happily after quarreling with the
Brahmanas.


27. One cannot seize the wind with his
hands. One cannot touch the moon with
his hand, One cannot support the Earth
on his arms. Similarly, O king, oneis not
able to defeat the Brahmanas in this
world, ‘


CHAPTER XXXIV.


(ANUSHASANA PARVA)—
: Continued. :


Bhishma said :—


.t. One should always offer the most
respectful adoration to the Brahmanas.
They have Soma for their king, and they
it is who confer happiness and misery uport
others. -


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


2. They, O king; should always be
cherished and protected as one cherishes
and protects his own father and grand-


father, and should be adored with bows and”


gifts of food and ornaments and other
articles of enjoyment as-also with such
things as they may wish for, The peace and
happiness of the kingdom originate from
such respect shown to the Brahmanas even
as the peace and happiness of all living
creatures come from Vasava the king of
the gods.


3. Let Brahmanas of pure conduct and
Brahma-effulgence be born in a kingdom,
Kshatriyas also. who are splendid car-
warriors and that are capable of defeating
all enemies, should be desired.


4. This was said to me by Narada.
There is nothing higher, O king, than this,
vis, the act of making a Brahmana of
good birth, having a knowledge of morality
and righteousness, and steadfast in the
observance of excellent vows, live in his
mansion, Such an act yields every sort of
blessing. '


5. The sacrificial offerings given to


Brahmanas reach the very gods who ac-
ceptthem. Brahmanas are the fathers of


all creatures. here is nothing higher
than a Brahmana.
6. The Sun, the Moon, the Wind,


the Water, the Earth, the Sky, and the
points of che compass, all enter the body
of the Brahmana and take what the Brah-
mana eats.


7. In that house where Brahmanas do
not eat, the departed manes refuse to eat.


8. The gods also never eat
house of the wretch who hates the Brah-
manag. When the Brahmanas are pleased,
the departed manes are also pleased.


g. The deities also become pleased
when the Beahmanas are pleased. There is
no doubt in this. They who give away
the sacrificial Havite the Brahmanas be-
come themselves pleased.


to—ir. Such mew never meet with
destruction. Indeed, they % succeed in
acquiring great ends. ‘lhose particular
offerings in sacrifices with which one
pleases the Brahmanas, go.to please both
the departed manes and the deities. The
Brahmana is the cause of that Sacrifice
whence all created things have originated.


32, The Brahamana is acquainted with
that from which this universe has origi-
nated and to which, when apparently
destroyed, it returns, Indeed, the Brah-
mana knows the path that leads to the
celestial region, and the other path which
leads io the opposite place.


13


in the


97


13. The Beahmana is conversant with
that which has taken place and that which —
will take place. ?The Brahmana is the fore»
most of all two-legged beings. The
Brahmana, O chief of the Bharatas, is
fully conversant with those duties which
have been laid dewn for his order. ,


14. Those persons who follow the
Brahmanas are never defeated. They never
meet with destruction even after deat.
ludeed, victory is always theirs.

15. Those great persons,—indeed, those
persons who have subdued their souls,—
who accept the words that fall from the


‘lips of the Brahmanas, are never defeated.


Victory always becomes theirs.

16. The energy and power of those
Kshateiyas who scorch everything with
their energy and might, when they en-


counter the Brahmanas, become neu-
tralised.
17, The Bhrigus conquered the Tala-


janghas. Thesons of Angiras conquered
the Nipas. Bharadwaja conquered the
Vitahavyas as also the Ailas, O chief of
Bharata’s race.


18. Although all these Kshatriyas were
capable of using vattous arms, yet the
Brahmanas named, owning only black deer
skins for their emblems, succeeded in con-
quering them effectually. Bestowing the |
Earth upon the Brahmanas and iluminat-
ing both the worlds by‘the brilliance of such
an act, one should accomplish acts through
which one may suceed in acquiring the end
of all things. ;


2.
19. Like fire concealed within wood,
everything that is said or heard or: read ia
this world, lies in the Brahmana.


20. Regarding it is cited the old ae
of the conversation between Vasudeva and
the Earth, O chief of Bharata’s race.


Vasudeva said :—


21. © mother, of all creatures, O auspi-
cious goddess, I wish to ask you for a solu-
tion of this doubt of mine! By what act
does a man living like a house-holder suce
ceed in cleansing ail his sins?


The Earth said :—


22. One should serve the Brahmanas.
This conduct is purifying and excellent,
All the impurities are destroyed of that
man who serves the Brahmanas with
respect.


23. From this (conduct) arises prosperity.
From this arises fame. From this originates
intelligence or knowledge of the soul. A
Kshatriya, by this conduct, becumes 9


98


powerful car-warrior and a destroyer of
foes and succeeds in winning great fame.


24. Even this is what Narada said to
me, vig., that one should always respect a
Brahmana that is well born, of rigid vows,
and conversant with the scriptures, if one
wishes every kind of prosperity.


25. That man really grows in prosperity
who is praised by the Brahmanas who are
higher than those who are regarded supe-
rior to all men high or low.


_ 26, That man who speaks ill of the
Brahmanas soon meets with discomfiture,
even as a clod of unbaked earth, meets
with destruction when thrown into the
sea.


27. Similarly, all acts that are hurtful to
the Brahmanas are sure to bring about dis-
comfiture and ruin, Lok at the dark spots
on the Moon and the salt waters of the
ocean,


28. The great Indra had at one time
been marked all over with a thousand sex-
marks, It was through the power of the
Brahmanas that those marks were meta-
morphosed into as many eyes.


29. See, O Madhava, how all these
things took place, Desiring fame and
prosperity and various regions of beatitude
in the next world, a person of pure conduct
and soul should, O destrayer- of Madhu,
live in obedience to the dictates of the
Brahmanas.


Bhishma said :—


30. Hearing those words of the goddess
Earth, the destroyer of Madhu, O you of
Kuru’s race, said,—Excellent, Exceltent !—
and honoured the goddess in due form.


3t. Having heard this discourse between
the goddess Earth and Madhava, do you,
O son of Pritha, always, with rapt soul,
adore all superior Brahmanas. Doing this,
yow will surely obtain what is highly bene-
ficial for-you.


. CHAPTER XXXV.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued,


Bhishma said :—

1. O blessed king, a Brahmana, by birth
alone, becomes an object of worship with
all creatures,and entitled, as guests, to eat
the first portion of all cooked food.


2. From them come all the great objects
of life They are the friends of ail crea-
tures in the universe, They are again the


MAHABHARATA.


mouths of all the gods (for food poured intd
their mouths is eaten by the deities).
Adored with respect, they wish us prosperity
by uttgritig words fraught with auspici+
ousness.


3. Disregarded by our enemies, let them
be engaged with these, and let them
wish evil to those detractors of theirs, ims
precating them with severe curses.


4. About it, persons conversant with
ancient history repeat the following verses
sung of old respecting how in ancient times
the Creator, after having created the
Brahmanas, laid down their duties.


5. A Brahmana should never do any
thing else than what has been laid down tor
him. Protected, they should protect others.
By acting thus, they are sure to acquire
what is for their behoof,


6. By doing those acts that are laid
down for them, they are sure to acquire
Brahma prosperity, Ye shall become the
exemplars of all creatures, and reins for
controlling them.


7. A Brahmana endued with learning
should never do that which is laid down fot
the Shudras. By doing such acts, a Brah-
mana loses his merit.


8. By Vedic study he is sure to acquire
prosperity, intelligence, energy and power
competent to scorclr all things, as also glory
of the most superior kind.


9. By offering oblations of clarified
butter to the deities, the Brahmanas ac-
quire high blessedness, beconve worthy of
taking the precedence of even chitdren in
the matter of all kinds of cooked food, and
gifted with Brahma- prosperity.


to. Endued with faith that is fraught
with mercy towards all creatures, and
devoted to self-controt and the study of the
Vedas, you shalt acquire the fruition of all
your desires,


11. Whatever things exist in the world
of men, whatever things exist ia the region
of the celestials, can all be achieved and
acquired with the help of penances and
knowledge and the observance of vows and
restraints.


12. I have thus recited to you, O sinless
one, the verses that were sung by Brak-
mana himself. Gifted with supreme intelli-
gence and wisdom, the Creator himself
ordained this, through mercy for the Brat
manas,


13. The power of those amongst them
who are devoted to penances is equal to the
power of kings: ‘“Fhey are, indeed, irresisti+
ble, fierce, fleet like lightning, and exceed-
ingly quick in what they do,


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


i
14. There are amongst them those who
are possessed of the might of lions and those
who are possessed of the might of tigers.
Some of them are gifted with the might of
boars, some of the deer and some of croco-
diles. ;


15. Some there are amongst them whose
touch resembles that of snakes of dreadful
poison, and some whese bite resembles that
of shacks. Some amongst them are cap-
able of bringing about by words only the
destfuction of those that are opposed to
them ; and some are competent to destroy
by a look only of their eyes.


16. Some amongst them, as already said,
are like snakes of dreadful poison, and some
that are gifted with very mild dispositions.
The dispositions, O Yudhishtbira,. of the
Brahmanas, are of various kinds.


17. The Mekalas, the Dravidas, the
Lathas, the Paundras, the Knowashiras,
the Shaundikas, the Daradas, the Darvas,
the Chauras, Shavaras, the Varvaras, the
Kiratas, the Yavanas and numerous other
tribes of Kshatriyas, have degenerated into
the status of Shudras through the anger of
the Brahmanas.


19. On account ‘of %their having’ *disre-
garded the Brahmanas, the Asuras have
been obliged tojtake refuge in thesdepths of
the ocean. Through the favour of the
Brahmanas, the celestials have become
denizens of the happy regions of Heaven,


20. The element ‘of other fisXincapable
of being touched. The Himavat mountains
are incapable of being moved from their
root, ‘he current of; Ganga is incapable
of being resisted by a dam. The Brah-
manas are incapable of being governed,


2t. Kshatriyas are incapable of ruling
the Earth without jsecuring the good will
of the Bralimanas. Yhe Brahman:s are
great. They ace the deities of the very
deities.


22.. Do you always adore them with gifts
and obedient services, if, indeed, you desire
to enjoy the sovereignty of the whole Earth
encircled by seas. ;


23. The energy and power “of, Brah-: |:


manas, QO sinless’ one, . become -abated
by the acceptance of gifts. You should
Protect your family, O king, from. those
a eananeaee who do not desire to accept
gifts,


99
CHAPTER XXXVI.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA} =
Continued,


Bhishma said :—

1." Regarding it is cited the eld history
of the discourse between Shakra and
Shamvara. Do you listen to it, OQ Yudhish-
thira,


2. Once upon atime Shakra, assuming
the guise of an ascetic with matted locks
on his head and body covered with ashes
all over, rode on an ugly car and went ta
the’Asura Shamvara,


Shakra said:—


3. Through what conduct, O Shamvara,
you have been able to become the head of
your family? Why do all people considec
you as superior? Do you tell me this truly
and fully.


Shamvara said :—


4. I never entertain any ill feelings to-
wards the Brahmanas. Whatever instruc:
tions they give I accept with uuqualified
reverence. When the Brahmanas are ens
gaged in explainiug the scriptures, I listen
to them with great happiness.


5. Having heard their interpretations
[ never disregard them. Nor do I ever
offend against the Brahmanas in any way,
1 always adore intelligent Brahmanas. [
always seek information from them, I
always adore their feet.


._ 6. Approaching me with confidence,
they always address me with affection and
enquire after my well-being. If they, ever
happen to be careless, | am always careful.
If they happen -to sleep, { always remain
awake, a


7. Like beesdrenching the cells of the -
comb with honey, the Brahmanas, who . are... .
my instructors and rulers, always drench
me with the nectar of knowledge—-who am
always devoted to the path pointed out by
the scriptures, who am devoted fto the
Brahmanas, and who am perfectly shorn of
tnalice or evil passion, : ae


.8. YT always accept with cheerful hearts
whatever they say. Helped by memory
and understanding. I am always careful
of my own faith in them and I always think
of my own inferiority to them,


9. I always lick the nectar that is at the
end of their tongue, and it is for this reason
that I occupy a position far above that of
all others of my family like the Moon tran-
scending all the stars.


100


1o. The scriptural interpretations which
fall feom the lips of the Brahmanas and
hstening to which every wise man acts in
the world, form nectar on Earth and may,
also be likened to most excellent.


1t. Seeing the battle between the celes-
tials and the Asuras in days of old, and un-
derstanding the power of the. instructions
that fell from the Brahmanas, my father
became filled with delight and wonder.


12. Seeing the power of great Brah-
manas, my father asked the Moon isthe
question, How do the Bratymrnas acquire
success ? ‘


Soma said :-~


13. ‘The Brahmanas bécome crowned
with success by virtue of theic penances.
‘Ybeic strength consists in speech. ‘he
power of Kshatriyas is in their armas, ‘Fhe
Brahmanas, however, have words for their
weapons,


14. Undergoing the ‘discomforts of a
residence in the house of his preceptor,


the Bratmana should study the Vedas or


at least the Pranava. Freeing himself of
anger and renouncing earthly attachments,
he should become a Yati, regarding all
things and all creatures with equal eyes.


15. If remaining in the house of his father
he masters all the Vedas and acquiring
great knowledge acquires a position that
should command respect, people still con-
-demn him as untravelied or home-keeping.


16. Like a snake swallowing mice, the
Earth swallows up these two, v¢z., a king
that is unwilling to fight anda Brahmana
who is celyuctant to leave home for ac¢-
quiring knowledge.


17. Pride destroys the prosperity of
persons of litte wit, A maiden, it she
conceives, becomes stained. A Brahmana
incuts reproach by remaining at home.


18. This is what my father heard from
the revered Soma. My father, on account of
this, began to adore and respect the Brah-
manas. Like him, 1 also worship and
adore all Brahmanas of high vows!


Bhishma said :—-


19. Hearing these words that fell from
the mouth of that prince of Danavas, Shakra
began to adore the Braimanas, and asa
result thereof he succeeded in acquiring the
kingship of the celestials.


- preceptor’s fee or for


MATIABHARATA.


CHAPTER XXXVII.


C(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA ).—
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


1. Which amongst these three persons,
O grandfather should be regarded as the
best for making gifts, vzs., one who isa
through stranger, or one who is living with
and known to the giver for a long time, oc
one who comes to the giver, from a long
distance ?


Bhishma said :—


2. All these are equal. The fitness of
some consists in their soliciting alms for
celebrating sacrifices or for paying the
maintaining their
wives and children. The fitness of some,
for receiving gifts, consists in their follow-


ing the vow of wandering over the Earth,


never soliciting anything but receiving when
given. We should also give to one what
one seeks,


3. We should, however, make gifts withe
out afflicting those {who depend upon us.
This is what we have heard. By afflicting
one’s dependants, one afflicts his own self.


4. The stranger,—one, that is, who has
come for the first time,—shbould be consi-
dered as a proper object of gifts. He who
is familiae and well-known and has been
living with the’giver,'should also be consi-
dered in the same light. he learned know
that he too who comes from a distant place
should be considered in an equal light.;


Yudhishthira said :—


5 It is true that we should make’gifts
to others without afflicting any. one and
without going against the ordinances of
scriptures. One should, however, correctly
determine who the person is that should be
considered as a proper object for making
gifts. He should be such that the gift
itself, when made over to him, may not
grieve.


Bhishma said :—

6. If the -Ritwij, the Purohita, the
preceptor, the Acharya, the disciple, ‘the
relative (by marriage), and kinsmen,
happen to be endued with learning and
free from malice, then stiould they be cou-
sidered worthy of respect and adoration.


-7. Those persons who do not possess
such qualifications cannot be considered as
worthy of gifts or hospitality. Hence, one
should with deliberation examine persons
whom one meets.


ANUSHASANA PARVA. ror


8—g. Absence of anger, truthfulness of
Speech, abstention from injury, sincerity,
peacefulness of conduct, the absence of
pride, modesty, renunciation,, self-control,
and tranquillity or contentment of soul,—he
in whom these are by nature, and in whom
there are no wicked acts, should be consi-
dered as a proper object. Such a person
deserves{honors.


1o, Whether the person be one who is
well-known and familiar, or one who has
come newly, whetker he has or has not
been seen before, if he happens to possess
these qualifications, he should be considered
as worthy of honors and hospitality.


11, He who denies the authority of the
Vedas, or tries to show that the scriptures
should be disregarded, or approves of ail
breaches of control in society,-~simply
brings about his own ruin.


12—-14. That Brahmanra who is proud
of his learning, who speaks ill of the
Vedas, or who is given to the science of
useless disputation, or who is desirous of
acquiring victory (in disputations) in as-
semblies of good men by disproving
the reasons that exist for morality and
religion and attributing everything to
chance, or who indulges in censuring
and reproaching others or who reproves
Brahmanas, or who is suspicious of all
persons, or who is foolish and bereft of
judgment, or who is bitter of speech, should
be known to be as hateful as a dog.


15. As a dog meets others, barking the
while and seeking to bite, such a person is
even so, for he spends his breath in vain
and trices to destroy the authority of all
the scriptures, :


16. ‘Those practices that support sSciety,
the duties of virtue, and all those acts
which yield benefit to one’s own self, should
be attended to. A person that lives, at-
tending to these, becomes prosperous for
good,


17-18. By satisfying the debt one owes
_to the deities by performing sacrifices, that
to the Rishis by stu. ‘ying the Vedas, that to
the departed manes by procreating children,
that to the Brahmanas by making presents
to them, and that to guests by feeding
them, in due order, and with purity of
motive, and properly attending to the
ordinances of the scriptures, a householder
does not fall away from virtue.


CHAPTER XXXVIIL


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA)—
: re Continued,
Yudhishthira said:—

1. O best of the Bharatas, I wish to
hear you describe the disposition of women.


Women are said to be the root of all evil.
‘They are all considered as highly frail.


Bhishma said :—


2. Regarding it is cited the old history
of the discourse between the celestial Rishi
Narada and the (celestial) courtezin
Panchachuda. :


. 8. Once in ancient times, the celestial
Rishi Narada, having roamed over all the
world, met the Apsara Panchachuda of
faultless beauty, having. her residence in
the region of Brahman. ‘


4. Seeing the Apsara every limb of
whose body was highly beautiful, the
ascetic addressed her, saying,—O you of
slender waist, I have a doubt in my mind.
Do you explain it !—


Bhishma said:—


5. Thus addressed by the Rishi, the
Apsara said to him,—It the subject is one
which.is known to me and if you consider
me competent to speak on it, I shall certain-
ly say what is in my mind.


Narada said:—


6. O amiable one, I shall not certainly
ask you for any task that is beyond your
power. O you of beautiful face, I wish to
hear from you of the disposition of women.


Bhishma said :—


7. Hearing these words of the celestial
Rishi, that foremost of Apsaras replied to
him, saying,—I am unable, being myself
a woman, to speak ill of women.


8. Yeu know what women are and
with what nature they are gifted. You
should not, O celestial Rishi, set me to such
a task. =


g. To her the celestial Rishi said,—It is
very true, O you of slender waist ! One
commits sin by speaking what is untrue.
in saying, however, what is true, there can
be no sin,


10. Thus addressed by him, the Apsara
Panchachuda of sweet smiles consented to
answer Narada’s question. She then ad-


_dressed herself to mention what the true


and eternal shortcomings are of women,


fo2


Panchachuda said :—


ut. Even if high-born and gifted with
beauty and possessed of protectors, women
wish to transgress the restraints assigned
tothem. ‘This fault truly attaches them,
O Narada, ;

12. There is nothing efse that is more
sinful than women. Verily, women are
the root of alt evils: That: is certainly
known to you, O Narada. ~ eye

13. Women, even when having hus-
bands of fame and wealth, of -handsome
features and completely obedient to them,


are prepaced to disregard them if they get:


the opportunity.


14. This, O powerful one, is a sinful dis-
Position with us women, casting off modesty,
we seek the companionship of men of sinful
habits and intentions.


15. Women show a liking for those men
who court them, who approach their pre<
sence, and who respectfully serve them to
even a slight extent. ‘


16. Through want of solicitation by
persons of the other sex, or fear of relatives,
women, who are naturally impatient of all
control, do not transgress those that have
been ardained for them, and remain by -the
side of their husbands.. :


17. There is none whom they cannot
admit to theie favours. “Fhey never con-
sider‘about the age of the person they -are
prepared to favour. Ugly or handsome,
if only the person happens to belong to the
Opposite sex, women are ready to enjoy his
compantonship.


18. That women remain faithful to their
husbands is due not to their fear of sin,
nor to mercy, nor to riches nor to the affec-
tion that originates in their hearts for Bins-
men and children.


Ig. Women living in the respectable
families envy the condition of those mem-
bers of ther sex who are-young and well-
adorned with jewels and gems and that
Jead a free life.


20. Even those women who are loved
by their husbands and treated with great
respect, are seen to confer their favours
upon men who are hump-backed, who aré
blind, who are idiots, or who are dwarfs,


2t. Women may be seen to like the
companionship of even those men who are
inert or those men who are ugly to look at,
O great Rishi, there is no man in this
world whom women may consider as unfit
for companionship.!

22—23. Through inability to obtain per-
sons of the opposite sex, or fear of rela-


MAHABHARATA.


women remain, of themselves, under
control, :

24. They are highly fickle, for they
always han€er after new companions, On


account of their nature being unintelligible,
they are incapable of being kept in obe-
dience by loving treatment. ‘Their nature
is such that they are incapable of being
controlled. when bent upon transgression,
Indeed, women are like the words uttere:
by the wise.

25. Fire is never satiated with fuel -
Ocean can never be filled with the water
that the rivers bring to him. The Des
troyer is never satiated with killing eve: -
all living creatures. Likewise, women are
never satiated with men.


26. This, O celestial Rishi, is another
mystery about women. As soon as they
see &@ man of beautiful and charming
features, unfailing signs of desire appear
on their body.


27. They never show sufficient regard
for even such husbands as satisfy all their
wishes, as always do what is agreeable to
them, and as protect them from want and
danger. ’


28. Women never prize even profuse


| articles of enjoyment or ornaments or other


delightful things, so much as they do the
companionship of persons ,of the opposite
sex. +


-29. Fhe destroyer, the god of wind,
death, the nether regions, the equine moutt:
that roves through the ocean, vomiting
ceaseless flames of fire, the sharpness of
the razor, dreadful poison, the snake and
Fire,——all these exist in a,state of union in
woman, : ;


30. Indeed from that eternal Brahma
whence the five great elements have origi-
nated whence the Creator Brahman hath
ordained the universe, and whence, indeed,
men have sprung, have women sprung into
existence. At that time, again, O Narada,
when women were created, these faults
that I have described were planted in
them. .


CHAPTER XXXIX.


CANUSHASANA PARVA)—
. Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


1. Overcome by the illusion of the divine
Being, all men, O king, in this world,


tives, or fear of death and imprisonment, | are seen to attach themselves to women,


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


4. Lileewise, worhernt, too, are seen to
attach themselves to men, All this Is seen
taking place everywhere in the world. 1
have a doubt on this subject.


3. Why, O delighter of the Kurus, do
men still attach themselves to women?
Who, agaid, are those men with whom
are women highly pleased, and who are
‘they with whom they are displeased,;


4. You should, O chief of men, explain
to me how men are capable of protecting
“women ?


5. While men take pleasure in women
-and sport with them, women, .it seems,
"are engaged in imposing upon men. Then,
again, if a man once falls into their
bands, it is difficult for him to escape from
them, Like kine ever liking pastures new,
women like new men one after another.


6. The women have in them the sum- total
of that illusion which the Asura Shamvara
possessed, {that illusion which the Asura
Namuchi possessed, that illusion which
Vali or Kumbhinas} had. -


4. If man laughs, women laugh. If
man weeps, they weep. If the opportunity
requires, they receive the man who is dis-
agreeable to them with sweet words.


8. That science of policy which the pre-
‘ceptor of the Asuras knew, that science of
policy which the preceptor of the celestials,
ves., Vrihaspati, knew, is not deeper or
more subtile than what woman’s intelli-
gence. Indeed, how can women, therefore,
_ be restcained by men ?


9g. They make a lie appear as truth,
anda truth appear as a lie. They who
can do this,—lI ask, O hero,—how can
they be governed by persons of the opposite
sex


to. It appears to me that Vrihaspati
and other great thinkers, O destroyer of
enemies, evolved the science of Policy from
observation of the understandings of
women.


1. Whether treated by men, with res-
pect cr with hatred, women are seen, to
tucn the heads and agitate the hearts of
men.


12, Living creatures, O you of mighty
arms, are virtuous. Eventhis is what we
have heard. ‘Treated with love and res»
pect or otherwise, women are seen to de-
serve censure for their conduct. towards
men.


13. This great doubt fills my mind, v¢s.,
when their conduct is suei, what man is
there that can restrain them within the
limits offvirtute ? Do you explain this to me,


O highly blessed scion of Kuru’s race,


103


[ 14. You should tell me, O chief of
Kuru’s race, whether. womea are truly cap-
able of being governed within the limits
prescribed by the scripqures or whether
arty one before our time did really succeed
ed in so controlling them.


CHAPTER XL.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).<#
Continued .


Bhishina said :—

1. Itistrue what you say, O you of
mighty arms. There is nothing untrue in
all this {that you say, O you of Kuru’s
race, on the subject of women, O mon-
arch !


2. About it I shall recite to you the old
history of how in days of yore the preat
Vipula had succeeded in restraining women
within the limits laid down for them.


3. I shall also tell you, O king, how ‘
wonten were created by the Grandfather
Brahman and the object for which they
were created by Him.


4. There is no creature more sinful, O
son, than woman. Woman is a burning
fire. She is the illusion, O king, that the
Daitya Maya created. She is the sharp
edge of the razor. Sheis poison. She is —
a snake. She is fire. She is, verily, all
these in a body.


5. We have heard that all human beings
are characterised by righteousness, and
that they, in course of natural progress
and improvement, attain to the dignity
of god. ‘This circumstance alarmed the
celestials,


6. ' They, therefore, O chastiser of foes,
assembled together and went to the Grands
father. Informing Him of what was in
their minds, they stood silent before him
with dowhtcast eyes.


7. Having learnt what was in the hearts
of the celestials, the powerful Grandfathec
created women with the help of an Athar-
van rite.


8. Ina former creation, O son of Kunti,
women were all virtuous. ‘Those, however,
that sprang from this creation jby Brahman
with the help of an illusion, became sinful,
The Grandfather bestowed upon them the
desire of enjoying all kinds of carnal plea-
sure.


Tempted by the desire of} enjoyment,


they began, to pursue persons of the other


104


‘sex, The powerful lord of the deities
created Anger as the c mpanion of Lust.


to, Persons of the male sex, yielding to
the power of Lust and Anger, sought the
companionship of women. Women have
no especial acts laid down for them. This
is the ordinance that was laid down.


it—1£2. The Shruti declares that women
are gifted with the most powerful senses
thatthey have no scriptures to follow, and
that they are living lies. Beds, seats,
ornaments, food and drink _and the
absence of all that is respectable


and righteous, indulgence in disagreeable’


words, and love of sexual companionship,—
these were bestowed by Brahman upon
women. Men are quite unable to restrain
them within limits,


13. The Creator himself is incapable
of keeping them within proper limits,, ‘what
need then be said of men ?


14. This, © chief of men, I ieee in
former days, v/s., how Vipula had suc-
ceeded in protecting his preceptor’s wife
in ancient times.


ig, There was in days of yore a highly
blessed Rishi of the name of Devasharman
of great fame. He had a wife, of name
Ruchi, who was peertlers on Earth in
beauly..


16. Her loveliness intoxicated every one
among the celestials and Gandharvas and
Danavas. he chastiser of Paka, visz.,
Indra, the destroyer of Vritra, O king, was
in particular esnamoured of her‘and coveted
her body.


17. The great ascetic Devasharman fully
knew the disposition of women. .He, there-
fore, to the best of his power and energy,
protected her.


18. The Rishi knew that Indra had no
scruples in seeking the companionship of
other people’s wives. (t was, therefore, that
he used to protect his wife, putting forth
all his power.


19. Once on a time, O son, the Rishi
becaine desirons of celebrating a sacrifice.
He began to think of how (during his own
absence from home) his wife could be pro-
tected.


20. Gifted with high ascetic merit, he
at last hit upon the course he should adopt.
Summoning his favourite disciple whose
mame was Vipula and who was of Bhrigu’s
family, he said as follows.


Devasharman said :—

2t. I shall leave home in order to cele-
brate a sacrifice. ‘he king of the celestials
always covets this Ruchi of mine. Do you,


MAHABHARATA.


during my absence, protect her, displaying
all your power.


22. You shall pass your time carefully
in view of Purandara. O foremost one of
Bhrigu’s race, that Indra assumes various
forms.


Bhishma said :—

23—24. ‘Thus addressed by his pre- _
ceptor, the ascetic Vipula, with senses
restrained, always engaged in severe pe-
nances, possessed of the splendour, O king,
of fire or the sun, conversant with all the
duties of virtue, and ever truthful in speech,
answered him, saying,—So be it !—Once


‘more, however, as his preceptor was about


to start, Vipula asked him in these words.


Vipula said :—


25. Tell me, O Muni, what forms does
Shakea assume when he comes. Of what
kind is his body and what is his energy ?
You should tell me all this,


Bhishma said :—


26. ‘The illustrious Rishi then truly des-
cribed to the great Vipula all the illusions
of Shakra, O Bharata,


Devasharman said :—


27. he powerful chastiser of Paka, O
regenerate Rishi, is full of illusion. Every
moment he assumes those forms that he
chooses.


28. Sometimes he wears a diadem and
holds the thunder-boit, Sometimes, armed
with the thunder-bolt and wearing a crown
on his head, he adorns himself with ear-
rings. In a moment he changes himself
into the shape and aspect of Chandala.


29. Sometimes he appears with coronal
locks om his head ; soon again, O son, he
shows himself with matted locks, his- person
being clad in rags. Sometimes he assumes
a goodly and huge frame. ‘The next
moment he changes himself into one of
emaciated limbs, and clad in rags.


30. Sometimes he becomes fair, some-
times darkish, sometimes dark, of com-
plexion. Sometimes he becomes ugly and
sometimes beautitul. Sometimes be appears
as young and sometimes as-old.


3t. Sometimes he appears as a Brah-
mana, sometimes as a Kshatriys, some-
times as.a Vaishya, and sometimes as a
Shudra. Indeed, he of a hundred sacri«
fices appears at timesas a person born of
impure caste, that is, as the son of a
superior father by an inferior mother or of
an inferior father by a superior mother.


32. Sometimes he appears as a parrot
sometimes as a crow, sometimes as a swan


- ANUSHASANA PARVA.


P : 2s .,
Bhd soffietiMtes 48 a eoel. He assiumes tive
forms also of a lion, a tiger, or af elephant,

33. Sometimes he appears as a god,
Sometimes as a Daitya, and sometime
he assumes the guise of a King. Some
limes he appears as fat and plump,
sometimes as one whose limbs have been
broken by the disordered wind in the
system, Sometimes as a bird, and sometimes
as one of ah exceedingly ugly form.

34. Sometimes he appears as a quad-
ruped. Capable of assuming any form,
he sometimes appears as an idiot shorn of


all intelligence. He assames also the forms.


‘of flies and gnats.

35. O Vipula, fo one Gan make him out
‘on account of these numberless disguises
that he is Capable of assuming. ‘The very
Creator of the universe is not equal to that
feat. ; es


36, He makes himself invisible when he
likes. He is incapable of bein
with the eye of knowledge. ‘The king of
the celestials sometimes changes himself
fnto the wind. ee , .

37. The! ‘chastiser’ of


Paka always
assumes these disguises.


Do you, theres


fore, O Vipula, protect this slender- waisted


wife of mine with great care.


38. O. foremost oné of - Bhrigu’s race,
do you take every care for seeing that the
king of the celestials may not defile this
wife of mine fike a Wretched dog licking the
Havi kept in view of a sacrifice.


‘39. Having said these words, the highly-
blessed aséetic, v¥s., Devasharman, intent
upon celebrating a sacrifice, started from
his abode, O chief of the Bharatas. —

40. Hearing these words of his’ precép-
tor, Vipula began to think,—I shall cer-
tainly protect this lady in every respect
from the powerful king of the celestials.


4t. .But -what. should be the means?
What can I do for protecting the wife of


my preceptor? The king of the celestials.


is endued with large powers of illusion.


Gifted with great energy, he is difficult of


being resisted,


42. Indra cannot be kept out by en-
closing this retreat of ours or fencing this
yard, since he is capable of assuming num-
berless forms. a


43. Assutning the form of the wind, the
king of the celestials may assault the wife of
my preceptor. ‘The best coursé, therefore,
for me, would be to enter the body of this
Jady and remain there.


44. By displaying my prowess I shall
not be able to protect the lady, for the
powerful chastiser of Paka, it has been


14


seen except |-


+


T@§


heard by me, is capabig Uf assuming any


forin he likes.


45- 1 shall, therefore, protect this one
from {udra by my Voga-power.* For satis-
fying wy object f shall with my body entec
the body of this lady. ;

46. -{f my preceptor on return, sees his
wife defiled, he will, forsooth, curse me
through ‘anger, for endued with great .
asGetic anetit, he is gifted with spiritual
Vision, es t : :

47. This lady is incapable of being pro-
tected in the way in which other women are
protected by men, since the king of the
¢elestials is gifted with large powers of
illusion, Alas, tlé situation is very critical.


48 The. command, of my. preceptor
should Certainly) be obeyed by me. If,
therefore, I protect her.by my Yoga-power,
the feat will be considered by all as a won-
derfal one. i


; my ‘Yoga-power, therefore, [
shall enter the body of ny preceptor’s lady. *
1 shall live within hee and yet not touch her |
body like a drop of water on a lotus leaf °
which lies on it yet does not: drench it
at all, : eae wu y

-go--gi. If I be free from the touch of
passion, I cannot incur any: sin by doing
what L. wish to do. As a traveller, in
course of his sojoura, takes up his. quarters
(for a while) in any enipty house he finds, -
1 shail, similarly live, this day withiu th: .
body of my preceptor’s lady. Indeed, with -
mind rapt up in Yoga, I shall live to-day ia '
this lady’s body. ; ‘ ‘

$253. Giving his best consideration to
these points of virtue, thinking of all the
Vedas and their branches, and with -eye,
directed to the penances which his precep-,
toc had and which be himself also was
possessed of, aiid having settled in, his,
thind, with a view only to protect the. lady,
to enter her bédy by Voga-power, Vipula,
of Bhrigu’s race took great care (for ac
complishing his object, Listen now to he,’
O king, as I recite to you what he did.


&4. Gifted with great penances, Vipula
sat himself down by the side of his piecep-
tor’s wife as she of faultless features was
sittlig in her cottage. Vipula then. began’
to discourse to ler for bringing nec over ‘to
the cause of virtue and truth, .,

55. Directing his eyes then to hers and.
uniting the rays of light shat came out
from her organs of vision , with: those that
issued from his, Vipula entered the lady's,
body even as the element of wind enters
that of ether or space.


$6. Penetrating her eyes with his eyes
and her face with his face, Vipula lived,


106


without moving, within her invisibly, like
her shadow.


- 57. Restraining every part of the lady’s
body, Vipula continued to live within her,
intent on protecting her from Indra. The
lady herself knew nothing of this.

58 It was in this way, O king, that
Vipula continued to protect the lady till tle
time of his great precepior's return after
accomplishing the sacrifice which he had
gone out to perform.


ericemcntneetay


CHAPTER XLI.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARYA).<
Continued.


Bhishma said :—

1. One day the king of the celestials
assuming a form of divine beauty, came
to the hermitage of the Rishi, thinking that
the opportunity he had been expecting had
at last come.


2. Indeed, O king, having assumed a
form peerlers in beauty and highly tempt-
ing to women and highly agreeable to look
at, Indra entered the ascetic’s asylum.


3-. He beheld the body of Vipula stay-
ing ina sitting posture, immovable as a
stake, and with eyes shorn of vision, like a
picture drawn on the canvas.


4. And he beheld also Ruchi, seated
there, adorned with eyes whose ends were
highly beautiful, possessed of full and
sound hips, and having a deep and swell-
ing bosom. Her eyes were targe and
expansive like lotus petals and her face
was as beautiful and sweet as the full
moon. ;


5. Seeing Indra come in that guise,
the lady wished to rise up and welcome
him. Her wonder having been excited at
the peerlers beauty of form which the
person possessed, she very much wished
to ask him as to who he was.


6, Although, however, she wished to
rise up and welcome him, yet her limbs
having been restrained by Vipula who was
living within her, she faited, O king, to do
what she wished. In fact, she was unable
to move from the place where she sat.

7. The king of the celestials then ad-
dressed her in sweet werds uttered with a
sweet voice,


8. Indeed, he said,—-O you of sweet
smiles, know that ! am Indra, arrived here
for your sake! Know, O sweet lady, that
4am afflicted by the god of love provoked


MAHABHARATA.


by your thoughts. G you of beautiful
brows, | have come to you. ‘Time passes
away.


g. These words that Indra spoke were
heard by the ascetic Vipula. Remaining
within the body of his preceptor’s wile,
he saw everything that took place.


to. The lady of faultless beauty, though
she heard what Indra said, was, however,
unable to rise up for welcoming or honor-
ing the king of the celestials. er senses
restrained by Vipula, she could make no


reply.


it. Judging from the marks afforded by
the body of his preceptor’s wife that she
was not reluctant to receive Indra with
kindness, that scion of Bhrigu’s race, of
mighty energy restrained her limbs and
senses all the more effectually, O king, by
his Yoga-powers,


12—-13. With Yoga-fetters he bound up
call her senses, Seeing her seated without
any mark of agitation on her body, the
husband of Shachi, abashed a little, once
more addressed that lady who was stupified
by the Yoga-powers of her husband’s dis-
ciple, in these words,—Come, come, UO
sweet lady !—Then the lady tried to answer
him. Vipula, however, restrained the words
that she intended to utter.


14. The words, therefore, that actually
dropped from her lips were,—What is the
reason of your coming here 7—These words
adorned with grammatical refinements,
came out of her mouth that was as beautiful
like the moon.


15. Subject to the influence of another,
she gave vent to these words, but became
rather ashamed for uttering them. Hlear-
ing her, Purandara became highly dis-
spirited,


16. Observing that awkward result, the
king of the cetestials, O monarch, having a
thousand eyes, saw everything with his
spiritual eye. }

17. He then saw the ascetic living with-
im the body of the lady. Indeed, the asce<
tic remained within the body of his precep-
tor’s wife like an image or ceffection on a
mirror,


18. Seeing the ascetic gifted with the
terrible power of penances, Purandara, O
king, fearing the Rishi’s curse, trembled in
fear.


19. Vipula then, gifted with great asce-
tic power, left the body of his preceptorc’s
wife and returned to his own body that was
lying near. Then he addressed the terri+


' fied Indra in the following words,


ANUSHABANA PARVA,


Vipula said:—

20. O wicked Purandara, O you of sin-
fal mind, O wretch who have tio control
over your senses, heither the deities nor
human beings will worship you for any
fength of time. ‘


21. Have you forgotten it, O Shakra,—
does it not: still dwell in your remem-
branee,—that Gautama had cursed you on
account of which your body became dis-
figured with a thousand sex-marks, which
owing to the Rishi’s mercy, were afters
words changed into so many eyes.


, 22. I know that you are of an exceed-
ingly foolish understanding, that your soul
is injpure and that you are of an exceeding»
ty fickle mind. . O fool, know that this lady
is being protected by me. O sinful wretch,
return whence you came,


23. O you of foolish soul, I do not
reduce you to-day into ashes with my
energy. Indeed, { am filled with mercy for
‘you. It is for this that I do not, O Vasava,
wish to burn you.

24. My preceptor gifted with great in-
telligence, is possessed of terrible power.
With eyes blazing with anger, be would,


‘if he saw you, have burnt your sinful self
to-day. :
25. You should not, O Shakra, do its


like again. The Brahmanas should be
respected by you. See that you do not,
with your sons and counsellors, meet with
destruction, afflicted by the power of the
Brahmanas. ;


26. You think that you are an immortal
and that, therefore, are at liberty to act
thus. Do not, however, dishonor the
Brahmanas. Know that there is nothing
‘unattainable by penance.


Bhishma said :—


27. Hearing these words of the great
Vipula, Shakra without saying anything,
and covered with shame, disappeared.


28. A moment after he had gone away,
Devasharman of great ascetic merit, having
accomplished the sacrifice he had intended
to perform, returned to his own hermitage.


29. When his preceptor returned, Vi-
pula, who had done a good deed, gave to
him his wife of faultless beauty whom he
had successfully protected against the ma-
chination of Indra.


go. Of tranquil sout and full of respect
for his preceptor, Vipula respectfully saluted
him and stood before him with a fearless
heart,


3t. After his preceptor had rested
awhile and when he was seated with his


107


wifé on the samé Seat, Vipila told him
everything that Shakea had done.

32. Hearing these words of Vipul,
that foremost of Munis, gifted with great
prowess, became highly pleased with: him
for his conduct and desposition, his per-
ances, and his observances,

33. Observing Vipula’s conduct towards
himself—his preceptor—and his devotion.
also, and marking his steadiness in virtue,
the powerful Devasharman exclaimed,—<=
Excellent, excellent.


34. The pious Devasharman receiving
his virtuous disciple with a sincere welcome,
honored him with a boon.


38. Indeed, Vipula, steady in virtue,
obtained from his preceptor the boon that
he would never swerve or fall away from
virtue. Dismissed by his preceptor he left
his house and practised the most severe
austerities,


36. Devasharman also, of severe pene
ances, with his wife, began from that day
to live in those solitary woods, perfectly
cules of him who had killed Vala and

cilra. |


CHAPTER XLII.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
» .
Continued.


Bhishma said :—~


1. Having satisfied his preceptor’s come
mand, Vipula practised the most severe pen-
ances. Gifted with great energy, he at last
regarded himself as endued witli sufficient


ascetic merit.


2. Priding himself upon the feat he had
performed, he wandered fearlessly and con-
tentedly over the Earth, O monarch, honor-
ed by all as one possessed of great fame for
what he had done.


3- The powerful Bhargava thoughe
that he had conquered both the worlds by .
that feat of his as also by his. severe pen-__
ances. 3


4, After sometime, O delighter of the
Kurcus, the time came for a ceremony of
gifts to take place with respect to the sister
of Ruchi. Profuse wealth and corn were to
be given away in it.


5. Meanwhile, a certain celestial damsel,
gilted with great beauty, was passing
through the skies,


6. From her body, as she passed through
the sky, some flowers dropped dowa‘on the .


108


Earth. Those flowers of celestial fragrance
tell on a spot wot far from the heneiinee of
Ruchi's hasbanad.


97. As the flowers lay scatearad on the
ground, they were picked up by Ruchi of
beautiful eyes. Soon after an invitation
came to Kuchi from the country of the
Angas. :


8. . Fhe sister, referred to. above, of
Ruchi, named Prabhavati, was the wife of
Chitvaratha the king of the Angas.


9 Ruchi, of great beauty, having
attached. those flowers to her hair, went to.
the palace of the king of the Angas to
answer the invitation she had. received.


10. ‘Seeing those flowers on her hair,
the queen of the Angas, having beautiful
eyes, urged her sister to ebtain some for
her.


tt. Ruchi, of beautiful face, speedily
informed her husband of that request of
her sister. The Rishi accepted the prayer
of his sister-in-law.


12. Summoning Vipula into his presence,
Devasharman of severe penances’ com-
manded his disciple to bring him’ some
flowers of the same sort, saying,—Go, go.


13, Accepting unhesitatingly the order
of his preceptor, the great ascetic Vipula.
O king, answered,—So be it !—and ther
proceeded to that spot whence the lady
Ruchi had picked up the flowers, that were
wanted by her sister,


14. -Arrived at that place where the
flowers had fallea from the sky, Vipula saw
some others still lying seattered, They
were alt as fresh as # they had been newly
plucked from the plants. None of thenr had
-faded away.


15. He took up those exqiisitely beauti-
‘ful celestial flowers. Possessed of celestial
fragrance, O Bharata, Vipula got them
there as the result of his severe penanees.


16. The accompfisher of his preceptor’s
command, having obtained them, he felt
great delight and started quickly for the
city of Crampa adorned with festoons of
* Champaka flowers.


17. As he went on, he saw on his way
a human couple moving in a circle hand in
hand.


18. One of them made a rapid step
and thereby destroyed the cadence of the
movement. Therefore, O king, a dispute
arose between them.


19. Indeed, one of them charged the
other, saying,—You have taken a quicker
step !-——The other answered.— No.—Indeed,
as cach held his own opinion obstinately,


MAHABHARATPA.


each, O king, asserted what the other
denied, and denied: what the othet asserted.


20. While thus quarrelling with eacl
other with great assurance, an oath was
then heard among them. Indeed, each
of them suddenly named Vipula in what
they uttered.


21. Their oath was this:—That one
amongst us two who speaks falsely, shall,
wm the next world, meet with the end which
will be the twice-born Vipula’s.


22—23, tearing these words of theirs,
Vipula's face became very sad. He began.
to commune with hintse#,—I have practised
severe penances. “Fhe dispute between this.
couple is hot. ‘Fo me, again, it is painful.
What sin have I committed thas both
these persons should refer to. my end’ im
the next world as the most painful one
among those reserved for all-creatures ?


_ 24 Thinking thus, Vipula, O best of
kings, hung down his head, and with a
dispirited mind. began to recollect what sim
he had done.


_ 25-26. Proceeding a little way he saw.
six other men playing with dice made of
gold and silver. Engaged in play, those
individuals seemed to him to be so excited
that the .hairs on their bodies stood erect.
They ‘also were heard by VWipufa to take
the same oath that he had already
heard the first’ couple 'to take: Indeed,
their words had reference i in the same way
to Vipula.


a7. He, amongst us who, led. by cupi+
dity, will act in an unfair way, shall meee
with that end which is reserved for Vipula
int the next world:


28 Hearing - "these words, however,
Vipula, although he tried earnestly to
recollect, coild not remember any sin. of
his from even his earliest years, O you of


Kuru’s race.


29. Indeed, be began to burn like a fire
placed in the midst of another fire. Hear-
mg that curse, his mind burnt with grief.


30. In this state of anxiety a long time
was passed. At last he recollected the man-
ner in which he had acted in protecting his
preceptor’s wife from the machinations of
Indra,


3t. had entered the body of that lady,
placing limb within limb, face within face. —
Although | had acted in this way, £ did
not yet tell my preceptor the truth.


32. This was the sin, O you of Kuru’s
race, which Viputa recollected in himself,
Indeed, O blessed king, forsooth, that was
the sin which he had actually committed.


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


- 43. Coming to the city of Champa, he
gave the flowers to his preceptor.:: Devoted
to superiors and seniors, be adored his
preceptor in due form.”


teens -


-CHAPYER XLII.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.


‘Bhishma said :— -


1. Seeing his disciple returned from. hisg
mission, Devasharman of great energy
addressed him in words which [| shall
“recite to you, O king.


Devasharman said :—


2. What have you seen, O Vipuld, in
course of your journey, O disciple, through
the great forest?
seen knew you, O Vipula. Ff, as also ‘my

‘wife Ruchi, know how you had acted in the
matter of protecting Ruchi. =e


Vipula said :—


3. O twice-born Rishi, who are those
two whom I first saw? Who also are those
‘other six whom [ saw afterwards? All of
them know me. Who, indeed, are they to
“whom youprefer in your speech to me ?=-


‘Devasharman said:- =

4. ‘The first couple, O twice-born, one,
‘whom you saw, are Day and Night.- They,
are ceaselessly moving like a circle. Both
of them know the sin you have committed.


5. ‘Those other men (six in number)
whom, O learned Brahmana, you saw.play-
ing cheerfully at dice, are the six Seasons.
They also are acquainted with your sins,


6. Havieg committed a sin secretly, no

-sinful man should cherish the assuring

thought that his sin is known only to him-
_ Self and not to any one else.


7. When a man commits a sinful deed
in secret, the Seasons as also Day and
Night see it always.


8. ‘Those regions that are reserved for
the sinful shall be yours. What you had
done, you did not tell me. ‘That your sin
was not known to any one, was your belief,
and this conviction had filled you with joy.


g. ‘You did not inform your preceptor of
the whole truth, choosing to hide from him
a substantial portion. The Seasens, and
Day and Night, whom you have heard
speak thus, thought it proper lo remind you
ot your sin, : co)


Then whom you have |. if A : :
y ‘Such union, is: very desirable with men.


‘109


to. ‘Day and Night and the Seasons,
do know all the good and the bad deeds,
that areinaman.; ,


tt. Fhey: spoke to you in that way, O
twice-born one, because they have fall
knowledge of what you had done but which
you had not the courage to inform me
of, fearihg you had done wrong.


12. For this reason you will visit the
regions that are reserved for the sinful.
You did not tell me what you had done.


- 13, You were fully capable, O twice.


born one, of protecting my wife whose
disposition, by nature, is sinful. In - doing
what you did, you did not commit any sin.
I was, for this, pleased with you.


14. O best of Brakmanas, ‘if I had
Known you to have acted wickedly, I would,
without hesitation, have cursed you en-
tirely.


15. Women become united with men.


You had, however, protected my wife in a
different spirit. If you had acted other-
wise, I would have cursed. Even this is
what I think.”


16. Yauhad, Oson, protected my wile
1 have known the manner in which you had
done it asif you had yourself informed me
of it. Ehave, O son, become pleased with
you. Kelieved of all anxiety, you shall go
to heaven.


17.. Having said these words to Viputa,
the great Rishi: Devasharman, ascended ta
Heaven with his wfe and his disciple and
began to. pass his time there in great happi-
ness.


18, In course of conversation, O king, ~
on a former occasion, the great ascetic -


Markandeya had described to me this .
history on the banks of Ganga.
tg. I, therefore, recite it to you.


Women should always be protected by
you. Amongst them both kinds are to be
seen, that js those wha are virtuous and
those who are not so.


20. ‘The: virtuous women are highly
blessed. “Phey are the mothers of the uni-
verse. They, it is, O king, that k-ep up
the Earth with all her waters and forests.


2t. “Fhose women who are sinful,. who
are of wicked conduct, who are the des-
troyer of their race, and who are wedded to
sinful purposes, are capable of being as-
certained by marks, expressive of the evil
that is in them, which appear, O king, on
their persons.


22. It is thus that great persons are
capable of protecting women. They cannot,


110


© foremast - of kings, be protected in any
other way. oo


23. Women, O king are fierce. They
-are gifted with fierce prowess. They have
neve whom they love or like, so much . as
them that have sexual intercourse with


then.


24. Women are like those (Atharvan)

. Mantrams which destroy life. Even after

they have consented to live with one, they

are prepared to leave him joining others.

They are never satisfied with one person
of the opposite sex, O son of Pandu.


25. Men should not love them. Nor
should they cherish any jealousy on ac-
count of them, O king! Only for the: sake
of virtue, men should enjoy theie society,
not with enthusiasm and attachment but
with unwillingness and absence of attach-
ment.


26. By acting otherwise, a man is sure
‘to meet with destruction, O delighter of
the Kurus. O foremost of kings, reason
is respected at all times and under ail
circumstances.


27. Only one man, vis.,. Vipula, had
succeeded in protecting. woman. ‘There is
none else, O king, in the three worlds who
can protect women.


CHAPTER XLIV.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—

1. Tell me of that, O grandfather,
which is the root of all. duties, which is
the root of kinsmen, of home, of the
departed manes and of guests.


2.-1 think this should be considered
as the foremost of all duties. Teil me,
however, O king, to what sort of a person
should one give his daughter.


3. Having enquired into the conduct
and nature of the person, his learning and
acquirements, his birth, and his acts, good
people should then confer their daughter

" upon accomplished bridegrooms.

4. Allrighteous Brahmanas, O Yudhi-
shthica, act thus. This is known as the
Brahma marriage, O Yudhishthira.

5. Selecting a befitting bridegroom, the
father of the girl should make him marry
his daughter, having, by various presents,
induced the bridegroom to that act, This


MATIABHARATA.


form of marriage, forms the eternal prace
tice of all good Kshatriyas.


6. When the father of the girl, without
consulting bis own wishes, confers his
daughter upon a _ person whom the
daughter likes and who reciprocates the’
girl’s sentiments, the form of marriage, O
Yudhishthira, is called Gandharva by
those versed in the Vedas.


7. The wise have declared, O king, to
be the practice of the Asutas, uig., marrye
ing a girl after buying her at a high cost
and after gratifying the cupidity of her
kinsmen,


8. Killing and chopping off the heads
of weeping kinsmen, the bridegroom some~
times forcibly takes away the girl he
marries. Such marriage, O son, passes by
the name of Rakshasa.


9. OF these five, (vis., the Brahma, the
Kshatra, the Gandharva, the Asura, and
the Rakshasa), three are righteous,
Vudhishthira, and two are unrighteous.
The Paishacha and the Asura fortns should,
never be followed.


to. The Brahma, Kshatra, and Gane
dharva forms} are righteous, O prince of
men! Pure or mixed, these forms should
forsooth be followed.


tr, The Brahmana can take three
wives. The Kshatriya can take two wives.
The Vaishya should take a wife from only
his own caste. ‘The children born of these
wives should all be considered as equal.


12. Of the three wives of a Brahmana.
she taken from his own caste should be
considered as the foremost. Likewise, of
the two wives permitted to the Kshatriya,
she taken from his own caste should be
considered as superior, Some say that
persons belonging to the three higher
castes may take, only for purposes of en-
joyment, wives from the lowest or the Shudra
caste, Others, however, forbid the practices


13. The righteous condemn the practice
of begetting children upon Shudra women,
A Brahmana, by begetting children upon
a Shudca women, becomes sul-ject to the
liability of performing an expiation.


14. A person of thirty years of age
should marry a girl of ten years of age
wearing a single piece of cloth. Or, a
person of one and twenty years of age
should marry a girl of seven years of age.


15. That girl who has no brother nor
father should not be married, O chief of
Bharata’s race, for she may be intended for
giving birth to the heir of her father.


16. After puberty, it in, the girl (if
not martied) should wait for three years.


O°


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


On the fourth year, she should look for a
husband herself.


17. The children of such a girl do not
lose their respectability, nor does union with
such a girl become disgraceful. If, instead
of selecting a husband for herself, she acts
otherwise, she gets the reproach of Praja-

. pati herself.


18. One should marry that girl who is
not a Sapinda of his mother or of the same
family with bis father. ‘This is the usage
which Manu has declared,


Yudhishthira said:— -


19. Desirous of marriage some ore
actually gives a dower to the girl’s kinsmen ;
some one, the girl’s kinsmen consenting,
promises to give a present} some one says,
—I shall carry away the girl by force ;—
some one simply shows -his ciches } some
one, again, actually takes the hand of the
girl with rites of matrriage. L ask you, O
grandfather, whose wife does the girl ac-
tually become? You are the eye to those
who wish to know the truth,


.Bhishma said :—


21. The deeds of men approved by. the
wise, are seen to yield good. . False speech,
however, is always sinful.


22. The girt herself who becomes wife,
the sons born of her, the Ritwijas and pre-
ceptors and disciples and Upadhyayas
present at the marriage all become liable
to expiation if the girl yives her hand to a
person other than he whom = she had
promised to marry. Some are of opinion
that no expiation is necessary fer such
conduct, Paes ad


23. Manu does-not speak highly ‘of the
practice of a gitt living with a person whom
she does not like. Living as wife with a
person whom she does not like, produces
Gisgrace and sin. No one commits sin in
any of the following cases.

24. In forcibly carrying away for mar-
tiage a gitl that is bestowed upon the ab-
ductor by the pirl’s relatives with due rites,
as also a girl for whom dower has been
paid and accepted, there is no great sin,


25. Upon the girl’s kinsmen having
given their consent, Mantras and Homa
should be restored to. Such Mantras
truly accomplish theie purpose. Mantras
and Homa recited and performed in the
case of a girl who has not been given away
by her kinsmeh, do not accomplish their
purpose,


26. The engagement made by the rela-
tives of a girl is, no doubt, binding and


aif


sacred. But the engagement that is made
by the bride and bride-groom, with the
help of Mantras, is very much more so.


27. According to the Injunctions of the
scriptures, the husband: should regard his
wife as an acquisition due to his own pris-
tine deeds or to what has been ordained
by God. One, therefore, commits no sia
by accepting for wife a girl who had been
Promised to another by her kinsmen or for
whom dower had been accepted by them
from another,


Yudhishthiva said:


28. When after the receipt of dower fot
a girl, the girl’s father sees a more eligible
bride-groom,—one, who is endued with.the
three-fold objects, does the girl's father
commit sin by rejecting the person from
whora dower had been received in favor of
him who is more eligible ?


29. In such a case either alternative
appears to be sinful, for to discard the
person to whom the girl has been promised
ean never be honorable, while to reject the
person who is more eligible can never be
good. I ask, how should the father act so
that he might be said to dothat which is
beneficial? ‘Yo us, of all duties this seems
to deserve utmost deliberation,


34>. Weare desirous of determining the
truth. You, indeed, are our eyes. Do you
explain this to us. I am never satiated
with listening to you,


Bhishma said :—


3t. The gift of the dower does not maka
the girl wife. This is well-known to the
person) paying it. He pays it simply as the
price of the girl, Then again the good
never bestow their daughters, induced by
the dowers that others may offer,


32—33- When the person desirous of
marrying happens to be gifted with suctr
qualities as do not go down with the girl’s
kinsmen, it is then that kinsmen demand
dower from him. ‘The person, however, who:
won over by another’s accomplishmetts,
says,—Do you marry my girl, adorning her
with proper ornaments of gold and gems,
and that person who satisfies this request,
cannot be said to demand dower’ or give it,
for such a transaction ‘is not a sale. The
bestowal of a daughter upon acceptance of
what may properly be considered as gifts is
the eternal practice. ;


34. In matters of marriage, some fathers
say——I shall bestow my daughter upon such
and such a person; some say—l shall not
bestow my daughter uppn such a one.—
Some; again, say forcibly—I must bestow

; wy daughter upon such an individual.


112


35. These declarations are rot tanta-
mount to actualmarriagt. People are seen


to solicit one another for the hands of -


maidens, Villthe hand is actually taken
with due rites, marriage does not happen.
We have treacd that even this was the boon
granted to men formerly by the Maruts
about maidens. . ;

46. The Rishis have laid thé command
upon all nen that maidens should never be
bestowed upon persons untess the father are
eligible. The datighter is thé root of desire
and of descendants of the collateral line.
‘This is what { think..


37. The practice of sale and purchase of


the daughter, has been known to human
beings for a long time. On account of Such
familiarity with the practice, you may be
able, upon éareful exantination, to find

innuimerable fatlts in it. The gift or
" acceptance of dower alone could not be
considered as creating the relation of hus-
bahd atid wife. - Listen to what I say on
this head.


38. Formerly, having defeated all the
Magadhas, the Kashis, and the Koshalas,
I brought away by force two maidens for
Vichitraviryya, Ae


39. Qne of those two maidens was
married with due rites. The other maiden
was not formally married on the
gtound that she was one for whom dower
had been paid in the shape of chivalry.
My uncle of Kuru's race, vig. king
Valhika, said that the riiaiden so brotght
away and not married with due. rites
should be liberated. That maiden, there-
fore, was recommiénded to Vichitraviryya
for being matried by hii according to
due cites, ‘


40. Doubting my father’s words I went
to others for asking their opinion, I
thought that my father was exceedingly
punctilious in matters of morality. - :


4t. AIthen went to my father himself,
© king, and addressed him these words
from desire of knowing something about
the practices of pious people in respect of
marriage:—l wish, O sire, to know what
in teuth the practices are of righteous
people !—I repeatedly expressed my wish.
Such wags my eagerness and curiosity, that
I expressed my desire several times.


42—43. Atter § had uttered those words


that foremest of pieus men, wis., ny
father Valhika, answered me, saying,~~
lf im your opinion the relation of hus-


band and wife belongs to the gift and
acceptance of dower and not to the actual
taking of the maiden's hand with due
tires, the father of the maiden would show


MAHABHARATAT


than that which comes [ror the ordinary
scriptures. This is what thé accepte
scriptures say.

44. Persons’ conversatit with morality
and duty do not hold that theic words aré
at all authoritative who say that the
relation of husband and wife arises from
the gift and acceptance of dower, and not
from the actual taking of the hand with
due rites. ;


43. The saying is well known that the
relation of husband and wife is created
by actual] bestowal of the daughter by the
father. ‘The relation of wife is not formed
through sale and purchasé. They who
consider .such status to be due to sale and
the gift of dower are persons who aré
certainly iutlacquainted with the scrip-
tures,


46. Noone should bestow his daughtet
upon such persons. In fact, they are not


men with whom one miay marry his.
daughter.: A wife should never be pur-
chased. Nor should a father sell


his
daughter. .


47. Oily those sinful persons who are
possessed, besides, by cupidity, and whd
sell and purchase fertiale slaves for itiaking
thetn Servants, consider the telation of
wife as eapdble of originating from thé
gift and acceptance of dower.


_48—49; On this subject some pecple on
one eccasion had asked prince Satyavat:
the following question i—If the giver of a
dower to the kinsnien of.a maiden happens
to die before marriage, can another person
take the hand of that maiden in marriage ?
We have doubts on this matter; .Do you
remove these doubts of ours for you are
gifted with great wisdom and are honored,
by the wise,

5s0-~gr1. Be you the eyes to ourselves
who are desirous of learning the truth.~=
Prince Satyavat. answered, saying,— he
kinsmen of the maiden should bestow het
upon him whom they consider proper..
‘There need be tio scruples in this, The
righteous. act thus without caring for
the giver of the dower even if he be alive ;'
while, about the’ giver who is dead, there
is not the slightest doubt. :


52. Some say that the virgin wife of
widow,—<one, whose, mattiage has fot
bees consummated with her husband by
actual sexual intercourse on account of
his absence or death—+may be alpwed to
unite hetself with her husband’s younger.
brother or such other relation. The huse
band dying before such consummation,
the virgin-widow may either surrender.
herself to her husband’s younger brother


himself to be the fullower of a creed other | or practise penances,


_ANUSHASANA PARVA,


83. Inthe opinion of some, the younger
brother of the husband or such other rela-
tion may thus use the virgin wife or widow,
though others hold that such practice,
though it is frequent, originates from desire
instead of being a scriptural ordinance.
They who say so are clearly of opinion that
the father of a maiden has the right to
bestow her upon any eligible person, dis-
regarding the dower previously given by
another and accepted by himself. L


54. Tf after the hand of a maiden has
been promised all the initial rites before
marriage be performed, the maiden may
still be given to a person other than the one
to whom she had been promised. Only the
giver commits the sin of falsehood ; so far,
however, as the relation of wife is concern-
ed, no injury can occur thereto.


55. The Mantras of marriage accom-
plish their object of bringing about the
indissoluble union of marriage at the
seventh step. The maiden becomes the
wife of him to whom the gift is actually
made with water.


56. The gift of maidens should be made
in the following way. The wise know it
forsooth. A superior Brahmana should
marry a maiden who is not unwilling, who
belongs to a family equal to his own in
purity or dignity, and who is given away by
her brother. Such a girl should be married
in the presence of fire, with due rites,
cansing her, amongst other things, to go
round the bridegroom for the usual number
‘of times.


CHAPTER XLV,


( ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


1. If a person, after having -given
dower for a maiden, goes away, how should
the maiden’s father or other kinsmen who
can bestow her, act? Do tell me this, O
grandtather ?


Bhishma said :—

2. Such a maiden, if she be the
daughter of a sonfess and sich father,
should be maintained by the father. Indeed,
if the father does not return the dower to
the kinsmen of the giver, the maiden should
be considered as belonging to the giver of
the dower.

She may even raise children for the
givec by any of those means that are laid
down in the scriptures. No person, how-


13


4. Commanded by frer father, the prin-
cess Savitri had in days of old chosen a
husband and united herself with him. This.
act of hers is praised by some; but othe-s,
conversant with the scriptures, condemn i'.


3. Others who are righteous have ‘ot
acted thus, Others maintain that the ¢ me
duct of the righteous should ever be cu si-+
dered as the foremost evidence of dury ov
morality. :


6. Upon this subject, Sukratu, tha
grand son of the great Janaka, the king
of the Videhas, has declared the following
opinion.

7. There is the well-known injunction
of the scriptures that women can enjoy
freedom at any period of their life. If this
were not the path of the virtuous, bow could.
this scriptural saying exist? As regards the
pious, therefore, how can there be any ques-
tion or doubt about it? How ean people
condemn that saying by choosing to cone
duct themselves otherwise 7


8. The impious violation of eternal
practice is considered as the practice of
the Asuras. We never hear of such practice
in the conduct of the ancients.


g. The relationship of husband and
wite is very subtile. It is different from the
natural relationship of male and female
which consists only in the desire for sexual
intercourse. This also was said by the king
of Janaka’s race,


Yudhishthira said :—


10. Under what authority is the property
of men inherited (by others ‘when they
happen to have daughters)? As for her
father the daughter should be considered
the same as the son,


Bhishma said :—


tr, The sor iseyen as one's own self,
and the daughter is like the son. How,
therefore, can another take the riches when
one lives in his ownself in the form of his
daughter ?


12. Whatever is the own property of tha
mother, is due to the maiden daughter, I€
the maternal grandfather happens to die
without leaving sons, the daughter’s son
should inherit it.


13. The daughter’s son offers funeral -
cakes to his own father and the father of
his mother. Hence, for the ends of justice,
there is no difference between the sun and
the daughter’s son.” :

14. When a person has got only a
daughter and she has been invested by him
with the position of a son, if he then hap-


ever, can marry her according to due rites. { hens to have a son, such son shares the


15


Lt,


inheritance with the daughter. When,
again, a person has got a daughter and
she has ‘been invesied by him with the
position of a son, if he then happens to
take a son by adoption or purchase, then
the daughter is considered superior to such
son.


15. In the following case I do not see
any reason why ihe daughter’s son should
be considered as the proper heir. Yhe
case is that of the daughter wha has been
sold hy her father. The sons born of a
daughter who has been sold by her sire for
actual price, belong exclusively to their
father. Such sons can never belong, even as
danghter’s: sons, to their maternal grand-


father on acconnt of his having sold their ,


mother for price and lost all his rights in
or to her by that deed.


16. Such sons, again, become full of
malice, impious in conduct, the misappro-
priators of other people’s riches, and full
of deceit and cunning, Having originated
from that sinful form of marriage called
Asura, the offspring becomes wicked in
conduct,


17. Persons acquainted with ancient
history, conversant with duties, devoted to
the scriptures and firm in maintaining the
restrictions therein laid down, recite in this
connection some verses sung in days of yore
by Yama,


19. This is what Yama had sung. That
man who acquires riches by seHing his own
son, or who bestows his daughter after
accepting a dower for his own livelihood,
nas to sink in seven dreadful hells one after
another, known by the name of Katas.
There that wretch has to feed upon sweat
and uine and stools during that period.


20 In that form of marriage which is
called Arsha, the person wha marries has


to give a bull and a cow and the father of,


the maiden accepts the gift. Some charae-
terise this gift as a dower (or price), while
some are of opinion that it should not be
nsidered in that light. The true opinion,
wever, is that a gift for such a purpose,

t of small value or large, should, O

be considered as dower or price, and
stowal of the daughter under such

. ‘ances should be considered as a


Loespite the fact of its having been
1 by a few persons it can never be
the eternal practice. Other forms
age are seen, practised by men,
marrying girls after carrying them
y force from amidst theic kinsmen.


Those persons. who have sexual in-
st with a_maiden,. by force -are con-


MAHABHARATA.


sidered as perpetrators of sin.
to sink in darkest hell.


23. Even a human being who is not a
relation of blood should not be sold. What
need then be said of one’s own child ? With
the riches that is acquired by doing sinfuk
deeds, ro meritorious deed can be per~
formed,


They have


CHAPTER XLVI.
(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—=


Continued,


Bhishma said :—


1. They who know the ancient history
recite the following verse of Daksha the .
son of Prachetas, vég.,—Vhat maiden, foe
whom nothing is taken by her kinsmen in
the forus of dower, cannot be fsaid to be
sold.


z. Honor good treatment, and every-
thing else which is agreeable, should all
be given to the maiden whose hand is
taken in marriage.


3. Her father and brothers and father-
in-law and husband's brothers should show
her every respect and adorn her with orna-
ments, if they be desirous of reaping bene-
fits, for such conduct on theie part always
produces considerable happiness and ad-
vanlage,


4. Tf the wife does not like her husband
or fails to please him, from such dislike and
absence of joy, the husband can_ never
have children for increasing his family.


5. Women, O king, should always be
adored and treated with love. There where
women are treated with honor, the very
gods are said to be propitiated. ;


6. ‘Fhere where women are not adored,
all acts become fruitless, If the women of
a family, on account of the treatment they
receive, indulge in grief and tears, that
family soon becomes extinct.


7. Those houses which are cursed by
women meet with destruction and ruin as
if scorched by some Athacvan rite, Such
houses lose their splendour. Their growth’
and prosperity cease, O king. :


8. Manu, on the eve of his departure
from this world, made over women to the
care and protection of men, saying that
they are weak, that they failan easy prey
to the seductiou of men, disposed to accept
the love which is offered them, and devoted
to truth. :


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


_ % There are others among them who
are full of malice, covetous of honors,
fierce in nature, unlovable, and impervious
to reason. Women, however, deserve to


be respected. Do ye men show them
‘honor,
, Yo. The virtue of men depends upon


women. All pleasures and enjoyments
also entirely depend upon them. Do ye
serve them and adorethem. Do ye bend
your wills before them. 5


wt. The begetting of children, the nur-
sing of children already born, and the ac-
complishment of all deeds necessary for
the needs of seciety, see, all these have
-women for their cause.

12. By respecting women, yé aré stre to
tacquire the fruition of all objects. Regard-
“ing it a princess of the {house of Janaka

the king of the Videhas, sang a verse. It
is this :—.

. 13. Women have no sacrifices ordained
for them. ‘There are no Shraddhas which
they are called upon to perform. ‘hey are
not cequired to oberve any fasts. ‘To serve
their lmusbands wish respect and willing
obedience form thetr ouly duty. Througi
the satisfaction of that duty they succeed in
conquering Heaven, :


14. In childhood, the father protects
her, The husband protects. her in youth.
When she becomes old, her sons protect
her, At no period of her life is woman free.


t5. Women are deities of- prosperity.
The person. that desires affluence and
prosperity should honor.them. By cherish-
ing women, O Bharata, one cherishes the
goddess of prosperity herself, and by afflict-
ing her, one is said to pain the goddess of


prosperity.


“CHAPTER XLVH.


{ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued, *


Yudhishthira said :-—


22, You know fully well the ordinances
of ail the scriptures. You are the foremost
of those who are acquainted with the
duties of kings. You are celebrated over
the whole world as a great remover of
doubts.


2. 1 have a doubt, do you explain it to
me, O grandfather. As regards this doubt
that-has originated in my mind, [ shall ‘not
ask any other person for its solution.


3- You should, O you of mighty arms,
expound as to how amian should act who


‘ever, of the distinction attaching


tg


is desirous of treading along the path of
duty and virtue,

4. fe has been laid down, O grand-
father that a Brahmana can take four
wives, vzg., one who belongs to his own


_caste, ove who is a Kshatriya, one wito is a


Vaishya, and one who is a Shudra, if the
Brahmana wishes to satisfy the desire of
sexual intercourse,


' §. ‘Tell me, O best of the Kurus, which
amongst those sons should inherit the
father’s riches one after another.


6: Who amongst them, O grandfather
shall take what share of the paternal
wealth? [ wish to hear this, v¢g., how the
distribution has been ordained antongst
them of the paternal property.


Bhishma said :—


zy. Yhe Brahmana, the Kshatriya, and
the Vaishya are considered the three twice-


| born castes. ‘fo marry in these three castes
y


has been ordained to be the duty of the
yes


Brahmana, O Yudhishthira, ‘


8. Through erroneous judgment or cupi--


dity or lust, O destroyer of enemies, a


Brahmana takes a Shudra wife. Heis not
competent to take, according to the scrip-
tures, such wife. ‘


g. A Brahmana, by knowing a Shudra
woman comes by a low end in the next
world. He should, having done such an
act, perform expiation ‘according to the
tites laid dowh in the scriptures.


10, That expiation must be twice
heavier or severer if on account of such an
act, O Yudhishthira, the ;Beah wana gets
children, I shall now tell you, O Bharata,
how the(paternal) jwealth is tobe distributed.


11. The son born of the Brahmani wife
shall, in the first place, appropriate from
his father’s wealth a bull of good marks,
and the best car or vehicle, ;


12, What remains of the Brahmana’s
property, O Yudhishthira, after this, should
be divided into ten equal parts, The son by
the Brahmani wife shall take four of suctt
parts of the paternal property.


13. The son that is born of the Ksha+
triya wife is, forsooth, possessed of the
status of a Brahmana. On account, hows
to -his
mother, he shall take three ofthe ten shares
into which the property has been divided.


14. The son who has been born of the
wife belonging to the third caste, uzg., the
woman of the Vaishya caste, by the Brab-
mana father, shall take, O Yudhishthira,
two of the three remaining shares of the
father’s property, eS a ater. ©


116


15. It has been said that the son who
has been begotten by the Brahmana_ father
upon the Shudra wife should not take any
portion of the father’s property, for he is
not to bé considered an heir. A little, hdw-
ever, of the paternal property slould be
given to the son of the Shudra wife, hence
the one remaining share should be given to
him out of compassion.


16. Even this should be the ordec of the
ten shares into which the Brahmana’s
wealth is ta be distributed. All the sons
that are bern of the same mother or ‘of
mothers of the same caste, shall share
equally the portion that is theirs. —


17. The son born of the Shudea wife


should not be considered as invested with |


the dignity of a Brahmana on account of
his being unskilled (in the scriptures and
the duties ordained for the Brahmana).
Only those children who are born of wives
belonging to the threeehigher castes should
be considered as invested with the dignity
of Brahmanas.


18 It has been said that there are only
four castes and there is no fifth, The sen
by the Shudra wife shall take the tenth part
of his father’s wealth.


19. That share, however, he is to take
only when his father has given it to him.
Hie shall not take it if his father does
not give it to him. Some portion of the
father’s riches should, forsooth, be given, O
Bharata, to the son of the Shudra wife.


20. Compassion is one of the greatest
virtues. It is through compassion that
something is given to the son of the Shudra
wife. Whatever be the object about which
compassion arises, as a cardinal virtue it is
always productive of merit.

21. Whether the father happens to have
children (by his wives belonging to the
other castes) or to have no children, to
the son by the Shudra wife, O Bharata,
nothing more than a tenth part of the
father’s wealth should be given.


22. If a Brahmana happens to have
more riches than what is necessary for
maintaining himself and his family for three
years, he should with that riches celebrate
sacrifices. A  Bratmana should sever
acquire riches for nothing.


23. The highest sum that!the husband
should give the wife is three thousand coins.
‘This wealth that the husband gives to the
wife, the latter may spend or dispose of as
she likes,


24. Upon the death of the childless hus-
band, the wife shall enjoy all his riches.
The wife should never take any ‘portion of
her husband’s riches, : ;


MAHABUARATA.


25. Whatever riches, O Yudhishthira,
the Brahmani wife may acquire by gift from
her father, should be taken by her daughter,
for the daughter is like the son.


26. The daughter, O king, has been
ordained in the scriptures to be equal to
the son, O delighter of the Kurus. hus
has the law of inheritance been ordained, O
foremost of Bharata’s family. Remember-
ing these ordinances about the distribution
and disposal of wealth, one should never
acquire riches uselessly,


Yudhishthira said :—


27. If the son born of a Shudra woman
by a Brahmana father has been made ina
the scriptures to be disentitled to any pro-
perty, by what exception of the rule then is
a tenth part of the paternal property to be
given to him ?


28. A son born of a Brahmani wife by a
Brabmana is unquestionably a Brahmana,
One born of a Kshatriya wife or of a
Vaishya wife, by a Brahmana husband, is
likewise a Brahmana.


29. Why then, O best of kings, are
such sons to share the paternal property
unequally ?. All of them, you have said,
are Brahmanas, having been born of
mothers that belong to the three higher
castes equally entitled to the name of the
twice-born,


Bhishma said :—

30. O destroyer of enemies, all wives in
this worfd are called by the name of Dara,
Although that name is applied to all,
yet there is this great difference to be
observed.


3t. Ifhaving married three wives be-
longing to the three other castes, a Beah-
mana takes a Brahmani wife the very last
of all, yet shall she be considered as the
fiest in rank among all the wives, and as
being worthy of the greatest respect. In-
deed, among all the co- wives, she shall be
the foremost.


32. Inher apartments should be -kept
all necessaty articles for the husband’s
baths, personal decorations, washing of
teeth, and application of collyrium to the
eyes, In her apartments should be kept the.
Havya and the Kavya and all else that the
husband may need for the performance of


his religious acts.


33. Ui the Brahmani wife is in the house,
no other wife is entitled to attend to these
needs of the husband. Only the Brahmani
wife, O Yudhishthira, should help the hus-
band in these acts,


4


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


34. The husband’s food and drink and
galands and dresses and ornaments,—-all
these should be given by the Brahmani
wife to the husband, for she is the fore-
most in rank among all the wives of the
husband.


35. These are the ordinances of the
scriptures as laid down by Manu, O
delighter-of the Kurus! This, O king, is
seen to be the course of eternal practice.


36. If a Brahmana, O Yudhishthira,
actuated by lust, acts in a different way, he
shail come to be considered as a Chandala
among Brahmanas.


37- The son born of the Kshatriya wife
has been said to be equal in dignity to the
son born of the Brahmani wife, For all
that, a distinction attaches to the son of the
Brahmani wife on account of the superiority
of the Brahmana wife to the Kshatriya wife
in respect of the order of caste,


38. The Kshatriya wife cannot be con-
sidered as equal to the Brahmana wife
in point of birth. Hence, O best of kings,
the son born of the Brahmani wife must
be considered as the first in rank and
superior to the son born of the Kshatriya
wife.


39. Because, again, the Kshatriya wife,
is not equal in point of birth to the Brah-
mani wite, hence the son of the Brahmani
wife takes, one after another, all the best
things, O Yudhisthica, among his father’s
property.

40. Likewise, the Vaishya wife cannot
be considered as the equal of the Kshatriya
wife in point of birth, Prosperity, kingdom
and treasury, O Yudhisthira, belong to the
Kshatriyas, .


4t. All these have been ordained for the
Kshatriya. ‘he whole Earth, O king, en-
circled by seas, is seen to belong to him.
By following the duties of his own caste,
the Kshatriya acquires immense riches,


' 42, The sceptre of royalty is held by
him. Without the Kshatriya, king,
there can be no protection, [The Brah-
manas are highly blessed, for they are the
gods of the very deities,


43. Following the ordinances laid down
by the Rishis, the Kshatriyas should adore
the Brahmanas according to due rites,
This is the eternal usage.


44. Coveted by thieves and others, the
properties of all men are protected by
Kshatriyas following the duties of their
order. Indeed, riches and wives and every
other possession owned by people would
have been forcibly taken away but for this
protection that the Kshatriyas give,


wt


45. The Kshatriya, as the king, becomes
the protector or rescuer of all the castes,
Hence, the son of the Kshatriya wife shall,
forsooth, be held to be supérior to him that
is born of the Vaishya wife. The son of
Kshatriya wife for this, takes a larger share
of the paternal property than the son of
the Vaishya mother.


Yudhishthira said :—


46. You have duly said what the rules
are that apply to Brahmanas, What, how-
ever, are the rules that apply to the others ?


Bhishma, said :—

47. The Kshatriya, O delighter of the
Kurus can take two wives. The Kshatriya
may take a third wife from the Shudra
caste. Such practice prevails, it is true, but
it is not sanctioned by the scriptures.


48. This should be the order, O Yudhi-
shthiea, of the wives of a Kshatriya. The
property of a Kshatriya should, O king;
be divided into eight shares.


49. The son of the Kshatriya wife shall
take four. of such shares of the paternal
property. The son of the Vaishya wife
shall take three of such shares.,


50. The remaining one or the eighth
share shall be taken by the son of the
Shudra wife. The son of the Shudra_ wife,
however, shall take only when the father
gives but not otherwise.


5t. The, Vaishya can take only one wife.
He can take a second wife from the Shudra
caste. Such is the practice, no doubt, but it
is not sanctioned hy the scriptures,


§2. If a Vaishya has two wives one of
whem is a Vaishya and the other a Shudra,
there is a difference between them in res+
pect of position.


53. The riches of a Vaishya, O chief of
Bharata’s race, should be divided into five
portions. shall now speak of the sons of
a Vaishya by a wile of his own caste and
by one belonging to the inferior caste, as
also of the manner in which, O king, his
property is to be distributed among those
children.,


54. The son born of the Vaishya wife
shall tzke four of such shares of his pater-
nal property. The fifth share, O Bharata,
has been said to belong to the son born of
the Shudra wife.


° 55. Such son, however, shall take when
the father gives. He should not take any-
thing unless the father gives it to him.
The son who is begotten on a Shudra wife
by persons of the three higher castes should
always be considered as disentitled to any
share of the father’s wealth,


118


56. The Shudra should take only one
wife from his own caste. Hecan, ander no
ciecumstances, take any other wife. Even
if he happens to have a hundred sdns by
this wife, all of them share equally the
property that he may leave behind.


57. As for all the castes, the children
born of the wife taken from the husband’s


own caste shall, it has been laid dawn, |


share equally the father’s wealth.


58. The eldest son’s share shall be
greater than that of every other son, for he
shall take one share more than each of his
brothers, ;comprising the best things of this
father, This ig the law of inheritance, U son
of Pritha, as declared by the Self-create
himself. .


59. Amongst -children alf born of th$
wife taken from the husband’s own caste’
there is another difference, O king! In
marrying, the elder ones should always
precede the younger ones,


60. ‘The wives being all equal in respect
of their order of birth, and the children
also being all equal in respect of the posi-
tion of their mothers, the son that is first-
born shall take one share more than each
of his other brothers. ‘The son who is next
in point of age shall take a share tliat is
next in value, while the son who is young-
est shall take the share which belongs to
the youngest. :


61. Thus among wives of all castes, they
who belong to the same caste with the hus-
band are considered as the first. ‘This is
what was declared by the great Rishi
Kashyapa the son of Marichi.


CHAPTER XLVIIL.


(ANUSHASANA PARVA).—.
Continued. ; :


Yudhishthira said :—


1. The intermixture of castes is brought
about through inducements offered by rich-
es, oc through mere lust, or through ignor-
ance of the true order of birth. :


2. What, O grandfather, are the duties
ef persons who are born in the mixed
classes and what are the atts laid down for
them? Do you describe them to me.


Bhishma said :—

.: 3. In the: beginning, the Lord of all
.- Creatures created the four castes and laid

_down their respective duties, for the sake of
sacrifice. .


wespectable families.


MAHABHARATA,


4. The Brahmana may take four wives,
one from each of the four castes. In two
of them, he takes birth himself. ‘hose sons,
however, who are begotten by him on the
two other inferior, (v7s., Vaishya and
Shudra), are inferior, their position being
settled not by that of their father but by
that of their mothers.


5. The son begotten by a Brahmana
upon a Shudra wife is cailed Parashava,
meaning one born of a dead body for the
SRudra woman's body is as inauspicious as
a dead body. He should serve the persons
of his i(father's) ‘race. Indeed, it is not
proper for him to renounce the duty of
service that has been laid down for him.


6. With all means in his power, he

should maintain his ‘family. Even if he
happens to be elder in age, he should still
dutifully serve the other ‘children of his
father, who in age may be younger to him,
and give them whatever he may succeed in
acquiring.
. 7. A Kshatriya may take three wives.
In two of them, he takes birth himself. His
third wife being of the Shudra caste, is
consideced as very inferior. he son that
he begets upon her is called an Ugra.


8. The Vaishya may take two wives. In
both of them, he takes birth himself. The
Shudra can take only one wife, from his
own caste. The son begotten by him upon
her becomes a Shudra,


9g. Ason who takes birth under circum-
stances other than those mentioned above,
is considered as avery inferior one. If a
person of a lower caste begets a son upon
a@-woman of a superior caste, such son is
regarded as outside the pale of the four
pure castes. Indeed, such son becomes an
object of derision with the four principal
castes. : ©


1o. If a Kshatciya begets a son upon
a Brahmani woman, = such son, without
being included in any of the four pure
castes, comes to be consideted as a Suta.
The duties of a Suta consist in reciting
eulogies and encomiums of kings and.other
graat men, The son begotten hy a Vaishya
upon a woman of the Brahmana, order,
is known as a Vaidehaka, Their duties
consist in taking charge of bars and bolts
for. protecting the privacy of women of
Such sons have no
purifying cites laid down for them.


iz. If a Shudra knows a woman be-
longing: to the foremost of the four castes,
the son that ‘ begotten is called a Chan-
dala. Endued wittr a dreadful disposition,
he must live in the outskirts of cities and
yowns and bis duty is that of the public


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


executioner. Such sons are always con-
sidered as wretches of their race. ‘hese,
© foremost of intelligent persons, are the
offspring of intermixed castes, :


12. The son begotten by a Vaishya
wpon a Kshatriya woman becomes a Vandi
or Magadha. His duties are eloquent
recitations of praise. The son begotten
through transgression, by a Shudra upon a
Kshatriya woman, becomes a Nishada and
his duties consist in the catching of fish. ,


13. Ifa Shudra happens to know a
Vaishya woman, the son begotten ‘upon
her comes to be called Ayogava. The
duties of such.a person are those of a car-
penter, The Brahmana ‘should never
accept gifts from sueh a person. They
are not entitled to possess any kind ‘of
riches.


14. Persons belonging to the thixed
castes beget upon wives taken from their
own castes children invested -with their
positions When they procreate children in
women taken from other inferior castes,
such children become inferior to their
fathers, for they become invested with
the position of their mothers.


15. Thus as regards the four pure castes,
persons beget children invested with their
own position upon wives taken from their
own castes as also upon them that are
taken from the castes immediately below
their own, When, however, offspring is
begotten. upon other wives, they are re
garded as invested with a position that is,
Principally, outside the pale of the four
pure castes,


16. When. such children beget sons in
women, taken from their own classes, those
sons take the position of their fathers, It is
only when, they take wives from castes
other than their own, that the children
they beget, become invested with inferior
position. :


17. Asan example of this it may be
said that a Shudra begets upon a woman
belonging to the most superior caste a son
that is outside the pale of the four castes,
The son that is outside the pale of the four
castes, by uniting with women belonging
to the four principal castes, begets off-
spring that is further degraded in point of
position. ae


18. From those outside the. pale -of the
four castes and those again that are further
outside that limit, children multiply on
account of the union of persons with women
of classes superior to their own. Thus, from
persons of inferior position’ classes ~ spring
up, altogether fifteen in number, that are
equally low or still lower in dignity, -i


tig


19. It is only from sexual union with
‘women of persons who should not have


such union with them that mixed castes ”


originate. Among the classes that are
thus outside the limit of the four principal
or pure castes, chiidren are begotten upon
woman belonging to the class called


Sairindhri by men of the class called


Magadha. ‘


zo, ‘The occupation of such children is
the adorement of the bodies of kings and
others. -They are well acquainted with the
preparation of unguents, the miaking of
garlands, and ‘the manufacture of articles
used for the decoration of the body,
Though free by the position that belongs
to them by birth, they should live like
servants. From the union of Magadhas of
alcertain class with women of the caste


‘called Sairindhri, another caste originates,


called Ayogava. Their business cons
sists in the making of nets. WVaidehas, by
knowing Sairindhri worgen, beget children
called Maireyakas whose business is the
manufacture of wines and spirits.


21. From the Nishadas originate a caste
called Madgura and another known by the
name of Dasas whose business is plying
boats. From the Chandalas originates a
race called Shwapaka whose business lies
in keeping guard over the dead.


22. The women of the Magadhi caste,
by union with these jfour castes of wicked
nature, produce four others who live by
deceitful means, These are Mangsa, Swae
dukara, Kshaudra, and Sougandha.


'


23. From the Vaideha originates cruel —


and sinful caste that lives by practising
deception. From the Nishadas again
originates the Madranabha caste whose
members are seen to ride on cars drawn by
asses.


24. From the Chandalas originates the
caste called Pukkasa whose members are
seen to eat the flesh of asses, horses and
elephants. These are clad in clothes, pro-
cured by stripping human corpses.
are again seen to eat off broken earthen-
ware,


25. These three castes of very low
origin, are born of women of the Ayogava
caste (by fathers taken from different
castes). The caste called Kshudra origi-
nates from. the Vaidehaka. The caste


.called Andhra which hives in che outskirts


of towns and cities, also originates (from
the Vaidehakas). :


26.


‘Then, again, the Charmakara,
knowing: woman


of the Nishada caste,


“begets the class called Karavara.: From.


the Chandala, again,coriginates the caste
known by the name of Pandusaupaka


They |


120


whose business-is to make baskets and
other things with cleft bambous,


27. From the union of the Nishada with
a woman of the Vaidehi caste, originates
ove who is called by the name of Ahindaka.
‘The Chandala begets upon a Saupata
women a son who does not differ from the
Chandala in position or occupation.


28. A Nishadi woman, by union with a_


Chandala, produces a gon who lives in the
outskirts of villages and towns, Indeed,
the members of sucha caste Jive in cre-
matoria and are considered by the very
lowest orders as incapable of being classed
among them.


29. Thus do these mixed castes origi-
nate from improper and sinful union of
fathers and mothers belonging to different
castes. Whether they live hidden or open-
ly, they should be known by their occupa-
. tions,


20. The duties have been laid down in
the scriptures of only the four principal
castes. About others, the scriptures are
entirely silent. Among all the castes, the
members of those castes that have no duties
assigned to them by the scriptures, need
entertain no fears as to what they do.


3t. Persons unaccustomed to the per«
formance of sacrifices or for whom sacrifices
have not been laid down, and who are de-
prived of the company and the instructions
of the pious, whether classed among the four
principal castes or out of theie limit, by
uniting themselves with women of other
castes, led not by considerations of virtue
but by uncontrolled lust, cause numerous
mixed castes to originate whose occupations
and houses depend on the circumstances
connected with the irregular unjons from
which they spring.

32. Having recourse to such places
where four roads meet, or crematoria, or
hills and mountains, or forests and trees,
they build their -houses.
they wear are made of iran.


33. Living in such places, openly, fol-
lowing their own occupations for acquiring
livelihood. They may be seen to live thus,
adorning their persons with ornaments and
engaged in the work of manufacturing
various domestic and‘other utensils.


34. Forsooth, by assisting kine and
Brahmanas, and practising the virtues of
abstention from cruelty, compassion, truth.
fulness of speech, and forgiveness, and. if it
is mecessary, protecting others by sacrificing
their own lives, persons of the mixed castes,
may acquire success, I have no doubt, O
king that these victues become the causes of
their success,


The ornaments |


MATABMARATA.


36.. He whois gifted with intelligence,
should, taking everything into considecation,
beget children according to the scriptural
injunctions, upon women that have been
declared as proper or fit for him. A son
begotten upon a woman belonging toa de.
graded caste, instead of rescuing the father,
brings him to grief even as a heavy burden
brings to grief a swimmer desirous of cross-
ing a pool of water.


37. Whether a man is learned or others
wise, lust and anger are natural tendencies
of humanity in this world. Women, theres
fore, may always be seen to drag men into
the wrong -path.


38. The disposition of women is such that
man's contact with her produces misery.
Hence, wise men do not allow themselves to
be excessively attached to women.


Yudhishthira said:—


39. ‘There are men who belong to the
mixed castes, and who are of very impure
birth. Putting - respectable appearance,
they are, in sooth, disrespectable. On
account of those external signs we may not
be able to know the truth about their birth.
Are there any signs, O grandfather, by
which the truth may be known about the
origin of such men ?


Bhishm a said:—

vo. A person who is born of an irregular
union shows various features of disposition.
One's purity of birth, again, is to be deter-
mined from one’s acts which must resemble
the acts of those who are admittedly good
and pious.


41. A disrespectable conduct, acts op-
posed to those laid down in the scriptures,
crookedness and cruelty, and abstention
from sacrifices and other scriptural acts
that lead to merit, show one’s impurity of
birth.


42. A_ son inherits the disposition of
either the father or the mother. Some-
times he inherits the dispositions of both,
A person of impure birth can never succee
in concealing his true nature. :


43. As the cub ofa tiger resembles its
father and dam in form and in stripes or
spots, Soa person cannot but show the cir-
cumstande of his origin.


44. However secret may one’s birth be,
if that birth happens to be impure, its
character or nature is sure to show itself
slightly or largely. ‘


45- A person may for purposes of his
own, choose to follow an insincere path,
practising such eonduct as seems to be
pious, His own nature, however, in the


hatter of those acts that he does, always
announces whether te belongs to a good
taste or to a different one.


46. Creatures in the world are gifted
with various kinds of disposition. Ttrey are,
again, seen to be employed in various
kinds of acts. [Amongst creatutes thus
engaged, there is nothing that is so good or
valuable as pure birth and righteous
conduct. :


47. If a person be born in a low caste,
good understanding originating from a
study of the scriptures fails to rescue his
body from low acts. Absolute goodness of
understanding is of different degrees. It
may be high, middting, and low. Even if
it appears ina person of low birth, it dis-
appears like autumnal clouds’ without pro-
ducing any result. On the other hand, good-
ness of understanding which, atcording to
its measure, has ordained the position in
which the person is born, shows itself in his
deeds,


48. Tf a person happens to belong toa
superior caste but still if he happens to be
divested of good conduct, he should receive
ho respect or worship. One may adore
even a Shudra if te knows his duties and
is of good conduct.


,49. A person proclaims himself by his
own geod and bad deeds and by his good
or bad nature and race of birth. {f ones’
sace of birth happens to be degraded for
any reason, one soon raises it and makes
it resplendent and famous by his deeds.


so. For these reasons the wise should
avoid those women among these various
castes mixed, upon whom they should not
beget childrens,


CHAPTER XLIX.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
; Continued,


Yudhishthira said:—


1. Describe to us, O sire, the orders
and classes separately, what kind of son
is begotten on what women, who is er-
titled to have whom for sons, and what
kinds of sonseare there,


2. Itis known that disputes frequently
take place about sons. You should, O
king, remove the doubts of our mind.


Indeed, we are stupefied about this subject.


Bhishma said :—
‘3. One’s own begotten son considered


as his Own self. The son that is ‘begotten.


3 6


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


421
upon one’s wife by a person whom he has
invited for it, #8 called Niruktaja. The
son that is begotten upon one’s wife by
somebody without his permission, is
Prasritaja.

4. The son begotten upon his own wife
by a person degraded from his position is -
called Patitaja, There -are two other, sons,
vig., the son given, and the son made.
‘There is another called Adhyuda.


5. The son bora of a maiden ig her
father’s house is called Kanina. Besides
these, there are six kinds of sons called
Apadhwangaja and six others that are
called Apasadas, Thesé are the several
kinds of sons mentioned in the scriptures,
know, O Bharata.


Yudhishthira said :—

6, Who are the six that ate called
Apadhiwansaja? Who also are the Apa-
sadas? You should fully explain all this
to me.


Bhishma said :—


7-8. The sons that a Brahmana be«
gets upon. wives taken from the three
inferior castes, those begotten by a


Kshatriya upon wives taken from the two
castes inferior to-his own, O Bharata, and
the sons that a Vaishya begets upon a
wife taken from the one caste that is infe«
tior to his,-—are all called Apadhwansase
‘They are, as thus explained, of sit kinds.
Listen now to me as I tell you who the
Apasadas are, :


9. The son that a Shudra begets upon
a Brahmani woman is called a Chandala.
Begotten upon a Kshatriya woman by a
person of the Shudra order, the son is
called a Vratya. He who is born of a
Vaishya woman by a Shudra father is
called a Vaidya. These three kinds of
sons are called Apasada. :


to, The Vaishya, by knowing a woman
of the Bralhmana order, begets a son that
is called a Magadha, while the son that he
begets upon a Kshatriya woman is called
a Vamaka. The Kshatriya can beget but
one kind of son upon a woman. of a
superior caste. ;

t1. Indeed, the son begotten by a
Kshatriya upon a Brahmana woman, is
called a Suta. ‘These three also. are called
Apasadas. It cannot be said, O king, that
these six kinds of sons are no sons,


Yudhishthira said :—

12. Some say that one’s son is he whe
is born in his soil. Some, on the other
hand, say that one’s son is ke who has
been begotten from his seed. Are. bath


+778


122


MAHABHARATA.


these kinds of sons equal? Whose, again, « and reared, and in whase case neithet the


is the son to be?
grandfather.


Bhishma said :—

13. Hisisthe son from whose seed he
has sprung. Hf, however, the owmer of the
seed discards the son born of it, such son
thea becomes Is upon whose wife he has
been begotten. The same rule applies to
the son called Adhyuda. He belongs to
the person from whose seed he has sprung.
1f, however, the owner of the seed forsakes
him, he becomes the son of the husband of
his mother. Know this is what the law
declares. .


Yudhishthira said :—-


14. We know that the son becomes his
from whose seed he has taku birth
Whence does fhe husband of the woman
who gives birth to the son derive his right
to the latter? Likewise the son called
Adhyuda shoald be ttnown to be the son
of him from whose seed he has sprung.
How ¢an they be the song of others on ac-
count of the engagement about owning and
rearing them having been broken ?


Bhiskma said :—

15. He who, having begotten a son of his
own loins,gforsakes him for some réason or
other, cannot be considered as the father of

- such gon, for vital seed only cannot create
sonship. Such son must be held to belong
to the person whe is the .master of the
soil. ;


16. When a nian, desiring to have a son,
marries a girl quick with child, the son
born of his wife must belong to him, for it
is the fruit of his own soil. The person
from whese vital seed the son kas sprung,
can have no tight to such son,


17. The son whois born in one’s soil
hut not begotten by the owner, O chief of
Bharata’s race, bears alt the marks of the
father that has actually begotten him. The
son thus born is incapable of concealing the
evidences of ptysiognomy. He is at once
known by eyesight.


_Do you tell me this, O


18. As regards the son made, he is
sometimes considered as the child of the
peraon who has made him ason and who
brings him up. In his case, neither the
vital seed: of whieh he has been born nor
the soil in which he has been born, becomes
the cause of sonship.


Yudhishthira said :—


19. Whatkind of son is that who is
said- to be a made son and whose sonship


vital seed nor the soil of bith, O Bharata,
is caused as the cause of sonship.


Bhishma said :—


20. When one takes up and tears a son
who has been cast off on the road by his
father and mother, and when the person
thus taking and rearing him cannot find out
his parents after search, he becomes the
father of such son and the latter becomes
what is called his made son.


tt. Not having anybody to own him, he
becomes .his who ‘rears him. Such son,
again, comes to be considered as belonging
to that castes to which his owner or rearer
belongs.


Yudhishithra said :—


22. How should the purifactory rites of
such a person be performed? In whose
case what Sort of rites are to be performed 7
With what girl should he be married?
Fell me all this, O grandfather.


Bhishma said :—

23, ‘The rites of purification for such a
son should be performed according tuo the
usage of the person himself who reara him,
for, renounced by his parents, such son gets
the caste ef the person who takes him and
rears him.


24. Indeed, O you of unfading glory, the
tearer shonld iperform all the purificatory
rites for suel son according to the practices
of his own family and kinsmen. As res
gards the girl also, O Yudhishthira, that
should be bestowed in marsiage upon sucht
a son, she strould belong to the caste of the
rearer himself, —


2§. All this is to be done only when the
caste of the son’s true mother cannot be
learnt. Among sons, he who is born of a
maiden and he who is born of a mother
who had conceived before her marriage but
brought him forth subsequent to that act,
are considered as very disgraceful and
degraded.


26—27. Even these two, howéver, should
receive the same rites of purification that
are Sanctioned for the soms begotten by the
father in lawful marriage. In respect of the
son who becomes his fathers on account of
his birth in the father’s soil, and of those
sons who are called Apsadas, and those
conceived by the wife in her traidenhood
but brought forth after marriage, Brah-
manas and others should apply the same
rites of purification that are tt: vogue in theic
own castes. “These are the conclusions that


Originates from the fact of his being taken | are seen in the scriptures about the diffrent


. <3
ANUSHASANA PARVA


castes. I have thus told yos everything of
your questions. What else do you wish to
hear ?


CHAPTER L.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued,


Yudhishthira said :—


1. Whatis the nature of the compassion
or pity that is felt at seeing the misery of
another? What is the nature of that com-
passion or sympathy that one feels for an-
other on account of his living in the com-
panionship of that other? What, is the
nature of the supreme blessedness of kine ?
You should, O grandfather explain all this
to me.


Bhishma said :—


2. 1 shall, O you of great effulgence,
recite (a you in this connection -an ancient
oarrative of a conversation between Nahu-
sha and the Rishi Chyavana.


3. Formerly, O chief of Bharata’s race,
the preat Rishi Chyavana of Bbriga’s race,
always practising high vows, became desic-
ous of leading for sometime the mode of
life called Udavasa, and sed himself -to
commence it. ;


4. Renouncing pride, anger, joy and
grief, the ascetic, pledging himself to ob-
secve that vow, set himself to live for
twelve years, according to the rules of
Udavasa. ’


5. ‘Phe Rishi inspired all creatures with,


trust, And he inspired similar confidence
in all creatures living in) water, The
powerful ascetic resembled the Moon him-
self in his conduct to all,


6. Bowing to all the deities and having
purged himself of all. sins, he entered the
water at the confluence of Ganga and
‘Yamuna, and stood there like au inanimate
post of wood.


7. Placing his head against it, he bore
the fierce and roaring current of the two
fivers united together,—the current whose
speed resembled that of the wind itself.


8. Ganga and Yamuna, however, and
the other rivers and lakes, whose waters
unite together at the confluence at Preyaga,
instead of afflicting the Rishi, went beyond
him. ,

9. Assuming the attitude of a wooden
post, the great Muni sometimes laid himself


123


sometimes, O chief of Bharata’s race, the
intelligent sage stood erect. :


to. He becatne quite agreeable to all
Creatures living in water. Without the
deast fear, ail these used to smelf the Rishi’s .
lips, -

41. In this way, the Rishi passed a long
time atthat grand confluence of waters.
One day, some fishermen came there.


12. With nets in their hands, O you of
great effulyencé, those men came where the
Rishi was. ‘They were many in numbec-
ad alf of them were bent upon catching

sh, ‘


13. Well-formed and broad.chested, —
gifted with great strength and courage,
and never returning in fear from water,
those men who lived upon the earning by
poets nets, came there, resolved to- catch
sh. ; :


t4. Arrived at that water which con-
tained many fish, those fishermen, O chief
of the Bharatas, tied all their nets together.


15. Desirous of fish, those innumerable.
Kaivartas, united together and surrounded
a portion of the watersof Ganga and Ya-
muna with their nets.


16. Indeed, they threw upon the water
their net which was made of new strings,
capable of covering a large space, and
having sufficient tength and breadth.


17. Getting down into the water, all of
them began to dray with great force that
net which was very large and~-had been
well-spread over a large space.


18 All of them were free from fear,
cheerful and fully determined to do one
another’s bidding, ‘They had succeeded ia
catching a large number of fis and othec
aquatic animals,


: 19. : And as they dragged their net, Oo
king, they easily draggad up Cnyavana the
ay of Bhrigu, along with a large number
of fish,


20. His body was overgrown with tha
tiver-moss. His beard and matted locks
had become green. And ail over his body
could be seen conchs and other mollusc


attached with their heads, ;


2t. Seeing that Rishi who was a master
of the Vedas dragged up by them from the
water, all the fishermen stood with joined
hands and then laid themselves low on the
ground and repeatedly bent their heads,


22. Through fear and pain caused by
the dragging of the net, and on account of
their ‘being brought upon the land, the


down in the water and slept at ease. And} fishes caught in the net died, :


124


23. Seeing that great onslaught of
fishes, the ascetic became filled with com-
passion and sighed repeatedly.


The fishermen said :—

24. We have perpetrated this sin un-
willingly. Be pleased with ust What wish
of yours shall we fulfil? Command us, O
great ascetic.


Bhishma said :—

‘25, Thus addressed by them, Chya-
vana, from among that mass of fishes
around him, said,—Do ye with rapt atten-
tion hear what my most cherished wish: is.


® 26. I shall either. die with these fishes
or do ye sell me with them. kf have lived
with them for a long time within the water.
1 do not wist to leave them at such a time !


27. Whew he said these words to them,
the fishermen became greatly terrified.
With pale faces they went to king Nahusha
and informed him. of alk thas had occurred.


eaeectctcts


CHAPTER LI.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA)—
Continued.


Bhishma said :—

t. Hearing the strait into which Chya-
vaua was reduced, Ning Nahusha speedily
went there, accompanied by his ministers
and priest.

- 2. Having purifred himself duly, the
king, with ‘joined hands and rapt attention,
introduced himself to the great Chyavana,

@ The king’s priest them adored with
due ceremonies that Rishi, O king, who
was observant of the vow of trutlr and
gifted with a great soul, and whe resem-
bled a god himself.


Nahusha said ~—


4. Tell me, O best of twice- born ones,
what act shall we do that may be pleasing
to you? However difficult that deed may
be, there is’nothing, O holy one, that E shall
not be able to do at your conmmand,


Chyavana said :—

5.
have ali been exhausted with fatizgae. Do
you pay them the price that may be fixed
upon me atong with the value of these
fish.


Nahusha said :-—


6 Let my priest give to these Nishadas


These men who live by catching fish, |


MAHABHARATA, |


a thousand coins as price for buying this
sacred one as he himself has ordered.


Chyavana said:


. & thousand coins is not mry price.
The question depends upon your discretion.
Give them a fair price, settling with your
discretion. Give them a fair price, settling
with your own intelligence what it should
be.


Nahusha said :— :
8. Let, O learned Brahmana, a hundred


! thousand coins be given to these Nishadas.
Shall this be your price, O holy one, of
do. you thing otherwise.


. Chyavana said >—
Q@ §& should not be bought with a hun
! dred thousand coms, O best of kings f
Let a proper price be givento these! Du
you consult with your ministers


Nahusha said :-—


1o. Let my priest give to these Nishadas.
a crore -of coins. . tf ever this. does nut
cover your value, let more be paid to them.


Chyavana said :-—

; bt. Oyking, 2 ant not with a erore
of coins or even more. [Let that peice be
: gives to. these men which weuld be fair or
. proper. you consult with the Brahe
manas. :


Nahushe said :-—

ta, Let half ay kingdom ov even the
. whole .be given. away to: these Nishadas.
"BR think that would be your price. What,
however, dv you think, O twice-born one ?


Chyavana said:— -
13. Lb do not deserve to be purchased
, with malt your kingdom or even the whole
of it, O Bing! Let that price which is
| proper be given to these men. Dio you
| consult with the Rishis !


| Bhishma continued :—


14. Hearing dvese words of the great
| Rishi, Nahusha became stricken with great
sorrow, With his ministers and priest he
began to think on the matter.


15. There then came to king Nahusha
an ascetic living in the forest and subsist-
ing vpon fruit and roots and born of a
cow. :


16. That best of ftwice-born persons,
addressing the.king, O monarch, said these
words :—I shall soon satisfy you. “Fhe Rshi
also will be satisfied.


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


t7. I shall never speak a falsehood,—=na,
hot even in jest, what then need } say of
other occasions? You should unhésitating-
ly do what 1 bid you.


Nahusha said :—


18. Do you, O illustrious one, say what
the value is of that great Rishi of Bhrigu’s
race. QO, save ine from this terrible difff-
culty, save my kingdom, and save: my
family. ms


19. If the holy Chyavana become angry,
he would destroy the three worlds; what
need I say then of my poor self who is
destitute of penances and who depends
upon the power only of his arms ? :


20. O great Rishi, do you become the
raft to us who have all fallen into a fathom-
less deep with all our counsellors and our
priest! Do you settle what the value should
be of the Rishi!


Bhishma said :—

at. Hearing these words of Nahusha,
the ascetic -born of a cow and gifted with
xreat energy spoke thus, gladdening the
monarch with all his counsellers :—


22. Breahmanas, O king, belong to the
foremost of the four castes. No value,
however great, can be fixed upon them.
Kine also are invaluable. ‘Iherefore, O
king, \do you regaid a cow,as the value of
the Rishi!


23. Hearing these words of the great
Rishi, -Nabusha became, O king, filled
with joy along with all his counsellers and
priest. ~

24. Proceeding then to Bhrigu’s son
Chyavana of rigid vows, he addressed him
thus,JO monarch, for satisfying himjto the
best of his power,


Nahusha said :—


- 25. Rise, rise, O twice-born Rishi, you
have been purchased, O son of Bhrigu,
with & cow as your price! O foremost
of righteous persons, even this, I think, is
your price !


Chyavana said :—

26. Yes, O king of kings, I do rise up,
I have been properly purchased by you, O
sinless one. I donot, O you of unfading
glory, see any riches that is equal to
kine.

27. To speak of kine, to hear others
speak of them, to make gifts of kine, and to
see kine, O king, are acts, that are all
praised, O hero, and that are highly aus-
picious and purifying.


| have also spoken with us,


125


28. Kine are. always.the root of prose
perity. Where is no fault in kine. Kine
always give the best food, in the form of
Havi, to the deities,

zg. The sacred Mantras, Swaha and
Vashat, are always established upon kine.
Kine are the chief conductresses of Saeri-
fices. ‘Fhey form the mouth of Sacrifice. |


30. ‘They bear and yield excellent and
strength-giving ambrosia, Shey receive
the adoration of all the worlds and ase
considered as the source of nectar.


gt. On Earth, kine resemble fire in
energy and form, Indeed, kine represent
high energy, and are conferrers of ‘great
happiness upon all creatures.


32. ‘That country where, kine placed by
their owners, breathe fearlessly, shines in
beauty. ‘The sins also of that country are
all removed.


33- Kine form the stairs leading to
Heaven. Kine are worshipped in Heaven ,
itself. [Kine are goddesses that can give
everything and grant every wish. ‘here
is nothing else in the world that is so higt*
or so superior. e


Bhishma said :—


34. This is what I say to you on the
subject of the glory and superiority of kine,
Q chief of Bharata’s race. 1 am competent
to desciibe a.part only of the merits of-the
kine. 1 have not the abilty to exhaust
the subject. ;


The Nishadas said :—


35-- O ascetic, you have seen us, and
bt has been’ said
that friendship, with the good, depends
upon only seven words. Dv you then, O
tord, show us your.favour, .


36. The blazing sacrificial fire eats all
the oblations of clarified batter poured upon
it. Of pious soul, and gifted with great
energy, you ate among men, a blazing fire
in energy.

37. We propitiate you, O you of great
learning. We sutrender ourselves to you,
Do you, for showing us favor, take bacic
from us this cow. .


Chyavana said :—

38. The eye of a poor or distressed
person, the eye of an ascetic, or the eye
of a snake of dreadful poison, consume @
man with his very roots even as a fire,
that burning with the aid of- the wind
and censumes a stack of dry grass or
straw.


39. 1 shall accept the cow that you wish
to present me.-Ye fishermen, freed from
every sin, go ye to heaven forthwith, with


126


“these fishes also that ye have caught with
your nets. _


Bishma said :—


40. After this, on account of the energy
of that great Rishi of purified soul, those
fishermen along with all those fish, through
virtue of those words that he had uttered,
“went to heavem


41. Seeing the fishermen ascending to
heaven with those fishes in theie company,
became filled with wonder, Q chief of
Bharata’s race.


42. Afier this, the two Rishis, ofz., the
one born of a cow and the other who was
Chyavana of Bhrigu’s race, pleased king

‘ Nahtsha by granting him many booms,

43. Then the highly energetic king
Nahusha that lord of all the Earth, filled
with joy, O best of the Bharatas, said,—
Sufficient.


44. Like a second Indra the king of the
celestials, he accepted the boon about his
own steadiness in virtue. ‘he Rishis
having granted him the boon, the de-
lighted king adored them beth with great
respect. :


45. As regards Chyavana, his vow
having been completed, he returned to his
own hermitage, The Rishi who had taken
his bicth from the cow, and who was gifted
with great energy, also proceeded to his
own hermitage.

46. The Nishadas alf ascended ‘to
heaven as also the fishes they had caught,
O king, king Nahusha too, havirg got


those valuahle bvons, entered his own
city.
474%. I have thus, O son, told you


everything about what you had asked me.
The affection that is caught by the sight
alone of others as also by the fact of living
with them, O Yudhjshthira, and the high
blessedness of kine too, and the ascertain-
ment of trae virtue, are the subject I have
described. Tell me, O hero what else is in
your mind, :


CHAPTER LIT.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
" Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


1. O you of great wisdom,'I have a doubt
which is very great and which is as vast
as the ocean itself. Listen to it, O mighty-
armed one, and having learnt what it is,
you should explain it to me.


MAtABUARATA.


2. Ihave a great curiosity about Jamas
dagni’s son, O-lord, uzs., Rama, that fore
most of all pious persons. You should
satisfy that curiosity.


3- How was Rama born who was gilted
with prowess incapable of being baffled 7
He belonged by bicth to a family of twice-
bora Rishis. How did he become a fol-
tower ef Kshatriya practices ?


4- Do you then, O king, recite to me
in full the circumstances of Rama's birth.
How also did a son of the race of
Kushika, who was Kshatriya become a


-Brahmana 7


Great, indeed, was the power of the
high-souled Rama, O chief of men, as also
of Vishwamitra, ?


6. Why did the grandson of Richika
instead of his son become a Kshatriya ?
Why also did the grandson of Kushika
and .not his son become a Brahmana?
Why did such untoward incidents befall
the grandsons of both, instead of their
sons? You should explain the truth of
these circumstances. :


Bhishma said :—

+J.- Regarding it is cited an old history
of the discourse, between Chyavana and
Kushika, O Bharata ! ‘


8. Gifted with ~ great intelligence,—~
Chyavana of Bhrigu’s race, that best of
ascetics, saw (with his spiritual eye) the
stain that would affect his own race.


9. Reflecting upon the merits and faults
of that incident, as also its strength and
weakness, Chyavana having asceticism for
his wealth, became desirous of consuming
the race of the Kushikas.


10. Going than to the presence of king
Kashika, Chyavaaa said to him,—O sinless
one, the desire has arisen in my heart of
living with you for sometime. -


Kushika said :—


11. O hely one, to live tegether is a
deed which the learned ordain for girls
when these are given away. The wise
always speak of the practice in such con-
nection only.


12, O Rishi having asceticism for your
wealth, the residence which you seek with
me is not sanctioned by the ordinance.
Yet, however oppdsed to the dictates of
duty and virtue, [ shall do what you may
be pleased to order.


Bhishma said :—
13. Ordering a seat to be placed for the
great ascetic 'Chyavana, king Kusltika,


; accompanied by his wife, stood befure him.


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


tg. Bringing a litle jar of water, the
Aking offered hith water for washing his
feet. He then, through his servants, catised
all the rites to be duly performed in honor
of his illustrious guest. ;


1g. The flistriaus Kushika, who was
observant of restraints and vows,- then
cheerfully presented, in due forms, the
ingredients consisting of honey and the
other things, to the great Rishi and asked
him to accept the same.


16, Having welcomed and honored the
jearned Brahmana thus, the king once more
addressed him and said,—We two await
your orders! Command us what we are
to do for you, O holy one,


17. If it is our kingdom or riches or
kine, O you of rigid vows, or all articles
that are given away in sacrifices, which you
want, tell us the word and we shall bestow
all upon you.


18, This palace, this kingdom, this seat
of justice, are at your disposal. You are
the master of all these! Do you rule the
Barth! As regards myself, I depend ene
tirely upon you. -

1g. Addrgssed in these words by the
king, Chyavana of Bhrigu’s race, filled with
great joy, said to Kushika these words in
reply.


Chyavana said:—

20. | do not, O king, covet your king-
dom, hor your riches, nor the damsels you
have nor your kine, nor your provinces, aor
articles needed for sacrifice! Do you listen
to me. : .


21. If ft pleases yoy and your wife, f
shall begin to observe a certain vow. I
wish you and your consort to serve me
during that period unhesitatingly.


22. ‘Thus addressed by the Rishi, the
king and the queen hecame filled with de-
light, O Bharata, and answered him, say-
ing,—Be it so, O Rishi.

23. Pleased with the Rishi’s words, the
king led him to an apartment of the palace.
It was an excellent one, agreeable to sée.
The king showed him everything in that
room.


The king said :—

24. This, O holy one, is yout bed. Do
you live heee as you please! O you having
asceticism for your wealth, myself and my
queen shall try our best to give you every
comfort and every pleasure.


25. While they were thus conversing
with each other, the sun was over the meri-
dian. The Rishi ordered the king to bring
him food and drink, : oe


127


26. Bowing to the Rishi, King Kushika
asked him, saying,—Wohat kind of food is
liked by you? hat food, indeed, shall be
brought for you. =~

27. Filled with joy, the Rishi aaswered
that king, O Bharata, saying,—Let food
that is proper be given to me.


28. Receiving these words with respect,
the king said,—-So be it l=and then offered
to the Rishi food of the,properc ‘kind.


29. Having finished his meals, the holy
Chyavana, knowing every duty, addressed
the king and the queen, sayiny;=1 wish to
sleep, O powerful one, sleep hinders me
now. -


30. Proceeding thence to a room that
had been got ready for him, that best of
Rishis then laid himself down upon a bed,
The king and the queen sat down, ©


gt. The Rishi told them,—Do not, while
I sleep, awake me! Do ye keep yourself
awake and continually press my feet as
long as I sleep. ,


32—33. Kushika, conversant with every
duty, unhesitatingly, said,--So be it! In«
deed, the king and the queen kept them-
selves awake all night, duly engaged in
tedding and serving thé Rishi in the mane
ner directed. ‘The royal pair, O king, ac
complished the Risli’s order with earnest«
ness and attention.


34. Meanwhi#e the holy Brahmana,
having thus. Commanded the king, _stept
soundly, without changing his posture of
turning even once, for one and twenty days,


35. The king, O delighter of-the Kurus,
abstaining from food, along with his wife,
sat joyfully the whole time, engaged in
tending and serving the Rishi. :


36. On the expiration of one and twenty
days, the son of Bhrigu rose of his own
accord. The great ascetic then went out
sf the reom, without speaking to them at
all.

37. Famished and toil-worn, the king
and the queen followed hin, but that fore
most of Kisliis did not please to cast a
single look upon any of them.


38. Proceeding a little way, the son of


‘Bhrigu disappeared in the very sight of the


royal pair. At this, the king, stcuck with
grief, dropped down on the Earth.

39.. Comforted, he rose up soon, and
accompanied by his queen, the king pos-
sessed of great splendour, began to search
everywhere for the Rishi.


ie evecare)


£28


CHAPTER LIU.


{ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).=
Continued. .


Yudhishthira said:—


t. Aftet the Rishi had disappeared,
what did the king do and what also his
hightly-blessed wife? Tell’ me this, O
grandfather.


Bhishma said :— a2 4
2. Not seeing the Rishi,. the king,

stricken with shame, toil-worn, and -fosing
his senses, returned to his palace, accom-
panied by his queen.

~ 3. Entering his mansion in a dejected
spirit, [he spoke fot a word with any
ove, He thought only of that conduct of
Chyavana,


4. With a despairing heart he then went
to his room. ‘there he beheld the son of
Bhrigu steetched as before on his bed.


§ Seeing the Rishi there, they wonder-
ed much. Indeed, they began to think
Epon that very strange incident. The sight
of the Rishi removed their fatigue.


6. Seated once more by his side, they
again began to gently press his feet as
before. Meanwhile the great ascetic ton-
tinued to steep soundly as before. Qnly, he:
now lay on another side.


7. Gifted with great energy, he thus
passed another twenty-one days. Moved
by fear, the royal pair showed no change in
their attitude or sentiment towards the
Rishi.

8. Awaking then from his sleep the as-
ceti¢c addressed the king and the queen,
saying,—-Do ye rub my body with oil, 1 wish
to lave a bath. .

9. Famishing and toil-worn though they
were, forthwith they volunteered their ser+
vices and soon approached the Rishi with
a rich oil that had been prepared by
boiling it a hundred times.


to. While the Rishi was seated at his
ease, the king and the queen, silently, cons
tinued to rub hina, Gutted with great asce-
tic merit, the son of Bhrigu did not once
utter the word Sufficient.


tt. Bhrigu’s son however saw that the
royal pair were totally unmoved, Rising
up all on a sudden, he entered the bath
room.


12—13. The various articles necessary
for a bath and such as were fit for a king’s
use, were ready there. Without using, any
of those articles, the Risht once more dis- |


MAHABHARATA.


power, before king Kushika (and his wife),
‘This, however, O chief of Bharatas, failed
to disturb the equanimity of the royal
pair.

14. The next time the powerful Rishi
was seen seated, after a bath, on the throne.
{ct was from that place that he then showed
himself to the king and the queen, O de-
lighter of the Kurus.


15. With a cheerful face, king Kushika,
together with his wife, then offered the
Rishi cooked food with great respect.


Gifted with wisdom, and with heart totally
unmoved, Kushika made this offer.


The Ascetic said :—


16. Let the food be brought. Assisted
by his wife, the king soon brought there the
food.


17. There were varieus kinds of meat
and different prepirations also thereof,
‘bere was a great variety of vegetables also
and potlerbs,


18. There were juicy cakes too among
those dishes and several ayreeable kinds of
confectionery, and solid preparations of
milk. Indeed, the viands were different in
kinds and taste. Among them there were
also some food—forest produces—such as
ascetics liked and took,


19. Various sweet fruits fit to be eaten
by kings, were also there. There were
Vadaras and [ngudas and /Mashmaryyas
and Bhallatakas.


-20, ‘The food that was offered contain
ed such things as are taken by house-holders
as also such things as are taken by the
forest-dwellers, hrough fear of the
Rishi’s curse, the king had caused alt kinds
of food to be gathered and got ready for
his guest.


21—22. All this food, brought from the
kitchen, was placed before Chyavana. A
séat was also placed for him and a bed too
was spread. The dishes were then caused
to be covered with white cloths. Soon, hows
ever, Chyavana of Bhrigu’s race put fire to
all the things and reduced them to ashes.


23. Gifted with great intelligence, the
royal pair showed no anger at this conduct
of the Rishi, who once more, after this,
disappeared before the very eyes of the
king and the queen.


2
24. The royal sage Kushika thereupon
stood there in the same posture for the
whole nigh, with his wife by his side, and
without speaking a word. Gifted with


great prosperity, he did not yield to wrath.


25-26. Every day, good and pure food


appeared there and then by his Yoga- of various sorts, excellent beds, profuse


ANUSHASANA BARVA. |


articles needed for bath, and cloths of


Various sorts, were collected and kept
ready in the palace for the Rishi, Indeed,
Chyavana could sot find any fault in the
conduct of the king. : ;

27. Then addressing king Kushika, the
twice-born Rishi said to him,Do you with
your spouge, yoke yourself to a car and
take me on it whereever I shall direct,


28. Unhesitatingly, - the king answered
Chyavana having ascéticism for wealth,
saying,—So be it !—And he further enquir-
ed of the Rishi, asking,—Which Gar. shall
1 bring ? Shall ic be my pleasure-car for
making pleasure-jourtieys ér, sliall it be my
war-chariot ?

2931. Thus addressed by the delight-
ed and contented king, the ascetic Said to
him,—Do you promptly get ready that
chariot with whict you attack hostile cities |
Indeed, that war-chaciot of yours, with every
Weapon, with its standard. and flags, its
darts and javelins and golden columns and
poles, should be made ready.
resembles the tinkling of bells. It is adorned
with numberless arches made of pure gold.
Icis always furnished with hundreds of high
and excellent weapons !—The king said,—
So be it;—and soon made his great war-
chariot ready.


32. And he yoked his wife thereto on
the left and his own self on the right. And
the king placed on the chariot, among its
other articles, the goad which had ‘three
handles and which had a point hard as
adamant and sharp as the needle.


33. Having placed every article upon
the car; the king said to the Rishi,—O holy
one, where shall the chariot proceed? O, let
the sor of Bhrigu issue his order.


“34-35. ‘This your chariot shall proceed
to the place which you may ‘be pleased to
direct !
replied to the kisg, saying,—Let thé car go
hence; dragyed slowly, step by step. Obey-
ing my will, do ye two ‘proceed in sucha
way that 1 may not feel any exhaustion.


36. I should be borne away pleasantly,
and let ail your people see this march that
I make through theie midst. No person
that comes to me, as I proceed along the
road, should be driven’ away. I shall distri<
bute riches among all.


37. To the Brahmanas who may ap-
proach me on the way, I shall grarit their
wishes and bestow upon all of them gems.
and riches without stint. : oi


38—40. Let all this be done, O king,
and do not entertain any scruples |—Hear-
ing these words of the Rishi, the king called
his servants and told them,—Ye shouid


IZ


Its rattle |


Thus addressed, the holy man;


-he unharnessed the royal pair.


139


without any fear, give away whatever the
ascetic will command.—Then profuse jewels
and gems and beautiful women, and pairs
of sheep, and coined and uncoinéd gold,
and huge elephants resembling hills or.
mountain summits, and all the ministers of
the king, began to follow the Rishi as he
was cartied on that chariot. ,


41. Cries of Oh and Alas arose from
every part of the city which was plunged in
grief at that extraordinary spectacle. The
Rishi struck the king and the queen sud~"
denly with that goad having a sharp point. -


42. Though thus struck on the back
aud the cheeks, the royal pair still showed
no sign of agitation. On the other hand*
they. continued to carry the Rishi on as
before.

43. Trembling from head to fost, for
no food had passed their lips for fifty nights,
and exceedingly weak, the heroic pair
somehow succeeded in dragging that ex-
cellent chariot.


44. Repeatedly and deeply cut by the
goad, the royal pair became covered with
blood. Indeed, O king, they then looked
like a couple of Kinshuka trees in the
flowering season. '


43. Seeiig the pliglt to which cheic
king and queen had been reduced, the citi«
Zens became afflicted with great grief,
Filled with fear of the curse of the Rishi,
they kept silesit under their misery.


46. Collected in masses they said to éath
other,-See the might-of penances! Al-
though all of us are angry, we are still
tinable to look at the Rishi.


47. Great is theeriergy of the holy
Risni of purified soul! Seé also the en-
durance of the king and His royal spouse.


48.~ Though exhausted with fatigue and
hunger, they dre still carrying the car!—
The son of Bhrigu, despite the misery he
caused to Kushika and his queen, could see
to sign of dissatisfaction or agitation in
them.
Bhishma said:—~

49. The perpetuater of Bhrigu’s race,
seeing the king and ‘the queen totally un+
moved, began to distribute wealth very


largely as if he were a second Lord of
Treasures,


50. At this deed also, king Kushika
showed no thark of dissatisfaction. He
did as the Rishi ordered. Seeing ail this,
that illustrious and best of ascetics became
pleased. .


st. Descending from that excellent car,
Having
freed them, he addressed them duly,


130


52. Indeed, the son of Bhrigu, in a
soft, deep, and delighted voice, said,—1 am
ready to give an excellent boon to you
both,


53. Delicate as they were, their bodies
had been pierced with the goad. Moved
by affection, that best of ascetics softly
touched them with his hands whose healing
virtues resembled those of asbrousia itself,
Q chief of the Bharatas.


54. Then the king answered,—Myself
and my wife have felt no exhaustion,—In-
deed, all their fatigue had been removed
through the power of the Rishi, and hence it
was that the king could say so to the Rishi.


55. Pleased with their conduct, the ill-
ustrious Chyavana said to them,—I have
never before spoken falsehood. it must,
therefore, be as I have said.


56. This spot on the banks of Ganga
is very charming and auspicious. { shall,
observing a vow, live for a little while here,
O king.

57. Do you return to your city. You
are exhausted ! You shall come again. ‘To-
morrow, O king, you shall returning with
your wife, see me here.


58. You should not give to anger or
grief. ‘Lhe tine is come when you shail
reap a great reward! That which is covet-
ed by you and which is in your heart will
indeed be done.


59: Thus addressed by the Rishi, king


Kushika, with a pleased heart, replied to


the Rishi in these pregnant words.


60. J have entertained no anger or grief,
O highly blessed one! We have been
cleansed and sanctified by you, O holy
one! Wehave once more become yeuth-
ful. See our bodies have become greatly
beautiful and possessed of great strength,


61. I donot any longer see those wounds
that were caused by you on our bodies
with your goad! Verily, with my wife, I
am in good health.


62. I see my goddess become as beauti-
ful in body as an Apsara. Indeed, she is
endued with as much beauty and splendour
as she had ever been before.


63. All this, O great ascetic, is due to
your favour. Indeed, there is nothing
wonderful in all this, O holy Rishi of power
ever unbaffled.

64. Thus addressed by the king, Chya-
vana said to him.—You shall, with your
wife, return here to-morrow, O king.

65. With these words, the royaf sage
Kushika was sent away. Saluting the Rishi,
the king, endued with a handsome body,


priest, came out to welcoine


MARABHARATA.


returned to his capital like a second king
of the celestials.


66. The counsellers with the
him. His
troops also and the dancing women and all


his subjects, did the same.


67, Surrounded by them all, king Ku-
shika, shining in beauty and splendour,
entered his city, with a delighted heart,
and his praises were sung by bards and
encomiasts. :


68. Having entered his city and per-
formed all his morning rites, -he ate with
his wife. Gifted with great splendour, the
king then passed the night happily.


then,


69. Each saw the other to be possessed
of fresh youthfulness. All theit sufferings
and pains having ceased, thev saw eaclr
other to resemble a celestial. Gifted witlt
the splendour they had got as a boon from
that foremost of Brahmanas, aid possessed
of exceedingly tovely features and beautiful
forms, both of them passed a happy night
in their bed.


70. Iw the interval spreader of the feats
of Bhrigu’s race, viz., the Rishi having
penances for his wealth, converted by his
Yoga-power, that charming wood on the
bank of Ganga into a retreat full of wealth
of every kind and adotned with every
variety of jewels and gems on account of
which it excelled in beauty and splendour
the very abode of the king of the celestials.


enc


CHAPTER LIV.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.


Bhishma said :—


1. When that night passed away, the
great king Kushika awoke and performed
his morning rites, Accompanid by his wife
he then went towards that forest which the
Rishi had selected for his residence.


2. Arrived there, the king saw a palatial
mansion made entirely of gold. Having a
thousand columns each of which was made


-of gems and precious stones, it looked like


a mansion belonging to the Gandharvas.


3-~4. Kushika saw in every part of that
building signs of celestial design. And
he saw hills with charming jvalleys, and
lakes with lJotuses on their ‘bosom; and
mansions full of rich and curious articles,
and gateways and arches, QO Bharata.
And the king -beheld many open glades


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


and open spots carpeted with grass, and
resembling fields of gold.


§. And he saw many Sahakaras adorn-
ed with blossoms, and Ketakas and Udda-
lakas, and Dhavas, and Ashokas, and
blossoming Kunda$, and Atimuktas,


6. And he saw there many Champakas
and Tilakas and ‘Bhavyas and Panasas and
Vyanjolas and Karnikaras adored with
flowers.


7. And the king saw many Shyamas
and Varanapushpas and the creepers called
Astapadika, all clipt properly and beauti-
fully.


8. And the king saw trees on which
lotuses of various species bloomed in ail
their beauty, and some of which bore
flowers-of every season. And he saw also
many mansions that tooked like celestial
cars or like beautiful mountains,


Q—10, And at some places, O Bharata,
there were tanks and lakes full of cool
water and at others were those that were
full of warm or hot water. And there were
various kinds of excellent seats and costly
beds and bedsteads made of gold and
gems and overlaid with beautiful cloths and
carpets. There were profuse viands and
edibles, all well-dressed and ready for use.


11—~12.—And there were talking patrots,
she-parrots, Bhringarajas, Kokilas, Shata-
patras with Koyashtikas and Kukkubhas,
and peacocks and cacks and Datyuhas and
Jivajivakas and Chakoras and monkeys
and swaas and Sarasas and Chakravakas.


13- Here and there he saw bevies of


rejoicing Apsaras and conclaves of happy
Gandharvas, O monarch,


14. And he saw other Gandharvas at
other places rejoicing with their dear wives.
The king sometimes saw ‘these.sights and
sometimes could not see them,


15. The king heard also sweet notes of
vocal music and the sweet voices of pre-
ceptors engaged in lecturing their disciples
on the Vedas and the Scriptures. And
the king also heard the harmonious notes
of the geese sporting in the lakes. « :


16. Seeing such highly wonderful. spec-
tacles, the king began to reflect inwardly,
saying,—-Is thisa dream? Or, is all this
due to an alienation of my mind?- Or is
ital real? =~ 3


17. O, I have, without renouncing my
body, attained to the beatitude of Heaven,
This land is either the sacred country of
the Uttara-Kurus, or the abode, called
Amravati, of the king of the celestials,


I3I


18. O, what are these wonderful spec-
tacles that | see{—Reflecting thus, the King
at last saw that foremost of Rishis,


tg In that golden palace having columns
made of jewels and gents, the son of Bhrigu


. day stretched on a costly and'excellent bed.


20. With his wife by -his side, the king
approached, with an exulting heart, the Rishi
as- he lay on that bed. Chyavana, how-
ever, speedily disappeared at this, with the
bed itself upon which he lay. ;


2t. The king then saw the Rishi at
another part of that forest, seated on a mat
made of Kusha grass, and mentally engaged
in the recital of some high Mantras,


22. Through bis Yoga-power, thus did
that Brabmana stupely the king, Ina
moment that charming forest, those bevies
of Apsaras, those bands of Gandharvas,
those beautiful trees, all disappeared.


23. The bank of Ganga became as silem.
as usual, and appeared as before coverev
with Kusha grass and anthiils,


24. Having seen that highly wonderful
spectacle and its quick disappearance also,
king 'Kushika, witn' his wife, became filled
with wonder,


25. With a delighted heart, the king
addressed his wife saying, see, O ami-
able one, the various agreeable scenes aud
sights, occurring nowhere else, which we
two have just seen, an


26. All this is dae to the favour of
Bhrigu’s son and the power of his penances.
By penances one attains all which cherishes
in his imagination.


27-28. Penances are superior {a even
the kingdom. of the three worlds. With
penances well-performed, Liberation itself
may be acquired. Mark, the power of the
great and celestial Rishi Chyavana derived
from his penances! - He can, at his plea-
sure, create even other worlds.


29. Quly Brahmanas are born in this
world for uttering and understanding sacred
deeds. Who else save Chyavana could do
all this ?


39. Sovereignty may be acquired easily*
But the dignity of a Brahmana is not
attainable, It was through the power of a
Brahmana that we were harnessed to a car
like: well-broken animals.

31. These thoughts that passed through
the king’s mind, became known to Chya-
vana. Ascertaining the king’s thoughts,
the Rishi addressed him and said,—Come
here quickly. :

32. Thus addressed, the king and the
queen approached the great ascetic, and


442


bending their heads they adored him
who were worthy of adoration.


33. Uttering a benediction upon the
king, the- Rishi, gifted with great intelli-
gence, O king, comforted the king and said,
—-Sit down on that seat. :


34-35. After this, O monarch, the son
of Bhrigu, without guile or insincerity of
any sort, pleased the king with many soft
words, and then safid,—O king, you have
completely subjugated the five organs of
action and the five organs of knowledge
with the mind as their sixth, For this you
have come out unhurt from the fiery ordeal
I had prepared for you,


36. I have been properly honored an@
adored, O son, by you, O foremost of alk
persons gifted with speech. You have no
sin, not even a minute one, in you.


37. Give me leave, O king, for I shall
now proceed to the place £ came from. I
have been highly pleased with you, O king.
Pray accept the boon I am ready to give t


Kushika said:—


38. Before you, O holy one, I have
staid like one staying in the midst of a fire.
That | have not yet, O chief of Bhrigu’s
race, been reduced to ashes is sufficient.


39. Even this is the highest boon that
{1 have got, O delighter of Bhrigu! That
you have been pleased by me, O Brahmana,
and that Ihave succ€eded in rescuing my
race from destruction, O sinless one, are
in my case the best boons.

40. This I consider, OQ learned Brah-
mana, as a distinct mark of your favour.
‘The object of my life has been accomplished,
Even this is what I consider the very object
of my sovereignty. This is the highest fruit
of my penances. /


4t. If, O learned ‘Brahmana, you have
been pleased with me, O delighter of
Bhrigu, then do you remove some doubts
which are in my mind.


CHAPTER LV.


(ANUSHASANA’ PARVA).—
Continued.


Chyavana said :—

1. Do you accept a boon from me.
Do you also,, O king, tell me what the
doubt is that is in your mind. I shall
@ectainly aecomplish all your purposes,


MAHABHARATA.


Kushika said :—

2. Hf you have been pleased with me,
© holy one, do you then, O son of Bhrigu,
tell me your object in living in my palace
for sometime, for | wish to hear it. What
was your object in skeping on the bed
I assigned you for, one and twenty days
continuously, without changing sides,


3. O foremost of ascetics, what also was
your object, again in going out of the room
without speaking a single word.


4. Why did you, again, without any
reason, disappear and once more become
visible? Why, O learned Brahmana, did
you again lay yourself down on the bed,
aiid sleep, as before, for one and twenty
days.

5. Why did you go out after you were
rubbed by us with oil for your bath? Why,
also, after having made various kinds of
food in my palace to be collected, did you
consume them with fire ?


6. What was the cause of your sudden
journey through my city on the car ? What
was your object in giving away so much
riches ? What was your motive in showing
us the wonders of the forest created by
your Yoga-power,


q What, indeed, was your motive in
showing, O great ascetic, so. many palaces
made of gold and so many bed-steads
supported on posts of jewels and gems ?


8. Why also did all these wonders dis«
appear from our sight? [ wish to heac
the cause of all this. Thinking of all these
acts of yours, O perpetuater of Bhrigu’s
race, I became stupefied.


9g. I cannot comprehend your motive.
O you having penances for wealth, I wish
to hear the truth about all those acts of
yours in full.


Chyavana said :—

to. Listen to me as EF tell you fully the
reasons which had moved me in all these
acts of mine. Asked by you, O king, I
cannot refuse to enlighten you.


tt. In days of yore, on one occasion,
when, the deities had assembled together,
the Grandfather Brahman said some words.
I beard them, O king, and shalt now repeat
them to you.


12. On account of a quarrel between
Brahmana and Kshatriya energy, there
will occur an intermixture in my race.—
Your grandson, O king, will become endued
with great energy and power.


13. Hearing this, l came here resolved
to exterminate your race, Indeed, I came,


ANUSHASANA PARVA


O Kushika, seeking the utter extermina-
tion of your family, in fact, for reducing
to ashes all your descendants. ’


14. Moved by this motive I came to
your palace, O monarch, and said to you,
I shail observe some vow. Do you attend
upon me and serve me dutifully.


15. While living, however, in your house
I could not see any shortcomings in you.
it is for that reason, O royal sage, that
you are still alive, for otherwise you would
have by this been dead.


16.
slept for twenty-one days in the hope that
somebody would awake me before I arose
out of my own accord,


17. You, however, with your wife, did
not awake me. Even then, O best of kings,
I became delighted with you.


18. Rising from my bed 1 went out of
the chamber without speaking to any of
you. 1 did this, O king, in the hope that
-you would ask me and thus I would have
an opportunity of cursing you. ?


19. I then disappeared, and again
showed myself in the room of your palace,
and once more following Yoga slept for one
and twenty days,


20. My motive was this. Exhausted
with toil and hunger you two would be
angry with me and do what would be un-
pleasant to me. |t was from this motive
that I caused yourself and your wife to be
afflicted with hunger,


21. In your heart, however, O king, the
slightest feeling of anger or vVexation did
not rise. For this, O king, I became higly
pleased with you.


22. When I caused various kinds of
food to be brought and then set fire to
them, T hoped that yourself with your wife
would yield to anger at the sight. Even
that act, however, of mine was tolerated
by you, .


2324. I then ascended the car, O
king, and addressed you, saying,—Do you
with your wife bear me!—You did what |
_ordered, without the least scruple, O king !
I became delighted at this. The gifts of
tiches 1 made could not excite your anger.


25. Pleased with you, O king, I created
with the help of my Yoga-power that forest
which yourself with your wife did see here.
Listen, O king, to the object I had.

26. For pleasing you and your queen I
made you to have a glimpse of Heaven, All
those things which you have seen in these
woods, O king, are a foretaste of Heaven.


27. O best of kings, for a little while I


it was with this’ resdlution that I [


133


made you and your wife behold, in even
your earthly bodies, some sights of Heaven.


28. All this was done for showing the
power of penances and the reward that is
im store for virtue. he desire that arose
in your heart, O monarch, at sight of those
delightful objects, is known to me.


20. You became desirous of obtaining
the dignity of a Brahmana and the merit of
penances, O king, disregarding the sover-
eignty of the Earth, nay, the sovereignty
of very Heaven.


30. You thonght this, O king. The
status of a Brahmana is highly difficult to
get; having become a Brahmana, it is
highly difficult to obtain the status of a
Rishi; having become a Rishi it is difficult
to hecame an ascetic.


31. I telt you that your desire will be
fulfilled. From yon, O Kushika, will origi-
nate a Brahmana who shall be called after
your name. ‘The person that wil} be the
third in descent from you shall obtain the
status of a Brahmana,


32. Through the energy of the Bhrigus,
your grandson, O king, will be an ascetic
gifted with the splendour of fire.

33. He shall always strike all men, in-
deed, the inhabitants of the three worlds,
with fear, I tell you the truth,

24. O royal sage, do you accept the
boon that is now in your mind. 1 shall
soon start for a sojourn to all the sacced
waters. ‘Time is expiring,


Kushika said :—

35. This, O great ascetic, is a high boon
in my case, for you have been pleased with
me! Let that take place which you have
said ! Let my grandson become a Brahma-
na, O sinless one. ;

36. Indeed, let the dignity of Brahmana-
hoad attach to my family, O holy onet
This is the boon { pray fer! 1 wish te orice
more ask you in full, O holy one.

37. In what way, O delighter of Bhrigtu,
will the dignity of Brahmanahoad attach to
my family ? Who will be my friend ? Who
will have my affection and respect 7


Canaan


CHAPTER LVI.


( ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued,


Chyayana said :—


1. I should certainly, O king, tell you
everything about the circumstance for


134


MAHABHARATA.-


which, O monarch, I came hither for exter- + manahood will attach to one who is third


tminating your race.


a. ‘This is well-known, O king, that the
Kshatriyas should atways have the help of
the sons of Bhrigu in the nsatter of sacri-
fices. ‘Thraugh an irresistible decree of
destiny, the Kshattiyas and the Bhargavas
will quarrel.


3. The Kshatriyas, O king, will kill all
the descendants of Bhrigu. By an ordi-
nance of fate, they will root out the race
of Bhrigu, not sparing even infants in their
mothers’ wombs. . ‘ -


4. There will then. be born in Bhrigu’s
race a Rishi of the name of Urva. Gift-
ed with great energy, be will in splendour
certainly resemble fire or the sun.


5. He will cherish such anger as will be
sufficient to consume the three worlds. He
will be competent to reduce the whole
Eartir with all her mountains and forests
into ashes, :


6. Fora little while he will put out the
flames of that fiery rage, throwing it into
the Mare’s mouth that wanders through
the ocean, ;


7—9. He will have a son of the name of
Richika, . he whole science of arms, O
sinless one, in its embodied form, will come
to him, for the extermination of the entire
Kshatriya caste, through a decree of Des-
tiny. Receiving that science by. inward
light, he will, by Yoga-power, communicate
it to his son, the highly blessed Jamadagni
of purified soul. ‘That foremost of Bhri-
gu’s race will bear that science in his mind.


to. O you of righteous soul, Jamadagni
will marry a girl, taking her from your
race, for spreading its glory, O chief of the
Bharatas.


tr. Having obtained for wife the daugh-
ter of Gadhi and your grand-daughter, O
king, that great ascetic will beget a twice-
born son gifted with Kshatriya accom.
plishments.


12, In your race will be born a son, a
Kshatriya gifted with the virtues of a Brah-
mana. Possessed of great virtue, he will
be the son of Gadhi. Known by the name
of Vishwamitra, he will in energy come to
be considered as the equal of Vrihaspati
himself, the preceptor of the cetestials.


13. The illustrious Richika will grant
this son to your raca this Kshatriya who
will be endued with high penances. ‘Iwo
women will be the cause in the matter of
this exchange of sons,


14. All this will fake place at the
command of the Grandfather. It will
never be otherwise, ‘Ihe status of Brah-


ris no doubt of this.


in descent from you. You shall~become a
‘relative of the Bhargavas !


Bhishma said :—


15. Hearing these words of the great
ascetic Chyavana, king Kushika became
filled with joy, and answered as follow :—~


16—17 | Indeed, O best of the Bharatas,
he -said,—So be it!—Gifted with hign
energy, Chyavana once more addressed
the king, and urged him to accept a boon
from himself, The king replied,—Very
well, From you, O great ascetic, I shail
obtain the fruition of my wish.


18—19—20. Let my family become inves-
ted with the dignity of Brahmanahood, and
let it always setits heart upon virtue !—
The ascetic Chyavana, thus solicited,
granted the king’s prayer, and bidding
farewell to the king, started on his intended
sojourn to the sacred waters, I have now
told you everything, O Bharata, relating
to your questions, vizs., how the Bhrigus
and the Kushikas became connected with
each other by marriage. Indeed, O king,
everything took place asthe Rishi Chya-
vana had said, The birth of Rama (of
Bhrigu’s race) and of Vishwamitra (of
Kushika’s race) happened in the way that
Chyavana had said,


Se amnmmanond


CHAPTER LVI.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued,


Yudhishthira said :—


1. I am stupefied, O grandfather, to
hear your words! Thinking that the Earth
is now destitute of a very large number
of kings all of whom were gifted with great
pie periys my heart becomes filled: with
griel. :


2a. Having conquered the Earth and
acquired hundreds of kingdoms, O Bharata,
I turn with grief, O grandfather, at the
thought of the millions of men I have
killed.


3. Alas, what will the condition be of
those foremost ladies who have been de-
prived by us of husbands and sons and
maternal uncles and brothers ?


4. Having killed those Kurus,—our
kinsmen, that is, and our friends and well-
wishers,—we shall have to sink in helf
with heads hanging downwards, There


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


8. .1 wish, O Bharata, to afflict my body
with severe penances.. With that end
in view, O king, | wish to receive instruc-
tions from you. :


Vaishampayana said :—

6. The great Bhishma, hearing these
words of Yudhishthira, refleeted upon
them acutely withthe help of his under-
standing, and addressed Yudhishthira in


reply.


Bhishma said :—

7. Hear what I say to you. It is highly
wonderful and is a great mystery. The
subject is the ends that creatures acquire
after death as the rewards of particular
acts or courses of conduct they follow.


8. One goes to Heaven by penances.
By penances one acqitires fame. By
penances, O-mighty king, one lives long
and gets all articles of enjoyment.


g. By penances one acquires knowledge,
science, health and freedom from disease,
beauty of person, prosperity, and blessed
ness, O chief of Bharata’s race.


10. By penances one acquires riches.
By observing the vow of silence one
succeeds in bringing the whole — world
under his sway, By making gifts one
gets all kinds of enjoyable articles. By
, observing the rite of Diksha one acquires
birth in a good and high family.


11. Those who spend their lives living
upon only fruits and roots succeed in
acquiring kingdom and sovereignty. Those
who live upon the leaves of plants and
trees as their food succeed in going to
Heaven. :


12, One who live _upon water only
attains to Heaven, By making gifts one
simply increases his wealth. By serving
with reverence his preceptor, one acquires
learning. By performing Shraddhas every
day in honor of his Departed Manes, one


acquires a large humber of children.


13. By observing Diksha upen potherbs
and vegetables, one acquires a large
uumber. of kine. Those who live upon
grass’ and straw succeed in going to
Heaven. By bathing thrice every day
with the necessary rites, one acquires a
large number of waves. By drinking the
air alone, one acquires residence in the
regions of Prajapati.


14. The Brahmana who bathes every
day and recites sacred Mantras in the
two twilights, becomes possessed of the
‘position of Daksha himself. By adoring
the deities in a forest or desert, one ac-
‘quires a kingdom or sovereignty, and by


134


observing the vow of relinquishing the body
by a long fast, one goes to the celestial
region,


_15. One having penances for wealth and

always passing his days in Yoga obtains
good beds and seats and vebictes. Re-
nouncing the body by entering a burning
fire, one becomes an abject of respect in
the region of Brahman.


16. Those who lie on the hard and bare
ground acquire housés and beds. Those
who clothe themselves in rags and barks


get good dresses and ornaments.

17. By avoiding the several agreeable
tastes one succeeds in winning great prose
perity. By abstaining from meat and fish,
one gets long-lived childen.


18. One who passes sometime in Udas-
vasa, mode of life, becomes the very lord of
the celestial region. ‘The man who speaks
the truth, O best of men, succeeds in sporte
ing happily with the celestials themselves.


19. By making gifts, one acquires great
fame on account of his high achievements,
By abstention from cruelty, one acquires
health and freedom from disease. By serve
ing the Brahmanas with respect, one acquires
kingdom and sovereignty, and the high
position of a Brahmana.


20. By making gifts of water and other
drinks, one acquires eternal fame on aca
count of high achievements, By making
gifts of food, one acquires various articles
of enjoyment. ;


21. One who gives peace to all crea-
tures, (by refraining to do them any injury),
becomes freed from every region. By serv-~
ing the gods, one obtains a kingdom and
celestial beauty.


22. By presenting lights at places which
are dark and frequented by men, one ac-
quires a good eye-sight. By giving away
good and beautiful objects, one acquires a
good memory and understanding.


23. By distributing scents and garlands,
one acquires far-reaching fame. Those
who abstain from shaving off their hair
aud beards, get excellent children,


24. By observing fasts and initiation
and baths, O Bharata, for twelve years one
acquires a region which is superior to that
attainable by urreturning heroes.


25. By conferring one’s daughter on
an eligible bridegroom according to the
Brahma form, one gets, O best of men, male
and female slaves and ornaments and fields
and houses.


26. By celebrating sacrifices and ob-
serving fasts, one goes to the celestial
region, Q Bharata. The man who gives


146 —


away fruits and flowérs stiéceeds In gainiig
sacred knowledge.


27. ‘The mat who gives away a thousand
kine with horns bedecked with gold; suc-
teeds in acquiritily Heaven. ‘This has beeti
declard by the very deitiés ia a celestial
assemblage,


28. One who gives away a Kapila ew
with her calf, with a Brazen pot for snilking,
with hors bedecked with gold, and’ pos-
sessed Of various other actomiplistriterits,
obtains the fruition of all his desires from
that cow.


29. Such a person, on account of that
act of gift, lives in the celestial region for
as many years as there are liairs on the
body of the cow -and rescues in the tiext
world iis sons and grandsons and all his
family to tti¢ seventh degree.


. 40. ‘That man gets to the regions of the

asus who gives away acow with horns
beautifully decorated with gold, accom-
panied with a brazen jar for milking, along
with a piece of cloth embroidered with gold,
a measure of sesame and a sunt of moriey as


gt
in the next world when he finds himself
falling into the deep darkness of hell and
fettered by his own deeds in this world,
ce a boat with sails that have caught the


air tescuing a person drowning in the
oceali,
32, He who confers a daughter accor-


ding to the Brahma form upon an eligible
person, or who makes a gitt of land to 4
Brahmana, ot who givesfood atcording . to
due rites, succeeds in attaining to the region
of Indra, .


33. That man who presents a house,
furnished with every sort of furniture toa
Brahmana given to Vedic studies and en-
dued with every accomplishment and good
behaviour, lives itt the country of the Uitara-
Kurus.


34. By making gifts of draft bullocks, a
person acquires the region of the Vasus.
Gift of gold secures Heaven. Gift of pure
gold yields greater merit still.


35- By making gift of an umbrella, one
acquires a palatial residence. By making
gift of a pair of sandals or shoes, one ac-
quires good cars, The reward of cloths,
is personal beauty, and by making gifts
of scents, one gets a fragrant body in
next life.


36. One who gives flowers and fruits
and plants and trees tov a Bralhimana, ace
quires, without any toil, a palatial residence


A gift of kine rescues the giver in


MAHABHARATA.


coiitaining beautiful worten and plenty of
riches,

37- The giver af food arid drink of
different tastes and other articles of enjoys
ittent succeeds in acquiring profuse supply
of such articles, ‘he giver, again, of houses
aiid cloths get articles of a similac natures
There is uo doubt in this.


38. That person whd makes gifts of
garlands and incense and scents and un-
guents and the articles needed by men
after a bath, arid garlands to Brahmanas,
beconies freed from every disease and,
possessed of personal beauty, sports in joy,
in the region réserved for great kings.


39. That nian, O king, who fresents to
a Grahmana a house that is stored with
grain, furnished with beds, full of riches,
auspicious, and delightful, acquires a pala<
tial residence.


40. He who gives to a Brahmana a
good bed perfumed with fragrant scents,
covered with an excellett sheet, and pillows;
gets without any effort on his part a beau-
tiful wife, belonging to a respectable family
and of agreeable manners.


4t. The nian who takes to a hero's bed
on the field of battle becomes the equal of
the Grandfather Brahman himself. There
is no end that is higher than this. Even
this is what the great Rishis have said.


Vaishamipayana said :—

42. Hearing these words of his gtatid-
father, Yudhishthira, the delighter of the
Kucus, became anxious to get the end
reserved for heroes and no longer expressed
mid disgust for leading a domestic mode of
ife. ;


43. Then, O foremost of men, Yudhish-
thira, addressing all the other sens of
Pandu, said to them,—Let the words
which our grandfather has said, command
your faith.’


44. At this, all the Pandavas with the
famous Draupadi amongst them, highly
spoke of the words of Yudhishthita and said
- yes.’


_ CHAPTER LVIIL


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA)—
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


1. I wish, O Bharata, chief to: hear from —
you what the rewards are, O best of the
Kurus, of the planting of trees and the
digging of tanks,


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


Bhishma said :—

2. A piece of land on a best sight,
fertile, situate in the midst of charming
adorned with various kinds of metals, and
inhabited by all sorts of creatures, Is con-
sidered as the foremost of spots.


3. A particular portion of such land
should be chosen for digging a tank. I
shall tell you, in due order, the different
kinds of tanks. I shall also tell you what
the merits also are of the digging of tanks.


4. The man who causes a tank to be dug
becomes entitled to the respect and adora-
tion of the three worlds.


5. A tank full of water is as agreeable
and beneficial as the house of a friend. It
is gratifying to the Sun himself. It also
helps the growth of the celestials. It is the
foremost of all things that lead to fame.


6—7. The wise have said that the exca-
vation of a tank brings on Virtue, Profit and
Pleasure. A tank ig said to be properly
excavated, if it is made ona piece of land
that is inhabited by respectable persons.
A tank is said to be necessary for all the
four purposes of living creatures. ‘Yanks,
again, are considered as forming the ex-
cellent beauty of a country.


8. The celestials, human beings, Gan-
dharvas, Departed Manes, Uragas, Raksha-
sas, and even immobile beings, all resort
to a tank full of water as their refuge.


g. 4 shall, therefore, recite to you the
merits attached to tanks as described by
great Rishis, and} the rewards in store for
persons who cause them to be excavated.


10. The wise have said that that man
acquires the nierit of an Agnihotra sacrifice
in whose.tank water is held in the season of
rains.


11. The high reward in the world that
is reaped by thé person who makes a gift
of a thousand kine is acquired by that man
in whose tank water is held in the season of
autumn,


12, That person in whose tank water
lies in the cold. season acquires the merit
of the wight who performs a sacrifice with
profuse gifts of gold,

13. That person in whose tank water
lies in the season of dew, acquires, the wise
have said, the merits of an Agnishtoma
saccifice.


14. That manin whose well-made tank
water lies in the season of spring acquires
the merit of the Atiratra sacrifice.


15, That-man in whose tank water lies
in the season of summer wins, the Rishi
say, the merits of a horse-scrifice,


18


ay
s 16. That man rescues his whole.race in
whose tank kine are seen to satisfy their
thirst and from which pioys men draw theie
water, ao
17. That man in whose tank kine satisfy
their thirst as also other animals and birds,
and human beings, gains the mecits of a
horse-sacrifice. -


18, Whatever quantity of water is drunk
from one’s tank and whatever quantity:
is taken therefrom by others for purposes of
bathing, all become stored for the benefit
of the excavater of the tank and he enjoys.
the same eternally in the next world.


19. Water, especially in the other worfd,
is difficult to get,O son. A gift of drink
yields eternal happiness.


20. Make gilts of sesame here. Make
gifts of water. Do you also give lamps.
While alive and awake, do you sport happi-
ly with kinsmen. ‘These are acts which you
shall, not be able to achieve in the other
world.


21. The gift of drink, O chief of men,’
is superior to every other gift. In point of
merit, it is superior-to all othec gifts. Theres
fore, do you make gilts of water.

22. Thus have the Rishis described the
high merits of the excavation of tanks,
shall now describe to you the planting of
trees.

23. Of immobile objects, six classes
have been spoken. They ate Vrikshas,
Gulmas, Latas, Vallis, Twaksaras, and
Trinas of diverse kinds,


24. These are the several kinds of
vegetables. Listen now to the merit of
their planting. By planting trees one
acquires ffme in the world of men. and
auspicious rewards in the next world.


25. Such a man is applauded and res-
pected in the world of the Departed Manes.
Such a man’s name does not die even
ao he goes to live in the world of celes~
tials,


26. The man who plants trees rescues
the ancestors and descendants of both his
paternal and maternal lines. Do you,
therefore, plant trees, QO Yudhishthira.


27. The trees that a man plants bee
come the planter’s children. There is no
doubt in this.” Departing from this world,
such a man goes to the celestial region.
jeseedl he enjoys many eternal regions of
bliss. :


28. Trees please the deities by their
flowers; the Departed Manes by their
fruits; and all guests and strangers by the
shadow they afford, :


‘


138


-


"29. Kinnatas, Uragas, Rakshasas, deities
Gandharvas, and human beings, as also
Rishis, all resort to trees as their refuge.


30. Trees that bear flowers and fruits
please all men. The planter of trees is
saved in the next world by the trees he


plants like children saving their own
father,
31. Therefore, the man who is desirous


of achieving his own good, should plant
trees by the side of tanks and rear them
like his own children. The trees which a
man plants are, according to both reason
and. the scriptures, the children of the
planter.


33» That Bralimana who excavates a
tank, and he who plants trees, and he who
performs sacrifices, are all adoved in the
celestial region as men who are devoted to
truthfulness of speech. :


33. Hence, one should cause tanks to
be excavated and trees to be planted, adore
the deities in diverse sacrifices, and speak
the truth,


eal


CHAPTER LIX.


‘((ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued,


Yudhishthira said :—


1. Amongst all those gifts mentioned
in the wock other than the Vedas, which
gift, O chief of Kuru’s race, is the most
superior, in your opinion 2


, 2. O powerful one, great is rly curiosity
in this matter. Do you describe to me that
gift which follows the giver to the next
aworld ? -


Bhishma said ‘—

3~—4. An assurance to all creatures of
love and affection and abstention from
every sort of injury, acts of kindness and
favor done. to a person in distress, gifts of
articles made to one who solicits with thirst
and agreeable to the solicitor’s wishes, and
whatever gifts are made without the giver’s
ever thinking of them as gifts made by him,
form, O chief of Bharata’s race, the high-
est and best of gilts.


5. .,Gift of gold, gift of kine, and gift of
€arth,—these are considered as sin-clean-
sing. ‘They rescue the giver from his evil
seeds, rte na
416, O king, do you always make such
gifts 6 the-cighteous. Forsooth, gifts
rescue the giver from all his sins, .


MAHABITARAFA.


7. That person who wishes to make his
gifts eternal, should always give to persorts
gifted with necessary qualificatiows whate
ever articles are desired by all and whate
ever things are the best in his house.


8. The man who makes gifts of agree-
able things and who does to others what is
agreeable to others, always succeeds in
getting things that are agreeable to him-
self. Such a person certainly becomes
agreeable to all, both here and hereafter.


g That man, O Yudhishthira, is a
cruel wight, who, through vanity, does mot,
to the extent of his means, attend to the
wishes of the poor and helpless who solicit
assistanee.


to. He is, indeed, thre forenrost of men
who shows favour to even an helpless enemy
fallen into distress when such enemy comes
and prays for help.


tE. No man is equal to him who satisfies
the hunger of a person who is emaciated,
possessed of learning, destitute of the
means of support, and weakened by misery.


12. One should always, O son of Kunti,
remove by ever means in his power, the
distress of the pious observant of vows and
aets, who,‘though having no sons and wives.
and plunged into misery, do not yet solicit
others for any kind of help.


13—14. Those persons who do not utter
blessings upon the deities and men, who are
worthy of respect and always contented,
and who live upon such alms as they get
without begging, are considered as verit
able snakes of virulent poison. Do you, O
Bharata, always protect yourself from them
by making gifts to them. ‘They are cap-
able to make the foremost of Ritwijas.
You are to find them out by means of your
spies and agents.

15. You should honor those men by
gifts of good houses furnished with every
necessary article, with staves and servants,


-with good dresses and vestments, O son of


Kuru, and with all articles bringing on
pleasure and happiness.


16. Righteous men of righteous deeds
should make such gifts, moved by the
desire that it is their duty to act in that way
and not from desire of reaping any rewards
therefrom. Indeed, good men should act
in thisi'way so that the virtuous men des-
cribed above might not, O Yudhishthira,
feel any disinclination to accept those gifts
sanctified by devotion and faith,


17. There are persons bathed in learn-
ing and bathed in vows, Without depend-
ing upon anybody they get their means of
living. These Brahmanas of rigid vows


| are given to Vedic study and penanecs


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


without proclaiming their practices to any
‘one.

18. Whatever gifts you may make to
those persons of pure conduct, of thorough
mastery over their senses, and always
contented with their own married wives, are
sure to acquire for you a merit that will
accompany you in all the worlds into which
you may go.


1g. One reaps the same merit by mak-
ing gifts totwice-born persons of controlled
souls which one acquires by properly pour-
ing libations to the sacred fire morning and
evening.

20. This is the sacrifice spread out for
you,—a_ sacrifice that is sanctified by devo-
tion and faith and shat is accompanied with
Dakshina! It is superior to all other sacri-
fices. Let that sacrifice ceaselessly flow
from you as you give away.


21. Performed in view of such men, O
Yudhishthira, a sacrifice in which the water
that is sprinkled for dedicating gifts forms
the oblations {in honor of the Departed
Maues, and devotion and worship rendered
to such superior men, serves to free one of
the debts he owes to the deities.


22, Those persons who do not give way
to anger and who never desire to take even
a blade of grass belonging to others, as
also they who are of sweet speech, deserve
to receive from us the most respectful
adorations.


23. Such persons and others never pay
their regards to the giver. Nor do they try
for obtaining gifts. They should, however,
be maintained by givers as they maintain
their own sons, [ bend my head to them.
From them also proceeds fearlessness.


24. Ritwijas, Priests and Preceptors,
when well-read in the Vedas and when
behaving mildly towards disciples, become
such. Forsooth, Kshatriya energy loses its
force upon a Brahmana when it meets him,


25.! Thinking that you are a king, that you
ace gifted with greatZpower, and that you
have riches do, not, O Yudhishthira, enjoy
your affluence without giving anything to
the Brahmanas.


26. Observing the duties of your own
caste, do you adore the Brahmanas with
whatever riches you have, O sinless one, for
purposes of adornment or sustaining your
power.


27.. Let the Brahmanas live in whatever
way they like. You should always bend your
head to them with respect. Let them always
sejoice in you as your children, living
_ happily and according to their wishes,


28. Who else save you, O,best of the
Kurus, can provide the means of livelihood


139


for such Bralhimanas as are gifted witl
eternal contentment,. as are your well-
wishers, and as are pleased with only a
little,?


29. As women have one eternal duty, in’
this world, vz., dependence ttpon, and the
obedient service of, their husbands, and
as such duty forms theie only end, so is the
service of Brahmanas our eternal duty and
end. .


30—31. If on seeing cruelties and othec
sinful deeds in Kshatriyas, the’ Brahmanas,
O son, unhonored by us, leave us all, I say,
of what use would life be to us, in the
absence of all contact with the Brahmanas,
especially as we shall then have to carry on
our existence without being able to study
the Vedas, to celebrate sacrifices, to hope
for worlds of bliss hereafter, and to per-
form great deeds?


32. I shall, about it, tell you what the
eternal practice is. Formerly, O king, the’
Kshatciyas used to serve the Brahmanas,


33» ‘The Vaishya likewise ysed .in those
days to adore the Kshatriya, and the
Shudra to adore the Vaishya. This is what
is heard, ‘The Brahmana was like a burn-_
ing fire. Without being able to touch him
or approach his presence, the Shudra used
to serve the Brahmana from a distance.


34. It was only the Kshatciya and the
Vaishya who could serve the Brahmana by
touching his body or approaching his
presence. The Brahmanas are gifted with
a mild disposition. They are truthful in
conduct. They are followers of, the true
teligioa. :
- 35. When angry, they are like snakes
of dreadful poison. Such being their:
nature, do you, O Yudhishthira, serve and
attend them with obedience and respect. .
The Brahmanas are superior to those who
ace higher than the high and the low.


' 36. The energy and penances of these
Kshatriyas who blaze forth with energy and
power, become powerless and neutralised
when they gcome in contact with the Brah-
manas.


37. My father himself is not dearer to


me than the Brahmanas. My mother is not
dearer to me than they. My grandfather,
O king, is not dearer, my own life is not
dearer,-O king, to me than the Brahmanas.

38. On Earth there is nothing, O Yu-
dhisthira, that is dearer to me than you.
But, O chief of Bharata’s race, the Brah- |
manas are dearer to me than even you.

39. I tell you truly, Oson of Pandu!
I swear by this truth, by which I hope to
acquire all those blissful regions that have
been Shantanu’s,


140


40. | see those sacred regions with
Brahma shining conspicuously before them.
1 shall go there, O son, and live in them
eternally,


41, Seeing these regions, O best of the
Bharatas, I am filled with joy at the
thevght of all these acts which 1 have done
in aid and honor of the Brahmanas, O
king.


terrae


CHAPTER LX.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
: Continued.


Yudhishthira said :-—-

1. Yo which of two Brahmanas, when
both happen to be equally pure in conduct,
equally gifted with learning and purity, of
birth and blood, but differing from each
other in only this, v¢z., the one solicits and
the other does not,—I ask, O grandfather,
would a gift be more meritorious ?


: 8
Bhishma said :-—~

2. It has beén said, O ‘sot. of Pritha,
that a gift made to an unsoliciting person
yigids greater merit than one made toa
person who begs, Qne endued with con-
tentment is certainly more deserving than
that person who is shorn of that virtue and
is, therefore, helpless amidst the storms and
buffets of the world.


3. The firmness of a Kshatciya consists
in the protection he gives to others. The
firmness of a Brahmana consists in his
refusal to beg. The Brahmana endued


with steadiness and learning and content- |-


ment gladdens the celestials.


4. The wise have said that an act of
begging on the tas of a poor man isa
great reproach. Those persons who solicit
others are said to annoy the world fike
thieves and robbers. .


5. The person who solicits is said to
meet with death. The giver, however, is
said not to meet with death. The giver is
said to give life to him who solicits, By an
act of gift, O Yudhishthira, the giver is
said to rescue his own self also.


6. Mercy is a very high vietue. Led by
mercy people make gifts to those who
solicit. Those, however, who do not beg
but are sunk into poverty and distress,
should be respectfully invited for receiving
help.

7. Ue such Brahmanas, who must be
considered as the foremost of their order,
live in your kingdom, you should consider
them as fire covered with ashes.


,


MAHABHARATA.


8. Burning with penances, they ara
capable of consuming the whole Earth.
Such persons, O son of Kuru's race though
not generally adored, should still be con-
sidered as worthy of adoration in every
way.

9. Gifted with knowledge and spiritual
vision and penances and Yoga, such persons
always deserve our adoration. O scorcher
of enemies, do you always offer adoration
to such Brahmanas.


10. One should go of his own accord to
those foremost of Brahmanas who do not
solicit any body and make gifts to them of
various kinds of wealth in abundance. The
merit that comes from properly pouring
libations on the sacred fire every morning
and evening, is acquired by the person who
makes gifts toa Brahmana endowed with
learning, with the Vedas, and with high and
excellent vows,


4112. You should, O son of Kuntis
invite those foremost of Brahmanas, who
are cleansed by learning and the Vedas
and vows, who live in independence, whose
Vedic studies and penances are concealed
without being announced from the house
top, and who observe excellent vows, and
honor them with gifts of well-built and
charming houses containing servitors and
robes and furniture, and all other articles
of pleasure and enjoyment.’ ;


13. Knowing all duties and possessed of
minute vision, those foremost of Brah-_
manas, O Yudhishthira, may accept the gifts
offered to them with devotion and respect,
thinking that they should not refuse and
disappoint the giver.


14. You should invite. those Brahmanas
whose wives wait for their return like tillers
in expectation of rain. Having fed them
well, you should present additional food to
them so that upon their return home their


expectant wives might be able to distribute


that food among their children who had
clamoured for food but who had been con-
soled with promises. ~


15. Brahmacharins of controlled ,senses,
O son, by eating at one’s house in the
forenoon, cause the three sacrificial fires to
bé pleased with the householder at whose
house they eat. 5


16. Let the sacrifice of gift proceed in
your house at midday, O son, and do you
also distribute kine and gold and dresses.
By acting thus, you are sure to please the
king of the celestials himself.


17. That -would constitute your third
sacrifice, O Yudhishthira, in which offerings
are made. to thé deities, the Departed


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


Manes and the Brahmanas. By such sacri-
fice you are sure to please the Vishwedevas.


18, Let mercy to all creatures, giving to
all creatures what is due to them, control-
ling the senses, renunciation, firmness, and
truth, form the final bath of that sacrifice
which is formed by gift.


19. This is the sacrifice that is spread
out for you,—a sacrifice which, is sanctified
by devotion and faith, and who has a large
sacrificial gift attached to it. This sacrifice
which is formed by gift is superior to all
other sacrifices. O son, let this sacrifice be
always celebrated by you. :


CHAPTER LXI.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued,


Yudhishthira said :—


1—2. I wish to know fully, O Bharata,
where one gets the high: rewards of gifts


and sacrifices. Are those rewards acquired:


here or hereafter? Which amongst these
two (viz., Gift and Sacrifice) yields superior
merit 2, To whom. should gifts, be made?
In what manner are gifts and sacrifices to
be made? When also are they to be made?
lask you this, O learned sire? Da you
discourse to me on the duty of. gifts !


3. Do you tell me, O grandfather, what
brings on the highest reward, vis,, gifts
made from the sacrificial platform or those
made out of that place? ;


Bhishma said :—

4. O son, a Kshatriya is generally en-
gaged in deeds of fierceness. In his case,
sacrifices and gifts, are considered as clean-
sing or sanctifying him.


‘5. The good and righteous, do not ac-
cept the gifts of persons of the royal order,
who perpetrate sinful deeds. Therefore, the
king should celebrate sacrifices with pro-
fuse gifts in the form of Dakshina.


6. I€ the good and righteous would ac-
cept the gifts made to them, the Kshatriya,
O king, should continually make gifts with
devotion and faith to them. Gifts yield
great merit, and are highly cleansing.


. 7. Observing vows, one should celebrate
sacrifices and please with wealth, such
Brabmanas as are friends of all creatures,
endued with righteousness, conversant of
the Vedas, and pre-eminent for acts, con-
duct and penances, :


-tqt


- 8. Hf such Brahmanas do not. accept
your gifts, no merit will Lecome yours.
Do you celebrate sacrifices with profuse
Dakshina, and make gifts of good and
agreeable food to the righteous. -


9. By making an act of gift you should -
consider yourself as performing a sacrifice,
You should, with gifts, worship those Brah-
manas who perform sacrifices. By duing
this you will acquire a share in the merits
of those sacrifices of theirs,


10. You should support such Brahmanas
as have children and as are capable of
sending people to heaven. By _ acting thus,
you are sute to geta large progeny,—in
fact, as large a ptogeny as the Parjapati
himself,


11. The righteous support and advance
the cause of virtue. One should, by giving:
up his all, support such men as also those
who do good to all creatures. -


12. Yourself being rich, do you, O
Yudhishthica, make gifts to Brahmanas of
kine and bullocks and food and umbrellas
and robes and sandles or shoes. . -


13. ‘Do you give to sacrificing Brah-
manas Clarified butter as also food, and
cars and vehicles with horses harnessed
thereto, and dwelling houses and mansions
and beds.


14. Such gifts yield prosperity and
affluence to the giver, and are considered
as pure, O Bharata. Those, Brahmanas
who are not censurable for anything they
do, and who have no means of suppert
assigned to them, should be found out. ©


15. Covertly or publicly, do ‘you main-
tain such Brahmanas by giving to them’
the means of support. Such conduct al-
ways gives higher benefit to Kshatriyas than
the Rajasuya and the Horse-Sacrifices.


16. Purged off of sin, you are sure of
attaining to Heaven. Filling your treasury, '
you should do good to your kingdom. |


17. By such conduct you are sure to
acquire immense riches, and become a Brah«
man (in your next{life). Do you, O Bharata,
protect your own means as also the means.
of other people’s livelihood,


18. Do you support your servants as
your own children. Do you, O Bharata,
protect the Brahmanas in the enjoyment of
what they have and make gifts to them of
such articles as they have not, te


19. Let your life be devoted to the
Brahmanas. Let it never be said that
you do not grant protection to the Brah«.
manas. Much wealth, when possessed by


142°


a’Brahmana ; becomes a source of evil to
bim.


20. Constant association with riches
and prosperity is sure to fill him with
pride and cause him to be} stupefied.
If the Brahmanas become stupefied and
steeped in folly, virtue and duties are sure
to suffer destruction. Forsooth, if virtue
and duty come to an end, it will lead to the
destruction of all creatures.


at. That king who having amassed
riches makes it over to his treasury officers
and guards, and then begins to again
plunder his kingdom, saying to his officers,
~—Do ye bring me as much riches as you
can extort from the kingdom.


22. And who spends the riches that is
thus collected at his behest under circums-
tances of fear and cruelty, in the perfor-
mance of sacrifices, should know that those
sacrifices of his, are never highly spoken of
by the pious,


23. Theking should celebrate sacrifices
with such money as is willingly paid to his
treasury by prosperous and unpersecuted
subjects. Sacrifices should never be
celebrated with money got with severity and
extortion.


24. The king should then celebrate
great sacrifices with lacge presents in the
shape of Dakshina, when on account. of
his being devoted to the behoof of his
subjects the latter bathe him with copious
showers of riches brought willingly by
them for the purpose.


25. The king should protect the riches
of those that are old, of those that are
minors, of those that are blind, and of
those that are otherwise disqualified. ‘The
king should never take any money from
his people, if they, in a season of drought,
succeed in growing any corn with the help
of water obtained from wells. Nor should
he take any wealth from weeping women.


26. The riches taken from the poor and
the helpless is sure to destroy the kingdom
and the prosperity of the king. The king
should always present to the righteous all
enjoyable articles in abundance. He
should certainly remove the fear of famish-
ing which those men may have.


«27. There are no men more sinful than
those upon whose food children look wist-
fully without being able to eat them duly.


28.- Lf within your kingdom any learned
Brahmana dies with hunger like any of
those children, you shall then incuc the
sin of faticide for having allowed such an
act. -. ‘


29. King Shivi himself had said this,


MAHABHARATA.


vigs.,—Fie on that king in whose kingdom a
Brahmana oc even any other man starves,


30. That kingdom in which a Brahmana
of the Snataka class starves, becomes over-
whelmed with adversity. Such a kingdom
with its king also incurs reproach. 4


gt. That king is more dead than alive
in whose kingdom women are easily
abducted from their husbands and sons
uttering cries and groans of indignation
and grief. y


32. The subjects should arm, themselves
for killing that king who does not protect
them, who simply plunders their riches,
who corfounds all distinctions,: who is #jne
capable of taking their lead, who is without
mercy, and who is considered as the most
sinful of kings.


33- That king who tells his people that
he is their protector but who does not or is
unable to protect them, should be killed
by his subjects in a body like a dog that is
affected with the rabies and has become
mad.


34. A fourth -part of whatever sins are
committed by the subjects visits that king
who does not protect, O Bharata.


35. Some authorities say that the whole
of those sins visits such a king. Others
are of opinion that a half thereof visits him.
Bearing in mind, however, the saying of
Manu, it is our opinion that a fourth part of
such sins visits the unprotecting «king.


36. That king, O Bharata, who affords
protection to his subjects gets fourth part
of whatever merits his subjects win by
living under his protection.


37- Do you, O Yudhishthira, act in
such a way that all your subjects may seek
sefuge with you as long as you are alive,
as all creatures seek the refuge of the god
of rain or as the birds seek the refuge of
a large tree.


33. Let all your kinsmen and all your
friends and well-wishers, O scorcher of
enemies, seek refuge with you as the
Rakshasas seek Kuvera or the gods seek
Indra as theirs.


CHAPTER LXII.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


1. People accept with respect the say-
ings of the Shrutis which say,— This is to be
given.—This other thing is to be given !—~
As regards kings, again, they make gifts


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


of various things to various men. What,
however, O grandfather, is the best or
foremost of all gifts?


Bhishma said :—


2. Of all kinds of gifts, the gift of earth
is said to be the first. Earth is immovable
and indestructible, It is capable of giving
to him who possesses it all the best things
upon which he may like to have.


3. It gives dresses and vestments, jewels
and gems, animals, paddy, and barley.
Amongst all creatures, the giver of earth
grows rich for ever and ever.


4. As long as the earth lasts, so long
does the giver thereof grow rich. There
is no gift that is higher, O. Yudhishthira,
than the gift of earth.


5. We have heard that all ‘men have
given a little quantity of earth. All'men
have made gifts of earth, hence all.men
enjoy a little of earth.


6. Whether in this or in the next world,
all creatures live subject to their own deeds.
Earth is Prosperity’s self. She isa power-
ful goddess. She makes him her lord
who makes gifts of her in this life to other
people.


7. That person, O best of kings, who
gives away earth, which is indestructible,
as gift, is born in next life as a man and
becomes also a lord of Earth.


8. The quantity of one’s enjoyment in
this life is equal to one’s gifts in a pristine
life.. This is the conclusion pointed out by
the scriptures, For a Kshatriya should
either give away the Earth in’ gift or
renounce his life in battle. ne


1 g. This is the highest source of pros-
perity to Kshatriyas. We have heard that
earth, when given away, cleanses and
sanctifies the giver,


10, The man who is of sinful conduct
who is guilty of Brahmanicide and of
falsehood, is purified by a gift of earth.
Indeed, such a gift rescues even sucha
sinnec from ail his sins.


11, The virtuous accept gifts of earth
only and no other thing from sinful kings.
Like one’s mother, earth, when given away,
purifies the giver and the taker.


12. This is an eternal and secret name
of earth, wis., Priyadatta. Given away
or accepted in gift, the name that is dear
to her is Priyadatta.


13. The gift of earth ‘is desirable.
That king who makes a gift of earth to a
learned Brahmana, gets from that gift a
kingdom,


143


14. Upon being born again ‘in this
world, such a man, forsooth, attains to a
position equal to that of a king. Hence, a

ing, as soon as he gets earth, should make
gifts of earth to the Brahmanas.


1g. None but a Jord of Earth can make
gifts of earth. Nor should one who is not
a worthy person accept a gilt of earth.


16. They who desire earth should act
thus. ‘That persen who takes away earth
belonging to a pious person never gets any
earth, 3


17, By making gifts of earth to the
righteous, one gets good earth. OF vir-
tuous soul, such a giver acquires great fame
both in this world and in the next. :


18, That pious king about whom the’
Brahmanas say,--We live on earth given to
us by him,—is such that his very enemies
cannot utter the least reproach about his
kingdom.


19. Whatever sins a man commits from
want of the means of livelihood, are alt
washed off by gift of only so much earth
as is covered by a cow-hide.


20. Those kings who are mean in their
acts or are of fierce deeds, should be taught
that gift of earth is highly purifying and
is at the same time the highest gift, :


21, The ancients thought’ that there is
always very little difference between the
man who celebrates a Horse-Sacrifice and
him who makes a gift of earth to one who
is righteous, -

22. The learned doubt the acquision of
merit which all other pious acts yield. The
only act about which they are dead certain,
is the gift of earth which, indeed, is the
foremost of all gifts.


23. The wise man who makes gifts of
earth, gives away all these, viz., gold, silver
cloth, gems and pearls and precious stones.


24.' Penances, sacrifice, Vedic learning,
good conduct, absence of cupidity, firmness
in truth, adoration of elders, preceptors,
and the deities, all these live in him who
makes.a gift of earth,


"25. They who ascend tothe region of
Brahman by renouncing their lives in battle
after having fought without any consider.
ation for themselves for securing the behoof
of their masters,—-even they are unable to
go above the merit of those who make gifts
of earth.

26. As the mother always nourishes her
own child with milk from her breast, so
does earth ‘please with all the tastes the ©
person that makes a gift of earth.

27. Mcityu, Vaikinkara, Danda, Tama,
Fire, who is highly fierce, and all heinous


144


and terrible sins are incapable -of touching
the person who makes a gilt of earth.


28. That man of tranquil’ soul who
makes a gift of earth pleases (by that act)
the Departed Manes living in their region
and the deities also hailing from the region
thatis theirs. - :


29. The'man who makes a gift of earth
to one who ig weak and cheerless and desti-
tute of the means of life and famishing
with weakness, and who thereby supplies
one with the means of sustenance, de-
serves the honor and merit of celebrating a
sacrifice,


30. As art affectionate.cow runs towards
her half, with full udders dropping milk,
similarly the highly blessed Earth, runs to-
wards the person who makes a gift of earth.


gt. That man who makes to a Brahmana
a gift of earth which has been tilled, or
sown with seeds, of which contajus standing
crops, or a palace well furnished with every
necessary article, succeeds in becoming the
accomplisher of the wishes of everybody.


32, The man who makes a-Brahmana
having the means ‘of life, possessing a
domestic fire and of pure vows and prac-
tices, accept a gift of earth, never falls into
any danger or distress.


33. As the moon increases day.by day,
so the merit of a gift of earth increases
every time such earth produces crops.


34. Those persons conversant with
ancient history sing this verse regarding
the gift of earth. Hearing that verse
Jamadagni’s son. (Rama) gave away the
whole Earth to Kashyapa.


35. The verse to which I refer is this.—
Receive me in gift. Give meaway. By
giving me away, you (O giver) will obtain
me again! That which is given away in
this life is re-acquired in the next. ,

36. That Brahmana who recites . this
great saying of the Vedas at the time of
a Shraddha get the highest reward.


37. A gift of eacthis a great expiation
for the sin of those powerful men who per-
form Atharvan rites for. injuring others.
Indeed, by making a gift of earth one
rescues ten generations of his paternal and
maternal families.


38. That person who knows this Vedic
saying about the merits of a gift .of earth,
succeeds in rescuing ten generations of
both his paternal and maternal families.
Earth is the original source of all creatures.
It bas been said that the god of fire is the
presiding genius‘of earth.


39. After the coronation ceremony has
been performed of aking, this Vedic say-


MAHABHARATA,


ing should be recited to him, so that ha
may make gifts of earth and may nevet
take away earth from a pious person,


40. Forsooth, the entire wealth owned
by the king belongs to the Brahmanas. A
king knowing well the science of duty and
morality is the first requisite of the king<
dom’s prosperity.

41. Those people whose king is uns
righteous and atheistic in conduct and be-
lief, can never be happy. Such people can
never sleep or wake in peace,


42—43. On account of his deeds of
wickedness his subjects become always filled
with anxiety. Protection of what the sub-
jects already have and new acquisitions:
by fair means are events that are not seen
in the kingdom of such a king. Those
people, again, who have a wise and righte-
ous king, sleep happily and wake up in
happiness, ,


44. By the Blessed and righteous acts
of such a king, his subjects become shorn
of anxiety. The subjects, restrained from
wicked deeds, grow in prosperity through
their own conduct. Capable of keeping
what they have, they go on making new
acquisitions, se

43, That king who makes gifts of earth,
is considered as well-born, He is con-
sidered as aman. He isa friend. He is
righteous in his acts. Heisa giver. He
is considered as possessing prowess.


46. Thase men who make gifts of ample
and fertile earth to Brahmanas knowing
the Vedas, always shine in the world, .on
account of their energy, like so many suus.


47. As seeds‘scattered on the soil grow,
and yield a goodly crop, so all one’s wishes
become successful on account of his making
gifts of earth,


48. ThejSun, Varuna, Vishnu, Brahman,
the Moon, the {Fre-God'and the illustrious
and trident-bearning Mahadeva, all praise
the man who makes a gift of earth. ;


49. Living creatures originatefrom Earth
and it is to the Earth that they return
when they disappear. Living creatures
which are divided into four classes have
Earth fot their primordia! essence,


50. The Earth is both the mother and
father of the universe of creatures, O king.
There%is no element, O king, that can com-
pare with Earth, a


51. About it is cited the old discourse
between the celestial preceptor Vrihaspati
and Indra the king of Heaven, O' Yudhish«
thira.


52. Having worshipped Vishnu in a
hundred sacrifices each of which was


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


famous for plentiful gifts, Maghavat put
this question to Vrihaspati, that foremost
‘of all orators.


Maghavat said =

53. O iNustrious one, by what gift does
one succeed in coming to the celestial region
and acquiring beatitude? O foremost of
speakers, do you tell me of that gift which
yields high and eternal merit.


Bhishma said:—


54. Thus addressed by the king of the
celestials, the preceptor of the gods, v7s.,
Vrihaspati of great energy, said these words
in reply to him of a hundred sacrifices.


Vrihaspati said :—

55. Gilt of gold, gift of kine, and gift
of earth,-by these, O destroyer of Vritra,
one becomes cleansed, Q you of great
wisdom, of all sins,


56. There is no gift, O king of the celes-
tials, higher than the gift of earth, O
powerful one. I consider this gift as the
most superior, according te what has been
declared by the wise.


57. Those heroes who, fearless of battle,
give their lives in battles with enemies.
come to Heaven. How high sover their
end, none of them can get over the giver
of earth. . ;


58. Those men who, disregarding their
bodies, give their lives in battle while work-
ing for the behoof of their masters, ascend
to the region of Brahman himself. But
even they are unable to get over the giver
of earth.


59. By making a gift of earth one res-
cues these eleven, vis., five generations of
ancestors and six generations of descen-
dants.


60. That person, O Purandara, who
makes a gift of earth rich with jewels and
gems becomes purged off of all his sins and
is highly respected in the celestial region.


6:. If a person, O king, makes a gift
of sich and fertile earth that is capable of
granting every wish he succeeds in attain-
ing to the position of a king of kings { in
his next life). A gift of earth, therefore,
is the foremost of all gifts. .


62. That person, O Vasava, who makes
a gift of earth capable of satisfying every
wish with fruition is considered as making
a gitt of every object in the world.


- 63. That man who gives away a cow
endued with every accomplishment and
granting the fruition of every desire, suc-
deeds, O you of a thousand eyes, in attain-
_ ing the celestial region.


19


145


64. The giver of earth, O king of the
celestials, is pleased when he comes to
Heaven, by hundreds of rivers which run
honey and ghee and milk and curds.


65. A king, by making gifts of earth,
is purged off of all his sins. There is no
gift, therefore, which is superior to the gift
of earth.


66. That king who gives away the Earth
bounded by the ocean, after having con-
quered it with the help of his weapons, is
talked of by all men and his memory lasts
as Jong as the mountains ast on the sutface
of Barth,


67. Gifted as he is with the merits that
belongto the gift of earth, the region of
bappiness reserved for the person who
makes gift of such earth as is auspicious
and rich with every taste, never become
exhausted.


68. That king, O Shakra, who wishes to
have prosperity and who wishes to acquire
happiness for himself, should always make
gifts of earth, with due rites, to worthy
persons,


6g. If after committing numerous sins
a person makes gifts of earth to the twice-
born class, he leaves off all those sins like
a snake casting off its slough.


70. The person who makes a gift of
earth is said to make gifts of everything,
that is, of seas and rivers and mountains
and forests.


71. By making a gift’of earth, the person
is said to give away lakes and tanks and
wells and rivers. On account of the
moisture of earth, one is said to give away
articles of various tastes by making a gift
of earth. :


72. The man who makes a gift of earth
is considered as giving away herbs and
plants possessed of high and_ efficacious
virtues, trees adorned with flowers and
fruit, charming forests, and hillocks.


73- The merit which a person acquires
by making a gift of earth is incapable of
being acquired by the performance of even
such great sacrifices as the Agnishtoma and
others with profuse gifts in the shape of
Dakshina.


74. The giver of earth, it has been af-
ready said, rescues-ten generations of both
his patetnal and maternal families. Like«
wise, by taking away earth that was given
away, one sinks himself into hell and casts
ten generations of both one’s paternal and
maternal lines. into the same place of
misery.

75. That man who having promised ta
make a gift of earth does not actually make


146


it, or who having made a gift resumes it,
has to pass a long time, in great misery on
account of béing tied with the noose of
Varuna at the command of Death,


76. Those men have never to go to
Vama who honor and adore those foremost
of Brahmanas who pour Hbations every day
on their domestic fire, who are always
engaged in the performance of sacrifices,
who have scanty means of livelihood, and
who. receive with hospitality every guest
secking shelter in their houses.


-77. The king, O Purandara, should free
himself from the debt he owes to the Brah-
manas and protect the helpless and the
weak of the other castes,


- 98 The king strotld never resume, O
chief of the gods, earth that bas been given
away by another toa Brahmana, O king,
of the celestials, who is destitute of the
means of life. '


79. The tears that would drop from the
eyes of such cheerless and destitute Brah-
manas on account of their lands being
resuméd, are capable of destroying the
ancestors and descendants to the third
generation of the resumer.


80, That man who re-instates a king
driven away from his kingdom, gets, resi-
dence in Lleaven and.is much honored by
the denizens thereof. , B AS


81—82,. ‘That king who succeeds in
making gifts of earth with such creps
standing thereon as sugarcane or barley or
wheat, or with kine and herses and other
draft cattle,—earth that has been acquired
with the might of the giver’s arms,—that
has mineral in its bowels and that is covered
with every kind of wealth on the surface,
acquires unending regions of happiness in
the next world, and such a king it is that
is said to celebrate the earth-sacrifice.;


83. That king who makes a gift of earth
is purged off of every sin and, and, therefore,
is pure and liked by the righteous. In thig
world he is highly honored and praised by
all righteous men.


84. The merit of a gift of. earth in-
creases every time the earth given away
bears crops for the benefit of the owner,
as a drop of oil, falling upon water, is seen
to extend on every side, and cover the
watery sutface.


85. Those heroic kings and ornaments
of assemblies who give their fives in battle
with faces towards the foe, attain, O Shakra,
to the region of Brahman,


86. Beautiful tidies skilled in music and
dancing and adorned with garlands of


Sowers, approach, O king of the |


MAHABHARATA.


deities, the giver of earth as he comes to
Heaven departing from the Earth,


87. That king who makes gifts of eartlr
with due rites to persons of the twice-bora
order, sports in bliss in the celestial regions,
worshtpped all the while by the celestials
and Gandharvas.


88. One hundred Apsaras, adorned with
cetestiat garlands, approach, O king of the
deities, the giver of earth as he ascends to
the region of Brahman.


89. Sweet-scented flowers, ’an excellent
conch and excellent seat, an umbrella and
excellent horses with good vehicles, are
always ready for the person who makes gifts
of earthy.


99. By making gifts of earth a king
can always command fragrant flowers and
heaps of gold. Having all kinds of wealth,
the commands of such a king can never be
disobeyed anywhere, and eries of victory
welcome him whereever he may go.


g1. The rewards of the gifts of earth
consist of residence in the celestial region,
O Purandara, and gold, and flowers, and
plants and herbs of medicinal virtue, and
iKKusha and mineral wealth and verdant
grass. A person by making a gift of earctir
wins in his next life nectar-giving eatth.


92. Thereis no gift equal toa gift of
earth. There is none worthy of greater.
respect than the mother, There isno duty
higher than truth. There is no riches
more valuable than that which is giver
away. :


Bhishma said:—

93. Hearing these words from the son’
of Angiras, Vasava made a gift to him of
the whole Earth with alt her jewels and
gems and all her riches. ; ‘


04. If these verses describing the merit
of the gifts of ‘earth. be recited on the
occasion of a Shraddha, neither Rakshasas
nor Asuras can succeed in getting any
share of the offerings made in it. .


95. Forsooth, the offerings one makes
to the departed manes at such a Shraddha
become unending. Hence, on occasions
of Shraddbas, the learned man should
recite these verses on the subject of the
merits of the gifts of earth, in the presence
and hearing of the invited Brahmanas
when engaged in eating. hes

96. I have thus, O chief of the Bharatas,
described to you that gift which is the
foremost of ail gifts. What elsedo you
wish to hear ? :


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


CHAPTER LXIIL.


(TANUSHASANA PARVA).—
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


1. When a king wishes to make gifts
in this world, what, indeed, are those gifts
which he should make, O best of the
Bharatas, to such Brahmanas as are endued
with superior accomplishments? What gift
is that by which the Brahmanas become
readily pleased? What fruits do they
give inceturn? O you of powerful arms,
tell me what is the high reward which can
be wot through the merit of gifts,


3. What gifts, O king, yield rewards
both in this world and in the next? t wish
to hear all this from you. Do you describe
10 me al) this ia detail.


Bhishma said :—


4. These very questions were formerly
put by me to Narada. Hear me as |
tecite to you what that celestial sage had
told me in reply.


Narada said :—


- 5. The celestiats and all the Rishis
speak highly of food. ‘The course of the
world and the intellectual faculties have ail
been fixed on food,


6. °There ‘has never been, nor will be,
any gilt equal to the gift of food. Hence,
men always wish particularly to make gifts
of food,


7. In this world, food is the root of
energy and. strength, The vital airs are
established on food. [tis food that keeps
up the wide universe, O powerful one,


-8. All classes of men, house-holders and
mendicants and ascetics, live upon food.


‘The vital airs depend upon food. ‘Phere
is no doubt im this. - -
g. Afflicting one’s relatives, one, if


desirous of his own prosperity, should make
_gifts of food to a great Brahmana or a
person of the mendicant order.


to. That man who makes a gift of food
to an accomplished” Brahmana who begs
the same, secures for himself in the next
world wealth of great value.


t1. The house-holder who seeks his
own prosperity should receive with respect
a deserving old man who is worn fout with
toil while proceeding on his way far from
home, when such aman comes to the house-
holder’s house.


1z. That man who, shorn of irrepres-
sible anger and becoming righteous in
nature and freed from malice, makes gifts.


147


of food, is suré to acquire happiness, O
king, both in this world and in the next.


13. The house-holder should never dis-
regard the man who camies to his place, nor
should he insult him by sending him away.
A gift of food made to even a Chandala
or a dog is never fost.


14. That man who makes a gift of clean
food to a person on the way who is fatigued
and unknown to the giver, is suce to win
great merit.


15. The man who pleases with ‘gifts of
food the departed manes, the deities, the
Rishis, the Brahmanas, and guests arrived
at his house, wins great merit.


16. That person who having committed
even a heinous crime makes a gift of foucl
to one who solicits, or to a Brahmana ita
special, is never stupefied by that hein-
ous sin.


17. A gift of food made to a Bralmana
becomes eternal, One madeto a Shudra
yields great merit. Thisisthe diffcrence
between the merits of the vifts of food
made to Brahmaanas and Shudras.


18. Solicited by a Brahmana, one should
not enquire about his family or conduct’ or
Vedic learning. Asked for food, ane should
give food to him who asks. — ‘


19. ‘There is no doubt in this, O king,
that he who makes gifts of food gets both iu
this wortd and in the next many trees
giving food and every other object of desire.


20. Like cultivators expecting auspicious
showers of rain, the depirted manes always
expect that their sons and grandsons would
present food to them.


21, The Brahmana 4s a great being.
When he comes into one’s house and
solicits, Saying, Give me!—the owner of
the house, whether actuated or not by the
desire of gaining merit, is sure te win great
merit by listening to that prayer.


22--23. The Brahmana is the guest of
all creatures in the universe. the is eft-
titled to the first part of every food. That
house increases in prosperity to which the
Bralimanas go from desire of getting alms
and from which they return honored on
account of their desires bein satisfied.
The owner of such a houseis born in his


“next life in a family, O Bharata, that has


all the comforts and luxuries of life.


24. A man, by making gifts of food in
this world, is sure to acquire an excellent
place: hereafter. He who makes gifts of
sweetmeats and all food that is sweet, gains
a residence in heaven where he is honored
of all the deities and other denizzns,


148


25. Food forms the life-breaths of men. +
Everything rests upon food. He who makes
gifts of food gets many animals, many
children, profuse riches (in other shape),
and all articles of coinfort and luxury in
profusion. :


26. The giver of food is said to be the
giver of life. Indeed, he is said to be the
giver of everything. Hence, O king, such
a man acquires both strength and personal
grace in this world.


27; If food be given duly to a Brahmana
come to one’s house as a guest, the giver
acquires great happiness, and is adored by
the very celestials.


28. The Brahmana, O Yudhishthira, is
agreat Being. He is also a fertile field.
Whatever seed is sown on that field yields
an abundant crop of merit.


29. A gift of food readily yields the
happiness of both the giver and the re-
ceiver, All other gifts produce unseen
fruits.


30. From food originate creatures. From
food springs happiness and joy, O Bharata,
Know that virtue and worldly profit both
spring from food. The cure of disease’ or
health also comes from food.


3t. Ina former Zon, the Lord of all
creatures said that food is ambrosia or the
source of immortality. Food is Earth, Food
is Heaven, Food is the Sky. Everything
tests on Food.


32. In the absence of food, the five
elements that form the body cease to exist
in a state of unision. From want of food
the strength of even the strongest man is
seen to fail,


33. Invitation and marriages and sacri-
fices all cease for want of food. ‘he very
Vedas disappear when there is no food.


34. All the mobile and immobile creatures
of the universe depend on food. Virtue
and,,worldly profit, in the three worlds,
depend on food. Hence the wise should
make gifts of food. .


35. The strength, energy, fame and
achievements of the man who makes gifts
of food, always multiply themselves in the
three worlds, O king.


36. The deity of wind, places above the
clouds (the water drawn by the Sun), The
water thus taken to the clouds is caused by
Shakra to be poured upon the Earth,
O Bharata.


37- The Sun, by means of bis rays,
draws up the moisture of the Earth, The
god of wind causes the moisture to fall
down from the Sun,


MAHABHARATA,


38. When the water comes down from
the clouds upon the Earth, the goddess
Earth become moist, O Bharata.


39. Then do people sow various kinds
of crops upon whose outturn the universe
of creatures depends. It is from the food
thus produced that the flesh, fat, bones aud
vital seed of all beings originate.


40. From the vital seed thus made, O
king, spring various kinds of living crea-
tures. Agni and Soma, tiving within the
body, create and maintain the vital seed.


4t. Thus from food, the Sun and the
god of wind and the vital seed spring and
act. All these are said to form one element
or quantity, and it is from these that aib
creatures originate.


42. That man who gives unto one who
comes to his house and begs it, is said,
O chief of the Bharatas, to contribute both
life and energy to living creatures.


Bhishma said :—


43. ‘Thus addressed by Narada, O king,
I have always made gifts of food. Do you
also, therefore, freed from malice and with
a cheerful heart, make gifts of food.


44. By making gifts of food, O king,
worthy Brahmanas with due rites, you may
be sure, O powerful one, of attaining to
Heaven.


45. Hear me, O king, as E tell you what
the regions are reserved for those who
make gifts of food. ‘The mansions of those
great persons shine with resplendence in
the regions of Heaven.


46. Bright as the stars in the sky, and
supported upon many columns, white as
the dise of the moon, and adorned with
many tinkling bells, and rosy like the
newly risen sun, those palaces are either
fixed or movable.


47. Those mansions are filled. with hun-
dreds and hundreds of things and animals
that live on land and as many things and
animals living in water. Some of them
are effulgent like lapis lazulé and some are
resplendent hke the sun, Some of them
are made of silver and some of gold.


48. Within those mansions are many
trees capable of satisfying every desire of
the inmates. Many tanks and roads and
halls and wells and lakes are all there.


49. Thousands of vehicles with horses
and other animals harnessed thereto and
with wheels whose caltter is always loud,
are all there. Mountains of food and all
enjoyable articles and heaps of cluths and
ornaments are also there.


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


so. Numerous rivers that run milk, and
hills of rice and other edibles, fare also
there. Indeed, many palatial residences
looking like white clouds, with many beds
of golden splendour, are in those regions.


51. All these are won by those men who
make gifts of food in this world. ' Do you,
therefore, become a giver of food. Indeed,
these are the regions reserved for those
great and righteous persons who make gilts
of food in this world. For these reasons,
men should always make gifts of food in
this world, ; :


CHAPTER LXIV.
(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—


Continued,


Yudhishthira said :—


x. I have heard your discourse about
the ordinances for the gift of food. Do you
describe to me-now about the. conjunctions
of the planets and the stars in relation to
the subject of making gifts,


Bhishma said :—


_2. Regarding it is recited this ancient
discourse between Devaki and Narada,
that foremost of Rishis,


3. Once on a time when Narada of
god-like features and knowing every duty
arrived at Dwaraka, Devaki asked him this
-question. j


4. The celestial Rishi’ Natada replied
to her question in the following words. Do
you hear as I recite them.


Narada said :—

5. By pleasing, O blessed lady, worthy
Brahmanas with pudding mixed with ghee,
under the constellation Krittika, one ac-
quires regions of great happiness.


_ 6. Under the constellation Rohini, one
- should, for freeing himself from the debt
he owes to the Brahmanas, make gifts to
them of many handfuls of vension along
with rice and clarified butter and milk,
and other kinds of edibles and drinks.


7. One giving away acow witha calf
under the constellation called Somadaivata
(or Meigashiras), proceeds from this human
region to a region in Heaven of great
felicity.

- §. One undergoing a fast and giving
away Krishara mixed with sesame, gets
over all difficulties in the next wosld, -in-
cluding those mountains with: rocks sharp
@s razors, z i


149


g. By making gifis, O beautiful tady,
of cakes and other food under the constel-
lation Punarvasu, one gets personal beauty
and great fame and takes birth in his next
life in a family in which there is profuse
food.

1o. Making a gift of wrought or un-
wrought gold, under the constellation
Pustiya, one shines like the Moon himself
in regions of surrounding darkness.


it. He who makes a gift, under the
constellation Ashlesha, of silver or a bull,
becomes freed from every fear and ace
quires riches and prosperity. :

12. By making a gift, under the cons+
tellation Megha, of earthen dishes filled
with sesame, one gets children and animals
in this world and acquires happiness iu the
next.

13. By making gifts, while fasting, to
Brahmanas, under the constellation called
Purva-Phalguni, of food mixed with Phani-
ta, the reward is great prosperity both here
and hereafter.


14. By making a gift, under the cons-
tellation called Uttara-Phalguni, of clarified
butter and milk with rice called Shash-
thika, one wins great honors in Heaven.


15. Whatever gifts are made by men
under the constellation of Uttara- Phalguni
yield great merit, which, again, becomes
unending. © This is very certain.


16. Observing a fast, the person who
makes, under the constellation Hasta, a
a gift of a car with four elephants, acquires
regions of great happiness that ace, capable
of granting the fruition of every wish.


17. By making a gift, under the cons-
téllation Chittra, of a bull and of good per-
fumes, one sports in bliss in regions of |
Apsaras like the deities sporting in the
garden of Nandana.


48. By making gifts of riches ynder the
constellation Swati, one acquires such exe
cellent regions as one desires. and wins,
besides great fame.


19-—20. By making gifts, under the con-
stellation Vishakha, of a bull, and a cow
giving profuse milk, acart full of paddy, .
with a Prasanga for coveting the same, and
also cloths for wear, a person pleases the
departed manes and the deities and ac+
quires external merit in the other world,
Such a person never meets with any cala+


-mity and certainly reaches Heaven,


21. By making gifts the Brahmanas of
whatever articles they want, one acquires
such means of subsistence as he wishes, |
and becomes rescued from Hell and every


‘calamity that befall sinners after death,


¥50
This is the certain concluston of tne
sciiptures.

22, By making gifts, under the constel-


lation Anuradha, of embroidered cloth and
other dresses and of food, observing a fast,
all the while, one becomes honored in
Heaven for a hundred cycles.


23. By making a gift under the cons-
tellation Jyeshtha, of the potherb called
Kalashaka with the roots, one acquires
great prosperity as alsosuch an end as is


_ desirable.


24. By making to Brahmanas a gift
under the: constellation Mula, of fruits and
roots, with a controlled soul, one pleases the
departed manes and attains to a desirable
end, j


25-~26. By making, under the constella-
tion Purvashada, a gift, to a Brabmana
knowing the Vedas'and of good family and
conduct, of cups filled with curds, while
observing a fast, ohe js born in his next
life in a family having abundant kine, One
secures the fruition of every desire, by
making gifts, under the constellation Utta-
rashda, of jugs full of barley-water, with
clarified butter and juice of sugar-cane in
abundance.


27, By making a gift, under the conjunc-
tion called Abhijit, of milk with honey and
ghee unto men of wisdom, a_ tighteous
person attains to Heaven and becomes an
object of adoration and honor there.


28. By making, under the conjunction
Shravana, a gift of blankets or other cloth
of thick texture, one passes freely through
every region of happiness, riding on a white
car of pure resplendence.


29. By making with a controlled soul
under the constellation Dhanishtha, a gift
of acar with bulls yoked thereto, or masses
of cloths and riches, one at once acquires
Heaven in his next life. ;


30. By making gifts, under the con-
stellation Shatabhisha, of perfumes with
Aquilaria Agallocha and sandal wood, one
acquires in the next world the companion-
ship of Apsaras as also eternal perfumes of
various sorts,


3t. By making gifts, under the con-
stellation Purva-Bhadrapada, of Raja-
masha, one acquires great happiness in
next life and comes by a profuse supply of
every kind of food and fruits.


32. One who makes, under the constella-
tion Uttara, a gift of mutton, pleases the
departed manes by such an act and ac-
quires unending merit in the next world.


33. If one makes a gift, under the con-
stellation Revati, of a cow with a vessel of


MAHABHARATA,


white copper for milking her, the cow sa
given away approaches him in the uvext
world, ready to grant the fruition of every
desire.


34. By making a gift, under the con-
Stellation Ashwini, of a car with horses
yoked thereto, one is boru in his next life
in a family possessing abundant elephants
and horses and cars and becomes gifted
with great energy. *


35. By making, under the constellation
Bharani, a gift to the Brahmanas of kine
and sesame, one attains in his next life
great fame and abundant kine.


Bhishma said :—


36. ‘Thus did Narada describe to
Devaki the subject of what gifts should be
made under what constellations. Devaki
herself, baving heard this account related
it in hec tuen to her daughters-in-law.


- CHAPTER LXV.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.


Bhishma said :—

1. The illustrious Atri, the son of the
Grandfather Brahman, said,—They who
make gifts of gold are said to make gifts
of every thing in the world,


2. King Harishchandra said that the
gift of gold washes off sins, leads to long
life, and yields inexhaustible merit to the
departed manes.


3. Manu has said that a gift of drink is
the best of all gifts: therefore should a
man cause wells and tanks and lakes to be
excavated. °


4 A well full of water and from which
various creatures draw water, is said to
take-off half the sinful deeds of the person
who has excavated it.


5. The entire family of a person is
rescued from hell and sin in whose well
or tank or lake kine and Brahmanas and
pious people constantly satisfy theic thirst.


6. That man gets over every sort of
calamity from whose well or tank every
one draws water without restraint during
the summer season, -


7. Clarified butter is said to please the
illustrious Veihaspati, Pushan, Bhaga, the
twin Ashwins, and the god of fire. ;

8. Clarified butter. is possessed of high
medicinal virtues. It is a high “requisite
of Sacrifice. Itis the best of all liquids.


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


The merit a gift of clarified butter yields
is very superior,


9. That man who wishes for the reward
of happiness in the next wocld, who wishes
for fame and prosperity, should, with a
purified heart and having purified himself,
make gifts of clarified butter to the
Brahmanas, :


to. The twin Ashwins, pleased, confer
personal beauty upon that man who makes
gilts of clarified butter to the Brahmanas
in the month of- Ashwin. ;


11. Rakshasas never invade the house
of that man who makes gifts to the Brah-
manas of pudding mixed with clarified
butter.


12. That man never dies of thirst who


makes gifts to the Bralimanas of jars filled
with water. Such a person gets every
necessary of life in profusion, and has
nevee to suffer from any calamity or dis-
tress,


13. That man, who with great devotion
and controlled senses makes gifts to the
foremost of Brahmanas, is said to take a
sixth part of the merits acquired by the
Brahmanas by their penances.


14—15. That man who makes presents,
to Brahmanas having the means of life, of.
fire- wood for purposes of cooking as also for
enabling them to drive cold, finds all his
purposes and all his acts successful. Such
a one is seen to shine over all his enemies. '


16. The illustrious god of fire becomes
pleased with such a man. As another
reward, he never becomes divested of
cattle, and he is sure to win’ vietory in
battle.


17. The man who makes a gift.of an
umbrella gets children and great pros-
erity, Such. a person never, suffers
rom any eye-disease. _ The merits also
that originate from the performance of a
sacrifice become his. re ae

18, That man who makes a gift. of an
umbrella in the season of summer or rains,
has never to suffer from any heart- burning
on any account,


19—-20. Such a man quickly succeeds
in freeing himself from every difficulty and
obstacle. The highly blessed and _ illustri-
ous Rishi Shandilya has said that of all
gifts, the gift of a car, O king, is the
greatest. - ‘


{51
CHAPTER LXVI.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued,


Yudhishthira said :—


1. I wish to hear; O grandfather what
the merits are of that person who makes
the gift of a pair of sandals to a Brahmana
whose feet are burning or being scorched
by hot sands while walking.


Bhishma said :—


2. The man who gives to the Brahmaaas
sandals for the protection of their feet, suc
ceeds in crushing all thorns and gets over
every sort of difficulty.


3-4. Such a man,O Vudhishthira, stands
over the heads of all his enemies, cars of
pure splendour, with mules yoked thereto,
and made of gold and silver, O monarch,
approach him. He who males a gift of
sandals is said to acquire the merit of
making the gift of a car with well-broken’
horses yoked thereto.


Yudhishithra said :— |


g. Tell me fully once more, O grand-
father, of the merits of gifts of sesame and
land, and of kine and tood.


Bhishma said :—


6. Hear, O son of Kunti, what the merits
are of the gift sesame. Hearing me, do
you then, O best of the KMurus, make gifts
of sesame according to the rites.


7. Sesame seeds were created by the
Self-create Brahman as the best food for
the departed manes. Hence, gifts of sesame
seeds always please the departed manes:
greatly. :


8. The man who makes gifts of sesame
seeds in the month of Magha, to the Brah-
manas, has never to see Hell which is full
of all dreadful creatures.


9g. He who worship the departed manes
with offerings of sesame seeds is consideted
as worshipping the deities in all the sacri-
fices. .One should never make a Shraddha
with offerings of sesame seeds without en-
tertaining some purpose.


10. Sesame seeds sprang from the limbs
of the great Rishi Kashyapa. Hence, in
the matter of gifts, they have come to be
considered as possessed of great efficacy.


11, Sesame seeds confer both prosperity
and personal beauty cleanse the giver of
ali his sins. Itis for this reason that the
gift of sesame seeds is superior to the gift
of every other article :


152


iz. The highly Intelligent Apastarnva,
Shankha and Likhita, and the great Kishi
Gautama, have all gone to the celestial
region by having made pifts of sesame
seeds.


13. Those Brahmanas who make Homa
with offerings of sesame, abstain from
sexual intercourse, and are observant of the
teligion of Acts, are consideted as equal to
vaccine Havi. :


#4. The gift of sesame seeds is superior
to all gifts. Amongst all gifts; the gift of
sesame is considered as yielding unending


merit.

15. Formerly when WHavi (clarified
butter) on one occasion could tot be pro-
cured, the Rishi Kushika, O scorcher of
enemies made offerings of sesame seeds to
his three sacrificial - fires and succeeded in


acquiring an excellent end.


16. I have thus said to you, O chief of
the Kurus, what the regulations are about
the excellent gift of sesame seeds. It is on
account of these regulations that the gift
of sesame seeds has come to be considered
as fraught with very superior merit.


17. After this, listen to what I would
say. Once ona time the gods, desirous of
making a Sacrifice, went, O king, to the
presence of the Self-create Brahman,


18. Having met Brahman, desirous as
they were of celebrating a sacrifice on the
Earth, they begged him for a piece of sacred
earth, saying,——We want it for our sacrifice.


The deities said :—

19, O illustrious one, you. are the ford
of all the Earth as also of all the gods !
‘With your permission, O highly blessed
one, we wish to perform a sacrifice,


20. The person who has not got. by
lawful means the earth whereon to make
the sacrificial altar, acquires not the merit
of the sacrifice he performs,


art. You are the Lord of all the universe
consisting of its mobile and tmmobilé
objects. Therefore, you should grant ?us a
piece of earth for the sacrifice we wish to
make.


Brahman said :—


22. Ye foremost of gods, I shall give
you a piece of earth whereon, ye sons of
Kashyapa, you shall celebrate your in-
tended sacrifice.


The gods said :—

23. Our wishes, O holy one, have be-
come successful. We shall celebrate our
sacrifice even here with large gifts. Let,


MAHABHARATA.


however, the ascetics always worship thig
piece of Earth.


24. Then there tame to that place
Agastya, Kanwa, Bhrigu, Atri, and Vrisha+
kapi, Asita atid Devala.


25. The great deities then, O you of
untading glory; celebrated thelr sacrifice.
Those foremost of gods finished it in due
time.


26 Having completed that sacrifice of
theirs on the breast of that foremost of
mountains, vis., Himavat; the celestials
attached to the gift of earth a sixth part
of the merit otiginating from their sacrifice.


27. The man who makes a gift of even
a span of earth with reverence and faith,
has never to suffer from any difficulty and
has never to meet with any calamity.


28. By making a gift of a house that
prevents cold, wind, and sun, and that
stands upon a piece of clean land, the givet
attains to the region of the celestials and
does not fall down even when his metit
becomes exhausted.


29. By making a gift of a house to live
in, the giver, endued with wisdom, lives, O
king, happily in the company of Shakra.
Such a person receives great honors in
the celestial region. :


go. That person in whose house a
Brahmana of controlled senses, well-read
in the Vedas, and belonging by birth toa
family of preceptors, lives in contentment,
succeeds in attaining to and enjoying a
region of great happiness.


gt., Likewise, O best of the Bharatas,
by giving away a shed for the shelter of
kine that can prevent cold and rai and
that is substantial in structure, the giver
rescues seven generations of his race.


32. By giving away a piece of earth fit
for cultivation, the giver acquires great
prosperity. By giving a piece of earth
containing mineral riches, the giver ad-
vances his family,


33- One should never give away earth
that is barren or that is burnt; nor should
one give away any earth that is neara
crematorium, or that has been possessed
eg enjoyed by a sinful person before such
gift.


34. When a man performs a Shraddha
in honor of the departed manes on earth
belonging to another person, the departed
manes render both the gift of that earth
and the Shraddha itself fruitless,


35- Hence, a wise man should buy even
a small piece of earth and make a gift of
it, The funeral cake that is offered to


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


One’s ancestors on earth that has been duly
durchased, becomes eudiess,


is . N
36. Forests, mountains, rivers, and
Tirthas, are considered as having no
owners. No earth need be bought here for
performing Shraddhas,


37. This has been said, O king, on the
subject of the merits of making gifts of
earth. After this, O sinless one, I shall
describe to you the subject of the gift of
Kine.

38. Kine are considered as superior to
all the ascetics. And therefore, the divine
Mahadeva practised penances in theic com-
pany.

39. Kine, O Bharata, live in the region
of Brahman, in the company of Soma.


Forming, as it does, Ithe highest end, the:


twice-born- Rishis, crowned with success,
try to attain to that very region. -


‘ao, Kine benefit human beings with
milk, clarified butter, curd, dung, skin,
bones, brorns, and hair, O Bharata.


41. Kine do not feel cold orheat. They
always work. Even the rainy season can-
not afflict them at all.


42. And since kine attain to the highest
end, in the company of Brahmanas, there-
fore do the wise say that kine and Brah-
tmanas are equal. ‘


43. Formerly king Rantideva celebrated
a grand sacrifice in which an immense
number of kine were offered up and killed.
From the juice that was secreted by the
skins of the slain animals, a river was
formed that passed by the name of Char-
manwati,


44~4§. Kine no longer are animals fit
for saccifice. ‘They now are animals fit
for gift. ‘hat king who presents kine to
foremost of Bralhmanas, O king, is sure to
get over every danger even if he falls into it.
‘The man who presents a thousand kine has
aot to go to hell.


46. Such a person, O king, wins victory
everywhere. The very king of the celestials
had said that the milk of kine is nectar.


47. Therefore, one who presents a cow
is considered as making a gift of nectar.
' Persons, well-read in the Vedas, have de-
clared that the clarified: butter, manufac-
tured from cow’s milk, isthe very best of
all libations poured upon the sacrificial
fire,


48—49. Therefore, the man, who pre-
sents a cow, is considered as making a gift
of alibation for sacrifice. A bull is the
embodiment of Heaven. He who makes
the gift of a bull to a qualified Brahmana,
receives great honors in the celestial


153


region. Kine, O chief of Bharata’s race,
are said to be the vital airs of livin
creatures, :


50. Therefore, the man, who makes the
gilt of acow, is said to make the gift of vitat
airs. Persons, conversant with the Vedas,
have said that kine are the great refuge of
living creatures.


51. .The man, who makes the gift of a
cow, is considered as making the gift of
what is the high refuge of all creatures.
The cow should never be given away for
slaughter; nor should the cow be given to a
tiller ofthe soil; nor should the cow be given
away toan atheist. The cow should not
also, O chief of the Bharatas, be given. ta
one whose occupation is the keep of kine.


52. The wise have said that the person,
who gives away the cow to any of such
sinful persons, has to sink in eternal Hell,


53- One should never give to a Brah-
mana a cow that is lean, or that produces
dead calves, or that is barren, or that is
diseased, or that is defective of limb, oc
that is worn out with toil,


54. The man, who gives away ten thou-
sand kine, attains to Heaven and sports in
bliss in the company of Indra. The man,
who makes gifts of kine by’ hundred thou-
sands, wins many regions of etecnal happi--
ness.


55. Thus have I recited to you the
merits-of the gift of kine and: of sesame, ag
also. of the giftofearth. Listen now to me
as I.describe 'to you the. gift of food, O
Bharata. ce Re .

56. ‘The gift of food, O son of Kunti, is
considered as a very superior gift. -For-
merly king Rantideva ascended to the
celestial region by having made gifts of
food. ;


57. That king, who makes a gift of food
to one who is toil-worn and hungry, ac-
quires the region of supreme happiness be=
longing to the Self-create,


58. Men cannot, by gifts of gold and
dresses and of other things, win that
happiness which givers of food succeed in


_winning, O you of great. power.


59. Food is, indeed, the first article,
Food is considered as. the highest pros-
perity, It is from food that life origi-
nates as also energy and prowess and
Strength. ° ; :

60. _ He, who always makes gifts of ‘food,
with attention, to the righteous, never
suffers any distress, This has been said by
Parashara. -


61. Having adored the deities duly,
food should be first dedicated to them, I¢


154


has been said, O king, that the kind of food
that is taken by particular men is taken
also by the gods those men worship.


62. That man, who makes gifts of food
in the light half of the month of MKartika,
succeeds in getting over every difficulty
here and acquires endless happiness here-
after,

63. That man, who makes a gift of food
toa hungry guest arrived at his house,
acquires all those regions, O chief of
Bharata’s race, that are reserved for
-persons acquainted with. Brahman.

64. The man, who makés gifts of food, is
sure to get over every difficulty and distress,
Such a person gets over every sin and
purges himself of every evil act.


65. I have thus described to you the
merits of making gifts of food, of sesame,
of earth, and of kine,


a


CHAPTER LXVII.-


(ANUSHASANIKA  .PARVA).—.
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


1. I have heard, O sire, of the merits
of the different kinds of gift which you
‘have described to me. I understand, O
Bharata, that the gift of food is especially
praiseworthy and superior. | ; ‘


2. What, however, are the great merits
of making gifts of drink. I wish to hear
of this in full, O grandfather. ,


Bhishma said:— __ .

3- I shall, O chief of Bharata’s race,

relate to. you this subject. Listen to me,
© you of unbaffled prowess, as I speak to
you. ,
- 4-5. I shall, O sinless one, describe to
you gifts beginning with that of drink.
The merit that a man wins by making gifts
of food and of drink is such that the like of
it, I think, is incapable of being acquired
by any other gift. There is no gift,
superior to that of either food or drink. - It
is from food that all living creatures are
able to exist.


6. Therefore, food is considered as 2
very superior object in alf the worlds.
From food the strength and energy of
-living creatures continually increase.


7. Hence, the: master of all creatures
has himself said that ‘the gift of food is a
very superior gift, You have heard, O son
of Kunti, what the auspicious words are of
Savitri herself,


7?


| water.


my


e MAHABHARATA,


8. You know why those words were Said,
what those words were, and how they were
said in course of the sacred Mantras, O
you of great intelligence. A man, by
making a gift of food, really makes a gift
of life itself.


g. There is no gift in this world which is
superior to the gift of life. Wou are not
unacquainted with this saying of Lomasha,
O you of mighty arms.


10, The end that was attained to formers
ly by king Shivi en account of his having
granted life to the pigeon fs acquired by
him, O king, who makes a gift of food to a
Brahmana,


Ir, Hence, we have heard that they
whe give life attain to very superior regions
of happiness in after life. Food, O best of
the Kurus, may or may not be superior, to
drink,

32. Nothing can exist without the help
of what comes from water. ‘he very lord
of all the planets, viz., the Hlustrious Soma,
has originated f:om water.


413. Ambrosia and Suddha and Swadha
and milk, as also every sort of food, the
deciduous herbs, O king, and creepers
originate from water.

14. From these, O king, the vital airs
of all living creatures flow. The deities
have nectar for their food. The Nagas
have Sudha. ‘


15. The departed manes have Swadha
for theirs. The animals have herbs and
plants for their food. The wise have said
that rice, &c., form the food of humans
beings.


16. All these, O king, originate from
tence, there is nothing superior to


the gift of water or drink.


17. Hf a person wishes to get prosperity
for himself, he should always make gifts of
drink. The gift of water is considered as
very Jaudable. It brings on great fame
and bestows long life on the giver.


18, The giver of water, O son of Kunti,
always stands over the heads of his enemies.
Such a person obtains the fruition of all
his desires and acquires everlasting fante.


-19- The giver, O king, becomes purged
of every sin and obtains unending happi-
ness hereafter as he proceeds to the celestial
region. O you of great splendour. Manw
himself has said that such a person acquires
regions of endless bliss in the other world.


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


CHAPTER LXVIU.
(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—


Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


1. Do you describe to me once again, O
grandfather, the merits of the gifts of sesame
and of lamps for lighting darkness, as also
of food and clothes,


Bhishma said :—


2. Regarding it, O YVudhishthira, is
recited the discourse that took place formerly
between a Brahmana and Yama.


3. In the region lying between the rivers
Ganga and Yamuna, at the foot of the hills
called Yamuna, there was a farge town
peopled by Brahmanas.


4. The town was known by the name of
Purnashala and was very charming, O king.
A large number of learned Brahmanas
lived in it.


5—6. One day, Yama, the king of the
dead, commanded a messenger of his, who
was clad in black, having blood-red eyes
and hair standing etect, and possessed of
feet, eyes, and nose all of which resembled
those of a crow, saying,—Go you to the
town inhabited by Brahmanas and bring
here the person known by the name of
Sharmin and born in the race of Agastya,


"9. He is intent on mental tranquillity
- and gifted with learning. He teaches the
Vedas and his practices are well-known.
Do not bring me another person belonging


to the same race and living in the same


neighbourhood.
8. ‘This other man [ want is equal to him


in virtues, study, and birth. As for children.


and conduct, this other resembles .the in-
telligent Sharmin, Hat hes
9. Do you bring the individual [ want
He should be adored with respect.—The
messenger, going there, did the very re-
verse of what he had been ordered to do.


40. Attacking that person, he brought
him who ‘had been forbidden by Yama to
be brought. Endued with great energy,
Yama rose up on seeing the Brahmana
and adored him duly.


ai—12, The king of the dead then
ordered his messenger, saying,*Let this
one be taken back, and fet the other one be
brought to me.— When the great judge of
the dead {said these words, that Brahmana
addressed him and said,—I have finished
my study of the Vedas and am no longer
attached to the world. Whatever period
may yet remain of my life, I wish to pass,
Niving here, O you of unfading glory.


155


| Yama, said :—

13. I cannot determine the exact period,
ordained by ‘fime, of one’s fife, and hence,
unutged by Time, I cannot allow one to
live here. I take note of the acts of virtue
(or otherwise) that one does in the world.


14. Do you, O learned Brahmana of
great splendour, return forthwith to your
house., Tell me what also is in tyoue mind
and what I can do for you, O you of un-
fading glory.


Brahmana said :—


15. Bo you tell me what those acts are
by doing which one may acquire great
merit. O best of all beings, you are
the foremost of authorities in the three
worlds, ; :


Yama said :—


16. Do you hear, O twice-born Rishi,
the excellent ordinances about gifts. ‘The
gift of sesame seeds.is a very superior gift.
It yields everlasting merit.


17. QO foremost of twice-born ones, one
should make gifts of as much sesame as ond
can. By making gifts of sesame every
day, one is sure to acquire the fruition of
his desires, : :


18. The gift of sesame at Shraddhas is
highly spoken of. The gift of sesame is a
very superior gift. Do you make gifts of
sesame to the Brahmanas according to the
cites laid down in the scriptures.


19. One should, on the day of the full
moon of the month of Vaishakha, make:
ifts of sesame. tothe Beahmanas, ‘They,
should also be made to eat and to touch
sesame on every occasion that one can
afford, ne:


20. ‘They, who are desirous of seeing
their well-being, should, with their whole
minds do this in their houses. Forsooth,
meén should likewise make gifts of water
and ‘set up resting places for the distcibu-
tion of drinking water. os,


21. One stiould make tanks and lakes
and wells to be excavated. Such acts are
rare in the world, O best of twice-born
persons. a


22. Do you always make gifts of water.
This act is full of great merit, O best of
twice-born persons, for’ making [such gifts
you should put up resting places along the
roads for the distribution of water.


23. After one has eaten, the gift to ond.
should especially be made of water for
drink,


156°


Bhishma’ said :—

24. After Yama had said these words
to him, the messenger who had borne him
from his house conveyed him back to it.
The Brahmana, on his return, obeyed the
instructions he had received.


25. Having thus conveyed him back to
his abode, the messenger of Yama fetched
Sharmin who -had really been sought by
Yama, Taking Sharmin to him, he in-
formed his master: ;


26. Endued with great energy, the judge
of the dead adored that pious Brahmana,
and having conversed with him for some
time dismissed him for being taken back.
to his house.


27. To him also Yama gave the same
instructions. Sharmin too, returning to the
world of men, did aif that Yama had said.


28. Like the gift of water, Yama, from
desire of doing good to the departed manes,
applauds the gift of lamps to light dark
places, for it is considered as benefiting the
departed manes, -


29. Hence, O best of the Bharatas, one
should always give lamps for lighting dark
places. The giving of lamps increases the
power of vision, of the deities, the Pitris,
and one’s own self, ~


go. It has been said, O king, that the
gift of gems is a very great gift. The
Brahmana, who having accepted a gift of
gems, sells the same for celebrating a
sacrifice; commits no sin,


31. The Brahmana, who having accepted
a gift of gems, makes a gift of them to
Brahmanas, wins endless merit himself and
confers endless merit upon him from whom
he had originally received them.


* 32. Knowing every duty, Manu himself
has said that he who, observant of proper
control makes a gift of gems to a Bra-
hmana observant of proper restraints, wins
inexhaustible merit himself and confers
inexhaustible merit upon the recipient.


‘33. The man, who is content with his
own married wife and who makes a gift of
dressess, acquires an excellent complexion
and excellent dresses for himself.


_ 34. TUhave told you, O foremost of men,
what the merits are of gifts of kine, of gold
and of sesame, according to various pre-
cepts of the Vedas and the scriptures.

35. One should marry and ‘procreate
offspring upon one’s’ married wives, Of
alt acquistions, O son of Kuru’s race, that
of sons is considered the foremost.


nee,


MAHABHARATA.


CHAPTER LXIX.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued,


Yudhishthira said :—


it. Do you, O foremost one of Kuru’s
family, describe to me once again the exeel-
lent ordinances about gifts, with especial
reference, O you of great wisdom, to the
gift of earth.


2. A Kshatriya should make gifts of
earth to a pious Brahmana; such a Brah-
mana should accept the gift with due rites.
None else, however, save a Kshatriya can
make gifts of Earth, :


3. You should now tell me what those
objects are that persons of all classes cam
freely give # actuated by the desire of ac-
quiring merit. You should also tell me
what has been said in the Vedas on this
subject.


| Bhishma said :—


4 There are three gifts that pass by.
the same name and that yield equal merits.
Indeed, these three confer the fruition of
every desire. The three objects whose gifts.


are of such a character are kine, earth, and
knowledge.


5. That person, who tells his disciple
words of good meang drawn from .the
Vedas, acquires merit equal to that which
‘ acquired by making gifts of earth and

ine.


6. Likewise are kine praised ¢ There is
no object of gift bigher than they. Kine
are supposed to confer merit forthwith.
They are atso, O Yudhishthira, such that a


gift of them cannot but yeild great merit.


7 Kine are the mothers of all creatures.
They grant every sort of happiness. -The
person, who seeks his own prosperity, should
aiways make gifts of kine.. ‘


“ 8. No one should kick at kine or pass.
through the midst of kine. Kine are god-
dessess and. homes of auspiciousness.
Therefore they always deserve worship.


g. Formerly, the deities, while tilling
the earth whereon they celebrated a sacri-
fice, used the goad for striking the builocks
yoked to the plough. Hence, in cultivating
earth for such a purpose, one may, with-
out incurring censure or sin, apply the.
goad to bullocks. [n other acts, however,
bullocks should never be struck with the
goad of the whip.


io. When kine are grazing or lying
down, no one should tease them in any
way. When thiesty and they do not get
water, ‘kine, by merely lookitig at such a


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


person, can destroy him with all his rela-
tives and friends. :


ti, Whiat creatures can be more sacred
than kine when with the very dung of kine
altars, whereon Shraddhas are performed in
honor of the departed manes, or those
whereon the deities are adored, are cleans-
ed and sanctified ?


12. That man who, before eating him-
self, gives every day, for a year, only a
handful of grass to a cow belonging to
another, is considered as practising a vow
or observance which bestows the fruition
of every desire.


13. Such a person acquires children and
fame and wealth and prosperity, and re-
moves all evils and bad dreams,
Yudhishthiva said :—

14. What should be the marks of those
kine that deserve to be given away? What
are those kine that should be looked over
in the matter'of gifts? What should be
the characters of those persons to whom
should kine be given? Who, again, are
those to whom kine should not be given ?


Bhishma said :—


- 15.' ‘A cow should never be given to one
who is not pious in conduct, or one that is
sinful, or one that is covetous, or one who is
a liar, or one who does not make offerings
to the departed manes and celestials.


16. A ‘person, by making a gift of ten
kine to a Brahmana learned in the Vedas,

oor in earthly riches, possessed of many
children, and owning a domestic fire, attains
numerous regions of great happiness.


17, When a man performs any meritori-
ous act, assisted by what he has got in gift
from another, he acquires a portion of that
merit. .

18, He who procreates a person, he who
rescues a person, and he who assigns the
means of livelihood to_a person, are con-
sidered as the three fathers.


19. Services dutifully done to the pre-
ceptor destroys sin. Pride destroys even
great fame, The possession of three chil-
dren removes the reproach of childlessness,
and the possession of ten. kine removes the
reproach of poverty.


20~—21. To one who is devoted to the
Vedanta, who is gifted with great learning,
who has been filled with wisdom, who has a
complete mastery over his senses, who obe
serves the restraints laid down in the scrip-
tures, who has withdrawn himself from all
worldly attachments, to him who says
agreeable words to all creatures, to him
who would never do an evil act even when
actuated by hunger, to one who is mild or


-that covered its mouth,


157


possessed of a peaceful disposition, to one
that is hospitable to all guests,—to such a
Brahmana, should a man, possessed of
similae conduct and having children and
wives, assign the means of livelihood,


22. The merit of the gift of kinetoa
worthy person is exactly equal to the sin of
robbing. a Brahmana of what belongs to
him, Under afl circumstances anything
belonging toa Brahmana should be avoide d
and his wives kept at a distance,


——as


CHAPTER LXX,


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA}—
Continued,


Bhishma said :—

1. Regarding it, O perpetuater of Kuru
race, is recited by the righteous the narra-
tive of the great calamity that, befell king
Nigra on account of his taking what had
belonged to a Brahmana.


2. Sometime before, certain ‘youths of
Yudu's race, while searching for water,
came to a large well covered with grass and
creepers.


3. Desirous of drawing water from ‘it,
they worked hard for removing the creepers
After the mouth
had been cleaned, they saw within the well
avery large lizard living withig it. The
youths made strong and repeated efforts for
rescuing the lizard from that plight.


5, Resembling a very hill in size, the’
lizard was sought to be freed by cords and
leathern tongs. Not succeeding in: theic
avempes the youths then went to Janard-

ana, 3


6. Addressing him they said.—Covering
the entire space of a well, there is a very
large lizard to be seen. Despite our best
efforts we have not succeeded in rescuing it
from that plight. This was what they said -
to Krishna.


7. Vasudeva then. went there and took
out the lizard and questioned it as who it
was. The lizard said that it was the soul
of king Nriga who had flourished in days of
yore and who had celebrated many sacri-
fices. 2


8. To the lizard that said those words,
Madhava spoke :— ;


You had done many pious deeds. Vou
committed no sin. Why then, O king,
have youcome by sucha distressful end?
Do you explain what is this-and why has
it been caused ? ; :


158


g We have heard that you did repeatedly |


make gifts to the Brahmanas numberable
kine. Why, therefore, have you come by
this end.


to. Nriga then replied to Krishna, say-
ing,—On one occasion a cow belonging to
a’ Brahmana who regularly adored his
domestic fire, escaping from the owner’s
house while he was absent from home, en-
tered my flock.


11. The keepers of my cattle included
that cow in theie list of a thousand. In
time that cow was given away by me to
a Brahmana, wishing for happiness in
heaven.


12. The true owner, returning home,
sought for his lost cow and at last found it
in the house of another. Finding her, the
owner said,—-This cow is mine.—


13. The other person contested his claim,
till both, growing wroth came to me. Ad-
dressing me, one of them said,—You gave
this cow.-The other one said,—You have
robbed me of this cow because she is
mine.


ty. I then begged the Brahmana to
whom I had given that cow, to return the
gift in exchange for hundreds and hundreds
of other kine. Without yielding to my
earnest solicitations, he addressed me
saying,~—The cow 1 have got is well suited
to time and place. She gives. profuse milk,
besides being very quiet and very fond of us.
The milk ghe gives is very sweet. She is
lauded in my house.


16. She is nourishing, besides, a weak
child of mine that has jast been born.
{ cannot, therefore, part with her.—
Having said these words, the Brahmana
_went away.


17. I then begged the other Brahmana
offering him an exchange, and saying,—Do
you take a hundred thousand kine for this
one cow.


' 18. The Brahmana, however, replied to
me saying,—! do not accept gifts from
Kshatriyas. [ am able to support myself
without aid. Do you then, jforthwith, give
me that very cow which was mine. Thus,
O slayer of Madhu, did that Brahmana
Speak to me.


19. I then offered to make gifts to him of
gold and silver and horses and cars. That
foremost of Brahmanas refused to accept
any of these gifts and departed.


20. Meanwhile, urged by Time’s irresis-
tible power, [ had to depart from this world.
Going to the region of the departed manes
I was taken before. Yama the king of the
dead.


MAHABHARATA.


21. Adoring me duly, Yama addressed
me saying,— The end cannot be determined,
O king, of youre righteous deeds.


22. There is, however, a little sin which
was unconsciously committed by you. Dao
you suffer the punishment for that sin now
ot afterwards as you like.


23. You had sworn that you would pro-
tect (all persons in the enjoyment of their
own.) This oath of yours was not rigidly
kept by you. You took also what belonged
toa Brahmana. This has been the twofold
sin you bave perpetrated.


24. I answered, saying,—1 shall first
suffer the distress of punishment, and when
that is over, I shall enjoy the happiness that
is in store for me, O lord!—After { had
said these words to the king of the dead, I
dropped down on the’ Earth,


25. Though fallen down I stil! could
hear the words that Yama said to me _ very
loudly, ‘Those words were,—Janarddana’
the son of Vasudeva, will save you. ?


26. Upon the completion of a full thou-.
sand years, when your sin will be. dissi-
pated you shall then attain to many regions
of unending happiness that have been ac--
quired by you through your own pious
deeds, :


2/. Falling down I found myself, with
head downwards, within this well, changed
into a creature of the intermediate order.
Memory, however, did not leave me.


28. By you I ,haveibeen saved to-day.
What else can it testify than the power of
your penances ? Let me have your permis-
sion, QO Krishna. I wish to ascend to’
the celestial region.


29. Permitted then by Krishna, king
Nriga bowed his head to him and then
mounted a_ celestial car and went to
Heaven.


t

30. After Nriga had thus proceeded to

the celestial region, O best of the Bhacatas,.

Vasudeva [recited this Verse, O delighter, of
the Kurus.


31. Noone should knowingly misappro-
priate anything belonging to a Brahmana.
The property of a Brahmana, if taken, des-
troys the taker even as the Brahmana’s cow
destroyed king Nriga! ;


32. I tell yoa, again,"O Partha, that a
meeting with the good never proves furtile.
See, king Nriga was rescued from Hell
through a meeting of his with one that is
good.


33- Asa gift yields merit, so an act of
Spoliation brings on to demerit. Hence
also, OQ Yudhishthira, one should avoid
doing any injury to kine, .


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


CHAPTER LXXIL


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).=«
Continued.


Ynudhishthira said :—


1. Osinless one, do you describe to me
more fully the merits of making gifts of
kine. O you of mighty arms, I am never
Satiated with your words.


Bhishma said :—~
‘2, Regarding it is cited the old discourse
Deteveen the Rishi Uddalaki and Nachi-
eta.


3. Once ona time the Rishi Uddalaki,
gifted with great intelligence, approaching
his son Nachiketa, said to him,—Do you
wait upon and serve me.—


4—5:., Upon the completion of the vow he
had observed, the great Rishi once more
said to his son,—Engaged in performing my
ablutions and deeply busy with my Vedic
study,I have forgotten to bring with me the
fireewood, the Kusha blades, the flowers,
the walariae and the potherbs I had col-
lected.” Bring me those things from the
river-bank,


6. The son went there, but found all the
articles washed away by the current. Ree
turning to his father, he said :—''I do not
see the things.”


7. Stricken as he then was by hunger,
thirst, and fatigue, the Rishi Uddalaki of
great ascetic merit, in a sudden anger
cursed his son, saying,—meet with Yama
‘to-day. .

_ 8, Thus struck by his father with the
thunder of his speect, the son, with joined

- hands, said,~»'' Be pleased with me.—Soon,

revere he dropped down on the earth
ead.


9g. Seeing Nachiketa prostrated upon the
earth, his father became senseless with grief.
He, too, exclaiming,—Alas, what have I
done !—dropped down on the earth,


-P 10, Filled with grief as he. bewailed for
his son, the rest of that day passed away
and, night came.


1t. Then Nachiketa, O son of Kuru’s
tace, drenched by the tears of his father,
showed signs of returning life as he lay on a
mat of Kusha grass. His regaining of life
under the tears of his father resembled the
sprouting forth of seeds when drenched with
good showers. - 3


12. The son, just restored to life, was still
weak. His body was smeared with scents
and he looked like one just awaking from a

‘deep sleep. The Rishi asked him, saying.—


159


13. Have you, O son, acquired auspici-
ous regions by your own deeds? By good
fuck, you have been restored to me. Your
body does not seem to be human.


14. Thus asked by his great father, Na-
chiketa who had seen every thing with his
own eyes, answered thus in the midst of the
Rishis.—


18. In obedience to your command I
proceeded to the vast region of Yama which
is possessed of a charming effulgence.
There f saw a palatial mansion which ex«
tended for thousands of Yojanas and emit-
ted a golden splendour on every part.


16. As soon as Yama saw me approach
ing with face towards him, he ordered his
attendants, saying,—Give him a good seat.
~—Indeed the king of the dead, for your
sake, adored me with the Arghya and
other ingredients,


17, Thus adored by Yama and seated in
the midst of his counsellors, I then asked
him mildly,—I have come to your house,
O judge of the dead. Do you assign
me those regions which I deserve for my
acts.


18. Yama then answered me, saying,
You are not dead, Q amiabie one. Gifted
with penances, your father said to thee~
Meet with Yama.—The energy. of your
father is like that of a buening fire.
could not possibly falsify that speech of
his. ‘

19. You have seen me. Do you go
hence, O child. The author of. your body
is bewailing for you. You are my dear
ese What wish of yours shall I fulfill 7

olicit, the fruition of whatever desire you
May have.


20. Thus addressed by him, I replied
to the king of the dead, saying,—I have
arrived within your territory from which no
traveller ever returns, If f am worthy of
your attentions, | wish, O king of the dead,
to see those regions of great prosperity
and happiness that have been reserved for
doers of virtuous deeds.


21. Thus addressed by me, Yama made
me mount a vehicle effulgent as the Sun
and to which were yoked many excellent
horses. Taking me on that car, he showed
me, O foremost of twice-born ones, all those
charming regions that are reserved for the
pious.


22. I saw in those regions many efful-
gent palaces intended for great persons.
‘Those mansions are of various forms and
are adorned with every kind of gems,


“ 23. Bright as the lunar disc, they are
ornamented with rows of tinkling bells.


160


Humdreds among them are many-storied.
Within them are charming groves and
gardens and transparent pools of water.


24. Effulgent like lapis lazuli and the
Sun, and made. of silver and gold, their
color resembles that of the morning Sun.
Some of them are fixed and some movable.


25. Withia them are many hills of foods
any enjoyable articles, and dresses and
beds in abundance, Within them are
many tress capable of granting the fruition
of every desire.


26. There are also many rivers and
roads and spacious halis and lakes and
large tanks, Thousands of cars with ratt-
ling “wheels may be seen there, having
excellent hors2s yoked to them,


. 27. .Many rivers of milk, many hills of
clacified butter and large pieces of trans-
parent water are there. Indeed, I saw
many such regions, never seen by me
before, of happiness and joy, approved by
the king of the dead.


28. Seeing all those objects, I addressed
the ancient and powerful judge of the
dead, saying,—For whose use and enjoy-
ment have these rivers with eternal currents
of milk and clarified butter been ordained?


Yama said :—


29. These rivers of mill end clarified
buttee are for the enjoyment of those pious
persons who make gifts in the world’of men.
Other eternal worlds there are’ which are
filled with such palaces free from every sort
of sorrow. -These are reserved for those
persons who make gift of kine.


30. The mere gift of Ikine is not lau-
dable. There are considerations of fitness
or otherwise about the person to whom kine
should be given, the time for niaking those
gifts, the kind of kine and the rites that
‘should be observed in making the gifts.
Gifts of kine should be made after knowing
the qualifications of both Brahmanas and
the kine themselves. Kine should not be
given lo one in whose house they are likely
to suffer from fire or the sun.


31. That Brahmana, who is endued with
Vedic learning, who is of austere penances,
and who celebrates sacrifices, is considered
as worthy of receiving kine in gift. ‘Those
kine which have been saved from distressful
situations, or which have been, given by
poor householders from want of sufficient
means to feed and cherish them, are, for
these reasons, counted as of great value.


32. Abstaining from all food and sub-
sisting upon water alone for three nights
and sleeping the while on the naked earth,
one Should, having properly fed the kine


MAHABHARATA.


intended to be given away, give them to
Brahmanas after having pleased them alsu
(with other gifts). 3


33- The kine, given away, should be ac
companied by their calves. They should,
again, be such as to bring forth good
calves at the proper seasons. They should
be accompanied with other articles. Hav-
ing completed, the gift, the giver should live
for three days on only milk aud abstaining
from food of every other kind.


34. He, who gives a good cow that
brings forth good calves at proper time,
and that does not fly away from the owner's
house, and accompanies such gifts with -a
vessel of white brass for milking her, enjoys
the. divine happiness for as many years
as are measured by the number of hairs
on the animal’s body. He who gives a bull
to a Brahmana, that is well-broken and
capable of carrying loads, strong and young
in years, disinclined to do any mischief,
large-sized and powerful, enjoys those re-
gions, approved of the righteous, that are
reserved for givers of kine.


35—36. He is considered as a proper
person for receiving a cow in gift who is
known to be mild towards kine, who takes
kine for his refuge, who is grateful, and
who has no means of livelihood assigned |
to him. When jan old man becomes ill,
or when a famine takes place or when a
Brahmana intends to celebrate a sacrifice,
or when one wishes to till for agriculture,
or when one gets.a son through the efficacy
of a Homa performed for the purpose, or
for the use of one’s preceptor, or for the
sustenance of a child, one should give away
a loved cow. ‘These. are the considera-
tions that are spoken highly of about place
and time, The kine worthy. of being given
away are those that give profuse milk, or
those which are well-known, or those that
have been purchased for a price, or those that
have been acquired as honoraria,for learning,
or those that have been obtained in exchange
by offering other living creatures, or those
that have been got by prowess of arms, or
those that have been got as marriage-dower,


Nachiketa said :—


37. Hearing these words of Vaivaswata,
the Regent of the dead, I once more address-
ed him, saying,»—What are those objects


. by giving which, when kine cannot be had,


givers may yet go to regions reserved for
men making gifts of kine.


38. Accosted by me, the wise Yama
answered, explaining further what the end
is which one wins by making gifts of kine.
He said,—In the absence of kine, a persov
by making gifts of. the substitute of kine,
acquires the merit of making gi‘tts of kine,


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


39. Tf -in the absence of kine, one makes
‘a gift of a cow made of clarified butter, ob-
servant of a vow the while, one gets for
‘one’s use these rivers of clarified butter. all
‘of which approach one like an affectionate
mother approaching her loved child.


40. If, in the absence of even a cow,
made of clarified butter, ove makes a gift of
a cow made of sesame seeds, observing a
vow the while, one succeeds with the trelp of
that cow to get over all calamities in this
world and to enjoy great happiness here-
after {rom these rivers of milk that you
see, ;


40. If a cow made of sesame seeds,
is not available, one makes a gift of a cow
made of water, he succeeds in coming to
these happy regions and enjoying this river
ef cool and transparent water, that can
grant the fruition of every desire.


42. The king of the dead explained to
me .all this while 1 was his guest, and, O
you of unfading glory, areat was the joy
that I felt on seeing all the wonders he
showed me.


43. 1 shall now tell you what would
certainly be agreeable to you. I have now
got agreat sacrifice whose performance
does not require much riches. ‘lhat sacri-
fice may be said to originate from me, O
sire. Others will obtain it also. it is not
quite of a piece with the ordinances of the
Vedas. : :


44. The curse that you had imprecated
on me was no curse but was in sootha
blessing, since it enabled me to see the
great king of the dead. There I have seen
what the rewards are of gifts. 1 shall
henceforth, O you of great soul, practise


the duty of gift without any doubt about its |


rewards.


45. And, O great Rishi, the righteous
Vama, filled with joy, repeatedly told me,
One who, by making repeated gifts, has
succeeded in acquiring purity of mind
should then make gifts of ‘kine in parti-
cular. :

46. This subject is fraught with sanctity.
Do you never disregard the duties of gifts,
Gifts, again, should be made to worthy

ersons, when time and place are suitable.

o you, therefore, always make gifts of
kine, Never entertain any doubt about it.


47. Devoted to the path of gifts, former-
ly many great persons used to make gilts of

' kine. Fearing to practise austere penances,
they made gifts according to their power.


48. In time they shook off all sentiments

of pride and vanity, and purified their souls.
Engaged in performing Shraddbas in honor
of the departed manes and in all religious


ai


161


acts of righteousness, they used -to make,
according to their power, gifts. of kite,
and as the reward of those acts they have
attained to the celestial region and are shin«
ing in effulgence for such virtue.


49. One should, on the eighth day of the
moon that is known by the name of Ka-
myashtami, make gifts af kine, properly
got, to the Brahmanas, after determining
the fitness of the recipients. After making
the gift, one should then live for ten days
together upon only the milk of ‘kine, their
dung and their urine. nek ee

50. The merit that one acquires by
making a gift of a bull is equal to that of,
the divine cow. By making a gift of a
couple of kine one gains, as the reward
thereof, a masiery of the Vedas. By
making a gift of cars and vehicles with kine
yoked thereto, one wins the merit of baths
in sacred waters. By making a gift of a
cow of the Kapila kind, one becomes purged
of all his sins. ‘


51. Indeed, by giving away even a singte
cow of the Kapila kind that has been acs.
‘quired by fair means, one becomes purged
of all bis sins. There is nothing higher
than the milk which is given by kine. The
gift of a cow is truly considered as a very
superior gift.

52. Kine, by giving milk, rescue alt the
worlds -from calamity. {t is kine, again,
that produce the food upon which creatures:
live. Qne who, knowing the extent of the
service that kine do, does not entertain in
his heart love for kine, is a sinner who: is.
sure to sink in Hell. os


53. If one gives a thousand or a hun-
Gred or ten or -five kine, indeed, if one
gives toa pious Brahmana even a single
cow which brings forth good calves at
proper Seasons, he is gure to see that cow
approach him in Heaven in the form of a
tiver.of sacred water capable of granting
the fruition of every desire.


54. About prosperity and the’ growth
that kine confer, ia the matter alse of the
Protection that kine grant to ali creatures
of the Earth, kine are equal to the very:
rays of the Sua that fall en the Earth.
‘The word that signifies the cow means also
the rays of the Sun. The giver of a cow
begets a very farge progeny inhabiting a
large part of the Earth, Hence, he who
gives a cow shines like a second Sun in
effulgence.


55. The disciple should, in the matter of
making gifts of kine, select his preceptor.
Such a disciple is sure to go to Heaven
everytime. Ihe selection of.a preceptor is
considered as.a high duty by persons know-
ing the ordiaances, This is, indeed, the


162


initial ordinance.
pend upon it.


56. Selecting, after examination, a fit
person among the Brahmanas, one should
make to him the gift of a cow that has been
.acquired by fair means, and having made
the gift make him accept it. The deities
and men and ourselves also, in wishing
good to others, say,—Let the merits of gifts
be yours on account of your virtue ?


57- Thus did the judge of the dead
speak to me, O twice-born Rishi. I then
bowed my head to the righteous Yama.
Getting his permission [ left his kingdom
and have now cose to the sele of your feet.


AH other ordinances de-


CHAPTER LXXIL
(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—


Continued,


Yudhishthira said :-—


1, You have, O grandfather, describe to
me the topic of gifts of kine in speaking of
the Rishi Nachigeta. You have also, related
O powerful one, the efficacy and pre-emine
ence of that act.


2. You have also told me, O grandfather,
of great intelligence, the exceedingly pain-
ful character of the misfoctune that befell
the great king Nriga on account of a single
transgression of his. '


3. He had to live for a long time at
Dwaravati (in thé form of a mighty lizard)
and how Krishna became the instrument
of his rescue from that. miserable con-
dition. : ;

4. Ihave, however, one doubt. About
the regions of kine. { wish to hear parti-
cularly about those regions which are re-
served for the residence of persons who
make gifts of kine.


Bhishma said:—

5. Regarding it is cited the old dis-
course between Him who sprang from the
primeval lotus and him who: performed a
hundred sacrifices.


Shakra said :— ;

6. lUsee, O grandfather, that those who
live in the region of kine transcend by their
efulgence the prosperity of the celestial
dwellers and pass them by. This has
created a doubt in my mind. :

7. Of what kind, O holy one, are the
regions of kine? Tell me all about them,
O sinless. one,


Indeed, what is the nature |


MAHABHARATA,


of those regions that ate inhabited by givers
of kine? I wish to know this.


8. Of what kind are those regions?
What fruits do they yield? What isthe —
highest object there which the inhabitants
thereof succeed in acquiring ?_ What are its
virtues. How also do men, shorn of anxiety,
sutceed in going to those regions,?


9. For what period does the giver of a
cow enjoy the fruits of his gift? How may
persons make gifts of many kine and how
may they make gifts of a few kine ?


10. What are the merits of the gifts of
many kine and what those of the gifts of a
few only. How also do persons become
givers of kine without really giving any
kine? Do you tell me all this.


11. How does one making gifts of even
many kine, O powerful lord, become the
equal of ane who has made gifts of only a
few kine? How also does one who has
made gifts of only a few kine equal one who
has made gifts of many kine ?

12, What kind of present is considered
as distinguished for pre-eminence in the
matter of gifts of kine? You should, O
holy one, describe to me all this according
to truth.


CHAPTER LXXIIE.


(CANUSHASANIKA PARVA ).-<
Continued.


The grandfather said :—

1. The questions you have put to me
about kine, beginning with their gift, are
such that there is none else in the three
werlds, O you of a hundred sacrifices, who
could put them.


_ 2. There are many kinds of regions, O
Shakra, which are invisible to even you,


Those regions are seen by me, O Indra,


as also by those women who are chaste
and whe have been devoled to only one
husband.


3. .Rishis observe excellent vows, by
means of their deeds of virtue and piety
and Brahmanas of righteous souls, suc-
ceed in going there in even theic human
bodies.


4. Men who perform excellent vowss
see those regions which resemble the bright
creations of dreams helped by their purified
minds and by that (temporary) fiberation
which succeeds the loss of one’s consciouse
ness of body. ; ‘


ANUSHASANA PARYA.


5 O you, of a thousand eyes, hear me
as I tell you what the attributes are of
those regions. ‘There the very course of
‘Time is stopped. Decrepitude is not there,
nor Fire which is oranipresent in the uni-
verse, There is slightest transgression does
not take place, nor disease, nor weakness
of any sort. : .


6. The kine which live there, O Vasava,
acquire the fruition of every desire which
they cherish in their hearts. £ have direct
experience of what I say to you.


q. Capable of going everywhere at will
and actually going from place to place with
ease, they enjoy the fruition of desire after
desire as it arises in their minds, Lakes,
tanks, ivers, forests of diverse kinds,
mansions, hills and all kinds of delightful
objects,—are to be seen there. ‘There is no
region of happiness that is superior to any
of these of which } speak.


g. All those foremost of men, O Shakra,
who are forgiving to all creatures, who
endure everything, who are full of love for
all things, who render dutiful obediestce to
their preceptors, and who are freed from
pride and vanity, go to those regions of
supreme happiness.


to—1r. He who abstains from every
kind of flesh, who is possessed of a pure
heart, who is gifted with righteousness, who
worships his parents with respect, who is
endued with truthfulness of speech and
conduct, who attends with obedience upon
the Brahimanas, who is faultless in conduct,
who never behaves with anger towards kine
and towards the Brahmanas, who performs
every duty, who serves his preceptors with
reverence, who is devoted for his whole life


to‘truth and to gifts, and who is always |


forgiving towards all transgressions against
himself, who is mild and self-controlled, who
is fuil of respect for the celestials, who is
hospitable to all guests, who is gifted with
mercy,—-indeed, he who is adorned with
these attributes,—succeeds in attaining to
the eternal region of kine.


13—14. He who is sullied with adultery,
sees not such a region; nor he who is a
destroyer of his preceptor; nor he who
speaks falsely or indulges in idle vaunts ;
noc he who always disputes with others ;
noc he who acts with hostility towards the
Bcrahmanas. Indeed, that wicked man who
is sullied with such faulis cannot even see
these regions of happiness ; nor he who in-
juces his friends; nor he who is guileful;
‘nor he who is ungrateful ; nor he who is a
cheat; nor he who is crooked in conduct ;
nor he who is a disregarder of religion ;
nor he who is a slayer of Brahmanas.
Such men cannot see in even imagination


163


the region of Kine that is the abode of only
the pious.


15. { have told you every thing parti-
culacly about the regions of tine, O king of
the celestials. Hear now, O you of a hun-
dred sacrifices, the merit of persons who ace
engaged in making gifts of kine.


16. He who makes gifts of kine, after
purchasing them with money obtained by
inheritence or acquired by fair means, at-
tains, as the fruit of such an act, to many
regions of endless happiness.


17. He who makes a gift of a cow,
having acquired it with money, won at dice,
enjoys happiness, O Shakea, for ten thou-
sand celestial years.


18. He who acquires a cow as his share
of ancestral riches is said to acquire her legi-
timately. Such a cow may be given away.
They who make’gifts of kine so acquired,
obtain innumerable endless regions of
eternal happiness,


19. ‘That person who having acquired a
cow in gift makes a gift of her with a pure
heart, succeeds, forsooth, O lord of Sachi, in
obtaining eternal regions of beatitude.


20. ‘That person who with controlled
senses speaks the truth from bis birth and
who endures everything at the hands of his
preceptor and of the Brahmanas, and who
practises fergiveness,. gains an eud that is
equal to that af kine,


zt. Improper words, O ford of Sachi,
should never be addressed to a Brahmana,
One, again, should not, in even his mind,
do an injury to a cow. One should, ia his
conduct, imitate the cow, and show mercy
towards the cow.


22. Hear, O Shakra, of the fruits which
truthful persons enjoy. Hf such a person
gives away a singte cow, that one cow be-
comes a thousand-fold.


23. If a Kshatriya endued with suely
qualifications, makes a gift of a single cow,
his merit equals that of a Brahtrana’s.
‘That single cow, Hsten, O Shakra, which
such a Kshatriya gives away produces ag
much merit as the single cow that a Bralt-
mana gives away does under similar cit-


cumstances, This is the issue of the scrip-
tures.
24. Hf a Vaishya, endued with similar


accomplishments, were to make a gift of a
single cow, that cow would equal five hun-
dred kine. If a Shudra enduéd with humility
were to make a gift of a cow, such cow
would be equal to a. hundred and twenty-
five kine.


25.- Given to penances and truth, versed
in scriptures through dutiful services done to


164


his preceptor, gifted with forgiving aature,
engaged in the adoration of the deities,
possessed of a tranquil soul, pure, entigh-
tered, observant of all duties, and freed
from every sort of egotism, that man who
makes a gift of a cow td a Brahmrana, for-
sooth, acquires great merit through that act
of his, véz., the gift, according to proper
rites, of a cow giving ptofywse milk. Hence,
one, with singleness of devotion, observant
of truth, and engaged in humbly serving
be preceptor, should always make gifts of
ine.


27. Wear, O Shakra, what the merit is
of that person who, duly studying the
Vedas, shows respect for kine, wha always
becomes glad on seeing kine, and who
since his bicth always bows his head to
kine. S

28. “The merit which one wins by ecle-
brating the Rajasuya sacrifice, the merit
that one acquires by making gifts of heaps of
gold, that bigh merit is acquired by a person
who shows such respect for kine. Wirtaous
Rishis and great persons crowned with suc-
cess have satd so.


29. Given to truth, possessed of a tran-
quil soul, free from cupidity, always truth-
ful in speech, and behaving with respect
towards kine with the steadiness of a vow,
the man who, for a whole year, before him-
self taking any food, regularly presents
some food to kine, acquirés the merit, by
such an act, of the gift of a thousand kine.


30. ‘That man who takes only one meat
a day and who gives away the entire quan<
tity of his other meal to kine,—that man,
who thus respects kine with the steadiness
of a vow and shows such mercy towards
them,~enjoys for ten years unlimited
happiness,

3. That man who takes himself only
one meata day and with the other meal
saved for some time purchases a cow and
makes a gift of it, acquires, through that
gift, O you of a hundred sacrifices, the
eternal merit of the gift of as many kine as
there are hairs on the body of that single
cow so given away,


32. These are sayings about the merits
that Brabmanas acquire by making gifts of
kine. Listen now to the merits that [Ksha-
ttiyas may acquire. It has been said that
a Kshatriya, by purchasing a cow in this
manner and making a gift of it to a Brah-
miana, acquires great happines for five
years. A Vaishya, by such conduct, wins
voly. half the merit of a Kshatriyas, and a
Shudra, by such conduct, wins half the
merit that a Vaistya does.


33. ‘hat man who sells himself and
witt the proceeds thereof purchases kine


MANASHARATA.


and gives thent away to Brahnranas, enjoys
happiness in Heaven for as lony a period a$
kine are seen on Earth.


34-35. It has been said, O highly
blessed one, that a reyion of eternal -happt-
ness exists in every hair of such kine as are
purchased with the proceeds obtained by
selling oneself. ‘Phat man who having ac-
quired kine by battle makes gifts of then,
acquires as much meré as be who makes
gifts of kine after having bought the same
with the proceeds of selling oneself. ‘Shae
man who, in the abseirce of kine, niakes a@&
gift of a cow made of sesame seeds, corr-
trolling his senses the while, is saved by
such a cow front every sort of calamity or


distress. Such a man sports in great
happiness.
36. The mere gift of kine is mot fraught


with merit. The considerations of worthy
recipients, of time, of the kind of kine, and
of the ritual to be observed, should be seen.
One should determine the proper time for
making a gift of kine. One should also
determine the distinctive qualifications of
both Brahmanas and of kine themselves.
{Kine should not be given to one in whose
house they are likely to suffer from fire or
the sun,


37. One who is rich in Wedic learning,
who is of pure birth, who is gifted with a
tranquil soul, who is given to the celebration
of sacrifices, who fears the perpetration of,
sin, whois gifted wih varied kmowledye,
who is eompasstoiate towards kine, who is
mild in conduet, who gives protection to alk
who seek it of him, ard who has no means
of tivelihood assigned to him, is considered
as a proper person for receiving a gift: of
kine.


38. Toa Brahmana who has no means
of livelilrood, to him while he is want of food
for purposes of agriculture, for a ehild born
on account of Homa, fer the purposes of his
preceptor, for the sustenance of a child born
should a cow be given. Indeed, the gift
should be made at a proper time and in a
proper place,


39. Those kine, O Shakra, whose dispo-
sitions are well known, which have been
won as honoraria for knowledge, ot which
have been bought in exchange for other
animals (such as goats, sheep, etc)., or
which have been got by prowess of arms, or
obtained as marriage-dower, or which have
been acquired by being rescued from situa-
tions of danger, or which, their poor owners,
being unable to maintain them, have been
made over by careful keep, is one’s house
with the wish of remaining there, are, foc
such reasons, considered as proper objects
of gift,


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


4o. Those Kthe which are strong of body, 1


which have good dispositions, and which
emit a sweet fragrance, are highly spoken
of in the matter of gifts. As Ganga is the
foremost of all rivers, so is a Kapila the
foremost of all kine.


41. Abstaining from all food and sub-
sisting only upon water for three nights, and
sleeping for the same time upon the naked
earth, one should make gifts of kine to
Brahmanas after having pleased them with
other presents, Such kine, freed from
every vice, should, at the same time, be ac-
companied by healthy calves. Having
made the gift, the giver should live for the
next thfee days successively jon food con-
sisting only of the products of the cow.


42. By giving away a gaod-natured
cow, that quietly allows herself to be milked,
that always brings forth living and healthy
calves, and that does not fly away from the
owner’s house, the givér enjoys happiness
in the next world for as many years
as there are hairs on her body.


43. Likewise, by giving toa Brahmana
a bull that is capable of carrying heavy
loads, that is young and strong and quiet,
that quietly bears the yoke of the plough,
and that is possessed of such energy as is
sufficient to undergo even great labour, one
acquires such regions as are his who gives
away ten kine,


44. That person who rescues kine and
Brahmanas in the forest, O Kaushika, is
himself rescued from every sort of danger.
Hear what his merit is.


45. The merit such a man wins is equal
to the eternal merit of a Horse-sacrifice.
Such a person acquires whatever end he
desires at the hour of death.


46. For such an act a man acquires
many a region of happiness,—in fact, what-
ever happiness he seeks in his heart.


47. Indeed, such a man permitted by
kine, lives honoured in every region of
happiness. That man who follows kine
every day in the forest with this intention,
himself living the while on grass and cow-
dung and leaves of trees, his heart freed
from desire of fruit, his senses controlled
from every improper object, and his mind
purified,—that man--O you of a hundred
sacrifices, lives happily freed from the con-
trol of desire in my region or in any other
region of happiness that he wishes, in the
company of the celestials.


165
CHAPTER LXXIV.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA),
_ Continusd.


Indra said :—


1. 1 desire to know; O Grandfather,
what the end is of his who. consciously
steals a cow or who sells one from motives
of cupidity.


4


The Grandfather said :— wo


2. Hear of the consequences that befall.
those persons who steal a cow for killing her
for food or selling her for money, or making
a gift of her to a Brahmana.


3. He who, without being. governed by
the restraints of the Scriptures, sells a cow,
or kills one, or eats the flesh of a cow, or
they who, forjthe sake of money, allow a
person to kill kine,—all these, vzz., he that
kills, he that eats, and he that allows the
destruction,—rot in hel] for as many years
as there are hairs on the body of the .cow
so killed.


5. Oyouof great power, those sins and
those kinds of faults that have been'said to
attach to one which obstructs a Brahmana’s |
sacrifice, are said to attach to the sale and
the theft of kine. £4 , ;


6. That man: who having stolen a cow
makes a gift of her to a Brahmana, enjoys
happivess in Heaven as the reward of the
gift but suffers misery in Well for the sin of
theft for the same period. .


7. Gold has been said to form = pres
sent, O you of great splendour, in.’ gifts of
kine. Indeed, gold has been said to be
the best present in all sacrifices. :


8. By making a gift of kine one is said
to rescue his ancestors to seventh degree as
also his descendants te the seventh degree.
By giving away kine with the presents of
gold, one rescues his ‘ancestors and de-
scendants of doubdie the number,


- 9. The gift of gold is the best of gifts.
Gold is, again, the best present. Gold is a
great purifier, O Shakra, and is, indeed,
the best of all purifying objects.


to. O you of a hundred sacrifices, gold
has been said to be the purifier of -the
entire family of him who gives it away. I
have thus, O you of great splendour. told
you in brief of Dakhsina.


Bhishma said :—

11. ‘This was said by the Grandfather to
Indra, O chief of Bbarata’s race.. Indra
delivered it to Dasharatha, and Dasharatha
in his turn to his son Rama, ~


166


12, Rama of Raghu’s.raee gave it to his
dear and illustcious brother Lakshmana.
While living in the forest, Lakshmana im-
patted it to the Rishis.


13. It has then described from genera-
tion to generation, for the Rishis of rigid
vows held it amongst themselves as also the
pious kings of tlre Earth,

14. ‘My preceptor, O Yudhishthirca,
comniunicated it to me. That Brahmana
who recites it every day in the conclaves
of Brahmanas, in sacrifices, or at gifts of
kine, or when two persons meet together,
acquires hereafter many regions of unend-
ing happiness where he always lives with
the celestials as his companions.


16. The holy Brahman, the supretne
Lord, had said so.


CHAPTER LXXV.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA),—
Continued,
Yudhishthira said —


t. [have been greatly assured, O you
of power, by you thus discoursing to me of


duties. I shall, however, express the
doubts I have. Explain them to me, O
gcandfather.


2. What are the fruits, described in the
scriptures, of the vows that men observe.
Of what nature are the fruits, O you of
great splendour, of observances of other
Kinds? What, again, are the fruits of one’s
Vedic studies,


3. Whatare the fruits of gifts, and what


those ef keeping the Vedas in memory ?
What are the fruits of teaching the Vedas ?
1 wish to know all this.


4. What, O grandfather, are the merits
of the non-acceptance of gifts in this world.
What fruits does one enjoy who makes gifts
of knowledge ?


5. What merits do persons enjoy who
perform the duties of their order, as also
do heroes who do not retreat from the
battle-field. What are the fruits of the
observance of purity and of the practice of
Brahmacharya ?


6. What are the merits of serving the
parents, What also are the merits of
serving preceptors and teachers, and what
the merits of mercy and kindness ?


7. wish to know all this, O grand-
father, in sooth and in particular, O you,
who are conversant with all the scriptures.
Great is my curiosity.


MAHABHARATA,


Bhishma said :— ‘


8. He enjoys eternal regions of happ?-
ness, who, having properly commenced @
Veata (vow) completes its observance ac-
cording to the scriptures.


9. The fruits of restraints, O king, are
visible even in this world. These rewards
that you have acquired are those of Niya-
mas and sacrifices.


to. The fruits of the Vedic studies are
seen both in this world and the next. The
person who is given to the study of the
Vedas is seen to sport happily both -in this
world and in the region of Brahma.


11, Listen now to me, O king, as F tell
you in detail what the fruits are of self-
control. The self-controiled are happy
everywhere. The self-controiled always
enjoy that happiness which results from the
absence or subjugation of desire.


12, The self-controlled can go every-
where at will. The self-controlled can
destroy every enemy. Forsooth, tle self-
controlled succeed in getting everything
they seek. ~


13, ‘Lhe self-controlled, O son of Pandu,
obtain the fruition of every desire. Lhe
self-controlled and the forgiving share
the happiness that men ehjoy in Heaven
through penances and prowess, (in arms),
through gift, and through various sacri-
fices, :


14. Self-control is more meritorious than
gift. A giver, after making a gift to
the Brahmanas, may yield to the influence
of anger. A self-controlled man, however,
never gives way to anger. Hence self-con-
trol is superior to gift. ‘That man who
makes gifts without yielding to anger, suc-
ceeds int acquiring eternal regions of happi-
ness.


16. Anger destroys the merit of a gift,
Hence self-control is superior to gilt.


17. There are ten thousand invisible
places, O monarch, in Heaven, Existing
in allthe regions of Heaven, these places
belong tothe Rishis. Persons, leaving this
world, attain tothem and become changed
into deities. ;


18. O king, the great’ Rishis repaie
there, helped only by their self-control, and
as the end of their efforts to attain to a
region of superior happiness, Hence, self-
control is supetior to gilt, : ;


Ig. The person who becomes a precep-
tor, and who duly adores the fire taking
leave of all his tiseries in this world,
enjoys endless happiness, O king, in the
region of Brahma.


“ ANUSHASANA PARVA,


#0. . That man who, having himself read
the Vedas, imparts a knowledge thereof to
righteous disciples, and who praises the acts
of his own preceptor, acquires great hanors
tn Heaven.


2t. That Kshatriya whe is given to the
studies of the Vedas, to the celebration of
sacrifices, to the making of gifts, and who
rescues the fives of others in battle, similar-
ly acquires great honors in Heaven.


‘22. The Vaishya who, observes the
duties of his caste, makes gifts, reaps as the
fruit of those gifts, a crowning reward.
‘Yhe Shudra who duly observes the duties
of his order, acquires Heaven as the reward
of such services.


23. Various kinds of heroes have been
spoken of. Listen to me as I explain to
you what the rewards are that they attain
to, ‘Ihe rewards are fixed of a hero be-
faonging to a heroic race.


24. There are heroes of sacrifice, heroes
of self-control, heroes of truth, and others.


equally entitled to to the name of hero..


There are heroes of battle, and heroes of
gift or liberality among men.


25. There are many persons who may
be called the heroes of the Sankhya faith,
there are many others that are called
heroes of Yoga. There are others who are
considered as heroes in the forest-life, of
domesticity, and of renunciation.


26. Likewise, there are others who are
called heroes of the intellect, and also
heroes of forgiveness, ‘here are other men
who live in tranquillity and who are consi-
dered as heroes of virtue.


27. There are various other kinds of
fyeroes who practise various other kinds of
vows and. observances. There are heroes
given to the study of the Vedas, and heroes
devoted to the teaching of the,same.


28. There are, again, men who come to
be regarded as heroes for the devotion with
which they wait upon and serve their pre-
ceptors, as indeed, heroes in respect of the
respect they show for their fathers. There
are heroes in obedience to mothers, and
heroes in the life of mendicancy they lead.


29. There are heroes in the matter of
hospitality to guests, whether living as
hermits or as house-holders. All these
heroes attain to very superior regions of
happiness which are, of course, acquired by
them as the rewards of their own deeds.


30. Keeping all the Vedas in memory, ”


or ablutions performed in all the sacred
waters, may or may not be equal to telling
the Truth every day in one’s life.


167


31. A thousand Horse- sacrifices and
Truth were once weighed in the balance.
It was seen that Truth weighed heavier than
a thousand. Horse-sacrifices.


32... It is by Truth that the Sun is giving
heat; it is by Truth that fire burns up}; it is
by. Truth that the winds blow; indeed,
everything rests upon Truth.


33. lt is Truth that pleases the deities,
the departed manes, and the Brahmanas,
Truth has been said to be the highest
duty. Therefore, no one should ever
transgress Truth, -


34. The -Munis are all given to Truth.
Their prowess depends upon Truth. The
also swear by Truth. Hence ‘ruth is
pre-eminent. All truthful men, O chief of
Bharata’s race, succeed by their truthful
ness in acquiring Heaven and sporting
there in happiness, ' "S


35. -Self-control is the attainment of
the reward that attaches to Truth. I have
described it with my whole heart. The:
man of humble heart who is endued with’
self-control, forsooth, acquires gréat honors
in Heaven. ry 2

36—37. Listen now to me, O king as
T explain to you the merits of Brahma.
charyya. That man who practises the vow
of Brahmacharyya from his birth to the
time of his Death, know, O king, has
nothing unattainable! Many millions of
Rishis are living in the region of Brahma. .


38—39. All of them, while here, .were
given to Truth, and self-control, and had
their vital seed drawn up. The vow of
Brahmacharyya, O king, duly observed by
a Brahmana, is sure to dissipate ali his
sins, ‘The Brahmana is said to be a burn.
ingsfire, Io those Brahmanas that are
given to penances, the deity of fire becomes
visible.


40. If a Brahmcharin gives way to
anger on account of any slight, the chief
of the deities himself trembles in fear.
This is the visible fruit of the vow of Brah«
macharyya that is observed by the Rishis.


41—42. Listen tome, .O Yudhishthira,
what the merit is of the worship of the
father and the mother. He who dutifully
serves his father without ever provoking him
in anything, or similarly serves his mother
or (elder) brother or other senior or precep+
tor, it should be known, O king, acquires a
residence in Heaven. ‘The man of purified
soul, on account of such service done to his’
seniors, has never to even see Hell, =~


168
CHAPTER LXXVL


{ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—=
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—

- 4 & wish, O king, to hear you discourse
in detail upon those high ordinances which
regulate gifts of kine, for it is by making
gifts (of kine) according to those ordinances
that one acquires innumerable regions of
eternat happiness.


Bhishma said :—

2.. There is no gift, O king, that is
higher in point of merit than the gift of
kine. A cow, lawfully acquired, if given
away, immediately rescues the entire family
of the giver. —

3. That ritual which sprang for the
benefit .of the pious, was subsequently
declared for the sake of all creatures, That
.situal has come down from primeval time.
{t existed even before it was declared. In-


deed, O king, listen to me as [ recite to |


you that ritual which affects the gift of
kine.


4. Formerly, when a number of kine was
brought (before him), king Mandhatri,
filled with doubt about the ritual he should
observe, properly questioned Veihaspati for
an explanation of that doubt.


Vrihaspati said :—


5. Duly observing restraints all the while,
the giver of kine should, on the previous
day, properly honor the Brahmanas and
appoint the time of gift. As for the kine
to be given away, they should be of the
Clase calted Rohini. ;


7 6
6, The kine also should be addressed
with the words—Samange and Vahule—
Entering the fold where the kine are kept,
the following Shrutis shonld be uttered :—


9. The cow is my mother. The bull is
my father. (Give me) Heaven and Earthly
prosperity. The cow is my refuge.—En-
tering the fold and acting thus, the giver
should pass the night there. He should
again utter the formula when actually giving
away the kine. -


8. The giver, thus living with the kine in
the fold without doing anything to cortrol
theic freedom, aed lying down on the naked
earth, becomes readily cleansed of all his
sins on account of his bringing himself down
to a condition of perfect similitude with the
kine.

9. When the Sun rises in the morning,
you should give away the cow, accompanied
by her calf anda bull. As the reward of


MAHABHARATA.


‘such a "deed, you will surely attain to the


celestial region. You will also enjoy the
blessings shown by the Mantras.


10.. The Mantras contain these refer»
ences to kine: Kine are gifted with strength
and energetic exertion. Kine are also wise.
They are the root of that immortality which
sacrifice yields. They are the root of alt
energy. ‘They are the steps by which
earthly prosperity is gained. hey are the
eternal course of the universe. ‘They multi-
ply one’s race.


tr. Let the kine dissipate my sins.
They have in them the nature of both the
Sun and the Moon. Let them help me in
the attainment of the celestial region. Let
them come to me, as a mother takes to her
children. May I enjoy all other blessings
which have not been named in the Mantras
I have uttered.


12. For alleviating or curing phthisis
and other wasting diseases, and for achiev«
ing freedom from the body, if a person takes
the help of the five products of the cow, kine
confer blessings upon the person like the
tiver Saraswati-~Ye kine, ye are always
conveyers of all sorts of merit. Pleased
with me, do ye assign a:‘desicable end for
me.


13. I have to-day become what ye are.
By giving you away, I really give myself
away.—Ye do not belong to him who gives
you away.’ Ye have now become mine.
Possessed of the nature of both the Sun and
the Moon, do ye cause both the giver and
the receiver to shine with all kinds of pros-
perity.

14. The giver should duly utter the
words found in the first part of the above
Verse, ‘The twice-born . recipient, conver-
sant with the ritual regulating the gift of
kine, should, when receiving the kine in
gift, utter the words found in the latter hal
of the above Verse, !


_15.. Tlie man who, instead of a cow, gives
away the usual value thereof or cloths or
gotd, is considered as the giver of a cow.
The giver, when giving away the usual.
value of a cow, should utter the words,—
This cow with face upturned is being given
away. Do you accept her.—The man who
gives away cloths should utter the words,
~—Bhavitavya—(this should be rezarded
as representing a cow), The man who
gives faway gold should utter the word,
Vaishnavi ¢.e., the gold is of the form and
nature of a cow.


16, These are the words that should be
uttered according to the kind of gift mens
tioned above. The reward that was reaped
by making gifts of kine is residence in the
celestial region for six and thirty thousand


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


years, eight thousand years, and twenty
. thousand years respectively.
t7. These are the merits, respectively, of
pifts of things as substitates
While, about him who gives an actual cow
all the merits that attach to gifts of kine
become his at only the eighth step of the
recipient.


18. He who gives an actual cow be-
‘comes gifted with righteous conduct in this |


world. . He who gives the value of a cow
becomes freed from every sort of fear,
who gives a cow never suffers from sorrow.
All the three, as also they who regularly


perform their abtations and othec acts at |
early dawn, and he who is well conversant -
with the Mahabharata, it is well known |


attain to the regions of Vishnu and Soma.


19. Having given away a cow, the giver |
should, for three nights, adopt the vaccine |


vow, and pass one night with kine. Begin-
ning again. from that tunation, numbering
the eighth, named Kamya, he should pass
three nights, living exclusively on mitk and
the wine and dung of the cow.


20. By giving away a bull, one acquires
the merit of Brabmacharyya, By. piving
away two kine, one acquires the mastery of
the Vedas. ‘That man who celebrates a
Sacrifice and makes gifts of kine according
to the ritual laid down, attains to many
great regions, ‘hese, however, are not at-
tainable by the person who does not know
that citual.


21. That man who gives away even a
single cow. which gives ‘profuse milk, ac-
quires the merit of giving away alt desirable
opjects on Karth collected together. What
_Meore should be said of the gift of many
such kine as give Havya and Racya on ac-
count of their fall udders? Phe merit which
belongs to the gift of superior oxen is greater
than that of the gift of kine.


22. Qne should not, by giving a know-
ledge of this ritual, benefit a person who is
not his disciple or who does not observe
vows, or who is bereft of faith or who is
possessed | of a Crooked understanding.
Indeed this religion is a mystery, which
_many people do not know, One who
knows it should not speak of it everywhere.


23. There are, inthe world, many men
who have no faith, ‘There are among men


many persons wha are mean and who
resemble Rakshasas. ‘This religion, if
given to them, would lead to evil. {t would


produce equal evil if given to such sinful
men as are atheists,

24. Listen to me, O king, as I recite to
you the names of those pious kings who
have attained to regions of great happiness
as the reward of those gifts of kine which


22


of kine. |


He '


169


s they made according to the instructions of
Vrihaspati.

25. Ushinara, Vishwagashwa, Nriga,
Bhagiratha, the celebrated Mandhatei the
son of Yuavanashwa, king Muchukunda,
Bhuridyumna, Naishadha, Somaka. Puru«.
tavas, .emperog Bharata te whose race
belongs ali the Bharatas, the heroic Rama
tha son of Dasharatha, and many other
celebrated kings of great deeds, and also
king Dilipa of widelysknown deeds, all,
on accosnt of their gilts of kine according to
the ritual, attained to Heaven. King Mane
dhatri, was always observant of sacrifices,
gifts, penances royal duties, and gifts of
kine,


18. Therefore, O son of Pritha, do you
also keep in mind, those instructions of
Vrihaspati which [ have recited to you.
Having obtained the kingdom of the
Kurus, do you, with a cheerful. heart, make |
gifts of good kine to foremost of Brah«
manas,


VYaishampayana said :—

29, Thus addressed by Bhishma on the
subject of properly making gifts of kine,
king YWudhishthira did all that Bhishma
desired. Indeed, king Yudhishthira bore in
inind the whole of that religion which the
preceptor of the gods imparted to the Royat
Mandhatri.


30. Yudhishthira from that time began
to always make gifts of kine and to maine
tain himself with grains of barley and cows
dung as both his food and drink, The king
also began to sleep from that day on the
naked earth, and possessed of controlled
soul and resembling a bull in conduct, he
became the foremost of monarchs.


3t. The Kara ting from that day be.
came very attentive to kine and always
adored them, singing their praises. From
that day, the king gave up the practice of
yoking kine to his cars. Wherever he had
occasion to go, he proceeded on cars drawn
by horses of good breed,


CHAPTER LXXVII,


ant 1
(ANUSHASANA PARVA).—
Continued.


Vaishampayana said:—~ .—
1. King Yudhishthira gifted with humi-
plity, once again asked the royal son of


Pera on the subject of gifts of kine in
UY ;


170
{


The king said :~

2. Do you, O Bharata, once more des-
cribe to me in full the merits of giving away
kine. Indeed, O hero, I have not been sa-
ti ted with hearing your nectar-like words.


Vaishampayana said:

_‘Fhus accosted by king Yudhishthira
the just, Shantanu’s sen began to describe
to him once again, in full, the merits of the
gift of kine.


Bhishma said :—

4. By giving to a Brahmaia a cow
having a calf, gifted with docility and other
virtues, young in years and covered round
with a piece of cloth, one is purged of all his
sins.


5» There are many regions which have
ho sun, One who makes the gift of a cow
has not to go there,


6, That man, however, who gives to a
Brahmana a cow that cannot drint of eat,
that has her milk dried up, that has
weakened senses and that is diseased and
overcome with decrepitude, and that may,
therefore, be compared to a tank whose
water has been dried up,—indeed, the man
who gives such a cow to a Bralimana and
thereby inflicts only pain and disappoint.
ment upon him, has cestaiuly to enter into
dark Hell.


7. That cow which is weathful and vici-
ous, or diseased, or weak, or which has been
brought without the price agreed upon
having been paid, or which would only
afflict the twice-born recipient with distress
and disappointment, should never be given,
‘The regions such a man may acquire would
not give him any happiness or energy,


8. Only such kite as ate strong, gifted
with good behaviour, young in years, and
possessed of odour, are highly spoken of by
all. Indeed, as Ganga is the foremost of
all rivers, so is a Kapila cow the foremost
of all lkine.


Yudhishthira said:


g. Why, O grandfather, do the righte-
ous highly speak of the gift of a Kapila cow
when all goud kine that are given away
should be considered as equal? O you of
great power, I wish to hear what the
Superiority is of a Kapila cow. You are
indeed, competent to discourse to me on
this subject.


Bhishma said :—

10. Ihave, O son, heard old men recite
this history about the circumstancess under
which the Kapila cow was created. I shall
recite that old history to you. :


MAHABHARATA,


ii. Formerly the Self-create Brahma
commanded the Rishi Daksha, sayintg,—
Do you createliving creatures.—For doing
good to creatures, Daksha, first of all
created food.


t2. As the deities livé upon nectar, so
all living creatures, O powerful one, live
upon the food assigned by Daksha.


13. Among all objects mobile and immo-
bile, the mobile are superior. Among mo-
bile creatures, Brahmanas are su; rior.
The sacrifices are all set upon them.


14. It is by sacrifice that Soma is go's
Sacrifice has been fixed upon kine. ‘Lhe
gods become pleased through sacrifices.
‘The mieans of livelihood were created first,
creatures came fiext.


15. As soon as creatures were born,
they began to cry aloud for food. All of
them: then approached their creator who
was to give them food, like children ap-
proaching their parents.


16. Approved of the desire of all lis
creatures, the holy lord of all creatures,
vtz., Daksha, for the sake of his creatures,
himself drank a quantity of nectar.


17.. He became pleased with the nectar,
he drank and thereupon an erucation came
out, spreading an excellent odour all around.
That erucation, Daksha saw gave birth toa
cow which he named Surabhi. This Sura-
bhi was thus a daughter of his, that had
come out of his mouth.


18. That cow called Surabhi gave birth
to a number of daughters who became the
mothers of the world. They were gold-hued,
and were all Kapilas. ‘They were the mears
of livelihood for all creatures.


19. As those Kine, whose complexion re
sembled that of nectar, began to pour milk,
the forth of that milk arose and began to
spread on all sides as when the waves of a
running river dashing against one another,
sufficient froth is produced that spreads ont
all sides,


20. Some of that froth fell, from the
mouths of the calves that were sucking,
upon the head of Mahadeva who was then
sitting on the Earth. ‘The powerful Maha-
deva thereupon, stricken with anger, locked
at those kine.


21. With that third eye of his which
adorns his forehead, he seemed to burn
those kine as he eSpied them. Like the Sun
living masses of clouds with various colors,
the energy that, came out from the third eye
of Mahadeva produced, O king, various
complexions in those kine. Those amongst
them, however, which succeeded in ese
caping from the looks of Mahadeva by


entering the region of Soma, remained of


*


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


the-same color with which they were born,
_ for no change was produced in their color.
Seeing that Mahadeva had become highly
wroth, Daksha, the Jord of all creatures,
addressed him, saying,—You have, O great
deity, been drenched with nectar. The
milk or the froth that escapes from the
_ mouths of calves sucking their dams is
never considered as impure. ‘The Moon,
after drinking the nectar, pours it once
more. It is not, therefore, regarded as
impure. :


25. Likewise, the milk that these kin
give, being born of nectar; should not be
considered as impure. ‘he wind can never
become impure. Fire can never become
impure. Gold can never become impure.
The Ocean can never become impure. ‘


26. The Nectar, even when drunk by
the gods, can never become impure. Like-
wise, the milk of a cow, even when her
udders are sucked by her calf, can never
become impure. These kine will support
all these worlds with the milk they will
give and the clarified butter that will be
made from it.


27. AMl creatures wish to enjoy the
saered wealth, at one with nectar, that kine
possess,—~-Having said these words, the lord
of creatures, Daksha, made a present to
M shadeva of a bull with certain kine.


28. Daksha pleased Rudra, UO Bharatay
with that present. Mahadeva, thus pleased,
made that bull his career. And it was after
the form of that bull that Mahadeva adopt-
ed the emblem on the standard floating on
his battle-car. ‘Therefore it is that Rudra
came to be known as the bull-bannered
deity.

2g. It was on that occasion also that the
celestials, in a body, made Mahadeva the
lord of animals, Indeed, the great Rudra
became the Master of kine and is named as
the bull-emblemed deity.


30. Hence, O king, the gift of kine is
considered as primarily desirable of Kapila
kine which are endued with great energy
and possessed of unchanged colour,


3t. Thus are kine the foremost of all
creatures in the world. It is from them
that the|food of all the worlds has emanated.
They have Rudra for their lord. They
yield (nectar) in the form of milk, They
are auspicious and sacred, and grantors of
every wish and givers of life. A person by
making a gift of a cow is considered as
making a gift of every article that is te be
enjoyed by men.


‘92, That man who, wishing to acquire
prosperity, reads with @ pure heart and
body these Verses on the ofigin of kine, be-


{


I


17L-


comes purged of allhis sins and acquires
prosperity and children and wealth and
animals. ;


33. He who makes a gift of a cow, O
king, always succeeds in winning the merits
of gifts of Havya and Kavya, of the offer of
oblations of water to the departed Manes, of
religious acts whose performance brings
peace and happiness, of the gift of vehicles
and cloths, and of cherishing of children’
and the old.


Vaishampayana said :—

34. tearing these words of his grande
father, Pritha's son, vig., the royal Yudhish«
thira of Ajamida’s. race, uniting with his
brothers, began to make gifts ef both bulls
and kine of different colors to foremost . of
Brahmanas,


"35. Indeed, for getting regions of felicity
in the next, and acquiring great fame, king
Yudhishthira celebrated many sacrifices ,
and, as sacrificial presents, gave away hun-
dreds of thousands of kine to such Brah-°
manas.” . : :


le


CHAPTER LXXVIIL.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA}.—.
; Continued,


Bhishma said :—


1-2, Formerly, king Saydasa born of.
Ikshaku’s race, that foremost of eloquent
men, on one occasion approached his family
riest, vig., Vashishtha, that foremost of
ishis, crowned with ascetic success, capa-
ble of passing through every region, the
receptacle of Brahma, and gifted with
eternal life, and put to him the following
question,


Saudasa said :—

3. O holy one, O sinless one,what is
that in the three worldswhich is sacred and
by reciting which at all times a uran may
win high merit ?


Bhishma ‘said :-—

4. Having first bowed to kine and puri--
fied himself, the learned Vashishtha des-
eribed to king Saudvsa who stood betory
him with head bent in reverence, the mystere
about kine, a subject that is fraught with
results highly beneficial to all persons, _


Vashishtha said :—


5. Kine, are always fragrant. The per-
fume of the Amyris agallochun+ comes out
of their bodies, Kitfe are the great refuge


t


[192


of all creatures. Kine form. the greet
source of blessings to at. :


6. Kine ‘are the Past and the Future.
Kine are the root of eternal growth. Kine
ate the root of Prosperity. Anything given
to kine is never fost. ;


7. Kine from the highest food. They
are the best Havi for the eelestials. ‘The
Mantras called Swaha and Vashat are for-
ever established in kine.


8. Kine form the fruit of saerifices. Sae-
rifices are established in kine. [Kine are
the Future and the Past, and the Sacrifices
rest on them.


9. Morning and evening kine give to
the Rishis, O foremost of men, Hiavi
for use it Homa, G yow of great efful-
gence.


10. They who make gifts of kine suc-
ceed in getting over alb sits which they may
have committed and all kinds of dangers
into which they may fall, O you of great
power.


11, The man_ possessing ten kine and
making a gift of one cow, one possessing a
hundred kine and making’a gift of ter kine,
and one possessing a thousand kine and
making a gift of a hundred kine, atl acquire
the same measure of merit.


12, That man who, having hundred
kine, does not establish a domestic fire for
daily worship,*that man who though pos-
sessed of a thousand kine does not celebrate
sacrifices, and that man who though having
riches acts as a miser, are all three consi-
dered as not worthy of any respect.


13. Those men who make gifts of Kapila
kine with their calves and with vessels of
white brass for milking them,—kine, which
are not vicious and whieh, while given away,
are wrapped round with cloths,—conquer
both this and the next world.


14—15. Such persons as make gift of a
young buil, that has all its senses, strong,
and that may be considered as the foremost
one among hundreds of herds, that has
large horns adorned with ornaments, to a
Brahmana endued with Vedic lore, succeed,
O scorcher of foes, in acquiring great pros-
perity and riches each time they are born ip
the world. ‘


16. One should never go to bed without
reciting the names of kine. Nor should one
vise from bed in the morning without simi-
larly reciting the names of kine. Morning
and evening one should bend one’s head
respectfully to kine. As the result of such
deeds, one is sure to acquire great pros-
perity.


_ MAHABHARATA. ,


17. One should never’ feel any repute
nanee for the urine and the dung of the
eow. One should never eat the meat of
kine. As the result of this, ome is sure to
acquire great prosperity.

18 One should always recite the names-
of kine. One should never show any dis-
regard for kine in any way. KH evil dreams
are seen, mem should recite the naines of
kine.


1@ One should always bathe, using cow-
dung. One should sit on dried cowdung,
One should never pass urine and excreta
and other secretions on cowdunyg. -.Qne
should never obstruct kine’in any way. &


20. One should eat, sitting ona cowhide
purified by dipping it in water, and then
lack towards the west. Sitting with con-
trolled speech, one should eat clarified
butter using the bare earth as his. dish,
One reaps, on account of such deeds, that
prosperity of which kine are the root.


21, One should pour libations on. the fire,
using clarified butter for purpose. One
should make Brahmanas utter blessings


upen one by presents of elarified butter.
One should make gifts of clarified butter.,.
One should also eat clarified buiter. As
the reward of such deeds one is sure to
acquire that prosperity which kine grant.


22. ‘That man who inspires a cow's. form
made of sesame seeds by uttering the Vedic
Mantras named Gomati, and then adorns
that form with every sort of gems and
makes a git of it, has never to suffer any
grief on accouat of all his. deeds of omis-
sion and commission


23. Let kine whiclr give profuse milk
and which have bons adorned with gold,—
kine vzz., that are Surabhis or the danyhrers
of Surabhis,—approach me even as rivers.
approach the ocean.


24. & always took at kine. Let kine
always look at me. Kine are ours. We
are theits. We are there where kine are.

25. “Fhus, at night or day, in weal or
woe,—at times of even great fear,—should
a@ man exclaim, By uttering such words,
be is sure to become freed from every


CHAPTER LXXEX.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued,


Vashishtha said :—


1. Whe kine which had been created in
a former age practised the hardest penan-
ces for a hundred thousand years with


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


the object of acquiring a position of great
pre-eminence.

2. Indeed, O scorcher of enemies, they
said to themselves,—We shalt, in this
world, become the best of alt kinds of
presents in sacrifices, and we shall not be
liable to be sullied with any fault.


3—4. By bathing in water mixed with
our dung, people shalt become purified. “Phe
celestiais and men shall use our dung for
the purpose: of purifying all creatures
mobile and immobile. They also who -will
give us away shall acquire those regions of
happiness which will be ours.


5. Appearing to them at the termination
of their austerities, the powerful Brahman
gave them the boons they sought, saying,—~
your desire will be fulfilled. Do you rescue

.al{ the worlds.


6. Crowned with fruition of their desires,
they all rose up,—those mothers of both
the Past and the Future. Every morning,
people should bow respectfully to kine. As
the result of this, they are sure to acquire
prosperity.

7. At the termination of their penances,
O king, kine became the refuge of the
world. It is therefore that kine are said to be
highly blessed, sacred, and the foremost of
allthings. [tis therefore that kine are said
to stay at the very head of all creatures.


8. By giving away a Kapila cow with a
calf fesembling herself, giving profuse
milk, free from every vicious habit, and
covered with a piece of cloth, the, giver
acquires great honors in the region of
Branma.


9. By giving away, a red cow witha
calf that resembles herself, giving milk,
free from every vice, and covered with a
piece of cloth, one acquires great honors in
the region of the Sun.


to, By giving away a cow of variegated
hue, with a calf similar to herself, giving
milk, free from every vice, and covered
with a piece of cloth, one acquires great
honors in the region of Soma.« ,


11. By giving away a white cow, with a
calt similar to herself, giving milx, free
from every vice, and covered with a piece
of cloth, one acquires great houors in the
region of Indra.


12. By giving away a cow of dark hue,
with a calf similar to herself, giving milk,
free from every vice, and covered with a
piece of cloth, one acquires great honors
in the region of Fire-God. :


13. By giving away a smoke-cotored
cow, with acalf similar to herself, giving
mills, free from every vice, and covered


173


with a piece ef cloth, one acquires great
honors in the tegion of Yama. .


14._ By giving away a -frothy-coloured
cow, with a calf and a vessel of white brass
for milking her, and covered with a piece
of cloth, one acquires the region of Varana.


45. By giving away a_ dust-coloured
cow, with a calf and a vessel of white brass:
for milking her, and covered with a piece
of eloth, one acquires great honors in the
region of the Wind- God. oe


16. By giving away a gold-hued cow, ~
having eyes of a tawny color, with a calf
and a vessel of white brass for making
her, and covered with a piece of cloth, one
enjoys the happiness of the region of
Kuvera. : E

17. By giving away a cow of the hue
of the smoke of straw, with calf and a vesseb
of white brass for milking her, and covered
with a piece of cloth, one acquires great
honors in the region of the departed Manes.


18. By giving away a fat cow with the
flesh of its throat hanging down and ac-
companied by her calf, one acquires easily
the high region of the Vishwedevas.


19. By giving away a Gouri cow, with
a calf similar to her, giving milk, free from
‘every vice, and covered with a piece of,cloth, ,
one acquire the region of the Vasus,.,

20. By giving away a cow of the hue
of a white blanket, with a calf and a vesset
of white brass, and covered with a piece of
cloth, one acquires, the, region, of the
Saddhyas, ~ e< 5

2%. By giving. away a bull with achuge
hump, and adorned with every, jewel, the
giver, O. king, acquires the. region, of, the.
Maruts.

22. By giving away a, blue-coloured
bull, that is full-grown in years and adorned.


. with every ornament, the giver acquires. the


regions of the celestial musigians. and.
nymphs. ; , ,

23. By giving. away a, cow with the
flesh, of her throat hanging down, and.
adorned with every ornament, the, giver,
shorn of grief, acquires the region of
Prajapati himself. o

24. That man, O king, who habitually
makes gifts of kine, proceeds, passing -
tirough the clouds, on @ sunpy car to the
celestial region and shines there it
splendour.


25. That man who habitually makes
gifts of kine is considered as the foremost of
his kind. When thus proceeding to-celestial |
region, he is received by a thousand celes-
tial damsels of beautiful hips and adorned
with handsome dresses and ornaments,


174


These girls serve him there and minister
to his detight.


26. He sleeps there in peace and is
awakened by the musical laughtee of those
gazelle-eyed maidens, the sweet notes of
their Vinas, the soft strains of their lutes,
and the sweet tinkle of their Nupuras.


27. The man who makes gifts of kine
lives in the celestial region and is honored
there for as many years as there are hairs
on the bodies of the kine he gives away.
Falling off from the celestial region.(upon


the termination of his merit}, such a man.


is barn as a man and, in fact, in a superior
family among men..


CHAPTER LXAX.
(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—


Continued.
Vashishtha said :—
1, Kine give clarified; butter and
milk. ‘hey are the sources of clarified


butter and they have originated from
_ Clarified butter. ‘Fhey are rivers of clarified
butter, and eddies of clarified butter. Let
kine ever be in my house.


2. Clarified butter is always in my heart.
Clarified butter is even established in my
navel. Clarnfied butter is in every limb of
mine. Clarified butter lives in my mind.


3. Kine are always at my front.
are always at my rear. Kine are on every
side of my body, 1 live in the midst of
kine.


4. Having purified oneself by touching
water, one should, morning and evening,
recite these Mantras every day. By this,
one is sure to be purged of all the sins one
may commit in course of the day.


5. They who make gifts of a thousand
kine, leaving this world, proceed to the
regions of the Gandharvas and the celestial
nymphs where there are many palatial
buildings made of gold and where the
celestial Ganga, called the current of Vasu,
runs,


6." Givers of a thousand kine go there
where run many rivers having milk for
their water, cheese for theic mire, and curds
for their floating moss.


7. That man who gives hundreds of
thousands of kine away according to the
ritual laid down in the scriptures, acquires
gteat prosperity (liere) and great honors in
the celestial region,


Kine |


MAHABHARATA.


8. Such a man causes both his paternal
and maternal ancestors to the tenth degree
acquire regions of great happiness, and
sanctifies his whole race. ‘


9. Kine are sacred. They are the
foremost of all things in the world. They
are indeed the refuge of the universe.
They are the mothers of the very celestials.
They are indeed incomparable. They
should be dedicated in sacriftces.


10. When going on journeys, one should
leave the kine to his lelt. Determining the
proper time, they should be given away to
worthy persons, :


it. By giving away a Kapila cow,
having large horns, accompanied by a calf
and a vessel of white brass for milking
her, and covered with a piece of cloth, one
freed from fear, enters the palace of Yama
that is;so difficult to enter.


12. One should always recite this sacred


Mantra, viz.,—Kine are of beautiful form.


Kine are of various forms. ‘hey are of
universal form. ‘They are the mothers of
the universe. O, let kine approach me.


13. There is no gift more sacred than
that of kine. ‘There is mo gift that yields |
more blessed merit. There has been nothing
equal to the cow, nor will there be anything
that will equal her.


14. With hee skin, her hair, her hornst
the hair of her tail, her milk, and her’ fat;—
with all these together,—the cow maintains
sacrifice. What thing is there that is more
useful than the cow ? 1


15. Bending my head to her with res-
pect, I worship the cow who is the mothee
of both the Past and Future, and by whom
the entire universe of mobile and immobile
creatures is sustained.


16. O best of men, I have thus recited
to you only a portion of the great merits of
kine. ‘Fhere is no gift in this world that is
superior to that of kine. ‘There is also no
refuge in this world that is higher than
kine. -


Bhishma said :—

17. Considering these words of the
Rishi Vashishtha as highly important, that
great giver of land, king Saudasa, then
made gifts of a very large number of kine
to the Brahmanas, controlling his senses all
the while, and as the result of those gifts,
the king succeeded in acquiring many
regions of happiness in the next world. —


ANUSHASANA. PARVA.


CHAPTER LXXXL
(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).=
Continned.


Yudhishthita said :—

1. Telt me, O grandfather, what is that
which is the most sacred of all sacred things
fn the world, otber than that which has been
already mentioned, and which is the great-
‘est of all purifying objects.


Bhishma said :—

_ 2 Kine are the foremost of all objects.
They are highly sacred and they save men.
With their milk and with the Mavi manu-
factured therefrom, kine sustain all creatures
in the universe. :


3. O best of the Bharatas, there is no-
‘thing that is more sacred than kine. ‘The
highest of all things in the three worlds,
kine are themselves sacred and capable of
purifying others.


4. Kine live in a region that is even.


Rrostet than the region of the ¢elestiats.
hen given away, they save their givers.
Wise men sucteed in acquiring the celestial
region by making gifts of kine.

5. Yuvanashwa’s son Mandhatri, Yayati,


and Nabhusha, used aiways to give away


kine in thousands,


6. As the reward of those gifts, they
have acquired such regions as are unattain-
able by the very celestials. ‘here is, about
{t, O sinless one, a discourse delivered of
yore. Ushail recite it to you.


7—8. Once on a time, having finished
his morning rites, the intelligent Shuka
approached with a controlled mind his
father, that foremost of Rishis, wiz., the
Isiand-born Krishna, who knows the dis-
tinction between the superior and the in-
ferior, and saluting him,- said,—-What is
that sacrifice which appears to you as the
foremost of all sacrifices ?


9. What is that act by doing which wise
men succeed in acquiring the highest
region? What is that sacred deed by which
the celestials enjoy divine happiness ?


10.
fice as sacrifice? Whatis that upon which
sacrifice rests ? What is that which is con-
sidered as the best by the deities? What
is that sacrifice which is above the sacrifices
of this world? Do you also tell me, O
father, what is that Which is the most sacred
of all things,


tit. Having heard these words of his
son, O chief of Bharata’s race, Vyasa, the
foremost of all persons knowing duties, said
as follows to him,


“energy.


What forms the character of sacri--


175


Vyasa said :=

12. Kine form the support of all creas
tures. Kine are the refuge of all creatures.
Kine are the embodiment of virtue. Kine
are sacred, and kine are purifiers of all.


13. Formerly kiné were hornless as we
have heard. For getting horns they adored
the eternal and powerful Brahman.

14. Seeing the kine paying. their ado-
rations to him and sitting without food,
the powerful Braman granted 10° each of
them what each desired.


15. Thereafter their horns grew and
each got what each wished. Of various
colors, and gifted with horns, they began
to shine beautifully, O son ?


16, Favored by Brahman himself with
boons, kine are auspicious and givers of
Havyaand Kavya. They are the embodi-
ments of virtue. ‘They are sacred and
highly blessed. They have excellent form
and qualities,


17—18. Kine form high and excellent
The gift of kine is highly spoken
of. ‘Those good men who, shorn of pride,
make gilts of kine, are consideréd as doers
of righteous deeds and as givers of all
articles. Such men, O sinless one, ac«
quire the highly sacred region of Kine.


1g. The trees there yield sweet fruits,
Indeed, those trees are always bédecked
with excellent flowers and fruits. hose
flowers, O best of twice-born persons, have
celestial fragrance.


0. The entire soil of that region is
formed of gems. The sands there are all
gold. The climate there possesses the
excellencies of every season. There {s no
mire, no dust. It is, indeed, highly sacred..


21. The rivers there shine in resplen«
dence for the red lotuses blossoming upon
their bosoms, and for the jewels, gems and
gold that are on their banks atid which
display the effulgence of the inorning Sun.


22. There are many lakes also on whose
breasts are many lotuses, mixed here and
there with Nympheéa stellata, and having
their petals made of costly gems, and
their filaments gold-hued. :


23. They are also bedecked with flowers
ing forests of the Nerium odorum with
thousands of beautiful creepers twining
round them, as also with forests of Santas
nakas bearing flowers. :


24. There are rivers whose banks are
variegated with many bright pearls and
shining gems and gold.


25, Parts of those regions are covered
with excellent trees that are decked with


996


jewets and gems of every sort. Some of
them are made of gold awd some of them
are effulgent like fire.


26. ‘There stand many mountaias made
of gold, and many hills made of jewels and
gems. These shine in beauty on account of
their tall summits made of all sorts of gems.


27. The trees that bedeck those regions
always pur forth flowers and fruits, and are
always covered with dense foliage. The
flowers always yield a celestial fragrance
and the fruits are greatly sweet, O chief of
Bharata’s race.


28. The righteous persons, O Yudhish-
thira, always sport there happily. Freed
from grief and anger, they spend their time
there, crowned with the fruition of every
desire. -


29. Pious and illustrious persons sport
there happily, moving from place to place,
O Bharata, on delightful and highly beauti-
ful cars.


30. Bevies of cefestial nymphs always
amuse there, with music and dance. Indeed,
VYudhishthira, a person goes to sucl ce-
gions as the fruit of his making gifts of
kine.


3t—32. Those regions which are owned
by Pushan, and the Maruts of great power,
are acquired by givers of kine. In riches the
royal. Varuna is considered as pre-eminent.
The giver of kine acquires riches like that
of Varuna’ himself.. One should, with the
steadin:¢s of a vow, daily recite these
Mantras sung by Prafapati himself, vs —
Yugandharah, Surupah, Vahurupab, Vik
shwarupah, and Matara.


33. He who serves kine with respect and
who follows them with humility, succeeds
in getting many invaluable boons from
kine who become pleased with him.


34. One should never, even in his heart,
injure’ kine. One should, indeed, always
confer Bappiness on them. One should
always respect kine and adore them, by
bending low his head.


35. He who does this, controlling his sen-
ses all the while and filled with cheerfulness,
succeeds in acquiring that happiness which
is enjoyed by kine. One should for three
days drink the hot urine of the cow. For
the next three days one should drink the
hot milk of the cow.


36. Having thus drunk for three days
hot milk, one should next drink hot clarified
butter for three days. Having thus drunk
hot clarified butter for three days, one
should live for the next three days on air
only.


37. That sacred thing by whose help the


MAHABHARATA,


celestials enjoy regions of happiness, that
which is the mast sacred of all sacred things,
vig., clarified butter, should then be carried
on the head,


38. With the help of clarified butter,
one should pour libations on the sacred fire.
By making gifts of clarified butter, one
should make the Brahmanas utter bene
dictions on oneself. One should eat clari-
fied butrer and make gifts of clarified butter.
As the reward of this conduct, one may
then acquite that prosperity, which belongs
to kine. ,

39. That man who, for a month, fives,
upon the gruel of barley picked up every
day from cow-dung, becomes purged of
sins as heinous as Brahmanicide.


4o. After their defeat at the hands of
the demons, the deities practised this ex-
piation. It was on account of this expiation
that they succeeded in regaining thgic


position as celestials, Indeed, it was
through this that they regained their
strength and became successful.

41. Kine are sacred. ‘They are ems


bodiments of virtue. They are high and
most efficacious purifiers of all, By making
gifts of kine to the Brahmanas one acquires
the celestial region.


42. Living in a pure state, in the midst
of kine, one should mentally recite those
sacred Mantras named Gomati, after touch-
ing pure waters By doing this, one bes
comes purified. :


43-44. Brahmanas of righteous deeds,
who have been purified by knowledge, study
of the Vedas, and observance of vaws,
should, only in the midst of sacred fires or
kine or conclaves of Brahmanas, impart 10
their disciples a knowledge of the Gomati
Mantras which are in every way like a
sacrifice. One should observe a fast for
three nights for receiving the boon formed
by a knowledge of the meaning of the
Gomati Mantras, |


45. The man who wishes to get a son


‘may obtain it by worshipping these Mantras.


He who wishes to acquire riches may have
his desire fulfilled by worshipping these
Mantras. The girl desirous of having a
good husband may have her wish _ fulfilled
by the same means. In fact, one may
acquire the fruition of every desire he
may cherish, by worshipping these sacred
Mantras, :


46. When kine are pleased with the
service one renders them, they are, forsovth,
capable of granting the fruition of every
desire. Evenso, kine are highly blessed.
‘They are the essential acticles of sacrifices.
‘They are grantors of every wish. Know
that there is nothing superior to kine.


ANUSHASANA PARVA,”


Bhishma said :—

47. ‘Thus addressed by his great father,
Shuka, gifted with great energy,
from that time to adore kine every day.
Do you also, V son, act thus.


CHAPTER LXXXII.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.


Yudhishithra said:—

1. I have heard that the dung of the
‘cow is gifted wittt prosperity. I wish to hear
how this has been occasioned. 1 have doubts,
O grand father which you should remove,


Bhishma said :—

2. Regarding it is cited the old story, O
king, of the conversation between kine and
goddess of prosperity, Q best of the
Hharatas.


3. Once on a time, assuming a very
beautiful form, the goddess Shree entered
a herd of kine. Seeing her beauty the
kine became filled with wonder,


The kine said :—

4. Who are you, O goddess? Whence
fave you become nonparie! on Earth for
beauty? O highly blessed goddess, we
have been filled with wonder at your
beauty. ;
__%. We wish to know who you are.
Who, indeed, ace you? Where will you


proceed? O you of very great beauty, do_


tell us in detail all we wish to know !—


Shree said :—

6. Blessed be ye, 1 am dear to all
creatures. Indeed, I am known by the
name of Shree. Forsaken by me, the
demons have been lost for ever.


7. The celestials, ois., Indra, Vivaswat,
Soma, Vishnu, Varuna, and Agni, having
obtained me, are sporting happily and will
do so for ever.


8. Indeed, the Rishis and the celestials, ©


only when they areendued with me, become
successful. Ye kine, those beings meet with
destruction into whom { do not enter,

g. Virtue, Prosperity, and Pleasure,

“only when endued with me, become sources

of happivess. Ye kine who are givers of
happiness, know that I am gifted with such
energy.

10, {f wish to always live in every one
of you. Going to your presence, [I solicit
you. Be all of you gifted with Shree.


23


began |


"77
The kine said :—~ ae

1f. Vou are fickle and restless. You
allow yourself to be enjoyed by many per~


sons. We do not wish to have you!
Blessed be you, go wherever you like.


12, As regards ourseives, all of us have
good forms. What need have we with
you? .Go wherever thou like. You have
already pleased us greatly.


Shree said :—~

13. Is it proper with you, ye kine, that .
you do not welcome me? Lam difficult of
being attained, Why then do you not
accept me ? .


14. It appears, ye creatures of excellent
vows, that the popular proverb is true, v7z., .
that it is certain that when one comes tao
another of his own accord and without
being sought, he is not mucty respected.


is. The gods, the Danavas, the Gane |
dharvas, the Pishachas, the Uroyis, the
Kkakshasas, and human beings succeed in.
getting me only aftee practising the severest
austerities. :


16. Ye who have Such energy, do ye
take me! Ye amiable ones, | am never
dishonored by any one in the three worlds
ot mobile and immobile creatures.


The kine said :—


17. We do. not disregard you, Q god-
dess! We do not slight youl, You are
fickle and of a very restiess heart.” It is for
this only that we take leave of you.


18. What need of much talk? Go
wherever you like: Ail of us have ex-
cellent forms. What need have we with
you, O sinless one ?


Shree said :—


19. Ye givers of honors, renounced by
you thus, I shall certainly be an object of
disregard with all the world! Do ye show
me grace.


20. Ye are all highly blessed. Ye are
ever ready to grant protection to those who
seek your protection. [ have come to you
soliciting your refuge. I have no fault,
Do you rescue me. :


2t.. Know that I shall always be de-
voted to you! IJ wish to live in any part
of your bodies, however repulsive it may be.
indeed, I wish to live even in your rectum.


22. Ye sinless ones, I do not see that
ye have any part in your bodies that may
be considered as repulsive, for ye are sacred,
and purifying, and highly blessed! Do ye,
however, grant my prayer. Do ye tell me
in which part of your bodies shall I live,


178


Bhishma said :-—~


23. hus addressed by Shree, the kine,
always auspicious and bent on showing
kindness to all who ace devoted to them,
patleyed with one another, and then
addressing Shree, said to her, O king,
these words,


The kine said :-~"


24. O you of great fame, it is certainly
desirable that we should honor you! Do
you live im our urine and dung. Both
these are sacred, O goddess.


Shree said :— ;

25. By good luck, ye have shown me
much favour. Let it be even as you say!
Blessed be you all, I have really been
honored by you, ye givers of happiness.


Bhishma said :—

26. Having, O Bharata, made this
contract with .kine, Shree, there and then,
before those kine, disappeared.


27: { have thas told you, O son, the
glory of the dung of kine. I shall once
again describe to you the glory of kine.
Do you listen to me.


CHAPTER LXXXIIL


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—=
Continued.


Bhishma said :—


1. They who make gifts of kine, and
who live upon the remnants of things offer-
ed as libations on the sacred fire, are con-
sidered, O Yudhishthira, as always per-
forming sacrifices of kind. .


2. No sacrifice can be performed with-


out the help of curds and clarified butter.
The very character as saccifice which sacri-
fices have, depends upon clarified butter.


Hence clarified butter is considered as the’


very root of sacrifice.


3. Of all kinds of gifts, the gift of kine
is spoken highest of. Kine are the foremost
of all things, - ‘Phemselves sacred, they are
the best of purifier.


4. People should cherish kine for getting
ptosperity and even peace. ‘The mitk,
curds, and clarified butter that kine yield
are capable of tpurifying one from every
kind of sin.


5. Kine are said to represent the high-
est energy both in this world and the next.


MAHABHARATA.


purifying than kine, O chief of the Bhas
ratas,


6. Regarding it is recited the ancient
discourse between the Grandfather and
chief of the celestials.


z- After the demons had been defeated
and Shakra had become the lord of the
three worlds, all creatures grew prosp+re
ous and became devoted to the true teli-
gion.


8—10. Then, on one occasion, the
Rishis, the Gandharvas, the Kinnaras, the
Ucagas, the Rakshasas, the Deities, the
Asuras, the winged creatures, and the
Prajapalis, O you of Kuru's race, all
assembled together and worshipped the
Grandfather. Vhere were Narada and
Parvata and Vishwavasu and Haha-Huhu,
who sang celestial songs for worshipping
that powerful lord of all creatures. The
god of wind bore there the fragrance of
celestial flowers.


1113. The Seasons also, in their
embodied forms, bore the fragrance of
flowers peculiar to each, to that assemblage
of celestials, that gathering of all creatures
of the universe, where celestial maidens
danced and sang in accompaniment with
celestial music. In the midst of that
assembly, Indra, saluting the Lord of alt
the celestials and bowing his head to him
with respect, asked him, saying,—I wish, O
Grandfather, to know why the region of
kine is higher, O holy one, than the region
of the ‘celestials themselves who are the
lords of all the worlds.


14. What austerities, what Brahma-.
chatyya, O lord, did kine perform on ac«
count of which they are able to live happi-
ly in a region thattis even above that of
the celestials.


1§. Thus addressed by Indra, Brahman’
said to the destroyer of Vala,—-You have
always, O destroyer of Vala, disregarded’
kine. -

16. Hence, you are not acquainted with
glorious pre-eminence of kine. Listen now |
to me, O powerful one, as I explairi to you
the great energy and glorious pre-eminence
of kine, O king of the celestials, — '


17. Kine have been said to be the limbs,
of sacrifice. They represent saccrifice itself,
O Vasavat Without them there can be
no sacrifice. ; ‘


18. With theie mitk and the Havi pra-°
duced therefrom, they sustain all creatureg. '


19. Their male children are engaged in |
helping the cultivation and thereby produce _


There is nothing that is more sacred or | various kinds of paddy and other seeds.


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


20. From them originate sacrifices and
Havya and Kavya, and milk and curds and
clarified butter. Hence, O chief of the


celestials, kine are sacred. Stricken with


-hunger and thirst, they carry various bur-
thens.


2t. Kine support ascetics, They sustain
‘all creatures by various acts. O Vasava,
kine are guileless in their conduct om ac-
count of such conduct and.of many well-
performed acts, they are able to live always
in regions that are even above ours.


22. I have thus explained to you to-day,
O you of a hundred sacrifices, the reason,
O Shakra, : of kine living in a place that is
high above that of the celestials.


~ 23. Kine got many excellent forms, O
».Vasava, and are themselves givers of boons,
They are called Surabhis. Of ‘sacred deeds
. and gifted with many auspicious marks
, they are highly purifying.

24. Listen to me also, O destroyer of
_ Vala, as | tell youin full the reason why
kine,—the children of Surabbhi,—have
descended on the Earth, O best of the
celestials.


25—26. Formerly, O son, when in the
golden age the great Danavas became lords
of the three worlds, Aditi performed the
-Severest austerities and got Vishnu within
her womb. Indeed, O chief of the celestials,
she had sto d upon one leg for many long
years, desirous of having a son.


27-728. Seeing the great goddess Aditi
thus practising the severest austerities, the
daughter of Daksha, vig., the illustrious
Surabhi, herself given to virtue, likewise
practised. very severe austerities upon the
breast of the charming mountains of
Kailasa that are resorted to by both the
celestials and the Gandliarvas.


29. Established on the highest Yoga,
she also stood ypon one leg for eleven
thousand years, ;


go. The celestials with the Rishis and
the great Nagas all became scorched with
the severity of her penances. Going there
with me, all of them began to worship that
auspicious goddess.


3t. I then addressed that goddess
gifted with penances, and said,—O god-
dess, O you of faultless conduct, for what


purpose do you practise such severe
austerities,
32. Ohighly-blessed one, { am pleased


with your penances, O beautiful one? Do
you, O goddess, beg what boon you wish
to have. { shall geant you whatever you
may ask !—~—These were my words to ler, O
Purandara,


179


33-35. Thus addressed by me, Surabhi
answered me, , saying,-—-I have no need, O
grandfather, of boons. QO sinless one, that
you have been pleased with meisa great
boon to me. To the illustcious Sucabhi, O
chief of the celestials, who said soto me,
O lord of Sachi,. 1 answered © thus,~O
goddess, I have been highly pleased with
this your freedom from cupidity and desire,
and with these penances of yours, O you
of beautiful face. -1 therefore, grant you
the boon of immortality.


36. You will live in a region that is
higher than the three worlds, through my
favour. ‘That region shall be known to all
by the name of Goloka.

37. Your offspring, ever engaged in
doing good deeds, will live in the world of
men. Infact, O highly blessed one, your
daughters will live there. © .


38—39. You will readily get all kinds
of enjoyment, celestial and human, that
you may think of. Vou will get whatever
happiness exists in the celestial region, O
blessed one! The regions, O you of a.
hundred eyes, that are Surabhi’s are re-
plete with’ means for the satisfaction of
every desire, Neither Death, nor Decre-
pitude, nor fire, can overcome its inhabi-
tants,


40. No ill-luck, O Vasava, exists there.
Many charming forests and delightful
ornaments and objects ef beauty may be
seen there.


4\—42. There may be seen many
beautiful cars, all excellently equipt and
which ove at the will of the rider, O
Vasava. O you having eyes like totus
petals, it is only by celibacy, by penances, by
Truth, by self-control, by gifts, by various
kinds of righteous deeds, by sofourns to
sacred waters, in fact, by severe austerities
and righteous deeds well-performed, that
one can attain to Guloka.


43. You had asked me, O Shakra and
[ have answered you in full. Q destroyer
of Asuras, you should never disregard
kine ! = y


Bhishma said :—


44. Hearing these words of the self-
create Brahman, O Yuudhishthira, Shakra
of a thousand eyes began from that time to
adore Kine every day and to show them the
greatest respect.


45—47. IT have thus told you everything
about the purifying character of kine, O
you of great splendour. [ have expounded
to you the sacred and high pre-eminence
and Rlory of kine, that is capable of purify-
ing one from every sin, O chief of men. .


- 180


That man who with senses withdrawn from
every other object will recite this aceount to
Brahmanas, on oecasions when Havya and
Kavya are offered, or at sacrifices, or om
occasions ef worshipping the departed
manes succeeds in conferring upon his an-
cestors an endless happines fraught with
the fruition of every desire.


48. The man who ts devoted to kine
succeeds in getting the fruition of every
desire of his. Indeed, even those women
who are devoted to kine succeed in securing
the fulfilment of every desire of theirs.


49. He who wishes for sons obtains then.
He who desires daughters obtains theny.
He who desires riches sueceeds in aequir-
ing wealth, and he who desires religious
merit succeeds in winning it.


50. te who desires knowledge acquires
it, and he who desires happitress succeeds
in acquiring happiness, Indeed, O Bharata,
there is] nothing which one devoted to kine
cannot obtain.


CHAPTER LXXXIV.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued,


Yudhishthira said :—


i. You have, O grandfather, expounded
tome the highly meritorious gift of kine.
In the case of kings performing their duties,
that gift is most merttorious. - -


2. Sovereignty is always painful. It is
incapable of being borne by persons of
impure souls, Generally kings fait to ac-
quire auspicious ends.


3. By always making, however, gifts of-
earth, they succeed in purifying themselves.
You have, O prince of Kuru’s race, des-
Cribe to me many duties.


4. You have described to me the gifts
of kine formerly made by king Nriga.
The Rishi Nachiketa, in aneient times, had
described the merits of this act.


5: The Vedas and the Upanishads atso
have laid down that in all sacrifices,—in
fact, in all sorts of religious rites,—the
sacrificial present should be earth or kine
or gold.


6. The Shrutis, however, declare that of
all presents, gold is very superior and is,
indeed, the best. I wish, O vrandfather,
to hear you describe truly this su! ject.

7. What is gold? How did it spring
up? When did it come into existence ?
What is ts essence? Who i its presiding


- Indeed,


MATIABULARATA.


god? What are its fruits. Why is it
considered as the foremost of all things?

8 Why do wise mew apphaud the gift
of gold? Why is gotd considered as the
best of presents in all sacrifices ?


9. Why alse is gold considered as a
purifier superior to eartlr itself and kine 7
Why, indeed, is it considered so superior
as a sacrificial present 7 Do you, O grand-
father, describe to me alt this.


Bhishma said :—

to. . Listen, O king, with rapt attentior
to me as F recite to you in detail the cir-
cumstances connected with the origin of
gold as understood by me.


tr, When my highly energetic father
Shantanu died, F proceeded to Gangadwara
for performing bis Shraddha.


12. Arrived there FE began the Shrad-
@ha of my father. My mother Janhavé
coming there, gave me great assistance.


r3 Inviting many ascetics crowned
with suceess and meking them take their
seats before me, F began the priliminary
rites consisting of gifts of water and of other
things.

r4. Having with a coneentrated mink
performed all preliminary rites as laid dow
in the scriptures, | began to duly offer the
obsequial eake.


15. I then saw, O king, that a beautiful
arm, adorned with armiets and other orna-
ments, tose up, piercing the ground, througty
the blades of Kusha grass which I} had
spread,

16. Seeing that arm rise from the
ground, I became stricken with wonder.
O chief of Bharata’s race, &
thought that my father” had come himself
for aceepting the cake I was about to
offer. 4


17—20. Reflecting ther, by the light of
the scriptures, | became convinced that t'e
ordinance is im the Vedas that the cake
should not be presented to the hand of him
whose Shraddha is performed. My cone
victton was that the obsequial cake should
never be presented in this world by a man
to the visible hand of the man whose obse-
quial rites are performed. The departed
Manes do not come in their visible forms for
taking the cake. On the other hand, the
ordinance lays down that it should be pre-
sented on the blades of Kusha grass spread
on the earth for the purpose. I then, dis-
regarding that hand which was the mark of
my father’s presence, and recollecting the
true ordinance of the scriptures regarding
the mode of presenting the cake, offered the
entire cake, O chief of the Bharatss, upon


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


those blades of: Kusha
spread before me. -


ar. Know, O king, that what I did was
perfectly consistent --with the ‘scriptural
ordinance. After this, the arm of my
father, O manarch, vanished in our very
sight. :

22—23. On that night as I slept, the de-
parted Manes appeared to me ina dream.
Pleased with me they said, O chief of
Bharata’s race, these words,—We have been
pleased with you, for the mark you have
shown to-day of your adherence to the
ordinance, It has pleased us to see that you
have not deviated from the injunctions of
the scriptures. The scriptural. ordinance,
followed by you, has become more-authori-
tative, O king.


24—25. By such conduct you have
honored and maintained the authority of
yourself, the scriptures, the Vedas, the
Pitris and the Rishis, the Grandfather
Brahman himself, and those elders, vis., the
Prajapatis. Adherence to the scriptnres
has been upheld. You have to-day, O chief
of the Bharatas, acted very properly.


26—28. You have made gifts of earth
and kine. -Do you make gifts of gold.
The gift of gold is very purifying. O you
that are well-conversant with duties, know.
that by such acts both ourselves and our
fore-fathers will all be purged of all our
sins. Such gifts rescue both ancestors,
and descendants to the tenth degree of the
person who makes them !—-These were the
words that my ancestors, appearing to me
in a dream, said tome. I then awoke, O
king, and become filled with wonder.


29. Indeed, O chief of -Bharata’s race, I
determined upon making gifts of gold,
Listen now, O king, to this old history. .


+ 30—32. [t is highly praiseworthy and
it gives longevity to a man who listens to it.
It was first recited to Rama the son of
Jamadagni. Formerly Jamadagni’s son
Kama, existed with great anger, rooted out
the Kshatriyas from off the face of the
Earth for twenty-one times. Having sub-
jugated the entire Earth, the heroic
Rama_ having eyes like lotus petals
began to make preparations for celebrating
a Horse-Sacrifice, O king, that is lauded
by all Brahmanas and Kshatriyas and that
is capable of granting the fruition of every
desire.

33. That sacrifice purifies all creatures
and increases the energy and splendour of
those who succeed in celebrating it. Gifted
with great energy, Rama, by the celebra-
tion of that sacrifice, became sinless.


34. Having, however, celebrated that
oremost of sacrifices, the great Rama


grass that were:


184


could not acguire perfect lightness of
heart. -

35--37- Going to Rishis conversant with
every branch of learning as also the celes-
tials, Rama .of Bhrigu’s race questioned
them. Filled with repentance and mercy,
he addressed them, saying,--O. highly
blessed ones, ‘do -ye declare that which
purifies men engaged in terrific deeds 7+
Thus addressed by him, those great Rishis,
fully read in the Vedas and the scriptures,
answered him, saying,-O. Rama, guided
by the authority of the Vedas, do you
honor all Jearned Brahmanas. Acting
thus for sometime, do you once more ask
the twice-born Rishis as to what should
be done by you for purifying yourself, —


-38.—39. Follow the advice which those
highly wise persons would give! Going
then to Vashishtha and Agastya and
Kashyapa, that delighter of the Bhrigus,
gifted with great energy, asked them the
very question—Ye foremost of Brahmanas,
even this is the wish that has originated in
my heart. How, indeed, can I purify
myself. :


40. By what acts and rites may this be
engendered ? Or, if by gifts, what is that
article by giving away which this wish of
mine may be satisfied, O foremost of righte~
ous persons, jf you are bent upon doing
me a favour, then do tell me, ye who have
asceticism for wealth, what is that by which
I may succeed in purifying myself !—


The Rishis said :— '


41. O delighter of the Bhrigus, the
mortal that has committed sin becomes
purified by making gifts of kine, of earth,


and of riches. This is what we have
heard, .
42. There is another gift that is consi-


dered as a great purifier. Listen to us, O
twice-born’ Rishi, as we discourse on it!
That article is excellent and is wonderful
to look at and is, besides, the offspring of
Fire.

43. Formerly the god Agni burnt all the
world. We have -heard that} from his
seed sprung gold of bright complexion.
It passed by the name of the good-com-
plexioned. By making gifts of gold you are
sure to have your wish fulfilled. :


44. Then the%illustrious Vashishtha in
especial, of rigid vows, addressing him,
said,—-H ear, O Rama, how gold, which is
effulgent like fire, first came into being.


45. That gold will confer mezit on you,
In matters of gifts, gold is highly spoken
of. [ shall also tell you what is gold, whence
it has come, and how it has come to be
endued with superior attributes.


382


46. Listen to me, O you of mighty arms,
as i describe these subjects. (now this as
certain that gold is of the essence.of Fire
and Moon.


- 47-48. The goat is Fire, the sheep is
Varuna; the horse is the Sun; elephants
are Nagas; buffalos are Asuras ; cocks and
boars are Rakshasas; O delighter of the
Bhrigus; earth is sacrifice, kine, water,
and Soma. These are the declarations of
the Smritis.: . ;

* 49. -Churning the entire ‘universe, a
mass of energy was found. That energy
is gold. Hence, O twice-born Rishi, com-
pared to alt these objects gold is surely
Superior. It is a valuable'thing, high and
excellent. A en

* 50. It is therefore that the ‘celestial and
Gandharvas and Uragas and Rakshasas
and human beings and Pishachas hold it
with care. : .


51.. Alt these beings, O son of Bhrigu’s
race, shine in splendour, with the help of
gold, after converting it into crowns and
armlets and various ornaments.


. 52. It is also for this reason that gold
is considered as the most purifying of all
cleansing things such as earth and kine and
all other kinds of riches, O king.


53- The gilt of gold, O powerful king,
is the highest gift. It is superior to the
gift of earth, of kine, and of all other
things. : ;


54- O you who are effulgent like an
immortal, gold is an eternal purifier. Do
you make gifts of it to the foremost of
Brahmanas as it is the foremost of purifying
things, — , :

55- Of all kinds of presents, gold is the
best. They who make gifts of gold are
said to be givers of all things, :


56. Indeed, they who make gifts of gold
are considered as givers of celestials. Agni
is all the deities in one, and yold has Agni
for its essence.


' 57- Hence it is that the person who
makes gift of gold gives away all the celes-
tials, Henee, O king, there is no gift
higher than the gift of gold.


Vashishtha said :—


58. Hear once more, O twice-born Rishi,
as [ describe, the superiority of gold, O
foremost of all wielders of weapons.


59. I heard this formerly in the Purana,
O son of Bhrigu’s race. It represents the
speech of Prajapati himself.


60—63. After the marriage was over of
the illustrious and great Kudra armed with
he trident, O, son of Bhrigu’s race, with


. MAHABHARATA.


_ the goddess who became his consort, or the


breast of that foremost of mountains, viz.,
Himavat, the illustrious and great deity
wished to unite himself with the goddess,
‘Thereupon all the celestials, stricken with
anxiety, approached Rydra. Bending theie
heads with respect and pleasing Mahadeva
and his boon-giving consort Uma, both of
whom were seated together, they addressed
Rudra, O perpetuator of Bhrigu’s race,
saying,--This union, O illustrious and
sinless one, of you with the goddess, is a
union of an‘ascetic with another. Indeed,
it isthe union, O lord, of ore energetic
person with another equally so. You, QO
illustrious one, are of irresistible energye
The goddess Uma also is gifted with energy
that is equally irresistible. .


_ 64. The offspring that will result from a
union like this, will, forsooth, O  illustrioug
deity, be gifted with very great might.
Indeed, O powerful lord, that offspring wil
consume alf things in the three worlds with-
out leaving a residue.


65. Do you then, O lord of alk the uni«
verse, O you having large eyes, grant to
these celestials prostrated before you, a
boon from desire of benefiting the three
worlds. :


66. Do you, O powerful one, restrain
this great energy of yours which may be-
come the seed of offspring.


67. Indeed, that energy is the essence of
all forces in the three worlds. Ye two, by
an aet of congress, are sure to scorch the
universe.


68—69. Your offspring will certainly be
able to afffict the celestials. Neither the
goddess Earth, nor the Sky, nor Heaven,
O powerful one, nor all of them together,
will be able to bear your energy, we firmly
believe. The entire universe is certain
to be burnt through the foree of your
energy.


jo. You should, O- powerful one, show
us favour, O illustrious deity. That favor
consists in your not begetting a son, O
emost of the celestials, upon the goddess
ma,


zi. Deo you, patiently govern your fiery
and powerful energy.—Tfo the deities that
said so, Ure holy. Mahadeva*having the bult
far his styn, O twice-born Rishi, answered,
saying,—So be it!—Having said so, the
deity that has the bull for his vehicle, drew
up his vital seed.


73. From that time he passed by the
name of Urddharstas fone that has diawn
up the vital seed). At this attempt of the
celestials to stop procreation, the consort of
Rudra became bighly wroth,


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


742076. On account of her being of the
Spposite sex, she used harsh words :—Since
ye have opposed my lord in procreatiug an
ofispring when he was desirous of procreat+
ing one upon me, as the result of this act,
ye celestials, ye all shall become sonless.
Indeed, since ye have opposed the birth. of
an offspring from me, therefore, ye shall
have no offspring of your own.—When this
curse was imprecated, O perpetuator of
Bhrigu’s race, the deity of fire was not
there.


77. tis on account of this curse of the
goddess that the deities have become child-
jess. Rudra begged them, held in himseif
his energy of incomparable power.


78. A small quantity, however, that
tame out o fhis body dropped on the Earth,
‘Yhat seed, falling on the Eacth, leaped into
a burning fire and there began to grow-most
wonderfully.


« 79~—82. The energy of Rudra, coming in
contact with another energy of great power,
became one with it in essence. ean-
while, all the celestials headed by Indra
were scorched by the Asura named Taraka.
The Adityas, the Vasus, the Rudras, the
Maruts, the Ashwins, and the Saddhyas
all became greatly afflicted on account of
the prowess of that son of Diti. All the
tegions of the celestials, their beautiful
tars, and their palaces, and the asylums


of the Rishis, were snatched away by the:


Asuras. Then ‘the celestials and the
Rishis, with depressed hearts, sought the
protection of the illustrious and powerful
Brahman of unfading glory.


———e


~YHAPTER LXXXV.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA)—
Continued.


The Deities said:

1. The Asura named Taraka who has
received boons from you, O powerful one,
is assailing the celestials and the Rishis.
Let his death be ordained by you.


‘2. -O Grandfather, we fear him greatly.
O illustrious one, do you save us! We
have no other refuge than you.


Brahman said :— °


- 3. I treat all creatures equally, I cannot
however, approve of sin, Let Taraka,
that enemy of the celestials and Rishis,
be speedily destroyed.

4. The Vedas and the eternal duties
shall not. be rooted out, ye foremost of
celestials, I have ordained what is proper,


_known by the name of


183


in this matter. Let the anxiety of your
hearts be removed.


The Celestiels said :—


§. Bor your having granted him boons,
that son of Diti has been proud of his
power. He is incapable of being killed
by the deities, How then will his death
be engendered ? ; ‘


6. The beon which, O Granfather, he:
has obtainad from you is that he should
not be kiHed by celestials or Asuras or
Rakshasas.


zy. Yhe celestisfs havé also been cursed
by the wife of Rud:a on aécount of their
attempt to stop propagation. The curse
imprecated by her has been, O lord of
the universe, this, v7s., that they are not to
have any offspring.


Brahman said :~


8—ro. Ye foremost of cetestials, Agni was
not there at the time the curse was given
by the goddess. He will beget a child for -
the destruction of the enemies of the gods,
Superior to all the deities, Danavas, ,
Rakshasas, human beings, Gandharvas,
Nagas and feathery creatures, the son of
Agni with his dart, which in his hands;
will be a weapon incapable of being baffled
if once hurled at the enemy, will destroy
Taraka whom you fear. Indeed, all other
enemies of yours will also be killed by him,


11. Will is eternal. ‘That Will is

Kama and is at:
one with Radra’s seed a portion of which

fell into the burning form of Agni.


12, That energy, which is a powerful’
substance, and which resembles a second
Agni, will be cast by Agni into Ganga
for. producing a child upon her: in order
to bring about the destruction of the ene«
mies of the, gods. : :


-13. Agni did not come within. the range
of Uma’s curse, The eater -of: sacrificial
libations was not present there when the:
curse was imprecated, .


14, Let the god of fire, therefore, be
searched out. Let him now be set to this’
task. Ye sinless ones, I have told you
the means for the destruction of ‘Taraka.


15. The curses of the energetic cannot
produce any effect upon the energetic,
Forces, when they come into contact with,
a stronger force, become weakened.


16. They who are endued with penances
can destroy even the boon-giving deities
who are indestructible. Will, or Like,
or ‘Desire sprang in former times and is
the most eternal of all creatures.


84


17. Agni is the ‘Lord of -the universe..-
He is incapable of. veing apprehended or
described. Capable of going everywhere
and present in all things, he is the Creator
of all beings. He lives in the hearts of
all creatures. Gifted with great power,
He is older than Rudra himself.


18—1g. Let that éater of sacrificial liba-
tions, who is a mass of energy, be found
out. That illustrious deity will fulfill this
desire of your hearts. Hearing these words
of the Grandfather, the great gods then
proceeded to find out the gad of fice with
cheerful hearts on account of their purpose
having been crowned with success.


20. The gods and the Rishis then
searched every portion of the three worlds
their hearts being busy with the thought
of Agni and eagerly desiring to see him.


at. Gifted with ‘penances, possessed
of prosperity, celebrated over all the worlds,
those great ones, all crowned with ascetic
success, sojourned over every part of the
universe, O foremost one of Bhrigu’s race.


22—~24. They could not find out the
eater of sacrificial libations who had
concealed himself by merging his self into
self. At this time, a frog, living in water,
got on the surface from the nethermost
regions, with cheerless heart ‘on account
of having been scorched by the energy of
Agni. . The little creature addressed the
celestials who had become stricken with
fear and who were all very eager to see
the god of fire, saying,—Ye gods, Agni is
now living in the nethermost» regions.
Scorched by the energy of that god and
unable to bear it longer, I have come here,


25. The illustrious bearer of sacrificial
offerings, ye gods, is now under the waters.
He has created a mass of waters within
which he is living. All of us have been
scorched by his energy.


_ 26. Tf, ye gods, you wish to see him,—
if you have any business with him,—go to
him there.


27. As regards ourselves, we shall fly
from this place, O celestials, from fear of
Agni!—Having said this much, the frog
dived into the water. .

28. The eater of sacrificial libations
came to krow of the treachery of the frog.
Coming to that animal, he cursed the whole
race, saying,—Ye will be deprived of the
organ of taste. .

29. Having made this curse on the frog,
he left the spot immediately for living else-
where. Indeed the powerful celestial did
not show himself.


30. Seeing the condition to which the
frogs were reduced for having done them a


MAHABHARATA.


service, the celestials, O best of the Bhrigus,
showed favor to those creatures. [I shall
tell. you everything about it. Do you hear
me, O mighty*armed hero,


The Deities said :—


3t. Though deprived of tongues througts
the curse of Agni and, therefore, of the
sensation of taste, you will be able to utter
various kinds of words.


32. Living within holes, deprived of
food, shorn of consciousness, wasted and
dried up, and more dead than alive, the
Earth will yet hold you all.


33. Ye shall alsobe able to move about
at night-time when everything is covered
with thick darkness!—Hawving said this to
the frogs, the celestials once more journeyed
over every part of the Earth for finding out
the god of fire, Despite ali their endeavours -
however, they could not find him out.


34. Then, O perpetuater of Bhrigu's™
race, an elephant, as large and powerful
as the elephant of Shakra, addressed the
gods, saying—Agni is now living within
this Ashwattha tree !


35. Worked up with anger, Agni cursed
all the elephants, O descendant of Bhrigu,
saying, —Your tongues will be bent back.


36. Having been pointed out by the
elephants, the God of Fire cursed ail ele-
phants thus and then went away and entered
the heart of the Shami tree for living within
it for sometime.


37. Listen now, O powerful hero, what
favor was shown to the elephants, O fore-
most one of Bhrigu’s race, by the celestials
of unbaffled prowess who were all pleased
with the service one of their representatives
had rendered them.


The Deities satd:—


38. With the help of even your tongues
bent inwards you shall be able to eat all
things, and with even those tongues ye
shall be able to utter cries which will only
be indistinct.


39. Having blessed the elephants thus,
the inhabitants of the celestial region once
more began to search Agni. Indeed, having
come out of the Ashwattha tree, the God
of Fire had entered the heart of Shami.


40. This new residence of Agni was
made known by a parrot. The gods theres
upon went there. Enraged with the cons
duct of the parrot, the God of Fire cursed
the whole parrot race, saying,--Ye shall
from this day be deprived of the power of


se


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


Reed, Tudeed, the eater of sacrificial
‘oiferin gs turned up the tongues of all the
parrots. Seeing Agni at the place pointed
out by the parrot, and beholding the curse
imprecated upon him, the gods, moved by
mercy for the poor creature, blessed him,
saying, on account of your being a parrot,
you shall not be wholly deprived of the
power of speech. Though your tongue
has been turned backwards, yet you will
only be able to speak the letter KK.


43—~44. Like that of a child or an
‘old man, your words shall be sweet and
indistinct and wonderful.-Having said
these words to the parrot, and seeing the
god of fire within the heart of the Shami,
the gods made Shami wood a sacred fuel fit
for producing fire in alt religious rites. It
was from that time that fire is seen to live
in the heart of the Shami.


45. Men began to consider the Shami as
a@ proper means for producing fire (in sacri«

ces), The waters that are in the nether-
most regions had come into contact with the
god of fire.


46. Those heated waters, Q you. of
Bhrigu’s race, are vomited forth by the
mountain springs. On account, of Agni’s
having lived in them for sometime, they
became hot through his power. ;

47. Meanwhile Agni, seeing the gods,
became grieved. Addressing the celestials,
Ai asked them,—Why have you come
nere ? §


48. To him the celestials and the great
Rishis said,-We wish to engage you
in a particular work. You should per-
form it. :

49. When done, it wil] redeund greatly
to your credit. .


Agni said:— is

50, Tellme what your business is, I
shall, O gods, accomplish it. am always
willing to do anything for you. Do not,
hesitate, therefore, to command me.


The celestials said :—


st. There is an Asura of the name of
Taraka who has been filled with pride on
account of the boon he has obtained from
Brahman. By his power he is able to op-
pose and discomfit us. Do you bring about
his destruction.


52. O sire, do you rescue these telestials,
these Prajapatis, and these Rishis, O highly
blessed Payaka.


83. O powerful one, do you beget a
heroic son possessed of your power, who
will remove, O bearer of sacrificial libations,
our fears from that Asura,


24


185


54. We have been tursed by the great
goddess Uma. ‘fhere is nothing else than
your power which can be our refuge now.
Do you, therefore, O powerful deity, rescue
us all. :


55. Thus addressed, the ilusteious and
irresistible bearer of sacrificial libations
answered, saying,—Be it so !—and he thea
proceeded towards Ganga otherwise called
Bhagicathi.

_ 56. He knew her and caused her to con-
ceive. Indeed, in the womb of Ganga the
seed of Agni began to gcow even as Agui
himself grows.


57. With the energy of that god, Ganga
became greatly moved at heart. Indeed,
she suffered great distress and became un-
able to bear it... -


53. When the deity of fire cast his seed
gitted with great energy into the womb of
Ganga, a certain Asura uttered a terrific’
roar. ; :


59. On account of that dreadful reac
tittered by the Asura for purposes of his
own, Ganga became very much terrified and
her eyes rolled in fear and betrayed her
agitation, ;


60. Shorn of consciousness, she could
not bear her body and the seed within her
womb. he daughter of Janhu, carrying
the energy of the illustrious god, began to
tremble.


61. Overwhelmed with the energy of the
seed she held in her womb, O learned Brah«
mana, she then addressed the god of fire,
saying,—I cannot any longer, O illustrious
one, bear your seed in my womb.


62. Indeed, I anv overcome with weak«
ness by this seed of yours. [he bealth T
had in days before, is no longer mine. EF
bave been greatly agitated, O illustrious
one, and my heart is dead within me, O
sinless one, ;


63. O foremost of all persons gifted with
penances, I cannot bear your seed any
longer. 1 shall chrow it off, induced by, the
distress that has befallen me, and not by
caprice.


64. There has been no actual contact
of my body with your seed, © illustrious
deity of fire. Our union, having for its
cause the distress that has befallen the
celestials, has been subtile and not of the
flesh, O highly effulgent one.


65. Whatever ‘merit or otherwise they
may be in this deed, O eater of sacrificial
offerings, must belong ta you. Indeed, f
think, you will be visited by virtue or sin of
this deed, ‘


i86


66. To her the god of fire said, —Do you
carry the seed; Do, indeed, bear the foetus
endued with my power. It will produce
great results. at


67-68. You ate, indeed, capable of
bearing the entire Earth. You will gain
nothing by not holding this energy. That
foremost of rivers, though thus dissuaded
by the deity of fire as also by all the other
celestials, cast off the seed on the breast of
Meru, that foremost of all mountains.


69. Capable of bearing that seed, yet
oppressed by the power of Rudra, she
could not hold that seed longer on account
of its burning energy. :


qo--71. After she had cast it off,
through sheer distress, that burning seed


having the splendour of fice, O perpetuater,
of Bhrigu’s race, Agni, saw her, and asked


that foremost of rivers,-—Is it all right with
the foetus you have cast off? Of what
complexion has it been, O goddess? Of
what form does it look? With what energy
does it seem to be gifted? Do you tell
me all about it, ,


Ganga said:—

2. The foetus is of gold-hue. In energy
it y like you, O sinless one! Of an excel-
tent color, perfectly stainless, and burning
with splendour, it has lighted the ‘entire
mountain. D

73: O foremost of all, persons gifted
with penances, the fragrance of it resem-
bles the cool perfume that. is scattered by
lakes adorned with lotuses, :


74. With the splendour of that feetus
everything around it seemed to be changed
into gold as all things on mountain and
low land seem to be changed into gold by
the rays of the Sun, ' '


75. The splendour of that feetus, spread-
ing far and wide, falls upon mountains
and rivers and springs. ; ;


976. It seems that the three worlds,
with all their mobile and immobile crea-
tures, are being lighted up by it. Such
is your child, O illustrious. bearer of- sacri-
ficial offerings.

77. Like the Sunor your blazing self,
in beauty it is like a second Soma!—Having
said these words, the goddess disappeared.


78. The highly energetic god ,of fire
also, having performed the business of
the celestials, proceeded to the place he
liked, O delighter of the Bhrigus.


79. It was on account of the result of
this act that the Rishis and the celestials
bestowed the name of Hiranyaretas upon
the gods of fire, Zz


MAHABHARATA,


80-—81. And because “the Earth held
that seed she also came to be called by
the name of Vasumati. Meanwhile, that
foetus, which had originated from the god
of fice and been held for a time by Ganga,
having fallen on a forest of reeds, began
to grow and at Jast assumed a wonderful
form. ‘The presiding goddess of the cons~-
tellation Krittika saw that form resembling
the rising Sun,


82. She henceforth began to bring up
that child as her son with the milk of hee
breast. For this reason that highly efful«
gent child came to be called Kartikeya
after her name.


83 And because he grew-from seed
that fell out of. Rudra’s, body, he came to
be called Skanda. The incident also of
his birth having taken place in the forest
of reeds, concealed from every body’s
view, gave him the name of Guha. It was
thus that gold came into existence as the
offspring of the god of fire


84. Hence it is that gold came to be
regarded as the foremust of all things and
the ornament of the very gods. It was
from this incident that gold came to be
called by the name of Jatarupam.


85. ‘It is the foremost of all precious
things, and among ornaments also it is
the foremost. ‘The purifier among all
purifying things, it is the most sacred of
all sacred objects. sv

86. Gold is truly the illustrious Agni,
the Lord of ‘all things, and the. foremost
of all Prajapatis. The most sacred of all
sacted things is gold, O foremost of twice-
born ones. Indeed, gold is said to have
for its essence Agni and Soma.


Vashishtha said :—


82. Formerly I also heard this history,
O Rama, called Brahma-darshana, about
the achievement of the Grandfather Brahman
who is at-one with the Supreme Soul.


88—89. To a sacrifice performed for-
merly, by that-foremost of gods, vis., the
Lord of Rudra, O you of great power, who
on that occasion had assumed the form of
Varuna, there came the asceties and all the
eelestials headed by Agni. There also
came to that sacrifice al] the sacrificial
limbs (in their embedied forms), and the
Mantra called Vashat in his embodied
form. mS _


go. All the Samans. also and alf the
Yajushes, in thousands and in their em-
bodied forms, came there. The Rig- Veda
also came there, adorned with the rules of
orthoepy. : ,


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


gt. The Lakshanas, the Suwras, the
Toinas, the Niruktas, the Notes arranged
In cows, and the syllable OM, as also
Nigraha and Pragraha, all came there and
lived in the eye of Mahadeva.


g2. The Vedas with the. Upanishads,
Vidya, and Savitri, as also, the Past, the
Present, and the Future, all came there and
were held by the illustrious Shiva.


93. The powerful Lord of All then
poured libations himself into his own self.
Indeed, the holder of Pinaka caused that
Sacrifice of multifarious form to look highly
beautiful.


94. He is Heaven, Sky, Earth, and the
Welkin. He is called the Lord of the Earth.
He is the Lord whose rule is acknowledged
by all obstacles. He is gifted with Shree
and He is at one with the God of Fire.


93. That illustrious pod is called by
various names. He is Brahman, Shiva,
Rudra, Varuna, Agni and Prajapati. He
is the auspicious Lord of all creatures.


g6—97. Sacrifice, Penance, all the rites,
the poddess Diksha burning with rigid ob-
seryances, the several Points with the pre-
siding deities, the consorts of all the deities,
their daughters, and the celestials mothers,
all came to Pashupati, O perpetuater of
Bhvigu’s race, together in a body.


98. Seeing that sacrifice of the great
Mahadeva who had assumed the form of
Varuna, all of them became highly pleased.
Seeing the celestial ladies of great beauty,


* the seed of Brahman came out and dropped |


upon the Earth.


g9. On account of the seed having fallen
on the ‘dust, the Sun took up that dust
mixed with the particles of seed from the
Earth with his bands and cast it into the
sacrificial fire.


too. Meanwhile, the sacrifice with the
sacred fire of burning flames was com-
menced and it went on. Brahman was


pouring libations on the fire: Wivile thus
engaged, the Grandfather became worked
up with desire.


‘for. As soon as the seed came out, he

took it up with the sacrificial ladle and
poured it as a libation of clarified butter, O
delighter of the Bhrigus, with the necessary
Mantras, on the bucning fire,


102. From that seed, Brahman of great
power caused the four orders of creatures to
come into being. ‘That seed of the Grand-
father was endued with the three qualities
of Goodness, Darkness, and Lynorance.
From that element in it which represented
the quality of Goodness, sprang all mobile
creatures gifted with the principle of actions


87


_: tog. From. the element of Ignorance
in it; sprang all immobile-creatures. “The
quality of Goodness, however, which lived
in that seed, entered both kinds of existence,
That. quality of Goodness is of the nature
of Light. It is eternal and of it is unending
Space. ~ : dah

104. In all the creatures the quality of
Goodness is present and is at one with that
light which shows what is right and what is
wrong. When the seed of Brahman wag
thus poured as a libation on that sacrificial
fire, there came from it, O powerful one,
three beings into existence,


105. They were three male persons,
gifted with bodies that partuok of the nature
of the circumstances from which they res-.
pectively. originated. One arose first from
the fire (called Bhrik).and hence he passed:
by the name of Bhrigu. A second came
from the burning charcoals and hence he
passed the name of Angiras. %


106. The third originated from a heap
of ‘extinguished’ charcoals and he passed
by the name of Kavi. It has been already
said that the first came out with flames
issuing from his body and hence he was
called Bhrigu.


to7. From the rays of the sacrificial fire
originated another called Marichi. From
Marichi (afterwards) sprang Kashyapa,
ft has been already said that from the
(burning) charcoals originated Angiras.
Ihe dwarf Rishis called Valikhillyas origis
nated from the blades of Kusha grass
spread out in that sacrice. eH oS


tu8—tog. From the same blades of
Kusha grass, O you of great power orizi-
nated Atri. From the ashes of the fire
originated the twice-born Rishis, vés., the
Vaikhanashas, endued with penances and
given to Vedic learning and all of excellent
qualities. aes


t1o. From the eyes of Agni originate
the twin Ashwins endued with great beauty, .
At last, froin his ears, originated the-
Prajapatis. :


_ tit—112. The .Rishis originated the
pores‘of Agni’s body. From his sweat oris
ginated Chhandas, and frown his strength
originated Mind. Therefore Agni has been
said to be all the celestials in his individual
self, by Rishis endued with Vedic learning,
guided by the authority of the Vedas. The
pieces of wood that -keep alive the flames
of Agni are considered as the Mi nths.
The juices the fuel yields form the Fort.
nights.


113. The liver of Agni is called the


| Day and Night, and his fierce light is


called the Muhurtas, The blood of Agui


18


is considered a's the gouree of the Rudtas.
From his blood originated the gold-hued
celestials called the Maitradevatas.


114. “From his smoke originated the
Vasus. From his flames originated the
Rudras as also the (twelve) Adityas of
great effulgence. . .


115—117. The Planets and Constelta-
tions and other stars that have been set in
theie respective orbits in the sky, are Con-
sidered as the (burning) charcoals of
Agni. The first Creator. of the universe
declared Agni to be Supreme Brahma and
Eternal, and the giver of all desires. This
is, indeed, a mystery. ‘After all these
births had taken place, Mahadeva who had
assumed the form of Varuna (for his
sacrifice) and who had Pavana for his
soul, said,-—This excellent Sacrifice is mine.
i am the Grahapatiin it. ‘Fhe three beings
that first originated from the sacrificial fire
are mine! Forsooth, they should be con-
sidered as my children. Know this, ye gods
who range through the skies{! They are
the fruits of this Sacrifice. _


118. {'=Agni  said—These children
have originated from my limbs. They
have all depended upon me as the cause of
their being. They shoultd, therefore, be
considered as my. children. Mahadeva in
the form of Varuna has erred in this
miatter, -


119. After this, the Master of all the
worlds, the Grandfather of all creatures,
viz., Brahman, then said,—These children
are mine! The seed which I poured. upon
the sacrificial fice was mine. _


120. I am the performer of this Saeri-
fice. I poured on the saerificial fire, the
seed that came out of myself. He who
has planted the seed always enjoys the
fruit. The ptincipal cause of these births is
my seed,


121—124. The celestial went to the
Grandfather and having bowed _ theic
heads to him and joined their hands in
respect, they said to him,—All of us, O
illustrious one, and the entire universe of
mobile and immobile creatures, are your
offspring, O sire, let Agni of burning flames,
and the illustrious and powerful Mahadeva
who has, for this sacrifice, assumed the
form of Varuna, have their wish, At these
words, although born of Brahman, the
powerful Mahadeva in the form of Varuna,
the king of all aquatic creatures received the
first-born one, viz., Bhrigu effulgent as the
Sun, as his own child. The Grandfather
then interded that Angiras should become
the son of Agni,

t25. Knowing the truth, the Grand-
father then took Kavi as his own son,


MAHABHARATA.


Busy with proereating creatures for petiple
ing the Earth, Bhrigu whois considered as
a Prajapati thence eame to be called as
Varena’s offspring.


126. Gifted with every prosperity,
Angiras passed as the offspring of Agni,
and the celebrated Kavi came to be known
asthe child of Brahman himself. Bhrigu
and Angiras, who had originated from the
fire and the charcoals of Ayni respectively,
became the procreators of extensive races
and tribes in the world.


127. Indeed these three, oe, Bhrigu
and Angiras and Kavi, considered as Praja-
pati, are the progenitors of many races and
tribes. All are the children of these three.


| Know this, O powerful hero.


128—129. Bhrigu begat seven sons alf
of whom became equal to him im merits
and qualities. Yheir names are Chyavana,
Vajrashirshan, Suchi, Urva, Shukra, that


giver of boons, Vibhu, and Savana,
These are the seven. They are children
of Bhriga and are henee Bhargavas.


‘They are also called Varunas on account
of theie ancestor Bhrizu having been
adopted by Mahadeva in the form
of Varuna. You belong to the race of
Bhrigu. :

tzo—131. Angiras beget eight sons.
They also are known as Varunas. Their
names are Vrihaspati, Utatthya, Payasya,
Shanti, Dhica, Virupa, Samvarta, and
Sudhanwan the eighth, These eight are
considered atso as the children of Agni. -
Freed from every evil, they are devoted
to knowledge only. ;


132. The sons of Kavi who was adopted
by Brahman himself are also known as
Varunas. Eight in number all of then
became progenitors of races and tribes


Auspicious by nature, they all knew
Brahma.
133. The names of the eight sons of


Kavi are Kavi, Kavya, Dirishnu, Ushanas
endned with great intelligence, Bhrigu,
Viraja, Kashi, and Ugra knowing every
duty.

134. These are the eight sons of Kavi.
By them the whole world has been peopled,
Yhey are all called Prajapatis, and they
have procreated many offspring.


135. Thus, O chief of Bhrigu’s race,
has the whole world been peopled with the
children of Angiras, and Kavi and Bhrigu,


136; The powerful’ and supreme Lord
Mahadeva in the form of Varuna which
he had assumed for his sacrifice had first,
O learned Brahmana, adopted both Kavi
and Angiras. FElence, these two are congi-+
dered as of Vaiuna,


ANUSHASARA PARVA.,


£137. - After that the eater of sacrificial
libations, vis., the god of fire, adopted
of Angiras. Hence, all the children of


Angiras are known as belonging to the
race of Agni.


* 138. The Grandfather Brahman was,
formerly propitiated by all the deities who
said to him,—Let these lords of the
universe save us all.


139. Let all of them beeome progenitors
of offspring. Let all of themt become en-
dued with penances. ‘Through your favour,
Tet all these rescue the world.


140. Let them become procreators and
extenders of races and tribes and let them
increase your power. Let all of them
become thorough masters of the Vedas
and let them be performers of great deeds.


‘rat. Letall of them be friends to the
divine cause. Indeed, let all of them be-
come gifted with auspiciousness. Let them
become founders of extensive races and
tribes and let them be great Rishis. Let
all of them be gifted with great penances
and let all of them be devoted to. high
celibacy, .


142. All of us, as also all these, are
your offspring, O you of great power. You,
O Grandfather, are the Creator of both the
celestials and the Bralhmanas,


143. Marichi is your first offspring. All
these also that are called Bhargavas are
vour progeny. Looking at this fact, O
Grandfather, we shail all help and support
one another,


144—145. All these shall, thus, multiply
their progeny and establish yourself at the
beginning of each zon after the universal
destruction. Thus addressed by them,
Brahman, the grandfather of all the worlds,
said to them,—So be it! I am_ pleased
with you all!—Having said so to the
celestials, he proceeded to the place he had
come from.


146. This is what took place in days
of yore in that sacrifice of the great
Mahadeva, that foremost one of all the
celestials, in the beginning of creation,
when he for’ the purposes of his. sacrifice
had assumed the form of Varuna.


147. Agniis Brahman. He is Pashu-
pati. Heis Sarva. Heis Rudra. He is
Prajapati. It is well-known that gold is
the offspring of Agni.


148, When fire is not to be had, gold
is used as a substitute. Guided by the
marks of the auditions of the Veda, one
who is conversant with authorities and who
knows the identity of gold with fire, acts
thus. :


| 189


t49—150, Putting a piece of gold on
some blades of Kusha grass spread out on
the ground, the sacrificer pours libations
upon it. [Ef libations are poured upon also
the pores of an anthill, u pon the tight ear
of a goat, upon a piece of level earth,
upon the waters of a Tirtha, or on the
nand of a Brahmana, the illustrious god
of fire becomes pleased and considers it
as a source of his own advancement as
also that of the celestials through his,


151- Uence, itis that we have heard
that all the celestials consider’ Agni as
their refuge and are devoted to him.
originated from Brahman, and from Agni


_ originated goldy


152. Hencé, we have heard that those
virtuous persons who make gifts of gold
are considered as giving away all the
deities.


153. “Fhe man who makes gifts of gold
acquires a very high end. Regions of burn-
ing effulgence are his. Indeed, O Bhar-
gava, he becomes installed as the king of
kings in the celestial region.


154. That person who, at sunerise,
makes a gift of gold according to the ordi-
nance and with proper Mantras, succeeds
in warding off the evils foreshadowed by
ominous dreams, ;


155. ‘The man who, as soon as the Sun
has risen, makes a gift of gold becomes
purged of all his sins. He who makes a
gift of gold at mideday destroys ail his
future sins,


156. He who, with controlled soul, makes


a gilt of gold at the second twilight suc- —


ceeds in living with Brahman and the god
of wind and Agni and Soma in their reg-
péctive regions.


157. Such a man acquires fame in re-
gions of great happiness that belong to
Indra himself. Acquiring great fame in
this, world also, and purged of all bis sins,
he sports in joy and happiness. i


158. Such aman acquires many other
regions of happiness and becomes peerless
for glory and fame. His course perfectly
unobstructed, he succeeds in going every-
where at will,


159. He has never to fall down from the


regions which he acquires, and the a
he attains to, becomes very great. Indeed,


Agni .


by making gifts of gold one acquires num-~


berless regions of happiness all of which he
enjoys for good. ‘


160. That man who, having lighted a
fire at sunrise, makes gifts of gold in view
of the observance of a particutar vow, suc-
ceeds in acquiring the fruttidn of all his
desires,


190


16%. It has been said that-go!d is at ove
with Agni. The gift of g oid, therefore, yields
great happiness. ‘The gift of gold leads to
the possession of those. merits and qualities
‘that are desired, and purifies the heart.


162. I have thus told you, O sinless one,
the origin. of gold. O you‘of power, know
how Kartikeya grew up, O delighter of
Bhrigu’s race.

163. After along time Kartikeya grew
up. He was then, -O perpetuator of
Bhrigu’s race, chosen by all the cetestials
with Indra at their head, as the com-
mander-in-chief of the celestiat forces.


164. He killed the Daitya Taraka as
also many other Asuras, at the command of
the king of the celestials, O Brahmana, and
moved also by the desite of benefiting all
the worlds.


165. I have also, O you of great power,
described to you the merits of making gifts
of gold. Do you, therefore, O foremost of
all speakers, make gifts of gold.


Bhishma said :—

166. ‘Thus addressed by Vashishtha,
Jamadagni’s son of great power then made
gifts of Fis to the Brahmanas and became
cleansed of his sins, ;

167. I have thus told you, O king,
everything about the merits of the gifts of


gold and about its origin also, O Yudhish-


thira.


168. Do you also, therefore, make pro-
fuse gift of gold to the Brahmanas. Indeed,
O king, by making such gifts of gold, you
will surely be purged of al! your sins,


ae


CHAPTER LXXXVI.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


1. Youhave, O grandfather described

to me.fully the merits of the gift of gold ac-

4% cording to the ordinances laid down in the
scriptures and tie Veda.


2. You have also described the origin of
gold. Do you tell me now how Taraka met
with destruction.


3 You have, said, O king, that that
Asura had become unslayable by the gods.
Do you telf me fully how his destruction
was brought about.


4. O perpetuator of Kuru’s race, | wish
to hear this from you, | mean the details of


MAHABHARATA. ,


Taraka’s-destruction. , Great is my curios
sity to hear the, narrative. |


Bhishma said :—

5. ‘The gods and the Rishis, O king, ce<
duced to great distress, urged the six
Krittikas to rear that child.


6. Amongst the celestial ladies there
were none, except these, who could by their
power, bear the seed of Agni in theic
wombs,


7. The god of fire became highly
pleased with those goddesses for their
readiness to sustain the conception caused
by the seed of Agni which was gifted with
his own great power.


8. When the energy of Agni, O king,
was divided into six parts and_ placed
within the channels, the six KMrittikas began
to nourish the portion that each held in her
womb.

9. As the great Kumara, however, began
to. grow within theic wombs, their bodies
being possessed by his energy, they could
not get peace anywhere.


10. Filled with energy as their bodies


were, the time at last came for delivery.


All .of them, it so happened, O piince of
men, delivered simultaneously.


11. Though held in-six different wombs,
yet when allthe parts, as they came out,
united into one. The goddess Earth held
the child, taking it up from a mass of gold.


12. Indeed, the child, possessed of a
beautiful form, shone like the god of Fire.
Of beautiful features, he began to grow ia
a charming forest of reeds.


13. The six Krittikas saw that child of
theirs looking like the morning Sun. Filled
with affection for him,—indeed, loving him
very much,-—-they ‘began to rear him with
their milk,


14. On acconnt of his having been born
of the Krittikas and reared ty them, he
was known in the three worlds by the name
of Kartikeya. Having originated from the
seed whicls bad fallen off from Rudra he
was named Skanda, and because of his
birth in a solitary forest of reeds he was
called Guha.


15-17. The thirty-three gods, the points
of the compass together with their presid-
ing deities, and Rudra, Dhatri, Vishnu,
Yama, Pushan, Aryyaman, Bhaga, Angsha
Mitra,- the Sadhyas, Vasava, the Vasus,
the Ashwins, the’ Waters, the Wind, the
Firmament, Chandramas and all the Cons.
tellations and the Planets and the Sun, and
all the Richs and Samans and Yajushes in
theic embodied forms, came there to see


_ANUSHASANA PARVA,


that wotiderful child who was the son of ,


the god of, Fire.

18 The Rishis sang hymns of praise
and the Gandharvas sang in honor of that
child called Kumara of six heads, twelve
eyes, and greatly devoted to the. Brah-
manas.


19—~20. His shoulders were broad, and
he had twelve arms, and the splendour of
his bady resembled that of fire and Aditya.
As he lay stretched on a clump of heath, the
gods with the Rishis, seeing him, became
filled with great joy and considered the
great Asura as already killed. ‘The celestials
then began te bring him various kinds of
toys and articles that could amuse him.


at.” As he played like a child, various
sorts of toys and birds were given tp him.
Garuda of excellent feathers gave to him a
child of his, v¢z., a peacock having plumes
of variegated color. :


22. The Rakshas gave to him a boar
and a buffalo. Aruna himself gave him a
cock of fiery splendour.


23. The Moon gave him a sheep, and
the Sun gave him some dazzling rays of his.
The mother of all kine, vzz , Surabhi, gave
him kine by hundreds and thousands.


24. Agni gave him a goat having many
good qualities. Ila gave him profuse
flowers and fruits. Sudhanwan gave him
a viding chariot and a car of the great
Kuvara.


25-26. Varuna gave him many auspi-
cious and good products of the Ocean, with
some elephants. The king of the celestials
gave him lions and tigers and pards and
various kinds of the birds of the air, and
many terrible beasts of prey and many um-
brellas also. Many Rakshasas and Agucas
began to follow that powerful child. '


27. Seeing the son of Agni grow up,
Tataka sought, by various means, to bring
about his destruction, but could not do any-
thing to that powerful deity.


28. The gods-in time invested Agni’s
son born a solitary forest with the com-
mand of theic army. And they also in-
formed him of the oppressions made upon
them by the Asura ‘Yaraka. i


29. The commander-in-chief of the
celestial army grew up and became poss-
essed of great energy and power. In time
Guha killed Taraka, with his irresistible
dart. ,


30. Indeed, Kumara killed the Asura as
easily as if in sport. Having brought about
the destruction of Taraka the re-established
the king of the celestials in his sovereignty
of the three worlds,


101


3t. Gifted with mighty, power, the celes-
tial general. shone in beauty and splendour,,
The powerful Skanda became the protector
of the celestials and did what wags apreee
able to Shankara,

32. The illustrious son of Pavaka had
a golden form. Indeed, Kumara is
always the leader of the celestial arms,

33. Gold is the powerful energy of the
god of fire and was born with Kartikeya,
Hence is gold highly sacred, valuable, and
excellent and has unending merit.

34. Thus, O son of Kuru’s tace, did
Vashistha recite formerly this topic to Rama
of Bhrigu’s race. Do you, therefore, O
king of men, try to make gifts of gold,.

35. By making gifts of gold, Rama
became purged of all his sins, and finally.
acquired a high place in Heaven that ts
unattainable by other men.


ES


CHAPTER LXXXVII.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).
Continued.


| Yudhishthira said :— ° _


1. You have described to me, O you
of righteous soul, the duties of the four
castes. Do you, similarly, O king, deg
cribe to me now all the ordinances regar+
ding the Shraddha. i 0


Vaishampayana said :—

2. Thus addressed by Yudhisthira, the
son of Shantann began to recite to him
the following ritual, consistent with ,the
ordinances, of the Shraddha,


Bhishma said: .

3 Listen, O king, with rapt attention,
tome as I describe to you the ritual of
the Shraddha, That ritual is. auspicious,
laudable, productive of fame and progeny,
and is considered asa sacrifice, O scorcher
of enemies, in honor of the departed Manes.


4. Gods or Asuras or human beings,
Gandbarvas or Uragas or Rakshasas,
Pishachas or Kinnaras, every oné should
always adore the departed Manes.


ft is seen that people adore the
departed Manes first, and please the celes-
tials next by offering them their worship.
Hence, one should always adore the depar-
ted Manes with every care. os :
6. Itis said, O king, that the Shraddha
performed in honor of the departed Manes
is performable afterwards. But this general

| tule has a special restraint.


gz:


7. The (deceased) grandfather become
gratified with the Shraddha that may be
performed on any day. 1 shail, however,
tell you now what the merits and demerits
are of ‘he respective lunar days,


8 I shall describe'to you, O sinless one,
what fruits are attained on what days by
performing the Shraddha, Do you listen
to me with rapt attention.


. 9g. By worshipping the departed Manes
on the first day of the light fortnight, one
obtains in his abode beautiful wives capable
of producing many children all endued with
desirable accomplishments.


_ 10. By performing the Shraddha on the
second day of the light fortnight, one gets
many daughters. By performing it on the
third day, one acquires many horses. By
performing it on the fourth day, one gets a
large herd of smaller animals in his house.


11. They, O king, who perform the
Shraddha on the fifth day, get many sons.
Those men who perform the Shraddha on
the sixth day, acquire great splendour,


12. By performing it on the seventh
day, O. king, one wins great fame. By
performing it on the eighth day one, secures
great profits in commercial pursuits,


13. By performing it on the ninth day,
one, acquires many animals of uncloven
hoofs. By performing it on the tenth day,
one acquires many valuable kine,


14. By performing it on the eleventh
day one gets valuable cloths and utensils.
Such a man also gets many sons all of
whom become - ‘endued with Brahma
splendour.


15. By performing the Shraddha on the
twelfth day, one always sees if he desires
various sorts of beautiful silver and gold
articles.


16—17. By performing the Shraddha on
the thirteenth day, one reigns supreme over
his kinsmen. Forsooth, ali the young men
in the family of him «who performs the
Shraddha on the fourteenth day die. Such
a man becomes entangled in war. By
performing the Shraddha on the day of the
new moon, one gets the fruition of every
desire.


18. In ‘the dark fortnight, all the days
beginning with the tenth, leaving only the
fourteenth day out, are good days for the
performance of the Shraddha. Other days
of that fortnight are not so.


19. Then, again, as the dark fortnight is
better than the light one, so the afternoon
of the day is better than the forenoon for

the Shraddha,


ad


MAHABHARATA.


CHAPTER LXXXVHI.


{ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued,


Yudhishthira said:—

r. O you of great power, tell me what
that object is which if dedicated to the
departed Manes, becomes inexhaustible !
What Havi, again, (if offered) lasts for alt
time? What, :indeed, is that which be-
comes eternal 2


‘Bhishbima said :—


2. Hear me, O Yudhishthira, what those
Havis are wilich persons conversant with the
ritual of the Shraddha consider as suttable
for the Shraddha and what the frunS are
of each,


3. With sesame seeds, rice, barley, Masha
water, root and fruits, if given at Shraddhas,
the departed Manes, O king, remain pleased
for a month, :


4. Manu has said that if a Shraddha is
performed with profuse sesame, such Shrad-
dha becomes inexhaustible. Of all sorts of
88) sesame seeds are considered as the

est.


5. With fishes offered at Shraddhas, the
departed Manes remain pleased for two
months. With mutton they remain pleased
for three months and with the flesh of the
hare for four.


6. With the flesh of the goat, O king,
they remain pleased for five months, with
becon for six months, and with the flesh of
birds for seven.


7. With venison got from tlose deer
that are called Prishata, they remain
pleased for eight months, and with that
obtained from the Ruru fer nine months,
and with the meat of the Gavaya for ten.
months.


8. With the meat of the buffalo the
remain pleased for eleven months. With
beef presented atthe Shraddha, they res
main pleased for a full year.


g. Payasa mixed with clarified butter
is as much as acceptable to the departed
Manes as beef. With the meat of the
Vadhrinasa the’ Pitris remained pleased
for twelve years. :


to. The flesh of the Rhinoceros, offered
to the departed Manes on the anniversaries.
of the lunar days on whieh they died, be-
comes endless. The potherb called Kala-
shaka, the petals of the Kanchana flower,
and meat of the goat also, thus cflered,
prove inexhaustible, ; ee


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


t1.. Regarding it, Vudhishthira, there
are some. Verses, originally sung by the
departed Manes, that are now sung (in the
world). Sanatkomara communicated them
to met in former days.


12, He who has taken birth in our
race, should give us Payasa {mixed [with
clarified butter on the thirteenth day (of
the dark fortnight), ander the constellation
Magha, ‘ducing the Suan’s southward course.


‘13. One born: in our race, should
under the constellation Magha, as if in the
observance of a vow, offer the meat of
goat or the petals of the Kanchana flower.
One should ‘also offer as, with due rites,
Payasa mixed with clarified butter, dedica-
ling it on a spot vovered by the shadow of
an elephant. - ; st


14. Many sons should be coveted.so that
even one may go to Gaya, where stands the
banian that is celebrated over afl the worlds
and that makes all offerings made under its
branches endtess. ar,

15. Even a little of water, roots, fritits,
meat, and rice, mixed with honey, if offered
om the anniversary of the day of death,
becomes endless.


Ce enammameed


. CHAPTER LXXXIX.. :


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA ).=
: Continned,
Bhishma said :— . ;
1. Hear me, O Yudhishthira, as T-tell
you what those optional Shraddhas are that
should be performed tinder, the different


constellations and that were first spoken of
by. Yama to king Shashavindu.


2. That man who always performs the
Shraddha under the’constellation Krittika
is considered as performing a sacrifice after
establishing the sacred fire. Such a person,


freed from. fever, goes to Heaven with his.


children.
3-. He who is desirous of, children should


‘
remy ar Pas an '


perform the Shraddha under the constella-’


tign Rohini, while he who is. desirous -of
power should do it under the constellation
Mrigashiras. By performing the Shraddhba.
under the constellation Ardra, a man be-
comes the doer of terrific deeds,


4. A man ,by performing the Shraddha
under Punarvasu, makes much ‘gain by
agricultuce. Lhe man who is desitous-of
growth and advancement should perform
the Shraddha ander Pushya.. ; :


5. By doing it under the constellation
Asblesha one begets heroic children, By


25


‘utensils of white “brass and copper,


193,


doing it ander the Maghas-one gains
superiority over kinsmen.

6. By ‘dving‘it tinder the (prior) Phat-
gunis, one gains good fortune. By doing
the Shraddha uader the fater Phalgunas
one gets many cividren ; while by perform-,"
ing it under Easta, one gets the fruition of
his wishes.


9. ‘By performing it under the constella-
tion Chitra one gets beautiful children,
By doing it under the consteltation Swati,
one makes much profit by trade.


8. ‘The nvan, who desires children, acquires
the fruition of his desice by performing the
Sheaddha_ under the-constellation Visbakha.
By doing it under Anuradha, one becomes
an Emperor. : ae i ,


9. By making offerings in honor of the
departed Manes under the constellation
Jeshthya, with devotion and humility, one
acquires sovereignty, O foremost one of
Kuru’s race., : ee eee,

to. -By doing the Shraddha under Mula,
one gains health, and by doing it ander the
prior Ashada, one acquires excellent, fame.
By. performing it .under te jater Ashada,
one succeeds in travelling over the, whole
would, freed from every sorrow, >,


t1. By doing it under the constellation
Abhijit, one acquires great knowledge» By
doing it under Shravana, one, after death,
attains toa very highend, | aie Cae

12. The man who performs the Shradha
under the constellation Dhanistha . becomes
a king, By doing it under the constella+
lion. presided over by Varuna (viz.,
Shatavisha), one becomes a _ successful
physician, . ; ‘ Shane

13. By performing the Shraddha undec
the constellation of the prior Bhadrapada;
one acquires many goats and sheep: while
by doing it under the later Bhadcapada,
oue acquires thousands of kine. ;


14. By performing the Shraddha under
the constellation Revati, one acquires many
By

doing it under Ashwini, one acquires many
horses, while under Bharani, one lives long,


15. Listening to these ordinances. .about


. the Shraddha, king Shashayindu acted


accordingly,,; and, succeeded in easily gop-
quering and ruling the whole Earth. 2 oo.


194
CHAPFER XC.
(ANUSHASANA PARVA).-+


Continued, *-


Yudhishthira said: -

t. | You should, Oforemodst one of Kuru’s
race, tetl me to what kind of Brahmanas, O
geandfather, should the. offers made at
Shaaddhas, be given away.


Bhishma said :—

2.. The Kshatriya who is conversant
with the ordinances about pift, should never
examine Brahmanas. hi allb matters, how-
ever, relating to the worship of the deities
and the departed) Munes, an exantination
has been said to be proper. ‘


‘3. ‘Fhe deities are adored’ on Earth
by “men onty when they are filled with
de¢votion originating from the celestiats
themselves. Hence, one.should, approach-
ing them, make gifts to all Brahmanas,
respecting such gifts as are. made, to the
celestial themsyives,


4. In Shraddhas, however, O king, the
man of intelligence should examine the
Brahmanas. Such examination, should be
about their birth, conduct, age, appearance,
and learaing,. :


5. Amongst the Brahmanas there are
some who pollute the line and some who
purify it. Listen to me, O king, as F telt
you.who.those Brahmanas are..that: should
be excluded: from. the liae. :


6—~11. He who is wily, or he wha is
guilty of foeticide, or he who is iff of con-
sumption, or lie who keeps animals, or he
who has no Vedic study, or is a common
servant of a villuge, or lives.upon usury, or
he who is a singer; or he who. sells. all
arsicles, on he. who is guilty of arson, or he:
who. is. ® poisoner, or he who is.a pimp.by,


profession, or he who.sells: Soma, os he. wha, t


teaches, palmistry, of he who isin. the em-
ploy, of the king, er he who is a seller of oil,
or be whais a.cheat and. false swearer,, or
he wha, has a quarrel! with his father, or he
who tolerates. a paramour of his wife, or he
who has been cursed, or he who is a thief,
or he who lives by some mechanical art, or
he who puts on disyuises; or he who is de-
ceifuhin his conduct, or he who ts hostile to.
those he calts his friends, or he who.is an
adulteres, or he who is a preceptor of
Shudras, or he who has taken up the pro-
fession of arms, or he who wanders with
dogs (for hunting), or he who has been bit
by a doy, or he who has married before
his elder prothers, or he who seems to have

undergone circumcision, he who violates

the bud of his pregeptor, he who is an actor

or mime, he who lives by setting up an idol,


MAHABHARATA.


“yand he who lives by calcufating the enms


junctions of stars and planets and asterism,
are considered as fit to be excluded fram
the line.


2. Persons knowing the Vedas say that
the offerings made at Shraddhas, if eaten


by suth Brahmanas, go to fill the stomachs |


of Rakshasas, O Yudhishthira.


£3. ‘That person who having eaten at &
Shraddha does not abstain that day from
Vedic studies, or who has. known that day a
Shudea woman, must know that his de-
parted Manes on account of such deeds
of his, have to He for a munth, on his own
excreta.


Y4—1§. The offerings. made at, Shrad«
dhas if presented toa Brahmana who sells,
wine, become converted into human excreta ;
if presented:to a Brahmana who practises
as a physician, they become converted intyu
puss and blood ; if presented to one who
lives by setting up an ido}, they fail'to pro-
duce any fruit; if presented to one who
who lives. apon. usury, they lead: to iafamy ;
if presented to.one who is engaged in trade,
they become productive of no fruits either
in this world or in the next.. EL presente
to a Brahmana who is born of a widowed
mother, they becomeas fruitless as libations
poured on ashes,


16, They-who- present the Havya and
Kavya to, such Brahmanas. who.do not pec-
form the duties ordained for them and wha
do not observe those.rules of good conduct
that persons of their order should obser ve,
find such presents productive of no- metits
hereafter : :

7; That little-witted’ man who makes
gifts of such articles to such men knowing
their. dispysitions, obliges, by such conduct,


| his depasted Manes to eat human excreta


in. the. next, world,


18: Your should: know that these wretched
Brahmanas deserve. to be excluded: from the
line. ‘Ehosee Brahmanas also of Iittle


‘energy- who are- engaged in instructing
- Shudras belong to the same class. ;


¥9. A Brahmana. who is blind: stains


“sixty. individuals of the line; one who


is destitme - of manly powers stains a
hundred; while one who is afflicted’


-with white lepresy stains as many as he


looks upon, O king.


20. Whatever offerings made at Shrad-
dhas are eaten by one with his head wrap-


ped. round with a cloth; whatever is eaten -


by one with face southwards, and_ whatever
is eaten with shoes or sandals on, all goes
to please the Asuras.


2%. i
lice, and whatever is given withuut respect,


1


Whatever, again is given. with mas __


ANUSHASANA PARYA. 195:


| whe. are self controlled “masters of their
senses, and they wha are devoted to the-
behsef of aft creatures,—these should be:
invited to Shraddhas.. . ae :
33. Anything given to these, became’
endless, ‘These, indeed, ‘ate purifiers of
lines. ‘There ave others ats; highly blessed,’
who should be considered as purifiers of thé:


HIG.

34. ‘They are Vatis aiid those who ‘are.
‘conversant with the teligion of Einancipa-. -
‘tion, and they who are devoted to Yoga and
they who properly observe excelent vows,
and they who, with collected mind, recite
(sacred) tistories’ to foremost ‘of Brah+
manas, a

35-36. “They who are conversant with,
coinmentaries, they also who aré given to,
grammatical studies, they who study the.
Puranas and they who study, the Diarma-
shastras, and haviny studied therm act up to
the standard taid down in therm, he wito has
lived in the house ef his preceptor, he who’
is truthful in speech, he who is a givér of:
thousands, they that-are foremost in Vedic
lore and {in the knowledge of} the scriptural:
and ‘philosophical aphorisms;+=these. purify
the lines as far they look at st,


have- been ordained by Brahntan himseff
. the portion ef the king of Asuras (vis,
ali.) j


23. Dogs, and euch Bratmiavas Gs are
pollsters of lines, should not be suffered
to look upon the offerings made at Shrad-
dhas. . Dherefore, Shraddhas sheuld ‘be
performed at a place that is properly
hedged around or conceated from the view.
‘That spot should alse be covered -with
sesame seeds.


a3. That Shraddha which is done with-
out sesame seeds, or that which is done by
& person in aager, has its Havi rebbed: by
Rakshasas and Pishachas,

24. According to the number of Brah-
Manas seen by one who deserves te be ex: :
cluded from the line, is the loss of merit tre
causes of the foolish performer of the
Shraddha who invites him to the feast.

25. I shall row, O chief of Bharata’s
race, tell -you who are purifiers of the Hine;
De you find them out by exainination.


-, 26. Al those Brahmanas who are puri-
fied by knowledges Vedic study, vows and
observances . atid they who are of good and
righteous- “conduct, ‘should be known as:
Purifiers of evesything: “A! 38. And beedtise they purify all wha sit,
tf the line, therefore aré they called puri-
fiers of tines, Utterets of Bralima say that,
éven a sidglé person who happens to be the.
descendant of andesters whi were teachers
of the Veda and who is hiniself a Vedic
He aiiiaad purifies full seve miles aroand
U7 nn 3 we


27. 1 shalf now tell you who deserve to
sit in the tine. Yui sttoutd kitow them to
be such whom. {shall mark out presently.
He who is conversant with the three Na-
chiketas, te who has set up the five sacrifi-
cial fires, he who knows the. five ‘Supartas,
he who knows the six braneles icatt
Angas) of the Veda, he who sis’ a:tdescen-"
daut of fathers who were engaged-# teach-
ang the Vedas and is himself engaged in
teaching, he who is well conversant with
the Prosody, he who ts acquainted with the
Jeshthya Saman, he who is obedient to. his
perrens, he who is conversant’ with -the-
Vedas, and whose ancestors have teemrso
for ten generations, he wh> knows only his
= goarcied. wives and this at their: seasons,
aud he who has beea purified by knowledge,
by the Veda, and by yows and obser-
varices,—even such a Brahmana,—purifies
the line. = ¢


3032, He who reads’the Atharva-
shiras, who is piven tothe observance of
Brahmacharyya practices, ad who is
steady in the observance of fighteous vows,
who’ is truthful and of gure conduct, and
who duly satisfies the duties: laid down for
his order, they also who have wnilergone
fatigwe and labour for Bathing ite sacred
waters, who have done the final bath after
celebrating sacrifices with. proper Mantras,
who are treed from anger, who are not
restless, who are endued with forgiveness,


ae 4 2 5 t .
39 «Whe whois nota Ritwik and that,
is not a Vedic teacher takes the foremost,
Seat iit a Shraddha, with even the perimis--
sion of the other Ritwiks there present, he
is said ta take the sing of all who may be
sitting in the lire. ;


492; HH, onthe other hahd, he happens
to be gativersant with the Vedas -And
freed fron alt these faults which are consi-
dered as capable of poilltning the line, Ind
shalt not, UO king, be considered as fallen.
Such. a man wold then be really 4 purilier
of the line. ; ; : eS

4t; Fut tliebe reasons, 0) ‘ing, yow
should properly exainine the Brahmanas
before nwiting then to Shraddhas. You
should invite onty such anlong thetit as ard
devoted to the duties laid down tor theie
order, and as are born ti yood fansibies, and
as are gifted with great learnings  - |!


42. He who performs Shraddhas for
feeding ouly his Friends and. whose Havi
does not please the celestials and tie
departed Manes, fails to ascend to Heaven.


2-166


AMAUABHARATAL |


43. “He who collects'his friends? and , to'Vedic'stedy, ‘to knowledge; ‘ta penances,


. relatives only on - the occasion & of the
Shraddha he performs, ‘fails to proceed
(after death) by the celestial path.-The man
whe converts the .Shraddha , he performs,
into an occasion for only - collecting his
friends, ‘never.jsucceeds in ascending, to
Heaven, _ ‘The, man, who,. converts _ the }
Shraddha into an oceasion for treating his
fciends,. becomes alienated from Heaven
even like a bird dissociated from’ the perch
when the chain tying it breaks, ”


44 - “Therefore, he who ‘performs a.
Shraddha should nog honor his friends.
He may make gifts of riches. to them on,
other occasions by collecting them together.
The Havi and the Kavi offered at Shrad-
dhas should be served to them who are
neither friends nor enemies but are only
indifferent. or neutral, |


45. As seed sown on-a barren soil does
not sprout forth, or as one who has not
sown does not get fa share of the produce,
so.that Shraddha the offerings in which are.
eaten by an unworthy. person, yields no
fruit either in this world or in the next..


46. That: ‘Brahmana who is destitute of
Vedic study, is like-a fire made by burning
grass or straw; and becomes soor put-out
even like sucha fice. ‘The offerings made
at Shraddhas should not be given to. him
even as libations shoutd not be poured on.
the ashes of the sacrificial fire. .


47. When the offerings made at Shrad-
dhas ace exchanged vy the performers with
one another, they become Pishacha presents.
Such offerings please neither the gods nor
the departed Manes.
the othec world, they wander about even
here like a cow’ which has fost her calf
wandering about within thé fold. Fe


"48. “As those libations of clarified butter
that are poured upon the extinguished ashes
of a sacrificial fire never reach either the
yods or the departed Manes, similarly a gift
that is.made to a dancer or a singer or a
Dakshina presented to a Aying (¢ or deceitéul
person, yields no merit.


"49. The’ present that is given toa lying
or deceitful person destroys both the giver
and the receiver without benefiting them
in any way. Sucha present is destructive
and highly censurable. Lhe Pitris of the
person making it have to fall down from
the celestial path.


50. The gods know them to be Beah-
manas who always walk, O-Yudhishthira,
within the limits set up by the Rishis who
know all- duties, and who have a firm faith
in their” efficacy.


Instead of reaching |:


and to,acts, O Bharata; shoukk be kiowt
-as Rishis. 1


§2. * Fhe offerings made at ShrAddhas,
should be given, to those who are devoted
to knowledge. Indeed, they are to be ‘con
sidered as men who never speaks Hb of the
Brahmanas.a


53’ Those men shoutd never be fed on
becasions of Shraddhas who speak il of
Brahmanas in course of conversation in the
midst of-eonclaves. H Brahmanas, O king,
be vilified, they would destroy three genera
tions of the caluminater.


54. This is the saying, O king, of the
Vaikhanasa’ Rishis. Bratmanas knowing
the Vedas..should be examined frorv a
distance.


sg. | Whether one hikes them or not, one
should give to such Brahmanas the offer-
ings made at Shraddhas, ‘fhat man who
feeds thousands upon thousands of unr
worthy Brahmanas acquires tmecit: that is
attainable by feeding even one Bralimana
if the latter happens to be endued with a
knowledge of the Vedas, O Bharata!


‘ o


|


"CHAPTER XCH.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).-
Continued,


Yudhishthira said :—


1 By whom was the Shraddha first
conceived and at what time 7 What also,
is its substance? In tbe time when the’
world was inhabited by only, the descen-,
dants of Bhrigu and Augiras ; who was the
Muni who established the Shraddha ?


‘2. What deeds should not be done at
Shraddha? What.are .those Shraddhas in.
which fruits, and roots are to be offered 2.
What kinds also of paddy should ve avoided.
in Snraddbas? ‘ell me all this, O grande
father. ,


Bhishma said :—


3. Listen to me, G king, as T tell you
how the Shraddha ‘was introduced, the
time of such introduction, the essence of
the rite, and the ascetic who conceived it.


4. From the Self-Create Brahman sprang
Atri, O you of Kurn's race. In Atri’s
family was born a Muni named Dattatreya.

5. Dattatreya got’a son named Nimi
having asceticism for wealth. Nimi got a
son vamed Shtimat who was gifted” with


¢


t


"


ot Sls Those. ‘Htabmnanas who are given great beauty of person.


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


216+ Upon the expiration’ of a Tull theut
sand years, Shrimat having practised ‘the
severest austerities, yielded to the tnffu-
ence of Time and depated from this world.


7. His father Nimi,, having performed
the purificatoy rites according to sanctioned


rites, became stricken with great grief, think. |


ing continually of the: loss of his som: |


8. Thinking of that cause of sorrow,
the great Nimi collected together varions
agreeable objects on the fourteenth day of
ahe moon, ' ‘The next Morhing he rose
from -bed. FL Om


9. Stricken as ‘his heart was with grief,
‘as‘he rose from sleep that day he succeeded
in withdrawing it from the one object upon
which it had been working. « His mind .de-
came busy with other-matters, 4 0 « iorf


' yom1r#. With rapt attention’ he then
conceived the idea of a Shraddha. All
those articles of his own food, containing
‘fruits and roots, and all those‘ kinds of
staple grains which he liked, were carefully
thought of -by that sage having penances
‘for wealth.


. 22. On the day of the New Moon he
.invited a number of ‘worthy © Brahmanas.
Gifted with great wisdom, Nimi made them
Sit on seats and honored them by going
round them.


: 13. Approaching seven such Brahmanas
whom he had brought to his house together,
the powerful Nimi gave them food con-
sisting of ic alias tice, manne, with
salt.


14. Towards the feet of hone Brah-
manas engaged in eating the food that was
‘served to them a number of Kusha blades
was spread out, on the seats they” occupied,
with the tops of the blades directed towards
the south.


15. With a pure body and ‘mind and
with rapt attention, Nimi, having: placed
those blades of sacred grass in the way
‘indicated, offered cakes of ‘rice
‘dead son, uttering his name and family.


16. Having done this, that foremost of
ascetics became filled with regret at*the
idea of having done a deed that had
not been Laid down in any of the scriptures.
‘Indeed, filled with regret, he began to
think of what he had done.


17. Never done before by ‘the ascetics,
alas, what have | done! How shall I avoid
as cursed by the Brahinanas ?


: He then thought of -the original
; bean of his race. As soon as he was
“thought of, Atri having penances for wealth
came‘there.


. 49. ‘Seeing tim greatly stricken: with grief


4 created by him.


to his.


4197


consequent. on the death of Bis soni, the ii
mortat Atci comforted him - with agi ceable
advice. : Oe


* 20.
that’ you have’ conceived, is
honor of the departed Manes,
O you, having asceticisth for wealili.


He said to him,—O Nimi," this: ‘rhe
a sacrifice in
Do not fear,


- Fore


mettby - the Grandfather, Erahnsan, himself


laid it down, °°’ eo


‘23, This cite thal you ‘have conceived,
has been ordained by the Self. Create hime
self, Who else save the Self-Create could
ordain this ritual in Stiwaddhas


22. L shall now teli you, oO ee the ex+
cellent ordinance laid down-in the matter of
Shraddhas. Ordained by, the Self-Create
himself, O son, follow it. Listen .to me first.,


a1'23~ ,, Having first performed-the Karana
on the sacred fire with the help of Maatras,
O you having penances for wealth, ong
should always pour libations next to the god
of fire, and Soma, and Varuna.. . . i


‘24. ‘Fhe Self-Create next ordained a
portion of the offerings to the ‘Vishwedevas
also, who are always the companions of the
departed Manes. -


25. The Earth also, as the goddess who
sustains: the offerings made at Shraddhas,
should then be lauded under the names of
Vaishnavi, eke, and the inexhaus+
tible, - :


26. When water is being fetched for the
Shraddha, the powerful god Varuna should
be lauded. After this, both Agni and
Soma’ should be invoked with respect
and pleased (with ’ libations), — oO sinless
one,


27. Those deities named Pitris were
created’ by the Self-Create. Others also,
higbly blessed, vis., the Ushimapas, were.
For all these, snares. have
been sanctioned of the offerings made ‘at
Sluaddhas. a ms


28. By worshipping all ‘these ‘gods'' at
Shraddbas, the ancestors. of the, persons
performing them become purged of. all ‘sins.
Vhe departed Manes referred to above’ As
those created. by the Self- Crests are sevéh
in number. rs - “4


-29.' > The .Vishwedevas, pues Agni for
their mouth, have been mentioned . vefores
A shall-now mentiva the names of these
great deities wno deserve shares of the
offerings made at Shraddhas. ; ro


reat


i 30—33- They are Vala, Dhriti, Vipap-
ma, Punyakrit, Pavana, Parshni,-Ksheman, .
Samuha, Divyasanu, Vivaswat, Viryyavat,
Heimat, Kictimat, Krita, Jitatman, Muni-
viryya, Diptroman, Bhayankara, - Anu>
karman, - Pratitay Pradatri, .Angsbumat,


198


Shailabha, Parama, Krodhi,
Bhupati,, Srajas, Najcin, and Vari,—these
are. the eternal Vishwedevas, here are
others also whose names are Vidyute
varchas, Somavarchas, and Suryashri by
hame.


34—37-. Others also are Somapa, Surya
savitra, Dattatman, Pundariyaka, Ushni-
nabha, Nabhoda, Vishwayu, Dipti, Cha-
muhara, Suresha, yomari, Shankara,
Bhava, Isha, Karttri, Kriti, Daksha, Bhu-
vana, Divyakarmakrit, Ganita, Pancha-
viryya, Aditya, Rashmimat, Saptakrit,
Somavarchas, Vishwakrit, Kavi, Anugoptri,
Sugoptri, Naptri, and Ishwara,—these
highly blessed ones are called Vishwedevas.
They are eternal, and they know: all that
occurs itt Time, i : ‘

' 38=-39. Kodrava, and Pulaka are the
species of paddy which should not be offer
ed at Shraddhas. Assafoe lita also, among
articles used in cooking, should not be offer+
ed, as also onions and garlies, the produce
of the Moringa, pterygosperma,, Bauhinia
Variegata, ,the meat- of animals killed
with poisoned arrows, all varieties of Ca-


curbita Pepo, Cucurbita lagenaria, and |


black salt. : . :


40-41, The other articles that’ should
not be offered at Shraddhas are the flesh of
the domesticated hog, the meat of all ani-


mals. vot killed at sacrifices, Nigella sativa, |


salt.of the variety called Vid, the potherb
that is called Shitapaki, all sprours and also
the ‘rapa bispinosa.. All kinds of salt
should be excluded from the offerings made
at Shraddhas, and also the fruits of the
Eugenia Jambolana, ~


42. Alfarticles, again, upon which any
one has spat or upon which tears have
fallen should be avoided at Shraddhas,
Among offerings made to the departed
Mines oc with the: Havya and Kavya
offered to the celestials, the potherb cailed
Sudarshana should not be included.


43—44- Havi mixed with this is not
acceptable to the departed Manes. From
the place where the Shraddha is being
performed, the Chandala and the Shwapa-
cha should be excluded, as also all who wear
yellow clothes and persons suffering from
leprosy, or one who has been outcasted, or
one who is guilty of Brahmanicide, or a
Brahmana of mixed descent, of one who
is the relative of an outcast man. These
all should be excluded by wise persons
from the place where a Shraddia is being
performed. ' :


- 45. Having said these words formerly


to the Rishi Nim of bis aww race, the |


Hlustrious Auri having penances for wealih


Dhiroshni, |


MAHABHARATA


then went back to the Grandiather’s court
in the celestial region,
}


CHAPTER XCIL
‘{ANUSHASANIKA PARVA)-
Continued. - :


Bhishma said :-—
g After Nimi had acted thus, alf the


| great Rishis began to celebrate the sacrifice


tn honor of the depsrted Manes (cated the
Shraddha) according to cites latd down iv
the ordinance.


2. Pesforming alf duties, the Rishis,
having performed Shraddhas, began to
also offer oblations of saered waters, witt»
attention.


3 On account, however, of the offete
ings made by persons of alt elasses, the
departed Manes begav to digest that food.


4. Soon they, and thé etelestials also
with them, became afflicted with indiges-
tion. Indeed, affficted with the heaps of
food that all persons beyan to give them,
they went to Soma,

ganz. Apptoaching Soma they said,
Alas, great ts our misery ov account of the
food that is offered to us at Shraddhis. Du
you ordain what is necessary for our com-
fort 7++Soma answered to them, saying,
Hf, ye gods, ye are desirous of acquiring.
comfort do ye then go to the abode of the
Selt-Create. Even he will do what is for
your behoofim-At these words of Soma,
the celestiats and the departed Manes theo
went, O Bharata, to the Grandfather where
he was seated on the sumurit of the moun.
tains of Meru,


The gods said

8. O illustrious one, with the food that
is offered us in sacrifices and Shraddhas,
we are suffering very much. O bord, show
us favour and do what would be forfour
behoof.


9g. Hearing these words of theirs, the
Self-Create said to them in-reply,—Here,
the god of fire is sitting beside me. Evets
he will do what is for your good.


Agni said :~

to. Ye sires, when 4 Shraddha comes,
we shall in a body eat the offerings made
tous. $f fe eat those offerings with mre,
ye shall, forsooth, succeed in digesting Uren
easily. ; us

tr. Hearing these words of the God of
Fire, the departed Manes became comlurted.


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


ft ts for this’ reason- also that ia making
offerings at Shraddhas a share ‘is first
offered to the God of Fire, Q hing. -'

‘#2, Hoa portion of the offerings be first
made to the God of Fire ata Shraddha,
U, king, Kaksnasas of. twice-bern. origin


caunot then do aly: injury ,tO sucha
Shraddha.. :
#3. Seeing the God of Fire at a


Shiaddha, Raashasas fly away fromjit. Ihe
tRuab ef the Shraddha is that the cake
should first be offered’ to the (departed)
fauvec., Next, jome should be-offered to the
Rravdiather.


4. ext should: one be offered’ to the
geeargrandfather. ‘Fhis is the ordinance
selatings to Shraddha. Over every cake
that is effered, the offerer should, with
fapt attention, utler the Savitri Mantras.


15. ‘This other Mantra also should be
uttered, vzz., to Soma wihto is fond of the
departed Manes. & woman. that has bee
come impure: on accouns of hee-season, or
one whose ears bave. been cut off, should.
not be allowed to remain where a Shraddha
is being done, Nor should a woman be
brought from a family: other that that of
the person who is performing the Shraddha.


16. While crossing a river, one should.
offer oblations of water to his Pitris, naming,
them all, Indeed, when one comes upon a
tiver one should please his) Pitris with
oblations of water.


17.. Having offered oblations of water
first to the ancestors. of. his. race, one.
should next offer such oblations to his
departed. friends and.ielativess 1 | ‘


13, When one crosses a river on a car
to which is: yoked? a couple of oxen of'
variegated: color, or from’ then ‘that cross’
a river on boats, the. depacted, Manes ex-
rect oblatiqns of, water. 4


19. ‘Hhose wha know this. always offec
oblations of water with rapt attention to the
departed Manes. Every fortnight. om. the
day of the New Muon,. one should make
offerings to his departed ancesters.


2zo—2r. Growth, longevity, energy, and
prosperity become alk wuainable. wrough
devotivn yw: the departed Manes.
Grandiather Brahman, Pulastya, Vashish-
tha, Pulaha, Angiras, Kratu, and the great
Rishi Kashyapa,-these, O' prince of Kuru's
race, ate considered as great masters of
Yoga.


"22, They ate numbered among. the des.


parted Manes,, Even this. is:the high ritual.


in the matter of Shraddha, O king. Through.
Shraddhas, performed. on, Earth,, the de-
ceased inembers of his race, become: freed
from a poison of misery. : ;


Fhe’


199


23. 1 have thus, O prince of Kurw’s race,
explained to you, atcording to the scrip
tures, the ordinances relating to Shraddhas,
1 shall ance mace discourse, ta you an
gifts. eg


ie


CHAPTER XC.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARNA).-= °
Coutinued,


Yudhishthira said =

1, If Brahmanas wha observe; 4. vow.
(vis., fast) eat, at the invitation of a Braha:,
mana, the Havi, can they be charged with
the sin of violating their vow? Tell me. this,
O Grandfather,


Bhishma said :-~ ‘
2. Let those Brahmanas eat, maved by
desire, who observe such vows as are'nok |
laid. down: in the Vedas. About those
Beahmanas, however, who observe such
vows as are faid' down in the Vedas, they”
are considered as guilty of a breact of their
vow, O Yudhishthira, by eating the Havi
of a Shraddha: ap the request of him who
performs the Shraddha, '


Yudhishithra said:—


3» Some people say, that fast is a pen+
ance, Is; penance really at ane with fast.
or is i, not, $0.2. ‘Fell ma this, Q grands.
father. | P ; t oo
Bhislima safd':—~’ aoe

4. People do cansider a regular fast for.
a month or a half month as ajpenance. The
truth, however, is that one who mortifies hig,
own body is not to be considered, either.
as’ an ascetic of as one conversant with
duty,’ -* toe ‘ 7 aid

§. Renunciation, however, is considered,
as tie best. of penances., A Brahmana.
should always abstain from’ food, and. ab-.
serve the vow of celibacy. :


5. A Brahmana should always practise:
selt-deniaf controlling even speech, and,
recite the Vedas. Fhe Brahmana should
tarry and susiound, himself with. children
and telatives, from desire of, acquiting vice
tue. He should never sleep, .  . _, 4


7. Hershauld. rbstain from: meat... He
shuuld always read the Vedas and, the,
scriptures. He should ‘always’ speale tre~
truth, and practise. self-contzalL. He: should
eat; the residaa, (ata., of. what .remainsafter:
serving, the, deities and, gnests).  Indued;. he
shguid be hospitable. towards: all that, camey
te his house. He should always eat nectar, -


(aes


200
gt
He should duly observe all rites and. cele-

brate sactifices, , ;


Yudhishthira said —

%. ‘How thay one come to be considered
as always observant of fasts? How may
one become observant of vows? How, O
ting, may one come to be an eater of the
residue? By doing what may one be said
to be fond of guests.

Bhishma said:~ = *-

g. He who takes food’ only morning
and evening at {the appointed hours
and abstains from aif food during the
interval, is said to be an abstainer from
foud.: 4 : ae


"11. ‘He who knows only his married wife
atid that only at her'season, is said to be
observant of the vow of celibacy. “By
always making gifts, one comes to be con-
sidered as truthful in speech, -


12.) By’ abstaining from all meat obtain-
ed from animals killed for nothing, one be-
comes an abstainer from meat. By making
gifts one becomes purged of ail sins, and by
sbstaining from sleep during day time, one
comes to be considered always awake...

- 13-1 He, who always eats what remains
after setving the guests and servants, know,
© Yudhishthira, is said to always eat.
nectar. . . .-


-s4. He who abstains from eating till
Brahmanas have eaten, is considered as
Conquering Heaven by such abstention,


15. He who eats what remains ‘after
serving the celestials, the departed Manes,
and relatives and dependants, is said to
‘eat Vighasa or the residue, © -


16. Such men acquire many regions of
happiness in the abode of Brahman him-
self. ‘here, O king, they live in the
company of Apsaras and Gandbarvas,

t7., Indeed, they sport and enjoy in
these regions, with the celestials and guests
and the departed Manes in their company,
and surrounded by their own children and
grandchildren. Even such becomes their
high end. 5 a ae


Yudbishthira said :—


18. People are seen to make various
kinds of yifts to the Brahmawsas, What,
however, is the difference, O grandfather,
between the giver and the receiver ?.


Bhishma said :—


lug, The Brahmana accepts gifts from
hira who is righteous, and from him who
is sinful. If the giver happens to be
virtuous, the receiver commits little sin. Hf,


MAHABHARATA,


on the other hand, the eter happens to be:
impious, the receiver sink in bal), | :


20. Reyarding itis cited aw od history:
of the conversation between Veishadarbhi
and the seven Rishis, O Bharata,


21—22. Kashvapa, Atri, Vashishtha,
Bharadwaja, Gautama, . Vishwanitra,
Jamadagni, and the chaste Arundhati (the
wife of Vashishtha), all had-a common
maid-servant whose name was Ganda. A
Shudra named Pashusakha marcied Ganda
and became her husband.


23. iXashyapa’ and others, formerly,
observed the austerest penances and roved
ever the world, desirous of acquiring
the eternal reyion of Beahman by the help
of Yoga-meditation.


24. About that time, O delighter of the
Kutus, there took place a severe drought)
Stricken with hunger, the whole world ol
living creatures become greatly weak.


-25. At a sacrifice which had been pera
formed formerly by Shivi’s.son, he +ads
given away {to the Ritwiks a son of Wis as
the sacrificial present.


Ne aairane '

'26. About this time, long-lived as the
prince was, he died of starvation, ‘They;
Rishis named, afflicted with hunger, appro-
ached the dead ptince atid sat encircling
him. :


. 5 '
.27, Indeed, those foremost of Rishis,
seeing the son of him at whose sacrifice,
they had officiated, O Bharata, thus dead
of starvation, began to cook the body in’ a
vessel, actuated by the pangs of tunger.


28. Ali food having disappeared’ from
thé world of men, those ascetics, desirous of
saving their lives, had recourse, for purposes,
of living, to such a miserable end.


29. While they ‘were thus engaged,
Veishadarbha’s son, v/s., king ‘Shaivya, in:
course of his roving,s came upon those
Rishis. Indeed, he met then on his way,)
engaged in cooking the dead body, moved
by the pangs of hunger. «70° Lo

3 eg ley, PEE Se Ad
The son of Vrishadarbha said :—~

30. The acceptance of a pift will ime:
mediately retieve you all. Do you, there-
fore, accept a gift for the ‘maintenance of:
your bodies! Ye ascetics having penances


for wealth, listen to me as | declare what
wealth | have...


3t. ‘That. Brahmana who solicits me is
ever dear to me. © Indeed I shall pive
you a thousand kine of white hair, foremost
in speed,-each accompanied by a: bull,’ and |
each having a well-born ealf, and, there
tore, giving milk. : Me


.m oe nis


ANUSHASANA PARVA..


“3, U shall also give you a thousand
balls of white color and of the best species
and capable of carrying heavy loads. 1 shalt


also give you a-darge number of kine, of


good nature, the foremost of their kind, all
fat, and each of which, having brought
+ forth her first calf, is quick with her second.


3g. Tell me what else { ‘shall give of
foremost villages, of grain, of bartey, and
of even the rarer and more precious jewels,
Do not seek to eat this food that is inedible.
Yell me what should I give you for the
maintenance of your bedies. -


The Rishis said :~


34. O king, to accept gifts from a
mouarch is very sweet at first but it is
poison in the end. Knowing this well, why
do you, @ king, tempt us then with these
offers ?


35. Tire body of the Brahmana is the
divine field. By penance, it is purified,
Then again, by pleasing the Biathmana,
‘one pleases the ceflestials.


é
36. Ifa Brahmana accepts the gifts
made to him by the king, he loses, by such
acceptance, the merit that he would other-
wise win by his penances, that day. Indeed,
such acceptance destroys that merit as a
burning fire destroys a wilderness,


37. May you be happy, O king, as the
result of the gifts you make to those who
solicit you.m«Saying these words to them,
they teft that place, proceeding by another
ways :

38. The flesh those great ones had in-
tended to cook remained wrcooked. in-
deed, abandoning that flesh, they went
puay and entered the forest in search of

vod.


39. After this, urged by their master,
the ministers of the king, entered those
woods and plucking’ certain figs tried to
give them away to these Rishis..


40. The officers ‘of the king filled some
of those figs with gold and mixing them
with others tried to induce those ascetics to
accept them, “ j


4t.. Atri took up some, of those figs,
-and finding them heavy refused to take
‘them, He said——We are not shorn of
knowledge. We are not fools,


42. We know that there is gold within
these figs. We have our senses about
us. Indeed, we are awake instead of
being asteep. If accepted in this world,
those will’ yield bitter results hereafter.
He who seeks happiness both in this world
and in the next, slrould never accept these.


26


“g0L


; Vashishtha said :~


43. {€ we accept even one gold coln,


it will be counted as a hundred er even -


ff, therefore, we accept many
coins, we shall surely attaiy lo an uthappy
end in the next-world,,


Kashyapa said:— .
44. All the paddy and barley on Earth,.
allthe gold and animals and women that


a thousand,


are in the world, are incapable of satisfying *


the’ desire of. a single. person. Hence, a
wise man should, removing cupidity, adopt


tranquillity. — . aS a,


Bharadwaja said :--
45.


first appear, begin to grow with the growth
of the animal. ‘The cupidity of man is like
this. It has no limit.
Gautama said :—~ ;
46. All the objects which exist in’ the
world cannot satisfy even a single person,
Man is like the ocean, for he can never be
filled (z.e., satisfied.)
' 47. When one desire cherished by a
person becomes satisfied, there originates
1


Vishwamitra said :—~


immediately another whose satisfaction
sought and which pierces him tike -an


arrow.


Jamadagni said :—~
48. Abstention from accepting gifts sup-
ports penances as their root.


Acceptance
however, destroys that. . .


Arundhati said :—


49. Some people hold that things of the
wold may be stored for spending them
upon the acquisition of virtue. 1 think,
however, that the acquisition of virtue is
better than that of riches.


Ganda said :—
50. When these my lords, who are
gifted with great energy, are so very much
afraid of this when seems to be a great
terror, weak as I am, I fear it the more.


Pashusakha said :—

51. ‘The value of virtue ig very superior,
There is nothing superior to it. That
wealth is known tothe Brahmanas. ° I wait
upon them as theic servant, only for learn-
ing to prize that wealth,


The Rishis said:— =~ 3!
52. May he be, as the result of the gifts
he makes, who is the king of the people of |


The horns of a Rurta, when they .


203


this fand, Let his gift bear fruit who has
rie these fruits to us, enclosing gold withia
them. ‘ :


Bhishma said:—


53. Having said these words, those
Rishis of steadfast vows, abandoning the
figs having gold within them, left that place
and proceeded where they liked.


The ministers said :—


54. O king, coming to know of the ex-
istence of gold within the figs, the Rishis
have departed. Let this be known to
you. ;


Bhishma said :—~

55. Thus addressed by his ministers,
king Vrishadarbhi became stricken with
anger against all those Rishis. Indeed, to
take vengeance upon them, the king entered
his own apartment. :


56, Practising the austerest of penances,
he poured on his sacred fice libations of
clarified butter, accompanying each with
Mantras uttered by him. ‘


57. From that fire there then originated,
as the outcome of the incantation, a form
capable of striking every one with fear.
Vrishadarbhi named her as Yatudhani.


58. That form which--had originated
from the incantations of the king, looking
as dreadful as the Last Night, appeared
with joined hands before the king. Ad-
dressing king Vrishadarbhi, she said,—
What shall I do?


Vrishadarbhi said :—


59. Go and follow the seven Rishis, as
also Arundhati, and the husband of their
maideservant, and the maid-servant herself,-
and undestand what the meanings are of
their names.


60. Having learnt their names, do you
kill all of them. After killing them you
may go wherever you like.


Bhishma said :—


61. Saying,—So be it.—The Rakshasi
who had been named Yatudhani, in her
proper form, went to that forest in which
a great Rishis, travelled in search of
ood.


62. Indeed, O king, those great Rishis,
with Atri among them, roamed within the
forest, living upon fruits and roots.


63. In course of their travel they saw a
mendicant of broad shoulders, and plump
arms and legs and well-grown face ‘and
abdomen. Of limbs that were all adipose,


MAHABHARATA,


he was travelling with a dog in his com.
pany.


64. Seeing that mendicant whose limbs
were all well-developed and beautiful, Arun-
dhati exclaimed, addressing the Rishis,~«
None of you will ever be able to show such
well-grown features.


Vashishtha said :~


65. ‘The sacred fire of this peason }s not
like ours, for while he is able to pour libas
tions on it, morning and evening, none of
us can do the same. [t is therefore that
we see both him and his dog so welle


‘formed. ;
‘Atri said:—


66. ‘This man does not like us, feel the
sufferings of bunger, His energy bas not
suffered, like ours, any decrease, .Ac-
quired with the greatest difficulty, his
Vedas have not, like ours disappeared.
Hence it is that we see both him and_ his
dog so well-grown.


Vishwamitra said :—


67. ‘This man is not, like us, unable ta
observe the eternal duties laid down in the
scriptures, I have become idle. I feel the -
sufferings of hunger, I have lost the know-
ledge I had acquired. This man ts not hike
us in this matter. Hence I see both him
and his dog so well-grown, :


Jamadagni said :—


68. ‘This man has not tothink of storing
his annual grain and fuel as we are to do.
Hence J see both him and his dog so well-
formed.


Kashyapa said :—


66, This man has not, like us, four bros
thers of the same blood .who are begging
from house to house, uttering the words,—~
Give—Give !—Hence it is that I see him
and his dog so well-growa,


| Bharadwaja said :—


go. This man has no regret like ours for.
having condemned and cursed his wife.
He has not acted so wickedly and foolishly.
Hence I see both him and his dog so wells"
formed,


Gautama said :—


71. This man has not like us only three’
pieces of covering made of Kusha grass,
and a single Ranku skin, each of which,
again, is three years old. Hence it is
that I see both him and his dog so well-
formed, :


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


Bhishma continued :—

72.
dering mendicant, approachcd them, and
accosted the all by touching their hand,
according to the practice. °-


73. Conversing then ‘with each other
about the difficulty of getting sustenance in


that forest and the consequent necessity of °


undergoing the pangs of hunger, all_ of
.them left that piace.


74. Indeed, they travelled through that
forest, all bent upon a common object, vis.,
the plucking of fruits and the extraction of
Toots for maintenance.


75. One day, as they- were travelling,
they saw a beautiful lake filled with lotuses,
Its banks were covered with trees which
stood thickly near one another. ‘Phe waters
- of the lake were pure and tran3parent.


76. Indeed, the lotuses that -adorned
the lake were atl of the cotor of the rising
sun. The leaves that floated on the water
were of the color of lapis lazuli.


77. Various kinds of acquatic fowls
were sporting on its bosom. ‘There was
but ane path leading to it. The banks
were not covered with mire and the access
to the water was easy.


78. Urged by Vrishadarbhi, the Rak-
shast of dreadful appearance who had
originated from his incantations and who
had been named Yatudhani, guarded the
lake.


79. Those foremost Rishis, with Pashu-
sakha ia their company, went towards the
Icke, which was thus guarded by Yatu-
dhani, for the object of collecting some
lotusestalks.


890—81. Seeing Vatudhani of fearful
aspect standing on the banks of the lake,
those great Rishis addressed her, saying,—
“Who are you who thus stand atone in this
solitary forest? For whom do yoe wait
here? What, indeed, is your purpose ?
What do you do here on the banks of this
lake adorned with fotuses 7


Yatudheni said :—

82. - It matters not_.who f am. FE deserve
mot ta be accosted. You taving ascetic
wealth, know that | am the guard set to
watch this take.


The Rishis said :—
83. All of us are hungry. We have
nothing else to eat. With your permission
_ we would collect some lotus-statks,


” Yatudhani said :—
84. According to agreement, do you take
he lotus-stalks as you please. Ye malay


Seeing those great Rishis, the wan--}


203


one by one, give me your ‘names, You
may then, without delay, take the stalks |


Bhisma said :—

85. Ascertaining that her name was
Yatudhani and that she stood there for
Killing them, Atri, who was famishing with
hunger, addressed her, and wid mere:


| words,
Atri said :—
86. I am ealled Atri because 1 purify
the world from sin. For, again, thrice


studying the Vedas every day, I have made
days of my nights.” That, again, isno
night in which [ have not studied the
Vedas. Therefore also I am called Atri,
O beautiful lady !


| Yatudhani said:—.


87. -O'..you’ of great effulgence, the exe


‘planation you have given me of your, name


is incapable of being understood by me.
Do you, therefore, go and plunge into, this
tank filled with lotuses. ,1


Vashishtha said: —


88. Iam gifted with Yoga powers, { live
again, as a householder, and am consi-
dered as- the foremost of all persons that
tead such a mode of life. On. account ‘of
my being gilted with (such) powers, of my
living as a householder, and of my being
considered, as the foremost of all house
holders, I any called Vashishtha,


Yatudiani said :—


89. ‘The etymological signification of
your name is simply. incomprehensible to
me inasmuch as the inflections which the
original roots have undergone are unine
teltigible. Go and plunge into this- lake a
lotuses.


Kashyapa said :—

go. 1 always protect nry body, and om
account of my penances L have become
gifted with effulgence. For thus protecting.
the body and for this effulyence that is due
to my penances, | pass by the name of
Kashyapa.


Yatudhani said :—

gt. O you of great effulzence, the
etymological signification you have given of
your name is what I cannot comprehend.
Go and plunge into this lake filled wiel»
totuses. .


Bharadwaja said: —_


92, I always support my sons, my dis-
ciples, the celestials, the Brahmanas, and


oo


MAHABHARATA.


my wile. On account of my thus ‘support- + account of the inffections the roots have


ing all with ease, I pass by the nanre of
Bharadwaja.


Yatudhani said :—. $e. a

93. The etymological signification you
have given me of sour tame is what I
cannot fully understand, om account of the
many inflections the root has undergone.
Go and plunge into this lake filled with
fotuses. ‘ .


Gotama said :-~


94. 1 have conquered Heaven and Earth
by the help of self-control. For my consider-


ing all creatures and objects impartially, I.


am like a smokeless fire, Herce F am in-
capable of being subjugated by you. When,
again, I was born, the effutgence of my
body removed the surrounding darkress.
For these reasons } am called Gotama.


Yatudhani said :—
95- The explanation you have given me


of your name, O great ascetic, is beyond:


the range of my comptehension. Go and


plunge into this lake of lotuses.


Vishwamitra said :—

096. The celestials of the aniverse are my
friends. | am also the friend of the
universe. Hence, O Yatudhani, F am
called Vishwamitra.


Yatudhani said —


97. The explanation you have given of
your name is a puzzle to me, on account of
the inflections the root has undergone, Go
and plunge inte this lake of lotuses.


Jamadagni said :— ;

98. I have originated from the sacri-
ficial fire of the celestiats. Hence am 1
called Jamadagni, O you of beautiful
features.


Yatudhani said:—

99. The etymofogical signification you
have given, O great ascetic, of your name,
passes the range of my comprehension.
Do you go and plunge into this lake of
lo: uses.


Arundhati said ‘—


too. I always live by the side of my
husband, and hold the Earth jointly with


him. J always incline my husband’s heart
towards me. 1 am, _ therefore, called
Arundhati. ,-


Yatudhani said :—
tor. The explanation you have given of


your name is beyond my understanding, on


undergone. Go and phimnge into this lake
of fotuses.
| Ganda said :—


102, The Garda means a portion of
the cheek. As E have that portion a little
elevated above the others, Fam, O you who


have originated from the sacrificial fire of


Shaivya, called by the name of Ganda.


Yatudhani said :—~

r0g. ‘Yhe explanation which yow have
given of your name is perfectly incomprehen-
sibfe to me, on account of the inffections
whielr tte root has undergone. Go and
plunge into this lake of botuses. :


| Pashusakha said :—


104. F protect and tend alf animals F
see, and l amr always a friend to all animals.
Hence am | called Pashusakha, O you who
have originated from the (sacrificial) fre
of king Vrishadarbhi).


Yatudhani said :—


105. ‘he explanation yow have given of
your name its what I cannot wnderstand, on
account of the inflections which the roots
have undergone. Go and plunge into this
lake of lotuses.


Shunasakha said :—


106. ¥ cannot explain the etymofogy of
my name like these ascetics. But know,
O Yatudhani, that ¥ am ealled by the name
of Shunasakha,


Yatudhani said :—


107. You have mentioned your name
only once. I have not beer able to tnder-
Stand the explanation you have given, do
you, therefore, mention it aganr, O twice:
born one.


Shunasakha said :~

_ 08 Sinee you have not been able to
catch my name on account of my having
mentioned it only once, FE shall sirike you
with. my tripte stick! Struck with it, be
you reduced forthwith into astres.


Bhishma continued ——

tog. Struck then, on the head, by the
Sannyasin, with his triple stick which resem-
bled the punishment inflicted by a Brah-
mana, the Rakshast who had originated
from the incartations of king Vrishadarbhi
dropped down on the Earth and became
reduced to ashes.


tro. Having thus killed the * powerful
Rakshasi, Shunasakha thrust his stick inte


A NUSHASENA PARVAG.


he earth and sat himself down on a grassy
plot of land.


ti1, The Rishis then, having, as they
liked, plucked a number of lotuses and
taken up a number of lotus-stalks, came
up from the lake, filled with joy.


112. Throwing on the ground the mass
of lotuses which they had collected with
great labour, they plunged once more into
it for offering oblations of water tu the de-
parted Manes.


113. Coming up, they went to that side
of the bank where they had placed the
lotus-stalks. Reaching that place, those
foremost of men found that the stalks were
nowhnre to be seen.


The Rishis said :—

114. What sinful and cruel men has
stolen away the lotus-stal&s collected by our
hungry selves from desire of eating.—


Bhishma said :—


115. Those foremost of  twice-born
Persons, suspecting one another, UO des-
troyer of enemies, said,—We shall each
have to swear to our innocence.


#16. All those ascetics then, exhausted
with hunger and exertion, agreeing to the
proposal, took these oaths,


Atri said :—

117. Let him who has stolen the fotus-
stalks touch kine with his foot, pass urine
facing the sun, and study the Vedas on ex-
cluded days,


Vashishtha said :-—


118—119. Let him who had stolen the
lotus-stalks abstain from reading the Vedas,
or leash hounds, or be a wandering mendi-
cant unrestrained by the ordinances laid

- down for that mode of life, or be a destroy-
er of persons who seek refuge with him, or
live upon the proceeds of the sale of his
dauyhter, or solicit riches from those who
are low and vile.


Kashyapa said :—

120—121t. Lethim who has stolen the
lotus-stalks give vent to all sorts of words in
all places, give false evidence in a court of
law, eat the flesh of animals not killed in


sacrifices, make gifts to unworthy persons .


or to worthy persons at unseasonable times,
and have sexual connection with women
during daytime.


Bharadwaja said :—


122-123. Let him who has stolen the
lotus-stalks be cruel and sinful in his con-
duct towards women and kiusmen and kine.


‘father of many children,


265


Let him humiliate Beahmanas, in disputa-
tions, by showing his superior knowledge
and skill, Let him study the Richs and
the Yajushes, disregarding his preceptor.
Let him pour libations. upon . fires made
with dry grass or straw,


Jamadagni said :—~


t2q—-125. Let him who has stolen the
lotus-stalks be guilty of throwing filth and
dirt on water. Let him be filled witt
enmity towards kine, "Let him be guilty of
having sexual union with women at times
other than their season. Let him incur the
hatred of all persons. Let him gain the
living from the earnings of kis wife, Let
him have no friends and let him have
many enemies. . Let him be another’s guest
for getting in return those acts of hospitality
which he bas done to that other,


Gotama said :—


126127. Let him who ‘has stolen the,
lotus-stalks be guilty of throwing away the
Vedas after having read them. Let hint
renounce the three sacred fires, Let him be
a seller of the Soma (plant or juice). Let
him live with that Brahmana who lives in a
village which has only one well: from which
water is drawn by all classes and who bas
married a Shudra woman. ‘


Vishwamitra said:—


128, Let him who has stolen the lotus
stalus be doomed to see his preceptors and


seniors and his servants maintained by


others during his own life-time. Let him
not have a good end. Let him be the


129 Let him be always impure and a
wretch among Brahmanas. | Let him be
proud of his riches. Let him be a tiller of
the soil and fet him be filled with malice, -:


130. Let him wander in the rainy season.
Let him be a paid servant. Let him be the
priest of the king. Let bim assist at the


‘sacrifices of such impure persons who are


not worthy of being assisted at their sacri+
fices.


Arundhati said:— .


13t. Let her who has stolen the lotus-
stalks always humiliate her mother-in-law.
Let her be always vexed with her husband.
Let her eat whatever good things come to
her house without giving a part to others.


132. Disregarding the kinsmen of her
huspand, let her live in her husband’s house
and eat, every evening, the flour of tried
barley! Let her come to beconsidered as
unenjoyable, Let her be the mother of a
heroic son, ,


- 206


_ Garda said:— :


433. Let hee who has stolen the lotus-
stalks be always a speaker of untruth. - Let


her always fall out with her. kinsmen ! Let


het. give away her daughter in marriagé


“of guilt. ;
-Pashusakha said :—


for money,


134. Let her eat the food which she has
has cooked, alone and without giving a part
it to'of anybody { Let her pass her whole life
asaslave, Indeed, let her who has stolen
the fotus-stalis be quick with child on
account of sexual union under circumstances


135 Let him who has stolen the fotus-
statks be born of a slave-mother. Let him


‘why have many unworthy children, And let


" mentioned
_ Brahmanas!


‘him never bow to the celestials.


Shunasakha said:—


136, Let him who has removed the
lotus-stalks acquire the merit of bestowing
his daughter in marriage upon a Brahmana
who has ‘studied all the Samans and the
Yajushes and who has carefully observed
the vow of celibacy. Let him perform the
final ablutions after having read all the
Atliarvans !-


All the Rishis said :-~


137. ‘The oath you have taken is no oath
at all, for all the deeds which you have
are very desirable for: the

It is evident, Sbunasakha,
that you have appropriated our lotus-stalks,


Shunasakha. said :—
138. Not seeing the lotus-stalks deposi-


_ ted by you, what you say is indeed true, for


“you that I came


ra


it is I who have actually stolen them,


139.: Before you alll have made those
stalks disappear. Ye sinless ones, the
act was done by me for testing you.


140. I came here for protecting you.
That woman who lies killed there was
called Yatudhani. She was of a dreadful
disposition. Originated fromthe incan-
tations of king Vrishadarbhi, she had come
here from the desire of killing all of you.


14t. Ye ascetics having penances for


. wealth, begged on by that king, she had


come but | have killed her. ‘Ihat wicked


“ and sinful creature, originated from the


sacrificial fire, would otherwise have taken
your lives.


142. It was for killing her and saving
here, O ye learned
Brahmanas. Know that | am Vasava! you
have entirely got rid of the influence of cupi-
dity. On account of this, you have acquired


nrany eternal regions fraught with the


MAHABHARATA,


fruition of every desire as soon As it rises fw
the heart! Do you rise, forthwith from this
place and go to those regions of beatitude,
O twice-born ones, that are reserved for
you.


Bhishma said: —


143. The great Rishis, highly pleased at
this, replied to Purandara, saying,—So be
it!—Fhey then ascended to the celestial
region the company of Indra himself.


144—145. Thus, those great persons,
though worn out with hunger and thougt
tempted at such a time with the offer of
various kinds of enjoyable articles, refrain-
ed from giving way to temptation. As the
outcome of such self-denial, they attained
to the celestial region. It appears, therefore,
that one should, under all circumstances,
renounce cupidity.


-146—147. Even this, O king, is the
highest duty. Cupidity should be renounced,
The man who recites this account in assem-
blies of men, succeeds in acquiring riches.
Such a man has never to come by a distress-
ful end. The departed Manes, the Rishis,
and the celestials become al} pleased witlr
him. Hereafter, ayain, he becomes gifted
with fame and religions merit and tiches,


CHAPTER XCIV.


(ANUSHASANA PARVA)—
Continued. , a


Bhishma said :—


1. Regarding” it is cited the old history
of the oattis on the occasion of a sojourn to
the sacred waters,


2. O best of the Bharatas, the act of
theft bad been committed by Indra, and
the oaths were taken by many royal and
twice-born Rishis. .


3. Oncean a time, the Rishis, having
assembled .together, proceeded to the west.
ern Prabbasa. They held: a consultation
there which resulted in a determination om
their part to sojourn to all the sacred waters
on Barth. .


4. There were Shakra, Angiras, the
highly learned Kavi, Agastya, Narada and
Parvata; and Bhrigu and Vashishtha and
Kashyapa and Gautama and Vishwamitra
and Jamadagni, O king.


5. There were also the Rishi Galava,
and Ashtaka and Bharadwaja and Arun-
dhati and the Valikhilyas ; and Shivi and
Dilipa and Nahusha and Amvarisha and
the royal Yayati and Dhundhumara and
Puru.


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


6. These foremost of men, headed the
great performer of hundred sacrifices, the
slayer of Vritra, sojourned to all the sacred
waters one after another, and at last’ reach-
ed the highly sacred Kaushiki on the
day of the full- maon in the month of
Magha.


7. Having purified themselves of all sins
by ablutions performed in all the sacred
waters, they at last’ proceeded to: the very
sacred Brahmasara, Bathing in that lake,
those Rishis gifted with fiery energy began
to gather and eat the stalks of the lotus,


8. Amongst those Brahmanas, some had
extracted the stalks of the lotus and some
the stalks of thé Nymphoe: stellata, Soon
they found that the stalks extracted by
Agastya had been taken away by -some-
body.


g. The foremost of Rishis, Agastya, ad-


dressing them all, said\—Who has taken


away the good staJks which I had extracted
and deposited here? I suspect some one
amongst you must have taken them,
him who has taken them away return them
tome. You should not thus misappropriate
ury Stalks,


to. It is heard that Time attacks the
energy of virtue. That Time has come
upon us, Hence, virtue is afflicted. It: is
proper that I should goto Heaven for good,
before sin assails the world and establishes
tself fully here.


11. Before the time comes when Brah-
manas, loudly uttering the Vedas, within
the precincts of villages and inhabited
places, cause the Shudras hear them, before
the time comes when kings offered against
the rules of virtue’ from motives of
policy, I shall go to the celestial region
for good.


12. Before men cease to regard the dis-
tinctions between the lower, the middie, and
the higher classes, | shall go to the celestial
region for good. Before Ignorance attacks
the world and covers all things in dark-
ness, I shall go to the celestial region for
good.


13- Before the time comes when the
strong begin to oppress the weak and treat
them as slaves, | shall go to the celestial
region for ever. Indeed; J dare not remain
on Earth for seeing these things.


‘a4. The Rishis, much concerned at what
he said, addressed that great ascetic and
said—We have not stolen your stalks!
You should not cherish these suspicions
against us, O great Rishi, we shall: take
the most dreadful oaths. ~~


15. Having said these words, conscious
as they were of their.own innocence, and


‘Let:


207


desirous of upholding the cause of virtue, -
those Rishis and royal sages then began to
swear, one after another, the following
oaths.


Bhrigu said :—~ -

16. Let him who has stolen your stalks *
censure when censured, a$sail when assail-
ed, and eat the flesh that j is attached to the ©
back- bone of animals, :


Vashishtha said :-—


17. Let him who has stelen your ‘stalks
neglect his Vedic studies, leash hounds,
and having taken himself to the mendicant —
order live in a city or town. , ,


Kashyapa said :—

18. Let him who has stolen your stalks:
sefl all ‘things in all places, misappropriate |
trusts, and give false evidence 1


Gotama said —~

19. Let him who has stolen your stalks,
live, showing pride in all things, with an
understanding that does not see ‘all creas:
tures with an egual eye, and always giving
way to the influence of desire and anger.
Let him be a cultivator of the soil, and let
him be moved by malice, a


Angiras said ‘— :

zo. _Let him who has stolen your stalks
be always impure! Let him be a ¢ensurable.
Brahmana. Let him leash hounds. Let
him be guilty of Brahmanicide. Let. him.
be averse to expiations after having com-
mitted sin,


Dhundhumara said :—


at. Let him who: has stolen your stalks,
be ungrateful to his friends! Let .him take
birth in a -Shudra woman! Let him eat
alone any good food. :


-


Dilipa said :—

22. Let him who has stolen your stalks
attain to those regions of misery and in-
famy which are reserved for-that Brahmana
who lives in a village having ‘but one well
and who knows a Shudra woman.


Puru said :— ,

23. Let him who has stolen your stalks’
practise as a physician! Let him be sup-.
ported by the earnings of his wife! Let him
draw his maintenance from his father-in«
law! :


Shukra said :—


24. Let him who has stolen your stalks
eat the flesh of animals not killed in


208


sactifices! Let him have sexual union at |


day-time! Let him be a seevant of the
king. ; “
Jamadagni said :—

25. Let him who has stolen your stalks
study
occasions.


dhas performed by him! Let him eat at the
Shraddha of a Shudra.


Shivi said :~

26. Get hia who has stole) your stalks
die without having established a. fire (for
daily worship)! Let him be guilty of
obstcucting the celebration of sacrifices by
others! Let him fall out -with those who
practise penances !


Yayati said:—

27. Let him who has stolen youre stalks
be guilty of having sexual union with his
wife when she is not in her season and when
he is himself in the observance of a vow
and bears matted locks on his head! Let
him also disregard the Vedas!


Nahusha said :—


28. Let him who has stolen your stalks
live in domesticity after having betaken
himself to the vow of mendicancy ! Let him
act in whatever way he pleases, after having
performed the initiatory rites in.view of a
Sacrifice or some solemn observance! Let
him take pecuniary satisfaction for teach-
ing his disciples. ;


Amvarisha said :~=

29. Let tim who has stolen your stalks
be cruel and sinful in bis conduct towards
women and Bkinsmen and kine! Let him be
guilty also of Brahmanicide! .'


Narada said :— ;
30. Lettim who has stolen your stalks be
one who identifies the body with the soul !
Let him study the scriptures with an un-
worthy preceptor. Let him = chaunt the
Vedas, violating at each step the rules of
orthoepy ! Let him disregard all his elders.


Nabhaga said :—


3t. Let him who has stolen your stalks
always speak untruth and quarrel with
those who are pious. Let him bestow his
daughter in martiage aftee accepting a
pecuniary satisfaction offered by his son-
in-law.
Kavi said :—

32. Let him who has stolen your stalks
be guilty of striking a cow with his foot.

et him pass urine, facing the{sun! Let him
renounce the person who seeks shelter at
his hands.


the Vedas on fordidden days or : [. : '
Let him feed friends at Shrad- | his sacrifices |


a a lc eg gt


> MAHABHARATA,


Vishwamitra said :—


33. Let him who has stolen your stalks
become a servant who acts deceitfully to-
wards his master! Let him be the priest af
aking! Let him officiate as the sacrificial
priest of one who should not be assisted at


Parvata said:—~


34. Let him who has: stolen your stalks
be the head of a village. Let him make
journeys on asses, Let him leash hounds
for maintenance,


Bharadwaja said :—


35. Let him who has stolen your stalks
be zuilty of all the transgressions of him
who is cruel in conduct and untruthful ia
speech.


Ashtaka said


26. Let him who has stolen yottr stalks
bea king shorn of wisdom, capricious and
sinful in his conduct, and disposed to rule
the Earth impiously. -


Galava said :—

:37- Let him who has stolen your stalls
be more infamous than a sinful man. Let
him be sinful in his deeds towards his kins-
men and relatives. Let him proclaim the
gifts he makes to others.


Arundhati said :—


38. Let her who has stolen your stalks
speak ill of her mother-in-law. Let her
dislike her husband. Let her eat alone any:
good food that comes te her house.


The Valakhilyas said :—


39. Let him who has stolen your stalks
stand on one foot at the entrance of a vils«
lage. Let him, while knowing all duties, be
guilty of every transgression.


Shunasakha said :—

49. Let bim who has stofen your stalks
be a Brahmana who sleeps happily having
neglected his daily Homa. Let him, after
becoming a religious mendicent, act in
any way he likes, without observing any
control.

Surabhi said :-~

4t. Let her who has stolen your stalke
be milked, with he, (hind) tegs bound with
a rope of human hair, and with the help of
a calf not her own, and, while milked,
let her milk be held in a vessel of white
brass,


Bhishma said :—


4z. After the Rishis and the royat
sages had taken various oaths, Q Kuru


ws
r


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


king, the thonsand-eyed chief of the celes- |


tials, filled with joy, looked at the angry
Rishi Agastya.

43. Addressing the Rishi who was very
angry at the disappearance of his lotus
stalks, Indra thus declared what was pass-
ing in his mind. Hear, QO king, the
words Indra spoke in the midst of those
uvice-born and celestial Rishis and royal
sages,


Shakra said :—

44. Let him who has stolen your stalks
acquire the merit of him who bestows his
daughter in macriage upon a Brahmana
who has duly observed the vow of Brahma-
charyya or who has duly studied the
Samans and the Vajushes. Let him also
fave the merit of one who takes the final
bath after completing his study of the
Atharva Veda.


45. Yet him who has stolen your stalks
acquire the merit of having studied all the‘
Vedas, Let him be observant of all duties
and righteous in‘his conduct. Indeed, tet
him go to the region of Brahman,


Agastya said +
46. You have, U destroyer of Vata,
uuered a benediction instead of a curse.


Give them to me, for that is the eternal |


duty.


Indra said :=

47. O holy one, [did not retnove your
stalks, loved by cupidity. Indeed, I
yemoved them from desire of hearing this
assembly recite what the duties are that we
should observe. Yuu should not yield to
Bugeti '

48. Duties are thé foremost of Shrutis.
Duties form the eternal path. “I have
listened to this discourse of the Rishis (on
duties) that is eternal and immutable, and -
that is above all change.


49. Do you then, O foremost of learned
Branimanas, take back these stalks of yours.
O holy one, you should forgive my trans-
gression, O you who are free front every
fault,


Hhishma said —

50. ‘Yhus addressed by the ting of the
celestials, the ascetics vis., Agastya,; who
had been very angry, took back his stalks.
Gifted with intelligence, the Rishi became,
eheerful. :
gt. Alter this, those dwellers" df! the:
forest Went td various other sacred waters,
Indeed, going to those sacred. waters they:
performed their ablutions everywhere:


Rog


with rapt attention on every Parva day, will
not begetsan ignorant andqui-ked'son. | He
will never be shern of learning.


83. No calamity will ever befall him.
He will, besides, be free from every sort
of sorrow, He will never suffer from
decrepitude and decay. - Freed from stains
and evil of every sort, and gifted with
merit, ne is sure to acquire Heaven.


84. He who studies this Shastra ob-
served by the Rishis, is sure, O king, to
attain to the eternal region of Beahinan that
is fall of happiness. ;


mmapeontniin,


CHAPTER XCV.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA)e.
Continued,


Yudhishthira said :—


t—3. O chief of Bharata’s race, by
whom was the custom of giving umbrellas
and sandals at Shraddhas introduced ? Why
was it introduced and for what purpose are
those gifts madé? They are given not
only at Shraddhas, but also at other re-
ligious rites. They are given on many
occasions with the view of winning religious
merit. 1 wish to know, in full, O twice-
born one, the true meaning of this practice.


Bhishma said :—

4. Do you, O prince, attentively listen
to the details 1 shall recite about the-cus<
tom of giving away umbrellas and, shoes
at réligious rites, and as to how and by
whom it was introduced.


5. I shall also tell you in full, O prince,
how it acquired the force of a permanent
observance and how it came to be gone
sidered as a meritorious act.


6. i shall in this connection, recite the
conversation between Jamadagni and the
great Sun, Formerly the illustrious Jama-
dagni, O powerful king, of Bbrigu’s race,
was engaged in practising with his bow.

J—to. Yaking his aim, be shot arrow
after arrow. His wife Renuka used to picls ~
up the atrows when he shot and repeatedly
bring them back to that descendant, gifted
with thé burning energy of Bhrigu’s race,
Pleased with the whizzing noise of his
arrows and the twang of his bow, he
amused himself thus by repeatedly shooting
lis, arrows which Renuka brought back ta
him. One day, at noontide, O monarch,
in that month wher the Sun was in Jyes<
thamuta, the Beahmiata, haying shot all


52. The man who reads‘ this discourse his arrews, said to Renukay~O large-eyed


2


210


‘lady, go and fetch me the arrows I have
shot fram my bow.


1114, Oyou of beautiful eye-brows 1
I shall. again shoot them with my bow !—
The tady proceeded on her errand but was
_compelled to sit under the shade of a tree,
on account of her head and feet being
scorched by the heat of the Sun. -Ihe black -
eyed and graceful Renuka, having rested
for only a moment, feared the curse of her
husband and, therefore, began to collect
and bring back the arrows. ‘Taking them
with her, the celebrated Jady of beautiful
features came back, distressed in mind and
her feet smarting with pain. ‘Trembling
with fear, she approached her husband.


15. The Rishi, stricken with anger, re-
peatedly addressed his fair-faced wife, say-
ing, —O Renuka, why have you been so tate
in returning ?


Renuka said :—


16. O you, having penances for wealth,
my head and feet were scorched by the
rays of the Sun! Oppressed by the heat,
I took shelter under the shade of a tree!


17. This has been the cause of the
delay! Informed of the cause, do you, O
lord, cease to be angry with me. ,


Jamadagni said :—
18,
troy, with the fiery energy of my weapons,
the star of the day with his burning rays,
who has afflicted you thus, -


Bhishma continued :-—


19. Drawing his celestial bow, and taking
up many arrows, Jamadagni stood, turning
his face towards the Sun and watching him
as he moved on,


20. Then O son of Kunti, seeing him
ready for fight, the Sun approached him in
the guise of a Brahmana, and said to him,—
What has the Sun done to offend you?


21. Passing through the {sky, he draws
up the moisture from the Earth, and in the
form of rains he pours it down once more
on her, ¢


. 22. It is through this, OQ twice-born
ene, that the food of human beings springs
up,—food that is so agreeable to them!
‘Vhe Vedas say that it is food that forms
the vital airs.


23. O Brahmana, hidden in the clouds
ard encompassed by his rays, the Sun
drenches the seven insular continents with
showers of cain. :


24. O powerful one, the moisture, thus
poured, spreading itself into the leaves and


O Renuka, this very day shall I des--


- MAHABHARATA.


fruits of vegetables and herbs, is changed
inte food.


23—26. O son of Bhrigu, the rites
consequent on birth, religious observances,
investiture with the sacred thead, gifts of
kine, marriage, all articles in view of sacri-
fices, the rules for the povernance of men,
gifts, all sorts of union, and the acquisition
of riches, originate from food! You know
this well]


27. All the good and sweet things in
the universe, and aii the efforts made by
living creatures, originate from food. &
duly recite what is well known to you!
indeed, yow fully know ail that 1 have
satd.

28. Do you, therefore, O  twice-bors
Rishi, appease your anger! What will you
gain by annihilating the Son 2’


CHAPTER XCVL


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—-
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


1, What did that foremost of ascetics,
vis., Jamadagni gifted with great energy,
do when thus besought by the Sun ?


Bhishma said :—

2, O descendant of Kuru, inspite of all
the prayers of the Sun, the sage Jamadagni,
effulgent like fire, continued to cherish his
anger, : ‘


3~4. Then, O king, the Sun, in the
guise of a Brahmana, bowed his head to
him and addressed him, with clasped hands,
in these sweet words,——O twice-born Rishi,
the Sun is always moving! How shall you
pierce the Lord of day who is continually
moving forward ?


Jamadagni said :—


5. With the eye of knowledge I know
you to be both moving and motionless! [
shall surely read you a lesson this day. ~


6. At midday you appear to stay in the
firmament fér a moment. It is then, O
Sun, that I shall pierce you with my arrows!
‘There is no swerving from this resolution
of mine. eee


Surya said :—
7. © twice-born Rishi, forsooth, you


know me, O best of archers! - But, O
holy one, though I have offended, see I


pray for your protection,


4


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


Bhishma said :—


8. At this, the worshipful Jam-dagni
smilingty addressed the Sun, saying,-O
San, when yor have sought my protection,
you have nothing to fear.


g—to. He would get over the simplicity
that exists in Brahmanas, the stability that
exists inthe Earth, the madness existing
in the Moon, the gravity existing ‘iv
‘Varuna, the effulgence existing in Agni,


_the brightness of Meru, and the heat of


the Sun, who would kil a suppfiant for
protection,


tr. The man who can killa suppliant
is capable of viotating the bed of his
preceptor, of killing a Brahmana and of
diinking atcohot.


_. 22. Do you, therefore, think of some
remedy for this evil, by which people may
be relieved when heated by your rays.


Bhishmra continued :—

13. So saying, that excellent descendant
of Bhrigu remained sifent for some time,
and the Sun immediately gave hine an
umbrella and a pair of sandals,


Sarya said :—

14. Do you, O great Rishi, take this
umbrella with which the head may be pro-
tected and my rays warded off. ‘This pair
of sandals ts trade of leather for the
protection of the feet.


15 |From this day the gift of these
articles in alt religious rites shall be
established as a eustum,


Bhishma continued :—


~t6. ‘This custom of giving unrbrella and
shoes was introduced by the Sun. @
descendant of Bharata, hese gifts are re-
garded merhocious in the Unree worlds, ~


17. Da you, therefore, give away um-
brellas and shoes to Brahmanas. EF have
no doubt that you will them acquire great
religious merit by the deed. |


18—1g. O foremost ome of Bharata’s
race, he who gives away a white umbrella
with a huadred ribs toa Brahmana, ac-
quires eternal happines after. death and
hives in the region of Indra, Teepented by
Brahmanas, Apsaras, and Devas.


‘20. O powerful one, he who gives shoes
to Snataka Brahmanas as also to Brahma-
nas practising the rites of rekigion whose
feet have become sore with the heat of the
Sun, acquites regions coveted by the very
celéstials.


21, Such a man, O Bharata, lives


211


happily im the highest Eleaven after bis
deatty.


2a. © foremost one of Bharata’s race, }
have thus recited to you, ia full, the merits
ef giving away shoes and umbreltas at celi-
gious ceremonies,


‘CHAPTER XCVII.


(ANUSHASANIKA -PARVA).—
Continued,


Yudhishthira said :—

1. O foremost one of Bharata’s race, do
you describe to me all the deities of the
household mode and tell me alk that a man
should do iny order to acquire prosperity in
this world,


Bhishma said:— ©
2. O Bharata, [ shalh, im this connec-


tien, recite to you the old story of Vasudeva
and the goddess Earth.


3 The powerful Vasudeva, O-! excellent

ince of Bharata’s race, after singing the
praises of the goddess E.rth, accosted her
about this very subject that you have re-
quired about.


Vasudeva said :—

4. Having adopted the domestic mode
of Hfe, what acts should F, or one like
me, do and how are such acts to yom
success.


The goddess: Earth said :—

5. O Madhava, the Rishis, the cefestiafs,
the departed Manes, and men should be
adored, and sacrifices sould be performed
bya householder,

6. Do you also learn thie fronr nre that
the eelestials are always pleased with sacri-


‘fices, and mer are pleased with hospitality.


‘Therefore, the householder should please
thens with such objects as they desire: -


7. By suet aets, O' destroyer of Madhu
Rishis also are pleased, Vhe householder,
abstaining from food, should daily attend
to his ‘saered fire and: te his sacvificiab
offerings.


8—ro. The ecelestials, © destroyer of
Madhu, are pleased: with such deeds: The
householder should daily offer oblations-
of food and water, or of fruits, roots and’
water, for the satisfaction of the d-parted
Manes, and give boiled food to the Vaishwe-
devas, and oblations of clarified butter to
Agni, Soma, and Dhanwantath


212


tr—-1z. He shoufd offer -separate and
distinet oblations to Prajapati. He should
make sacrificial offerings duly ; to Yama
in the South, to Varuna im the West, to
Soma in the North, to Prafapati within the
homestead, to Dhanwantarim the North |
East, and to Indra in the East.


13. He should offer food to men at the
entrance of his house. ‘These, O Madhava,
are known as the Vali offerings. ‘The Vali
should be offered to the Marats and the
deities in the interior of one’s house.


_ 14. To the Vishwedevas it slrould be
offered in open air, and to the Rakshasas
and evi spirits the offerings should be


householder should make offerings to Brah-
manas, and if no Brahmana be present,
the first portion of the food should be
thrown into the fire.


x6. When a man wishes to offer Shraddha
to his ancestors, he should, when the
Sheraddha ceremony - is done, please his
ancestors and they make the Vali offerings
duly.

17. He shonld then make offerings to
the Vaishwedevas. He should next invite
Brahmanas, and then properly entertain
guests arrived at his house, with food.

18. By this act, O prince, are guests
pleased. te who does not live in the house
long, or, having come, goes away after a
short time, is called a guest.

19—20. Yo his preceptor, to his father,
to his friend and to a guest, a househo!der
should say, I have got this in my house
10 offer you to-day !—And he should offer
it acordingly every day.


2t. The housetrolder slroutd do whatever
they would ofder hint to do.. This is the
established custom. ‘Phe householder, UO
Kristrna, should take his food the Fast of aff,
after having offered food to all of then.


j
made at night.
15. After making these offerings, the
|


22. The householder should adore with |
offerings of honey, etc., his king, his priest, |
his preceptor, and his father-in-law, as afso |
Snataka Brahmanas even if they were to
hive in his house for whole year. |


In the morning as well as in the


23.
food should be offered on 7


evening,
ground to dogs, the cooks fur dogs and
birds. ‘Lhis is called the VWaishwedeva
offerings.


24. The householder, who performs these
ceremonies with mind shorn of passion,
obtains the blessings of the Rishis in this
world, and after death acquirés the heavenly
eptons,


MAHABHARATA,


Bhishma said :-—

25. Having heard alf this front the god-
dess Earth, the powerful Vastrdeva acted
accordingly. Do yow alse act in the same
way.

26. By performing these duties of a
householder, O king, you shall acquire fame
in this world and Heavew after death f


Seater


CHAPTER XCVIII.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA)—
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—~


1. Of what kind is the gift of fight, O
chief of Bharata’s race? How did this gift
originate? What are the merits of uw?
Do you tell me alt this, -


Bhishma said :-


2. Reyarding it, O Bharata, is recited
the old discourse between Manu, that lord
of creatures, and Suvarna,


3- There was formerly an ascetic, O
Bharata, named Suvarna, His eomp'exion
was like that of gold and hence he was
caHed Suvarna.


4. ‘Gifted with good birth, good canduct
and good qualities, he had mag ered all che
Wedas. Indeed, by the accoiiplisiunents
he possessed, he succeeded in excelling
mary persorts of Goble birtir


g. One day that learned Brahmana be«
beheld Manu, the ford of all ereatuces, ane
approached him. Meeting each other, they
made the usual polite enguires,


6. -Both of them were fry the treth,
Havirg met each other, they sat.down orf
gharming breastof the gofden srount Meru:


J. Seated there they begart to tatle with
each other on various subfects about the |
great deities and twice-born -Rishis aid
Daityas of arfcient times,

8. Shen Suvarna, addressing the Self«
éreate Manu, said these words ‘You
should answer one question of wine for the
behoof of all sreatures,


g. O ford of ail creatures, the cefestizls
are seen to be adored with presents of
owers and othet good scénts. What igs
this? How has this practice come into
operation? What also are the merits of in?
Do you describe this subject to me.


Mandsaid=
to. Regztding it id tecited the old dis¢


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


course betweert Shuktra and
{Daitya) Vali.

tr. Once on a time, Shukra of Bhrigu’s
race approached Wali the son of Virochana
while he was ruling the three wortda.


the great


12. Having adored the descendant of
Bhrigu with the Arghya, the king of the
Asuras, that profuse giver of sacrificial
presents, sat down after his guest had
seated himself. .


13. This very subject which you have
introduced regarding the merits of the gift
o' flowers and incense and lamps, came up
ou the occasion.
Daityas put this high question to Shukra
that most learned of ali ascetics,


Vali said :—

14. O foremost of all persons conversant
with Brahma, what, indeed, is the merit of
‘giving flawers and incense and lamps?
You should, O foremost of Biahmanas,
describe this to me.


Shukra said :—


15. Penance first sprang into existence.
Afterwards came religion. In the interval
many creepers and herbs sprang up.


16. ‘Their species were inumeratle. All
of them have the Moon for their lord.
Some of these creepers and herbs came to
le considered as Ambrosia and some came
te be considered as Poison, Others that
were neither this nor that formed one class.


17. ‘Phat ts Ambrosia which gives im-
mediate pleasure and joy to the mind.
hat is Poison which tortures the mind
greatly by its smell.


18. Know again that Ambrosia is highly
fuspiclous and that Poison is highly in-
auspicious. All the herbs are Ambrosia.
Poison is born of the energy of fire.


1g. Flowers please the mind and confer
prosperity. Hence men of pious deeds
bestowed the naine Sumanas on them,


ao. That mati who in a state of purity
offers flowers to the celestials finds that the
telestials become pleased with hin, and as
the result of such ‘satisfaction confer pros-
perity upon hic, ,


2t, O kihg of the the Daityas, those
éelestials to whoin worshippers offer flowers,
O lord, utteritig their names the while, be-
come pleased with the offerers on account of
theif devotiori.
22. The (decidiious) Herbs aré of varidus
kinds and possess different qualitie. They
Should be classed as fierce, mild, and
fowerful.


Indeed, the king of the-


|


So a CR a


213


23. Listen to me as F tell you wirich trees
are useful for purposes of sacrifice and
which are not so. Hear also what gar-
lands are acceptable to Asuras, and
what. are beneficial when offered to the
celestials. :

24. I shall also set forth ia due order
what garlands are liked by the Rakshasas,
what by the Uragas, what by the Yakshas,
what by human beings, and what by the
departed Manes, in proper order,


25. Flowers are of various Kinds. Some
are wild, some are from trees which grow
i the midst of human dwellings ; sont
belong to trees which never grow unless
planted on well-cultivated soil; some are
from trees growing on mountains ; some are
from trees which are not prickly ; and sonre
from trees which are prickly. Fragrance,
beauty of form and taste also make grounds
of classification.


26. The scent of fowers is of two kinds,
agreeable and disagreeable. Those flowers
which have sweet smell shoutd be offered
to the celestials.


27. The flowers of trees which have ro
thorns are generally white in colot, Swecl?
flowers are always acceptable to’ the celes-
tials, O lord.

28. A. wise mat shouid offer garlands
of aquatic flowers, such as the Jotus and the
like, to the ‘Gandharvas and Nagas and
Yakshas.

2g. Such plauts and herbs as produce
red flowers, as have keen scent, and as ale
prickly, have been laid duwn ia the Athar«
vans as fit for all atts of incantation fdr
injuring enemies.

go. Such flowers as have keen energy,
as ate painful to the touch, as grow on
trees and plants having thorns, and as ate


either bloody-red or black, should be
offered . to (evil) spirits and unearthly
being3, Me

gt. Suct flowers as please tlie mind arid


heart, as ate very agteeable when pressed,
and as are of beautiful form, have been
said, O tord, to be worthy of being offered
to men,


34. Such flowers as grow on cenieteries
aiid crematoria, or in places dedicated to
the celestials; should net be brought and
‘used for anartlage atid other fites having
growth and prosperity for their object; or
fac acts of pleasure jn secrecy.


43. Stich flowers as grow of mountains
and in vales, and as are beautiful to look at
ahd sweet-scentéd, should be offered to the
celestials. Sprinkling theni with sandal<
paste, such sweet flowers should be duly


214


offered, according to the scriptural ordi-
hances.


34. The celestials become pleased with
the scent of flowers; the Vakstvas and
Raksbasas with their sight; the Nagas
with their touch; and human beings with
all three, vzs., seent, sight, and touch.


35- Flowers, when offered to the celes-
tials please them immediately. ‘They are
capable .of accomplishing every object by
merely wishing its accomplishment. As
such, when pleased with devotees offering
them flowers, they cause all the objects


_cherished by their wershippers to be imme-


diately achieved.


36. Pleased, they gratify their worship-
pers. Honored they make their worship-
pers enjoy all honors. Disregarded and
‘tmsulted, they make those vilest of men to
be cuined and consumed. ;


37. I shall, after this, speak to you of
the merits of the ordinances about the gift
of incense. Know, O king of Asuras, that
incenses. are of various sorts. Some of
them are auspicious and some inaus-
picious.

38. Some incenses consists of exudations..
Some are made of fragrant wood set on fire.
And some are artificial, being made by the
hand, of various artictes mixed together.
Their scent is of two sotts, vig., agreeable
and disagreeable. Listen to me as I des-
cribe the subject fully.


39. All exudations except that of the
Boswellia serrata are agreeable to the celes-
tials. | It is, however, certain that the best of
all exudations is that of the Balsamoden-
dron Mukul, — :


40. Of all Dhupas of the Sari class, the
Aquilaria Agallocha is the best. Itis very
acceptable to the Yakshas, the Rakshasas,
and Nagas. The exudation of the Bos-
wellia serratta, and others of the same-class,
are much acceptable to the Daitayas-


41. Dhupas made of the exudation of the
Shorea robusta and the Pinus deodara,
mixed with various spirits of strong scent,
are, O king, acceptable to human beings.


42. Such Dhupas are said to imme-
diately please the celestials, the Danavas,
and spirits. Besides these, there are many
othece kinds of Dhupas used by men for
purposes of pleasure or enjoyment.


43. The offer of flowers and the gift of
such Dhupas as yield gratification are equal
in merits. :


4. I shall now speak of the merits of
the gift of lights, and who may give them
at what time and in what manner, and


MARABHARATA. .


what should be the kind. of Tights that
should be offered.


45. Light is said to be energy and fame
and goes upwards. Hence the gift of light,
which is energy, increases the energy of
men.


46. There isa hell named Andhatamas.
The perfod also of the Sun's southward
course is considered as dark. For avoiding:
that hell and the darkness of this period,
one should give lights during that perio?
when the Sun isin northern solistice. Suctr
an act is highly spoken of by the good.

47. Since, again, light has am upward
course and is considered as a remedy for
darkness, therefore, one should give lights,
‘This is the conclusion of the scriptures,

48. It is by giving lights that the
eelestials have become pifted with beauty,
energy, and resplendence. By abstentiorr


‘from such a deed, the Rakshasaa have be-


come gifted with the opposite attributes.
Hence, one should always give lights.


49. By giving lights a man becomes:
gifted with keen vision and resplendence.
One who gives lights should not be looked
with jealousy by others. Lights, again,
should not be stolen, nor ptt out wher
given by others.


go. One who steals a light becomes.
blind. Such a man has to grope through
darkness and becomes shorn of resplend-
ence. One who gives lights shines ir
beauty in the celestial regions like a row
of lights. j


5t. Among lights, the best are those
in which ctarifted butter ‘is burnt. Next
im order are those in which the juice of
deciduous herbs is burnt. One seeking
prosperity and growth should never burn
fat or marrow or the juice that comes fronr
the bones of creatures.


52. The man who desires his own
aggrandisement and prosperity should al-
ways give lights at descents from mountains,
in roads through forests and inaccessible
regions, under sacred trees standing in the
midst of human dwellings, and. iw cross-
ings of streets,


53. The man who gives lights always
iMumings bis race, acquires purity of soul
and effulgence of form. Indeed, such a
man, after death, lives in the company of
the luminous bodies in the sky.


54. [E shall now describe to you the
merits, with the fruits they bring about, of
Vali offerings made to the celestials, the
Yakshas, the Uragas, human beings, spirits
and Rakshasas.


55- ‘Those unscrupulous and wicked men


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


who eat without first serving Brahmanas { -


‘and celestials and guests and children,
should be known as Rakshasas.


56. Hence, one should first offer the food
‘one has got ready to the celestials after
having adored them duly with controlled
Senses and rapt attention. One should
‘offer the Vak to the celestials, bending his
head in respect.


57. The celestials are always supported
‘by food that householders offer, ‘hey bless
‘such houses in which offerings are made
tothem. Whe Vakshasas and Rakshasas
and Pannagas, as also guests and all honse-
dess persons, are supported by the food
offered by householders,


58. Indeed, the celestials and the de-
parted, Manes derive their sustenance from
‘such offerings. Pleased with such offerings
they please the offerer in return with longe-
vity and fame and riches.


59. Clean food, of sweet scent and look,
mixed with milk and curds, should, along
with flowers, be offered to the celestials.


‘6o. The Valis that should be offered to
Yakshas and Rakshasas should be rich
with blood and meat, with wines and spirits
accompanying, and adorned with fried
paddy.

61. Valis mixed with lotuses and Utpalas
are very acceptable to the Nagas. Sesame
seeds, boiled in raw sugar, should be offered
to the spirits and other unearthly Beings.


62. He who never takes any food with-
‘out first giving a part of it to the Brah-
manas and celestials and guests, becomes
‘entitled to first portions of food. Sucha
man becomes gifted with strength
energy. Hence one should never take any
food without first offering a portion thereof
to the celestial after adoring them with
respect, : .


63. One’s house always shines in beauty
on account of the household deities that
five in it. Hence, he who desires his own
advancement and prosperity should adore
the household gods by, offering them the
first portion of every food. :


64. Thus did the learned Kavi of
Bhrigu’s race discourse to Vali the chief
of the Asuras. ‘That discourse was next
recited by Manu to the Rishi Suvarna. Su-
varna, in his turn, recited it to Narada.


65. The celestial Rishi Narada recited
to me the merits of the several acts men-
tioned. . Informed of those merits, do you,
© son, perform the several acts mentioned.


and-


215
CHAPTER XCIX,
(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—


Continued.


Yudhishthira said':—

1. £ ,have, O chief of the Bharatas,
heard what the merits which presenters of
flowers and lincense and lights acquire. {
have heard you speak also ‘of the merits
of a due observance of the ordinances in
respect of the presentation of the Vali. You
should, O grandfather, discourse to me once
more on this subject.


2. Indeed, tell me, O Sire, once more of
the merits of presenting incense and fights.
Why are Valis offered on the ground by
householders, P 1s


Bhishma said: —

3. Regarding it is recited the old dis-
course between Nahusha and Agastya and
Bhrigu. : :


4. The royal sage Nahusha, O monarch,
having penances for wealth, acquired the
sovereignty of the celestial region by his
own good deeds.


5. With controlled senses, Q king, he
lived in the celestial region, engaged in
doing diverse acts of both human and celes-
tial nature, ;


6. From that great king flowed various
kinds of husman acts and varivus kinds of
celestial deeds, also, O king.


7—8. ‘The various rites with respect: to.
the sacrificial fire, the collection of sacred
fuel and of Kusha grass, as also of flowers,
and the presentation of Vali consisting of
food adorned with fried paddy, and the
offer of incense and of light,—all thee, O
monarch, occurred daily in the house of


‘that great king while he lived in the celes-


tial region, Indeed, though living in the
celestial region, he celebrated the sacrifice
of recitation and the sacrifice of meditation.


. And, O chastiser of foes, Nahusha,
although he had become the wrk, al the
deities, yet adored all the deities, as he used
to do formerly, with due rites and cere
monies. :


10. Sometime after, Nahusha realized
his position as the king of all the deities.
This filled him with pride. From that time
all his deeds were suspended.


ii. Filled with pride on account .of the
boon he had received from all the celestials,
Nahusha caused the very Rishis to bear
him on their shoulders. On account, how-
ever, of his abstention from all religious


|. acts, his energy began to wang, .


216


12. The time was very Yong for which
Nahusha, filled with arrogance, continued
to employ the foremost- of Rishis, Having
penances for wealth, as the bearers of his
vehicles.


13. He make the Rishis perform by.
turns this humiliating work. ‘The day came
when it was Agastya’s turn to carry the
vehicle, O Bharata. ;


w4—15. Atthattime, Bhrigu, that fore-
most of all persons conversant with Brahma
went to Agastya while the fatter was
seated in his hermitage, and addressing him
“said,—-O great ascetic, why should we
patiently suffer such indignities inflicted on
us by this wicked Nahusha who bas become
the king of the deities,


Agastya said :—

16. Wow can 1 succeed in cursing
Nahusha, O great Rishi? You know how
the Boob-giving (Brahman) himself has
given Nabusha the best of buoms.


17. Coming to the celestial region, the
boon ‘that Nahusha prayed for, was that,
whoever would come within the range of bis
vision would, deprived of all energy, come
within bis control.


18. The Self-born Brahnian granted
him this boon, and it is therefore that
nigether yourself nor EF have been able
to consume him. Forsooth, it is for this
reason that none one else amongst tle
foremost of Rishis has been able to consume
or throw him down from bis elevated posi-
lion. :


19. Formarly, O lord, nettat was given
by Brahman to Nahusha for drinking.
Therefore we can do nothing to him.

20. . The great god, it appears, gave that
boon to Nalusha for plunging all creatures
ito grief. ‘That wretched than behaves


most unrighteously towards the Brah-
manas.
at. O foremost of all speakers, tell us


what should be done under the circumstane-
ces. Forsooth, [ shall do what you will
advise.

Bhiigu said :—

22. Itis at the command of the Grand-
father that IT have come tod yoii with the
view of tuiintetdcting the powet of Nahu-
sia who is gifted with great etictgy but who
has been stupefied by fate.


|
|


_ 83. That exceedingly wicked being who
has become the king of the Celestials, will
to-day yoke you to his car. With the help
of my power I shall to-day hurl him down
froth his position as Indra en account of-
his baving trattseended all restraints.


MAHABHARATA,


24. 1 shall to-day, in your very sight,
re-establish the true Indra in his position,
him, v7s., who has celebrated a handred
hoise sacrifices,—having hurled the wicked
and sinful Nahusha from that seat.


25. That impious king of the celestials
will to-day insult you by a kick, on account
of his understanding being afflicted by fate
and for bringing about his own downfall.


26. Euraged at such an insult I shall
to-day Curse that sinful wretch, that enemv
of the Brahmanas. who has transcended all
restraints, saying, —-Be you metamorphosed
into a snake.

27. Before your eyes, O great ascetic, f[
shall to-day hurl down on the Barth the
wicked Nahusha who shall be deprived of
all power on account of the cries of Me that
will be uttered from all sides. .

28. Indeed, [ shall hurl down Natuoha
to-day, that sinful man, who has, besides,
been Stupefied by lordship and power. I
shall do unis, if you like it, O@ ascetia

39. ‘Uhus addressed by Bhrigu, Mitrae
varuna’s son Ayastya of unfading power
and glocy, became highly pleased and trod
fron every anxiely,


CHAPTER C.
C(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).=


Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—~


t, How was Nahusha plunged inte diss
‘tress? How was he hurled down on the
Earth? How, indeed, was he deptived of
the sovereignty of the celesiials? Youu
should recite everything to més
Bhishma said t=

2. Thus gdid those two Rishis, of¢i,


Bhrigd arid Agastyd, tale with each oiher
I have alréady told you tow Nahttsha;
when he first bedvitie tlle Ring of the celess
tials, acted in a propet way. lideed, that
great royal sage petformed all hutan and
celestial deeds;


3—4. Nahtsha who had béesme the
king of the celestials, tiade gifts of light,
and property deserved all ailies rites of 4
similar. nature=the dite presetitation of
Valis, and all rites a8 are perfotrhed on
especially sacred days. -Pivtts acta até
always done by wise. ttien, in both thd
world of men atid that of the éelestiats:
Indeed, O foremost of kings, if stich avtd
are observed, householdersialways sticceeéd tnt
acquiring prosperity and aggrandisemetits


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


8. Even such is the effect of the gift of
lamps and of incense, as also of bows and
prostrations, to the celestials.


6. When food is cooked, the first por-
tion thereof should be offered” to a Brah-
mana. The particular offerings called Vali
should also be presented to the household
gods, The deities become pleased with
such gifts.


7. tt is also well known that the mea-
sure of gratification which the celestials
derive from such offerings is a hundred
times as great as that" which the house-
holder himself gets from making them.


8. Pious and wise persons make offering
of incense and ligtts, accompanying them
with bows and prostrations. Such acts
always yield advancement and prosperity
to those that do them.


g Those rites which the learned per-
form in course of their ablutions, and with
the help of waters, accompanied with bows
to the pods, always contribute to the satis-
faction of the celestials.


1a. When adored with proper rites, the
highly-blessed departed Manes, Rishis
having asceticism for wealth, and the house-
hold deities, all become pleased.


11. Filled with swch ideas, Nahusha,
that great king, when he obtained the
sovereipnty of the celestials, observed all
these rites and duties fraught with great
glory.

12. Sometime after, the good fartune of
Nahusha decreased, and as the outcome of
it, he neglected all these observances and
began to act in defiance of all control in
the manner I have already described,


13. The king of the celestials, on ac-
count of his abstertion fram observing the
ordinances about the offers of incense and
fight, began to decline in power,


14. His sacrificial rites and presents
were obstructed by Rakshasas. It was at
this time that Nahusha yoked that foremost
of Rishis, viz., Agastya, to his car.


15. Possessed of great strength Nahusha
smiiing ail the while, set that great Rishi
speedily to the task, commanding him to
bear the vehicle fromthe banks of the
Saraswati. At this time, Bhrigu, possessed
of great energy, addressed the son of
Mitravaruna, saying :—

16—17. Do you shut your eyes till I
enter into the matted locks on your head.—
Having said this, Bhrigu of unfading glory
and great energy entered into the matted
locks of Agastya who stood still like a
wooden post, for hurling king Nahusha
from the throne of Heaven, Soon after


28


217


Nahusha saw Agastya approach him for
bearing his car.


18. Seeing the king of the celestials,
Agastya addressed him, saying.-Do you
yoke me to your vehicle forthwith! To
what region shall I bear you.


19. O lord of the celestials, I shall bear
you to the spot which you may be pleased to
direct !—Thus addressed by chim, Nahusha
caused the ascetic to be yoked to his car,


20. Bhrigu, who was living within the
matted locks of Agastya, became highly
pleased at this act of Nahusha, He took
care not to look at Nahusha.


2t. Fully acquainted with the power
which the illustrivuus Nahusha had acquired
on account of the boon which Brahman had
granted him, Bhrigu acted -thus, Agastya
also though treated by Nahusha in this
way, did uot yield to anger,


22—28. Then, O Bharata, king Nahusha .
urged Agastya on with his goad. The
pious Rishi did not still yield to anger.
Vhe lord of the celestials, himself enraged,
then struck Agastya on the head with his
left foot. When the Rishi was thus struck
on the head, Bhrigu, who was living within
Agastya’s matted locks, became incensed and
cursed the sinful Nahusha, saying,—Since
you have struck with your foot on the head
of this great Rishi, do you, therefore, fall
down on the Earth, changed into a snake,
O wretch of wicked understanding !|—-Thus,
imprecated by Bhrigu who had not been
seen, Nahusha, forthwith became transform -
ed intoa snake and dropped down on the
Earth, O chief of Bharata’s race!—I[f, O
monarch, Nahusha had seen Bhrigu, the
latter would not then have succeeded, by
his power, in burling the former down on the
Earth, On account of the various gifts that
Nahusha had made, as also his penances
and religious observances, though hurled
down on the Earth, O king, he succeeded
in keeping his memory. He then began ta
propitiate Bhrigu with a view to get rid
of the curse,

29. Agastya also, filled with mercy joined
Nahusha in pacifying Bhrigu for the termi-
nation of the curse. At last Bhrigu felt
mercy for Nahusha and arranged for the
working out of the curse, :


Bhrigu said :—

30.° There will appear a king (on Barth)
of the name of Vudhishthira, the foremost
of his race. He will rescue you from this
curse!=Having said this, the Rishi dis-
appeared from the presence of Nahusha.


31. Agastya also, of great energy,
having thus performed the business of the


218


a“


true Indra, that arbitrator of a hundred
“sacrifices, returned to his hermitage, adored
of all members of the regenerate order,


32. You have, O king, rescued Nahusha
from Bhrigu’s curse. Rescued by you, he
ascended to the region of Brahman before
your eyes. .


33. As regards Bhrign, having hurled
Nahusha on the Earth, he went to the re-
gion of Brahman and informed the Grand-
father of it.


34. Yhe Grandfather having called
Indra back, addressed the celestials, say-
ing,~-Ye celestials; through the boon I had
granted him, Nahusha had obtained the
sovereignty of Heaven.


35. Deprived, however, of that sover-
eignty by the enraged Agastya, he has
been hurled on the Earth, O celestials,
you will not succeed in living without a
king,


36—38. Do you, therefore, once more
install Indra as the king of Heaven.—The
celestials filled with joy, O son of Pritha, re-
plied to the Grandsire, who said so to them,
saying,—So be it. Brahman then, O best
of kings, installed Indra in the sovereignty
of Heaven. Made once more the king of
the celestials, Vasava began to shine in
beauty and resplendence, ‘FPhis is what
took place formerly through the tcansgres-
sions of Nahusha.


39. On account, however, of the merits
he had acquired through deeds of the kind
I have mentioned, Nahusha succeeded in
once more regaining his lost position.
Hence, when evening comes, householders
should give lights.

49. The giver of lights is sure to win
celestial vision after death. Givers of light
become as resplendent as the full moon,


41. The giver of lights becomes gifted
with beauty of form and strength for years
corresponding with the number of twinkles
for which the lights given by him burn or
blaze.


CHAPTER Cl.


(ANUHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued,


Yudhigshthira said :—


1. Where do those foolish, wretched,
and sinful men go, O king, who steal or
misappropriate such aiticles as belong to
Brahmanas ?


MAHABHARATA,


Bhishma said :—

2. I shail, about it, O Bharata, recite to
you the ‘conversation between a Chandala
and a low Kshatriya,


This Kshatriya said :—


3. Youseem, O Chandala, to be old in
years, but your conduct appears to be like
that of a boy! Your body is besmeared
with the dust raised by dows and asses, but
without minding that dust you are anxious
about the little drops of milk that have fall-
en upon your persons.


4. Htis plain that such acts as are cen-
sured by the pious are ordained for the
Chandala, Why, indeed, do you seek to
wash off the spots of milk from = your
body. -


The Chandala said :—


5—6. Formerly, O king, certain” kine
belonging to a Brahmana were. stolen,
While they were being carried away, some
milk from their udders dropped upon a
number of Soma plants that grew by the
road-side. Those Brahmanas who drank
the juicé of the plants thus bedewed with
milk, as also. the king who celebrated the
sacrifice in which that Soma‘was drunk, had


to sink in hell. Indeed, for having thus
appropriated something belonging to a
Brahmana, the king with all the Brah-


manas who had helped him had to go to
hell,


7. All those men also, Brahmanas and
_Kshatriyas, who drank milk or clarified
butter or curds, in the palace of the king
who had stolen the Brahmana’s kine, had
to fall into hell.


8. The stolen kine also, shaking their
bodies, killed with their milk the sons and
grandsons of those who had stolen them, as
also the king and the queen although the
latter treated the animals, with great care
and attention.


9. As for myself, O king, I used to
live the life of a celibate in that place
where these kine were placed after they had
been stolen away. ‘The food | had got by
begging became sprinkled ovec with the
mill of those kine.


to. Having taken that food, O Ksha-
triya, I have, in this life, become a Chan-
dala. The king who:had stolea the kine
belonging to a Brahmana came by a
wretched end,


tr. Hence, one should never steal or
appropriate anything belonging to a Brah-
mana. Mark, to whatstate I am reduced
on account of my having eaten food that


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


had been sptinkled over with milk belong~
ing toa Brahmana.


12. {tis for this reason that Soma plants
should never be destroyed by wise men.
They who sell the Soma plantace held in
low esteem by the wise.


13. Indeed, O son, they who purchase
Soma and they who sell it, both sink in
the hell called Raurava after death.


14. That man who, possessing a know-
ledge of the Vedas, duly sells Soma, be-
comes in his next life a usuer and speedily
meets with destruction. ’


1§—16. For three-hundred times he has
to sink into hell and become changed into
an animal which subsists upon human
excreta. Serving a low person, pridv, and
tape upon a friend’s wife, if weighed
against one another in a balance, would
show that pride, which is above all restraints,
is the heaviest. Mark this dog, so sinful
and disagreeably pale and lean,


17—~23. It is through pride that living
creatures come by such a miserable end.
As for myself, I was born in a large
family in a former birth of mine, O
lord, and | was a perfect master of ali
branches of knowledge and all the sciences.
1 knew the immensity of all these faults,
but moved by pride, | became blinded and
ate the meat attached to the vertebral
columns of animals. On account of such
conduct and such food, I have come by
this state. Mark, the reverses engendered
by Time! Like a person whose cloth
has caught fire at one end, or who is
pursued by bees, see, | am running, filled
with fear, and smeared with dust! ‘The
house-holders are rescued from all sins by
a study of the wise. O Kshatriya, a sinful
Brahmana becomes rescued from all his
sins by a study of the Vedas, if he becomes
a forest-recluse and abstains from attach-
ment of every kind. O chief of Kshatriyas,
I am, in this life, born in a sinful caste.


24. I cannot see clearly how I may
succeed in purifying myself from all sins,
On account’ of some meritorious deed of a
former life, 1 have.not lost the memory of
my previous births.


25. O king, I throw myself on your
mercy! I ask you. Do you remove my
doubt. By what auspicious course of
conduct should I wish to acquire my libe-
ration? O foremost of men, by what means
shall I succeed in getting rid of my
Chandalahood.


The Kshatriya said :—


26. Know, O Chandala, the means by
which you may be able to acquire libera-


219


tion. By renouncing your life for the sake
of a Brahmana, you may come by a
desirable end,


27. By throwing your body on the fire
of battle as a libation to the beasts and
birds of prey for the sale of a Brahmana,
indeed, by renouncing your life thus, you
may achieve liberation, By no other
means will you succeed in acquing it,


Bhishma said :—

28. Thus accosted, that Chandala, O
scorcher of enemies, poured his life- breaths
as a libation on the fire of battle for the.
sake of protecting a Brahmana’s riches
and as the result of that act attained toa
very desirable end, :


29. Hence, O son, you should always
protect the property of the Bratmranas, if,
O chief of Bharata’s race,-you wish, O you
of mighty arms, an end consisting of eternal
happiness.


CHAPTER .CIL.


(ANUSHASANA PARVA).—
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


1. O grandfather, it has been said
that all righteous men attain to the same
region after death. It is true; O Bharata,
that there is difference of position among
them ? ;


Bhishma said ‘—


2. By different acts, O son of Pritha,
men acquire different regions. ‘They who
are cighteous in conduct acquire blissful
regions, while they who are sinful acquire
miserable regions,


3. Regarding it is cited the old discourse,
O son, between the ascetic Gautama and
Vasava


4. A certain Brahmana named Gau-
tama, mild and self-centrolled and with all
his senses under complete control, saw an
infant elephant that had Inst his mother
and that was highly cheerless on that
account.


5. Full of mercy and steady in the ob-
servance of his vows, the ascetic nursed
that infant animal. After along time the
little beast grew up into a Jarge and power-
ful elephant.


6. One day, Indra, in the guise of king
Dhritarashtra, seized that powerfut elephant


220


which was as huge as a hill and from whose
rent temples the juice was trickling down.


7-8. Seeing the elephant dragged
away, the great ascetic Gautama of rigid
vows said to king Dhritarashtra,—O un-
grateful Dhritarashtra, do not rob me of
this elephant. It is considered by me asa
son and I have reared it with much pain.
It is said that between the pious, friendship
is formed by merely the exchange of seven
words, You should see, O king, that the
sit of injuring a friend does not affect you.


Gautama said :—

Q@—~10. You should not, O king, take
away by force this elephant which brings me
my fuel and water, which protects my her-
mitage when 1 am away, which is exceed-
ingly docile and obedient to his instructor,
which carefully does what his preceptor
‘commands, which is mild and well-broken,
and which is grateful and very dear to me.
Indeed, you should not take it away without
Caring for my protestations and cries.


Dhritarashtra said :—


it. 1 shall give you a thousand kine, a
bundred maid-servants, and five hundred
pieces of gold. I shall also, O great Rishi,
give you various other kinds of wealth.
What use can Brahmanas have with ele-
phants?


Gautama said :—


12,
servants and coins of gold and various gems
and various other kinds of riches. Waat, O
king, have Brahmanas to do with riches.


Dhritarashtra said :—


13. Brahmanas have no use for ele-
phants. Indeed, O learned Brahmana,
elephants are intended for Kshatriyas. In
taking away an animal, véz., this foremost
of elephants, for my use, } cannot be consi-
dered as committing any sin. Do you
cease obstructing me thus, O Gautama.


Gautama, said :—

14. Q illustrious king, going even sto
that region of Yama where the pious live
happily and the sinful in grief, | shall take
from you this my elephant.


Dhritarashtra said:—


15. -They who are destitute of religious
acts, they who have no religious faith and
are atheists, they who are sinful and are
always engaged in pleasing their appetites
only they have to go to the region of Yama
and suffer the misery he inflicts. Dhrita-
rashtra shall go to a higher region and not
there.


Keep, O kihg, your kine and maid- .


MAHABHARATA.


, Gautama said :—


16. Men are restrained in the region of


Yama. No falsehood can be told there.
Only truth prevails in that place. There
the weak persecute the strong. Going


there 1 shall compel! you to yield up this
elephant to me.


Dhritarashtra said :—


17, Only those persons who, intoxicated
with pride, treat their eldest sister and
father and mother as enemies, have to go, O
great ascetic, to such a region. [I shall go to
a higher region. Indeed, Dhritarashtra
shall not have to ‘go there.


Gautama said :—


13. Those highly blessed ones go to the
region cajled Mandakini, of king Vaishra-
vana for enjoying jyy and comfort, There
live Gandharvas and Yakshas and Apsaras.
Going even there, O king, 1 shall compell
you to yield up this elephant to me.


Dhritarashtra said :—


19. ‘Those persons who consider hospita-
lity to guests as a vow, who observe good
vows, who give shelter to Brahmanas, and
who eat what remains after distribution
among his dependants, adorn the region
called Mandakini of Kuvera. [ shall not
go there, fora higher region is reserved
for me.


Gautama said :—


20. If you go to those charming woods,
decked with flowers, which stand on the
summit of Meru, which echo with the melo-
dious notes of Kinnaris, and which are
graced with beautiful Jamvus of wide-
spreading -branches, I shall proceed even
there and campell you to yield up this ele-
phant to me.


Dhritarashtra said :—

21—22. Yhose Brahmanas who have mild
dispositions, who are devoted to truth, who
are endued with scriptural knowledye, who
are compassionate to all creatures, who,
study, the Puranas with all the histories, who
pour libations on the sacred fire and make
gifts’ of honey to the Brahmanas, go to such
regions, O great Rishi! I shall go toa
higher region. Indeed, Dhritarashtra shall
not go there. If you are acquainted with
any other well-known region of happiness,
speak to me, for 1 shall go even there.


Gautama said :—


23. If you go to the woods owned by
Narada and held dear by him, which are
adorned with flowers and which echo with
the meledieus songs of the prince of


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


Kinnaras, and which are the eternal habi-
tation of Gandharvas and Apsaras, f shall
follow you there and compell you to yield
up this elephant to me, ;


Dhritarashtra said :—


24. They who never beg, they who culti-
vate music and dancing, and always move
about happily, proceed to such regions.
great Rishi, 1 shall goto a region which is
higher. Indeed, Dhritarashtca shall not
have to go there.


Gautama said :—


25—26. If you go to that region where
the Utrara-Kurus blaze in beauty and pass
their days happily, O king, in the company
of the very celestials, where those beings
who originate from fire, those who originate
from water, and those who originate from
mountains, live happily, and where Shakra
rains down the fruition of every desire,
and where women live in perfect freedom,
uncontrolled by rules of any kind regulating
their conduct or motions, and where there is
no feeling of jealousy among both the sexes,
—if you go there, even there shall I go
and compell you to yield up this elephant
to me. :


Dhritarashtra said :—


27—-28. Those men who are freed from
desire for all articles of enjoyment, who
abstain from meat, who never take up the
rod of punishment, and never inflict the least
harm on mobile and immobile creatures, who
have formed -themselves the soul of all crea
tures, who never accost others by pronoun-
cing blessings upon them, who are entirely
freed ‘from the idea of mineness, who are
shorn of attachments for every thing, who
view profit and loss as also praise and
blame in equal light, only those men, O
great Rishi, go to such regions. 1 shall go
to a higher region. Indeed, Dhritarashtra
shall not go there.


Gautama, said :—~


2g. Next to these shine in beauty those
eternal regions, full of excelient perfumes
which are tree from passions of every kind
and which are destitute of sorrow. These
form the abode of the great king Soma. If
you go there, even there shall 1 proceed
and compell you to yield up this elephant
to me.


Dhritarashtra said :—


30—31. Those men who always make
gifts without receiving any gift, who never
accept any service from others, who possess
nothing which they cannot give to a worthy
person, who are hospitable to all creatures,


22T


who are inclined to show favour to every
one, who are of forgiving dispositions, who
never speak ill of others, who protect all
creatures by covering them with mercy,
and who are always righteous in their. con-
duct, only those men, O great Rishi, go
to such regions. I shall go to a higher
region, Indeed, Dhritarashtra shall not
go there. : ;


Gautama said :—


32. Nextto these shine in beauty other
regions that are eternal free from passion
and Darkness and sorrow, and which lie at
the foot of the great Sun-God. If you go
there, even there shall I go and compell you
to yield up this elephant to me.


Dhritarashtra said -—


33—34. Those men who attentively
study the Vedas, who are given to the ser-
vice of their preceptors, who observe pen«
ances and excellent vows, who are firm in
truth, who never utter words of disobedience
or enmity to their preceptors, who are always
alert, and ever ready in the service of elders
and preceptors,—they go, O great Rishi,
to such regions, they who are puré who are
gifted with cleansed souls, who are of con-
trolled speech, who are firm in truth and
who are well versed inthe Vedas. I shall
proceed to a higher region. Indeed, Dhri-
tarashtra shall not go there. ‘


Gautama said :—


35. Next to those are the eternal regions
which shine in beauty, which are full of
excellent perfumes, which are free from
passion, and which are destitute of every
sorrow. ‘They form the abode of the great
king Varuna. If you proceed there, even”
there shall I go and compell you to yield up
this elephant to me. -—~


Dhritarashtra’ said:—


36-37. Those men who adore the celes-
tials by observing the vow called Chatur-
masya, who perform a hundred and ten
sacrifices, who pour libations every day on
their sacred fire with devotion and faith for
three years according to the ordinances
declared iu tie Vedas, who perform without -
hesitation of all duties, who waik steadily
along the way trod by the pious, who
steadily sustain the course of conduct fol-
lowed by the righteous-souled,—only they
goto such regions, I shall go to a higher
region. Indeed, Dhritarashtra shall not go
there.


Gautama said :—


38. Above them are the regions of Indra,
free from passion and sorrow, which are
difficult of access and coveted by all men,


222°


Going even to the abode of Indra himself
of great energy, I shall, O king, compel you
to yield up this elephant to me.


Dhritarashtra said :—


39. He who lives for a hundred years,
who is gifted with herpism, whe studies the
Vedas and who celebrates sacrifices with
devotion, indeed, such men proceed to the
region of Shakra. I shall go toa higher
region, Indeed, Dhritarashtra shall not go
there.


Gautama said :—

40. Above the firmament are the regions
of the Prajapatis, of superior, happiness,
abounding in every happiness, and shorn of
sorrow. Belonging to those powerful ones
from whom the creation has originated, they
are coveted by all persons. If you go there,
even their shall | go and compell you to
yield up this elephant to me.


Dhritarashtra said:—


4t. Those kings who have bathed upon
the termination of the Rajasuya sacrifice,
who are gifted with righteous souls, who
have protected theic subjects properly, aod
who have washed their limbs with purified
water upon the termination of the Hurse-
sacrifice, go to such regions, Indeed
Dhritarashtra shall not go there.


Gautama said :—


42. Next to those, shine in beauty those
eternal regions, full of delicious perfumes,
freed from passion, and transcending allt
sorrow. ‘Those are the regions of kine, very
hard to get in, where oppression can never
be. If you go there, I shall go even there
and compell you to yield up this elephant
to me,


Dhritarashtra said :—


43—44. He who, having a thousand
kine, gives away a hundred kine every year,
or having a hundred kine gives away ten
every year to the best of his power, or
possessing only ten or even five kine gives
away therefrom one cow, and they who give
a mature old aye practising the vow of
celibacy all their days, who obey the in-
junctions of the Vedas, and who, gifted with
energy of mind, go to sacred waters and
shrines, hve happily in the region of kine.


45—48. They who go to Prabhasa and
Manasa, the lakes of Pushkara, the large
lake called Mahatsara the sacred forest of
Naimisha, Vahuda, Karatoya, Gauga,
Gayashiras, Vipasha, Sthulavaluka, Krishna,
the five rivers (of the Punjab), the extensive
lake called Mabahrada, Gomati, Kaushiki,
Champa, Saraswati, Drishadwati, and Ya-


MAHABHARATA,


muna,—indeed those illustrious Brahmanas,
firm in ihe observance of vows, who go tu
these sacred waters,—go to the regions of
which you speak. Gifted with celestial
bodies and adorned with celestial garlands,
those blessed individuals, always emitting
the sweetest perfumes, go to the regions of
joy. Indeed, Dhritarashtra shall not go
there.


Gautama said :—


49—51!. Next to these are regions where
there is no fear of the least cold or heat, no
hunger, no thirst, no pain, no sorrow, no joy,
no one who is agreeable or disagreeable, no
friend, and no enemy, no decrepitude and na
death, and where there is neither virtue nor
sin. Going, even to that region which is
freed from passion, which is full of happi-
ness, and where there is wisdom and the
quality of Sattwa,—indeed, going to even
that sacred avode of the self-create Brah-
man,—I_ shall compel you to yield up this
elephant to me.


Dhritarashtra said :—


52—53, Lhey who are shorn of all at-
tachments, who are gifted with purified
souls, who steadily observe the foremost
vows, who are given to Yoga which is the
outcome of the pacification of the mind, and
who have acquired the happiness of Heaven
—those persons possessed of the quality of
Sattwa—come to the sacred region of Brah-
man. O great ascetic, you shall nat be
able to discover Dhritarashtra there.


Gautama said :— .

54, There where the foremost of Ra-
thantaras is sung, where altars are covered
with the sacred Kusha blades, for the “cele-
bration of Pundarika sacrifices, there where
Soma-drinking Brahmanas sojourn on cars
drawn by excellent horses, going even
there I shall compel you to yield up this
elephant.


55. I think you are the destroyer of
Viitra, vig., the god who has celebrated a
hundred sacrifices, engaged in passing
through all the regions of the universe, [
hope | have not, through mental weakness,
committed any fault by the words I have
addressed you,


The God of a hundred sacrifices
said :—

59. Yes, I am Maghavat. I came on
earth for seizing this elephant. I bow to
you. Do you command me. [ shail im-
mediately accomplish all that you may be
pleased to say.


Gautama said :—
56. Do you give me, O king, of the


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


telestials, this white elephant that is so
young, for it is only ten years of age. I
have raised it as a child of my own. Living
in this forest, it has grown under my eye
and has been to me a dear companion. Do
you set free this my child that you have
seized and wish to take away.


Yhe god of a hundred sacrifices

sald i—

58. ‘This elephant that has been a son,
to you, O foremost of Bralimanas, comes to
you looking wistfully at you. See, it smells
your feet with its nostrils. My salutations
to you. Do you pray for my well-being.


Gautama said :—


59. O king, of the celestials, 1 do always
think of your good. | always offer. you
worship. Do you also, O Shakra, impart
your blessings to me. Given by you, I ac-
cept this elephant.


The God of a hundred sacrifices
said :—

60. Amongst all those great and fore-
most of Rishis who firmly follow truth and
who have the Vedas planted in their heart,
you alone have been able to recognise me.
‘Therefore I am exceedingly pleased with
you.


61. Do you, therefore, O Brahmana,
come with me sfeedily, accomyanied by
this your son, You are worthy of going to
various regions of great happiness, without
the delay of even a single day.


Bhishma said:—


62. Having said these words, the holder
of the thunderbolt, taking Gautama with
him and placing him before, alang with his
son, wig., that elephant,, went to Heaven,
that is difficult of attainment by even the
pious.


63. He who would Jisten to this history
every day or would recite it, controlling his
senses all the while, will go to the region o
Brahman even as Gautama himself. :


CHAPTER CIIf.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—

‘1. You have described (o us the various
kinds of gift, tranquillity of soul, ‘ruth,
mercy, contentment with one’s married wife,
and the merits of gift,


223


2. Vou know very well, O grandfather,
that there is nothing whose power is supe.
rior to that-of Penances. Yow should exs
plain to us what forms the highest pens
ance,


Bhishma said :~—

3-1 tell you, O Yudhishthira, that one
acquires a regions of happiness according
to the nature of penances he practises,
This is what 1 hold, O son of Kunti, that
there is no Penance superior to abstention
from food.


4. Regarding it is recited the ancient
discourse between Bhagiratha and the illus«
trious Brahman,


5. We have heard, @ Bharata, that
Bhagiratha attained to that region which is
superior to that of the celestials of kine, and
of the Rishis,


6. Seeing this, O monarch, the Grand«
father Brahman, addressing Bhagiratha,
said—How, O Bhagiratha, have you ate
tained to this region that is so hard to
get at.


7. Neither the celestials, nor Gandhar-
vas, nor mankind, O Bhagiratha, succeed
in coming here without having ‘per formed
the severest austerities. How, indeed, have
you come by this region. ;


Bhagiratha said :~

8. I used to make gifts of hundred thous
sands of gold coins to the Brahmanas prac-
tising the vow of celibacy all the while. It
is not by dint of the merit of those gifts,
Q learned one, that I have acquired this
region. ;

9. I celebrated the €karatri (one-
night's } sacrifice (consisting of fasts and
gifts) for ten times, and the Pancharatri
(five-nights’) sacrifices for as many times.
I perf ormed eleven times the E-kadashratri
sacrifice. 1 performed a hundred times
the great sacrifice of Jyotishtoma. It is
not, however, through the merits of those
saccifices that I have acquired this region
of happiness:

to. -For a hundred years | lived continu-
ously by the side of tie sacred Jahnavi, all
the while performed the severest austerities.
There ] made gifts to the Brahmanas of
thousands of males and numberless female
slaves.

11. By the side of the Pushkara lake I
made gifts to the Bralmanas, for a hundred
thousand times, a hundred thousand horses,
and two hundred thousand gine.


12, I also gave away a thousand women
of great beauty, each adorned with golden
moons, and sixty thousand more, decked


224 MAHABHARATA.


with ornaments of pure gold. It is not, 23—24. Spending avast sum of tioney,
however, through the merits of those deeds | O Grandfather, and celebrating eight
that 1 have suceeded in acquiring these { Rajashya sacrifices, | gave away to the
regions, Brahmanas who officiated in them, a thou-
13. © ford of the universe, performing sand kings whose necks were adorned
those sacrifices knowt as Gosava, I gave | with garlands of gold, after having defeat-
away ten Arvudas of kine, presenting each ed them in battle. It is not, however,
Brahmana with ten kine, each of whom | through the merits of those deeds that I
was accompanied with her calf, each of | have acquired this regicen.
whom gave milk at the time, and with each 25. In those sacrifices, O Lard of the
of whom _ were given & vessel of gold and | universe, | made presents as profuse as the
One of white brass for milking her. stream of Ganga herself. Each Brahmana
14. Celebrating many Soma sacrifices, | 1 gave two thousand elephants decked with
1 gave away to each Brahmana ten kine | gold, as many horses adorned with golden
each of whom gave milk, and each of whom | ornaments, and a hundred villages of the
had brought forth only her first calf, besides | best kind.
making presents to them of hundreds of 26—27. Indeed, I gave these thrice to
kine belonging to that kind which is known | each Brahmana observant of penances,
by the name of Rohini, living on regulated diet, adopting tran-
15. l also gave away to the Brahmanag | quillity of soul, and controlling speech, I
twice ten Prayutas of other kine, all giving | lived for a long time on the breast of
milk, It is not through the merit of those | Himavat by the side of that Ganga whose
gifts, O Brahman, that | have succeeded | irresistible current was borne by Maha-
in acquiring to this region of happiness. deva on his head. it is not through the
16, Lalso gave away a hundred thou. | merit of these deeds, O grandfather, that


sand horses of the Vathika breed, ail of I have acquired this region,
white complexion, and adorned with garlands 28. Throwing the Shami, I worshipped
of gold. [t is not, however, through the | the gods in numberless such sacrifices as
merits of those deeds that I have acquired | are completed in course of a single day, and
this region, such others as take twelve days for com-
17. I gave also eight crores of golden pleting, and others still as can be completed
coins to the Brahmanas, O Brahman, and in thirteen days, besides many Pundarikas.
another ten crores also, in each sacrifice that | | have not acquired this region through the
lcelebrated, [t is not, however, through | TEs of any of those sacrifices.
the merits of ghose deeds that I have ace 29. I gave to the Brahmanas eight
quired this region of happiness, thousands of white bulls, each possessed of
18. Lalso gave away seventeen crores of | 2 beautiful hump, and each having one of


horses, O Grandfather, each of green color, a0 horas wade with gala: To Meese it
each having black ears, and each adorned | 2'S° save beautiful wives whose necks were
with garlands of gold. adorned with chains of gold.


19. Lalso gave away seventeen thou- 30. { also gave away masses of gold
sand huge elephants having teeth as large and wealth of other kinds. [ gave away
as ploughsshares, each having those whirls hills of gems and valuable stones. I gave
on its body, which are called Padmas, and | 2¥4 Villages, thousands in number and
each bedecked with gatlands of gold. filled with wealth and corn,


20. 1 gave away ten thousand cars, O
Grandfather, whose parts were made of gold,
and which were adorned with various orua-
ments of gold.


21. I also gave away seven thousand
other cars with horses yoked to each. All
the horses that were yoked to them were
adorned with ornaments of gold. Those
cars represented the presents of a sacrifice
and were of exactly that kind which is indi-
cated in the Vedas.


22. Inthe ten great Vajapeya sacrifices
that I celebrated, I gave away a thousand
heroes each gifted with the power of Indra
himself, judged by theie prowess and the
sacrifices they had celebrated.


3t. With all my senses about me, I
gave away the Brahmanas a_ hundred
thousand kine each of whom had brought
forth only her first calf, at many great
sacrifices which I celebrated. It is not,
however, through the merits of those deeds
that I have acquired this region.


32. I worshipped the celestials in a
sacrifice that is completed in eleven days.
Twice I worshipped them in sacrifices that
are completed in twelve days. 1 worshipped
them also many a time ja the Horse-sacri-
fices. I performed the Arkayana sacrifice
sixteen times. It is not through the merits
of those deeds that I have acquired this
region.


ANUSHASANA, PARVA.


33. BP alge gave each Brahmana a forest
of Kanchana trees extending for a Yojana
on every side, and with each tree adorned
avith jewels and gems. {t is not through
the merits of that deed that Ihave acquired
this repion. ~


34. Bor thirty years, with heart perfect
fy freed from anger, | observed the Tura-
yana vow that has very superior merit, and
gave away to the Brahmanas every day
nine handred kine.


35. Indeed, O Lord of the universe,
every one of those kine belonged to the


Rotini species and yave milk at the time’


{gave them away. {t is not throngh the
merits of those deeds, O king of the deities,
that I have acquired this region.


36. adored thirty fires, O Brahman,
every day. 1 worshipped the celestials in
eizght sacrifices in) which the fat of all
animais was poured on the fire. 1 worship-
ped them in seven sacrifices in which the
fat of human beings was poured on the


fire, ~


37. 1 adored them in a thousand and
twenty-eight Vishwajit srcrifices. Tt is not
tbrough the merits of those sacrifices, O
king of ail the celestials, that 1 have ac-
guired this region.


38. On the bants of Sarayu and Vahuda
and Ganga, as also in the forest of Nai-
misha, { pave away millions of kine to the
Brahmans, {t is not through the merits
of those deeds that { have acquired this
region.


The vow of fast had been known to
Indra. He had, however, kept it a secret.
Shukra, the descendent of Bhrigu, gained a
knowledge of it by means of spiritual sight
acquired through penances. Burning with
energy as he does, it is Ushanas who frst
made it known to the universe. 1 observed
that vow, O boon-giving Deity.


40. When [{ finished that very superior
vow, the Brahmanas became all pleased
with me. A thousand Rishts came there.


4t. All those Brahimanas and Rishis, O
poiverful lord, pleased with me, said,—-Do
you go to the region of Brahman !—It is
on account of the merits of that vow that
f have succeeded in acquiring this region of
very superior happiness, ‘There is no doubt
in this. - :


42. Asked by the Supreme Creator of
all things, | have duly explained the merits
of the vow of fast? In my opinion, there
is no penance higher than fast. I bow to
you,-Q foremost of all the celestials.
Propitiated with me,


29


Be.


22 5


A

Bhishma said :—~

43. King Bhagiratha, who had said so
and who was worthy of every honor, was,
on the conclusion of his speech, honored by
Brahman according to the rites ordained
for that purpose. .

44. Do -you, therefore, O Yudhishthira,
observe the vow of fast and adore the Brah-
manas every day. The words uttered by


Brahmanas can do every thing both in this, —


world and in the next. _
45. Indeed, the Brahmanas should ever


be pleased with gifts. of dresses and food ,


and white-complexioned kine and good
dwelling hoyses and palaces. ‘The very
celestials should please the Brahmanas.
Fieeing yourself from cupidity, do you
practise this vow of very superiot merit
that is not known to all.


ne


CHAPTER CIV,


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued,


Yudhishthira said:—

t. Man, it is said, is gifted with a petiod
of life extending for a hundred years, and
with great energy and power. Why then,
O grandfather, do human beings die even
in thir youth ?


2. By what does a man become fong-
lived, and by what is his life shortened ?
Yhrough what does a man acquire the fame
that depends upon great deeds ?
what does one acquire wealth and pros-
perity 2. ; :

3. Is it by penances, or celibacy or
silent recitation of sacred Mantras, or
dtugs? [s it by his deeds, or mind, .or
speech? Dou yous explain to me this, O
grandfather. .

5
Bhishma said ‘—


4. I shail tell you what you ask me. In


fact, I shall tell you what the reason is for
which one becomes short lived, and what
the reason is for which one becomes long-
jived.


5. I shalt also explain to you the reason
for which one succeeds in winning the fame
that depends on great deeds, and the reason
for which one succeeds in acquiring riches
and prosperity. Indetd, I shall enlighten
you about the manner in‘which one must


live-in order to be possessed of what is good ,


for him,


6. it is by conduct that one acquires
a long life, and it is by conduct that one


Through,


‘


226


acquires riches and prosperity. Indeed,
it ts by conduct that one acquires the fame
uhat depends upon great deeds both in this
world and in the next.


7. The man whose ¢onduct is improper
or wicked never acquires a lony life. All
creatures fear such a pian and are oppressed
by him. :

3. If, therefore, one wishes his own ad-
vancement and prosperity, ene should, in
this world, follow the path of righteousness
and conduct himself properly. Good con-
duct succeeds in removing the inauspicions-
ness and misery of éven one that is sinful.


9. Virtue is singled out by conduct.
The good and virtuous are so on account of
the conduct they follow, The marks, again,
of good conduct are afforded by the deeds
of those that are good or righteous,


10, People regard that man who acts
righteously and who does good acts even if
they only heag of hin without actually seeing
him. ; ‘

it, The atheists, they who are destitute
of al} acts, they who are disobedient to pre-
ceptors and violate the injunctions of the
scriptures, they who are unacquainted with
and, therefore, unobservant ot duties, and
they who are wicked of conduct, become
short-lived.


12, They who aré of improper conduct,
they who violate all restraints, they who are
unscrupulous about sexual congress, become
_Shortlived here and have to go to Hell here-
after. a


13. Even thosemen live for a hundred
years who, though destitute of all accom-
plishments, follow propriety and righteous-
mess of conduct and become endued with
faith and freed (rom malice.


14. He who is free from anger, who is
truthful in speech, who never does any in-
jury to any creature in the universe, who is
shorn of malice and crookedness and insin-
cerity, succeeds in living for a bundred
years,

15. He who always breaks little clods of
earth, or tears up the grass that grows
under his feet, or cuts off his nails witk
his teeth, or is always impure, or very
restless, never succeeds in living long.


16. One should wake up from sleep at
the hour known as the Brahma Muhurta
and then think of both religion and worldly
profit, Getting up From bed, one should
then wash his. face and mouth, and joining
his hands iy an attitute of respect, then say
the morning prayers.


17. In this way, one should when evening
ets iu, say his evening prayers also, cou-


MAHABHARATA.


trolling speech the while. One should
never look at the rising sun, wor at the
setting sun,


28. Nor should one look at the sun when
he is in eclipse; nor at his image in the
water, nor at midday when he is at the
meridian. ‘Yhe Rishis, on account of theic
worshipping the two twilights, with grew
regularity succeeded in acquiring longevity.


tg~20. Hence one should, controlling
speech, say his prayers regularly at the two
twiligits. As regards those Brahmanas
who do not say their prayers at the twa
twilights, a righteous king should set them
to perform such deeds as are ordained far
the Shudras, Persons of every caste should
never have sexual congress with other
people’s wives.

21. Yhereis nothing that shortens life
so effectually as sexual union with other
people’s wives.


22, The adulterer shall have to live in
Hell for as many thousand years as the
aumber of peres on the bodies of the
women with whont he may commit the
offence, .


23. One should dress one’s hair, apply
coliyrium to one’s eyes, and wash one's
teeth, as also worship the celestials in the
forenoon,


24—27. One should not gaze at urine or
feeces, or tread on it or touch it with one’s
feet. One should not see out on a journey
at early dawn, or at mid-day, or in the
evening twilight, or with a companion that
is unknown, or with a Shudra, or alone.
While passing along a road, one should
standing aside, always give way toa Brah-
mana, to kine, to kings, to an old man, ta
one that is loaded with a burthen, toa woman
big with child, or to one that is weak.
When one meets a large tree that is known,
one should walk round it, One should also,
when coming upon the crossing of four
roads, walk round it before pursuing his
journey. At mid-day, or at midnight, or
at night in general, or at the two twilights,
one should not proceed to the crossings of
the four roads. One should never wear
saedals or clothes that have been worn by
another.


28—30. One should always observe the
vow of celibacy, and should never cross his
legs. One should observe the vow of celi-
bacy on the day of the new moon, as also,
on that of the full moon, as also on the eighth
lunar day of both fortnights. One should
never eat the flesh of animals aot killed in
sacrifices. One shauld never eat the flesh
of the back of aa animal. One should
avoid: censuring a caluminating others,
as also all kinds of deceitful conduct.


—


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


. 3t. One should never eut others with
wardy arrows. Indeed, one should never
utter any cruel speech. One should never
accept anything in gift from a person who is
tow and vulgar, One should never utter
such words as pain other people or
as are inauspicious or as are sinful.


32. Wordy arrows fall from the mouth,
Pierced therewith, the vietim grieves day
and night. he wise man should never
shoot them for. cutting the vitals of other
people.

33. A forest, piereed with arrows or cut
down with the axe, grows again. ‘The many;
however, who is pierced with words unwisely
spoken, becomes the victim of wounds that
festec and bring on death.


34. Barbed arraws and Natlikas and
broad-headed arrows are capable of being
extracted from the body. Wordy arrows,
however, are incapable of being extracted,
for they lie embedded in the very heart.


35- One should not taunt a person who
ts uefective of a limb or who has a limb in
excess. or one who is shorn of teartring, or
one ‘who is miserable, or one who is ugly
Or poor, or one who is sharn of strength.


36. One should avoid atheism, vilifying
the Vedas, censuring the celestials, malice,
pride, arroganee, and harshness.


37- One should not angrily, take up
the rod of pirnishment for laying # upon
another. Only the son or the pupil, it has
been said, can be mildly reprimanded for
purposes of instruction.


38. One should not, vilify Brahmanas;
nor should point at the stars with one’s
fingers, Hf asked, one should not say what
the lunation is on a particular day. By
telling it, his life beconres shortened.


39. Having answered ealls of ature
or having walked over a road, one sbould
wash his feet.
feet before sitting to recite the Wedas or
to eat any food,


40. These are the three things which are
considered as pure and sacred by the celes-
tials and as such fit for the Brahmana’s
tse, vig., that whose impurity is unknown,
that which has been washed in water,. and
that which has been well spoken of,


4t.


. for one’s ownself. Whenever cooked, these
Should be offered to the celestials.


42. One should attend every day to his
sacred fire. One shoutd every day give
alms. One’ should, controiling speech the


while, clean his teeth with the tooth-stick,


One should also wash bis~


Samayava, Krishara, meat, Shasha- |
kuli, and Payasa should never be covked |


227


43—41. One should never be in bed
when the sun is up. Ef one fails any day .
to be up with the sun, he should then pere
forty aw expiation. Rising from: bed, one
should first salute his parents, and precep-
tors, or other elders worthy of respect. By
so doing one acquires a long life. 4he tootli-
stick should be thrown off when done wiftt,
and a new ote should be used every day.


4§- One should eat food which is wot
forbidden in the scriptures, abstaining from
food of every kind on days of UTR new
moon and tive full moon, One should, witir
senses controlled, answer calls of ature,
facing the north.


46—47. One should dot adore the celese .
tials without having first washed his teeth,
Without also adoring the celestials first,
one shoutd never repair to any person
except his preceptor or one whio is old in
years or one who is righteous or one who
is wise. Wise men should mever see theme -
selves in an unpolished or dirty mirror.


48.’ One should never know a womatr
that is unknown o¢ with one that is big
with ehild, ,


49: One should never sleep with head
turned towards the north or the west, One
should not lie down upon a broken, bed’
stead.


50. One should wot sleep om a bed with
out having examined it first with the help
of alight. Nor should one sleep on a bed
with another by his side, One should never
sleep in & transverse direetiow. , Qne should
never make an agreement with atheists oe
do anytting i eonjunction with then, |


5t. One should never drag a'seat witty
the foot and: sit om it. One should never
bathe ia a nude state nor at nig he


52. An intelligent person should néver
allow his limlys to be rubbed or pressect
after bathing. One should never smear
unguents upon his body without having
first gore through bath. Having bathed,
one steould never wave his cloth i the air,


53- One should not wear wet clothes
every day. Que should never take off his-
body the gartands of flowers one may wear.
Neor.should one wear such garlands over
his outer garments,


.§4. One should never ever talk with &
woman during the period of her menses,


‘One should not answer a call of nature’on


a freld or at a place too near an inhabited
village,


55+
nature on a piece of water.
first wash his mouth
before eating any food,


One should never answer a calk of
ne should
thrice with water


228


§6. Having’ finished his meals, one
should wash his mouth thrice with water
and twice again. One should eat, with
face turned eastwards, his food, controlling
speech the while and without censuring the
Jood thatis eaten.


$7- One should always leave a residue
of the food that is placed before one for
eating, Having finished his meals, one
rhould mentally touch fire. Ef one eats with
face turned eastwards, he becomes long-
lived. By eating with face turned south-
wards, one acquires gréat fame<


58. By eating with face turned west-
wards, one acquiresgreat riches. By eat-
ing with face turned northwards, one be-
comes trathful ia speech. Having fiished
his meats, one should wash all the upper
holes of one’s body with water.


59 Likewise, all the limbs, the navel,
and the palms of the hands should be
washed with water. One should never sit
upon husk of corn, or upon hait, or upon
ashes, or upon bones,


60. One should, never use the water tha:
has been used by another for bathing.
One should always perform the Homa for
propitiating the celestials, and cecite the
Savitri Mantras. .


61, One should always eat in a seated
posture. One should never eat while walk-
ing. One should never answer a call of
nature standing. One should never answei
a call of nature on ashes or in a cowpen.


62. One should wash his feet before
sitting to-one’s meals. One should never
sit or tie down for sleep with wet feet. One
who sits to his meals after having washed
his feet, lives for a century.


_ 63. One should never touch these three

‘things, while one is in an impute state, viz.,
fire, acow, anda Bralimana. By observ-
ing this rule, one lives lung.


64. One should not, while he is in an
impure state, cast one’s eyes of these three
things, véz., the sun, the moon and the
slars, :


65. The life-breaths of a young man go
upwards, when an old and venerable person
comes to his house. He gets them back
Ly standing up and properly saluting the
guest.


66. Old men should always be saluted.
One should, upon seeing thein, offer seats
with hig own hand, After the old man has
taken his seat, a person should sit and
temain with hands joined in respect. When
un old man goes along the road, one
should always follow hin instead of walk-


ing ahead.


MAHABHARATA,


67. One should never sit on a torn of
broken seat. One should, without using it
any longer, throw away a broken vessel of
white brass. One should, mever eat with-
out a piree of upper garment eovering tts
body. One should never bathe ina nude
state.


68. One should never steep in a naked


state. One should never ever touch the
remnants of other people’s dishes and
plates. One should never, whike he ts is


au impure state, touch another's head, fur
it is said in the scriptures that the vwital airs
are alt eonceitrated i the head.

6g. One should never strike another on


the head of seize anotiver by the hair, One
should not joe his hands together for


scrateliog tus head.

qo. One should not, while bathing, re-
peatedly dip his head ts water. By so
dvity one shortens one’s hile, One who has
bathed by dipping the head in water should
not, afterwards put of to any part of his
body.

a1. One should never take his meals
without eating some sesame. One should
wever teach (the Vedas or any scriptures
ata time when he is impure. Nor should
one study while is inpure.


q2—74. When a storm rises or a bad
smell spreads itself im the atmosphere, he
should never think of the Wedas. Persons
knowing ancient history recite a G-.tha sung
by Yama in daysof yore, He who runs
while impure oc studies the Veda under
similar ecucumstances, indeed, that bwices
born Brahman who studies tie Veda at
forbtddes times loses his Veda and shortens
his life.

75—76. Hence, one should rever study
the Veda with rapt attention at furbiide
times, “Phey whoa answer a call of nature,
with face tywards the sun or lowards @
burning fire, or towards a cow, or towards
a twice-boro person, or On the coad, bes
come shortlived. At day time both calls
of mature should be auswered with face
turned towards the north,


77-73. At night, those calls should be
answered facing the south. By so doing
une does not shorten his life. One who
wishes to live lung should never disregard
or insult any of these three, however weais
of emaciated they mav appear to be, vis.,
the Brakmana, the Kshatriya, and ‘the
snake. Ail three are yifted with dreadful -
poison. ‘The snake, tf angry, burns the
victiua with vuly a look ‘of its eye. .


79 ‘be Kshatriya also, if angry, burns
the object of his anger, as soon as he sees
him, with his energy. The Brahman.


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


stronger than any of these two, destroys,
not only the object of his anger but his
entire family as well, not by looks alone but
by thought also.


8. A wise maz should, therefore, tend
Uese three carefully. One should never
engage in any disputation with his pre-
ceptor.

8i. O Yudhishthira, if the preceptor
becomes angry, he should always be paci-
fied with due honors. If the preceptor is
entirely in the wrong, still one should ioilow
and honor him,


82. Forsooth, calumnious sayings against
the preceptor always consume the lives oi
those who utter them. One should always
auswee a call of nature at a spot far
distant from his dwelling place. One

, should wash his feet at # distance from bis
dwelling place.


83. Oneshould always throw the rem-
wants of his distes and plates at a spot
distant from his dwelling place. Indeed,
he who wishes for his own belhuof sbould do
all this. Oue should not wear garlands of
ted flowers. Indeed, the wise shuuld wear
gatlands of white fluwers.


84. Rejecting the lutus and the lily, O
you of yreat might, one may bear on his
head, however, a flower that i is red, even if it
be at aquatic one.


85. A yarland of gold can never become
impure, After one has bathed, O king, he
should use perfumes mixed with water.


86 One should never wear his upper
garment fur covering the lower limbs or
the luwee yarments for covering the uppce
ones. Nor should one wear clothes used
by another, One should not, again, wear a
piece of cluth that has not its fringes.


87. When one goes to bed, O king, he
should wear a different piece of cloth.
When passing along a road, one should
wear a different piece of cloth. So also,
“when aduting the celestials, one aieuld wear
a different piece of cloth,


88. The intelligent man should. smear
his limbs with unguents made of Pri-
yangu, sandal wood, Vilwa, lagara, and
Keshara.


8g. In obseiving a fast, one should puri-
fy buayself by a bath, atid adorn bis body
with ornamerts and unguents. One snould
always abstain from sexual union on days
of the full moon and the new moon.


-go. One should never, O king, eat off
the same plate with another even if he be of
‘his owa or equal rank. Nor shonld one
‘ever eat any food that has been prepared
by a woman in hec menses. ‘


229


gt. One should never eat any food of
drmk any liquid whose essence has been
taken off. Nor should ove eat anything
without giving a part thereof to persons who
wistlully gaze at the food that one happens
totake. Vhe intelhgent man should never
sit near an impure person. Nor should one
sit near persous whe are foremost iu vitae.


92—93- All food that is forbidden in reti-
gious rites should never be taken even on.
other occasions The feusts of the Ficus
teligiosa and the Ficus Benyalensis as also
the leaves of the Crotolaria Juncea, and the
fruits of the Ficus glomerata, should never
be eaten by one who seeks his own good.
The flesh of goats, of kine, andthe peacock,
should never be eaten,


94-95. One should also abstain from
dried flesh and all flesh that is stale. -Ihe
intelligent man stould never eat any sale,
taking it up with bis hand. Nur should he
eat curds and (Jour of fried barley at night.
One should abstain also trom flesh of
animals vot killed in sacrifices) One
should, with rapt attention, eat once on
uke morning and once in the evening,
abstaining entirely from all food in the
interval.


96. One should never eat any food in
which he may find out a hair. Nor should
one eat at the Shraddha of an enemy. Que
should eat silently ; one should never eat
without covering his body with an upper
garment, and whbout sitting down,


97~~100. One'should never eat any food
placing it on the naked ground. Que
should aever eat except ina sitting posture.
One should never make any noise while
eating. Phe witelligent man should first
offer water and then Food to ong who has
become his guest, and after having served
the guest thus, should then take his meals
himself. He wha sits down to dinner in a
line with friends and himself eats any food
without giving thereof to his friends, is
said to eat dreadful poison. As regards
water and Payasa and flour of fried barley
and curds and clarified butter and honey,
one should never, after drinking or eating
these, offer the residue thereof to others,
One should never, U king, eat any food
hesitatingly.


ior. One seeking one’s own good, should
never drink curds finishing bis meal, After
the meal is finished, one should wash his
tnouth and face with the (right) band only,
and taking a little water should then dip the
tue of the right food in it.


to2. After washing, one should tonch

the érown of his head with the (right) hand.

ao rapt Set, one should next touch
re, “


a30


“£930 The man who knows haw to ob-
serve all these ordinances carefully suc-
ceeds in acquiring the foremost place
among his kinsmen, One = should, after
finishing his meals, wash his nose and eyes
and ears and navel and both hands with
water.


tog. One should aot, however, keep his
hands wet. Between the tip and the root
of the thumb is situate the sacred ‘Tirtha
known by the name of Brahma.


tog 7106, On the back of the title’
ftuger, it is said, is situate the Deva- firtha.
‘The intervening space between the thumb
and the forefinger, O Bharata, should be
tsed for performing the Pitri cites, after
touching water according to the ordinance.
Ove should never vilify other people. Nor
should. oné ever utter anything that is
disagreeable. :


107. The man who desires his own good,
should never seek to bring on “himself
the wrath of others. One shauld never
seek to tall witl an ou'caste. he very
sight of such a person shoutd ‘be shunned,


108. One shonld never come in contact
with a degraded person, By avoiding such
contact one succeeds in acqitiring a long life.
One should never indulye in sexual inter-
course at daytime. Nor should one know
@ maiden, or a harlot nor a barren woman.


tog=tio. One shontd never know a
woman wha has not bathed after the ex-
piry of her menses. By avoiding such acts
one succeeds in acquirinty -a fong life.
After washing the several timbs directed,
in view of religious acts, one should wash
his lips thrice, and once more twice. By
doing this, one becomes purified and fit
for religious rites. The several organs of
sense should each be washed once, and
water should also be sprinkleti over the
entire body,


tri—112. Having done this, one should
perform the adoration of the departed
Manes and the celestials, according to the
ordinances of the Vedas. Listen ta me,
O you of Kurn’s race, as [ tell you what
purification is cleansing and beneficial for
a Brahmana, Before beginning to eat and
after finishing the meal, and in all deeds
requiring purification, the Brahmana should
rinse his mouth with water placed on the
limb called the Brahma-tirtha.


11z—114, After ejecting any matter from
the throat or spitting, one should wash
his mouth before he can become pure. A
kinsman who happens to be old, or a friend
who happens to be poor, should be acco-
modatedia one’s house and his comforts
looked after as if he were a member of the
famady. By doing this, one succeeds in


MAHABHARATA.


winning both fame and longevity. To keep,
pigeons as also parrots both mate and
female, in one’s house is highly blessed.


115—116. ff these live in one’s house,
they succeed in removing calamity. The
same is the ease with cockroaches, If fire-
flies and vultures and wood-piygeons and
bees enter a house and lve iu it, acts ‘of
propitiating the celestials should be per-
formed. Uhese are creatures af evil omen,
as also ospreys.


117. One should never give out the
secrets of great men ; one shoukt never have
sexual union with a forbidden woman. Nor
should one ever trave such tmion with the
consort of a king or with women who are the
friends of queens,


118—-120, One should never make friends
with physicians, or with ehildren, ot with
persons who are old, or with one’s servants,
O Yudhishthira, One should atways pro-
vide for friends, for Bralymanas and for
such as seek his protection. By doing this,’
VU king, one acquires a long life. A wise
man should live in such a house as has beew
constructed with the help of a Brahmana’®
and an engineer skilled in his calling, if,
indeed, O king, he seeks for his own hee
hoof. One should not, O king, sleep at the
evening twilight. Nor should one study ae
such an hour for acquiring any branch of
knowledge. ‘


r2t. An intelligent man should never
eat also at suctkan hour, By acting thus,
one acquires a long file. One should never
perforin any actin honor of the departed
Manes at night time. Owe should sot
adorn his body after finishing his meals.


122. One should not bathe at night, ifhe
seeks his own aggrandisement. One shoulc
also, O Bharata, always abstain from the
flour of fried barley at might, ’


123. The residue of food and drink, as
also the flowers with which one has adored
the celestirls, should never be used. lnvit-
ing a guest at.night, one should never, with
excessive courtesy, compell him to eat ta
bis fill, Nore should one eat to his fill, ac
night.


t24~-125. One should not kill a bird
(for eating it), especially after having fed it,
A wise man should espouse a maiden born
in a high famity, gifted with auspicious
marks, and of full age. Begetting’ children


| upon her and thus perpetuating his race


by that means, one should make over his
Sons to a good preceptor for being educated


| generally, O Bharata, as also in the especial


customs of the family,°O monarch. Ihe
daughters that one may beget should be
married to youths of respectable families,
who are again possessed of intelligence.


ANUSHASANA PAR vA
.


y29. Sons should also be settled and a
portion of the family inheritance given to
trem, O Bharata, as their provision. One
should bathe by dipping his head in water
before he sits down to perform any act
in honor of the departed Manes or the
deities.


128. One should never perform a Shrad-
dha under the constellation of his nativity.
No Shraddta should be performed under
any of the Bhadrapadas (prior or later),
nor undee the constellation Kcrittika, O
Bharata,


126. The Shraddha should never be
performed under any of those constellations
that are considered as dreadful (such as
Ashlesha, etc,) and any of those that upon
calculation, seem to be hostide. Indeed, in
this matter, all these constellations should
be avoided which are forbidden in astrology.


130. One should sit facing either the east
er the north while being shaved by a barber.
By so doing, O great king, one succeeds in
diving long.

131. One should neither vilify others nor
reproach himself, for, O chief of the Bha-
ratas, it is said that calumny is sinful
whether of others or of oneself.


132. In marrying, one should avoid a
woman who is deficient of any limb. A
maiden too, if such, should also be avoided. |
A woman of the same Pravars should also
be avoided; as also one. who is ill-formed
tn body; as also one who has been born
in the race to which one’s mother belongs.


133. A wise man should never know
& woman who is old, or one who has given
up the domestic mode of fife for entering
the forest mode, or one who is faithful to
hee husband or one whose organs of yene-
ration are not healthy or well-formed.


134-136. You shonld not’ marry a
woman who is of a yellow color, or one
who is attacked with leprosy, or one born
in a family in which there has been epilepsy,
or one that is tow in birth and habits, or
one that is born ‘in a fatmily in which the
disease called leprosy has appeared, or
one belonging by birth to a family in which
there are early deaths, Quly that maiden
who is gifted with auspicious indications,
and who is accomplished for all sorts of
qualifications, who is agreeable and beauti-
tul, should be married. One should marry,
O Yudhishthira, in a family who is bigher
or at least equal to his own. ;


_ 137-138. One who is desirous of his
own prosperity, Should never marry a |
woman who is of an inferior caste or who
has failen away from the caste of her birth.
Carefully lighting up the fire, one should


—— 231
erform . P
eile all those acts which have been”
ral ed “and- declared in the Vedas ot
Y We Beahmanas. One should never
seek to injure women, Waves shyuld
always be protected.

139. Malice always = shortens _ life.
Hence, one should always abstain from.


entertaining malice. Sleep at day time
shortens lite, To sleep after the sun-tise
shortens life. ;

140., ‘They who sleep at any of the
twilights, or at nightfall, or who go to sleep
in, a state of impurity, have their lives
shortened. Adultery always shortens hile.
Une should not remain in. a State of ine
purity after shaving. :

agi. ,OQne should, O Bharata, carefully
abstain from reading or reciting the Vedas).
and ealing, and bathing at eventide.


142. When the evening twilight sets


in one should gollect his senses for meditas


tion, without duing any act. One should
collect his senses for meditation, without any
act. One should, O king, bathe and then
adore the Bratmanas.


143—144. Indeed, one should bathe
before auoring the celestials and reverens.
tially saluting the preceptor. “One should
never go lv a_ sacrifice unless invited,
Indeed, one may go there without an in«
vitation, if he wishes to only see how the
sacrifice is conducted. If one goes to a
sacrifice without an invitation and if one
dves not on that account, receive proper
adoration fiom the sacrificer, his life be-
comes shurtened. One should never go
alone on a journey to foreign parts. Nor
should one ever go alone to any place at
night. ,


145—146. Before evening sets in, one
should return to his house and remain
within it. One should always obey. the
commands of his parents and preceptor, -
without at all judging whether those come
mands or good not. One should, O king,
attend carefully to the Vedas and: the
military scence. ‘


147. Do then, O king, carefully attend
to the practice of riding an elephant, a
horse and -a war-chariot. ‘Ihe man whe
attends to these with care,‘succeeds in acs
qQuiting happiness.

148. Such a king succeeds in becoming
unconquerable by enemies, and govern his:
servants and Kinsmen without any of thenr
being able to subjugate him. The king who
attains to such a position and who carefully
attends to the duty of protecting his sub-
jects, has never to incur any loss.


_ %49. You should, O king, be proficient
in logic, as also the science of words, the


232


“science of music, and the four and the sixty


branches of knowledge known by the name
of Kala.


t50, One should every day hear the
Puranas and the histories and all the other
narcatives thst exist, as alsu the biogra-
phies of aH great men.


15t. When one’s wife is in her season,
one should never know her, nor even sum -
mon her for conversation. A wise man
may take her into his company on the fourth
day after the bath of purification.


152. {tf one liolds sexual union on the
fifth day from the first appearance of the
calaminal flow he gets a daughter. By
holding it on the sixth day, be gets a son.
A wise man should, in the matter. of sexual
futercourse attend to this rule.

153. Kinsmen and relatives by marriage
and friends should all be treated with res-
pect. One should, to the best of his power,


worship the celestials in sacrifices, giving |


away various kinds of articles as sacrificial
presents,

154.
domestic mode of life, one should, Y& king,
become a hermit. [ have thus told you
briefly all the characteristics of persons who
succeed in living long.


155. What'{ have not told you should be
heard by you from “the mouths of persons
well-versed in the three Vedas, O Yudhish-
thira. You should know that conduct is
the root of ‘prosperity. Conduct increases
fame.


156. Itis conduct which prolongs life,
It is conduct which destroys all calamities
and evils. Conduct has been said to be
superior to all the branches of knowledge.


157. Itis conduct which begets virtue,
and it is virtue which prolongs hfe. Con-
duct gives fame, long life, and Heaven.
Conduct is the most efficacious rite of
propitiating the celestials. ‘Ihe Self-create
Brahman himself has said that one should
show mercy to all orders of men.


CHAPTER CV.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).~—
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


1. Tellme, O chief of Bharata’s race,
How the eldest brother should treat his
younger brothers, and how the younger
brothers should behave towards their eldest
brother,


After the period faid down for the.


MATIABHARATA.


Bhishma said:—


2. Do you, O son, always behave tawarde
your younger brothers as their eldest brother
should. You are always the eldest of alf
these your brothers, You should always
treat your younger brothers in the way in
which a preceptor treats his disciples.


3. If the preceptor happens to ube ne
wise, the disciple cannot possibly behave
towards him in a respectful or proper way.
If the preceptor is possessed of purity and
good conduct, the disciple also succeeds in
acquiring conduct of the same Bind, O
Bharata,


4. The eldest brother should at times
not notice the acts of his younger brothers,
and though possessed of wisdom should at
times act as if he does not understand their
acts. If the younger brothers be guilty of
any sin, the eldest brother should correct
them by indirect ways and means.


5. Tf there be good understanding
among brothers and if the eldest brother
seeks to correct his younger brothers by
direct or ostensible means, persons who are
enemies, O son of Kunti, who feel pain on
seeing such good understanding and who,
therefore, always seek to bring abouta dis
union, try to disunite the brothers and sow
dissension among them.


7. tis the eldest brother who increases
the prosperity of the family or destroys it
entirely. If the eldest brother happens
to be not gifted with sense and wicked in
conduct, he encompasses the destruction of
the whole family.


7. ‘That eldest brother who injures his
younger brothers ceases to be considered as
the eldest and forfeits his share in the
family pespeisy and deserves to be checked -
by the king. . : _

8. That man who acts deceitfully, ‘has,
forsooth, te go to the regions of grief and
every kind of evil, The birth of such a
person is of no avail like the flowers of the
cane,


9g. That family in which a sinful) person


is born becomes subject to every evil. Such
a person brings about infamy, and all the


good deeds of the family disappear.


to, Such among the brothers as are ad-
dicted to wicked deeds forfeit their shares
of the family property. In such a case, the
eldest brother may appropriate the entire
jeint property without giving any portion
thereof to his younger brothers.


tr. If the eldest Erother makes any
money, without using the paternal property
and by going to a distant place he may ap-
propriate for his own use, such wealth with-


ANUSHASANA PARVA.,


dut giving any share thereof to his younger
brothers,


iz. If brothers wish (during the life-time
of their father) to partition the family pro-
perty, the father should give equal shares
to all his sons.


13. If the eldest brother happens to be
a vicious man and without any accom-
plishments, he may be disregarded by his
younger brothers. If the wife or the younger
brother happens to be sinful, her or his good
must still be looked after.


14. Persons convervast with the efficacy

of righteousness hold thatevirtue is the high-

“est good. The Upadhyaya is superior to

even ten Acharyyas. he father is equal to
ten Upadhyayas,


15. The mother is equal to ten fathers or
even the whole Earth. There is ‘no senior
equal tothe mother. Indeed, she is above
all in respect of the reverence due to her.


16 It is, therefore, that people regard the
mother to deserve so much respect. After
the demise of the father, O Bharata, the
eldest brother should be considered as the
father. .


(7. [tis the eldest. brother who should
assign to them their means of support and
protect and maintain them. All the younger
brothers should bow to him and obey his
cominand,


18. Indeed, they should depend upon
him, as they did upon their father during
his life-time. So far as the body is con-
cerned, O Bharata, it is the father and the
mother who creates it.


1g. That birth, however, which the
Acharyya ordains, is considered as the true
birth which is, really unfading and immortal.
‘The eldest sister, O chief of Bharata’s race,
is like a mother. ‘The wife of the eldest
brother also is like the mother, for the
younger brother, in infancy, receives nur-
sing from her. :


CHAPTER CVI.
(ANUSHASANA PARVA).—


Continued.


Yudhishthira said :-—

1. -O grandfather, all the orders of men,
including the very Mlechchhas, are natural-
iy disposed to observe fasts. We, however,
do not know the raason thereof.

2. We have heard that only Brahmanas
and Kshatriyas should observe the vow of
fasts. How, O grandfather, are the other


30


sgn ens pr ning
ane


233


the observance of fasts ?


3. How have vows and fasts come to be
observed by persons of all castes, -O king ?
What is that end which one devoted to the
observance of fasts, acquires ? :


4. It has been said that fasts are greatly
meritorious and that fasts are a great
refuge. -O king, what is the fruit that is
acquired in this world by the man wha ob-
serves fasts ? :


5. By what means is one purged of his
sins? By what means dves one acquire
virtue. By what means, O best of the
Bharatas, does one succeed in acquiting
Heaven and merit.


6. After having observed a fast, what
should one give away, O king? O tell me,
what those duties are by which one may
succeed in acquiring objects leading to
happiness.


Vaishampayana said i— a

7. Kunti’s son begotten by the deity of
Dharma, who was conversant with every
duty and who said so to him, Shantanu’s
son, Bhishm:, who knew every duty, an-
swered in the following words,


Bhishma said :— - ——

8. Formerly, O king, I heard of these
high merits, O chief of Binarata’s race, as
belonging to the observance of fasts ace
cording to the ordinance. ;


9. I had, O Bharata, asked the Rishi
Angiras of great ascetic merit, the very
same questions which you have asked me
to-day, , , :

to. Accosted by me thus, the illustrious
Rishi, who originated from the sacrificial
fire, answered me even thus about the
observance of fasts according to the ordi+
nance. ;


Angiras said :—

11. Fasts for three nights together, are
ordained for Brahmanas and Kshatriyas,
O delighter of the Kurus. Indeed, O
king, a fast for one night, for two nights,
and for three nights, may be observed by
them.

12. Past for one night is ordained for
Vaishyas and Shudras. If they observe
fasts for two or three nights by mistake,
such fasts never bring on their advance-
ment. :

13, Fasts fortwo nights have been ore
dained for Vaishyas and Shudras (on cer-
tain special occasions). Fasts for three
nights, however, have not been ordained
for them by persons knowing duties,


castes to be taken as acquiring any merit by


,


43+


t4—15. The wise man who, with his
senses and soul under restraint, O Bharata,
fasts, by abstaining from one of the two
meals, on the fifth and the sixth days of
the moon as also on the day of the full
moon, becomes gifted with fergiveness and


personal beauty and knowledge of scrip- -


tures. Such a person never becomes child-
less atid poor.


16—18. He who celebrates sacrifices for
worshipping the deities on the fifth and the
sixth days of the moon, becomes superior
to all the members of his family and suc-
ceeds in feeding a large number of Brah-
.manas. He who observes fasts on the
eighth and the fourteenth days of the dark
fortnight, becomes freed from diseases and
possessed of great energy. The man who
abstains from one meal every day through-
out the month catled Margashirsha, should,
with respect atid devotion, feed a number
of Brahmanas. By so doing he becomes
freed from all his sins. Such a man bes
comes gifted with prosperity, and alt sorts
of grain become his,


19. He becomes gifted with energy.
In fact, such a person reaps profuse harvest
from his fields, acquires great ricties an
much corn, .


zo. That man, O son of Kunti, who
passes the whole mionth of Pausha, abstain-
ing every day from one of two meals,
betomes a gaifter of good fortune and
pleasant features and great fame.


21. He who passes the whole month of
Magha, abstaining every day from one of
the two meals, is born in a high family and
attains to a position of eminence among
his kinsmen,


22. He who passes the whole month of
Bhagadaivata, confining himself every day
to only one meal, becomes a favourite with
women who, tiideed, readily acknowledge
his sway.


23. He who passes the whole of the
month of Chaitra, taking every day one
meal only, is born in a high family and
becomes rich in gold, gems, and pearls.


24. The person, whether mate or female,
who passes the month of Vaishakha, taking
himself or herself every day one meal, and
keeping his or her senses under restraint,
succeeds in attaining to a position of emi-
nence among kinsmen,


25. The person who passes the month
of Jaishthya taking himself every day one
meal, succeeds in acquiring a position of
eminence and great riches. If a woman,
she reaps the same reward.


26. He who passes the month of Asha-
@a, taking himself one meal a day and.


MAHABHARATA,


with senses steadily concentrated upon his
duties, becomes possessed of much curd,
great riches, and a latge progeny.


27. He who passes the month of Sra-
vana, taking himself one meal a day re-
ceives the honors of Abhisheka wherever be
may happen to live, and attains to a posi-
tion of eminence among kinsmen whom he
supports.


28. ‘That man who takes himself only
one meal a day for the whole month of
Proshthapada, becomes possessed of great
riches,


29. The man who passes the month of .
Ashwin, taking himself one meal a day,
becomes pure in soul and body, possessed of
many animals and vehicles and a large
progeny.

30. He who passes the month of Kar
tika, taking himself one meal every day,
becomes possessed of heroism, many wives
and great fame.


31. E have now told you, O king, what
the fruits are that are obtained by men by
observing fasts for the two and ten months
in detail. Listen now, O king, to me as !
telt you what the rules are about the lunar
days.


32. The man who, abstaining from it
every day, takes rice af the termination of
every fortnight, becomes possessed of: a
great many kine, a large progeny, and a
long life.


33. He who observes fasts for three
nights every month and acts thus for two
and ten years, acquires a position of emi-
nence among his kinsmen and friends, with-
out a rival to contest his claim and without
any anxiety caused by any one trying to
rise to the same height.


34. These rules which I speak. of, O
chief of Bharata’s race, should be observed
for twelve years. Be disposed to do it.


35—35. That man who eats once in the
forenoon and once after evening and abs-«
tains from drinking at the interval, and wha
shows mercy towards all creatures, and
pours libations of clarified butter on his sas
cred fire every day, acquires success, O
king, in six years, There is no doubt in
this. Such a man acquires the merit of
the Agnishtoma sacrifice.


37. Gifted with merit and freed from
every sort of stain, he acquires the region
of the Apsaras which echo with the sound
of songs and dance, and passes his days in
the company of a thousand highly beaue-
tifyl ladies.


38. Herideson a car of the color of


ANUSHASANA PARVA.,


melted gold and receives great honors in the
region of Brahma.


39—40. After the exhaustion of that merit,
such a person returns to Earth and acquires
elevated position. That man who passes One
whole year, taking himself every day only
One meal, acquires the merit of the Atiratra
sicrifice. He ascends to Heaven after
d ath and receives great honors there.


41—42. Upon the termination of that
merit he returns to the Earth and acquires
a position of eminence. He who passes one
whole year fasting for three days in succes-
sion and taking food on every fourth day,
and abstaining from injury.from every sort,
adhering to truthfulness -of- speech, and
keeping his senses under control, acquires
the merit of the Vajapeya sacrifice,


43—44. Such a person ascends to Heaven
after death and receives great honors there.
That man, O son of Kunti, who passes a
whole year observing fasts for five days and
taking food on only the sixth day, gains the
merit of the Horse sacrifice. The chariot
he cides, is drawn by Chakravakas.


45—46. Sucha man enjoys every kind
of happiness in Heaven for full forty thou-
sand years. He who passes a whole year
observing fasts for seven days and taking
food on only every eighth day, gains the
merit of the Gavamaya sacrifice. The
chariot he rides, is drawn by swans and
cranes.

47—48. ‘Such a person enjoys all kinds
of happiness in Heaven for fifty thousand
years. He who passes a whole year, O
king, taking food only at intervals of a fort-
night, gains the merit of a continuous fast
for six months, This has been said by the
iMustrious Angiras himself. Such a man
lives in Heaven for sixty thousand years.


49. He is roused every morning from
his bed by the sweet notes of Vinas and
Vallakis and flutes, O king.


50. He who passes a whole year, drink-
ing only a little water at the termination of
every month, acquires, O king, the merit of
the Vishwajit sacrifice.


§t. Such aman cides a chariot drawn
by lions and tigers. He lives in Heaven
for seventy thousand years in the enjoyment
of every sort of happiness. :


52. No fast for more than a month, O
king, has been ordained. Even this, O son
of Pritha, is the ordinance about fasts that
has been declared by sages conversant with
duties.

53- That man who, unafflicted by
disease and free from every malady,, ob-
serves 2 fast, indeed acquires, at every step,
the merits of Sacrifices.


“233


54 Such a man ascends to Heaven on a
car drawn by swans. Gifted with power,
he enjoys every sort of happiness in Heaven
for a hundred years,


55. A hundred Apsaras of the most
beautiful features, wait upon, and sport with
him.


56. He is roused from his bed every
morning by the sound of the Kanchis and
the Nupuras of those ladies.


57. Such a person rides on a cac drawn
by a thousand swans. Living, again, in
a region teeming with hundreds of the
most beautiful ladies, he passes lis time in
great joy. ‘

58—59. The person who seeks Heaven,
does not want strength when he becomes
weak, or the cure of wounds when he is
wounded, or the administration of medicine
when he is ill, or soothings by others when
he is angry, or the mitigation, by the ex+
penditure of money, of sorrows caused by
poverty.


60. Leaving this world, where he suffers .


all sorts of privations, he proceeds to
Heaven and rides on cars bedecked with
gold, his body adorned with ‘all sorts of
ornaments. There,in the midst of hun-
dreds of beautiful ladies, he enjoys all Sorts
of pleasure and happiness, cleansed of
every sin.


61. Indeed, abstaining from food and
enjoyments in this world, he renounces this
body and ascends to Heaven as the fruit of
his penances. There purged of alt his sins,
he enjoys health and happiness and all his
wishes become crowned with success.


62—63. Such a person rides on a celes-


tial car of golden color, effulyent like the’


morning sun, set with pearls and tapis
lazuli, resounding with the music of Vinas
and Murajas, adorned with banners:and
lamps, and echoing with the sounds of celes-
tial bells.


64. Such a person enjoys all sorts of


happiness in Heaven for as many yeats as
there are pores in his body.


65. ‘There is no Shastra superior to the
Veda. ‘There is no person more worthy of
respect than the mother.
quisition superior to that of virtue, and no
penance superior to fast.

66. There is nothing, more sacred, in
Heaven or Earth, than Brahmanas. Simi-
lacly there is no penance that is superior to
the observance of fasts.


67. twas by fasts that the celestials


have succeeded in becoming dwellers of -


Heaven. It is by fasts that the Rishis
have acquired high success.


There is no ac- °


236


. 68. Vishwamitra passed a thousand
celestial years, taking one meal a day, and
as the consequence thereof acquired the
status of a Brahmana.


69. Chyavana, Jamadagni, Vashishtha,
Gautama and Bhrigu.—ali these great
Rishis gifted with the virtue of forgiveness
—have attained to Heaven through the
observance of fasts.


7o. Formerly Angiras declared so to the
great Rishis. The man who teaches an-
other the merit of fasts, has never to suffer
any sort of misery.


7t.. The ordinances about fasts, in their
due order, O son of Kunti, have originated
from the great Rishi Angiras. The man
who daily reads these ordinances or hears
them read, becomes freed from all sins.


72. Not only is such a person freed
from every calamity, but his mind rises
above all sorts of shortcomings. Such
a person succeeds in understanding the
sounds of all creatures other than human,
aiid acquiring eternal fame, becomes the
foremost of men. xt


CHAPTER CVIL


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
. Continued. ‘


Yudhishthira said :—


1. O grandfather, you have duly des-
cribed to us the subject of Sacrifices, inclu-
ding the merits in full that attaet: to them
both here and hereafter.


2. It should be remembered, however, O
grandtather, that Sacrifices are incapable of
being celebrated by poor men, for these re-
quire a large store of various articles.


3. Indeed, O grandfather, the merit
attaching to Sacrifices can be acquired by
only kings and princes, That merit is in-
capable of being acquired by those who
have no wealth and power and who live
alone and are heipless.


5. Do you tell us, O grandfather,
the ordinances are about those acts that are
fraught with merit equal to what belongs to
Sacrifices and which, therefore, are capable
of being performed by poor men.


Bhishina said :—

6 Listen, O YVudhishthira! Those
ordinances that I have told you of,—those,
vig., that were first promulgated by the
great Rehi Angiras, and that have refer-
ence to meritorious fasts for their soul,—are
conridered as equal to Sacrifices,


what


MAHABHARATA. ° :


g-—-8. That man who takes one meal in
the forenoon and one at night, without
taking any food or drink during the inter-
val, and who observes thisZregulation for a
period of six years successively abstaining
all the while from injuring any creature and
regularly pouring libations on his sacred fire
every day, attains, forsooth, to success,
Such a man acquires hereafter a car of the


‘color of heated yold, and acquires a resi-


dence, for millions of years, in the region of
Prajapati, in the company of celestial
ladies, that ever echoes with the soun.j of
music and dance, and shines with the efful-
gence of fire.


9. He who passes three years, taking
one meal a day and abstaining all the
while from intercourse with any other
woman except his own married wife, attains
to the merit of the Agnishtoma sacrifice.


to—14. Such a man is considered as
having performed a Sacrifice, with plenty
of gifts in gold, that is dear to Vasava
himself. By practising truthfulness of
speech, making gifts, respecting the Brah-
manas, avoiding malice, becoming forgiving
and self-controlled, and conquering anger,
a man acqiires the highest end. Riding on
a car of the color of white clouds that is
drawn by swans, he lives, for millions and
millions of years, in the company of Apsaras.
Fasting for a whole day and taking only
one meal on the second day, be who pours
libations upon his sacred fire for the period
of a whole year,—indeed, he who observes
such a fast and attends every day to his
fire and rises every day from bed before
sunrise, acquires the merit of the Agnich-
toma sacrifice. Such a man acquires a cae
drawn by swans and cranes. °


t§-~-17. Surrounded by the most beauti-
ful ladies, be lives in the region of Indra.
That man who takes only one meal every
third day, and pours libations every day
on his sacred fire for a period of a whole
year,—indeed, he who thus attends to his
fire every day and wakes up from sleep.
every morning before sun rise, acquires the
high merit of the Atiratra sacrifice. He
acquires a car dcawn by peacocks and
swans and cranes. :


18. Proceeding to the region of the
seven Rishis, he lives there, surrounded by
Apsaras of great beauty. It is well-known
that such residence lasts fos fulf three
Padmss of years,


19—20. Fasting fore three days suc-
cessively, he who takes only one meal every
fourth day, and jpours libations every day
on his sacred fire, acquires the great merit
of the Vajapeya sacrifice. Phe car he


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


acquires is graced by highly beautiful celes-
tial ladies who have Indra for their father.


21. He lives in the region of Indra for
millions and millions of years, and enjoys
great happiness by witnessing the sports of
the king of the gods.


22—23. Fasting for four days  suc-
cessively he who eats only one meal every
fifth day, and pours libations on the sacred
fire every day for the period of a whole
year, and who lives without cupidity, telling
the truth, respecting the Brahmanas,
abstaining from every sort of injury, and
avoiding malice and sin, acquires the mecit
of the Vajapeya sacrifice.


2g. The car he rides, is made of gold
and drawn by swans and effulgent like
many suns rising together. He acquires,
besides, a palatial building of pure white.


25. He lives there happily for full one
and fifty Padmas of years.


26—27. He who fasting for five days,
takes food only on the sixth day, and
pous, libations on his sacred fire every
day foe one year, and who performs three
ablutions in course of the day far purifying
himself and saying his prayers and paying
his adoration, and who leads a celibate life,
divested of malice in his conduct, acquires
the merit of the Gomedha sacrifice.


28. He acquires an excellent car adorn-
ed with pnre gold, effulgent like a blazing
fire and drawn by swans and peacocks,


29 He sleeps an the lap of Apsaras and
is awauened every morning by the melo-
dious sound of Nupuras and Kanchis,


30. He leads such a happy life for ten
thousand millions of years and_ three
thousand millions besides and eight and
ten Padmas and two Patakas.


31. Such a man lives also, honored by
all, in the region of Brahma for as many
years as there are hairs on the bodies of
five thousand bears.


32—-34. Fasting for six days, he who
takes only one meal every seventh day and
pours libations on the sacred fire every
day, for a full year, controlling speech
all the while and observing the vow of
celibacy and abstaining from the use of
flowers and unguents and honey and meat,
acquires the region of the Maruts and of
Indta. - Crowned with the fruition of every
wish as it originates in the mind, he is
waited upon and adored by celestial
ladies.

35. He acquires the merits of a sacrifice
in which profuse gold is given away. Pro-
ceeding to the regions named, he lives there
for numberless years in the enjoyment of
greatest happiness,


237


36—37. He whd shows mercy to alk
and fasting for seven days eats om every
eighth day for a whole year, and, pouring
libations every day on the sacred fire, wor-
ship the celestials, regularly, acquires the
great merits of the Paundarika sacrifice.
The car he rides is Jotus-hned.


38. Forsooth, such a man acquires also-
a large number of young and beautiful
ladies, some having complexions that are
dark, some with complexions like that of
gold, and some that are Shyamas, whose
looks and gestures are of the most agreeable
kind. :


39-——~40. He who fasts for eight days and
takes only one meal on every ninth day for
one full year, and. pours libations gn the
sacred fire every day, wins the.great merits
of a thousand Horse sacrifices. .'he car
he rides in Heaven is beautiful like a lotus.


4%. He always jourmeys, on that car,
accompanied by the daughters of Rudra
bedecked with celestial garlands and gifted
with the effulgence of the midday sun or
of fires of burning flames.


42. Acquiring the regions of Rudra, he
lives there tn great happiness for number-
less years. -


43—44. He who fasts for nine days and
takes only one meal every tenth day fora
whole year, and pours libations on his
sacred fire every day, gains the high merit.
of a thousand Horse sacrifices and attains.
to the companionship of Brahmana’s
daughters whose beauty charm the hearts
of all creatures.


45. These fadies, possessed of such
beauty, and some of,them possessed of color
of the lotus and some like that of the same
flower of the blue variety, always-keep hime
in joy. ‘ - . ‘

46. He acquires a beautiful car which
moves in beautiful circles and which looks
Jike the dense cloud called Avarta, resem-
ble also an. ocean wave.


47. That car resounds with the constant
tinkle of rows of pearls and gems, and the
melodious sound of conchs, and is -adorned
with columns made of crystals and dia-


t


monds, as as also with an altar constructed -


of the same minerals.


48. He rides such a car, drawn by
swans and cranes, and lives for millions and


millions of years in great happiness itr
Heaven. ;
49—5t. He who fasts for ten days and


eats only clarified butter on every eleventh
day for one full year and pours libations on
his sacred fire every day, who never, in word”
or thought, seeks the company of other


233


people’s wives, and who never utters a false-
hood even for the sake of his mother and
father, succeeds in seeing Mahadeva of
great power seated on his car. Such a
person acquires the great merit of a thou-
sand Horse sacrifices.


52. He seesthe car of the Seff-create
Brahman himself approach for taking him
on it. He rides on it, accompanied by
celestial ladies gifted with great beauty, and
complexions as effulgent as that of pure
gold,


53. Gifted with the blazing splendour
of the cycle fire, he lives for many years in


a celestial mansion in Heaven, full of
every happiness,
54. For , those mumberless years he


experiences the joy of. bending his head in
respect to Rudra worshipped by the celes-
tials and Danavas.


55--56. Such a person sees every day
the great god. Yhat man who having fasted
for eleven days, eats only 4 little. clarified
butter on the twelfth, and acts thus for a
whole year, succeeds in acquiring the merits
of all the Sacrifices. “Ihe car he rides, is
effulgent like a dozen suns.


57—58. Adorned with costly gems and
pearls and corals, embellished with rows of
swans and snakes and of peacocks and
Chakravakas uttering their melodious notes,
and beautified with large domes, js the
aad to which he attains in the region of

cabman,


59-
with men and women.
highly blessed Rishi
every duty, said.


6» That man who having fasted for
twelve days, eats a little clarified butter
on the thirteenth, and acts thus for a
whole year, succeeds in acquiring the merits
of the divine sacrifice. :


6:. Such a man gets a car of the color
of the new-blown lotus, adorned with pure
gold and heaps of jewels and gems.


62. He goes to the regions of the Maruts
which. are full of celestial ladies, which
are adorned with every kind of celestial
ornament, which are filled with celestial
perfumes, and which contain every element
of happiness.


That house, O king, is always filled
This is what the


63. Countless is the number of years he
lives in those happy regions. —


64. Soothed with the sound of music
and the sweet voice of Gandharvas and the
sounds and blare of drums and Panavas,
be is constantly pleased by celestial ladies
of great beauty.


_@ superior


Angicas,. knowing.


MAHABHARATA,


65. That man who having fasted for
thirteen days, eats a little ‘clarified butter
on the fourteenth day, and acts thus fora
full year, acquires the merits of the Muha-
medha sacrifice.


66. Celestial ladies of indescribable
beauty, and whose age cannot be detere
mined, for they took ever young, adorned
with every ornament and with armlets of
blazing effulgence, wail upon him with many
cars and follow him in his journeys.


67. He is waked every morning from
his bed by the melodious note of swans, the
tinkle of Nupuras, and the highly agree-
able jingle of Kanchis. Indeed, he lives in
house, waited upon by such
celestial ladies, for years as countiess) as the
sands on the shores of Ganya.


68—-70. That man who, keeping his
senses under restraint, fasts for a fortnight
and ‘takes only one meal on the sixteenttr
day, and acts thus for a whole year, pour~
ing libations every day on his sacred fire,
acquires the great merits of a thousand
Rajasuya sacrifices. ‘The car he rides, is
highly beautiful and is drawn by swans
and peacocks.


7i—73. Riding on such a car which is,
besides, adorned with garlands of pearls
and the purest gold and graced with
bevies of celestial ladies decked with orna-
ments of every sort, having one column
and four arches and seven altars exceed-
ingly auspicious, having thousands of
banners and echoing with the sound of
music, celestial and of celestial attributes,
set with gems and pearls and corals, and
effulgent like lightning, such a man _ lives
in Heaven for a thousand cycles, having
elephants and rhinoceroses for dragging
that car of his.


74. That man who having fasted for
fifteen days takes one meal on the sixteenth
day and acts thus for one whole year,
acquires the merits of the Soma sacrifice.


75. Proceeding to the celestial region, he
lives in the cormmpany of Soma’s dauynhters. -
His body fragrant-with unguents whose
perfumes are as sweet as those of Soma
himself, he acquires the power of going


immediately to any place he likes,


76. Seated on his car he is waited upon
by beautiful damsels of agreeable manners,
and commands all articles of enjoyment.


77. ‘He enjoys such happiness for many
years,


78—79. That man who having fasted
for sixteen days, eats a little clarified butter


on the seventeenth day, ard acts thus for a


whole year, pouring tiba tions every day on


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


339


his sacred fire, proceeds to the regions of own car, he is followed bya large train of


Varuna and India and Rudea and the
Maruts and Ushanas and Brahman him-
self. ‘


80. There he is waited upon by celestial
fadies and sees the celestial Rishi called
Bhurbhuva and sees the entire universe.


81. The daughters of the king of the
deities gladden him there. ‘Those damsels,
of agreeable manners and adorned with
every ornament, are capable of assuming
thirty-two forms.


82. As long as the Sun and the Moon
move in the sky, so lung does that wise man
five in those regions of happiness, living
upon the succulence of ambrosia and
nectar,


83. That man who having fasted for
seventeen days, takes only one meal on the
eighteenth day, and acts thus for a whole
year, succeeds in seeing the seven regions
of the universe.


84. While making hif journeys on his
car, he is always followed by a large train
of cars producing the most agreeable rattlé
and ridden by celestial ladies shining with
ornaments and beauty,


85. Bnjoying the greatest happiness, the
car he rides, is celestial and endued with the
greatest beauty. Itis drawn by lions and
tigers, and produces rattle as deep as the
muttering of the clouds.


86. He lives in such happiness for a
thousand zeuns, living upon ambrosia that
is as sweet as nectar itself.


87. That man who having fasted, for
eighteen days, eats onty one meal on the
nineteenth day and acts thus for a full year,
succeeds in perceiving all the seven regions
of the universe. :


88. The region to which he attains is
peopled by various tribes of Apsaras and
resounds with the sweet note of Gandharvas,
‘The car he rides is effylgent like the sun.


89. His heart shorn of every anxiety,
he is waited upon by the foremost of ¢eles-
tial ladies. Decked with celestial garlands,
and possessed of beauty, he lives in such
happiness for millions and millions of years.


g0—gt. That man who having fasted
for nineteen days, eats only one meal on
every twentieth day, and acts thus for a
full year, observing all the while truthful-
ness of speech and observance of other
(excellent) rituals, abstaining also from
meat, leading a celibate life and devoted
to the behoof of all treatures, acquires the
extensive regions of great: happiness, be-
longing to the Adityas.


92, While making his journeys on his


'


cars ridden by Gandharvas and Apsaras
decked with celestial garlands and pers
fumes. :


93—94. That man who having fasted
for twenty days, takes a single mea] on the
twenty-first day, and: acts thus for a fall
year, pouring libations every day on his
sacred fire, acquires the regions of Ushanas
andjShakra, of the Ashwins and the Maruts,
and lives there in uninterrupted happiness
of great measure.


95. Unacquainted with all sorrows, he
tides the foremost of cars for -making his


journeys, and waited upon by foremost of
‘celestial badies, and possessed of power, he


sports in joy like a celestial himself,


96—~—97. That man who having fasted
for twenty-one days, takes a single meal on
the twenty-second day, and acts thus for a
full year, pouring libations on his sacred
fire every day, abstaining from injuring any
creature, observing truthfulness of speech,
and freed from malice, acquires the :egions
of the Vasus and becomes enducd with
solar effulgence.


98. Gifted with the power of going every
where at will, living upon nectar, and
riding on the foremost of cars, his body
decked with celestial ornaments, he sports ~
in joy in the company of celestial ladies.


g9~—100. That man who having fasted
for twenty-two days, takes a single meal on
the twenty-third day, and acts thus fora
full year, thus regulating his diet and keep-
ing his senses under restraint acquires the
regions of the Wind-God of Ushanas and
of Rudras. Capable of going everywhere
at will, and always roving at will, he is
adored by various tribes of Apsaras,


to1. Riding on the foremost of cars and
his body decked with celestial ornaments,
he sports for numberless years in great
happiness in the company of celestial ladies,


toz—to3. That man who having fasted
for twenty-three days eats a litle clarified
butter on the twenty-fourth day, and acts
thus for a full year, pouring libations on
his sacred fire, lives for countless years in
great happiness in the regions of the
Adityas, his body decked with celestial
dresses and garlands and celestial perfumes
and unguents.


104. Riding on an excellent car, made |
of goid and gifted with great beauty and
drawn by swans, he sports in joy in the
company of thousands and thousands of
celestial ladies.


105. That man who having fasted for
twenty-four days, takes a single meal on the
twenty-fifth day, and acts thus for full year,


240


. Succeeds in getting acar of the foremost
kind, fall of every object of enjoyment.


406--108. He is follewed in his journeys
‘by a large train of cars drawn by lions and
tigers, and producing a sound as deep as
the muttering of the clouds, ridden by celes-
tial ladies, and all made of pure gold and
endued with great beauty. Himself riding
‘on an excellent celestial car endued with
great beauty, he lives in those regions for a
thousand gons, in the company of hun-
dreds of celestial tadies, and living upon
ambrosia that is sweet as nectar itself.


tog~=112. That man who having fasted
for twenty-five days, takes only one meal
on the twenty-sixth day, and acts thus for a
full year in the observance of such a regue
Jation about diet, keeping bis senses under
restraint, freed from attachment, and pour-
ing libations, every day on his sacred fire,—»
that blessed man,—sadored by the Apsaras,
Acquires the regions of the seven Maruts
and the Vasus. When making his journeys,
he is followed by a large train of cars
made of excellent crystal and adorned with
all sorts of gems, and tidden by Gandhar-
vas and Apsaras who show him every
honor. He lives in those regions, in enjoy-
ment of such -happiness, and gifted with
celestial energy, for two thousand cycles,


113-114, That man who having fasted
for twenty-six days eats a single meal on
the twenty-seventh day, and acts thus for a
full year, pouring libations every day on his
sacred fire, acquires great merit and pro-
ceeding to the celestial region, receives
honors from the deities. Living there, he
subsists on- nectar, freed from thirst of every
kind, and enjoying every happiness.


115. His soul purified of every dross and
making his journeys ow a celestial car of
great beauty, he lives there, O king, acting
like the celestial Rishig and the royal
sages.

116. Gifted with great energy, he lives
there in great happiness in the company of
celestial ladies of highly agreeable manners,
for three thousand cycles and aons.


117—118. That mau who having fasted
for twenty-seven days, takes a single meal on
the twenty-eighth day, and acts thus fer a
full year, with soul and senses under perfect
restraint, acquires very great mecrit, which,
in fact, is equal to what is acquired by the
celestial Rishis. Having every article of
enjoyment, and gifted with great energy,
he shines with the effulgence of the midday
sun,


t1g—-120. Sportive ladies of the most
delicate features and gifted with splendour
of complexion, having deep bosoms, taper-


ing thighs and full and round bips, decked


MAHABHARATA,


with celestial ornaments, please him with
their company while he rides on a deligittal
and excellent car effulgent like the sun and
equipped with every article of enjoyment,
for thousands and thousands of zeuns.


21-123. That man who having fasted
for twenty-eight days, tales a single meai on
the twenty-ninth day, and acts thus fora
full year, observing all the while truthful-
ness of speech, acquires auspicious regions
of great happiness that are adored by celes-
tial Rishis and royal sages. The car he
obtains is effulyent like the sun and the
moon, made of pure guld and adorned with
every sort of gem, ridden by Apsaras and
Gandharvas singing melodiously,


124. Thereon he is attended by auspi-
cious ladies adorned with celestial ornae
ments of every sort. Gifted with sweet
dispositions and agreeable features, and
endued with great energy, these gladdeu
him with their company.


125. Budued with every article of enjoy»
ment and with great energy, and possessed
of the splendour of a burning fire, ne shines
like a celestial, with a celestial form having
every excellence, :


126. The regions he attains are those of
the Vasus and the Matuts, of the Saddhyas
and the Ashwins, of the Rudras and of
Brahman himself. :


127. Yhat man who having fasted for a
full month, takes a sinyle meal on the first
day of the following month, and acts thus
for a full year, looking on all things im-
partially, attains co the regions of Brahman
himself,


128. [here he lives upon ambrosia,
Gifted with a beautiful form highly agreeable
to all, he shines with energy and prosperity
like the sun himself of a thousand cays.


t29. Devoted to Yoga and adorned with
celestial dresses and gartands and smeared
with celestial pertumes and unguents, he
passes his time in great happiness, mot ex<
periencing the least sorrow, He shines on
his car attended by ladies that blaze forth
with effulyence emitted by themselves.


130. Those tadies the dauyhters of the
celestial Rishis and the Rudras, worship
him with veneration,


131. Gapable of assuming various forms
thac are highly delightful and highly agree-
able, their speects is characterized by
various kinds of sweetness, and they are
able to please the person they wait upou
in various kinds of ways.


¥32—133. While making his journeys,
he rides on acar that looks like the sty
itself in color. An his_cear ase cars which


ANUSHASANA PARYVA,


those
right


look like the Maon ; before him are
which resemble the clouds; on his
are cars that are red; belowjhim are those
that are blue; and above him are those
that are of variegated color. He is always
worshipped by those who wait upon him.


134. Gifted with great wisdom, he lives
in the region of Brahman for as many
years as are measured by the drops of rain
that fall in course of a thousand years on
the insular continent of Jamvudwipa.


135. Indeed, gifted with the effulgence
a deity, he lives in that region of unailoyed
happiness for as many years as the drops
of cain which fall upon the Barth in the
rainy season.


_ 136. The man who, having fasted for a
whole month, eats onthe first day of the
following month, and acts thus for ten years,
acquires the status of a great Rishi. He
has not to undergo any change of form
while going to the celestial region for enjoy:
ing the rewards of his deeds in this life.


137. Indeed, this is the status which one
@cquises by controlling speech, practis-
ing self-denial, subjugating anger, sexual
appetite, and the desire to eat, pouring
Jibations on the sacred, fire, and tegularly
worshipping the two-twilights.


138. That man who purifies himself by
the observance of these and similar vows
and practices, and who eats in this way, be-
comes as pure as ether and gifted with
solar effulgence,


139. Such a man, O king, proceeding
to the celestial region in even his own cor-
poreal frame, enjoys all the, happiness that
is there like a celestial at his will.


1 140. 1 have thus told you, O chief of
the Bharatas, what the excellent ordinances
are about sacrifices, one after another, as
dependent upon the fruits of fasts.


14t—142. Poor men, O son of Pritha,
may, nevertheless, acquire the fruits thereof
(by the observance of fasts). By observing
these fasts, even a poor man may acquire
the highest end, O foremost one of Bharata’s
race, cevoting himself all the while, besides,
to the worship of the celestials and the
Brabmanas. I have thus recited to you
in full the ordinances about fasts.


143. Do not entertain any doubt about
those men who so observe vows, who are
so heedful and pure and great, who are so
freed from pride and malice, who are en-
dued with such devoted understandings,

-and who pursue their end with such firm-
ness -and fixity of purpose . without ever
deviating from their path.


31


ern yf ee


24%


CHAPTER CVIULE.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).~«
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—

1. Tell me, O grandfather, of that which .
is considered as the foremost of. all Tirthas,
Indeed, you should expound to me what
that Tirtha is which conduces to the greatest
purity.


Bhishma said :—

2. Forsooth, all Tirthas ate possessed of
merit. Listen, however, with attention to
me as I tell you what the Tirtha, the
cleanser, is of men gifted with wisdom.


3. Following eternal Truth, one should
bathe in the Tirtha called Manasa, which
is unfathomable, stainless, and pure, and
which has Truth for its waters and the
understanding for its lake,


4 The, fruits, in the form of cleansing,
that one gains by bathing in that Tirtha,
are freedom from cupidity, sincerity, truth-
fulness, mildness, mercy, abstention from
injuring arty creature, self-control, and
tranquillity.


5. Those men who are freed from at-
tachments, who are shorn of pride, who are
above all pairs of opposites, who have no
wives and-children and houses and gardens,
etc., who are gifted with purity, and who
live upon the alms given to them by others,
are considered as Tirthas, :


6. He who knows the truths of all thing
and who is freed from the idea of mineness,
is said to be the highest Tirtha, In finding
out the marks of purity, your gaze should
ever be directed towards these qualities,


78. Those persons from whose souls
the ‘qualities of goodness, darkness, and .
ignorance have been washed off, they wha,
not caring for purity and impurity, pursue
the ends they have proposed to themselves,
they -who have renounced everything, they
who are possessed of omniscience and gifted
with universal sight, and they who are
of pure conduct, are considered as Tirthas
possessing the purifying power,

g. That man whose limbs only are wet
with water, is not considered as one that is
washed. He, on the other hand, is con-
sidered as washed who has washed himself
by self-denial. Even such a person is said
to be pure both internaliy and externally.


ro, They who never busy themselves
with what is past, they who feel no attach-
ment for present acquisitions, indeed, they
who are free from desire, are said to be
possessed of the highest purity.


242


tt, Knowledge is said to form the
especial purity of the body. So also free-
dom from desire, and cheerfulness of mind.


12. Purity of conduct forms the purity of
the mind. The purity that one acquires
by ablutions in sacred waters is considered
as inferior, Indeed that purity which ori-
ginates from knowledge, is considered as
the best.


13. Those ablutions which one performs
with a burning mind in the waters of the
knowledge of Brahma in the ‘Tictha called
Manasa, are the true ablutions for truth-
knowing persons. :


14. That man who is endved with true
purity of conduct and who is always given
to the preservation of a proper attitude to-
wards all, indeed, he who is gifted with
attributes and merit, is considered as truly
pure.


15. These that I have mentioned have
been said to be the Tirthas of the body.
Listen to me as I tell you what those
sacred ‘Virthas are that are situate on the
Earth also. fi


16. As special attributes of the body
have been said to be sacred, so theré are
particular sp ts on Earth as well, and par-
ticular waters, which are considered sacred.


17. By reciting the names of the Tirthas,
by perfurming ablutions there, and by offer-
ing oblations to the departed Manes in
those places, one’s sins are dissipated.
Those men whose sins are thus dissipated,
succeed in acquiring the celestial region,
when they Jeave this world. :


18. On account of their association with
pious persons, through the special efficacy
of the earth itself, of those spots and of
particular waters, there are certain portions
of the Earth that have come to be con-
sidered as sacred.


19, The mental Tirthas are separate
and distinct from those of the Earth. That
person who bathes in both, acquires success
forthwith. :


20—21, As strength without exertion,
or exertion without strength can never per-
form anything, singly, and as these, when
combined, can do all things, so one that
becomes gifted with the purity that is con-
tributed by the Tirthas in the body as also
by that which is contributed by the Tirthas
ov the Earth, becomes truly pure and ac-
quires success. Vhat purity which is de-
tived from both sources is the best.


M..MABHARATA,


CHAPTER CIX.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :-—


t. You should, O grandfather, tell me
what is the highest, the most beneficial,
and the most certain fruit of all sorts of
fasts in this world.


Bhishma said :—


2. Listen, O king, to what was recited
by the Self-create himself and by doing
which a person, ‘forsooth, acquires ‘the
highest happiness.


3. That man who fasts on the twelftly
day of the moon in the month called Marga-
shirca and adores Krishna as Keshava
for the whole day and night, acquires the
merits of the Horse sacrifice and becomes
purged off of all his sins. ;


4. He who, sintlarly, fasts on the twelfttr
day of the moon in the month of Pausha
and adores Krishna as Narayana, for the
whole day and night, acquires the merits
of the Vajapeya sacrifice and the highest
success.

5. He who fasts orf the twelfth day of
the moon im the month of Magha and
adores Krishna, as Madhava, for the whole
day and night, acquires the merits of the
Rajasuya sacrifice, and rescues his own
family.

6. ‘He who fasts on the twelftlr day of
the moon in the month of Phalguna and
adores Krishna as Govinda, for the whole


‘day and night, acquires the the merit of


the Atiratra sacrifice and goes to the region
af Soma,


q. He -who fasts on the twelfth day of
the moon in the month of Chaitra and
adores Krishna as Vishnu, for the whole
day and night, acquires the merit of the
Pundarita sacrifice and proceeds to the
region of the celestials.


8. By observing a similar fast on the
twelfth day of the month of Vaishakha and
adoring Krishna as the destroyer of Madhu
for the whole day and night, one acquires
the merits of the Agnishtoma sacrifice and
proceeds to the region of Sama,


9. By ebserving a fast on the twelfth
lunar day in the month of Jaishtha and
adoring Krishna as him who had covered
the universe with three steps of his, one
acquires the merits of the Gomedha sacri-
fice and sports with the Apsaras in great
happiness, :


to. By observing a fast on the twelfeh
day of the moon in ‘the month of Ashad a


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


and adoring Krishna as the Dwarf, one
acquires the merits of the Naramedha
sacrifice and sports in happiness with the
Apsaras.


tt. By observing a fast for the twelfth
luaar day of the month of Shravana and
adoring Krishna for day and night as
Shreedhara, one acquires the merits of the
sacrifice called Panchayajna and acquires
a beautiful car in the celestial region where-
on he sports in joy.


t2. By observing a fast on the twelfth
day of the moon in the month of Bhadras
pada and adoring Krishna as. Hrishikesha
for the whole day and night, one acquires
the merits of the Sautramani sacrifice and
becomes purged off of all sins.


13. By observing a fast for the twelfth
day of the moon in the month of Ashwin
and adoring Krishna as Padmanabha, one


acquires, forsooth, the merits of that sacri- ‘


fice in which a thousand kine are given
away.


14. By observing a fast for the twelfth
day of the moon in the month of Kactica
aad adoring Krishna as Damodara, one
acquires, forsooth, the combined merits of
all the sacrifices. _


15. He who, in’ this way, worship
Krishna for a whole year as Pundari-
kaksha, acquires the power of recollecting’


the incidents of his pristine births and ||


acquires much wealth in: gold.


16. Likewise Wie who adores Krishna’
every day’ as Upendra, acquires oneness
with him. After Krishna has been adored
thus, one should, at the conclusion of his
vow, feeda number of. Brahmanas or make
gilts of clacifed butter to them,


17. The illustcious Vishnu, that ancient
Being, has himself said that there is no
fast which possesses superior merits.


CHAPTER CX.


{ ANUHASANIKA PARVA).—~
Continued. ;


Vaishampayana said :—


t. Approaching Bhishma venerable in
years, vis., Bhishma,. who was then lying
on his bed of arrows, the highly wise

_ Vudhishthira put the following questions,


Yadhishthira said :—


2. How,.O grandfather, does one acquire
beauty @f form and prosperity and syect=


‘prosperity, personal poet
‘tuck which brings about


$44:


ness of disposition? How,’ indeed, does
one acquire religious merit and wealth and
pleasure? How does one wit happiness ?


Bhishma said :—


3-9. In the month of Margashira, when
the mvof comes in conjinction with’ the
asterism called Mula, when his two feet
ace united with that very asterism, ‘O king,
when Rohini is in his calf, when his knee-
joints are in Ashwini, and his thighs are in
the two Ashadas, when Phalguti makes
his anus, and Krittika his waist, when his
navel is in Bhadrapada, his ocular region
in Revati, and his back on the Dhanishthas,
when Asuradha makes his: belly, when with
his two arms he reaches the Vishakhas,
when his two hands are indicated by Hasta,
when Punarvasu, O king, makes his fingers,
Ashlesha his nails, when Jyeshtha makes
his neck, when Shravana makes his ears,
and Pushya his mouth, when Swati is said
to make his teeth ard lips, when Shats-
bhisha’is his smile and Magha his nose,
when Mrigashiras is known to be in his
eye, and Chitra in his forehead, when: h's
head is in Bharani, whea Ardra forms hid
hair, O king, the vow called Chandra-
vrata should be taken in hand. Upon the
termination of that vow, gifts of clarified


[butter should be made to Brahmanas con-_


versant with the Vedas, :


to. As the fruit of that vow, one acquires
and that good
newledge. Ine
deed, one becomes, on account of such’ a
vow, as full of attribute as the full Moon


CHAPTER CX.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


t. O grandfather, O greatly wise one,
conversant with all the scriptures, I wislt
to know those excellent ordinances by which
mortals have to travel through their sounds
of ce-birth.


2. What is that conduct by following
which, O king, men succeed in acquiring
high heaves, and what is that conduct by
which one sinks in Hell ?


3. When, renouncing the déad body
that is as inert as a piece of wood or clod
of earth, people proceed to the other world,
what are those which follow them there ?


244°


Bhishma said:—

4.. Yonder comes the illustrious and
highty intelligent Vrihaspati. Do you ask
his blessed self, The subject is an eternal
mystery.

5. None etse is. capable of explaining
the matter, There is no speaker like
Vrihaspait _-


Vaishampayana said :—

6, While the son of Pritha and the son
of Ganga were thus conversing with each
other, there came at the spot from the sky
the illustrious Vrihaspati of purified soul.

King Yudhishthira, and all others,
headed by Dhritarashtra, stood up and
received Vrihaspati with proper honors.


Excellent was the worship they offered to


the preceptor of the celestials.


8. Then approaching the illustrious
Vrihaspati, Dbarma’s royal son, Yudhish-
thira, asked him the question in proper
form, desirous of knowing the truth.


Yudhishthira said :— °


g+ O illustrious one, you are conversant
with all duties and all the scriptures. Do
you tell me what is truly the friend of
mortal creatures ?


to. Is the father, or mother, or son, or
preceptor, or kinsmen, or relatives, or those
called friends, that’ may be said to truly
form the friend of a mortal creature? One
goes to the next ‘world, leaving his dead
body that is like a piece of wood or a clod
of: earth, Who is it that follows him
there ? :


Vrihaspati said :-
1s. One is born alone, O king, and one
dies alone; oné crosses alone the difficulties


ove meets with, and one alone meets what-.


ever misery falls to his lot.


12—13. One has really no companion
in these deeds. The father, the mother,
the brother, the son, the preceptor, kinsmen,
relatives, and friends, leaving the dead
body as if it were a piece of wood or a cold
of earth, after having mourned for only a
moment, all turn away from it and mind
their own affairs.


14. Only virtue follows the body ‘that
is thus lefe by them all. It is, therefore,
plain, that virtue is the only friend and
that virtue only should be sought by all.


15. A virtuous man would acquire that
high end ‘which is formed by Heaven. If
sinful, he goes to Hell. .


16. Hence, an intelligent man should
always seek to acquire virtue through


MAHABHARATA.


wealth acquired by fair means. Virtue fs
the one only friend which creatures have
in the next world,


17, Moved by cupidity, or stupefaction,
or mercy, or fear, one shorn of knowledge
is seen to do unfair deeds, for the sake of *
even another, bis judgment thus stupefied
by cupidity. :

18. Virtue, wealth, and pleasure,—these
three form the fruit of life. One should
win these three by means of being free from
impropriety and sin.


Yudhishthira said :—


19. I have carefully heard the words
spoken by your illustrious self, —these words
that are fraught with virtue, and that are
highly beneficial, [ wish now to know of
the state of the body (after death).

20. The dead body of man becomes
subtile and unmanifest.* It becomes invi-
sible. How is it possible for virtue to fol-


_low it?


Vrihaspati. said :—

2i—-22. Earth, Wind, Ether, Water,
Light, Mind, Yama (the king of the dead),
Understanding, the Soul, as also Day and
Night, all together witness the merits of
all tiving creatures. With these, virtue fol+
lows the creature (when dead).


23. When the body becomes bereft of'
life, skin, bones, flesh, the vital seed, and
blood, leave it simultaneously. mt :

24. Gifted with merit '{and demerit)
individual soul. (after the. destruction of this
body) comes by another body. After the
attainment by individual soul of that body-
the presiding deities of the five elements
once more witness all his deeds, good
and bad. :


25. What else do you wish to hear? 1f
gifted with virtue, individual soul enjoys
happiness. What other subject, belonging
to this or the other wortd, shall I describe
to you?


Yudhishthira said :—


26. Your illustrious self has explained
how Virtue follows individual soul. I wish
to know how the vital seed is originated.

- ¢ ° y
Vrihaspati said :—

27—28. The food that these gods, ‘O
king, who live in the body, wzg., Earth,
Wind, Ether, Water, Light and Mind, eat,
pleases them. When those five elements
become pleased, O monarch, with .Mind
numbering as their sixth, their vital seed
then becomes generated, O you of purified


soul.


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


29. When an act of union takes ‘place |


between male and female, the vital seed
comes out and causes conception. I have
thus explained to you what you had asked.
What else do you wish to,hear.


Yudhishthira said :—


3e. You have, O illustrious one, said
how conception takes place. Do you ex-
plain how the individual soul that takes
birth, grows. .


Vrihaspati said :—

gt. As soon as individual soul enters the
vital seed, he becomes overwhelmed by the
elements already mentioned, When indivi-
dual soul become disunited therewith, he
is said to attain to the other end (vis.,
death).

32. Gifted with these elements, the in-
dividua) soul comes by a body. ‘Fhe deities
that preside over those elements, witness
all his deeds, good and bad. What else do
you wish to lrear,


Yudhishthira said:—


33- Living off skin, bone and flesh, and
becoming destitute of all those elements,
in what does individual soul reside, O illus-
trious one, for enjoying and suffering hap-
piness and misery ? ;


Vrihaspati said :—~ oe,

34. Endued with all his acts, individual
soul quickly enters the vital seed, and avait-
ing of the menstrual flow of women, takes
birth in time, O Bharata. ;


35. . After birth, individual sou) receives
woe and death from the messengers of
Yama; Indeed, he goes through misery
and a painful round of re-birth,


36. “Endued with life, O king, individual
soul in this world, from the moment of his
birth, enjoys and’ suffers his own (pris:
tine deeds), depending upon virtue (and its
reverse). a ;


37. If individual soul according to ‘the
best of his power, follows virtue from the
day of his birth, he then succeeds in enjoy-
ing uninterruptedly, when re-born, happi-
ness,

38. If, on the other hand, without
following virtue without interrution, he acts
sinfully, he reaps happiness at first as the
reward of his virtue and suffers’ misery
after that. e .

39. Endued with sin, individual soul has
te go to the dominions of Yama and suffer-
ing great misery there, be has to take birth
in an intermediate order of being.


245


4o—41. Listen to me as 1 tell you, what
the different acts are by doing whicl: indivi-
duals soul, stupefied by folly, has to take
birth in different orders.of being, as declar- -
edin the Vedas, the scriptures, and the
histories, Mortals have to go to the dread-
ful regions of Yama, In those regions, O |
king, there are places which are fraught


_with every merit and which are worthy on


that account of being the habitations of the
very celestials. ;


42.- There are, again, places in those
regions that are worse than these which are
occupied by animals and birds. Indeed,
there are places of these kinds in the abode
of Yama which is equal to the tegion of
Brahman himself in merits. -


43—44. Creatures, fettered by their
deeds, suffer various kinds of misery. 1
shall, after this, tell you what those acts
and dispositions are on account of which
a person acquires an end that is fraught
with great misery and terror. :


45. If a twice-born person, having studied °
the four Vedas, becomes stupefied by folly
and accepts a gift from a fallen man, he
has then to'take birth in the order of - asses.


46. He has to live as an ass for fifteen
years. Shaking off bis assinine form, he
has next to take birth as an ox and which


state he has to live for seven years,


47. Throwing eff his bovine form, he.
has next to take birth as a Rakshasa of the
twice-born order. Living as a Rakshasa.
of the twice-born order for three months,
he then regains his status of a Brahmana.


148. A Beahmana, by officiating at the:
sacrifice of a degraded person, has to. take
birth as a vile worm. In this- form he has
to live for fifteen years; O Bharata.


49. Freed from his worm birth, he is:
next born.as-an ass, Asan ass he'has to
live for. five years, and. then as a hog,. in
which state also be has to remain for as.
many years. ' Poy an, 0k


50. After that, he is born as a cock, and!
living. for five ‘years in that form, he..is
born. as. a jackal and lives for as many:
years in that state. He is then born asa
dog, and living thus for a year he regains
bis manhood.. pa ot 4

51. That foolish disciple. who offends
his preceptor by injuring him, has cer-
tainly to undergo three changes in this
world. - :

52. ‘Such a person, O king, has in the
first instance to become a dog. He has
then to become a beast of prey, and then
an ass. Living his assinine form, he has to
wander for sometime in great misery as.a


246


spirit. After the expirati n. of that time,
he 1s bora asa Braliunana,


That sinful disciple who even in‘
thought knows the wife of his preceptor,
has, ot account of such a sinful heart, to'
undergo many dreadful shapes
world,


54. Fitst takiag birth in the canine
order he has to live for three years. Throw-
ing off the canine form when death comes,
he is born as a vile vermin.


55. In this form he has to live fora
year, Renouncing that form he succeeds in
regaining his status as a human being of
the twice-born order.


56. If the preceptor kills, without reason,.
his. disciple who is even as a son to him,
he has, on account of. such a wilful deed of
sin on his part, to take birth as a beast
of prey.


57. That son: who. disregards his father ,


and mother, O king, is born after renoun-
cing his human form as an ass,


58. Assuming the. assinine. form he has:
to live. for ten years. After that he is born
as a crocodile,.in which form he has to live
foc a year. After that he cegains the
human: form,


§9. That’ son with whom his. parents
become angry, has, on account of his evil
thoughts towards them, to take bicth as
an assi-


6o. As an ass he has to live for ten
months. He is next born as.a dog and has to
remain as such for fourteen months. After
that he is: born as a cat and living in that
form for seven months he regains his human
form.


61, Having spoken ill of parents, one’ is
born as @ Sarika.
born, O. king, as a tortoise.


62. Living as- a tortoise for ten years,
hte is born as-a porcupine. After that he
has to take birth as: a snake, and: living:
for six months in that form he regains:
humaa form.

63. That: maw who, while living upon
the food that his’ royal master’ suppties,
commits-deeds injurious to the interests-of
kis master, stupefied by folly, has; after
death, to take birth as a monkey.


64. For ten years he has to live asa
monkey, and after that for five years:as-a
mouse. After that he is barn as' a dog,
and living in that form for six months he
succeeds in regaining his human ‘form.


65. That man who misappropriates
what is deposited with bim in teust, has
to undergo a hundred births, He at last
takes birth ab a vile’ worm,


in this |


Striking them one is-


MAHABHARATA.


66. In that order he has to five for


fifteen. years, QO Bharata. Upon the exe
haustion of his sin in this way, he succeeds


j ia regaining his human form.


67. ‘That mar who has malice towards
others, has, after death,.to take birth as a
Sharngaka. ‘That wicked: man who becomes
guity of breach of trust has- to take birth
as a fish.


68. Living asa fish for eight years, he is
born, O Bharata, as a deer. Living as a
deer for four months, he,is next born as
& goat.


69 After the expiration of a fulf year,
he renounces his goatish body, and is
then born as aworm. After that he suc-
ceeds in regaining his human form.


70-71. That shameless insensate man
who, through stupefaction, steals paddy,
barley, sesame, Masha, Kulattha, oil-seeds,
oats, Kalaya, Mudga, wheat, Atasi, and
otter kinds of corn, is born as a mouse.:


92. After leading the life for sometime,
he is next born asa hog. As soon as he
is born as a hog he has to die of disease,


73. ‘On-account of tis sin, that foolish
man Has next to take birth as a dog,
Oking: Living as a‘ dog for five years,
he then regains his human form.


74. Having committed an act of adul-
tery with the wife of another man, one is
born as awolf. After that he has. to as-
sume the forms of a dog and jackal and
vulture. He bas next to take birth as a
snake’ and then as a Kanka (a bird of prey)
and then as a crane.


75. That sinful wight who, out of foolish-


ness, knows his brother’s wife, has: to take


birth as a'male: Goet and to live in that
form for a whole year, O king.


76. He who,. through lust, knows the


wife of a friend, or the wife of preceptor,


or the wife of his king, has after death to
take the form of a hog.


77- He hasto live in this form for: five
years and then to assume that of a wolf
for'ten years. For the next five years he
has to live as a cat’ and then for the’ next -
ten years as’ a cock.


78. Ue is next born as an ‘ant, for three
ieuha and then as aworm for a month.
Having undergone’ these births, he has next
to live'as a vile worm for fourteen years.


_ 79: When: his: sin. becomes exhausted
by such punishment, he: at last regains the
buman form,


So. Whee a marriage is about te take


place,.or a: sacrifice, or an act of gifts is
about to be: made, O.you. of great power,


ANUSHASANA PARVA.-


the man who puts in any impediment, has


to take birth in bis next life as a vile worm.


80. Assuming such a form lhe has to
Vive, O Bharata, for fifteen years, When
his sin is exhausted by such suffering, he
te-gains the human form.


81. Having once bestowed his daughter
in marriage upon a, person, he who seeks
to bestow her again upon a second husband,
is compelled, O king, to take birth among
vile worms.


83. Assuming such a form, O Yudhish-
thira, he has to live for thirteen years.
Upon the exhaustion of his sin by such
sufferance, he re-gains the human form,


84. He who eats without having per-
formed the rites in honor of the celestials
er those in honour of the departed Manes
or without having offered (even) oblations
of water to both the Rishis and the departed
Manes has to take birth as a crow. .


85. Living as a crow for a hundred
years, he next assumes the form of a cock.


His next change is that of a snake for a.


moath, After this, he regains the human
form.


86. He who disregards his eldest brother
who is like a father, has, after death,
40 take birth as a crane.


_87. Having assumed that form he has
to live in it for two years. Renouncing
that form at the conclusion of that period,
he re-gains the human form.


$8. That Shudca who knows a Brahmani
woman, has, after death, to take birth as
a hog.


89. As secon as he takes ‘birth in that
order he dies of- disease, O king. The
wretch has next to take birth as a dog,
O king, on account of that sinful deed.


go. Renouncing his canine form he re-
gains, upon the exhaustion of his sin, the
human form, The Shudra who begets
offspring upon a Brahmani woman, leaving
off bis human form, is born again as a
mouse.


gt. The man who becomes guilty of
ingratitude, O king, has te go to the regions
of Yama and there to suffer very painful
and severe treatment at the hands af the
emissaries, provoked to fury, of the grim
hing of the dead.


9293. Clubs with heavy hammers and
mallets, sharp-pojnted lances, heated jars,
dreadful sword- blades, heated sands, thorny
Shalmalis,—these and many other engines
of torture such a man has (© suffer in the
regions of Yama, O Bharata,


247


94 G@ chief of Bharata’s race, having.
suffered such dreadful treatment in the
regions of the grim king of the dead, the
angrateful person has to return to this
world and take birth among vil vermin.


95. He has to live as a vile vermin for a
period of fifteen years, O Bharata. He has
then to enter the womb and die prematurely
before birth.


96. After this, that person has to enter
the womb ‘a ‘hundred times successively.
Indeed, having undergone a hundred re-
births, be at last is born as a creature: in
some intermediate order between man and
inanimate nature.


97. Having suffered misery for a great
many ‘years, he ‘has to take birth as a-haire
less tortoise. .


g8. A person who steals curds is born
as a crane. ‘One becomes a monkey by
stealing raw fish. That intelligent man
‘who steals honey, is born asa gadfly.


99. By stealing fruits or roots or cakeg,
one becomes an ant. By stealing Nishpava,
one becomes a Halagolaka.


aoo. By stealing Payasa, one becomes,
in his next birth, a Tittiri bicd. By stealing
cakes, one becomes a screech-owl. :


1o1. That little-witted man who steals
iron, has to take birth ag a cow. That ‘man
who steals white brass, is born as a bird
of the Harita species, :


102. By ‘stealing a silver vessel, one
becomes a pigeon. ‘By stealing a golden
vessel, one has to take birth as a vile
vermin, ; j


103. By stealing a piece of silken cloth,
one becomes a Krikara. By stealing a
piece of cloth made af red silk, one be-
comes a Vartaka. :


104. By stealing a piece of, nausiin, one
becomes a parrot. By stealing a piece of
cloth that is of fine texture, one becomes:a
duck after renouncing his human .body.


105. By stealing a piece of cloth made
of cotton, one becomes acrane. By steale
ing a piece of cloth made of jute, one be-
comes a sheep in his next life. —


106, By stealing a piece of linen, one is
born asa hare. By stealing different sorts
of coloarisg matter, one is burn as a pea-
cock. :


to7——to8. By stealing a piece of red
clath one is born asa bird of the Jiva-
jivaka species. By stealing unguents (such
as sandatpaste) and perfumes in-this world,
the avaricious man, O king, is born asa
mole. Assuming the form of a mole one
“has to live in it for fifteen years,


248


tog. After the exhaustion of his sin by
such suffering, he regains the human form.
By stealing milk, one becomes a crane.


Ito, That man, O king, who, througt
stupefaction of the understanding, steals
oil, is. born, after renouncing this body, as
an animal who lives upon oil as bis form.


aut. That wretch, who, himself ‘well-
armed, kills another while that other is un-
armed, for getting his riches .or out of
hostile feelings, has, after renouncing his
human body, to take birth as an ass.


112, Assuming that assinine form, he
has to: live for a period of two years and
then he is killed bya weapon, Renoun-
cing his .assinine -body, he has to take
birth, in, his next life, as.a deer always
anxious (for fear of being killed), . —-. .


, 11g—t14., Upoo the expiration of a
year from the time of bis birth as a deer,
he is killed by a weapon. Thus. renouncing
his form of a deer,.he next takes birth asa
fish and dies on-account of being dragged
up ina net, on the expiration of the fourth
month.” He has next to take birth asa
beast of prey. He has to live in that form,
for ten years and then he takes birth as a
bird in which form he has to: live for five
years.


115. Actuated by the change that is
occasioned by time, he then renounces that
form, and, his sin having been exhausted,
he re-gains the human form. _ :


116. That man of little understanding
who slays a woman, has to go to the regions
of Yama and to suffer various kinds of
pain and misery. He then has to pass
through full twenty-one transformations.


117. After that, O king, he has to take
birth as a vile vermin. - Living as a vermin
for twenty years, he regains the human
form.


t18—119. By stealing food, one has te
take birth as a bee. Living for many
months in the company of other bees, his
sin become exhaustediand he re-gains the
human form. By stealing paddy, one be-
comes a cat. ¢


120. That man who steals food mixed
with sesame cakes, is in his next birth bocn
as a mouse large or small according to
the fargeness or smallness of the quantity
“stolen. ~ ; ' :


121. He bites human beings every day
and, therefore, -becomes sinful and passes
* through a varied ctound of re-births, That
foolish man who steals clarified butter has
‘ to take birth as a gallinule.


_ 122. That wicked man who steals fish
has to take birth asacrow. By stealing


MAHABHARATA.


salt one kas to take birth as an imitating
parrot.


123. That man who misappropriates
trust-property, has to suffer a diminution in
the period of his life, and dying has to take
birth among fishes.


124. Having lived for sometime as a
fish, hé dies and re-gains the human form,
Regaining, however, the human form he
becomes short-lived.


125. Indeed, having perpetrated sins, O
Bharata, one has totake birth in an order
intermediate between that of humanity and
vegetables, ‘Those people do not know
the principles of virtue who take their own
hearts for their guide.


+: 126. Those men who commit various
sinful deeds, and then seek to expiate .
them by continuous vows and observances
of piety; enjoy happiness and suffer misery
and live in great anxiety of heart.


' 129. Those sinful men who yield to the
influence of cupidity and stupefaction, are
surely .born as Mlechchhas who are .un<


worthy of being associated with. :


: 428. ‘Those men, on the other hand, who
abstain from sin afl their lives, become
free from disease of every sort, gifted with
beauty of form, and possessed of riches.


129. Women also, when they act in this
way, attain to births of the same kind.
Indeed, they have to take births as the
males of the animals I have mentioned.


" ago. VT have told you all the faults of the |
misappropriation of others’ properties. I
have described to you very briefly the sub-
ject, O sinless one. -

1gI—132. In connection with some other
subject, U Bharata, you will again hear of
those faults. I heard all this, O ‘king,


formerly from: Bhrahman himself, and I


asked all about it in a-proper way, when le
described it in the midst of the celestial
Rishis. 1 have told you truly and in detait
all that you had asked me, .
133. Having listened to all this, O king,
do you always set your heart on virtue, _ ,
‘


CHAPTER CXIL.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued. :


Yudhishthira said :—


; ad
t. You have told mé, O twice-born one,
what the end is of virtue or sin. I wish
now to hear, O foremost of speakers, of
what the end is of virtue.


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


2. Having committed various sinful
deeds, by what acts do people succeed in
acqiiring an auspicious end in this world?
By what acts also, do people acquire auspici-

* ous end in the celestial region ?


Vrihaspati said :—

3. By committing sinful deeds with per-
verted mind, one gives way to the influence
of sin, and accordingly goes to Hell,


4. That man who, having perpetrated
sinful deeds through stupefaction of mind,
feels the pangs of repentance and sets his
heart on meditation of the deity), has not
to suffer the consequences of his sins,


5. One becomes freed from his sins in-
asmuch as he repents for them.


6 If one, having committed a sin, O
king, mentions it before Brahmanas conver-
sant with duties, he speedily becomes freed
from the obloquy arising from his sin.


7. Accordingly as one mentions his sins,
fully or otherwise, with concentrated mind,
he becomes cleansed therefrom fully or
otherwise, like a snake freed from his
diseased slough.


8. By making, with aconcentrated mind,
gifts of various kinds to a Brahmana, and
concentrating the mind (on the deity), one
attains to an auspicious end.


9g. shall now tell you what those gilts
are, O Yudhishthira, by making which a
person, even if guilty of having committed
sinful deeds, may become gifted with
merit.


ro. Of all kinds of gifts, that of food is:
considered as the best. One desirous of
acguiring merit should, with a sincere heart,
make gifts of food. '


11. Food is the vital air of men, From
it all creatures originate. All the worlds of
living creatures are established upon food.
Hence food is highly spoken of.


12. The deities, Rishis, departed Manes,
and men, all praise food. Formerly king
Rantideva, proceeded to the celestial region

by making gifts of food.


13. Good feod that has been acquited
by fair means, should be given, with a cheer-
ful heart, to Brahmanas possessed of Vedic
learning.

14. That man, whose food, given with a
cheerful heart, is taken by a_ thousand
Brahmanas, has never to take birth.in an
intermediate order. ,

.15. A person, O king, by feeding ten
thousand Brahmanas, becomes cleansed of
sin and devoted to Yoga practices.


16. A Brahmana knowing the Vedas,
32


249


by giving away food acquired by him as
alms, to a Brahmana devoted to the study
of the Vedas, succeeds in acquiring happi-’
ness here. —


17—18. That Kshatriya who, without
taking anything belonging to a Brahmana, ~
protects his subjects lawfully, and makes
gifts of food, obtained by his strength, to
Brahmanas foremost in Vedic knowledge,
with concentrated ‘heart, succeeds by such
conduct, O you of righteous soul, in cleans-
ing himself, O son of .Pandu, of all his
sinful deeds,


19. That Vaishya who divides the pro-


| duce of his fields inta six equal parts and


makes a giffof one of those shares to Brah=
manas, succeeds by such conduct in cleans~
ing himself from every sin.


20, That Shudra who, acquiring food
by hard labour and at the risk of life itself,
makes a gift of it to Brahmanas, becomes
purged off of every sin.


21. That ‘man who, by dint of his physi-
cal strength, acquires food withaut doing
any act of injury to any Creature, and
inakes gift of it to Brahmanas, succeeds in
avoiding all calamities.


22. A person by cheerfully making gifts
of food acquired by fair means to Brah-
manas pre-eminent for Vedic learning,
becomes purged off of all his sins.


23. .By treading in the path of the pious,
one becomes freed from all sins. A persen
by making gifts of such food as creates
great energy, becomes himself endued with
great energy.


24. The path made by charitable per-
Sons, is always trod by the wise. They who
make gifts of food, are consideréd as givers
of life. The merit they acquire by such
gifts, is eternal,


25. Hence, a person should, under all
Circumstances, seek to acquire food by fair
means, and having got it to make always
gifts of it to worthy men. Food -is the
great support of living creatures,


26. By making gifts of food, one has
never to go to Hell. Hence, one should
always make gifts of sead, having got it by
fair means.


27. The house-holder should always try
to eat after having made a gift of food toa
Brahmana. Every man should make the


. day fruitful by making gifts of food.


28—-29. A person by feeding, O king, a
thousand Brahmanas who are all conversant
with duties and the scriptures and the


| sacred histories, has not to go to Hell and te


return ‘to this world for going through


- 280


re-births. Gifted with the fruition of every
desire, he enjoys great happiness in the. next
world,

30. Gifted with such merit, he sports
in happiness, freed from every anxiety,
possessed of personal beauty and great
fame and endued with wealth.


31. I have thus told you all about the
great merit of gifts of food. This is the
root- of all virtue and merit, as also of all
gifts, O Bharata. ;


CHAPTER CXIII.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued,


Yudhishthira said :—


1. Which amongst these is more effica~
cious toa person, namely, abstention from
injury, the observance of the Vedic ritual,
meditation, control over the senses, penances
and obedient services rendered to the pre-
ceptors.


Vrihaspati said :—

2. All these six are meritorious. They
are different doors of virtue. I shall dis-
course upon them now. Do you listen to
them, O chief of the Bharatas !


3. I shall tell you what forms the highest
good of a human being. glhat man who
practises the religion of universal mercy,
acquires his highest good.


4. That man who keeps under restraint
the three passions, viz., lust, anger and
avarice, by throwing them upon all creatures,
acquires success. :

5. He who, for his own happiness, kills
other innocent creatures with the rod of
punishment, never acquires happiness in the
next world. .


6. That man who considers all creatures
as his own self, and treats them, as his own
self, laying aside the rod of punishment
and completely controlling his anger, suc-
ceeds in acquiring happiness.


7. The very cetestials who are desirous
of a fixed habitation, become stupefied in
ascertaining the road of that person who
forms himself the soul of ail creatures and
considers them all as his own self, for such
a person leaves no track behind,


8. One should never do that to another
which he considers as injurious to his own
self, This, in brief, is the rule of virtue.
One by acting in a different way by giving
way to desire, becomes guilty of sin.


MAHABHARATA.


9. In refusing and giving, in weal and
woe, in the agreeable and the disagreeable,
one should judge of their effects by con-
sidering his own self.


to. When one injures another, the in-
jured in return injures the injurer. Like-
wise, when one cherishes another, that othec
cherishes the cherisher, One should form
his own tule of conduct according to this.
I have told you what virtue is even by this
subtile way. :


Vaiskampayana continued :—

tr. The preceptor of the celestials endued
with great intelligence, having said this to
king Yudhishthira the just, aseended up=
wards for proceeding to the celestial regfom
before our eyes.


CHAPYIER CXIV.


( ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.


Vaishampayana said :—

x, After this, king, Vudhishthira gifted
with great energy, and the foremost of
eloquent men, addressed his grandfather
tying on his bed of arrows, in the folowing
words.


Yudhishthira said :—~

2. O you of great intelligence, the Rishis
and Brahmanas and the celestials, led by
the authority of the Vedas, all speak highly
of the religion of mercy,


-3. But, O king, what F ask you is this
how does a man, who has perpetrated acts
of injury to others in word, thouybt and
deed, succeed in purifying himself frony
misery, -


Bhishma said :—


4. Brahmavadins have said that there
are four kinds of mercy or ‘abstention frour
injury. L€ even one of those four kinds be
not observed, the religion of mercy, it is
said, is not observed.


5. As all quadruped animats are in-
capable of standing on three legs, so the
religion of mercy cannot stand if any of
those four divisions or parts be wanting.


6—7. As the foot-prints of all other
animals are suuk in those of the elephant,
so all other religions are said to be con-
tained in that of mercy. A person becomes
guilty of injury through acts, words. and
thoughts.


ANUSRASANA PARVA,


8. Discarding it mentally in the begin-
ning, one should next discard it in word
and thought. He who, according to this
rule, abstains from eating meat is said to
be purified in a three-fold way.


9. {tis heard that?]Brahmavadins point
out three causes (for the sin of eating
meat). ‘that sin may attach to the mind,
to words, and to deeds.


to. It is, therefore, that wise men who
are gifted with penances refrain from eating
meat. Listen to me, O king, as I tell you
what the faults are which attach to the
eating of meat.


t1. The meat of other animals is like
the flesh of one’s son. That foolish person,
stupefied} by felly,t:who eats meat is con-
sidered as thevilest of human beings.


12, The union of father and mother
produces children, Similarly the cruelty that
a helpless and sinful wretch commits, pro-
duces its progeny of repeated re-births
fraught with great misery.


13. As the tongue is the cause of sensa-
tion of taste, so, the scriptures declare,
attachment proceeds from taste.


14. Well-dressed, cooked with salt or
without salt, meat, in whatever form one
may take it, by and by attracts the mind
and enslaves it.


15. How will those foolish men who live
upon meat succeed in listening to the sweet
music of celestial drums and cymbals and
lyres and harps?


16. They who eat meat “highly speak of
it, allowing themselves to be stupefied by its
taste which“they declare to be something
inconc eivable, undescriable, and unimagi-
nable.


~


17. Such praise even of meat is sinful.
Formerly, many pious men, by giving the
flesh of their own bodies, protected the flesh
of other creatures and as a result of such
deeds of merit, have proceeded to the
celestial region.


18. In this way, O king, the religion of
mercy is surrounded by four considerations.
T have thus declared to you that religion
which contains all other religions within it,


4


est
CHAPTER CXV..


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued. ‘


Yudhishthira saig :—

1. You have told it many times that
abstention from injury is the highest Religion.
In Shraddhas, however, that are performed
in honour of the departed Manes, persons
for their own behoof, should make offerings
of various kinds of meat.


2. You have said so while discoursing
formerly upon the ordinances about Shrad+
dhas. How can meat, however, be pro-
cured without killing a living creature ?
Your declarations, therefore, appear to me
to be contradictory,


3-_ A doubt has, therefore, sprung in ou
mind about the duty of abstaining from
meat. What are the sins that one commits
by eating meat, and what ace the merits
that one acquires ? é >


4. Whatare the demerits of him who
eats meat by himself slaying a living crea-
ture? What are the merits of him who
eats the meat of animals, slain by others ?
What the merits or demerits of him: who
kills a living creature for another? Or of
him who eats meat buying it of others ?


5. I wish, O sinless one, that you should
describe to me this subject in full, I wish to
ascertain this etecnal Religion with certainty.


6. How does one acquire longevity ?
How does one acquire strength ? How does
one acquire faultiessness of limbs? Indeed,
how does oné become gifted with excellent
marks ?


Bhishma said :—


7. Listen to me, O scion of Kuru’s race
what the merit is of abstention from meat.
Listen to me as I declare to you what the
excellent ordinances, in sooth, are on this
subject.


8. Those great men who desire beauty,
faultlessitess of limbs, long life, understan-
ding, mental and physical strength, and

memory, should abstain from acts of injury

g. Numberless discourses took place.
bcetween the Rishis, on this subject, O
s,ion of Kuru’s race. Listen, O -Yudhish-
Hira, what their opinion was,


to. The merit acquired by that persos,
O Yadhishthicra, who, with the steadiness
of a vow, worship the eelestials every
month in Horse-sacrifices, is equal to him


who discards honey and meat,


aga


- 11, The highly wise seven celestial
Rishis, the Valakshillyas, and those Rishsi,
who drink the rays of the sun, all speak


highly of abstention from meat.


12. The Self-create Manu has said that
man who does not eat meat, or who does
not kill living creatires, or who does not
cause them to be killed, is a friend of all
Greatures,


13. Such a man is incapable of being op-
pressed by any creature. He enjoys the
confidence of all living beings. He always
enjoys, besides, the praise of the pious.

14. The virtuous Narada has said that
that nia: who wishes to multiply his own!
flesh by’ eating the flesh of other creatures,
meet with disastet.


15. Ycihaspati has said that that man
who abstains from honey and meat, gains.
the merit of gifts and sacrifices and!
penances,


16. In my view, these two persons are
equal, viz., be who worships the celestials
every “month ‘in a Horse-sacrifice for a
tentury. and he who- abstains. from honey.
and meat.


17. On account of abstention from meat,
one is considered as one who always wor~
ships the celestials in sacrifices, or as one
who always makes gifts to others, or as one
who always practises the severest auste-
rities,

18. That: man who having eaten meat,
gives it up afterwards, wins merit by such
a deed thatis so great that a study of all
the Vedas or a performance, O Bharata,
of all the sacrifices, cannot give its like.


1g. It is very difficult to abstain from
meat after one has known it staste. Indeed,
it is extremely difficult for such a person
to observe the great vow abstention from
meat, a vow that assures every creature
by removing all fear, :


20. That learned person who gives to all
living creatures the gift of complete assur-
ance, is forsooth, regarded as the giver of
life-breaths in this world.


21. This is the high Religion which
wise men esteem very highly. ‘he vital airs
of other creatures are as dear to, them as
those of his own self.


22. Men gifted with intelligence and
purified souls should always treat others as
they themselves wish to be treated.


23. It is seen that even those mea who
are endued with learning and who seek to
acquire the greatest good in the shape of
Liberation, are not free from the fear of
death,


~ MAHABHARATA,


23. What! necessity there be said o
those innocent and healthy creatures gifted
with love of life, when they are sought to


be killed by sinful wretches living by
slaughter ?
24. Therefore, O king, know that the


discarding of meat is the highest refuge of
Religion, of the celestial region, and of
happiness,


25. Abstention from injury is the high-
est Religion. It is, again, the highest
penance. It is also the highest truth from
which all duty emanates,


26. Flesh cannot be had from grass or
wood or stone. Unless a living creature is
killed, it cannot be procured, Hence is: the
fault in eating flesh.


27. Thecelestials, who live upon Swaha,
Swadha, and nectar, are-.given to truth
and sincerity. Those persons, however,
who are for satisfying the sensation of taste,
should be known as Rakshasas pervaded
by the quality of Darkness,


28—29. That man who abstains? from
meat, is never put in fear, O king, by any
creature, wherever he may be, vtg., in
terrible forest or inaccessible fastnesses, by
day or by night, or at the two twilights, in


. the open squares of towns or in conclaves
-of men, from upraised weapons or in places


where there is great
animals or snakes.


30. All creatures seek. his protection.
He is trusted.by all. He never causes any
anxiety in others, and himself has never to
become anxious,


31. If there were nobody who ate flesh
there would then, be nobody to slay living
creatures. The man who slays living crea-


fright from wild


_tures kills them for the sake of the person
‘who eats flesh.


32. If flesh were not considered as
food, there would then be no destruction of
living creatuces. It is for the sake of the
eater that the destruction of living crea-
tures is carried on in the world,


33. Since, O you of great splendour,
the period of life is shortened of persons
who &ill living creatures or. cause them


‘to be killed, it is clear that the person


who seeks his own, behoof, should give up
meat altogether.


34. Those dreadfnl persons who are
engaged in the destruction of ne crea
tures, never find protectors when they are
in need. Such persons should always be
molested and punished even as beasts of
prey.

35. Through cupidity or stupefaction
of sense, for the sake of strength. and


ANUSHASANA PARVA.,


energy, er through association with the
sinful, men show tendency for committing
Sin... !


36. That man who seeks ‘to multiply
his own flesh by’ (eating) the flesh of
others, has to live in this world in great
anxiety and after. death has to take birth
in indifferent races and families.


37. High Rishis given to the obser-
vance of vows and self-control have said
that abstention from meat is worthy of
praise, productive of fame and Heaven, and
@ great satisfaction itself.


. 38. This L heard formerly, O son of


Kunti, from Markandeya when that Rishi |.


discoursed on the sins of eating flesh.


39. He who eats the flesh of animals are
who desirous of living but who have been
slain by, either himself or others, commits
the sin of slaughter for his this act of
cruelty.


40. He who purchases flesh, kills living
creatures through his money. He who
eats flesh, kills living creatures through
such act of eating. He who binds or seizes
and actually kills living creatures, is the


slaughterer, These are the three sorts of
slaughter, each of these three acts
being so.

41. He who does, not himself eat flesh


but approves of an act of slaughter, be-
comes stained with the sin of slaughter.


42. By abstaining from meat and
showing mercy to all creatures one be-
comes incapable of being - molested by
any creature, and acquires longevity, perfect
health and happiness. -


43. The.merit won by abstaining from
meat, we have heard, is superior to that
of one who makes presents of gold, of
kine, and of land. :


44 One should never eat meat of
animals not dedicated in sacrifices and
that are, therefore, killed. uselessly, and
that has not been offered to the gods and
departed Manes with the help of the ordi-
nances. There is not-the least doubt that
@ person by eating such meat goes to Hell,


45. Hf one eats the meat that has been
sanctified on account of its having been
procured from animals dedicated in sacri-
fices and that have been killed for the
purpose of feeding Brahmanas, one incurs
a little fault. By, behaving otherwise, one
becomes stained with sin. .


$4 :
46, That wretched man who kills living
creatures for the sake of those who would


"eat them, commits great sin, The eater’s.


SLN is not so great,


‘and: is, therefore, inedible,


‘down from the sky on the Earth.


253


47. That wretchsed man who, following
the path of religious cites and sacrifices
laid down in the Vedas, would. kill.a living
creature from desire of eating its flesh,
would certainly go to Hell.


48. That man who having eaten. flesh
abstains from it afterwards, acquires great
merit on account of such abstention from
sin, j

49 He who arranges for obtaining
flesh, he who approyes of these, arrange-
ments, he who kills, he who buys or sells,
he who cooks, and he who eats, are all
considered as eaters of flesh.


50. I shall now cite another aythority,
depending upon the saying of the ordainer
himself, that is ancient, worshipped by the
Rishis, and established in the Vedas.


51. It has been said that that religion
which has acts’ for its marks, has been
ordained for house-holders, “OU: chief of
kings, and not for those men who are
desirous of Liberation. .


52. Manu himself. has said. that meat
which is sanctified with Mantras and
properly dedicated, according to the ordi-
nances of the Vedas, in cites performed
in honor of the departed Manes,—is pure.


53-54. All other meatfis-useless slaughter,
and: leads: to
Hell and infamy.‘ One should’ never eat,
O chief of Bharata’s race, like a Rakshasa,
any meat that has been procured by
means not sanctioned. by the ordinance.
ludeed, one should never eat flesh obtained
from useless destruction and that has not
been sanctified by the ordinance,


55. That man who wishes to- avoid
disaster should abstain from the meat of
every living creature. ;


56. It is heard that in. the former Aton
persons, desirous of ‘acquiring regions of
merit hereafter, celebrated sacrifices _ with
seeds, regarding such animals as dedicated
by them. 7


57. Doubtful about the propriety of

eating flesh, the Rishis asked, Vasu the
king of the Chedis, for removing their
doubt. King Vasu, knowing ‘that flesh
sbould not be taken, answered that it was
edible, O king.
_ 58. From that moment Vasu dropped
After
this he once more repeated His opinion, with
the result that he had to go down below the
Earth foe it.

59: Desirous.of doing good to all. men,
the great Agastya, by the help of his pen-,
ances, dedicated, once. for ail, all wild deer
to the celestials,


254


6o. Hence there is no longer awy neces-
sity of purifying those avimals for offering
them to the celestiafs and the departed
Manes.
ordinance, the departed Manes become
pleased.


61, Listen to me, O king of kings, as |
tell you this, O sinless one. There is ab-
solute happiness in abstaining from meat,
O king. :

62. fYewho practises severe austerities
for acentury, and he who abstains from
meat, are both equally meritorious, This
is my opinion,

63, In the ligtt half of the month of Kar-
tika in especial, one should abstain from
honey and meat. It has been ordained,
that there is greet merit in it,


64. He who abstains from meat for the
four months of the rainy season, acquires
the blessed achievements, viz., longevity,
fame, and power.


65. He who abstains for the whole
month of Kartika from meat of every kind,
gets over all sorts of woe and lives in com-
plete happiness.


66. They who abstain from flesh by
either months or fortnights, have the region
of Brahma ordained for thgm on aewount of
their abstention from cruelty.


67. Formerly many kings, O son of
Pritha, who had formed themselves the
souls of all creatures and who has known
the trutbs of all things, vzs., Soul and Not-
Soul, had abstained from flesh either for the
whole of the month of Kartika or for the
whole of -the light fortnight in that
month,


68—70. They were Nabhaga, Aimvarisha,
the great Gaya, Ayu,’ Anaranya, and
Dwilipa, Raghu, Puru, Kartavirya, Ani-
ruddha, Nahusha, Yayati, Nriga, Vishwak-
sena, Shasavindu, Yuvanashwa, Shivi the
son of Ushinara, Muchukunda, Mandhatrt,
and Harishchandra.


7t. Do you always speak the truth.
Never speak an untruth. ‘Iruth is an
eternal duty. It is by teuth that Harish-
. chandra roves through the sky like a
second Moon.


g2—77. These other kings also, w7s.,
Shyenachitra, O monarch, and Somaka,
Vrika, Raivata, Rantideva, Vasu, Srinjaya,
Dushmanta, Karcushma, Rama, Alarka,
Nala, Virupashwa, Nimi, intelligent Janaka,
Aila, Prithu, Virasena, [kshaku, Shambhu,
Shweta, Sagara, Aja, Dhundhu, Subahu,
Haryyashwa,ashupa and Bharata, O mon-
arch, did not eat flesh for the month of


Served with flesh according to éhe.


these ordinances about abstention


MAHABETARATA,


Kartika, and, therefore, attained to the celese
tial region, and gifted with prosperity, blaze
forth with effulgence in the region of
Brahmana, worshipped by Gandharvas
and surrounded by a thousand, beautiful
ladies.

78. Those great men who practise this
excellent Religion which is marked out by
abstention from injury, succeed in living in
the celestial region. ‘


79. Those pious men wha, from the time
of birth, abstain from haney and meat and
wine, are considered as ascetics.


80. That man who practises this religion
consisting of abstention from meat or wha
recites it for making others hear it, will
never have to go ta Hell, even if he bea
great wicked man.


81—82. He, O king, who always reads
from
medt, that are sacred and worshipped by
the Rishis, or hears it read, becomes purged
off of every sin and acquirea great happi-
ness on. account of the fruition of every
desire. Forsooth, he acquires an eminent
position among kinsmen.


83. When afflicted with calamity, he
immediately gets over it. When obstructed
with obstacles, he succeeds in freeing him-
self from them with the utmost ease. When
suffering from a disease, he becomes quick-
ly cured, and afflicted with sorrow he
becomes liberated from it with greatest
ease.


84. Such a man has never to take birth
in the intermediate order of animals or
birds. Born in the order of men, he attains
to great personal beauty. Gifted with great
prosperity, O chief of Kuru’s race, he ace
quires great fame as well.


85. I have thus told you, O king, all
that should be said about the subject of
abstention from meat, together with the
ordinances about both the religion of action
and inaction as framed by the Rishis,


CHAPTER CXVI.
(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—


Continued.
Yudhishthira said:~- _
1. Alas, those cryel men, who not


caring for various other sorts of food, want
only flesh, are really like great Rakshasas.


2. Alas, they do not relish various kinds
of cakes and diverse serts of pot-herbs and


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


vatiots species of Khanda with juicy
flavour so much as they do flesh.


3. I cannot understand this at all. I
think they feel that there is nothing so
tasteful as meat.


4. J wish, therefore, O powerful one, to
hear what the merits are of abstention from
flesh, and the sin about the eating of flesh,
O chief of Bharata’s race.


5. You know every duty. Describe to
me, in full, according to the ordinances on


duty, this subject, Do tell me what, indeed, |


is edible and what inedible ?


6. Tell me, O grandfather, what is flesh,
of what substances it is, the merits of absten-
tion from it, and the sins for eating meat.


Bhishma said :—


7. Omighty-armed one, what you say
istrue! There is nothing on Barth that
is supetior to meat in taste,


8. There is nothing that is more bene-
ficial than meat to persous who are lean,
or weak, or afflicted with disease, or ad-
dicted tosexual union or exhausted with
travel.


9. Meat quickly increases strength, ft
ordains great development. There is no
food, O scorcher of enemies, that is superior
to meat.


io. . But, O delighter of the Kurus, those
who abstain from it, win great merits.
Listen to me as I describe it to you.


tr. That man who wishes to increase
his own flesh by the meat ef another living
creature, is such that there is none meaner
and more cruel than he.


1z, In this world there is nothing that
is dearer to a creature than his life. Hence,
one should show mercy to the lives of others
as he does to his own life.


13. Forsooth, O son, flesh has its origin
in the vital seed. There is -great sin at-
taching to its eating, as, indeed, there is
merit in abstaining from it. .


14. One does not, however, commit any
sin by eating flesh sanctified according to
the ordinances of the Vedas. The Skrutz
says that animals were created for sacrifice,
They who eat flesh in any other way are
said to follow the Rakshasa practice.


15. Listen to meas [ tell you what the
ordinance is for the Kshatriyas. They do
not commit any sin by eating flesh that has
been acquired by power.


16. AH wild deer have been dedicated
to the celestials and the departed Manes


in days of old, O king, by Agastya. Hence,


the hunting of deer is not censured,


255

17. There can be no hunting without
tisk of one’s own Hife. There is equality
of risk between the ka@ler and the killed,
Either the animal is killed or it kills the
hunter.


18. Hence, O Bharata, even royal sages
take to hunting. By such conduet they do
not become stained with sin. Indeed, the
practice is not cousidered sinful. .


19. Thére is nothing, O delighter of the
Kurus, that is equal in point of merit,
either in this world or in the next, to the
practice of mercy to all living creatures.


zo. The merciful man has no fear,
Those innocent men who are éndued with
mercy, have both this world and the next.


21. Persons conversant with duty say
that that Religion is worthy of being called
Religion which is characterised by absten-
tion from eruelty.. The man of purified
soul should do only such acts as have mercy
for their soul.


22. That flesh which is dedicated in
sacrifices performed in honour of the deities.
and the departed Manes, is called Havi.
That man who is given to mercy and who
behaves with mercy towards others, has no
fear tO entertain from any creature. j


. 23-24. It is heard that all éreatares ~
abstaii from causing any fear to such a
creature, All creatures protect hint when
he is wounded or fallen dowm’ or prostrated
or weakened or bruised. [ndeed, they da
so, under all circumstances, whether he is.
on even or uneven ground, Neither snakes
nor wild animals, neither Pishachas nor
Rakshasas, evet kill him. . Fe


25. When circumstances of fear origi+.
nate, he becomes freed from fear who frees.
others from situations of fear, There bas
never been, nor will there ever be, a gift
which is superior to the gift of life.


26. Itis certain that there is nothing
dearer to oneself than his life. - Death, O
Bharata, is a disaster to all creatures.


27—29. When the time comes for Death,
a trembling of the entire body is seen in all
creatures. Undergoing birth in the uterus,
decrepitude, and sufferings of all sorts, in
this ocean of the world, living creatures
may be seen to be continually going forward
and coming back. Every creature is afflice
ted by Death. While living in the utérus, all
creatures are cooked in the fluid juices,
that are alkaline and sour and bitter, of
urine and phlegm and fzeces,— juices which
produce painful sensations and are difficult
to bedr. There in the uterus, they have to
live in,a state of helplessness and are even
repeatedly torn and pierced, :


256


‘30. ‘They who are covetuous ‘of meat, are
seen to.be repeatedly cooked in the uterus in
such a state of helplessness. Going through
all sorts of birth, they are cooked in the Hell
called Kumbhipaka.


3t. They are assailed and killed, and in
this way have to travel again and again.
There is nothing so dear to ome as his life
when one comes to this world.


‘32-35. Hence,a person of purified soul
should be merciful to all living creatures.
That'man, O king, who abstains from every
kind of meat from his birth, forsooth, ac-
quires a large space in the celestial reyion.
‘They who eat tle flesh of animals who are
Gesirous ‘of life, are themselves eaten by
the ‘animals they eat. ‘This is my opinion.
Since ‘he has eaten me, | shall eat him in
retuen, this, O Bharata, forms the character
as Mansa of Mansa. -fhe destroyer is
always ‘slain. After him the eater meets
with the same fate,


36-37. He who acts with hostility to-
wards another, becomes the victim of similar
deeds done by that other. Whatever acts
one does in whatever bodies, he has to
suffer the consequences thereof in those
bedies. Abstention from cruelty is the
highest Religion. Abstention from cruelty
is the greatest self«restraint.


38. Abstention from cruelty i is the high-
est gift. Abstention from ‘cruelty is the
highest penance. Abstention “from cruelty
is the highest sacrifice. Abstention from
cruelty is the highest power.


39. Abstention from cruelty is the great-
est friend. Abstention from cruelty is the
greatest happiness. Abstention from cruelty
is the highest ‘truth. Abstention from
cruelty is the highest: Shruti. :

40. Gifts made in all sacrifices, ablutions
performed in all sacred waters, and the
merit which one acquires from making all
kinds of gifts mentioned in the scriptuces,—
all these do not equal abstention from
cruelty in merit. :


4t. ‘The penances of a man who abstains
from cruelty are endless. The man who
abstains from cruelty is considered as
always performing sacrifices. The man
who abstains from cruelty is the father and
mother of all creatures.


42. Even these, O chief of Kuru’s race,
are some of the merits of abstention from
cruelty. Altogether, the merits of it are so
many that they are incapable of being ex-
hausted even if one-were to speak fora
century.


MAHABHARATA.


CHAPTER CXVILE.


( ANUSHASANIKA 'PARVA ).~—
: Continued.


Yudhishthira said :-~


I. Wishing to die and wishing to live,
many persons surrender their lives in the
great sacrifice (of battle). Tell me, O
‘grandfather, what is the end that these ate
tain to.”


2—3. To give up life in battle is fraught
with sorrow for men. O you of great wis-


; dom, you know that to give up life is diffi-


cult for men whether they are rich or .poor,
or are in happiness or misery. In my opi-
nion, you are gifted with omniscience. Do


-you tell me the reason of this,


Bhishma said :—

4. In prosperity or adversity, in weal or
woe, living creatures, O king, coming
into this world, live according to a parti-
cular method.


5., Listen to meas IT explain the reason
to you. The question you have put to me,
is, indeed, excellent, O Yudhisnthira !


6. Regarding it, O king, I shall explain
to you the old discourse that took place
formerly between the Dwaipayana Rishi
and a crawling worm.


7. Formerly when that fearned Brah-
mana, vis. the Krishna Dwaipayana,
having identified himself with Brahma,
roamed over the world, he saw on a road
over which cars used to pass, a worm


‘moving quickly. a


8. The -Rishi knew the course of every
creature and the language of every animal,;
Gifted with omniscience, he addressed the
worm he saw in these words.


Vyasa said :—

g. O worm, you appear. to be greatly
alarmed, and to be in great haste. ‘Tell
me, where do you run, and whence fave
you been afraid ? ;


The worm said :—


1o. [I am stricken with fear on hearing
the rattle of that large car. O you of great
intelligence, it makes a fearful roar. It is
almost come. #


The sound is heard. Will it not. kill
I bear


It.
me? 1 am flying away for this.
the sound of the bulls.


12, They are breathing hard under the
whip of the driver, as they are carrying the
heavy load. [ hear also the various sound,
made by the men who are driving the ‘bulls.


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


a


43. Creatures which like us are born as
worms, cannot bear such sounds. It is,
therefore, that I am flying from this situation
of great fright. ;


14, Death is considered by all creatures
as painful. Life is an acquisition difficult
to make. Hence, I fly away in fear, 1 do
not wish to pass from a state of weal to
one of woe.


Bhishma said :—
15. Thus addressed,


Dawipayana Vyasa said :—

O worm, whence can be your happiress ?
You belong to the intermediate order of
being, I think death would be of happi-
ness to you. :


16. Sound, touch, taste, stent, and
various kinds of excellent enjoyments ate
unknown to you, O worm! I think death
will prove a benefit to you, ,


The worm said :—

17. A living creature, however circum-
stanced he may be, becomes attached to it,
In even this order of being I am happy,
I think, O you of great wisdom! It is for
this that I wish to live,


18. In this condition, every object of
enjoyment exists for me according to the
necessity of my body. Human beings and
those creatures which originate from immo-
bile objects have different enjoymients.


19.
being.
Shudra,
manas,
usurer.


20. 1 was harsh in speech. I consi-
dered cunning as wisdom. I hated ail
creatures. Taking advantage of pretexts
in agreements made between myself an
others, | used always to take away what
belonged to others.


O powerful one, 1 was a wealthy
I was not- devoted to the Brah-
I was cruel, vile in conduct, and a


2t. Without feeding servants and guests
arrived at my house, I used to fill, when
hungry, my own stomach, proud, covetous
of good food, cruel as I was.


22. Greedy as I was of riches, I never
dedicated, with faith and respect, any food to
the celestials and the departed Manes,
although duty required me to dedicate food
to them.


23. Those men who moved by fear, came
to me, for seeking my help, 1 sent adrift
without giving them any protection, 1 did
not extend my help to those who came to me
with prayers for removing their fear.


33


In my former life. 1 was a human


‘this field of action,


257


24. 1 used to feel unreasonable envy at
seeing other people’s riches, and corn, and
wives held dear by them, and articles of
driak, and good palaces. ;


25. Seeing the happiness of others I wag
filled with envy and I always wished them
poverty. Acting thus which promised to
crown my own wishes with fruition, 1 sought
to destroy the virtue, riches, and pleasures
of other people,


26. In that past life of mine, { committed
various deeds moved by cruelty and such
other passions, Recollecting those deeds 1
am filled with repentance and grief, as one
is filled with grief at the loss of his dear son,


27. On account of those deeds of mine,
I do not know what the fruits are of good
deeds. 1, however, adored my‘ old mother
and on one occasion adored a Brahmana.


“28. Gifted with birth and accomplish»
ments, that Brahmana, while travelling,
came to my house once as a guest. I
received him with respectful hospitality. On
account of the merit of that decd my
memory has not forsaken me.


2g. I think that on account of that deed,
I shall once. more succeed in regaining
happiness. O you having asceticism for
wealth, you know everything, Tell me
please what is for my behoof,


CHAPTER CXVIIL


- (ANUSHASANIKA PARVA)+=
Continued.


Vyasa said :— +


1. On account of a meritorious deed,


O worm, that you, though born in the inter
mediate order of being, are not stupefied.
Fora deed of mine, Q worm, you ate not
stupefied,


_2. On account of the power of my
penances, 1 am able to rescue a being of
sin by granting him a sight only of my
body. There is no stronger power than
that of penances.


3. I know, O worm, that you have taken
birth in the order of worms through ‘the
evil deeds of your past life. If, however,
you think of acquiring virtue and merit,
you may again attain to it. t

4. Deities a5 well as beings crowned
with ascetic success, enjoy or suffer the
consequence of deeds done by them in
Men perform acts of


258


merit from desire of fruit, The very ac-
complishments that one seeks to acquire
are sought from desire of the happiness
they will produce. oy eg) Peeuse g

5. Learned or ignorant (in a previous
existence) the creature that is, in this life,
shorn of speech and’ understanding and
hands and feet, is really shorn of every-
nhing. :

6. He who becomes a superior Brah-
mana worships while alive, the deities of the
Sun and the Moon, uttering various sacred


MAHABHARATA.


utter the
chief,"

‘17. Through your favour who are firm
in truth and gifted with immeasurable
energy, I who was before a worm have now
become a Kshatriya. ‘ °

18. I bow my head to you, O you of
ereat wisdom. Da you command-me as to
what I should now do. Ordained by the
power of your penances, I have come by
this position.


agreeable praises of Indra theit


Mantras. O worm, you wil] come by that | Vyasa said :—


State of existence.


7. Acquiring that status, you will enjoy
ali the elements converted into articles of
enjoyment. When you have acquired that
state, I shall impart to you Brahma. Or,
if you wish, | may place you in any other
status. oe

8. Agreeing to the words of Vyasa, the
worm did not leave the road; but remained
on it. Meawhile, the large car which was
coming in that direction’came there,: |”


g—11. Torn to pieces by the assault of
the wheels, the worm. died, Born at fast
in the Kshatriya order through the grace of
Vyasa of immeasurable power, he proceed-:
ed ‘to see the great Rishi. ‘He had, before
becoming a Kshatriya, ‘to pass through


various orders of birth, such as hedge-hog
and Iguana and boat and’ deer and bird, '|.


and Chandala and Shudra and Vaishya.
Having given an account of his various
changes to the truth-telling Rishi, and re-
membering the Rishi’s kindness for him,
the worm (now with ‘joined. hands fell at
the Rishi’s feet and touched them with his
head. ee ae ay ee ors


The Worm said :—

12, My present status is that great one
which is coveted by all and which only
persons having ten well-known attributes,
can get. ‘Indeed, 1 who' was formerly a
worm have' thus acquired, the status of, a
prince. a ae

13. . Elephants of great strength, decked
with golden chains, carry me on their backs.
Yo my cars are yoked Kamvoja horses
of high mettle. ~~ — . an

14. Numerous cars to which are attached
camels and mules, bear me. With all my
relatives and friends I, now eat food rich:
with meat. ca ;


15. Adored. by all, I sleep, O. highly


\les. ed one, on rich beds in charming rooms’


to which disagreeable winds cannot blow.
16.


5. ‘Towards the dawn, bards and en- |
comiasts sing my praises even as the deities


19. I have to-day been adored by you, O
king; with various words expressive of
respect. Changed- into a worm, your
memory had become clouded, That memory
has again appeared. '

20. The sin you had committed in a
pristine life, has aot yet been dissipated,—
that sin, vés., which was acquired by you
while you were a Shudra covetous of riches
and cruel in conduct and hostile to the
Brahmanas, ;


2t——22. You were ableto obtain a sight
of my body. That was an act of merit to
you while you were a worm. On account
of. your having saluted.and worshipped me,
you shall rise higher, for, fromthe Ksha-,
triya order you shall rise to the status of a
Brahmana, if only you’ die on the field of
battle for the sake of ‘kine or Brahmanas.
| 23. O prince, enjoying much happiness
‘and celebrating many sacrifices with profuse
presents, you shall attain to ‘Heaven and,’
changed into eternal Brahma, yoy shalt
enjoy perfect beatitude,

24. Those who take birth in the. mter-.
mediate order, become Shudras. The Shudra
rises to the status of the Vaishya; and the
‘Vaishya .to that of the Kshatriya. The
Kshytriya who takes a pride in the dis-
charge of the duties of his caste, succeeds
in ‘acquiring the status of a Brahmana. |
The Brahmana, by following ‘a righteous —
conduct, acquires Heaven which is full, of
happiness, ¥ /


CHAPTER CXIX.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—_
Continued.


Bhishma said:—


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


259°


2. Seeing those severe austetities of the | 13, ‘That foremost of all persons con+


Kshatriya who was well conversant with
Religion and Profit, Krishna-Dwiapayana,
that foremost of Brahmanas, went to him.


Vyasa said :—

3. The penances, O worm, of the Ksha-
triyas consist’ of the protection of all crea-
tures. Consider these duties of the Ksha-
triya to be the penances taid down for you.
You shall come by the status of a Brahmana.


4. Ascertaining what is right and what
is wrong, and purifying your soul, do you
duly cherish and protect all ‘creatures, judi-
ciously satisfying all good desires and
correcting all that is unholy, _ ‘

5. Be you of purified soul, be. contented
and be devoted to the practice of virtue.
Acting thus, you will then, when you die,
become a Brahmana.


Bhishma said :— i

6. Although he had retired into the
forest, yet, O Yudhishthira, having heard
the words of the great Rishi, he began to
cherish and protect his subjects righteously.


7. Soon, O best of kings, that worm,
on account of the duty of protecting his
subjects, became a Brahmana after re-
nouncing his Kshatriya body.


mana, the celebrated Rishi, vis., Kriskna-
Dwaipayana of great wisdom came to him.


Vyasa said :— -

g. O chief of Brahmanas, O blessed one,
be not troubled, He who acts piously,
comes by a respectable birth, He, on the
other hand, whoacts impiously comes
by alow and vile birth. O you who are
conversant with virtue, one attains to misery
according to the measure of, his sin.


10. Therefore, O worm, do -not be
troubled through fear of death. The only
fear you should entertain, is about the foss


of virtue. Do you, therefore, go on prac-


tising virtue.


The worm said :—_
11. Through your favour, O Holy One,
I have attained from bappy to, happier
positions! Having obtained such pros-
perity as is established in virtue, I think my
demerits have been lost. _ ‘


Bhishma ssids—-

12. The worm having, at the command
of the holy Rishi, acquired the status of a
Brahmana that is so difficult to attain,


caused the Earth to be marked with 2
thousand sacrificial stakes, -


versant with Brahma then gained a resi-«
dence in the region of Brahman himself.
indeed, O son of Pritha, the worm acquired
the highest status, vzz., that of etecnal
Brabina, as the result of his own deeds done
according to the counsels of Vyasa,


14. Those foremost of Kshatriyas, also,
who have renounced their life-breaths,
exerting their energy-all the while, have all
acquired a meritorious end. Therefore, O
king, do not mourn on their account,


ompemmitmaat |


CHAPTER CXX.


a .
(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued,

Yudhishthira said :—
1. Which amongst these three ; is
superior, wts., Knowledge, Penances, and -


Gifts? I ask you, O foremost of pious men.
fell me this, O grandfather.


Bhishma said :— .
2. Regarding it is cited the old conver-
sation between Maitreya and Krishna- .


8, Seeing him changed into a Brah-. Dwaipayana


3 Once ona time, Krishna- Dwaipayana, -
O king, while wandering over the world in -
disguise, proceeded to Baranasi and waited |
upon Maitreya who betonged by birth to a
race of ascetics. ys

4, ‘Seeing Vyasa arrive, that foremost
of Rishis, vis., Maitreya, gave him a seat
and after adoring him with due rites, entec-
tained him with excellent food.


15+ Having eaten that good food. whiclt
was very wholesome and which gave every ,
kind of gratification, the great . Krishna
become highly pleased and as he sat there,
he even laughed aloud, :


6. Seeing -Krishna faugh, Maitreya
addressed him, saying,—Tell me, O
Righteous-Souled One, what the reason is -
of your laughter ! You are an ascetic, gifted .
with .power to coatrol. your emotions.
Great joy, it appears has come over you.


7. Saluting you and adoring you with’
bent head, 1. ask you this, o¢s., what the’
power.is of my penances-and what the high
blessedness is that is yours,


8. The. acts Ido, are different fron,
those of yours. You are already eman-
cipated though alive. [, howevem am not
yet freed. For all that, E think that there


260


is not
me. | am, again, distinguished by birth.


Vyasa said :—

g. This wonder that has filled me, has
originated from an ordinance which appears
like a hyperbole, for the comprehension of
of the people. The declaration of the
Vedas seems to be untrue. But why should
the Vedas say an untruth ?


to. It has been said that there are three
roads which form the best vows of a man,
One should never injure; one should always
tell the truth ; and one should make gift.


11, The Rishis of old said this, follow-
ing the ordinances laid down inthe Vedas.
These injunctions of yore, should certainly
be followed by us éven in our times.


2, Even a small gift, made under the
circumstances laid down, yields great fruits.
You have given a little water with a sincere
heart to a thirsty man. os


13. Yourself thirsty and hungry, you
have by giving me such food, conquered
many high regions of happiness, O power-
ful one, as one does by many sacrifices.


14. I am greatly delighted with your
very sacred gift, as also with your penances.
Your power is that of virtue. Your appear-
ance is that of virtue.


15—16. The fragrance of virtue, is
about you. I think that all your acts are
performed according to the ordinance. O
son, gift is superior to ablutions in sacred
waters and to the accomplishment of all
Vedic vows. Indeed, O Brahmana, gift
is more auspicious than all religious rites.
lf it be not more meritorious than all reli-
gion rites, there can be no question about
its superiority.

17. All those rites laid down in the
Vedas which you highly speak of, do not
equal a gift, for, gift is undoubtedly traught
with very superior merit. ° !

18. The road that has been made by
those men, who make gifts is the road that
is trodden by the wise.. They who make
gifs are considered as givers of even the
life-breaths. The duties that form virtue
are established in them.


-19, As the Vedas when well-studied, as
the controlling of the: senses, as a life of
universal Renunciation, so is Gift which is
fraught with very superior merit.


20. You, O son, will rise from joy to
greater joy (for performing the ‘duty of
making gifts.) The intelligent man cer-
tainly rises from joy to greater joy.

21. We have undoubtedly seen many
instances of this. Men gifted with pros-


MAHABHARATA.


much difference between you and | perity succeed in acquiring riches, making


gifts, celebrating sacrifices, and acquiring
happiness as the result thereof.


22. It is always observed, O you of great
wisdom, to happen naturally that happiness
is followed by misery, and misery is fol-
lowed by happiness.


23. Wise men have said that human
beings in this world have three kinds of
conduct. Some are righteous; some are
sinful ; and some are neither righteous nor
sinful.


24. The conduct of the person who is
devoted to Brahma is not considered either
way. His sins are never considered as sins,
So also the man who is devoted to the
duties laid down for him, is considered as
neither pious nor sinful.


25. Those men who are devoted to sacri-
fices, gifts, and penances, are considered
as pious. These, however, who injure other
creatures and are unfriendly to them, are
considered sinful.


26. There are some men who appro-
priate others’ properties. These certainly
fall into Hell and meet with misery. All
other acts that men do are indifferent, being
considered as neither righteous nor sinful.


27. Do you sport and grow and rejoice
and make gifts and celebrate sacrifices.
Neither men of knowledge nor those gifted


| with penances will then be able to get the


better of you.


ee


CHAPTER CXXI.


-(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA ).—
a Continued.


Bhishma said :—
t. Thus addressed by Vyasa, Maitreya,
who was a worshipper of deeds, who had
been born in a-family gifted with great
prosperity, who was wise and endued with
great learning, said to him these words.


Maitreya said :— ;

2. O. you of great wisdom, it is what
you have said. O powerful one, with your
permission I wish to say something.


Vyasa said :—

3. Whatever you wish to say, O Maitreya
in what way so even, do you say, O man
of great wisdom, for I wish to hear you.


Maitreya said :=-
4. Your words on the subject “of Gift
are faultless and pure, Forsooth, your soul


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


has. beep purified by . knowledge and
penances.


5. Onaccount of your soul being puri-
fied, even this is the great advantage I reap
from it. With the help of my understand-
ing I see that you are gifted with high
penances. : :


6. As regards ourselves we succeed in
acquiring prosperity through only seeing
personages like you. I think, that is due
to your favour ‘and - originates fronr the
nature of my own acts,


7. Penances, knowledge of the Vedas,
and birth ina pure family, these are the
causes of the status which one acquires of
a Brahmana. When one is possessed of
these three qualities, then does he come to
be called a twice-born person.


8. If the Brahmana be pleased, the de-


parted Manes and the deities’ also are’


pleased. There is nothing superior to a
Brahmana possessed of Vedic learning.


9g. Without the Brahmana, all would be
darkness. Nothing would be known,’ The
four castes would not exist. The’ dis-
tinction between virtue and sin, Truth and
Untruth, would disappear.


10. Men, when they sow on a well-culti-
vated field, reap an abundant harvest.


Even so, ane reaps great merit by making:


gifts to a Brahmana endued with great
learning, ~


at. If there were no Brahmana gifted
with Vedic learning and good ‘éonduct
for accepting gifts, the wealth possessed by
rich men would be useless, * - ie


12, Theignorant Brahmana, by eating
the food that is offered to him, destroys
what he eats. “The food also that is eaten
destroys the eater, That is called food
which is given away to a worthy man, in all
other cases he who takes it, makes the
douor’s gift thrown away and the receiver
is likewise ruined.for his unduly taking it


- 13. The Brahmana endued with learning,
becomes the subjugator, of the food that he
eats. -Having eaten it, he:begets other
other food. ‘The ignorant man who. eats the
- food offered to him, loses. his right to: the
children he procreates, for the latter become
his whose food has enabled the progenitor
to beget them. ‘This is the shortcoming of
petsons eating other people’s food when
wey have not the powef to conquer that
food. -


14. The merit which the giver wins by
making the gift, is equal to what the taker
acquires by accepting the food. © Both the
giver and the taker depend equally upon each
other. This is what the Rishis have said,’


261


15. ‘There where Brahmans exist, gifted
with Vedic learning and conduct, people
are enabled to acquire the sacred fruits of ©
gifts and to enjoy them both in this world
and the next.


16. Those men who are of pure birth,
who are devoted to penances, and who make
gilts, and study the Vedas, are considered
as worthy of the most respectful adoration.


17, It is those good-men who have
chalked out the path by treading on which.
ene does not become stepefied. It is those
men who take others to the celestial region.
They are the men who carry on their
shoulders the burthen of Sacrifices and live
for good.


CHAPTER CXXII.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA ).<
: Continued.
Bhisma, said :—
1, Thus addressed, the Holy One replied
to Maitreya, saying,—-By good luck, you are


gifted with knowledge. By good luck, your
understading is of this kind.  ~


2.« Good men highly speak of righteous
qualities. By your good luck you are not
overwhelmed by , personal beauty, youth
and prosperity. Sg =H


This favour done to you is due to


‘kindness of the celestials. Listen to me, as I


describe to you what is even superior to gift.


4. All scriptures, religious treatises, and


rites that are seen in the world, have all


originated from the Vedas, according to
their due order,

5.. Following them I highly speak of gift.
You highly speak of penances and Vedic
learning. Penances.are sacred. . Penances
are the means by which one may acquire
the Vedas and the celestial region.


6. With the help of penances and of
knowledge, one acquires the highest fruits.
[tis by penances that one dissipates his
sins and all else that is evil.


ee |
q-, We -have heard that .with whatever
purpose in view one performs penances, one
acquires the fruition thereof on account of


.those penances. The same may be said of


knowledge. wt!

8. Whatever is difficult to do, whatever
is difficult to conquer, whatever is difficult to
attain, and whatever is difficult to cross, can
all be done with the help of penances, Of


262


all thiags, penances aré of very superior
power.
The man who drinks alcohol, or he
- who takes forcibly other men’s properties,
or he who is. guilty of fceticide, or he who
violates the bed of his preceptor, succeeds
in crossing with the help of penances. In-
deed, oné becomes purged off of all these
sins through penances.


xo. Onegifted with all knowledge and,
therefore, having teue vision, and an ascetic
of whatever kind, are equal. One should
always bow to these two. ’


11. All mén who have the Vedas for
their wealth should bé adored. Likewise
all men gifted with penances deserve to be
adored. They who make gifts get happi-
ness in the next world and much prosperity
in this world,


12, By making gifts of food, righteous
men ef this world obtain both this world
and that of Brahman himself with many
other regions of superior happiness.


13. Those men who are worshipped by
all, themselves worship hini who makes
gifts.. hose men who are honored every-
where, themselves honor him who makes
ee . Wherever the giver goes, he hears
himself his own praise.


14. He who does acts and he who
omits to dd them, gets each what is pro-
ortionate to his acts and omissions.

hether one fives in the upper cegions or
in the nether, one always acquires those
plices to which one becomes entitled by
his. deeds.


15. As regards yourself, you will cer-
tainly obtain whatever food and drink you
may covet, for you are gifted with intelli-
gence, good birth, Vedic learning” and
mércy.

16, You are possessed of youth, O
Maitreya! You are observant of vows.
Be devoted to virtue. Do you take ins-
tructions from me about those duties which
you should first follow,—the duties, vis.,
of householders.


i7. That house in which the husband
is pleased with his married wife, and the wife
pleased with her husband, all auspicious
results ensue.


18 As filth is washed away from the
body with water, as darkness is rémoved
by the light of fire, so issin washed off
by gifts and penances.

1g. Bless you, O Maitreya, may
you have palaces! I depart hence in peace.
Do you remember what I have said. You
shall then be able to reap many advan-
tages!


MAUABHARATA.


go. Maitreya thet walked round his
illustrious guest and bowed his head to him,
and joining his hands in respect, said,—Let
blessing be to you also, O Holy One!


‘CHAPTER CXXIIL


( ANUSHASANIKA PARVA }.—
Continued,


Yudhishthira said :—

1. O you who know all duties, § wish
to hear, in full, what forms the excellent
conduct of good and chaste women. Do
you, O grandfather, describe this td me !


Bhishma said :—


2—4. Once on a time, in the celestial
region, a lady named Sumana of Kekaya’s
race; addressing Shandili gifted with great
energy and conversant with the truth re-
garding everything and gifted with omni-
science, said,—By what conduct, O auspi-
cious lady, by what course of deeds, have
you succeeded in acquiring the celestial
region, purged off of every sin? You shine
with your own energy like a flame of fire.
- You appear to be a daughter of the Lord
of stars, come to Heaven in your own
effulgence.


5. You put on dresses of pure white,
dnd are quite cheerful and at your ease.
Seated on that celestial car, you shine, O
auspicious dame, with energy multiplied a
thousandfold, °

6. You have not, I understand, attained
to this region of happiness by great penan-
ces and gifts and vows. Do you ,tell me .
the truth !- :


_ 7. Thus questioned sweetly by Sumana,

‘| Shandili of sweet smiles, addressing her
fair interrogatrix, thus answered her
silently, 1 did not wear yellow robes;
nor barks of tréég. I did not ‘shave my
head; nor did I keep matted locks on my
head. It is not on account of these deeds
that I have acquired the status of a -
celestial.

St = = glg- . “ sj fal
_9. 1 never carelessly addtessed any
harsh words to my husband.

10. I was always devoted to the adora-
tion of the celestials,the departed Manes, -
‘and the Brahmanas. Always careful, f
waited upon-and served my, mother-in-law
and father-in-law. °


, 2, EEe This was my resolution that I
hould never act deccitfully. I never useds
ects atees


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


fo stay at the door of our house .nor did I
Speak long with any body.


12. I never did any evil deed. 1! never
laughed aloud; I never did any injury.
never gave out any secret. Thus did I
myself act. : . ;


13. When my husband, having left home
upon any business, used to return, | always
served him by giving him a seat, and
adored him with respect.


14. I never ate food of any kind which
was unknown to my husband and with
which my husband was not pleased.


13, Rising early in the morning I did
and caused to be done whatever was
brought about and requited to be done for
the sake of relatives and kinsmen.


16. When my husband leaves home for |
going to a distance place on any errand, | |


remained at home engaged in various kinds
of auspicious deeds for blessing his enter-
prise.


17. During the absence of my husband
1 never use collyrium, or ornaments; I
never wash myself properly or use_gaclands
and unguents, or adorn my feet with lacdye
or body with ornaments.


18, When my husband sleeps in peace
I never awake him even if important busi-
ness wanted his. attention. I was happy
to sit by him fying asleep. Paes


1g. I never urged my husband to work
hard for acquiring | riches to ‘support his
family and relatives.


to always keep our premises clean.


20, That woman who, with rapt atten-
tion, follows her duty, receives profuse


honors in the celestial region. like a second.


Arundhati.


Bhishma said :—~ ;
21. The illustrious and highly blessed


Shandili, of pious conduct, having said.


these words to Sumana on. the subject of
woman’s duties towards her husband, dis-
appeared there and then.


22, That man, O son Pandu, who reads
this discourse at every full. moon and new
moon, succeeds in acquiring the, celestial
region and enjoying


bowers of- Nandana,
or voy coy
ASE


rs me


_Rakshasa who wished to feed on him.


6 The Brahmana, gifted as he was witt
junderstanding and. learning, was not at alt
| moved,


¢ 1 always kept secrets.
without gwing them out to others. I used,


gceat happiness in the |


263


CHAPTER CXXIV.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
: Continued. ‘


Yudhishthira said :—

1. In which is superior efficacy, Cone
ciliation or Gifts? Tell me, O chief of
Bharata’s +ace, which of these two is
superior in efficacy. aS :


Bhishma said :—
‘a. Some become pleased by Conciliation,
while others are pleased by Gifts. Every
man, according. to his own: nature, likes
the one or the other. site

3. Listen to me, 'O king, as. Fexplain
to you the merits of Conciliation, O chief


| of Bharata’s race, so that the “most furious
. creatures may be cooled down by its


4. Regarding it is cited, the ancient
narrative of how a’ Brahmana, | who ‘had
been seized in the forest by a Rakshasa,
was freed.


§.~ A certain ‘Brahmana, gifted with eloe
quence and intelligence, fell into distress,
for he was seized in a lone forest by a


: Without altowing himself to, be
‘ stupefied at the sight of that terrible cannis.
ibal, he resolved ‘to apply Conciliation and.
| see its effect on the Rakshasa.

| 7. Respectfully saluting the Brahnana
‘with words, the Rakshasa: put to him this’
question: You shall escape, but tell me
why I am so pale aad lean.


' § Reflecting for a short time, the
Brahmana accepted the question of the
Rakshasa and replied in the following welt-
spoken words.


‘The Brahmana said :—

g. Living in a place distant from your
house, moving in a sphere that is not your
own, and deprived of the company of. your:
friends and kinsmen, you are enjoying vast
riches, It is, therefore, that you are so pale
and lean. : :


10. Indeed, O Rakshasa, your frien ds,.
though well-treated by you, are still not,
well-disposed towards you on account of,
theie own vicious nature. It is for this that
you are so pale and lean. a


11, You are gifted with merit and wise
dom and a well-controlled soul. Yet. it is.
your lot to see others who have merit and
wisdom honored in preference to yourself,
Itis for this that you are so pale and.lean,


264


12.
than yours but inferior to you in merit, are,
Indeed, disregarding you. It is for this
that you are so pale and lean.


13. Though distressed for, want of the
tmeans of support, yet you are actuated
by the greatness of your mind to disregard
Such means as are open to you for getting
your sustenance. It is for this that you.are
50 pale and lean.


%4. On account of your virtuous nature
you had deprived yourself for doing good
to another. This person,, O righteous

akshasa, considers you. deceived and
defeated. lt is for this that you are so pale
and lean.


15. I think you .are grieving for those
persons who with souls possessed by lust
and anger, are suffering. misery in this
world, It. is for this that you are so pale
and lean.


16.. Though wise,. you are ridiculed by
others who are entirely destitute of. it.
Persons of wicked conduct are vilifying
ou. It is for this that you are so pale and
lean. :


17. Indeed, some enetny of yours, with
a friendly tongue, coming to you behaved
at first like a pious man and then has
left you, beguiling you like a knave. It is
for this that you are so pale and lean.


18. You are well conversant with the
course of world’s affairs. You -ate well-
skilled in all mysteties. You are gifted with
power. ‘Ihose-who know you to be such do
not yet respect and praise you. It is for this
that you are so pale and lean,

19.: Staying: in the midst of bad‘men en-'
gaged together in-some business, you had
discoursed to them, removing their doubts.
Still they did not admit your superior


merits. I¢ is for this that you are so pale
and lean, ‘
20. Indeed, though destitute of riches


and intelligence and Vedic tearning, you
wish yet, with the help of your energy
alone, to accomplish something great. it
is for this that you are so pale and lean,


“at. It appears that although you are
resolved to practise severe austerities. by
retiring into the forest, yet your kinsmen
are not favourably disposed towards this
Project of yours. It is for this that you are
so pale and lean.


22. Some rich neighbour of yours, en-
dued with youth and handsome features,
covets your dear wife. It is for this that
you are so pale and lean.


.23. The words spoken by you, even
whea excellent, in the midst of rich men,


MAHABHARATA.


Persons having riches much greater 1 are not regarded by them as wise of wells


timed,


It is for-this that your so pale and
lean.


24.. Some dear kinsman of yours, shorn
of intelligence though repeatedly instructed
in the scriptures, has become angry. You
have not been able to pacify him. [tis for
this that-you are so pale and lean.


25. Indeed, somebody, having first set
you to the ‘accomplishment of some object
desirable to you, is now trying to deprive you
of the fruit thereof. It is for this that you
are so palé and lean.


26. Though possessed of excellent quali-
ties and adored by allon that account, you
are yet considered by your kinsmen as
adored for their sake and not for your own,


It is for this tliat you are so pale and lean.


27. Indeed, through shame you are un-


.able to give out some purpose in your


heart, moved also by the inevitable delay
that will take place in its accomplishment,
It is for this that you are so pale and lean,


28. Indeed, you wish with the help of
your intelligence, to control various persons
with various kinds of understandings and
inclinations. [t is for this that you are so
pale and lean.


29 Shorn of learning, without courage,
and without much riches, you seek such
fame as is: won by knowledge and prowess:
and gifts. Indeed, it is for this that you are
so pale and lean. ee


go. You have not been able to get
something which you have long been seek-:
ing for.” Or, what you try todo is sought.
to be undone by somebody else. “It is. for:
this that you are so pale and lean. ;

gi. Indeed, without being able to see
any fault on your part, you have been
cursed by somebody.’ It is‘ for this that
you are so pale and lean;


32. Having no wealth and accomplish«


ments you try in vain to rernove the grief.


of your friends and the sorrows of sorrowing
men. It is for this that you aré so pale and
lean.


33. Seeing virtuous persons living like


householders, unrighteous persons living .


according to the forest mode, and liberated
persons attached to domesticity and fixed
abodes, you have become so pale and lean.


34. Indeed, your acts ‘connected with
Virture, Profit, and Pleasure, as also the
well-timed words spoken by you, do no€
produce fruit. It is for this that you are
so pale and lean.


35- Though gifted with wisdom, yet
desirous of living, you live with wealth


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


obtained by you in gift from somebody of
evil conduct. it is for this that you are
30 pale and lean.

36. Seeing sinful persons multiplying on
every side and virtue languishing, you are
filled with grief. itis for this that you are
so pale and lean,


37, Urged by them you seek to please
all your friends even when they are quarrel-
ling and opposing one another. It is for
this that you ace so pale and lean.


38. Seeing persons gifted with Vedic
tearning engaged in improper deeds, and
dearned persons unable to keep their senses
under control, you are filled with grief, It
is for this that you are so pale and lean.


39. Thus praised, the Rakshasa adored
that learned Brahmana in return, and
making him his friend and bestowing suffi-
cient riches upon him in gift, sent him away,


CHAPTER CXXV,


{ ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
: Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


1, Tell me, O grandfather, how should
@ poor man, desirous of achieving his own
behoof, act after having acquired the status
of humanity and come into this region of
acts that is so difficult to acquire.


2. ‘Tell me also what is the best of all
gifts, and what should be given under what
circumstances? Tell me, O -son of Ganga,
who are truly worthy of honor and .adora-
tion, You should describe these mysteries
to us. ;


Vaishampayana continued :-—

- 3. Thus accosted by that famous king,
vtg., the son of Pandu, Bhishma explained
to that king these great, mysteries about
duty. vee


Bhishma said:—'

4 Listen to me with rapt attention, O
king, as | explain to you, O Bharata, these
mysteries of duties, as the holy Vyasa had
explained them to me formerly,


5. This subject is a mystery to the very
eelestials, O king. Yama of pure deeds,
with the help of-vows well observed and
Yoga meditation, had acquired the koow-
ledge of these mysteries as the high fruits
of his penances, ; ‘

+ ,6-—8. What. pleases what deity, what
pleases the departed Manes, the Rishis, the


34


’


264


companions of Mahadeva, the goddess Shri,
Chitragupta, and the powerful Elephants
which rule the cardinal points of the com.
pass, what forms the religion of the Rishis,
—the religion, vis., which has many mis«
teries and which yields high fruits,—the
merits of what are called great gifts, and
the merits of all the sacrifices, he who knows
these, O sinless one, and knowing acts
according to his knowledge, becomes freed
from stains if he has sfains, and acquires
the merits indicated. , : :


9 One oilman is equal to ten butchers.
Equal to ten oilmen is one drinker of
alcohol, Equalto ten drinkers of alcohol
is one harlot. Equal to ten harlots is a
single king. mf,

to—11. A greatking is said to be equal
to hatf of these all. Hence, one should
not accept gifts from these. On the other
hand, one should attend to the science,
which is sacred and which has virtue for
its marks, of the threefold objects of life.
Amongst these, Wealth and Pleasure aré
naturally attractive. Hence; one should,
with rapt attention, listen to the sacred
expositions of Religion, for the fruits of
listening to the mysteries of Religion are
very great, One should certainly hear every
subject bearing on Religion as ordained by
the celestiafs themselves. ear ;


12. In it is contained the ritual about
the Shraddha in which have been: declared
the mysteries of the departed Manes. ‘The
mysteries about the deities have also been
explained there. : ae


13. It contains the duties arid practices,
productive of great merit; of the Rishis also,
together with the mysteries attaching to
them." It contains an exposition of the
merits of great sacrifices and all kinds of
gifts. an

14.- Those men who always read” the
scriptures about these subjects, those who
bear them properly in their mind, and he
who, having listened to them, follows them
in practice, are alt.considered to be, as
holy and sinless as the powerful Narayana
himself. ve, :

15... The merits of the gift of kine, those
that belong to the performance of. ablutions
in sacred waters, those that are acquired
by the eelebration of sacrifices,—all these
are acquired by that man who treats guests
with respect. ;


. 1617. They who listen to these scrip-
tures, they who.are gifted with faith, and
they who have a pure heart, it is well
known, conquer many regions of felicity.
Those pious men, who are gifted with faith,
become cleansed of all sins and no sin can
touch them. Such men always-dncrease’ in


266


virtue and succeed in attaining te the
celestial region.


18. Once on a time, 2 celestial messen-
ger, coming ‘to ‘the court of Indra of ‘his
own accord, but remaining invisible, ad-
dressed the king of the deities in these
words :— ;


19. At the command of Ashwini Kumars


(the celestial physicians) and who are gifted
with every desirable quality, I have come
to this place where 1 see human beings the
departed Manes and the celestials as-
sembled together.

20. Why, indeed, is sexual intercourse
interdicted for the man who performs a
Shraddha and for him also who eats ata
Shraddha? Why are three rice-balls offer-
ed ‘separately at a Shraddha? -


21. To whom should the first of those
balls -be offered? Jo whom should the
$econd one be offered? And whose has
it been said is the third or the remaining
one? I wish to know all this!


, 2a. After the celestial messenger had
Said: these words.connected with virtue and
duty, the celestials who were seated towards
the east and the departed Manes also,
praising that ranger of the sky, began as

OWSa :


The Pitris said:—

23, Welcome are you, and blessings
upon you! Do you listen, O best of all
rangers of the sky! The question you
have put isa high one and fraught with
deep import. ; ar

24. The departed Manes of that man
who indulges in sexual intercourse on the
day he. performs a Shraddha or eats at.a
Shraddha, have to lie for a whole month
on his vital seed.


23. We shall explain the classification
of the rice-balis offered at a Shraddha.
The first rice-ball should be thought af
as being thrown into the waters.


26. The second ‘ball should be given to
one of the wives to eat. Lhe third ball
should be thrown into the burning fire.

27. This is the: ordinance ‘about the
Shraddha. This is the. ordinance of the
rites ‘of religion, The Pitris ef that man
avho acts -according. to ‘this ordinance 'be-
come pleased with him and remain always
cheerful. :

28. The progeny of. such'a man in-
creases and -he always commands endless
riches.


The Celestial Messenger said :—
2g. You have-explained the division of
the rice-balls and their consignment .one


MAHABHARATA.


after another to the three, together with the
teasoris thereof.


30. Whom does that rice-ball which is
thrown into the waters, reach ? How does it,
by being so thrown, please the deities, and
how does it rescue the departed Manes ?


31. The second ball is eaten by the wife.
That thas been faid down in the ordinance.
How do the Pitris of that man become the
eaters thereof 7


32- The last ‘balt goes into the burning
fire.. ‘How does that ball succeed in finding
its way to you, or who is he te whom it
goes?


*'33; IT wish to hear this,—that is, what
are the ends attamed by the balis offered
at Shraddhas when thus disposed of by
being .thrown into the waters, given to the
wife,-and thrown into the burning fire.


The Pitris said :—~


34. The question which you have asked
is of deep import. It involves a mystery
and is wonderful. We have been highly
pleased with you, O ranger of the sky.


35. The very celestials and the Munis
applaud acts done in honor of the departed
Manes. Even they do not know what the
certain conclusions are of the ordinances
about the acts done in honor of the Pitris.


36. Excepting the great, immortal, and
excellent Markandeya, that learned Brah-
mana of great fame, who is ever devoted
to the Pitris, none amongst them is.cone
versant with the mysteries of the ordinanées
about the Pitris.


‘37. ‘Having ‘heard from the holy Vyasa
what the end is'of the three rice-bails
offered ‘at the ‘Shraddha, as explained by
the Pitris themselves in reply to the ques-
tion of the celestial messenger, I shal).ex-
plain the same to you. Do you hear, ‘
king, -what the conclusions are about the
ordinances about the Shraddha.


38. Listen with attention, O Bharata,
to me as I explain what the end is of the
three rice-balls. That cice-ball which goes
into water is considered as pleasing the
deity of the Moon.


39. That deity being pleased, O you of
great intelligence, gratifies in return the
other deities and the Pitris also with them.
it has been laid down that the second rice«
bal} should be eaten by the wife.


40. The Pitris, who always wish for
progeny, ‘bestow ,children on the woman of
the house. Listen now to me as I tell you
-what becomes of-the riceeball, that is throwa
into the burning fire, ;


‘


_describe a rite that is more subtle.


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


4t. With that ball the Pittis are pleased,
and as the result thereof, grant the fruition
of all desires to the person offering it.
have thus told you everything about the end
of the. three cice-balls offered at the
Shraddha and consigned to the three €via.,
water, the spouse, and the fire).


42. That Brahmana who becomes the
priest at a Shraddha forms himself, by that
deed, the Pitri of the person performing the
Shraddha. Hence, he should abstain that
day. from sexual intercourse with even his
own wife.


43.. O best of all rangers of the sky,
the man who eats at a Shraddha shouid
remain pure for that day. By acting other-
wise, one, surely commits the sin I have
indicated. It cannot be otherwise.


44. Hence, the Brahmana who is ine
vited: to a Shraddha for eating the offer-


-ings, should eat them after purifying him-


self by a bath and remain pious for that
day by abstaining from every kind of in-
jury or evil. The progeny of such a person
multiplies and he also who feeds him gets
the same reward. i


Bhishma said :—


45. Aftee the Pitris had said so, a
Rishi of austere penances, named Vidyut-
prabha, whose form was effulgent like the
Sun, spoke, , j


46—47. Having heard those mysteries
of religion as explained by the Pitris, he
addressed Shakra, saying,—Stupefied by
folly, men ili numerous creatures born in
the intermediate orders, such as worms,
ants, snakes, sheep, deer, and birds. They
commit a great sin: by these acts. What,
however, isthe remedy? = si


48. When this question was asked, all
the gods and Rishis having penances for


wealth and the highly blessed Pitris, praised -


that ascetic.
Shakra said :— 8D os


49. Thinking in one’s mind of Kuru-
kshetra and Gaya and Ganga and Prabhasa
and the lakes of Pushkara, one should dip
his head ww a piece of water.


50. By so doing he becomes purged off


_ Of all his sins lize the Moon freed from Rahu.


He should thus bathe for three days suc-
cessively and then fast for every day.


51. Besides this, he should touch (after
bathing) the back of a cow and bow his
head to her tail. ‘Vidutprabha, after this,
once more addressing Vasava, said,—I shall
Listen
to me, O you of a hundred sacrifices,


267


52. Rubbed with the astringent powder
of the hanging roots of the banian and
annointed with the oit of Priangu, one
should eat the Shashtika paddy mixed with
milk. By so doing he becomes purged off
of all his sins,


53. Listen now to anether mystery un-
known to many but which was discovered
by the Rishis with the help of meditation.
I heard it from Vrihaspati while he recited
it before Mahadeva,


54-55. O king of the celestials, do you
hear it with Rudra ia your company, O lord
of Shachi. Ifa person, ascending a moun-
tain, stands there on one foot, with arms
upraised and joined together, and, abstain-
ing from food, looks at a burning fire,—he
acquires the merits of severe penances and
obtains the rewards of fasts. ;


56. Heated by the rays of the Sun, he
‘becomes purged off of all his sins. One who
acts thus in both the sumnter and the winter
seasons, becomes freed from every sin,


57. Purged off of every sin, one acquires
a splendour of complexion for all time. Such
a man burns with energy like the ‘Sun ec
shines in beauty like the Moon... 11).

58. After this, the king of the celestials
vig., he of a hundred sacrifices, seated in
the midst of the gods, then sweetly ad-
dressed Vrihaspati, with these excellent
words :— ; ; 5


59. O Holy One, do you describe those
mysteries of religion which are fraught with
happiness to human beings, and what the
faults are which they commit, together with
the mysteries of them. ‘— Y ‘

4 vi A 4 4 . ’

Vrihaspati said: . ine

6o—6t. They who pass urine, facing the
Sun, they who do not. show respect’ for the
wind, they who do net pour libations on the
burning fice, they who milk a caw whose
calf is very young, actuated by, the desire of
obtaining from her, as much milk as-pag-
sible, commit many sins. £. shall. describe
what those faults are, Q lord of Shachi.
Do you hear me. :


62-63. The Sun, Wind, the carrier of
sacrificial oblations, O Vasava, and kine
who.are the mothers af all creatures, were
created by the Self-Create himself, for res-
cuing all the worlds, O”Shakra. hese are
the deities of human beings. Listen all
to the conclusions of religion,

64. Those wicked. men and wicked
women who pass-urine facing the Sun, liye
in great infamy for eighty-six years.

65. That man, O Shakra, who cherishes
no respect for the Wind, gets children that
come out ptematurely from the womb of


268


‘his wife. Those men who do not pour iba-
tions on the burning fire, find that the fire,
when they do tight itup for such rites as
they wish to perform, refuses tu eat their
libations. |


66. Those men who drink the milk of
kine’ whose calves ‘are’ very young, never
get children for perpetuating their races.


"67. Such men see their children die. and
their families shrink. These are the conse-
quences of the acts referred to, as observed.
‘by wwice- born’ persoris, venerable for age in
their respective families. ‘


68. ‘Hence, one’ should always, avaid
that Which’ has beén’ interdicted,. and. do
only that whieh has been directed to be
‘done, if ane’ is! desirous ‘of ‘seeuting — his


prosperity, ‘This: that E "gay to you is very,
true,
69—~70. " After’ the’ celestial preceptor


had said this, the highly blessed celestials,
with the Maruts, and the highly blessed’
Rishis questioned tlie departed Mane-, say-
ang, Ye° Pitris' with~ what’ aets-of naman |
beings, who are generally pifted - with little
‘anderstandings, do you become pleased ?
What gifts, made in course of sudh rites as
are. performed. for ‘improving the. position
of deceased persons in the other world, be-
come inexhaustible in efficacy 2


- 9 By doing what acts eaa men be-
come freed from the debt they owe to their
ancestors? We wish to hear this., Great is
our curiosity...


The Pitris said :—


72. Ye highly blessed’ ones, the dowht
existing in your miads has been properly
explained. Listen as we describe the deeds
of righteous men. with which we become
pleased. 4


73. Blue-hued Bulls should be liberated.
Gilts should be made tu-us, on the day of
the new moon, of sesame seeds and water.
In the season of rains, lamps should be
Vighted. By these deeds of men, they can
free themselves fram the debt they ewe to
theie ancestors.


74. Such gifts never become vain. On
the other hand, they yield great and end-
less fruits. Fhe gratification we derive
from them is considered to be inexhaustible.


75. Vhose men, who gifted with faith,
beget offspring, rescue their deceased
ancestors from miserable Hell.


76—77. Hearing these words of the Pitris,
Veiddha-Gargya, endued with penances
and high energy, became filled with wonder
so that the hair on his body stood erect. Ad-
dressing them he said, —YVe having penances
for wealth, tell us what the merits are of


MAHABHARATA. *


setting free Bulls having blue complexions.
What merits, again, are of the gift of lainps
in the season of rains and the gift of water
with sesame seeds ?


The Pitris said:—

78. If a bull of blue complexion, upon
being liberated, raises a (smull) quantity of
water with its tail, the Pimuius become
pleased witb that water for full sixty thous
said years. '


79 ‘Fhe mud such a bull raises with its:
hoins from the banks (of a river or lakey,
succeeds, forsooth, in sesding the Pitris to-
the region of Soma, . '


80. By giving lamps “in the season of


“rains, one shines with effulgence tike Soma


himself. “he mau who gives lamps is


-neven sobject to the quality of Darkness,


81—82. Those men who make gifts, or
the dhy of the new moon, of sesame seeds.
and water, mixed with honeyfand using a
vessel of copper, O you having penances
for wealth, are considered as duly perform=
ing a Shraddha with all its mysteries,
Vhese men get children of sound health:
and cheeriul minds.


83 he. merit acqniredi by the giver of
the Pinda takes the form of the growth of
his family. Indeed, he who performs these
acts with faith, becomes freed from. the
debt he owes to the ancestors,


84. “Thus have been laid down the pro-
pec time for the performance of the
Shraddha, the ordinances about the rites.
to be observed, the proper™person that
should be fed at the Shraddha, and the
merits that belong to H. IT have described
everything to you in due order.


CHAPTER CXXVE


€ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.


Bhishma said :—


1, The king of the celestials, u¢z., Indra,
after the Piris had ceased to speak, ad-
dressed the powerful) Hari, saying,—O
Lord, what are those deeds. which please
you? How, indeed, do men succeed it
pleasing you ? é


Vishnu said :—


2. That which I greathy
detraction of Brahmanas.
Brabmanas are adored,
adored,


hate, is the
Forsooth, if the
} consider myself


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


> 3.° All superior Brahmanas should al-
ways be saluted with respect, after feeding
them with hospitality. One should respect
his own feet atso (in the evening). Lam
pleased with men who act thus, as alsa with
those who worship and make offerings to
the whirl that is noticeable on cowdung.


4-6 They who see a Brahmana that
“js a dwarf in stature, ac.a boar that has
just risea from water and that bears on his
head a quantity of mud taken up from the

“bank, have never to meet with any evil,
They become freed from every sin. “Phat
’man who adores every day the Ashwattha


(Ficus religiosa) and the'substance called |


Gorochana and the cow, is ‘considered as
_ adoring the whole universe with the celestials

and Asuras and human beings. Indeed,
i staying within these, | accept, in my own
« form, the adoration that ts offered to them.


+7. The worship that ds offered to these,
is the adoration cfiered to me. ‘This has
been so as long as the worlds have been
created. hose litthe-witted men who adore
me in a different way, worship me in vain,
for the worship of that kind | never accept.
indeed, the worship of other kind is not
at all pleasing io me. ..


Indra said :—


8. Why do you speak highly of the
encular marks on cowduny, the feet, the
boar, the Brabmana that is a dwarf in
stature, and mud raised up from the soit?


g. tt is you who create all creatures and
it ts you who destroy them. You are the
eternal nature of ail transitory things.


Bhishma said :—


10. Hearing these words of Indra,
Vishnu smiled a little and then said,—ft
was with my circular disc that the Daityas
were killed. It was with my two feet that
the world was covered.


it. Assuming the form of a boar 1
killed Hiranyaksha. Assuming the form of
a dwarf I conquered king Vali.


12. Those great men who adore these,
gratify me, Indeed, they who who worship
me in these forms never meet with defeat,


13. If one, seeing a celibate a Brah-
‘mana arrived at one’s house, offers to him
‘the first portion of his food that belongs as
of right to a Brahmana, and eats the
residue, he is consided as eating Amrita.


14. If one, after worshipping the morn-
twilight, stands with face directed towards
the Sun, he reaps the merit that belongs to
the performance of ablutions in ali Tirthas
and becomes purged off of all sins.


15. Ve Rishis having penances for


269


wealth, [have told you in?detail what forms
agreat mystery. On what else stall £ dis-
course to you? ‘Yell ne your doubts !


Va ladeva said :—~


16. Listen now to another great my se
tery that yields happiness tomen, Unace
quainted with it, ignorant persons suff-f
much distress from other creatures.


17. That man who, rising at early dawn,
touches a cow, clarified, butter, and curds,
as also mustard mecds ani the larger
variety thereof called Priyangu, becomes
purged off of all his sins.


8. As figards Rishis having penances
for wealth, they always avoid all creatures
both before and behind, as atso all that
is impure, while Dertonming Shraddhas, . 4


a Ae
The deities said :—


Ig—20. If a .person, taking a vessel of
copper, filling it with water, and facing the
East, determines ppon a fast or the obser-
vance of a particular vow, the celesti-ts
become pleased wth him and all-his wishes
become crowned with fortune, By observing
fasts or vows in any other way, litthe-wited
Mav gain nothing.


21—22. Iv uttering the resolution abont
the observance of fasts and in making
offerings to the celestials, the use of a
vessel of copper is preferable. Ju presen: -
ing the offerings to the celesti. ls, in (giving
and accepting) alms, in presening the in-
gredients of the Argha, and in offering
oblations of water mixed with sesame
seeds to the departed Manes, a_ vessel
of copper should be used. By doing these
acts in any other way, one acquires little
merit. These mysteries have been laid
down about how the deities are pleased.
Dharma, said :— i.

23-24. The offerings made in all rites
in honour of the cefestials and in those in
honor of the departed Manes, should never
be given away to a Brahmana who has
accepted service under the king, or wio
tings the belf or attends to minor duties in
acts of worship or at Shraddhas, or who
keeps kine, or who drives a trade, or who
follows some art as a profession, or who is
an actor, of who quarrels with friends, or
who is destitute of Vedic studies, or who
marries a Shudra woman,


25. The performer of the Shraddha who
gives away such offerings to such a Brah-
mana, loses prosperity and multiplies nat
his cace. He fails, again, to gratily his
Pitris by doing such an act,


26. From the house of that person
whence a guest returns unsatisfied, the


270


Pitris, the deities, and the sacred fires, all
return disappointed on account of such
treatment of the guest.


27. That man who does not perform
the duties of haspitality towards the guest
arrived at his house, comes to be considered
as equally sinful with those who are slayers
‘of women or of kine, who are ungrateful
towards benefactors, who are slayers of
Brahmanas, or who are violators of the beds
of their preceptors.,


- Agni said :—

28—30. Listen ye with rapt attention.
I shall describe the demerits of that man of
. wicked understanding who lifts up his feet
-foc striking therewith a cow or a highly
blessed Brahmana or a burning fire. ‘The
infamy of such man spreads throughout the
world and reaches the boundary of Heaven
itself. His Pitris become filled with fear.
The deities atso become highly dissatisfied
wit: hiv. Gifted with great energy, Fire
reiuses to accept the libations poured by
him.


3I.
Hell,


32—33- One should, therefore, never
touch a cow with his feet, or a Brahmana of
high energy, or a burning fire, if he is gifted
with faith and seeks his own behoof, These
are the demerits declared by me of one
who lifts up his feet towards these three,


Vishwamittra said :—


31—36. Listen to a great mystery that
is unknown to mast of men and which is
connected with religion. He, who offers to
the departed Manes, rice boiled in milk
and sugar, sitting with face directed to the
south at noontide, in the shade caused by
an elephant’s body in the month of Bhadra-
pada, under the constellation Magha,
acquires great merits. Hear of those merits.
“Yhe man who makes such an offering to
the Pitris under such circumstances, is con-
sidered as performing a great Shraddha
each year for thirteen years successively.


The kine said :—


. 37-39. That man becomes purged off of
all his sins who worships a cow with these
Mantras,,—vis..—O Vahula, O Samanga,
O you who are fearless everywhere, O you
who are forgiving and full ol auspicious-
ness, U friend, O source of all plenty, in
the region of Brahman, formerly you_ were
present with your calf in the sacrifice of
Indra the holder of the thunderbolt! Vou
were stationed in the sky and in the path of
Agai! The celestials with Narada among
them worshipped you on that occasion


For a hundred lives he has to rot in
He is never rescued at any time.


MAHABHARATA,


by calling you Sarvamsaha !—Suck a man
attains to the region of Purandara. He
acquires, besides, the merits that belong to
kine, and the splendour of the Moon also.


42. Such a man becomes freed from
every sin, every fear, every grief. At the
end, he acquires residence in the happy
region of the Phousand-eyed Indra.


Bhishma said:—


4t. After this, the highly blessed and
illustrious seven Rishis, headed by Vashi-
shtha, rose and going round the Lotus-
born Brahman, stood around him with
hands joined in respect.


42. Vashishtha, that foremost of all
persons conversant with Brahma, became
their spokesman and put this question which
conduces to the behoof of all creatures but
especially to the Brahmanas and Kshatriyas,


43. By doing what acts may virtuous
men who have no worldly belongings, suc-
ceed in acquiring the merits of sacrifices ?


44. Hearing this question of theirs, the
Grandfather Brahman began to say what
follows,


Brahman said :—

45: Excellent is this question, ye highly
blessed ones! It is at once auspicious and
high and full of mystery. This question
that you have put i8 subtife and conduces to
the well-being of mankind.


46. Ye Rishis having penances for
wealth, I shall recite everything to you in
full. Do you listen with attention to what I
say as to how men acquire the merits of
sacrifices.


47—48. Inthe lighted fortnight of the
month of Pousa, when the constellation
Rohini is ia conjunction, if one, purifying
himself by a bath, lies, undec the canopy of
heaven, clad in a single piece af cloth, - with
faith and rapt attention, and drinks the rays
of the Moon, he wins the merits of great
sacrifices.


49. Ye foremost of twice-born persons,
this is a great mystery that I declare it to
you in reply to your question, you who
know the truths of all subjects. '


op


CHAPTER CXXVIL


(ANUSHASANIKA PARYA).-—
Continued.
Vibhavasu (the Sun) said :-—~-


1—2. There are twe offerings. One of
these consists of a palmf{yl of water and the


ANUSHASANA PARVA. 27t


other called Akshata consists of rice-grains , ever, which I have tentioned are such that
with clarified butter, One should, on the day | when observed by persons having faith,
of the full -moon, stand facing that bright | their merit becomes endless.

orb and make to him the two offerings 12-13. Listen now to another great
mentioned, vs., a palmful of water and the | mystery unknown to many. The celestials
rice-grains with clarified butter called | go not eat the libations on occasions of
Akshata, The man-who presents these | Siraddhas and rites in their honor or on
offerings is said to worship his sacred fire. | oceasions of those rites which are performed
Indeed, he is considered as one who has | on ordinary lunar days or on the espically
poured fibations on the three (principal) | sacred days of the full moon and the new
fires. moon, if they see a woman in her menses
.3- That man of little understandiag who | or one-who is the daughter of a mother
cuts down a large tree on the day of the | suffering from leprosy.


new moon, becomes sullied with the sin of 14. The ancestors of the man who allows”
Brahmanicide. - By killing even a single | such a woman to come near the place where
leaf one commits that sin. the Shraddha is being performed by him,


4. That foolish man who chews a tooth. | do not become pleased with him for thirteen
brush ae the day of hil ie moon is con- | years.
sidered as injuring the god of the moon by 1. Clad in white clothes, and becomin
such a deed. The departed Manes of such , wee in body and mind,-one should inviee
a person become annoyed with him. Brahmanas and make them utter theit

.§. The celestials do not accept the liba- | benedictions. On such occasions one should:
tions poured by such.a man on days of the | also recite the the Bharata. It is by obser-
full moon and the new moon. His de- | ving ail these that the offerings made at
patted Manes become enraged with him, | Sbraddbhas become endless,


and his family become extinct. . ,
z Dhaumya said :-—


Shree said :— 16. Broken utensils, broken bedsteads,
6—9. The cefestials and departed Manes | cocks and dogs, as also such trees as have
leave that sinful house, in which eating and | grown within dwelling houses, are all ine
drinking vessels and seats and beds lie | auspicious objects. so
scattered, and in which women are beaten, 17. Ina broken utensil exists Kali him-
Without accepting the offcrings made to | self, whife ina broken bedsteid is loss of
them by the owners of such houses, the money. When a cock or a dog is seen, the’
celestials and the departed Manes fly away | celestials do not eat the offerings made to °


from such a sinful house. them. Scorpions and snakes find shelter
: 4, under the roots of a tree, ‘Hence, ona
Angiras said:~ should never plant a tree within his house,


8. The offspring of that man multiplies oe
who stands every night fora full year under | J amadagni said :—


a Karanjaka tree with a lamp for lighting 18—19. Tnat man whose heart is not
it, and holds in his hands the reow of the. pure, Hh sure to go to Hell even if he wore
Suvarchala plant. ships the celestials in a Horse-Sacrifice or in

“ey, < a hundred Vajapeya Sacrifices, or if he
Gargya said:— practises the severest austerities with head


9g. One should always do the duties of | down most. Purity of heart is considered
Yiospitality to his guests. One should give | as equal to Sacrifices and Truth.
lamps in the hall or shed where sacrifices : ety
are celebrated. One should avoid sleep | 20 A very poor Brahmana, by giving


during the day, and abstain fromuall sorts | Only a portion of powdered barley with a
of flesh or food, pure heart to a Brahmana, acquired the


tezion of Brahman himself. This is a


to. One should never injure kine and | sufficient proof. ;


Brahmanas. One should always recite the
names of the Pushkara lakes and the other
sacred.waters. Such a course of duty is the
foremost. Even this forms.a high religion
with jts mysteries, Jf observed in practice, :

-it js suce to yield great results. —


# a1. If a person celebrates even' a hun-

.dred sacrifices, he is doomed to see the
exhaustion of the merits belonging to the
libations poured therein, The daties, how- |


B72
CHAPTER CXXVIIL.


( ANUSHASANIKA PARVA ).—
Contenued.


Vayu said :—

-t. L shall recite some duties the obser-
vance of whieh produces happiness to man-
kind. Do you hsten also, with rapt atten-
tion, to certain transgressions upon which
they depend.


2—4. ‘Yhat man who offers for the four
months of the rainy season sesame and
water (to the Pitris), aud food, according
to the best of his power, to a Brahmana
thoroughly expert in duties, who duly pours
libations on the sacred fire, and makes
offerings of rice boiled in sugared mill, who
gives lamps in honor of the ancestors, with


sesame and water, indeed he who doves all.


this with faith and rapt attention, acquires
all the merits of a hundred sacrifices in
which animals are offered up to the celes-
tials.

5. Listen to this other great mystery
that is unknown to all, That man who
thinks it all right when 4 Shudra lights up
the fice upon which he is to pour libations
or who does not see any fault when women
who are incompetent to assist at Shraddhas
and other tites are allowed to assist at them,
commit a sin,


6. ‘fhe three sacrificial fires become
encaged with such a person. In his next
life he is born as a Shudra. His departed
Manes, together with the celestials, are
never pleased with him. ;


7. AUshall now recite what the expiations
are which one must perform for purifying
himself from such sins. Listen to me with
attention. By performing those expiatory
rites, one becomes happy and free from
fever,


8. Fasting all the while, one should, for
three days, with rapt attention, pour liba-
tions, on the sacred fire, of the urine of the
cow mixed with cowdung and milk and cla-
rified butter. -


9. The celestfals accept the offerings of
such a man on the expiration of a full year,
His departed..Manes also, when the time
comes for him for performing the Shraddha,
become pleased with him,


to. f have thus recited what is righteous
and what unrighteous, with all their un-
known details, about human beings desirous
of attaining to Heaven. Men who abstain
from these sins or who having committed
them perform the expiatory rites pointed
out, succeed in attaining to the celestial
region when they leave this world.


‘lawful wives of others,


‘acquires great merits,


MAHABHARATA.


CHAPTER CXXIX.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA ).—~
Continued.


Lomasha said :—


1, The departed Manes of those men
who, without having wives of their own,
know the wives of other people, are disap-
pointed when the time for the Shraddha
comes.


2. He who knows the wives of other
people, he who indulges in sexual union
with a barren woman, and he who appro-
priates what belongs to 4 Brahinana, are
equally sinful.


- 3. Forsooth, the departed Manes of such
people cut them off without wishing to have
any intercourse with them, The offerings
they make fail to please the celestials and
the departed Manes,


4. Hence, one should always abstain
from sexual union with women who are the
as also with women
wh are barren. Lhe man who seeks his
own good, should not appropriate what
belongs to a Brahmana.


5. Listen now to another mystery, un-
known to all, about Religion. One should,
having faith, always do the command of jhis
preceptor and other elders,


6. On the twelfth lunar day, as also on
the day of the full moon, every month, one
should make gifts to Brahmanas of clarified
butter and of Akshata. Listen to me as L
say what the measure is of the merit that
such a person wins.


7. By such a deed one is said to increase
Soma and the Ocean. Vasava, the king of
the celestials, confers upon him a fourth
part of the merits of a Horse-Sacrifice.


8. By meking such gifts, a person he-
comes gifted with great energy and prowess.
Well-pleased with him, the divine Soma
grants him the fruition of his desires.


g. Listen now to another duty, together
with the foundation on which it depends,
which yields great merits. in this age of
Kali, that duty, if pecformed, gives much
happiness to men.


lott. That man who, rising at dawn
and purifying himself by a bath, dresses
himself in white clothes and with concentra-
ted attention makes gifts to Brahmanas of
vessels full of sesame seeds, who makes


_ Offerings to the departed Manes of water


with sesame seeds and honey, and who gives
lamps as atso the food called Krishara.
Listen to me as I
‘Say what those merits are, ‘


ANUSHASANA PARVA.,


14-13%. The divine chastiser of Paka


273


guilty of Brahmanicide, and he who violates


has attributed these merits to the gift of | the bed of his preceptor, should never be


vessels of copper and brass filled with
sesame seeds. He who makes gifts of kine,
he who makes gifts of land which yield
eternal merit, he who performs the Agni-
shthoma sacrifice with profuse presents in
the form of Dakshina to the Bratmanas are
all considered by the cefestials as acquiring
merits equal to those which one acquires
by mecieg gifts of vessels filled with sesame
seeds.


14. Gifts of water with sesame seeds are
considered by the departed Manes as yietd-
ing eternal gratification to them. The
xrandfathers ail become highty pleased with
gifts of lamps and Krishara.


- 15. 1 have thus recited the ancient ordi-


nance, laid down by the Rishis, that is.


highly spoken of, by both the departed
Manes and the celestials in theic respective
regions,


Seeman canal


CHAPTER CXXX,


( ANUSHASANIKA PARVA ).—=
Continued.


Bhishma said :—

1. ‘Fhe diverse Rishis there assembled
together with the departed Manes and the
deities, then, with rapt attention, asked
Arundhati who was gifted with great asce-
tic merit,


2. Having penances for wealth Arun-
dhati was equal to her husband the high-
souled Vashisntha in’ energy, for both in
vows and conduct she was her husband's
equal. | Pe

3. Addressing her, they said,—We wish
to hear from you the mysteries of duty
and religion. You should, O amiable lady,
tell us what you consider as a great mys-
tery.


Arundhati said :-—

4—5. Jhe great progress I have been able
to make ia penances is owing to your con-
sideration for me in thus remembering my
poor self. With your gracious permission |
shall now describe duties that are eternal,
and are great mysteries. [ shall describe
them with the causes on which they depend.
Listen to me as I describe them to you in
full. A knowledge of these should be com-
municated to him only who has faith or who
has a pure heart. ~ ‘


6. These four, wz., he who is bereft of
faith, he who is full of pride, he who is


35


talked to. Religion and duty should never
be communicated to them.


e

g—8. The merits acquired by a pérson
who gives away a Kapila cow every day foc
twelve years, or by a person who worship=
the deities every month in a sacrifice, or by
him who gives away hundreds of thousands
of kine in the great Pushkara, do not equal
those that are his with whom a guest [s
pleased,


‘9. Listen now to another duty whose ob-
servance yields happiness to mankind. {t
should be observed with its secret ritual by
a person having faith. Its merits ace cere
tainly high, ; :


to—12. Listen to what they are. Ufa
person, rising at dawn and taking with bim
a quantity of water and a few blades of
Kusha grass, goes to a cowpen and, arrived
there, washes a cow’s horns by sprinkling
thereon that water with these blades of
Kusha grass and then causes the water to
drip down on his own head, he is considered,
on account of such a bath, as one who has
performed his ablutions in all the sacred
waters that the wise have heard to exist in
the three worlds and that are honored and
resorted to by the Shiddhas and Charanas.


13. After Arundhuti had said these
words, all the deities and ancestors ap-
plauded her, saying, —Excelient, Excellent.
-—Indeed, all the beings there were highly
pleased and all of them adored Arundhati.


Brahman said :—~

14. O highly blessed one, excellent is
the’duty that you have described, together |
with its secret ritual. Praise be to you!
I grant’ you this boon, vs!, that your
penances will continually increase.


Yama said :~—+'

15. have heard from you ah excellent

and agreeable subject. Listen now to what
Chitragupta has said and what is agreeahie
to me. -
16 Those words touch on duty with its
secrét rituat, and are worthy of being heard
by the great Hishis, as also by men having
faith and desirous of achieving their owa
good.


17. Nothing is lost ef either virtue or
sin that is committed by ereatuses. On
days of the full moon and vhe new «moon,
those acts are taken to the Sun where they
rest. yy ae ; bos,

18. When a mortal goes into the regions :
of the dead, the Sun witnesses all his deeds -


274


He who is virtuous, acquires the fruits of his
virtue there.


tg—-20. I shall now tell you of some auspi-
cious duties that are approved of by Chitra-
gupta, Water for drink, and lamps for
lighting darkness, should always be given,
as also sandals and umbrellas and Kapila
kine with due sites. In Pushkara especially,
one should make the gift of a Kapila cow
to a Brahmana convesant with the Vedas.


zt. One should also always maintain his
Aguihotca with great care. Here is ano-
thee duty which was proclatmed by Chitra-
wupta. |

22, The best of creatures should listen
to what the merits are of that duty sepa-
tately. In course of time, every creature is
destined to undergo dissolution. : :


;23. , The little-witted meet with great
distress in the regions of the dead, for they
become stricken with hunger and thirst.
Indeed, they have to rot there in pain,
‘There is ag escape for them from such a
disaster,


24. They have to enter into a thick
darkness, | shali now tell you of, thase


duties by discharging which one may suc-


ceed in getting over such dasasters.


25. The performance of those duties
costs very little but yields great merit.
Indeed, such performance: yields great
happiness in the other world. The merits
of the yift of water for drink, are excellent.
In the next world, in especial, those merits
are very great. iy


26. A large river full of excellent water
is ordained in the other world for them who
wake gifts of water for drink. Indeed, the
water contained in that river is endless and
cool and sweet as nectar.


27. He who makes gifts of water in this
world, drinks from that river in the next
world when he goes there. Listen now to
the profuse merits accruing from tre gift
of lamps.


28.
world, has never to even see the thick darks
tess (of Hell), he. Sun and the Moon and
the God of Fire always give him theic light
when he goes to the other world.


29. The celestials ordain that on every
side of such a person there should be burn-
ing light. Indeed, when the giver of lights
xaes to the world of the dead, he himself
shines in pure effulgence like a second
Due

30. Hence, one should give lights while
hese and water foc drink in especial. Listen
new te whatthe merits are of the person


The man who gives lamps in this.


MAHABHARATA.


who makes the gift of a Kapila cow toa
Brahmana knowing the Vedas, especially if
the gift be made in Puskkara.


gt. Such a man is considered as having
made a gift of a hundred kine with a bull~
a gift that yields eternal merit.


32. The gilt of a single Kapila cow is
capable cleansing whatever sins the giver
may be guilty of, even if those sins be as
grave as Brahmanicide, for the gift of a
single Kapila cow is considered as equal in
merit to that of a bundred kine,


33 Hence, ore should pive away a
Kapila cow at that Pushkara which is con-
sidered as the senior, on the day of the full
moon in the month of Kartika. Men who
succeed in making such a gift have never


. to meet with distress of any kind, or sorrow,


or thorns giving pain.


34. That man who gives away a pair of
sandals to a superior Brahmana who is
worthy of the gilt, acquires similar merits.
By giving away an umbrella, a person gets
comfostable shade in the next world.


35- A gift made to a worthy person
never goes for nothing. It is sure to yield
agreeable results to the giver. Hearing
these’ opinions of Chitraguta, the Sun's -
hairs stood erect.


36. Gifted with great splendour, he
addressed ali the celestials and the departed
Manes, saying, —Ye have heard the myster-
ies about duty, as explained by the great
Chitrag upta.

37- ‘Those human’ beings who, gifted


“with faith, make these gifts to great Brah-


manas, became freed from fear of every
sort.


38. These five kinds of men, sullied witt:
vicious deeds, have no escape. Indeed,
these wretched men of sinful conduct, should
never be talked to. Indeed, they should
always be avoided.


39 Those five are he who is the destroy-
er of a Brahmana, he who is the destroyer
of a cow, he who is addicted to sexual
union with other people’s wives, he who is
bereft of faith (in the Vedas), and he who
maintains himself by selling the virtue of
his wife.


40. These men of sinful conduct, when
they go to the region of the dead, rot in hell-
like worms which live upon puss and blood,


41. These five are avoided by the depar-
ted Manes, the celestials, the Snataka
Brahmanas, and other twice-born persons
who are given to the practice of penances,


r


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


CHAPTER CXXXI.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA ).=
Continued.


Bhishma, said :—

1—2. Then all the highly blessed celes-
tials and the departed Manes, and the
highly-blessed Rishis also, addressing the
Pramathas, said,—Ye are all highly blessed
beings. Ye are invincible night-rangers.
Why do you afflict those men who are vile
and impure and that are unclean ?


- 3. Whatacts are considered as obstacles
to your power? What, indeed, are those
acts on account of which ye cannot afftict
men? What are those acts that are des-
tructive of Rakshasas and which prevent.
you from influencing the dwellings of men? _


4. Ve night-rangers, we wish to hear all
this from you.


The Pramathas said :—


5—6. Men are rendered unclean by acts
of sexust intercourse, They who do aot
purify themselves after such deeds, they
who insult their elders, they wha from stu-
pefaction eat different sorts of meat, the
man also who sleeps at the foot of a tree,
he who keeps any animal matter under his
pillow while lying down for sleep, and he
wholies down or sleeps putting the head
where his feet should be placed, or his
feet where bis head should be placed,—ihese
men ace considered by us as unclean.
Indeed, these men have many. holes,


7-8. Those also are classed amongst
those who throw their phlegm and other
uncle an secretions into the water, Forsooth,
these men deserve to be killed and eaten up
by us. Indeed, we afflict those human beings
who are endued with such conduct. Listen
now to what those acts are which are con-
siderei as antidotes and on account of
which we fail to do any injury on men.


g~—tt. Those men on whose body are
marks of Gorochana, or who hold Vachas
in their hands, or who make yifts of clarified
butter with Akshata, or who place clarified
butter and Akshata on their heads, or
those who abstain from meat, are incapable
of being afflicted by us. That maa in
whose house the sacred fire burns day and
night. without being ever extinguished, or
who keeps the skim or teeth of a wolf in his
house or a hill-tortoise, or from whose
house the sacrificial smoke is seen to curl
upwards, or who keeps a cator a goat that
is eithee tawny or black in colour, is free
from our power.


12. Those householders who keep these
things in their houses always find them free


|


aia a i ep peep Sa tlre aan


275


from the attacks of even the most dreadfal


spirits that live on carrion.
a L


‘13. Those beings also, that like us range
through different. worlds seeking pleasure,
are unable to'do any harm to such houses.
Therefore, should men keep such articles én
their houses as are destructive of Rakshasas,
We have thus told you everything in solt-
tion of your great doubts.


CHAPTER CXXXIL


(ANUSHASANIKA  PARVA).—
Continued.


Bhishma said :—


1—2. After this, the Grandfather Brah-
man, sprung from the primeval lotus and
resembling the lotus (in agreeableness and
fragrance), addressed the celestials headed
by Vasava, the husband of Sachi,—Yonder
sits the powerful Naga who lives iw the
nether regions. Gifted with great strength
and energy, and with great prowess also,
his name is Renuka. He is certainly a
great being. a ne


3—5. Those powerful elephants of great
eneryy and power, who hold the entire
Earth with here bills, waters, and lakes,
should be seen by this Renuka at your
request. Let Renuka go to them and ask
them about the mysteries of religion or
duty !——Hearing these words of the Grand-
father, the celestials, well-pleased, sent (the
elephant) Renuka to where those uptolders
of the world are. p? s


6. Going where those elephants are,
Renuka addressed them, sayinyg,—-Ye
powerful creatures, | have been command-
ed by the celestials and the departed
Manes to question you about the mysteries
of religion and duty! [ desire to hear you
discourse on that subject in detail. Ve
highly-blessed ones, do ye discourse on the
subject as your wisdom may dictate.


7. Standing in the eight quarters, the
elephants said,—On the sacred eighth day
of the dark fortnight in the' month of
Kartika, when the constellation Ashlesha is
in the ascendant, one should make gilts of
treacle and rice. ;


8—11. Renouncing anger, and living
on cegulated diet, one should make these
offerings at a Shraddha, uttering these
Mantras,—Let Valadeva and other Nayas
endued with great strength, let. other power
ful snakes of huge bodie$ that are indesr
tructible and eternal, and let alf the othe-


276


great snakes that have taken their birth
in their family, make Vali offerings to me
for the increase of my strength and energy.
-Indeed, let my strength be as great as that
of the blessed Narayana when he raised
the submerged Earth. Uttering these
Mantras, one should make Vali offerings
upon an anthill. After sunset, offerings of
kaw Sugar and rice should be made on
anthill selected. Yhe anthil should previ-
ously be strewn with Gajendra flowers.
Offerings should also be made of blue
clothes and fragrant unguents.


13. If offerings are made thus, those
beings that live in the nether régions, car-
rying the weight of the upper regions upon
theie heads or shoulders, become well-
pleased and gratified. As for ourselves, we
also do not feel the exertion of upholding
the Earth, on account. of such offerings
being made to us.


14. Afflicted with the burthen we bear,
this is what we think (beneficial for men),
without the slightest selfish end.. By obser-
ving this cule for a full year, fasting on each
occasion, Brahmanas Kshatriyas, and Vai-
shays and Shudras, acquire great merits
from such gifts.


15. We think that the making of such
Vali offerings on the anthill is really fraught
with very superior merits.

16.. By making such offerings, one is
considered as doing the duties of hospitality
for a hundred years to all the powerful
elephants which exist in the three worlds.


17. Hearing these words of the powerful
elephants, the celestials and the departed
Manes, and the highly-blessed Rishis, alk
spoke highly of Renuka.


|
t
t
|
{


|


|


Te ane aand


CHAPTER CXXXItE


TANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.


Maheshwara said :—


1. You have recited excellent duties from
your memory. Listen all of you now to me
as 1 declare some mysteries about religion
and duty.


2. Ouly those persons whose understand-
ings have been fixed on religion and who are
endued with faith, should be instructed
about those mysteries of duty and religion
fhat-are fraught with high merits.


_ 3 Hear what the merits are that become |
his, who, with heaig showin of anxiety; gives |
5 ?


ac ammeter age ec 3 ~~


‘MAHABHARATA.


food every day; for a montl, to kine, and
contents himself with one meal a day
throughout such period.


- 4 The kine are highly blessed. They
are considered as the most sacred of alt
sacred things. Indeed, it is they wha are
upholding the three words with the celestials,
Asuras, and human beings.


5. Respectful services done to then,
yield great merit and grave results. That
man who every day gives food tq kine daily,
acquires accumulated religious merits.


6. Formerly, in the golden age, f had
expressed my approval of these ereaturese
Afterwards Brahman, sprung from the
primeval lotus, requested me (to show kind-


| Ness towards kine).


7 «It is, therefore, that emblem of bul?
_ Stands on my standard overhead. | always
sport with kine, Hence, should kine be
adored by all.


8. Kine are endued with great power.
‘They are givers of boons. If adored, they
would grant boons. That person who
gives food to kine even for a single day,
receives from those beneficent creatures, for
that deed, a fourth part of the merits he
may acquire by alk his good aets in Hife.


CHAPTER CXXXIV.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.


Skanda said :—

¥—~2. | shall mow describe a duty that
#3 approved of by me. Do ye listen to it with
rapt attention. That person who takes #
little earth from the horns of a butl of blue
color, smears his body therewith for three
days, and then performs his ablutions, wins
great merits. Hear what those merits are.
By such a deed he would) wash away every
stain and evil, and acquire soveretyn sway
hereafter.


3. Every time he is born in this world,
he becomes celebrated. for his heroism.
Hear of another mystery unknown to all,


4. Taking a vessel of copper and placing
therein’ some cooked food after having
mixed it with honey, one should offer it as
offering to the rising Moon on the evening
of the day when that luminary is at full.


_ §—6. Do ye tearn, with faith, what the
merits are of the person who acts thus. ‘The
Saddhyas, the Rudras, the Adityas, the
Vislwedevas, the twins Ashwins, the Maruts,


; ANUSHASANA PARVA.


and the Vasus; all accept that offering.’ By
suck an offering, Sema increases as also
ocean, that-great receptacle of waters. This
duty that is declared by me and that is an-
known to all, if performed, certainly yields
great happiness.


Vishnu said :—.

7—-8. That person who, gifted with faith
and freed from malice, listens every day
with rapt attention to the mysteries about
religion and duty that are preserved by the
great deities and those mysteries also of
the same kind that are preserved by the
Rishis, has never to succumb to any evil.
Such a person becumes also fred from
every fear,


9. That man who, with his senses under
thorough restraint, reads these seetions des-
cribing these auspicious and meritorious
duties, together with their mysteries,—
duties that have been described (by the
p'evious speakers),—acqg tires all the merits
of their actual performance.


10. Sin can never lord over him. Ine
deed, such a man can never be stained. with
faults of any sort. Indeed, one acquires
profuse merits. by reading these mysteries,
or by reciting them Lo others, or by heating
them recited. ,


tt, The celestials and the departed
Manes eat for ever the Havi and the Kavi
offered by such a creature. Both qhese, on
account of the virtues of the offeret, become
inexhaustible, Even such is the ‘me it of
the person who, with rapt attention, recites
these mysteries ta foremost of Brahm inas
ov days of the full moon of the new
moon. :


12. Such a person, on account of such a
deed, becomes steady in the performance
‘of all duties, He also enjoys personal beauty
and prosperity. He succeeds, besides this,
in becoming the favourite for all time, of
the Rishis and the celestials and the depart-


ed Manes, f


13. Ifa person becomes’ guilty of all sins
except those whict are classed as grave or
heinous, he becomes purged off of them all by
only listening to the recitation -of these mys-
teries about religion and duty.


Bhishma said :—


1q-—1t5. Even these, O king, are the
mysteries about religion and duty living, in
the breasts of the deities. Held in high
esteem by all the celestials aed prorrul-
gated by Vyasa, they have now been de-
clated by me fer your behoeof, One who is
conversant with religion and duty thinks
that this excellent . knowledge is even


277


superior ta the entire Earth full of ciches _


and wealth. n


16 ‘This knowledge should net be given
to one whe has no faith, of to.one who fs an.
atheist, or to one who has fallen away from
the duties of. his easte, of to one, who is
shorn of mercy, or to one who is giver to
the science of empty disputations, er to ene
who is hostile t» his prec-ptors, arto one
who thinks all creatures tobe different from
oneself.


ed


CHAPTER CXXXV.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued. .


Yudhishthira said :— ies

t. Who are thosé persons, O ‘Bharata :
from whom a Brahmana in this world may
take his food? From whom may a Kshar
triya, a Vaishya, and a Sbudra take their
food respectively ?


Bhishma said :~ ;

2. A Brahmana may take his food from
another Brahmana, or from a Kshatriya, or
from a Vaishya, but he must never take food
from a Shudia. eed

3 A Kshatriya may take his food from
a Brahmsna,a Kshatriya, or a Vaishya.
He must, hewever, not take food giver by
Shudras. who are piven’ to evil ways and
who partake of all sorts:of food without atiy
hesitation, €; ans Ys


4. Brahmanas and Kshatriyas dan par.
take of foud given by such Vaistryas a¥ serve
the sacred fire every day, as aré faultless in
Character, and-as perform the vow of Chae
turmasya. ‘ :


‘ 5 ‘ 2 1 yt

§. But the man who accepts food from a
Shudra, swallows the very abomination of
the Earth, and drinks the excretions of the
human body, and partakes of the filth of all
the world.

6. He partakes of the’ vety filth ofthe
Earth who takes his food thus from a Shudra.
Indeed, those Brahmanas who accept their
food from Shudras,. take the dirt of the
Earth. Ve

7< Tt one engages in the service of a
Shadra, he is doomed to perdition, though
he may duly perform all the rites of his
caste. A Brahmans, a’ Kshdttiya, or a
Vaishya, so engaging, is doomed, although
giver’ to the proper performance of religious.
rites. :


278


‘


8_ It is said that a Brahmana’s duty
consists in studying the Vedas and seeking
the behoof ef humanity; thata Kshatriya’s
duty consists. in. protecting men, and that a

Vaishya’s in promoting their material pros-
perity., : : -

|g. A Vaishya lives by dist:ibming the
‘fruits of his own deeds and agriculture.
The breeding of kine and trade are the le-
fitimate duties in: which a Vaishya may
engage: without fear of censure.


to. The man who gives up his own pro-
per occupation and does that of a Shudra,
should be regarded as a Shudra, and, on
no account, should any food be accepted
from him.,, 2


t1. Professors of medicine, mercenary
soldiers, the priest who acts as warder of the
house, and persons who devote a whole
year to study without any profit, are all to
be regarded as Shudras.


12—13. And those who foolishly par-
‘take af food offered at ceremonials in a
Shudta’s house, suffer from a dreadful
disaster. On account of pasteking such
forbidden food, they loose their family,
strength, and energy, and acquire the
status of lower animals degenerating to the
position of dogs, fallen in virtue and devoid
of all religious observances.


14.. He who takes food from a physician,
takes but an excrement; the food of a
harlot is like urine; that of a skilled mecha-
nic is like blood,


15... lf good Brahmana takes the food
of one who lives by hig learning, he is con-
sidered as taking the food of a Shudra. Ali
good men should avoid such food.


16. . The food of a person who is censured
by all, is said to be like a drink from a p: ol
of blood. The acceptance of foad from a
wickedse person is as heinous as the killing
of a Brahmana.


17. One should not accept food if he is
slighted and not received with due honors
by the giver. A Brahmana, who does soa,
is soon possessed vy disease, and his family
‘soon becomes extinct.


38. By accepting food from the warder
of a city, one degenerates to the status,
of the lowest outcaste.


«19. If a Brahmana accepts food from
one who is guilty of slaying either a cow or
a*Brahmana, or from one who has com-
snitted adultery with his perceptor’s wife,
or from adrunkard, he helps to promote
the family of Rakshasas.


20. By taking food from a eunuch, or
“from an ungrateful person, or from oue


re


_ MAHABHARATA,


who has misappropriated money entrusted
to his care, one is born in the country of the
Savaras situated beyond the limit of the
middie country.


2t. Ihavethus duly described to you
the persons from whom food may be ac-
cepted and from whem it may not. Now
tell me, O son of Kunti, what else do you
wish to hear from me to-day.


CHAPILER CXXXVI.


( ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


1. You have told me fully of those from
whom food may be taken, and of those from
whom it should not be taken ?


2. But I have grave doubts on one point,
Do you, O sire, enlighten me; do you
tell me what expiation 2 Brahmana_ should
make upon accepting the different kinds of
food, those especially offered in honor of the
celestials and the oblations made to the
departed Manes,


Bhishma said :-—


3. (shall tell you, O prince, how great
Brahmanas may be freed from all sins in-
curred by accepting food from others.


4. Ia accepting clarified butter, the
expiation is made by pouring oblations
on the fire, reciting the Savitrihymn. Ifa
accepting sesamum, O Yudhishthira, the
same expiation has to be made.


5. In accepting meat, or honey, or salt,
a Biahmana becomes purged off of all sins
by standing till the rising of the Sun.


6—7. If a Brahmana accepts gold from
any One, he becomes cleansed of all sins
by silently reciting the great Gayatri, and
by holding a piece of iron, in -his hand,
before the public. In accepting money or
clothes or women or gold, the pycification
is the same as before. 4


8. In accepting food, or rice boiled in
milk and sugar, er sugarcane juice, or
sugargane, or oil, or any sacred thing, one
becomes purified by bathing thrice during
the day, vés., at morn, noon and eve.


9. If ane accepts paddy, flowers, fruits, *.
water, half-ripe barley, cmilk,.or curdled ~
milk, or anything made of meat or flour, the
expiation is done by #eeiting the Gayatri
prayer a hundred -times. i - .


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


to, {n accepting shoes or clothes at
obseqguial ceremonies, the sin is dissipated
by reciting devoutly the same hymn a hun-
dred times.


11, The acceptance of the gift of land !
daring an eclipse or during the period of
impurity, is expiated by observing a fast
during three successive nights. . ;


12, The Brahmana who partakes of ob-
Jations offered to departed Manes, in course
of the dark fortnight, is purified by fasting
for a whole day and night.


13. Without performing his ablutions a
Brahmana should not recite his evening
prayers, ndr engage in religious meditation,
nor take his food a second time. By so
doing he is purified. :


14. Therefore the Shraddha of departed
Manes has been ordained to be performed
in the afternoon: and then the Brahmana
who has been invited beforehand should be
treated with food. ;


15. The Brahmana who takes food at
the house of a dead person on the third day
after the death, is purified by bathing three
times daily for twelve days.


“16. After the expiration of twelve days,
and performing the purification ceremonies
duly, the sin is dissipated by giving clarified
butter to Brahmanas. :

17. If a man takes any food in the house
of a dead person, withirten days after the
death, he should perform all the expiations
before mentioned, and should recite the
Savitri hymn and perform the sin-destroy-
ing Ishti and Kushmanda penances,


18—19. The Brahmana who takes -his
food in the house of a dead person for
three nights, becomes purified by perform-

“ing his ablutions thrice daily for seven days,
and thus gains all the objects of his desire,
and is never troubled by misfortunes.


20. The Brahmana who takes his food
in the company of Shudras, is purged from.
all impurities by duly performing ttre cere-
monies of purification.

21. The Brahmana who takes his food
in the company of Vaishyas, is purged loff of
all sins, by living on alms for three succes
sive nights.


22. if a Brahmana takes his food with
Kohatriyas, he should perform expiation by
bathing with his clothes on.


23. By eating with a Shudra on the
same plate. the Shudra loses his family pres-
tige; the Vaishya-by eating on the same
plate witha Vaishya, loses his cattle and
friends. The Kshatriya loses his prospe-
rity; and the Brahmana, his effulgence and
power, :


279


24. ‘In such cases, exniations should be
performed, and. propitiatory rites, should ba
observed, and oblations offered to the celes-
tials, “he Savitri hymn shculd be recited
and the Revaii rites and Kushminda pen-
ances should be performed for destroying
the sin. oe ;

25. If any of the abave four castes par-
take of food partly eaten by a person of
any other caste, the expiation is, forsnoth,
made by smearing the body with sacred _
articles Tike Rochana, “ Durba_ grass, and
turmeric, gre se SS


+


: paar


CHAPTER CXXXVIL
. i “, yA
( ANUSHASANIKA PARVA ).—
Continued. ‘


Yudhishthira said :—

1. O Bharata, kindly tell me which of
the two ifbetter, vis., charity. or devotion ?
By this expell a great doubt from off my
mind. i


Bhishma said :‘—

2. Listen to meas I recite the names of
the princes who having been devoted to
virtue, and having purified their hearts by
penances and practised gifts nnd’ other acts
of virtue, undoubtedly acquire the differs!
ent celestial regions. 4
_'3 The Rishi Atreya respected of all,
attained, O king, to the excellent “celestial !
reyions, by imparting the knowledge’ of the !
limitless Suprenie Being to his pupils. ; +

. By offering the dife of his dear son,:
for the beboof of a Brahmana, King Shivi!
the son of Ushinara was taken from this


world to the celestial region. 1 Bee


5. Pratardana the king of Kashi, secured -
to himself unique and eternal fame in this
as well as in the other world by giving bis
son toa Brahmana,


6. Rantideva, the son of Sangkriti, at-'
tained tu the highest heaven by duly making
gifts to the great Vashishtha.


7. Devavriddha, too, went to the celes-
'tial region by giving a hundred-ribbed and
excellent golden umbiella to a Brahmana,
‘far a sacrifice. . . 5


8. The worshipful Amvarisha, too, has
acquired the celestial region by making a
gilt of all his kingdom toa highly powerful
Beahmana. ;


g. King Janamejaya! of the solar race,
went'to the highest heaven 'by making a


giftof earrings, ‘fine vehicles, and cows to


Brahmanas,


280 -


to. The Royal Sage Vrishadwrvi went to
the celestial region by making gifts of vari-
ous jewels and beautifut houses to Brah-
manas.


11. King Nini of Vidarva, acquired the
celestial region with his sons; frends and
cattle, by giving his daughter and kingdom
tothe great Agastya. :

12. The illustriogs Rama, the son of

amadagni, acquired the eternal regions,
tar beyond his expectation by giving lands
to Brahmanas.”~


13. Vashishtha, the greatest of Brah-
manas, saved all the creatures at a time of
great drought when the Rain God did not
bestow his grateful shawers upon ihe Earth,
and for this deed he has secured eternal
bliss. for himself, .


14. The highly-itlustrious Rama the son
Dasharatha, acquired the eternal regions by
making gifts of riches at saerifices.:


15, The Wlustrious Royal Sage Kaksha-
sena. went. to the, celestial regiow by duly
making over to the great Vahsishtha the
wealth which he had deposited with him.


16. Forthwith Marutta the son of Abi-
kshita and the grandson of Karandhama, by
giving his daughter in marriage to Angiras,
went to the celestial region.


t7. ~The highly devout king of Panchala,
Brahmadatta, attained the blessed way by
giving away a valuable conchshell,


U8 King Mitrasaha ascended to Heaven
by giving -his favourite wife Madayanti to
the great Vashishtha.


19. Sudyumna, the son of Manu, attained
to the most blessed regions by duly punishing
the high-souled Likbita,

‘20, Fhe celebrated Royal Sage Saha-
stracM@ta went to the blessed regions by
sacrificing: his dear life for a Brahmana.


2t. The king Satadyumna went to
heaven by giving to Maudgala a golden
palace filled with all the objects of desire.


22. Formerly, King Sumanyu by giving
to Shandilya heaps of food resembling a
hill, wert to the celestial region.


23. The Shalwa_ prince Dyutimat <f
great effulgence attained to the highest
segions by giving his kingdom to Richika.


24. The Royal Sage Madirashwa went
to the region of the celestials by giving his
slender-waisted daughter to Hiranyahasta.


25. The lordly. Lomapada attained all
the objects of his desire by giving his.
daughter Shanta in. marriage to. Rishya-
shringa. :


MAHABHARATA.


26, The Royal Sage Bhagiratha went to
the eternal regions by giving his famous
daughter Hansi in matriage to. Kautsa.


27. King Bhagiratha acquired the most
blessed regions by giving vundreds and
thousands of kine with their young one
to Kohala.


28. These and many other men, O
Yudhishthira, have attained to the celestial
region, by the merit of their charities aud
penances and they hava also returned from
there again and again.


29. heir fame wilt last as long as the
world will last. I have related te you, O
Yudhishthica, this story. of these goed
householders who have attained to eternal
regions by virtue of their charities and
penances.


go. ‘These people have acquired the
celestial region by their charities and by
performing sacrifices and by procreating
children. -

gt. O foremost scion of Kuru's raeg,
these men devoted their virtuous intellects
to the celebration of sacrifices and charities
by always performing acts of chacity.


2. O powerful prince, as night has set
in 1 shall explain to you in the morning
whatevet dvubis may spring up in your
mind. ‘


=e


CHAPTER CXXXVIU.


( ANUSHASANIKA PARVA ),-we
: Continued,


Yudhishthira said :—


t. [I have heard from you, O sire, the
names of those kings who have ascended to
the celestial region, O you whose power is
great in the obse: vance of the vow of truth,
by following the religion of gift.


‘2. How many kinds of gift are there 7?
What are the fruits of the several kinds of!
gifts respectively.


3. For'what reasons what kinds of gifts
made to what persons yield merits ? Indeed,
to what persons should what gifts be made 7?
Fer what reasons are how many kinds of
rity to be made? wish to hear all this in

ull,


Bhishma said :— :

. 4. Listen,,O son of Kunti, in full to-me,.
O sinless one, as 1 describe the subject of
gifts. Indeed, I shail teli you, O Bharata,
how gilts sliould. be made to. ail. the orders:
of men.


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


&. Gifts are made from desire of merit,
from desire of profit, from fear, from free
choice, and from pity, O Bharata! Gifts,
therefore, should be known to be of five
sorts. Listen now to the reasons far which
gifts are thus divided into five classes.


6. With mind shorn of malice, one should
make gifts to Brahmanas, for by making
gifts to them one wins fame in this world
and great happiness in the next.


g. He is in the habit of making gifts;
orhe will make gifts; or he has .already
made gifts to me. Hearing such words
from solicitors, one gives away all kinds of
riches to a particular solicitor,


8 1 am not his, nor is he mine. If dis-
regarded, he may injure me. From such
motives of fear even a learned and wise
man may make gifts to An ignorant wretch,


9g. This one is dear to me. I also am
dear to him. Actuated by considerations
lixe these, an intelligent person, freely and
with alacrity, Makes gifts to a frictid,


to. ‘The person who solicits me is poor.
He is, again, satisfied with a fittl. From
considerations such as these, one should
always make gifts to the poor, moved by
pity.

11, These are the five sorts of gift. They
increase the giver’s merits and fame. ‘The
Lord of all creatures has said that one should
always make gifts according to his power.


. CHAPYER CXXXIX.,


( ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).=
Continued,


Yudhishthira said:~


1. QO grandfather, you are endued with
great wisdom, Indeed, you are fully cons
versant with every branch of learning. In
our great family you are the only individual
who have mastered sciences.


2. I wish to hear from you discourses of
Religion and Profit, which bring on happi-
hess in the next world, and that are fraught
with wonder ty ail creatures. ,


- 3. ‘The time that has come is full of dis-
tress. The like of it does not generally
come to kinsmen and friends. Indeed,
except you, O foremost of men, we have
-now none else who can take the place of an
instructor.


4. If, Q sinless one, 1 with my brothers
deserve ydur lavoiir, you should answer the
questions I wish to ask you,


36


287


5. This one is Narayana who is gifted
with every prosperity and is honored by all
the kings. Even he waits upon you, show-
ing you every indulgence and honoring you
greatly.


6, You should describe jt to me, through
affection, for my benefit as also for that of
my brothers, in the presence of Vasudeva
himself and of all these kings.


Vaishampayana said :—

gy. Hearing these words of king Yue
dhishthira, Bhishma, the son of the rivee
Ganges, filled with joy on account of his
affection for the monarch and his brothers,
said what follows.


Bhishma said :—~—

8. I shall certainly recite to you dis-
courses that are charming on the subject, O
king, of the power of this Vishnu as display-
ed in days of yore and as | have heard
(from my preceptors}.


g: Listen to me also as I describe the
power of that great god who has a bull for
his emblem.: Listen to me as I describe also
the doubt that filled the mind of the wife of
Rudra and that of Rudra himself.


io. Once ona time the virtuous Krishna
observed a vow extending for two and ten
years. For seeing him who had performed
the rite of initiation for the observance
of bis great vow, there came to that
place Narada and Parvata, and Krishna-
Dwaipayana and Dhaumya, that foremost
of silent reciters, Devala, Kashyapa, and
Hastikashyapa, .

1z. Other Rishis also, gifted with initia»
tion and self-restraint, followed by -thei¢
disciples and accompanied by many Sid«
dhas and many asceties of great merit, came
there, *


13. The son of Devaki offered them
such laudable honors of hospitality as are
offered to the gods alone,


14. Those great Rishis sat themselves
down upon seats some of which were green
and some were gold-hued and sotne were
made of the plumes of the peacock and
some were perfectly new and fresh.


tS. Thus seated, they began to converse
sweetly with oe another on subjects of
Religion and Duty as also with many royal
sages arid celestials,


16. At that time the energy, in the
form, of fice, of Narayana, rising from the
fuel that consisted of the rigid observance
of his vow, came out of the mouth of
Krishna of wonderful deeds.


17. That fire began to consume those
mountains with their trees and creepers ang


asz


little plants, as also with their birds and
deer and beasts of prey and reptiles.


18. Soon the summit of that mountain
presented a distressing and pitiful sight.
inhabited by anjmals of various kinds which
began to utter eries of woe-and pain, the
summit soon became berelt of every living
creature.


1g. That fire of powerful flames, having
€onsumed everything without living a re-
sidue, at last returned to Vishnu and touch-
ed his feet tike‘a docile disciple.


20. That crusher of enemies, viz.,
Krishna, seeing that mountain burnt, cast
a benignant look upon it and thereby
brought it back to its former condition.


21. That mountain thereupon once more
became bedecked with flowering trees and
¢reepers, and once more echoed with the
notes’ and cries of birds and deer and
“animals of prey and reptiles,

22, Seeing that wonderful and incon-
ceivable spectacle, all the ascetics became
filled with wonder. Their hair stood erect
and their vision was disturbed with tears.

23. Seeing those Rishis thus stricken
with wonder, that foremost of speakers,
Narayana, addressed them in these sweet
and refreshing words :—~ —


244 Why, indeed, has wonder filled the
hearts of this collection of Rishis, these
ascetics who are always free from attach-
ment of every kind, who are divested of the
idea. of mine-negs, and who are fully con-
versant with every sacred science,


25. These Rishis having penanees for
wealth and freed from every stain, should
explain to me truly this doubt which has
originated in my mind, .


The Rishis said :—

26. You are the creator of all the worlds,
and the destroyer of them again. You are
Winter, you are Summer, and you ace the
Season of Rains, :

27. Of all the creatures, mobile aud im+
mobile, that exist on Earth, you are the
father, you are the mother, you are the
master, and you are the origin, ‘

28, Even this, O destroyer of Madhu, is
a matter of wonder and doubt with us, ‘O
source of all auspiciousness, you should ex-
plain to us that doubt, v7z,, the issue of fire
from your mouth,

29. Our fears being removed, we shall,
then, O Hart, recite to you what we have
heard and seen,


Vasudeva said :—
30. ‘The fire that came out from my


MAHABHARATA.


mauth and that resembles the all-destroy-
ing Yuga-Fire in splendour, and by whictr
this mountain has been crushed and scor-
ched, is nothing else than the power of
Vishnu.


3t. Ye Rishis, ye are persons who have
governed anger, who have brought your
senses under complete control, who are
gifted with wealth of penances, and wha
are very gods in power. Yet you have
allowed yourselves to be agitated and dis-
tressed,


32. Tam now engaged wholly with the
observances about a rigid vow. Indeed,
on accouht of my observing the vows of an
ascetic, a fire came out from my mouth,
You should not allow yourselves to be agi-
tated therefor.


33. It is for “observing a rigid vow
that f came to this charming and _ sacred
‘mountain. The object that has brought
me here is to acquire, by the help of
penances, a son that would be my equal in
power,


34. On account of my penances, the
Soul existing in my body became changed
into fire and came out of my mouth. ‘That
fire had gone to see the boon- giving Grand-
father all the universe.


35. The Grandfather, ye foremost of
ascetics, told my soul that half the energy
of the great god having the bull for bis
emblemr would take birth as my son.


36. That fire returning from its mission,
has come back to me and approached my
feet like a disciple desirous of attending to
me dutifully. Indeed, renouncing its
fury it has come back to its own proper
nature.


- 37. have thus told you, in brief, a mys~
tery belonging to Him who has the lotus
for his origin and who is gifted with great
intelligence. Ye Rishis having penances
for wealth, you should nat yield to fear,,


38. You are gifted with far-reaching
vision, You can proceed to every place
without any obstacle. Radiant with vows
observed by ascetics, you are adorned with
knowledge and science.


39. EF now ask youto tell me semething
that is highly wonderful which you have
heard of or seen on Earth or in the celgs-
tial region. .

40. lam anxious to taste the honey of
words which will drop from your lips, and
which, I am sure, will: be as sweet as a
jet of nectar itself.


4, -Uf E see anything on Earth or in the
celestial region, which is highly delightful


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


and wonderful but which is unknown to all
of you, O god-like Rishis, that is on ac-
count of my own supreme Nature which is
incapable of being obstructed by anythirig.
Anything wonderful which 1 know iby na-
tute ot by my own inspiration, ceases to ap?
pear wonderful to me, :


43. Anything, however, that is recited
by pious persons and that is beard from
those whe are good, deserves to be accept-
ed with respect and faith. Sucti discourses
exist on Eurth for a long tinte and will last
like characters engraved on rocks.


44. 1 wish, therefore, to hear at this
meeting of ourselves, something dropping
from the lips of persons whe are good and
who cannot fail to be productive of good te
men,


45. Hearing these words of Krishna,
all those ascetics became filled with wosder.
They began to look at Janarddana with
those eyes of theirs that were as beautiful
and large as the petals of the lotus,


46. Some of them began to glorify him
and some began to adore him with respect,
Indeed, all of them then sang the praises
of the destroyer of Madhu with words
whose meanings were adorned with the
eternal Richs.


47. All those ascetics then appointed
Narada, that foremost of all persons con-
versant with words, to satisfy the request of
Vasudeva. :


The Ascetics said :—

48—49. You should, O Narada, describe
in full, from the beginning, to Hrishikesha,
that wonderful and inconceivable incident
which took place, O powerful one, on the
fountains of Himavat and which, O ascetic,
was seen by those of us who had gone there
in course of our sojourn to the sacred waters.
indeed, for the behoof of all the Rishis here
collected, you should recite that incident.


50. Thus addressed by those ascetics,
the celestial Rishi, viz., the divine Narada,


then recited the following story whose |


incidents had taken place sometime before.


CHAPTER CXL.


CANUS HASANIKA PARVA.—)
Continued.


- Bhishma said :—

a1. Then Narada, that holy Rishi, that
friend of Narayana, recited the following
discourse that took place between Shankara
and his wife Uma,


‘| bling Heaven itself.


283


Narada said :— 4

z. Once on atime the pious lord of alf
the celestials, vs., Mahadeva having bult
for his emblem, practised severe penances
on the sacred, mountains of Himavat the
tesort of Siddhas aud Charanas,


3- That charming inountain is over-
grown with various kinds of herbs and
adorned with various flowers. At that time
they were inhabited by the different tribes
of Apsaras and ccowds of ghosts.


4. There the great god sat, filled with
joy, and encircled by hundreds of ghostly
beings who presented various aspects to the
eye of the beholder. Some of them were
ugly and awkward, some were very beauti-
ful, and seme presented the most worder-
fal appearances.


§. Some had faces tike die lion’s, some
tike the tiger's, and some like the eleplrant’s;
In fact, tlre faces of these goblins presented
levery variety of anintal faces.~Some had
| faces cesembling that of the jackal; some
f those of the pard’s; some like the ape’s ;


some like the bull’s.


‘6. Some of them had faces like the
owi’s; some like the hawk’s; some had
' faces like those of the deer.


zy. The great god was also encircted by
Kinnaras and Yakshas and Gandharvas
and Rakshasas and various other created
beings. The retreat of Mahadeva alse
.abounded with celestial flowets and shone
with celestial. rays of light.


8. It was perfumed with celestial sandal,
and celestial incense was burnt on all sides.
And it echoed with the sounds of celestial
instruments. |


g. Indeed, it resounded with the beat
‘of Mridangas and Panavas, the blare of
| conchs, and the sound of drums, it was
| fult of goblins of diverse tribes that danced
in joy and with peacocks also that danced’
I with plumes outspread.


10. It was the resort of the celestial
I Rishis, the Apsaras danced there in joy.
| The place was aera ig beautiful to look
at. It was exceedingly beautiful, resem~
Its view was wondere
ful, and, indeed, its beauty and sweetness
was beyond description,


q


ui. With the penances of that great god
who sleeps on mountain breasts, that king
of mountains shene with great beauty.
it resounded with the chaunt of Vedas
uttered by learned Brahmanas given to
Vedic recitation. Echoing with the hua
of bees, O Madhava, the mountain be-
came peerless in beauty.


284


12, Seeing the
fierce form and who looks like a great festi-
val, the ascetics became filled, O Janard-
dana, with great joy.


13—-14, All the highly blessed ascetics,
the Siddhas who have drawn in their vital
seed, the Maruts, the Vasus, the Saddhyas,
the Vishwedevas, Vasava himself, the
Vakshas, the Nagas, the Pishachas, the
Regents of the world, the several sacred
Fires, the Winds, and all the great crea-
tures lived on that mountain with minds
concentrated in Yoga. ,


ts. All the Seasons were present there
and filled those regions with all sorts of
wonderful flowers.  cicae kinds of burn-
ing herbs illuminated the woods and forests
on that mountain,


16, Various species of birds, filled with
joy, danced about and sang merrily on
the charming breast of that mountain.
Those birds were exceedingly loveable on
account of the notes they uttered.


17. The great Mahadeva sat, beauti-
fully on one of the peaks that was adorned
with excellent minerals, as if it served the
purposes of a fine bedstead.


18. Round his loins was a tiger-skin,
and a lion-skin was his upper garment.
His sacred thread consisted of a snake.
His arms were decked with a pair of red
armlets,


19. His beard was green.: He had mat-
ted locks on bis head. Of dreadful features
he fills with fear the hearts of all the enemies
of the gods. He removes the fear of all
Gteatutes. He is adored by his worship-
pers asthe deity having the bull for his
emblem.


20. The great Rishis, seeing Mahadeva,
bowed to him by touching the ground with
their heads. Gifted with forgiving souls,
they all became freed from every sin and
thoroughly purified.


21. The retreat of that lord of ail crea-
tures, filled with many terrible forms, shone
with a peculiar beauty. Abounding with
many large snakes, it was unapproachable
and unbearable.


22. Within the twinkling of the eye, O
destroyer of Madhu, everything there be-
came highly wonderful. Indeed, the house
of that great deity having the bull for
his emblem began to blaze with a terrible
beauty.


23. To Mahadeva seated there, came
his wife the daughter of Himavat, sur-
rounded by the wives of the ghostly beings
who are the companions of the great god.
Her dsess was like that of her husband


MAHABHARATA.


reat god, who has a : and the vows she observed, were like thase


of his.


24. She held a jar on her loins that was
filled with the waters of every Tictha, and
was accompanied by the presiding goddess
of ail the mountain rivers. Those auspici-
ous ladies followed her.


25. The goddess came, raining flowers
on all sides and various kinds of sweet per-
fumes. She who loved to live on the breast
of Himavat, advanced in this guise towards
her great husband.


26. With smiling lips and desirous of
playing a jest, the beautiful Uma covered
from behind, with her two beautiful hands,
the eyes of Mahadeva.


27. Assoon as Mahadeva’s eyes were
thus covered, all the regions became dark,
and life seemed to be extinct everywhere in
the universe. The Homa rites ceased.
‘Lhe universe became suddenly deprived of
the sacred Vashat.also.


28. Alt living creatures became dispi-
cited and filled with fear. Indeed, when
the eyes of the lord of all creatures were
thus closed, the universe appeared sunless.


29. Soon, however, that besetting dark-
ness disappeared. A powerful and burning
flame of fire came out from Mahadeva’s
forehead,


30. A third eye, resembling another sun,
appeared (on it). That eye began to shine
like the Yuga- Fire and began to consume
that mountain.


31. Seeing what took place, the large-
eyed daughter of Himavat bowed her head
to Mahadeva gifted with that third eye
which resembled a blazing fire. She stood
there with looks fixed on her husband.


32-—33. When the mountain forests burn-
ed on alt sides with their Salas and othec
trees af straight stems, and their delightful
sandals and various excellent medicinal
herbs, herds of deer and other, animals fill-
ed with fear, came quickly to the place
where Hara sat and sought his protection.
With those creatures almost filling it, the
hermitage of the great deity shone with a
sort of peculiar beauty.


34. Meanwhile that fice, swelling wildly,
soared up to the very sky and endued with
the splendour and unsteadiness of lightning
and looking like a dozen suns in powec and.
effulgence, covered every side like the all-
destroying Yuga-Fire.


_35. In a moment the Himavat moun-
tains were consumed, with their. minerals
and summits and blazing herbs.


1


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


36. Seeing Himavat crushed and con-
sumed, the daughter of that king of moun-
tains sought the protection of the great
deity and stood before him with ber hands
joined in respect.


37. Seeing Uma overcome by womanly
mildness and finding that she was reluctant
to see her father Himavat reduced to that
pitiable condition, then Sharva cast kind
looks upon the mountain.


28. Ina moment the whole of Himavat
regained his former condition and became
as beautiful to look at as ever. Indeed, the
mountain displayed a cheerful aspect. All
its trees became bedecked with flowers.


39. Seeing Himavat restored to his
natural condition, the goddess Uma, dives-
ted of every fault, addressed her husband,
that master of all creatures, vzz., the divine
Maheshwara, in these words,


Uma said :—


40. O Holy One, O Lord of all creatures,
O God holding trident, O you of high vows,
a great doubt has filled my mind! You
should remove that doubt of mine.


41. Why has this third eye appeared
in your forehead? Why also was the
mountain consumed with the forests and
all that belonged to it ?


42. Why also, O illustrious god, have
you restored the mountain to its former
condition? Indeed, having burnt it once,
why have you again filled it with trees?


Maheshwara said :—


43. O goddess without any. fault, for
your having covered my eyes through an
act of indiscretion, the universe became in
a moment devoid of light.


44. When the universe became sunless
and, therefore, all became datk, O daughter
of the prince of mountains, | created a third
eye for protecting all creatures.


45. The great energy of that eye crushed
and consumed this mountain. For pleasing
you, however, O goddess, | once more res-
tored Himavat to his pristine condition for
making good the injury.


Uma said :—


46. O Holy One, why are those faces of
yours which are on the east, the north, and
the west, so beautiful and so agreeable to
look at like the very moon.


47. And why is that face of yours which
is on the south sé dreadful? Why are
your matted locks tawny in colour and so
erect? Why is your threat blue like the
peacock’s plumes ?


!


285


48. Why, O illustrious god, is the Pinaka
always in your hand?) Why are you always
a Brahmacharin with matted locks ?


49. O lord, you should explain all these
tome. Iam your wife who seeks to follow
the same duties with you. Further, ] am
your devoted worshipper, O deity having
highly the bull for your emblem. *


Narada continued :—

50. Thus addressed by the daughter of
the king of mountains, the illustrious holder
of Pinaka, the powerful Mahadeva becam
highly pleased with her, : 2


5i. The great god then addressed her,
saying,—O blessed lady, hear as I explain
with the teasons thereof, why jmy forms
are so.


CHAPTER CXLL,


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA ),—
Continued,


The Blessed and Holy One said :—


x. Formerly a blessed and foremost of
women, was created by Brahman, ¢alled
Tilottama, by collecting beauty from every
beautiful object in the universe,


2. One day, that lady of beautiful face,
peerless in the universe tor beauty of form,
came to me, O goddess, for circumambu--
lating ‘me but, in sooth, moved by the desire
of tempting me.


3. In whatever direction that lady of
beautiful teeth turned, a new face of mine
instantly appeared. All these faces of mine
became handsome to look at, .


4 Thus,fon account: of the: desire of
seeing her, | became four-faced, through
Yoga-power. Thus 1. showed my high


Yoga- power in becoming four-faced.


5. With that face of mine which is turn+
ed towards the east, I exercise the sove-
reignty of the universe. With that face of
mine which is turned towards the north, I
sport with you, O you of faultless features.


6. That face of mine which is turned
towards the west is handsome and auspi-
cious. With it I ordain the happiness of
all creatures. ‘lhat face of mine which is
turned towards the south is dreadful, With
it 1 destroy all creatures.


7. 1 live as a Brahmacharin with matted
locks on my head, for doing good to alt
creatures, Lhe bow Pinaka is always in


286


my hand for accomplishing the work of the
celestials.


8. Formerty, Indra, desirous of acquir-
ing my prosperity, had burled his thunder-
bolt at me. With that weapot my throat
was scorched. Therefore { have become
blue-throated.


Uma said -—

g. When, O foremost of all creatures,
there are so many excetlent beautiful cars,
why have you selected a bull for your
vehicle ? :


Maheshwara said :—


- 10. Formerly, the Grandfather Brahman
created the celestial cow Surabhi giving
profuse milk. After hee creation there
sprang from her a lacge number of kine
all of which gave sufficient quantities of
milk sweet as nectar.


Ir. Once on a time a quantity of froth
fell from the: mouth of one of her calves on
my body. [ was enraged at this and my
anger scorched alt the kine which there-
upon became diversified in colour.


12. I was then pacified by the Lord of
all the. worlds, ws., Brahman, conversant
with all subjects, It was he who gave me
this bull both as a car for bearing me and
as device on my banner,


Uma said :—~

43. You have many’ houses, in the celes-
tial region, of various forms and possessed
of every comfort and luxury. Why, O Holy
One, do you live in the crematorium, aban-
doing alt those delightful palaces.


14. The crematorium is fulf of the hair
and bones (of the dead), abounds with vul-
tures and jackals, and is covered with
hundreds of funeral pyres.

‘15. Fall of carrion and muddy with fat
and blood, with entrails and bones scattered


all over it, and always echoing with the |


howls of jackals, it is certainly an impure
place.


Maheshwara said :—


16. T always tcavel over the whole Earth
in search after a sacred spot. I do not,
however, see any spot that is more sacred
than the crematorium.


7. Therefore, of all houses, the crema-
tortum appears to me to be the best,
shaded as it generally is by branches of the
banian and adorned with torn garlands of
flowers.


18. O you of sweet smiles, the multitudes
of goblins that are my companions Iove to


MAH SBHAKATA,


| live in such spots. I do not like, O goddess,


lo live anywhere, without those goblins by
my side. :

19. Therefore, the crematorium is a
sacred house tome. Indeed, O auspicious
lady, it appears to me to be very Heaven.
Highly sacred and endued with great
merit, the crematorium is much praised
by persons desirous of having holy abodes,


Uma said :—

zo. O Holy One, O ford of alt creatures,
O foremost of all observers of duties and
religious rites, have a great doubt, Q hold-
er of Pinaka, O giver of bouns.


21. These ascetics, O powerful ford, have
practised’ various kinds of austerities. In
the world are seen asceitcs wandering every-
where under various forms and clad in
various kinds of dress.


22. For benefitting this large number
of Rishis, as also myself, do you kindly
cemove, O ehaister of all enemies, this doubt
| of mine.


23. What are the characteristics of


| Region or Duty? Efow, indeed, do men


unacquainted with the details of Religion or
Duty succeed in observing them. O paower~
fuk lord, O you. who are conversant with
Religion, do you tell me this.


Narada said :—


24. When the daughter of Himavat, put
' this question, the assemblage of Rishis there
| present, adored the goddess with words
adorned with Richs and with hymns fraught
with deep meaning.


Maheshwara said:


25. Abstention from injury, truthfulness
of speech, mercy towards all beinys, tran-
quillity of soul, and the making of gifts to
the best of one’s. power, form the foremost
duties of the householder. ;


26—27- <Abstention from sexual union
with the wife of other men, pratection of the
' siches and the woman committed to his care,
reluctance to appropriate what is not given
to one, and avoidance. of honey and meat,—
these are the five chief duties. Indeed,
Religion or Duty has many branches all of
which yield happy results. ‘Phese are the
duties which those embodied creatures whio
consider duty as superior, should observe
and practise. These are the sources of
merit.


Uma said -— Es
* 28. O Holy One, I wish to asie you
‘another question about which [ entertain


ANUSHASANA PARVE.


great doubts. Vou should answer it and
remove my doubts, What are the meri-+
torious dutjes of the four castes.


29. What are the duties of the Brah-
mana? What of the Kshatriya? What
are the duties of the Vaishya? And what
are the duties of the Shudra.


The Holy One said :—


30. O highly blessed lady, the question
you have put, is a very propet one. ‘lhose
persons who belong to the twice-born order,
are considered as highly blessed, and are,
indeed, gods on earth.

31. Forsooth, the observance of fasts, is
always the duty. of the Brahmana. When
the Brahmana succeeds in properly ob-
serving all his duties, he becomes at one
with Brahma.


32. The proper observance of the duties
of Brahmacharyya, O goddess, are his
ritual, The observance of vows and the
investiture with the sacred thread form his
other duties. It is by-these that he becomes
truly twice-born.


33. He becomes a Brahmana for ador-
ing his preceptors and other elders as also
the celestials, Indeed, that religion which
has for its soul the study of the Vedas,
is the source of all virtue. Even that is the
religion which those embodied creatures


who are given to virtue and duty, should |


observe and practise.


Uma said :—


34. O Holy One, my doubts have not
been removed. You should explain in de+
tail what the duties are of the four respec
tive castes of men.


Maheshwara said :—


36. Listening to the mysteries of religion
and duty, observance of the vows laid down
in the Vedas, attention to the sacred fire,
and accomplishment of the business of the
preceptor, leading a mendicant life, always
bearing the sacred thread, constant recita-
tion of the Vedas, and rigid observance of
the duties of a celibrate life, constiture the
duties of the Brahmana, :


* 37. After the student life is over, the
Brahmana, at the behest of his preceptor,
should leave his preceptor’s abode for
returning to his father’s house. Upon
his return he sheuld duly marry a proper
wife.

38. Another duty of the Brahmana con-
sists of avoiding the food prepared by the
Sbudra. Walking along the path of virtue,

‘always observing fasts and the practices of
Srahmacharyya, form his other duties.


‘| guests and all his dependants,


287


39- The householder should keep up his
domestic fire for daily adoration. He
should study the Vedas. He should pour
libations in honor of the departed Manes
and the celestials. He should keep his
senses under proper restraint. He should
eat what remains after serving gods and
He should
be abstemious in food, truthful in words,
and pure both in body and mind,


40. Attending to guests is another duty
of the householder, as also the keeping up
of the three sacrificial fires. The house-
holder should also attend to the orc inary
sacrifices called Ishti and should also dedi-
cate animals to the deities according to the
ordinances,


4t. Indeed, the celebration of sacrifices
is his greatest duty as also a complete abs+
tention from injury. to all creatures. Never
to eat before serving the celestials and
guests and dependants is another duty of
the householder, ‘Ihe food that remaing
after setving gods and guests and the de-
pendants is called Vighasa,. The house-
holder should eat Vighasa,


42. Indeed, to eat after the members of
bis family including servants and other de+
pendants, is considered as one of the espe
cial duties of the twice-born householder,
who should, besides, be conversant with the
Vedas. :


43. The conduct of husband and wife, in
the case of, the householder, should be equal.
He should every day make offerings of
flowers and other articles to those celestials
who preside over domesticity.


44. The householder should see that his
house is every day properly rubbed with
(cowdung and water). He should also ob
serve fasts every day. Well-cleaned and
well-rehbed, his house should also be every
day fusigated with the smoke of clarified
butter poured on his sacred fire in honor
of the ceiestials and the departed Manes,


’ 4s. Even these are the duties of a twice
born householder. ‘Those duties really ups
hold the world. ‘Those duties always and
eternally: emanate from those pious persons
among the Brahmanas who live lice house-
holders,


46. Do you listen to me with rapt atten«
tion, O yoddess, for I shali now tell yow
what the duties are of the Kshatriya and
about which you have asked me,


47. From the beginning it has been said
that the duty of the Kshatriya is to protect
all creatures. ‘Ihe king gets a fixed share
of the merits acquired by his subjects. By
that means the king becomes gifted with
rigliteousuess,


288


48. The king who rules arid protects his
subjects piously, acquires, by virtue of the
Protection he offers to others, many régions
of happiness in the next world.


49. The other duties of a Kshatciya con-
sist of setf-conteol and Vedic study, the
pouring of libations on the sacred fire, the
making of gilts, study, the bearing of the
sacred thread, sacrifices, the performance of
religious rit#s, the support of servants and
dependants, atid preseverance in acts that
have been utrdertaken,


g1—82. Another duty of his is to give
punishments proportionate to the offences
committed. It is also his duty to celebrate
sacrifices and other teligious rites accord-
ing to the ordinances laid down in the Vedas.
Propecly judging the disputes of litigants
before bim, atid truthfulnes of .speeth, and
interference for helping the distressed, are
the other duties by doing which the king
acquires great glory both int this world and
in the texte.’ He should also sacrifice lis
life on the ‘field of battle, having shown
' great prowess on behalf of kine and Brah-
inanas,


_ $3. Such a king acquires in the celestial
¢egion such reyions of happiness as are
capable of. being acquired by the perfor-
tmance of Horse-Sacrifices, :


. $4. The duties of the Vaishya always ate
the keep of cattle and agriculture, the pour-
ing of libations on the sacred fire, the
making of gifts, and study. : ;

1 ,5§- Trade, walking in the path of virtue,
hospitality, peacefulness,self-cantrol, welcome
ing of Brahmanas, and retiouncing things
ace the other eternal duties of the Vaishya.


: 56. The Vaishya, engaged in trade and
walking in the path of virtue, should
never sell sesame .and perfumery and
juices or liquid substances. He should pere
form the duties of hospitality towards all.


*- $7. ‘Heis at liberty to pursue virtue and
profit and pleasure according to his means
and asmuch as is judicious for him. The
service of the three twice-bori classes
forms the high duty of the Shudra.


-° 88. ‘Fhat' Shudra who is truthful in
Speech and who has controlled his senses, is
considered as having acquired meritorious
penances, . Indeed, the Shudra, who having
gota guest, performs the duties of hospi-
tality towards him, is considered as acquir-
ing the merit of great penances.


59. ‘That intelligent Shudra whose con-
duct is virtwous and who adores the deities
and Brahmanas, gets desirable rewards of
virtue,

. 60, O beautiful lady, f have thus recited
4 you what are the duties of the four castes,


MAHABITAR ATA.


Indeed, O blessed lady, { have told vd
what are their respective duties. What
else do you wish ta hear ?


Uma said :—

61. Vou have recited to me what ard
the respective duties of the four castes, aus-
Picious and beneficial for them. Do you
now tell me, O Holy One, what are the
common duties of the all castes.


Maheshwara said :—


62. The ‘foremost of all beings in the
universe, v7zs., the Creator Brahmana,
always seeking righteous accomplishments,
created the Brahmanas for rescuing all the
worlds. Among all created beings, they
are gods on Earth. ;


63. [shall at the begining tell you what
are the religious acts which they should dd
and what are the rewards which they
acquire through them. ‘The religion of the
Brahusanas is the foremost of all religions.


64. For the sake of the virtue, three
religions were created by the Self-Create.
Whenever the world is created, those Reli-+
gions are created by the Grandfather, Do
ye listen,


63. These are the three eternal Reli«
gions, The Religion prescribed in the Vedas
isthe greatest; that of the Smritis is the
next in the order of importance; the third
in.importanee is that which is based upon
the practices of the virtuous. : .


66. The Brahni-na, endued with learn«
ing, should have the three Vedas. ‘tie
should nevet make the study of the Vedas.
He should devote himself to the three well-
known deeds (of making gifts, studying the
Vedas, and performing -sacrifices). . He
should be above the three (uzz., lust, anger;
and cupidity). He should be thie friend of
all creatures. A person who possesses these
qualities is called a, Brahmana.

67. The lord of all the universe de-
clared these six deeds for the observance of
Brahmanas. Listen to those eternal duties,


68. The celebration of sacrifices, officiat-
ing at the sacrifices of others, the making


} of gifts, the acceptance of gifts, teaching}


and study, are the six deeds by doing which
a Brahoiana acquires religious mierit.


69. Indeed, the daily study of the Vedas
is a duty. Sacrifice is (another) eternal
duty. The making of gifts according to


his power and _ the ordinance, is, in his casey
much praised. 7 . ,
70. Tranquillity of mind is a great duty
that is in vogue among the righteous.
Householders of pure mind are capable of
acquiring very great merit, . ,


ANUSHASANA PARVA:


qime72. lLadeed, he who purifies his soul
by the performance of the five sacrifices,
who -is truthful in speech, who is shorn of
malice, who makes gifts, who treats whh
hospitality and honor all regenerate guests,
who lives in well-cleaned houses, who is
shorn of pride, who is always sincere in his
dealings, who uses sweet and assuring words
towards others, who takes a pleasure in


serving guests and others arrived at his-


house, and who eats the food that remains
after the requirements have been satisfied
of all the members of his family and depen-
dants, acquires great merit.


73. That man who offers water to his
guests for washing their feet and hands,
who presents the Arghya for honoring him,
who duly gives seats, and beds, and lamps
for lightning the darkness, and shelter to
those who come to his house, is considered,
as highly righteous.


74. That householder who rises-at dawn
and washes his mouth and face and gives
food to his guests, and having honored
them duly dismisses them from his house
and follows them for a little distance, wins
eternal merit.


75. Hospitality towards all, and the pur-
suit of the three-fold objects, are the duties
of the householder. [he duties of the
Shudra consist in the pursuit of the three-
fold objects.


76. The Religion laid down for the
householder has action for its chief charac-
teristic. Auspicious, and beneficial to all
creatures, I shall explain it to you.


77. The householder should always
make gifts according to his power. He
should also perform sacrifices frequently.
Indeed, he who wishes to secure his own
good, should always achieve meritorious
acts.


78 The householder should acquire
tiches by fair means, The riches thus ac-
quired should be carefully divided into three
parts, keeping the cequirements of virtue in
view.


79. With one of those portions he should
accomplish all acts of virtue. With another
he should seek to satisfy his carvings for
pleasure The thicd portion he should lay
out for increasing.


80. The Religion of Renunciation is dif-
ferent. it exists for Liberation. I shall
tell you the conduct that constitutes it.
Listen to me in full, O goddess. ,

81. One of the duties inculcated by
that Religion is Mercy towards all creatures.
The man whe follows it should not live in

_ene place for more than a day. For ac-
quiring Liberation, the followers of this


37


mind is devoted to Supreme Brahma.


‘989


Religion free themsefves from the fetters of
hope (or desire). -

82. They have no. attachment to habi-
tation, to the Kamandalu they bear for the
the keep of water, to the clothes that cover
their loins, or the seat whereupon they rest,
or the triple stick they bear in their hands,
or the bed they sleep on, or the fire they
want, or the chamber in which it lies.


83. A follower of this Religion fixes his
heart upon the workings of his soul. fp

e
is filled with the idea of attaining to
Brahma. He is always devoted to Yoga
and the Sankhya philosophy.


84. He seeks for no other shelter than
the foot of a tree, He lives in vacant
houses of men. He sleeps on the banks of
tivers. Hetakes a pleasure in living by
such banks. :


85. Heis freed from every attachment,
and from every bond of affection. He
merges the existence of his own soul into the
Supreme Soul.


86. Standing like a stake of wood, and
abstaining from all food, he does only such
deeds as point to Liberation. Or, he may
wander about, devoted to Yoga. These
are the eternal duties of a follower of the
Religion of Renunciation.


87. He lives aloof from men. He ie
freed from all attachments. He never lives
in the same place for more than a day.
Freed from all fetters, he roves over the
world. Freed from all ties, he never sleeps
on even the same river-bank for more than
a day.

88. This is the Religion of persons con-
versant with Liberation, as declared in the
Vedas. This is the righteous path -that is
trodden by this virtuous. He who follows in
this path, leaves no vestige behind. i


89. ‘Vikshus (mendicants) are of four
kinds. They are Kutichakas, Vahudakas,
Hansas, and Paramhansas. ‘The second is
superior to the first, the third.to the second,
and the fourth to the third.


go. There is nothing superior to the
Paramhansa; nor is there anything ine
ferior to it or equal to it or superior to it.
It is a condition shorn of sorrow and happi-
ness ; auspicious and freed from decrepitude
and death, and without any change.


Uma said :—

gt. You have described the Religion of
the householders, that of Liberation, and
that which is based upon the observances
of the pious. These patls! are noble and
highly beneficial to the world of living
ereatures, ; .


290


92. O you who: are conversant with
every religion, I wish to hear what the high
Religion is of the Rishis. I always havea
liking for those who live in hermitage.


93. ‘The perfume that comes out of the
the smoke of the libations of clarified butter
poured on the sacred fire, seems to pe: vade
all the hermitages and make them delight
ful. Seeing this, O great god, my heart
becomes always filled with joy.


9495 © powerful god, I have doubts
about the Religion of the Ascetics. You are
conversant with the details of alf retigions.
Do you enligtten me, O god of gods, in
detail about this subject truly about which
I haye asked you, O great god.


The Blessed and Holy One said :—


96 Yes, I shall recite to you the high
and excellent Religion of the Ascetic. By
following the dictates of that Religion, O
auspicious lady, the Ascetics acquire suc-
cess through the severe penances they
practise.


97. ‘O highly ‘blessed -one, do you hear,
from the beginning, what are the duties of
those pious Rishis who know every duty
and who are known by the name of
Phenapas.


98. The Grandfather Brahman drank
some nectar. ‘Phat water had flowed in
the celestial region from a great sacrifice,


99. The -froth of that water is highly
sacred and it partook’ of His own nature.
Those Rishis who live upon the measure
_of froth that thus came out are called
Phenapas (Froth-eaters). This is the con-
duct of those pure Rishis, O lady having
penances for wealth! Listen now to me
_as | explain to you who the Valikhillyas
are.


100, The Valikbillyas are ascetics who
have acquired success by their panances,
They live in the solar dise. Living Hke
birds, those Rishis, conversant with every
duty of rightedusness, live according to the
Uncha mode.


tot. Their dress consists of deer-skins
or barks of trees. Freed from pairs of oppo-
sites, the Valikhillyas, having penances for
wealth, walk in this track of virtue.


10% They are as big as a digit of the
thumb. Divided imto classes, each class
lives in the practice of its duties. ‘They
wish only to practise penances, - The meriss
they acquire by their righteous conduct are
very great. ~


¥o3. They are considered as having ac-
quired an equality with the gods and exist
tor the fuifilment of the purposes of the
gods. Having dissipated all their sins by


“MAHABHARATA. -


severe penances, they shine in effulgence,
lighting up all the points ef the compass. «


a04. Others, called Chakracharas, are
gifted with cleansed souls and devoted to the
practice of mercy, Righteous in their con-
duct and possessed of great purity, they
live in the region of Soma.


105. Thus living near enough to the
region of the departed Manes, they duly
live by drinking the rays of Soma. ‘There
are others called Samprakshalas and Ash-«
Makuttas and Dantolukhalas.


106. These live near the Soma-drinking
celestials and others that drink flimes of
fire. With their wedded wives and with
passions under complete restraint, they too
live upon the rays of Soma.


107. ‘They pour libations of clarifted
butter on the sacred fire, and worship whe
departed Manes under proper forms, hey
also celebrate the well-known sacrifices.
Ubis is said to form their religion.


108 This religion of the Rishis, O
goddess, is always observed by those who
are. houseless and who are free to go
through every region including ‘that of the
celestials, ‘There are, again, other elasses
about whom I shal speak now. Do you,
bisten,


tog, It is necessary that they who ob-
serve the different religions of the Rishis,
should control their passions and know the
Soul. Indeed, in my opinion, lust and anger
should be completety controlled.


rio—t1t. With corn (wealth} acquired
by the Uncha mode, they should perform
the following duties, wzs., the pouring of
libations on the sacred fire, occupying a fixed
seat employing oneself during the time in the
sacrifiee called Dharmaratri, performance
of the Soma-Sacrifice, acquisition of especial
knowledge, the giving of sacrificial presents,
which forins the fifth, the daily performance
of saerifices, devotion to the worship of the
ancestors and the deities, hospitality to-
wards all. 7


112—113. “Abstention from alt tuxurious
disttes prepared from cow’s milk, taking a
pleasure in tranquillity of heart, lying on
naked rocks or the earth, devotion to Yoga,
eating potherbs and leaves of trees, and
living upon fruits and roots, and wind and
water and moss, are some of pratices of the
Rishis, by which they acquire the end that
belongs to persons unsubjugated.


114—115. When the smoke has ceased
to curl upwards from a house; when the
husking machine has ceased to ply, when
‘the hearth-fice has been put out, when all
the inmates have ‘taken ‘their food, when
dishes are no lenger carcied-from room so


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


room, when mendicants have ceased ta walk
the streets, itis then that the man who is
devoted to the Religion of Truth and tran-
quillity of soul, wishing to have a guest,
should eat what remnant of food may. still
remain in the house. By acting thus, one
becomes a practisec of the Religion of the


Munis.


116. ) One should not be arrogant; nor
proud; nor ‘cheerless and discontented ;
nec wonder at anything. Indeed, one should
treat his friends and enemies alike. indeed,
one who is the foremost of all persons: con-
versant with duties should treat all creatures
tike friends.


CHAPTER CXLIE.


({ANUSHASANIKA PARVA),—
Continued.


Uma said :—

1. Hermits five in charming regions,
among the springs and fountains of rivers,
in bowers by the sides of rivers and rills, on
hills and mountains, in woods and forests,
and in sacred places full of fruits and roots.


2. With rapt attention and observing
vows and rules, they live in even such
places.


3. 1 wish, @ Shankara, to hear the
sacred ordinances which they follow. These
hermits, O god of all gods, are persons, who
depend, for the protection of their bodies,
upon themselves alone, :


Maheshwara said :—


4. Do you hear with rapt attention what
are the duties of Hermits. Having listened
to them with one mind, O goddess, do you
fix your heart upon virtue.


5. Listen then to what the acts are that
should ‘be practised by righteous hermits
crowned with success, observant of rigid
vows and rules, and living in woods and
“forests.


6—-7. Performing ablutions thrice-a-day,
adoring the departed Manes and the celes-
tials, pouring jibations on the sacred fire,
performing of those sacrifices and rites
called Ishti-Homa, picking up the grains of
Nivara-paddy, eating fruits and roots, and
using oil that is pressed out from Lnguda
and castor seeds, form their duties,


8. Having pesformed the practises of
Yoga and become crowned with (ascetic)
success and freed from tust and anger, they
should seat themselves in the attitude
called Virasana, indeed, they should live


291


in, those places which are inaccessible to
cowards, -


g—10. Observant of the excellent ordi-
nances about Yoga, sitting iv summer
in the midst of four fires on four sides with
the sun overhead, duly practising what is
called: Manduka- Yoga, and always seated
in the attitude called Virasana, and tying
on naked rocks or.the earth, these men,
with hearts fixed upon virtue, must expose
themselves to cold atid water and fire.


‘tt. They five upon water or air or moss.
They use twofpieces of stone only for husking
their corn. Some fof them use their teeth
@uly for such a pucpose; They do not keep
utensils of any sort.


12. Some of them clothe themselves with
rags and barks of trees or deer-skins. ‘Fhus
do they pass their lives for the time allgtted
to them, according to the ordinances,


13. Remaining in woods and forests,
they wander within woods and forests, live,
within them, and are always to be found
within them. Indeed, these hernvits enter.
ing into woods and forests live within them
as disciples, obtaining a preceptor, live
with him.


“14—16. The performance of the rites of
Homa and the observance of the five sacri-
fices are their duties. A due observance -
of the rules about distribution of. the fivefold
sacrifices as fordained in the Vedas, devo-
tion to sacrifices, forming the eighth, obser-
vance of the Chaturmashya, performance
of the Paurnamashya and other sacrifices,
and performance of the daily sacrifices, are
the duties of these celibate men, freed
from every attachment, and cleansed from
every sin. Indeed, they should live thus
in the forest, 5 ;


17. The sacrificial fadie and the water-
vessel are their chief properties. “They ace
always devoted to the.three fires. Virtuous
‘in their conduct and adhering to the path
of virtue, they acquire the highest end.


18. These Munis, crowned with success’
and ever given to the Religion of Truth,
acquire the highly sacred region of Brah-
man, or the eternal region of Soma,


19. © auspicious goddess, I have thus
recited to you, in brief, the outlines of the
religion that is followed by hermits and
that has many practices in detail.


Uma said :— ..

20. © Holy One, O lord of alt-creatures,
O you adored of all beings, 1 wish to
hear what is the religion of those conclaves
of ascetics who are followers of the scriptures
describing ascetic success, Do you recite it
to me. :


292


21. Living in woods and forests and well-
accomplished in the scriptures of success,
somé amongst them live and act as they
like, without being controlied by particular
practices; others have wives. How, indeed,
have their practices been ordained.


Mahadeva said:—


22. O goddess, the shaving of the head
and the wearing of the brown robes are the
characteristics of those recluses who rove
about freely; while the characteristics of
those who sport with wives consist in pass»
ing their nights at home.


.. 23. Performing ablutions three times a
day is the duty of both the classes, while
the Homa, with water and wild fruits,
belongs to the married recluses as performed
by the Rishis in general. Absorption in
Yoga-Meditation, and performance of those
duties which form righteousness and which
“have been laid down as such, are some of
the other duties prescribed for them.


24. All those duties also of which I have
spoken to you before as belonging to re-
cluses living in forests, are the duties of
these also. Indeed, if those duties are
observed, they who observe them acquire
the rewards of severe penances,


25. Those forest recluses who lead mar-
ried tives should indulge in the gratifica-
tion of their senses with these married wives
of theirs, By indulging in sexual union
with their wives at only those times when
their seasons come, they perform the duties
which have been laid down for them,


26, The religion which these virtuous
men are to follow is the Religion that has
been laid down and followed by the Rishis.
With their eyes set upon the acquisition of
virtue, they should never pursue any other
object of desire [com a sense of uncontrolled
caprice, ;

27. That man who gives promises of
safety to all creatures, freed as his soul
becomes from the stain of malice or harm-
fulness, becomes gifted with virtue.


28. Indeed, that person who shows
mercy to all creatures, who adopts as a vow
of sincere conduct towards all creatures,
and who forms himself the soul of all crea-
tures, becomes gifted with virtue.


29. A bath in all the shrines, and sincere
conduct towards all creatures, are regarded
as equal in point of merit; or, perhaps, the
latter is a little distinguished above” the
other in point of merit.


30. Sincerity, it has been said, is Virtue ;
while insincerity or crookedness is sin,
That man who acts sincerely becomes
indued with Virtue. :


MAHABHARATA.


3r. The mar who is always devoted to
sincerity of conduct, succeeds in acquiring
a residence among the celestials. Hence,
he who wishes to achieve the merit of virtue,
should be sincere.


32. Gifted with a forgiving nature and
self-control, and with anger under complete
subjection, one should transform himselt
into an embodiment of Virtue and become
freed from matice. Such aman, who be-
comes devoted, besides, to the discharge of
all the duties of Religion, becomes indued
with the merit of Virtue.


33. Freed from drowsiness and procras-
tination, the righteous person, who follows
the path of Virtue to the best of his power,
and becomes possessed of pure conduct,
and who is venerable in years, comes to
be considered as equal to Brahmaitself.


Uma said :—

34. By what course of duties, O god, do
those ascetics who are attached to their res-
pective retreats and have penances for
wealth, ’succeed in becoming indued with
great splendour ?


35 By what acts, again, do kings and
princes who are immensely rich, and others
who are poor, succeed in getting high re-
wards ?


36. By what acts, O god, do dwellers of
the forest succeed in acquiring that place
which is,eternal and in adorning their per-
sons with celestial sandat-paste.


37. O illustrious god of three eyes, O
destroyer of the triple city, do you remove
this doubt of mine about the auspicious subs
ject of the observance of penances by telling
everything in full,


The illustrious Deity said :—

38. Those who observe the vows of fasts
and control their senses, who abstain from
injury of any kind to any creature, and who
practise truthfulness of speech, acquire suc~
cess and ascending to the ‘celestial region
sport in happiness with the. Gandharvas as
ar companions, freed from every kind of
evil. . ‘ . .


39. That pious man wha lies down in
the attitude of Manduka-Yoga, and who
properly and according to the ordinance
performs meritorious deeds after having
been duly initiated, sports.in happiness in
the next world in the company of the Nagas.


40. - That man who lives in the company
of deer and tives upon suth grass and veges
tables as drop from their mouths, and who
has undergone the initiation and attends to
the duties attached to it, succeeds in going
to the capitai of Indra. © :


ANUSHASANA- PARVA.


. 4h. That man who lives upon the moss
he gathers.and the fallen leaves of trees
that he picks up, and puts up with all the
severities of cold, acquires a very high
place. 7

42. That man who lives upon “either air
or water or fruits and roots, acquires in the
-next life the affluence that belongs to the
-Yakshas and sports in happiness in the
company of the various tribes of Apsaras.


43. Having practised for twelve years,
according to the rites laid down in the ordi.
ances, the vow relating to the endurance
of the five fires in the summer season, one
becomes in his next life.a king.


“44. That man who, having observed
vows about food, practises penances for
‘twelve years, carefully abstaining from all
interdicted food, and forbidden hours as
well, during the period, becomes in his next
fife a king. . :


45. That man who sits and lies on thé
bare ground with the canepy of heaven


over his head, observes the course of duties’


of initiation, and then renounces his body
by abstaining from all food, acquires great
happiness in the celestial region.


46—51. The rewards of one who sits and
lies dowa upon the naked ground are said to
be excellent cars and beds, and rich palaces
effulgent like the moon, O lady. ‘That man
who having lived upon abstemious diet and
ebserved various excellent vows, lives de-
pending upon his own self and then renoun-
‘ees his body by abstaining from all food,
“succeeds in ascending to Heaven and en-
‘joying all its happiness. That man who
having lived in entire dependence upon his
own self, observes for twelve years the duties
of initiation, and at last renounces his body
‘on the great ocean, succeeds in attaining to
the regions of Varuna after death. ‘That
.man who living in entire dependence upon
‘his own self observe the duties of initiation
for twelve years, and pierces his own feet
with a sharp stone, acquires the happiness
‘of the region that belongs to the Guhyakas,
He who cultivates self with the help of self,
who frees himself from the influence of alt
pairs of opposites, who is freed fcom every
sort of attachment, and who mentally ob-
serves for twelve years such a course of. con-
duct after initiation, attains to Heaven and
enjoys every happiness with the celestials as
his companions.


_ 52 He who lives in entire dependence
upon his own sels and observes for twelve
years the duties of initiation and finally
renounces his body on the fire as an obla-
“tion to the celestials, acquires the region of
“Brahman and is held in high esteem there.


‘in the regions of Shakra,


“293


53—55. That twice-born man, O god-
dess, who having properly performed ini-~
tiation keeps his senses under control, and
placing his Self on Self frees himself from
the sense of mine-ness, desirous of achieving
virtue, and sets out, without a covering for
his body, after the due observance of the
duties of initiation for twelve yéars and
after having. placed his sacred fire.on a tree,
and walks along the path of heroes and lies
down inthe attitude of heroes, and always
acts like heroes, certainly acquires the end
that is reserved for heroes,


56. Such a man goes to the eternal


region of Shakra where he becomes crowned


with the fruition of all his desires and where
he sports in joy, his body decked with gar-


lands of celestial, flowers and celestial
perfumes, ; @ % a
57-58. Indeed, that pious person lives


happily in Heaven, with the celestials as
his companions. . The hero, following the
practices of heroes and devoted to that Yoga
which - belongs to heroes, living in the
practice of Goodness, having renounced
everything, performed the initiation, con-
trolled his senses, and observing purity of
both -body and mind, is sure to acquire
that path which is reserved for heroes,
Eternal regions of happiness are his,


Riding on acar that moves at ‘the
will of the rider, he passes through all
happy regions as he likes. (Indeed, livin
that blessec
person always sports in joy, freed from


every calamity.


ee


CHAPTER CXLIII.
(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA )=..


Continued.


Uma said :—
1. O Holy One, O you who had torn off
the eyes of Bhaga and the teeth of Pushan,
O destroyer of the sacrifice of Daksha, O
three-eyed deity, I have a great doubt.


2. Formerly, the illustrious Self-Create
created the four castes. Through the evil
result of what deeds does a Vaishya be-
come a Shudra ? ; : :


3. Through what acts does a Kshatriya -
become a Vaishya and a Brahmana be-
comes a Kshatriya? By what means may |


~such degradation of castes bé warded off ?


4. Through what deeds does a Brahmana
take birth in his next life, in the Shudra
caste? Through what acts, O powerful
deity, does a Kshatriya also come down to
to the status of a Shudra? . ”


294


5. O sinless one, O lord of all created +
beings, do you, O illustrious one, remove
this doubt of mine. How, again, can the
theee castes naturally succeed im acquiring
the status Brahmanhood ?


The Illustrious Orie said :—


6. The status of a Brahmana, O god-
dess, is highly difficult to attain. O auspi-
cious lady, one becomes a Brahmana through
creation or birth. Similarly the Kshatciya,
the Vaishya, and the Shudra, all becomes
so through original creation, This is my
‘opinion, 3

7: He, however, that is born a Brah-
mana goes down from his status through
bis own evil deeds. Hence, the Brahmana,
after having acquired-the status of the firs
- Order, should always protect it. - .


8. Ifone whois a Kshatriya or Vaishya
performs those duties which are assigned
to the Brahmana, after the mannér of a
Brahmana, he becomes a Brahman,


g. That Brabmana who renounces the
duties of his order for following those of the
Kshatriya, is considered as one who has
fallen away from the status of a Brahmana
and who has:become a Kshatriya,


to—18. . That litfle-witted Brahmana,
who, moved by cupidity aad folly, follows
the practices assigned ta Vaishyas, forget-
ful of his position as a Brahmana that is
highly difficult to attain, comes ta be consi-
dered as otie who has become a Vaishya.
‘Likewise, one who is a Vaishya by birth
- may, by following the practices of a Shudra,
become a Shudra. Indeed, a Brahmana
falling away from the.duties of his own
order, may go down to the status of even a
Shudra. :


12. Sucha Brahmana, degraded from
the order of his birth and outéasted, with-
out attaining to the region ‘of Brahman,
sinks into Hell, and in his next’ ‘birth be-
comes bora as a Shudra.


13-14, A highly blessed Kshatriya or
a Vaishya, who renounces ile duties of his
order, and follows the practices of a Shudra,
falls away from his own order and becomes
a person of mixed caste. It isin this way
that a Brahmana, or a Kshatriya,-or a
Vaishya, .comes by the position of a
Shudra.


15. That man who has acquired clear-
ness of vision{through practice of the duties
of his own caste, who is gifted with know-
ledge and science, who is pure (in body and
mind), who knows every duty and is devo-
ted to the practi 2 of all his duties, is sure to
enjoy the rewards of virtue.


MAHABHARATA.


16. I shall now tecite to you, O goddess,
a saying uttered by Brahman on this sub-
‘ject. ‘The virtuous and those who are
desirous of acquiring merit always pursue
with fiemness the culture of the soul.


17. ‘The food that comes from cruel and
fierce persons is censurable. So also is the
food that has been cooked for serving a
large number of persons. “The same is said
of the food that is' cooked for rhe first
Shraddha of a dead person. So also is the
food that is suilied for the usual faults and
the food that is supplied by a Shudra,
‘These should never be taken by a Brah-
mana at any -time.


18. The food of a Shudra, O goddess, is
always disapproved of by the great deities.
This, I think, is the authority enunciated by
the Grandfather with his own mouth,


19. Ifa Brahmana, who has set up the
sacred fire and who performs sacrifices, were
to die with any portion of a Shudra’s food
remaining undigested in his stomach, he is
sure to be bern a Shudra.


20. On account of those remains of a
Shudra’s food in his stomach, he fails away
from the position of a Brahmana. - Such
a Brahmana becomes surely a Shudra.


2. ‘Phe Brahmana in his next life comes
by the position of that order upon whose
food he lives through life or with the un-
digested portion of whose food in his
stomach he dies.


22, That man who having acquired the
sacred position of a Bralimana which is so
difficult to acquire, disregards it and eats
forbidden food, falls away from his high
Status. ¥

23—24. That Brahmana who drinks
alcohel, who becomes guilty of Brahmani-


. cide or mean in bis conduct, or. a thief, or


who breaks his vows, or becomes impure,
or unmindful of bis Vedic studies, or sinful,
or characterised by cupidity, .or guilty :of
cunning, or a cheat, or who does not obr
serve vows, or who marries a Shudra woman,
or who derives his livelinood by pandering
to the lusts of other people, or who sells the
Soma plant, or who serves a person ot a
low caste, falls away ‘from his status. of
Brahmanhood.


25. That Brahmana who violates the bed
of his preceptor, or who cherishes malice
towards him, or ‘who takes a pleasure in
speaking ill of him, falls away from the
status of Brahmanhood even if he knows
Brahma. .


e a4 we

26. By these good deeds again, O gode
dess, when performed, a Shudra becomes a
Brahbmana, and a Vaishya becomes a
Kshatriya. oa


| AMUSHASANA PARVA.


29, The Shudra should perform all the
duties sanctioned for him, properly and ac-
cording to the ordinance. He should al-
ways serve, with obedience and humility,
persons of the three other castes and serve
them with care.


28. Always following the path of virtue,
the Shudra should cheerfully do all this.
He’should honor the celestials and twice-
born persons. He should observe the vow
of hospitality to all persons.


29. With senses kept ies control and
becoming abstemious in food, he should
nMever approach bis wife except in. her
season. He'should ever search after persons
who are holy and pure. As reyards food,
he should eat that which remains after the
needs of all persons have been fulfilled.


30. If, indeed, the Shudra wishes to be
a Vaishya (in his next life), he should also
abstain from meat of animals not killed
in sacrifices. If a Vaishya wishes to bea
Brahmana (in his next life}, he should per-
form these duties. He should’ be truthful
in speech, and shorn of pride or arrogance.
He should be above all pairs of opposites,
He should observe the duties of peace and
tranquillity,


31—34. He should worship the celestials
in sacrifices, attend with devotion to the
study and recitation of the Vedas, and
become pure in body and mind. He should
keep his senses under control, honor the
Brahmanas, and seek the behoof of all the
orders. Living like a- householder and
eating only twice a day at the appointed
hours, he should satisfy his hunger with only
such food as remains after all the members
of his family with dependants and guests
have been fed. He should be abstemious
in food, and act without being actuated b'


the desire of reward. He should be free.


from egotism. He. should worship the
deities in the Agnihotra and pour libations
according to the ordinance. Performing the
duties of hospitality towards all persons,
he should, as already said, eat the food
that remains after serving all others ‘for
whom it has been cooked. He should, ac-
cording to tre ordinances laid down, adore
‘the three fires.
conduct is born’ in his next life in a high
Kshatriya family,

35. Uf a Vaishya, after having taken
birth as a Kshatriya, performs the usual
purificatory-rites, becomes invested with the
sacred thread, and betakes himself to the
observance of vows, he becomes, in his next
jife, an honored Biahmana.
| 36. Indeed, after his birth ‘as a Kshatriya,

e shoutd make -presérits, worship the
deities in great sacrifices with profuse pre-


Such ‘4 Vaishya of pure


|


205


sents, study the Vedas, and desirous of
ened to Heaven, should adore the three
res, .


37. He should interfere for removing the
sorrows of the distressed, and should al.
ways cighteously cherish and protect his
subjects. He should be truthful, and do
all true works, and seek happiness in_
conduct like this. .


38. He should administer proper. punish
ments, without laying aside the rod of
punishment for good. He should induce
men to do righteous deeds. -Guided- by
considerations of policy, he should -take a
sixth of the produce of the fields. : .


39. He should never induige in sexuat
pleasure, but live cheerfully and. independs
ently, well-conversant with the science of
Wealth’ or Profit. Of righteous -soul, he
should seek his married wife only in hee
season,


40. He should always observe fasts, keep
his soul under restraint, devote himself to
the study of the Vedas, and be pure in
body and mind. He should sleep on blades
of Kusha grass spread out in his fire»
chamber, -.


4t. He should pursue the three-fold ob«
jects of life, and be always cheerful. He
should always say “‘it is ready” toi Shudras
desirous of food.


42. He should never wish for anything
from motives of gain or pleasure. He
should adore the ;ancestors and gods and
guests. . ‘


In_ his‘ own house he should live the
life of a mendicant. He'should duly wore
ship the deities in his , Agnihotra, morning,
noon, and evening every day, by pouring .
libations according to the ordinance.


.


44. With his face turned towards the
enemy, he should renounce his life-breaths
in battle fought for the behoof of kine
and Brahmanas. Or he may enter the
three fires sanctified with Mantras and re«-
nounce his body. By doing ait this he is
born in his next life as a Brahmana,


45. Gifted with knowledge and science,
purified from all dross, and fully conversant
with the Vedas; a pious Kshatriya, by his
own deeds, becomes a Brahmana. 7


46. tis with the help of these deeds, O
goddess, that a person who has originated
from a degraded caste, vzz., a Shudra, may
become a Brahmana purged off of aH sins
and possessed of Vedic learning,


' 47. One who is a Brahmana, when he
becomes wicked in conduct and observes no
-distinction about food, falls away from the


296


status of Brahmanhood- and becomes a
Shudra.


48. Even a Shudra, O goddess, who has
pucified his soul by pure deeds and who has
controlled all hig senses, deserves to be
waited upon and served with respect as a
Brahmana, his’ has been said by the
Self-Create Brahman himself.


49. When a pious nature and pious
deeds are seen in evett a Shudra, he should,
according to my opinion, be held superior
to a person of the three twice-born classes.


50. Neither birth, nor the pucificatory
rites, nor learning, nor offspring, can be
considered,as grounds for conferring upon

_ one the dignity of a twice-born person.
Indeed, conduct is the only ground.


5%. All) Brahmanas-in this world are
Brahmanas on account of conduct, A
Shudra, if he is of good conduct, is consi-
dered as equal to a Brahmana.


52. The position of Brahma, O aus-
picious lady, is equal wherever it exists.
This is my opinion. He, indeed, is a Brah-
mana in whom the dignity of Brahma
exists,<-that condition which is bereft of
qualities and which has no stain attached
to it.


»

53. The boon-giving Brahman, while he
created all creatures, himself said that the
division of human beings into the four orders
as dependant on birth is only. for purposes

-*ef classification,


54. The Brahmana is a great field in
this world,—a field having feet, for it
moves from place to place. He who plants
seeds in that field, O beautiful lady, reaps
the corps in the next world.


55. That Brahmana who wishes to
secure his own good, should ‘always live
upon the remains of the food that may
temain in his house after satisfying the
needs of all others. He should always
folfow the path of virtue. Indeed, he should
tread along the path of Brahma.


56. He should live, engaged in the study
of the Samhitas, and remaining at home he
should perform all the duties of a house-
holder. He should always be given to the
study of the Vedas, but he should never
derive the means of livelihood from suck
Study. Ks


57. That Brahmana who always acts
thus, following the path of virtue, adoring
his sacred fire, and engaged in the study of
the Vedas, comes to be considered as
Brahma. .


38. Having sede? the position of a
Brahmana, it should always be protected
withcare, O you of sweet smiles, by avoid-


MAHABHARATA.


ing the stain of contact with persons bortt
in inferior castes, by abstaining from the
acceptance of gifts, and by other acts laid
down in the scriptures.


59. Ihave thus told you a mystery, vis,
the manner in which a Shudra may become
a Brahmana, or that by which a Brahmana
falls away from his own pure position and
_becomes a Shudra.


CHAPTER CXLIY.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
7 Continued.


Uma said :—

1. O Holy One, O lord of all beings, O
you adored of deities and Asuras equally,
tell me what are the duties and derilections
of men. Indeed, O powerful one, remove
my doubts,


a. kt is by these three, ofz., thought,
word, and deed, that men become fettered
with bonds. Itis by the same three that
they become freed from these fetters.


3. By following what condidct, O god.—
indeed, by what kind of acts,—by what
behaviour and qualities and words, do men
succeed in ascending to Heaven 7?


The God of gods said :—


4 O goddess, you are well conversant
with the true meaning of duties. You are
ever devoted to Virtue and Self-Control.
‘The question you have asked me is fraught
with the benefit of all creatures... It in-
creases the intelligence of all persons. Do
you, therefore, listen to the answer.


§. Thase persons who are devoted to the
Religion of Truth, who are righteous and
destitute of the indications of the several
modes of tife, and who enjoy the wealth ac«
quired by faic means, succeeds in ascending
to Heaven.


_6. Those men whoare freed from alt
doubts, who are gifted with ommiscience,
and who have eyes for seeing all things, are
never fettered by either virtue or sin. Those
men who are shorn of all attachments, can
never be fettered by the chains of action.


7. They who never injure others in
thought, word, or deed, and who nevef |
attach themselves to anything, ean never
be fettered by deeds.


8. They who abstain from killing any
creature, who are gifted with righteous con-
duct, who have merey, who treat friends and
foes équally, and who are self -controtled,
can never be fettered by actsy


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


§. Those men who are gifted with mercy
towards all beings, who succeed in creatin
the confidence of ali living creatures, and
who have shaken off malice in their conduct,
succeed in ascending to Heaven,


to. Those men who have no desire to
appropriate others’ properties, who never
associate with the spouses of others, and who
enjoy only such wealth as has been acquired
by fair means, succeed in ascending to
Heaven.


tt. Those men who treat the wives of
other people as their own mothers and sis-
ters and daughters, succeed in attaining to
Heaven, ee


12. Those men who abstain from mis-
appropriating others’ things, whe are per-
fectly contented with what they themselves
possess, and who live depending upon their
own destiny, succeed in ascending to
Heaven.


13. Those men who never know other
peoples’ wives, who are masters of their
senses, and who are given to righteous con-
duct, succeed in ascending to Heaven.


14. This is the path, created by the
gods, that the pious should follow, This is
the path, freed fram passion and aversion,
sanctioned for the pious to follow.


15. Those men@ho are devoted to their
own wives and who seek them in only theic
seasons, and who do not indulge in sexual
pleasure, succeed in ascending to Heaven.


16. For the sake of multiplying their
merit or for acquiring their means of liveli-
hood, the wise should follaw charity, pen-
ances and purity of both body and mind.


17. Thoge who wish to ascend to Heaven,
should follow iv this tract and not any
other. : ‘


Uma said :—-

18. ‘Tell me, O illustrious god, O sinless
ford of all creatures, what are those words
by which-one becomes fettered and what ate
those words by speaking which one may be
{reed from fetters.


Maheshwara said :—

19. Those meti who never tell falsehood
for either themselves or for others, or in jest
or for exciting laugtter, succeed in ascend-
ing Heaven.


20. They who never tell lies for acquir-
ing their livelihood or for acquiring merit
or. through mere capsice, succeed in ascend-
ing to Heaven.


2t. They who utter words which are
smooth and sweet and faultless, and who


38


297


with sincerity welcome all whom they meet
with, succeed in ascending to Heaven. |


22, They who never utter words which
are harsh, bitter and cruel, and who are frea
from jdeceitfulness and evil of every kind,
succeed in ascending to Heaven. -.


23. Those men’ who never utter deceRful
words which create disunion between friends
and who always speak. what is true and
what promotes good feelings, succeed in age
cending/to Heaven. .


24. Those men who avoid harsh words
and abstains from quarrels with others, who
are equal in their conduct to all creatures,
and who have governed their souls, succeed
in ascending!to Heaven.


25. They who abstain from evil speect
or sinful conversation, .who avoid disagree-
able speeches, and who utter only auspici+.
ous and agreeable words, succeed ip ascends
ing to Heaven.


26. They who never utter, under anger,
such words as cut others to the quick, and
who, even when under the influence of
anger, speak words that are peaceful
and agreeable, succeed in ascending to
Heaven. mn ;


27. This religion, O goddess of speech,
should always,be followed by men. Kk is
auspicious and characterised by Truth,
The wise should always avoid untruth.


Uma said: —

28. Tell me, O god of gods, O holder of
Pinaka, O you who are highly blessed,
what those thoughts ara by which a person
may be fettered.


Maheshwara saidi~—- — Looe


29. Gifted with merit that originates
from mental acts, O goddess, one ascends
to Heaven. Listen to me, O auspicious
one, as I recite to you what those acts are. - '


go. Listen to me, O you- of sweet face,
how also a mind of illsregulated features,
becomes fettered by ill-regulated or evil _
thoughts.


31. Those men who do not seek, even
mentally, to take other peoples’ things even
when they lie in a lone forest, succeed in
ascending to Heaven,


32. Those men who care not others’
belongings, even when they see it lying in


a house or a village that has been desetted,


|:


ascend to Heaven.


23. Those men who do not seek, even
mentally, to associate with the married
wives of others, even when they see them in
deserted places and under the influence of
desire, succeed in ascending to Heaven.


298


34- Those, men ~ who, meeting with
friends or enemies,t{behave inf the same
friendly way towards all, succeed in ascend-
ing to Heaven. |


35. Those men who are possessed of
learning. and mercy, who are pure in body
and mind, who are firm in truth, and who
are contented with what belongs to them,
succeed in ascending to Heaven, -


36. Those men who do not bear ill-will
to any creature, who do not stand in need of
labour for their livelihood, who bear iriendly
hearts towards all beings, and who entertain
mercy towards all, succeed in ascending
to Heaven.


+37. Those men-who have faith, who have
mercy, who are holy, who seek the company
of holy men, and who know the distinctions
between right and wrong, succeed in as-
cending to Heaven.


38. Those men, O goddess, who know
the consequences of good and bad deeds,
succeed in ascending {to Heaven.


39. Those men who are just in all. their

\ denlings, who.have desireable accomplish-

ments, who are devoted tothe deitiés and

.the Brahmanas, and who are persevering

i) doing all good aets, succeed in ascending
to Heaven.


4o. . Alkthese men, O goddess, succeed
in ascending to Heaven through the meri-
torious results of their deeds, What else
do you wish to hear ?


Unia said :—
41. 1 have a great doubt, O Mahesh-


wara, on a subject about human beings.
You should explain it to me carefully.


: 42. By what deeds does a man succeed,
O powerful deity, in acquiring a long life?
By what penances also does one acquire a
long life ?


43 By what acts does one become
short-lived on Earth? O you who are
Perfectly stainless, you should tell me what
are the consequences of acts.


‘ , -k

44. Some ‘have great good fortune and
some suffer from ‘misfortune. Some are
possessed of noble, and some are of ighoble,
birth. ;

45. Série have such ‘repulsive ‘features
as if ‘they ate made of wood, while othérs
look very handsorite at even the first Sight.


46. Some appear to have no wisdom,
while dthérs ‘are 'posséssed of it. Some,
#guin, are Seen 'pifted with high intelligence
dad wisdom, ‘enfightened by knowledge and
science.


47. Some have to suffer Tittle pain,


“MAHABHARATA.


while others there are that are loaded with
heavy calamities. Sueh diverse sights are
seen of men. O illustrious one, you should
tell me the reason of all this !


The god of gods said :—


48. Indeed, O goddess, I shall describe
to you the fruits of acts. It is by them
that all human beings in this world enjoy
or suffer the consequences of their acts.


49—51. That man who assumes a dread-
ful aspect for the purpose of taking ‘the
fives of other creatures, who arms himself
with strong sticks for injuring other crea.
tures, who is seen with uplifted weapons,
who kills living creatures, who is shorn of
mercy, who always causes tribulation to
living beings, who refuses to grant protec-
tion to even worms and ants, who is cruel,
one whois such, O goddess, sinks in Hell.
One who has an opposite disposition and
who is righteous in deeds, becomes born as
a handsome man.


52. Phe man who is cruel, goes to Hett,
while he who is merciful, ascends to Heaven.
The man who goes to Hell, has to suffer
great misery.


.§3, One who, having sunk in Hell, rises
therefrom, takes birth as a short-tived man.


54—57. That man @vho is given to
slaughter and injury, O goddess, becomes,
through his sinful deeds, liable to destruc-
tion. Such a person becomes disagreeable
to all creatures and short-lived. ‘hat man
who belongs to what is called the White
class, who abstains from the destruction of
living creatures, who has thrown away all
weapons, and never inflicts any punish-
ment on any body, who never injures any
creature, who never causes arlybody to
kill creatures for him, who never kills or
strikes even when struck or attempted
to be killed, who never sanctions or ap-
proves an act of destruction, who is gifted
with mercy towards all creatures who treats
others as his own self,—such a superior
man, O goddess, succeeds in acquiring to
the dignity of acelestial. Filled with joy,
such a man enjoys various kinds of luxuri-
ous articles.


58 If such a person is ever born in the
world of men, he becomes long-lived and
enjoys great happiness.y

59. ‘This is the way of those who are
of righteous conduct and righteous deeds,
arid who are blessed with longevity, the
way that was marked out by the Self-Create
Brahman himself and which is marked by
abstenfion from the destruction of living
creatures.


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


CHAPTER CXLY.


CANUSHASANIKA PARVA),.—
Continued.


Uma said ;—

1. By what nature, what conduct, what
deeds, and what gifts, does a man succeed
in attaining to Heaven.


Maheshwara said :—


3—6. He who has a liberal disposition,
who honors Brabmanas and treats them
with hospitality, who makes gifts of food
and drink and clothes and other articles of
enjoyment to the destitute, the blind and
the distressed, who makes gifts of houses
erects halls, digs wells, constructs shelters
whence pure and cool water is distributed,
excavates tanks,makes arrangements for the
4ree distributions of gifts every day, gives to
all comers what each prays for, who makes
gifts of seats and beds and vehicles, wealth,
qewels and gems, houses, all kinds of corn,
kine, fields, and women,—-he who always
makes these gifts with a cheerful heart, be-
comes a denizen, O goddess, of the celestial
region. :


6. - He lives there for along time, en-
joying various kigds of superior articles.
Passing his time happily in the company of
the Apsaras, he sports in the garden of
Nandana and other delightful regions.


q7- After the exhaustion of his merits he
falls down from the celestial region and
takes birth in the order of humanity, in a
rich family, O goddess, which has a large
command of every article of enjoyment.


8. In that life he gets ail articles for
gratifying his wishes and appetites. In-
deed, blessed with the possession of such
articles, he gets riches and a well-filled
treasury.


g. ThesSelf-Create Brahman himself de-
clared it formerly that it is even such per-
sons, O goddess, who become highly bless-
ed and possessed of liberal dispositions and
handsome features.


_ to. There are others, O goddess, who
aré incapable of making gifts. Gifted with
small understandings, they cannot make
gifts even when solicited by Brabmanas and
possessed of immense riches.


11. Seeing the destitute, the blind, the
distressed, and mendicants, and even guests
arrived at theic houses, those persons always
filled with{the desire of pleasing the organ
of taste, turn away, even when expressly
Solicited by them. .


12. They never make gifts of wealth or


“such an honor,


_ 299


dresses, or viands, ot gold, or kine, or any
kind of food. :


13. Those men who are disinclined te
relieve the distress of others, who are full of
cupidity, who have no faith inthe scriptures,
and whe do nat make gifts.—verily, these
men of little understanding, Q goddess,
have to sink in Hell. —


14. In course of time, when their suffer-
ings in Hell, terminate they take birth in the
order of humanity, in poor families.


15. Always suffering from hunger and
thirst, excluded from all decent society,
hopeless of ever enjoying all goodly things;
they lead wretched lives. ie


16. Born in familtes which are destitute
of ail articles of enjoyment, these men pever
succeed in enjoying the goodly things of
Eatth. Indeed, O goddess, it is through
deeds that persons become wretched aud
poor. ; y


17. There are others who are arrogant
and proud for the possegsion of riches,
‘Those senseless wretches never offer seats ta
worthy persons. :


18. Gifted with little understandings,
they do not give way to them who deserve
Nor do they give water ‘for
washing the feet to persons to whom it
should begiven, :


19. Indeed, they do not honor, accord-
ing to the ordinance, with gifts of the
Arghya, such persons as deserve to be
honored therewith. hey do not offer water
for washing. the mouth to such as deserve
to have that honor, ’

20—2t. They do not treat their very
preceptors, when the latter arrive at their
houses, in-the manner in which preceptors
should be trested. Living in cupidity and
pride, they refuse to treat their elders and
aged men with love and affection, even in-
sulting those who deserve to be honored
and asserting their superiority over them
without showing reverence and- humility.
Such men, O goddess, sink in Hell.

22. When their sufferings terminate
after many years, they cise from Hell, and
take birth as men, in low and wretched
families.

23. Indeed, they “who' humiliate theie


‘preceptors and seniors, have to take birtts


in such castes as those of Swapakas and
Pukkasas who are greatly vile and bereft
of intelligence,


24—28. He who is not arrogant or filled
with .pride, who is a worshipper of the
deities and Brahmanas, who enjoys the


| esteem of the world, who bows to every one


who deserves his reverence, who - utters


300


smooth and sweet words, who benefits
persons of all castes, who is always devoted
to the behoof of all beings, who does not
feel hatred for anybody, who is sweet-
tongued, who is an utterer of sweet and
cooling words, who gives way to one who
deserves to have way, who worships ‘his
preceptors in the manner in which precep-
tors deserve to be adored, who welcomes
ali ceeatuces with proper courtesy, who does
not bear ill will towards any creature, who
lives, adoring elders and guests with such
honors as they deserve, who is ever bent
upon having as many guests as possible,
and who adores all who honor his house
with their presence, succeeds, O goddess,
in ascending to Heaven. Upon the exhaus-
tion of his merit, he is born as aman ina
high and respectable family.


29. In that life he gets all articles of
enjoyment in profusion and jewels and gems
and every kind of riches in abundance. He
gives to worthy persons what they deserve.
He performs every duty and every act of
virtue.


. Honored of all creatures and re-
ceiving their respect, he obtains the fruits
ef his own deeds.


gt. Even such a person acquires a
high birth in this world. ‘Fhis that — have
recited to you, was said by the Ordainer
(Brahman) himself formerly.


32—34, That man who is fierce in con-
duct, who creates terror in all creatures,
who injures other beings with hands or feet
or cords or sticks, or brick-bats or clods of
hard clay, or other means of wounding and
paining, O beautiful tady, who practises
various kinds of deceit for killing living
creatures ec vexing them, who chases
animals and causes them to tremble in
feac,—indeed, that man, who acts thus, is
certain to sink in Hell.’ ;


35. If in course of time he is born as
man in a low and wretched family which
meets with obstacles of every kind on every
side. ;


36. He is hated by all. A wretch among
men, he becomes so for his own deeds.


37—38. Another, who is possessed of
mercy, casts his (benign) eye on all creatures.
Gilted with a friendly vision, treating all
creatures as if he were theie father,
shorn of every hostile feeling, with all his
passions under complete restraint, he nevec
vexes any creature and never fills them
with fear by means of his hands or feet
which are always under his control. He
inspires the confidence of all beings.


_39- He never afflicts any oreature with
either cords or clubs or brick-bats or clods


MAHASHARATA.


of hard earth or weapons of any sort. His
deeds are never fierce or crucl, and he is
full of mercy.


40. One who is given to such practices
and conduct, certainly ascends to Heaven
‘There he lives like a god in a celestia
palace full of comfort.


41. If, upon the exhaustion of his merit,
he has to take birth as a man, he becomes
born as a man who has not to fight with
difficulties of any kind or to meet wth any
fear. Indeed, he enjoys great happiness.


42. Happy and not compelled to work
for his livelihood, he lives freed from every
kind of anxiety. .fven this, O yoddess,
is the path of the virruous. In it there are
no obstacles or afflictions.


Uma said :—

43. In the world some men are masters
of inferences and the premises leading to
them, Indeed, they are masters of science
and knowledge, have large progeny, aud
are gifted with learning and wisdom,


44. Others, O god, are shorn of wisdom,
science, and knowledge, and are marked
out by folly. By what particular acts does
a person become endued with wisdom ?


45. By what acts, again, does one be-
come of littke wisdom and distorted vision ?
Do you remove this doubt of mine, O you
who are the foremost of all beings knowing
duties,


46. Others there are, O god, who are
blind from the moment of their birth.
Others there are who are diseased and


impotent. Do you, O god, tell me the
reason of this.
Maheshwara said :—

47—-48. Vhose men who always enguire


about what ts for their behoof and what is
to theic detriment, of Brahmanas learned
in the Vedas, crowned with success, and
knowing all duties, who avoid all kinds of
evil deeds, who achieve only such deeds as
are good, succeed in ascending to Heaven
aftec leaving this world, and enjoy great
happiness as long as they live there. '


49. Indeed, upon the exhasution of their
merit, when they take their birth in the
order of humanity, they become born as
men endued with great intelligence. ‘They
enjoy every kind of happiness and aus-
Piciousnéss on account of that intelligence
with which they are born. 7


50. Fhose men of foolish understand-
staudings who cast wicked eyes upon the
married wives af other men, become cursed
with congenital blindness on account af
that sinfulness of theirs.


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


51. Those men whe, moved by desire
in their hearts, cast their eyes’ on naked
women, those men of wicked acts take
birth in this world to pass their whole lives
in one continuous disease.


§2. Those men of foolish and wicked
acts who indulge in sexual union with
women of castes different from their own,—
those men of little wisdom,—have to take
birth in their next lives as persous shorn, of
the virility. :

53. ‘Yhose men who cause animals to be
killed and those who violate the beds of
their preceptors, and those who indulge in
promiscuous intercourse have to take birth
in their next lives as persons shorn of man-
hood,


Uma said :~

54. What deeds, O foremost of the
celestials, are faulty, and what deeds are
faultless? What, indeed, -are those deeds
by doing which a man succeeds in acquir-
ing what is for your highest good ?


Maheshwara said :—


55- What man who is desirous of deter-
ming what is righteousness, and who wishes
to acquire prominent virtues and qualities,
and who always puts questions to the
Bralimanas with a view to find out the path
leading to his highest goud, succeeds in
ascending to EHleaven.


56. If, he is born as a man, he becomes
gitted with intelligence and memory and
great wisdom,


67. This, O goddess, is the: line of
conduct that the pious are to follow
and that is fraught with great good. I have
told you of it foc the behoof of human
beings. 7


Uma said :—


58. There are men who hate virtue and
who are gifted with littl understandings.
They never wish to approach Brahmanas
knowing the Vedas.


59. Tbere are others who observe vows
and who are given to the duty of perform-
ing Sbraddhas. Others, ayain, ‘are desti-
tute of all vows. ‘They do not care for
observances and are like Rakshasas in
conduct,


60. Some there are wha are given to
the performance of sacrifices and sume who
do uot care for Homa. For what deeds do
men become possessed of these different
natures,


‘ Maheshwara said :~
6i. Through the Vedas, the limits have


| sacred Mantras,


301


been laid out of all the acts of human beings.
Those men who acts thus according to the
authority of the Vedas, are seen to become
devoted to the observance of vows.


62—63. Those men, however, who being
influenced by folly accept unrighteousness
for its reverse, become destitute of vows,
transgress all restraints, and come to be
considered as Brahmarakshasas. Indeed,
it is these men who do not care for Homa,
who never utter the Vashat and other
and who come to be
considered as the lowest and vilest of
men,


64. Thus, O goddess, have I explained
to you the entire ocean of duties of human
beings for the sake of removing your
doubts, not omitting the sins of which they


‘become guilty.


CHAPTER CXLVIL,


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA)—
Continued.


Narada said :—.

1. Having said these words, the power-
ful Mahadeva himself became desirous of
hearing, and with that view he questioned
his dear wife who was seated by his side
and was bent upon doing his will,


Mahadeva said :—


2. You, O goddess, know what is Su.
preme and what is not so. You know all
duties, O you wis love to live in the retreats
of ascetics. You are gifted with every
virtue, possessed of beautiful eyebrows, and
hair ending in the fairest curls, O daughter
of Himavat, the king of mountains, =,


3. You are skilled in every work. You
are gifted withj self-control and look jimpar-
tially towards all creatures. Divested of
the senses of mine-ness, you are devoted to
the practice of all the duties. O yeu of
beautiful features, I wish to ask you (about
something). I wish that, asked by me, you
will describe to me that subject.


4. Savitri is the chaste wife of Brah-
man. -‘Fhe chaste Shachi is the wile of
Indra. Dhumorna is the wife of Markan-
deya, and Riddhi of (king) Vaishbravana,

5. Varuna has Goury for his consort, and
the Sun-God has Suvarchala. Rohini is the
chaste wife of Shashin, aad Swaha of Vi-
bhavasu.

6. Kashyapa has Aditi. All these con-
sider their ‘husbands as their gods. You


302


have, O goddess, conversed and associated
with all of them every day.


j. tis, therefore, O you knowing every
duty, that I wish to question you about the
duties of women, O you whose words are
always consistent with tighteousness. I
wish to hear you describe that subject from
the beginning,

8. You practice all the duties of virtue
with me, Your conduct is exactly like mine,
and the vows you observe are the same that
are observed by me. Your power and
energy are equal to mine, and you have
practised the austerest penances. :

g. The subject, when described by. you
will become higtiy meritorious. Indeed,
that subject will then become authoritative
in the wortd, |


~ te. Women, in especial, arejthe highest
cefage of women. O you of beautiful hips,
amony human beings the course of conduct
laid dewa by you will be fellewed from
generation to generation,


11. Half of my bedy is made up of half
your body. You are always engaged in
doing the work of the celestials, and it is you
are the cause of have peopling the Earth.


12. Q auspicious lady, you know afl the
eternal duties of women. Do you, therefore,
tell me in full what the duties are of your
SEX,


Uma said :—


13. Obholy one, O lord. of all created
things, O source of all that is past, present,
and future, itis through your favour that
ihe words I am uttering are originating in
my mind,

- 14. All these Rivers (that are of my sex),
O god of gods, having the waters of all the
‘Yitthas, are approaching your presence tor
enabling you to perform your ablutions in
them.


a5. After consulting them f shall describe
the subject in due order. ‘That person who,
though capable, is still free from egotism, is
rightly called a Purusha,


16. As for women, O Iocd of all beings,
she follows persons of her sex. By consult-
ing these foremost of Rivers, they will be
honoured by me.


17. The sacred Saraswati is the foremost
river of jall rivers. She goes towards the
ocean and is truly the first of all rivers.


*» 18-20. MVipasha, also, is here,4 and
Vitasta, Chandrabhaga, [ravati, Shatadcu,
the civer Devika, Kaushiki, and Gomati,
and this celestial River who has in
her all the sacred Tirthas, wiz., the
goddess Ganga, who having originated


MAHABHARATA.


from the celestial region has descended
on the Earth and is considered as the
foremost of all rivers !—Having said this,
the wife of that god of gods, that foremost
of all pious persons, smilingly addressed
all those Rivers of her sex.


21. Indeed, the wife of the great god,
devoted to the performance of all duties,
questioned those individuals of her sex
about the duties of women. Indeed, those
foremost of rivers, having Ganga for their
first all know the duties of women.


Uma said :—

22. he illustrious god has asked a quese
tion about the duties of women. I wist to
answer Shankara after having consulted
with you.


23. [ do not find any branch of know-
ledye on Earth or Heaven that is capable
of being mastered by any individual without


your help. Ye rivers that run towards the
ocean, it is, therefore, that I seek your
opinions.


24. It was in this way that those fore
most of Rivers, all of whom were auspicious
and highly sacred, were accosted by Shiva’s
wife. ‘hea the celestial River Ganga, who
adored the daughter of the king of moun-
tains in return, was selected for answering
the question.


25. Indeed, she of sweet smiles is held
as swelling with various kinds of under-
standing and well conversant with the duties
of women. The sacred goddess, capable of
removing all féar of sin, gifted with humility
in consequence of her intelligence, well
acquainted with all duties, and endued with
an exceedingly comprehensive intelligence
sweetly smiling, uttered these words :—


27. O goddess, you are always given to
the due performance of all duties. You
have favored me highly by thus questioning
me. Osinless one, you are honoured by
the entire universe, yet you ask me that am
but a River,


28. That person who, though himseif
competent yet asks another, or who pays a
graceful tribute to another, certainly de-
serves, I think, to be considered as righte-
eus-souied. Indeed, such a person deserves
to be called learned and. wise.


29. That person never falls into disgrace
who asks such speakers as are gifted with
knowledge and science and as ace well con-
versant with premises and inferences.

G


30. A proud man, even when gifted with
intelligence, by speaking in the midst of an
assembly fotherwise, finds .himself uttering
only words of weak meaning. j


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


41. Vou are gifted with spiritual insight.

ou are the foremost of all the celestials,
You have taken your rise accompanied by
various kinds of excellent merit. You, O
goddess, are fullyicompetent to describe the
duties of women.


32. In this way, the geddess Uma was
adored by Ganga and honored with the
ascription of many high merits. ‘he beau-
tiful goddess, thus praised, then began to
discourse upon all the duties of women in
full.


Uma said :—

33. JI shall, according to the ordinance,
describe the subject of women’s. duties as
far as they are known to me. Do ye all
listen with rapt attention.


34. The duties of women begin when
created by kinsmen in the rites of wedding.
Indeed, woman becomes, in the presence
of the nuptial fire, the companion of her
husband in the performance of all righteous
acts.


35—41. Gifted with a good disposition,
endued with sweet speech, sweet conduct,
and sweet features, and always looking at the
face of her husband and deriving as much
joy from it as she does;from looking at the
face of her Child, that chaste woman who
regulates her deeds by .observing the pres-
cribed restraints, comes to be considered as
truly righteous in her conduct. Listening
to the duties of married life, and perform-
ing all those sacred duties, that woman who
considers virtue as the foremost of all ob-
jects of pursuit, who observes the same
vows as those which are observed by her
husband, who, adorned with clrastity, looks
upon her husband as a god, who waits upon
and serves him as if he #s a god, who
surrenders her own will completely to that
of her husband’s, who is cheerful, who ob-
Serves excellent vows, who is gifted with
good features, and whose heart is com-
pletely devoted to her husband insomuch
that she never thinks even of any other
man, is considered as truly righteous in
conduct. ‘That wife who, even when ad-
dressed harshly and looked upon with angry
eyes by her -husband, appears cheertul to
him, is said to be truly devoted to her dus-
band. She who does not cast her eyes upon
the Moor or the Sun ora tree that hasa
masculine name, who is worshipped by her
husband and who is gifted with beautiful
features, is considered as ‘truly righteous,
‘Fhat woman who, treats her husband with
the affection which one shows towards her
child, even when he happens to be poor or
diseased or weak or worn out with the toil of
travelling, is considered as truly righteous
in het conduct.


$93


42—45. That “woman who is gifted, with
self-control, who has given birth to children,
who Serves her husband with devotion, and
whose whole heart is devoted to him, is con-
sidered as truly righteous in her conduct.
That woman who waits upon and serves her
husband with a cheerful heart, who is always.
cheerful of heart, and who is gifted with
humility, is considered as truly righteous in
her conduct. ‘That woman who always sup-
ports his kinsmen and relatives by giving
them food, and whose desire for gratifying
hec wishes or for articles of enjoyment, or for
tiches or for happiness, falls shert of ber
devotion to her husband, is considered as
truly righteous in her conduct.


46—48. That woman who always takes a
pleasure in rising early in the morning, who
is devoted to the satisfaction of all house-
hold duties, who always keeps her house
clean, who rubs her house daily with cow-
dung, who always attends to the domestic
fire, who never neglects ta make offerings of
flowers and other articles to the celestials,
who with her husband satisfies the deities
and guests and all servants and dependants
of the family with teat share of food which
is theirs by the ordinance, and who always
takes, according to the ordinance, for herself,
what food remains in the house after the
needs of gods and guests and servants, have
been satisfied, and who pleases all people
who comein contact with her family and
feeds them to their fill, succeeds in acquiring
great merit.


49. That woman who is gifted with ac-
complishments, who satmes the feet of hee
father-in-law and mother-in-law, and who
is always devoted to his father and mother,
is considered as possessed of ascetic merit.


g0. That woman who supports with food
Brahmanas who are weak and helpless, who
are distressed or blind or destitute, comes to
be considered as entitled to share the merits
of her husband.


51. That woman who always observes,
with with a light heart, vows which are diffi-
cult of observance, whose heart is devoted
to her busband, and who always seeks the
behoof of ker husband,.is considered as en-
titled ‘to share the merits of her busband.


‘52. Devotioh to‘her husband is woman's
merit; itis her penance; it is her eternal
Heaven. Metit, penances 4nd Heaven be-
come hers who considers her husband as her
all in all, and who gifted with chastity, seeks
to ‘devote herself to her husband in all
things. 7

'53. ‘Fhe husband is the god which
women have, ‘The husband is:their friend.
‘Yhe husband is their great refuge. ak
have no refuge that can Compare with th


304


husband, and no god that can compare with
him,

54. A woman considers husband’s grace
and Heaven as equal; or, if unequal the
inequality is very trivial. O Matheshwarat
I do not-wish Heaven itself if you are not
satisfied with me.


55. Ifthe husband thatis poor, or dis-
eased or distressed, or fallen among enemies,
or afflitéted by a Brahhmana’s:curse, were to
command the wife to accomplish anything
that is improper or unrighteous or that may
bring on the destruction of life itself, the wife
should, without any hesitation, accomplish it,
guided by the code whose propriety is sanc-
tioned by the Law of Distress.

57- U have thus, O god, explained at
your commind, what the duties of women
are. Indeed, that woman who acts thus,
becomes entitled to a shace of the merits ac-
quired by her husband.


Narada said :—

, 58. hus addressed, the great god highly
spoke of the daughter of the king of moun-
tains and -thenidismissed all persons who
had assembled there, together with all his
own attendants.


59. The various tribes of ghostly beings,
as also all the embodied Rivers, and the
Gandharvas and Apsaras, all bowed their
heads to Mahadeva and departed for re-
turning to the places whence they had
come.—


‘
- ‘ *
CHAPTER CXLVIL.
(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—


Continued, :


The Rishis said:—


1, QOholder of Pinaka, O tearer of the
eyes of Bhaga, O you adored of the entire
universe, we wish to heac the glory of
Vasudeva.


Maheshwara said :—

2. Hariissuperior to the Grandfather
himself. He is the Eternal Purusha. Other-
wise Called Krishna, He is endued with
the splendour of gold and gifted with sular
effulgence.


3. Having ten arms, He is gifted with
great energy, and is the Destroyer of the
enemies of the celestials. He has a whirl
on His breast, and curly locks of hair on
His head. He is adored of all the celestials.


4. Brahman has ‘sprung from his abdo-
men, | have originated from. his head.


.body which is his abode.


MAHABHARATA.


All the luminaries in the sky have origi+
nated from his hair. From the bristles on
his body have originated all the gods and
demons.


5. From his bady have originated the
Rishis as also all the eternal worlds. He
is the abode of the Grandfather and of
all the gods.

6. Heis the Creator of this Earth, and
He is the Lord of the three worlds. He is
also the Destroyer of all creatures mobile
and immobile. ;

7. He is, indeed, the Foremost of all the
celestials. He is their Master. He is the
Chastiser of all enemies. He is gifted with
Omniscience. He exists in everything. He


is capable of going everywhere. He per-
meates everything.
8. He isthe Sttpreme Soul. He is the


Worker of all the ‘senses. He covers the
universe, He is the Supreme Lord. There
is nothing in the three worlds which is
superior to Him.


g—t1. He is Eternal. He is the des-
troyer of Madhu, and is otherwise called
Govinda. The Giver of honors, He wilt
cause all the kings of Earth to be killed
in battle, for securing the purposes of the
celestials, taking birth in a human form.
The celestials, abandoned hy Him. are
unable to do their work on Earth With-
out Him as their leader they cannot do
anything. He is the leader of ‘all creatures
and is worshipped by all the gods.


12—13. Within the abdomen of this
Master of the gods Who always does celes-
tial work, of this One Who is at one with
Brahma, and Who is always the refuge’ of
the twice-born {Rishis, lives Brahman,
Indeed, the latter lives happily in Hari’s
[ myself, tha€
am called Sharva, also live happily in that
happy abode of mine.


14. All the celestials, too, live happily
in His body. Gifted with great effulgence,
He has eyes which resemble lotus petals.
The goddess of prosperity lives within Hint
and He lives always in her company,


1517. The bow called Sharanga and
the discus (called Sudarshana) are his
weapons, as well as a sword. He has the
emblem of the enemy of all the snakes ow
his standard. Heis distinguished by ex-
cellent conduct; by purity, by self-control,
by prowess, by energy, by the most beauti-
ful corm, by taliness and well proportioned
limbs, by patience, by sincerity, by riches,
by mercy, by the beauty of form, and by
power. He shines, having all celestial
weapons of wonderful form and make.


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


a8. Hehas Voya for his iHusion. He
has a thousand eyes. He is free from
every stain oc fault. He is high-minded.
fle is gifted with heroism. He is an object
of pride with all his friends. He is dear
to all his kinsmen and relatives and they
are dear to him.


tg. He is gifted with forgiveness. He
is tree from tide or egotism. Heis de-
voted to the Bratimanas and is their leader.
He removes the feacs of all persons stricken
with fear. tie increases the joys of all iis
friends. ;


20, He is the refuge of all creatyes.
He is ever engaged in protecting and Me-
cishing the distcessed. Having mastery
ever all the scriptures and every Kind of
affluence, tie is adored by all beings,


2t. Knowiag all duties, He is a great
benefactor of even enemies when they seek
His protection, Conversant with policy and
endued with policy, He is an utterer of
Brahma and has all tis senses under per-
fect restraint,


22—23. For doing good to the celestiats,
Govinda will take birth in the family of the
great Manu. Indeed, giited with great in-
telligence, He will take birth in the auspici-
ous and righteous family of that Prajapati.
Manu will have a son named Anga. Alter
Anga will come Antardhaman,


24. From Antardhaman will come Ha.
virdhaman, that lord ot all creatures, free
from every stain, Havirdhaman will beget
an illustrious soa named Prachina- Varhi,


25. He will have ten sons having Pra-
Chetas fur theic first. Prachetas will have a
suv named Daksha who witl be regarded as
a Prajapati. Waksha will beget a daughter
named Dakshayani,


26, From Dakshayani will spring Aditya,
and from Aditya will spring Manu. Manu
wil beget a daughter named fla and a son
tamed Sudyumna, _ :


27. {la will have Vudha for her husband,
and from Vudha will spring Pururavas.
From Pururavas will spring Ayu. From
Ayu with spring Nahusha, and Nahusha will
beget a son named Yayati.


28. From Yayati will spring a powerful
son named Yadu. Yadu will beget Krosh-
tri. Kroshtri will beget a powerful son
named Vrijinivat.


29. Vrijinivat will beget the invincible
Ushadgu. Ushadgu will beget a son named
Chitraratha. :


go——31. Chitraratha will have a younger
son of the uname of Shura. Indeed, in the
family of these powerful men of energy known


39


395


all over the world, gifted with excellent can-

duct and various accomplishments, given to

the performance of sacrifices and pure. in

behaviour,—in the pure family honored by

the Brahmanas, Shuru will take his birth.
He will be a foremost Kshatriya, giited with

great energy, and possessed of great fame.


32. Shura, that giver of honors, will
beget a son, the perpetuator of his family, of
the name ef Vasudeva, otherwise called
Anakadundhuvi.


33. Vasudeva will have a sen of name
Vasudeva. He wil have four haads. He
will be greatly liberal, and will hoaor the
Brahmanas greatly. Identical with Brahma,
he will love and like the Brahmanas, and
-the Brabmanas will love and like him.


34. That scion of Yadu’s race will libe-
rate many kings confined in the prison of
the king wf the Magadhas (Jarcasandha)
after defeating him in his capital bucied
among mountains.


35. Gifted with great energy, he will be
rich with the jewels and gems of all rulers of
the Earth. Indeed, ia energy he wilt be
peerless on Earth. ;


36—39. Possessed of great prowess, he
will be.the king of all kings of the Earti.
Foremost among alf the Surasenas, the
powerful one, living at Dwacaka, will cule
and protect the entire Earth after defeating
all her kings, conversant as he will be witl
the science of policy. Assembling together
do ye all-worship Him, as ye adore the
Eterna! Brahman, with speech, flowers, and
excellent incense and perfumes. He who
wishes to see me or the Grandfather Brah-
man should first see the illustrious Vasu-
deva of great power. If He is seen I am
seen, as also the Grandfather Brahman,
that foremost of all the celestials.


40—42. Ldonot find any difference in
this, Know this,O Rishis having asceti-
cism for wealth. That person with whom
the lotus-eyed Vasudeva becomes pleased,
is liked by alf the deities with Brahman
amongst them. That man who will seek the
protection of Keshava will succeed in ac-
quiring great achievements and victory and
Heaven. He will be au instructor in reli-
gion and duties, and will acquire great reli-
gious merit.


43. All persons knowing religion and
duties should, with great readiness, bow
down to that Lord of all the gods. By
adoring that powerful one, one will acquire
great merit.


44. Gifted with great energy, that god
with the desire of benefiting all creatures,
created muillions of Rishis for the sake of
syirtue,


306


45. Those millions of Rishis, thus created
by that great Ordainer are now living on
the mountains of Gandhamadana, headed
by Snatkumara and engaged in the per-
formance of penances.


46. Hence, ye foremost of twice-born
ones, that foremost of all eloquent persons,
wvig., the righteous Vasudeva, should be
worshipped by all, The illustrious Hari, the
powerful Narayana, is, indeed,the foremost
of all beings in Heaven.


47. Adored, he adores, and honored, he
honors ; to them who make offerings to him,
he makes offerings insreturn. Worshipped,
he werships;in return.


48. If seen always, he sees the seers
always. If one seeks His refuge and pro-
tection, He seeks the seeker as His refuge in
return. O foremost of all righteous ones, if
adored and worshipped, He adores and
worships #1 return.


49. This isthe practice of the faultless
Vishnu. This is the vow that is practised
by all righteous people, of that first of all
deities, that powerful Lord of all ereatures.


50. Heis always adored in the world.
That Eternal Being is adored by even the
celestials. Those persons who are devoted
to Him: with the steadiness of a vow become
freed from calamity and fear proportionate
to his devotion.


51. The regenerate ones should always
adore Him in thought, word, and deed.
The son of Devaki should be seen by them
with respect and in order to see Him with
respect they should undertake the perform-
ance of penances.


§2. © foremost of ascetics, this is the
path that I show to you. By seeing Him,
you will have seen all the foremost of celes-
tials,


53. I, too, bow my head in respect to that
Lord of the universe, that Grandfather of
all the worlds, that powerful and huge
boar.


54. By seeing Him one sees the Trinity.


Ourselves, vig., all the celestials, live in
Him.
55. He will have an elder brother who


will be known over all the world by the
name of Vala. Having a plough for his
weapon, in form he will look like a white
hill, In fact, he will be gifted with strength
capable of uplifting the entire Earth.


56 Upon the car of that divine person a
tall palmyra, three-headed and made of
gold, will be his standard.


57. The head of that mighty-armed hero,
that Lord of all the worlds, will be covered
with many huge snakes. All weapons of


a


MAHABHARATA.


attack and defence will also come to him as
soon as he will think of them.


58—s9. Heis called Ananta (Infinite),
That Hlustrious One is at one with the im-
mutable Hari. Once on a time, the celestials
thus spoke to the mighty Garuda, the son
of Kashyapa:—Do you, O powerful one,
see if this One has any end.—Vhough gifted
with great energy and power, Garuda, how-
ever, could not find out the end of this Il-
ustrious One who is at one with the Supreme
Soul,


60. Supporting the entire Earth on His
head, He lives in the nether revions. He
tove¥ through the universe as Shesha, filed


with great joy.

61. He is Vishnu, He is the illustrious
Ananta, He isthe supp»rter of the Earth,
He who is Rama is Hrishikesha. He who
is Acbyuta is Ananta the bearer of the
Earth. 2


62. Bath of those foremost of all crea-
tures are celestial and gifted with divine
prowess. One of them is armed with the
discus and the other with the plough. They
deserve every honor and should be seen.


63. I bave, through my kindness for you,
have thus described to you the nature of
Vasudeva. ‘Ihis, O ye ascetics having pen-
ances for wealth, is Virtue.

64. Ihave described all this to you so
that ye may, with respect and care, adore
Krishna, that Foremost One of Yadu's
race.


CHAPTER CXLVIIE.


( ANUSHASANIKA PARVA ).—
Continued.


Narada said :—


i. At the conclusion of Mahadeva’s
speech, loud roars were heard in the sky,
‘Lbunders bellowed, with fl sshes of lightning.
the sky was covered with blue and thick
clouds,


2. The god of the clouds then poured
pure water like to what he dnes in the sea-
son of rains, A thick darkness appeared.
The cardinal points could no longer be
made out.


3. Then on that charming, sacred and:
eternal breast of that celestial, mountain,
the assembled Rishis no longer saw the
ghostly beings who associate with Maha-
deva. .


4. Sodn, however, the sky cleared,
Some of the Rishis started for the sacred
waters. Others returned whence they Ca Mae,


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


8. -Seeing that wonderful and incon-
ceivable spectacle, they became filled with
surprise, [hey had heard the discourse, too,
between Shankara and Uma with the same
feelings.


6. That Foremost of all Beings, of whom
the great Shankara spoke tous on that
mountain, are You. You are at one with
Eternal Bratima.


7. Sometime before, Mahadeva burnt
Himavat with his energy, You have showu
usa similar wonderful spectacle. fndeed,
we remember that by what we have seen
to-day. a

8. O Mighty-Armed Janarddana, I have
thus, O Powerful One, recited to You the
glory of that Gud‘%f gods, véz., Him that is
called Kaparddin or Girisha.


Bhishma said :—


g. Thus addressed by those hermits’
Krishna, the delighter of Devaki, paid due
honors to all those Rishis.


10. Filled with joy, those Rishis once
more addressed Krishna, ‘saying,—O Des-
troyer of Madhu, do you repeatedly show
yourself to us at all times.


11. O Powerful One, Heaven itself can-
not rejoice us so much asa sight of Your-
self. Everything that was said by the illus-
trious Bhava is true.


12—13. O Crusher of enemies, we have
told you all about that mystery, You are
yourself acquainted with the truth of every
subject. Since, however, asked by us, You
were kind enough to ask us in return, we
have, therefore, recited, everything to You
for only pleasing You. There is nothing in
the three, worlds that You do not know,


14. You are fully acquainted with the
birth and origin of all things, indeed, with
everything that works as a cause, On ac-
count of the lightness of our character; we
cannot keep close any mystery.


15. Indeed, in Your presence, O Power-
ful One, we indulge in fncoherencies from the
lightness of our hearts. ‘There is no wonr
derful thing which You do not know.


i

16. You know whatever is on Earth,
and whatever is in the celestial region,
We take our leave of You, O Krishna, for
returning to our respective quarters. Muy
You increase in intelligence and prosperity.


17. O Sire, You will soon get a son after
You or even more Mstinguished than Your-
self. He will be gifted with great energy
and splendour. He will achieve great feats,
and become possessed of power as great as
Yours,


#7


Bhishma said :~


18. After this, the great Rishis bowed
to that God of gods, that scion of Yadu’s
race, that Foremost of all Beings. They
then went round Him and taking His leave,
departed.


19. As regards Narayana, who is gifted
with prosperity and blazing effulgence, He
returned to Dwaraka after having duly ob-
served that vow of His.


20. His wife Rukmini conceived, and on
the expiration of the tenth month a son was
born of her, gifted with heroism and honors
ed by all for. his highly wonderful accom.
plishments. ;


21. Heis at one with that Kama (Des
sire) which exists in every creature and
which pervades every condition. Indeed,
he moves within the hearts of both gods and
demons.


22, This Krishna is that foremost of al
persons. He, gifted with the complexion of
the clouds is that four-handed Vasudevar
Through affction He has taken up the
cause of the Pandavas, and you alsd, ye
sons of Pandu, have attached yourselves to


-Him.


23. Achievements, Prosperity, I{ntelli-
gence, and the Path that leads to the celes-
tial region, are all there where this Qne, viz.,
the Illustrious Vishnu of three steps, is.


24. He isthe thirty-three gods headed
by Indra. There is no doubt in this. He
is the one Ancient God. He is the Fere-
most of all gods, He is the refuge of all
Creatures,


25. He is without beginning and without
destruction, He is unmanifest. He is the
great Destroyer of Madhu. Gifted with
mighty energy, He has taken birth (among
men) for doing the purposes of the gods.


26-—~27, This Madhava is the expounder
of the most difficult truths about Profit or
Wealth, and He is also their achiever. O
son of Pritha, the victory you have got over
your enemies, your peerless achievements,
the dominion you have acquired over the
whole Earth, are all owing to having
Narayana espoused your cause.


28. The fact of your having got the in-
conceivable Narayana for your protector
and refuge, enabled you to become an
Adharyyu (chief sacrificer) for pouring mul-
titudes of kings as libations on the burning
fire of battle. This Krishna was your great
sacrificial ladle resembling the all-destroy-
ing’ fire which appears at the end of the
cycle.


29. Duryodhana, with his sons, brothers


308


and kinsmen, was much to be pitied inas-
much as, moved by anger. he made war
with Hari and the wielder of Gandiva.


30. Many sens of Diti, many foremost of
Danavyas, of huge bodies and vast strength,
have died jn the fire of Krishna’s discus like
insects im a forest fire.


31. How incapable then must human
beings be of fighting against that Kristina,
human beings who, O forenrost of men,
are shorn of strength and power.


32. Asregards Jaya, he is a powerful
Yogin resembling the all-destroying eycle-
fire in energy. Capable of drawing the
bow equally with both hands, he is always
in the van of fight. With his energy, O
king, he has killed all the soldiers of Suyo-
dhana,


33. Listen to me as F tell you what
Mahadeva having the bovine bull for the
emblem on his standard had recited to the
ascetics on the breast of Himavat. His
utterances form a Purana.


34. The advancement org greatness,
energy, strength, prowess, power, humilicy,
and family that are in Arjuna cau form only
a third part of the attributes of Krishna.


35. Who is there who can transcend
Krishna in these attributes? Whether
that is possible or not, listen. Peerless
Excellence prevails where the illustrious
Krishna is.


36. As for ourselves, we are persons of
lite understanding. Dependent upon the
will of others, we are highly unfortunate.
Knowingly we betook ourselves to the eter-
nal path of death.


37. You, however, are devoted to since-
rity of conduct. Having formerly promised
not to take your kingdum, you did not take
it, desirous of keeping your promise.


38. O king, you make too much of the
destruction of your kinsmen and friends in
battle. You should remember, however, O
chastiser of enemies, that it is not fair to
break a promise.


All those who have fallen on the
field of battle have really been killed by
‘Time. Indeed, all of us have been killed
by Time. Time is, indeed, all powerful.


40. You are fully acquainted with the
power of ‘lime. Afflicted by time you
should not grieve. Know that Krishna
Himself otherwise called Hari, is that
etary with blood-red eyes and with club in
hand.


41. For these reasons, O son of Kunti,
you should not grieve for your (slain) kins-
folk. Be always free, O delighter of the
Kurus, from grief,


MAHABHARATA.


42. You have heard me sing the gfory
and greainess of Madhava. That is sufff-
cient for making a good man undestand
Him. :


43 Having heard the words of Vyasa, as
also of the highly intelligent Narada, I have
described to you the adorableness of Krishna.
| have myseli added, from my own know-
ledge, something to that account.


44. Indeed, } have descrilved also on the
Surpassing Power of Krishna as recited by
Mahadeva, to that assembly of Rishis. fF
have also deseribed to you the discourse too
between Mabeshwara and the daughter of
tlimavat, O Bharata.


45. He who will remember that dis-
course when coming out* from a foremost
person, he who will listen to it, and he who
will recite it, is sure to acquire what is
highly beneficial.


46. That man will find all hts wishes
fulfilled. Departing from this world he will
ascend to the celestial region. ‘Hhere is no
doubt in this.


47. ‘That man who wishes to obtain what
is beneficial for himselH, should devote him-
self to Janarddana.


48 O king of the Kucus, you should
also remember those incidents of duty and
virtue which were declared by Maheshwara,


49 If you act according to those pre-
cepts, if you carry the rod of punishment
tighthy, if you protect your subjects pro-
petly, you may be sure of attaining to
the celestial,


50. Yow should, O king, protect your
subjects always according to the dictates
of virtue. The strong rod of punishment
which the kings bear has beew said to be
the embodiment of his virtue os merit.


5t. Hearing this discourse, fraught
with righteousness, between Shankara and
Uma, that I have recited betore this pions
assemblage, one should adore -with respect
that god having the bull for the device on
his banner. “


52. One who becomes even desirous of
listening to that discourse, should adore
Mahadeva with respect. Indeed, the person
who wishes to obtain what is beneficial for
him, should worship Mahadeva with a pure
heart. 7


This is the behest of the sinless and
high-souled Narada. He has commanded
such adoration of the great god. O son
of Pandu, do you obey that command of
Narada.


54. O powerful king, these are the won-
decful incidents which took place on the


ANUSHASANA PARYVA,


aicred breast of Himavat about Vasudeva
and Sthanu, O son of Kunti. Those events
emanated from the very nature of those
great deities.


55. Accompanied by the holder of
Gandiva, Vasudeva practised eternal
penances in the hermitage of Vadavri -for
ten thousand years,


56. Indeed, Vasudeva and Dhananjaya,
having eyes like lotus petals, practised
severe austerities for three entire cycles. 1}
have learnt this from Narada and Vyasa, O
king,

87. The lotus-eyed and mighty-armed
Vasudeva, while yet a child performed the
great feat of killing i<ansa for the relief of
his kinsmen.


58. 1 dare not, O son of Kunti, enume-
rate the feats of, this Ancient and Eternal
Being, O Yudhishthira.


O son, forsooth, high and great |


benefits will be reaped by you who have
that foremost of all persons, vzs., Vasudeva,
for your friend.


60. 1 grieve for the wicked Duryo-
dhana about even the next world to which
he has gone. It was for him that the entire
Earth has been depopulated with her horses
and elephants.


61. Indeed, through the fault of Duryo-
dhana, of Karna, of Shakuni, and of Dussha-
sana as the fourth, that the Kurus have died,


Vaishampayana said :—

62. While that foremost of men, vis.,
the son of Ganga, spoke to him thus, the
Kuru king (Yudhishthira) remained entirely
silent in the midst of those great persons.


63. All the kings with Dhritarashtra
amongst them became stricken with wonder
upon hearing the words of the Kuru grand-
father. In their minds they adored Krishna
and then turned towards him with hands
clasped in respect.


64. The Rishis also headed by Narada,
accepted and highly spoke of the words of
Bhishma and approved of them joyfully.


65. ‘These were the wonderful subjects
recited by Bhishma which Yudhishthira
with all his brothers heard with joy.


66. Sometime after, when king Yudhish-
thira saw that Bhishma who had given
away profuse riches .as_ presents to the
Brahmanas in the sacrifices celebrated by
him, had rested and become refreshed,
the intelligent king once more asked him
as follows.


308
CHAPTER CXLIX.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.


Vaishampayana said :—

1. Having heard all the duties in full
and all those sacred deeds and objects
‘ which purify human beings of their sins,
. Yudhishthira once more addressed the son
| of Shantanu in the following words.


Yudhishthira said :—
2. Who may be said to be the One God


, in the world? Who may be said to be the


One Object which is our only refuge ? Who
is He by adoring whom or singing whose
praises human beings would get what is
beneficial ? :


3. What religion is that which, accord
ing to your judgment, is the foremost of abt
religions? What are those Mantras by
reciting which a living creature becomes
freed from the fetters of birth and life ?


Bhishma said :—


4. One should always, diligently and
throwing away all idleness, sing the praises
of that Lord of the universe, that God of
gods, (viz., Vasudeva), who is Infinite and
the foremost of all Beings, by uttering His
thousand names.


5~—-6. By always adoring with respect
and devotion that immutable Being, .by
meditating on Him, by singing His praises,
and bowing the head to Him, and by cele-
brating sacrifices to Him, indeed, by always
praising Vishnu, who is without beginning
and without end or destruction, who is the
Supreme Lord of ali the worlds, and who
is the Master and Controller of the universe,
one can succeed in getting over all sorrow.


7. Indeed, He is devoted to the Brah-
mavas, knowing all duties and practices,
the enhancer of the fame and achievements
of all persons, the Lord of all the worlds,
highly wonderful, and the prime cause of
the ofigin of all creatures. ,


8. This, in my judgment, is the fore-
most religion of ali religions, viz., one
should always adore and sing the praises of
the lotus-eyed Vasudeva with devotion,


9. He isthe highest Energy. He is the
highest Penance. He is the highest Brahma.
He is the highest Refuge.


to. He is the most Holy of all holies, the
most sacred of all sacred objects, He is the
God of all the gods, and He is the immutable
Father of all creatures.


RIO


tr, On the advent of the primitive cycle,
alt creatures originate from Him. On the
expiration, again of the cycle, all things dis-
appear in Him,

12. Hear, & king, the thousand names,
highly efficacious in dissipating sins, of that
Foremost One in all the worlds, that Master
of the universe, vzg., Vishnu.


13, All those names, derived from His
attributes, secret and well-cnown, of the
great Vasudeva, which were sung by the
Rishis, 1 shall recite to you for the good of
all.


14. They are, Om! He who enters all
things besides Himself, He who covers all
things, He to whom sacrificial libations are
poured, the Lord of the Past, the Present,
and the Future, the Creator (or Destroyer)
of all existent things, the preserver of all
existent things, the Existent, the Soul of all
things, the Originator of all things (I—1x) ;


15. Of purified Soul, the Supreme Soul
the Highest Refuge of all liberated persons,
the Immutable, He who lies enclosed in a
case, the Witness, He who- knows the
material case in which He lives, the Indes-
tructible (xK—XvVID;


16. He upon whom the mind rests during
Yoga-meditation, the Guide or leader of
all persons conversant with Yoga, the
Lord of both Pradhana or Prakriti and
Purusha, He who assumed a human form
with a leonine head, He of beautiful features
and equipments, He of beautiful hair, the
foremost of Purushas (XV11I—xXXVI) ;


“17. The embodithent of all things, "the
Destroyer of all things, He who transcends
the three qualities of Goodness, Darkness,
and Ignorance, the Motionless, the Beginning
of all things, the source into which all things
go at the universal Dissolution, the Immut-
able, He who takes birth at his own will, He
who causes the acts of all living creatures to
fructify, the Upholder of all things, the
Source from which the primal elements have


1


Originated, the Powerful One, He in whom,


exists the unbounded Lordship over all
things (XXV—xxxVI}) ;


18. Fhe Self-Create, He who gives
happiness to His worshippers, the pre-


siding Genius in, the midst of the Solar,


disc, the Lotus-Eyed,
He who is without beginning and without
end, He who upholds the universe, Hé who
ordains all deeds and their fruits, He who is


superior to the Grandfather Brahman
(XXXVIII~XLYV}) ; :
19. The Immeasurable, the Lord -of


the senses, He from whose navel the
Primeval lotus originated, the Lord of all
the celestials, the Divine Architect, the


the Loud- Voiced, :


MAHABHARATA.


Mantra, He who weakens or emaciates al
things, He who is vast, the Ancient One,
He who is enduring (XLVII—LV1) ;


20. He who is incapable of being appre-
hended (by either the senses or the mind),
the Eternal One, Krishna, the Red-Eyed, He
who kills all creatures at the time of the unt-
versal dissolution, He who is vast for know-
ledge and power and other attributes of the
kina, He who resides in three parts of every
creature, That which cleanses, is auspicious,
and high (LVH—LXIv) ;


21. He who urges all creatures in
their acts, He who makes the vital airs
work, He who causes all living creatures
to live, the Eldest, the Foremost of all
those who are considered as the Lords of
all creatures, He who has gold in his
abdomen, He who has the Earth for his
abdomen, the Lord of Shree or Lakshmi, the
Destroyer of Madhu (LxV—LxXxi11) ;


22. The Omnipoteut, He who is endued
with great prowess, He who is armed with
the bow, He who is possessed of a mind cap-
able of.understanding all treatises, He who
roves through the universe, riding on Garuda,
He who is well-suited to the offerings made
to him and who has the power to enjoy
them properly, the Peerless, He who is
incapable of being discomfited, He who
knows all acts that are done, He who is at
one with all deeds, He who rests on His
own true self (LXXIV—LXxXXIV) ;


23. The Lord of all the celestials, He
who is the Refuge of all, the embodiment
of the highest happiness, He whose seed
is the universe, He who is the seurce of all
things, the Day, the Year, the Snake, the
embodiment of Conviction, He who sees
ali things (LxxxV—xcIv) ;


24. The Unborn, the Lord of all crea-
tures, He who has acquired success, He
who is Success.itself, He who is the begin«
ning of all things, He who.is:above deterto-
ration, He who is virtue in the form of the
bull and the great boar that raised the sub-
merged Earth, He who is of immeasurable
soul, He who stands aloof from all kinds of
union (xCV—CIII) ; :


25. He who is Pavaka among the deities
called Vasus, He that is of liberal soul,
being shorn of anger, hatred, pride
and other -evil passions, ‘JIruth He is
whose soul is equable on account of His
perfect impartiality, He-.who has been
measured by His adorers, He who is always
equal, being above all change or madifica- |
tion, He who never refuses to grant the
wishes of His adorers, He whose eyes are
like lotus petals, He whose deeds are always
marked by Virtue (CIV-—Cx1II) ;


ANL SHASANA PARVA


26. He who destroys all creatures, the
Many-headed, He who upholds the universe,
He who is the source of the universe, He who
is of pure or spotless reputation, the Immor-
tal One, He who is Eternal and Fixed, He who
has beautiful limbs, He who has such know-
ledge having penance for its mark that He
is able to agitate Nature for evolving the
universe out of her (CXIV—CXX11);


27. He who goes everywhere, the Omni-
scient One, He who shines forth in unmodified
effulgence, Fie whose troops are everywhere,
He who is coveted by all, He who is the Veda,
Hie who is conversant with the Veda, He who
is conversant with all the branches of the
Veda, He who represents the branches of the
Veda, He who settles the interpretations of
the Vedas, He who has no superior in wisdom
(CKXILI—CXXXIIJ) ;


28." He who is the Master of all the
worlds, He who is the Lord of the celes-
tials, He who is the Supervisor of both
Virtue and Sin, He who is both Effect and
Cause, He who is four-souled, He who is
known by four forms (as above), He who
has four horns, He who has four arms
(CXXXIV—CXLI) j


29. Hewho shines forth in effulgence,
He who is the giver of food and cherishes
the good, He who does not put up with
those that are wicked, (or He who puts up
with the occasional transgressions of his de-
votees), He who existed before the universe
came into life, He who is stainless, He
who is ever victorious, He who defeats the
very celestials, He who is the material
cause of the ‘universe, He who repeatedly
Lives in material causes (CXLII—CL) ;


30. He who is the younger brother of
Indra, He who took birth as a dwarf, He
who is tall, He whose acts are never futile,
He who cleanses, He who is gifted with
pre-eminent energy and strength, He who
transcends Indra in all attributes, He who
accepts all His worshippers, He who is the
Creation itself.on account of His being the
Causes thereof, He who upholds His selt in
the same form. without being ever subject
to birth, growth, or death, He who sustains
all creatures in their respective functions in
the universe, He who controlls the hearts of
all creatures (CLI--CLXII) ;


« 31._ He who is worthy of being known by
those who wish to acquire what is for their
highest good, He who is the celestial physi-
cian in the form of Dhanwantri, He who is
alwaysengaged in Yoga, He whokills great
Asuras for establishing virtue, He who is the
Lord of that Lakshmi who originated from
the ocean when it was churned by the celes-
tials and the Asuras, He who is honey, He


Art


with great powers of illusion, fle who dis-
plays great energy, He who transcends all
in energy (CLXIII—GLXX1II) ;


.

32. He who transcends all in ‘intelli-
gence, He who transcends all in power,
He who transcendens alt in ability, He
who discovers the universe by ‘the efful-
gence coming out from His body, He whose
body is incapable ef being .seen by the eye,
He who is gifted with every beauty, He
whose soul is incapable of being compre-
hended by either the celestials or the mortals,
He who keld on His back, in the form of the
vast tortoise, the huge mountain, Mandara,
which was made the churning rod by
the celestials and the Asuras when they
began to churn the great ocean for getting
therefrom ail the valuables hid in his bosom
(CLXXITI—CLXXX) ;


33- He who can shoot His arrows to
a great distance, piercing through obst:uc-
tions’ of every sort, He who raised the
submerged Earth, having assumed the
form of the powerful Boar, He on whose
bosom lives the goddess of Prosperity, He
who is the Refuge of the pious, He who
is incapable of being won without thorough
devotion, He who is the delight of the
celestials, He who rescued the submerged
Earth, He who is the Master of all elo-
quent persons, (CLXXXI —CLXXXVIID) ;


34. He who is full of blazing effulgence,
He who removed the afflictions of His adorers,
He who assumed the form of a Swan for
communicating the Vedas to the Grand-
father Brahman, He who has Garuda, the
prince of birds for his vehicle, He who is the
foremost of snakes on account of His identi-
ty with Shesha or Ananta who upholds. on
his head the vast Earth, He whose navel is
as beautiful as gold; He who practised
the severest austerities in the form of Naras
yana at Vadarion the breast of Himavat,
He whose navel resembles a lotus, He who
is the Lord of all creatures (CLXxxIx—
CXCVII) ;


35- He who transcends death, He who
always casts a kind eye on His worshippers,
He who destroys all things, He who is
the Ordainer of all ordainers, He who
Himself enjoys and suffers the fruits of all .
deeds, He who assumed the form of Rama
the son of Dasharatha and going into exile
at the command of his father made a treaty
with Sueriva the king of the Vanaras for
helping Him in the recovery of his kingdom
from the grasp of his elder brother Vali in
return for the help which Sugriva promised
Him for recovering from Ravana His wife


.Sita who had been carried away by that


Rakshasa to his island home in Lanka, He
who is always of the same form, He who is


who is above the senses, He who is gifted} always moving, He who is ineapable of


gle


being endured by Danavas and Asuras,
fe who puttishes the wicked, He whose
soul, has true Knowledye for its mark, He
who destroys the enemies of the celestials
(CXCVINI—CCVIIT) 5


36. He who is the instructor in all
sciences and the father of all, He who is
the instructor of even the Grandfather
Brahman, He who is the abode or resting
place of all creatures, He who is the bene-
factor of the good aad is free from falsehood,
He whose prowess is incapable of being
thwawted, He who never casts his eye on
such acts as are not sanctioned or approved
by the scriptures, He who casts his eye
on such acts as are sanctioned or approved
by the scriptures, He who wears the un-
fading gacland of victory called by the
name of Vaijayanti, He who is the Lord
of speech and that is possessed of great
liberality insomuch that He rescued the
lowest of the low and the vilest of the vile
by granting them His favour (cc1x—
CCXVIL) ;


37. He who leads persons desirous of
Liberation to the foremost of all conditions,
vts., Emancipation itself (or, He who as-
sumes the form of a powerful Fish and pass-
ing through the vast expanse of waters that
cover the Earth when the universel disso-
lution sets in and dragging the boat tied
to His horns, leads Manu and others to
safety), He who is the leader of all crea-
tures (or, He wlio sports in the vast expanse
of waters which cover all things at the
universal dissolution), He whose wrrds are
Veda and who rescued the Vedas when
they were submerged in the waters at the
universal dissolution; He who is the ac
complisher of all functions in the universe,
He who assumes the form of the wind for
making all living creatures actor exert, (or,
He whose movements are always te:sutilul,
or, who wishes His creatures to glorify Him),
He who has a thousand heads, He who is
the Soul of the universe and as such per-
vades all things, He who has a thousand
eyes and a_ thousand legs (ccxix—
CCxxvi);


38. He who causes the wheel of the
universe revolve at His will, He whose
soul is freed from desire and who is above
those conditions which invest the individual
soul, He wiio is concealed from the view of
all persons who are attached to the word
(or, He who has covered the eyes of ail
persons with the bandage of Nescience), He
who grinds those who turn away ftom Him,
He who sets the days agoing, on account of
His being at one with the Sun, He who is
the destroyer of all-destroying Time itself,
He who conveys the libations poured on
the sacred fice to those for whom they are


MAHABHARATA.


intended, (or, He who bears the universe
placing it on only a minute-part of his body),
He who has no beginning, (or, He who has
no fixed habitation), He that upholds the
Earth (in space in the form of Shesha, or
rescues her in the form of the powerful boar,
or supports her as a subtile pervader)
{(COXXVII—CCXXXV) ;


39- He who is exceedingly inclined to
grace, insomuch that He grants happiness
to even enemies like Shishupala; He who
has been fieed from the qualities of good-
ness, dackness and ignorance so that He is
pure or stainless Sattwa by itself, (or, He
who has obtained the fruition of ail His
desires), He who supports the universe, He
who feeds (or enjoys) the universe, He who is
displayed in infinite power, He who honors
the celestials, the departed manes, and His
own worshippers, He who is honored or
adored by those that are themselves honored
or adored by others, (or, He whose acts are
all beautiful and enduring), He who accom-
plishes the purposes of others, He who
withdraws all things unto Himself at the
universal dissolution, (or, He who destroys
the foes of the celestials or of His worship-
pers), He who has the waters for his home,
(or, He who is the sole Refuge of all crea-
tures), or He that destroys the ignorance of
all creatures (CCXXXVI—CCXLV}) ;


40. He who is distinguished above all,
He who cherishes the virtuous, He who
cleanses all the worlds, He who crowns with
fruition the desires of all creatures, He
whose wishes are always crowned with
fruition, He who gives success to all, He
who bestuws success upon those who solicit
Him for it (CCKLVII—CCLV1) ;


41. He who presides over all sacred
days, (or, He who overwhelms Indra himself
with His own excellent attributes), He who
showers all objects of desire upon His wor-
shippers, He who walks over all the uni-
verse, He who offers the excellent flight of
steps formed by Virtue, He who has Virtue
in His abdomen, (or, He who protects Indra
even as a mother protects the child in her
womb), He who aggrandises (His worship-
pers), He who spreads Himself out for
becoming the vast universe, He who is aloof
from all things, He who is the receptacle
of tie ocean of Shrutis (CCLVII—CCLXIV) ;


42. He who is possessed of excellent
arms, He who is incapable of being borne
by any creature, He from whom flowed the
sounds called Brahma (or Veda), He who
is the Lord of all Lords of the universe,
He who is the giver of riches, He whe lives
in His own power, He who is multiform,
He who is of vast form, He who lives in
the form of Sacrifice in all animals, He who


ANG SHASANA PARVA


tauses. all things to be displayed (cctxv—
CTCLEXIV) ;


43. He who is gifted with great might,
‘energy, and splendour; He who displays
Himself in visible forms to His adorers, He
who scorches the unrighteous with his burn-
ing energy, He who is gifted with the sixfold
attributes, He who imparted the Veda to
the Grandfather Brahman, He who is of
the form of the Samans, Richs, and Yaju-
shes, He who soothes.His adorers burning
with the afflictions of the world like the rays
of the moon cooling all living creatures of
the world, He that is gifted with burning
effulgence like the Sun (CCLXXV—CCLXXXII);


44. He from whose mind has originated
‘the Moon, He who blazes forth in His own
effulgence, He who nourishes all creatures
‘even like the luminary marked by the hare,
He who is the Master of the celestials, He
who is. the great medicine for the disease
of worldly attachment, He who is the great
‘causeway of the universe, He who is gifted
with knowledge and other qualities that are
never futile and with prowess that is incap-
able of being baffled (cc~xxxi111—Ccs-
XXXIX);


45. He who is solicited by all creatures
at all times, He who rescues his worshippers
by casting kind looks upon them, He who
sanctifies even them who are sacred, He
who merges the life-breath in the Soul,
He who assumes various forms for protect-
ing both the Liberated and the Non-Liberas
ted; He who kills the desires of those that
are Liberated, He who prevents evil desires
from arising in the minds of His worship-
pers, He who is the father of Kama, He
who is most agreeable, He who is desired
by all creatures, He who grants the fruition
of all desires, He who has the ability to
accomplish ali deeds (Ccxc—ccxcix) 5


46. He who sets the four Cycles to begin
their course, He who causes the Cycles to
continually revolve as ona wheel, He who
is gifted with various kinds of illusion, He
who is the greatest of eaters, He who is in-
capable of being seized, He who is manifest,
He who subjugates thousands of foes, He
who subjugates innumerable foes (ccc—
CCCVIN) ;


47» He who is desired, or He who is wor-
shipped in sacrifices), He who is distin-
guished above all, He who has is desired
by the wise and pious, He who has an
ornament of (peasocok’s) feathers on his
head-gear, He who stupefies all creatures
with His illusion, He who showers His
favour on all His worshippers, He who
kills the anger of the Righteous, He who
fills the Unrighteous with anger, He who
is the accomplisher of all deeds, He who


40


343


holds the universe. on his arms, He who
upholds the Earth (COcIx—cccxvill) ;


48. He who transcends the six well».
known modifications, He who is gifted with
great celebrity, He who causes all living
creatures live, He who gives life, the
younger brother of Vasava, He who is the
receptacle of ail the waters in the. universe,
He who covers all creatures, He whois
never careless, He who is established on-
His own glory (CGCxIX--CCCXXVII} 5


49. He who flows in the form of nectar,
He who dries up all things, He who up-
holds the path of Virtue, He who bears the
load of the universe, He who gives desir-
able boons to those who solicit them, He
who causes the winds to blow, He whois
the son of Vasudeva, He who is endued
with extraordinary lustre, He who is the
originating cause of the deities, He who
pierces alt hostile towns (CCCxxVILI—ccc-
XXXVI) ;


50. He who is above all sorrow and
grief, He who leads us safely across the
ocean of life or the world, He who removes
from the hearts of all His worshippers the
fear of re-birth, He who is possessed of
infinite courage and “prowess, He who is
an offspring of Shura’s race, He who is the
master of ail living creatures, He who is
inclined to show His favoer to all, He who
has come on Earth for a hundred times,
He who holds a lotus in one of his hands,
He whose eyes resemble the lotuspetals
(CCOC¥XXVII--CCCXLVI)';


51. He from whose navel originated the
primeval lotus, He who is seated upon a
lotus, He who has eyes resembling lotus
petals, He who is adored by even worship-
pers as one seated within the lotus of their
hearts, He who assumes the form of em-
bodied soul, He who is gifted with power
of every kind, He who grows in the form
of the five primal elements, the Ancient
Soul, He who is endued with vast eyes,
He who has Garuda sitting on the standard
of His car (CCCXLVII—CCCLY) ; :


§2. Hejwho is peerles, the Sharabha
(the lion-killing animal), He who Strikes
the wicked with terror, He who knows
everything that has taken place in Time,
He who accepts, in the forms of the celes-
tials, the butter poured on the sacrificial
fire, He who is known by all kinds. of evi-
dence or proof, He upon whose breast sits
Prosperity always, He who is victorious in
every battle (CCCLVI—~CCCLXIV) 5


53. He who is above destruction, He
who assumes a red form, He who is an
object of search with the Virtuous, He whe
is at the rout of all things, He who has
the mark of the string around his abdomen,


314


He who bears or forgives all injuries, He
who upholds the Earth in the form of her
mountains, He who is the foremost of ali
ebjects of adoration, - He who is gifted with
great speed, He who swallows vast quanti-+
ties of food (CCCLKV—CCCLxxIV) ;


54.- He who caused the creation to start
into being, He who always agitates both
Nature and Soul, He who shines with
tesplendence (or, sports in joy), He who
has power in bis stomach, He who is the
Supreme Lord of all,.He who is the mate-
rial out of which the universe has been
made, He who is the cause or Agent.who
has made the universe, He who is indepen-
dent of alt things, He who ordains variety
in the universe, He who is incapable of
being comprehended, He who renders
Himself invisible by the screen of illusion
(CCCLAXV—COCLXXxxV) ;.


55. He who is understanding divested of
all qualities, He on whom all things rest,
Ele in whom all things live when the uni-
versal dissolution comes, He who assigns
the foremost place to those who worship
Him, He who is durable, He who is gifted
with the highest power, He who has been
glorified in the Vedanta, He who is conten-
ted, He who is always full, He whose
glance is auspicious (CCCLxxxvI—CCCxCY) ;


56. He who fills all Yogins with joy,
He who is the end of all creatures, He who
is the faulless Path, He whe is, in the
form of Sentiency, lead to Liberation, He
who leads (Jiva to Emancipation), He who
has none to lead Him, He whi is endued
with great might, He who is the foremost
of all Beings possessed of might, He who
upholds, He who is the foremost of all
Beings knowing duty and religion (Gccxcv1
—cDIv) ;


.§7. He who joins, at the time of creation,
the disunited elements for forming all
objects, He who resides in all bodies, He
who causes all creatures to act in the form
of Kshetrojna, He who creates all creatures
after destroying them at the universal dis-
solution, He to whom every one bows with
respect, He who is extended over the entire
universe, He who owns the primeval golden
egg as His abdomen whence everything pro-
ceeds, He who destroys the enemies of the
celestials, He who over-spreads all things,
He who spreads sweet perfumes, He who
disregards the pleasure of the senses (chY—
CDxv) ;


58. He who is at onee with the seasons,
He at whose sight alone all adorers succeed
in obtaining the great object of their wish,
He who weakens all creatures, He who
lives in the sky of the heart, depending


| all creatures live,


‘overspreads


MAHABHARATA.


capable of being knowa everywhere, He
who fils everyone with dread, He in whom
He who is clever in
doing all acts, He whe forms the Rest of
allt creatures, He who is more powerful than
other Beings (CDxVI—CDxxv) ;


59 He in whom the whole universe is
spread out, He who is himself immobile aad
in whom all things rest for ever, He who is an
object of proof, He whe is the ndestructible
and unchanging seed, He who is sought
by all, He who has no desire, He who is
the great case {which covers the universe),
He who has all sorts of things to enjoy, He
who has great wealth wherewith to secure
all objects of desire (CDxXVI—-CDXxxxIV) ; °


60. He who is above despair, He whe
exists in the form of Renunciation, He who
is without birth, He who is the stake to
which Virtue is bound, He who is the great
embodiment of sacrifice, He is the nave.
of the starry wheel that revolves in the sky,.
He who is the Moon among the constel-
lations, He who is competent to perform
every feat, He who stays in His own soul
when all things disappear, He who
cherishes the desire for Creation (cDxxxv—
CDXLIV) ;


61. He who is the embodiment of all
saccifices, He who is adored in all sacrifices.
and religious rites, He who is the most
adorable of all the deities present in the
sacrifices that men perform, He who is the
embodiment of all such sacrifices in which
animals are offered up according to the.
ordinance, He who is adored by persons
before they take any food, He who is the
Refuge of those who seek Liberation, He
who sees the acts and omissions of all crea-
tures, He whose soul is above all attri-
butes, He who is possessed of omniscience,
He who is identical with knowledge that is
unacquired, unlimited and capable of doing
everything (CDXLV-—CDL1¥) ;


62. He who is observant of excellent
vows, He whe has a face always full of joy,
He who is exceedingly subtile, He who
utters the most agreeable sounds, He who.
gives happiness, He who does good to
others without expecting any return, He
who fills all creatures with joy, He wha
has subdued anger, He who has mighty
arms, He who tears the impious (CDLY~.
CDLXIV);


63. He who causes those persons who
are destitute of knowledge of the soul to
be steeped in the deep sleep of His illu-
sion, He who relies on himself, He who.
the entire universe, Ele who
exists in infinite forms, He who is engaged
in vocations infinite in number, He whe
lives in everything, He who is full affec-


pon His own glory and power, He who is ! tion towards all His wershippers, He whe


(


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


is the universal father, He who holds in
the form of the vast Ocean, all jewels and
gems in His abodemen, He -who is the
Lord of all treasures (CDLXV—CDLXxIV) ;


64. He who is the protector of Virtue,
He who accomplishes all the duties of
Virtue, He wha is the substratum of Virtue,
He who is existent for all time, He who is
non-existent, He who is destructible, He
who is indestructible as Chit, He who is, in
the form of Jiva, destitute of true know-
ledge, He who is in the form of the Sun,
gifted with a thousand rays, He who
erdains, He who has created all the Scrip-
tures (CDLKEXV—~CDLXXXY) ;


65. He who exists, in the form of the
Sun, as the centre of innumerable rays of
light, He who lives in all creatures, He
whe is: endued with great prowess, He
who is the Master of even Yama and
others of similar power, He who is the
oldest of the.deities, He who exists in ‘His
own glory, renounc.ing all conditions, He
who is the Lord of even all the deities,
He who is the ruler of even him who up-
holds the deities (v¢z., Indra) (CDLKXXVI-~~
CDXCII1) ;


66. He who transcends birth and death,
He who tended and protected kine, He
who nourishes all creatures, He who is
approachable by knowledge alone, He who
is Ancient, He who upholds the elements
which form the body, He who enjoys and
suffers, He whe assumed the form of a
huge Boar, He who gave plentiful presents
to all in a grand sacrifice performed by Him
(CDXCIV—DI}) ;


67. He who drinks Soma in every sacri-
fice, He who drinks nectar, He who in the
form of Soma (Chandramas), nourishes all
the herbs and plants, He who conquers
enemies in a moment when even they are
infinite in number, He who is of universal
form and is the foremost of all existent
hodies, He who is the chastiser, He who
is victorious over all, He whose purposes
are never baffled, He who deserves gifts,
He who gives what His creatures have not
and who protects what they have (piu—
DXII)}


68. He who holds the life-breaths, He
who sees all His creatures as objects of
direct vision, He who never sees anything
besides His own Self, He who gives Libera-
tion, He whose footsteps covered Heaven,
Earth, and the Nether regions, He who is
the receptacle of all the waters, He who
overwhelms all Space, all Time, and all
things, He who lies on the vast expanse of
waters aflee the universal dissolution, He
whe causes the destruction of all things
(DXITI—DXX]) ; :


315


6g. ‘ Hé who is without birth, He who is
excéedingly adorable, He who appears in
His own nature, He who has conquered
all enemies, He whoa delights those who: .
meditate on Him, He who ts joy, He who-
fills others with delight, 'He who swelis
with all causes of delight, He who has
‘Truth and other virtues for His indications,
He whose footsteps are in the three worlds
(DXXII—DXxxX) ; : ,


go. He who is the first of Rishis, He -
who is identical with the} preceptor Kapila,
He who is knower of the universe,, He who
is Master of the Earth, He who has three
feet, Ife who is the guardian of the celes-


‘tials, He*who has large horns, He who


exhausts all acts by causing their doers
to enjoy or suffer theit fruits (DxxxI~
DXXXVIII);


71. The great Boar, He who is under-
stood or apprehended by the help of the
Vedanta, :He who has beautiful troops, He
who is adorned with golden armlets, He
wlio is conceald, He who is deep, He who
is difficult of access, He who transcends
both word and thought, He whe is armed
with the discus and the mace (Dxxix—«
DXLVII) ; 4


72, The Ordainer, He who is the cause
(in the form of helper) of the universe, He
who has never been defeated, He who is
the Island-Born Krishna, He who is endur-
ing, He who atows all things, and is Him-
self above decay, the Varuna; the son of
Varuna, He who is immovablé as a tree,
He who is shown in His own true form in
the lotus of the heart, He who creates,
preserves, and destroys by His will (pxLVv11
—DLYVIII) ;


73- He who is possessed of the sixfold
attributes, He who destroys the sixfold
attributes, He wlio is felicity, He who is
adorned with the triumphal garland, He
who is armed with the plough, He who
took birth from the womb of Aditi, He
who is endued with solar effulgence, He
who endures al] pairs of opposites, He who
is the foremost Refuge of all things (DLIx—
DLXV11)}}


74. Hewhois armed with the best of
bows {called Sharnga), He who was di-
vested of His battle-axe (by Rama of
Bhrigu’s race), He whr is fierce, He whe
is the giver of all objects of desire, He who
is so tall as to touch the very Heavens with
his head, He whose vision extends over the
entire universe, He who is Vyasa, He
who is the Master of speech or all learning,
He who has come into being without the
intervention of genital organs (DLXViLL—
DLXXVI); eo?


316,


75. He who is hymned with the three
(foremost) Samans, He who is the singer of
the Samans, He who is the Samans, He
who is the Extinction of all worldly attach-
ments, He who is: the Medicine, He who
is the Physician, He who has ordained the
fourth or last mode of life called Renuncia-
tion, He who causes the passions of His
worshippers to be controlled, He who is
contented, He who is the Refuge of devo-


tion and tranquillity of Soul (@LxxviI—
DLXXXv) ; zs :
76. He who is possessed of begutiful


limbs, He who is the giver of tranquillity of
soul, He who is the Creator, He who sports
in joy on the bosont onthe Earth,-He who
sleeps (in Yoga) lying on the body of the
prince of snakes, Shesha, after the universal
dissolution, the Benefactor of kine, the
Master of the universe, the Protector of
the universe, He who is endued with eyes


like those of the bull, He who cherishes’


Virtue with love (DLXxxvi—pDxcy) ;


77. He whois the unreturning hero, He
whose soul has been withdrawn from all
attachments, He who reduces to a subtile
form the universe at the time of the univer-
sal dissolution, He who does good to His
afflicted worshippers, He whose name, as
soon as heard, purges the hearer of all his
sins, He who has the mystic mack (Shribatsa)
on His breast, He in whom lives the god-
dess of Prosperity for ever, He who was
chosen by Lakshmi as- her husband, He
who is the foremost one of all Beings gifted
with prosperity (DXCvI-=DCIV) ;


78. He who gives prosperity to His
worshippers, the Master of prosperity, He
who always lives with those who are endued
with prosperity, He who is the receptacle
of all kinds of prosperity, He who gives
prosperity to all persons of righteous deeds
proportionate to their virtue, He who holds
the goddess of Prosperity on his bosom,
He who confers prosperity upon those that
hear of, praise, and meditate on Him, He
who is the embodiment of that condition
which represents the attainment of unattain-
able happiness, He who is possessed of
every kind of beauty, He who is the Refuge
of the three worlds (DCv—pDcxtv) ;


79. He who has beautiful eyes, He who
has beautiful limbs, He who is a hundred
sources of delight, He who represents the
highest delight He who is the Master of
all the luminaries in the sky, He who has
subjugated His soul, He whose sou! is not
governed by any superior Being, He who
ts always of beautiful deeds, He whose
doubts have all been removed for He sees
thé whole universe as a myrobalam in His
Palen (DCXV—DCXXI1I) ;

. \


. MAHABHARATA,


80. He who is above all creatures,
He whose vision extends in all directions,
He who has no Master, He who at all times
is above all changes, He who (in the form
of Rama) had to lie down on the naked
earth, He who adorns the Earth, He who is
power incarnate, He who is above all grief,
He who removes the griefs of all his wor-
shippers aS soon as they remember Him
(DCXXIV—DCXXxII) ;


8t. He who is possessed of effulyence,
He who is adored by all, He who is the
water-pot, He who is of pure soul, He
who purifies all as seon as they hear of
Him, He who is free and unrestrained,
He whose car never turns away from bat-"
tles, He who has immense riches, He
whose prowess is incapable of being mea-
sured (DCXXxXIII—DCXLI).


82. He who is the destroyer of the Asura
named {alanemi, He who is the Hero,
He who has taken birth in the family o€
Shura, He who is the Lord of all the
celestiats, the Soul of the three worlds; the
Master of the three worlds, He who has the
solar and lunar rays fer His hair; the des-
troyer of Keshi, He who destroys all thingy
(at the universal dissolution (DCXLII—DCL) ;


83. The deity from whom the fruition of
all “desire is sought, He who grants the
wishes of all, He who has desires, He wha
has a handsome form, He who is endued
with perfect knowledge of Shrutis and Smri-
tis, He whe is possessed of a form which
is indescribable by attributes, He whose
brightest rays overwhelm Heaven, He who
has no end, He who (in the form of Arjuna
or Nara) acquired immense riches on the
occasion of his campaign of conquest (DCL
—DCLX) ;


84. He mho is the foremost obiect of
silent recitations of sacrifices, of the Vedas,
and of all religious deeds, He who is the
creator of penances and the like, He who is
ofthe form of Brahman, He whois the
augmentor of penances, He who is conver-—
sant with Brahma, He who is of the fora


-of Brahmana, He who has for His limbs


Him who is called Brahma, He who knows
all the Vedas and everything in the-.uni-
verse, He who is always fond of Brahe
manas and of whom the Brahmanas also
are fond (DCLXI—DCLXxX) ;


85. He whose footsteps cover vast areas,
He whose feets are mighty, He who is
gifted with great energy, He who is at one
with Vasulli the king of the snakes, He
who is the foremost of all sacrifices, He
who is the foremost of all sacrificers, He
who is Yapa, the first of sacrifices, He who
is the foremost of all offerings made in sae
crifices (DCLXXI—DCLXXVIII) ; :


ANUSHASANA PARVA:


86. He who is hymned by all, He who
loves ta be hymned, He who is Himself
the hymns uttered by His worshippers, He
who is the very act of hymning, He who is
the person who hymns, He who is fond of
fighting with the evil, He whois full in
every respect, He who fills others with every
kind of affluence, He who destroys all sins
as soon as He is remembered, He whose
acts are allrighteous, He who is above all
sorts of disease (DCLXXIX——DCLXXXIX) {


87. He who is fleet like the mind, He
who is the creator and promulyator of all
kinds of learning, He whose vital seed is
gold, He who is the giver of wealth, He who
takes away all the wealth of the Asuras,
the son of Vasudeva, He in whom all
creatures live, He whose mind lives in all
things, He who takes away the sins of all
who seek refuge in Him (DCXC—DCxcVII1) ;


88. He who is attainable by the pious,
He whose acts are always good, He who
fs the one entity in the universe, He who
shows Himself in various forms, He who
is the refuge of all truth-knowing persons,
He who has the greatest of heroes for his
troops, He who is the foremost of the
Yadavas, He whois the abode of the pious,
He who sports in joy in the banks of
Yamuna (pcxcrx-—pccv11) ;

8g. He in whom all created things live,
the deity who overwhelms the universe with
His Maya (illusion), He in whom all fore-
most of Beings become merged, He whose
hunger is never satiated, He who humbles
the pride of all, He who fills the Righte-
ous with just pride, He who swells with
oy, He who is incapable of being seized,
fe who has never been defeated (OCCVIEI—
DCCXV) 5

go. He who is of universal form, He
who is of vast form, He whose form shines
with energy and effulgence, He who is
without form, He who ts of diverse forms,
We who is unmanifest, He who is of a
hundred forms, He who is of a hundred
faces (DCCXVII—DCCXXIV) ;


gt. He who is one, He who is many,
He who is full of happiness, He who forms
the one grand subject of investigation,
He from whom is this all, He that is called
THAT, He who is the highest Refuge,
He who confines Jiva’ within material
causes, He who is coveted by all, ie
who took birth in the family of Madhu,
He who is exceedingly affectionate towards
His worshippers (WCCXXV—DCCXXxXY) ;


_ 92. He who is of golden hue, He whose
limbs are like gold, He who has beautiful
limbs, He whose person is adorned with
Anugadas made with sandal paste, He who
is -the destroyer of heroes, He who has


4!


317


no peer, He who is like cipher, He who
stands in need of no blessings, He who
never swerves from His own nature and
power and knowledge, He who is mobile
in the form of wind (DCGXXxVI—DCCXLY) ;


93. He who never identifies Himself
with anything that is Not-Soul, He who
confers honors on His worshippers, He who
is honored by all, fe who is the Lord of
the three worlds, He who upholds the
three warlds, He who is gifted with in-
telligence and memory capable of holding
in His mind the contents of all treatises,
He who took birth in a sacrifice, He who is
worthy of the highest praise, He whose.
intelligence and memory are never futile,
He who upholds the Earth - (pccxtvi—
DCCLY) ;


94. He who pours forth heat in the form
of the Sun, He who has great beauty
of limbs, He who is the foremost ‘of ail
holders of weapons, tHe who accepts the
flowery and leafy offerings made to Him
by His worshippers, fle who has controlled
all his passions and grinds all His enemies,
He who has none to walk before Him, He
who tras four horns, He who is the elder,
brother of Gada (pCCLVI—BGCLXIV) ;


95. He who has four forms, He who
has four arms, He from whom the four
Purushas have originated, He who is the
refuge of the four modes of tife and the
four orders of men, He who is of four
Souls, He from whom springs the four
objects of life, viz., Virtue Wealth, Pleasure,
and Liberation, He who is conversant with
the four Vedas, He who has shown only a
part of His power (BCCLXV—DCCLXXI})3 .


96. He who sets the wheel of the world
to revolve round and round, He whose soul
is dissociated from all worldly attachments,
He who is incapable of being defeated,
He who cannot be transceaded, He who is
exceedingly difficult of being attained, He
who is difficult of being approached. He
who is difficult of access, He who is difficult
of being brought within the heart by even’
Yogins), He who kills even the most power+
ful enemies (BCCLEXITI—DCCLXXXI) 5


. ‘
97. He who has beautiful limbs, He
who takes the essence of all things in the
universe, He who has the most beautiful
warp and woof, He who weaves with
ever-extending warp and woof, He ‘whose
works are done by Indra, He whose works
are great, He who has no act undone, He
who has composed all the Vedas and scrip~'
tures (DCCLXXXII--DCCLXXXIXx) ;


98. He whose birth is high, He who is
exceedingly beautiful, He wnose heart is full
of mercy, He who has precious gems in his
navel, He who has excellent knowledge fol


318


his’ eye, He who is worthy of adcration by
Brahman himself and other foremost ones
in the universe, He who is the giver of food,
He who assumed horns at the time of the
universal dissolution, He whe has always
subjugated His enemies mest wonderfully,
He who knows allthinzgs, He wiso is ever
victorious aver those who are of irresistible
prowess (BCCKC—DCCXCIX) ;

99. He whose limbs are like gold, He
who is incapable of being agitated, He
who is Master of all those who are masters


of all speech, [le who is the deepest lake,


He who is the deepest pit, He who trans-
vcends the influence of ‘Time, He in whom
the primal elements are established (DCcC—
DCCCv}) ; :


100. He who gladdens the Earth, He
who grants fruits which are as agreeable as
the Fasmimm pubesceus flowers, He who
wave away the Earth to Kashyapa, He
who removes the three kinds of misery like
a rainecharged cloud cooling the heat of the
Earth by its down-pour, He who purifies
all creatures, He who has none to urge
Him, He who drank nectar, ee who has
wer undying body, He whois possessed of
emniscience, Ite who has face and eyes
turned towards every direction (DCCcCVII—
DECCXVI) 5


‘tor, He who is easily won, He who has
performed excellent vows, He who is
crowned with success by Himself, He who
is victorious over all enemies, He who
seorches all enemies, Ile who is the ever-
yrowitg and tall Banian that overtops all
other trees, He who is the sacred fiy tree,
He who is the Ficus veligiosa, (or, He who
is not durable, jn consequence of His being
all perishable forms in the universe even as
tHe is all the imperishable forms which exist,
He who is the slayer of Chanura of the
Andhra country (QCCCKVII—DCUCKXXY) ;


“402; He who is endued with a thousand


rays, He who has seven tongues, He who


has seven flames, He who has seven horses
tor carrying His vehicle, He who is forms
less, He who is sintess, He who is incon.
teivable, He who removes all fears,
He who destroys all fears (pcccxxvi—
DCCCXXXIV) 5


103. He who is -minute, He who is
gross, He who is emaciated, He who is
adipose, He who is gifted with attributes,
He who is above all attributes, He who is
unseizable, He who suffers Himself to be
easily seized (by His worshippers), He who
has an excellent face, He who has for His
descendants the peopie of the accidental
tegions, He who extends the creation cons
Sisting ef the fivefold grimal elements
(DCCCKXXV—DCCECXLV]) ; :


a ei eg Ss


MAHABHARATA.


to4. He who bears heavy weights (i
the form of Ananta), He who has beer
declared by the Vedas, He who is devoted
to Yoga, He who is the Lord of all Vogins,
He wha ts the giver of all desires; He who
affords an asylum to those that seek it, He
who sets Yogins to practise Yora anew
after their return to life upon the conelusion
of their blessed life in Heaven, He wha
invests Yogins with power even after the
exhaustion of their merits, tle who has
goodly leaves, He who causes the winds to
blow (DCCCXLVH—DCCCLY)}) ;


105. He who is armed with the bow, He
who ts conversint with the science of -arms,
He who is the rod of punishment, He who
is chastiser, Ile who executes all sentences
of punishment, He who has never been
defeated, tle whois competent in all acts,
He who engages all persons in their respec
tive duties, He who has none to set Him to
any work, He who has no Yama to kill
Him (BCCCLVII-DCCCLXVI) 3


106, He whois gifted with heroism and
prowess, He who has the quality of Sattwa
(Goodness), He who is identicat with Pruth,
He who is devoted to Truth and Virtue, He
who is sought by those who are determined
upon acquiring Liberation, He who deserves
to have all objects which His worshippers
present to His, He who is worthy of being
adored, He who does good to all, He who
increases the delights of all (mocccLxvu—
DCCCLXKY) ;


107. He whose track is through the sky,
He who snines in His own effulgence, He
who is gifted with great beauty, He who
eats the offerings made on the sactificial
fire, He who lives everywhere and is gifted
with supreme power, He who sucks the
moisture of the Earth in the form of the
Sun, He who has various desires, He who
brings forth all things, He who is the
parent of the universe, He who has the
Sun for His eye (DCCCLXXVI-——DCCCLXXKXY) ;


108. He who is Infinite, He who accepts
all sacrificial offerings, He who enjoys
Nature ist the form of Mind, He who gives
happiness, He who has taken repeated
births, He who is the First-Born of all
existent things, He who is above despair,
He who forgives the picus when they trip,
He who is the foundation of the universe,
He who is most wonderful (DCCCLXxXxVI—~
DCCCxKeY) ;


tog. He who is existent from the begin-
ning of Time, He who is existing from
before the birth of the Grandfather and
others, He who is of a tawny color, He
who assumed the form of the great Boar,
He who exists even when all things are
dissolved, tHe who is the giver of all bless~


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


ings, He who creates blessing, He who is
identifiable with all blessings, He who enjoys
blessings, He who is able to scatter bless
ing (BCCccCXCviI—cNV) ;


ito. He who is without anger, He who
lies ensconced in folds, He who is armed
with the discus, He who is gifted with great
prowess, He whose sway is governed by the
great precepts of the Shrutis and the
Surritis, He who is incapable of being des-
cribed by speech, Hie whom the Vedantas
have tried to express with the help of
speech, He who is the dew wirich cools
those who are afflicted with the three kinds
of grief, He who lives in all bodies, gifted


with the power of removing darkness
(CMVI—CMXIV) ;
iit, He who ts shorn of anger, He who


is expert in doing ali acts by thought, word,
and deed, He who can do all acts within
the shortest time, He who destroys the
wicked, He who is the foremost of all fore
giving persons, Ele who is foremost of alf
“persons gifted with knowledge, He who is
above all fear, He whose names and deeds,
heard and recited’ lead to virtue (cMxv—
CMXXEL) 5


112. He who rescnes the Virtuous fron
the tempestuous ocean of the world, He
who destroys the wicked, H» who is Virtue,
tHe who removes all evil dreams, He who
destroys all bad paths for leading His
worshippers to the good path of Liberation,
He who protects the universe by staying
in the quality of Goodness, He who walks
along the good path, He who is Life, He
who exists overspreading the universe
(CMXXILI—CMXXXf) ;


113. He who is of infinite forms, He who
is gifted with infinite prosperity, He who
has subdued anger, He who destroys the
fears of the pious, He who gives just fruits,
on every side, to sentient beings accore
ding to their thoughts and deeds, He who
is of immeasurable Soul, He who bestows
various kinds of fruits on worthy persons
for their various ceeds, He who issues
various commands, He who attaches to every
deed its proper fruit (Cmxxxf1—CMAXL) ;


. ff. He who has no begining, He who
ts the receptacle of all causés as well as of
the Earth, He who has the goddess of
Prosperity always by his side, He who is
the foremost of all heroes, He who is adorn.
ed with beautiful armilets, He who produces
all creatures, He who is the original cause
of the birth of all creatures, He who is the
terror of all the wicked Asuras, He who is
gifted with terrible prowess (CMxLI—
CMXLIX) ; :


115. He who is the receptacle and abode
of the five primal elements, He who gulps


3'9


down His throat all creatures at the time of
the universal dissulution, He whose smile
is as pleasant as the sight of flowers, He
who is always wakeful, He whe stays at
the head of all creatures, He whose con»
duct consists of those acts which the Pious
do, He who who revives the dead, He who
is the mystic syllable Om, He who has
ordained ail pious deeds (CML—CMLVIE1) 3


116. He who displays the truth about the
Supreme Soul, He who is the abode of the
five life-breaths and the senses, He who is
the food which maintains all living crea-
tures, He who canses all living creatures ta
live with the belp of the vital air called
Prana, tHe who is the great subject of every
system of. philosophy, {le whe is the Qne
Sout in the universe, tHe who is above birth,
decrepitude, aud death (CMLIx—CMUXy) 5


117. ‘He who rescuers the universe oi
account of the sacred syllables Bhuh, Bhu-
vah, Swah, and the others with which
Homa-offerjngs are made, He wha is: the
gre:t rescuer, tle who is the fatherof ah,
He who is the father of even the Grand-
father (Brahman), He who is of the forne
of Sacrifice, He whois the Lord of alf sae
crifices, Hfe who is the sacrificer, He who
has sacrifices for His limbs, He who
upholds all sacrifices (CMLXVI—CMLKXY) 7


118. fe who protects sacrifices, He
who has created sacrifices, He who is the
foremost of all performers of sacrifices, He
who enjoys the rewards of all sacrifices, He
who causes the ceicbration of all sacrifices,
He who completes all sacrifices by accepting
the full libation at the end, He who i3 ac
one with such sacrifices as are performed
without desire of fruit, Ele who is the food
which sustains all living creatures; He who
is also the eater of that food (CMLKxvI—~
CMLXXX1V) ;


11g. fe who is Himself the cause of His
existence, tle whoa is self-born, He who
penetrated through the solid Earth, He
who sings the Samans, He whe is the de-
lighter of Devaxi, He who is the Creator
of all, He whois the Lord of Earth, He
who is the destroyer of the sins of His wore
shippers (CMLXXxV—CMXGII) ;


120. He who bears the conch (Panchas
janya) in His hand, He who bears the
sword of knowledge and iflusion, He who
sets the wheel of the cycles to revolve ceases
lessly, He who invests Himself with cop.
sciousness and the senses; He who is gifted
with the mace of the most-solid understand -
ing, He who is armed with a car-wheel,
He who is incapable of being agitated, He
who is armed with all kinds of weapons
{(CMXCIII—M).


Of, SaLurations To HIM,


‘320


121. Thus I have recited to you, without
any exception the thousand excellent names
of the great Keshava whose glory should
always be sung.


122. The man who hears these names
every day or who recites them every day,
never meets with any evil either in this
world or in the next,


123. If a Brahmana does this, he suc-
ceeds in mastering the Vedanta; if a Ksha-
turlya does it, he becomes always victorious
in battle. A Vaishya, by doing it, becomes
possessed of riches, while a Shudra acquires
great happiness.


t24. If one becomes desirous of acquir-
ing the merit of virtue, one succeeds in ac-
quiring it. If it is riches which one desires,
one succeeds in acquiring them. So also
the man who wishes for the gratification of
the senses, succeeds in enjoying all kinds of
pleasures, and the man desirous of children,
_ acquires them,


125—126, Fhat man who with devotion
and perseverance and heart wholly turned
towards him, recites these thousand names
of Vasudeva every day, after having puri-
fied himself, succeeds in winning great fame,
an eminent position among his kinsmen, en-
during prosperity, and lastly, that which is
of the highest good to him (viz., Emancipa-
tion itself),


127. Sucha man never meets with fear
at any time, and acquires great prowess
and energy. Disease never afflicts him;
‘ sheen of complexion, strength, beauty, and
accomplishments, become his.


428. ‘Fhe sick, become sound ;. the afftic-
ted become freed from. their miseries; the
" affrighted become freed from fear, and he
who is plunged is calamity becomes freed
from calamity. :

£29, The man who sings the praises of
" that foremost of Beings by reciting His
thousand names with devotion succeeds in
speedily getting over ali difficulties.


130. That mortal who takes refuge in
Vasudeva and who becomes devoted to
Him, becomes freed of all sins and acquires
eternal Brahma,


131. They who are devoted to Vasudeva
have never to meet with any evil. They
become freed from the fear of birth, death,
“decrepitude, and disease.


132. That man who with devotion and
. faith recites this hymy succeeds in acquir-
ing beatitude, forgiveness, prosperity, ine
tcHigence, memory, and fame.


133. Neither anger, nor jealousy, nor
cupidity, nor evil understanding, ever ap-


MAHABHARATA‘


pears in those virtuous men who are devoted


to that foremost of Beings.


134. The sky with the sun, moon, and
stars, the points of the compass, the Earth,
and the Ocean, are all held and supported
by the might of the great Vasudeva.


135. ‘The entire mobite and immobile
universe with the celestials, Asuras, and
Gandharvas, Yakshas, Uragas and Rae
kshasas, is under the sway of Krishna,


126. ‘The senses, mind, understanding,
life, energy, strength, and memory, it has
been said, have Vasudeva for their root.
Indeed, this body that is called [shetra,
and the intelligent sonl within, that is called
the knower of Kshetra, alsaohave Vasudeva
for their root,


137. Conduct is said to be the foremoss
of all subjects treated of in the seriptures.
Virtue has conduct for its root. ‘The un-
fading Vasudeva is said to be the Lord of
Virtue.


138. The Rishis, the manes, the celes«
tials, the great (primal) elements, the
metals, indeed, the éntice mobile and im-
mobile universe, has originated from
Naraya na.

139. Woga, the Sankhya philosophy,
knowledge, all mechanical arts, the Vedas,
the various scriptures, and all learning,
have originated from Janarddana,


149, Vishnu is one great element o¢
substance which has spread itself out inte
various forms. Covering the three worlds,
He, the soul of all things, enjoys them ail,
tiis glory Knows no decrease, and He it is
that is the Enjoyer of the universe,


141. This hymn in praise of the illustri«
ous Vishnu, composed by Vyasa, should be
recited by that person who desires to ac»
quire happiness and that which is of the
highest benefit (vzz., Emancipation).

142. Those persons who worship and
adore the Lord of universe, that Deity wha
is unborn and endued with blazing efful-«
gence, who is the origin or cause of the
universe, who knows no. decay, and who has
eyes. tha& are as large and beautiful as the
petals of the lotus, have never to. meet wih
any discoinfiure,

\


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


CHAPTER CL.
( ANUSHASANIKA PARVA ).—


Continued,


Yudhishthira said :—


1; O grandfather, O you of great wis-
dom, O you who know all branches of know-
ledge, what is that subject of silent recita-
tion by recititing which every day one
-may win the merit of virtue in a large
measure ? :


2. What is that Mantra for recitation,

. which gives success, if recited on the occasion

of starting on a journey or in entering a

new building, or at the beginning of any

undertaking, or on the occasion of sacrifices
in honor of the deities or of the manes?


3. You should tell me what, indeed, what
Mantea it is, which propitiates all malevo-
lent influences, or brings on prosperity or
growth or protection from evil, or the des-
truction of enemies, or the dispelling of
fears, and which, at the same time, is con-
sistent with the Vedas,


Bhishma said :~


4. Hear, O king, with rapt attention,
what that Mantra is which was declared by
Vyasa. It was ordained by Savitri and is
highly excellent. It is capable of purifying
a person forthwith of all his sins,


5- Hear, O sinless one, as I recite to
you the ordinances about that Mantra, In-
deed, O chief of the sons of Pandu, by
listening to those ordinances, one becomes
purged of all his sins.


6. One who recites this Mantra day and
night hecomes never sullied by sin. 1 shall
now declare it to you what that Mantra is.
Do you listen with rapt attention.


7. ludeed, the man who hears it becomes
gifted with longevity, O prince, and attain-
ing to the fruition of all his desires, sports
happily both in this life and in the next,


8. This Mantra, O kigg, was daily re-
cited by the foremost of royal sages per-
forming Kshatriya duties and steadily ob-
serving the vow of truth,


g. Indeed, O foremost of ‘kings, those
monarchs who, with cantrolled senses and
tranquil soul, recite this Mantra every
day, .succeed in winning unrivalled pros-
perity. .

to, Salutations to Vashishtha of high
vows, after having bowed with respect to
Parashara, thay Ocean.of the Vedas. Salu-
tations to the great snake Ananta, and
salutations to all those who are crowned
with success, and who are of undecaying


glory.


, 32t


tt. Salutations to the Rishis, and to
Him who is the Highest of the High, the
god of gods, and the giver of boons to alt
those that are foremost, Salutations unto
Him of a thousand heads, Him that is most
auspicious, Him who has a thousand names,
vig., Janarddana. ’ :


12-13. Aja, Ekapada, Ahivradhna, the
unvanguished Pinakin, Rita, Pitrirupa, the
three-eyed Maheshwara, Vrishakapi, Sham-
bhu, Havana, and Ishwara,—these are the
celebrated elevery Rudras, who are the lords
of all the worlds, : '


t4—15. ‘These eleven ‘high-souled ones
have been mentioned as a hundred in the
Shatarudra (of the Vedas), Angsha,
Bhaga, Mitra, Varuna the lord of waters,
Dhatri, Aryaman, Jayanta, Bhaskara,
Tashtri, Pushan, Indra, and Vishnu, are
said to comprise a tale of twelve, These
twelve are called Adityas and they are
the sons of Kashyapa as the Shruti de-
clares.

16. Dhara, Dhruva, Sama, Savittra,
Anila, Anala, Pratyusha, and Prabhava, '
are the eight Vasus, named in the scrip-


“tures.


17. Nasatya and Dasra are said to be
the two Ashwins, They are the sons of
Martanda born of his. wife Samjna, from
whose nostrils they emanated.


18. After this I shalt recite the names of
those who are the witnesses of all deeds in
the worlds. ‘They take note’ of all sacrifices,
of all gifts, of ali good deeds.


1g—20. ‘Those lords among the deities
see everything although they are invisible,
Indeed, they see all ue good and bad deeds
of all beings. They are Mrityu, Kala, the
Vishwedevas, the Pitris having forms, the
great Rishis having penances for wealth, the
Munis, and others crowned with success and
devoted to penances and Liberation,


21. These of sweet smiles, confer various
benefits upon those men who recite their
names. indeed, gifted as they are with
celestial energy, they confer various regions
of happiness created by the Grandfather
upon such men. ’


22. They live in allthe worlds and at-
tentively mark all deeds. By ceciting the
names of those lords of all living creatures,
one always becomes gifted with righteous.
ness and wealth and enjoyments in profus
sion. ;


23. One acquires hereafter divdrse re.
gions of auspiciousness and happiness crea-
ted by the Lord of the universe,

24—28. ‘These thirty-three deities, who
ate the lords of all beings, as also Nandi-
shwara of huge body, and that pre-eminent

ty


322


one who has the bull for the emblem on his
banner, and those masters of all the worlds,
eis., the fellowers and associates of him
called Ganeshwara, and those called Sau-
myas, and those called- the Raudras, and
those called the Yogas, and those who are
known as the Bhutas, and the luminaries
in the firmament, the Rivers, the sky, the
king of birds (viz., Garuda), all those
Persons on Earth who have become crowned
with success on account of their penances,
and who are existing in an immobile or
mobile form, Himavat, all the mountains
the four Oceans, the followers and compa-
nions af Bhava who are gifted with prowess
equal to that of Bhava himself, the, illustri-
ous arid ever-victorious Vishnu and Skanda,
and Amvika,—these are the great souls by
reciting whose names with controlled senses,
one becomes purged of all his sins.


29—30. After this, [ shall recite the
names of those foremost Rishis who are
known as Manavas. Vhey are Yavakrita,
and Raibhya, and Arvavasu, and Paravasu,
and Aushija, and Kakshivat, and Vala
the son of Angiras. Then is Kanwa the
son of the Rishi Mandhatithi, aud Vari-
shada.


gt. All these are gifted with the energy
of Brahma and have been spoken of as
creators of the universes They have origi-
nated from Rudra and Anala and the
Vasus. By reciting their names people get
great benefits.


32. Indeed, by doing goad deeds on
Earth, people sport happily in the celestial
region, with the celestials, Phese Rishis
are the priests of Indra. ‘They live in the
East.


33. That man who, with capt attention,
recites the names of these Rishis, succeeds
in ascending to the regions of Indra and
getting great honours there.


34-35. Unmuchu, Pramuchu, Swas-
twyatreya of great energy, Dridhavya,
Urdhavahu, ‘Trinasoma. Angiras, and
Agastya of great energy, the son of Mitra-
varuna,—these seven are the Ritwijas of
the Yama the king of the dead, aud live in
the southern quarter. -


36—37. Dridheyu, Riteyu, illustrious
Parivyadha, Ekata, Dwita, and Trita,—
the last three gifted with solar effulgence,
—and Atri’s son of rigeteous soul, viz., the
Risbi Saraswata,—these seven who had
acted as Ritwijas in the great saccifice of
Varuna—have taken up theic abodes in
the Western quarter.

38—39. Atri, ihe iftustrious Vashishtha,
the great Rishi Kashyapa, Gotama, Bha-
tadwaja, Vishwamitra the son of Kushika,


ener ee a


‘Brahman.


MAHABHARATA. |


and Richika’s fierce and energetic son
Jamadagni,—these seven are the Ritwijas
of the Lord of treasures and live in the
Northern quarter.


40. ‘There are seven other Rishis wha
live in all directions without being confined
to any particular one. ‘They, it is, who give
fame and of al! that is beneficial to men,
and they have been sung as the creators of
the worlds,


4t. Dharma, Kama, Kala, Vasu,
Vasuki, Ananta, and Kapifa,—these seven
are the upholders of the world.


42. Rama, Vyasa, Drona’s son Ashwate
thaman, are the other Rishis. ‘These are
the great Ristis as divided into seven
groups, each group consisting of seven.


43. They are the creators of that peace
and good which men enjoy. They are
said to be the Reyents of the quarters.
One should turn his face to that direction
in which one of these Rishis live if one
desires to adore him.


44-~45. hose Rishis are the creators
of all creatures and have been considered
as the purifiers of all. Samvarta, Meru-
savarna, the righteous Markandeya, and
Sankhya and Yoga, and Narada and the
great Rishi Durvasas,—these are gifted
with’severe penances and great self-control,
and are celebrated over the three wortds,


46. ‘There are others who are equal to
Rudra himself. ‘hey live in the rezion of
By naming them with respect a
sonless man obtains a son, and a poor man
acquires riches.


47-48. Indeed, by naming them, one
acquires success in religion, and wealth and
pleasure. One should also take the name
of that celebrated king who was Emperor
of all the Earth and equal to a Prajapati,
vis., that foremost of monarchs, Prithu, the
son of Vena. ‘The Earth became his
daughter. Oue should also name Puru-
ravas, of the Solar race and equal unto
Mahendra himself in power,


49. He was the son of [la and celebrated
over the three worlds. One should, indeed,
take the name of that deac son of Vudha..


50—5t. One should also take the name
of Bharata, that ‘hero celebrated uver the
three worlds. Healso who in the golden
age worshipped the geds in a grand
Gomedha sacrifice, vig., the illustrious Ranti-
deva, who was equal to Mahadeva himself,
should be named. Gifted with penances,
possessed of every auspicious mark, the
sousce of every kind of good to the world,
he was the conquecor of the universe.


52. One should also take the name of
the royal sage Shweta of illustrious fame.


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


He had pleased the great Mahadeva and
jt was for his sake that Andhaka was killed.


53. One should also take the name of
the illustrious royal sage Bhagiratha, who,
through the favour of Mahadeva, sticceeded
in bringing down the sacred | river from the
celestial rigion,


§4. It was Bhagiratha who caused the
ashes of the sixty thousand sons of Sagara
to be washed with the sacred waters of
Ganga and thereby rescued them from their
sin. Indeed, one should take the names
of all these who were gifted with the blazing
effulgence of fire, great beauty, and high
energy.


55. Some of them were of awe-inspiring
forms and great power. One should take
the names of these deities and Rishis and
kings, those lords of the universe,—who are
multipliers of fame.


§6—57. Sankhya, and Yoga which is
highest cf the high, and Havya and Kavya
and that refuge of all the Shrutis, vzs.,
Supreme Brahma, have been declared to be
the sources of great good to ail creatures.
‘These are sacred and sin-purifying, and
have been spoken of very highly. ‘hese
are the foremost of medicines for curing ali
diseases, and are the givers of success in
all deeds.


58. Controlling one’s senses, one ‘should,
O Bharata, take the names of these, morn-
ing and evening, It is these who protect,
It is these who shower rain. It is these
who shine and give light and heat. It is
these who blow. It is these who create all
things.


39. These are considered as the fotaiwane
of all, as the leaders of the universe, as
highly clever in the performance of all
things, as gifted with forgiveness, as com-
plete masters of the senses, Indeed, it has
been said that they remove all the evils to
which human beings are subject.


60. These great ones are the -witness
of all good and bad deeds. Rising up in
the morning one should take their names,
for by this one is sure to acquire all that is
good.

61. He who takes the names of these,
becomes freed from the fear of fires and of
thieves. Such a man never finds his way
obstructed by any obstacte. By taking the
names of these yreat ones, one becomes free
from bad dreams of every kind,

62-63. Purged of every sin, such men
take birth in auspicious families, ‘That
twicesborn person who, with controlled
senses, recites these names on occasions of
performing the initiatory rites of sacrifices
and other religious practices, becomes, as


“323


the outcome thereof, gifted with righteouss
ness, devoted to the study of the saul,
possessed of forgiveness, and self-control,
and free: from malice. If a man suffering
from disease recites them, he becomes freed
from his sin in the form of disease. ,


64. By reciting them within a honse, all:
evils. are removed froin the inmates. By
reciting them within a field, the growtls
of all kinds of crops is helped. ‘


65-68. Reciting them at the. time of
starting on a journey, or while one is away
from his home, one meets with good fortune.
These names lead to the protection of his
ownself, of his children and wives, of his!
wealth, and-of his seeds, and plants. The
Kshattiya who recites these names at the
time of joining a battle sees destruction
overtake his ememies and good fortune
crown him and his party, The man who
recites these names on occasions of per
forming the rites in honor of the deities ot
the manes, heips the manes and the deities.
eat to the sacrificial Havya and Kavya.
Yhe man who recites them becomes freed
from fear of disease and beasts of prey, of
elephants and thieves. o


‘69—70. His burden of anxiety becomes
lightened, aud he becomes:freed from every
sin. By reciting these excellent Savitri
Mantras on board a vessel, or in a car, of
in the courts of kings, one acquires high
success. heré where these Mantras are
recited, fire does not burn wood,


* 9t, There children do’ not die, nor
snakes live. Indeed, at Such places, there
can be no fear of the Rite GUE Pishachas
and Rakshasas.


72. Indeed, the man who recites these
Mantras ceases to have any fear of fire or
water or wind, or beasts of prey.


73. These Savitei Mantras, recited duly
bring on the peace and well-being of all the
four casies. ‘Those men who recite them
with respect become {reed from every-sorrow
and at last acquire a high end.


74. Even these are the results acquired
by them who recite these Savitci Mantras
which are of the form of Brahma. ‘That
man who recites these- Mantras in the
wiidst of kine, sees his kine become fruitful.


75-76. Whether when starting on a
journey, or entering a house on returning,
one ‘should recite these Mantras on every
occasion. ‘These. Mantras form a great
mystery of the Rishis and are the. very
highest of those which they silently recite.
Such are these Mantras to them who
practise the duty of cecitation and pour
libations on the sacrificial fire, eA


‘


oat


97. This that ‘I have said to you, is the
excellent opinion of Parashara. It was
recited formerly to Shakra himself. Re-
presenting, as it does, Truth or Eternal
Brahma, ! have declared it fully to you.


98-—-79. It forms the heart of allfcrea-
tures, and is the highest Shruti. All the
princes of the solace and lunar families,
wis., the Raghavas and the Kuravas, recite
these Mantras every day after having puri-
fied themselves. These form the highest
end of human creatures. One becomes
freed from every trouble and calamity by
daily reciting the names of the celestials,
of the seven Rishis, and of Dhruva.
Indeed, such recitation speedily frees one
from distress,


80. The sages of olden times, #fs.,
Kashyapa, Gotama, and others, and
Bhrigu, Angiras and Atri and others, and
Shukra, Agastya, and Vrihaspati, and
others, all of whom are regenerate Rishis,
have worshipped these Mantras. Approved
of by the son of Bharadwaja, these Man-
tras Were attained by the sons of Richika.
Having acquired them again from Vashish-
tha, Shakra and the Vasus went forth to
battle and succeeded in vanquishing the
Danavas. :


8t. That man who makes a present of a
NWundred kine with their horns covered with
plate of gold to a Brahmana gifted with
much learning and well-conversant with the
Vedas, and te who causes the excellent


Bharata story to be recited in his house-


every day, are said to acquire equal
merits,
82. By reciting the name of Bhrigu,


one’s virtue becomes enhanced. By bow-
ing to Vashishtha, one’s energy becomes
enhanced. By bowing to Raghu, one be-
comes victorious in battle. By reciting the
praises of the Ashwins, one becomes freed
from diseases. iN


83. 1 have thus, .O king, told you
ef the Savitri Mantras which are at
one with eternal Brahma. . Hfi-you wish to
question me on any other subject, you
may do so. | shall, O Bharata, answer
you, ,


ete


CHAPTER CLI.
(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA). =


Continued,


Yudhishthira said :—


t. Who are worthy of being adored?
Who are they to whom we should bow ?


How, indeed, should we behave towards


MAHABHARATA. \


whom? What course of conduct, ‘O grand.
father, towards what classes of persons. is
considered faultless ?


Bhishma said :—


2. Yhe humiliation of Brahmanas would
humiliate the very celestials. By bowing ta,
Brahmanas, one does not, O Yudhishthira,
commit any fault.


3. They, indeed, deserve to be adored,
They deserve to have oue vows. You
should behave towards them as if they are
your sons. Indeed, it is those wise men who
upholds all the worlds,


4. The Brahmanas are the great causes
ways of Virtue about all the worlds. ‘Their
happiness consists in renouncing all kinds
ot riches. ‘I'hey are devoted to the vow of
controlling speech.


§. They are agreeable to all creatures,
and observe various excellent vows. ‘Ihey
are the refuge of all creatures in the uni-
verse, ‘Yhey are the authors of all the
regulations which govern the worlds. ‘They
are endued with great fame.


6. Penances are always their great
riches. Their power consists in speech.
Their energy emanates from the duties they
observe. Knowing all duties, they aré
gifted with minute vision, so that they are
cognizant of the subtlest considerations.


7. They are of righteous desires. They
live in the observance of well-done duties.
‘They are the cause-ways of Virtue. The
four kinds of living creatures exist; depeu-
ding upon them as their refuge.


8. They are the path or road along
which all should go. ‘They are the guides
of all. ‘They are the eternal upholders of
all the sacrifices. ‘They always uphold the
heavy loads of fathers and grandfathers.


g.. They never droop under heavy loads
even when passing along difficult roads, likd
strong cattle, They are attentive.to the
requirements of manes and deities and
guests.; They are entitled to eat the first
portions af Havya and Kavya. ; '


to. By the very food they eat, they
rescue the three worlds from great fear.
‘They are, as it were, the Island for alt
worlds. They are the eyes of all persons
gifted with sight.


11. The wealth they possess consists
of all the branches of knowledge known by
the name of Shiksha, and all the- Shrutis.
Gifted with great skill, they are conversant
with the most subtile relations of things.
They know the ends of ail things, and thei¢
thoughts are always engaged upon the


scicuce of the soul.


" ANUSHASANA PARVA.


328


12. They are gifted with the knowledge ; sidered as deserving of honors. Indeed,


ST the beginning, the middle, and the end of
all things, and they are persons in whom
doubts no longer exist on account of the
certitude of their knowledge. They are
fully aware of the distinctions between
what is superior and what is inferior. They
it is who acquire the highest end, ;


13, Shorn of attachments, purged of all
sins, getting over all paits of opposites,
they areunattached to all worldly things.
Deserving of every honor, they are always
esteemed by persons gifted with knowledge
and high souls.


14. They cast impartial looks on sandal
paste and filth or dirt, on what is food and
what is not food, . They see with an equal
eye theic brown dresses of coarse cloth and
fabrics of silk and animal skins.


15. They would live for days together
without partaking of any food, and dry up
their limbs by such abstention. They de-
vote themselves earnestly to the study of the
Vedas, controlling their senses.


16, They would make gods of those who
are not gods, and not gods of those who are
gods. Enraged, they can create other
worlds and otker Regents of the worlds
than those who exist.


17, Through the curse of those great
ones, the ocean became so saline as to be
undrinkable, The fire of their anger yet
burns in the forest of Dandaka, unquench-
ed by time,

18, ‘They are the gods of the gods, and
the cause of all causes. They are the
authority of all authorities. What man of
intelligence and wisdom is there who would
seek to humiliate them.


19. Amongstthem the young and the
old all deserve honors, Vhey honor one
another on account of distinctions in respect
of penances and knowledge,


20. Even the Brahmana who is destitute
of knowledge is a god and is a great instru-
ment for purifying others. He amongst
them, then, who is posseseed of knowle ige
isa much higher god and like the ocean
when full (to the brim), - i

21. Learned or unlearned, the Brah-
mana is always a great deity. Purified or
not, Fire is ever a great god.


22, A blazing fire, even when it burns
on a crematorium, is not considered as
sullied on account of the character of the
spot whereon it burns. Clarified butter
looks beautiful whefher kept on the sacri-
ficial altar or in a chamber. :


23. So if the Brahmana be always
engaged in evil deeds, he is still to be con-


42


know that the Brahmana.is always a great
god.


CHAPTER CLii.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.


Yudhishthira said:—=


1. ‘Tell us, O king, what is that ree
ward of the worship of Brahmanas, seeing
which you adore them, O you of superiot
intelligence! Indeed, what is that success,
emanating from their adoration, guided by
which you worship them ?


Bhishma said :—

2. Regarding it is cited the conversa-
tion between. Pavana and Arjuaa, O
Bharata,


3. Gifted with a thousand arms and
great beauty the powerful Kartavirya,
formerly became the tord of all the world,
He had his capital in the city of Mahish-
mati.


4. Of unbaffled prowess, that king of
the Haihaya race of Kshatriyas governed
the whole Earth begirt by seas, togethet
with all her islands and all. her precious
mines of gold and gems.


5. Respecting the duties of the Kshae
triya order, as also humility and Vedic
learning, the king made large gifts of
wealth to the Rishi Dattatreya.


6. Indeed, the son of Kritavirya thus
worshipped that great ascetic who, bes
coming pleased with him, asked him te
solicit three boons.


7+ Thus requested by the Rishi for
boons, the king addressed him, saying,
Let me have a thousand arms when I am
in the midst of my elders. While, howe
ever, | remain at home let me have, as
usual, only two arms,


8. Indeed, let combatants, when fight~
ing, see me possessed of a thousand arms..
Observant also of high vows, let me succeed
in subjugating the entire Earth by my
prowess.


9. Having acquired the Earth ‘righte-
ously, let me govern her with vigilance,
There is a fourth boon which, O' foremost
of twice-born persons, I solicit thee ta
grant,


to. © faultless one, being disposed to
favor me, you should grang it to met
Dependent as I am on you, whenever J


326


may happen t6 -go wrong, let pious men
come forth to instruct and set me right.

tr. Thus addressed, that Brahman
replied to the king, saying.—So let it be!
thus were those boons acquired by that
king of burning effulgence,


12—14. Riding then on his car which
was effulgent like jfire or the Sun, the king,
blinded by his great prowess, said,—-Who,
indeed, is there who can be considered as
my equal in patience and energy, in fame
and heroism, in prowess and strength ?7—
After he had uttered these words, an invi-
sible voice in the sky, said,—-O ignorant
wretch, do you not know that the Brahmana
is superior to the Kshatriya? ‘The Ksha-
triya, helped by the Brahmana, rules all
creatures. .


15. When pleased, } am able to create
many creatures. When angry, f am able
to destroy all. In thought, word, and deed,
i am the foremost. ‘he Brahmana is
certainly not above me.


16. The first proposition here is that the
Brahmana is superior to Kshatriyas. The
counter-proposition is that the Kshatriya
is superior. You have said, that the two
are united together. A distinction, however,
is observable in this.


iy. It is seen that Brahmanas take
refuge with Kshatriyas. “Fhe Kshatriyas
never seek the refuge of Brahmanas. In-
deed, throughout the Earth, the Bra-
hmanas, accepting such fefuge under the
pretence of teaching the Vedas, get their
maintenance from the Kshatriyas,


18. The duty of protecting all creatures
lies with the Kshatriyas. It is from the
Kshatriyas that the Brahmanas derive their
livelihood. How then can the Brahmana
be superior to the Kshatriyas ?


19. Well, I shall, from to-day, bring
under my subjection, your Brahmanas who
ure superior to all creatures but who have
mendicancy for their occupation and who
are so self-conceited.


20. What-the virgin Gayatri has said
from the sky is not true. KRobed in skins,
the Brahmanas move about in indepen-
dence. 1 shall bring those independent
anen under my subjection,


21. Deity oc man, there is none in the
three worlds who can throw me off from the
sovereignty I erjoy. Hence, i am certainly
6uperiur to the Brahmanas, ,


22. This world that is now considered as
having Brahnianas for its foremost dwellers,
stall soon be made such as to have Kshatri-
yas for its forer.o3: dwellers. “There is nene
who is capable of withstanding my power in
battle. aa


MAHABHARATA.


23 Hearing these words of Arjuna, the
sky-canging goddess became moved.


24. Then the god of wind, addressing
the king from the sky, said——Renou.ace this
sinful attitude. Bow to the Brahmanas.
By injuring them you will bring aboat
troubles on your kingdom.


25. The Brahmanas will either kill you,
king, though you are, er, endued with great
might as they are, they will drive you away
from your kingdom, despoiling you of your
energy. '


26. Hearing this speech, the king ad-
dressed the speaker, saying,— Who, indeed,
are you ?—Tie pod of ‘wind answered,—l
am the god of wind and the messenger of
the celestials. I say to you what is for your
benefit.


Arjuna said :—

27. Oh, I see that you have to-day shawn
your devotion and attachment to the Bra-
hmanas. Tell me now what kind of earthly
creature is the Bralimana.


28. Tell me. does a superior -Brahmana
resemble the Wind in auy respect? Or,
is he like Water, or Fire, or the Sun, or the
Firmament ?—


Se aeeEeaeed


CHAPTER CLIL


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.


The god of wind said :—


1. Hear, O deluded man, what the ate
tributes are of Brahmanas who have all higly
souls. The Brahmana is superior to all
those which, O king, you have named.


2. Formerly, the Earth, indulging ina
spirit of rivalry with the king of the Angas,
forsook her character as Earth. Uhe re-
generate Kashyapa caused destruction to
betall her by actually paralysing her.


3- The Brahmanas are always uncon-
querable, O king, in Heaven as also on
Earth. Formerly, the great Rishi Angi-
ras, through his energy, drank off ali the
waters,


4- Having drunk off all the waters as if
they were milk, the great Rishi did not feel
yet his thirst to be satished. tle, there-
fore, once more caused the Earth to be
filled with water by raising a mighty wave.


5. On another occasion, when Angiras
became enraged wits me, | fled away,
leaving the world, and lived for a long time
concealed in the Agnihotra of the Brahma-
nas, through fear of that Rishi,

t


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


6. The illustrious Purandara, an account
of his having coveted the body of Ahalya,
was cursed by Gautama, yet, for the sake of
Virtue and wealth, the Rishi did not destroy
outright the king of the celestials.


g. The Ocean, O king, that was full
in former days of crystal water, cursed
by the Brahmanas, became saline in taste.


8 Even Agni who is} gold-hued, and
who blazes with effulgence when destitute of
smoke, and whose flames uniting together,
bur. upwards, when cursed by the angry
Angiras, became divested of all these qua-
lities. .

g. See, the sixty thousand sons of Sa-
gara, who came here to worship the Ocean,
have all been pulverised by the’, Brahmana
Kapila of golden hue.


to. You are notequal to the Brahmanas.
Do you, O king, seelk your own good.
The Kshatriya of even great power bows to
Brahmana children who are still in their
mothers’ wombs.


11. The large’kingdom of’the Dandakas
was destroyed by a Brahmana. The power-
ful Kshatriya Valajangha was destroyed by
aisingle Brahmana, viz.,?Aurva.


12,¢ You, too, have acquired a large
kingdom, great might, religious merit, and
Icarning, which are all difficult of acquire-
ment, through the grace off Dattatreya..

13. Why do you, O Arjuna, adore Agni
everyday whoisa Brahmana?,sHe is the
bearer of sacrificial libations from every
part of the universe, Ace you ignorant of
this fact.


14, Why, indeed, do you allow yourself
to be stupefied by folly when you are
not ignorant of the fact that a superior
Brahmana is the protector of all creatures
in the world and is, indeed, the créator of
the living world ?


15. The Lord of all creatures, Brahman,
unmanifest, gifted with power, and of un-
fading glory, who created this vast universe
with its mobile and immobile creatures, (is a
Brahmana).


16. Some ignorant persons there are, who
say that Brahman was born of an Egg.
From the original Egg, when it opened,
mountains and the cardinal points ahd the
waters and the Earth and the Heavens all
came into existence.


17, No one had seen this birth of the
creation, How then can Brahman be
said to have taken his birth from the origi-
nal Egg, when esbeciaHy he is said to be
Unborn? It is said that vast increate Space
is the original Egg. It was from this in
create Space that the Grandfather was bern.


‘327


18. If you ask,—Whereon would ‘the
Grandfather, after his birth from increate
Space, rest, for there was then nothing else ?
—the answer may be viven thus. There is
an existent Being of the aame of Conscious-
ness. Vhat mighty Being is gifted with
great energy.


19. ‘There is no Egg. Brahman, how-
ever, is existent. Heis the Creator of the
universe and is its King !—Thts addressed
by the god of wind, king Arjuna remained
silent. -


roi


CHAPTER CLIV.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued,


The god of wind said -— -

t. Once on a time, O king, a king
named Anga wished to give away the
entire Earth as sacrificial present to the
Brahmanas. At this, the Earth became
stricken with anxiety,


2. I am the daughter of Brahman. 1
hold all creatures. Having obtained me,
alas, why does this foremost of kings wish
to give me away to the Brahmanas ?


3. Renouncing my character as the soil,
I shall now go to my father. Let this king
with all his kingdom meet with destruction !
—Forming this conclusion, she departed
for the region of Brahman.


4.’ Seeing the goddess Earth about to go,
the Rishi Kashyapa himself immediately
entered the visible body of the goddess,
renouncing his own body, by the help of
Yoga. ‘ :


5. Thus penetrated by the spirit of
Kashyapa, the earth grew in prosperity
and became full of ail kinds of vegetabte
produce. Indeed, O king, for the time the
Kastiyapa pervaded the earth, Virtue
became foremost everywhere and all fears
ceased,


6. Thus, O king, the earth remained
penetrated by the spirit of Kashyapa for
thirty thousand divine years, fully alive
to all those fuactions which it used to, dis-
charge while it was penetrated by the spirit
of Brahmana’s daughter. -

7. Upon the éxpiration of this period, the
goddess returned from the region of Bra-
hman and arrived herd bowed to. Kashyapa
and from that time became the daughter of
that Rishi, 2%


8. Kasnyapa is a Brahmana. This was
the feet, O king, that a Brahmana did,


428.


Tell me the name of the Kshatriya who is
superier to Kashyapa.


gq: Hearing these words, king Arjuna
remsiv-ed sitent, The god of wind once
riore gaid to him,—Hear now, O king, the
story af Utathya who was born in the family
of Angiras.


to. The daughter of Soma, named Bha-
dea, came to be considered as peerless in
beauty, Her father Soma regarded Uta-
thya to be the fittest of husbands for her.


11, The famous and highly blessed
maiden of faultless limbs, observing various
vows practised the severest austerities from
the desire of getting Utatbya for her hus-
band.


12. After some time, Soma’s father Atri,
inviting Utathya to fiis house, bestowed
upon him the famous maiden. Utathya,
who used to.give away sacrificial presents
in profusion, duly received the girl for his
wife.


13. {[t so took place, however, that the
beautiful Varuna had, from a long time
before, coveted the girl. Coming to the
forest where Utathya lived, Varuna stole
away the girl when she had plunged into
the Yamuna for a bath.


14. Abducting her thus, the Lord of the
waters took her to his own house. That
“mansion was wonderful. It was adorned
with six hundred thousand lakes,


15. There is no palace that can be con-
_ sidered more beautiful than that of Varuna.
It was adorned with many places and by
the presence of various tribes of Apsaras
and of various excellent articles of enjoy-
ment,


16—-17. There, within that palace, the
the Lord of waters, O king, sported with
the damsel. A little while after, Utathya
came to know of the ravishment of his wife.
Indeed, having heard all the facts from
Narada, Utathya addressed the celelestial
Rishi, saying, —Go, O Narada, to Varuna
and speak with due severity tohim. Ask
him as to why he has abducted my wife,
and, indeed, tell him in my name that he
should give her up.


18. Wou may tell him further,—You are
a protector of the worlds, O Varuna, ard
not a destroyer. Why then have you
abducted my wife bestowed upon me by
Soma ? :


19. Thus requested by Utathya, the
celestial Rishi Nacada went to where
Varuna was and addressing him, said,
Do you liberate the wife of Utathya. In-
deed, why have you abducted her !


MAHABHARATA.


20. Hearing these words of Narada,
Varuna replied to him, saying,—This timid
girl is very dear to me. 1 dare not let
her go.


21—22. Receiving this reply, Narada
went to Utathya and cheerlessly told him,—
O great ascetic, Varuna has driven me from
his house, catching me by the throat. He
is reluctant to rc>sture to you your wife. Do
you act as you please.


22. Hearing these words of Narada,
Anyiras became enraged. Having pe-
nances for wealth, he solidificd the waters
and drank them off, by his energy.


24. When all the waters were thus
drunk off, the Lord of that element became
very dispirited with all his friends and
kinsfolk, For all that, he did not still give
up Utathya’s wife.

25. Then Utathya, that foremost of
twice-born persons, filled with anger, com-
manded Earth, saying,—O amiable one, do
you show land where there are at present
the six hundred thousand lakes.


26—27. At these words of the Rishi, the
Ocean receded from the spot marked out,
and land appeared which was highly sterje.
To the rivers which flowed through that
region, Utathya said—O Saraswati, do you
become invisible here. Indeed, O timid lady,
leaving this region, go you to the desert.
O auspicious goddess, let this region, desti-
tute of you, cease to become sacred,


28. When that region became dry, he
repaired to Angirasa, taking with him
Utathya’s wife, and made her over to him.


29. Getting back his wife, Utathya be-
came cheerful. Then, O chief of the
Haihaya family, that great Brahmana res-
cued both the universe and the Lord of
waters from the situation of -distress into
which he had reduced them.


30—31. Knowing every duty, the highly
energetic Rishi Utathya, after getting back
his wife, O king, said to Varuna,—l have
recovered my wife, O lord of waters, with
the help of my penances and after iuflicting
such distress on you as made you cry aloud
in pain. Having said this, he went home,
with that wife of his.


- 32. Even such, O king, was Utathya,
that foremost of Brahmanas. Shall I go
on? Or, will you yet persist in your
opinion? What, is there a Kshatriya that
is superior to Utathya ? ;


ANUSHASANA PARVA.,


” CHAPTER CLV.


( ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.


Bhishma said :-—


t. Thus addressed, king Arjuna temain-
ed silent. The god of wind once more
spoke to him,—Listen now, O king, to the
greatness of the Brahmana Agastya.


2. Once on a time, the gods were defea-
ted by the Asuras upon which they became
very dispirited. ‘The sacrifices of the deities
were all robbed, and the Swadha of the
manes was also misapproptiated.


3. Indeed, O chief of the Haihayas, all
the religious acts and observances of human
beings also were stopped by the Dauavas.
Shorn of their prosperity, the celestials
wandered over the Earth as we have heard.


4. One day, in course of their wanderings,
they met Agastya of high vows, that Bra-
hmana, O king, who was gifted with great
energy and solar splendour.


5—6. Saluting him duly, the celestials
made the usual polite enquiries. They then,
.O king, said these words to that high-souled
one,—We have been defeated by the
Danavas in battle, and have, therefore, been
deprived of affluence and prosperity. Do
you, therefore, O foremost of ascetics, rescue
us from this situation of great fear,


7. Thus informed of the condition to |-


which the celestials had been reduced,
Agastya became highly enraged. Highly
energetic, he at once blazed forti like the
all-consuming fire at the time of the uni-
versal dissolution.


8. With the burning rays which then
came out from the Rishi, the Danavas
begamto beburnt. Indeed, O king, thou-
sands of them began to drop down from the
sky. -

g._ Burning with the energy ‘of Agastya,
the Danavas, abandoning both Heaven and
Earth, fled towards the south.


to. At that time the Danava king Vali
was celebrating a Horse-Sactifice in the
nether regions, Those great Asuras who
were with him in those regions or who were
living in the bowels ef the Earth, were not
burnt,


11. Thecelestials, upon the destruction
of their enemies, then regained their own
regions, their fears entirely removed. En-
couraged by what he did for them, they
then begged the Rishi to destroy those
Asuras who had taken refuge within the
bowels of the Earth or in the nether
regions.


329


32. Thus requested by the gods, Agas-
tya replied to them, saying,—Ves, I can
consume those Asuras who are living unders
neath the Earth; but if I achieve sucha
feat, my penances will suffer decay. Hence,
I shall not exert my power.


13. Thus, O king, were the Danavas
consumed by the illustrious Rishi with his
own energy. Thus did Agastya of purified
soul, O monarch, accomplish that deed with
the help of his penances.


14. O sinless one, so was Agastya as
described by me. Shall 1 continue? Or,
will you say anything in cepty? Is
there any Kshatriya who is greater than
Ayastya t= :


Bhishma said :—


15. Thus addressed, king Asjuna re-
mained silent. ‘Ihe god of wind once mare
said,—Hear, O king, one of the great feats
of the illustrious Vashishtha,


16. Once ona time the celestials were
engaged in celebrating a sacrifice on the
shores of the fake Vaikhanasa, Knowing
his power, the sacrificing gods thought of
Vashishtha and made him their priest in
imagination. :

17. Meanwhile, seeing the gods reduced
and emaciated on account of the initiation
they were undergoing, a race of Danavas,
of the name of Khalins, of statures as gigane
tic as mountains, wished to kill them.


18. Those amongst the Danavas that
were either disabled or killed in the fight
were plunged into the waters of the Manusa
lake and on account of the boon of the
Grandfather they immediately came back
to vigour and life.


19. Taking up huge and terrible mouns
tain summits and maces ahd trees, they
agitated the waters of the lake, makin
them swell up te the height of a hundre
Yojanas.


20, They then ran against the celestials
numbering ten thousand. Afflicted by the
Danavas, the gods then sought the refuge
of their king Vasava.


21. Shakra, however, was soon afflicted
by them. In his distress he sought the pro-
tection of Vashishiba. At this, the holy
Rishi Vashishtha assured the celestials,
removing their fears.


22. Understanding that the gods had
become greatly dispirited, the ascetic did
this through mercy. He displayed his
energy aud burnt, without any exertion,
those Danavas cailed Khalins.

23. Having penances for wealth, the
Rishi brought the River Ganga, who had
gone to Kailasa, to that spot, Indeed,


-33°


Ganga appeared, piercing the


waters of the fake.


24. The lake was penetrated by that
tiver. And as that celestial river piercing
through the waters of the lake, appeared, it
flowed on, under the name of Sarayu. The
palace whereon thase Danavas fell came to
be called after them.


25. Thus were the dwellers of Heaven,
headed by Indra, rescued from great dis-
tress by Vashishtha. [It was thus that
those Danavas, who had received boons
from Brahman, were killed by that great
Rishi. :

26. O sinless one, I have described to
ou the feat which Vashishtha accomplished.
hall 1 goon? Or, will you say anything ?

Was there a Kshatriya who could be said
to excel the Brahmana Vashishtha ?


through


ney
CHAPTER CLVI.


( ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued. ,


Bhishma said :—


1. Thus addressed, Arjuna remained
silent. ‘he god of wind once more ad-
dressed him, saying,—Hear me, O foremost
ene of the Haihayas, as I describe to you
the achievement of the great Atri.


2. Once on a time as the gods and Da-
navas were fighting each other inthe daik,
Rahu pierced both the Sun and Moon with
his arrows. ;


3. The gods, overwhelmed by darkness,
began to fall before the powerful Danavas,
O foremost of Kings.


4—-5. Repeatedly struck by the Asuras,
the celestials began to Jose their strength.
‘hey. then saw the learned Brahmana Atri,
having penances for wealth, engaged in
the observance of austerities. Addressing
that Rishi who had all his senses .
whom anger had been extingulsti-.:, they
said,—See, O Rishi, these two, viz., the
Moon and the Sun who have both been
pierced by the Asuras with their arrows.


6. Qn account of this, darkness has
overtaken us, and we are being struck down
by the enemy. We do not see the eni of
our troubles, Do you, O lord of great
power, rescue us from this grea: fear.


TheRishi said :—


7+ How, indeed, shall I protect you ?—
They answered, saying,—Do you become
the Moon. Do you also become the Sun,
and do you begin to kill these robbers,


Co git


MAHABHARATA.


8. Thus begged by them, Atri assumed
the form of the darkness-destroying Moon.
Indeed, on account of his agreeable dis-
position, he began to look as beautiful and
delightful as the Moon himself.


9. Seeing that the real Moon and the
real the Sun had become darkened by the
arrows of the enemy, Atri, assuming the
forms of those luminaries, began to shine
forth over the field of battle, helped by the
power of his penances.


10. Indeed, Atri made the universe
shine in light, removing all its darkness.
By displaying bis power, he also subjugated,
the vast multitudes of those enemies of the
celestials.


tr. Seeing those great Asuras burnt
by Atri, the gods also, protected by Atci’s
energy, began to despatch them quickly.


12. Displaying his prowess and collect-
ing all his energy, it was thus that Atri
illumined the god of day, rescued the celes-
tials, and killed the Asuras.


13. This was the feat that that twice-
born one, helpwd by his sacred fire,—:hat
silent reciter of Mantras, that one clad in
deer-skins,—performed ! See, O royal sage,
the act achieved by that Rishi wha lived
upon fruits only.


14. I have thus described to you, in full,
the feat of the great Atri. Shall f go on?
Or, will you say anything ? Is there a
Kshatriya who is superior to this twice-born
Rishi ?


15. Thus addressed, Arjuna rémaine?
silent. he god of wind once more spoke
to him.—Hear, O king; the feat achieved
by the great Chyavana.


16.° Having made his promise to the
twin Ashwins, Chyavana addressed the
chastiser of Paka, saying,—Do you make
the Ashwins drinkers of Soma with all the
other celestials.


Indra said :—

17. The Ashwins have been outcasted
by us. How, then, can these be admitted
into the sacrificial circle for drinking Soma
with the others? They are not classed with
the celestials. Do not, therefore, tell us
so.


18. O you of great vows, we do not wish’
to drink Soma in the company of the
Asbwins! Whatever other comminds you:
may be pleased to utter, O learned Bra-
hmana, we are ready to do.


Chyavana said :—
19. The twin Ashwins shall drink Soma
with all of you. Both of them are geds, O


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


king of the celestials, for they are the sons
of the Sun,
20. Let the gods-do what I have said,
By acting according to those words, the
gods will reap great advantage. By acting
_ otherwise, evil will overtake them.


Indra said :—

21. I shall not, O foremost of twice-born
persons, drink Sona with the Ashwins.
Let others drink with them as they please.
As for myself, I dare not do it,


Chyavana said :—

22. If, O destroyer of Vala, you will not
obey my words, you shall, this very day,
diink Soma with them in sacrifice, compell-
ed by me.


The god of wind said :—

23. ‘Then Chyavana, taking the Ashwins
with him, began a great religious rite for
their benefit. ‘The gods all became stupe-
"od by Chyavana with the help of his Man-
tras,


24. Seeing that feat undertaken by
Chyavana, Indra became enraged. ‘Taking
up a huge mountain he ran against that
Rishi,

25. The king of the deities was also
armed with the Thunderbolt. Then the
illustrious Chyavana, gifted with penances,’
rast angry looks, upon Indra as he ad-
fanced,

26. Throwing a little water at him, he
paralysed the king of the deities with his
‘Vhunderbolt and mountain. As the result
- of the religious rite he had begun, he created
a terrible Asura hostile to Indra.


27. Made of the libations he had poured
on the sacred fire, that Asura was called
Mada, of mouth gaping wide. Such was
-the Asura that the great ascetic created with
the help of Mantras. ‘here were a thou-
sand teeth in his mouth, extending for a
hundred Yojanas.

28. Of terrible appearance,
were two hundred Yojanas in length.
of his cheeks rested on the Earth and the
other touched the sky,

29. Indeed, all the gods with Vasaya
seemed to stand at ths rant of that great
Asuta’s tongue, as fishes when they enter
“into the wide open mouth of a leviathan.


30. While standing within the mouth of
Mada, the gods consulted speedily and then
addressing Indra, said,—Do you soon bend
your head in eespect to this twice-born per-
sonage.


3t. We = shall without any hesitation


his fangs


One


_ 33


drink Soma with the Ashwins in our come
pany.—Then’ bowing down his head to
Chy avana, Shakra obeyed hig command.

32. Fhus did Chyavana make the
Ashwins drinkers of Soma with the other
gods, Calling back Mada, the Rishi then
assigned him his work. :

33. Soma was ordered to live in dice, in
hunting, in drinking, and in women.
Hence, -O king, those men who betake
themselves to these, forgooth, meet with
destruction.

34. Hence, one should always renounce
these faults toa great distance. Thus, O
king, | bave described to you the feat ac
hieved by Chyavana. Shall I yo on? Or,
will you gay anything in reply? Is there a
Kshatriya who is higher than the Brahmana
Chyavana ?


faa ereretic,


CHAPTER CLVII.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued,


Bhishma said :—

i—2. Hearing these words of the god of
wind, Arjuna remained silent. At this, the
od of wind once more addressed him say-
ing, — When the dwellers of Heaven, headed
by Indra, found themselves within the
mouth of the Asura Mada, at that time,
Chyavana took away from them the
Earth,

3. Deprived previously of Heaven and
now of the Earth also, the gods became
very dispriited. Indeed, those great ones,
afflicted with grief, then threw themselves
unreservedly upon the. Grandfather’s. pro-
tection, —


The gods said:—

O you who are-adored by all crea-
tures of the nniverse, the Earth has been
taken away from us by Chyavana, while we
have been deprived of Heaven by the Ka-
pas, O powerful one. ‘


Brahman said :— ‘

5. Ye dwellers’ of Heaven, do you, with
Tnara, repair speedily and seek the protec-
tion of the Brahmanas. By pleasing them
you will succeed in regaining both the re-
gions as before.


6. Thus instructed by the Grandfather,
the deities went to the Brahmanas and
begged for their protection. ‘The Brah-
manas replied, enquiring,-- Whom shall we
subjugate ?—Thus asked, the celestials said
to them,—Do ye subjugate the Kapas.


—


332


g. The Brahmanas then said,—Bringing
them down on the Earth first, we shall
r aciped subjugate them.—After this, the

rahmanas began a rite having: for its
object the destruction of the Kapas. As
soon aS this was heard of by the Kapas,
they immediately sent a messenger of theirs,
named Dhani, to those Brahmanas,


8. Dhani, coming to them as- they sat
on the Eacth; thus communicated to them
the message of the Kapas,-~The Kapas are
like you all. Hence, what will be the results
of these rites which it appears you are de-
termined upon ?


9. Of alt them are Well conversant with
the Vedas and pifted with wisdom. All of
them care for sacrifices. All of them have
Truth for their vow, and for these reasons
all of them are considered as equal to great
Rishis.

#o. The goddess of Prosperity sports
among them, and they, in their turn, sup-
port her with respect. They never know
theic wives uselessly, and they never eat the
flesh of such animals as have not been kill-
ed in sacrifices. ;


11. They pour libations in the sacrificial
fire {every day) and obey the commands of
theic preceptors and elders. All of them
are of souls under perfect restraint, and
never take any food without dividing it duly
among their children.


12. They always proceed on cats and
other vehicles together. “They never know
their wives whenthe latter are in menses.
They all act in such a way as to acquire re-
gions ef happiness hereafter. Indeed, they
are always righteous in their deeds,


13. They never eat anything themselves,
when enciente women or old men have
wot eaten. They never indulge’ in
play or sports of any kind in the forenoon,
‘VLhey never sleep during the day.

14. When the Kapas have these and
manyaother virtues and qualities, why, in-
deed, would you seek to subjugate them ?
You should abstain from the attempt. In-
deed, by such abstention you would achieve


* te for your good
AVAL to ~ id Boone


The Brahmanas said: ~ 7 >.


15. Oh, we shall sul-jugate the Kapas
In this matter, we are quite of a piece with
the ce'estials. Hence, the Mapas deserve
to be killed beis. As reyards Dhanin, he
should retuyd whence he came,


16. After this, Dhanin, returning to the
Kapas, said to them,—The Brahmans are
not disposed to do you any good.—Hearing
this, all the Kapas took up their weapons
and went towards the Brahmanas.


es


7 Deana is7


MAHABHARATA,


17. Seeing the Kapas advancing agatdst
them with the standard of their cars upraised,
the Brahmanas immediately created certain
fires for the destruction of the vital airs of
the Kapas.


18. Having brought about the destruc
tion of the Kapas, those eternal fiires,
created with the help of the Vedic Mantras,
began to shine in the firmament like so
many clouds.


19. The gods having assembled together
in battle, killed many of the Danavas,
They did not know at that time that it was
the Brahmanas who had encompassed thei
destruction.


20. Then toring there, O king, the
highly energetic Narada informed the
deities how their enemies, the Kapas, had
been really killed by the Bralmanas of
mighty energy.

21. Hearing these words of Narada, the
dwellers of Heaven became highly pleased.
They also lauded those regenerate and
illustrious allies of theirs.


22. The energy and prowess of the
celestials then began to increase, and adored
in all the worlds, they acquired also the
boon of immortality.


23. After the god of wind had said these
words, king Arjuna adored him duly and
addressing him answered in these words.
ae O mighty-armed king, what Arjuna
said,


Arjuna said :=

24. O powerful god, always and by all
means do I live for the Brahmanass De-
voted to them, I adore them always.


25. Through the favour of Dattatreya I
have acquired this might of mine, Through
his favor I have been able to perform
great feats in the world and acquire high
merit.


26. lon, I have with attention, heard the
achievements, O god of wind, of the Bra-
hmanas with all their interesting details as
described by you truly.


The god of wind said :—
27. Do you protect and maintain the
Sey Derfarming those Kshatciya
duties which are yours by’ pr" De you
protect them even as you protect your oWn
senses. here is danger to you from the
family of Bhrigu. Ali that, however, will
happen on a distant day.


ANUSHASANA’ PARVA.


CHAPTER CLVIIEf.


(CANUSHASANIKA PARVA),~e
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—

1. You always worship, O king, Bra-
hmanas of praiseworthy vows. What, how-
ever, is that fruit seeing which you adore
them, O king ?


2, O you of high vows, seeing what pros-
perity of the worship of the Brahmanas, do
you worship them? Teil me all this, O you
of mighty arms, 5


Bhishma said :—

3 Here is Keshava gifted with great
intelligence. He will tell you everything.
Of high vows and gifted with prospetity,
he will tell you what the prosperity is of the
worship of Brahmanas. .


4. My strength, ears, speech, mind, eyes,
and that clear understanding of mine, are
all clouded to-day. I think the time is not
distant when I shall have to renounce my
bady. The Sun seems to me to go very
slowly,


5. Those high duties, O king, which are
mentioned in the Puranas as observed by
Brahmanas and Kshatriyas and Vaishyas
and Shudras, have all been desuribed by ime.
Do you, O son of Pritha; learn from
Krishna what little remains to be learnt
about them.


6. I know Krishna truly. I know who
he is and what his ancient might is. O
chief of the Kauravas, Keshava is of im-
measurable soul. Whenever doubts arjse,
- it is he who upholdg virtue then,


7. tis Krishna who created the Earth,
Sky, and Heaven, Indeed, the Earth has
otiginated from Krisiina’s body. Of dread’
ful prowess and existing from the beginning
of tine, it is Krishna who became the
powerful Boar and raised the submerged
Earth, Itis He whe created all the
cardinal points, together with all the moun-
tains, :


8. Below Him are the sky, Heaven, the
four cardinal points, and the four subsidiary
points. tis from Him that the entire crea-
tion has emanated. It is He who has
created this ancient universe.


g. ‘In His navel appeared a Lotus.
Within that Lotus originated Brahman,
himself of immeasurable energy. Ht was
Brahrvan, O son of Pritha, who broke open
that darkness which existed surpassing the
very ocean (in depth and extent).


1o.. In the Krita age, O Partha, Krishria
existed in the form of Virtue. In the Treta


43


333


age, he existed inthe form ef Knowledge,
In the Dwapara age, he existed in the fornt
of power. In the Kali age, he came to the
Earth in the form of sin.


tr. It is He who formerly killed the
Daityas. It is He who is the Ancient God,
It is He who ruled the Asuras in the form
of theic Emperor (Valin), It is He who
is the Creator of all beings. It is He who
is also the future of all created Beings.
It is He whe is also the frotector of
this universe having the seed of dese
truction.


12. Whea the cause of Virtue suffers,
this Krishna takes birth in the family of
either the gods or among men. Staying on
Virtue, this Krishna of purified soul (on such
occasions) protects both the higher and the
lower worlds.


13. Sparing those who deserve to be
spared, Krishna sets himself _te the destruc»
tion of the Asuras, O Partha. It is he who
is all acts proper anid improper and itis he
who is the cause. It is Krishna who is the
act done, the actto be done, and the act
that is being doue. Know that that
iHustrious one is Rahu and Soma and
Shakra.


14. Itiste who is Vishwakarman. It
is he who is of universal form. He is the
destroyet and he is the Creator of the uni-
verse. He is the holder of the Shula (lance) ;.
He is of human form j and he is of terrible
form. All creatures sing his praises, for he


| is known by his deeds.


15. Hundreds of Gandtatvag and
Apsatas and ‘celestials always accompany
him. The very Rakshasas sing his praises,
He is the Enhancer of Wealth; He is th
ohne victorion Being in the universes - 7


16. 1n Saccifices, eloquent met sing His
praises, The singers of Samians praise hint”.
by reciting the Rathantaras. The Brah- |
manas praise him with Vedic Mantras.’ It ">
is to him that the sacrifictal priests’ pour
their libations. :


17. The celestiats headed by Indra sang :
his praises when he lifted up the Gobar-
dhana mountains for protecting the cow-
herds of Brindavan against the incessant
showers that Indra poured in anger. He is,
O Bharata, the one Blessing to all creas |
tures. He, O Bharata, haviog entered the
old Brahma-cave, saw from that place the
original cover of the world in the beginning
of lime, ;

18. Agitating alf the Danavas and the
Asuras, this Krishna of foremost deeds
rescued the Earth. It is to Him that
people dedicate various kinds of food, I$


334


is to Wim that the warriors dedicate all
kinds of-their cars at the time of war,


1g. He iseternal, and it is under that
illustrious ome that the Sy, Earth, Heaven,
all things exist and stay, Hie it was who
caused the vital seed of the gods Mitra and
Varuna to fall within a jar, whence origi-
mated the Rishi known by ihe name of Va-
shishtha,


20, It is Krishna who is the god of
wind ; it is he who is the powerful Ashwins ;
it is he who is that first of gods, vis., the
Sun having a thousand rays, It -is he -by
whom the Asuras have béen subjugated.
Tu is he who covered the three worlds, with
three footsteps, :


21, Heis the soul of the celestials and
human beings, and Pitris. It is he who
is the Sacrifice performed by those ‘persons
who are conversant with the rituz.ls of sacri-
fices. [tis he who rises every, day in the
“sky (in the form of the Sun) and divides
“Vime into day and night, and courses for
half the year northwards and for half the
year southwards,


22, Innumerable rays of light come out
from his upwards and downwaids and trans-
versely and idumine the Earth. Brahmanas
conversant with the Vedas worship him.
"Taking a portion of his rays the Sun shines
in the sky. Month after month, the sacri-
ficer. ordains him as a sacrifice. ‘fwice-
born persons conversant with the Vedas
bymn his praises i sacrifices of all kinds.
He it is wio is the wheel of the year, having
three naves and sévew horses to drag it. It
is thus that he supports the seasons, —


24. Gifted witn great energy, pervading
all things, the foremost of all creatures, it is
Krishna wio alone upholds all the worlds.
He is the Sun, the remover of all darkness.
Hie is the Creator of all. Do you, O hero,
approach that Krishna.


25. Once ona time, the great and
powerful Krishna lived, for a while, in the
form of Agni in the forest, of Khandava
among some straw or dry grass. Soon was
he pleased. Capable of going everywhere
at will, it was Kristina whe, having subju-
wated the Rakshasas and Uragas, poured
them as libations upon the burning fire.


26, It is Krishna who gave to Arjunna
number of white horses. tt is he who is the
creator of all horses. This world represents,
his car. He it is who yokes that car for.
setting it in motion, That cat has ‘three
wheels, ;

27. kt has three kinds of motion. Jt has
four horses yoked to it. It has three naves. |


28. Itis-this Krishna who is’ the ‘refuge.


MAHABHARATA.


among them. It is he who created the Earth
and Heaven and the intervening space.
Indeed, it is this Krishna of immeasurable
and burning energy who has created the
forests and tie mountains, It is this
Krishna who, desituas of punishing Shakra
who was about to hu:t lis thender at him,
crossed the rivers and at once paralysed
him. He is the one great Indra who is
worshipped by the Brahmanas in great
sacrifices with the help of a thousand old
Richs.


29. Ht was this Krishna, O king, who
alone was able to keep the highly energetic
Rishi Durvasas as a guest for some time
in his house. He is said to be the one
ancient Risht. He is the Creator of the
universe. Indeed, he creates everything
from his own nature. .


30. Superior to all the celestials, it is he
who teaches all the deities. He scrupulously
observes all ancient ordinanees. Know, O.
king, that this Krishna, who is called Vish-
waksena, is the fruit of all deeds which
relate to pleasure, of all. deeds which are
foundéd on the Vedas, and of all deeds
which appertain to the world.


3%. Heisthe white rays of fight which
are seen in all the worlds. He. is the three
worlds. He is the three Regents of all the
worlds, He is the three sacrificial fires.
He is the three Vyahritis ; indeed, this son
of Devaki is all the gods together.


32. He isthe Year; He is the?Seasons ;
He is the Fortnights ; Heis tve Day. and
the Night}; He. is those divisions of time
which are called Kalas, and Kashthas, and.
Matras, and Muhurtas, and Lavas, and
Kshanas. Know that this Vishwaksena is
all these.


. Fhe Moon and the Sdn, the Planets,
the Constellations, and the Stars, all the
Parva days, including the day of the full
moon, the conjunctions of the constellations,
and the seasons, have, QO son of Pritha,
emanated from this Krishna who is Vi-
shwaksena. ;


34. The Rudras, the Adityas, the Vasus,
the Ashwins, the Sadhyas, the Vishwedevas,
the Maruts, Prajapati himself, the mother
of the celestials, os., Aditi and the seven
Rishis, have all originated from Krishna,


35. Changing himself into the Wind, he
scatters the universe. Of universal form,
he becomes Fire which consumes all things.
Changing himself into Water, he drenches
and submerges aH, and assuming the form
of Brahman, he creates all the various ani«
mate and inanimate, creatures,


26. He is himself the Veda, yet he learns


of the five ociginal-elements. with the sky | all the, Vedas. He is himself the Veda,


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


335


Po


yet he fearns all the Vedas. He is himself | the death which overtakes all. creatures


allthe ordinances, yét he observes all the
erdinances which have been laid down in
aatters connected with Righteousness and
the Vedas and that force or might which
aules the world. Indeed, know, O Yudhish-
thica, that this Keshava is all the mobile
aud immobile universe.


37. Heis of the. form of the most res-
plendent light. Of universal form, this


Krishna is shern in that blazing efful- |


gence. The original cause of the soul
of all existent creatures, he at first created
the watecs. Afterwards he created this
anivecse. 7


38. Know that this Krishna is Vishnu.
Know nim to be the soul of the entire uni-
verse.’ Know him to be all the seasons; he
as these various wonderful visitations of
Nature which we see; he is the clouds that
pour rain and the lightning which flashes
inthe sky, He is the elephant Atravata.
in fact, he is the immobile and mobile uni-
verse,


39: The clay of the universe and above
all attributes, this Krishna is Vasudeva.
When he becomes individual soul be is
called Sankarshana. Next, he changes
himself into Pradyumna and then into Ani-
euddha. Thus, the great Krishna, who has
sprung from himself, divides himself in
fourfold form.

40. For creating this universe which
consisis of the five primal elements, he
begins this work, and ciuses itte goa on in
the fivefold form of antmate existence con-
taining celestial and Asuras and human
beings and beasts and birds.
then creates the Earth and the Wind, the


Sky, Light, and also Water, O sou of
Pritha, :
4t. Having created this universe of im-


mobile and mobile objects divided into four
orders of being (z1s., viviparous, oviparous,
vegetable, and filth-born), he then created
the Earth with her G&vetold seed, He then
created the Sky for pouring copious rain
on the Earth.


42-44. Forsooth, O king, it is this
Krishna who has created this universe. He
has originated from his own self; it is he
who causes all things to exist through his
own power. He it is who has created the
celestials, the’ Asuras, the human beings, the
worlds, the-Rishis, the departed manes and
all creatures. Desirous of creating, that
Lo¢d of all creatures duly created the entire
universe of life. d<now that good and evil,
mobile and immobile, have all originated
from this one who is Vishwaksena, What-

ever exists, and whatever will come into
being, all is Keshava. ‘Vhis Krishna is also


He it is who’


when their end comes, He is eternal and it
is he who upholds the cause of Virtue,
Whatever existed in the past, and whatever
we do not know, indeed, all that alse is this
Vishwaksena, :


45. ~All that is noble and meritorious
in the universe, all that is good and evil,
is Keshava who is inconceivable. Hence, it
is absurd to think of anything which is supee
rior to Keshava, ;


46. Keshavais such. More than this,
He is Narayana, the highest of the high,
immutable and undecaying. . He is the
eternal and changeless cause of the entire
mobile aud immobile universe with its
beginning, middle, and end, as also
of hg creatures whose birth follows their
wish.


CHAPTER CLIX.


{(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA),—
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :—


‘. Tell us, O destroyer of Madhu, the:
prosperity which originates from the wor
ship of the Brahmanas, You are a master
of this subject, Indeed, cur grandfather
koows you.


Vasudeva said:—


2. Hear me, O king, with attention,
© chief of Bharata's race, as I recite to you
what thie merits of the Brahmanas are, O
foremost one of Kuru’s race.


3—4. Once on a time while I was seated
at Dwaravati, O deligliter of the Kurus, my
son Pradyumna, euraged by certain Beah-
manas, tame to me and said, —O destroyer
o: Madhu, what merit is there for ador-
ing the Brahmanas. Whence is their lord--
ship detived both in this world and in the
next. ‘


5. O giver of honors, what rewards are
gained by constantly adoring the Brah-
manas? Kindly explain this clearly to me,
for my mind is disturbed by doubts about
this. - . ;


6. When Pradyumna said, these words
to me, | answered him as follows. Da you
hear, O king, with rapt attention, what those
words were,


zy. Ochild of Rukmini, listen.to me as I:
tell you what prosperity one nay acquire by
adoring the Brahmanas. When one tries
to acquire the threefold objeces of life (vis.,


336


- Vistas, Profs and Pleasure), or Emancipa-
on, or fame and prosperity, or the treat-
ment and cure of disease, or the worship of
the deities and the departed manes, he
should take care to please the twice-born
enes. They are each a king Soma. They are
the dispensers of happiness and misery.


9g O child of Rukmini, whether in this
erin the next world, O son, everything
agreeable has originated from the Brah-
manas. 1 have no doubt in this.


to. From the adoration of the Brah-
Manas originate achievements and fame
and strength. Men and the Regents of the
universe, adore the Bralimanas.


tr. How'then, O son, can we disregard
them, thinking that we are lords of the
“Eacth? O mighty armed one, do not allow
your anger to embrace the Brahmanas as
its object.


12, In this as also the next world, Brah-
manas are considered as great Beings.
‘They have direct knowledge of everything
in the universe. Verily, they are capable
of, reducing evetything into ashes, if
angry.

13. They are capable of creating other
worlds and other Regents of worlds. Why
then should not persons gifted with energy
and true knowledge treat them with obe-
dience and cespect ?


_ 14. Formerly ia miy house, O son,
lived the Brahmana Durvasas whose com-
plexion was green and tawny. Clad in
tags, he had a‘ stick made of the Vilwa
tree. His beard was long and he was
greatly emaciated. . :


15-16. He was taller in stature than
the tallest man on. Earth. Wandering
over all the worlds of human beings and
of the deities and other superior beings,

e sang constantly among assemblies and
in public squares.~—Who is there who would
cause the Brahmana Durvasas to live in his
house, doing the duties of hospitality to~
wards him ?.


17. He becomes wroth with every one
if he finds even the slightest transgression !
Hearing this about my nature, who is there
whe will give me refuge?


18. Indeed, he whe would give me
shelter as a guest should not do anything to
anger me!—When I saw that no one ven-
tured to give him shelter in his house, I
invited him and made him live in my
abode.


tg. On certain days he would eat the
food sufficient for the needs of thousands
ef persons. On other days he would eat
very little. On some days he would go
eyt ef my house and would not return.


MAHABHARATA,


20. He would sometimes laugh without


‘any reason and sometimes cry uselessly


At that time there was nobody on Earth 5
old as he. ‘ ‘


at. One day, entering the quarters which
were given to him, he burnt all the beds
and coverlets and all the well-adorned
damsels who were there for secving him.
Doing this, he went out.


22. OF highly praiseworthy vows, he
met me shortly after this and address-
ing me, said,—-O Krishna, I wish to eat
frumenty forthwith,


23. Having understood his mind previ
ously, I had set my servants to prepare
every kind of food and drink,


24. Indeed, many excellent viands had
been kept ready. As soon as I was asked,
I caused hot frumenty to be brought and
offered to the ascetic,


25. Having eaten some, he quickly said
to me,—O Krishna, take some of this
frumenty and smear all your limbs with it.


26. Unhesitatingly I did as directed.
Indeed, with the residue of that frumenty I
smeared my body and head. :


27. The ascetic at that time saw your
beautiful mother standing near. Laugh-
ing the while, he smeared her body also
with that frumenty.


28. The ascetic then caused your mother,
whose body was smeared over with
frumenty, to be yoked to a car without any


delay. Ascending that car he started
from my house,
29 «6Highly intelligent that Brahmana


shone with effulgence like fire, and struck,
before me, my youthful Rukmini, as if she
were an animal botn to drag the cars of
human beings.


30. Seeing this, I did not feel the slight-
est grief born of malice or the desire to
injure the Rishi.. Having yoked Rukmini to
‘the car, he went out, desirous of passing
along the high road of the city,


31-32. Seeing that extraordinary
spectacle, some Dasharhas, filled with
anger, addressed one another and began to
converse thus;—-Who else is there on
Earth whaq would live after having yoked
Kukimini toa car! Indeed, let the world
be filled with Brahmaias only! Let no.
other orders take birth here!


33- The poison of a virulent snake is
greatly powerful. More powerful than
poison is a Bratimana. There is no physi-
cian for a person who has keen bit or burnt
by the virulent snake of a Brahmana. ,


34. As the irresistible Durvasas’ pro-
ceeded on the car, Rukmini tottered on the .


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


toad and frequently dropped down.
this the twice-born Rishi became angry and
beyan to urge Rukmini on by striking hec
with the whip.


35- At fast, filled with an irresistible
passion, the Brahmana leaped down from
the car, and fled towards the south, running
on foot, over a pathless ground.


36. Seeing that foremost of Brahmanas,
flying along the pathless ground, we follow.
ed him, although we were smeared with
frumenty, exclaiming behind  him,—Be
pleased with us, O holy one. .


37. Gifted with great energy, the Brahs


mana, seeing me,} said, O mighty-armed
Krishna, you have subdued anger by the
strength of your nature. :


38. O you of excellent vows, I have not
found the slightest fault in you. O Govinda,
I have been highly pleased with you. Do
you solicit the fruition of such desires as you
please.


39—40. Behold duly, O son, what the
power is of myself when 1 become pleased
with any one. As long as celestials and hu-
man beings will continue to entertain a liking
for food, so long will every one among them
cherish the same liking for you that they
cherish for their food. As long, again, as
there will be Virtue in the several worlds, so
long will the fame of your deeds !dst.


4t. Indeed, your distinction will last so
long in the three worlds. O Janarddana,
agreeable you will be to all persons.


42. Whatever articles of yours have been
broken or burnt or otherwise destroyed (by
me), you will see restored, O Janarddana,
to theic former state or they will reappear
even in a better form.


43. Aslong again, O you of unfading
glory, as you will wish to live, so jong wiil
you have no feat of death attacking you
through such parts of your body as have
been smeared with the frumenty I gave
you.


44. Oson, why did you not smear that
frumenty on the soles of your feet as well?
By not doing it, you have acted in a way
that is not approved by me.—These were
the words that he said, well pleased with
me on that occasion. After he had ceased
speaking, I saw that my body became
gifted with great great beauty and splen-
dour.


45. To Rukmini also, the Rishi, well
pleased with her, said,—O beautiful lady,
you will be the foremost one of thy sex in
fame, and you will “enjoy great glory, and
achievements. You will never suffer from
decrepitude or disease er loss of com-
plexion,


1At--


“2


337


46. Every one will see ‘you engaged in


waiting upon Krishna, possessed ‘as you
already ate with a fragrant,odor which is
always present inlyou. ~


47. You will becomefthe foremost of all


‘wives,gnumbering sixteen thousand, ef Ke-


shava. At last, when the tine comes for
your departure from the world, you: will
acquire the inseparable companionship .of
Krishna hereafter.— oY


48—49. Having said these words ta
your motter, the Rishi once more addres
sed me and uttering the’ following words,
left the spot. Indeed, the Rishi Durvasas,
shining hke a fire, said -O _Keshava,. may
you be so disposed always ‘towards the
Brahmanas.—~After uttering these - words,
that Brahmana disappeared there and ther
before my eyes. : ; :


so. After his disappearance, I began. te
follow the vow of uttering certain Mantras
silently without being heard by anybddy,
From that day 1 resolved to do whatever
commands I sitould receive from the Brahe
manas,


51. Having adopted this vow, O son,
along with your mother, both of us,
with hearts filled with joy re-entered our
palace. ;


52. Entering our house I saw that
everything which the Rishi had broken or
burnt had re-appeared fresh. :


$

53. Seeing those new articles, which had
besides become more durable, I became
stricken with wonder. O som of Rukmini,
from that.day forth 1 have always adored
the Brahmanas in my mind. : ‘


54.
what 2 said on that occasion about’ the


e


This, O chief of Bharata’s race, is’


grea(ness of those Brahmanas who are the |


foretnost of their order. i


55. Do you also, O son of Kunti, adore
the highly blessed Braltimanas every day,


with gifts of wealth and kine, O powerful, -


one. 7
ie


56. It was thus that I won the prosperity


I enjoy—the prospesity that is born of the, ©


favour of Brahmanas, hatever, again,


Bhishma has said of me, O chief of the. -


Bhoaratas, is all true.


338


CHAPTER CLX.


{ ANUSHASANIKA PARVA ).—
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :— .-

t. Wou should, O destroyer of Madhu,
explain to me that knowledge which you
ihave acquired through the favour of
Durvasas,


2.- O foremost ef all persons having
intelligence, 1 wish to know everything
about the great blessedness and all the
mames of that great one truly and in
detail !


Vasudeva said vn


3- | shall recite to you the good which {
have acqitired and the fame which I have
won through the favour of that great one.
{ shall describe to you the subject, after
having bowed unto Kaparddin,


4 QO king, listen to me as I tecite to
you that Shata-Kudriya which | repeat, with
controlled senses, every morning after rising
froin bed,


§._ The great lord of alf creatures, vzs.,
the Grandfather Beahinan himself, having
penances for riches, composed those Man-
teas, after havi, observed especial pe-
nances for some tine. O sive, it is Shaukara
who created all thejcreatures in the universe,
tnobile and immobile,

‘6. There is no being who is superior, O
monarch, to Mahadeva. He is ghe bighest
of all beings in the three worlds,


' 9. ‘There is no one who is capable’ of
standing before that great Being. Indeed,
there is no Being in tue three worlds who is
his equal.


8. When he stands, filled with anger,
on the field of battle, the very scent of his
body deprives ail foes of consciousness and
etd who ase not killed tremble and fall

jown.


g. His coars are terrible, like the mute
terings of clouds. Hearing those roars in
battle, the vecy hearts of the celestials break.
in twain, *

to—12. When the holder of Pinaka be-
comes angry and assurhing a terrible mien
merely casts his eye upon deity, Asuca, Gan-
dharva, or snake, that individual cannot ob-
tain peace of mind by taking shelter in the
wecessess of even a mountain cave. When
that lord of ail creatures, wzz., Daksha,
desirous of celebrating a sacrifice, spread
his sacrifice out, the brave Bhava, yielding
to anger (at Daksha’s slight of him), pierced
the Sacrifice. Shooting his arrow frei his
tecaible bow, he roared aloud.


MAHABHARATA.


13. Indeed, when Maheshwara becama
angry and suddenly pierced with his arrow
the embodied form of sacrifice, the celestials
became filled with sorrow, losing happiness
aad tranquility of heart.


14. On account of the twang of his bowe
String the whole universe became agi-
tated. The celestials aud the Asuras,
O son of Pritha, all became cheerless and
stupefied.


15. The Ocean rolled in agitation and
the Earth trembled to her centre. The
hills and mountains began to move from
theic bases and ran on ail sides. The vault
of the sky became cracked.


16. All the worlds became covered with
darkness. Nothing could be seen, The
lighe of all the luminaries became darkened,
along with that of the Sun himself, O
Bharata.


17. The great Rishis, stricken with fear
and desirous of doing good to themselves
and the universe, performed the usual rites
of propitiation and peace.


18. Meanwhile, Rudra of terrible prov
wess rushed against the celestials. Fiiled
with anger, he tore out the eyes of Bhaga.


sto. Excited with anger, he attacked
Pushan with his foot. He tore out the
teeth of that god as he sat employed in
eating the large sacrificial ball (called Pu-
codasha),


20. Trembling with fear, the cclestials
bent their heads to Shankara. Without
being appeased, Rudra once more placed.
on his bowstring a sharp and blazing
arrow.


21. Seeing his prowess, the {celestials
and the Rishis became all alarmed. ‘Those
foremost of gods began to pacify him.


22. ‘Joining their hands in respect, they
began to recite the Shata-Rudriya Mantras,
Thus lauded by the celestials, at last Ma-
heshwara became gratified.


23. The deities then assigned a large
share to him. Trembling with fear, O king,
they suught refuge with bim.


24. When Rudra became pleased, the
embodiment of sacrifice, which had been
cut in twain, became once more united.
Whatever limbs of his had been$-destroyed
by the arrows of Mahadeva, became once
more whole and sound.


|. 25. “The Asuras gifted with great energy
had formerly three cities ia: the: Bemament.’
One of these had been, made of irot; one’
of silver; and-the third 8f gold.


26. With, ali his. weapons, Maghavat
the chief of the celestials, was unable to


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


pierce those cities. Afflicted by the Asuras, 4
all the celestials then sought the protection
of the great Rudra,


27. The high-souled celestials in a body
addressed him, saying, O Rudra, the
Asuras threaten to, display their desiruclive
influence in ali deeds.


28. Do you kill the demons and destroy
their city for the protection of the three
worlds, O giver of honors.!—Thus accosted
by them, be replied, saying,—So be it !—
and then made Vishnu his excellent shaft-
head. .

29. H%® made the deity of fice his shaft-
reed, and the Sun-God’s son Yama the
wings of that arrow. Hemade the Vedas


‘his bow and the goddess Savittri his ex-
cellent bowstring. :


30. And he made the Grandfather Brah-.
man his charioteer. Applying all these,
he pierced the triple city of the Asuras
with that arrow of his, consisting of three
Parvans and three Shalyas.


3t. Indeed, O Bharata, the Asuras with
their cities, were ail burnt by Rudra with,
that arrow which had solar effulzence and
whose energy resemoled that of the fire
which appears at the end of the cycte for
consuming all things. : ;


32. Seeing that Mahadeva changed
into a child with five locks of hair lying on
the lap of Parvati, the fatter asked: the
celestials as to who he was.


Seeing the child, Shakra became
suddenly filled with jealousy and anger
and determined to kill him with his thunder.
‘The. child, however, paralysed the arm,
appearing like a mace. of ‘iron, of- Indra.
with the thundeibolt in its


34. The celestials all became stupe-.
fied, and: they could not understand that
that child was the Master of the universe.
Indeed, all of them, along with the very
Regents of the world, found their intellects
Stupefied about that child who was none
else than the Supreme Being.


35. Then reflecting with the help: of his
jpenances, the illustrious Grandfather Brah-
man found out that that child was the
foremost of all Beings, the tord of Uma,,
Muhadeva of immeasurable. prowess. He


then lauded the Lord,


36—37. The celestials also began to sing
the praises of both Uma and Rudra. The
arm (which had been paralysed) of- the
destroyer of Vala then became restored to
its former state, Thaf Mahadeva, taking
birth as the highly energetic Brahmana
Durvasas, lived for a Jong time at Dwara-
vati in my house,


<=,


/
339.

38. While living tin my heuse he com=
mitted various mischiefs. Though difficult
of. being borne, I suffered them yet from,
magnanimity of heart, ;

39. He is Rudra; he ‘is Shiva; he: is,
Agni; he is Sarva; he is the defeater of all;
he js Indes, and Vayu, and the Ashwins
and the god of lightning. ;

40—41. He is. the Moon ; he is Ishana ;.
he is the Sun ; he is Varuna; he is Time ;
he is the Destroyer ; he is Death; he. is


the Day and the Night; he is the forte.


night; he is the seasons; he is the two...
twilights ; he is the year, He is Dhatri;
and he is Vidhatri; and he is. Vishwae
karman ; and he kuows all things,


42. He is the cardinal points of the
compass and the subsidiary points also. .
Of universal form, he is of great soul, The
holy and illustrious Durvasas is of the color:
of the celestials. ,


Metered


forms. ;


°44. Even such is Mahadeva. He is,..
again, that god who is undorn. In -even.,
ajundred years, one cannot exhaust his.
merits by recounting them.


CHAPTER CLXI.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA)ime-.
Continued. i


Vasudeva said :—


1. -O.mighty-armed Yudhishthira, listen
to me as I recite to you the many names’ of” '
Rudra as also the high blessedness of that, .
gteat: one, 7 ;

2. Fhe Rishis describe Mahadeva as
Agni, and Sthanu, and Maheshwara; as.,
one-eyed, and three-eyed, of universal form,
and Shiva or highly auspicious. © aN

3. Brahmanas knowing the Vedas say
that that god has two forms. One of these
téctibie, and_ the other mild and auspis
lous, Those two forms, again, are sub-
divided into many.forms. ; é

4. That form which is fierce and terrible.
is. considered” as identical with- Agni and ©
Lightning and the Sun, That-other form. -
whieh is mild and auspicious is identical
with . Vietué and Water and the Meon,

5. Then, again, it is said that half his,
body is fire and half is the moon. That


340. MAHABHARATA.


18. Ifhisemblem is adored, Mahestis
wara becomes highly pleased with thd
adorer. Affectionate towards his devotees,
he confers happiness upon them with a
cheerful soul.

tg. ‘This great god loves to live in cre«
matoria and there he burns and consumes
all dead bodies. Those persons who cele-
brate sacrifices on such grounds attain at
the end to the regions of hetoes,


forny of his which is mild and auspicious,
is said to be engaged in the practice of the
vow of celibacy.


5. That other form of bis which is highly
terrible performs all the destructive opera+
tions in the universe. Because he is great
andthe Supreme Lord of all (ishwara),*
therefore he is called Maheshwara.


7. ~And because he burris ard oppresses,
is keen and fierce, and gifted with great
energy, and is engaged in eating flesh
and: blood and marrow, that he is called
Rudra.


8.. Because he is the foremost of all the
celestials, and because his dominion and
acquisitions are very extensive, and because
he protects the vast universe, therefore the
is called Mahadeva.


oto. Because he is of the form or colot
of smoke, therefore he is called Dhurjjati.
Because by all his deeds he performs sacri-
fices for all and seeks the well-being of
every creature, therefore he is called Shiva
or the auspicious one. Living in the sky,
he burns the lives of all creatures and is,
besides, fixed in a particular path from
which he does not deviate.


11. His emblem, again, is fixed and im-
movable for all time. He is, for these
reasons, called Sthanu. He.is also of tnul-
tiferm aspect. He is present, past, aud
future. : ¢


12, He is mobile and immobile. For
this he is called Vahurupa. . The celestials
called Vishwedevas live in his body. He is,
for this, called Vishwarupa having an uni-
versal form... :


13. He has a thousand eyes; or, he has
numberless eyes; or, he has eyes on all
sides and onevery part of his body. His
energy comes out through his eyes. There
is no.end of his eyes. aa


zo. Engaged in his proper duty, he it i?
who is considered as the Death who lives
in the bodies of all creatures. He is, ggaim
those vital airs called Prana and Apana;
in the bodies of all embodied creatures.


2t. Hehas many burning and terrible
forms. All those forms are adored in the
world and are known to Bratmanas gifted
with knowledge.


2%. Amongst the gods he has many
significant names. Indeed, the meanings
of those names are derived from either his
greatness or vastness, or his feats, or his
conduct,


23, The Brahmanas always recite the
excellent Shata-Rudriya in his honor, that
is in the Vedas as also that which has been
composed by Vyasa.


24. Indeed, the Bralimanas and Rishis
call him the eldest of all beings.


2§. tleisthe first of all the celestials,
and if was from his mouth that he created
Agni. That great deity, ever willing to
grant protection to all, never forsakes his
suppliauts,


26-27. He would much rather give up
his own life and suffer all possible afflictions
himself. Long life, health and freedom
from disease, affluence, wealth, various.
kinds - of pleasures and enjoyments, are
conferred by him, and it is he also who
| snatches-them away. The lordship and
affluence that one sees in Shakca and the
other celestials ate, indeed, his.


28. Jt is he. who: is always engaged in
all that is good and evil in the three worlds.
On account of his fullest control over
all objects of enjoyment he is called
Ishwara. ke


29. . Because he is the master of the vast
universe, therefore hejis called Maheshwara, —
The whole universe is prevaded by him in
various forms. His mouth roars and burns \
he waters of the sea ti (he-formrot the huge
mare’s head. Sates po eee


14.' Because ke always nourishes all
Creatures and sports also with tiem, and |
because he is their lord or master, therefore
is he called Pashupati (the lerd of ali
creatures, :


15. Because his emblem always observes
the vow of Brahmacharyya, all the worlds,
therefore, adore it. This act of worship is
said to please him highly. :


16. If there is one who adores him by
creating his image, and another who adores
his emblem, the latter it is who wins great
prosperity for ever. - :


17. The Rishis, the celestials, the Gan-
@harvas, and the Apsaras, adore that em-
blem’ of his which is ever erect and up-
faised. * : ‘


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


CHAPTER CLXIL.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued.


Vaishampayana said :—

t—2. Alter Krishna, the son of Devaki,
had said these words, VYudhishthira once
more asked Bhishma the son of Shantanu,
saying,—O you of great intelligence, O
foremost of all persons ;knowing duties,
which, indeed of thej two, direct perception
and thejfscriptures,{ is to be considered as
authority for coming to a conclusion?


Bhishma said :—~


3. L think there is no Jdoubt in this.
Listen to me, O you of great wisdom, I
shall answer you. ‘The question yo@ have
asked is indeed proper. it is easy to enter-
tain doubt. But the solution of that doubt
is difficult.


4. Numberless are the instances,,about
both direct perception and Shrutis in which
doubts may oriyinate. Certain persons,
who take pleasure in the name of logicians,
imagining themselves to be gifted with
superior wisdom, afficm that direct percep-
tion is the only authority.


. They assert that nothing, however
true, exists which is not directly perceivable ;
or, at least, they doubt the existence of
those objects. Such assertions however are
absurd and they who inake them are fools,
whatever their pride of learning.


6. If, onthe other hand, you entertain
any doubt how the one indivisible Brahma
could be the cause, I answer that one would
understand it only after many years and
with the help of Yoga practised assiduously.


‘9. Indeed, O Bharata, one who lives
according to such means as present them-


selves, and one who is devoted, would be


capable of understanding it. Nene else,
truly, is competent for comprehending it.


8. When one gets to the very end of
reasons, he attains to that excellent and all-
comprehending knowledge—that vast mass
of effulgence,twhich illumines all the uni-
verse (called‘Bralhhma).


"9. That knowledge, O king, which is
derived trom reason ¢an hardly be said to
be knowledge. Such knowledge should be
rejected. It should be . understood, that it
is not defined or comprehended by the
word. - lt should, therefore, be rejected.


-Yudhishthira said :-—


» 10. Tell me, O- grandfather, which
among these (four) is most authoritative,
vis, direct perception, Inference from


44


rn te tne nentan anata ennitlinen e-waste natn hitter enna sere etter nthe


gat


observation, the science of scriptures, and
various kinds of practices which distinguish
the good.


Bhishma said :—~


11. While virtue is sought to be destroys
ed by wicked persons possessed of great
power, it is capable of being protected for
the time being by those who are good if
they work with care and earnestness. Such
protection, however, is of no use in the long
run, for destruction{does overtake virtue at
the end,


12. Then, again, “virtue} often proves a
mark {fer2covering sin, like grass and straw
covering thejmouth of a deep pit and con-
cealing -it from theiview. Hear, again, O
Yudhishthira. On account of this, the
practices of the good are interfered with and
destroyed by the wicked.


13. Those persons who are evil-doers,
who gdiscard the Shrutis,~—indeed, those
wicked persons who are haters ‘of virtue
destroy that good conduct, hence, doubts
attach to direct perception, Inference, and
good conduct.


14. Those, therefore, amofig the good who
are possessed of understanding purified
by the scriptures and who are ever conten~
tented, are to be considered as the fore-
most, Let those who are anxious and
deprived of tranquility of soul, approach
these. Indeed, O Yudhishthira, do you
seek them and ask them for,the solutions of
your doubts. ,


15. Disregarding both Pleasure and
Peofit which always fellow  cupidity and
cherishing the condition -that only: virtuz
should be sought, do you, O Yudhishthira,
wait upon and ask those persons,


16. The conduct of those gersons never
goes wrong or meets with destruction, as
alse their sacrifices and Vedic study and
rites. Indeed, these three, vts., good
conduct, mental purity, and the Vedas to-
gether form virtue.


Yudhishthira said :—


17. © grandfather, "my understanding is
once more stupefied by doubt. I amon
this side of the ocean, engaged in searching
after the means of crossing it. I do not,.
however, see the other shore of the ocean. —


18, If these three, viz., the Vedas,
direct perception and behaviour (or mental.
purity) together form’ what is to be consi+
dered as authority, it can be alleged that
there is difference between each. Virtue
‘then becomes really of three kinds although
it is one and indivisible,


342


Bhishma said :—

19. Victue is sometimes seen to be des-
‘troyed by a wicked man of great power. If
you think, O kiag, that virtue’shosld really
be of three sorts, | answer that your con-
clusion is supported by reason,


20. The truth is that virtue is one and
indivisible, although it is capable of being
seen from thiee different points.


at. The paths, cf those three, which form
the foundation of virtue have each been
‘aid down, Do you act according to the
instructions laid down. You should never
wrangle about virtue and then seek to have
those doubts of yours removed.


22, O chief of the Bharatas, let no
doubts like these ever take possession of
your mind. Ba you obey unhesita-
tingly what I say. Follow me like a blind
man or like one who, having no sense him-
self, has to depend upon that of another.


23. Abstention from injury, truth,
absonce of anger (or forgiveness), and
liberality or gifts,—these four, :O king do
you practise, for these four form eternal
virtue.


24, Do you also, O mighty-armed prince,
fellow that conduct towards the Bralimanas
which is consistent with what has been
observed towards them by your father and
grandfather, ‘These , ate. the principal
marks of virtue.


25. ‘That foolish wight, who would des-
troy the weight of authority by denying
that to be a standard which has always
been accepted as such, wold himself fail to
become an authority among men, Such a
saan becomes the cause of much sorrow
in the world.


26. Doyou respect the Brahmanas and
treat them with hospitality. Do you always
serve them in this way. Fhe universe
sests oy them. Do you understand them
to be such, ;


Yudhishthiva said :—’


27. ‘Tell me, O grand-father, what the
respective ends are of those who hate


2


virtue and of those who worship and.


observe it.


Bhishma said :— ;

28. Those men who hate virtue are said
to have their hearts possessed by the
qualities of passion and darkness. Such
nea have always to go to Hell.


29. “Fhose men, on the other hand, O
king, who always observe virtue, those men
who are given to truth and sincerity, are
called good. ‘They always enjoy the plea-
suies ur happiness of the celestial region,


MAHABHARATA.


go. Qn account of their waning nped
their preceptors with respect their hearts
always turn towards virtue. Iadeed they,
who worship virtue, attain to the region of
the celestials.


gt. Vhose individuals, whether men or
eelestials, who are shorn of cupidity and
mraltce and who emaciate or afflict their
bodies by the practic of austerities succeed,
on aceount of the virtue which they thus
acquire, to attaity to preat happiness.


32. Yhe righteous always adore them
with love and affection as a hunery man’s
stomach longs for ripe and sweet fruits.


Yudhishthira said :-—


33. What are the marks of the wicked,
and what are those deeds which the good.
do? Explain to me this, O holy one.
Indeed, tell me what characteristics are
of the good and the wicked.


Bhishma said :—

34. ‘Fhe wicked are evil in their prace
tices, incapable of being governed by rules,
and evil-tongued. ‘Fhe good are, however,
always good in theic deeds. Indeed the
acts these men do are considered as the
characteristics of good deeds.


35- The good or tive righteous, O king,
never answer the two calls of nature on the
public road, or in the midst of a cowpen, or
ona field of paddy.


36. After feeding the five they take their
own food. They never talk while eating,
and never go to sleep with wet hands.


37. Whenever they see any of the follows
ing, they go round them for showing them
respect, vis., a burning fire, a bull, the
image of a deity, a cowpen, a crossing
piace of four roads, and an old and virtuous
Bralhmana.


38. “Fhemsetves standing aside they
give the way to those that are old, those
that are afflicted with burdens, ladies, those
that bold bigh appointments in the village
er town administration, Brahmanas, kine,
and kings,


-3g. “Fhe righteous or good man is he
who protects his guests, servants and other
dependants, his own relatives, and all those
who seek his protection, Such a marr
always welcomes these with the usual polite
enquiries. ; ;


40. As ordained by the deities human
beings should take thetr feod twice-a-day,
vis., morning and evening. During the
interval one should not eat anything, By
following this rule about eating, one is said
to observe a fast,


_Preceptors are


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


at. As the Sacred fire waits fer liba-
Yions to be poured upon it when the hour
for Homa arrives, so a woman, when her
period is over, expects sexual union with
her husband. ;


42. One, who never knows his wife at
any othec time except after the period of
menses, is said to ohserve the vow of Bra-
hmacharyya. Amrita (nectar), Brahmanas,
and kine,—these three are considered as
equal, .

43. lence, one should alwabs adore,
with due cites, Brahmanas and kine. One
does not commit ary fault or stain by eat-
ing the meat of animals killed in sacrifices
with the hefp of Mantras from the Yajur
Veda. :


446 The flesh of the back-bone, gr that
of animals not killed in sacrifices, should
be avoided ever as one avoids the flesh of
his own son. One should never cause his
guest to go without food whether he
lives in his own country or in a foreign
land. .


45. After completing his study one
should give the due present to bis pre-
ceptor. When one sees his preceptor, he
should receive him with respect and adoring
him present him a seat.


46. By .adoring his preceptor, one in-
creases the period of his life as also his
fame and prosperity. One should never
censure the oid, nor send them an any
business.


47-49. One should never be seated
when any ove that is old is standing.
By acting thus one protects the duration
of his life, One should never cast his
eyes on a naked woman, nor a naked
man, One should never indulge in sexual
Congress except in privacy, One sheuld
eat also without being seen by others.
the foremost of shrines ;
the heart is the foremost of all sacred
objects; Knowledge is the foremost of all
objects of search; and contentment is the
foremost of all happiness. Morning and
evening one should listen to the grave coun-
sels of the aged.


50. One acquires wisdom by constantly
waiting upon the aged. . While reading
the Vedas or employed in eating; one
should use his right hand.


§{—52. -One should always keep his


‘speech and mind under perfect control, as


.


also bis senses. With-well-cooked frumen-
ty, Yavaka, Krishara, and Havi (clarified
butter), one should adore the departed
manes and the celestials in the Shraddha
called Ashtaka. ‘he same should be used
in adoring the Planets. One should not


343


undergo a shave without calling down a
blessing upon himself. If one sneezes, one
should be blessed By those present. Ally
who are ill or suffer from diseases, should be
blessed. The extension of their lives should
be prayed for,


53. One should never address an emie
nent persou familiarly. Under even the
greatest difficulties one shon!d never do this.
To thew such a person and to kill him are
egnal. Learned persons are depraded by
such a manner of address.


54. Such a word can be used: toe those
who are inferior, or equal, or to disciples.
A sinful man always Speaks: of the sins he
bas committed. : ;


55. Those men, who have deliberately
committed sins, meet with destruction by
trying to conzeal them from the good.- In«
deed, the confirmed sinners try to conceat
thair sinful: deeds from others, ;


56. Such persons think that their sins
are seen neither by men nor the celestials,
The sinful man, laden with bis sing, takes
birth is a miserable order of being.


57. The sins of such a man. continually
grow, even as the interest charged by au
usurer daily multiplies itself. If having
committed a sin, ote seeks to have it
covered by virtue, that sin becomes
destroyed and leads to virtue instead of ta
other sins,


58. tf a quantity of water be poured
upon Salt, the latter is immediately dissol-
ved. So when expiation is performed, sin is
dissipated,

59- For these reasons one should never
conceal a sin. Concéaled, it fis sure to in-
crease. tlaving committed a sin, one
should confess it before the good. They
would then destroy it forthwith.


60. Tf one does not enjoy in good time
what he has stored with hope, the result is
that the stored wealth passes into another
man’s hands after the death of him who has
stored it.. ;

61. ‘Phe wise have said that the ‘mind of
every creature is the true test of virtue
Hence, all creatures in this world have an
innate tendency to achieve virtue.


62. One should achieve virtue alone or
single-handed. Indeed, one should not
proclaim himself virtuous and- walk with
the standard of victue upraised for purposes
of show. ‘Fhey are said to be traders in
virtue who practice it for enjoying its
fruits, ‘


63. One sheuld worship the celestials
without giving way to seatiments of pride,
Similarly, one should serve his preceptor


344


without deceit, One should make -arrange-
ments for securing to . himself } invaluable
riches in the next ‘world ‘which consists in
gifts made here to worthy persons.


CHAPTER CLXIIL


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued,
Yudhishthira said :—

t. It is seen that if a person happens
to be unfortunate, he fails to acquire riches
how greatsoevet his strength, On the
other hand, ifthe happens to be fortunate,


he amasses riches, even if he be a weak or
a foolish wight.


2. When, again, the time does not come
for acquisition, one cannot make an ac-
quisition, even if he tries his best. When,
-however, the time comes for acquisition,
one acquires great wealth without any
exertion, :


3. Hundreds of men may be seen who
ain no result even when they try their
est. Many persons, again, are seen to
make acquisitions without any exertion.


4. If riches were the result of exertion,
then one could, with exertion, acquire it
forthwith. Indeed if the case were so, no
learned man could then be seen to take the
protection for the sake of his livehood, of
one destitute of learning.


5. Among men, that which is not to be
attained, O chief of the Bharatas, is never
attained, Men are seen to fail in gaining
results even if they try their best.


*,6.- One may be seen to seek riches by
hundreds of means (and yet failing to
acquite it); while another, without at ail
seeking it, gets it. Men may be seen doing
evil deeds continually (for wealth) and yet
they do not gain it.

7. Others get wealth without doing any
evil act whatever. Others, again, who
follow the duties assigned to them by the
scripture, are without wealth. One may
be seen to be without any knowledge of the
science of ethics and polity even after he
has studied all the treatises on that
science. =


8. One, again, may be seen appointed
as the prime minister of a king without
having at ail studied the moral and political
aciences. A learned man may beseen who
has wealth. An ignorant man may be
seen having wealth. Both kinds of men,
again, may be seen who has wealth.


- MAHABHARATA,


9g. If by the acquisition of learni g ote
could acquire the happiness of riches then
no man of learniag could be found living,
for the very means of his livelihond, under
the protection of one shorn of learning.


to. Indeed, if one could obtain, by the
acquisition of learning, all desirable objects
like a thirsty individual having his thirst
satisfied upon getting water, then none in
this world would have shown idleness in
acquiring learning. -

t1. If ‘one’s time has not come, one
does not die even if cut [with hundreds of
shafts. On the other hand, one dies if his
hour has come, even if it be a_ blade of
grass with which he is struck,


Bhishma said :—


*12. If one,"by performing arduous works,
fails to acquire wealth, he should then
practise severe austerities. Unless seeds
be sown, no crops appear.


13. It is by making gifts that one gets
numerous objects of enjoyment ; one becomes
endued with intelligence and wisdom by
waiting upon the elders, he wise have
said that one becomes long-lived by practi-
sing the duty of abstention from cruelty to
all creatures.


14. Hence, oné should make gifts and
not solicit and one should adore individuals.
Indeed one should be sweet-speeched to-
wards all, and always do what is agreeable
to others. One should seek to attain ta
purity; one should always abstain from
doing injury to any creature.


15. It is but proper, O Yudhishthira,
that you should be possessed by peaceful
sentiments, since their deeds and Nature
are the ruling causes of happiness and
misery to even insects and ants.


CHAPTER CLXIV.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA)—
Continued,


Bhishma said :—

t. If one does good deeds or causes
others to do them, he should then expect to
attain to the merits of virtue; likewise if one
does evil deeds and causes others to do
them, he should never expect to attain to
the merits of virtue.


2. At all times, it is Time, which enter-
ing the understanding of all creatures, sets
them to deeds of virtue or sin and then
confers happiness or misery upon them,


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


3- When a person, seeing the fruits of
virtue understands virtue to be superior, it
is then that he inclines towards virtue and
puts faith in it. One, however, whose un-
derstanding is not firm, cannot place faith
in it.


4. As regards faith in virtue, it is this.
To place faith in virtue is the mark of the
wisdom of all persons. One, who is ac-
quainted with what should be done and
what should not be done, with a view to
Opportuneness, should, with care and
devotion, do what is right.


5. ‘Those virtuous men, who have in this
life been blessed with riches acting of their
own accord, take particular care of their
souls so that they may not, in their next
lives, have to take birth ‘as persons with
the quality of darkness predominating in
them.


6. Time can never make the cause of
misery, One should, therefore, know that
the soul which is virtuous is certainly pure.

i


7. As vegards sin, it may be said that,
even when it is very great it is incapable of
even touching virtue which is always pro-
tected by time and which shines like a
burning fire.


8. These are the two results achieved by
virtue, vis., the purity of the soul and un-
susceptibility of being touched by iniquity
Indeed virtue is fraught with victory. Its
effulgence ‘is so great that it lights up the
three worlds.


g. A-wise man cannot catch hold of a
sinful person and forcibly make him pious.
When seriously urged to act piously;the sin-
ful only act with hypocrisy, moved by fear,


to. Even the righteous among the
Shudras never betake themselves to such
hypocrisy undee the pretext that persons
of the Shudra order ace not permitted to
live according to any of the four prescribed
mades.


ti. FE shall tell you particularly what the
duties truly are of the four castes. ‘So far as
their bodies are concerned, the individuals,
belonging te all the four castes, have five
primal elements for their constituent in-
gredients ; they are zl! of the same substance
in this matter.


12. For all that, their practices relating
to life or the world and the duties of virtue,
vary despite these distinctions, and sufficient
liberty of action is teft to them by which all
individuals may attain .to an equality. of

“ condition.


13. The regtons of happiness which
represent the results or irewards of virtue
- ate sot eternal, for they are destined to


345 ~


come to an end. Virtue, however, is eternal
When the cause‘ig eternal, why is the effact
not se? The answer to this is as follows.
Only that vietue ig eternal which is not
prompted by the desire of fruit or reward,


1g. All men are equal as regards
their physical organism. All of them,
again, have souls which are equal in nature,
When dissolution comes, all else dissolves
away. What remains is the desire. for
acquiring virtue, That, indeed, re-appears
(in next life) of itself, :

15. When such is the result, the ine
equality of condition, seen among human
beings, cannot be considered in any way
anomalous, So also, it is seen that those
creatures that belong to the intermediate
orders of existence are equally subject, about
their acts, to the influence of example.


ce


CHAPTER CLXV.


(ANUSHASANIRA PARVA).—
Continued. :


Vaishampayana said :—

1. Desirons of acquiring the merit which
destroys sins that perpetuator of Kuru’s
race, vis., Yudhishth ira the son of Pandu,
questioned Bhishma who waslying on a
bed of ar rows saying.


Yudhishthira said :—


2+ What, indeed, is beneficial for a
person in this world? What jis that by
doing which one may acquite happiness ?
By what may one be purged of al? his
sins? Indeed, what is that which destroys
sins ?


Vaishampanana said:—-

3- On this subject, the royal son of
Shantanu, O foremost of men, dul recited
the names of the celestials to Yudhishthira
who was desirous of hearing. :


Bhishma said :— :

4- O son, the following names of the
celestials with those of the Rishis,. if duly
recited morning, noon, and evening, destroy
all sins.


5—6. . Acting with the help of his senses,
whatever sins one may commit by day or
by night or by the two twilights, willingly
or unwillingly, one is sure to be cleansed
thereform and become thoroughly puse by
reciting these‘names. One, that takes those
names, has never to become blind or deaf;
indeed, by taking these names, one always
succeeds in getting what is beneficial,


946


7- Such aman never takes birth in the


intermediate order of being, never goes to -


hell and never becomes a human being of
any of the mixed castes. He has never
to fear any calamity. When death coines,
be never becomes stupefied.


8. The master of all the celestials and
Apsaras, resplendent with effulyence, ador-
ed. af all cteatures, inconceivable, indescrib-
able, the life of all living beings, and unborn
is gthe Grandfather Brahman, that Lord of
the universe. His chaste wife is Savittri.
Then comes that origin of the Vedas, the
creator Vishnu, otherwise called Narayana
of immeasurable power,


to-~34. Then comes the three-eyed
Lord of Uma; then Scanda the comman-
det in-chief of the celestial army, then
Vishakoa ; then Agnithe eater of sacrifi-
cial libations; then Vayu the god of wind;
then Chandramas; then the sun-god, gifted
with effulgnce ; then the illustrious Shakra
the husband of Sachi, and Yama with
his wife Diumorna; and Varuna with
Gauri; Kuvera the lord of riches, with bis
wife Riddhi; the amiable and illustrious
cow Surabhi; the great Rishi Vishravas;
Sankalpa, Ocean, Ganga ; the other sacred
Rivers; the Maruts; the  Valakhillyas
crowned with success of penances; the is-
land-born Krishna, Narada, Parvata;
Vishwavasu; the Hahas; the Huhus;
Tumvuru; Chitrasena; the celestial nies-
senger j; the highly-blessed celestial mai-
dens; the celestial Apsaras; Urvashi,
Menaka, Ramva, Mishrakeshi, Alamvasha,
Vishwachi, Ghritachi, Panchachada, ‘Vilot-
tama, the Adityas, the Vasus, the Ashwins,
the Pitris; Dharma, (Righteousness) ;
Vedic learning, Penances, Diksha, Perseve-
rance (in religious acts), the Grandfather,
Day and Night, Kashyapa, the son of Ma-
tichi, Shukra, Vrihaspatt, Mangala the son
of Earth, Vudha, Rabu, Shanaisichara,
the Constellations, the Seasons, the Months,
the Fortnights, the Year, Garuda the son of
Vinata, the several Oceans, the sons of
Kadcu, vis, the Snakes; Shatarudra, Vi-
pasha, Chaadrabhaga, Saraswati, Sindhu,
’ Devika, Prabhasa, the takes of Pushkara,
.Gaiga, Mahanadi, Vena, Kaveri, Nar-
mada, Kaulampuna, Vishalya, {Maratoya,
‘Amvuvahbini, Sarayu, Gandaki, the great
ruee Letita, Vamra, Acuna, Vetravati,
- Varnasa, Gautami, Godavari, Vena, Krisn-
navena, Dwija, Drishadvati, Kaveri, Van-
khu, Mandaxin, Prayaga, Prabhasa, the
-sacred Naimisha, the spot sacred to Vish-
weswara or Mahadeva, wis , Kashi, that lake
cof crystal water, Kurukshetra, full of many
sacred waters, the foremost of oceans i(viz.,
the ocean of“milk), Penarices, Gifts, Jamva-
marga, Hiranwati, Vaasta, the river Plak-


‘utecine brothers, greatly energetic,


MAHABHARATA.


shavati, Vedasmriti, Vedamati, Malava,
Ashwavati, all sacred spots on Earth, Gane
gadwara, the sacred Rishikulya, the civer
Chitravahe the Charmanwati, the sacred
river Kaushiki, the Yamuna, the river
Bhimarathi, the great river Vahuda, Ma-
hendravani, <Tridiva, Nilika, Saraswati,
Nanda, the other Nanda, the large sacred
lake Gaya, gPhalgutirtha, Dtharmaranya
(the sacred forest) inhabited by the celes-
tials, the sacred celestial river, the lake
created by the Grandfather Brahman,which
is sacred and celebrated over the three
worlds and auspicious and capable of purify-
ing all sins, the Himavat mountain having
excellent herbs, the Vindbya mountain
variegated with various kinds of metals,
containing many ‘Tirthas and evergrown
with medicinal herbs, Meru, Mahendra,
Malaya, Shweta gifted with silver, Shriny a-
vat, Mandara, Nila, Nishadha, Darcdura,
Chitrakuta, Anjanabha, the Gandhamadana
mountains, the sacred Somagiri, the various
other mountains, the cardinal points of
the compass, the subsidiary points, the
Earth, all the trees, the Vishwedevas, the
Ficmament, the Constellations, the Planets,
and the Deities,—let these all, named and
unnamed, rescue and purify us.


35. The man, who takes the names of
these, becomes purged of all his sins. By
singing their praises and pleasing them,
one becomes freed from every fear.


36. Indeed, the man, who delights in
singing the hymns in faudation . of the
deities, becomes pu g d of all such sins as
lead to birth in impure orders.


37-38. After this recital of the deities,
[ shall name those learned Brabmanas
crowned with ascetic merit and success and
capable of purifying one of every sin. Whey
are Yavakrita and Raibhya and Kakshivat
and Aushija, and Bhrigu. and Angiras and
Kanwa and the powerful Medhatithi, and
Varhi endued with every accomplishment.
Yhese all belong ta the Eastern region.


g9—40. Others, vés., Unmuchu, Pra-
muchu, Mumuchu, all bighly. blessed, the
highly energetic Swastyatreya, the highly
powerful Agastya, the son .of Mitra and
Varuna; Dridbayu and Urdhavahu, those
two foremost and celebrated of Rishis,—
these live in the Southern quarter, ;


41—43.—-Listen now te me as fF name
those Rishis who live in the Western
quarter. Vhey are Ushangu. with ait
ir-
ghatamas, Gautama, Kashyapa, Ekata,
Dwita, Trita, the righteous-souled son af
Atri (viz., Durvasas), and the powerful
Saraswat, Listen now to me as [ name


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


those Rishis who adere the celestial in
sacrifices, living in the Northern region.
44—47.. They are Atri, Vasishtha,


Shaktri, Parasara’s son Vyasa of great
energy; Vishwamitra, Bharadwaja, Jama-
dagni, the son of Richika, Rama, Audda-
laka, Shwetaketu, Kohala, Vipula, Devala
Devasharman, Dhaumya, Hastikashyapa,
Lomasha, Nachiketa, Lomaharshana, Ugra-
shravas, and Bhrigu’s son Chyavana. This
is the number of Rishis gifted with Vedic
learning.


“48, They are primeval Rishis, O king,
whose names, if taken, are capable of
purifying one of every sin. After shis 1
shall recite the names of the principal
kings.

49-58. They are Nriza, Yayati, Nahue
sha, Yada, highly energetic Puru, Sagara,
Dhundhumara, -Dilipa of great prowess,
Krisashwa, Yauvanashwa,  Chitrashwa,
Satyavat, Dushmanta, Bharata who became
an illustrious Emperor over many kiags,
Dasharatha, the heroic. Rama, that des-
troyer of Rakshas,Shashavindu, Bhagiratha,
Warishchandra, Marutta, Dridbaratha, the
highly fortunate Alarka, Aila, Karandhama,
that foremost of men, Kashmira, Daksha,
Anmvarisha, | Kukuca, highly illustrious
Raivata, Kuru, Satmvarana, .Mandhatri ot
unmitigated prowess, the royal sage
Muchukunda, Jahna who was much favour-
ed by Janhavi (Ganga), the first (in point
of time) of alf kings, vis., Prithu the son
of Vena, Mitrabhanu, Priyankara, T'rasa-
dasyu, Shweta that foremost of royal sages,
the celebrated Mahabbisha, Nimi, Ashtaka,
Ayu, the royal sage Kshupa, Kaksheyu,
Pratarddana, Divodasa, Sudasa, Koshalesh-
wara, Aila, Nala, the royal sage Manu,
that lord of all creatures, Havidhra, Prisha-
dhra, Pratipa, Shantanu, Aja, the senior
Varhi, ikshaku of great fame, Anaranya,
Janujangha the royal sage Kakshasena,
and many others not named (in history).


59- That man, who rising early in the
morning, takes the names of these kings at
the two twilights, v#z., at sunset and sunrise,
with a pure body and mind and without
Qistracted attention, wins great religious
merit.

60. One should sing the praises of the
celestials, the celestial Rishis, and the royal
sages and say,— These lord of the creation
will ordain my growth, longevity and lame.


61.. Let no calamity visit me, let no sin
defile me, and Jet there be no Opponents or
enemies of mine. Forsooth, I will always
have victory and; an auspicious end here-
alter.


347
CHAPTER CLXVI.


(ANUSHASANIKA: PARVA).—
Continued,

Janamejaya said :—

1-2. When that foremost person
among the Kauravas, vég., Bhishma, was
lying on a bed of arrows—a bed that is
always coveted by heroes—and when the
Pandavas were sitting around him, my
great-grandfather Yudhishthira of much
wisdom, heard these. expositions of ntys-
teries about the subject of duty and tad
all bis doubts removed.


3. He heard also what the ordinances
are about gifts, and thus had all his doubts
removed about the topics of virtue and
wealth. You should, O learned Bralmana,
tell me now what else did the great
Pandava king do. ;


Vaishampayana said :—

4. When Bhishma became silent, the
entire body of kings became perfectly
silent, Indeed, they all sat motionless
there, like figures painted on canvass.


5—6. Then Vyasa the son of Satyavati,
having thought tor a moment, addcessed
the royal son of Ganga, saying,—O king,
the Kuru king Yudhishthira has been res.
tored to his own nature, with all his brothers
and followers.


7. With highly intelligent Krishna by
his side he bends his head in respect to you.
You should give him leave for returning
to the city. :

8. Thus addressed by the holy Vyasa,
the royal son of Shantanu and Ganga dis
missed Yudhishthira and bis counsellors. *


9. Addressing his grandson in a sweet
voice, the royal son of Shantanu, also said,—~
® you return to your city, O king. Let
the fever of your heart be removed.


to, Do you adore the celestials in vari-
ous sacrifices distinguished by large gifts
of food and riches ike Yayati himself, O


foremost of kings, gifted with devotion and
y “.


- ®

11.. Devoted to the practices of the
Kshatriya do you, O sen of Pritha, please
the departed manes and the celestials,
You shall then acquire great benefits. In-
deed lect the fever of your heart be ree
moved,


self-control.


12. Do you please all your subjects.
Do you assure them and establish peace
among all. Do you also honer all your
well-wishers with such rewards as they
deserve.


348


13. Let all your friends and well-wishers
live, depending on you for theie means, as
birds live, depending for their means upon
a full grown tree laden with fruits and
Standing ona sacred spot.


14. When the hour comes for depar-
ture from this world, do you come here,
O king. I shall relinquish my body when
the Sun, stepping in his southward course,
will begin to return northwards.


15 The son of Kunti answered,—‘ So
be it!’ and saluted his grandfather with
respect and then started with all hid rela-
tives and followers, for the city of Hastina-
pur.


16-17, Headed by Dhritarashtra and
also Gandhari who was greatly devoted
to her husband and accompanied by the
Rishis and Keshava as alse by the citizens
and the inhabitants of the country and by
his counsellors, O monarch, that foremost
one of Kuru’s cace entered the city of
Hastinapur,


ei


CHAPTER CLXVIL.


(ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).—
Continued,


Vaishampayana said :

1. Then having duly honored the
citizens and the inhabitants of the province,
the royal son of Kunti dismissed them to
their respective homes.


2. The Pandava king then consoled
those women, who had lost their heroic
husbands and sons in the battle, with pro-
fuse gifts of wealth.


3. Having recovered his kingdom,
Yudhishthicra caused himself to be duly
installed on the throne, ‘Phat foremost of
men then assured all his subjects by various
deeds of good will. ;


4. ‘That foremost of righteous men set
himself to acquire the substantial blessings
of the Brahmanas, of the foremost military
efficers, and the leading citizens.


5. Having passed fifty nights in the
capital, the blessed monarch recollected the
time indicated by bis grandfather as the
hour of his departure from this world,


- 6. Accompanied by a number of priests
he then left the city of Hastinapur ‘having
seen that the sun, ceasing to go southwards,
had. begun to proceed in. his northward
course.


» ¥—BZ. Vudhishthira, the son of Kunti,
took with him a large quantity of clacified


‘| intelligent, son Vyasa,


MAHABHARATA.


butter and floral garlands and scents and
silken cloths and exceltent sandal wood and
Aquilaria Agallocha and dark cloe wood,
for cremating the body of Bhishma. Vari-
ous kinds of rich garlands and gems also
were among those Stores, ;


g—tt. Placing Dhritarashtra at the head
and queen Gandhari celebrated for her
virtues, and his own mother Kunti and all his
brothers also the highly intelligent Yudhish-
thira, accompanied by Krishna and wise
Vidura, as also by Yuyutsu and Yuyu-
dhana, and by his other relatives and fol-
lowers forming a large train, proceeded, his
praises sung the while by eulogists and
bards. The saccificial fires of Bhishma
were also borne in the procession.


#2, Thus accompanied, the king started
from his city like a second king of the celes-
tials. Soon he came upon the spot where
the son of Shantanu was siiil lying on his
bed of arrows.


13-16. He saw his grandfather waited
upon with reverence by Parashara’s
by Narada, O
toyal sage, by Devala and Asita, and
also by the surviving unslain kings
assembled from various parts of the coun-
try. lndeed, the king saw that his great
grandfather, as he lay on his heroic bed,
was guarded on ail sides by the ‘warriors
appointed for that duty. Getting down
from his car, king Yudhishthira, with his
brothers, saluted his grandfather, that
chastiser of ali enemies. Whey also saluted
the Rishis with the Isiand-born Vyasa at
their head. They were saluted in return
by them.


17. Accompanied by -his priests each of
whom resembled the grandfather Brahman
himself, as also by his brothers, Yudhish-
thira, of naomi glory, then approached
that spot whereon Bhishma lay on bis bed
of arrows sucrounded by those
Rishis.


18—19. Then king Wudhishthiea the
just with all his brothers, addressed that
foremost ore of Kuru’s race, the son of
the River Ganga, as he fay on that bed of
his, saying,—I am Yudhishthira, O king.
Salutations to thee, O son of the River
jJanhavi. Uf thou hearest me still, O, tell


reverend


me what I am to do for thee.


20-—21. Carrying with me thy sacrificial
fices, | have come here, O king and wait
upon thee atthe hour appointed. Precep-
tors of all branches of learning, Brahmanas,
Ritwijas, all my brothers, thy son the king
Dhritarashtra of great energy, are all here
with my counsellors as also Vasudeva of
great prowess. :


ANUSHASANA PARVA.


22. The remnant of unslain warriors,
and all the denizens of Kurujangala, are
also here. Opening thy eyes, O chief of
fKuru’s race, do thou see them.


23. Whatever should be done on this
eccasion have all been arranged and pro-
vided for by me. Indeed, at this hour
which thou hadst spoken of, all things have
been kept in readiness,


Vaishampayana said :—


24. Thus addressed by the highly intel-
KRgent Kuntits son the son, of Ganga opened


his eyes and all the Bharatas assembted’


there and stood around him.


25. The mighty Bhishma then, taking
the strong hand of Yudhishthira, address-
ed him, in a voice deep as that of the
clouds. . ;


26. By good luck, @ son of Kunti, you


have come here with all your counsellors,
@ VYudhishthira. The  thousand-rayed
maker of day, the holy Sun, has began his
noithward course. © : ;


27. Uhave been lying on my bed “here
for fifty-eight nights. Stretched on these
Sharp-fointed arrows, I have felt this period
to be as Jong as if it was a century.


28. © Yudhisthira, the lunar month of
Magha has come. This is, again, the
lighted fortnight > .J a fourth part of it
ought by this (aceording to my calculations)


be over, i


29. Havingsaid soto Yudhishthira the
son of Dharma, Ganga’s son Bhishma then
saluted Dhritarashtra and said to him as
follows,


‘Bhishma said :— .

30. O king, you -know well the duties.
All your doubts, again, relating to the
, science of wealth, have been well solved.
You have served many learned Bralimanas.


3t. You know the subtile sciences con-
nected with the Vedas, all the duties of
religion, O king, and the whole-of the four

- Vedas, :


32. You should not grieve, therefore, O
son of Kuru. ‘That which was pre-ordained
has come to pass. It could-not ‘be other-

‘ wise. You have have heard the mysteries
relating to the deities from the lips of the
XIsland-born Rishi himself,


_ 33. Yudhisthira and ‘his brothers are

morally as much your sons as are the sons
of Pandu. Following the duties of religion,
_ cherish and protect them, In their turn,
they are always devoted to the service of
their elders.


45


349


34. . King Yudhishthira, the just, is pure=
souled. He will always be obedient to
you. I know that he is given to thé virtue
of meréy or abstention trom injucy. Ele is
devoted to his elders and preceptots.

35. Your sons wore all wicked-souled.
They were full of anger and cupidity.
Overwhelmed by envy they were all sf
«wicked conduct. You should not grieve for
them.


Vaishampayana said:—

36. Having said this much to Dhrita.
rashtra -of great wisdom, the Kurd chief
then addressed Vasudeva of great arms,


Bhishma said:—- am
37. O holy one, O god of all gods,Q
thou adored by all the deities and Asuras,
O thou who didst cover the three worlds
with three. steps of thine, ] bow unto thee,
O wielder of the couch, the ‘discus, and the
mace. ' j ae,


38. Thou art Vasudeva, thou art ot
golden body, thou art the one Purusha (or
active agent), thou art the creator {of the
universe), thou art of huge proportions, Thou
art sentiercy. VYbouart subtle, Dhow art
the Supreme and Eternai Sout. °"- :


39. Do thou, O lotus-eyed one, save me,
O foremost of ail beings. :


40. Do thou give me permission, O
Krishna, to depart from this world, O thou.
who art supreme happiness, O-foremost of
all beings. Thoa shouldst always protect
the, sons of Pandu.. Thou art, indeed,
atready their sole refuge. om

4t. Formerly, | spdke to the foolish Dur-
yodhana of wicked undérstanding that there
is Vittue where. Krishna is, and that there
is victory where Virtae is, , ;


42. Ufurther advised him that. depen-
ding on Vasudeva as his refuge, he should
make peace with the Pandavas. Indeed,
I repeatedly -told him,—* This is the fittese


time for you to make peace,’


43. The foolish and wicked Duryodhana
however did ‘not do what EF said: Having
caused a greatthavoc on Earth, at last, ke
himself gave up his life. :


44. I know thee, Ojillustcious one, to be
that ancient and best of Rishis who lived
for many years ip the company of Nara, in
hermitage of Vadari.


‘48. The celestial Rishi Narada told-me
this, as also Vyasa of austere penances.
Even they have said to me that, Thyself
and Arjuna are the old Rishis Narayana
and Nara born among mem, .


359


46. Do thou, O Krishna, grant me leave.
1 shall renounce my body. Permitted by
thee, I shall attain to the highest end,


Vasudeva said :—
47. 1 give you leave, O Bhishma, O
king, to attain to the status of the Vasus,
you of great splendour, you have not
keen guilty of a single sin, in this wortd.


48. O royal sage, you are devoted to
your father. Wou are, therefore, like a
second Markandeya. [It is, therefore, that
sal depends wpon your pleasure like a
slave,


Vaishampayanea said :—

41k Having said these words, the son
of Ganga once more addressed the Panda-
vas headed by Dhritarashtea, and other
friends and well-wishers of his.


§0; I wish to renounce my fife. You
should give me leave.. You should strive
.for attaihing to truth, Truth forms the
highest power. :

5t, You should always five with Brah-
manas of righteous conduct, devoted fo
penanees, ever abstaining from cruel con-
duct, and who have their souls under res-
traint,

52. Maving said these words to his
friends and embraced them all, the intelli-

ent Bhishma once more addressed Yu-
Shishthira, saying,——'*O king, worship all
Brahmanas, especially those who are gifted
with wisdom, them who are preceptors,
those who are priests capable of assisting
at sacrifices.


CHAPTER CLXVHL


( ANUSHASANIKA PARVA).-<
Centinued.


Vaishampayana said :—~

t. Having said so to all the Kurus,
Bhishma, the son of Shantanu, remained
silent for some time, O chastiser of
enemies,

2. He then held forth his life-breaths
successively in those parts of his body
_ which are indicated in Yoga. ‘The vital
airs of that great one, restrained duly, then
rose up.

3. Those parts of the body of Shan-
tanu’s son, on account of the adoption of
Yoga from which the vital airs west up,
became soreless one after another.

. 4 In the midst of those great persons,
including those- great Rishis headed by


MAHABHARATA.


Vyasa, the sight seemed to be a strange
one, O king.


8 Within a short time, the entire body
of Bhishma became arrowless and soreless.
Seeing it, all those great personages, headed
by Vasudeva, and al! the ascetics with
Vyasa, became filled with wonder.


6. The vital airs, restrained and unable
to escape through any of the outlets, at last
passed through the crown of the head and
proceeded upwards to Heaven.


7- The celestial kettle-drums began to
play and fforal showers were rained down.
The Siddhas and regenerate Rishis, filled
with delight, exclaimed,—Excellent, Ex-
cellent.


8 The vital airs of Bhishma, piercing
through the crown of his head, shot up
through the sky like a large metéor and
soon became invisible, *


g. O great king, thus did Shantanu’s
son, that pillar of Bharata’s race, unite
himself with eternity,


10. Then. the great Pandavas and
Vidura, taking a large quantity of wood
and various kinds of fragrant scents, made
a funeral pyre.


II~~32, weyatee and others stood as
Spectators of the preparations. Then
Yudbishthira and the great Vidura wrap-
ped Bhishma’ body with silken cloth and
floral garlands. Yuyutsu held an excellent
umbrella over it.


13. Bhimasena and Arjuna both held
in their hands a couple of pure white yak-
tails. The two sons of Madri held two
head-gears in their hands.


14. Yudhishthira and Dhritarashtra
stood at the feet of the body, taking up
obi A fans, the wives of the lord of the

wrus stood around the body and began to
fan it softly. ‘The Pitci sacrifice of the
great Bhishma was then duly performed.
Many libations were poured npon_ the
sacred fire, ‘Fhe singers of Samans sang
many Samans.


‘ 16-17. Then covering the body of
Ganga’s son with sandal wood and black
aloe and the dark wood and other fragrant
fuel, and setting fire to the same, the Kurus,
with Dhritarashtra and others, steod on the
tight side of the funeral pyre.


18. Having thus eremated the body of
the son of Ganga those foremost ones of
Kuru’s race proceeded to the sacred Bhagi«
tathi, accompanied by tle Rishis,


19. They were followed by Vyasa,
Narada, Asita, Krishna, by the ladies of
the Bharata family, as also by such of thie


ANUSHASANA PARVA,


asf


titizens of Hastinapore as had come to the{ 28—30. Hearing the goddess of the


place.


20. All of them, arrived at the sacred
river, duly offered oblations of water to the
great son of Ganga. °


21. After those oblations of water had
been offered by them to her son the goddess
Bhagirathi, rose up from the river, weep-
ing and distracted by sorrow.


22. In the midst of her lamentations,
she addressed the Kurus, saying,—Ye sin-
less ones, listen to me as I say to you all
that took place. :


23. Gifted with royal conduct and dis-
osition, and endued with wisdom and
high birth, my son was the benefactor of

all the elders of his family. He was devo-
ted to his father and was of high vows,


+24. He could not be defeated by even
Rama of Jamadagni’s race with his high-
ly powerful celestial weapons; alas, that
hero has been killed by Shikhandin,


25. Vekirgs, forsooth, my heart is made
of adamant, for it does not break even at
the disappearance of that son from my
view.


26. At the Swayamvara at Kashi, he
defeated on a_ single car the assembled
Kshatriyas and carried away the three
princesses,


27. There was no one on Earth who
equalled him in power ; alas, my heart does
not break upon hearing the slaughter of that
son of mine by Shikhandin.


great river thus bewail the powerful Krishna
consoled her with many soothing words.
Krishna said,—*O amiable one, be come
foried. Do not give way to serrow, O you
of beautiful features. Forsooth, your son has
gone to the higliest region of happiness.


31. He was one of the Vasus of great
energy. ‘Through a curse, O you of beau-
tiful features, he had to take birth among
men, You should not grieve for him.


#

32. . According to Kshatriya duties, he
was killed by Dhananjaya on the field of
battle while engaged in battle. He has not
been killed, O goddess, by Shikhandin.


33. The very king of the celestials him-
self could not kill Bhishma in battle when
he stood with stretched bow in hand,


34. O you of beautiful face,’your son has
happily. gone to Heaven. All the gods
assembled together could not kill him in
battle.


35- Do not, therefore, O goddess Ganga,
gtieve for that sen of Kuru’s race. He
was one of the Vasus, O goddess, your san
has gone to Heaven. Let the fever of your
heart be removed.” 7


Vaishampayana said :—~

36. Thus addressed by Krishna that
foremost of all rivers cast off her grief, O
great king, and became consoled.


37. O monarch, having honored that
goddess duly all the kings there presen,
headed by Krishna, received her permission
to.go away from her banks,


Finis ANUSHASANA Parva,


A PROSE ENGLISH TRANSLATION


OF


THE MAHABHARATA.


(TRANSLATED LITERALLY FROM THE ORIGINAL SANSKRIC TEXT).


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA.
VOL. XIV.


EDITED & PUBLISHED BY


MANMATHA NATH DUTT, (Sfasér:) M.A, M.B.A.S.
Rector, KesuuB ACADEMY;


Author of the English Translations of the Ramayana, Vishnu Puranam,
Srimad-Bhagavatam, Kamandakiya, Nitisara, Bhagavad: Gita,
and many other works.


40, Nayan Chand Dutt’s Street, Calcutta.


CALCUTTA:


Prinren sy H. C. Dass, Ezysrum Press,
40, Nayan Chand Dutt's Street.


1905.


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA.


TABLE OF CONTENTS,


Cuarrer }.—Vudhishthira’s -gtief and
consolation by Dhritarashtra—p. 1.


Cuarrer I[.—The conversation between
Yudhishthira and Krishna—p. 1.

CHAPTER I1I.—Consolation offered by
Vyasa—p. 2.

Cuaprer 1V.—The story of the Royal
Sage Marutta—p. 3.

CHaprers V te X.—The story of Marutta
and Vrihaspati continued—p. 4.


CHAPTER XI.—The story of Vritra and
Indra—p. 13.

Cuaprer XH.—Mental and Physical
Diseases as described by Krishna~—p, 13.


Cuapter XIII.—The Means of Salvation
as described by Krishna—p. 14.

Cuarrer XIV.—The exhortation of the
Rishis to Yudhishthira for going to Hima-
layas—p, 16.

Carter XV.-—Krishna’s desire of going
to Dwarka—p, 16.

CuapteR XVI--The story of Anugita—
p. i7

Cuarrer AVIL.—The dissolution of the
body and the acquirement of another, The
altainment of the Soul to Brahman--p, 19.


CuarTer XVIIL—The fruits of human
actions—p, 21.

Cuapter XIX.—The characteristics of
a Liberated Person—p._22.


CuapTeR XX.—The discourse of the
married couple. ‘The description of Brah-
“man—p. 25. ;
CHAPTER XXI.—-The ten Hotris and two
Minds—p, 26.


Cuarrer XXIL-—The seven sacrificing


presents—p. 27.

CuaPreR XXIllemThe five sacrificing
Priests—p. 28.

Cuarrer XX1V.—The first creation in
a creature born—p, 29.

Cuarrer XXVThe Chaturhotra Sacri-
fice—p. 30.

CuarTer XXVIL.——The extensive forest
of Brahma described—p. 31.

Cuaprer XXVIil-Nature described—
P 32.


Cuaprer XX1X.—The discourse between
Kartavirja, Arjuna and the Ocean—<p. 33.


Cmarrer XXX.—Alarka’s — discourse
about controlling the various organs of the
body—p. 34.

Cuaprer XXXI.—_The three enemies—
p. 30.

Cratrer XXXI1.—The Means for dese
troying Egoism. The discourse of Janaka
—P- 36. :

Craprer XXXIII.—The Knowledge of
Self-+-37.

CuapTeR XXXIV.—The Source of the
Knowledge of Self—p. 38.

Cgarrer XXXV.—An account of Brah«
ma-—the highest object of Knowledge—p. 38,


CuapTeR XXXVI—The three qualities
and the means of improvement—p. 40.


CuarteR XXXVIL—The
darkness—p. 42.

Cuaprer XXXVIII—~-The quality of
goodness—p. 42.

Cuaprer XXXIX —The united state of
the three qualities described=-p. 43.


quality of


CuarTer XL.—An account of the Great
Soul—p. 44.

Cuaprer XLI—The principle of Greats
ness—p, 45. ;

CuapTir XLII.—The five great elements.
—P. 45.

Cuaprer XLIII.—The foremost objects
in Nature are enumerated—-p. 47.


CuaprerR XLIV.—The creation of Day,
Night, Stars, etc.—p. 49.

Cuarrer XLV.—The Wheel of Life—
p. 50.

CuarTeR XLVJ.—The Conduct of the
Twice-Born—p. 51.

CaarTer XLVII—An account of Renuns
Ciation—-p. 53. ~

Cuarrer XLVIIL.—The relation between
Nature and Soul—p. 54.

Cuaprer XLIX.—Description of Duty—
P- 55-

CuarreR L.—Abstention from Injury.
Association and disassociation of Soul and
Nature—p. 56.


=
me


Cuaprer LL.—The Mind and the Dissolu-
tion of the Body described—p. 58.

Or leree LU.—The departure of Krishna
—p. 60.

Gaarter LILf.—The meeting of Krishna
and Utanka—p. 62.

CuHaprer LIV. Spiritual Science descri-
bed by Krishna to Utanka—p. 63.

Caarter LV.—Krishna shows his
supreme form to Utnaka—p. 64.

Cuarrers LVEto LVHE—The story of
Utanka and Saudasa—p. 66.

Craprer LUX.—The return of Krishna
to Dwacka~~p. 71.

CwarteR LX.—Krishna describes the
wonderful battle—p. 72.

CuarreR LXI.—An account of Abhi-
manyu’s death-—p. 73. :

Carrer LXIf.—Obsequial offerings of
Abhimanyu—p. 75.

Cuarrers LXUI to LXV.—Yudhish-
thira’s acquisition of wealth turned inta earth
by Marutta—p. 75.

Cuaprer LXVi.—~Krishna’s return to
Hastinapur—p. 78.

Caarrer LXVIE—Subhadra’s lamenta-
tion—p. 79.

CuapTer LXVIII.—Krishna is requested
to restore Abhimanyu’s son to life—p. 80.


Cuaprer LXIX.—Krishna restores him
to life—p. 88.
Carrer IL.XX.—-Great rejoicing—p. 82.
CaarTer LXXE.—The return of the Pan-
davas—p. 82.
Crarprer LXXH,—Yudhishthira’s desire
for Horse-Sacrificep. 83.
-CHaprer LXXIII.—The horse js let loose
and Yudhishthira is initiated~p. 85.


Cuaprer LXXIV.—The fight between
Arjuna and Trigartas—p. 86.


| of Naga king, also, goes there,


CONTENTS.


Cuaprer LXXV,—The fight between
Arjuna and Bhayadatta—p. 87.

Cuaprer LXXVI.—The defeat of Bha-
gadatta—p. 88.

Cuarter LXXVIE.—The battle between
Arjuna and the remaining Saindhavas
—p. 89.

CuarTter LXXVILI.—The speech of


| Dusshala—p. go.


Cuarrer LXXIX.—The arrival of Arjuna
at Manipur. Hearing of the death of her
husband and son, Chitrangada goes to the


- field—p. 92.


Cuarprer LXXX.—Ulipi, the daughter
She revives
Arjuna—p. 93.

‘CaarTerR LXXXI.—She gives an account


of the whole thing—p. 95.


Carter LXXXiL.—The return of the
sacrificial horse homewards—p. 97.


Cuarrer LXXXIII.—The return of the


sacrificial horse to Dwarka—p. 98.


Cuarter LXXXIV.—The battle between
Arjuna and Gandhara king—p. 99.


CuapTteR LXXXV.—The beginning of
the Horse-Sacrifice of Arjuna—p. roa


Cuaprer LXXXVI.—Thie arrival of a


| messenger from Arjuna—p. tol.


Cuarrer LXXXVII.—Yudhishthira goes
out to receive Arjuna—~p. 102,


Cuarrer LXXXVIII.—The arrival of
Babruvahana, Chitrangada and Ulupi—


| ps 10g.


Cuarter LXXX1IX.— The
begins—p. 105.

Cuarrer XC.—A description of the
sacrifice—p. 106,


CuarpteR XCI.—The ordinance about


ceremony


the sacrifice—p. 11F.


Cuarrer XCII.—The highest end of ak


sacrifices—p. 113,


THE MAHABHARATA
«GN ENGLISH),
ASHWAMEDHA PARVA.


- —


GHAPTHR I,


Having saluted Narayana aid Nara the
best of malé beings as also the Goddess of
Learning, let as cry success. .


Vaishampayana said :—

1—2. After the king Dhritarashtta had
offered libations of water, the mighty-armed
Yudhishthira, with his senses bewildered,
keeping the former in his front, ascended


the banks (of the river), his eyes filled with +


tears, and dropt down on the bank of the
Ganga like an elephant pierced by the
hunter.


3. Then, asked by Krishna, Bhima took
him up sinking, ‘This must not be so, said
Krishna, the grinder of hostile arnties,


4. The Pandavas, O king, beheld


Vudhishthira, the son of Dharma troubled-


and lying on the ground, and also sighing
again and again.


. And seeing the king despondent and
feeble, the Pandavas, over laden with grief,
sat down, surrounding him, :


.

6. And gifted with high ‘intelligence,
and wise vision, king Dhritarashira‘greatly
afflicted with grief for his sons, addressed
the king, saying,‘ Rise up, O foremyst of
Kucus.


7. Do you trow satisfy your duties. O
Kunti’s son, you have conquered this
Earth like the Kshatriyas. ,

8 Do you now, O king enjoy her with
‘your brothers and friends. O° foremost of
the pious, I do not see why you should
gtisve. O king, having tost a century of

sons like wealth got in a dream, -it is
Ganghari and I, who should mourn.

- 9. Not -having
of the great Vidura, who sougiit out’ well-
beirg, J, of perverse senses, (now) repent.


19, Tte vittucus Vidura; gifted with


listened weighty - words -


divine insight, “liad told mie,—your farily
will bé extinct for the sins of Duryodhana.
tt—ig. O king, if you wish for the well-
being of your family, act up to. my advice,
Renounce this wicked king, Suyodhana
and let not either Karna or Shakuni by
any means see him. ‘Put down their gam-
ling tos, atid anoint the pious king Yudhi-
shthira. That one of controlled senses
will righteously goverti the Eacth,


. 1415. Lt you would not have king Vu
dhishthica; son of Kunti; thes; O monarch,
do you; celebrating a sacrifice, yourself take
charge of the kingdom, ‘and regarding all
creatures impartially,,O king, do you let


your kinsmen, O you advancer of yout
kindred, subsist on your bounty,
16. When,’ O Kunti’s son, the fate


sighted Vidura said this, foolishly I follows
ed the wicked Duryodhana, .
‘197. Having. paid no heed to the sweet
words of that sedate one, I have obtained
this powerful grief as a consequence, and
have been plunged in an ocean of misery.
18, See’ your old father aud mother, O
king, plunged in niisery. But, O master
of men, I find no reason for your sorrow.


ae
_CHAPTER IL.
. ( ASHWAMEDHIKA PARVA.)= -
may? a ‘Continuéd. ;
Vaishampayana said: —¢= |
"1,6 Thus accostéd by the intelligent king
-Dhritarashtra, Yudhishthira, gifted with


aunderststanding, became calm. And thea
Keshava (Krishna) said to tim, i


‘al Ib a! person indulges: excessively in
sorrow for his departed maneés he grieves
them. -°


4


3- Do you (now) celebrate many a sacri-
‘fice with suitable presents to the priests ;
and-do you please the celestials with Soma
juice and the manes of your forefathers,
with their due food and drink.


4. Do you also please your guests with
meat and drink -and -the poor with gifts
after their hearts. A person of your high
intelligénce should not act thus. |


5. You know what ought to be known,
you have performed what ought to be done,
and you have heard-the- -dities of the
Kshatriyas, recited by Bhishma, the son
of Bhagirathi, by Krishna Dwaipayana,
Narada and Vidura. : 4%


6. Therefore you should not act like a
stupid; but following the course of your:
forefathers, sustain the burthen (of the
-Empire). - ; ; '

a his that a Kshatriya should;

dite ine toe région for certain by ‘his:
{own):renown, “Of heroes, those who came,
ro be killed never shall have to turn away.
' 8, Renounce ‘your grief, O powerfut
king. ‘Indeed, what has taken place was
destined to happen ‘so. You can_ in tfo
“way ‘see thuse that have been killed in this
war,

Having said this te Yudhishthira,
‘prince of the pious, the high-spirited
Govinda ‘stopped; “and © Yudhishghira
‘answered him thus.

10. ‘O Govinda, I know fall well your
fondness forme. You have ever favoured
me with your love and -friendship.


_ 1% And, O holder of the mace and the
discus, O scion of Yudu’s race, -O. glorious
one, if (now) do you gladly permit me to re-
tire into the woods, then you would do what
is greatly desired by me,

12, After having killed. my grandfather,
and that foremost of men, Karna, who
never fied from the field of battle, | find so
peace. :

13. Do you, O Janarddana, so ordain
that I may be freed from this heinous sin
and that my mind may be purifted.


14. As Pritha’s son was speaking thus,
the highly euergetic Vyasa, ‘knowing the
duties of life, soathing him, spoke these ex-
cellent words, ‘

15. My chitd, ‘your mind i ‘not ‘yet
calmed; -and therefore you arg again
stupefied by childish feeliggs... And whese-/
fore, O chiid,:do we over.and ,quet again;
throw our words to che winds 3 wee a

56.. You know the duties .of. the Ksha-:

‘triyas, who live. by warfare, Ackiag who,
has done his duty, should not allow himsel
to be overwhelined by grief. -


MAHABHARATA?


17. You have faithfully fistened ta the
entire doctrine of salvation; and I have
repeatedly removed your misgivings origi-
nating from desire,

18. But not paying due heed to what
} have unfolded, you of perverse undere
standing have-doubtless forgotten it clean,
Be it not so. Such ignorance és not worthy
of you. -

1g. O sintess one, you are eognizane
-of all kinds -of expiation ; and you have
-abso- heard of ‘the -virtues of kings, as-well
as the merits of gifts.

20. Wherefore then, O Bharata, know-
ing every form of morality and versed iw
alt the Agamas, are you overwhelmed (with
igrief) as if from ignorance.


CHAPTER IEE


(ASHWAMEDHIKA PARVA.)—
Continued,


Vyasa. said :—

's. © MWudhishthira, your wisdom, 1}
eonceive, ig not sufficient. None does a
work by his own power.

2. ‘ft is God who engages him in deeds,
Rood or’bad, O bestower ‘of -honor, What
is the cause'then for repentance 7


3 You consider yourself as having
perpetrated impious deeds. Do you,
therefore, O Bharata, listen to the way in
which sins, may be removed, 1


-4. O Nudhishthira, those who commit
Sins, can always free themselves from . then?
ttfrough penance, sacrifice and gifts.


5 O king, O foremost of men, sintul
people are purified by sacrifice, austeritics
and charity.


6. The great celestials and Asuras
celebrate sacrifices for acquiring religious
merit ; and thetefore sacrifices are of great
importance,


y. tis througt sacrifices that the great
eelestials bad grown so. wondrously power-
ful; and having celebrated rites did. they
defeat the. Dranavas. :

8 Po you, O Wudhishthirca, prepare
for the Rajasuya, and the Horse~Sacrifice,
as well as, O Bharata, forthe Sarvamedha
aad the Naramedha.


Q—~10. Aed.as Dasharatha’s, san, Ramas
or as Dushmanta’s and Shakuntala’s sone


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA.


yout avcestor, the. lord of the Earth, the
exceedingly powerful king Bharata, had
done, do you according ta the ordin
celebrate the Horse-Sacrifice with presents. |


11. WVudhishthira replied :—Undonbted-
ly, the Horse-Sacrifice purifies princes. But
{ have a purpose of which you should
hear. ;

12, Having caused this "huge slaughter
of kindred, 1 cannot, O best ofgthe twice-
born ones, dispense gifts even on a smati
scale, I have no riches to give.


13. Nor can { for riches solicit these
young sons of kings, living wretchedty with
their wounds yet grees, and undergoing
suffering.

14. How, O foremost of “twice-born
ones, haviag myseff destroyed the Earth, |
tan I, overwhelmed with sorrow, levy dues
tor celebrating a sacrifice? .


15. Through Duryodhana’s folly, O best
of ascetics, the kings of the Earth have met
with destruction, and we with ignominy. —

16. Duryodhatsa, hath wasted the Earth
for money; and the treasury of thatrwicked
son of Dhritarashtra is empty.


17. (In this. sacrifice), the Earth is the
sacrificial gift; this is. the rule that is. pres-
cribed ia the first. instance, The learned
observe the usual reversal of this rule though
sanctioned, : ES


18. Nor, O ascetic, do I like to have a
substitute, ‘In this. matter, O: reverend sir,
you should favor me with your advice.


19 Thus addressed by Pritha’s son,’
Krishna- Dwaipayana, thinking for a while,
spoke to the righteous king, “Vhis treasury,
{now) exhausted, shall be full, O son
of Pritha, in the mountain Himavan
(tiimalaya) there is gold which had been.
left behind by Brahmanas at the sacrifice of
the great Marutta, ; Ja


22. Yudhishthira asked: How in that
sacrifice} celebrated by Marutta, was so
much gold collected 2 And, O foremost of
speakers, when did he reign ? ;


Vyasa said :— :
23. ‘If, O Pritha’s son, you are anxious
to heae, about that king of the Karandhbama
line, then Jisten ta meas I tell you when
that highly powerful king having immense
siches reigned, * PE ae


ance |


‘an ideal bowman, -Vinsha’s son, O


CHAPTER IV. .
{ ASHWAMEDHIKA PARVA j=
Cantinueds
Yadhishthira said :—


1.. Q righteous one, 1 wish to, hear che


| history of that royal sage Marutta. Do you


© Dwaipayana, describe this to me, Q sin-
fess one. ;


Vyasa said :— rei

2. O child, in the golden age Manu was
lord wieldiag the sceptre. His son was
known under the name of Prasandhi.


3. Prasandhi had a son named Kshupa.
Kshupa’s son was king {kshwaku, ;

4. He,O king, had a hundred sons pes-
sessed of pre-eminent piety. And all of
them were made monarchs by king [ksh-
waku. ;

§- The eldest of them, Vinsha, bean
y Bha-
rata, was the auspicious Vivinsha,

6. Vivinsha, G king, had fifteen sons;
all of them powerful archers, tespecting
Brahmanas and speaking the truth, gentle.
and ever-speaking fait. “The eldest brother
Khaninetra, oppressed’ alt tris brothers. -

8. And having conquered the entire
kingdom: shorn of all troubles, Mhaninetra, '
could not retain his supremacy; nor were
the people satisfed with him. as

g. Anddethroning him, they, O fore:
most of kings invested his son Suvatcha
with the righes of sovereignty, and’ ex+
petienced joy. : oer.

to-—-11. Seeing the reverses of his father
and his expulsion from the empire he was.
ever busy with encompassing the well-being
of the people, being devoted to Brahman,
speaking the truth, practising purity and
controlling his ‘serises and thoughts. And,
the subjects were well-pleased, with that
great one:constant in virtues =
_ 12. But he being constantly engaged in
virtuous ‘works, his: treasures and vehicles
became greatly reduced.” Aud on his
tceasury -having become exhausted, the
feudatory princes gathered round him and


| began to give him trouble.


13. Being thus oppressed by mary ene-
mies while his (reasury, herses;and vehicles
were impoverished, the king suffered great
tribulation‘ alerig with his retainers and the
citizens. a eh

14. Although his power decreased great-
ly, yet the enemies-could not Kili “the “king,
for bis power, O Yudhishthica, was, esta-
blished in virtue, -


ya ” MAUABHARATA.


15. And when he had reached the worst

oint of misery along with the citizens, he
Brew his hand, and from that there appear-
ed a supply of forces. ;


16. And then he defeated all the kings:
living along the borders of ‘his dominions
And from this incident, O kiag, he hath
been celebrated as Karandhama.

17. His son, Katandhama was born at
the commencement of the Treta age, equal-
ling Indra himself,?gifted with grace, -and.
invincible even by the immortals.


18. .At that time. all the kings were
under his fcontrol; and alike by virtue of
his riches and of prowess, he became their
emperor, .


19. In short, the righteous king Avikshit
became like,{ndra himself in heroism ; and
he was given 10 sacrifices, delighted in
virtue and held his seases uader control.


20. And in energy he resembled the sun
and in patience, Earth herself ; in intetli-
gence, he was like Vrihaspati, and ia
€alimness the mountaia Himavan himself.


2t. And’ that king pleased the hearts of
his subjécts by act, thought, speech, self-
control, aud forbearance. ~ nae

az. ‘Ihe lords who celebrated hundreds
of Horse-Sacrifices ; and whom the powerful
and learued Angira himself setved ‘as
priest. -


23. His son excelled his father in the
aaa ef good qualities; named

arutta, that lord of kings was righteous
and of great fame; having the power of
ten thousand elephants, and like unto
Vishnu’s second self, :


24—25. Desirous of celebrating a sacri-
fice, that virtuous king, coming to Mount
Meru on the northern side of Himavat,
made thousands of shining’ golden vessels
to be forged. ‘There on a huge golden hill
he performed the rites.


26. And goldsmiths::made -numberiess
basins and vessels and pans and seats.


- 29. And the Sacrificial ground was near
this place. And that righteous king
Marutta, with other princes, celebrated a
sacrifice there. :


CHAPTER V.


.. (ASHWAMEDHIKA PARVA.)—
Continued.
Yudhishthira said :— ;
t. OF best of speakers, how that king


waxed so powerful? And: tow, O twice-
born one, did he get so much gold ? ‘


.2. And where now, O reverend sire, is
all his wealth? And, O ascetic, how cap


we secure the same?


Vyasa thereupon said :—

3-5; As the numerous children of the
Prajapati Daksha, the Asuras, and the
Celestials challenged each other, so in the
same way Angira’s sons, the highly energe-
tic Vrihaspati aud the ascetic, Samvartta,
of: equal vows, challenged each other, O
king. .Vrihaspati began to worry Samvartta
again and again.

6 And always troubled hy his elder
brother, he, O Bharata, renouncing his
riches, went to the forest, with uothing to
cover his body except the open sky.


99. (At that time), having defeated
and destroyed the Asuras, and gained the
sovereignty of the celestial regions, Vasava
had appointed as his priest Angira’s eldest
son, that best of Brahmanas, Yribaspati.
Formerly Angira was the family-priest of
king Karandhama; peerless among men in
might, power and character ; powerful like
Shatakrdtu. righteous-souléd ‘and of rigid
vows.


“to-tt Oking, he had vehicles, and
warriors, and many adherents, and _beauti-
ful and rich bedsteads, produced through
meditation by the breath of his mouth.
And by his native virtues, the king had
brought all the princes under his control.


12--13. And having lived as long as he
desired, he ascended the celestial region in
his bodily form. And his son named Avik-
shit—conqueror of enemies—righteous like
Yayati, brought all the Earth under his
sway. And bothia merit and power the
king cesembled his father.


14. "He. had a son named Marutta,
gifted with energy, and resembling Vasava
himself. This earth clad in oceans felt her-
self auracted towards him.


; ‘15. He always used to defy the king of
the celestials ; and, O son of Pandu, Vasava
also defied M srutta.


16. And Marutta—master of ‘Earth—
was pure and perfect. And despite his
striving, Shakra could not prevail over
him.


17. And unable to-control him, be riding
on the hoarse, along with -the celestials
summoning Vrihaspati, spoke to him thus. -


18—19. O Vrihaspati, if we wish to do
what is agreeable to me, do not perform
pristely offices for Marutfa on behalf of the
celestials or the departed Manes. [ have,
O Vribaspati, obtained the sovereignty of
the three worlds, while Marutta is merely
the king of the Earth,


ASHWAMEDKE “nya


20. How, O Brahmana; having aeted ‘as
priest to the immortal king of the celestials,
will you unhesitatingly act as a priest to
Marutta subject to death? . - :


-


5


take tliose saccificial -things arid-celebrate
the sacrifice yourself. ed


Vrihaspati said --


‘21, | May you fare well. : Either take up


my side or that of the king, Marutta, or
forsaking Marutta, gladly come over’ to
me. : :

22. Thus addressed by the king of the
Vrihaspati, thinking for a moment, replied
to the king of the celestials.

23. You are the Lord of creatures, and
in you are the worlds established. And you


have. killed Namuchi Vishwarupa and


Vala.
24.
highest prosperity of the celestials, and O
slayer of Vala, you-sustain the earth as well
as the celestial region. ;

25. How, O foremost of the celestials,
having officiated as your priest, shall 1, O
destroyer of Paka; serve a mortal prince
and listen to what I say.

26. Even if the god of fice cease to
cause heat and warmth, or the earth
change its nature, or.the sun cease to give
light, I shall never deviate from the truth.


Vaishampayana said :-—~

27. On hearing these words of Vrihas-
pati, Indra became freed from his envious
feelings, and then lauding tim he repaired
to his own palace.


Se aeimeaeaead


CHAPTER VI.
(ASHWAMEDHIKA PARVA)—


Continued.


Vyasa said:
1. Regarding it is cited the ancient
jJegend of Vrihaspati and the wise Marutta,
2. On hearing of the agreement made
by Angirca’s son Vrihaspati with the king
of the celestials, king. Matutta made the
necessary preparations for a great sacrifice.


3. {(Macutta) having conceived the idea


You, O hero, alone, bring about the *


of a Sacrifice in his mind the eloquent.


grandson of Karandhama went to Vrihas-
pati and spoke to him thus.


4—5. O worshipful ascetic, I have
intended to celebrate the sacrifice which
you did propose to mé once on a previous
occasion, according to your instructions,
and I now wish to appoint you, as officia-
ting priest at this sacrifice, the materials
whereof. 1 have collected, O excellent one,
you are our family-priest, therefore do you


- 6. O king, I do net wish to perform
your sacrifice, 1 tave been appointed -as
priest by the King'the Celestials and I have
promised to him to act as such, ©”
Marutta said :—

7- You are ouc heriditary family-priest,,


and therefore 1 cherish great regard for"
you, and-I have-acquired the right of being


-hetped at sacrifices by you, and therefore


it is proper that you should officiate as:
priest at my sacrifice. :
Vrihaspati said :—.

8. Having,: O Marutta,:- acted as


priest to the celestials, how can [Tact as:
such to mortal men, and whether you de.
leave this place or stay here, I: tall you:
I have ceased-to: dct as priest to any but
the celestials, 8) 0 ve tg ce

. O you of mighty arms, f am unable
to act as your priest now.” Ard according
to your own desire, you" can appoint any
one as your priest Who. will perform your
sacrifice, © a ae ee ge y ;


Vyasa said :—

10. Thus“ told, ‘king’ Marutta ‘became
confounded with’$hame, and ‘while return-
ing home with his mind stricken with
anxiety, he met Narada on his way.

ti—12. And on'seeing the divine Rishi-
Narada, that king stood: before him with
due salutation, and with his hands clasped
together, and then Narada addressing him
thus said,—-O royal’ sage, ‘you appear
to be not well-pleaséed in your mind, is all
well with you, where have you been, O sin-
less one, and why-is this your mental dis-.
quietude ? a ;

13. And, O king, if there “be no’ objece
tion to your telling it to me, do you, O best
of kings, disclose to me, so that, O prince,
I may remove the disquistude of your mind
with ali my efforts. ar


Vaishampayana continued :—.

14. Thus addressed by the great Rishi
Narada, king Maruta informed him of the
refusal he had received frem -his religious
preceptor. eat


Marutta said :— hie

15.. Trying, to. find out a priest to offici-
ate at .my sacrifice, I went to that priest of
the Immortals, Vrihaspati, the son: of.
Angiras,, but he did not choose to accept
ity offer.


.


6 | MAHABHARATA;


6. Having met with this refusal from.
him, U have no desire to live any longer
now, for by his abandoning me thus, I have,
O Narada, become sultied with sin.


Vyasa said :—

17, .Thus told by. that king, Narada,
O powerful prince, made this ceply ta him
with words which seemed to cevive that
son of Avikshit. —


Narada said :—

18--19. ‘The virtuous son. of Angicas,
Samvarta by name, is travelling over all the
earth in a nude state to the amazement
all creatures ; do yeu, O prince, goto him,
if Verihagpati does not wish to officiate at
your sacrifice, the powetful Samvarcta, if
pleased with you, will, perform, your
Sacrifice, ;


Marutta said :—

‘g0-~2%; 1b feel as if filled with new. life,
by these your words, O Narada, but, O the
best: af speakers, da you tell me where |
can Gnd. Samvarta, and how I can cemain
by his side, and how 1 am to act so that he


may not leave me, for I do not wish to live :


if { meet with a refusal from him alse.


Narada said :—


4% Desicaus of seeing Maheshwara,
Q prince, he raves about at his pleasure in
the city of Varanasi dressed as 4 maniac,


23—24. And having reached the gate. of
the city, you. must place a dead body some-
where near it, and the man.wha shall turn
away. @n seeing the dead body, do you, O.
prince, know that man. to be Sanivarta,
and- knowing him, do you follow his foot-
Steps wherever that powerful man wishes to
go, and finding him (at length) in a lonely
place you must seek his protection with your
hands clasped together. ;

25. And if he acquire of you as to the
person who has given you the information
about hig own self, do you tell him
that Narada has inform you about.
Samv arta. ,


25. And if he should ask you to follow
me, you must telf him unhesitatingly that 1
have entered into the fire. ;
Vyasa said :-~

26. Having signified his consent to the
proposal of Narada, that cayal sage after
duly adoring him and with his permission,
went to the city of Varanasi, and having
reached there, that famous prince did as he
had been asked, and remembering the
words of Narada, he placed a dead body
at the gate of the city. :


ag. And by coincidence, that Brahmans
alsa entered the gate of the city at the same
time. Then on.seeing the dead, body, he
suddenly turned away.


30. - And on. seeing him turn back, that
rince, the son of Avikshit followed his
ootsteps: with his. hands, joined. together,
and with a view to receive instruction fron
him.

3t. And them finding him in a lonely
place, Samvarta covered the king with mud.
and ashes and phlegm and spittle.


32. And though thus worried and op-


‘pressed: by Samvarta, the king followed


that sage with his hands joined together in,
prayec and endeavouring to please him.

33. At length overcome, with fatigue,
and reaching the coal shade of a fig tree
with many branches, Samwvarta desisted,
from his course and sat down to rest.


—=
CHAPTER VII.


(ASHWAMEDHIKA PARVA.)—=
Continued,


Samvarta said —

1, How have you came to know me, and
who. bas referred, you to me, do you tell this
to me truly, if you desire me to do what, is
good to you. ‘


2. And if you speak truly, you wi
gain all the objects of your heart, and should
you tell a lie, your head shalt be cut intoa
hundred pieces.


Marutta said :~—


3. I have been told by Narada, wander-
ing on his way, that you are the son of our
family-priest, and this (information) has
bent my. miad (towards you), with great sa-
tisfaction. oo


Samvarta said :—

. You have told this to me truly, he
(Narada) knows me -to be a performer. of:
sacrifices, now tell me where is Narada
living at- present.


Marutta said —
-§. ° That king of gelestial saints (Narada) .
having given me this informatiqn about you,;


and commended me to your care, has enters
ed inte the fire.


Vyasa said :—
6. Hearing. these wards of the. king.
Marcutta, Samvarta was highly pleased, and


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA, ]


that! eee

7-9. Then, O prince, that Brahmana,
taving like a maniac, and continually scold-
ing Marutta’ with rude words, again accos-
ted him thus, I am afflicted with a brain
disorder, and, I always‘act according to the
fretful caprices of my own mind, why are
you then 'bent upon having this sacrifice
performed by a priest‘ of such a ‘peculiar
nature; ‘my brother is able to officiate at
sacrifices, and he has gone over ‘to Vasava
(Indca), and is engaged in celebrating his
‘sacrifices, do you therefore have your sacri-
fice performed by him, bs ;

to-rit. .My -elder brother: has taken
away by force from me all my household
articles and mystical gods, and sacrificing
clients, and has now left’ to me only this
iphysical body of mine, and, O son of Avik-
‘shit, as he deserves all respect from me,
I cannot by any means officiate at you sacci-
“fice, unless he permits me.


_. 12. _ You must therefore go to Vrihaspati
first, and taking bis permission you can
return to me, if you have any desire to cele-
brate -a ‘sacrifice, ‘and ‘then ‘only ‘shall I
officiate at your sacrifice.


Marutta said :—

13. Do you listen'to me, O Samvarta, I
did goto Vrihaspati first, but wishing the
patronage of Vasava, he did ‘not wish to
have me as his sacrificer.

14—~15. He'said;,—Having secured ‘the
‘priest-hood of the Immortals, 1 do not wish
‘to act for the mortals, and, I have been
forbidden by Shakra (Indra) to ‘officiate at
Marutta’s sacrifice, as he told me that
Marutta having become king, was always
filled with a desire to rival him. And to
this your brother agreed by saying to the
destroyer of Vala (Indra), Be it so.


16. Know, O best of ascetics, that as he
had succeeded in getting the protection of
the King of the Celestials, | went to him
with gratified heart, but fe did not agree
to act as my priest. ;

17. And thus repulsed, | now wish to
spend ali I possess, to have this sacrifice


petformed “by -you, and to outstrip: Vasava -


by the merit of your good: offices.


18. As I have been repulsed by Vrihas-
patifor no fault of mine, 1 have now no
desire, O Brahmana, -to ge to hint te seek
his help in this. sacrifice, :


‘Samvarta said :~-


1920. .1 can.certainly, O king, do all
that you wish, if only you agree to do all
that I shall ask you to do, but I apprehend


hie said } f ico arn petfectly able to do all:


j equality with Shakra,


j the great mountain,


that Vrihaspai and Puaratidara (Indray
when they will learn that | am engaged in
celebrating your sacrifice, will be filled
with anger, and do all they can to injure
you.

21. Therefore, do you assure me of your
steadfastness, so as to eusure my -conlness
and constancy, as otherwise, if 1 am filled
with anger against you, I shall. reduce
(destroy) you and your kindred to ashes.


Marutta said :—


22-23. lf ever I forsake you, may 1
never attain the blessed regions as long as
the mountains shail exist, and the thousand-
tayed sun continue to pour heat; if 1 for
sake you, may I never gain true wisdont,
and -remain for ever addicted ta -worldly
(material) works. oe


Samvarta said:~ ie

24-25. Listen, O son of Avikshit, ex»
cellent as is your inclination to perform this
-aet, so too, O-king, have f in my mind the
ability to perform the sacrifice, 1 tell thee,
O king, that your good things will become
imperishable, and that you shall ford it over
Shakra and the Celestiais with Gan-
dharvas. oie. ;

26. For myself, I have no wish to hoard
tiches or sacrificial presents; 4 :shall only
do what is disagreeable to both Andra and
my brother,

27. 1 shall certainly make you attain
and T tell you
traly that I shall do what is agreeable
to you. ; . :


CHAPTER VUTL.


- -(ASHWAMEDHIKA PARVA.)~
" Continued,


Samvarta said :— ;

1. here isa peak named Munjaban .on
the summits of the Himalaya mownains,
swhere the -worshipful husband .of _Upm
(Mahadeva) is constantly. practising austere


_pemances.


a—3. There the powerful and worshipfu
god of great power accompanied by his wife |
Uma, and armed with. his trident, and sur=
rounded by wild goblins of many sorts,
following his random .wish or fancy, cons-
tantly lives in the shade of huge forest trees, -
or in the caves, or on the rugged peaks of


'


3 MAVABMARATA,


4—5, And there the Rudtas, the Sad-
dhyas, the Vishwedevas, the Vasus; Yania;
Varuria, and Kuvera with all his followers,
and the spitits and globins, and the two
Ashwiris, the Gandharvas, the Apsatas, the
Vakshas, as also the celestial sages, tHe
Sun-Gods, as well as the ‘gods presiding
over the winds, and evil spirits of all sorts,
‘adore the -gteat lord of Una, gifted with

’ diverse characteristics. :

J. Aad'there, O kitig, the adorable god,
Sports with the wild and playful followers of
Kuvera, having weird and ghastly appea-
frances, .


_ 8. Shining with its own splendour, that
mountain looks resplendent as the diorning
sun,


gy. And no creature with his natural eyes
made of flesh, can ever’ see its shape ot
figure; and neither heat not cold prevails
theres noc does the sun shine or tle winds
low. ae .


_ to. And, O king, neither does senility,
hor hunger; nor thiest; nor death nor fear
afflict any one there. . .


12, And, O foremost of conduerars, there
exist mites of gold, resplendent as the solae
rays on all sides of that mountain. And, O
‘king, desirotis 6f doing good ta hin, the at-
tendants of Kuvera protect these mines of

_ gold from intruders, with uplifted arms.


18—31.. Come here, and appease that
adorable god whois known by the name of
Sarva, Bedha, Rudra, Shitikantha, Surupa,
Siivarcha, Kapardi, Karala, Haryyaksha,
Varada; ‘lryaksha, Pushnodantabhid,
Vamana, Shiva, Yamya, Avyaktacupa,
Sadvritta, Shankara, Kshemya, Uarihesha,
Sthanu, Purusha, WHarinetra, Munda,
Krisha, Uttarana, Bhaskara, Sutictha,
Devadeva, Ranha; Ushnishi, Suvaktra,
Sahasraksha, Midhvan, Girisha, Prashanta,
Vata, Chiravasa; Vilwadanda, Siddha,
Sarvadandadhara, Mriga, Vyadha, Mahan,
Dhanesha, Bhava, Vara, omavaktra,
Siddhamantra, Chakshu,
Ugra, Dikpati, Lelinana, Goshtha, Shid-
dhamantra, Vrishnu, Pashupati, Bhutapati,
‘Veisha, Matribbakta, Senani, Madhyama,
‘Sruvahasta, Yati, Dhanwi, Bhargava, Aja,
Krishnanetra, Virapaksha,- Tikshnadansh-
tra, Tikshna, Vaishwanaramukha, Maha-
dyuti, Ananga, Sarva, Dikpati, Bilohita,
Dipta, Diptaksha, Mahauja, Vasuretas,
Suvapu, Prithd. Krittivasa, Kapalmali,
Suvarnamukuta, Mahedeva, Krishna, Try-
“anivaka, Anagha, Krodhana, Nrishansa,
Mridu, Vahusali, Dandi, Taptatapa, Akru-
rakarma, Sahasrashira, Sahasca-Charana,

« SwadhaswaR-upa, Vahu-Rupa, Danshtri,
Pinaki, Maha-Deva, Maha- Yogi, Avyaya,


Hiranyavatru,


Trishutahasta, Varada, Tryartivaka, Bhue
vaneshwara, Tripuraghna, Trinayana, Tri-
lokesha, Mahanja, Sarvabhuta-Prabhavaj)
Sarvabhuta- Dharana, Dharanidhara,[shana
Shankara, Sarva, Shiva, Vishweshwara,
Bhava, Umapati, Pashupati, Vishwarupa;
Mahesawara, - Vicupaksha, Dashabhuja,
Vrishavadhwaja, Ugra, Sthanu, Shiva,
Raudra, Sharva, Girisha, Ishwara, Siti.
kantha, Aja, Shukra,; Prithu, Prithuhara
Vara, Vishwarupa, Virupaksha, Vahucupa,
Umapati, Anangangahara, Hara; Sha:
ranya, Mahadeva, Chaturmukha.


32. There bowing to that deity, you must
seek his protection. And thus, O prince,
making your submissiori to that great Ma-
hadeva of great erlergy, you. will acquire
that gold. : '


33. Aiid the mien wWhd go there thus,
succeed in getting tlie gold. ‘Lhuis instruc-
ted, Marutta, the son of Karandhama, did
as he was advised.


34. He made superhumian.arrangements
for the celebration of his sacrifice. And
areane thade golderi vessels for tliat satti+

ce,


35—36. And hearing of the prosperity .
of Marutta, eclipsing that of the gods, Vri-
haspati, too, became greatly sorry at heart,
and, distressed at the thought that his rival
Samvarta should become prosperous, be-~
came sick at heart; and the glow of his
complexion left him, and his body became
emacited,

37. And when the king of the gods came
to know that Vrihaspati was much agegrié-
ved, he went tohim attended by the Int«
mortals and spoke to him thus.


CHAPTER [X.
,(ASHWAMEDHIKA PARVA.)—
Continued, :
Indva said: =
.1, Do you, O Vrihaspati, sleep"in peace,


and do you like: your servants, do you seek
the welfare of the celestiais, and do the


celestials, O Brahmana, protect’ you.


Vrihaspati said :—

2. Idosleep in’ peace, in my. ‘bed, O
Lord of the celestials, an@ my servants are
to my liking, and I always seek the welf-


_ being of the celestials, and ‘they cherish me
well. : F


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA.


India said —


3. Whence then is this pain, mental or”


physical, and why are you pale and changed


in appearance at present, tell me, O Brah-—


mana, who those people are, whd have
maaned you pain, so that I may slay them
all. , .
Vrihaspati said :—

4. O Indra, I have heard that Marutta
will celebrate a great sacrifice at which rich
presents will be given by him (to Brahma-
nas) and that at his sacrifice Samvarta wilt
act as the officiating priest, and, therefore,
do I wish that he may not officiate as priest
at that sacrifice,


Indra said :—~


5. You, O Brahmana, has attained all
the objects of your desire when you ‘have.
become the excellent priest of the celestials,
versed in all the sacred hymns, and have
got over the influence of death and de-
crepitude, what can Samvarta do to you
mow ? : x


Vrihaspati said :—


6. Prosperity of a rival is always painful,
and do you, therefore, with youe atten-
dant gods persecute the Asuras with their
kith and kin, and slay the most prosperous
among them; hence, O Lord ef the gods,
am I changed in appearance at the thought
that my rival is prospering, therefore, O
{ndra, do you, by all means, restrain Sam-
varta and king Marutta.


Indra turning to Agni said :—

8. Do you, O Jataveda, following my.
direction, .go to king Marutta to present
Vribaspati to him and say to him that this
Vribaspati will officiate at his sacrifice and:
make him immortal, ;


Agni said :—

g. Ishall presently, O worshipful one,
go there, as your messenger, to. present
Vrihaspati to king Marutta; and to make
Indra’s words true, and to shew_respect to
Veihaspati, Agnijdeparted.


Vyasa said—

lo. Then the great Fire-God went on his
errand, Saying _ waste all the forests and
trees, like the powerful wind, roaring and
revolving at random at the end of the
winter season,


ogee ft

Marutta said — ae

ar. See! 1 finds the Fire-God come in

his own embodiment, this day, therefore,

do cu, O Muni, c ffer him a seat and water,
ard a cow and water for washing the feet,


2


.


9
Agni said :— . .


12. [ accept your offeritigs of water,
seat, and water for washing the feet, O
sinless one, do you know, me aé the mes-
senger of Indra, come: to you as ordered
by him,
Marutta said:— -

13. QO Fire-God, is the glorious King
of the Celestials happy, and is he please
with us, and are the other celestials loyal
tohim? Do you enlighten me duly on all
these matters. ‘ : ;


Agni said:— - -

14. O king, Shakra is perfectly happy,
he is pleased with you, and wishes to make .
you free from decrepitude, and all the’
other gods are loyal to. him, do you, O
king, listen to the message of the King of -
the Celestials. :


15. And the object for which he has
sent me to you is to present Vrihaspati ta
Marutta; O prince, let this priest perforny
your sacrifice, and make you who are only
a mortal, attain immortality.


Marnutta said — “a


16. This twice-born Brahmana. Sam.
varta will perio your sacrifice, and [
pray to Vrihaspati, that he having acted.
as priest to Mahendra it does not appear:
well for him now to act as priest to mortal
men.


Agnisaid:-

17. If this Veihaspati officiate as your
priest, then you will by the blessings of the
King of the Celestials attain the highest
place in the celestial mansion and acquiring.
fame you will, forsooth, conquer the heavenly


‘| region, +


18... And, .O king, if ‘Vrihaspati act as
your priest you will be able to conquer
all the regions inhabited. by men, and the
heavenly regions and all the highest ree
gions created by Prajapati and even the
entire, kingdom of the celestials, -¢°


Samvarta said :—

19. “You must never come again” thus
to present Vrihaspati to Marutta ;.for know, |
O Pavaka,‘ {Agni), if you do, I losing my
temper, will burn you with my fierce evil!
jeyes. . '


\Vyasa, said: | . Aes
‘ .20,° Then fearing destruction’ by fire,’

and, trembling dike the leaves of the
Ashwattha tree (Ficus veligiosa), Agni re-
turned to the gods, and the great Shakra


,


1@


MAHABHARATA,


seeing that carrier of oblations (Agni) inthe as I do not strike the weale with my


company of Vrishaspati said as follows :


Indra said :—

‘at. You, O Jataveda (Agni), went to
present Vrihaspati to Marutta aceording to
my direction, now what did that sacrificing
king say to you, amd did- he accept my
command 7


Agni said :—
22. Your message was not acceptable
by Macutta amd when urged by me, he
-clasping the hands of Vritraspati, said again
and again, that Samvarta would act as. his
priest.


23. And he also observed that he did
Net wish to attain the worldly and! the
heavenly regions, and aN: the highest re-
gions of Prajapati, ami that if he were so


minded, he would accept the terms of |


India,


Indra said:—- a:

‘a4. Do you. return to that king and
meeting him, tell bins these words of mine,
full of meaning’ ‘and if he obey them not,
1 shall strike him with my thunderbolt.


Agni saidi—
25-926. Let this king of the Gandharvasy
go thece as your messenger, O Vasava, for
Jam afraid to go there myself. Know, O
Shaka, that highly enraged Sasvarta,
addicted to ascetic practices, told me these
words in anger. ‘Lt shall bura you with my
fierce evil eyes if you on any account come
again here to present Veihaspatito king.
Marutta.’


Shakra said:—- _

27. O Jataveda, it is you who burns
all other things and there is none else who
can seduce you to ashes; all the world
is afraid to come in contact with you, O
carrier of oblations, these words of yours
are worthy of nv credence. :


Agni said :-— .

28. You, O Shakra, have encompassed
fhe dominion of the heaven and ‘the earth
and the sky by the strenyth of your own
arms, but even thus how ceuld Vritea (ot


uld) wrest from yoy the seveceigmy. of the


celestial regions ?
Inira said :—


29. LT can reduce mv enemies ta sub-
Misson avican even reduce the size of a
Toun-ain to an atom, if E wilbit. But, O
Vahui, as Ido noe accept the libation of
Soma drink if offered by an enemy, and


thunderbolt (Vitra got the better of me for
atime.) But who anrong mortals can live
in peace by creating enmity with me.

30. Lhave banished the Kalakeyas to
the earth, and removed the Danavas- front
the celestial region, and have terminated
the existence of Prahlada in heaven, can
there be any man who can leave in peace by
exciting my enmity.

Agni Said :—

31-32. Do you, O Mahendra, ree
member that formerly wheu the sage Chya-
vana officiated at the sacrifice of Sharyat?
with the twin gods Ashbwins, and himself
appropriated the Soma offering alone, you
were filled with anger, and when bent upon
preventing Sharyati’s sacrifice, you did vie~
fendly sirike Chyavana with your thunders
bok, that Brahinana, O Purandara, yield-
iny to anger, was able by the power of his
devotions to seize and hold fast your hand
with youe thunderbolt in it,


And in anger, he again create?
a terrible looking enemy of yours, the Asura
named Mada : ssuming all shapes, on see
ing wiiom yuu did shut your eyes with fear,
whose ore huye jaw was placed on earth,
and the’ ‘other extended to the celestial?
regions, and who Tvoked terrible with his
thousand sharp teeth extending’ over a huns
dred Yojanas, and had' four prominent ones
thick a set, aird shining like a pillar of
siiver, and extending over two hundred
VYojanas. And when grinding his teeth he
followed you with his terrible and uplifted
pike with tlie object of slaying yeu, you ory
seeing that te:sible monster, ‘presented 2
(pitiful) sight to-all the bystanders, ‘Phen,
O destroyer of‘ lanavas, overcome witlr
fear of the monster, with your hands clasp-
ed in prayer, you did seek the protection of
the great sage,


37. The power of Brahmanas, O Shakra,
is greater than that of the Kshatriyas, none
are more powerful than: Brahmanas and
knowing duty, as I do, the power of Brah-
tranas, { do not, O Shakra, wish to quarrek
with Samvarta,


CHAPTER X.


( ASHWAMEDHIKA PARVA, Jw
; Continued.
Indya said,— a
t. Phe power of Beahmanas is, ia tie t
great and there. are gone more pov erfut
than Brahinaaas, but Iocan aeaver osac


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA, 1f


Hatiently the insolent pride of Avikshita’s 1 Brahmanas remove this fear of Tndea
son, and so shall [ grind him with my thun- | from my mired. ,


derbolts. tt. The Holder of the Thunderbolt i
2, Therefore, O Dhritarashtra, do vot | coming encompassing the ten directions of

according to my direction go to king Ma- | space with his dreadfut and superhuman

tutta, attended by Samvarta, and deliver | refulgence and my assistants at this sacri-

this now to him—'do you, O prince, accept | ficial assembly have been filled with fear.

Veihaspati as your spiritual preceptor, as - .

ailieriise: { shatl strike you with gy dread- Samvarta said :—


ful thunderbolt.” . _ 12. Ofaremast of kings, your fear of
bat Shakra will soon be removed, .and t shall
Vyasa said :— : seon.remove this terrible pain by means af


3. Then ODbvitarashtra went to that | my magic (incantation), he calm and have
monarch’s court and delivered this news to | no fear of being overpowered by Indra,


thim from Vasava. i 136 Yee have nothing to fear from the
7 ca, od of a Hundred Sacrifices, | shall use mv
Dhritarashtra said :— staving charms, U king, and the weapons of


4-5. O king, know that 1 am Dhrita- | all the geds will avail them not,
rashtra the Gandharva, come here with ahe | - : , : sae
object of delivering to you the message of | 14-15. Let the lightning flash in all the
Indra, do you, G foremost af kings, -listen | directions, and the winds entering into the
to the words which the great lord of alf the | clouds pour dewn cain in the midst of the
worlds meant for you.—-that one of incom. | forests, and the waters deluge the heavens
prehensible deeds (Indra) only said this | and the flashes of lightning that are seen
much—‘do you accept Vrihaspati as your | wil avail not, you have nothing to fear, let
officiating priest for the sacrifice, or if you | Vasava pour down the caius and plat his
do not comply with my request. I shall terrific thunderbolt where be will, floating
strike you with my dreadful thunderbolt.’ among the masses of (clouds) for your des-
truction, for the god Vahni (Agni) will pra.
Marutta said :— tect you in every way, and make you attain


Heke O Purandara, the Vishwadewas, all the objects of your desire,
the Vasus and the Ashwins ye all know, that, > \ .
in this world there is no escape for the results Marutta said : i
of playing false to a friend, it is a great sin 16. ‘This dreadful crash of the thunder.
like!that of Brahminicide. holt together with the rearing of the winds,
: ; : seem dreadful to my ears and my heart is
Let Vrihaspati (therefore) officiate as | stricken again and again, O Brahmana,
priest to that Mahendra the supreme Deva | and my peace of mind is gone at present.
(god), the highest Sne holding the thunder- : :
bolt, and, O prince, Samvarta will act as my Samvarta said :— :


ite as vast his Aah words, nor 7 O king, the fear in your mind from
tinne commend themselves to me, this terrible thanderbalt wili.leave you im-

3 4 mediately. I shall remove the thunder by
The Gandharva said : the help of the winds, and setting aside all


8. Do you, O foremost of kings, listen ta | fear from your mind, do you accept. a boon
the terrible ware-cry, of Vasava rqaring in | from me according to your heart's desire,
the sky, assuredly and openly will Mahen- | and I shall do it for you.

Gra bucl his thunderbolt at you, do you, ; Wat
therefore, think of your well-being, for this | Marutta said :-—


is the time todo it. 4 - 18. . I wish, O Brahmana, that Indra alf
Vv ey, - | of a sudden should come bodily at this sacti-
yasa said :-— - fice, and accept the oblation offered to him,


9. Thus addressed by Dhritarashtra, | and that all the other celestials also come
and hearing the roar of Vasava, the king | and take their appointed shares of the offer-
communicated this. news to Samvarta firm | ings and accept the libations of Soma olfere
in devotion and the highest of all virtuous | ed to them. . :
men. ° : *

ae <3 Samvarta said :—~
Marutta said *~- A 19. I have, by the.power of my incanta«
10. Indeed this rain-cloud floating inthe | tions, attracted Indra bodily to this sacrifice.
air, indicates that Indra must be near at | See, O king, Indra coming with his horses,
present, therefore, O prince ef Brahmanas, I | and adored by the other celestials hastening
seck shelter from you, do you, O best of | to this sacrifice,


*


12


Agni said :—

zo. Then the King of the Celestials at-
tended by the other deities and riding in
his chariot drawn by the most excellent
horses, approached the saccificial altar of
hat son of Avikshit aud drank the Soma
bations of that peerless king .-


2t. And king Marutta with his priest
rosé to receive Indra coming with the host
of celestials'and well-pleased in mind; he
welcomed the King of ‘Deities with due
and foremost honors’ according to the
Shastras. :


Samvarta said:—  . ;

22. Welcome to you, O Indra, by your

presence here, O learned one, this ‘sacrifice

_ has been made grand, O destroyer of Vala,

and Vritra, do you, again, drink this Soma
juice produced by me to-day, |


Marutta said :—

23 Do you Jook with kindness upon me,
J bow to you, O Indra, by” your’ presence,
my sacrifice has been perfected, and my
life too blessed with good results. O
Surendra, this excellent Brahmana, the
younger brother of Vrihaspati, is engaged
in celebrating my sacrifices,


Indra said :—

24. >I know your priest, this highly ener-
getic ascetic, the younger brother of Vrihas-
pati, at whose invitation I. have come to
this sacrifice, | am, O king, well-pleased
with you, and my anger against you is
‘gone.


1


Samvarta said:—__..


25. . If, O King of the Celestials, you are
‘pleased with us, do you yourself give all the
directions for this sacrifice, and, O Surendra,
yourself ordain the sacrificial portions (for
the gods), so that, O ‘god, all the world may
Enow that it has been done by you.


Vasava said :—


26. Thus addressed by the son of Angira,
Shakca himself gave directions to all the
celestials to erect the hall of assembly, and
a thousand well-furnished excellent rooms
looking grand as in a canvass, and quickly
to complete the staircase inassive and dur-
able, for the ascent of the Gandharvas and
Apsaras and to furnish that portion of the
sacrificial ground reserved for the dance of
the Apsaras, like the palace of Indra in the
celestial region. ~


28--29. °O king, thus directed, tlre re-
niowned denizens of heaven’ quickly carried
out the directions of Shakra. And then, O
king, Indra w-il-pleased and worshipped, {


-MAHABHARATA.


thus said to king Virutta, ~9 prince, by
associating with you at this sacrifice, your
ancestors who have gane before you, as
well as the other celestials have been
highly pleased and accepted the oblations
off-red by you. ; :


30. And now, O king, let the foremost
of twice-born ones, offer on the sacrificial
altar a red bull belonzing to the Fire-God
and a sadred and duly consecrated blue
bull with a variegated skin, belonging to
the. Vishwedevas.


31. ‘Then, O king, the sacrificial cere-
mony grew in splendour, wherein the
celestias themselves collected the food, and
Shakra the King of the Celestials, possessed
of horses, and adored by the Brahmanas,
became all assistant at the sacrifice.


32. And then the great Samvarta ascen-
ding the altar, and looking radiant as the
second embodiment of the Burning Fire,
loudly addressing the celestials. with satis«
faction, offered oblations of clarified butter
to the fire with incantation of the sacred
hymns. ~


33- And then the Destroyer of Vala first
diank the Soma juice, and then the assembly
of other celestials who drank Soma, and
then in happiness and with the king’s per-
mission they returned home well-pleased
and delighted.


34. Then that king, the destroyer of
his enemies, with a delighted heart, placed
heaps of gold on various spots, and distri-
buting the immense riches to the Brah-
manas, he looked glorious like Kuvera the
King of Riches. ,


35. And with a pleaséd heart, the king
filled his treasury with different kinds of
wealth, dnd with the permission of his
spiritual preceptor, he returned (to his
kingdom) and continued to rule the entire
kingdom extending to the limits of the sea.


36. ‘So virtuous in this world was that
king, atgwhose sacrifice such an enormous
quantity of gold was collected, and now, O
prince, you must collect that gold and
adoring the gods with due rites, do you
celebrate this sacrifice. ;


Vaishampayana said :— .

37-- Then the-Pandava prince Yudhish-
thira was delighted on hearing this speech
of the son of Satyavati (Vyasa), and desi-
rous of celebrating his sacrifice with those
riches, he ‘consulted again and again with
his ministers.


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA


CHAPTER XI.


. (ASHWAMEDHIKA PARVA.)— *
Continued, :


Vaishampayana said :— .

1—3. When Vyasa of wonderful deeds
had concluded his speech tothe king, the
highly powerful son of Vasudeva ( Krishna)
also addressed him.. Knowing the king,
the son of Pritha, afflicted in mind, and
bereft of his relatives and kinsmen killed in
battle, and appearing crest-fallen like. the
sun darkened by eclipse, or fire smothered
by smoke, that support of the Vrishni
race (Krishna), comforting the son of
Dharma, tried to address him thus.


Vasudeva said :—


4. All crookedness of heart brings en
destruction, and ail rectitude leads to
Brahma. ‘This and this only is the aim and
object of all true wisdom, what can. mental
distraction do (to him).,


5- Your Karma Has not yet been des-
troyed nor have your enemies been sub-
jugated, for you do not _yet- know the
enemies that live within your own body.


6. I shall (therefore) relate to you truly
as [ have heard it, the story. of the war of
Indra with Vritra as. it happened.


g—8. Formerly, the Earth, O king, was
encompossed by Vritra, and by this abstrac-
tion of earthly matter the seat of all smell,
there arose bad odors on all sides, and the
Performer of a Hundred Sacrifices (Indra),
being much incensed by this deed, hurled
his thunderbolt at Vritra.

- 9. And being deeply wounded by the
thunderbolt of powreful [udra, Vritra enter-
ed into the (waters), and by doing so, he
destroyed their property.


to. The waters being seized by Vritra, |
their liquid property left them. At this
indra became wroth and again smote him
with his thunderbolt. .

At. And he .(Vsitra) smitten by the-
thunderbolt by the most powerful Indra
went to the luminous matter and abstracted
its inherent property...

_ 12-—t4. The luminous matter being over-
whelmed by Vritra and its property, color
and form being thereby lost, the angry
Indra again hurled his thunderbolt at him.
And thus wounded again by Lndra of great
power, Vritra entered all on a sudden into
the gaseous matter, and thereafter’ made
away with its inhecent property.


.15—16. And. this matter being over-
-. Powered by Viitca and its property, touch,


13


being lost. Indra became again angry
and flung his thunderbolt at him. Aad
wounded therein by the powerful (Indra),
he. overwhelmed the ether, and teok away
its inheret property, and the ether being
overwhelmed by Vritra, and its property,
sound, being destreyed, the God of a
Hundred Sacrifices highly énraged, again
smote him with bis thunderbo! t. ;


47, And thus. smitten by the powerful -
Indra, he suddenfy entered into bis
(Shakra’s) body, .ard joek away its
essential attributes. ; :

18-20. And overtaken by Vritra, he
was filled with great illusion. Aud, GO
venerable sir, the most powerful of Bharata’s
race, we have heard that Vashishtha com-
forted Indra and that the God of a Hundred
Sacrifices killed Vritra in his body by means
of his invisible thunderbolt, and know, O
prince, that this religious mystery was
recited by Shakra to the great sages, and


they in ture told it to me.


CHAPTER XI,


( ASHWAMEDHIKA PARVA. )==
. Continued.


Vasudeva said :—
1. There are two kinds of diseases,
pyre and mental. They are produced
y the mutual action of the body and mind
on each other, and they never originate
without the interaction of the two,


2. The disease that is produced in the
body, is called physical, and that which is
produced in the mind, is called mental,


3. The cold, the warm (phlegm and
bile) as well as the windy. humours, O
king, are the essential changes created in
the physical body, and when. these hu-
mours are equally distributed, and are
present in due proportions, they indicate
good health, —_


4—5. The warm-humour is influenced -
by the cold, and the cold by the warm.
Goodness, Darkess and Ignorance are
the attributes of the soul, and it is said by
the learned, that their presence in equal
parts, indicates health - (af -the mind). “Bat
if any of the three preponderate, some
remedy. is laid down, |

6 Happiness is overcome by sorrow,
and sorrow by pleasure. Some people while
afflicted by sorraw, wish: to ceeall (past)
happiness, .while athers, while in the en-
joyment of, happiness, wish to: secall past
Sorrow, - :


t4


MAHABHARATA.


7a, Bui you, O son of Kunti, do | giving up things which satisfy the flesh


neither wish to recall. yaue sorrows nor
your happiness, what else do you wish to
recall barring this delusion af sorrow. Or,
perchance, QO son of Pritha, it is your
tnnate nature, by which you are at present
overpowered. You do not wish to recall
to your mind the painful spectacle of
Kristina standing io the hall of assembly
with @nly one piece of cloth to caver her
body, and while she was in hee menses and
befure alf the Pandavas, And it is not
Proper that you should breed over your
departure fram the city, and .your exile
with the hide of the antelope for your
Gress, and your wanderings in the great.
forest, nor should you cecall to your mind
the affiiction from Jatasura, the fight -with
Chitrasena, and your troubles frum the
Saindhavas, ..


12—(3. Nor itis meet, O son of Pritha,
and conqueror of your foes, that you should
tecall tue incident of Kichaka’s kicking
Draupadi, during the period of your exile
passed in absolute concealment, nor the in-
cidents of the fight which took place
between yourself and Drona and Bhisthma.
The time has now acrived, when you must
fight which each must do singte-handed with
his mind. sae

14. Therefore, O chief of Bharata’s race,
you mist now prepare to carry the struggle
against your mind, and by dint of abstrac-
tion and the merit of your own Karma, you
must reach the other side of the mysterious
and unintelligible (mind).


15. In this war there will be no need for |
any weapons nor for friends nor attendants,
The battle which is to be fought alone and
sitgle-handed has now arrived for you.


16. Aud if defeated in this struegle, you
shalt find yourself in the most wretched con-
ditien, and, O son of. Kunti, knowing this,
and acting accordingly, shall you attain
success. :

17. And knowing this wisdom and the

- destiny of all creatures, and following’ the
conduct of your forefathers do you ‘duly
govern youc kingdom. :


CHAPTER XII.


( ASHWAMEDHIKA PARVA., )~
Continued,


Vasudeva said :—

t. O foremost of Bharata's race, salva-
tion ts not attained by removing the exter-
nal things (ke kingdom, etc.), but by


(bedy).

z. The virtue and happiness which one
attains who has renounced anly the external
objects, but who at the same time possessed
by passions and weakness of the flesh, let
these be the portian of our enemies.


3. The word with two letters is Mrityt
{death,} and the word with three letters is
Shashwata Brahman, or the eternal spirit.
Che consciousness of ego, or the state of
being addicted to worldly objects is Death,
and the absence of that feeling is immorta-
lity.

4. And these two, Spirit and Death, O
king, have their seats in the souls of all
creatures, and remaining unseen, they, fore
sooth, rage war with each other.


s. And if, O Bharata, it be trne that no
creature .is ever killed, then one commits nao
sin for the death of a creature by destroying
its body.


6. What matters the world toa man, if
having acquired the sovereignty of the entire
eacth with its mobile aod immobile creation,
he does not become attached to it.


7. But if the man who having renounced
the wortd, has adopted the forest mode of
life, living on wild roots and edibles, O son
of Pritha, has a craving for the earthly
things, and is addicted to them, he may be
said to beac death in his mouth.


8.. Do you, O Bharata, watch and ob-
serve the character of your external aud
internal enemies. And the man who is
able to perceive the nature of the eternal
reality is able to get over the influence of
the great feac (perdition). ~


Ott.
those who are engrossed in earthly desires,
and there is no deed without having a desire


Men do not like the conduct of


(at its root) and all desires are, as it were, .


the limbs. of the mind. . Therefore, wise
men knowing this, control their desires.
The Yogi who communes with the Supreme


Spirit, knows Yoga to be the. perfect way |


to sxivation by reason of the practices of his
| many pristine births.


And remembering
that, what the soul wishes,
cive of piety and virtue, but that the con-
trol of the desires is at the -roat of all
true virtue, such men do not engaze in the


is not condue -


practice.of charity, Vedic learning, asceti- ©


cism, Vedic rites, whose object is attain
ment of earthly prosperity, ceremonies,
sacrifices, religious rules and meditation,


with the desires of securing any advantage .


thereby. _


iz. As an illustration of this truth, the .
sages, well-read in ancient Igarning, recite -


ASHWAMBDNA PARVA:


these verses called by the name of Kama-
gita, do you, O Yudhishthira, listen to the
recital of them in full. :


13. (Kama says,) No creature is able to
destroy me without following the proper
methods (ves , subjugation of all desires and
practice of Yoga, etc.)


ty—15. If a man knowing -mty power,
tries to destroy me by muttering prayers,
etc., | prevail over him by deluding drim
with the belief that { ami the ego within him.
If he desire to destroy me by means of
sacrifices with many presents, | deceive him
by appearing in his mind as a must virtue
ous creature amongst the mobile creation,
and if he wish to destroy me by mastering


the Vedas and its auxiliacies, | overreach |!


him by appearing to his mind to be the
soul of virtue amongst the immobile crea-
tion.


16—19. And if the man whose streagth
lies in truth, wish to “overcome me by
patience, [ appear-to him as his mind, and.
thus he does not perceive my existence, and’
if the man’ of austere religious practices,’
wish to destroy me by' means of asceticism, ©
lappear in the dress of asceticism in his
inisid, and thus he fs prevented froni know- |
ing me, and the man of learning, who with’
the object of attaining salvation wish to
destroy me, I frolic and laugh in the face of.
such a man intent on salvation. | am the
everlasting one without an equal, whem no
creature can kill or destroy. ©


20. Therefore, you too, O prince, divert
your desires (Kama) to virtue, so that, by
this means, you may attain what is for your
good, ,


21, Do you, therefore, make preparations
for the due performance of the Horse-Sacri-
fice with presents, and vatious other sacri+
fices of great splendour, and accompanied
with presents. .


22. Let not, therefore, grief overpower
you again, on seeing your friends lying kil-
led on the battle-field. You cannot see the
meh killed in this batie alive again.


23. Therefore, should you perform mag-
nificent sacrifices with presents, so that you
may attain fame. in this world, and reach
the perfect way in the next.


1§


'


CHAPTER XIV.


(ASHWAMEDIINKA PARVA.J—
Continued.


Vaishampayana said —

1. LYhose yreat ascetics consoled the
royal saint Vudhishthica, bereft of his
friends; with these words, : ;


a— 4. And; O monarch, that king ex-
horted by the worshipful Vishtarasheaba
himself, and by Dwaipayana (Vyasa), _
Ktishna, Devasthana, Narada, Bhima, .
Nakula, Krishna (Draupadi), Sahadeva,
and the sharp. witted Vijaya, as well as by
other ‘great men, and Brahmanas versed
in the scriptures, became relieved’ of ail
mental suffering and sorrow — originating
frem the death of his dear relations,


5. And that king Yudhishthira after
performing the: ebsequial ceremonies of
(his departed friends, and honoring the
| Brahmanas.and the celestials, brought the
j kingdom of the earth with its girdle of
oceans, under his sway. — ;

6. And having regained his: kingdom,
with atranquimind, that prince of [uru’s
race thus addressed Vyasa,’.Narada and-
the othes sages. who were preseut.


7. Ubave been consoled by the words of
so great, ancient and aged saints as yotr-
selves, and f have now no cause left for
the least sorrow. ot oo os


8. And likewise, 1 have attained great
fiches, with which I may adore the celes-
tials, therefore, with your help, | shall now
celebrate the saci ifice. ae


g—to. -O the best of the twice-borns, we’
have heard-that those (Hiinalayan) regions
are full of wondets; therefore, O' Brahmana
Saint’ and grandfather do you so ordain
that under your protection we inay safely
reach the Himalaya, mountains, the perfor
mance of my sacrifice being entirely within
your control, and then the worshipfut
celestial saiit Narada and Devasthana
have ‘also addressed exquisite and well
meaning words for our behvof. .


.11. -No unlucky man -in times of great


|
|
|


sorrow and distress, has ever the good —


fortune to secure the services of ‘such pres
ceptors?.and friends approved of all vir+
tuous men, -


12-13. Thus addressed hy the king,
those great saints, commending tie king
and Krishna and Arjuna to go the Hima-
Jayan regions, then and there vanished
before the ‘assembled multitude, and the
king, the royal son of Diarma, then seated,
himself there for some time, —


16.


14.—16, And the Pandavas then on
account of the death of Bhishma, were
engayed in celvbyating his funeral cere-
monies, And their time, while thus en-
gaged, seemed too leng in passing, and

erforming the last rites for the bodies of

hishma, Karna and other ‘foremost
Kauravas, they gave away large presets
to Brahmanas. .And them the:
descendant of Kuru, again perforated’ with
Dhritarashtra the funeral cites, and having
distithuted profuse riches amongst. the
Braheanas, the Pandava chief with Dhritaa
rashtra in advance, entered..the city of
Hastina Nagar, and consoling his uncle,
having eyes of wisdom, that virtuous prince
continued to govern the earth with his
brothers..


Pe


CHAPTER XV,


(ASHWAMEDHIKA PARVA.)=
Continued.
Janamejaya said :— ;


1. O best of the twice-bornsj when the
Pandavas had reconquered and pacified


their kingdom, what did-the two warriors |


Vasudeva and Dhananjaya do? :


Vaishampayana said :—
"a—4. Oking, Vasudeva and Dhananjaya
were highly pleased when the Pandavas had


succeeded in regaining and pacifying their:


kingdoms, and they deported themselves
with great glee, like Indra and his wife: in
the celestial: regions, and amidst picturesque
forest. sceneries, and tablelands. of moun-
tains, and sacred places of pilgrimage, and


lakes and rivers, they travelled. with great.


pleasure like the two Ashwins in. the Nan-
dana garden of Indra. ae d


*§. And, O Bharata, the great Krishna
and the son of Paridu (Dhananjaya) enter-
ing the beautiful hall of assembly at Indra-
prastha, passed theit time in great merri-
ment.


6. And there, O prince, they passed


their time in-degcribing the stirring incidents


ef the war, and the sufferings of their past
liyes.

7. Andthose two great ancient sages,
pleased, recited the genealogy of the races
of saints and gods. ’ ' :


8. Then Keshava, knowing the, full
significance of all matters, addressed Partha
in sweet and beautiful words of excellent
style and meaning. .


foremost”


_’ MAHABHARATA. -


“*y, Aqd then Jawarddana consoled the
son of. Pritha afflicted by the death of his
sons, and thousands of other relatives.


to. And he of great ascetic merit and
knowing the science of all things duly
comfotting him, rested for a while, as if a
great burden had’ been removed from his
own body. :


-at Then Govinda (Krishna) comfors
ting Arjuna with sweet speech, addressed’
these well-reasoned words to him.


Vastideva said :-=


«12. O Arjuna, the terror of your
enemies, this entire earth has been con-
quered by the king, the sen of Dharma,
depending on the power of your arms.


13. And, O best of men, the virtuous
king Yodhishthira now enjoys the sover-
eignty of the earth without a rival, by the
power of Bhimasena and the twin brothers. -


14-17. O you, who know what virtue
‘Is, at was by virtue alone, that the king has
been able to regain his kingdom shorn of all
enemies, and it was by the action of virtue,
that king Suyodhana has been slain in
baule, and, son of Pritha and pillar of
the Kuru cace, the wicked sons of Dhrita-
rashtra, avaricious, always rude in speech,
and bent upon a sinful course of conduct,
having been rooted out with their followers,
the kjng, the son of Dharma and lord of the
earth, now peaceably enjoys the entire king«
dom of the earth with your help, and I too,
O son of Pandu, have been pleasantly pas-
sing away my time in your. company, amidst
woodland scenes.

18. O ‘terror of your enemies, what’
more need [ tell you, but that where you
and Pritha, and the king, the son of
Dharma, and the powerful Bhimasena and
the two sons of Madri are, there am §.


ft drawn with exquisite delight.


19—20. O descendant of Kuru, in these’
delightful and sacred and celestial halls of
assembly, a long time has gone away in
your company without ‘my seeing Vasudeva,
Valadeva and other leaders of the Vrishni
race, :


2t. And now I am desirous of going
to the city of Dwaravati. Do you, therefore, :
O most courageous of men, assent to my
departure. os


22. When king Yudhishthira was
Stricken heavily with sorrow, I with
Bhishma, have recited to him many appro-
Priate legends suited to the occasion with a
view of dispelling his grief, and the pliant
and great Yudhishthira, though our sover-
eign, and versed in all learning, paid due
heed to our words.


ASHWAMEDIIA PaRVA. 17)


§4-—24. That son of Dharma honors |


teuth, and is grateful and virtuous, therefare


will his virtue, and good sense and tite stabl-.


lity of his power always endure.


25. And now, O Arjusa, if it pleases you,
do you go to that great prince and tell him
of my desire to leave this place.


26—31. For, O you of mighty arms, even
if death comes to me, 1 am reluctant to do
anything that may displease him, what to
Speak of, my going to the city of Dwaravati,
Oson of Pritha, and descendant of Kuru,
Tow tell you truly desiring to do only
what is good atid agreeable to you, and
there can be nothing equivocal in it in any
way, that the necessity for my staying bere
no longer exists, when, O Arjuna, that
monarch the son of Dbritarasntra, has been
killed with his armies and attendants, ahd
the earth, nosy friend, with its belt of seas,
and its tnountains and: woods and forests,
and the kingdom of the Kuru king filled
with various gems, have passed under the
control of that wise son of Dharma. And,
O foremost prince of Bharata’s race, may
that virtuous prince govern the entire king-
dom of the earth in virtue, and with the
respect and approbation of numerous great
Siddhas, and having his praises always
extolled by the panegyrists. ~


32.7 Do you, O pride of Kuru’s race,
accompany me to-day to the king, the great
advancer of the Kuru race, and sound him
of my intended return to Dwaraka.


33. As Vudhishthira the great king of


the Kurus, always commands my love and.


respect, | have, O son of Pritha, placed this
my body and all the riches that I have in
my: house, at his disposal.

34. And, O prince, Partha (son of Pritha)
when this earth has come under your con-
trol and that-of the worshipful Yudbishthica
of excellent character, there -no longer. re-
mains any need.for my staying bere except
for iny love for you. is


35. And, O king. when the redoubtable
Arjuna had been thus addressed by the
noble-hearted Janarddana, he, shewing all
the honors due to him, sorrowfully replied
by merely saying ‘be ft so.’


wd i


CHAPTER XVi. *
(ANUGITA PARVA,)
Sahaméjaya said :—
1, ‘When the great Keshava and Arjuna
after killing their enemies went to the as-


sembly .reums what conversation, © twice-
born one, took place between them 7


a


. hot good.


2. Thesonof Pritha (Acuna), having ,
recovered his own kingdom, spent bis time
gladly, without doing anyshing else, inthe
company of Krishna, bis veart filled wit
joy, in that palace of celestial beauty,


3." One day, those two listlessly went ta
a particular pact of the palace that looked,
© hing, like a veritable partion of the celes- .
tial region, ‘Themselves filled with joy,they
were then surrounded by their relatives aud
attendants.

4. Pandu’s son Arjuna, filled with joy in
the company of Kristina, saw that deliptt-
ful palace, and then addressed his com-
panion, saying,—‘O mighty-armed. one,
your greatness became known tu me -upois
the approach of the battle, “1


5. O son of Devakt, your form also, ag
the Lord of the universe, thea became
known tome. ‘ pace : :


6. What your holy “self said to me at
that time; O Keshava, through love, has all
been forgotten by me, O chief of meni, ov
account of the fickleness of my mind. = °’


7. However, I,have been curious. again, 7
and ay aidfon the subject of those truths. You,
too, U Madhava, will go to Dwaraka svon, |


Vaishampayana said — 7

8. ‘Thus addressed by him, Krishna of |
great energy, that foremost of speakers,
embraced Phalyuna and seplied to him as .
follows, 4


Vasudeva said :-—

9 J made yon listen to truths that are
considered as mysteries, I conferred on you |
eternal truths. Indeed, I described to you
Religion in its ‘thus form and gh all the’
etetnal regtons. ; 3


10. {tis greatly disagreeable to me to’
learn that you did not, froin folly, receive
what I gave. ‘The recollection of all that [
told you on that occasion will not come ta
me vow. ; er
- 4a. Forsooth, O son of Pandu, you are
destitute of faith and: your understanding is
hc is iinpossible for me, O Dha-
nanjaya, to repeat, in full, all that —E said on -


. that occasion,


12, That religion is moré than’ sufficient
for understanding Bralimds { cannut dese
cribe it again in detail. : ; ;

13. | described to you, O Supreme


- Brahma, having concentiated myself in


Yoga. | shail now, however, recite to you
an old history upon the same subject,

14. O foremost of all persons knowing
duty, listen to everything [ now say, so that, ,
with an understanding adapted to my


38


4


‘teaching, you may succeed i in attaining to
the highest end, -


15. O chastiser of enemies, on- one oc-
casion, a Brahmana came. to -us from the
celestial regions, Of iccesistible energy, he
came from the regions of the grandiather,
tle was duly respected by us, 5


16. Listen, O'sow of Pritha, unhesita- '
tingly to what he, -O chief of Bharata’s race,
said, in answer to our Cniities, actording-
to heavenly forms,


Brahmana said:— + “

17-18 That which you ask me, -O
Krishna, about the: religion ‘of Moksha
(Emancipation), led -by your compassion
for all creatures,—-that, indeed, which des-
troys all delusion,~-O you ‘gifted. with Su-
preme power, I shall now tell you. duly, O
destroyer of Madbu.. Do you listen with
aapt attention as | discourse Lo you, Oo
Madhava.”


‘19. A Brahmana tained
possessed of penances and the foremost of
all persons knowing duties, came to a. cere
tain other Brahmana who had become con-
versant with all the mysteries of religion. -


20. Indeed, the latter had mastered
all the knowledge which the scriptuxes teach
about the departure and reappearance of
beings and possessed that direct’ knowledge
ofall things which Yoga gives, ‘He: was
well-skitied in the truths of all ‘subjects
telating to the world. He had ‘nrastered
the tcuth abuut pleasure and pain.


21. He knew the truth about birth’ and
death, aud understood the distinctions be-
tween merit and demerit." He had seen the
ends attained to by embodied creatutes
Ligh and low on actount of their deeds.


22-24 He lived like one freed from the
world. Crowned with ascetic success and
gifted with perfect tranquillity of soul, -he
had all his’ senses under complete control.
Ite seemed to shine with the resplendence
of Brahma and capable of going every-
where at will, He knew the science of
Visappeating at will from before the eyes
of, all. He used to move: about in the.
company of invisible Siddhas and celes-.
tial musicians. He used to sit and. talk with -
them on some spot retired from . the ..bustle |
of humanity, -He was as unattached. to all
things as. the wind, Kashyapa having.
heard of him truly, wished to see ‘him.
Gitted with intelligence, that faremost of
ail Brahmanas approached thé sage. fi


25. Himself possessed ' of’ penances,
Kashyapa, moved by the wish of acquiring
tacit, fell, with a rapt heart, at the feet
of the sage when lg had seen all those won-
derlul atuibutes.


”


Kashyapa, :


aed


MAHABHARATA.


26. Stricken with wonder at the sight of
those ‘extraordinary qualiues, Kashyap
began to wait‘ upon that foremost of: alF
Bralimanas,- with the dutiful respect‘ of a
disciple waiting upon his preceptor and suce
ceeded. in pleasing him.


‘27. By his devotion, O  scorcher ” of
enemies, rendering to him the ‘obedietice due
from a disciple to a preceptor, Kashyapa
pleased thas Brahmana .who possessed all
these qualities and was ‘pifted, besides with
Scriptural learning and excellent conduct.


28. Pleased with MKashyapa, the Brah-
mana one day addressed him cheerfully and!


| spoke as follows, having the highest success:


in view,, Listen to these words, O Jinard.
dana, as I cepeat them.


The successful Ascetic said: —


29. By various deeds, O son, as also by
the help of mevit, mo:tal, creatures attain to
diverse ends here and pesidence in b¥cavens


go. ' Nowhere one can enjoy the highest
happiness; nowhere one can live for good.
Vhere are repeated falls from the hig best
tegions acquired with such sorrow,


3t. On account of my indulgence in


e sin, if had to come by various miserable and


inauspicious ends, filled as F was with luse
and anger, and deluded by cupidity.


32. ° I have repeatedly undergone deattr
and're- birth: '} have eaten-various kinds ‘oft


_ food, § have sucked: at various breastss.


+ 43. dT have seen various kinds of motlers;
and Varions ‘fathers dissimilar: to one
another. « kthave come by various binds of:
Happenses and - misery; O siiless One.


' 34. On various occasions have B beer
separated: from ‘what was agreeable and
united with what was disagreeable.’ Having
acquired wealth with ' great. labour L have
had to put up with its Toss, ‘


35. T have received trom king and’ rele
tives insults and excessive ‘misery. VT have
suffered ‘from severe mental and phy sicab
path «i


36. 1 eee eee humiliations and.
death and “imprisonment under circum=
stances of grea! severity. I} have had falls’
into ‘Hell and have suffered great tortures
in the domains of Yantras: —-


37- U bave, again and again, suffered
fotm decrepitude -and diseases,’and from
frequent and -great calamities. In this


world | have ‘repeatedly’ suffered from alt


those affiictions which arise drom. @ percep, *
tion of all pairs of opposites.


38. After all this, one day, laden with
sorcow, Wespair: came upou me,. 1 tool


ASHWAMEOHA PARVA.


vefuge in the Formless, Suffering from
great distress, I gave up the world with ail
is joys and sorrows,


39. Finding out then this path, 1 exer=


cised myself in it inthis world. Afterwards,
through tranquillity of soul, 1 acquired the
‘success you see, : :

.40,, I shall not have to


wereld azain. Indeed, till [ .attain to ab-
sprption into eternal Brahma,. til, ia fact,


the final dissolution of, the universe, 4 shall:


Jook on those happy eads that will. be mine
and on those beings and that form this uni-
verse. i een, a Shad
4t. Having acquired this excelfent suc-
cess, ( shadl, after departing from-this wasid,:
proceed te what is above it and thence
what is higher. :


42. Indeed, 1 shall come by the condi-
tion, which is unmanifest, of Brahma. Do.
not doubt this. GQ scorcher of enemies, |
shall not return to this world of mortal
creatures, e>  ietae

43. O you of great wisdom, 1 -have be-
‘come pleased with you. ‘Tell'me what 1
shall do for you. The time has come fdr
the. accomplishment of that purpose for
which you have come here, ee er


44. U know that object for which you
have sought me. i shall soon depatt from:
this world. Hence itis that I have given
you this hint. — ; 7
145. Q vou of great wisdom and” ex-
perience, | have been highly pleased with
you.for your behaviour, Do you question
me! [ shal discourse on what is bene-
ficial to you as desired by you. Poe Ne


46. I think your intelligence is great.
indeed, { speak highly af dt, for it was with
the help of that inteHigence that -you were
able to recognise me. \Surely, O- Kashyapa,
you are endued with great intelligence.
~


CHAPTER XVII.


{ANUGITA PARVA).—
Continued,


Vasudeva said :— ne wie

1. Touching the feet of that sage, the
Brahmana asked him some very: difficult
questions. That foremost of all pious per-
sons then described those duties that were
referred to, * :


Kashyapa said :—


2. How does the body dissolve away,
and how is another is acquired? low does


*


come to this


19°


one become liberated after passing through .
a repeated round of painful re-births ?

“3. Enjoying Nature for sometime, how |
does the Individual Soul cast’ off the parti«
cular body ? How does the Individual Soul,
freed from the body, attain to what is
different from it, (vis., Brahman) ?

_ 4. How does'a human being enjoy the,
good and bad deeds done by him? Where
do the acts exist of one that is devoid of ©
body ?

eee oe ee .

The Brahmana said ;— ae

§: Thas urged by Kashyapa, the Libes”
tated Sage’ answered those questions one!
after another. Do you listen to me, 0!
hero of the Vrishni race, as I recite to you
the answers he gave,


The Liberated Sage said :—

‘67. -Upon ‘the - exhaustion -of those!
deeds capable of prolonging life and bring-«
ing‘on fame which are done is a particular!
body that the Individual Sout ‘assumes, the


embodied - Jiva, with the span of: his: tife:


shortened, begins to do:acts “hostile to life’
and: heath.;.On the approach of destruc-
tion, his understanding deviates from the.
proper course. ., Ree ech '


8. Fhe mar of impure soul, after every
a correct, understanding. of his constitution
and strength and-of the season of both bis,
own ,ife and of the year, begins to eat at,
irregulac istervals and to eat such food as.
is hostile to him. ; A. tate sae 8

g. Atsuch a time Ge does practices that
are greatly harmful; He sometitnes eats:
excessively and sometimes abstains alto-
gether from fogd. |, aie


‘ta. le eats bad :food or bad meat or
takes bad drinks, or food that has been,
made up of hostile ‘ingredients. He eats, _
food that is heavy and more than.what is,
beneficial, or jbefore the food previously
taken, has been, digested, ; ,

M1... He indulges in physical exercise and
sexual pleasure in excess, or through avidity,
for work, suppresses the urgings of bis cor
poreal organism even when they become
pronounced, eyes ,
‘G2. Or, he takes juicy food or indulges
in sleep during daytime. Food that is not
properly digested, of itself excites the faults,
when the times comes. _~

no ot add


13. From such excitement. of the faulty
in his body, he. gets disease ultimately
bringing on death. Sometimes the person,
engages in unnatural deeds Jike strangling.


14°- Through these causes the living
body of the creatuce dissolves away, Uu-
. >


20. MAHABHARATA,


derstand correctly the manne* as 1 declare
it to you. | .

15. Urged on by the Wind which be-
comes violent, the heat in the body, be-
coming excited, and reaching every part of
the body one after another, restrains all the
vital airs.


16, Know truly that excited all over the
body, the heat becomes very strong, and
pierces every vital part where life may be
said to live, ;


17-18. On account of this, the Individual,
Soul, feeling great pain, quickly takes leave
of the body. Know, O toremost of twice-
born ones, that when the vital parts of the
body become thus’ afflicted, Individual Soul
passes away from the body, suffering from
great pain. Alliiving creatures repeatedly
suffer from birth and death.


19—20. It is seen, O chief of Brahmanas,
that the pain which is felt by a person when
renouncing his bodies is like to what is felt
by him when first entering the womb or
when coming out of it. His joints - become
almost diskocated and he derives much dis-
tress from the waters,


at. Moved by (another) violent wind,
the wind in the body becomes excited
through cold, and dissolves away the union
of matter into its five primal elements.


‘22. That wind which lives in the vital
aits called Prana and Apana occurring
within this compound of the five primal ele-
ments, rushes upwards, from a situation of
distress, leaving the embodied creature,


"23. It is thus-that the wind leaves the

body. ‘Then is seen breathlessness. ‘The
snan then becomes destitute of heat, of
breath, of beauty, and of consciousness.


“24. Deserted by Brahma, the person is
Said to be dead. By those canals through
which he perceives all sensuous objects,
the beatet of the body no longer perceives
them. ~ - |


25, The Individual Soul creates in the
body in those canals the vital airs formed
by the food. ;


; 26. The elements gathered together be-
come in certain parts firmly united. Know
that those parts are called the vitals of -the,
body. It is said so in the Shastras. :


27. When those vital parts are cut, the
Individual Soul, rising up, enters the heart
of the living creature and restrains the
principle of animation forthwith.


28. The creature then, though still
possessed of consciousness, fails to know
uuything. ‘be vital parts being all worked
up, the the knowldye of the lving creature
Lecumes overwhelmed by darkness.


29—30. The Individual Soul then, whe
has been deprived of everything upon which
to stay, is then agitated by the wind. He
then, deeply breathing a [ong and painful
breath, goes out speedily, making the in-
animate body to tremble. Separated frum
the body, the Individual Soul, however, is
surrounded by his deeds.


3{—34. He becomes equipped on all
sides with all his auspicious deeds of nterit
and with all bis sins. Brahaianas gifted with
knowledge and equipped with the certain
conclusions of the scriptures, know him,
from marks, as to whether he is possessed
of metit or with its demerit. Even as men
having eyes see the fire-fly appearing and
disappearing in the midst of darkness, men
having the eyejof knowledge and crowned
with success of penances, see, with spiritual
vision, the Individual Soul as he leaves the
body, as he is re-born, and as he enters the
womb. It is seen that the Individul Sout
has three regions assigned to him eternally.


35. ‘This world where creatures live is
called the field of action. Performing
acts, good or bad, all embodied creatures
attain to the fruits thereof.


36. On account of their own deeds,
creatures acquire even here superior or in-
inferior enjoyments. Doers of evil deeds
here, on account of those deeds of theirs,
attain to Hell,


37.. This condition of sinking with head
downwards, in which creatures are boiled
is one of great misery. [t is such thata
rescue therefrom is highly difficult. - Indeed,
one should try hard for saving himself from
this misery. ~


38. Those regions where creatures live
when they ascend from this world, 1 shall
now declare truly. Do you listen to me
attentively,


39-40. By listening to what Isay, you
will acquire firmness of understanding and
aclear apprehension of deeds. Know that
even those are the regions of all creatures
of righteous deeds, yvzz., the stellar worlds
that shine in the sky, the lunar disc, and
the solar disc as welt that shines in the
, universe in its own Nght.


r# 4%. Upon the termination, again, of
theic merits, they fall away from those re-
gions repeatedly, There ts distinction of
inferior, superior and middling happiness
even in the celestial region.

o


42. There is discontent at sight of pros-
perity more burning than one’s own ever
in the celestial region. Even these are-the
goals which I have mentioned iu full,


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA,


43. 1 shall, after this, describe to you
the attainment by the Individual Soul of
the condition of residence in the womb.


, 44. Do you-hear me, with rapt attention,
O twice-born one, as I speak to you. .


(CHAPTER XVIII, _
( ANUGITA PARVA. j—
" Continued. -


The Brahmana said:—- = *,

1. The acts, good and, bad, that the
Individual Soul, does are not: subject to
destruction. Upon attainment of body after
body, those deeds yield fruits corresponding
with them, ort


2. As a fruit bearing tree, when the
season for production comes, yields a large
quintity of fruit,, merit, achieved. with a
‘pure heart, likewise yields a large’ measure
of happiness. ; : pte

3- Similarly, sin, committed with a sin-
ful heart, produces a large quantity of
misery. he Individual Soul, placing the
mind a head, performs action, ' .


4. Hear then how the Individual Soul,
equipt with all his deeds and. overwhelmed
with lust and anger, enters the womb, -


5. The vital seed, mixed with blood,
enters the womb of females and becomes
the field (of the Individual Soul), good or
bad, born of (his) deeds. . ’


: 6, On account of his subtlety and the
coudition of being unmanifest, the Indivi-
dual Soul does not become attached | to
anything even after coming by a body.
Therefore, he is called-Eternal Brahma.


7—8. That (vis., Jiva or Brahma) is the
seed.of all creatures. It is on account of
Him that living creatures live. hat the
Individual Soul, entering all the limbs of the
foetus part by part, accepting the attribute
of mind, and living. within all the regions
that belong to vital air, supports (life). - On
account of this, the foetus, becoming pos-
sessed of mind, begins to move its limbs.


9: As liquified iron, poured {inte a
mould), takes the form of the mould, so
is the entrance of the Individual Sout into
the foetus.


to. As fire, entering a mass of iron,
heats it greatly, so is the manifestation of
the Individual Sgul in the foetus.

11. As a lamp, burning in a room, dis-
covers {all things within it), so does the
thind discover the different limbs of the
body. ;


is U4


«


sf


12. , Whatever deeds; good ‘or bad; the.
Individual Soul does in a former body,
have certainly to be enjoyed or endured by
him. | -


13. By such enjoyment and endurance
former deeds are exhausted, .and other
deeds, again, accumulate, till the Individual
Soul succeed in. acquiring a knowledge of
the duties included in that contemplation
which leads to Liberation. ‘


14. Reghrdiig this, I shall tell you those
deeds by which the Individual Soul, O best
of men, while passing through a repeated
round of re-bitths, becomes happy.


15—18. Gifts, observances of austerity}
celibacy; bearing Brahma‘according to the
ordinances laid dowa, self-control, tran-
quillity, mercy for all :creatures. restraint of
passions, abstention from cruelty as also
trom appropriating others’ properties, re-
fraining from doing even mentally all deeds
that are false and injurious .to living
creatures on the Earth, respectfully serving
mother and father, hénoring the celestials
and ‘guests, adoration of preceptors, pity,
purity, constant control of all, organs, and
causing of all good deeds are said ‘to form
the conduct of the good: From observance
of such conduct, originates virtue which
protects al! creatures eternally.


“ 39. Such conduct one would always see
among good persons. Indeed, such con-
duct lives there for good. ‘That course of
ractices which persons of tranquil souls
‘ollow, indicates Virtue.
' 20, ‘Among them is. thrown that course
of practices which forms eternal Virtue. He
who would follow virtue would never have
to come by a miserable end. ‘


21. It is by the conduct of the good that
the world is restrained in the paths of Virtue
when it falls away, He who isa Yogin is
Liberated, and is, therefore, distinguished
above these (viz., the'good).- :

22. Deliverance from.the world occurs,
after a long time, of one ‘who acts rightee
ously and well on every . occasion as he
should,’ ’ ; er

23. A living creature thus always meets
with his pristine-deeds. All these deeds
form the cause in consequence of which he
comes into this world ia a-state different
from his true form,


24. ‘There is a donbt in. the world about
this question. By what was the acceptance
(by the Individual Soul) of a body first
determined. 5 eo re eae

25. Having first formed a body of, his
own, the Grandfather of all the worlds .vze., .
Brahman , then created the three worlds, of


mobile and immobile creatures.


£3


‘MAITABHARATA.


26! Having first” himself taken'a body, | ta think of even hig’ own existence,aaa


he then created Pradhana,
is the material cause of all embodied crea-
tures, by whom is all this covered, ahd
whom all came to know ag the greatest.

+ 27. This which is seen is'said to be’ des-
tsuctible; while the other is immortal and
indestructible. ‘Chis: which (is seen) is said
to be Kshara (the destructible); that, how!
ever, which is the other is the Imimartal (as
also) Akshara (the Indestructible), Of each
Purusha taken separately, the whole is dua
lity among these three.


28. S-en first (to appest in att embodied
form), Prajapati (then) created all the , pri-
mal elements and. all immobile creatures,
This.is the ancient Sheuti.


2g. Of that (acceptance’ of bédy), the
Grandfather put down a ‘limit about tinie,
and migrations: among: various' creatiires
and return or ce-birth, : rar
* go, All that I say is proper and’ correct,
@s'a person’ who has intelligence and, who
has seen his Soul, would say on this subject
of previous births, & 7
. 3132. That person who considers plea-
sure and prin as inconstant, which, indeed;
is the correct view, who. regards the body
as an unholy collection, and destruction as
ordained in action, and who remembers
that what little of pleasure there is, is really
all pain, will succeed in crossing this terrible
ocean of worldly migration which is so_ diffi-
cult'to cross.’ i

33- Though-attacked by decrepitude and
death’ and disease, he who understands
Pradhana sees with an equal eye.that, Con;
sciotishess which lives in ail beings gifted


'


with Consciousness,

34. Seeking the supreme seat, he then
becomes utterly indifferent to all (other)
things.” O best of men, I shall now deliver
.insteuction to you, according to truth, con-
cerning this. : Has

35. Do you, O tearned’ Brahmana, un;
derstand in full’ what form: thé . ¢xcellent
kiiowledge, as { ‘declare it, of that indes-
tructible seat.


CHAPTER ‘XIX,
(ANUGITA PARVA,)—«#!


Continiteds


The Brahmana said :—

t. He who becomes'“immérged! in’ the
one receptacle (of ‘all' things}, freeing hini-,
self from even the thought of his own
identity with all’ -thiags,—indeel,’ ceasing


That Pradhana,


gradually renouncing “one after another,


will sticceed in crossing his bonds.


2, That man whois the friend of all, wha
endures alt, who is attached to tranquillity,
who has conquered ali his senses, wha is
shorn of fear and anger, and who is of can-
trolled soul, succeeds in liberating himself.


3. He who treats all creatures as his
ownself, who is restrained, pure, free from
vanity, and shorn of egoism, is considered
as liberated from everything.


4- He also i§ liberated who censiders

in the same light life and death, pleasure
and pain, ‘gain aiid loss, agreeable and
disagreeable,
__§:., He is in every way liberated who
does not covet others’ properties, who never
disregards any body, who is above all pairs
of opposites; and whose soul is shorn of
attachments,


6. He is liberated who has no enemy,
no_kinsman, and no child, who has cast cff
religion, . riches and pleasure, and who is
freed frori desire of cupidity.

7>...He becomes liberated who acquires
neither merit nor demerit, who casts off
the, merits and demerits accumulated ‘in

tistiné' bitths, who wastes the elements of

is” body for attaining to a tranquillised
‘soul, and’ wid gets over all pairs; of
opposites, - :

8-—g.' He who abstains'from ali deeds,

whd'is free from desire or cupidity, who.
considers the universe as ‘unenduring or as
like ‘an Ashwattha ‘tree, ever gifted with
birth, death, and decrepitude, whose un-
derstanding is fixed on renunciation, and
whose eyes are always directed towards his
own faults, soon succeeds in freeing him-
self fram the fetters that bind him.


' 108 He who’seés his soul void of smell,
of taste ‘and: touch, of sound, of belong:
ings} of vision; and. unknowable, becomes
liberated. 2
“an ‘He 'whd bees! “his soul shorn of the
attributes ‘of the five elements, to, be with-
dut“form’ and’ cause, to be really destitute
of attributes though enjoying them, be-
eomes Nberatedy ,

12.’ Abandoning,. with ‘the help of the
uridergtanding, all purposes relating to
body and mind, ‘one gradually attains to
cessation of separate existence, like a fire
unfed with fuel.


Seek ng :

135, One who is freed from all impres-
sions, who ‘is above all pairs of opposites, .
who is destitute of all belongings, and wha
usés all “his senses “under the guidance fo
penances, becemes liberated.


ASHWAMEDHA PARYA.


?4. Having become freed from all im-
pressions, one then attaing to ‘Bealina which
ts Evecnal add ‘supremé,’and ‘(ranguil,’ aud
Siabic,-and enduring and indestcuctible. :


15. After this I shall describe’ the, science’
of Yoga” than which there is nothin} J
superior, and how Yogin8; by’ concentias
tion, see the pecfect soulr  ¢


16. 1 shall communicate the insteuci ions
abuut it'duly. “Do you learn {rout ine hosé
dooi's by ‘Which divecting'' the’ ‘soul within
tué"'body one sees that’ which : ‘is witligut
beginning and end.


17. Withdrawing the: senses front’ their.
objects, one should ‘fix ‘the tind ‘uiposl the’
soul ; ‘having previously’ practised’ the
severest *: austerilies, ° ‘one should’ ‘practise
that concentration of me whieh teads tb '}


Liberation. ' sth OF


18, Observant of penances and always
practising ‘concentration of ' mind,’ “the
learned Bralimaitia, ‘gifted with ‘inielligente,
should observe the precepts of the Scieitce
of Pa seeing the-soul in the bodys


ficating the “niind on the soul; he' thenS
‘used te exclusive. meditation, ' sees the
Supremwne Soul in bis own soul.: : :


20; Self-controlled and always concen. °
trated, and with ‘all his senses’ Completely ”
conquered, the man of purified soul;*'on'
account of such complete: concéntration of
inind, succeeds. ia seeing ‘the’ soul. by soul,

2t. As a persoit “seeing ‘ some unseen
individual in a dream recognises him, saf- |
jing, —Lhis is hée;—whey ‘he sees hit aftes
waking, similarly the good, man. ‘having
seen the Supreme Soul. in-the deep. contem-
plation of Samadhi. ESCO HEE ‘it. upen
‘waking from Samadhi: : ,


22. As one sees the fibrous. pith after,
extracting it fcom a blade of the. Sgccha-
rum Munja, so the Yogiu. sess the, Soul,
extracting it from the body. ‘


23. The body has ‘been “called: the
Saccharum - -Munja and te filbrous pith ig
called the Soul. ‘his is the excellent. iNuse.
tration given by persons knowing . Yoga.


24. When’ the bearer of a. body adegua-.
tely sees the Soul ‘in ioe he he, then “has ‘no,
one to master hin, Yor’ ne thes ‘betes the.
lord of three worlds, ©


25. He succeeds in. assuming., various
budies accerding.as -he. wishes. Lurning
away decrepitude .and«dsath, .
gcieves nor exults, ©


26. The self-controlled Man, concen:
trated in Yoga, can create (for himself)
the godship of the very gods. Renouncing


S fall


‘If the good man succeeds ‘in'con- |: 32;


29


his transient body he attains to imnutable
-Beahima,

27. He does not fear even at on seeing
all creatures falling victims to destruction.
Wien all “creatures are afflicied ie can
‘never be’ afflicted by any one. ;


28, Devoid of desire and gifted with a
trang: sil mind, the person in Yoga is never
affected by pain an@ sorfew and fear and
the’ ‘dreadful effccis of attachment and |
affection, Bale :


2g. ° * Weapons never pierce him; ‘death
dvés not ‘exist for him. Nowhere in the
world can besten any one’ whu is happier
than he. ‘


go. Having adequately concentrated his |
soul, “he'lives firmly on himself. ‘Turning to
dettepirude™ and paity and- Pleasure, he
sleeps at ease.


31. Renouncing this human body he
attains to (other) for ms accerding to his
pleasure.: While one is enjoying the sove-
reigity that Yoga ‘bestows, one should never
away from devotion to Yoga.


When one, after. adequate devotion,
to Yoga, sees the Soul in his, ownself, he
then ceases to have any regard for even ‘pian
of a‘hundred sacrifices (Indra).


33-37. Hear ‘now, how gne,, habitua-
ting, himself, ta, exclusive meditation, | suce
ceeds in atiaining ty Yoga, Thiaking of
that point of the compass which has the
‘Sun betvind it; thé mind should be’ fixeds
not” ‘outside, but i the interior of that
- palace ‘in’ which one “may  bappen ‘to live.
Living within that palace the mind should
ithen, ‘with. all it joutward.. and . inward
(operations), see in that particular, qaom in.
which one may live. At. that time when,
.bavjng deeply meditated, one sees the
All (ig., Brahma, | the Soul of thé’ Uai-
verse), there is then nathing ‘externat to
‘Brabina,’ ‘where the tind may hye, ‘Control-
ling” all" the ‘senses in’ a forest, that is free.
{com noise and that is uniniabited, with
miad fixed thereon, oné should-meditate oa
the All ‘both’ outside and- inside his body.
‘One should: meditate’ on the teeth, the:
palate, the tongue, the throat, -the neck:
‘likewise; one, should also meditate on the
iheartand the. ligatures..of the pci


| ‘The.Brahmana, said :—
33, Thus addressed, by, me, that: intelli-

geut, disciple, O destroyer, of Madhu, once,

rmygre, asked, me jabout., this religion, of Libe-,


‘


he neither | ration phat, is so difficult to explain. |


39. How does this food that js eaten
‘from time to time become digested in the
stomach? How does it become epanees
into juice?» How, again,.into blood ? +


oy


40. How does it nourisli the flesh, the
Ynarrow, the sinews, the bones? How do
ali these limbs of ewbodied creatures grow %


4t. How does the strength grow of the


Browing man? How takes place the escape


‘of all sucti elements as are not nutritive,
and of ail impurities separately ?


42.. How does this one inhale and again,
eXvale?. Staying upen what partidae
part does the Soul live in the body


43. How does the Individual Soul, exer-
ting himself, bear the body ? Of what colour
and gf what kind is the body in which he
lives again ? , a

44. O holy one, you should tell me all
this accurately, Q sinless one! ‘Thus was I
accosted by that. learued Brahmana, O
Madhava ? ;


45-46. 1 replied to him, O you of


mighty arms, as_[ myself had heard, O
chastiser of all enemies! As one, placing
some. precious object in jis sture-room,
should keep his mind on it, so placing the
tnind within one’s own body, one should
then, controlliny all the senses, seek after
the Soul, avoiding all carelessness,


47. One weuld, becoming always assidu-
ous in this way and pleased with his own
self; within a very short liale, attain to that
Braliua by seeing which one would become
conversant with Pradhana. :

48. Helis not capable of being appre-
hended by the eye; aor even by all the
senses, It is only with the tamp. of the
tnind that the great Soul can be seen,


49. He has hands and feet on all sides;
’ he bas eass on all sides; he lives, pervading
all things in this-woeld, ,

§0. ‘The Individual Soul beholds the Soul
as extracted froni the body. Theu renouncing
Brahiia as invested with forni, by tolding
the mind in the body, ‘he sees Brahma as
freed from all qualities. =~ : ;


gt. He sees the. Soul with his mind,
smiling as it were at the time. Depending
upon that Brahata, he then attains to Libe-
ration in me.


52+ O foremost of twice-born: ones, all
this mystery has now been-dectared by - itte.
I ask your perimission, for 1 shall leave this
place. Do you (also) go wherever -you likey

53. ‘Thus addressed by me, O Krishna,
ost that occasion, that disciple of mine, gift-
ed with austere penances, that “Brahmana
of tigid vows, wént away according to his
pleasure. : ree


Vasudeva said :—


54. O.seu of Pritha, having said these
wuids tu me, Of that o¢casivn, about the


| than this.


MAHABHARATA.


Religion of Emaucipation, that best of Bralta
tmanas disappeared then and there.


53. Have you heard this discourse, U


| son of Pritha, with mtind directed sulely to-


wards it?) Vhis you did hear on that occa-
sion while you were on your car.

56. I think, Oson of Pritha, that this is
difficult of being compreheuded by one whase
understanding is confused, or who has ac-
Quiced no wisdom by study, or who eats food
not suited to his body, oc whose Suul is nut
purified.


57- Ochief of Bharata’s race, this is a
great mystery among the celestials that has
been declared. At no time or place, O
son of Pritha, has this been heard by than


“in this world.


58. O sinless one, save yourself no other
man is worthy of hearing it. It is not, at


r this time, capable of being easily understood


by one whose inner soul is confused.

59. The world of the celestials is filled,
O soh of Kunti, with those who follow the
religion of actions. ‘he cessation of the


body is not liked by the celestials.


60. That goal, O son of Pritha, is the
highest which is formed by eternal Brah-
man where one,. renouncing the body,
attains to immortality and becomes always
happy.

61.
who are of-sinful birth, such as women and
yeenses and Shudeas, came by the highest
goal.


62, What need be said then; O son of


Pritha, of Brahmanas and Kshatriyas en- -


dued with great learuing, always devoted
‘to the duties of theirs own orders, and ‘wha
are intent on the region of Brahma? . ,


63. ‘This has been laid dowa: with the
-teasons 3 and also the means for’ its acqui-
sjtion; and -its complete attainnrear and
fruit, vzz., Liberation and the ascertainment
of the truth about pain, | . :


64-65. Ochief of Bharata’s race, there is


j nothing else which yields happiness. greater
That mortal, O ‘sen of. Pandu,-


who, gifted with intelligence,-and faith, and


| prowess, rénounces as unsuustantial what is


considered as substantial by thie world, suc


ceeds withii a short tine in ubtaining the


Supreme by these means, *”’

66. This is all that is te be said,—there
is nothihy else whiek is higher than. this.
He, O som of Pritha, who devotes himself
to its constant practice for a-period of six
months, succeeds in attaining to Yoga.


IS


By following this religion, even they .


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA.


’ CHAPTER XX.
{ANUGITA PARVA: )—
Continued,


Vasudeva said :—
t. Regarding it is cited the old narrative,


0 son of Pritha, of the discourse that took


place between a married couple.


2—%, Acertain Brahmana’s wife, seeing
the Brahmana, ber husband, who was a
‘complete master of every kind of knowledge
and wisdom, seated in seclusion, said to
him,~=Into what region shall I go, de-
pending on you as my husband,—you who
afte seated, having cast off all (religious)
acts, who are harsh in your conduct towards
me, aud who are so undiscerning ?


4. Wehave heard that a wife attains to
those regions which are acquired by her
husband, What, indeed, is the goal that I
shall attain, having obtained you for my
husband.


5. Thus questioned, that Brahmana of


tranquil soul then said to her, smilingly,—O ©


blessed dame, I am not offended with these
words of yours, O sinless one.


6. Whatever acts’’ exist which are
adopted with the help of others, which are
seen, and which are true, are done, as acts,
by men devoted to acts.


* 7, Those persons who are destitute of
knowledge, only store delusion by deeds.
Hreedom from acts, again, cannot even be
momentarily attained in this world.


8. From birth to the attainment of a
different form, action good or bad, and
accomplished by deeds, mind, or speech,
exists in all beings.


g. Those paths (of action) which are
characterised by visible objects (such as
Soma-juice and clarified butter for libations)
being destroyed by akshasas,
away from them: I have perceived the seat
{of the soul) that is in the body, with the
help of the soul,


to. There fives Brahma transcending
all pairs of opposites;-there Soma with
Agni; and there the mover of the under-
standing, (viz, Vayu) always moves, up-
holding all creatures.


tr. It is for that seat that the Grand-
father Brahman and others, concentrated
in Yoga, adore the Indestructible. It is
for that séat thag men of learning and ex-
cellent vows, of tranquil souls, and of senses
completely controlled, striye. °


12, That is not capable of being smelt


" by the’ sense .of smell; nor tasted by the’


4


turning


26


tongue; or tottched by the organs of touch.


‘| ft ts by the mind that that is attained.


13. It is incapable of being conquered
by theeye. Itis above the sense of hear-


ing. It is shorn of scent, taste, touch, and ,


form as attributes,


14—1§. It is that from which proceeds
the well-ordained universe, and it that


upon which it depends. The vital airs called


Prana, Apana, Samana, Vyanaand Udana,
flow from it, and it is that into which they
again enter. The vital airs Prana and
Apana move betweeti Samana and Vyana.


16. When the soul sleeps, both Samana
and Vyena are absorbed. Between Apana
and Prana, Udana lives, pervading all.


17. Hence, Prana and Apana do not
desert a sleeping person. On account of
its controlling all the vital aics, the controlt-
ing breath is so called Udana.


1g—22, Hence, -utterers of Brahma
practise penances which have myself for
their goal, In the midst of all these vital
airs which swatlow up one another and
move within the body, shines forth
the fire called Vaishwanara made up of
seven flames. The nose, the tonzue, the
eye, the skin, the ear which numbers the
fifth, the mind, and the understanding,
these are the seven tongues of that Vaish-
wanara’s flame. That which is smelt, that
which is seen, that which is drunk, that


which is touched, as also that which is |


‘heard, that which is thought of, and that
which {fs understood,~these are the seven
sorts of fuel for me. That which smells,


that which eats, that which sees, that which |


touches, that which sees, that which touches,
that which hears, numbering the fifth} that
which thinks, and that which wundere
stands,—sthese are the seven great officias
ting priests, :


23—26. Mark, O blessed one, learned
sacrificers duly casting seven libations in
seven ways in the seven fires, v7%., that
which is smelt, that which is drunk, that
which fs seen, that which is touched, as
also that which is heard, that which is
thought of, and that which is understood,
create them in their own wombs. Earth,


Wind,


Ether, Water, and Light num-,


bering: as the fifth, Mind and Under~ .


standing,—these seven are called wombs
(of all- things). All the attributes which
form the sacrificial offerings, enter into
the attribute that is born of the fire;
and having lived'within that dwelling be-
come _ reborn in their respective wombs.
There alsd, vzz., in that which generates
all beings, they remain absorbed during the
period for whiclt dissolution lasts. .


26


27-r28. From that is produced smell,
from that is produced taste, from that és
produced color, and from that is.produced
teuch; from that is produced sound ; from
that Originates doubt ; and from that is pro-
duce a resolution. Thus is what is known
as the sevenfold creation. 3


29 «Itis thus that all this was compre-
hended by the ancients. By the -three full
and final libations, the full become full
with light.


—<-


CHAPTER XXI.


(ANUGITA PARVA.)—=
Continued,


The Brahmana said :—

1, Regarding it is cited the following
ancient story. Do you understand, of what
kind the institution is of the ten Hotris
Gucrificing priests).’

2. ‘The ear, the skin, the two eyes, the
tongue, the nose, the two feet, the two
lands, the genital organ, the lower duct,
and speech,these, O beautiful one, are the
en saciificing priests,


3. Sound, touch, color, taste, scent,
speech, action, motion, and the discharge
of vital seed, of urine, and of excreta, are
the ten libations.


4. The points of the compass, wind,
Sua, Moon, earth, firé, Vishnu, Indra,
Prajapati, and Mitra,—these, O beautiful
one, are the ten (sacrificial) firés.


5—6. The ten organs (of knowledge and
uction) are the sacrificing priests. “Vhe
hibations, O beautiful one, are ten. Fhe
ubjects of the senses are the fuel that are
thrown into these ten fires, as also the
mind, which is the ladle, and the wealth
avts., the good and bad acts of. the sacri-
ficer.) What remains is the pure, highest
knowledge. We have heard that all this
universe was well differentiated (from know-
leuge). :

7. All objects of knowledge are Mind,
NKoowledge only perceives i. Tho Indivi-
daal Soul, encased in subtle form, lives with-
in the yross body that is produced by the
vital seed. :

8. The bearer of the body is the Garha-
patya fire. From that is produced another.
Mind is the Ahavaniya fice. Into it is.
poured the eblation.

9. From that was produced the Veda
or Wud); (then was born Misd); Mind
(usouvus of Creation) Sets itsclt an the

°


MAHABHARATA.


Veda (or the Ward.) Then arises form o¢
color) undistinguished by particular culos,
fi runs towards the Mind.


The Brahmana’s wife said :—


to. Why did Word first arise and why
did Mind arise afterwards, seeing that


“Word comes into being after having been


thought upon by Mind?


31, Upon what authority can it be said
that Mati (Prana) takes refuge im Mind.
Why, again, in dreamless sleep, though
separated from Mind, does not Prana ap-~
prehend (all objects)? What is that whieh
controls it then ?


The Brahmana said :—


12. The Apana air, becoming the Tord,
on account of such lordship over it, makes
it at one with itself. Vhat restrained
motion of the Prana air has been said to
be the motion of the mind. Hence the
mind depends upon Prana.


13 But since you ask me a questiow
about word and mind, £ shall, therefore,
describe to you a discourse between them.


_ ¥4- Both Word and Mind, repairing to
the Sou? of matter, asked him,—Do you
say who amongst us is superior. Do you,
O powerful one, remove our doubt.

5. On that occasion, the holy ome made
this answer,—The mind undoubtedly (is
superiot)!—To him Word said,—-1l grart
you the fruition of all your desires.


The Brahmana said :—~


16. Know that I have two minds, im-
movable and movable. ‘That which is im-
movable is, indeed, with me; the movable
is in your dominion.


17. That mind is indeed called movable
which, in the form of Mantra, letter, or
voice, is seferrible to your- dominion, Hence,
you are superior,


18 But since,, coming ‘of your own
accord, © beautiful one, you entee into the
engagement, therefore, filling myself with
breath, | utter you.


19. Fhe goddess Word used always to
live between Prana and Apana, Bu, O
blessed one, sinking into Apana, though
urged upwards, on account of becoming
dissociated trom Prana, she ran to Prajapaté
and said,—Be pleased with me, O toly
one,


20. Then Prana appeared, once more

fostering Word. Hence, ¥Vord, encounter~

ing deep exhalation, never utters anything.
> A


2t. Word always comes as endued with
ulierance or uuendued with it. Amengst


ASHWAMEDHTA PARVA,


these two, Word without utterance is
seperior to Word with utterance.


22. Like a cow having mitt, she vields
various kinds of meaning. ‘This one always
gives the Evernal (véz., Emancipation),
speaking of Brahma,


23. O you of beautiful smiles, Word is
a cow, on account of her power which is
both divine and not divine. See the dis-
tinction of these two subtle forms of Word
that flow. .


The Bramana’s wife said: —


24. What did the goddess of Word
then say, formerly when, though moved by
the wish to speak, spcech could aot come
out? . ;


The Brahmana said :—


25. The Word that is made im the body
by Prana, then attains to Apana fiom
Prana. VYhen changed into Udana and
coming out of the body, it covers all the
quarters, with Vyana.


26. After that, she lives in Samana.
Even thus did Word formerly speak.
ence Mind, on account of being im-
anovable, is distinguished, and the goddess


Word, on account ef being movable, is |


also distinguished.
—»


CHAPTER XXII.


(ANUGITA PARVA.)—
Continued,


The Brahmana said :-~


1. Regarding it is cited the ancient
story, O blessed one, of what the institution
is of the seven sactificing priests,


2. The nose, the eye, the tongue, the
skin, and the ear numbering the fifth, the
mind, and the undetstanding,—these are
the seven sacrificing priests standing dis-
tinctly from ove another.


3. Living in subtle space, they do not
perceive one-arother. Do you, O beautiful
one, know these sacrificing priests that are
seven by their nature.


The Brahmana’s wife said :—

4 How is it that living in subtle space,
these do not perceive one another? Wuat
ate their (respective) natures, Q holy one?
Do you tell me this, O lord,


The Brahmana said :—
' §. Not knowing the qualities is igno-
fance; while knowledge of the qualities is


- “37


tnowledge. These seven never succeed in
apprehending or knowing ‘the qualities of
one another. . ;

6. The tongue, the eye, the ear too, the
skin, the mind, asd the understanding, ds
not succeed in apprehending smelis, Ut is
the nose alone which apprehends them.


7. The nose, the eye, the ear too, the
skin, the mind, and the understanding,
never succeed in apprehendiny tastes. The
tongue alone apprehends them.


8 The nose, the tongue, the ear also,
the skin, the mind, and the uaderstandiny,
never succeed in apprehending colors, It
is the eye alone which apprelyends them.


g. The nose, the tongue, the eye too,
the ear, the understanding, and the mind,
never succeed in apprehending sensations
of touch. Ieis the skin aloue that appce-
hends them.


10. The aose, the tongue, the eve, the
skin, the mind, and the understanding,
neyec succeed in apprehending sounds. [t
is the ear alone which appretends then.


11. The nose, the tongue, the eye, the
skin, the ear, and the understanding, never
succeed in-appreheng doubt. It is the
mind which apprehends it.


12. The nose, the tongue, the eyé, the
skin, the ear, and the anind, never succeed
ia apprehending determination. It is the
understanding alone which apprehends it.

13. Regarding it is cited, O beautiful
lady, this aucient discourse between the
senses and the nsind.


The Mind said :—


tj—15. The nose does not smell with
out me. (Without me) the tongue does
not apprehend taste. The eye does not
perceive color, the skin does not feel touch,
the ear dues not apprehend sound, when
deprived of me. 1 am the eternal and
foremust one among all the elements.


16. tt always occurs that without my+
self, the seuses never sttine, like habita-
tions empty of inmates or fires whose flames
have been quenched.


17. Without me, all creatures cannot
apprehend qualities and objects, with even
the se-ses exerting themselves, as fuel that
is wet and dry cannot catch fice.


18. Hearing these words, the Senses
said, This what you think would be true,
if, you could enjoy pleasures without either
ourselves or our objects. - :

19—20. If, when we are no more, there
be gratification and support of life, and a
Continuation of your enjoymenuts, then what
you think wyuld be tue; or, i, when we


28


are absorbed and objects are existing, you
can’t have your enjoyments by your desire
alone, as truly as you have them with our
help, - : :

21, If, again, you consider your power
over our objects to be always complete, de
you then seize color by the nose, and taste
by the eye.


22. Do you also take smells by the ear,
and sensations of touch by thetengue, Do
you also take sounds by the skin, and like-
wise touch by the understanding.


23. The powerful do not acknowledge
the control of any rules. Rules exist only
for the weak. bo you seize enjoyments
unenjoyed before ; you should not enjoy
what has been tasted before (by others).


24—25. Asa disciple goes toa preceptor
for the sake of the Shrutis, and then, having
acquired the Shrutis, lives on their meaning,
so do you regard as yours those objects
which are shown by us, past or future, in
sleep or in wakefulness.


26. OF creatures, again, who have little
intelligence, when theic mind becomes
distracted and cheerleéss, fife is seen to be
‘upheld upon our objects discharging their
functions, ;


27. It is seen also that a creature, after
having made many purposes and indulged
in dreams, when afflicted by the desire
to enjoy, runs to objects of sense alone.


28. One entering upon
depending on purposes alone and uncon-
nected with actual objects of: sense, always
meets with death upon the exhaustion of
the vital airs, like an enkindled fire upon
the exhaustion of fuel. -


2g. True it is that we have connections
with our respective attributes; true it is,
we have no knowledge of one anothe’rs
attributes. But without us you can have
no perception. Without ws no happiness
can come to yon.


CHAPTER XXIIl.


(ANUGITA PARVA. )—
Continued,


The Brahmana said :—


1. Regarding it, O blessed lady, is cited
the ancient story of what kind the institution
is of the five saccificing priests.


2. The learned know this to be a great
principle that Prana and Apana and Udana
and Samana and Vyana are the five sacri-
icing priests.


enjoyments .


MAHABHARATA.


The Brahmana’s wife said :—


3. 1 naturally believed that there are
seven Sacrificing priests. Let the great
principle be declared to me as to how,
indeed, the number is five of the sacrificing
priests.


The Brahmana said :—


4. The wind nursed by Prana afterwards
takes birth in Apana. The wind nursed in
Apana then becomes developed into Vyana.


5. Nursed by Vyana, the wind is then
developed into Udana. Nursed in Udana,
the wind is then generated as Samana.


6. Those good beings formerly asked
the first-born Grandfather, sgying,—Do
you say who amongst us is the foremost.
He alone will be our chief.


—Brahman said :—


7. He upon whose extinction all the
vital airs become extinct in the bodies of
living creatures, he upon whose moving
they move, is, indeed, the foremost. Do
you go where you like.


Prana said :—


8. Upon my extinction all the vital airs
become extinct in the bodies of living
creatures. Upon my moving they once
more move. I am the foremost. See, I go
into extinction,


The Brahmana said :—


Q—10. Prana then became extinct and
once more moved about. Then Samana
and Udana also, O blessed one, said these
words,—You do not live here, pervading
all this, as we do. You are not the fore-
most amongst us, O Prana! (Only) Apana
is under your dominion !—Pgana then
moved about, and to him Apana spoke.


—Apana, said :— :

tr, When I become extinct, all the
vital airs become extinct in the bodies of
living creatures. When L[ move about,
they again move about. I am, therefore,
the foremost. See, 1 go into extinction,


The Brahmana said :—


12. To Apana who said so, both Vyana
and Udana said,—O Apana, you are not
the foremost. (Only) Prana is under your
dominion.


13. Then Apana began to move about.
Vyana once more addressed him, saying,—
1 am the foremost of all,, Listen, for what
reason. 7


14. When I become extinct, all the
vital airs become extinct in the bodies!


ASHWAMEDHIA PARVA. _


living creatures. When I move about, they
once more move about, I am (therefore)
the foremost. See, I go into extinction,


The Brahmana said :—

15-17. Then Vyana became extinct
and once mare began to move about. At
this, Prana and Apana and Udana and
Samana addressed him, saying,—-You are
not the foremost among us, O Vyana !
(Only) Samana is under your dominion.—
Vyana then -began to move about. and
Samana said to him,—! am the foremost
of you all! Listen, for what reason.> When
i become extinct, all the vital airs become
extinct in the bodies of living creatures.
When I begin to move about, they once
more move about, Hence, I am the foremost.
See, I become extinct. ae


18. Then Samana began to move about.
To him Udana said,I am the foremost of
all the vital airs, Listen, for what reason,


19, When I become extinct, all the vital
airs become extinct in the bodies of living
creatures. When I move about they once
more move about. Hence, 1 am the fore-
most. Behold I become extinct. ‘


20. Then Udana, after having become
extinct, began to once more move about.
Prana and Apana and Samana and Vyana
said ta bim,—O Udana, you are not the
foremost one among us, (Only) Vyana is
under your dominion. .


The Brahmana said:— - ,

2t. To them assembled together, the
Lord of creatures, Brahman, said,—~Ye are
all foremost and not foremost. Ye are alt
gifted with the attributes of one another,


22, -All are foremost in their own
spheres, and all possess the attributes of
ene another !—The Lerd of all creatures,
thus. said ta them, thas were assembled
together. a :


23, There is one that is unmoving, and
one that is moving; ‘On account of special
attributes, there are five vital airs. My
own self is one, That one accumulates
into many forms. .


24. Becoming friendly to one another,
and pleasing one another, depart in peace,
Blessings to.ve. do ve un held one another.


CHAPTER XXIV.


‘( ANUGITA PARVA. )=
Continued.


The Brahmana said :— -


1. Regarding it is cited the ancient diss
course between Narada and the Rish?
Devamata.


Devamata said:— ~

2. What, indeed, comes first into exist«
ence, of a creature that takes birth? Is
it.Prana, or Apava, or Samana, or Vyana,
or Udana ? t


Narada said :— .


By whatever the creature is created,
that first comes to him which is othér, ‘The
vital airs are to be known as existing ia
pairs, o¢s., those which move transversely,
upwards, and downwards. a


Devamata said :— ;

4. By whom is a creature produced ?
Who (amongst) them comes first? ‘Tell
me what the pairs are of the vital airs,
which move transversely, upwards, and
downwards.


Narada said :—


5- From wish originates Pleasure. It
also arise from sound. It arises ‘also. from
laste; it arises too from color.


- 6 From the semen, united with blood,
first originates Prana. Upon the semen
being modified by Prana, flows Apana.


7. Pleasure originates from the semen
as well. It arises from -taste also. This
is the form (effect) of Udana. Pleasure is
produced from union.


8—9: Semen is formed by desire. From
desire is produced the menstrual flow. In
the’ ynion of semen and blood, generated
by Samana and Vyana, the pair that con;
sists of Prana and Apana, enters, moving
transversely and upwards. Vyana and
Samana both form a pair which move
transversely. : 7.


ro Agni (fire) is.all the.celestials, This
is the teaching of the. Veda. -The know,
ledge of Agni arises in a Brahmana, with
intelligence. _ :

10. ‘The smoke of that fire is’ of the
form of Darkness. The quality that is
known by the name of Passion is in its
ashes. The quality of goodness originates
from that portion ef the fire into which the -
oblatidn is- poured, a

11. They who are conversant with
sacrifices know that Samana and Vyana


30


“are from the quality of Goodness.
and Apana are portions of the oblation
(et cla:ified butter), Between them is the
+iTe.


12. That is the ‘excellent form (or seat)
of Udana, as the Beahmanas know. Listen
as | say which is distinct from the pairs.


“13. Day and Night form a pair. Be-

tween them is the Fire. That is the
excellent seat of Udana as the Brahmanas
Know.


14. The existent and the non-existent
form a paic. Between them is the Fire.
That is the excellent seat of Udana as
the Brahmanas know.


15. First is Samana. Then Vyana. The
latter’s function is managed through it
(vi#., Samana). Then, secondly, Samana,
ounce more comes to work,


16. Only Vyana exists for tranquillity.
Tranquillity is eternal Brahma, This ts
the excellent seat of Udana asthe Brah-
manas know, ; ee


Ce manana


CHAPTER XXV.


(ANUGITA PARVA.j—
Continued,


The Brahmana said : —


1. Regarding it‘is recited the ancient
story of what the institution is of the
Chaturhotra (sacrifice). ; .


2. The ordinances are now being duly
declared in fail. Listen to me, O faic lady,
as [ describe this wonderful mystery. :


3- The instrument, the action, the agent
and liberation,—these, O beautiful lady,
are the four sacrificing priests by whom
the universe is covered,


4—7. Hear fully of causes. The noise,
the tongue, the eye, the skin, the ear for
the fifth, the mind and the understanding—
these seven should be understood as the
cause§ of qualities. Smell, taste,. color,
sound, touch, numbering the fifth, the ob-
jects of the mind, and the objects of the
understanding,—these are the seven causes
of action. :
who sees, he who speaks, be who hears,
numbering the filth, he who thinks, and he
who understands,—these seven should be
known as the causes of action. Endued
with qualities, these enjoy their own quali-
ties, agreeable or disagreeable.

8—g. As regards the soul, that is des-
titute of qualities. ‘nese seven are the
causes of Liberation, With them who are


Prana


| going on as regards myself.


He who smells, he who eats, he


MAHABHARATA.


learned and gifted with sufficient under
standing, the qualities, which are in the
position of celestials, eat the oblations, each
tn its proper place, and according to what
has been ordained. The person who is
shorn of learning, eating various kinds of
food, becomes seized with the sense of
egoism.

10. Digesting food for himself, he be-
comes tuined through the sense of egoisin
The eating of food that should not be eaten
and the drinking of wine, ruin him.


aur. He destroys the food (he takes), and
having destroyed that food he becomes
destcroyed himself. ‘The learned man, how-
ever, gifted with power, destroys his food
for reproducing it.


12—14. The minutest sin does not arise
in him from the food he takes. Whatever
is thought of by the mind, whatever is
uttered by words, whatever is heard by the
ear, whatever is seen by the eye, whatever
is touched by touch, whatever is smelt by
the nose, form oblations of clarified butter
which should all, after controlling the
senses with the mind numbering the sixth,
be poured into that fire of high merits
which burns within the body, vés., the Soul.


15. The sacrifices formed by Yoga is
The spring
whence that sacrifice proceeds is that which
gives the fire of knowledge. The upward
vital air Prana is the Stotea of that sacri-
fice. ‘The downward vital air Apana is its
Shastra. The renunciation of everything
is the excellent present of that sacrifice.


16. Consciousness, Mind, and Under-«
standing, which are all Beahma,: are ‘its
Hotri, Adhwaryyu, and Udgatri. The
Prashastri, his Shastra, is truth. Cessation
of separate existence (or Emancipation) is
the Honorarium.


17. -People conversant with Narayana,
recite some Richs on this subject. Hormer-
iv animals were offered to the divine
Narayana.


18. Then are sung some Samans. There
is an authority on this subject. O timid
one, know that the divine Narayana is the
Soul of all.


CHAPTER XXVI.
(ANUGITA PARVA,)—
Continueda«


The Brahmana said :-—
1. There is one Ruler. There is no
second beside him. He who is Raler lives


ASUWAMEDHA PARVA.


in the heart. I shail speak now of him.
Moved by Him, I move as directed hke
water along an inclined plane.


2. There is one Preceptor. There is no
second but him. He lives in the heart, and
of him I shall now speak. Instructed by
that preceptor, ali snakes in the world are
always possessed of feelings of enmity.


3: There is ‘one kinsman. There is no
second except him. He lives in the heart
of him I shall now speak. Instructed by
him, kinsmen become possessed . of kins-
men, and the seven Rishis, O son of
Pritha, shine in the sky. :


4. Thereis one dispeller. There is no
second but him. He lives in the heart.
Of him I shall now speak. Having lived
with that instructor, under the proper mode
of living with an instructor, Shakra gained
the sovereignty of all the worlds.


5. There is one enemy. There is no
second but him. He tives inthe heart. Of
him I shall now speak. Instructed by that
preceptor all snakes in the world are always
possessed of feelings of enmity.


6. Regarding it is cited the ancient story |
of the instruction of the snakes, the celes-
tials, and the Rishis by the Lord of all
Creatures.


7—8. The celestials and the Rishis, the
snakes and the Asuras, seated around the
Lord of all creatures, asked hiin, saying ,—
Let that which is highly beneficial for us’
be said.— To them who enquired about. what
is highly beneficial, the holy one uttered
only the word Om, which is Brahma in one
syllable. Hearing uhis, they ran away in
Vativus directions, won

9. Amongst them: that thus ran in all
directions from: desire of self-insteuction,
the tendency for biting first arose in’ snakes. 4


to, Fhe tendency for ostentatious pride
first arose in the ‘Asuras. ‘The celestials:
betook themselves: to gifts, aud the great
Rishis to self-control. -


tt. Having gone to one teacher, and
having been instructed (refined) by one
word, the snakes, the celestials, the Rishis,
and the Danavas, all betook themselves to
various different dispositions. :

. att y

12, It is that one who hears himself
when speaking, and understands it dulyg
Once, again, is that heard from bim when
he speaks. There is no second preceptor.


13. It is in obedience to his advice. that
action afterwards originates. “The instruc-
tor, the appreheader, the hearer, and the
enemy, ate placed within the heart.


14. By acting sinfully in the world, it is


ai


By acting auspiciously in the world,i is he
who becomes a person of auspicious de eds.

1. It is he who becomes a person of
controlled conduct by becoming addicted
to the plessures of sense, moved by ‘desire,
It is he who becomes a. Brahmacharin
by always devoting himself te the control
of his senses.


16. It.is he, again, who casts off vows.
and actions and takes fefuge on Brahma
alone. By moving in-the world, ena
ing himself the while with Brahma, he
becomes a Brahmachatin. .

17. Brahma is his fuel; Brahma is his
fice; Brahma is his origin; Biahma is his
water; Brahma is his preceptor ; he is ime


. Merged in Brahma.


18. Brahmacharyya is even so subtle,
as undgrstood by the wise. Having under-
stood u, they followed it, instructed by the


Kshetrajna,


CHAPTER XXVIL


{(ANUGITA PARVA. )—
Continued.


The Brahmana said :— -


1—2. Having crossed that impassable
fortress (of the world) which has putposes
for its padflies and musquitoes, grief and
joy for its cold and heat, heedlessness for
its blinding darkness, cupidity and diseases
for its reptiles, wealth for its one danger
on the road, and lust and atyer its robbers,
I have entered the ,extensive . forest (of
Brahina).


The wife of the Brahmana said :—:


3. Wrere is that foremost, O vou of
great wisdom ? What are its trees ? What
are its rivers? What its mountains and
hills? How far is that forest?


*
The Brahmana said :— |

4. There exists nothing that is senarate
from it. There is nothing more delightful
than it. ‘There is nothing that is une
separated from it, “There is nothing more
afflicting than it.‘ ~

5. There is nothing smaller than that.
There is nothing huger than that. There
is nothing minuter than that. There is no
happiness that can resemble it.

6. ‘Twice-born persons, entering into it,
at once get over both joy and sorrow,
They (then), never stand in fear of any
creature, noc docs any creature stand in


6 whe becomes 4 person of sinful deeds. , feat of them,


32


3. Wn that forest ara seven large trees,
seven fruits, and seven guests. There are
seven hermitages, seven (forms of) Yoga
concentration, and seven (forms) of initia~
tion. ‘This is a description of that forest.


8. The trees which stand filling that
forest, yield excellent flowers and fruits of
five colors. .


g. The trees which stand there filling
that forest, yield flowers and fruits which
are of excellent colors and which are,
besides, of two kinds. :


to, The trees which stand there Alling
that forest, yield fragrant flowers and fruits
of two colors. : ;


11. The trees which stand there filing
that forest, yield fragrant flowers and fruits
of one color, - ' :


12. ‘The two trees which stand illing
that forest, produce many flowers and fruits
which are of unmanifest colors. ~


13. There is one fire here, possessed of
a good mind, That is connected with
Brahman. The five senses are the fuel
here. The seve forms of Liberation ori-
pisating trom them are the seven forms of
vitiation. The qualities are the fruits,
and the guests eat those fruits.


14. There, in various ‘places, the great
Rishis accept hospitality. When they,
having been adored become annihilated,
then another forest shines forth,


18. In that forest, Intelligence .is the
tree; Liberation is the fruit; Tranquillity
js the shade of which it is possessed.. It
has knowledge for its resting house, cone
tentment for its water, and the Kshetrajna
For its sun.


16. Its end cannot be determined up=
wards, downwards, or horigontally.


tz. Seven females always live there,
with faces downwards, endued with efful-
gence, and the cause of generation. They
take up all the different tastes from all
palette even as instonstancy sacks up
truth. . :


18.
emerge, the seven Rishis who are crowned
with ascetic success, having Vashishtha
for their foremost,


tg. Glory, effulgence, greatness, en-
lightenment; victory, perfection, and
energy,—these seven always follow this
same like rays following the sun.


zo. Hills and mountains also exist
there, in a body; and rivers and steams
carrying waters in their course, waters
that are born of Brahma.


In that itself live, and from that :


MAHABHARATA,


zt. And there is a confluence also of
rivers In the secluded spot for sacrifice,
‘Thente those who are contented with theit’
own souls proceed to the Grandfather,


22. They whose wishes have been re-
duced, whose wishes have been directed:
to excellent vows,: and whose sins have
been consumed by penances, merging
themselves in their souls, succeed in attain-
to Brahma.


23. Tranquillity is lauded by those who
ate Conversant with the forest of know-
ledge. Keeping that forest in view, they
take birth so as not to lose courage.

24. Such is that sacred forest that is
understood by Brahmanas, and = under<
standing it, they live as directed by the
Kshetrajna,


CHAPTER XXVIIL.


(ANUGITA PARVA,)=
Continued.


The Brahmana said :—

t.. J do not smell scents. {do not get
tastes, I donot see colors. { do not like»
wise hear the variotis sounds Nor do I ene
tertain purposes of any kind.


2.. Ie is Nature which desires such ob-.
jects as-are liked it is Nature which hates
such objects as are disliked. Desire and
hatred originate from Nature, like the
upward and the downward vital airs when
souls have entered animate bodies.


3. Separated from then ard others; in
them are eternal dispositions; Yogins
would see in the body, the soul of all
creatures. Living .in ‘that, I am never
attached to anything through desire and
anger, and decrepitude and death, '

4.: Not having any desire for.any object.
of desire, and not having any hatred for.
any evil, there is no taint. on my natures,
as there is no taint of a drop of water on
the lotus.


5—6 OF this fixed (principle) which.
looks upon various natures, they are fickle
possessions. Thotigh actions ate per-
pe: yet the collection of enjoyments

oes not attach itself to them, as the collec@
tion of rays of the sun does not attach to
the sky. Regarding it is recited an ancient
discourse between ati Adhwaryu and a
Yati. Do you heat it, O gtorious lady.

7- Seeing an animal sprinkled with
water at a sacrifice, a Yati said to the
Adhwaryu seated there these words. in--
, censure,—-This is destruction of life. .”


AS. WAMEDILA PARVA.


.


8. Yo thn the Adhwaryu replied —~ Fhis
Roat will not be destroyed. The animal
meets with great good. if the Vedic de-
clacation on this subject be true.


g. That part of this animal which is of
earth will go to earth, That pact of this
one which is of water, will enter into water.


10, His eye will enter the sun: his ear
will enter the various points of the horizon;
his vital airs will enter the sky. 1 who
foltow the scriptures commit no sin.


The Yati said :—


tr. If you see such good to the goat in
this dissociation with (his} vital airs, then
this sacrifice is for the goat. What need
have you for it? oa ;

2. Let the brother, father, mother, and
friend give you their approval in this.
Taxing bia (te them) do you co sult them.
This goat is especially dependent,

13 You should see them who can give
them consent in this. After hearing their
consent, the matter will become a worthy
topic for consideration.


14. The vital afrs of ‘this goat have been
made to return to their respective sources.
Only the inanimate body remains belind.
Thuis is what Lb think,


1§. Of those who wish to enjoy pleasure
by means of the inanimate body (af an
animal) which can be compared with fuel,
the fuel (of sacrifice) is after all the animal
hirnselt.


16. Abstention from cruelty is the fore-
most of all duties. This is the teaching of
the elders. We know that ne cruel action
should be done. ,


17. This is the proposition, ofs..—-No
Gesteuction ‘(of living creatures. —If [say
anything further, then various kinds of
faulty actions are capable of being dune
by you.


_ 18, Always abstaining from cruelty to
all creatwes is what is lauded. e
establish this from what is duectly per-
Ceptible, We do not rely on what is bes
youd direct perception. ;


The Adhwaryu said:

1920. You enjoy the properties of
smell which belong to the earth. You
drink the tastes which belong to water.
You see colors which belong to tuminous
bodies. You touch the properties which
originate from wind, you hear the sounds
which originaté from ether: You think
thoughts witlr the miad. . Alk these entities,
you hold, have life. ste


5


er neem nn eR A


3


Ww


21. VYowdo not then abstain from taking
life, Really, you are engaged in slaughter.
There can be no movement without des
truction.. Or, what do you think, O twice-
born one,


The Yati said :—

22. Yhe Indestructible and the Des-
tructible form the twofold manifestation
of the soul. Of these the Indestructible is
existent. The Destructible is said to be
exceedingly non-existent. °

23—24, The vitat air, the tongue, the
mind, the quality of goodness, along with,
the quality of passion, are all existent, Of
him who is freed fram these existent ab-
jects, who is above all pairs of opposites,
who does not cherish any expectation, who
is alike to all creatures, who ts freed from
the idea of mineness, wha has governed his
self,. and who, is released fiom all ‘his
surroundings, no fear exists fiom any
source,


The Adhwarynu said :—


25. O foremost of intelligent men, one
should live with the good. Hearing your
opinion my understanding shines with light.


26. O ithstrious one, I come to you,
believing mn to be a gods and [| say f
have ne fauft, O twice-horn one, by pet-
forming . these cites
Mantras,


The Brahmana gaid:—

27. With this conclusion, the Vati re
miined silent after this, Vhe Adhwaryu
also went on with the great sac: ifice, freed
from delusion,


28. The Beahmanas understand Libera-
tion, which is exceedingly, subtle, to be
of this kind; and, having understood it,
they five. accordingly, directed by the
Kshetrajna, that seec of all topics. i


with the heip of


‘Rercemeraentinmcmtiy


CHAPIER XXIX.


(ANUGLIFA PARVA)— —
; Continned., a


The Brahmana said :—

1. About it is cited the ancient story,
O lady, of the discourse betwee Karttas
viryya and the Ocean.

‘2. ‘There was a king named Karttae
viryya-Aijana who had a thougind arms,
He conquered, with His tow, the Eatht «
extending tothe ocean,


34°


MAHABHARATA.


3. We have beard that, onoe on a time, | begotten by the Brahmanas upon Kshatciya


as he was walking on the shores of the sea,
proud of his power, he showered hundreds
of- arrows on that vast receptacle of waters.


4. The Ocean, bowing down to him,
aad with joined hands,—Do not, hero,
dis_ srged your arcows (at me) ! Say, what
shall } do-to you.

S$. With these strong arrows shot by you,
those creatures which have taken shelter in
ing ave being killed, O foremost of kings!
Do you, QO Jord, grant them security,


Arjona said :—~


6. Jf any holder of the bow exists that
is equalto me ia battle, and that would
stand against me in the field, do you name
him to me.


The Ocean said :—

7. T€ you have heard, O king, of the
great Rishi Jamadagni, his son is competent
to ditly receive you as a guest.


8, Ther that king proceeded, becoming
highly irate, Arrived at that hermitage, he
found Rama himself,


g. With his kinsmen he began to do
many deeds while were hostile to Rama,
and caused much trouble to that great hero.


10. Then the energy, which was im-
measurable, of Rama shone forth, burning
the troeps of the enemy, OU loias-eyed one.


ti, Taking up his. battleeaxe, Rama
suddenly displayed his power, and hacked
that thousand-armed hero, like a tree of
many branches.


12. Seeing him killed and laid fow on
the earth, alt his kinsmen, collected ina
hody, and taking up their darts, rushed at
Rama, who was then seated, frour all sides.


13.. Rama also, taking up his bow and
quickly getting on his car, ‘discharged
snowers cf arrows and punished the army
of tne ining.

14. Then, some of the Kshatriyas,
streken wih the terror of Jamadagni’s
son, entered monntain-fastnesses, like deer
afflicted by the lion.


13. Of them that were unable, through
fear of Rama, to perform the duties ordain-
ed for their order, the progeny became
Vrishalas owing to theic inability to find
Brahmanas.  *


16. Uhus the Dravidas and Abhiras and
Pondras, together with the Shavaras, be-
came Vrishalas through those men who
had Kshatriye duties assigned to them, fall-
ing away (from them). :


17.


women who had lost their heroic children,
were repeatedty destroyed by Jamadagni’s
son.


18—19. The destruction proceeded ons
and twenty times. At its conclusion 2
boditess voice, sweet and co:ning from the
celestial region, and which was heard
by alt peopte, spoke to Rama,—O Rama,
OQ Rama, stop! What merit do you see,
O son, ‘in thus destrcying repeatedly these
inferior Kshatriyas 7

20, Thus, O blessed dame, his grand-
sires, headed by Richika, addressed that
great one, saying,—Do you, desist.

2t. ‘Rama, however, unable to forgive
the destructiot: of his father, replied to those
Rishis, saying, you should not forbid me. -


22. ‘The departed manes then said,—
O foremost of all victorious men, . you
should not kill these inferior Kshatriyas }
It is -not proper that your self, being a
Brahmana, should kill these kings.


CHAPTER XXX.


( ANUGITA PARVA. )—
Continued.


The Pitris said :—


i. Regarding it is cited this ofd, history.
Having heard n, you showd act accad-
ing to it, O foremost -of all iwice-born
Persons.

2. There was a royal sage, named of
Alaka gifed with the austerest of penances,
He anew all duties, was trythful in speech,
of high soul, and exceedingly firm in big
vows. Having with his bow, conquered the
whole Earth extending to the seas, and
theseby performed a highly difficult feat, he
set his mind on that which is subile.


4. While sitting at the roet of a tree,
his thoughts, O you of great intelligence,
abandoning alt those great deeds, tutned
towards that which is subule !


Alarka said :—


5 My mind = has become strong.
Having conquered the mind, one's cats
quest becomes permanent. Though sur-
rounded by enemies, F shalt (henceforth)
discharge myy arrows at other objects.

6. Since on account of ‘its uasteadiness,
it sets all mortals to per orm acts, f shalt
shoot very Sharp-pointed arrews at tig


Tien the Kshkatriyas that were | mind!


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA.


The mind said :—


7. These arrows, O Alarka, ‘will"never
cut me through, They will pierce only
your own vital parts. Your vital parts
being pierced, you shall die.


8. Do you Inok out for other arrows
with which to kill me!—Hearing these
‘words and and reflecting upon them, he
said as follows.


Alarka said :—


9. Smelling many perfumes, ‘(the’ nose)
hankers after them only. Hence I shall
discharge whetted arrows at the nose.


The nose said :—


10. ‘These arrows will never pass through
me, O Alarka!l ‘They will pierce only
your own vital parts, and your vital parts
being pierced, you shall die.


tr. Do you look for other arrows with
which to destroy me !—Hearing these
words and thinking upon, them, he said
as follows.


Alarka said :—


12. This one enjoying savoury tastes,
hankers after them only. Hence 1 shall
discharge whetted arrows at the tongue.


The tongue said :—

13. These arrows, °O Alarka,* will not
cut through me. They will only pierce
your own fvital parts and your vital parts
being pierced, you shall die.


14. Do you look for other arrows with
which to kill me!—Hearing these words


and thinking upon them, he said as
follows.
Alarka said :— é


15. The skin, touching various objects
of itouch, hankers after them only. Hence,
I shall tear off the ski with various arrows
equipt with the feathers of the Kanka,.


The skin said :—


16. ‘these arrows will not, O Alarka,
pass through me. They will pierce your
ewn vital pacts only, and your vital pacts
being pierced, you shall die.


17. Do you look for other arrows with
which to kill me!—Hearing these words
aad thinking on them, be said as follows.


Alarka said:

8. Hearing various sounds, (the ear)
hankers after them only, Hence, { shall
discharge whetted shafts at the car.


35


Theearsaid:- . .

"49. These arraws wil not, GQ Alacka
pass through me, They will pierce your
own vital parts only, and your vital parts
being pierced, you shail die.


20. Do you then look for other arrows
with which to kill me!—Hearing these
words and thinking upon then, he said as
follows,


Alarka said :—

2t. Seeing many colors, the eye longs
for them only. Hence, I shall destcoy the
eye with sharp-pointed arrows.


The eye said :—

2a. These arrows will not, O Alarka,
pass through me at all. They will piecce
your own vital parts ‘only, and your vital -
parts being cut, you shall die. =.


23. Do you then look for other arrows
with which to «ill mel—Hearing these.
words and reflecting upon them, he said
as follows. ‘


Alarka said :— |

24. {his forms many determinations
with the help of ratiocination. Hence, f
shall discharge whetted acrows at the
understanding.


The understanding said :—


25. These arrows will not, O Alarka,
pass through .me at all, “hey will pierce
your vital parts only, and your vital parts
being pietced, you shall die. Do you then
look for other arrows with which to kill me.


The Brahmana said :— ;
26. Then Alarka, engaging himself, even
there, on penances difficult to perform and
greatly austere, failed to obtain, by the high
power (of his penances) arrows for casting
at these seven. ‘


2728. Gifted with power, he then, with
mind well concentrated, began to reflect.
Then, O best of twice-born ones, Alarka,
that foremost of intelligent men, havisg
thought for a long time, could not obtain
anything better than Yoga. Setting his
mind on one object. he remained perfectly
stil, eagaged in Yoga. foe


29. Gifted with energy, he speedily kill-
ed all the senses with one arrow, having
entered by Yoga into tis squl and thereby
acquired the highest success.


30. Stricken’ with wonder, that royal
sage then sang this verse: Alas it isa
pity that we should have performed alt acts
that are external,


te
2Qo


“1 3h _ Alas, that -we: shontd “have, ‘gifted
wittt the thirst for enjoyment, - courted
soveretunty before now ! k have learnt this
afterwards! There is no happiness that is
higher than Yoga.


32. Do you know this, O Rama! r Cease
to kill the Kshatriyds! Do you practise
the austerest of penances! You wel then
altain to what is good.


33. ‘Thus addressed by ‘his grandfathers,
Jamadagni’s | son performed the atsterest
“penances, and having practised them, that
“highly blessed one‘ acquired ‘that success
whicly i is d ffi: ult to. reacn.


CIIAP TER XXXE


(ANUGI ra’ PARVA).—
Continued.


The Brahmana said :—


t. There are three enemies in the world..
They are said to be ninefold, according-
‘to their qualities. Exultation, ‘satisfaction,
‘and joy,—these three qualities belong to
Goodness,


2. Cupidity, anger and hatred, | these-
three qualitids-; resid to belong” Duarkness,
Lassitude, procrastination and delusion,
these three qualities belong to lynorance.


3- Cutting these with showers of arrows,
the tcellivent man, free  frour idleness
possessed of a tranquil soul, and with his
senses under control, vertures, to- defeat:
others.


4. “Abont it, persons conversant with
anciéat cycles recite some verses which were
su g ‘forinerly by king Amwvarisha who had
acquited a tranquil svul.


5. When various kinds of faults were

reigning suprenre and when the‘ righteous

- were afflicted, the iHustrious Amvarisha

put forth his ‘strength for assuming sov-
. ereignty. "ee.

‘6, Subduing his own faults and adoring

bh righteous, he acquired feat success and
‘g hese verses.


7. 1 have controlled many ‘faults. I have
‘shan al enemies. But there is one, the
yreatest, vice which deserves te be des-
troyed but which has not been destroyed
by me.

8. Urged by that fault, this individual
soul fails to attain to fr eedoin from desire. -
Possessed by dese, one runs into ditches
without knowing it. :


og. Urged by that fault, one induiges i in|


- forbidden deeds.


-suddenly. overwhelmed


MARABUARATAY


D>» you cut off, ent off,
that cupidity with sharp-edged swords.


to. From cupidity originates desire.
From desire orivinstes anxiety. “The mar
who yields to desire acquires nrany qu ilities
which belong to Darkness,


tr.) When thesé have been acquired, he
gets many qualities which belong to lye
norance.


12. On account of the qualities, he re-
peatedly takes birth, with the fetters of
body united, and is moved to action. Upon
the expiration of hfe, with body becoming
separ.ted and seattered, he once mreets witht
ceath which is due to birth itself.

13...
govei ning


Hence, duhy understanding this, and
‘cupidity by inteMizence, one


I shoukd glesire for sovereignty in bis sonb.


There is no


The soul properly


his is (true) sovereignty.
other sovereiynty here,
understood, is the king,


14. Even these were the verses sung by
the iHastrious king Amvarista, on the sub+
ject of sovereignty which he kept before
him,—that king who had severed the one
foremost fault, vis , eupidity.


CHAPTER XXXIE°


(ANUGITA PARVA }—=
Continued.


The Brahmana said :—


t. Regarding it is cited the ald dis-
course between &@ Brahmana _and- fking)>
Janaka.


2. King Janaka (on a certain occasion),
desirous of punishing him said to a Brah-
mana who had become guikty of some
offence,—You shall not live within my
dominions. e


3. Phus addressed, the Brahmana re-
plied to that best of kins, saying,— [clk
me, O king, what the Yimits “are of the
territories subfsct to you.


g | wish, O lord,
dominrons of anather ae
to obey your command, O
to the scriptures.


5. Thus addressed by that ‘eccbrarea
Brahmana, the -king, hearing repeated and
hot sizhs, said not a-word in reply.

6. Like the planet. (Rahu) possessing
the San, ‘a. clouudedness of understanding
that king of in-
compasabk-euecgy as he sat plunged in
thought


to tive whhin the
‘ Firdeed, [ wish
» King, mecordii


ASHWAMEDHA PAKVA, 37


-7. When: that cloudedness of: under-


*‘anding: departed and the king became.
. comforted, he spoke after a short time.


these words tu that Brahmana.


Janaka said :—


8. Although a (large) inhabited domi-
nion is Subject to me within this ancestral
kingdom of mine, yer I fail to find my
dominion, searching through the whole
TE arth, eee


9. When I could not find it on the


Earth, I then searched Mithila (for it).
When I could not find it in Mithila, I then
searched for it among my own children.”


_ Io. When I could not find it even there,
a cloudedness of understanding came over
me. After that cloudedness of understand-
ing departed, intelligence came back to me.


_ ir .Then 1 thought that I have no
dominion, or that everything is my domi-
nion, This body is not mine, or the whole
Earth is mine.


12. Atthe same time, O-best of twice-
born persons, I think that that is as much
mine as it is of others. Do you,, therefore,.
live (here) as long as your choice leads
you, and do you enjoy as long as yeu.
please.


The Brahmana said :—~

13. When there is a large inhabited
tract in your ancestral kingdom, tell me,
depending upon what understanding, ‘has
the idea ef mineness been got rid of by
you. a et eee
14. What also is that understanding.
depending upon which you have come to
the, conclusion that everything forms your
dominion ? What, indeed, is the notion
through which you have no dominion; : or
everything is your dominion ?


. Janaka said :— ti


15. All conditions here, in all affairs,

1 understand, are liable.to come to an, end.

Hence, [ could not find that which should
- be ealled mine, -


16. (Considering) whose is this, 1 thought


* of tlie Vedié text about anybody’s property.


I could not, therefore, find, trough my
understanding, what stwuld be (called)
mine. .


ee © Pe Depending upon. this notion, I got
rid of the idea of mfneness... Hear now
what that notign is depending upon which I
arrived at the Paes that I have domi-
nion everywhere. -


as


18. I do not wish for my own ‘selé those
smells which are even in my ose, “ There-


A


fore, the earth, subjugated by me,. is always
under_« me.


tongue. ee water, pp sans by
‘me, is always under me.


20, ‘1 do-not wish for my,own self the


color or light which belongs to my eye.


‘Therefore, light subjngsted by me, is al-
always under me.


_ 21. I do not wish for my ows self those
sensations of touch Which are in. contact
with even my skin. Therefore, the wind,
subjugated by me, is always under me.


22. I do not wish for own self those
sounds, which are in contact with even my
ear. Therefore, sounds, suvjugated by me,
are always under me,


. 23. 1 do not wish for my own self the
mind that is always in iny mind. ‘Vhere-
fore the mind, subjugated by me, is under
me.


24. Alt these. acts of mine jare for the
sake of the celestials, the departed manes,
the Bhuttas, together with guests.


25, ‘The Brahmana then, smiling, once
more said to Jinaka—Know that [ am
Dharma, who come here to-day fos examine
ing yous


26.’ You are indeed the one person for
setting this wheel in motion,—this wheel
‘that has, the quality of Goodness. fer its
circumference, Brahma for its nave, and
the understanding for its spokes,’ and which
' never turns back ! 8


|... CHAPTER XXXII.
(ANUGITA PARVA. )—
Continued, ,


The Brahmana said :—


1. Ido not, O, timid one, move ‘in this
world in the manwer which you, according
to your own understanding, censure. bam
a Brahmana endued with Vedie knowledge.
| am liberated... 1 am a hermit, I foltew the
duties of a householder. f observe vows.


2. Lam not what you see me in good
and bad deeds.-1 pervaded eyegtbing
that exists in this universe.


3. [ am the destroyer of ‘all’ creatures
that exist in the world, mobile or’ immobile,
as’ me déstroys' all: kinds of wodd.


* Sovereignty over the whole Earth or.
Soe r the Heaven can be compared with this
knowledge of. my ‘onénéss™ with the unt
verse). - This snowledae isiny wealth,


.


nN


38


This is the one path for Brahmanas


MAHABHARATA. -


Those whose understandings have not been


‘hy which they who usderstand it proceed / so purified consider that entity, through


to domesticity, o¢ abodes in the forest, or
residence with preceptors, among mendi-
cants. y ;


-'6. With numerous uncenfused symbols,
only one knowledge is adored. ‘Phose who,
‘whatever the symbols and modes of life
which they follow, have acquired an under-
‘standing having tranquillity for its essence,
attain to that one entity as numerous rivets
ail meeting the Ocean.


7. ‘This path can be trodden with the
help of the understanding and not of the
bedy. Actions have both beginning and
end, and the body fias actions for its fetters.

8. Hence, O blessed tady, you need
have no fear about the world to come. With
youc heart intent upon the real abject, it
is my seul inte which yoa will come!


mes.


CHAPTER “XXXIV.


(ANUGITA PARVA)J—
Continued,


The Brahmana’s wife said :—
1. This cannot be understood by a weak-
‘minded persen as also by one whose sout
has not been purified. My intelligence is
very little, and contracted, and confused.


a. Tell me the means by which the
“knowledge may ‘be acquired, I wish to learn
from you the source from which this know-
ledge comes,


The Brahmana’s said :—


3. Know that intelligence about Brahma
is the lower Arani; the preceptor is the
upper ‘Aratti; penances and conversance


with the scriptures are what make attrition, |


From this is originated the fire of know-
ledge. .


‘The Brahmana’s wife said :—~
4. About this symbol of Brahma, which
is designated (Kshetrajna, where, indeed,
is a description of it by which it is capable
of being seized ?


The Brahmana said :—


§. Heis without symbols, and without
qualities, Nothing exists that may be con-
sidered as his cause. I shall, however,
tell you ‘the means by. which he can be
apprehended or not.

6. A good means may be found ; which
fs perceived as by bees. That means cansists
of ;an understanding purified by action.


their own ignorance, as invested with the
properties of knowledge and others.


Icis not laid dawn that this should
be done, or that this shoul i not ve done, in
the rules for acquiring Lib-ration,—those
that is, in which a knowledge of the soul
originates only in him wire sees and hears.


8. One should understand as many parts,
unmanifest and manifest, by hundreds and
thousands, as one is capable of compre-
hending here.

9. Indeed, one should comprehen!
various objects of various significancies, ard
all objects of direct perception. Then
will come, from practice, that above which
nothing exists.


The holy one said :— _

lo. ‘Then the mind of that Brahmana’s
wife, wpon the destructian of the Kshetrajna,
became that which is beyond Kshetrajna,
on account of the knowledge of Kshetra.


Arjuna said :—

tt. Where, indeed, is that Brahmana’s
wife, O Krishna, and where is that fore-
most of Brahmanas, by both of whom was
such success acquired. ‘Tell me about them
O you of undecaying glory. ; :


‘The blessed and holy one said :-—


12 My mind is the Bratmana, and that
my understanding is the Brahmana’s wife.
He who has been spoken of as Kshetrajna
is | myself, O Dhananjaya,


eoeiat


CHAPTER XXXV.


(ANUGITA PARVA).—
Continued.


Arjuna said:— .

1. You should explain Brahma to me,—«
that which is the highest object of know-
ledge. Through your favour, my mind is
‘delighted with these subtle disquisitions.


Vasudeva said :— Ee


2. Regarding it is recited the old dis-
course’ between a preceptor and his dis-
ciple-on the subject of Brahma. 7


3- Once on a time, @ destroyer - of


‘enemies, an intelligent {disciple questioned


a certain Brahmana of rigid vows who was
preceptor, as he. was. seated, -saying,—


What, indeed, is the highest good’?


ASHWAMEDHA PaRvA,


4. Desirous of acquiring that which
forms the highest good, { throw myself at
your feet, O holy one! O learned Brah-
mana, I solicit yeu, bending my head, to
explain to me what I ask,


y. Lo that disciple, O son of Pritha,
who said so, the preceptor said,—O twice-
born one, 1 shall explain to you everything
about which you may have any doubts.


6, Thus addressed, O foremest one of
Kuru’s race, by his preceptor, that disciple
whe was greatly devoted to his preceptor,
spoke as follows, with joined hands. Do
you hear what he said, O you of great
intelligence. :


The Disciple said ;—

7. Whence amil? Whence are you?
Explain that which is the bighest truth.
From what source have oriyinated all
Creatures mobile and immobile ? .


8. By what do creatures live? What
is the limit of their life? What is truth ?
What is penance, O learned Brahmana?
What are called qualities by the good ?

Q7-to. What paths are to be called
auspicious? What is happiness? What
is sin? O boly one, O you’ of excellent


vows, you Should answer these questions:


of mine, O fearned Rishi, correctly,
truly, and accurately, Who else is thee


in this wocld than you who is capable of


answering these questions ?


t1. Do you answer ‘them, © foremost
of all persons knowing duties! My curio-
sity is great. You are celebrated in aj) the
worlds as one well-skilled in the duties
about liberation.


_ 12. There is none else save you who can

remove all kinds of doubts.
worldly life, we have become desirous of
acquiring Liberation, :


Vasudeva said :—

13—14. To that disciple who had humb-
ly sought his instruction and put the ques:
tions duly, who was devoted to his precep-
tor and endued with tranquillity, and who
always acted in a manner that was agree-
able (to his instructor), who lived so cons-


tantly by the side of his instructor as to-


have almost become his shadow, who was
self-controiied and who had the life of a
Yati and a Beahmacharin, O son of Pritha,
that preceptor gifted with intelligence and
observant of vows, duly explained all the
questions, O foremost of Kuru’s ,race, O
chastiser of all ehemies. :


The preceptor said :—
15. All this was declared by Brabman


Afraid of ©


3%


himself. tApplauded and practised by the
foremost of Rishis, and depending on Vedie
knowledge it involves a consideration of
what forms the real entity,


16-23. We regard knowledge to be
the highest object, and renunciation as the
best penance. He who, certainly, knows
the true object of knowledge which is in.
capable of. being modified by circumstances,
vig., the soul living in all creatures, succeeds
in going wherever he likes and comes tq be
considered as the highest. ‘That learned
maw who sees the residence of ail things in
one place and their severance as well, and.
who sees unity in Giversity,. suceeeds in
freeing himself from misery. fle who dass
not Jong for anything and does not cherish’
the idea of mineness about any thing, comes
to be considered, although living in this-
world, as being at one with Brahma. He
who knows the teuth about the qualities of
Nature, acquainted with the creation of all:
existent objects, divested of egoism, ard:
without pride, succeeds, for south, in
freeing himself. Understanding properly
that great tree which has the uamanitest
for its seedsprout, and the understanding |
for its trunk, and high consciousness
of self for its branches, and the senses
for the cells whence its twigs issue, and’
the (five) great elements for its Sowers’
buds, and the gross elements for its smatler
boughs, which bas leaves, which always’
puts forth flowers, and upon which alF
existent objects. depend, whose seed is’
Brahma, and which is eternal,—-and cut+
ting all subjects with’ the sharp sword: of
knowledge, one acquires immortality and
renounces birth and death, are:


24—25. The conclusions absnt the past,
present, and futare, etc, and religion,
pleasure, and profit, which are all weil
known to Siddhas, which belong to remote
ages. and which are, indeed, eternal, | strall


‘declare to you, O yau of great wisdom |


These form what is called Goad, Wise Men,
undeestanding them in this world, acquire
success.

26-27. Formerly, the Rishis  Vrihas-«
pati Bharadwaja, Gautama Bhargava,
Vashishtha, Kasbyapa, Vishwamitra and
Awi, assembled tegether forthe purpose of
asking one another. They thus assembled
together after having ‘travelled -over all
paths and after they had got tired with the
deeds each of them had done.


28. Those twice-born persons, headed by
the sage son of Angiras, proceeded to the
tegiow of the Grandfather, There they
Saw Bealiman peflectly purged af all sin,


a9. Bowing their heads to. that great
ene who was seated at their ease, the great


49


Rishis, gifted with humility, asked him this _
Brave question about the highest good.


. go. How should a good man act? How
would ane be freed from sin? What paths
are auspicieus for us?) Woat is truth, and
what is sin ?


3t. By what action are the two paths,
northern and southern, obtained 2?) What :
is destruction 2 What, Liberation? What
is birth and what death of all existent
objects ?


32. 1 shall telf you, O discipfe, what the
Grandfather, thus addressed, said to them,
according to the scriptures. Do you listen.


— Brahman said :—

33 It is from ‘Truth that all creatures,
mobile and immobile, have been born.
‘They live by penance (or action). Under-
stand this, O ye of excellent vows! On
account of their own actions they live,
transcending their ows: osigin.


34.° Bor Truth. when united with quali-
ties, becomes always possessed of five


marks. Brahman is Truth. Penance is
truth, Prajapati istruth,
35--37- Ie is from. Truth that ail crea-


tues have originated. ‘Truth is the uni-
verse of being, It is for this that Bra-
himanas who are always devoted to Yoya,
who bave got over anger and ‘sorrow, and
who always consider Religion as the cause-
way, take refuge in Truth. I shall now
speak of those. Brahmans who are con-
trolled by one another and endued with
knowledge, of the orders, and of those who
belong to the four mades of life.


38. The wise say that Religion or duty
is one, having four quarters. Ye twice-
born ones, [ shall speak to you now of that
pith which is auspictots and yields good.


390 That path has constantly been trod
Over by wise men in order to acquire an
identity with Brahma. EF shall speak now
of that path which is the highest and which
is highly difficult of being understood. °


40. Bo you understand, in all its fuliness,
ye highly blessed ones, what is the highest
sea. he first step has been said to be
the mode of life that belungs te Brahma-
charins,


41. The second step is domesticity.
Aner this ig the residence in the forest.
After that it should be known is the highest
step, vie, that belongs to Adhyatma.


42. Light, ether, sun, wind, Indra, and
Prajapati,— ne sees these as long as one


does not acquire Adhyatma. 44 a8


43-——-44.. I shall declare the means. Do
ge tist understand them. ‘Ihe forest anode


| the celestials.


_ qualities, and consisting of


MAHABHARATA,


of life that is followed by ascetics living tn
the forest and subsisting upon fruits and
roots and air is laid down for the three
twice-born classes. Ute dom stic mate of
life is ord ined for all the orders.


45.


_ The wise say that R-ligion or daty
has Baith foe its characteristic mark.


: have [ declared to you the paths leading to


hey are adopted by the
good and wise by their acts: ‘Those paths
are the causeways of piety,


46, That person of rigid vows who follows
any one of these medes separately, always
succeeds in time to understand the produce
tion and destruction of all creatures.


47. I shall now declare, accurately and
with reasons, the elements which live in
parts in all objects.


48—49. The great soul, the unmanifest,
egoism, the eleven organs (of knowledge
and action), the five great elements, the
characteristics of the five elements,—these
form the eternal creation, The number of |
elements has been said to be twenty-four,
and one (more).


50. That wise person who understands
the production and destruction of all these
elements, that man among all Creatures,:
never meets with delusion.


t. He who understands the elements’
accurately, all the qualities, all the celestials,
succeeds in purifying himself of all sin.
Fieed from all fetters, such a man suc-'
ceeds in enjoying all regions of spotless
purity.


CHAPTER XXXVI.


(ANUGITA PARVA. j=
Continued.


— Brahman said :—


s. That which is unmanifest, which is
indistinct, all-prevading, everlasting, tn.
mutable, should be-known to become the
city of nine portals, possessed of three
five ingre+
dients,


2. Encompassed by eleven including
Mind which distinguishes (objects), and
having Understanding for the ruler, this is
an aggregate of eleven.


3. The three ducts thaf are in it, support
it always. ‘[bese are the three Nadis,
They run continually, and have the three
Qualities for their essence.


ASHWAMEDHA PARYA.


4.
these are called the (three) qualities. These
are connected with one another. They exist
depending on one another,


5. They take refuge in one another, and
follow one another. ‘They are also joined
with one another. The five (principal) ele-
ments are marked by (these) three qua+
lities, :

6. Goodness is also the match of Igno-
rance. Of Goodness the match is Darkness.
Goodness is also the match of Darkness,
and of Goodness the match is Ignorance.


7. There where Ignorance is restrained,
Darkness is seen to flow. ‘There where
Darkness is restrained, Goodness is seen to
flow.


8. Darkness should be known to have the
night for its essence. It has three marks,
and is (otherwise) called Detusion. It has sir
also for its mark, and it is always present in
all sinful deeds. This is the nature of Ig-
norance and it appears also as confined with
Others.


g. Darkness is said to have activity for
its essence. It is the cause of successive
deeds. When it predominates, its mark,
among all beings, is production.


to. Splendour, lightness, and faith,—
these are the form, that is light, of Goodness
among all creatures, as considered by all
good men,


t1. The true nature of their marks will
now be declared by me, with reasons. These
shall be stated in aggregation and separae
tion. Do ye understand them,


12—18. Complete delusion, Ignorance,
illiberality, indecision about action, sleep,
haughtiness, fear, cupidity, grief, censure of
good deeds, loss of memory, unripeness of
judgment, absence of faith, violation of alt
rules of conduct, want of discrimination,
blindness, vileness of conduct, boastful as-
Sertions of performance when there has been
no performance, presumption of knowledge
in ignorance, unfriendliness (or hostility),
evilness of disposition, absence of faith,
Stupid reasoning, crookedness, incapacity
for association, sinful action, senselessness,
stolidity, lassitude, absence of self-control,
degradation,—all these qualities aré known
as belonging to Ignorance. Whatever other
states of inind, connected with delusion,
exist in the world, all belong ta Ignorance,
Frequent ill-speaking of other people, cen-
suring the celestiqis and the Brahmanas, illi-
berality, vanity, delusion, anger, unforgive-
ness, hostility towards all creatures, are
considered as the characterestics of Igno-
rauce, “


6


Ygnorance, Darkness, and Goodness, |


4t


19. Whatever undertakings exist which
are unmeritorious; what gifts there are
which are unmeritorious, vain eating,
these also belong to Ignorance,


20. Indulgence in calumny, unforgives
ness, animosity, vanity, and absence of
faith are alsq said to be characteristics of
Ignorance. ; ,


21. Whatever men there are in this
world, who are characterised by these anfd
other faults of a similar kind, and who
break through the restraints are all cone
sidered as belonging te. the quality o
Ignorance. * ;

22, I shall now declare the wombs where
these men, who are always of sinful deeds,
have to take their birth. CUrdained to go
to hell, they sink in the order of being.
Indeed, they sink into the hell of the brute
creation.


23—24. They become immobile entities,
or animals, ot beasts of burden ; or carni-+
vorous creatures, or snakes, or worms,
insects, and birds; or creatures of the
oviparous order, or quadrupeds of various
species, or lunatics, or deaf ot dumb human
beings, or men who are afflicted by dread-
ful maladies and considered as unclean,


25. These men .of evil conduct, always
show the marks of thejr deeds, sink in
Ignorance. Their course is always downe
wards, Belonging to the quatity of Ignore
ance, they sink in Ignorance.


26. I shall, after this, declare what the
means are of theic improvement and ascent ;
indeed, by what means they succeed in
acquiring the regions which exist fot men
of pious deeds. = ; .

27—~28. Those men who take birth in
orders other than human beings, by grow-
ing up in viéw of the religious ceremonies,
of Brahmanas devoted to the, duties of
their own caste and desirous of doing good
to all creatures, succeed through the help
of such purificatery rites, in ascending up-
wards. Indeed, struggling, they at last
attain to the same regions with these pious
Brahmanas. Indeed, they go to thé celestia
region, ‘This is the Vedic Shruti. ;


29. Born in orders other than humanity
and growing old in their respective deeds,
even thus they become human beings that
are, of course, ordained to return.


30—3t. Coming to sinful births and
becoming Chandalas or human beings that
are deaf or who lisp indistinctly, they attain
to higher and higher castes, one aftec
another in proper turn, getting above the
Shudra order, and other (consequences of},

j Guilities which belong to Ignorance and


42


whe abide in it in course of migrations
this world.


32. Attachment to objects of desire is
considered as gréat delusion. NHere Rishis
and Muuis and celestials become deluded,
desiruus of pleasure.


33. Ignorance, delusion, the great delu-
sion, the great obscurity called anger, and
death, that blinding obscurity. As regards
anger, that ig thé great obscurity.


34, With respect then to its color, its
characteristics, and its source, I have, ye
leacned Brahmanas, declared to you, ac-
curately and in due order, everything, about
Ignorance.


35. Who is there that truly gets over
it? Wo is there who truly-sees it? ‘Phat
indeed, is the characteristic of Lgnorance,
vis., the seeing of reality in what is not
real,


36. The qualities of Ignorance have
been declared to you in various ways. Duly
has Ignorance, in .its higher and lower
forms, been described to you. That man
who always bears in mind the qualities
mentioned here will surely succeed in be-
coming freed from all marks which belong
to lyuosance,


CHAPTER XXXVIL


(ANUGITA PARVAJ)—
Continued.


Brahman said :—

1. Ye best of beings, I shall now declare
to you accurately what (the quality of)
Darkness is, Ye highly blessed ones, do
you understand what those qualities are
that belong to Darkness.


2—14. Injucing (others), beauty, toil,
pleasure and pain, cold and heat, lordship
(or power), wer, peace, argument, dissatis-
faction, enducance, power, valour, pride,
anger, exertion, quarrel (or collision),
jealousy, desire, matice, batile, the sense of
mineness, protection (of others), destriction
fetters and affliction, buying and selling,
lopping off, cutting, piercing, and cutting
off the coat of mail that another has worn,
tierceness, cruelty, vilifying, pointing out
the faults of others, thoughts entirely
devoted to wordly affairs, anxiety, ani-
niosity, vilification of others, false speech,
false er vain gifts, hesitancy and doubt,
beastiulness of speech dispraise and praise,
laudation, prowess, defiance, attendarrce,
obedience, service or minisirations, hare
hearing of thiest of desire, Cheverness of


MAHABHARATA.


dexterity of conduct, policy, carelessness,
contumely, possessions, and various deco-
tations which prevail in the world among
men, women, animals, inanimate things,
houses, grief, incredulousness, vows and re~
gulations, actions with expectation (of good
results), various acts of public charity, the
tites of Swaha, salutations, rites of Swadha
and Vashat, officiating at the sacrifices of
others, imparting of instruction, pertore
tuance of sacrifices, study, making of gilts,
acceptance of gifts, rites of expiation,
auspicious acts, the wish to have this and
that, affection caused by the merits of the
object for which or whom it is felt, treachery
deception, disrespect aud respect, theft,
killing, desire of concealment, vexation,
wakelulness, ostentation, pride, attachment,
devotion, contentment, exultation, gain-
bling, indulgence in scandal, all relations
arising out of women, attachment to dan-
cing, instrumental music, and songs,—all
these qualities, ye learned Brahmanas,
have been said to belong to Rajas or
Darkness, ?


15, Those men on Earth who meditate
on the past, present, and the future, who are
devoted to the threefold fobjects of life,
viz., Religion, Profit, and Pleasure, who,
acting from the impulse of desire, exult on
acquiring riches in respect of every desire,
are said to be covered by Darkness, ‘These
men have downward courses.


17. Repeatedly reborn in this world,
they addict themselves to pleasure. ‘They
covet what belongs to this world as also ail
those fruits of the world to come. They make
gifts, accept gifts, offer oblations to the
departed manes, and pour hbations on the
sacrificial fire.


18. The qualities of Darkness have
{thus} been declared to you in their mani-
fold aspeets. ‘fhe course of conduct also to
which it leads has been properly described
to yous. the man who always understands
these qualities, succeeds in always libera-
ting himself fram all of them whicts belong
to Darkness,


CHAPTER XXXVIIL.


f{ANUGITA PARVA. )—
Continued,


Brahman said :—

t. E shall, after this, describe to you
that excellent quality whigh is the third,
kt is beneficial to ali creatures in the world,
and unblamable, and forms the conduct of
the good,


ASHWAMEDUA PARVA,


2—~3. Joy, satisfaction, nobility, enligh-
tenment, and happiness, absence of stingi-
ness, absence of fear, contentment, disposi-
tion for faith, forgiveness, courage, absten-
tion from injuring any creature, equability,
truth, « straightforwardness, absence of
anger, absence of malice, purity, cleverness,
prowess, belong to the quality of Good-
ness.


4. He who is devoted to the duty of
Yoga, considering knowledge to‘:be vain,
conduct to be vain, service to be vain, and
mode of life to be vain, attains to what is
highest in the next world.


5. Freedom from egoism, freedont from
expectations, looking on all impartially, and
freedom from desire,—these form the eter.
nal religion of the good.


6—g9. Confidence, modesty, forgiveness,
fenunciation, purity, absence of laziness,
absence of cruelty, absence of delusion,
mercy to all creatures, absence of the dis-
position to calumniate, exultation, satis-
faction, rapture,.humility, good conduct,
purity in all acts having for their object
the attainment of tranquility, righteous
understanding, liberation, indifference, celi-
bacy, complete rentnciation, freedom from
the idea of mineness, freedom from expec-
tations, unbroken observance of virtue,
belief that gilts are vain, sacrifices are vain,
study is vain, vows are vain, acceptance of
gilts is vain, observance of duties is vain,
and penances are vain.

to. Those Brahmanas in this world,
whose conduct is marked by these virtues,
who follow virtue, who abide in the Vedas,
are said to be wise and possessed of correct-
ness of vision.


11. Freed from sins and grief, those
wise men attain to the celestial region and
Create various bodies (for themselves).


12. The power of governing everything,
self-control, minuteness, these great ones
make by operations of their own mind, like
the gods themselves living in the celestial
region,


13. Such men are said to have their
courses directed upwards. They are veri-
table gods capable of modifying all things.
Attaining to the celestial region, they
modify all things by their very nature.


14. They get whatever objects they
desire and enjoy them. Thus have I, ye
foremost of twice-born ones, described to
you what that conduct is which belongs to
the quality of goodness. Understanding
these duly, one acquires whatever objects
one desires.


15. The qualities which belong to good-
ness have been declared particularly. The


43


conduct which these qualities form, has alsa
been prope:ly described, That man who
always understands these qualities, succeed¢
in enjoying the qualities without being
attached to them.


CHAPTER XXXIX.


(ANUGITA PARVA.)—
Continued, =


Brahman said :—


1. The qualities are incapable of being
described as completely separate from one
another. Darkness: and Goodness and
Ignorance are seen existing in a state of |
unison.


2. They are attached to one another,
lhey depend on one another, The have
one another for their support. They likes.
wise follow one another,


3. As long as goodness exists, so long
does Darkness exist. There is no doubt in
this, .As long as Ignorance and Goodness
exist, so long does Darkness exist.


4. ‘hey travel together, in union, and.
moving collectively, They move in a body,
when they act with cause or without cause.


5. Of all these which work with one
another however much they may differ jn.
their devetopement, the manner in which
their increase and diminution take place
will now be described.


6. There where Ignorance exists in an
increased measure, in the fower creatures
(for example), Darkness exists in a smallec—
measure aud Goodness in a still lesser
degree.

7. There where Drakness predominates,
in creaturs of middie course, Ignorance |
exists in a smaller measure anid Guadness
in a still smaller quantity.

8. There where Goodness predominatese
in creatures of upward courses, Ignorance |
should be known to exist in a small measur,
and Darkness in a still lesser quantity.


9- Goodness is the spring which causes
the modifications of the senses. It is,
again, the great enlightener. No duty has |
been laid down that is+higher than Guod-
ness, .

to. They who abide in ‘Goodness pro-
ceed upwards. They who abide in Dark.
ness remain in the middle. They who
abide iv Ignorance being characterised by -
qualities that are low, sink downwards,


44
iz. Ignorance is in the Shudra; Dark-
ness in the Kshatriya; and Goodness,


which is the highest, in the Brahmana.
The three qualities exist thus in the three
castes. :


12. From a distance, the three qualities
of Goodness, Darkness and lgnoranee,
are seen to exist in a state of union and
more collectively, They aré never seen in
a state of separation.


13. Seeing the Sun rising, men of evil
deeds become filled with fear. ‘lravellers
on their way become afflicted with heat, and
suffer distress,


14. The Sun is Goodness developed ;
men of evil deeds represent Ignorance ;
the heat which travellers on their way feel,
is said to be a quality of Darkness.


15. The Sun representing light is,Good-
ness; the heat is (he quality of Darkness;
the shading (or eclipse) of the Sun on
Parvan days, should be known fo represent
Ignorance,

16. hus, the three qualities exist in all
luminous bodies. They act by turns in
Various places in various ways,

17. Among immobile objects, the quality
of. Ignorance predominates, The qualities


Belonging to Darkness are these pro-
perties of theirs which suffer constant
changes. ‘heir oleaginous qualities belong


to Goodness.


18. The Day should be understood as
threefold. The Night has been ordained
to be threefold. So also are fortnights,
months, years, seasons, and conjunctions,


19. The gifts are threefold. TVhreefold
is sacrifice. Vhreefold are the worlds;
threefold the celestials; threefold is know-
ledge; and threefold the path or end.


20. The Past, the Present, and the Fu-
ture, Religion, Profit and Pleasure, Prana,
Apana, and Udana, these also are per-
meated by the three qualities.


2t. Whatever object exists in this world,
everything in it, is fraught with the three
qualities. “he three qualities act by turns
in all things and in All circumstances.


22. Indeed, the three qualities always
act in an unmanifest form. ‘The creation
of those three, viz., Goodness, Darkness
and Ignorance is eternal,


23—24. The unmanifest, consisting of
the three qualities, is said to be darkness,
unperceived, holy, constant, unborn, womb,
eternal, Nature, change or modification,
destruction, Pradhana, production, and
at.crpsian, undeveloped, not small (ze,
Last), unshaking, immovable, fixed, exict-
Gia, and nun-cexmt nt


MAHABHARATA.


25. Afl these names should be known
by those who meditate on matters about
the soul,


. 26. That person who accurately knows
all the names of the unmanifest, and the
qualities, as also the pure actions, well con.
versant wilh 1 ¢ trath abou! all distinctions
and freed from the body, becomes eman-
cipated from all the qualities and enjoys
absolute happiness. ‘


CHAPTER XL.


(ANUGIYTA PARVA.)—
Continued,


Brahman said :—

1. From the unmanifest . first originated
the Great Soul, gifted with great intelli-
gence, the source of all the qualities, ‘That
#5 Said to be the first creation.


2—3. The Great Soul has these synony-
mous words,—-the Great Soul, Intelligence,


Vishnu, Jishnu, Shambhu of great valour,


the Understanding, the means of acqui-
ring knowledge, the means of perception, as
also fame, courage, and memory. Know-
ing this, a learned Brahmana has never to
meet with delusion.


4. It has hands and feet on every side.
Tt has ears on every side. It pervades every


‘thing in the universe.


. Of great power, that Being ts station-
ed in the heart of all. Minuteness, Light.
ness, and. Affluence, are his. He is the
lord of all, and at one with effulgence, and
knows not decay.


6—7. In Him are all those who com-
prehend the nature of the understanding,


all those who are devoted to goodness of


disposition, all those who practise medita-
tion, who are always devoted to Yoga, who
are firm in tryth, who have governed their
senses, who are gifted with knowledge,
who are freed from cupidity, who have
conquered anger, who are of cheerful
hearts, who are gifted with wisdom, wha
are liberated front ideas of mine and thine,
and who are devoid of egoism. ;


8. All these, shorn of all attachmentst
attain to the status of Greatness. Tha,
person who understands that holy and high
goal, wis., the Great Soul, becomes freed
from delusion. ;


9. The self-create Vishnu becomes the
Lord in the primary creations. He who
thus knows the Lord lying in the cave, the
Supreme, Ancient Being, of universal form,


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA.


the golded one, the highest goal of all. } solution takes place in an order that is the


persons gifted with understanding,—that
intelligent man lives, transcending the
understanding.


CHAPIER XLI.


(ANUGITA PARVA.}=
Continued,


Brahman said: — °

1. That Mahat or principle of great-
ness who was first produced is called
Egoism. When, it originated as I, it came
to be called as the second creation.


2. That Egoism is said to be the source
of all creatures, for these have originated
from its modifications. It is pute effulgence
and is the supporter of consciousness. It
is Prajapati. :

3. It is a deity, the creator of deities,
and of mind. It is that which creates the
three worlds. [tis said to be that which
feels—J am all this. ,


4. That is the eternal world existing for
those sages who are contented with. know-
ledge about the soul, who have meditated
on the soul, and who have acquired success
by Vedic study and sacrifices.


5- By consciousness of soul one enjoys
the qualities. hat source of all creatures,
that creator of all creatures, creates thus.
It is that which causes all changes. It is
that which causes all beings to move. By
its own light it lights up the universe
likewise,


)


CHAPTER XLIL.


( ANUGITA PARVA.)—
Continued.


Brahman said :—

1. From Egoism were, indeed, born the
five great elements. They are earth, air,
ether, water, and light numbering the fifth.


2. Im these five great elements, in the
matter of the operations of sound, touch,
color, taste, and smell, all creatures become
deluded. <


3. When at.the close of the destruction
of the great elements, the dissolution of
the universe-comes, O wisemen, a great fear
possesses all living creatures.


4. Every existent object is dissolved into
that from which it is produced, The dis-


reverse of that in which creation occurs.
Indeed, as regards birth, they are born
from one another.


5.. Then, when all existent objects,
mobile and immobile, become. dissolved,
wise men possessed of a, powerful memory.
never dissolve.


6. Sound, touch, colour, taste, and. smell
numbering the fifth, are effects. They are,
however, inconstant, and. called by the
name of delusion.


7—9. Generated by the production of
cupidity, not different from one another,
without reality, connected. with flesh and
blood, and depending upon one another,
existing outside the soul, these are all help-
less and powerless. Prana and Apana, and,
Udana and Samana and Vyana,-these five
vital airs are always closely attached to the
soul. ‘Together with speech, mind, and
understanding, they form the universe of
eight ingredients,

1o—11. He whose skin, nose, ear, eyes,
tongue, and speech are controlled, whose
mind is pure, and whose understanding
deviates not (from the right path), and’
whose mind is never burnt by those eight
fires, succeeds in acquiring that auspicious
Brahma than which nething superior exists.


12. I shall now, © twiceeborn ones,
mention ‘particularly, those which have
been called the eleven organs and which
have originated from Egoisin. :


13. ‘They are the ear, the skin, the two,
eyes, the tongue, the nose for the filth, the
two feet, the lower duct, the organ of
generation, the two hands; and speech.
forming the tenth.


14. These form the group of organs, with
mind numbering as. the eleventh. One
should first subdue this group. Then will
Brahma shine forth (in him).


15. Five amongst these are called organs
of knowledge, and five, organs of action,
The five beginning with, the ear are con-
nected with Knowledge.


16. The rest, however, which are cons
nected with action, are without distinction,


‘The mind should be considered as belonging.


to both. The understanding. is.che twelfth.
in the top.
17. Thus have been enumerated the


eleven organs in due order. Learned men,
having understood these, think they have
done everything.


18. I shall, after this, enumerate all the


45


various orgains. Space (or Ether) is the-


first. As connected with. the soul; it is
called the ear,


46


1g. As connected with objects, it is
sound. Tbe presiding deity (of this) is the
quirters. The Wind is the second. As
connected with the soul, it is known as the
skin.


2o. As connected with objects, it is
known as objects of touch; and_ the pre-
siding deity there is touch. The third
is said to be Light. As connected with the
soul, it is knawn as the eye,


at. As connected with objects, it is colar;

and the sun is its deity. The fourth shcu'd
' be known as Water. As connected with the
soul, it is said to be the tongue.

22. As connected with objects, it is taste,
and the presiding deity there is Soma.
The fifth is Earth. As connected with the
soul, it is said to be the nose.


23. As connected with objects it is scent ; |


and the presiding deity there is the wind.
Thus bas the manner been described of
how the five entities are divided into sets
of three.


24. After this [ shall describe every-
thing abaut the various (other) organs,
Brabmanas knowing the truth say that
the two feet are mentioned as connected
with the soul.


25. As conneced with objects, it is
motion; and Vishnu is there the presiding
deity, ‘The Apana air, whose motion is
downward, as connected with the soul, is
called the lower duct.


26 As connected with objects, it is the
excreta that is ejected; and the presiding
deity there is Mitra. Ag connected with
the soul, the organ of generation is men-
tioned, the producer of all beings.


27. As connected with objects, it is the
vital seed; and the presiding deity is
Prajapati. Thetwo hands are mentioned
as connected with the soul by persons know-
ing the relations of the soul.


a8. As connected with objects, it is
actions; and the presiding deity there is
Indra. Next, connected with the soul is
speech which relates to all the celestials.


29. As connected with objects, it is
what is spoken, ‘he presiding deity there
is Agni. As connected with the soul, the
mind is mentioned, which moves within the
soul of the five elements.


30. As connected with objects, it is the
mental operation; and the presiding deity
is the moon. As connected with the soul
is Eyoism, which is the cause of the entire
course of worldly life.:


31. As connected with objects, it is
cousciousuess of self; and the presiding


MAHABHARATA.


deity there is Rudra. As connected witl
the soul is the understanding, which moves
the six senses. ,


32. As connected with objects, it is
that which is to be understood, and the
presiding deity there is Brahman. ‘Three
are the seats of all existent objects. A
fourth is not possible.


. These are land, water, and ether.
The birth is fourfold. Some are born of
eggs; some are born of germs which spring
upwards, passing theough the earth; some
are born of filth; and some are born of
fleshy balls in wombs.


34. Thus the birth of all living creatures
is of four kinds. Now, there are other in-
ferior beings and likewise those which
range the sky*


35. These should be known to be borts
of eggs as also those which crawl on theic
breasts. Insects are said to be bora of
filth, as also other creatures of a like des-
cription.


36—40. Thisis said to be the second
mode of birth and is inferior, ‘Yhose living
creatures which take birth after the lapse
of sometime, bursting through the earth,
are said to be germ-born beings, O foremost
of twice-born persons! Creatures of two
feet or of many feet, and those which move
crookedly, are the beings born of wombs.
Among them are some which are deformed,
ye best of men! The eternal womb of
Brahma should be Known to'be of two kinds,
vig., penance and meritorious acts. Such
is the doctrine of the learned. Action
should be understood to be of various kinds,
such as sacrifice, gifts made at sacrifices,
and the niertturious duty of study for every
one that is) born; such is the teaching of
the ancients. He who duly understands
this, comes to be considered as possessed
of Yoga, ye chief of twice-born persons.


4t. Kuow also that such a man becomes
freed too from ali his sins. I have thus des-
cribed to you duly the doctrine of spiritual
science.


42. Ye Rishis knowing all duties, a
knowledge of this is gained by those who
are considered as persons of knowledge.
Uniting all these together, vtz., the senses,
the ‘objects of the senses, and the five great


elements, one should keep them in the
mind. Ea
43. When everything is immersed in


the mind, one no-longer regards highly the
pleasures of life. Learned men, whose un-
derstandings are furnished with knowledge,
consider that as true happiness,


44. 1 shall, after this, tell you of re-
auuziation about aH entities by means gentle


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA,


and hard, which produces ‘attachment to
subtle topics and which is fraught -with
auspiciousness,


45. hat conduct which consists in ttrea-
ting the qualities as not qualities, which is
shorn of attachment, whichis living alone,
which does not recognise distinctions, and
Which is full of Brahma, is the root of all
happiness. :


46. Vhe fearned man who takes all
desires into himself from all sides hke the
tortoise withdrawing all its limbs, who is
devoid of passion, and who is freed from
everything, becomes always happy.


47- Controlling all desires within the Soul,
killing his thirst, concentrated in medita-
tion, and becoming the friend of good heart
tuwards all creatures, he succeeds in be-
coming fit for assimilation with Brahma,


48. Through suppression of all the
Senses which always hanker alter their
objects, and abandonment of inhabited
places, the spiritual fire blazes forth in the
man of contemplation.


49. As a fire, fed with fuel, becomes
bripnt on account of the burning flames
it puts forth, so, on account of the repres-


sion of the senses, the great soul puts forth


its effulgence.


50. When one with a tranquil soul sees
ali entities in his own heart, then, lighted
by his own effulyence, one attains to that
which is subiler than the subtle and whicti
is peerless in excellence.


J

51—53. It is settled that the body has
fire for color, water tor’ blood and jother
liquids, wind for sense of touch, earth for
the hideous holder of mind (v7s., flesh and
bones, etc.), space (or ether) for sound ; that
it is pervaded by disease aud sorrow ; that
tt is overwhelmed by five currents; that it
ts made up of the five elements; that it
has nine doors and two deities; that it is
full of passion; that it is unfit to be
seen; that it made up of three qualities ;
that it has three elements, | (vig., wind,
bile, and phlegm); that it is delighted with
attachments of every kind; that it is full of

elusion. :


54. It is difficult of being moved in this
mottal world, and it rests en the under-
standing as its stay. That body is, in this
world, the wheel of ‘Time that is continually
revolving.


55. That (body), indeed, is a terrible and
untathomable ocdan and is called delusion.
It is this body which stretches forth, con-
tracts, and awakens the universe with the
immoctals, .


49


56. By controlling the senses, one res
nonnces lust, anger, fear, cupidity, enmity,
‘and falsehood, which are eternal and, theré-
fore, highly difficult to renounce,


87. He who has controlled these in this
world, vig., the three qualities and the five
élements of the body, has the Highest for
his seat in the celestial region, By him is
Infinity attained. i


§8. Crossing the river which has the
five senses for its steep banks, the mental
inclinations for its powetful waters, and
delusion fer its take, oue Should controt
both lust and anger,


59. Sucha man, freed from all faults,
then sees the Highest, concentrating the
mind within the mind and seeing self i
self, . ; : .

60. Understanding all things, he sees
his self, with self, in all creatures, some>
times as one and sometimes as various;
changing form from tine to time,

61. Forsooth, he can perceive numerous
bodies like a hundred lights from one light.
Indeed, he is Vishnu, and Mitra, and
Varuna and Agni, and Prajapati.

62. He is the Creator and the ordainer }
lve is the powerful Lord, with taces turned
in all directions. In fim, the heart of alt
Creatures, the great soul, becomes respleie
dent,

63. All the learned Brahmanas, éelesa
tials, Asuras, Yakshas, Pishachas, the dee
parted manes, birds, Rakshasas, gobiing,
and all the great Rishis, laud Hina.


CHAPTER XLUt
(ANUGITA PARVA., )—


Continued.


a


Brahman said :—

1—2. Among ‘men, the royal Kshatriya
is guted with the middie quality. Among
vehicles, the elephant (is su)j and among
dwellers of the forest the hon; amuny all
(sacrificial) avimals, the sheep; among ail
those that live in holes, is the snake ; amoung
caltte, the bull; amony females, the male.

3. There is no doubt in this (bat in’ this
world, the Nyagrouha, the, Jaimvu, the
Pippala, the Shalmasi, the Siuushapa, the


Meshashringa, and the Kichaka, are the
turemost ones among wees,
4-5. Himavat, Paripatra, Sahya,


Vindhya, ‘Trikutavat, Shweta, Nila, Buasa,
| Koshthavat, Guruskandba, Mahendra, and


48


Malyavat,—these are the foremost of moun-
tains. Likewise the Maruts are the foremost
of the Ganas,


6. ‘Fhe Sun is the lord of alf the planets,
and the Moon of all the constellations.
Yama is the lord of the depaited manes;
Ocean jis the lord of all rivers.


7... Varuna is the king of the waters.
Indra is said to be the king of the Maruts.
Arka is the king of all hot bodies,. and
Indra of all luminous bodies.


8 Agni is the eternal lord of the
elements, and Vrihaspati of the Brahma-
anas. Soma is the lord herbs, and Vishau
is the foremost of all that are gifted with
might,

9. Tashtri is the king of Rudras, and
Shiva of all creatures. Sacrifice is the fore-
tmost of all initiatory rites, and Maghavat
of the celestials,


10. ‘he North is the lord of all the
points of the compass ; the energetic Soma
is the lord of all learned cahmanas.
Kuvera is the lord of all precious:gems,
and Purandara of all the celestials.


11. Such is the highest creation among
all entities, Prajapati is the lurd of all
Creatures. Of all entities whatever, l, who
am full of Brahma, am the foremost.


12, There is no entity that is higher
than myself oc Vishnu. ‘The great Vishnu,
who is full of Brahma, is the king of kings
over alk Know him to be thé king, the
creator, the uncreated Hari.


13. Heis the ruler of men and Kin-
naras and Yakshas and Gandharvas, and
snakes and Rakshasas, and celestials and
Danavas and Nagas.


14. Among those that are followed by
persons full of desire is the great goddess
Maheswari having beautiful eyes,


15. She is otherwise called by the name
of Parvati, Know that the goddess Uma
is the foremost and the most auspicious
of women. Among women who are a
Source of pleasure, the foremost are -the
Apsaras who are endued with great
splendour, :


16. Kings are desirous of acquiring
piety, and Brahmanas are causeways of
piety. Therefore, the king should always
gttive to protect the twice-born ones.


17. Those kings in whose kingdoms
good men languish are considered as bereft
of the virtues of their order. Hereafter
they have to go into wrong paths.


18. Those kings in whose territories
good men are protected, rejoice in this
watld and enjoy happiness in the next.


MAHABHARATA,


19. Indeed, those great ones attaln to
the highest seat. Understand this, ye fore»
most of twice-born ones! I shall after this
describe the eternal characteristics of duties,


Abstention from injury is the highest
Jnjury is a mack of sin. Splendour
Men have acts


20.
duty,
is the mack of the deities.
for their characteristics.


21. Ether (or space) has sound for its
characteristic. Wind has touch for its
characteristic. The characteristic of lumi-


nous bodies is color, and water has taste for
its characteristic.


22. Earth, which holds all entities, has
smell for its characteristic. Speech has
words for its characteristic, refined into


vowels and consonants.


23. Mind has thought for its charac-
teristic. ‘Thought has, again, been said to
be the characteristic of the understanding.
The things thought of by the mind are
determined with accuracy by the undere
standing.


24. There is no doubt in this, vis., that
the understanding, by perseverance, per-
ceives all things. ‘he characteristic of mind
is meditation. ‘The characteristic of the
good man is that he does not allow his aets


“to be noticed.


25. Devotion has acts for its charac
teristic. Knowledge is the characteristic of
renunciation. “Therefore, keeping know-
ledge before his view, the man of undere
standing should practise renunciation,


26. The man who follows renunciation
and who is endued with knowledge, who is
above all pairs of opposites, as also dack-
ness, death, and decrepitude, attains to the
highest goal.

27. I have thus described to you duly
what the characteristics are of duty. f£
shall, after this tell you of the comprehen-
sion of qualities.


28. Smell, which belongs to earth, is
seized by the nose. The wind, which dwells
in tle nose is likewise appointed (as an
agent) in the perception of smell.


29. ‘Taste is the essence of water, That
is perceived by the tongue. Soma, whe
lives in the tongue, is appointed likewise in
the perception of taste.

30” The quality of a lighted body is
color. That is apprehended by the eye.
Aditya who always lives in the eye hag
been appointed in the perception of color.


3t. Touch always beléngs to the wind
(as its quality), hat is perceived by the
skin. Lhe wind that always lives in the
rane has been appointed in apprehending
touch,


a


ASHWAMEDHa PARVA.,


_ 4a. The quality of a ether is sound.
That is seized by the.ear. All the quarters,
which live in the ear, have been appointed
in apprehending sound.


33. The quality of the mind is thought.
That is seized by the understanding. +The
upholder of consciousness, living in the
heart, has been appointed ia apprehending
the mind.


34. The understanding is anprended in
the form of determination or certitude, and
principle of Greatuess in the form of knuwe
ledge. “The unperceived (Nature) has been,
jt is evident, appointed for the seizure of all
things after certitude, ‘There is no doubt
in this,


35. The Kshetrajna which is eternal and
is storm of qualities about its essence, is
incapable of being seized by, symbols,
Hence, the characteristic of the Kshetrajna,
which is without symbols, is purely know-
ledpe.


36 The unmanifest lives in the symbol
called Kshetra, and is that in which the
qualities are produced and absorbed. 1
ulways see, know, and hear & (thoughy it
is hidden.


37. Purnsha knows it; therefore is he
called Kshetrajua. The Kshetrajna per-
ceives also the actions of the qualities and
absence of their actions.


38:


The qualities, which dre created re-


.peatedly, do not Know themselves, being


unintelligent, as entities to be created and
gifted with a beginning, middie, aud end,


39- No one else, but. the Khsetrajna,
comes by that which is the highest aud
gieat and which is above the qualities and


, those entities which are born ef the qualities.


40. Hence, one who understands duties,
renouncing qualities and the understandiiy,
aud having his sins destroyed, and trans-
cending the Qualities, enters the Kshe-
trajna.


41. One who is free from all pairs of
opposites, who never bends his head to any
one, who is divested of Swaha, who is
inimovable, and Homeless, is the Kshetrajna.
He is the Supreme Lord.


there is no doubt in this,


49
CHAPTER XLIV.
en: ae
( ANUGITA PARVA.)—
Continued,


peaked said


t. I shalt now tell you truly about all
that which has a beginning, middle, and
end, and which has name and characteris-
tics, togettier, the means of apprehension,


2. It has been said that the Day came
first. Yheu came Night. ‘The Months are
said to have the lighted. fortnights first.
The constellations have Siravana for theic
first; the Seasoris have that of dews (viz.,
Winter) for their first.


3. Earth is thé'source of all smells ; 5 and
Water of all tastes. The solar light is, the
source of all colours; the wind of malt sensae
tions of touch. .

4. Likewise of sound the source is space
(or Ether). ‘Rese are the qualities af ele~
ments. [ shall, after this, describe that
which is the first and the highest of alt
entities.


The. sun is the first of all luminous
bodies. Tire is wesaid to be the first of all
the elements. Savitri is the first of all
branches of leartiing, Prajapati is the first
of all the celestials, .

6. The syllable Om is the first of alf the
Vedas, and the vital air Prana is the’ first
of all winds.- Savitri is the first of all et
gious observances.


y. ‘The Gayatri is the first of all metres,
goat is the first of all (sacrificial) animals,
Kine are the first of all quadrupeds.. ‘The
twice-born ones are the first of all hurnan
beings,


8. The hawk is the first of all birds.
OF sacrifices the' first ig the pouring of
clarified butter on the fice.- Of all reptiles
the first, O foremost of twice-born ones, is
the snake.

9. The Krita is the first of all the cycles;
‘Goid is the first
of all precious things:


to, Barley is the first of all plants.
Food is the first of all ‘things to. be eaten
or swallowed. Water is the first of all
liquid substances to be drunk,


11. Of allimmobile objects without dis-
tinction, Plaksha is said to be the first, that
ever holy field of Brahinan,


12. Of all the Prajapatis am the fest,
There is no, doubt in this. Of .inconcei-
vable soul, the selfj-existent Viobnu is said
to be my superior, ,


50


13- Of all the mountaina the great
Meru is said to be the first-born. Of all
the cardinal and subsidiary points of the
herigon, the eastern is said to be the fore-
most and first-born.


14. Ganga having three courses is said
to be first-barn of all rivers. Likewise, of
alt wells and reservoirs of waters, the ocean
is said to be the first-born.


15. Ishwara is the Supreme Lord of all
the celestials and Danavas and ghosts and
Pishachas, and snakes and Raksbaras, and
human beings and Kinnaras and Yakshas.


16. The great Vishnu, who is full of
Brahma, than whom there is no higher
being in the three worlds, is the first of alt
the ustiverse, -


17. Of all the modes of life, that of the
householder is the first. Of this there is no
doubt. The Unmanifest is the source of all
the worlds as well as is the end of every
thing. a.

18. Days end with the sun’s setting and
Nights with the sun’s rising. The end of
pleasure is always sorrow, and the end of
sorrow is always pleasure.


19. AU collections have expenditure for
their end, and alf ascents have falls for their
end, All associations have disseciations
ae their end, and life has death for its
end.


20, All action ends in destruction, and
all that is bern is certain to meet with
death. Every mobile and immobile thing
in this wocid is fickle.


2t.
observances,—all these have destruction to
their end. Of Knowledge, there is no end,


22. Hence, one who has a tranquil soul,
who has subjugated his senses, who is freed
from the sense of mineness, who is devoid of
egoism, is freed from all sins by pure
knowledge, :


NED


CHAPTER XLV.


(ANUGITA PARVA.)}—
Continued.


Brahman said :—


t. The wheel of Kfe roves on. It has

the understanding for its strength ; the mind

’ for the pole zthe group of senses for its

fetters, the (five) great elements for its nave,
and home for its circumference.


Sacrifice, gift, penances, study, vows, |


MAHABHARATA.


2. It is possessed by decrepitude and
sorrow and it has diseases and calamities
for its progeny. That wheel relates in time
and place. i has toil and exercise for its
noise,


3. Day and Night are the rotations
of that wheel. It is encircled by heat and
cold, Pleasure and pain are its joints, and
hunger and thirst are the nails fixed inte
it.


4. Sun-shine and shade are the ruts.
It is capable of being moved during even
such a short space of time as is taken up
by the opening and the closing of the eye-
lid. It is covered with the dreadful waters
of delusion. It is ever revolving and void
of consciousness.


§. t is measured by months and half-
months. It is not uniform (being evers
changing), and moves through all the
worlds. Penance and vows are its mud,
Passion’s force is its mover.


6. It is lighted up by the great egoism,
and is sustained by the qualities. Vexa-
tions are the fastenings that bind it around.
It revolves in the midst of grief and
destruction.


7. ht has actions and the instruments
of action. Ft islarge and is extended by
attachments. It is rendered unsteady by
cupidity and desire. It is produced by
variegated Ignorance.


8. it is full of fear and delusion, and
is the cause of the delusion of all beings.


“It moves towards joy and pleasure, and has


desire and anger tor its possession.


-g. Ht is mvade up of principles begin-
ning with greatness and ending with the
gross elements. It is macked by produc-


| tion and destruction gomg on ceaselessly.


Its speed is like that of the mind, and it
has the mind for its limit.


to, This wheel of life which ts connected
with pairs of opposites and devoid of cen-
sciousness, the universe with the very im-
meres should cast away, abridge, and
check.


11, That man who ever understands
correctly the motion and stoppage of this


wheel of life, is never seen to be deluded,


anféng all creatures,


12. Freed from all impressions, divested
of all pairs of opposites, freed from all sins,
he attains to the highest goal.

€


13% The householder, the Brahnvachariy
the hermit and the mendicant,—~«hese four


| modes of life have alk been said tote


the householder’s mode for their cuot.


“ASHWAMEDHA PARVA,


tg. The observance of ney system of
tules is prescribed in this world. Such ob-
secvance has always been highly spoken of.


15. He who has been first purified by
ceremonies, who has duly observed vows,
who belengs by birth to a family of bigh
qualifications, and who understands the
Vedas, sheuld return (from his preceptor’s
house).


16. Always devoted to his married wife,
acting like a good man, with his senses
under control, and full of faith, ene should
in this world perform the five sacrifices.


18—17. He who eats the residue after
feeding celestials and guests, who is given
to the observance of Vedic rites, who duly
celebrates, according to his means, sacri-
fices and gifts, who is unduly active with
his hands and feet, who is unduly active
with his eye, who is devoted to penances,
who is not unduly active with his words
and limits, comes under the category of
Shista or the good.


19. One should always bear the sacred
thread, wear white (clean) clothes, observe
pure vows, and should$ always mix with
good men, making gifts and practising self-
control. .


20. One should govern his fust and
stomach, practise universal compassion,
and be characterised by good conduct. One
should bear a bamboo-stick, and a water-
pot filled with water.


21. Having studied, one’ should teach
likewise should celebrate sacrifices himself
and officiate at the sacrifices of others. One
should also make gifts made to oneself.
Indeed, one’s conduct should be marked by
these six deeds. .


22. Know that three of these
should form the livelihood of the Brah-
manas, wts., teachiug (pupils), officiating
at the sacrifices of others, and the accep-
tance of gifts from a person who is pure.


23. As to the other duties which remain,
numbering three, vis, making of gifts,
study, and sacrifice, these are accompanied
by merit.


24. Observant of penances, self-con-
trolled, practising universal mercy’ and
forgiveness, and looking upon alt creatures
impartially, the man who is cenversant with
duties should never be careless about those
three acts. 5


25. The learned Brahmana of pure
heart, who leads the domestic mode of life
and practises rigid vows, thus devoted and


acts


52


thus performing all duties to the best of
his power, succeeds in sornquesing the
celestial region..


Ream


CHAPTER XLVI.


(ANUGITA PARVA,)—
Continued.


Brahman said :—


1—3. Properly studying thus to the best
of his power, in the way described above,
and likewise living as a Brahmacharin, one
who performs the duties of his own order,
endued with learning, observant of penances,
and with all the senses under control, de-
voted to what i¢ agreeable and beneficial ta
the preceptor, steady in practising tie duty
of truth, and always pure, should, witt
the permission of the preceptor, eat his
food without decrying it, He should eat
Havishya made from what is got in alms,
and should stand, sit, and take exercise
(as directed).


4. tHe should pour libations on the fire
twice a day, having purified himself and
with concentrated mind, He should always
carry a staff made of Vilwa or Palasha.


The raiments of the twice-bora man.
should be linen, or of cotton, or deer-skin,
or a cloth that is entirely brown-red.


6. There should also be a girdle made
of Munja-grass. He should bear matted
locks on head, and should perform his
ablutions daily, ~ He should bear the sacred
thread, study.the scriptures, divest himsel€
of cupidity, and be steady in the observance
ef vows.


7. He should also satisfy the celestials
with oblations of pure water, his mind
being controlled the while. Such a Brahmae-
chacin is worthy of being lauded,


8. With vital seed drawn up and mind
concentrated, one who is thus. devoted,
succeeds in conquering the celestial region.
Having attained to the Highest. seat, he
has not to return to birth, :


9. Cleansed by.all purificatory rites. and
having lived as a Brahmacharin, one should
next go out of his village and next live as
an ascetic in the forest, having cast off
{all attachments).


to. Clad in animal skins or barks of
trees, he should perform his ablutions
morning and evening. Always living within
the forest, he should never retura to an
inhabited place,


52


tt. fiomoring guests when they come,
he should give them, shelter, ‘and himself
live upon fruit3 and ‘leaves , and cemmoa
roots, and Shyamaka.


12. He should,.withaut being idle, live
on seach water as he gets, and air, and all
torest products. He should live upon these,
in due order, according to the regulations
of his initiation.


13. He should honor the guest that
comés to him with ‘alms of fruits and roots,
He should then, without -idleness, always
give whatever othec food he may have,


14. Controlling speech the while, he
should eat after satisfying celestials and
guests. . His. mind «should be shorn af
envy. He should eat fittle,. and depend
always on the celestials.


15. Self-controlled, practising universal
mercy, ‘and endued with forgiveness, he
should wear both beard and hair, -Cclebra-
ting sacrifices and devoting himself tuo the
study of the scriptures, he should be steady
in the observance of the duty of truth.


16. With body always in a state of
purity, gifted with cleverness, ever living
in the forest, with concentrated mind, and
senses in subjection, a hermit, thus devoting
himself, would conquer the celestial region,


17. A hauseholder, or Brahmacharin, or
forest-recluse, who would wish to acquire
Liberation, should have recourse to that
which las beeti called the best course of
conduct. . :


18. Having granted to alt creatures the
pledge of utter abstention from harm, be
should renounce all action. He should
contribute to the happiness of all creatures,
practise universal triendliness, govera all
his senses, and be an ascetic.


tg. Living upon food got without ask-


ing and without trouble, and that has come,


to him spontaneously, he should make a
fire. tle should go for alms to a place
whence sinoke has ceased to curk up and
where all the inhabitants have already
eaten.


20. The person who is conversant with
the conduct that leads to Liberation should
seek for alms after the vessels (used in
cooking) have been washed, He should
never tejuice when he gets anything, and
never lose heart if he vets anoying.


2t. Seeking just what is necessary for
supporting life, he should, with concentra-
ted mind, go about for alms, waiting for
the proper time. He should not wish for
earnings in commen with others, nor eat
when honoured,


ae a NE eR


MAHABAHRATA.


The mendicant should eonceat him
self for avoiding gifts with honour, White
eating, he should not eat the residue of
anether’s dish, nor such food as is bitter,
or astringent, or pungent,


22.


+ 23. He should not also eat such kinds
of food as havea sweet taste. He should
eat only so much as is necessary to keep
him alive.


24—26. The person conversant with
Liberation should obtain his livelihood
without obstructing any creature. fn bis
rounds of mendicancy he should nevee
fellow another, He should never show
his piety ; he should move about in as oli-
tary place, freed from passion. Ae should,


“resort to either an empty house, or a forest,


or the foot of soine tree, or a river, of a
mountain-cave for shehter, tn summer he
should pass only one nightin an inhabited
place; in’ the cainy season he may live in
one place.


27. ~He should move about the world
like a worm, having his path pointed out
by the Sun. From mercy for creatures,
he should walk on the Earth with his eyes
directed towards it.

28. He should never amass riches and
should avoid living with friends. The
man knowing Liberation should every day
do all his acts with pure water.


29--30. Such a man should always per-
form bis ablutions with water that has been
taken (from the river or tank). Abstention
feom barn, celibacy, truth, simplicity, free-
dom, frou: anger, freedom from decrying
othets, self-contre} and habitual freedom
from back-biting ; with senses controlled,
be should steadily pursue these eight vows.


3t. He should always practise a sinless
mode ef conduct, which is not deceptive er
crooked, Shorn of attachments he shou'd
always make one who cemes as a guest eat
(at least) a-morsel of food,


32. He should. eat just enough for live-
libood, the maintenance of life. He should
eat only such food as has been got by fair
means, and should not pursue the dictates
of desire.


33. He should newer accept aty other
thing than foed and clothing only. Fhe
should, again, accept only as much as he
can-eat and nothing more.


34. He should not be induced to accépt
gifts from others, nor sheuld he make- gifts.
to others. Owing to the helplessness ‘of
creatures, the wise man skould alweys share
with others, -


35. Heshould not misappropriate others’
belongings, nor- should he take anything


ASH WAMEDIUA PARVA. 33


without being asked. He should not, ! which is-without head and without stomach,
" having enjoyed anything, become so aiechs which is free from the action of all qualities,
ed to it as to seek for tt once more.’ | Which is absolute, untainted, and stable,
36. One should take only earth, water, which js without smell, without taste and
pebbles, leaves, flowers, and fruits, which are toych, without color, and, hlrate pounds
net owned by any body, as they come, which is fo be Seay wee (by AA a
when one wishes to do any act. study,) which is unattached, which is without
; flesh, which is free from anxiety, unfading,
_37-_ One should net live by the occupa- | and divine, and, lastly, which ‘though
tion of an artisan, nor should he covet gold. | jiving in a house resides in’ all creatures,
One should not hate, nor teach ; nor should succeed in escaping déath.


one have any belongings. . go. here the understanding reaches

38. One should eat only whatiis conse: { not, nor the senses, nor the celestials, nor the
peer by faith. One should shun contro: | Vedas, ‘nor sacrifices, nor the regions .(of
versies. One should fellow the nectarine superior bliss), nor penance, ner yows..
course of conduct. One should never be :
attached to anything, and should never
enter into relations of intimacy with any
creature.


51. The attainment to it by, those wha

| are endued with knowledye is said to be

without comprebension of symbals. Hence

: the man who knows the prepertics of that

39. One should not perform, nor cause | which is shorn of symbols, should practise
to perform, any such deed as inyolves | the truths of piety.

expectation of fruit or destruction of fife


ar the hoarding of siches cearticles. 52 he learned man, living as a Hoiwes


hotder, should adopt that conduct which ts
4o. Rejecting all objects, content with a | conformable: to true -knowledge, Though

very little, one shouldjmove about (home- undeluded, te should practise piety like

less), pursuing an equal conduct towards {| One that is deluded, without finding fault

all creatures mobile and immobile. without it.

53. Without finding fault with the


41. One should never annoy another practices of the good, he should act ia such


being ; nor should one be annoyed with
hal _ | a_way for practising piety as may induce
anether. He who is trusted. By alberes others to always disregard him. rn
tures is considered as the foremost of those
persons who understand Liberation. © = 54-57 Uhat man who is gifted with
sucn a conduct is said to be the ‘foremost
42. One should not think of the past | of ascetics.. ‘Fhe senses, the objects of the
nor feel anxious about the future. One | senses, the (five) great elements, mind,
should disregard the present, biding time, f understanding, egoism, the unmanitests
with fixed mind. Purusha also, after comprehending these
43. One {should never defile anything duly with the help of correct - inferences,
by eye, mind, or speech, Nor should one one attains to the c lestial region, released
do anything which is wrong, openly or in ‘from all: fetters. One conversant with the
secret. truth, understanding these at the-time of the


; ‘ : : termination of his life, should meditate, exe
44 Withdrawing his senses like the = s life, sh me #,¢€


: draw A 2 Koala clusively resting on one point, hen, “de-
tortoise withdrawing its limbs, one shou pending on none, one acquires Liberation.
govern his senses and mind, cultivate a


: Freed from all attachments, like the, wind
thoroughly peaceful understanding, and | in space, with his hoarded up means. ex-
‘+ seek to master every subject. hausted, without distress’ of any sort, he
45. Freed from all pairs of opposites, | attains to the highest goal. ‘
never bending his head in respect, abstain-


ing from the rites requiring the utterance : coerced.

of Swaha, one should be freé from mine- : x ,

ness, and egoism. With purified soul, owe CHAPTER XLVIE.

should never seek'to acquire what one has '

not and protect what one has. (ANUGITA PARVA.)—<
46. Eree from expectations, shorn “of as Continued.


qualities, endued with tranquility, “ one }
should be free from all attacnments, and Brahman said: i—


should depend on none. Attached to one’s “4. The ancients who always pe ito.
own self and understanding all subjects, one speak truth, say that Renunciatiyn is
becomes, forsooth, liberated. peuance. Brabmanas, living in that whieh


47—49. Those who perceive the self, | has Brahma for its origin, understand
which is without hands and feet ard back, | Knowledge to be high Braluna,


54


2. Brahma is very far off, and its attain-
Ment depends upon a knowledge of the
Vedas. It is free from all pairs of opposites,
it is shorn of all quafities; it is eternal ;
it is gifted with unthinkable qualities ; it
is supreme.

3. It is by knowledge and penance that
those gifted with wisdom see that which is
the highest. Indeed, they who are of un-
sultied minds, who are purged of every sia,
and who have transcended all passion and
darkness (succeed in seeing it.)


4. They who are always given to re-
Nunciation, and who are conversant with
the Vedas, sueceed in attaining to the
supreme Lord who js at one with the path
of happiness and peace, by the help of
penance.


5. Penance, it has been said, is light.
Conduct leads to piety. Knowledge is said
to be the highest. Renunciation is the best
penance,


6. He who understands self threugh
accurate determination of all subjects, un-
disturbed, which is at one with Knowledge,
and which lives in all principles, succeeds
in going everywhere.


7. That learned man who sees associa-
tion and dissociation, and unity in diversity,
is freed from misery.


8. He who never desires for anything,
who despises nothing, becomes eligible,
even when living in this world, for assimila-
tion with Brahma.


g. He who is conversant with the truths
about qualities of Greatness, and under-
stands the Pradhana as existing in all
principles, who is free from mineness and
egoism, forsooth, becomes liberated,


to. He who is freed from alt pairs of
opposites, who does not bend his head to
any body, who has got over the rites of
Swaha, succeeds by the help of tranquility
alone in attaining to that which is free from
pairs of opposites, which is eternal, and
which is shorn of qualities.


it. Renouncing all action, good or bad,
developed from qualities, and casting off
both truth and falsehood, a creature, for-
sooth, becomes liberated.


12—1§. Having the unmanifest for the
seed of its origin, with the understanding
for its trunk, with the great principle of
egoism for its collection of boughs, with
the senses for the cavities of its little sprouts,
with the (five) great elements for its large
branches, the objects of the senses for its
smaller branehes, with leaves that are ever
present, with flowers that always embellish


MAHABHARATA.


it, and with fruits both agreeable and dis- —
agreeable always produced, is the eternaf
tree of Brahma which forms the support of
all creatures. Cutting and piereing that
tree with knowledge of truth as the sword,
the wise man, abandoning the fetters whictt
are made of attachment and which cause
birth, decrepitude, and death, and freeing
himself from mineness and egoism, fersooth,
becomes liberated.


16. These are the two birds, which are
immutable, which are friends, and whiclz
should be known as unintelligent. That
other who is different frem these two is
called the Intelligent.


17. When the inner self, which is shora
of knowledge of nature, which is (as it were)
unintelligent, becomes conversant with that
which is above nature, then, understanding
the Kshetra, and gifted with an intelligence
that is above all qualities and apprehends
everything, becomes released from all sins.


eee


CHAPTER XLVIIE.


( ANUGITA PARVA. })—~
Continued.


Brahman said :—


1. Some consider Brahma as a tree.
Seme consider Bcrahma as a great forest.
Some consider Brahma as _ unmanifest.
Some consider it as transcendant and freed
from every distress,


2—§5. They think that all this is pro-
duced from and absorbed into the unmani-
fest. He who, even for the shart space of
time covered by a single breath, when his
end comes, becomes equable, attaining to ~
the self, fits himself for immortality. Con-
trolling the self in the self, even for the
space of a wink, one goes, through the tcan-
quility of the self, to that which forms the
endless acquisition of those that are endued
with knowledge. Restraining the vital airs
again and again by controlling them accor--
ding to the method galled Pranayama (sup-
pression of vital -ics), by the ten or the
twelve, he attains,.o that which is beyond the
four and twenty. “Thus having first acquired
a tranquil soul, one attains to the fruition
of all his desires.


6. When the quality of Goodness pre-
dominates in what originates from the
Unmanifest, it becomes fit<for immortality.
They who are conversant with Goodness
speak higly of it, saying that there is nothin g
superior to Goodness,


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA.


9, By infetente we know that the Purusha
ts dependent on Goodness. ©O best of
twice-born ones, it is impossible to attain
to Purusha by any other means.


8. Forgiveness, courage, abstention
from injury, equability, truth, sincerity,
knowledge, gift, and renunciation, are said
to be the marks of that course of conduct
which arises out of Goodness. .


g. It is by this inference that the wise’


believe in the oneness of Purusha and Good-
ness. ‘There is no doubt in this,


to. Some learned men that are devoted
to knowledge hold that Kshetrajna and
Nature are one. This, however, is not
correct.


it. If it is said that Nature is different
from Purusha, that also will indicate a want
of consideration. .


“42. Distinction and association should
be truly known. Unity and diversity are
likewise laid down, ‘That is the doctrine of
the learned. Even both unity and diversity
are seen in the gnat and Udumvara. e


13. Asa fish in water is different from it,
So is the relation of the two (vis., Purusha
and Nature.) Indeed, their relation is like
that of water drops on the leaf of the lotus,


The preceptor said :—

14. hus addressed, those learned Brah-
manas, who were the foremost of men, felt
some doubts and (therefore) they once more
questioned the Grandfather,


ee


CHAPTER XLIX.
(ANUGITA PARVA.)-—=*


Continued,


The Rishis said :—


1. Which among the duties is considered
to be the most worthy of being performed ?
‘The various modes of duty, we see, are con-
tradictory.


2. Some say that it continues after the
body (is destroyed}. Others say that it
does not exist. Some say that everything is
doubttul. Others have no doubts.


3. Some say that the eternal (principle)
is not eternal. Some say that it exists, and
some that it exists not. Some say it is of
one form, o¢ twofold, aud others that it is
mixed.


3
4- Some Brahmanas who are conversant
with Brahma and utterers of truth con-
sider it to be one. Others, that it is distinct ;
and others again that it is manifold,


| down


55


5. Some say that both time and space
exist } others, that itis not so. Seme bear
matted locks on their heads and are clad in
deer-skins. Others have shaven heads and
go entirely naked.


6. Some abstain entirely from bathing,
and some are for bathing. Such differences
of views may be seen among celestials and
Beahmanas conversant with Beahma and
gifted with preceptions of truth.

9. Some are for taking food } while seme
are given to fasts. Some speak highly of
action. Others speak highly of perfect
tranquility, ,

8. Some applaud Liberation,
various sorts of enjoyments,


g. Some desire various kinds ef riches,


Some,


Some, poverty. Some say that means
should be resorted to. Others, that this is
hot so.


1o. Some are given toa life of absten«
tion from injury. Others are inclined to
destruction. Some are for merit and glory.
Others say that this is not so.


11. Some are devoted to geodness,
Others are established on doubt. Some
are for pleasure. Some are for pain,
Other peopte say that it is meditation.


12. Other learned Brahmanas say that
it is Sacrifice. Others, again, say that it
is gift. Others speak highly of penances.
Others, the study of the scriptures.


t3. Some say that knowledge and re-
nunciation (should be followed). Others
who ponder on the elements, say that it is
Nature. Some speak too much of every
thing, Others, nothing.


14. O foremost of the celestials, duty
being thus confused and full of contradic-


‘tions of various kinds, we are deluded and


unable tu arrive at any conclusion.


15. People stand up for acting, saying,
This is good, This is good.—fe who follow
a certain duty speaks highly of that duty as
the best. <

16. Therefore our understanding breaks
and our mind is distracted. We,
therefore, wish, O best of all beings, to
know what is good.


“197. You should declare to us, after this, ;
what is (so) mysterious, and what is the
cause of the connection between the Soul
and Nature, :

18, ‘Thus addressed by those learned
Brahmanas, the illustrious creator of the
worlds, endued with great intelligence and
possessed of a righteous soul, described to
them accurately what they asked, we


CHAPTER Li
(ANUGITA PARVA.)—
Continied,

Brahman said :— .
t. Well then, [ shall describe té you


what you ask. earn what was told by a
preceptor to a disciple who came to him.


. 2. Hearing it ali, do you settle properly
(what i it should be}. Abstention from in-
juring any creature is considered as the
torertiost of all duties. .


3. That is the highest seat, shorn of
anxiety and forming a mark of holiness.
The ancients who had seen the Certain
truth, have said that knowledge is the
highest happiness.


4—6. Hence, orie betonies freed af all
Sins by pure knowledge. ‘They who are
éngaged in destruction and kara, they who
Are infidels in conduct, have to go to Helt
‘on account of their being gifted with cupi-
‘dity and delusion, Those who, without
idleness, perform acts, moved thereto by
expectation, become repeatedly born in this
world and sport in happiness. ‘Those mien
who, gifted with learriing and wisdom, per-
‘form acts with faith, free from expectations,
and possessed of Coricentiation of niind, ate
Said to perceive clearly.


7—8. 1 shall, after this, describe how the
association and the disassociation takes
place of Soul and Nature. Ye best of meni,
listen. ‘Lhe relation here is said to be that
between the object and the subject.


g. Purusha is always the subject; and
Nature the object. It has beew ex-
plained, by what has been said in a pre-
vious part of the discourse where it has
‘been pointed out, that they exist after the
manner of the gnat and the Udunrvara,


to, An object of enjoyment as it is,
.Nature .is unintelligent and knows nothing.
He, however, who enjoys it, issaid to Know
it, Soul being enjoyer, Nature is enjoyed,


11. ‘The wise have said tnat Nature is
always made up’of pdirs of opposites. Soul
is, on the other hand, destitute of pairs of
opposites «devoid of parts, eternal, and-free,
mvout its esseuce, from qualities.

12. He lives in everything alike, and
walks with knowledge. He always enjoys
Nature as a lotus leaf (enjoys) water. .


13. Endued with knowledge, he is never
fainted even if brought into contact with
‘all the qualities,


14. Forsooth, Purusha is unattached like


. the unsteady drog of water on the lotus-


MAHABHARATA.


leaf. This is thé certdin conclusion that


-Nature is the property of Piirusha.


15—16. The relation between these two
(vis., Purusha and Nature) is like that
existing Between matter and its maker. Ag
one goes into a dark place carrying a light
with him, so those who wish for the
Supreme, proceed with the light of Nature.
As long as ttatter and quality exist; so long
the light shines.


17. The flame, however, becomes put
out when matter and. quality (or oil and
wick) are exhausted. ‘Khus Nature is mani-
fest; while Pucusha is said to be un-
manifest.


18. Understand this, ye learned Brah-
manas! Well, L shall now tell you some-
thing triore. With even a thousand (exe
planatiens), one who hds a bad understan-
ding succeeds not in acquiring knowledge.


1g. One, however, who is gifted witly
intelligerice succeeds in acquiring happiness,
through only a forth share (of explanas
tions), ‘Thus should the accomiplishment of
duty be uderstood as dependent on means.


zo. For the intelligent man, having know-
ledge of means, succeeds in searing
supreme happiness.


Zt. As some man travelling along a road
without provisions of his journey, proceeds
with great uneasiness and may even meet
with destruction before te reaches the end
of his journey, so should it be known that iu
deeds there may or miay not be fruits.

22—24. The exasination of what is
agreeable and what disagreeable in one’s
own self, yields benefit. ‘The progress in life
of a man who is devoid of the perception
of trutly is like that of a man who rashly
journeys on a long road unseen before.
Vhe progress, however, of those who are
gifted with intelligence, is like that of met
who journey alonp the same road, riding
on a cae to which’ are yoked (feet)
borses and which moves with swiftness.
Having ascended to the top of a mountain,
one should not cast his €yes on the sutiace
of the earth,


25. Seeing a. man, even though travel
ling on a car, afflicted and rendered insen-
sible by pain, the intelligent man journeys
on a car as long as there is a car-path.


26.
car-path end, abandans his car for going
on. ‘Thus dogs the intelligent man who
knows the ordinances about truth and Yoga,
proceed.

27. Kuowing the qualities, such a maa,
proceeds, comprehending what is next and
next.


The learned man, when he sees the *


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA.


#829. As one who plunges, without a
boat, inta the terrible ocean, with only olve’s
two arms, through delusion, undoubtedly
wishes for destruction; while the wise man
conversant with distinctions, goes into the
water, with a boat having oars, and soon
crosses the lake without fatigue, and having
crossed it gets to the other shore and leaves
off the boat, freed from the thought of
mineness.


30. ‘Fhis has been already explained by
the illustration of the car and the pedestrian,
One who has been overwhelmed. by delusion
nn account of attachment, sticks to it hke a
fisherman to his boat.


3t. Overcome by the idea of mineness,
one wanders within its narrow range. After
embarking on a boat itis not possibie in
moving about on land.


32. Likewise, it is not possible in moving
about on water after one has pot on a car.
There are thus various actions aliout various
objects,


33-34. And as action.is performed in
this world, so does it result to those who
perform them. ‘Phat which is void of smell,
void of taste, and void of touch and sound,
that which is meditated upon by the sages
with the help of their understanding, is’ said
to be Pradhbana. Now, Pradhana is un-
manifest. A development of the tnmani-
est is Mahat. ; ;


_ 35. A development of Pradhana when it
has) become Mahat is Egoism.. From
egoism emanates the great elements,


36. And from the great elements rés-
pectively, the objects of sense proceed.
The onmanifest is of the nature of seed. It
produced its essence. «


37. We have heard that the great soul
has the virtues of a seed, and that is a pro-
duct. Eyoism is of the nature of seed and
is a product again and again.


393—49. And the five great elertienits are
of the nature of seed and prodticts, “Uhe
objects of the five great elements ate gifted
with the nature of seed, and’ yield products.
Vhese have-inteligence for their pfoperty.
Among them, space has one equality; wird,
is said to have.two. :


40. Light, it is ssid, is gifted. with thrée:
qualities; and, water as possessed of foun
qualities, “Eurth, consisting of mobile and
simmobiles, should be known as possessed of
five qualities. .


41-42. She is a goddess. who, is the’
Source Of alf entities and abounds. with
examples of the agreeable and the disagtee-
able. Sound, likewise touch, color, taste,
-and ‘smeil fdr the fifth,—these are the five


&


57


qualities of éarth,.O foremost ef twice-born
ones. Smell always belongs to earth, and
smell is said to be of various kinds. -


43. LI shall describe at length the numers
ous qualities of smell. Smell is: agreeable
or disagreeable, sweet, sour, pungent,
diffusive and compact, oily and dry, and
clear, . x
44. Thus smell, which belongs to- the
earth, should be kuown as of ten sorts.


45. Sound, touch, color, and taste have
been said to be the qualities of water,
Lo shail now speak ot the qualities of
Taste. Taste has been said to be of vati-+
ous kinds. ; 7 a:

46. Sweet, sour, pungent, bitter, astrins
gent, and saline likewise. Taste, which hag
been said to belong to water, is thus of si€
varieties. ,

47. . Sound, totich, and éolor,—these ‘are
the three qualities of light. Color is thé
quality of light, and color is said to be 6f
varions sorts. — roo

48—49. White, dark, red, blue, yellow,
and grey als6, and stiort, fong, minute,
gross, square atid circulaé, of these twelve
virigties is colo¢ which appertains to tight.
Ubese should be ‘understood by “Brahimanas
venerablé for yeas, knowing duties, and
teuthful in speech,. .


- 59, Sound: arid -touch shduld be known
as tlie two qualities of wind. Touch has
been said to ve of various sadrts. ;


5t—52. Rouzh, cold and hot, tender
and clear, hard, oily, ‘simiooth, ‘slippery,
painful and soft, of. twelve kinds is touch,
which is the quality of. wind, as said by
Brahnranas trowned with success, tsowe
ing duties; and possessed of a sight of
truth. "
" .g3 Now, space has anfy one quality,


aud that is said to be sound. 1° shall
speak at length of the munrerous qualities
of sound. .


- g4. Shadafa, Rishabha, together witlr
Gandhara, Madhyama, and likewisé Pan-
cnama ; after this should be known Nishada,
and then Dhaivata, besides chese, there are


t ‘| agreeable sounds and disagreeable sounds,


cotnpact;-and of many ingredients.


55. Sound which is born of space should
thus be Kaown tobe often sorts. Space is
the highest of the (five) elements, Egoilsiv
is above it. ; ci 8

6. Above .égoisnt is understanding,

Above understanding is the soul. Above
[the soul is the Unmanifest. Above the Vas

manifest is Parashay


53
T
7. One who knows which is superior

and inferier among existent creatures, who
38 conversant with the ordinances about
all deeds, and who forms himself the
soul of all creatures, attains to the Uufading
Soul. FS


CHAPTER LI.
(ANUGITA PARVA,)—


Continued.


Brahmanga said :—


4. Since the mind is the ruler of these
five elements, for controlling and bringing
them forth, the mind, therefere, is the soul
of the elements.


‘a, The mind always presides over the
great elements. The understanding pro-
claims power, and is called the Soul.


3. ‘The mind yokes the senses as a
charioteer yokes good horses, The senses,
the mind, and the undetstanding are always
joined to the Soul,


4 The individual soul, mounting the
chariot to which big horses are yoked 2and
which has the understanding for the reins,
drives about on a)} sides.


With all the senses attached to it
(lor steeds), with the mind for the charie-
teer, and the understanding for the eternal
Feins, exists the great Brahma-car.


6. Indeed, that man gifted with learning
and wisdom who always understands the
Brahma-car in this way, is never possessed
by delusion in the midst of all. entities.


7—9- This forest of Brahma begins
with the unmanifest and ends with gross
objects. It includes mobile and immobile
objects, and gets light from the radiance
of the sun and the moon, and is decorated
with planets and = censtellations, It is
decked, again, on all- sides. with nets of
rivers and mauntains. Jt is always em-
bellished likewise by {various kinds of
waters. It is the means of livelihood for
all creatures. it is, again, the end of all
living creatures. kn that forest the Kshe-
trajna always moves about.


10, Whatever exist in this world, mobile

_and immofile, are the very frst to be dis-

solved away. Alter this (are dissolved)
those quilittes which compose all entities. 4


ti—it2a, Afuer the qualities (are dis-
solved) the five elements. Such is the
giadstroa of entities, Czlestiats, men,


MANABHARATA.


Gandharvas, Pishachas, Asuras, (and)
Rakshasas, have ali originated from Nature,
and not from actions, nor from a cause.
The Brahmanas, who are creators of the
universe, are born here again and again,


13. All that originates from them dis
solves, when the time comes, in those very
five great elements like billows in the
ocean,

14. All’the great elements are beyond
those elements which form the universe.
He who is released from those five elements
goes to theshighest, goal.


55. The‘ powerful Prajapati created
all this by the mind only, Similarly Rishis
attained to the status of celestials by the
help of penance.


16. Likewise, those who have acquired
perfection, who were capable of the con-
centration of Yoga, and who Jive on fruits
and roots, likewise perceive the triple world
by penance. .


17. Medicines and herbs and all the
various sciences are acquired by means of
penance alone, for all acquisition has
penance for its root.


18. Whatever is difficult of acquisition,
difficult to learn, difficult to defeat, difficult
to pass through, can all be acquired by
penance, for penance is irresistible.


19. One who drinks alcoholic liquors,
one who kills a Brabmana, one who steals,
one who destroys a foerus, one who violates
one’s preceptor’s bed, becomes cleansed of
such sin by penance well performed.


20-~21, Human beings, departed manes,
deities, (sacrificial) -animals, beasts and
birds, and all other creatures mobile and
immobile, by always devoting themselves
to penances, become successful by penance
alone, Similarly the celestials gifted with
great powers of illusion, have attained to
the celestial region. are


22. Those who withont idleness. perform
deeds with expectations, being full of
egoism, approach the presence’ of
Prajapati.

23- Those great ones, however, who are
devoid of mineness and freed from egoism
through the pure contemplation of Yoga,


tacquire the great and highest regions,


24. Fhose who ‘understand. best the


self, having acquired Y¥-oga contentplation


and having their minds always cheerful,


renter into the unmanifes: accumulation of
; happiness.


a5. Those persons who are freed from


}egotsm, and who are re-born after having


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA.


attained ta the fulness of Yoga contem-
plation, enter into the highest region re-
Served for the great, eis., the Unmanifest.


26—27. Born from that same unmani-
fest (principle) and attaining to the same
once more, freed from the qualities of Dark.
ness and {ynorance and adhering to only
the quality of Goodness, one becomes
freed {som every sin and creates all things.
Such a one should be known to be Kshe-
trajua in perfection. He who knows him
knows the Veda.


28. Attaining to pure knowledge from
(restraining) the mind, the ascetic should
sit self-comtrotled. One necessarily becomes
that on which one’s mind is set. ‘This is
an eternal mystery.


2g. ‘That which has the unmanifest for
its beginning and gross qualities for its
end, has been said to have Ne-science for
its mark. But do you understand that
whose nature is short of qualities.


30. Of two syilables is Mrityu (death);
of three syllable is the etersal Brahma.
Mineness is death, and the opposite of
tnineness is the eternal.


3t. Some men who are fed by bad under-
standing speak hiptly of action. © ‘Vhose,
however. who are unmbered among the
reat ancients aever speak highly of action.


32. By action is acreature born with
body which isgy made up of the’ sixteen,
Cfeue) Knowledge swallows up Purusha.
This is what is highly acceptable to eaters
of ambrosia. .


33- Therefore, those whose vision ex-
tends to the other end fave no attachment
to actions. ‘This Purusha, however, is fui]
of knowledge and aot full of actios. :


34. He dies not who understands Him
who is immortal, immutable, incomprehen-
sible, eternal and indestructible—Him who
is the restrained Soul and who is above all
attachments.


35. He who thas understands the Soul
to which there is nothing prior, .which is
uncreated, immutable, unconquered, and
incomprehensible even to those witd are
eaters of nectar, certainly becemes himself
incomprehensible and immortal through
these means.


36. Removing all impressions and con-
trolling the soul in the soul, he understands
that auspicious Bralima than which nothing
greater exists,


37- Upon the understanding becoming
clear, he succeeds in acquiring tranquillity.


The mark of tranquillity is like that what |


takes place in adceam. - a


38. This is the end of these liberated
ones who ase intent on Knewledge. They
see all chose movements which are bore -of
successive developments. z


39- This is the end of thase who are
unattached to the world. This is the eternat

ractice. This is the acquisition of men of

nowledge. Ttisis the uncensured mode
of conduct.


40. This end is capable of being at-
tained by one who is alike to all creatures,
who is without attachment, who is without
expectations, and who looks equally on all
things.


41. Ehave now described everything ta
you, O foremost of twice-born Rishis! Du
you act thus immediately, you will then
acquire success.


The Preceptor said :—


42. Thus addressed by the pre¢eptoc
Brahman, those great sages acted accord.
ingly and then attained to many happy
regions.


43- Do you also, O blessed one, duly
act according to the words of Brahman as -
described by me, QO you of pure soul,
You will then acquire success,


Vasudeva said :—


44. ‘Ubus instructed in the principles of
high religion by the preceptor, the pupil,
O son of Kunti, did everything accordingly
and then attained to Liberation.


45. Having done all that he should have
done, the pupil, O perpetuater of Mura's
race, attained to that seat going where. ond
has not to grieve,


Arjuna said :—

46. Who, indeed, was that Brahnana,;
O Krishna, and whe the pupil, O Janard-
dana! ‘Truly, if am worthy of hearing it,
do you then tell me, Q Lord!


Vasudeva said :—~ :

47. € am the preceptor, O mighty-
armed one, and know that the mind is my
pupil. Fheough my affection for you, O
Dhananjaya, & have described this mystery
to you.

48. f& you have any love for me, O
Perpetuator of Kuru family, da you then,
after having heard these in-tructions about
the Soul, always act culy, O you of excellent


vows,


49. Then. when this religion has been
duly practised, Q- destroyer. of foes, yo
wilf become freed from ail your sius
attaia to perfect liberativn,


ny
med


60 MAHABHARATA.


50. Formerly, when the hour of battle 9 O destroyer of Madhu, the soul of
came, this very religion, O you of mighty- | every creature is always born of your
arms, was described by me, Do you, there- | energy. Playful sport is yours., Earth
fore, set yout nind on it, and sky, O lord, are your illusion.


gt. And now, O chief of Blhiarata’s race,| “10. “This entire universe, consisting o
it islong since that I saw the lord niy | mobile and immobile objects, is established
father. [wish to see him again, with your | on you, You create, by modification, the
leave, O Phalguna. four ‘orders of Being.


£9 Ss tr. You create the Earth, the Sky, and
Vaishampayana. said: Heaven, O Destroyer cof Madhu. ‘The


§2. Dhananjaya replied to Krishna who | stainless lunar light is your smile. ‘Lhe
had said so, —We shall ga to-day from this seasons ate, your senses,


town to Hastinapur, as ; fl
i : . 12. The f ever-moving * wind {fis your
53. Meeting king Yudhishthira of virtu- | breath, and death, existing eternally is your
ous soul there, and informing him you shail | anger, [iy your grace is the guddess of


then yo to your awa city, prosperity. Indeed, Shree is always esta
: blished-in you, O you of the highest intelli-
ee : gence,

. 13. You are the sport; you are their
CHAPTER LIL contentment; yau their intelligence, you
: ‘ aa their forgiveness, you their inclinations,
(ANUGITA PARVA. )— “| you their beauty. You are the universe
-| with Rs mobile and immobile objecis. At
Continued. the end of the ave. it is you, O sinless one,

who are called destruction,
Vaishampayana, said :— 1g. lam incapable of reciting’ all youe


1. After this, Krishna ordered Daruka, qualities in course’ of even a long period.
saying,—‘Let my car be yoked.’ Within | You are the Soul and.the Supreme Soul.
a very shoit space of time Daruka ivfoem- | bow ta you, O you of eyes like the (p: tats
ed (his maser), saying It thas been | of the) lotus.
yoked.”


2. The son of Pandu then: ordered all
his attendants, saying.—-‘Prepsre your-
selves and be ready. We shall go to-day to
Hastinapur.


3. Thus addressed, O king, the army
got themselves ready, and informed Pritha’s
son of immeasurable energy, . saying,—
Everything is ready,’


15~-18 O you who are irresistible, F have
learnt it fromgZNarada and Devata and the.
island-born (Vyasa), and the Kure yiand- |
father also, that all ibis (universe) rests
on you. You are the one Lord of «lt
creatures, Vhis, G sivless one, that you
have described ‘to wre en acéeount of
your favour for myself, I shall duly - accom.
plish in full, Qo Janarddana! Highly
wouderfal is this which you have done fron
desire yf doing what is agreeable to. us,
vis., the desteuction in baitle of the Kau-
tava (price), the son of Onhetarashtra.
Phat army bad been burnt by you which
I (subsequently) deieated in batife. ;


4. Then those two friends, vi#s., Keeishasi i
and the son: of Pandu, ascended their car |
and proceeded on the journey, Peres in |
delightful conversation, - |

|


5. To Vasuteva seated on the ear, the
highly energetic Dhananjaya once more


said these wor ds, O chief of the Bharatas: 19-20. That feat was’ achieved by you


en account of which victory becime mine !
By the-power of your intelligence was.shown
the means by. which was duly effected the
destruction- of Duryodbana m battle, as
also of Karna, ag of the sinful king of the
Sindhus,‘and Bhurishravas.


6. O perpetuator ef the Vrishni race, the
king has got victory through your grace.
Ali h's enemies have been killed, avd he has
recovered his kingdom without a thorn in it.


7. O Ydestroyer: of Madha, on you the
Pandavas have got a powerful protector
Having obtained you for our rait we have
crossed the Kuru ocean,


2t. I shall accomplish fall that which,
O sonfof Devaki, pleased with me you have
declared to myself, 1 do ootcentertain any
doubt in this. . :


&

22. Going to king YWudhishthira. of
righteous soul, 1 shall, O sinless one, urge
hin’ te dismiss you, WO ‘you whe are Con
“versant with every duty,


8. O yon who have this universe for
your handiwork, salutations to you, O Soul
of the universe, "OG best ofialt beings’ in the
universe. I kiow you itt that measure in
wich { an sppioved by you,


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA.


23. O ford, I apptove of depacture for
Dwaraka. You shall soon see my maternal
uncle, O Janarddana.


24. You shall also see the iceeistible
Valadeva and other chiefs of thetVrishni
race !’—Thus conversing ‘with each other,
the two reached the city of Hastinapur.


35. They then, with cheerful hearts, and
without any anxiety, entered the palace of
Dhritarashtca which resembled the mansion
of Shakra.


26—28. They then saw, fo monarch,king
Divritarashtra, and highly intelligent Vidura,
and king Yudhishthira ; and the irresistibly
Bhimasena, and the two sons of Madri by
Pandu; and king Diritarashtra seated;
and the unvanquished Yuyutsu; and
Gandhari of great wisdom, and Pritha,
and the beautiful Kvishna, and the other
ladies of Bharata’s race with Subhadra
for the first. ;

29-31.
who used to wait upon Gandhari.
approaching king Dinitarashtra, those twe
chastisers of enemies announced theic names
and touched his feet. Indeed, those great
ones also touched the feet of Gaidhant and
Pritha and king Yudhishthira the just,
and Bhima. Embracing Vidura also, they
enquired after his well-being.


They also saw all those ladies


32—33. In the company of all those
persons, Arjuna and Krishna then ap-
proached king  Diritarashtea (again).


Night came and then the intelligent king
Divitarashtra dismissed all those perpe-
tuaters of Kuru’s race as also Jawarddana
for retiring to theic respective rooms, Per-
mitted by the king, all of them entered.
their respective apartments.


34-—-36. Krishna of great energy pro-
ceeded to the apartments of Dnananjaya.
Adored duly and furnished wh every
object of comfort and enjoyment, Krishna
of great intelligence passed the night in
happy sleep with Dhananjaya as his com-
panion, When the night passed away and
morning came, ‘the two heroes, finishing
their morning frites and adoring their
persons propetly, proceeded to the palace
of king Vudhishthira the just. There
Yudhishthira the just, of great might, sat
with his neinisters,


37: ‘The two great ones, entering that
well-adortied chamber, saw king Yudhish-
thira the just like the two Ashwins seeing
the chief ot the celestials,


38. Meeting> the king, he of Vrishni’s
race, as also that foremost hero of Kuru’s
‘race, getting the permission of Yudhish-
thira whe was highly pleased wit thea,
sat themselves down, ;


Theo>


Of

39- Then the king, gifted. with great
intelligence, seeing those two friends,
became desirous of addressing then, Soon


that best of kings, that foreinost of speakers,
addressed them in the following words,


Yudhishthira said :—


4o. Ye heroes, ye foremost ones’ of
Yadu’s aud Kuruy’s race, it appears that -
-ye two are desirous of saying something to
me. Do ye say what is-in- your mind. I
shall soun satisfy it, Do net hesitade.


4t. Tbus addressed; Phalguna, well
conversant with speech, humbly approached
king Yudhishthira thé just and then said
these words.


42. Highly powerful, Vasudeva ‘Here,
O «king, is long absent frem home. He
wishes, with your permission, to see his sive,


“43.
to tue city of the Anarttas |


O hero, grant him permission,


Yudhishthira said :—

44. O lotus-eyed one, blessed be you!
O slayer of Madhu, do you-ge this very day
to the city of Dwaravati fur seeing, O
powerful one, that foremost ene gf Sura’s
face.


45- O mightysarmed Keshava, your
departure is approved by me! You trave
Not seev my maternal uncle wus also the
goddess Devaki fur a loug time.

.


Let -him go, if you think it proper,
You should,


46. Meeting my maternal uncle ‘and,
gving to Valadeva also, O giver of honors,
you, will, O ‘you of great wisdony, adore
both of them at any word as they deserve.


47- Do you also think of me daily 48
also of Bhima, that foremost of powerful
men, and of Phalguna aud Nasula aud
Sahadeva, O giver of honours, t


48. Having seen the Anarttas, and
your father, O opighty- armed one, and the
Viishois, you will return. to my heise
sacrifice, O sinless one ! :


49 Do you then go, taking with you
vatious kinds of gems and various sorts ,of
wealih. Do you, O hero of the Satwata
race, also take with you whatever else you
like,

50. It is through your grace, O Keshava
that that the whole. Earth, O hero, has
come under our sway and all our enemies
have been killed.


st. When king’ Yudhishthira the just
-of Kuru’s race said so,- Vasydeva, that
foremost of men, said these words (in
reply). : a.


62°


Vasudeva said :—

52. O migtty-armed one, all jewels
and gems, all riches and the entire Earth,
Lelong to you #lone, Whatever wealth
axists in my house, you, lerd,
ere always the owner thereof.


$53. To him Yudhishthira, the son of
Dharma, said,—‘Be it so’—and then duly
adored (Krishna) the eldest brother, gifted
with great energy, of Gada. Vasudeva
then proceeded to his paternal aunt (Kunti).
Duly honowing her, he circumbulated her _
bedy.


54- He was properly accosted by hee
in retutn, and then by all the others having
Vidura for their first. ‘fhe four-armed
eldest brother of Gada then statted from
Nagapura on his excellent car.


53. Placing his sister, the lady Subhadra,
on the car, the mighty-armed Janarddana,
then, with the permission of both Yudhish-
thira and (Kunti} his paternal aunt, started,
accompanied by a large train of citizens.


56. The hero who had the foremost of
apes on his banner, as also Satyaki, and
the two sons of Madravati, and Vidura
of incomparable intelligence, and shima
himself whose tread resembled that of a
prince of elephants, all followed Madhava.


57. Janarddana of great energy, causing
all those extenders of the Kuru kingdom
and Vidura also to
Daruka, and Satyaki, saying,—‘ Urge the
horses to speed.’

56. Then that grinder of enemies, vis.,
Janarddana of great prowess, accompanied
by Satyaki, the foremost one of Shini’s race,
proceeded to thacity of the Anarttas, atter
having killed all his enemies, like Me of a
hundred sacrifices proceeding to the celes-
tial region,


rem


CHAPTER LIL


( ANUGITA PARVA. )-=
Continued.


Vaishampayana ‘said : —

st. As he of Veishni’s family was going
to Dwaraka, those feremost princes of
Bharata’s race, those chagtisers of
enemies, embraced him and fell back with
their attendants.

2. Phalguna repeatedly embraced the
Veishni heco, and as long as he was within
the cange of eye-sight he repeatedly turned
his eyes towards hin.


cetucn, addressed |


. MAHABAHRATA.


e@

3. With great difficulty, the son of
Pritha withdrew his look that had fallen
on Govinda. Yhe undefeated Krishna
also (did the same).


4 The marks which were displayed on
the occasion of that great one's departure,
E shall now fully describe. Dao you listen to
me.


5. The wind blew with great force bee
fore the car, clearing the path of sand-
grains and dust and thorns,


6. Vasava rained pure and fragrant
showers and celestial flowers before the
holder of Sharanga.


7. As the mighty-armed hero went on
he came upon the desert ill-supplied with
water, There he saw that foremost of
ascetics, named Utanka, of immeasurable
energy.


8. The hera of large eyes and great
energy adored that ascetic. He was then
adored by the ascetic in return.
Vasudeva then enquired after his well-
being.

g. That foremost of Brahmanas, oss.,
Utanka, politely accosted by Madhava,
honoured him duly and the addressed
him in these words.


10. O Shaurin, having gone to the
palaces of the Kurus and the Pandavas,
have yeu succeeded in establishing a
durable understanding between them = such
as should exist between brothers? You
should tell me every thing.


tt. Do you come, O Keshava, after
having united them in peace,—them who are
your relatives and who are ever dear to


- you, O foremost one of Vrishni's race.


12. Will the five sons of Pandu, and
the children of Dhritarashtra, O destroyér
of enemies, sport in the world in joy with
you?


13. Willall the kings enjoy happiness
in their respective kingdoms, on account
of the pacification of the Kauravas brought
about by you ?. <

14. Has that trust, O son, which I had
always reposed on you, borne fruit about
the Kauravas ? i


‘fhe blessed and holy one said :-—


15—16, [ tried my best at first, for brings
ing about a good understanding, about the
Kauravas. When 1 could not by any
means establish them on peace, it happened
that all of them, with theic relatives and
kinsmen, died. It is impossible to trans-
gress destiny by either intelligence or.
power, : .


ASUWAMEDHA PARVA,


17. O great Rishi, O sinless one, this
Rlso cannot be unknown to you. They
(the Kauravas) disregarded which Bhishma
and Vidura gave them referring to me.


18. Encountering one anotherjthey then
became guests of Yama’s palace. Only the
five Pandavas form the remnant of the un-
stain, all their friends and all theic children
having been destroyed. All the sons


Dhritarashtra also, with their children and |


kinsmen, have been killed.


19. When Krishna had said these words,
Utanka, filled with anger, and with eyes
expanded in rage, addressed him in these
words.


Utanka said :—


azo. Since, though able, O Krishna,
you
of Kuru’s race, who were your relatives
and, therefore, dear to you, I shall, for-
Sooth, curse you. :


21. Since you did not forcibly compel
them to forbear, therefore, O destroyer of
Madhu, [ shall, filled with anger denounce
a curse on you.


22. kt seems, O Madhava, that, though
fully able (to save them), you were in-
different to these foremost of Kurus who,
overwhelmed by insincerity and hypocrisy,
have all met with destruction.


Vasudeva said :—

23. QO scion of Bhrigu’s" race’ Hsten,
to what I say in full. Do you accept my
apologies also. O you of Birigu’s race,
you are an ascetic !


24. After having heard my words about
the soul, you may then wer your curse.
No man is able, bya liule ascetic merit,
to put me down.


25. O foremost of ascetics, 1 do not
wisti to see the destruction of all your
penances! You havea large measure of
blazing penances. You have passed your
preceptors and seniors,


26. O foremost of twice-born ones. I
know that you have observed the cules
of Brahmacharyya from your infancy. I do
not, therefore, wish the loss or diminution of
your penances acquired with sa much
pain!


did not rescue those foremost ones |


63
CHAPTER LIV.


( ANUGITA PARVA, }—
Continued.


Utanka said :—


1. Do you, O Keshava, tell me that
fauliless spiritual science. Having heard
your discourse I shall ordain what is for
your good or imprecate a curse to yott
O Janarddana!


Vasudeva said :~


2. Know that the three qualities of
Ignorance, Darkness and Goodness exist, -
depending on me as their refuge. So also,
O twice-born one, know that the Radras
and the Vasus have originated from me.


3. In me are all creatures, and in all
creatures do ! exist; know this. Let no
doubt arise in your mind about this,


4 So also, O twice:born one, know
that all the tribes of the Daityas, all the
Yakshas, Gandharvas, Rakshasas, Nagas,
Apsaras, have originated from me.


5. Whatever has been called existent
and non-existent, whatever is manifest,
and not-manifest, whatever is destructible
me indesteuctible, all have me for theic
soul.


6. Those fourfold courses of duty which,
O ascetic, are known to attach to the
(four) modes of life, and all the Vedie
duties, have me for their soul,


7. Whatever is non-existent, whatever
is existent atid non-existent, and whatever
is above that which is existent and note
existent,—-all these which form the universe
sare from me, There is nothing higher
{or beyond) me who am the eternal god
of gods,


8. O perpetuater of  Bhrigu’s race,
know that all the Vedas begmuing with (the
original syllable) OM are at one with me.
Know, O son of Bhrign’s race, that lam
the sacrificial stake ; | amsthe Soma (drunk:
in sacrifices); | am the Charu (cooked in
sacrifices for being offered to the deities) ;
am the Homa (that is performed); | am
those deeds which sacrificers perform for
pleasing the celestials; [ am even the
pourer of the sacrificial libation ; and Tam
the Havi or libation that is poured, Foam
the Adhyaryu. Lam the Kalpaka;' and I


{am the highly sanctified sacrificial Havi.
| lvis me whom the Udgatri, in the great
| sacrifice, hymns by the sound of his songs.


In all rites of expiation, O Brahmana, the
utterers of auspicious Mantras and bene-
dictions fraught with peace sing my praises


64


whe am the artificer, O foremost of twice-
born ones, of the universe.


ir. Know, O best of twice-born persons,
that Dharma is my eldest: born offspring,
originated from my mind, O Jearned Brahe
mana, whose essence is mercy for, all crear
tures,


12. Constantly. chanting ‘myself, T take
birth in. various wombs, O best of men,.for
upholding that sen of mine, with the help of
men now existing jn or departed from the
world. ‘Indeed, f do this for protecting Vic-
tue and for establishing it.” . ‘


13. In those forms that 1 assume for the
purpose, fam known, O sow of Bhrigu’s
race,-in the three worlds as Vishnu and
Brahman and. Shakra, F am the origin
and I anv.the destruction of ail things,


t4. IT am the creator of. all existent
objects and | am theic destroyer. Kuow-
ing no change myself, [ am the destroy:
er of all those creatures that live in ' sinful-
ness.


15.. In every cycle | have to. tepair, the
causeway of Virtue, entering into various
kinds of wombs ftom desire of doing good

-to my creatures. or.


16. When, O- son ot Bhrigu's race, |
live in the order of the celestials, 1 then‘ in-
deed, act in every tespyct as a celestial.


17. Whew 1 five in the order of the
Gandharvas, I then, O son of Bhrigu’s
race, act in every respect as a .Gandharva.


18. When [ five in the. order. ‘ef the
Nagas I then act asa Naga, and when I
live in the order of Vakshas of that of
Rakshasas,-I act alter the manner of that
order.


19. Born now in the order of men |
must act a human being. I appealed to
them (the Kauravas)’ most piteously. But
stupefied as they were and deprived of thei¢
senses, they refused to take my words,


20, I frightened them, filled with angers
‘referring to some great fear. But once
more | showed themselves my musk baman
form.


2t. Possessed as they were of tnrightes
ousness, and assailed by the virtue of Time,
all of them have been righteously kitled in
battle, and have, forsooth, gone to the celes-
tial region.

22. The Pandavas also, O best of
Beahmanas have acquired great fame. 1
have thus told you all that you had asked
Me, ‘


‘indestructibie forny of yours.
‘yotr now in your own Colman) form which,
too, is eternal. ,


a


MATARHARATA.


CHAPTER LV.


(ANUGITA PARVA.)—
Continued.


Utanka said :— |


1. I-know you, O Janarddana, ta be the
creator of the. universe. Farsooth, this
knowledge that: IE have is the cesult of your
grace towards me,


3. O youof unfading glory, my heart
is possessed of cheerful teanquillity on ace
count of its being devoted to you. Know, O
chastiser of enemies, that my heart is no
longer inctinted to curse you.


3- ¥f, O Janarddana, I deserve the least
grace from you, do you then show me suce
your supreme form,


‘Vaishampayana said :—


4. Pleased with him, the holy one ther
showéd Utanka that eternal Vaishnava
form which Dhananjaya of great intelli-
gence had seen.


5. Utanka saw the great Vasudeva of
universal form, gifted with mighty-arms.
The effulgence of that form was Itke that
ofa buruing fire or a thousand suns. It
stood before hinr filling all space. - It had
faces on every side.


6. Seeing that high and wonderfut
Vaishnava form of Vishnu, in fact, seeing
the Supreme Lord in (that guise) the
Brahmana Utanka became filled with
wonder, nhs : “e :


Utanka said »— _
7. O yow. whose handiwork js the tni-


werse, FE bow to you, O soul of the universe,


Ovparent of all things! With your feet
you have éovered the entire Earth, and
with your head you fll the firmament.


8. .That which lies between the Earth
and the firmament has been filled by your
stomach, Ail the points of the compass are
covered by your arms. O you of unfading
glory, you are all this.


g. De you withdraw this extcellent and
[ wish tosee


Vaishampayana said :—~

10—1t. Tohim, O Janamejaya, Govinda
of contented spirit said these words,—Do
you ask for sonve boon f Yo him Utanka,
however said, this is a sufficient boon from
you for the present, O you of great splen-
dour, in that, O Krishna, I have seen this
form of yours, O foremost of all beings !


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA,


t2. Krishna, however, once more said
to him,—‘Do not scruple in this matter!
This must be dove! A sight of my form
cannot be fruitless !


Utanka said :—


13. IL must accomplish that, O lord,
which you think should be done! J wish
to have water wherever my wish for it may
arise. Water is scarce in such deserts !


14. Withdrawing that energy, the
Supreme Lord then said to Utanka,—
Whenever you will require water, think
of mel’ Having said so, he proceeded
towards of Dwaraka,


15. Subsequently, one day, the illustrious
Utanka, solicitous of water and greatly
thirsty, wandered over the desert. [n course
of his wanderings he thought of Krishna
of unfading glory.


16. The intelligent Rishi then saw in
that desert a naked hunter (of the Chandala
class), all besmeared with dirt, surroun-
@ed by a pack of dogs.


17. Extremely fierce-looking, he carried
asword and was armed with bow ard
arrows. That foremost of twice-born ones
saw copious streams of water issuing from
the urinary organs of that hunter,


18. As soon as Utanka had thought
of Krishna, that hunter smilingly ad-
dressed him, saying,—O Utanka, O you or
Bhrigu’s race, do you accept this water
from me.


19. Seeing you afflicted by thirst I have
felt great mercy for you! Thus ad-
dressed by the hunter, the ascetic showed
no inclination to accept that water.


20. The intelligent Utanka even began
to blame Krishna of undecaying glory. The
hunter, however, again and again addressed
the Rishi, saying,—' Drink Le


21—-22 The ascetic refuséd to drink the
water thus given. On the other hand, with
heart stricken with hunger and thitst, he
even became angry. Disregarded by the
great Rishi through that conviction, the
hunter, O king, with his pack of dogs, dis-
appeared there and’thén., Seeing that dis-
appearance, Utanka felt himself ashamed,


23-—-27. He even thought that Krishna,
that destroyec of enemies, had beguiled
him. Soon after, the holder of the conch
and discus and mace, gifted with grea
intelligence, came to Utanka by the way
(along which the hunter had come). Ad-
dressing Krishna, the Brahmana_ said,—
*O foremost of beings, it was hardly propet
for you to offer water to foremost of Brahma-


65


nas in the form of a hunter’s urine, O
lord! Utanka’ who said these words,
Janarddana of great intelligence replied,
comforting him with maty soft, words,—
‘That form which it was proper to assume
for offering you water, in that form was
watec was water offered to you! But,
alas, you could not understand it! The
holder of the thunderbolt, Purandara, was
requested by me for your sake.


28. My words to that powerful celestial
were,—Do you give nectar in the form
of water to Utanka.—The king of the celes-
tials replied to me, saying,—lIt is not meet
that a mortal should become immortal !


29. Let some other boon he granted
to Utankal——O son of Bhrigu’s race,
these words were repeatedly addressed
to me. The husband of Shachi, however,
was once tore requested by me in these
words, viz., even nectar should be giver
to Utanka !


30—32. The king of the celestials then,
comforting me, said,—If, Q you of great
intelligence, nectar isto be given to him,
I shall then assume the form of a hunter
and give it to that great descendant ef
Bhrigu. If that son of Bhrigu accepts it
thus, I then go .to him, O lord, for giving
itto him! {f, however, he sends me away
from disregard, 1 stall not then give it
to him by any means. .


33-36. Having made this agreement
with me, Vasava appeared before you,
in that disguise, for giving thee nectar.
You, however, did disregard him and send
him away, seeing that the illustrious one
had put on the guise of a Cliandala. Thy
fault has been greats Quee more, about
your desire, I am prepared to do what is
in my power, Indeed, this painfnt thirst
of yours, I shall arrange, shall be Satisfied,
On those days, O twice-born one, in which
you will feel a desire for water, clouds well-
charged with water will -rise over this


desert, ‘Ihose clouds, O son of Bhrigu’s
race, will give you savoury water to
drink. Indeed, those clouds will become


known in the world as Utanka-clouds.


37. Thus addressed by Krishna, Utanka
became glad, and to this day, O Bharata,
Utanka-clouds (appear and) shower rain
on arid deserts,


66
CHAPTER LVI.
(ANUGITA PARVA.)—
: Continued.
Janamejaya said :—


1. With what penances was the great
Utanka endued go that he entertained the
wish to impreeate a curse on Vishnu him-
self, who is the source of all power ?


Vaishampayana said :—

2.. O Janamejaya, Utanka was gifted
with austere penances. He was devoted
to his preceptor. Gifted with great energy,
‘he abstained from adoring anybody else.


3. All the children of the Rishis, O
Bharata, entertained even this desire, vis.,
‘that their devotion to preceptors should
be as great as that of Uranka.


4. Gavtama’s gratification with and
affection for Utanka, among his number-
less disciples, were very ‘great, O Janame-
jaya. ~

5. Indeed, Gautama was greatly pleased
with the self-control! and purity of conduct
that matked out Btanka, and with his acts
of prowess and the services he did to him.


6. One after another, thousands of dis-
ciples received the preceptor’s pe:mission
to return home. On account, however, of his
great affection for Utanka, Gautama could
not permit him to leave his hermitage.


7. Gradually, m course of time, O son,
decrepitude oveitodk Utanka, that great
ascetic. ‘Ihe ascetic, however, on account
of his devotion to his preceptor, was not
conscious of it,


8. One day, he started, O king, for
fetching fuel fur his preceptor. Soon after
Utanka brought a heavy boad of fuel.


g- Toil-worn and hungry and afRicted
by the load he carried on his head, O
chastiser of enemies, he threw the foad
down on the Barth, O king.


10. One of his matted locks, white as
silver, had become entangled with the load.
Accordingly, when the lead was thrown
down, with fell on the earth that matted
luck of hair. 7


it. Oppressed as he had been by -that
toad and overcome by hunger, O Bnuarata,
Utanka, Seeing that sign of old age, be-
gan to bewail aloud fiom excess of sorrow,


12—13. Knowing every duty, the
daughter of his preceptor then, who had
eyes resembling lotus petals, and hips
that were full and round, at the com-
may? € her father, sought, with down-


MAHABHARATA.


east face, to hold Utanka’s tears tn her
hands. Her hands seemed to burn witi
those tear-drops that she held. Unable,
accordingly, to hold them longer, she
was compelled to throw them down on the
Earth.


14—I5. The Earth herself was unable
to hold those tear-drops of Utanka. Wittr
a pleased heart, Gautama then satd to the
twice-born Utanka,—'Why, O- son, is
your mind so afflicted with grief to-day 7
Tell me catnly and quietly, O learned
Rishi, for | wish to hear it ny full,


Utanka said :—


16—17. With mind entirely devoted to


F you, and whoHy bent upon doing what is


agreeable to you, with my heart's deyotion
turned to you, and with thoughts entirely
living on you, (I have lived here tit!) decre=
pitude has overtaken me without nty know.
ing itat all. I have not, again, known any
happiness. Though I have'lived with you
for a century yet you have not granted me
permission to depart. :


- 18. Many disciples of yours, who were


| my juniors, have, however, been permitted
by yow to return,


Indeed, hundreds and
thousands of foremost Brahmanas have,
gifted with knowledge, been favored with
your permission.


Gautama said :—


19. Through my love and affection for
you, and on account of your dutiful services
to me, a long time has passed without my
kaowing it, O- foremost of Brahmanas.


20. If, however, O you of Bhrigu” race,
you desire to leave this place, do you go
without delay, with my permission,


Utanka said :—


23s. Wohat shall F present to my precep=
| tor? ‘Tell me this, O best of twice-born
persons. Fhaving brought it, b shalk go


hence, O lord, with your permission.’


Gautama said :—
22. ‘The good say that the satisfaction of
the preceptor is the fina fee. Forsooth, O
twise-born one, b,have been highly pleased
with your conduct. :


23-24. Kuow, O perpetuater of Bhrigu’s
race, that | have been highly pleased with
your conduct. Know, petpetuater of
Bhrigu’s cace, that I have been very much
pleased with you for this. Hf you become a
young man to-day of sixteen years, I shall
confer on you, twice-born one, this my
own daughter for becoming your wife. No
ether, woman except this one is capable of
waiting upon your energy.


4


* eyaeo6. At these words of Gautama,
Utanka once again became a youth and
accepted that famous maiden for his wife.
Receiving the permission of his preceptor,
he then addressed his preceptor’s wife,
saying,—What shall I give you as final fee
for my preceptor? Do you command
me. I wish to do, with ciches, or even
my life, whatis agreeable and beneficial
to you,

27. Whatever gem, exceedingly won-
‘dectul and of great value, exists in this
-world, Ijshal bring] for for you with the
help of {my penances. I have no doubt in
this.


Ahalya said :—

28. Iam highly pleased with you, O
learned Brahmana, with your unceasing
devotion, O sinless one. This is enough,
Blessed be you, go wherever you like.


/


Vaishampayana, said :—

2g. Utanka, however, O king, ence
more said these words,—Do you command
me, O mother. itis proper that I should
do something that is agreeable to you.


Ahalya said:—

go. Blessed be you, bring for me those
celestial ear-rings ,which are worn by the
wife of Saudasa. ‘That which is due to
your preceptor will then be well-dis-
charged.

gt. Replying her,—‘So be it,,—-Utanka
went away, O Janamejaya, determined
upon bringing those ear-rings fer doing
what his preceptot’s wife liked.


32. That foremost of Brahmanas,
Utanka, proceeded forthwith to Saudasa
who had become a cannihal, in order to
solicit the ear-rings from him.


33. Gautama meanwhile said to his
wife—'Utanka is not to be seen {to-day.
Thus addressed, she informed him how he
had gone for fetching the jewelled earsrings
(of Saudasa’s queen),

34. At this, Gautama said,~‘You have


not acted wisely. Cursed (by Vashishtha),
that king will, indeed, kill Utanka,


Ahalya gaid:—-

45. Without knowing this, O holy one?’
¥ have engaged Utanka in this task. He
shall not, however, come by any danger
through your grace,

36. Thus addressed by her, Gautama
said,—‘Let it bé so.” Meanwhile, Utanka
met king Saudasa in a deserted forest,


$7


CHAPTER LVIE.


(ANUGITA PARVAJ—
. Continued,


Vaishampayana said! —

1. Seeing the king, whe had become s0,
of frightful apperrance, wearing a long
beard emeared with thé bloed of human
beings, the Brahmana Utanka, O king,
did not become moved,

a—3. That highly energetic monarch,
inspiring terroc in every breast and looking
like a second Yama, cising up, addressad


| Utanka, saying,—'By good fuck, O best of


Brahmanas, you have come to me at the
sixth hour of the day whea tam ia search
ot food.


Utanka said :—


4 Oking, know that [ have come here
in course of my wanderings for the sake of
my preceptor. The wise have said that
while one is engaged for the sake of one’s
preceptor, one should not be injured, ,


The king said :~

§. O best of Brahmanas, food has been
ordained for me at the sixth hour of the
day. I am hungry. 4 cannot, therefore,
allow you escape to-day,


Utanka said :~

6. Let it be so, O king! Let this agree~
ment be made with me! After [ have
ceased to wander for my preceptor 1 shali
once more come and put myself within youc
power.


1 have heard, G best of kings, that
the object f seek for my preceptor is under
your control, O king, therefore, Q king, I
beg you for it.


8. You evéry day give many foremost
of gems to superior Brahmanas. You are
a giver, O king, from whom gifts may be
accepted. Know that I too ama worthy
object of charity present before you, O
best of kings. ° :


g~—t0. Having accepted from you in
gift that object for my preceptor, which is
ander your control, I shall, O king, on
account of my agreement, once mere come
back to you and put myself under your
power, I 4ssure-you truly of this. There
is no falsehood in this. Never before have
i spekes any falsehood, no, not even in jest!
What shali I say then of ether occasions ?


Saudasa said :—
tr. Ifthe object you seek for your
preceptor. is capable of being placed in


68


your hands by me, If I be considered as
one from whom a gift may be accepted, do
you then say what that object is !


Utanka said :—


12. O foremost of men, O Saudasa, in
my estimation you are a worthy person
from whem gifts may be accepted. I have,
therefore, come to you for ,begging of you
the jewelled ear-rings (worn by your
queen),


Sandasa said :—


13. Those jewelled ear-rings, O learned
and twice-born Rishi, belong to my wife,
They should be asked from her. Do you:
therefore, soticit some other things from me.
I shalt give it to you, O you of excellent
vows !


Utanka said':—


14. If we be -consideréd as any autho-
rity, do you cease then to urge this pretext.
Do you give those jewelled ear-rings to me.
Be truthful in speech, O king.


Vaishampayana said :—~

1g—-16. Thus addressed, the king once
more addressed Utanka and said to him,—
‘Do you, at my word, go to my venerable
queen, O best of men, and ask her say-
ing,—‘Give !'!—She of pure vows, thus beg-
ged by you will certainly, at my command,

ive you, O foremost of twice-born persons,
‘Xhose jewelled ear-rings of hers without
doubt.


Utanka said :—


17. Where, O king, shall ¥ be able to
meet your queen? Why do you not your-
self go to her?


Saudasa said :—


18. You will find her to-day near a
forest fountain. 1 cannot. see her to-day
as the sixth hour of the day has come.


Vaishampayana said :—.

19. Thus addressed, Utanka, O chief
of Bharata’s race, then left that place.
Seeing Madayanti, he informed her of his
object. ,


zo. Hearing the order of Saudasa,
that lady of large eyes replied to the high-
ly intelligent Utanka, O Janamejaya, in
ahese words.


21. It is even so, O twice-born one.
You should, however, O sinless one, assure
me that you do not say what is untrue !
You should bring me some signet from
my husband.


MAHABHARATA.


22. “These celestial ear-rings of mine,
made of rich gems, are such that the
celestials and Yakshas and great Rishis
always watch for opportunities for taking
them away.


23. If placed at any time on the Earth,
this costly article would then be stolen by
the Nagas. If worn by one who is impure
on account of eating, it would then be
taken away by the Yakshas. If the wearer
falls asleep, the celestiats would then take
them away.


24. O best of Brahmanas, these ear-
tings are capable of being taken away,
when such opportunities come, by celestials
dnd Rakshasas and Nagas, if worn by a
careless person.


25. O best of twice-born ones, these
ear-rings, day and night, always produce
gold. At night, they shine brightly,
attracting the rays of stars and constella-
tions,


26. O holy one, if worn by any one, he
would be freed from hunger aud thirst and
fear® of every sort. ‘The wearee of these
ear-rings is freed also from the fear of
poison and fite and every kind of danger.


27. If worn by one of short stature,
these become short. [f worn by one of
tall stature, these grow in size,


28. Even of such virtues are these ear-
tings of mine. They are lauded and
honoured everywhere. Indeed, they are
known over the three worlds. Do you,
therefore, bring me some sign,


ee
CHAPTER LVIIE.


( ANUGITA PARVA. )—
Continued.


Vaishampayana said :—

1. Returning to king Saudasa who was
always well-disposed towards all his friends,
Utanka solicited him for some sign. - That
foremost one of Ikshaku’s race then gave
him a sign.


Saudasa said :—

2. This my present condition is intoler-
able. I donot see any refuge. Knowing
this to be my wish, do you give away the
jewelled ear-rings.


3. Thus addressed by the king, Utanka
returned to the queen and reported to her
the words of her husband, Hearing those
words, the queen gave to Utanka her

| jewelled ear-rings.,


ASISWAMEDHA PARVA,


4. Having got the ear-rings, Utanka
returned to the king and said te him,~'1
wish to hear, O king, what the meaning is
of those mysterious words which you said
as a sign to your queen,


Saudasa said :—


5. Kshatriyas are seen to henour the
Brahmanas from the very beginning of the
creation. ‘Towards the Brahmanas, how-
ever, many offences originate (on the part
of the Kshatriyas). .


6. As for myself, I am always bent in
humility before them. I am overtaken by
a calamity through a Beahmana. Posses-
sed of Madayanti, I do not see any other
refuge. .

7. Indeed, O foremost of all persons,

having a high goal, I do not see any other
refuge for myself in the matter of approach-
ing the celestial gates or in continuing here,
O best of twice-born ones.
. 8. It is impossible for a king that is
hostile to Brahmanas to continue living in
this world or in acquiring happiness jp the
next.


9. Hence have I given you these my
my jewelled ear-rings which were coveted
by you. Do you now keep. the agreement
which you have made with me to-day,


Utanka said :—


to. O king, [ shall certainly carry out
my promise. I shall truly return and place
myself under your power. ‘There is, how-
ever, a question, O scorcher of enemies
which I wish to ask you.


Saudasa said :—


11. Say, O learned Brahmana, what is
in your mind. 1 shall certainly reply to
your words, I shall remove whatever doubt
may be itt your mind, I have no hesitation
in this, ‘ :


Utanka said :-—

12. ‘Those who are skilled in the rales of
duty, say that Brahmanas are of controlled
speech, One who acts wrongly towards
friends is considered as vile as a thief.


13. You, again, O king, have become
my friend to-day. Do you-then, O foremost
of men, give me such advice as is approved
by the wise. ;

14. As for myself, I have now obtained
the fruition of my wishes. You, again, are
a cannibal. Is it proper for me to ceturn
to you or not. m


S audasa said :—
15.


If it is proper (for me), O foremost.


of superior Brahmanas, to say what you
ask, 1 should then, O best of twice-born
onés, tell you that you should never retusn
to me.


16. O perpetuater of Bhrigu’s race, by
acting thus, you will secure your weil+being.
If you return, O learned Brahmana, you
will surely meet with death,


Vaishampayana said :—

17. Thus addressed by the intelligent
king about what was bereficial for him,
Utanka took leave of the king aud set out
for the presence of Ahalya.


18. Desirous of doing what was agree-
able to the wife of his ‘preceptro, he took
the ear-rings with him and started with
great speed for reaching the hermitage of
Gautama.


19. Protecting them even in the manver
directed by Madayanti,—that is,. binding
them withia the folds of his black ;deer-
skin,—he proceeded on his way.


20. After he had proceeded for -some
distance, he became stricken with hunger.
He there saw a Vilwa tree covered down
with the weight of (ripe) fruits. He clim-
bed that tree.


at. Causing his deer-skin, O -chastiser
of enemies, to hang on a branch, that fore-
most of twice-born ones, then began to
pluck some fruits.

22—23. While he was engaged jn pluck-
ing those fruits with eyes set tawards them,
some of: them. dropped, O king, on that
deer-skin, in which those earrings had
been carefully tied by that foremost of
Brahmanas. With thé strokes of the fruits,
the knot became loosened.


.24. Suddenly that deer-skin, with the
ear-rings in it, dropped down. When the
knot being unfastened, the deer-skin fell
down on the ground, a snake who was there
saw those jewelled ear-rings,


23-27. That snake belonged to the
race of Airavata. Promptly he took up
the ear-rings in his mouth and then entered
an ant-hill, Seeing the earsrings taken
by that snake, Utanka, filled with anger
and in great anxiety of mind, came .down
from the tree. ‘Taking his staff he began
to pierce that ant-hill.


28. That best of Brahmanas, burning
with anger and the desire for revenge, con+
tinually busied himself for thirty-five days
in that work.

29. The goddess Earth, unable to bear
the force of Utanka’s walking staff and
with body torn therewith, became greatly
anxious, ;


ae


go~—3t. To that twice-born Rishi then,
who continued to dig the Earth from desire
of making a path to the nether regions in-
habited by the Nagas, the king of the celes-
tials, armed with the thunder, came. there,
on his car drawn by green horses. Gifted
with great energy, he saw that foremost of
Brahmanas, as he sat there engaged in his
“task,


Vaishampayana continued :—

32. Looking lite a Brahmana stricken
with the sorrow of Utanka, the king of the
celestials addressed him, saying,—‘This
(purpose of thine) is impracticable of being
accomplished. :


33. ‘The regions of the Nagas are thou-
sands of Yojanas removed from. this plate.
I think chat your purpose is impossible of
being achieved with your walking staff.


Utanka said :—

34. If, O Brahmana, the ear-rings be
not recovered by mie from the regions of ‘the
‘Nagas, { shall renounce my Kfe-breaths
before your eyes, O foremost of twice-born
persons,


Vaishampayana said :-~

35. When the thunder-armed Indra
could not divert Utanka from his purpose,
he united the latter’s walking staff with
the force of thunder. }


36. Then, O Janamejaya, the Earth,
opening with those strokes having the. force
of thunder, gave way to the (nether) regions
inhabited by the Nagas. :


37. By that path Utanka entered the
world of Nagas. - He saw that that region
lying thousands of Yojanas on all sides. ~


38. Indeed, O blessed one, it had many
walls made of pure gold and decked with
jewels and gems. :


39- There’ were many fiue tanks of
water furnished with flights of stair-cases
made of pure crystal, and many civers of
clear and transparent water. He saw also
many trees with various species of birds
perching on them,


40. That perpetuator of Bhrigu’s race
saw the gate of that region which was full
five Yojanas high and a hundred Yojanas
in width. os


41. Seeing the regions of the Nagas,
Utanka became very dispirited. Indeed,
he despaired of getting back the ear-rings..


42. Then there appeared to him a black
horse with a white tail. His face and eyes
were of a coppery colour, O you of Kuru’s

, race, and he seemed te blaze forth with
energy. :


' MAHABHARATA.


43. Addressing Utanles, he said,—'Do
you blew into the Apana duct of my body.
You will then, O learned Brahmana, get
back your ear-rtngs which have been taken
away by a descendant of Airavata’s race.


44. Do not hate to do my order, O son.
Vou did it often at the hermitage of
Gautama in former days.


Utanke said :—


45. How did Ul know youin the asylum
of my preceptor? Indeed, I wish to hear
how I did in those days what you order me
to do now.


The horse gaid:


46—47. Know, O learned Brahmana,
that I am the preceptor fof youc preceptor,
fer[ am the blazing Jatavedas (deity of
fire). By you I was often adored for the
sake of your preceptor, O child of Bhrigu's
tace, duly and with a pure heart and body.
I shalt therefore accomplish what is for
your well-being. Do my bidding forth-
with, -

48.8 Thus addressed by the god of
fire, Utanka did as he was ordered.
The: deity then, pleased with him, blazed
up far consuming everything.


49. From the pores ‘of his body, O
Bharata, on account of his very nature, a
thick smoke came out threatening terrors


} ta the world of Nagas.


50. With that powerful and wide-
spreading smoke, O Bharata, everything
became covered with darkness, so that
hothing, QO king, could any longer be
seen in the world of the Nagas.


5t. Cries of woe were heard through. .
out the palace of the Airavatas, uttered b
the Nagas headed by Vasuki,
Janamejaya. ;

52. Covered by that smoke, the palaces
could no longer be seen, O Bharata.
These resembled forests and hills overs
whelmed by a thick frost.


53- With eyes that were red on account
of that smoke, and afflicted by the energy
of the god of fire, the Nagas came out of
theie palaces to the greet’ son of Bhrigu’s
race for determining what was the matter.


54. Having heard what the matter was
from that ascetic of incomparable energy,
all the Nagas, with fear depicted on their
eyes, offered bim their adorations accor-
ding to due forms.


55- Indeed, all the Nagas placing the
old and the young ones before them, bowed
to him with theic heads and joining their
hands addressed him, saying,—‘ Be pleased
with us, O holy one.’


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA,


86, Having pleased that Brahmana
tid offered him water to wash his feet
and the ingredients of the Arghya (for
honouring tim), the Nagas gave him those
celestial and highly-adored ear-rings,


57. Thus honored by them, Utanka of
great prowess, going. round the god of
fire, started for the hermitage of his
preceptor.


58. Indeed, going quickly to Gautama’s.
hermitage, O king, he pfesented those ear-
rings to the wife of his preceptor, O sinless
one. :


59. That best of Brahmanas also told
“his preceptor eyerything about Vasuki and


the other Nagas that had occurred.


60. It was thus, O Janamejaya, that
the great Utanka, having wandered through
the three worlds, fetched those jewelled
ear-rings (for his preceptor’s wife).

61. Of such prowess, O chief of
Bhasata’s race, was the ascetic Utanka.
So austere were the penances with which
he was gifted. I have thus told you what
you had asked me. “ :


eee


CHAPTER LIX.


(ANUGITA PARVA. )—
Continued.


Janamojaya said :-—

1. After having conferred that boon on
Utanka, O foremost of twice-born persons,
what did the mighty-armed Govinda of
great celebrity next do ?


Vaishampayana said:—


2. Having granted that boon to Utanka,
Govinda, accompanied by Satyaki, went to
Dwaraka on his car, dcawn by his large
quick-coursing horses.


3 Passing many lakes and rivers and
forests and hills, he at last came upon the
charming city of Dwaravati.

4. It was at the time, O king, when the
festival of Raivataka had begun, that he
having eyes like lotus-petals arrived with
Satyaki as his companion.


5. Adorned with many beautiful things
and covered with various Kostras made of
jewels and gems, the Raivataka hill shone,
O king, with great splendour.

6—7. That high mountain, decked with
excellent garlands of gold and gay festoons
of flowers, with many large trees which

ooxed Like the Kulpa trees of Ladca’s


‘less,


-Vrishni,


qt


garden, and with many golden poles on
which were lighted lamps, shone in beauty.
through day and night. By the caves
and fountains the light? was so great that
it appeared like a broad day. ‘


8. On-all sides beautiful flags waved on
the air with little bells that jingled cons
tinuously; The entire hill resounded with
the sweet songs of men and worten.


go—10. Raivataka presented a most
delightful appearance like Meru with all
his jewels and gems. Men and women ex-
cited and filled with delight, O Bharata,
sang alcud. The swell of music which
thus rose from that foremost of mountains
appeared to touch the very heavens.
Everywhere were heard. spouts and loud
whoops’ of men who were in all forms of
excitement.


11, The cackle of thousands of voices
made that mountain delightful and charm-
ing.. It was aderned with many shops and
Stalls filled with various foods and enjoyable
articles,


12. There were heaps of cloths and gar-
lands, and the music of Vinas and flutes’
and Mcidangas was heard everywhere.
Food mixed with wines of varieus -kinds was
stored here and there.


13. Gifts were being continually given to
those that were distressed, or blind or help-
For all this, the festival of that moute
tain became highly auspicious.

14, There. were many sacred houses
built on-the breast of that mountain, O
hero, within which lived many pious men,
Even thus did the Vrishni heroes sport
in that festival of Raivataka,

1§—18, Equipt with those palaces that
mountain appeared like @ second Heaven.
At the arrival Krishna, O chief of Bharata’s


‘race, that prince of mountains resembled


the blessed mansion of Indra himself,
Adored (by his relatives), Krishna then,
entered a beautiful palace. Satyaki also
went to his own quarters with a delighted
soul. Govinda entered his residence after
a long absence, having accomplished deeds
of great difficulty Tike Vasava amid the
Danava host. ‘The heroes of the Bhoja,
and Andhaka races, all came
forward to receive that great one like the
deities advancing to receive the deity of
a hundred sacrifices. :


19. Gifted with great intelligence, he
honoured them in return and enquired
after their well-being. With a pleased heart
he then saluted his father and mother.


20. The mighty-armed hero was em-
braced by both of them and comforted


¥E:


too, He then took his seat with all the
Viishnis sitting around hia ;


2t. Having washed his feet and re-
moved his fatigue, Krishna of mighty
energy, as he sat there, then described the
cheif events of the great battle in answer
to the questions put to him by his father.


CHAPTER LX.


(ANUGITA PARVA,)==
Continued.


Vasudeva said :—


t. O you of Vrishni’s race, I have
repeatedly heard men speaking of the
wouderful battle,


2, You, however, O mightysarmed one,
have seen it with your own eyes. Do you,
therefore, O sinless one, describe the battle
in full.


3—4. Indeed, tell me how that battle
took place between the great Pandavas
and Bhishma and Karna and Kripa and
Drona and Shalya and others, between,
in fact, numerous other Kshatriyas well-
skilled in arms, differing from one another
in conduct and dress and coming from
various kingdoms,


Vaishampayana said :—

5. Thus addressed by his father, he
having eyes like lotus-petals, described, in
the presence of his mother algo, how the
Kaurava heroes had been killed in batue,


Vasudeva said :—

6. The feats were highly wonderful
whigh were achieved by those great Ksha-
triyas. On account of their large number,
they are incapable of being described in
even hundreds of years. tee


7» TU shall, however, mention only the
foremost of them. Do you listen, therefore,
to me as I mention in brief those feats won
by the kings of Earth, O you of godlike
splendour,


8. Bhishma of Kuru’s race became the
Commander-in-chief, having eleven divi-
sions of the Iaurava princes under his
command, like Vasava of the celestial
forces.

9. Highly intelligent Shikhandin, pro-
tected by the blessed Arjuna, became the
leader of the seven divisions ef the sons of
Pandu,


to. The battle between the Kurus and
the Pandavas went on for ten days, It


MAHABAHRATA.


was so dreadful as te make one’s hair stand
erect.


t1. Then Shikhandin, in great battle,
helped by the holder of Gandiva, killed,
with insumerable arrows, the son of Ganga,
fighting bravely.


12. Lying on a bed of arrows, Bhishma
waited like an ascetic till the sun leaving
his southward path entered on his northerly
course when that hero died.


13. Then Drona, that foremost of all
persons conversant with arms, that greatest
of men under Duryodhana, like Kavya
himself of the lord of the Daityas, became
the Commander-in-chief,


14. That foremost of twice-born persons,
ever boasting of his prowess in battle, wag
supported by the residue of the Kaurava+
army consisting then of nine Akshauhinis,
and protected by Kripa and Vrisha and
others.


rg. Dhrishtadyunina familiar with many
powerful weapons, and gifted with greet
intelligence, became the leader of the
Pandavas. He was protected by Bhima
like Varuna protected by Mitra.


16. That great hero, always desirous of
comparing his strength with Drona, sup-
orted by the Pandava-army, and recol-
footing the wrongs inflicted (by Drona) on
his father (Drupada, the king of the Pan-
chalas) performed great feats in battle.


17. In that battle between Drona and
the son of Prishata, the kings assembled
from various realms were nearly rooted
out. 2 : ‘


18, That furious battle lasted for five
days. At the conctusion of that period,
Drona, exhausted, succumbed to Dhrishta-
dyumna. :


1g. Afterthat, Karna became the Com-
mander-in-chief of Duryodhana’s forces.
He was supperted in battle by the residue
of the Kauravaearmy which numbered five
Akshauhinis, ‘


20. Ofthe sons of Pandu, there were
then three Akshauhinis. After the destruc-
tion of innumerable heroes, protected by
Arjuna, they came to battle,


21. The Suta’s son Karna, though a
dreadful warrior, encountering Partha,
came to his end on the second day, like an
insect encountering a burning fire.


22. After the fall of Karna, the Kaura«
vas became dispirited, and lost all energy.
Numbering three Akshauhinis, they gathece
ed round the king of the Madras.


t
ASHWAMEDHA PARVA,


#3. Having lost many car-warriors and
elephants and horsemen, the residue of the
Pandava-army, numbering one Akshauhini
and overtaken with depression, supported
by Yudhishthira.


23. The Kuru king Yudhishthira, in the
bate that took place, accomplished the
most difficult feats and killed, before half
the day was over, the king of the Madras.


25. After the fall of Shalya, the great
Sahadeva, of immeasurable prowess, killed
Shakuni the man who had brought about
the quarrel,


26. After the fall of Shakuni, the royal
son of Dhritarashtra, whose army had suf-
fered an extensive carnage and who on that
account had become greatly dispirited, fied
from the field, armed with his mace,


27. Then Bhimasena of great prowess,

- filled with anger, pursued him and disco-
vered him within the waters of the Dwaipa-
yana lake. .


28. With the residue of their army, the
Pandavas surrounded the lake and, filled
with joy, met Duryodhana concealed within
the waters.


2g. Their wordy arrows, penetrating
tHrough the waters, pierced Duryodhana.
Rising up from the fake, the latter ap-
proached the Pandavas, armed with his
mace, desirous of battle, |


30. Then, in the great battle that took
place, the royal son of Dhritarashtra was
‘killed by Bhimasena, displayed his great
prowess, in the presence of many kings,


gt. Aftec this the residue of the Panda-
va-army, as it slept in the camp, was killed
at night time by Drona’s son who was
unable to put up with the destruction
of his father (at the hands of Dhrishta-
dyumnaa.)

32. Their sons killed, their forces killed,
theie friends killed, only the five sons of
Pandu, are alive with myself and Yuyu-
dhana.

33. “With Kripa and the Bhoja prince
Kritavarman, the son of- Drona represents
the unkilled residue of the Kaurava-army,
Dhritarashtca’s son Yuyutsu also has es-
caped slaughter on account of his. having
adopted the side of the Pandavas,


34. Upon the destruction of the Kaurava-
king Suyodhana with all his followers and
allies, Vidura and Sanjaya have come to
the presence of kihg Yudhbishthira the just.


38. Thus did that battle take place, O
lord, foe eighteen days.
Earth, killed therein, have
celestial region.


19


ascended the


Many kings of’


’


73


Vaishampayana continued :—-
36. The Vrishnis, as they heard, O king,
that dreadful account became filed with
grief aud sorrow and pain,


CHAPTER LXI.


(ANUGITA PARVA.)~
Continued.


Vaishampayana said :—~

t—~2. After the great Vasudeva of great
prowess had finished his narration of the
great battle of the Bharatas. before his
father, it was plain that that hero had passe
ed over the destruction of Abhimanyu. The
motive of the great one was that his father
might not hear what was highly unpleasant
to him. -


Indeed, the intelligent Krishna did
not wish that his father Vasudeva sliould,
on hearing the dreadful intelligence of the
death of his daughter’s son, be afflicted with
sorrow aud grief,


4. {His sister) Subhadra, noticing that
the slaughter of her son had not been men
tioned, addressed her brother, saying,-—Do
you warrate the death’ ef my son,
Krishna 1~and dropped down on the earth
-(in a Swoon).


5. Vasudeva saw ‘is daughter fallen on
the ground. As soon as he saw this, ha
also fell down, deprived of his senses by
grief. ;

6—7. (Regaining his senses) Vasudeva,
afflicted with grief at the death of his -
daughter’s son, O king, addressed Krishna,
saying,—O lotus-eyed one, you are famed
on Earth for being trutaful ‘in speect
Why, however, O destroyer of enemies, do
you not tell me torxglay of the death of my
daughter’s son ? : ; .


8. O powerful one, tell me in full of the
destruction of your sister’s son! Having
eyes resembling thine, alas, how wag. he
killed in battle by enemies.


9. Since any heart does not from grief
break into a hundred pieces, it seems, O
you of the Vrishni race, that it does not
die with men when its hour does not come,


10. Oh, at the time of his fall, what
wards did he give utterance to, addressing
his mother? O lotus-eyed one, what did
that darling of mine, having restless eyes,
say to me ?


11. I hope he has not been killed by
enemies while retreating from batile with


74


his back towards them? I hope, O
Govitsda, that his face did not become
cheerless while fighting 7


tz. He was possessed, O Krishna, of
great energy.
that powerful hero, boasting (of his prowess)
in my presence, used to speak of his skill
qin battle). ~


13. I hope that boy does tot lie on the
field, killed deceitfully by Drona and
Karna and Kripa and others? Do you
tell me this, ~


14. That son of my daughter always


used to challenge Bhishma and that fore-.


most of all powerful warriors, viz.,
in battle.


15-16. His father who, from excess of
grief, bewailed thus, Govinda, more affic-
ted than he, answered in these words,—His
face did not become cheerless as he fought
in the van of battles Dreadful though that
battle was, he did not tura his back wpon
It, a

17. Having killed hundreds and thou-
sands of kings of Earth, he was distressed
by Drona and Karna and at last was
killed by the son of Dushasana.«


28, Hf, O lord, he had been eneountered,
one to One, without intermission, he was
incapable of being killed in battle by even
abe holder of the thunder. bolt.


39. When his father Arjuna was with-
drawn from the main body by the Samsap-


Karna,


takas, Abhimanyu was surrounded by the }.


enraged Kaurava-heroes headed by Drona
am battle. ‘ :


«= 30. Then, O father, after he had killed
a very large number of enemies in battle,
your davughter’s son at bast succumbed to
the son of Dushasana. ; ‘


2%. Forsooth, he has gone to the cefestial
region! Kill this grief of thine, O you of
great intelligence!’ “They who are of puri-
fied understandings. never languish when
they meet with any calamity.


22, tte by whom Drona and Karna and


others were checked in battle,--heroes who |.


were equal to Fndra himself in. power—-wlily
would not he ascend to the celestial region.


23. O irresistible one, do you kal this
grief of thine! Do-not alow yourself to be
swayed by anger. ‘Fhat conqueror of
rostile cities has attained ta that sanctified
tnd which depends upon deatir at the edge
of weapons,


24. Afierthe fall of that hero, this my
istee Subhadra, stricken with grief, be-
wailed aloud, when. she saw [anti, like a
emale as prey.


From a spirit "of childishmess, }


great, Kshatriyas.
| restless glances, O girl of eyes like lotus-
| petals F


MANABATRATA,


25. When she met Draupadi, she asked


cher in grief,—O reverend lady, where are


all our sons?


26. Hearing her lamentations, all the
iXaurava-ladies embraced her and wept


i wish to see them.


| sitting around. her.


23. Seeing (her daughter-in-law) Uttara,


‘she said,—-O blessed girl, where has your


husband gone 7? When he returns, do you
without losing a moment apprise me of it.


28 Alas, O daughter of Virata, as soon
he heard my voice, he used to come out of
his chamber without the loss of a moment.
Why does not your husband come out tow
day.

2Q Alas, O Abhimanyu, your maternal
uncles—powerful  car-warriors—are — all
hale. ‘Khey ased to bless you when they
saw you come here prepared to go out for
battle.


30.. Do you tell me the incidents of
battle to-day as before, O chastiser of
enemies. Oh, why do you not answer me
to-day—=me who am weeping so bitterly ?


31—32. -Hearing these lamentations of
this daughter of the Vrishni-race, Pritha,
.deeply stricken with grief, addressed hee
and slowly said,—-O Subhadra, thougl
protested by Vasudeva and Satyaki and
by his owm father, your youthful son has
yet been killed. That slaughter is due to
the influence of Time.


33-. O daughter of Yadu’s race, mortat
your son was. Do not grieve. Irresistible
in battle, your son has, forsooth, attained to
the highest end,


34. You are born ia a high family of
Do not grieve, O you of


35. Do you cast your eyes on Uttara,
who is quick with chid. _O. blessed lady »
do not give way to grief. This auspici+
ous girl will.soon. bring forth a son to that
hero E

36-39. tHaving ecorsforted hee, thus,
Kunti, knowing every duty, O perpetuater,
of Yadu’s cace, casting off her grief, O@
irresistible. one; made arrangements for
Abhimanyu’s sing aire rites, with the pere
mission of king Yudhishthica and: Bhima,


| and the twins (vés, Nakula and Sahadeva}


who in prowess resembled ¥ama himself.
She also made many presents tothe Brah<
nianas, and bestowed upon. them many Kine,
OQ perpetuater of Yadu’s race. ‘Fhen. the:
NVrishniedame (Kunti), comforted’ a little.
addressed the daughter of Virata, saying,—~
O faultless daughter of Virata, you shoulé&
not grieve! For the sake of your husband,,
c


ASHWAMEDHA ®ARVA.


@ you of round hips, protect the child in
your womb,


40. Having said these words, O you of
great splendour, Kunti ceased. With her
permission { have brought Subhadra here.


4t. It was thus, O giver of honours,
that your daughter’s son was kitled. Cast
of your burning grief, O irresistible one!
Indeed, do not set your heact on sorrow,


CHAPTER CXIEL.
CANUGITA PARVA. jJ—


Certinued,


Vaishampayana said :—

1. Having heard these words of his san,
Vasudeva, that descendant of Shura, of
wighteous soul, renouncing grief, made ex-
cellent obsequial offerings {to Abhimaayy).


2. Vasudeva also performed those rites
for the ascension (to Heaven) of his great
nephew, that hero who was ever the darling
of his father (Vasudeva).


3. He duly fed six millions of Brahma-
nas, gifted with great energy, with edibles
possessed of every recommendation.


Presenting many clothes to them,
{Krishna satished the thirst for wealth of
those Brahmanas. Wonderful were the
heaps of gold, the number of kine and of
beds and cloths, that were then given
away.
Let (IKrishna’s wealth) increase.

6, Then Vasudeva of Dasharha’s race,
and Valadeva, and Satyaki, and Satyaka,
each performed the obsequial rites of
Abhimanyu.


7. Greatly stricken with geief, they cauld
find no comfort. ‘The same was the case
with the sons of Pandu ia the city of Hasti-
Napore. ;


8—g. Deprived of Abhimanyu, they
could yet no peace of mind. ‘The daughter
of Virata, U king, for many days, totally
abstained from all food, greatly afflicted by
grief oa account of the death of hec hus-
band. At this ail her relatives, became
plunged into excess of grief. ‘They were
all afraid that the embryo ia her womb
might be destroyed,


1o—12. Then, Vyasa, ascertaining the
state of things by his spiritual vision,
arrived there. The highly intelligent Rishi,
gifted with great energy, arrived (at the


—5.


palace), addressed Pritha of large eyes, |
as also Uttara herself, sayings~—Let this


The Brahmanas loudly declared,


75


grief be given up! Q famous. lady, a son
gifted with great energy will be born to you,
through the power of Vasudeva and at my
word, ‘Phat son will rule the Barth aftee
the Pandavas.


13—t4. Seeing Dhananjaya, he said to
him, inthe bearing of kiag VYudhishthira,
the just and pleasing bim with his words,
O Bharata,—Your grandson, O highly bles-
sed one, will become a great prince! He
will céghteously govera the whale Earth to
the verge of the sea.


15, Therefore, O foremost one of Kuru’s.
wace, renounce this grief, mower of
enemies! Dy not doubt this! This -will
tculy take place,

16. . That which was uttered by the
Veishni-hero on a former occasion, will,
surely, happen! Do not think otherwise.


ty. As regards Abhimanyu, he has gone
to the regions of the celestials, conquered
by him with his own deeds. That hera
should be grieved for by you or, indeed, by
the other Kurus, j

18. Thus addressed by his grandfather, -
Dhananjaya of righteous soul, @ king, re-
nounced his grief aud even became cheerfal.

19. Your father, O prince, who are cons
versant with all duties, began to grow in
that womb, O yow of great intelligence,
like the Moon, ia the lighted fortnight.


20. Then Vyasa acged the royal son of
Dharma for celebrating the Horge-Saccrifice.
Having said so, he made himself invisible
there and then.

21. The intelligent king Wudhishthira,
the just, hearing the words of Vyasa, set
his mind o# the journey for briagiag’
weatth, ; ‘


Oe eeeemeee


CHAPTER LXUf.


{ANUGITA PARVA.)—
Continued. ¢


Janamejaya said :—

1. Having heard these words, O twice+
born one, that were spoken by the great
Vyasa about the Horse-Saccrifice, what steps
were taken by Vudhishthbira, ‘


2. Teil me, O foremost of twice-bora


| ones, how the king succeeded in obtaining


the riches which Marutta had buried iu
the Barth!
Vaishampayana said :—


3-6. Having heard the words of the
Island-born ascetic, king Yudghishthica


96


the just, summoned all his brothers, viz.,
Arjuna and Bhimasena and the twin sons
of ‘Madri, in proper time and then said
to them—Ye heroes, you have heard the
words ‘which the highly intelligent and
great Krishna has said from his friend-
ship for and the desire 9 doing good to the
Kurus! Indeed, you have heard those words
that have been uttered by that ascetic of


profuse penances, that great sage desirous .


of conferring prosperity on his friends,
that preceptor of righteous conduct, vis.,
Vyasa of wonderful feats! You have
heard what Bhishma also said, and what
Govinda too of great intelligence has
uttered, :


7. Remembering those words, ye sons
of Pandu, I wish.to obey them duly! By
obeying those words of theirs great blessed-
ness will belong to all of you.


8. ‘Those words spoken by those utters
of Brahina are’ certain (if obeyed) to
produce considerable benefit. Ye per-
petuaters of Kuru’s race, the Earth has
become divested of her riches.


9-17. Ye kings, Vyasa, therefore,
informed us of the wealth of Marutta. If
you think that wealth abundant or sufficient,
how shall we bring it? What, O Bhima,
do you think about this? When the king,
O perpetuater of Kuru’s race, said these
words, Bhimasena, joining his hands, said
these words in reply,—Ihe words you
have said, O you of mighty arms, on the
subject of bringing the riches indicated
by Vyasa, are approved by me? If, O
powerful one, we succeed in getting the
riches kept there by the son of Avikshita,
then this sacrifice, O king, purposed by us
will be easily accomplished! This is what
Tthink. We shall, therefore, bowing our
Neads to the great Girisha, and offering dye
adoration to that deity, bring that wealth.
Blessed be you. Pleasing that god of gods
as also his companions and followers, in
words, thought, and deed, we shall, for-
sooth, obtain that wealth. Those Kinnaras
of deeadful appearance who are protecting
that treasure will certainly yield to us if
the great deity having the bull for his sign,
becomes pleased with us! Hearing these
words uttered by Bhima, O Bharata, king
Yudhishthira the son of Dha:ma, became
highly pleased. - The others, headed by
Arjuna, at the same time, said,—So be it.


18. The Pandavas then, having resolved
to bring that wealth, ordered their forces
to march under the constellation Dhruba
and oa the day called by the same name.


1g Making the Biahmanas utter bene-
dictions on them, and having duly adored


MAHABH \RATA.


the great god Maheshwara, the sons of
Pandu started (on their enterprisc). :


20. Pleasing that great deity with
Modakas and frumenty and with cakes
made of meat, the sons of Pandu started
with cheerful hearts,


2t. While they thus started, the citizens,
and many foremost of Brahmanas, with
cheerful hearts, uttered auspicious blessings
(on their heads).


22. The Pandavas, going round many
Bralmanas who daily adored their fires,
and bending their heads unto them, procee~
ded on their journey,


22—24. Taking the permission of king
Dhritarashtra who was stricken with grief
on account of the death of his sons, his
queen (Gandhari), and Pritha also of large
eyes, and keeping the MKaurava-prince
Yuyutsu, the son of Dhritarash'ra, in the
capital, they started, adored by the citizens
and by many Brahmanans endued with
great wisdom,


——— ee
®


CHAPTER LXIV.


(ANUGITA PARVA.)—~
Continued.


Vaishampayana said :—

1. They then started with cheerful hearts,
and accompained by men and animals all
of whem and which were equally cheer-
ful. 7! ey filled the whole Earth with the.
loud clatter of their wheels. .


2. Their praises sung by eulogists and,
Sutas and Magadhas and bards, and sup-
ported by their own army, they appeared |
tike so many Suns adorned with their own
rays. :

3. With the white umbrella held over
his head, king: Yudhisthira stone with
beauty like the lord of the stars on the night -
when he is at full, ~


4. That foremost of men, the eldest son
of Pandu, accepted, with due forms, the
blessings and cheers of his gladdened sub-
jects as he went on his way.


§. About the soldiers who followed the
king, their confused murmurs seemed to fill
the entire sky.


6. That army crossed many lakes and
rivers and forests and pleasure gardens.
They at last came upon the mountains.


j. ‘Arrived at that region where that
wealth was buried. O king, Yudhishthira
fixed his camp with all his brothers and
troops.


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA.


$—13. The region selected for the pur-
pose, O chief of .Bharata’s race, was per-
fectly level and auspicious, ‘There the king
pitched his camp, placing in his van such
Brahmanas as were gifted with penances
and learning and self-control, as also his
priest Agniveshya, O you of Kuru’s race,
who was well-conversant with the Vedas
and all their branches. Then the royal
sons of Pandu, and the other kings, and the
Brahmanas and priests well-skilled in
sacrificial rites, having duly performed same
propitiatory ceremonies, spread themselves
all over that spot. Having duly placed the
king and his ministers in the middle, the
Brahmanas caused the camp to be pitched
by laying out six roads and nine divisions,
King Yudhishthira caused a separate en-
campment to be duly made for ‘the in-
furiate elephants who ‘accompanied his
army. When everything was complete, he
addressed the Brahmanas, saying,—Ye
foremost of Brahmanas, do that which you
think should be done in view of the matter
at hand. Indeed, let an auspicious day
and constellation be fixed for it. Let not a
long time pass away over our heads as we
wait in suspense here. Ye foremost of
learned Bralimanas, having formed this re-
solution, do what should be done after this!
Hearirg these words of the king, the Brah-
manas with those amongst them wha were
well-skilled in the performance of religious
rites, became filled with gladness and
desirous of doing what was agreeable to
king Vudhishthira the just, said these
words in reply,—This very day is an aus-
picious one with a auspicious constellation,
We shall, therefore, try to celebrate those
high rites we propose. We shall to-day, O
king, live upon water alone. Dv you all
fast also to-day.

16. Hearing those words of those fore-
most Brahmanas, the royal sons of Pandu
passed that night, abstaining from all food,
and lying confidently on beds of Kusha-
gtass, like burning fires in a sacrifice.

17.
fistened to the discourses of the learned
Brahmanas. When the cloudless morning
came, those foremost of Brahmanas addres-
sed the royal son of Dharma, (saying as
follows).


es


CHAPTER LXV.
( ANUGITA PARVA, )—
s Continued, :


The Brahmanas said :—
_<t. Let offerings be made to the great


.


Mahadeva of three eyes, Having duly


And the night wore away as they


77
_ dedicated those cfferings, O king, we shalt
then try to gain our object.


2. Hearing these words of those Brah-
manas, Yudhishthira caused offerings to be
duly made to that deity who Joved -to lie
down on mountain-breasts.


3. Pleasing the (sacrificial) fire ‘with
(libations of) ‘sanctified’ butter according
to the ordinance, the priest (Diaumya)
cooked Charu with the aid of Mantras and
performed the necessary rites.


4. He took up many flowers and sanc-
tifted them with Mantras, O bing. With
Modakas and frumenty and meat, he made
offerings to the deity.


‘5. With -various kinds of flowers and
with fried paddy, of very+ superior kind,
Dhaumya, well-versed in the Vedas, per-
formed the remaining rites.


6. He next presented offerings accord-
ing to the ordinance to those ghostly beings
who formed Mahadeva’s train. And
offerings were next made to Kuvera the
king of the Yakshas, and to Manibhadra
alsg. :

7-8. To the other Vakshas also
and to them who were the foremost ones
among the ghostly companions of .Mahdeva,
the priest offered due adoration, having
filled many jugs with food, with Kristharas
and meat and Nivapas mixed with sesame
seeds. - The king gave away unto the
the Brahmanas thousands of kine,


9—16.. He then directed the presen-
tation, according to due rites, of offerings
to those night-ranging beings(who live
with Mahadeva). Surcharged, as it were,
with the scent of Dhupas, and filled with
the fragrance of flowers, that region, sacred
to the deity of deities, O king, became
highly delightful, Having performed the
adoration of Rudra and ot alt the Ganas,
the king, placing Vyasa ahead, went towards
the place where the treasure was buried.
Once more adoring the Lord of riches, and
bowing to him with respect and saluting
him properly, with various kinds of flowers
and cakes and..Krishara, having: adored,
those foremost of gems, vis, Shankha and
Nidhi and those Yakshas who are the.
lords of gems, and having adored many ,


| foremost of Brahiianas and caused them


to utter blessings, the king gifted with
great power, strengthened by the energy
and the auspicious benedictions of those
Brahmanas, caused that spot to be excava=
ted. Then numerous vessels of various
and delightful forms, Bhringaras, Katahas, :
Kalasas, Bardhamanakas, and innumer-
able Bhajanas of beautiful forms, were
dug out by king Yudhishthira the just.


78


‘The wealth thus dug out was placed in large
‘as Karaput’ (wooden chests united with
each othee by chains or cords, and carried
by bullocks or camels) for protection.


17, A portion of the wealth was caused
to be carried upon the shoulders of men
it stout balances of wood with baskets
slung like scales at both ends. Indeed, O
kivg, there were other methods of con-
veyance there for carryiag away that wealth
of the son of Pandu.


18. There were sixty thousands of camels,
and a hundred and twenty. thousand horses,
and of elephants, O king, there were one
hundred thousand, :


1g. Of cars there were as many, and
of carts too as many, and of she-elphants
as many. Mules and men were of unlimited
number.


20. That wealth which VYudhishthira
. caused te be dug out was even so much.
Sixteen thousand coins were placed on the
back of each camel; eight thousand on each
car; and twenty-four thousand oa each
elephant. ,


2122, Having loaded these vehicles
with that wealth\and once more adoring
the great deity Shiva, the son of Pandu
Started for the city of Hastivapur, with
the permission of the I[sland-born Rishi,
and placing his priest Dhaumya in the van.
‘bhat foremost of men, vis., the royal son
of Pandu, made short marches of four
miles every day. :

23. That powerful army, O king, afflicted
with the weight they bore, returned, car-
tying that wealth,, towards the capital,
phasing the hearts of all those perpetuaters
of the Keuruciacgy


———


CHAPTER LXVIL
(ANUGITA PARVA.)—


Continued.


Vaishampayana said:—

1. Meanwhile, the highly energetic Vasu-
deva, accompained by the Vrishnis, came
to the city of Hastinapore.


2. While leaving that city for returns
ing to his own Dwaraka, he had been reques-
ted by the son of Dharma to come back.
Hence, knowing, that the time fixed for


the Horse-Sacrifice had come, that foremost -


of men returned to Hastinapore.


3—4. Accompained by the son Rukmini,


by Yuyudhana, by Charudeshna, by
Shamva by Gada, by Kritavarman, by the


’ MAHABHARATA,


heroic Sarana; by Nishatha and by Une
mukha, Vasudeva came, with Valadeva at
the head of the train, and with Subhadca
also accompanying him.

5. Indeed, that hero came for seeing
Diaupadi, Uttara and Pritha and for coms
forting those renowned Kshatriya-ladies
who had been bereft of many of their
protectors.


6. Seeing those heroes come, king
Dhritarasttra, as also the great Vidura,
received them with due honours.


jg. That foremost of men, vés., Krishna
of great energy, worshipped by Vidura and
Yuyutsu, continued to live in the Kuru
capital.


8. It was while the Vrishni heroes, O
Janamejaya, were living in the Kuru city,
U king, that your father, that destroyer of
hostile heroes, was born.


g. The royal Parikshit, OQ monarch,
afflicted by the Brahma-weapon of Ashwat-
thaman), upon coming out of the womb,
lay still and mationless for he had no life.
By his birth he had pleased the citizens but
soon plunged them into grief,


to. The citizens, learning of the birth
of the prince, uttered a leonine shout. That
noise proceeded to the utmost limit of every
point of the compass. Soon, however, that
noise ceased.


ti. Krishna, his senses and mind con-
sider: bly affected, with Yuyudhana in
his company, entered speedily the innec
apartments of the palace.


12. He saw his own paternal aunt
(Kunsti) coming, loudly weeping and cal-
ling upon him repeatedly.


13. Behind her were Draupadi and the
famous Subhadra, and the wives of the
relatives of the Pandavas, all weeping
piteously.


14. Meeting Krishna, Kunti, that
daughter of the Bhoja race, said to him in
a voice choked with teacs, O foremost of
monarchs,


15. O Vasudeva, O mighty-armed hero
Devaki, by ‘having borne you, has come to
be considered as an excellent genetrix!
You are our refuge and our glory! This
race (of Pandu) depends upon you for
its protector. -


16. O Yadava hero, O powerful one
this child of your sister’s son, has com,
out of the womh; killed by Ashwatthamane,
O Keshava, do you revive him!


17. O delighter of the Yadavas, this was
vowed by you, O powerful one, when
Ashwatthanian had inspired the blade of

¢


ASU WAMEDHNA, PARVA:


grass into a Brahma-weapon.of great ener-. [.


gy! Indeed, O Keshava, your. words were
these :—I shall revive that child if l.¢ comes
out of the womb dead !


18—19. That child, O son, has been
botn dead! See him, O foremost of men,
You should, O Madhava, rescue Uttara
and Subhadra and Draupadi aud myself,
and Dharma’s son (Yudhishthira), and
Bhima and Phalguna, and Nakula and the
itresistible Sahadeva.


20—2t. In this’ child are fettered the
life-breaths of the Pandavas and myself !
© you of the Dasharha-race, on him de-
pends the obsequial cake of Pandu, as also
of my father-in-law, and of Abhimanyu
too, blessed be you, that favourite nephew
of yours who was so very like you! Do
you do to-day what will be beneficial
to all these} 1 urge you earnestly, O
Janarddana.


22. Uttara, O destroyer of enemies,
always repeats the words said to her. by
Abhimanyu. Forsooth, O Krishna, those
words were highly agreeable to her.


23. O you, of the Dasharha-race,
Arjuna’s son said to this daughter of
Virata,--Your son, O.blessed girl, wilt go
to my maternal uncles,


24. Taking up his quarters with the
Vrishnis and Andhakas, he will obtain from
them the science ef arms, indeed, various
wonderful weapons .and the ,whole of the
science of polities and morality.


25. These were.the words, O son, that
that destroyer of hostile heroes, vis, the
son of Subhadra, that irresistible hero, said
to Uttara from his-foye for her, _ {


26. O destroyer of Madhu, bowing |.


-our heads to fyou, we pray .you for making

those words of Abhimanyu true! , Jn; view
‘also of the time that has .come, do you
accomplish what is highly beneficial. ;


27. Having said, these words to that
hero of the Vrishni’s race, Pritha of large
eyes, raised her arms upwards and with
the other ladies in. her company, dropped
down on the Earth. ie

28, , Al}. of {thera;, with eyes wendered
muddy by tears, repeatedly explained, say-
ing,—Alas, : the son of Vasudesa’s nephew
has been born dead, ; .


ers v
29. After Kunti had said so, Janarddana
took hold of her, O Bharata, and gently


raising her, from :the Earth, comforted her


_ as follows,


79
CHAPTER LXVIL .


( ANUGITA PARVA.)—
Continued,


Vaishampayaua said :-—

1—2. After Kunti had sat up, Subhadra,
seeing her brother, began to weep aloud,
and stricken with excessive grief, said,~O
you having eyes like lotus-petals, look at
the grandson of Arjuna of great intelli-
gencef Alas, the Muru-race having beer
thinned, a child has been born that is feeble
and dead. <" ;

3.!'Thé blade of grass, uplifted by
Drona’s son for bringing about the destruc-
‘tion of Bhimasena, felt epon Uuara and
Vijaya and myself.

4: Alas, that blade, O Meshava, js stil?
existing (unex'racted) in me, after having
pierced my heart, since } do not, O irresia-
tible hero, see this child with my son.


15. What'will the 'righteous-souled king
Yudhisthira the just say? + What wilt
Bhimasena and Arjuna, and the two sons
of Madravati also say 7 ;


6. Hearing that Abhimanyu’s son was
born and dead, the Pandavas, O you of
Vrishni’s race, will consider themselves a3
imposed upon by Ashwatthaman.


7. Abhimanyu, O Krishna, was, forsooth,
the minion of all the Pandava-brothers.
Hearing this intellygence, what will those
heroes, defeated by the weapon of Drona’s
son,fsay? | *

‘8. What grief, -O Janarddana, can be
greater than this, vés., that Abhimanyu’s
son should be born and dead 7?

9. Bowing to you with my head, O
Krishna, } seek to please you to-day! See
O foremost of men, these two standing
here, vis., Prtha and Draupadi.


to—1r. When, O Madhava, the son of
Drona tried to destroy the embryos even
in the wombs of the tadies of the Pandavas,
at that time, O grinder of enemies, you said
in anger to Drona’s son (even these words).
—-O wretch of a Brahmana, O vilest of men,
*— shall disappoint your wish! JI shall re«
vive the son of Kiritin’s son.


32, ‘Hearing these words of yours and
well-knowing your power, I'seek to gratify
you, O irresistible hero? Let the son of
Abhimanyu be revived.


13 EH having pledged yourself previously
you do not accomplish your auspicious vow,
do. you then know for certain, O-chief of
the Vrishni sace, that 1} shall put an end
to my life... 7


“Bo


14. Tf, O hers, this son of Abhimanyu
does not revive when you, O irresistible one,
are alive and near, of what othet use will
you be to me? :


15. Do yau, therefore, O irresistible one,
tevive this son of Abbimanyu,—this child
who has eyes similar to his,~-even as a
rain-charged cloud revives the lifeless crops
(on a field). :


16. You,:O Keshava, are righteous-
souled, truthful, and of prowess incapable
of beiag baffled. You should, O chastiser
of enemies make your words truthfal,


17. lf only, you wish it, you can revive
the three worlds (af being) if dead | What
need. I say, therefore, of this darling child,
born but dead, of your sister’s son ?


i8. I kaew your power, O Krishna!
‘Therefore, do I solicit you! Do you show


this great favour to the sons of Pandu. —,


19. You should,,O mighty-armed one,
show mercy to shis Uttara, or. to me,
thinking that I am your sister, or even a
mother who has lost her son, and one who
has thrown herself upon your protection,


eae


CHAPTER LXVIIL.
(ANUGITA PARVA, )=


Continued.


Vaishampayana said :—

1. Thus addressed, O king, the des-
troyer of Keshin, greatly possessed by sor-
row answered,—So be it !—Vhese words
were uttered with sufficient loudness and
they pleased all the inmates of the inher
apartments of the palace, a


2. ‘The powerful Krishna, that foremost
of men, by uttering these words, pleased
all. the people assembled: there, like: one
pouring cold water on a person: afflicted
with sweats j :

g~—5. He then quickly entered the lying-
in-room in’ Which your father was born,


It was duly sanctified, O king, with many }


garlands‘ of whrite flowers; with miany well-
filled water-pots arranged en every side;
with char-coal, soaked in clarified: butter of
Tinduka-wood, and mustard-seeds, O you
of mighty arms; with shining. weapons
properly arranged and several fires on
every side. And it was filled with many
agreeable and aged damea summoned for
waiting. :

6—7. [t was also surrounded by many
well-skilled and clever physicians, O you
of great intelligence! Gifted ‘with great


MAHABHARATA.


energy, he also beheld there all articles
that are destructive of Rakshasas, duly
placed by persons knowing the subject.
Seeing the lying-in-room in which your
father was born thus equipt, Hrishikesha
became very glad .and said,—Excellent,
Excellent !’


8—9 When he of Vrishni’s race said
so and presented such a cheerful look,
Draupadi. going there quickly, addressed
the daughter of Virata, saying,—-O blessed
lady, here comes to you your father-ine
law, the destroyer of Madhu, that ancient
Rishi of inconceivable soul, that unvane
quished one.


to. Virata's daughter, checking her tears
said these words in a voice chocked with
gtief. Covering herself properly, the pincess
waited for Krishna like the celestials ree
verentially waiting for him.


ir. The helpless lady with heart agitated
by sorrow, seeing Govinda coming, be«
wailed, sayitig,—

12, O lotus-eyed one, see us two
deprived of our child! O Janarddana,
both Abhimanyu and myself have been
equally killed. ° 4


13. O you of Vrishni’s race, O dese
troyer of Madhu, I seek to please you by
bending my head, O hero, to you! Do you
.tevive this child of mine who has been
‘consumed by the weapon of Drona’s son.


14—1§. If king VYudhishthira the just,
or Bhimasena, or yourself, O fotus-eyed
one, had, on that occasion, said,—Let the
blade of grass: destroy the unconscious
-mother,—O powerful one, then I would
have been destroyed and this would not
have taken place.


-16. Alas, what benefit has been reaped
by’ Drona’s ‘son by doing this cruel deed, _
-vig., the destcuction of the child ‘in the
womb by his Brahma-weapon,. § -  *


17. That self-same mother now seeks
to piss you, O slayer of enemies, by
bending ter head! ‘Surely, O Govinda,
1 shall kill myselé if


revive.


18. In him," O righteous one, f placed
“many jexpectations! Alas, when these have
been frustrated - by ‘ Drona’s’* ‘son, ‘what
necessity have I, O Keshava, to catry da
thé burden of life? rs


19. TE hoped, O Krishna; that with nty
chitd on my fap, O Janarddana, t would.
salute you with respect! Alas, O Keshava,
that hope has been destroyed.


this child does not


20. QO foremest of all beings, at the
death of this heit of Abhimanyu of rest-
less eyes, all my hope#have been destroyed,

<


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA,


2t. Abhimanyu of restless eyes, O des-
troyer of Madhu, was exceedingly dear to
you. Behold this child of bis killed by
the Brahma-weapon.

22. This child is very ungrateful and
very heartless, like his father, for, see, dis-
regarding the prosperity and affluence of
the Pandavas, he has gone to Yama’s
house. ;

23. { had, before this, vowed, O Keshava,
that if Abhimanyu fell on the field of
battle, OQ hero, I would follow him
mediately.

24. I did not, however, keep my vow,
cruel that { am and fond of life! ff { go
to him now, what, indeed, will Phalguna’s
won say?


im-


CHAPTER LXIX.
( ANUGITA PARVA. )—


Continued.


Vaishampayana said :—

r. The helpless Uttara, desirous -of
fretting back her child, having thus be.
wailed, dropped down in sorrow on the earth
fike a demented creature.

2. Seeing the princess fallen on the
‘earth deprived of her son and with her
body uncovered, Kunti as also all the
qother) Bharata-ladies, deeply afflicted,
began to weep aloud.

3- Resounding with the voice of lamen-
tation, the palace of the Pandavas, O
king, was soon converted into a house of
sorrow where nobody could remain.


4. Greatly stricken with grief on ac-
count of her son, Virata’s daughter, O
king, seemed to be struck down for some.
time by sorrow and cheerlessness.


5. Regaining consciousness, O chief of |


Bharata’s race, Uttara took up her child
‘on her lap and said these words.


‘6. Wou are the child of one who knew
‘every duty. Are you not conscious then
of the sin you commit, since you do not
salute this foremost one of the Vrishni’s
race ? ,

7—8. © son, going to your father tell him
these words of mine, vis.—It is difficult
for living creatures to die before their time
«comes, because* through reft of you, my
husband, and now deprived of my child
also, 1 am yet alive when 1 should die,
anendued as | am with everything auspici-
ous and everything valuable,


iz ?


33


9. O -mighty-armed one, with the
permission of king Yudhishthira the just.
L shall swallow some dreadful poison or
cast myself on the burning fire.

10. O father, difficule of destruction is
my heart since, though I am deprived of
husband and child, that heart of mine dost
not break into a thousand pieces.


tr, Rise, O son, and see this your


‘afflicted greatgrandmother! She is deep-


ly stricken with grief, bathed in tears, ex:
ceedingly cheerless, and plunged-in an
ocean of sorrow. ;

12. See the reverend princess of Pan-
chala, and the helpless princess of the
Sattata race! Look at myself, exceedingly
afflicted with grief, and sesembling a deer
pierced by a hunter. ;

13. Rise, O chifd, and took at the face”
of this king, who is gifted with great wise
dom, and possessed of eyes like lotus- petals
and resembling your father af restless
glances,


14. Seeing Uttara, whe bewailed thus,
fallen on the earth, all those ladies, raising
her, caused her to sit up.


15. Having sat up, the daughter of the
king of the Matsyas, summoning her pa-
tience, joined her hands in respect and
touched the earth with ker head fer
saluting Keshava having eyes like lotus-
petals.


16. Hearing those heart-rending lamen-
tations of hers, that foremost of persona
touched water and withdrew the (force of
the Brahma- weapon,


17-18. That hero of undecaying gfory,’
belonging to the cace of the Dasharhas,
promised to revive the child. Then he of
pure soul, said these words in the hearing’
of the whole wniverse,-'O Uttara, | never
wttec a falsehood. My werds will prove
true. 1 shall revive this child before all
creatures.


1g. Never before have { uttered a false-
hood even in jest. Never have 1 turned
back from battle. (By the merit of those
deeds} fet this child revive.


20. As virtue is dear to me, as Brah-
manas are especially dear to me, let Abhi~
manyu’s-son, who is born dead, revive.


at. Never has a misunderstanding
arisen between me and my friend Vijaya.
Let this dead child revive by that truth.


2z. As truth and virtue are always
established in me, fet this dead child ef
Abbimanyu revive.


82


, 236 As Kansa and Keshi have been
righteously killed by me, let this child
cevive to-day by that truth.


24. After these words were uttered by
Vasudeva, that child, O foremost one of
Bharata’s family, became animate and
began gradually to move, O king.


— ey


CHAPTER LXX.


(ANUGITA PARVA,.)—
Continued,


‘Vaishampayana said :—

1, When the Brahma-weapon was with-
drawn by Krishna, at that time, the lying-
3-room was lighted up by your father with
his energy.


2. All the Rakshasas were foreed to
leave the room and many of them were
killed, _In the sky a voice was heard, say-
ing,— Excellent; O Keshava, Excellent.


3. The burning Brahma-weapon then
returned to the Grandfather. Your. father
got back his, O king.


4. The child began to move according
to his energy and power. ‘The Bharata-
ladies became all filled with joy.


5. At the command of Govinda, the
Brahmanas were made to utter benedic-
tions. AH the ladies filled with joy, lauded
Janarddana. 2


6. Indeed, the wives of those Bharata-
heroes, viz., Kunti and Drupada’s daughter
and Subhadra and Uttara, and the wives of
other leading men, tike (ship-wrecked).
persons who have reached the shore after
having got a boat, became greatly pleased.


6—8. Then wrestlers and actors and:
astrologers and those who enquire after the
sleep (of princes), and bands of bards and
eulogists all uttered the praises of Janard-
dana, while uttering benedictions filled with
the praises of the Kurus, O chief of the
Bharatas.


9 Uttara, rising up atthe proper time,
with a pleased heart and bearing her child
in her arms, reverentially saluted. the de-
lighter of the Yadus.


1o—14. Rejoicing greatly, Krishna
made gifts tothe child of many valuable
gems. The other chiefs of the Vrishni-race,
did the same. Then the powerful Janard-
dana, fi:mly following truth, bestowed a


name on the infant who was.your father,, O-


monarch.—'Since this child of Abhimanyu
has been born at a time when this family


MAHABHARATA,


has become nearly extinct, let his name be
Parikshit.’ This is what he said. Then
your father, O king, began to grow, and
please all the people, O Bharata. When
your father was a month old, O hero, the
Pandavas returned to their capital, bring-
ing with them abundant riches. Hearing
that the Pandavas were near, those fore-
most ones of the Vrishuni-race went out.


15. The citizens decked the city of Has-
tinapur with many garlands of flowers,
with beautiful pemnons and standards of
various kinds,


16. The citizens also, O king, adorned
their respective palaces. Desirous of doing
what was beneficial to the sons of Pandu,
Vidura ordered various kinds of adoration
to be offered to the celestials established in
their respective temples. The principat


streets of the city were adorned with
flowers.
18—21. Indeed, the city was filled witl»


the noise of thousands of voices which resem-
bled the softened roar of distant ocean waves.
With dancers all engaged in their business,
and with the voice of singers, the (Kurup
city then resembled the palace of Vaishra-
vana himself. Bards and eulogists, O king,
accompanied by beautiful women, were
seen to adorn various retired spots in the
city. he pennons were made by the wind
to float gaily on every part of the city, as ié
bent upon showing the Kurus the southern
and the northern points of the compass.
All the officers also of the government
loudly proclaimed that that was to be a day
of rejoicing for the whole kingdom as a
mack of the success of the enterprise for
bringing a profusion of gems and other
valuables,


CHAPTER LXXI.


f ANUGITA PARVA. )-=
Continued,


Vaishampayana said :—

t. Hearing that the Pandavas were near,
that destroyer of enemies, vzs., Vasudeva,
accompanied by his ministers, went out for
seeing them,


2.. The Pandavas then, uniting with the
Vrishnis according to the ususat fornralities,.
together entered, O' king, the city of Husti-
napur. <


3. With the voices and the clatter of cars.
of that powerful host, the Earth and the sky,.
and the firmament itself, became, as it were,
entirely filled,


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA,


4. With rejoicing hearts, the Pandavas,
accompanied by their officers and friends,
entered the capital, placing that treasure in
their van.


5. Going, according to custom, to king
Dhritarashtra first, they adored his feet,
announcing their respective names.


6. Those foremost ones of Bharata’s
race, O chief of kings, then paid their res-
pectful salutations to Gandhari, the daughter
of Suvala, and to Kuati.


7. They next adored (their uncle) Vidura
and Yuyutsu, the son of Dhritarashtra by
his Vaishya wife. ‘Those heroes were then
adored by others and they shone forth in
beauty, O king.


8. After this, GO Bharata, those heroes
heard the news of that highly wonderful
and marvellous and gladsome birth of your
father.


9. Hearing of that feat of the highly
intelligent Vasudeva, they all adored
Krishna, the delighter of Devaki, who was
every way worthy of adoration.


to. Then, after a few days, Vyasa, the
son of Satyavati, gifted with great energy,
came to the city of Hastinapur.


11. Vhe perpetuaters of Kuru’s race
adored the great Rishi according to the
usual custom. Indeed, those heroes, with
those foremost princes of the Vrishini and
the Andhaka-races, worshipped the sage.


12—-13. After having conversed on
warious topics, Dharama’s son Yudhishthira
addressed Vyasa and said,— This treasure,
O holy one, which has been brought
through your favour, { desire to devote to
that great Horse-Sacrifice.


14. O best of ascetics, I wish to have
your permission. We are all, O Rishi, at
your disposal, and at that of the great
Krishna.


Vyasa said :—
15. I give you permission, O king. Do
what should be done after this, Do you
adore the deities duly by performing the
Horse-Sacrifice with profuse gifts.

16. The Horse-Sacrifice, O king, is a
purifier of allsins. Forsooth, having adored
the deities by that sacrifice you will swrely
be purged of all sins,


Vaishampayana said :—

17. Thus addregsed, the Kuru-King
Vudhishthira of #ighteous soul, O monarch,
began to make the’ necessary preparations
for the Horse- Sacrifice.


t8.—19. Having represented alf this to


the Island-born Krishna, the king gifted |
% aa ?


83
with great eloquence, approached Vasudeva
and said,—O foremost of ali beings, the
goddess Devaki has, through you come to
be considered as the most fortunate of
mothers. © you of undecaying gtory, do


you perform what! shall now telt you, O
mighty-armed one.


20, O delighter of the Kurus, the various


‘enjoyments we enjoy, have all been acquired


through your power. The whole Eartn has
been subjugated by you with the help of
your prowess and intelligence.


2t. Do you, therefore, case yourself to
undergo the rites of initiation. You are ouc
highest preceptor and master. If you per-
form the sacrifice, O you of the Dasharha-
race, 1 shall be purified from every sin,


22. You are Sacrifice! You are the
Indestructible! You are this All! Vou
are Virtue! You are Prajapati! Wou are
the goal of all creatures! This is my
certain conclusion. .


Vasudeva said :—

23. O mighty-armed one, what you say
is worthy of you, O chastiser of enemies !
You are the goal of all creatures, This is
my Certain conclusion.


24. Of the heroes of the Kuru-race,
you shine to-day in great glory for your
virtue! They have all been cast into the
shade, O king, by you! You are our
king, and you are our senior.


25 With my approval freely granted,
do you worship the celestials in the sacrifice
suggested. Do you, O Bharata, appoint
us to whatever task you like. Truly, do
{ pledge myself that { shall accomplish all,
O sinless one, that you mayst bid me ac-
complish. .


26. Bhimasena and Arjuna and the two


sons of Madravati will be sacrificing whea
you, O king, sacrifice,


omer


CHAPTER LXXIt.


(ANUGIFA PARVA.)—
Continued.


Vaishampayana said: —

1, Thus addressed by Krishna, Vu-
dhishthira, the son of Dharma, gifted with
great intelligence, saluted Vyasa and said
these words :—

2, Do you cause me to be initiated When
the proper hour, as you truly know, come
foc that rite, This my sacrifice Entirely
depends on you. ‘


84


Vyasa said :—~
3. Mysetf, O son of Kunti, and Paila


and = Yajnavalkya, shall, undoubtedly,
achievelevery rite at the proper time,


4. The rite of initiating you will be per-
formed on the day of full moon belonging
to the month of Chaitra. Let all the
necessaries of the sacrifice, O foremost of
men, be got ready.


5. Let Sutas well-versed in the science of

: horses and let Brahmawas also possessed of

the same learning, Select, after examination,

a worthy horse in order that your sacrifice
may be completed,


6. Loosening the animal according to
the injunctions of the seciptures, fet him
wander over the whole Earth with her belt
of seas, showing your effulgent glory, O
king. ;


Vaishampayana said:—


y. Thus addressed (by the Rishi), Yu-
Ghishthica, the royal son of Pandu, answer-
ed,-—'So be it !'—~and then, O monarch, he
accomplished all that that utterer of Brahma
had said,


8. All the articles necessary for the sa-
crifice, O king, were duly procured.


g. The royal son of Dharma, gifted with
immeasurable soul, havirig procured all the
necessaries, informed the  Island-born
Krishna of it.


10, Then the highly energetic Vyasa said
to the royal son of Dharma,—'As regards
oursetves, we are all prepared to initiate
you in view of the sacrifice.


tr. Let the Sphya and the Kurcha and
all the other articles that, O you of Kuru’s
race, may be necessary for your sacrifice, be
made of gold,


12. Let the horse also be loosened to-day,
for wandering on the. Earth, according to
the ordinances of the scriptures. Let the
animal, duly protected, wander over the
Earth.’


Yudh‘shthira said :—-


13. Let arrangements be made by you,
O wwice-born one, about loosening this horse
for enabling it to wander over the Earth at
its will,


+14. You should, O ascetic, say who will


Aba this horse while roaming over the
arth freely according to its will.


Vaishampayana continued :—
45—~16. Thus addressed (by king
Yudhishthira), QO king, the Island-born
Kristina said,— He who is born after Bhima-
ena, who is the foremost of all bowmen, who


MAHABAHRATA.,


is called Jishnu, who is gifted with great
patience and capable of overcoming all re
sistance,—-he will protect the horse. That
destroyer of the Nivatakavachas can con¢
quer the whole Earth.


17. In him are all celestial weapons,
His body is like that of a celestial in its
powers of endurance. His bow and quivers
are celestial. He will follow this horse.


18. He is well-versed in both Religion
and Profit. He is a master of all the scien-
ces. O foremost of kings, he will, according
to the scriptures, cause the horse to roam
and graze at its will,


19. This mighty-armed prince, of dark
color, is endued with eyes resembling fotus-
petals. hat hero, the father of Abhi-
manyu, will protect the horse.


20. Bhimasena also is gifted with great
energy. That son of Kunti is possessed o
immeasurable power. He is competent to
protect the kingdom, helped by Nakula, O
monarch.


21. Gifted with great intelligence and
fame, Sahadeva will, O you of Kuru's race,
duly attend to all the relatives who have
been invited to your capital.

22. Thus addressed by the Rishi, that
pe rpetuator of Kurn’s race, os., Yudhish-
thira, performed every injunction duly
and appointed Phalguna to attend to the
horse.


Yudhishthira said :—


23. Come, O Arjuna, let the horse, O
hero, be protected by you. You alone


are competent to protect- it, and none
else.
24. Those kings, O mighty-armed hero


who will come forward to encounter you, try
© sinless ene, to avoid battles with tnem to
the best of your power.


25. You should also invite them all to
this sacrifice of mine. Indeed, O mighty-
armed one, go forth but try to establish
friendly celations with them,


Vaishampayana said :—

26. Having said so te-his brother
Savyasachin, the righteous-souled — king
Yudhishthira commanded Bhima and Nas
kula to protect the city. _

27. With the permission of king Dhrita-
rashtra, VYudbishthira then set Sahadeva,
that foremost of warriors, to wait upon alt!
the invited guests. € :


T onhamaanemd


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA.


CHAPTER LXXIIL
(ANUGITA PARVA.)=


Continued,


Vaishampayana said :—
“1, When the hour for initiation came,
all those great Ritwijas duly initiated the
king for the Horse- Sacrifice.


2. Having finished the rites of binding
the sacrificial animals, the son of Pandu,
vis., king Yudhishthira the just, gifted with
great energy, the initiation being over,
shone with great splendour along with those
Ritwijas.

3. The horse that was brought for the
Horse-Sacrifice was let loose, according to
the injunctions of the scriptures, by that
utterer of Brahma, vis., Vyasa himself of
great energy,

4. Then king VYudhishthira the just, O
king, after his initiation, adorned with a
garland of gold around his neck, shone like
a burning fire.


5 Having a black deer skin for his
upper garment, carrying a staff in hand,
and wearing a cloth of red silk, the son of
Dharma, gifted with great splendour, shone
like a second Prajapati seated on the sacri-
ficial altar, ;


6, All his Ritwijas also, O king, were
clad in similar dresses, Arjuna also shone
like a burning fire.


7. Dhananjaya, to whose car were yoked
white horses, then duly prepared, O king,
to follow that horse of the complexion of a
black deer, at the command of Yudhish-
thira.


8. Repeatedly drawing his bow, named
Gandiva, O king, and easing his hand in a
fence made of iguana skin, -Arjuna, O
monarch, prepared to follow that horse, O
king, with a cheerful heart.


g. All Hastinapur, O king, with the
very children, came out at that spot from
desire of seeing Dhananjaya, that foremost
of the Kurus, on the eve of his journey.


to. So great was the crowd of specta-
tors that came to see the horse and the
prince who was to follow it, that on account
of the pressure of bodies, it seemed a fire
was created. :


t1, Loud was the noise which arose from
that crowd of men who assembled together
for seeing Dhananjaya the son of Kunti,
and it seemed to fill all the points of the
compass and the entire sky.


13. And they said,—There goes the son
of Kunti, and there that horse of burnin
1 ;


85


beauty. Indeed, the’ mighty-armed hero
follows the horse, having atmed himself
with his excellent bow,


13. These were the words which''the in-
telligent Jishnu heard. The citizens also
blessed him, saying,—‘Let blessinys be
yours’. Go safely and return, O Bharata.’


14. Others, O chief of men, uttered
these words :—' So great is the; crowd that
we do not see Arjuna. His bow, however,
we see. :


15. That is the celebrated bow Gandiva
of terrible twang. Blessed be you. Let
all dangers fly from your path. Let fear
nowhere inspire you.


16. When he returns we shall see him,
for it is certain that he will return, ‘The
great Arjuna repeatedly heard these and
similar other sweet words. of men and
women, O chief of the Bharatas. A disci-
ple of Yajnavalkya, who was well-versed in
all. sacrificial rites, and who was & complete
master of the Vedas, proceeded with Partha
for performing auspicious cites in favour
of the hero. Many Brahmanas also, O
king, all knowing Vedas, well, and many
Kshatriyas too, followed the great hero, at
the command, O monarch, of Yudhishthira
the just. ‘


20. The horse then travelled, O foremost
of men, wherever he liked over the Earth
already congsered by the Pandavas with
the power of theic weapons,


21. In course of the horse’s wanderings,
O king, many great and wonderful battles
were fought between Arjuna and many
kings. ‘Ihese I shall descrive to you.


22. Thehorse, O king, travelled over the
whole Earth, Know, O monarch, that from
the north it turned towards the East.


23. Grinding the kingdoms of many
kings that excellent horse wandered. And
it was followed slowly by the great cac-
warriors Arjuna of white horses.


24. O monarch, many Kshatriyas and
kings, who faught with Arjuna on that
occasion, were rendered miserable for having
lost their kinsmen ot the field of Kuru-
ksbetra,


2§—~—26. Many Kiratas also, O king, and
Yavanas, all excellent bowmen, and various
tribes of Mlechchas too, who had been
discomfited before (by the Pandavas on the
field of Kurukshetra), and many Aryan
kings, possessed of soldiers and animals
gifted with great alacrity, and all irresistible
in fight, met the son of Pandu in baitle.


_ 27. Thus took place innumerable battles
in various countries, O monarch, between


86


Arjuna and the kings of various realms
who came to encounter him.


28. LIshall, O sinless king, describe to
you those battles only which raged with
great fury and which were the principal
ones among all he fought.


S  ememeamunnand


CHAPTER LXXIV.


( ANUGITA PARVA.)—
Continued.


Vaishampayana, said :—

t. A battle took place between the
diadem- decked (Arjuna) and the sons and
grandsons of the Trigartas whose hostility
the Pandavas had incurred before and all
of whom were welt-known as powerful car-
warriors,


2, Having learnt that that foremost. of
horses, which was intended for the sacrifice,
had come to their kingdom, those heroes,
accoutering themselves in coats mail, sur-
rounded Arjuna,


3. Mounted on their cars, drawn by
excellent and well-decked_steeds and with
quivers on their backs, they surrounded
that horse, O king, and tried to capture
it.

4. Thinking of that attempt of theirs,
the diadem-decked Arjuna, forbade those
heroes, with conciliatory words, O chastiser
of enemies.


5. Disregarding Arjuna’s message, they
attacked him with their arrows. The
diadem-decked Arjuna resisted those war-
riors who were under the control of darkness
and passion.


6. Jishnu, addressed them  smilingly
and said ,—‘ Desist, ye unrighteous ones !
Life is a blessing.’


gq. Atthe time of his starting, he had
been earnestly ordered by king Yudhish-
thira the just not to kill those Kshatriyas
whose kinsmen had been killed before on the
field of Kurukshetra.


8. Remembering these behests of king
Yudhishthiea the just who was gifted with
great intelligence, Arjuna asked the ‘ri-
gartas to forbear. But they disregarded
Arjuna’s injunction,

g. Then Asjuna defeated Suryavarman,
the king of the Trigartas, in battle, by
shooting countless arrows at him and
Jaughed in scorn.


to. The Trigarta warriors, however:
filling the ten points with the sound o


MAHABHARATA.


their cars and ¢ar-wheels, rushed towards
Dhananjaya.


tr. ‘Then Suryavarman, showing great
lightness of hand, pierced Dhananjaya with
hundreds of straight arrows, O king !


12, The other great bowmen, who follow-
ed the king and who were all desirous of
bringing about the destruction of Dhanan-
jaya, shot showers of arrows on him.


13. With numberless arrows shot from
his own bowstring, the son of Pandu, O
king, cut off those clouds, of arrows upon
which they fell down.


14. Gifted with great energy, Ketuvar-
man, the younger brother of Suryavarman,
and gifted with youthful vigour, fought, for
the sake of his brother, against Pandu’s
son endued with great fame.


15. Seeing Ketuvarman approaching
towards him for battle, Vibhatsu, that des-
troyer of hostile heroes, killed him with
many sharp-pointed arrows.


16. Upon Ketuvarmana's fall, the power-
ful cat-warrior Dhritavarman, rushing on
his car towards Arjuna, showered a per-
fect downpour of arrows on him.


“47. Seeing that lightness of hand shown
by the youth Dhritavarman, Gudakesha of
great energy and great{, prowess became
highly pleased with him.


18. The son of Indra could not see
when the young warrior took out his arrows
and when he placed them on his bowstring
aiming at him. He only saw showers of
arrows,in the air.


to. For a brief space of time, Arjuna
pleased his enemy and mentally admired
bis heroism and skill,


zo. The Kuru hero, smiling the while,
fought with that youth who took after an
angry snake.: The mighty-armed Dhanane
jaya, iglad as he was in seeing the courage
of Dhritavarman, did not take his life,


21. While, however, Partha of im-
measurable energy fought mildly with him
without wishing to, kill him, Dhritavarman
shot a burning arrow at him.


22. Deeply pierced in the hand by that
atrow, Vijaya became stupefied and his
bow Gandiva dropped down on the Earth
from his relaxed grasp.


23. The form of that bow, O king,
when it fell from the grasp of Arjuna, re-
cues O Bharata, that of the bow of
Indra.


24. When that great and celestial bow
dropped down, O king, Dhritavarman
laughed loudly in battle,


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA.


as. At this, Jishnu, worked up with 1


tage wiped the blood from his hand and
once more taking up his bow, showered a
perfect downpour of arrows.


26. Then a loud and confused noise
arose, filling the sky and touching the very
heavens, as it were, from various creatures
who spoke highly of that feat of Dhanan-
jaya.

27—28. Seeing Jishnu inflimed with
wrath and Jooking like Yama himself as he
appears as the end of the cycle, the lrigarta
warriors hastily surrounded him, rushing
from theie posts and desirous of rescuing
Dhritavarman, Seeing himself surrounded
by his enemies, Arjuna became more angry
than before.


29. He then quickly despatched eighteen
of their foremost warriors with many arrows
of hard iron which resembled the arrows
of the great Indra himself.


30. The Trigarta warriors then began
to fly. Seeing them retreat, Dhananjaya,
quickly shot many shafts at them which
resembled angry snakes of dieadful poison,
and laughed aloud.


31. The powerful car-warriors of the
Trigactas, with dispirited hearts, fled in
all directions, greatly afflicted by Dhanan-
jaya with his arrows.


32. They then addressed that foremost
of men, that destroyer of the Samsaptaka
army, saying,—' We are your slaves! We
yield to you.


33. Do you command us, O Partha!
Lo, we wait here as the most docile of your
servants '—-O delighter of the Kurcus, we
shall execute all your commands.’


34. Hearing these words expressive of
their submission, Dhananjaya said them,—
‘Do ye, O kings, save your hives, toand
accept my dominion.’


CHAPTER LXXV.


(ANUGITA PARVA. )—
Continued.


Vaishampayana said :—

1. That foremost of horses then pro-
ceeded to the kingdom of Pragjyotisha
and began to wander there. At this,
Bhagadatta’s son, who was greatly courage-
ous in battle, came out. ; :

2. King Vajradata, O chief of the
Bharatas, finding the (sacrificial) horse
arsived within his kingdom, fought (for
detaining it).


89


3. The royal son of Bhagadatta, coming
out of his city, afflicted the horse which:
was coming (and seizing it), marched back
towards his own place.

4. Marking this, the mighty armed
chief of the Kuru-race, speedily stretched
his Gandiva, and suddenly rushed towards
his enemy.


5. Stupefied by the arrows shot from
Gandiva, the beroic son of Bhagadata,
letting loose the horse, fled from Partha.


6. Once more entering his capital, that
foremost of kings, irresistible in battle,
cased himself in mail, and mounting on his
prince of elephants, came out.


7. ‘That powerfal car-warrior had a
white umbretta held over his head, and
was fanned with a milk-white yak-tails.


8. Moved by childishness and folly, he
challenged Partha, the powerful car warrior
of the Pandavas, famed for dreadtul deeds
in battle, to an encounter with him.


9. The enraged prince then urged to-
wards Arjuna that elephant of his, which
resembled a veritable mountain, and from
whose temples and mouth came oul streains
of juice showing excitement.


10. Indeed, that elephant showered its
secretions like a great mass of clouds poure
ing rain, Capable of resisting hostile feats
of its own species, it had been equipped
according to the ordinances of the treatises
(on war-elephants). Irresistible in battle,
it had become so infuriate as to be beyond
control, ‘


tt. Urged on by the prince with the
iron-hook, that powerful elephant theq
seemed as if it would cut through the sky
(tike'a flying hill).


12, Seeing it advance towards him, O
king, Dhananjaya, filled with anger and
Standing on the earth, OQ Bharata, met the
prince on its back.


13. Filled with anger, Vajradatta quick.
ly shed at Arjuna a number of broad-
headed arrows gifted with the energy of
fire and resembling (as they coursed
through the air) a cloud of speedily
moving locusts.


14. Arjuna, however, with arrows sped
from Gandiva, cut off those arrows, some
into two, and some into three, pieces. He
cut them off in the sky itself with those
atrows of his passing through the sky.


15. The son of Bhagadatta, seeing his
broad-headed arrows tlus cut off, quickly
sped at Arjuna a number of other arrows in
a continuous line,


-


88


16. Filled with anger at this, Arjuna
more quickly than before, shot at Bhaga-
datta’s son a number of straightly coursing
arrows equipped with golden wings.


17. Vajradatta of powerfut energy,
struck with great force and pierced with
thase arrows in that fierce encounter, felf
down on the Earth. Consciousness, how-
ever, did not leave hiny.


18. Mounting on his prince of elephants
again in the midst of that battle, the son of
Bhagadatta, desirous of victory, very coolly
shot a number of arrows at Arjuna.


19. Fiiled with anger, Jishnu then ‘shot
atthe prince a number of arrows which
looked- like burning flames of fire and
which appeared to be so many snakes of
qreadful poison,


20. Pierced therewith, the powerful ele.
phant, emitting a large quantity of blood,
looked jike a mountain of many springs
discharging rillets of water coloured with
red chalk,


CHAPFER LXXVIE.
(ANUGITA PARVA.)—
Coxtinued.


Vaishampayana siad :—
rt. Thus went on that battle, O chief of
the Bharatas, for three days between
Arjuna and that prince like the encounter
ea him of a hundred sag¢rifices and
titra,


2—3. On the fourth day, Vajradatta.


of great power laughed loudly and ad-
dressing Arjuna, said these words t—»‘ Wait,
wait, O Arjuna! You shall not escape
me alive! Killing you { shall duly discharge
the water-rite of- my father.


4 My aged father -Bhagadatta, who
was the friend of your father, was killed by
you on account of his weight of years. Do
you, however, fight me who am but a boy.


5. Maving said these words, O you of
Kurn’s race, king Vajradatta, filled) with
anger, urged his elephant towards the son
of Pandu.


6. Urged on by the highly intelligent
Vajradatta, that prince of elephants, as if
desinrous of cutting through the sky, rushed
towards Dhananjaya.

7. That best of elephants drenched
Arjuna with a shower of juice emitted from
the end of his trunk, like a mass of blue
clouds drenching a hill with its down-pour.

8. Indeed, urged on by the king, the
elephant, repeatedly vcoaring like a cloud,


MAHABHARATA.


rushed towards Phalzuna, sending fortn
deep noise from its mouth.


9. Indeed, urged on by Vajradatta that
prince of elephants quickly moved towards
the powerful car-warrior of the Kurus, with
the tread of one that seemed to dance in
excitement.


10. Seeing that beast of Vajradatta ad-
vance towards him, that destroyer of
enemies, vts., the powerful Dhananjaya,
relying on Gandiva, stood his ground with
out shaking with fear.


tr. Recoilecting what an obstacle Vajra-
datta was proving to the performance of
his task, and remembering the old enmity
of the house, the son of Pandu became
greatly excited with rage against the king.


12. Worked up with rage, Dhananjaya
impeded the course of that beast with a
shower of arrows like the shore resisting the
surging sea.

13. That best of elephants and beautiful
in appearance, thus impeded by Arjuna,
stopped is its course, with body pierced with
many an arrow, like a porcupine with its
quills erect.


14. Seeing his elephant impeded in its
course, the royal son Bhagadatta, deprived
of sense by anger, shot many whetted
arrows at Arjuna. -


15. The mighty-armed Arjuna baffled
all those arrows with many foe-destroying
arrows of his, The feat appeared to be
exceedingly wonderful.


16. Once more the king of the Pragjyo-
tishas, worked up with rage, forcibly urged
his elephant, whieh resembled a mountain,
at Arjuna,


17. Seeing the beast once more advane
cing towards him, Arjuna shot with great
Strength an arrow at it which resembled a
veritable flame of fire.


18. Cut to the quick, O king, by the
son of Pandu, the beast suddenly droppep


| down on the Earth like a mountain-summit


loosened by a thunder-boit.


19. Struck with Dhananjaya’s arrow,
the elephant, as it lay on the Earth, looked
like a huge moyntain-cliff lying on the
ground, loosened by the bolt of Indra.


20, When the! elephant of Vajradatta
was prostrated on the ground, the son of
Pandu, addressing the king who had fallen
down with his beast, said,—‘Do not fear.’


21. Indeed, Yudhishthira of great energy.
said to me while commissioning me for this-
task even these words, wig. You should
not, O Dhananjaya, kill those kings (whe


may give you battle). .
¢


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA.


22. O foremost of men, you sheuld con-
“sider your task as accomplished if only you
disable those hostile kings! You should
hot also, O Dhananjaya, kill the warriors
of those kings who may come forth to
fight you. :


23. They should be requested to tonie, ”


with all: their kinsmen and friends, to the
Horse-Sacrifice of Yudhishthira.


24. Having heard these commands of
my brother, [ shail not kill you, O king}
Rise ups let no fear be yours; return to
your city safe and sound, O king.


25. When the day of full moon in the
month of Chaitra ‘comes, you shall O

reat king, go to that sacrifice of king

adhishthira the just, for it takes place
‘on that day ! ‘

26 ‘Thus addressed by Arjuna, the
royal son of Bhagadatta, defeated by the
son of Pandu, said,—‘ So be it.’


CHAPTER LXXVIL


( ANUGITA PARVA.)—=
Continued.


‘Vaishampayana said:—

t. There took place a great battle be-
tween the diadem-decked Arjuna and the
hundreds of Saindvavas who still lived
alter the destruction of their clan. .


2. Hearing that he of white horses had
entered their territories, those Kshatriyas
came ont against him, table to bear that
foremost one of Pandu's race. ~


Those warriors who were as terrible
as dreadful poison, finding the horse within
their dominion, seized it without being
filled with any fear of Partha who was the
younger brother of Bhimaseiia. ,

"4. Advancing against’ Vibhatsu) who
waited on foot, armed whith his bow, upon
gthe sacsifiggal lorse, they attacked him from
‘a near pomt, i

5. Defeated in battle before, those
Kshatriyas of great enctgy; moved by the
desire of victoty, surrounded that forernost
of men,


. 6... Proclaiming their names and families
and their various feats, they showered their
arrows on Partha,


' 9. Pouringsshowers of arrows of such
fierce energy as were capable of obstruc-

_ ting the course of trostile elephants, those

* heroes surrounded the son of Kunti, desir-
ous of defeating him in battle, -


iz


“89


8. Theniselves seated On cars, ‘they
fought ~Arjuna of dreadful {eats who was
on foot. | : } .

.g. “From every side they began to strike
that liero, that destroyer of the Nivata-


| kavachas, that destroyer of the Samsaptakas,


that destroyer of the king of the Sindhus.


to. Surreunding him on al} sides ag
within a cage.by means of a thousand cars
and ten thousand horse, those brave ware
rior8 expressed their joy.

11—12. Recollecting the destruction by
Dhananjaya of Jayadratha’ in battle, O
you of Kuru’s race, they poured heavy
showers of arrows 6n that hero like a mass
of clonds showering a heavy’ downpour.
Overwhelmed with that arrowy shower,
Arjuna looked like the sun covered by a
cloud. :


13. That foremost son of Pandu, ia
the midst of that cloud of arrows, re~
sembled a bird in the midst of an iron cage, .
oO Bharata. ‘


14. Seeing the son of Kunti thus afflicted
with arrows, ¢ries of oh and alas were
‘uttered by the three worlds, and the Sun
himself became shorn of his splendour.

13. Then, O king, a terrible wind began
to blow, and Rahu swallowed up beth the
Sun and the Moon: simultaneously.


16. Mary meteors struck the solar dis¢
and then shot in different directions... ‘he
prince of mountains, is., Kailasa, began
to tremble, ; :


17. The seven (celestial) Rishis, as also
the other Rishis ‘of Heaven, stricken with
fear, and afflicted with grief and sorrow,
breathed hot sighs, :


18, Piercing through the sky, those
meteors fell on the lunar disc as well.’ All
the points of the compass became Aled with
smoke and assumed a Strange aspect.


19 Reddish clouds, with Aushes of
lightning playing in their midst and the
bow of Itvtra measuring them from side to
side, stiddenly covéred the sky and poured
flesh and bioods om the Earth.


20. Such was the aspect which all nature
assumed when that hero was overwhelmed
with showers of asrows. Indeed, when
Phalguna, that foremost one among the
Bharatas, was thus afflicted, those marvels
were witnessed.

2t. Overwhelmed by that dense cloud
of atrows, Arjuna became stupefied. His .
bow, Gandiva, fell down from his relaxed
grip and bis leathern fence also droppéd
down. * Ss ;


22. When Dhananjaya became stipe-
fied, the Seindhava wartiors once more


ye


shat fdrthwah at that sedeéiess wactior,
numberless other arrows.


23. Unsderstanding that the son of
Pritha was insensible, the celestials, with
héarts stricken with fear, began to seck his
well- being. by uttering vatioug benedictions.


24. Then the celestial Rishis, the seven
Rishis, and the twice-born Rishis, became
engaged in silent recitations from desire
of giving victory to the highly intelligent
son off Pritha’s.


25. When at last the energy of Partha
blazed forth through those deeds of the
dwellers of the celestial region, that hero,
who was conversant with celestial weapons
ce great efficacy, stood immovable like a
will. -

26. The delighter of the Kurus then
Grew. his celestial bow. And as he repea-
tedly stretched the bowstring, the twang
that: followed resembled the loud sound of
some strong machine,

27. Like Purandara pouring rain, the
powerful Arjuna then, with that bow of his,
poured incessant showers of arrows on his
enemies.


28. Pierced by those arrows, the Saind-
hava watriers with their csidis became
invisible like trees covered witt fucusts.


! 29. ‘Terror-stricken at the very sound
of Gandiva and filled witiy consternation
ahey fled away, In grief of heart they sted
tears and cried aloud.


30. The powerful warriot moved amidst
that host of enemies with the celerity of a
fiery wheel, all the time piereig those
wartiors with his arrows. *

31. Like the great Indra, the holder of
the thunder-bolt, that destroyer of enemies,
vis., Arjuna, shot from his bow in every
direction that shower of arrows which
sesembled a sight produced by magic.

32. The Kaurava hero, piercing the
hostile army with showers of arrows loaked
resplendent like the autumnal Sua when he
Gieperses the clouds with his powerful rays.


CHAPTER LXXVIIL


(ANUGITA PARVA,)—~
Continued.
Vaishampayana said :—
8. The icresistible holder of Gandiva,


ready for battle, stood imimoyvable on the
ficid like Himavat hitmsell,


MAHABHARATA.


2. The Saindhava warriors, once mote
rallying, showered in great rage repeated
down-pours of arrows on him.


3. The mighty-armed hero, laughing
at his enemies, who had once more rallied
but who were on the point of death,
addressed them in these soft words :—


4. Do ye fight to the best of your power
and do ye try to defeat me. Wo ye, howe
ever, accomplish all necessary deeds, fora
great danger awaits you all.


§. See, f fight all of you, baffling your
clouds of arrows! Bent as you are on
battle, wait a litle. I shall soon quell your
ptide.

6. The holder of Gandiva, having said
these words in anger, recollected, however,
the words, O Bharata, of his eldest brother.


9—8. Those words were :—You should
not, O child, kill those Kshatriyas who
will come against you for battle! They
should, however, be defeated by you $
That foremost of men, Phalguna, had been
thus addressed by king Yudhishthira the
just, of great soul. He, therefore, began
to reflect thus. Thus was I commissiened
by my brother, Warriors advancing
against me should not be killed.


9, 1! must act in such a way as not ta
falsify the words of king Wudhishthira the
just.

to. Having arvived at this conclusion,
Phalguna, that foremost of men, then said
to these Saindhavas who were all dreadful
in battle, these words:


tt. I say what is for your benefit.
Though staying before me, I do not wistt
to kill you. He amongst you who will say
to me that he has been defeated by me and
that he is mine, wilt be spared by me.


12. Having heard these words of mine,
act towards me in that way which may best
secure your well-being. .By acting ia a
different way you will place yourselves in @
situation of great feat and danger,


13. Having said these wog}s to those
hervic warriors, the chief of the Kurus
began to fight them. Arjuna was worked
up with rage. His enemies, deésivous of


{ victory, were equally enraged.


14. The Saindhavas then, O king, shot
hundreds and thousands of straight arrows
at the wielder of Gandiva. .


15. Dhananjaya, with his ewn whetted
arrows, €ut off those arto'ws of sharp and
‘terrible points, resembling snakes @f dreads
‘ful poison, before they could come up te
him,


ASUWAMEDHIA PARVA.


t6. Having cut off those shacp arrows
bedecked with Kanka-feathers, Arsjuna
pierced each of the warriors opposed to him
with a whetted arrow.

17. Yhe Saindhava Kshatriyas, recol-
lecting that it was Dhananjaya who had
killed their bing Jayadratha, then hurled at
him darts and javelins with great force.


18. ‘Phe diadem-decked Dhananjaya of
great powec baffled their aim by cutting
off all those weapons before any of them
could reach him. At length the son of
Pandu became highly angry.


19. With many straight and broad-
headed arrows, he cut off the heads of
many of those warriors who were rushiag at
him from desire of victory.


zo. Many fled, many rushed at Arjuna ;
many moved not; all of them, howéver,
uttered such a loud noise that it resembled
the coas of the ocean.


at. As they were killed by Partha of
immeasurable power, they fought him, each
according to his strength and prowess.


22. ‘Their animals being all exhausted,
Partha succeeded in depriving a large
number of those warriors of theic senses by
means ef his sharpest acrows in that battle.


33. Yhen Dusshala, their queen, tite
daughter of Dnuritatastra, knowmy that
they were rendered cheerless: by Atjuna,
took her grandson in her atms and went to
Arjuna.


24. Yhe child was the son of Suratha
(the son of Jayadratha), The brave prince
proceeded tu his maternal uncle on his cat
tor tue safety of allthe Samdhava wartiors,


25. ‘Yhe queen, arrived before Dhanan-
jaya, began to weep in surrow., Seeing her,
the pewertul Dhanaujaya cast off his buw.


26—27. Leaving off his bow, Partha
duly received his sister and enquired of ber
as to what he could do for her, ihe queen
teplied to him, saying,—U chief ot the
Roaratas, this child is the son of your sister’s™
sun. He saiutes you, O Partha. Look at
him, O tocenust of men.


28. ‘Thus addressed by her, Partha
enquired alter his son (Suratha), saying.
Where is he ?


29. Dusshala answered him, saying,—
Burning with grief on account of the des-
tcuction of tis father, the heroic father of
this child died broken-hearted. Listen to
me as to how he died.


39—33- O Dhananjaya, he had heard
betore that his father Jayadratha had been.
killed by you, O siniess one. Exceedingly
affiicted with grief at this, and hearing of your


an ee cern


‘


arrival here as the follower and protector
of this sactificial horse, he at eece felt dawnr
and gave up bis i@e. Indeed, deeply afflice
ted with grief, as he was, as soon as he
heard of your arrival, he gave up his life.
Seeing him prostrate on the Earth, O lord,
t tuok his infant son with me and have come
to yon, seeking your protection. Havin
said these words, the daughter of Dhrita-
cashtra began to lament in deep sorrow.


Arjuna stood before her in great.
cheeclessness of heart, [is face was turned
towards the Earth. The cheerless sister
then said to her brother, who was equalfy
cheerless, these words: See your sister.
See the child of your sistes’s sar.


35. O perpetuater of Kuru’s race, O
you whe are fully conversant with everv
duty, you should show mercy to this child,
forgetting the Kurw peince, (Duryodhava)
and the wicked Jayadratha.


36. -As that destroyer of hostile heroes,
Parikshit, has beea bern of Abhimanyu,
so has this mighty-arored child, my: grands
son, originated from Suratha,

37. Taking him with me, O king, b have
come to you desirous of the salety of all
the wariars! Dy you listen to these words
of mine,


33. This child of that wicked enemy
of yours has now come to you, O mighty-
armed here. You should, therefore, show
mercy to this infant.


3g. O chastiser of enemies this infant
seeks to please you by bending his head.
He solrcits you for peace? O mighty~
armed hero, be fichived: to make peace,


40. Q you who know evéry duty, be.
pleased with the child whose friends and
kinsinen have alt been killed and who him-
self knows nothing of what has taken
place. Dv not yield to anger, ~~


4t. Forgetting his disreputable and
eruel grandfather, who offended against you
So highty, itis but fit that you should extend
your grace towards this child.


42. Recollecting queen Gandhari and
king Dhritarashtra, Dhananjaya, afflicted
with grief, addressed Dusshala who had
said so to iim, and aaswered her, censuring
Kshatriya practices all the time.


43. Fie on Duryodhana, that mean
person, cevetous of kingdom and full of
vanity! Alas, it was for him that all my
kinsmven have been sent by nie to the abode
of Yama,


44. Having said so, Dhananjaya com-
forted his sister and. became inclined (a
make peacer Cheefully, he embraced -her


$2.


bad then dismissed her, asking ber to
return to her palace.


4§- Dusshata asked all] hee warriors to
@esist from that great battle, and adoring
Partha, sbe of beautiful face returned to-
wasds her palace, .


46. Having defeated those heroes, viz.,
the Saindhavas, thus, Dbananjaya began
to follow that horse which ranged at its
will,


47. The heroic Arjuna duly followed
that sacrificial horse even as the divine
hotder of Pinaka had in days of yore follow-
ed the deer through the sky,


48. ‘The horse, at its will, passed through
various kingdoms successively, multiplying
the feats of Arjuna,


49. iw course of time, O king, the horse
wandering at its pieasure, at last arrived
within the kingdom of Manipmrca, followed
by the son of Pandu.


———e


CHAPTER LXXIX,


(€ANUGITA PARVA, J
Continued,


Vaishampayana said :~

t. Hearing that his father Arjuna had
arrived within his kingdom, the king of
Manipurca, Vabhruvahana went out with
humility, with a number of Bralmanas and
some treasure in his van.


2. Remembering, however, the duties
of Kshatriyas, the highly intelligent Dhanan-
jaya, seeing the king of Manipuca arrive ia
that guise, did not approve of it. ©

3. The righteous-sonfed  Phalyuna
angtily said,—Your conduct is not proper.
You have cettainly fallen away from Ksha-
atriya duties. ;

4:

Yudhishthira’s sacrificial horse.
son, will you not fight me, seeing that f
have come within your territories 7


I have come here asthe protector of


Fie on you, O yow of foolish une
derstanding, fie on you who have deviated
trom Kshatriya duties! Fie on you who
would receive me peacefully even though
have come here for fighting with you.


6—8. In thus receiving me peacefully
you act like a woman. O you of wreiched
understanding, if I had come to you, leav-
ing aside my arins, then wouid this conduct
ot yours have been fic, O worst of meu !’’
Leaning that these words were addressed
hy her husband, the daughter of the
Snake-King, vis., Uupi, unable to tolesate


Why, O-


a ee EE Oe


MAHABHARATA,


it, pierced Zthrough the Earth and came np
there. She saw her son standing there
perfectly cheerless and witly face hanging
down,


g—10. Indeed, the prince was repeatedly
rebuked by his father who was desirous of
battle with him, O monarch! Fhe daugltee
of the Snake, possessed of beautiful limbs,
vis., Ulupi, said these words consistent with
righteousness and duty to the prince who
himself was conversant with righteousness
and duty. Kuoow that [ am your mothes
Ulupi that am the daughter of a snake.


tt. Do you perform my order, O sot?
for you would then acquire great merite ,
Fight. your father, this foremost one o
Kucu’$ race, this hero who is irresistible in,
battle.


12. Forsooth, he will then be pleased
with you. ‘Thus was king Vabhruvahana
incited “against his father by his (step)
mother,

#3—14. At last, gifted as he was witlr
great energy, be made up his mind, O chief
of the Bhatatas, to fight *Dhananjaya.
Putting on his armour of bright gold and
his shining head-dress, he got upon au
excellent car which had hundreds of quivers
ready on it. ‘Vhat car was equipt with
necessaries for battle and had horses yoked
to ie which were ffcet like the mind.


15. It had exceblent wheels and a strong
Upashkara, and was adorned with golderm ~
ornaments of every sort. Raising his
standard which was decorated most beauti-
fully and which bore the device of a tion in
gold, the beautiful . prince Vabbruvahana
proceeded. ayainst this father for batue.


16. Coming upon the sacrificial horse
which was protected by Partha, the herie
prince caused it to be seized by persons
well-versed in veterinary science,


17. Seeing the horse seized, Dhananjaya
became filled with joy. Standing on the
Earth, that hero began to oppose the ade
vance of his son who was on his car,


iS The king affficted the hero with
repeated showers of arrows gifted with
whetted points and resenling snaltes of
dreadtul poison.


19. Eneomparable was’ the battle which
teok place between the father and soa. BH
resembled the battle between the Ccelestials
and the Asuras of old. Each was pleased
with obtaining the other fue an antagonist.


20. ‘Then Vabhruvahana; laughing, cut
the diadcem+decked Arjuna, that foremost
of men, iu the shoulder with .a straighs
arrow,


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA,


at. Equipt with feathers, that arrow
penetrated Arjuna’s body’ like a suake
penetrating on an anthill. Piercing the’son
of Kunti through, the arrow went deep into
the Earth,

22. Feeling acute pain, the intelligent
Duananjaya rested awhile, supporting hint
self on tis excellent bow. He stood, having
recourse to bis celestial energy and seemed
externally like one dead.

23-24. Vhat ,fouremost of men, then
regaining consciousness, lauded his son
highly. Possessed of great splendour, the
son of Shakra said,~—Excellent, Excetlent,
O mighty-armed one, O son of Chitran-
gada! QO son, seeing this feat, so worthy
of you, I am highly pleased with you.

25. Ishall now discharge these arrows
at you, Usoal Stand for fight (without
running away). Havigg said these words,
that destroyer of enemies shot a shower of
arrows on the prince,


26. King Vabhruvahana, however, with
his own broad-lheaded arrows, cut all those
arrows, which were discharged froin
Gandiva and which cesembied the thuader-
bolt of indca in splendour, some in two, and’
some into three, pacts,


27. Then the standard, decked with
geld and resembling a golden palinyra, vo
the king's car was cut off by Partha with
some excellent Srrows of his,


28. Lhe son of Pandu, laughing, next
killed the King’s horses of large size and
great speed,


29. Descending from his car, the king,
woiked up with rage, fougat his father on
foot.


30. Pleased with the prawess of his son,
that foremost one of the sons of Peitha,
vig., the son of thejwielder of the thunder.
buit, began to afflict him greatly.


3t. ‘Fhe powerful Vabhruvahana, think.
ing that his tathec was uo. tonger able to
face tin, again afflicted him with many


arrows resembling snakes of dreadiul
Pyiron.
32. From a spirit of childishness he then


vigurously cut bis father in the breast with
a whetted arrow having excellent wings,


33-35. That arrow, O king, penetrated
the bouy of Pandu’s son and reaching his
very vitals caysed him great pain, ‘Lhe
delighter of the Kurus, Diananjaya, deep-
ly pierced therewith by bis son, then
dropped down ‘in a swoon on the Eugrth,
O wing! When that hero, that bearer ot
the vurthens of the Kurus, fell down, the
son of Chittabgada also became uncon-
scious, he latiec’s swoon was owing to


93


his exertions in battle as. also to his grief at.
seeing his father killed. os

36. He had been pierced deeply by
Arjuna with cloads of arrows. He, there.
fore dropped dowu at the van of battle
embcacing the Barth. :


37. Heating that her husband had been’
killed and that her son had falleas down on
the Barth, Chitrangada, in great agitation
of mind, went to the field of batde.

38. Her heart burning with sorrow,
weeping piteously the while, and trembling
all over, the mother of the king of Manipura
saw her killed husband,


a


CHAPTER LXXX..


(ANUGITA PARVA.)—
Continued, :


Vaishampayana said :—

1. nat lady. having eyes like lotus.
petals, having bewaled much, and bacning
with grief, at last lust her senses aid
dropped down on the Barth,


a—3. Reyaining cotisciausness. and seée
ing Ulupi,. the daughter of the Snake-Chief,
queen ,Chittangada gifted with celestiab
beauty, said to her these wotds ;—See, O
Utupi, our ever victorious husband killed
in battle, through you, by my son of tendge
yeats,

4, -Do you know the practices of the
respectable ?. Are you a wiig devoted -ty
youe husband?) It is through your deed,
that youc husband is lad low, slain in:
battle. '

§. {f Dhananjaya has offended against
you fa every respect, dv you forgive him!
I solicit you, do you revive Wat hero.

6. O righteous lady, you know piety.
You ace, O blessed one, known (for your
virtues) over the three worlds!  thow is it
that having caused your husband to be
kilied by youc gon, you do not indulge i
grich?

7. O daughter of the Snake-Chief, I da
not grieve fur my kiiled son! 1 grieve toe
only my husband who has received this
hospitality froin his son, :


”

8—9g. Having said these words to the
queenty Ulupi the daugitter of the snake-
ting, the illustrious Chitrangada went to
whee hee bhusvand lay onthe Eartn and ad=
dressing him, said,—Rise, O dear husband,
yeu occupy Line foremost place in the affec-
tions of the Kuru-King (Yuduisithira)'}


“$4


Mere is that herse of yours! It has been
liberated by me,


10. Indeed, O powerful ane, this sacri-
ficial horse .of king Yudhishthica the just,
should be followed by you. Why then do
you lie still on the Earth,


ti. My life-breaths depend on you, O
Gelighter of the Kurus. How is it that he
who is the giver of other people’s life-
breaths. cenounces his own life-breaths
to-day ? :


rz. See, O Ulupi, this beautiful form of
‘your husband lying prostrate on the ground.
How is it that you: do not grieve, having
caused him to be killed through your son
whom you did excite with your words ?


13. It is fie that this boy should yield to
the power of death and fie thus on the
ground besides his own father. Oh, let
Vijaya, let him that is called Gudakesha,
fet this hero with reddish eyes return to life.


14. O blessed lady, pelygamy is no
fault with men. Women only comntit sin
by taking more than one husband. De
trot, therefore, cherish such thoughts {of
veegeance}.


“45. This relationship was ordained by
the Supreme Creator himself. [t is, besides,
an eternal and unchangeable ane. Do you
attend to that relationship. Let your union


(with Dhananjaya) be made true,


16. Lf, having killed your husband
through your son, you do not revive him
to-day before my eyes, I shall then re-
ounce my own life-breaths,


t7. Forsooth, O reverend lady, afflicted
as lam with grief and deprived as 1 am
ef both bnsband and son, F shall sit here
to-day in Praya-vow before your presence.


18. Having said so to the daughter of
the Snake- Chief, who was a co-wife with ber
to Arjuna, the princess Chaitravahini sat in
Praya, O king, restrainiag speech.


Vaishampayana said :—

19. Ceasing to lament, the cheerless
queen, taking upen ber lap the feet of her
husband, sat there, sighing’ heavily and
desicinz also for the restoration of her son
to life, 7

ao—21. King Vabhruvahana then, re-
gaint - conscioustiess, saw his mother .sea-
ted in that guise on the dield of battle.
Addressing ter he said,—What_can be
more painful than the sight ef my mother,
who has been brought up in luxury, lying
on the naked Earth beside her heroic hus-
band stretehed thereon.


22. Alas, this destroyer of all enemies,
this foremost of-all wielders of weppors, has


I pret ee pp


MAHABAHRATFA,


been killed by me in battfe. ft is cfear
that men de die, till their hour comes.


23. Oh, the heart of this priacess seems
to be very hard since it does not break
even ou seeing her mighty-armed and
broad-chested husband lying dead on the
ground,


24. It is-clear that one does not die tilk
oue’s hour comes, since neither myself, nor
iny mother is deprived of hfe.


25. Alas, alas, the golden coat of mail of
this foremost hero of Kutu’s race, killed by
me, his son, knewingly, is lying ou the
ground, cut off from his body.


26. Alas, ye Brahmanas, see my heroic
father lying prostrate on the Earth, on a
hero's bed, killed by his son.


27. What benefit is done to this hero,
killed by me in battle, by those Brahmanas
who were commissioned to attend upon this
foremost one of Kuru’s race engaged in
following the horse ?


28 Let the Brahmanas direct what ex-
piation should now be done by me, a cruel
and sinful wretch, who has killed his own
father in battle.


2g Waving willed my own father, |
should, suffering every sort of misery,
wander over the Earth, cruet that I aim,
covering myself with his skin,


30. Give me the two halves of my sire’a
head to-day, for there is no other expiation
for me who have killed my own father.


gt. See, O daughter of the foremost of
Snakes, your husband kifled by me. Indeed,
by killing Arjuna in battle | have acconr-
plished what is pleasant to you. ;


32. I shall to-day follow in the track
by whieh my father nas gone. O blessed
one, f cannot comfort myself. ,


33. Be happy to-day, O mother, seeing
myself and the wielder of Gindiva both
embrace: death to-day. I swear to you by
truth itself,


34~-35  Heving said these words, the
king, sorely afflicted with grief, O monarch,
touched water, and exclaimed in sefrow,-~
Let all creatures, mobile and immobile,
listen to me! Do you also listen ta me, O.
mother! I say the truth, O best of all
daughters of the snakes.


36. If this best of men, Jaya, my fathec
does not rise up, I shall emaciate my owe
body, sitting on the field of battle,


37. Having killed my father, there is no
rescue forme. Afflicted as{ am with the
sin of patricide, § shall, forsooth, have to
sink in ficll, YS ad


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA,


48. By killing a heroic Kshatciya one
Becomes tleansed by m-king a gift of a
tundred kine. By killing niy father, how-
ever, so dreadful has been my siu that my
*escue is impossible.


39. This Dhananjaya, the san of Pandu,
was the ohne hero gifred wtth mighty energy.
Possessed of righteous soul, he was the
treator of my being. How can I be
rescued after having killed him ?


40. Having bewailed thus, the great son
of Dhananjaya, king Vabbrovahana, taach-
ed water and became silewt, vowing to
starve himself to death.


Vaishampayana said :—~

4t—42. When the king of Manipura, that
ebastiser of enemies, afflicted with grief, along
with his mother, sat down to starve himself
to death, Ulupi then thought of the gem
that has the virtne of reviving a dead man.
The pem, the great refuge of the Snakes,
thus thought of, arrived there.


43. The daughter of the Prince of
Snakes, taking it up, uttered these words
Which highly gladdened the combatants
standing on the field,


44. Rise up. O son! Do not grieve!
Jishnu bas not been vanquished by you!
This hero is incapable of being defeated by
men as also by the celestials headed by
Vasava himself.


45. I have exhibited this illusion, de-
eeiving yeur senses, for the benefit of this
foremost of men, vis., your illustrious
father.

46. O you of Kuru’s race, desirous of
ascettaining the prowess of yourself, his
son, this destroyer of hostile heroes, O
king, came hete for fighting with you.


47. ‘It was, therefore, O son, that you
were urged by me to fight. O powerful
king, O son, do not suspect that you have
committed any, even the least, fault, by
his challenge.


48. He is a Rishi, of a powerful soul,
eternal and indestructible. O dear son,
Shakra -himself is Incapable of defeating
him in battle. *


49.. This celestial gem-has been brought
by me, O king. [t always revives. the
snakes as often as they die.


50. O powerful king, do you
gem on the breast of your father,
shall then seé the son of Pandu revive.


lace this


You


-$ts Thus addressed, the prince who had
committed no sin, moved by love. fer his
father, then placed that gem on the breast
of Pritha’s son of incomparable energy.


Bh)


32. . After the gem had been placed on
his breast, the heroic and powerful Jishua
became revived. Opening his red eyes, he
rose up like one who had slept long.


33. Seeing his father, the great hero of
in exhaustible energy, restored to. conscigus
ness and quite at his ease, Vabhruvahana
adored him with respect. ;

$4. When that feremost of men, O
powerful one, awoke from the slumber of
death with every auspicieus sign of Itfe, |
the chastiser of Paka raived down celestial
flowers,


§§ Kettle-drums struck by nobody,
produced theie music deep as the muttoring
of the clouds. A toud uproar was heard
in the sky consisting of the words—~Excel-
lent, Excelent,


6. The mighty-armed Dhananjaya,
rising up and well-cemfoited, embraced
Vabhruvahana and smelied his head. -


5758 He saw sitting at a distance
from his son, this latter’s mother stricken
with grief, in the compaty of Utups
Dhananjaya asked,—-Woy is it that every
thing in the field of battle seems to bear
the marks of grief, wouder and joy? tf
O destroyer of enemies, you know the cause,
do yeu then tell me.


. Why bas your mother come to the
field of battle? Why, also, has Utupi the
daughtse of the Pijuce of Snakes, come
bere


60. 1 know that you had fought this
batde with -me at my own command, {
wish to .kiveow what the cause is which has
brought out the ladies.

61. Thus questioned by ee
the inteHigent king of Manipura grat
him by bending his head in respect, and
then said, —Let Ulupi be asked. .


S anamtencl


CHAPTER LXXXI.


(ANUGITA PARVA.)—
Continued. ;


Arjuna said :—~

1, What brings you here, O daughter
(-in-law) ef Kusu’s race, and what, also, is
the cause of the arrival on the field of batcle
of ber who is the mother of the king of
Manipura : : :

2. Do yau entertain friendly motives
towards this king, O daughter of a snake ?
O you-of restless glances; do you wish good
to me too ?


gi


“MAHABHARATA.


3. 1 hope; O you of ample hips, that i blessed son who, youthful as he is, is the


hetther I, wor this Vabruvahana here, have,
O beautiful lady, done ‘any injury to you
unconsciously ?

4. Has Chitraneada of faultless limbs,
descended from the line of Chitravahana,
done you any wrong ? :


5.. ‘To thm, the daughter of the Prince of
Snakes answered srmilingly,—You have not
offended me, nor has Vabhryvahana done
mé any Wrotty, .

6. Nor this prince’s mother who fs always

‘obedient to me as a hand-maid: Listen,
how all this has been caused by me.


% Vou should not be angry with me.
indeed, | seek to please you by bending my
head in respect. O you of Kuru’s race, alt
this has been done by me for your good, O
powerful one!


8—=16. O mighty-armed Dhananfaya,
Hear all that I have done. In the great
battle’ of the Bharata-Princes, you had
killed the royal sot of Shantanu by unfair
ways. What 1 have done hag expiated
your sin. You did not overthrow Bhishma
while fighting with you !

11-18. He was engaged with Shikandin.
Relyiiig on him as your help, you did bring
about the overthrow of Shatitany’s son. If
‘you bad died without having expiated your
Bin, you would then have fallen, forsooth, into
‘Hell on account of that sinful deed of yours.
Even this which you have pot from your son
is the expiation of that sin !


13. Fortnerly, O king, I heard this said
by the Vasus while they were ih the com-


pany of Ganga; O you of great intelligence.


14—15. After the fall of Shantanu’s son,
‘those -celestials, vtg., the WVasus, coming
to the banks of Ganga, bathed in her waters,
and calling the goddess of tliat stream, they
uttered these terrible words having the
sanction of Bhagirati herself, ws ,—Shan-
tanu's son Bhishma has been killed by
Dharanjaya.


16. Indeed, O goddess, Bhishma then
was engaged with another, and had ceased
to fight. For this-fault we shall to-day
imprecate a curse on Dhananjaya !


17. ‘Yo Yhis, the goddess Ganga readily
agreed, saying,—Be it so!—Hearing these
-words E became very much distressed and
penetrating into the nether regions represen-
ted everything to my father.


18—19. Informed of what had taken
place, my father became planged in grief,
Going to the Vasus, he begged them for
your sake, again and again ~ gratifying
‘them by every means in his power. They
then said to him,—-Dhananjaya has a bighly


king of Manipurca.


20. He will, standing on tie field of
battle, cast Dhananjaya down on the Earth,
When this will take place, O Prince of
Snakes, Arjuna will be freed from ouc
curse !


2t. Do you return !—Thus addressed
by the Vasus, he came back and informed
me of what had taken place. Having
learnt all this, O hero, { have freed you
from the curse of the Vasus in tltus.


22. The king of the celestials himselfis
incapable of defeating you [In battle. The
son is one’s own self, it is fur this that you
have been defeated by him,


23. I cannot Be held, O powerful one, ta
have committed aty sin. How, indeed,
would you hold me censurable ?


24. Thus addressed (by Ulupi), Vijaya
became cheerful of heart and said to her,—
_ All this you have done, O goddess, is
highly agreeable to me.


2§—26. After this, Jaya addressed his
son, the fing of Manipura, and said to
him in the hearing of Chitrangada, the
daughter (-int-law) of Kuru’s race. ‘the
Horse-Sacrifice of Yudhishthira will take
place on the day of fall moon in the coming
month of Chaitea, Conie thére, O king,
with your mother and your counsellors and
officers !’ :


27—28. Thus addressed by Partha, king
Vabhruvahana of great intelligence, with
tearful eyes, said these wotds to his father,
—*O you who are conversant with every
daty, I shall certainly go, at your command,
to the great Horse-Sacrifice, and take uport
myself the task of distributing food among
the twice-born ones !


29. For, however;. showing your grace
towards me, do you enter your own city
with your two wives. Do not. cherish any
scruple about this, O you who.ate fully acs
quainted with every duty!

' go. O lord, having lived ‘for one hight in
your own palace in happiness, you may
then follow the horse, 9 foremost of victori-
‘ous watriors ! _ .


31—32. The ape-bannered son of Kunti,
thus addressed by his son, answered the
child of Chitrangada, saying,—You know,
mighty-armed one, what vow I am _ obsers
ving ? O you of large eyes, till the ter-
mination of this my vow, I cannot enter-
your city. :


€
43. O foremost of men, this sacrificial
-horse wanders at will. Blessings on you.
I must go away. I have no place to rest
for even a short while! - Ae ws


.


ASHWAMEOHA PARVA.


34. The son of the chastiser of Paka
then, duly adored by his son and obtaining
the permission of his two wives, left the
Spot and proceeded on his way.


CHAPTER LXXXIL.


(ANUGITA PARVA. )-—-
Continued,


Vaishampayana said :-~

1. The (sacrificial) horse, having wan-
dered aver the entire Earth, bounded by
the ocean, then ceased and turned his face
towards the city of Hastinapore.


2. Following as he did that horse, the
diadem-decked Arjuna also turned his face
tawards the Kuru capital. Wandering at
his will, the horse then came to the city of
Rajagriba.

3: Seeing him arrived within his’ king-
dom, O monarch, the heroic son of Saha-
deva, following Kshatriya duties, challeng-
ed him to battle,


4. Coming out of his city, Meghasandhi,
mounted on his car and equipt with bow
and arrows and leathern. fence, rushed to-
wards Dnananjaya who was on foot.


5. Gifted with great energy, Megha-
sandhi, approaching Dhananjaya, O king,
said these words froma spirit of childish-
ness and without any skill.


6. This horse of yours, O Bharata,
seems to move about, protected by women
‘enly | [ shall take away the horse. Do
you try to free him.


7. Althoughmy sires did not teach you
in battle, 1, however, shall do the duties
of hospitality to you. Do you strike me,
for | shall strike you. .


t


. 8~g. Thus addressed, the son of Pandu,
smiling the while; anwered him, saying,
To resist him who obstructs me is the vow
imposed on tae by my eldest brother. For-
sooth, O-king, you know this. Do you
- strike me to the bestaf your power. I have
No anger. .
ro. Thus addressed, the king of Magadha
first struck the sow of Pandu, showeriag
his arrows on him fixe the thousand-eyed
‘Indra showering a heavy downpour of
raitt.


1t. Then, O chief of Bharata’s race, the

heroic wielder &f Gandiva, with arrows shot

of that excellent bow, baffled all the arrows
- shot carefully at. him by bis adversary.


42, Having thug, baffled that cloud of
43


97


arrows, the ape-bannered hero shot a num-
ber of burning arrows at his enemy. which -
resembled snakes with. fiery nouths.


13. ‘Fhese arrows he shot at his flag and
flag-staff and car and poles and yoke and.
the horses sparing the -body of his enemy
and his car-driver. . 3


14. ‘Though Partha who was capable of
shooting with the bow with the left-hand (as
well as the right) spared the body of the
king of Magadha, yet. the latter, thinking .
that his body was protected by his own
prowess, discharged many acrows at Partha,.-

15. The wielder ‘of Gandiva, -deeply
struck by the king of Magadha, shone like
a blossoming Palasha’ (Butea frondosa) in
the season of spring, :


16. Arjana had no desire of killing the
king of Magadha, Ht was jfer this that,
having struck -the -son of Pandu, he suc-
ceeded in remaining before that foremost
of heroes. .


17. Then Dhananjaya, becoming angry,
drew his bow with great force, and killed
his antagonist’s: horses and then struck off
the head of his car-driver,


18. With a razor-headed arrow he then
cut off Meghasandhi’s large and beautiful
bow, and then his leathern fence. ‘“Bhen
cutting off his flag and flag-staff, he caused
it to falldown, E

19. The king of Magadha greatly afflic«
ted, and deprived of horses and bow and
driver, took up atnace and crushed with
great speed at the son ‘of Kunti.“’ :


20. Arjuna, then, with many arrows of
his equipt with his vulturine feathers, cut off
into pieces, that mace of his advancing
enemy which was adorned with bright
gold, * s


21. Thus cut off into pieces, that mace,
with its jewelled bonds and knots all sever
ed, fell on the Earth, like'a shé-snake help=
lessly hurled down by somébody.


22. When his enemy became deprived
of his car, his bow, and his mace, that
foremost of his ‘warriors, wig., the intelli«
gent Arjuna, did not wish to strike him.


23-24. The ape-banuered -heso then,
comforting his cheerless enemy wlio had
been observant of Kshatriya daties, said ta
him these words:—O son, you have suffi-
ciently shoriv your adherence te Kshatriya
duties. Go uow.- Great hate been the
feats, O king, which you havé accomplished
in battle althougie you -are, very young in
years. « f bo a

2g. The ‘Gommtand f teceived froma
Yadhishthira ‘was that .kiags who oppose
me should wot be kitled, fis for this you


98


ve yet, Q monarch, although you have ,
vifended me in battle,


26. Thus addressed, the king of
Magadha considered himself defeated and
spared, Thinking then that it was his duty
to do so, he approached A:juna and join-
ing iis hands in respect adored bim.


23. And he saidy—Defeated have I been
by you! Blessed be you, i da not venture
to continue the battle. “lell me what I am
to dv now for you! Consider your com-
usand as already carried out.’


28. Comforting him again, Arjuna once
More said to him,—-You should go_to the
Horse-Sacrifice of oue king which takes
place at the coming full moon of Chaitra,


49. Thus addressed by him, the son of
Sahadeva said,—Sa be it,—and then duly
adored that horse as also Phalguna, that
toremnost.of warriors,

30. The sacrificial horse then, having
beautiful manes, proceeded at his will along
the seacoast, going to the countries of the
Banyas, the Pundcas, and the Koshalas.


31, kn those. kingdoms Dhananjaya,
with his bow Gandiva, O king, defeated
numberless Mlechchha armics one alter
another, '


—


a
CHAPTER LXXXIFE,


€ ANUGITA PARVA. )—
Continued.


Vaishampayana continued :—

t. Adored by the king of Magadha,
Panéeu’s son having white horses yoked tu
his car, proceeded aiong the south, follow-
img the (sacrificial) horse. .

2. Turning round in course of his
wanderings at will, the strong horse came
upon the beautiful city of the Chedis called
atier the oyster,


3. Sharabha, the son of Shishupala,
gited with great strength, frst met Arjuna
iw battle and then adored hiny with due
honours?


4. Adored by him, O king, that best of
bosses then proceeded to the kingdony of the
Kashis, the Angas, the Koshalas, ‘the
Kiratas, and the Langanas.

5. Reeciving due homours in all those
kingdoms Duananjaya tacned his course.
tudeed, the son of Kunti then proceeded
ko the country of the Dasharnas.

6. ‘Ihe suler of that people was
Giuargada whq was gifted with great
sucnyth aud was a crusher of enemies.


} t0 Ute country of the Gandharas.


MAHABHARATA.


Between him and Vijaya took place a very
dreadful battle,


7. Bringing him under his control the
diadem-decked Arjuna, that foremost of
men, went to the kingdom of the Nishada
king, vis., the son of Ekilavya.


8. The son of Ekalavya received Arjina
in battle! The encounter took place be-
tween the Kuru hero and the Nishadas was
so furious as to make the hairs stand erect.


Unvanquished in battle, the brave son
of Kunti defeated the Nishada king whe
proved an impediment to the sacrifice.


to. ‘Having subjugated the son of
Ekalavya, O king, the son of Indra, duly
adored by the’ Nishadas, then proceeded
towards the soutlrera ocean.


tt. In those regions battles took place
between the diadem-decked hero and the
Deavidas and Andhras and the dreadful
Mahishralsas and the bhilimen of Kolwa.


12. Subjugating those tribes
having to perform any terrific feats, Arpuar
proceeded to the country of the Surashtras,
bis footsteps guided by the horse.


13. Acrived at Golsarna, ‘he went thence
to Prabhasa. Flen he proceeded to the
beautiful city of Lywaravati protected by the
hecoes of the Vrishui race, -


14. When the beautiful sacrificial horse
of the Kucu king reached Dwaravati, the
Vadava youths, used force against that
foremost of horses.


15—16. King Ugrasena, however, soo
went out and focbade those youths from
doing what they thought. Then the king
of the Vrishnis and the Andhakas, issuing
out of tis palace, with Vasudeva, the
tvaternab uncle of Arjuna, in his econrpany,


p cheerfutly meet the Kacu trero and received


hing with due rites.


17. The two elderly’ chiefs honoured
Arjuna duly. Getting their permission, the
Kuru prince then proceeded to where the
horse he followed ted hin. r

18. ‘Fhe sacrificial horse then proceeded
along the coast of the western ocean and at
last reached the country of the five waters
full of population and prosperity.

19. Thenee, O king, the horse proceeded
Arrived
there, it roamed at will, followed by the som
of Kunth Lt .

20. Then took place a dreadful battle


| between the diadem-decked hero and the


king of the Gandharas, dia., the son of
Shakuni, who hada bitter remembrance of


the grudge his father bure te the Pandavas


(4


witha -


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA.


CHAPILER LXXXIV.


(ANUGITA PARVA.)—
Continued,


Vaishampayana said :—

t. The heroic son of Shakuni, who was
a powerful car-warrier amoung the Gan-
dharas, accompanied by a large army, pro-
ceeded against the Kuru heco of curly hair.
‘That force contained elephants, horses and
cars, and was adorned with many flags aud
banners. .


2. Unable ta bear, and, therefore, burn-
inv to avenpe, the destruction of theic king
Shakuni, those warriors, armed with bows,
tushed together at Partha.


3. ‘Phe unvanquished Vibhatste of virtu-
Ous soul addressed them peacefully, but
they were reluctant to accept the beneficial
wards of Yudhisthira.

4 Though forbidden by Partha with
sweet words, they still pave themselves up to
anger and surrounded the sacrificial horse.
At this, the son of Panda becatne filled with
tage.


5. Then Arjuna, carelessly shooting from.


Gindiva many arrows with cazor-like heads
that blazed with splendour, cut off Ute heads
of mary Gendhara warriors,


6. While thus killed by Partha, the
Gindhacas, O king, exceedingly afflicted,
liberated the horse, moved by fear and
desisted from battle.


7. _Resisted, however, by those Gan-
dhara combatants who stil surrounded hint
on all sides, the sou of Pandu, gifted - with
great energy, cut off the heads of many,
previously nanting these who he thus
killed,


8. When the Gandhara warriors were
thus being killed all arouhd bint in’ battle,
the royal son of Shakuni came forward to
resist the son of Pandu..


g. To the Gindbara king who. was
figating witn bim, moved by Ksbatriya duty,
Arjuna said,—-t do aot ‘intend to kill the
kings who fight with me; ow account of the
contimands of Yudhishthira,


lo. Gease, O hero; to fight with me.
Do uot seek defeat.


it. Thus addressed, the son of Shakuni,
stupefied by folly, disregarded that ddvice
and covered with many swift ‘shafts the
Kuru hero who resembled Shakra himself
in tie feats he performed ia batue. ©


tz. Then Partha, with a crescent-shaped

arrow, cut off the head-year of his enemies.

Gi tuameasurable soul, he also caused that
?


98


head-gear to be borne alone a great dis.


| tance like the head of Jayadcatha,


13. Seeing this feat, all the Gandhara
warriors became stricken with wonder,
They fall well understood that Arjuna
voluntatily spared their king. i


tg. The prince of the Gandharas then
began to fly away from the fi-ld, followed
by all his warriors who resembled a flock
of frightened deer.


15. The Gandharas, through fear, fost
thete senses and wandered over the field,
tnable to escape. Arjuna, with his broad-
headed arrows, cut off the heads of many.


16. Many- there were who fost their
zrms on account of Arjuna’s arcows; but sa
stupefied were they with fear that they were
not aware of the loss of that limb. Indeed,
the Gindhara army was greatly afflicted
with those large arrows which Partha dis-
charged from Gandiva, ;


17. That army, which then consisted of
frightened Snen and clephants and horse,
which lost many warriors and animals, and
which had been disurdeced and routed, began
to wander aud wheel about te field again
and again,


18. Among those enemies who were thus
being killed, none could be seen standing
in front of the Kuru hero famed for fore=
most of feats. Noone could be seen who
was able to beac the prowess of Dhananjaya.

19. Then the mother of the king of tha
Gandharas, filled with fear, and with alt
the aged ministers of state, came out of hee.


city, taking au excellent Agghys for
Arjuna.
20, She forbade ter brave son of steady


heart from fighting any longer, and pleased
Jishnw who was never fatigued with toil,


22. The powerful Vibhatsu adored het
and became inclined ta show mercy towards
the Gandharas. Comforting the son of
Shakuni, be said,-—You have not, O mighty~
acmed hero, done what is agreeable to me
by adopting these hustile measures! OU
destroyer of heroes, you are imy brother,
QO sinless one,


23. Recollecting my mother Gandhari,


y and for the sake of Dhritarashtra also, lL


have not taken your life. [tis for this, O
king, that you live still, Many of your
followers, however, have beea killed by
mec,


24. Let not such a thing happen again.
Let hostilities cease. Let not your undere
standing again go wrong. You sheuld go
to the tlorse-Sacrifice of our king which
takes place on the day of full usoon of the
mouth of Chaitra.


* 56d


CHAPTER LXXXV,


( ANUGITA PARVA. )—=
Continued.


Vaishampayana said :—

' 4. Having said these words, Partha
started, following the horse which roamed at
will, ‘The sacrificial horse then turned to-
wards the road leading to the city of Hasti-
papue, - ; :


2. Yudhishthiraj heard from his intelli-
gence-bearers that the horse had turned
back, And hearing also that Arjana was
hale and hearty, he became filled with joy.


: Hearing also the feats, performed by
Vijaya in the country of the Gandharas as

_also in other kingaoms, the king became
highly pleased.


4—6. In the meantime, seeing that the
twelfth day of the lighted fortnight in the
month of Magha had come, and marking
also that the constellation was favourable,
king Yudhishthira the just summoned all
his brothers, wig, Bhima and Nakula and
Sahadeva, Gifted with great energy, the
king, UO you of Kuru’s race, that foremost
wf ail persons knowing duties, said these
words in proper time. Indeed, that fore-
most of all speakers, addressing Bhima, the
first of all smiters, said,


jg. Your younger brother (Arjuna), O
Bhimasena, is returning with the horse. |
have learnt this from those men who had
tullowed Arjuna.


8. The time is come. The sacrificial-
horse is near. Whe day of full moon of the
month of Magha is also near. Yhe month
is about to expire, OU Vrisodara.


Let, therefore, learned Brahmanas


knowing the Vedas look for a sacrificial -


spot for (Be celebration of the Horse-Saeri-
tice.

10. Thus Addressed, Bhima obeyed the
royal command tie became very glad upon
hearing that Arjuna of curly hair was about
to return.


tr. Then Bhima went out with a number
cf men knowing the rules of laying out
sacrificial grounds and constructing build-
ings. And he took with hin many Brah-
manas well-versed in all the rites of sacti-
fices.


12. Bhima selected a beautiful place and
caused it to be duly measured out for laying
the sacrificial compound. Numbertess
houses and matisions were Constructed on
it and high and bivad toads also were aid
cul, 7


-MAUABHARATA. °*


13. Soon enough the Kaurava hero filled
that ground with {hundreds of excellent
palaces. The surface was levelled and
made smooth with jewels and gems, and
adorned with various golden structures.


14. Columns were raised, ornamented
with bright gold and high and wide
triumphal acches also were made on that
sacrificial compound. All these were made
of pure gold.


“1g. The righteous-souled prince also
caused apartments to be duly constructed
for the accomodation of ladies and of the
numerous kings who, coming from many
kingdoms, were expected to grace the
sacrifice with their presence.


16. The son of Kunti also caused many
palaces to be duly erected for Brahmanas
who were expected to come from various
kingdoms.


17.7 Then the mighty-armed Bhimasena,
at the command of the king, sent out
messengers to the great kings of the Earth.


18. Those best. of kings came to the
Horse-Sacrifice of the Kuru king for doing
what was agreeable to him. And they
brought many gems with them and many
female slaves and horses and; weapons.


1g. The sounds which arose from thase
great kings who lived within those pavilions
touched the very heavens and resembled
the noise made by the roaring ocean,


ao. King Yudhishthira, the delighter of
the Kurus, assigned to: the coenaiche wha
thus came, to his sacrifice various kinds of
food and drink, and beds also of celestial
beauty.


at. The chief of the Bharatas, vis.,
bing Yudhishthira the just, assigned several
stables well-filled with different kinds of
corn and sugar-cane and milk to the
animals,


2z. To that great sacrifice of king
Vudhishthira the just who was gifted with
high ‘intelligence, there also came a larye
number of ascetics all of whom were utter=
ersjof Brahma. ;

23. Indeed, O king, all the foremost
Ones among the twice-born class that were
then falive, came to that sacrifice, accom-
panied by their disciples. The, Kuru king
received them all.-~-


24. King Yudhishthira of great energy,
renouncing all pride, himself followed all
his guests to the pavilions that had been
assiyned tor their tesidenae. "


zs. Then all the mechanics and en-
gineers, having cocnpleted the arrange-
ments of the sacrifice, informed king
Yudhishthira of it.-


ASUWAMEDIIA -PARVA.


26. Wearing that everything was ready,
king Yudhishthira the just, full of alertness
aud attention, became highly pleased along
with his brothers all of whom honoured him
duly. 2


Vaishanipayana said :—

27. When the great sacrifice of Yudhish-
thira began, many eloquent dialecticians
started diverse propositions and disputed
thereon, desirous of defeating one another.


28. The (invited) kings saw the ex-
cellent preparations of that sacrifice, resem>
bling those of the king himself of the
Celestials, made, O Bharata, by Bnimasena.


29. They saw many triumphal arches
made of gold, and many beds and seats and
other articles of enjoyment and luxury, and
crowds of men collected at different parts.


30. There were also many jars and
vessels and cauldrons and jugs and lids and
covers, ‘he invited kings saw nothing
there that was not made of gold, —


gi. Many sacrificial stakes also were
set up, made, according to the directions
of the scriptures, of wood, and adorned
with gold. Gifted with great effulgence,
these were duly planted and _ dedicated
(with scriptural Mantras).


32. The kings, again, saw all animals
of land and water, collected there on the
occasion,


. 33-44. And they also saw many kine
and many buffaloes and many old women,
and many aquatic animals, many beasts
of prey, and many species of birds, and
many specimens of viviparous and oeviparous
creatures, and many that are filuh-born,
and many belonging to the vegetable
kingdom, and many. animals and plants
which live or grow on mountains.


35- Seeing the sacrificial compound thus
adorned with animals and kine and corn,
the invitedjkings became filled with wonder.


_ 36. Large masses of costly sweetimeats
were kept ready for both the Brahmanas
and the Vaishyas. And when the feeding
was over of a hundred thousand Brahmanas,
drums and cymbals were beat.


37. And so large was the number fed
that the sounds of drums and cymbals were
heard again and again.- Indeed, those
sounds continued from day to day.


38. ‘Thus was performed that sacrifice
‘of the intelligent king Yudnishihira. Many
-hills of food, O king, were dedicated on the
occasion. Many largetanks were seen of
curds and many lakes of clarified butter.


39. In that great sacrifice, O monarch,
was seen the entire population of Jamyu-


Yor


dwipa, with all its kingdoms and provinces,
collected together.


4o—4t. Thousands of nations and races
were there. A large number of men, OF
chief of Bfrarata’s race, adorned with
garlands and wearing bright ear-rings made
of gold, taking numberless vessels in their
hands, distributed the food to the twice«
born classes by himdreds and thoysands.


42. The attendants of the Pandavas
gave away tothe Brahmanas various kinds
of food an:! drink which. were, besides, so
costly as to be worthy of being eaten and
drunk by kings themselves.


CHAPVER LXXXVL


(ANUGITA PARVA.)}<«
Continued.


Vaishampayana said :—

“a2. Seeing those  kings—-lords of
Earth—all conversant with the Vedas,
arrive, king YWudhishthira, addressing
Bhimasena, said,—O chief of men, let
proper honors be paid to these kings who
have come, for these foremost of men are
all worthy ‘of the highest honors.


3. . Thus addressed by the illustrious
king Yudhistthica, Pandw’s son Bhimasena
of mighty energy did as he was ordered,
assisted by the twins, :


4. The foremost of all men, vs.,
Govinda, came there, accompanied by the
Vrishnis, and with Valadeva in the van.


5- He was accompanied by Yuvudhana
and Pradyumna and Gada,{ and Nishatha
and Shamva and Kritavarman,


6. “Khe powetful car-warrior Bhima
offered them the most respectful adoration.
‘Those princes then entered the palaces,
adorned with gems, which were assigned to
them, .


7. Atthe end of a converfation he had
with Wudhishthira, the destroyer of Madhba
teferred to Arjuna who had been emaciated
on account of many fights.


8. The son of Kunti repeatedly asked
Krishna, that ehastiser of enemies, about
Arjuna. ‘Yo Dharma’s son, the lord of all
the universe began to speak about Jishnu,
the son of Shakra.


9. Oking, a confidential agent of mine
living in Dwarka came tome. He had seen
Arjuna, that foremost of Pandu’s sons.
Indeed, the latter has been very mueh
emaciated with the fatigue of maoy, battles.


‘102


to. O powerful monarch, that agent of
mine informed me that the mighty-armed
hera is very near to us. You begin ta cele-
brate your Horse-Sacrifice,


tt. Thus addressed, king Yudhishthira
the just said him,—By good tuck, O
-Midnava, Arjuna comes back safely |


1a. L wish to ascertain from you, O de-
liginer of the Yadavas; what has been said
in this matter by that mightiest of heroes
amongs the song ef Pandu !


13—14. Thus addressed by king Yuadhish-
thira the just, the lord of the Veishnis
and the Andhakas, that foremost of eloquent
men, said these words to that) monarch of
righteous soul—My agent, reported the
words of Partha thus to me, O great king, —
Vudhishthira, O (Krista, should. be told
these words of mine when the tim comes!


15. O chief of the Kauravas, many kings
will come (to your sacrifice}! When they
atrive, high honours shyuld be paid to them.
‘This would, indeed, be worthy for us.


16—17. O giver of honours, the king
should tucther be informed at my request
that he should do what is necessary for
preventing a distinction similar to what oc-
curred at the time of présenting the Arghya
{on the occasion of the Rajasuya-Sactifice).
Let Krishna also approve of tis. Let not,
O «ing, through the ill-feeling of kings, the
people be destroyed. ~


18. My man further reported, O king,
these words of Dhananjaya. Listen as 1
Tepeat them, :


19. O monarch, the king of Manipura,
my dear son Vabhruvahana, will come at
the sacrifice,


20. Do you honour him duly for my sake,
O powerful one, he is always attached and
deeply devoted to me.

2t. Hearing these words, king Yudhish-
thira the just approved of them and said as
follows.


CHAPYFER LXXXVIL


( ANUGITA PARVA. )—.
Continued.


Yudhishthira said:—


r. I have heard, QO Krishna, your
agreeable words. ‘They are worthy of you.
Gladsome and sweet as mectar are they.
Indeed, they fill my heact with great joy, O
powerful one.


2. O Hreishikesha, I have heard that


MAHABHARATA,


Vijaya has fought numberless battles witty
the kings of the Earth.


Why is Partha, always dissociated
front ease and comfort? Vijaya is exceed-
ingly intelligent. This, therefore, pains my
heact very much,


4. Lalways, O Janarddana, think, when
1 ain withdrawn from business, of MKunti’s
son Jishnu. he fot of chat deli ghter of the
Pandus is highly miserable,


§. His body has eve-y auspicious mark,
Wuat, however, O Krishna, is that sign in
his excellent body for which he has always
to suffer misery and discomfort?


6. That son of Kunti has to bear a large
share of misery. {do not see any censure
able mark in his body. You should explaia
the cause to me if | deserve to hear it.


7. Thus addcessed, Heishikesha, that
énnancer of the ylory of the Bhoja princes,
having thought for along time, answered as
follows ;—1 do not see any censurcable mark
in this prince, except that the cheek-bones
of this furemust of mea are a little tou high.


9 For this that that foremost of men has
always to be on the road. IL really do not
see anything else fer which he could be
made sv unhappy.


to. Thus answered by the intelligent
Krishna, that foremost of men, vis,, King,
Yudhishthica, said to the chief of the
Vrishnis that it was even so.


tr. Lhe princess Deaupadi, however,
lovuted angrily and askance at Krishua.
The destroyer of Keshi, vis., Hcishikesha,
approved of that mark of love (for his friend)
which the princess of Panchala, who alsy
was his friend, showed.


12. Bhimasena and the other Kurus,
‘including the sacrificial priests, who heard
of the agreeable triumphs of Arjuna in
course of his following the horse, became
highly pleased,


13. While ‘they were still engaged iu
talking about Arjuna, a messenger came
from that great hero Déaring message frout
him,

14. Going to the presence of the Kuru
king, the intelligent messenger bowed his
head in respect and informed him of the
artival of that foremost of men, vis.,
Pnalguna,


15. On receipt of this news, tears of joy
covered the king’s eyes. Lurge gifts were
made to the messenger fur the very sweet
tidings he had brought. ls


16 On the second ‘day from that date,
a loud din was heard when that foremost of
men, that chief of the Kurus, came.
C


ASHWAMEDNA PARVA.


17. The dust raised by the hoofs of. that
horse as it walked close to Atjuna, looked
us beantiful as that raised by the celestial
horse Uchchaishravas.


18. And as Arjuna advanced, he heard


many pleasing words uttered by the citizens. -


By gvood luck, O Partha, you ate out of
danger, Praise to king Yudhishthira,


19. Who else than Arjuna could return
after having caused the horse to’ wander
wver the whole Earth and after having
defeated all the kings in battle ?


20. We have not teard of such a feat
having been done by ever Sagara and
other yceat kings of yore.


21. Future kings also will never be able
to perform so difficult a feat, O foremost
one of Kucu’s race, as this which you have
done.


22. Listening to such a agreeable
to the ear, of the citizens, the righteous
sowed Phalguna entered the sacrificial
compound.


23. Thea king Yudhishthira with all bis
mintsters, and Krishna, che delig hter of the
Yadus, placing Daritarashtra in their van,
went out for receiving Diattanj cya.

24. Saluting the feet of his uncle
(Duritarashtra), and then of wise king
Yudbishthica the just, and then adoring
Bhiina and others, the embraced Keshava.


25. Adored by them ‘all ana worship
ping them in return according to due tites,
the mighty-armed hero, accompanted by
those princes, took rest like a ship-wrecked
man tossed on the waves resting on teach
ing the shore,


26. Meanwhile the wise king Vabhru-
vahana, accompanied by his mothers (Chi-
trangada and Ulupi), came to the Kuru
capital.

27. The mighty-armed prince duty salut.
ed all his elders of Kuru’s race ‘and the
other kings present there, and was honored
by them all in return. ‘He then entered
the excellent abude of his grandinother
Kuni.


CHAPTER LXXXVII1.
_( ANUGITA PARVA, )=
Continued, ,
Wilh cavans said :—
3. sEntering the palace of the Pandavas


the mighty-armed prince saluted his grand-
saother in soothing and sweet words,


topos


103


"a, Then queen Chitrangada, and (Ulupi)
the daughter of (the snase) Kauravya,
together humbly approached Pritha and
Krishna. ‘They then met Subhadra and the
other ladies of the Kuru race with, due
formalities.


g  Kunté gave them many gems and
costly -things. Draupadi and Subhadra
and the other fadies of Kuru’s race all,
made presents to them.


4. The two ladies took ap their resi«
dence there, using costly beds and seats,
treated with affection and honor by Kuati
herself from desire uf doing what was
ayreeable ta Partha,


g. King Vabhruvahana of great energy,
duly honored (by Kunti), then net Dh:
rashtra accordiug to due rites.


6. Going’ then to king Yudhishthiea
and Bhima and. the other Pandavas, the
mighty prince of Munipura saluted ther
ali with bunsility.


7. They all embraced him with great
love and honored him duly, And those
powerful car-warior highly pleased with
him, made targe gifts’ of wealth to him,


8. The king of Minipura’ thes humbly
approached Krishna, that hero armed witts
the discas and ‘the mace, like a second Pra
dyumna approaching his father. Krishna
gave tothe king a very costly and excel+
lent cat adofned with gold aud to whiclt
were yoked excellent harses. :


Yo. ‘Then king Yudhishtlira the just,


‘and Bhima, aud Phalyuna, and the twins,


each: separately -honured him and made _


-costly presents to hia,


ti—14. On the third day, the sage
Vyasa the son of Satyavati, that ' foremost
of eloquemt men, approaching Yudhishthira,
said,—From this day, O son of Kunti, do
you begin your sacrifice. Phe time for it
has come! ‘Phe moment for andertaking
the rity is at hand, The priests are urging
you. "ee

1g. Let the sacrifice be performed in
such a way that no limb may - become
defective. On account of the very large
quantity of gold that is’ required for this
sacrifice, it has come to be called the sacti«


fice of profuse gold.


14. Do you atso, O great king, make
the Dakshina otf this sacrifice three times
of what is enjoined, Let the merit of your
sacrifice imcrease threefold. The Bralre
manas are competent for ae purpose.


15. Acquiring the merits thea’ of three
Horse-Sacrifices, each with profuse presents,
you shall be freed,{O king, from the sin of -
having killed your “ kinsmen,


104


16. The bath which one performs upon
completion of the Hecse-Sacrifice, O king,
is higtty powerlul. and productive of the
highest merit. ‘That merit will be yours, O
king of Kuru's race.


17. Thus addressed by Vyasa of incom-
pee intelligence, the righteous-souled

udhishthiya of great energy underwent
the inittation for performance of the Horse-
Sacrifice.


18. The mightyearmed king then per-
formed the great Horse-Sacrifice characte-
tised by gifts of food and presents in profus
sion and capable of fructifying every: desire
and producing every merit.


19. The priests, well-conversant with
the Vedas, did every rite, duly, moving
about in all directions. They were all
well-trained, and possessed of omniscience,


20. In nothing was there any deviation
from the ordinances, and nothin
improperly. hose foremost of twice-born
persons followed the procedure as laid down
as it should be tollowed in those points
about which no directions are given.


at. Those best ef twice-born ones, having


first performed the rite called Pravargya ,


otherwise called Dharma, then duly pers
formed the tite of Abhishava, O king.


22. ‘Those foremost of Soma- Drinkers,O
monarch, extracting the juice of the Soma, ;
then performed the Savana rite, following !
the injunctions of the scriptures. - ,


23. Among those. who: came to that
sacrifice none could be seen who was cheer-.
dess, none who was poor, notte who was
hungry, none who was plunged into grief, '
aud none that seemed to be vulgar.


24. Bhimasena of great energy, at the
Command of the king, caused food to be
ceaselessly distributed among those who
desired to eat. :


25. Following the injunctions of the
scriptures, priests, well-versed in sacrificial
rites of every kind, performed every day all
the acts necessary to complete the great
sacrifice.


26. Amongst the Sadasyas of king
Yudhishthira of great intelligence there was
none who was not a master of’ the six
beanches of (Vedic) learning. ‘here was
hone among them who was not an observer
of vows, none whe was not an Upadhaya;
hone ywho was not wel versed in dialectical
disputations,


27. When the time came for erecting
the sacrificial stake, O chief of Bharata’s
race, six stakes were set up which were made
of Vilwa, six which were made of Khadira,
and six which were made of Sarvavaraiuy


was done |


- sacrifice.


MAHABAHRATA,


28. Two etakes were set up hy tha
priests which were made of Devadaru in
that sacrifice of the Kuru king, and one
which was made of Shleshmataka.


29 «6At the behest of the king, Bhima
caused some other stakes to be set up, for
the sake of beauty only, which were made
of gold.


30. Adorned with fine cloths supplied
by the royal sage, these stakes shone there
like [Indra and the deities with the seven
celestial Rishis standing around them in
Heaven.


3t. A number of galden bricks were
made for making therewith a Chayana.
Ybe Chayana made resembled in. beauty
that which had been riade for “Daksha,
the lord of creatures, ,


32. The Chayar'a measured eight and
ten cubits and had four stories oc lairs.
A golden bird, of the shape of Garuda,
was then made, having three angles.


33. Following the injunctions of the
scriptures, the priests endued with great
learning then duly tied to the stakes both
animals and birds, assigning each to its
particular deity.


'

34- Bulls, possessed of such marks as
are mentioned in the scriptures, and
aquatic animals, were properly tied to tha
stakes after the rites of the sacrificial fice
had been performed. ‘


35. In .that ‘sacrifice of the great sin of
‘Kuati, three hundred animals were tied
to the stakes set up, including that fore-
most of horses.


36. ‘That sacrifice looked greatly beauti+
ful as if adorned with the celestial Rishis,
with the Gandharvas singing iu chorus and
the various tribes of Apsaras dancing in
merriment.


37. it teemed, besides, with Kimpuru-
shas and was jadurned with Kinnaras.
All around it were houses of Brahmanas
crowrted with ascetic success,


38. There were daily seen the disciples
of Vyasa, those foremost of twice-born
ones, who are compilers of ajl branches of
learning, and well conversant with sacri-
ficial rites.


39. There was Narada, and there was
Tumvurt of great splendour. There were
Vishwavasu and Chitrasena and others;
all of whom were proficient in tousic,


40. At intervals of the sactificial rites,
those Gandharvas skilled in music and
well-versed in dancing, used to please the
Brahmanas who were engaged in the


Sime El


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA.


CHAPTER LXXXIX.


( ANUGITA PARVA. )—
Continued.


Vaishampayana said :—


1. Having cooked,- according to due
rites, the other excellent animals which
were sacrificed, the priests then sacrificed,
according to the injunctions of the scrip-
tures, that horse (which had wandered
over the whole world).


2. After cutting that horse into pieces,
according to scriptural directions, they
caused Draupadi of great intelligence, who
was possessed of the three requisites of
Mantras, things, and devotion, to sit near
the divided animal.


3. Yhe Brahmanas then, with cool
minds, taking up the marrow of that horse,
cooked it duly, O chief of Bharata’s race,


4. King Yudhishthira
all his younger brothers, then smelled,
according to the scriptures, the smoke,
Capable of purging one from every sin,
of the marrow that was thus cooked.


“et § The remaining limbs, O king, of
hat horse, were poured into the fire by the
ixteen sacrificial priests possessed of great

wisdom.


the just, with


6. Having thus completed the sacrifice
of that monarch who was gifted with the
energy af Shakra himself, the illustrious
Vyasa with his disciples eulogised the king
Rreatly.


7. Then Yudhishthira gave away to the
Brahmanas a thousand crores of golden
xishkas, and to Vyasa he gave away the
whole Earth,


8—g. Satyavati’s son Vyasa, having
accepted the Eurth, addressed that fore-
most one of Bharata’s race, o76., king
Vudhishthira the just, and said,—© best of
kings, the Earth which you have given me
T return to you! Do you give me the


purchasing value, for Brahmanas are desir--


ous of wealth.


1o. The great Yudhishthira of great
intelligence staying with his brothers in the
midst of the kings invited to his sacrifice,
said to thuse Brahmanas :—


11. The Dakshina ordained in the scrip-


tures for the great Horse-Sacrifice is the


Earth. Hence, [ have given away to the
éacrificial priests the Earth conquered by
Arjuna. *


12. Ye foremost of Brahmanas, I shall
enter the forest. Do ye divide the Earth
among yourselves! Indeed, do you divide


14?


v5


the Earth into four parts according to what
is done in the Chaturhotra-Sacrifice.


13. Ye best of twice-born ones, I da
net wish to appropriate what now belongs
to the Brahmanas.


14. This, ye learned Brahmanas, has
been the intention of myself and my
brothers. When the king said these
words, his brothers and Draupadi alsa
said,—'. Yes, it is even so.’ Great was tha
sensation created by this announcement.


1§. Then, O Bharata, an invisible voice
was heard in the sky, saying,’ Exceljent,
Excellent( he murmurs, also, of crowds
of Brahmanas as they spoke, arese,


17. The Island-born Krishna, highly
applauding him, once more addrested
Yudhishthira, before the Brahmanas, say«
ing. —‘ Phe Earth has been given by you
tome! £, however, give her back to youl
Do you give to these Brahmanas gold.
Let the Earth be yours !”


18. Then Vasudeva, addressing king
Yudhishthira thé just, said,-You should do
as you are ordered by the illustioug
Vyasa.’ =


19. Thus addressed, that foremost ong
of Kuru’s race, along with all his brothers,
became pleased and gave away millions of
golden coins, in fact, trebling the Dakshina
ordained for the Horse-Sacrifice.

20. No other king will be able ta
accomplish what the Kuru king did on that
occasion like Macutta.

at. Accepting that wealth, the Island-
born sage, Krishna, of great learning, gava


“it to the sacrificia] priests, dividing it into


four parts.


22. Having paid that wealth as the price
of the Earth, Yudhishthira, purged of his
sins and assured of Heaven, rejviced with
his brothers, —


23. The sacrificial priests, having got
that unlimited quantity of riches, distri+
buted it among the Brahmanas gladly and
according to the desire of each recipient,


24. The Brahmanas, also divided amongst
themselves, according to Yudhishthira’s
permission, the various ornamenis of gold
which were in the sacrificial compound, in-
cluding the triumpaal arches, the stakes,
the jars, and various kinds of vessels.


25. After the Bratmanas had tiken as
much as they wished, the wealtty that re-
mained was taken away by K-<hatrivas and
Vaisthvas and Shudras and various tribes
of Mlechchhas, ;


26. Thus pleased with presenta mate by
king Yudhishthira of great,inielligence, tue


166


Brahmanas, Med with joy, returned te
theic respective abodes.


a7. The holy and illustrious Vyasa
respecifully presented his own share, which
was very latye, of that gold to Kunti.


43. Reeciving that gift of affection from
Her fathcr-inelaw, Pritha became pleased
and devoted it tothe performance of vari-
Qua acts of merit.


a9. King Yudhishthira, having bathed
at the conclusion of his sacrifice and be.
come purged of all his sins, shone in the
midst Of his brothers, honoured by ail, like
the king of the deities in the midst of the
dweiiers ef the celestial region.


30. The sons of Pandu, surrounded by
the assembled kings, looked as beautiful,
QO king, as the planets in the midst of the
blars.


3t, To those kings they made presents
of various jewels atid yems, ahd elephants
and horses and ornaments of gold, and
female slaves and cloths and immense
quantity of gold,


32. Indeed, Pritha’s son, by distributing
that untold riches among the invited kings,
shone, O king, like Vaishravana, the lord
of riches,


33. Summoning next the heroic king
Vaotravahana, Yudhishthira, gave to him
varicua Binds of wealth in profusion and
geve him permission to return home.


34. The son of Pandu, for pleasing bis
ster Dussbala, established her infant
gratcaton in bis paternal kingdom.


35. The Kuru king Yudhishthira, having
acul mastery over his senses, than dis-
~wissed the assembled kings all of whom
ae been preperly classed and honoured by
Vstta,


35—37- The illustrious son of Panda,
Hort cmastiser of foes, then duly adored the
g vat Govinda and Valadeva of great
power ane the thousands of other Vrishni
reroes having Pradyumna for their first.
sissisted by its brot#ers, he then dismissed
iogm for returning to Dwaraka,


a3. Thus was celebrated that sacrifice
of aire Yudhishthira the just, which was
Usstit ettisued by a profusion of flood and
wealtss and jawels and gems, and oceans of
wines of differeat kinds,


39 There were lakes whose mire con-
sisied of clarified butter and mountains of
i ad, Cnerca were, also, O chief of Bharata’s
rage, tery rivers made of drinks having
wee 2X kunds of taste.


a. Or men employed in making and
sa ceg tha sweetmeats called Khandava-


MAHABAHRATA,


ragas, aud of animals killed for food, there
was no end,


41. The vast compound was filled with
men inebriated with wine, and with young
ladies filled with joy. The extensive
grounds constaitly echoed with the sounds


of drums and the blare of conchs. With
all these, the sacrifice became highly
delightful.

42. ‘Let agreeable things be given


away,’—' Let agreeable food be eaten,’—
These were the sounds which were re-
Peatedly heard day and night in that
sacrifice. It was lilte a yreat festival, full
of rejoicing and contented men, People
of various kingdoms speak of that sacrifice
to this day. >


43. Having showered wealth in torrents,
and various objects ef desire, and jewels
and gems, and drinks of various kinds, the
foremost one of Bharata’s race, purged of
all his sins, and his purpose fulfilled, enters
ed his capital,


CHAPTER XC.


(ANUGITA PARVA.)—
Continued.


Janamejaya said :—

1. You should tell me of any wonderful
incident which took place in the sacrifice of
my grandsire.


Yaishampayana said : ~


2. Hear, O chief of kings, of a most
wonderful event which took place, O power-
ful menarch, at the conclusion of that great
Horse-Sactifice.


3-5. On all the foremost of Brahmanas
and all the kinsmen and relatives and
friends, and all the poor, the blind, and
the helpless ones, being gratified, O chief of
Bharata’s race, when the yifts made in
profusion were being spoken of on all sides,
indeed, when flowers were rained down oa
the head of king Yudhishthira the just, a
blue-eyed mungoose, O sinless one, with
one side of his body converted into gold,
came there and spoke in a voice that was as
loud and deep as thunder.


6—7. Repaatedly uttering such deep
sounds and thereby frightening all animals
and bicds, that proud dweller of a hele,
with large body, spoke in ‘a human voice
and said,—‘Ve kings, this great sacrifice
is not equal to a prastha of powdered bailey
given away by a liberal Brahmana of Kurue
kshetra whe was obsevying the Unchcha vows

t


- ASHWAMEDHA PARVA,


8. Hearing these words of the mungoose,
O king, all those foremost of Brahmanas
became stricken with wonder,


9. Approaching the mungoose, they
then asked him, saying,—-* Whence have
you come to this sacrifice, this resort of the
good and the pious ?


to. What is the extent of your power ?
What your learning 7 And what your
refuge? How should we know you who
thus censure this our sacrifice ?


tr. Without having disregarded any
portion of the scriptures, everything that
should be done has been done here accord-
ing ‘to the fseriptures and according to
reason, with the help of various sacrificial


rites,


tz. Those who are deserving of adora-
tion, have been duly adored here according
to the way; pointed out by the scriptures.
Libations have been poured on the sacred
fire with the help of proper Mantras. That
which shoutd be given, has been given away
without pride.


13. The twice-born class have been
pleased with gifts of various kinds.- The
Kshatriyas have been pleased with battles
fought according to just methods. The
grandfathers have been, pleased with Shrad-
dhas.


14. The Vaishyas have been pleased by
the protection offered to them, and many
foremost of women have been pleased by
accomplishing their desires. The Shadras
have been pleased by kind speeches, and
others with the residue of the profuse wealth
collected on the spot.


15. Kinsmen and relatives have been
pleased by the purity of conduct shown by
our king. The celestials have becn pleased
by libations of clarified butter and acts of
merit, and dependants and followers by
protection. ;


16. That, therefore, which is true, da
you truly declare to these Bralrmanas.
Indeed, do you declare what is according
to the scriptures and to actual experience,
asked by the Bralimanas who are eager to
know. :


17. Your words are creditable. Yow are
wise. You have have, also, a celestial form.
You have come into the midst of learned
Brahmanas. You should explain yourself.’


18. Thus addressed by those twiceGborn
persons, the mungoose, smiling, answered
them as follows.—' Ve twice-born ones, the
words [ have uttered are not false. Neither
have I spoken them from pride.


1g. You have all heard what I have
said. You foremost of twice-born persons,


)


ref


this sacrifice is not equal in erwrit to the
gift of a prastha of powdered barley.


20, Forsooth, # should say this, O fore-
most of Brahmanas, Listers to me with
rapt ‘attention as 1 truly describe to you
what took place. |


2t. Wenderfal and excellent was the
event that happened. lt was seen by re
and its consequences were felt by me. Vhs
incident relates to a liberal Brahmana
living in Kurukshetea ia the observance of
the Unchcha vow.


22. On account of that ineident hé at.
tained to Heaven, O twice-bora ones, sfong
with his wife and sow and daughter-in-law,
And in consequence of -what then took
place half my body became changed ints
gold.


| The Mungoose continued :—~


23. O twice-born ones, I shall presently
tell you what the excellent fruit was of the
gift, made by a Brahmana, of a very tile
measure (of powdered barley) acquired by
fair means,


24. On that rightseus spot of ground
known by the name of Kurukshetra, which
is the habitation of many righteous persons,
there ived a Brahmana observing the Un-
chcha vow. That mode of fiving is like that
of the pigeon,


ag. He tived there with his wife and
sow and daughter-in-law and practised
penanees. Of rigiteous seul, and with
senses completely controlled, he adcpted
the mode of living which is followed by a
parioct.


26—28. Of excellent vows, he used to
eat every day at the sixth division. TE
there was frothing to eat at the sixth divi-
sion of the day, that excellent Bralhmana
would fast for that day and eat the next
day at the sixth division. On one occasion,
ye Brahmanas, there took place ia dread-
ful faraine in the fand. During that time
there was deal stored in the abede ef
that righteous Brahmana. ‘The herbs and
plants were all dried up and the whole
kingdom became void of food-steres.


29 When the habituat heurs came for
eating, the Brahmana iad nothing to eat.
This happened day after day. All the
members of his family were stricken with
hunger but were obliged to pass the days
as best they could.


30. One day, inthe month of Jsishtha,
while the Sun was in the meridian, uie
Brahmana was engaged in picking up grains
of corn, Afflicted by heat and hunger, na


.was practising this penance.


108
gt. Unable to obtain grains of corn, the
Brahmana soon became exhausted with
hunger and toit. Indeed, with all the
members of his family, he had no food
to eat,


- 32. That best of Brahmanas passed the
days in territle suffering. One day, after
the sixth division came, he succeeded in
getting a prastha of barley.


33-34. hat barley was then reduced
by those ascetics to powder for making
what is called Sakty of i. Having finished
their silent recitations aud other daily rites,
and having duly poured libations on the
sacred fire, those ascetics divided that little
quantity of powdered barley amongst them-
selves so that the share of each came up to the
measure of Kudava (twelve double handtuls)
As they were about to sit down for eating,
there came to their abede a guest.


35. Seeing the person who came asa
guest, all of them became highly pleased.
Indeed, seeing -him, they saluted him and
made the usual enquiries of health and
happiness.


36. They were of pure minds, sgelf-con-
trolled, and gifted with faith and contol
over the passions. Freed from malice, they
}alconquered anger. Possessed of piety,
they were never pained at seeing other
people’s happiness.


37-38. ‘They had rencunced pride. and
hhaughtiness and and anger, Indeed, they
knew every duty, O foremost of twice-born
ones! Informing their guest of theie own
penances and of the race or family to which
they belonged, and ascertaining from him
in return those particulars, they caused
ihat hungry guest of theirs to enter -their
cottage. Addressing hia they ssid,—This
js the Arghya for you. This water is for
washing your feet. There are scattered
some Kusha grass for your seat, U sin-
hess one.


39. Here is some clean Saktu acquired
by lawful means, O powerful one! Given
by us, O foremost of twice-born persons,
do you accept it.


. 40. Thus addressed by them, that Brah-
mana accepted the [Kudava (twelve double
handfuls) of powdered barley which was
offered to him and ate it all. But his
hunger, O king, was not satisfied with
what he ate,


4t. The Brahmana while observing the
Unehcha vow, seeing that his guest’s hunger
was still unsatisfied, began to think of what
other food he could place before bin for
, Pleasing him.


42. Then his wife said to him,—Let my
Share be given to him! Let this feremest


MAHABHARATA.


of twice-born persons he pleased and fet
him then go wherever he will.


43- Kuowing that his chaste wife who
said so, was herself stricken’ with hunger,
that best of Brahmanas could not approve
of hee share of the powdered barley being
given to the guest.


44-46. Indeed, that bese of Brahe
manas endued with learning, knowing frouvr
his own state that his aged, toil-worn, cheere
less, and helpless wife was herself afflicted
by hunyer, and seeing that lady who had
been emactated into mere skin and bones,
was quivering with weakness, addressed
her aod said,‘ O beautiful one, with even
animals, with even worms and insects,
wives are fed and protected. You should
not, therefore, say su. Whe wife treats her
busband with kindness and feeds and pro-
tects him.


47. Everything connected with  reli-
gion, pleasure, and wealth, careful nursing,
offspring for perpetuating the race, are all
dependent on the wife. fudeed, the metits
of a pecson himself as also of his deceased
ancestors depend also on her.


48. The wife should know heer husband
by his deeds. Indeed, that man who fails to
protect his wiife, earns great infamy here
and goes into Hell hereafter. Such a man
falls down from even a position of great
fame and never sueceeds in acquiring
happy regions hereafter.


49. Thus addressed, she answered hint,
sayug,—Q_ twice-born one, our religious
acts and wealth are united. Do you take
a fourth of this barley! Indeed, be pleased
with me,


5 Truth, pleasure, religious merit, and
Hizaven, as acquirable by good qualities, of
women, as also all the objects of their
desire, O-foremost of twice-born ones, de-
pend on the husband.


5st. In the production of children the
mother contributes ber blood. The father
conttibutes his seed. ‘Phe husband is the
highest deity of the wife. Fhrough the
favour of the husband, women yet both
pleasure and offspring as the reward.


52. You are my Pati (lord) for the
protection you give me. You are my
Bbartri for the means of sustenance you
give me. You are, again, boon-giver to me
on@ccount of your having presented me a
son, Do you, therefore, take my share of
the barley and give it to the guest.


53- Overcome by decrepitude, you are
of advanced years, Afflicted by. hunger,
you are greatly weakened. Worn out with
fasts, you are very much emaciated.


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA.-


s4. Thus addressed by her, he took her
share of the powdered barley and adures-
sing his guest, said —— O twice-born one,


O best of men, do you accept this quantity


of powdered barley as well.


55- The Brahmana, having accepted
that quantity, immediately ate it up, but his
hunger was not yet satisfied. Seeing him
ungratified, the Brahmana in the obserc-
vance of the Unchcha vow became thought-
ful.


36. His son then said to him,—'O brst
of men, taking my share ef the bariey do
you give it to the guest! I consider this
act of mine as one of great merit. ‘There-
fore, 1 do it. .


57. You should be alwavs maintained
by me with great care. Maintenance of
the father is a duty which the geod always
covet.


58. The maintenance of the father in
his old age is the duty laid down foe the


son, This is the eternal Sheuti (audition)
current in the three worlds, O learned
Rishi.


59- By living on barely you are capable
of practising peénances, ‘The life-breath is
the great. deity which lives in the bodies of
all embodied creatures.’


The father said :—


60. If you attain to the age of even a
a thousand years, you will still seem to me
to be only a little child. faving begotten
a son, the father achieves success through
him.


61. O powerful one, I know that the
hunger of children is very strong. I am
old. [ shall somehow succeed in holding
my life-breaths. Do you, O son, become
Strong, ¥


62. Old and decrepit as I am, O son,
hungee scarcely afflicts me. [ have, again,
for many years, practised penances. I have
no fear of death.


he son said :-—


63. I am your offspring. The Shruti
declares that one’s offspring is called Putra,
because one is rescued by him. One's own
self, again, takes birth as‘his son. Do you,
therefore, rescue yourself by your own self,


The father said :—


64. In form you are like me. In con-
duct and in self-control, also, you are my
like. You have been examined on various
occasions by me.
your share of the barley, O son !


65. Having said this, that foremost-of
: ; :


I shall, therefore, accept |


tag


twice-born persons cheerfully tank his son’s
share of the barley and sinWingly presented
it to his twice-born guest.


66. Having eaten that. barley also, the
guest's hunger was not satisAed. The
righteous-souled host in the observance o!
the Unchcha vow became ashamed, ,


67—-68. Desirous of doing what was
agreeable to him, his chaste dauyhter-in-
Jaw then, bearing her share: of the bailey,
approached him and said,—Ubrough your
son, O learned Brahmana, | shall obtain
ason. Do you, therefore, take my share
of the batley and give it to this guest.


69. Through your grace, numerous re-
gions of beatitude will be mine for eternity,
Through a grandson one obtains those re-
gions going where one has not to suffer any
kind of misery.


70. Like the three-fold objects of life
beginning with Religion, or the three-fold
sacred fires, there js a triple aggregate of
everlasting fleavens, depending upon the
son, the grandson, and the great-grandson.


71. The son is called Putra because he
frees his ancestor’s debt. Fhrough sons and
grandsons one always enjoys the happiness
of those regions which are reserved for the
pigus and the good.


The father-in-law said :—

72—73. QO you of excellent vows and
conduct, seeing you wasted by wind and
san, deprived of your very complexion,
emaciated, and almost destitute of conscious.
ness throwgh hunger, how can [ be such
a teansgressor ayainst thé cules of virtue
as to take your share of the barley? OU
auspicious damsel, you should not say so,
for the sake of those auspicious results
for which every family aust tury.


74. O auspicious lady, how can f hold
you at even this, the sixth division of the
day abstaining from food and observing
vows? You are gifted with purity and
good conduct and penances. Alas, even
you have to pass your days in so much
misery. - -


73. You area child, afflicted by hunger,
and belong to the softer sex. You should ”
be always protected by me! Alas, I have
to see you worn out with fasts, O you who
are the delighter of all your kinsmen.


The daughter-in-law said:—

‘76. You are the senior of my senior,
since you are the deity of my deity. You
are, indeed, the god of my god. Do you,
therefore, O powerful one, take. my share
of the barley,


119


97. My hody, life-breaths, and religious
rites, have all one object, o1s., the service of
my elder, Threugh your favour, O learned
Brahmana, I shail obtain many regiens of
happiness hereafter. ;


78. I deserve to be looked after by you.
Kuow, O twice-born one, that | am wholly
devoted to you. Cherishing also this
thought, o7s., that my happiness is your
concern, you should take this my share of
the barley.


The father-in-law said :—


79. O chaste lady, on account of such
conduct of yours you will for ever shine in
glory, for endued with vows and steadiness
in religious rites, your eyes are directed to
that conduct which should be observed to-
wacds elders, -


80, Therefore, O daughter-in-law, I
shall take your share of the barley. You
deserve not to be deceived by me, consider-
ing all your virtues. You are truly, O
blessed damset, the foremost of all persons
observing the duties of righteousness.


8, Having said so to her, the Brahmana
took her share of the barley and gave it
to his guest. At. this the guest became
pleased with that great Brahmana gifted
with great piety,


82--83. With gratified soul, that first
of twice-born persons, endued with great
eloquence, who was pene else than the
deity of Virtue in a human. form, then
addressed that foremost of Brahmanas and
said,—‘O best of twice-born ones, | am
highly pleased with this pure gift of yours,
this gift of what was acquired by fair means
by you, and which you did freely part with,
according to the rules of victue,


84. Indeed, this gift of yours is being
bruited about in Heaven By the dwellers of
that happy region. Mark, flowers have
been rained down from the sky on the
Farth,


45. The celestial Rishis, the deities,
the Gandharvas, those who walk before the
dejties, and the celestial messengers, are
all lauding you, struck with wonder at
your gift.


86. The twice-born Rishis who live in
the regions of Bralrma, seated on their
cars, are anxious to see you. O foremost
of twice-born persons, go to Heaven,


87. The Pitris living in their ewn reggon,
heave all been rescued by’ them. Others,
also, who have not attained to the position
of Paris, have equally been rescued by you
for countless cy cies. :


MANABHARATA.


88. For yeur Brahmacharyya, your
gifts, your sacrifices, yeur penances, and
your acts of piety done with a pure treart,
geo you te Heaven,


8g. O yeu of excellent vows, you prac
tise penances with great devotion. Your
gifts have, therefore, pleased the deities
highly, O best of twice-born ones.


go, Since you have made this gift, in a
seasen of great difficulty, with a pure heart,
you have, by this act of yours, conquered
the celestial region.


gt. Hunger destroys one’s wisdom and
dives off one’s righteous understanding.
One whose intelligence is overwhelined by
hunger renounces all fortitude.


gz. He, therefore, who conquers hunger,
conquers Heaven, forsooth. One's righte-
ousness is never destroyed as long as he
cherishes the inclination of making gifts.


93. Disregarding filial affection, disre-
garding the affection one feels for his wife,
and reckoning virtue as the foremost, you
have paid no attention to the cravings of
nature.


94- The acquisition of riches is an act of
slight merit. lis gift to a worthy person
is fraught with greater merit. Of still
greater merit is the (proper) time. Lastly,
devotion is fraught with the higheste merit.


95. The door of Heaven is very difficult
to see. ‘Through earelessness men canngt
see it. The bar of Heaven's door has cupi-
dity for its seed. That har is kept fastened
by desire and affection. Indeed, Heaven's
door is unapproachable,


95. Those men who have subdued anger
and conquered their passions, those Brahe
manas wno are gifted with penances and
who make gifts accarding to the extent of
their ability, succeed in seeing it.


97. It tas been said that he whe gives
away a hundred, baving a thousand, he who
gives away ten, having a hundred, and he
who gives a handful of water, having no
money, are all equal as regacds the merit
they acquire.


98. King Rantideva, when divested of
all his ciches, gave a small quantity of
water with a pure heart. Through this
gift, O learned Brahmana, he went to the
celestial region. .


9. The deity of righteousness is never
pleased so much with large gifts of costly
things as with gifts of even worthless things,
if acquired lawfully and given away with
devotion and faith.


too. King Neriga had made gifts of
thousands- of kine te the twice-born class-
¢


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA.,


By giving away only one tow which did
fot belong to him, he fell into Hell.


tor, Ushinara’s son Shivi- of excellent
vows, by giving away the flesh of bis own
body, is rejoicing in the celestial region,
having attained to the regions ef the pious.


02. Mere wealth {s not merit. Good
then acquire merit by exerting to the best
of theic power and with the help of rigtne-
ousness, One does not acquire,such merit
by means of even various sacrifices as with
even alittle weaith that has been acquired
by faic means,


103. Through anger, the fruits of gifts
are destroyed. Through cupidity one fails
to go tothe celestial region. One conver-
sant with the merits of gift, and leading a
just course of conduct, succeeds, through
penances, in enjoying the celestial region.


104. The fruit, OQ Brahmana, ef this
gift made by you (of a prastha of powdered
barley) is much greater than what ene
acquires by many Rajasuya-Sacrifices with
profuse gifts oc many Horse-Sactifices,


tos. With this prastha of powdered
barley you have conguered the eternal
tegion of Brahman. Go you in happiness,
O learned Brahmaaa, to the house of Brah+
man who is without the stain of darkness.


106. O foremost of twice-born persons,
acelestial car is here for all of you. Do
you ascend it as you please! O Brah-
mana, | am the deity of Righteousness,
Bebold me} ;


_ 107. You have rescued your bedy. The
fame of your achievement will fast in the
world. With your wife, your son, and your
daughter-in-law, go now to the celestial
region,

108. After the deity of Righteousness.
had said these words, that Brahmana, with
his wife, son, daughter-in-law, proceeded
to the celestial region.


tog. After that learned Brahmana know-
ing all duties, had thus ascended té the
celestial region with his_son, daughter-in-
law, and wife numbering the fourth, | came
out of my hole.


r1e—+112. There with the scent of that
powdered barley, with the mire caused by
the water (which the Brahmana had given
ro his guest), with the contact (of my body)
with the celestial flowers which had been
tained down, with the particles of the barley
powder which that good man had given
away, and thé penances of that Brahmana,
‘my head became gold. See, on account of
the gift of that Brahmana who was firm in
truth, and his penances hal€ ef this my
ample body has become golden, :
= )


tit


113. Otwice-born ones, fer converting
the rest of my body into gold ft repeatedly
go, with a cheerful heart, to the hermitages
of ascetics and sacrifices performed by
kings.

114. Hearing of this sacrifice of the
Kuru king, gifted with great wisdom, I came
here with hopes. 1 have not, however, been
made gold. 2


113. O foremost of Brahmanas, it was
for this that 1 uttered those words, v7s.,
that this sacrifice can by no means eompare
with (the gift ef) that prastha of powdered
barley.


116. With the grains of that prastha ef
powdered barlay, | was made gold on that
occasion. ‘This great sacrifice, however,
is not equal to these grains, This is my
opinion.


117. «Having sald those words to all those
foremost of Brahmanas, the mungoose diss
appeared from their view. ‘Those Brahs
manas then returned to their respective
homes,


Vaishampayana said :—

118. O conquerer of hostile towns, I
have now told you all about that wonderful
incident. which took place im that great
Horse- Sacrifice.


119 You should not, O king, think
highty of sacrifice. Millions of Rishis have
ascended to the celestial region with the
help of only their penances,


120. Abstention from injury to all creas
tutes, contentment, conduct, sincerity,
penances, self-control, trathfulness, and
gifts, are each equal in point of merit to
sacrifice.


Ce eeaemeeneel


“CHAPTER XCI.


(ANUGITA PARVA. )—
Continued,


Janamejaya said :— ‘

1. O powerful Rishi, kings are attached
to sacrifices, The great Rishis are attached
to penances, Learned Brahmanas observe
tranquillity of mind, peacefulness of conduct
aud self-control.


2. Hence it appears that nothing can be
seen in this world which can compare with
the fruits ef sacrifices. This is my comvic-


.tion. That conviction, again, seems to be


sutely corrects


12


3. Numberless kings; O best of twice-
born persons, having adored the celestials
in sacrifices, acquired high Tame here and
obtained the celestial region hereafter.


4. Grlted with great energy, the power.
ful king of the deities, vis., Indra of a
thousand eyes, obtained the sovereignty
over the deities through the many sacrifices
he performed with gifts in profusion and
attained to the fruition of all his desires.


5~6. When king Yudhishthira, with
Bhima and Arjuna by him, resembled the
king of the deities himself in prosperity
and prowess, why then did that mungoose
depreciate that great Nerse-Sacrifice of the
great monarch,


Vaishampayana said :—


9. Do you listen to me, O king, as 1
describe to you duly, O Bharata, the excel-
lent ordinances about sacrifice and the
fruits also, O king, that sacrifice yields.


8. Formerly, on one occasion Shakra
celebrated a particutar sacrifice. While the
limbs of the sacrifice were spread out, the
Ritwijas became busy in performing the
various rites ordained in the scriptures.


9—10. The pourer of Jibations, possessed
of every qualification, became engaged in
pouring libations of clarified butter, Tbe
great Rishis were seated around. The
celestials were summoned one by one by
contented Brahmanas of great learning
uttering scriptural Mantras in sweet voices.
Those foremost of Adhwaryyus, rot fatigued
with what they did, recited the Mantras
of the Yajurveda in soft accents.


11, The time came for killing the
animals. When the animals selected for
sacrifice were seized, the great Rishis, O
king, felt mercy for them.


12. Seeing that the animals had all be-
come dispirited, those Rishis, gifted with
wealth of penances, approached Shakra
and said to him,—' This method of sacrifice
is not auspicious.’


13. Desirous of winning great’ merit
as you are, this is, indeed, a mark of your
ignorance of the rites of sacrifice. O Puran-
dara, animals have not been ordained to
be killed in sacrifices,


14. O powerful one, these preparations
of yours are destructive of merit! ‘This
sacrifice is not consistent with virtue. The
destruction of creatures can never be said
to be an act of virtue ! :


* y
15. If you wish it, ‘et your priests.


pertorm your sacrifice accerding to the
Agama.
ing te the scriptural ordinances, great will


be the merit acquired by you,


By performing a saerifice accord- |


MAHABHARATA,


16. O you of a hundred eyes do yott
perform the sacrifice with seeds of grain
which have been kept for three years. This,
‘O Shakra, would be fraught with great
virtue and productive of fruits of high
efficacy.


17. The deity of a hundred sacrifices,
however, moved by pride and overwhelmed
by stupefaction, did not accept these words
uttered by the Rishis,


18. Then, O Bharata, a great dispute
arose in that sacrifice of Shakra between
the ascetics as to how sacrifices should be
performed, that is, should they be performs
ed, with mobile creatures or with immobile
objects.


tg. All of them were exhausted with
disputation, The Rishis, then, those bes
holders of truth, having made a compact
with Shakeca, asked king Vasu.


20. O highly blessed one, what is the
Vedic declaration about sacrifices? Is it
preferable to perform sacrifices with animals
or with seeds and juices.


21. Hearing the question, king Vasu,
without at all judging the merits of the
arguments advanced on both sides, at once
answered, saying,—‘ Sacrifices may be per«
formed with any of the two kinds of objects
ready.’ * ;

22. Having answered the question ‘thus,
he had to enter the nether regions. Indeed,
the powerful king of the Chedis had to
undergo that misery for having answered
falsely. -. ; :


23. Therefore, when a doubt arises, no
person, however wise, Should singly decide
the matter, unless he be the powerful and
self-born Lord himself of creatures.


24. Gifts made by a sinner with an ims
pure heart, for this, even when very large,
become lost. Such gifts go for nothing.


25. By the gifts made by a person of
unrighteous conduct,~one, that is, who is
of sinful soul and who is a destroyer, just
fame is never acquired either in this world
or in the next.


26. That person of little intelligence,
who, from desire of acquiring merit, cele-
brates sacrifices with wealth acquired by
unfaic means, never succeeds in acquirii g
merit. .


27. That low wretch @ sinful soul, who
hypocritically sssuming a garb of virtue
makes gifts to Brahmanas, orfly creates the
conviction in men about bis own virtue.


28: That Brahmana of uncontrolled
conduct, wha acquires wealth by sinful
re .


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA,


deeds, overwhelmed by passion and stupe-
faction, attains at last to the goalof the
sinful,

29. Some ote, overwhelmed: by cupi-
dity and stupefaction, becomes bent on
Storing riches. He is seen to persecute ali
creatures, urged by a sinful and impure
understanding.


30. He who, having acquired riches by
such means, makes gifts or performs
sacrifices therewith, never enjoys the fruits
of those gifts or sacrifices in the other
world on account of the wealth having
been acquired by unfair means,


31. Men having wealth of penances,
by giving away, to the best of their power,
grains of corn picked up from the fietds or
roots or fruits or potherbs or water or
leaves, acquire great merit and proceed
to the celestial region...


32—33. Such gifts are fraught with
virtue'and equal to high austerities. Such
gifts, as also mercy to all creatures, and
Brahmacharyya, truthfniness of speech,
and kindness, and fortitude, and forgive:
ness, form the eternal foundations of
virtue which itself is eternal. We hear of
Vishvamitra and other. kings of ancient
times, ; :


34—35- Indeed, Vishmvamitra, and
Asita, and king Janaka, and Kakshasena
and Arshtisena and king Sindhudwipa,
these and many other kings, gifted with
wealth of penances, having made gifts of
articles acquired by fairness, have attained
to high success.


36. Those amongst Brahmanas and
Kshatriyas, Vaishyas and Shudras, who
perform - penances, O Bharata, and who
purify themselves, by gifts and other deeds
of righteousness, proceed to the celestial
regioa, ; ; 7


CHAPTER XC€It.
( ANUGITA PARVA. )=
Concluded.


Janamejaya said :—

1. If, O illustrious one, celestial region
is the fruit of riches acquired by fair means,
do you fully describe it to me. You are
welleconversant with the subject and, it is,
therefore, proper for you to explaih it.


2. Otwice-bofn one, you have said to
me what the high fruit was that accured
to that Brahmana, who lived according
to the Unchcha mode, through his gift of
powdered barley. Forscoth, all you have
Said is true.


15


has


113


4. In what way, however, was the attain=
ment held certain of the highest end in all
saccifices? O foremost of twice-born
persons, you should fully expound ail this
to me. : :
Vaishampayana said:— _

4. Regarding it is cited this old narra<
tive, O chastiser of enemies, of what took
place formerly in the great sacrifice o£~
Agastya. :

§. Formerly, O king, Agastya of great
energy, devoted to the well-being of all


creatures, entered into a Diksha extending
for twelve years.


6. In that sacrifice of the great Rishi
many Hotris were engaged who resembled
blazing fires in the splendour of their bodies. *
Among them were men who lived upon
toots or fruits, or who used two pieces of.
store only for busking theie corn, or who
were supported by only the rays (of the,
moon). ,


g. Among them were also men who
never took any food unless it was placed
before them by others desirous of feeding
them, and those who nevee ate anything
without having first served the celestials,
the departed Manes, and guests, and those
who never wastied the food which they took.
‘There were also Vatis and Vikshus among
them, O king. .


8. Ail of them were men who had-obtain«'
ed asight ofthe deity of virtue in his em.“
bodied form. They had subjugated anger
and acquired a complete mastery over all.
their senses. Living in the observance of
self-control, they were freed froin pride and


“the desire of injuring others.


9. They were always observant of a jure
conduct and were never obstructed Sy their
senses. Those great, Rishis attended that
sacrifice and performed its various rites.


1o. The illustrious Rishi (Agas.+ 20
quired the food which was collecte:! —'
sacrifice and that came up to the rays.
guantity, by lawful means according to .
best of his power.


11-13. Numerous other ascetics at tht
time celebrated large sacrifices. As Axyas-
tya, however, was engaged in that sacrifice
of his, the thousand-eyed Indra, O best of
the Bharatas, ceased to pour rain (on the
Earth). At the intervals, O king, of the
sacrificial rites, this talk took place among
those Rishis of purified souls about the
great Agastya, vis..—‘ This Ayastya, en-
gaged in sacrifice, is making yifts of food
with heart purged of pride and vanity.

14. The deity of the clouds, however,
ceased to pour rain. Plow, indeed


Ir4


will food grow? This sacrifice of the Rishi,
ye Brahmanas, is great and extends for
twelve years.


15—20. The deity will not pour rain
for these twelve years. Thinking on this,
you should do some favour to this Rishi of
xreat intelligence, viz, Agastya of severe
penances.’ When these words were said,
Agastya of great prowess, pleasing .all
those ascetics ty bending his head, said,
‘If Vasava does not pour rain for these
twelve years, 1} shalf then perform the
mental sacrifice. This is the eternal ordi-
nance. If Vasava does not’ pour rain for
these twelve years, 1 shall then perform the
“‘fouch-Sacrifice, Fhis is the eternal sacri-
fice. Hf Vasava does not pour rain for
these twelve years, I shall, then, putting
forth, all my exertions, make arrangements
for other sacrifices ¢haracterised by the
observance of the most difficult and severe
vows. ‘This present sacrifice of mine, with
seeds, has been arranged for by me with
habour of many years.


a1. I shall, with seeds, do much good.
No obstacle will arise. This my sacrifice
is incapable of being baffted.


22—23. Ht matters little whether the
deity pours rain or no downpours come.
Indeed, if Indra does not, of his own will,
show any regard for me, F shall, in that
case, change myself into Indra and keép
all creatures alive. Every creature, on


whatever food he has been nourished, will }


continue to be nourished on it as before.


24. | eat even repeatedly create a
different order of things. Let gold and
whatever else of riches there is, come to
. this place to-day,


25~—27. Let alf the wealthy which is in
the three worlds come here to-day of its
own accord! Let all the tribes of celestial
Apsaras, all the Gandharvas along with
the Kinnaras, and Vishwavasyw, and others
there are (of that order) approach this
sacrifice of mine! Let all the weakh. which
exists among the Norther: Kurus, come of
their own accord to these sacrifices. Let
Heaven, and all those who have Heaven
for theis home, and Dharma himself, come
here.


28 After the ascetic had uttered these }


words, everything took place as he desired,


by virtue of his penances, for Agastya was |


gifted with a mind which resembled a burn-
ing fire and was possessed of extraodinary
energy.


29. The Rishis who were there saw the
power ef penances with rejoicing hearts.
Filed with wonder they then said these
words of grave significance.


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA.


The Rishis said :—

30. We have been highly pleased with
werds you have uttered. We do not, how-
ever, wish that your penances should suffer
any diminution. Those sacrifices are ap-
proved by us which are performed by faire
means. Indeed, we wish duly those sacri+
fices which rest on lawful means,


gt. Acquiring our food by lawful means
and observant of our respective duties, we
shall seek to go through sacrificial initia
tions and the pouring of libations on the
sacred fire and the other religious rites,

3233. We should worship the celestials,
practising Brahmacharyya by lawful means.
Completing the period of Brahmacharyya


| we have come out of our house, observe


ing lawful methods, That understanding,
which is freed from the desire of inflicting
any kind of injury on others is approved
by us. .

34. You should, always, O powerful one,


-commend such abstention from injury in
tall sacrifices,
| Pleased, O foremost of twice-born ones,


We shall then be highly


After the completion of your sacrifice, when
dismissed by you, we shall then, leaving
this place, go away.


.35 As they were saving these words,
Purandara, the king of the deities, gifted
with great energy, seeing the power of
Agastya’s penances, poured rain.

36 Indeed, O Janamejaya, till the com
pletion of the sacsifice of that Rishi of
great prowess, the deity of rain poured
tain which met the wishes of men both
about quantity and time.


3% Placing Vrihaspati before him, the
king of the deities came there, O' royal


| sage, and pleased the Rishi Agastya,


38. On the termination of that. sacrifice,
Agastya, filled with joy, adored all those
great Rishis duly and then sent thenr all
away.


Janamejaya said —

39. Who was that mungoose with @
golden head, which said all those words in
a human voice? Asked by me, do you
tell me this, :


Vaishampayana said :-—

40. You did not ask me before and,
therefore, I did not telk you. Hear as k
tet you who that mungoose was and why
he could assume a human voice.


41. Formerly, the Rishi Jamadagné
desired to perform a Shraddha. His
Homa-Cow came to him and the Rishe
milked her himself, *


ASHWAMEDHA PARVA.


42. He then placed thé milk in a vessel
which was new, durable, and pure. The
deity Dharma, assuming the form of anger,
entered that vessel of milk.


43. Indeed, Dharma was desirous of
determining what that foremost of Rishis
would do when seeing some injury done
to him. Having thought thus, Dharma
spoiled that mils.

44. Knowing that the spoiler of bis milk
was Anger, the ascetic was not at all en-
raged with hini. Anger, then, assuming
the form of a Brahmana lady, showed him-
self to the Rishi.


45. Indeed, Anger, finding that he had
been vanquished by that foremost one ef
Bhrigu’s race, addressed him, saying,—«
‘O chief of Bhrigu’s race, 1 have been
conquered by you. ‘There is a saying
among men that the Bhrigus are very
wrathful. [I now find that that saying is
false, since I have been subdued by you.

46. You are endued with a powerful
soul. You are endued with forgiveness.
I stand here to-day, acknowledging your


sway. I fear your penances, O righteous
one! Do you, O powerful Rishi, stow me
favour.


~


Jamadagni said :—
47. Ihave seen you, O Anger, in your
embodied form. Go you wherever you like,


tig


without any anxiety, You tiave riot done
me ary injury to-day. f have no grudge
against you,

48. Those for whom 1} had kept this
mil are the highly blessed Pitris, Present
yoursélf before them and ascertain theic
intentions,


49. Thus addressed, stticken with fear,
Anger vanished from the sight of the Rishi.
Through the curse of the Pitris he- became
a mungoose.


go. Hethen began te please the Pitris
in ocder to bring about atti end of his curse.
By them he was told these words :—'
speaking disrespectfully of Dharma you
shall attain to the end of your curse.’


g1. Thus addtessed by them, he wan-
dered ovet places where sacrifices were
performed and over other sacted places,
employed in censuring great sactifices. ft
was he who came to the great sacrifice of
king Yudhishthira.


32. Disptaising the son of Dharma by
a ceference ta the prastha of powdered
barley, Anger became freed from his curse,
for Yudhishthira (as Dharma’s son) was
Dharma’s self.


53. This is what took place in the sacris
fice of that great king. ‘Ihe nvungoose,
appeared there in our very presence,


Finis ASHWAMEDHA PARVA. .


A PROSE ENGLISH TRANSLATION
OF


THE MAHABHARATA.


(TRANSLATED LITERALLY FROM THE ORIGINAL SANSKRIT TEXT).


ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA:
‘VOL. XV. sal


EDITED & PUBLISHED BY ose ae


MANMATHA NATH DUTT, (Siastr?) MLA, MBAS,
REcToR, KesHusp ACADEMY ;


Axthor of the English Translations of the Ramayana, Vishnu Puvanam,
Srimad-Bhagavatam, Kamandakiya, Nitisara, Bhagavad- Gita,
and many ether works.


40, Nayan Chand Dutt’s Street, Calcutta.


CALCUTTA:


Patep sy H. C. Dass, Exysruw Press,
40, Nayan Chand Dutt’s Street.


1905.


ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA:


=e
TABLE OF CONTENTS.


Cuaprer t.—The conduct of the Pan-
davas after regaining theic kingdom—p. 4.

CHaPrer El.—The respectful treatment
of the Pandavas towards Dheitarashtra—
Pp. 2

CHAPTER III.—Cruel act of Bhima, the
grief of Dhritarashtra and Yudhishthira—
Pp. 3-

CuarPTER 1V.-=Vyasa’s consolation to
Dhritarashtra—p. 6,


Cuaprer V.—Dhritarashtra’s advice to


Yudhishthira—p. 7.
Cuaprer VI.—Royal duties described by
Dhritarashtra—p. g.
CuarterR VII.~lInsteuctions about war
and peace—p. 10,
Cuarter VII[.—Dhritarashtra settles
about returning into forest—p. 13.
Caaprer 1X.--Dhritarashtca announces
his intention and apologizes to. the citizens
Pp. 12, .
Carrer X.—The history of the war as
described by a Brahmana—p. 13.
Cuartrer XL.-Dhritarashtra distributes
money—p. 14.
‘Cuaprer XIL-—-Arjuna advises Bhima,
to give up his hostile feelings—p. 15.
CuarTeR X{}.—Viduca communicates
to Dhritarashtra, Yudhishthira’s apology
for Bhima’s conduct—p. 16.
Cuarrer X1V.—Distribution of gifts.
P- 376
Cuaprer XV.—Dhritarashtra’s depar-
ture for the forest—p. 17.
Cuartzr XVE~~Kunti’s determination
to follow the blind king=«p. 18.
CHAPTER XVII—-Kunti’s reply to her
sons—p. 1Q.
Cuarrer XVHl—The arrival of the
party at the forest—p. 20.


Cuaprer XIX.--Arriyal at Vyasa’s bere |


mitage=p, al.


Dhritarashtra—p. 38,


Cararrer XX.—The “arrival of asceties
to see the king—p, 22.

CuarrerR XX\.—The sorrows of the
Pandavas—p, 23.

Cuarrer XXI1.—~Yudhishthiea goes with
his party to see the king in the forest—p 24.

Caarter XXUL—Lhe royal march—


I Pe 25.


Cuarrer XX1IV.—The meeting of the
Pandavas with theic mother and the blind


| king—-p. 26,


CHAPTER XXV.—The same continued
Pp. 26.

Cuarrer XXVI.—Dhritarashtra enqui-
tes Yudhishthira of his well-being and
the latter’s reply—p. 27.


Cuarrer XXVII.—The passing of a day


| in the forest by Yudhishthira—p. 29.


Cuarrer XXVIiL—The history of |


| Vidura—p. 30.


Cuarter XXIX.—The conversation of
Vyasa and other astetics—p. 3.

CHaprer XXX.—The history of Kacna
described by Kunti—p. 33. ;

Cuaprers XXXI—-XXXHL—Gandhari


| sees her sons—p. 34.


CuarTER XXXIV.—How persons whose
bodies have been destroyed révappear—
Ps 37+ ;

Cuarren XXXV.—Janamejaya sees his


| father-—p. 38.


Cuarrer XXXVE.—Vyasa consoles.


Cuarrer XXXVIL—Narada comes to


¥udhishthira and describes the death of
| Dhritarashtra, Kunti, and others==p. 40.


Cuapten XXXVIIE—Yudhishthira’s
lamentations—p. 42.


Crapren XXXIX.—Narada describes
the history of the deathep, 43. ~


THE MAHABHARATA.
(IN ENGLISH),
ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA,


CHAPTER I.
Having saluted the Supreme Deity (Nara-.


yana) and the highest of all male berngs
(Nava) and also the Goddess 4 Learning
(Saraswati), let us cry successé .


Janamejaya said :—

1. Aiter having gained their kingdom,
how did my graiidtathers, the great Pan-
davas, treat the high-souled king Dhrita-
vashtra?


2. How, indeeéd, did that king who had
all bis counsellors and sons killed, who was
without a support, and whose wealth had
vanished, behave? How also did the illus-
tuious Gandhari act ?


3. For how many years did my noble
grandfather rule the kingdom? You should
tell me all this.


Vaishanipayana said :—

4. Having regained their kingdom, the
preat Pandavas, theic enemies ali killed,
tuled the earth, placing Duritarashtra at
their tfead.


5. Vidura, Sanjaya and the highly in-
telligent Yuyutsu, who Was Dhritaraslitra’s
son by his Vaishya wife, used to wait upon
Doritarashira.


6. The Pandavas used to consult that
king in all matters. indeed, for filteen
years, they did all things under the_advice
of the olu king,


7. Those heroes ased very often to go
to that king and sit beside him, after having
adored his feet, according to Che wishes
of king Yudhisbthira the just. .


8. They did all things under the com-
frand of Duatitacashtra who smelt their
heads in love. Lhe daughter of king Kuati-
bhoja also obeyed Gaudhari in all matters.


g. Draupadi and Subhadra and the
Other ladies of the Pandavas treated tbe
old king and the queen as if they were


dbeir own fatligt-iiu-law and mother-in-law. |


}


+


1to—it. Yudhishthira gave the king
costly beds, dresses and ornaments, and
food and drink and other enjoyable articles) .
in profusion and of such superior kinds
as were worthy of royal’ use. Likewise
Kunti behaved towards Gaudhati as toe
wards a senior.

12. Vidura, Sanjaya, and Yuyutsu, O
you of Kuru’s race, used to always wait
upon the old king whese sons had all been
killed,

13. The dear brother-in-law of Drona,
vis., the very superior Brahmana, Kripa,
that pewer.ul bownian, also, attended upon
the king. oa

14.. The hely Vyasa also used to ofter:
meet with the oid king and redite to him
the ‘histories af old Rishis and celestial
ascetics and Pitris and Rakshasas.


13. Vidura, under the orders of Mhrita-
rashtra, superintended the performance of
all religious acts and the administration of
the law.


16. Through the excellent policy of
Vidura, by the expenditure of very little
money, the Pandavas yot numerous agres-
able services from theie feudatorics aud
followers.

17. King Dhritarashtra freed priemoers
and parduned those who were condimred
to death. King Yudhishthira the jast oever
said atiything to this.

18. On those otcasiotis when the son of
Amvika went on pleasuce trips, the vially
energetic Kuru king Yudhisnuiica ised ta
give him every article of enjoyment. ?

1g. Aralikas, and juice-makers, and
makers of Ragaktandavas waited on king
Dnheiiarasiitra as befure.


20. Pandu's son collected castly cresses
awd garlands of various kinds and daly
offered them to Dhritarsshtra,


21. Maireya wines, ash of various ics de.
and shetlets and honey, and yatious kinus yf


3 MAHABAHRATA,


food agreeably prepared by the admixture,
of many articles, were caused to be made for
the old king as in his prosperous days.


23. Those kings who came there one
after another, all used to wait upon the old
Kuru king as before.


23—26. Kunti, Draupadi, and she of the
Sattwata race possessed of great fame,
and Ulupi the daughter of the Naga king,
and queen Chitrangada, and the sister of
Dhrishtaketu, and the daughter of Jara-
sandha,—these and many other ladies, O
king, used to wait upon the daughter of
Suvala like maids of ali work. Yudhisthira
always enjoined upon his brothers that
Dhritarashtra, who was deprived of all his
chitdren, might not feel himself unhappy in
any way. ‘they also, on their part, listening
to these pregnant commands from king
Yudhishthira, showed particular obedience
to the old king,


297. There was one exception, however.
It was Bhimasena. All that had followed
from that match at dice which had been
brought about by the wicked understanding
of Dhritarashtra, did not go away from
the heart of that hero,


ieee ead


CHAPTER I.


(ASHRA AVASIKA PARVA.)—
Continued,


Vaishampayana said :—

1. Thus adored by the Pandavas, the
royal son of Amvika passed his time happily
as before, waited upon and honoured by
the Rishis.


2. That perpetuater of Kuru’s race used
to make these foremost of offerings which
should be given to the Brahmanas. The
royal son of Kunti always placed
articles at Dhritarashtra’s command.


3—4. Shorn of malice as king Yudhish-
thira was, he was always affectionate
towards his uncle. Addressing his brothers
and ministers, the king said,—’ King Dhrita-
rashtra should be honoured both by myself
and you all, He, indeed, is a well-wisher
of mine who obeys the commands of Dhrita-
rashtra,


5—6.- He, on the other hand, who treats
him otherwise, is my enemy, Such a man
should certainly be punished by me. On
days of performing the rites ordained for
the Pitris, as also in the Shraddhas perform-
ed fer kis sons and all well-wishers, the
great ifucu king Dhritarashtra, gave


those


away to Brahmanas, as each deserved
immense quantity of wealth after his heart.


gz. King Yudhishthira the just, and
Bhima, and Arjuna, and the twins, desirous
of doing what was liked by the old king,
used to execute all his commands.


8. They always took care that the old
king who was afflicted with the destruction
of his sons and grandsons,—with, that ig,
grief caused by the Pandavas themselves,—
might not die of his grief,


9. Indeed, the Pandavas treated him
in such a way that that Kuru hero might
not be deprived of that happiness and all
those articles of enjoyment which he had
during his sons’ life-time.


10. The five brothers, vis., the sons of
Pandu, treated thus Dhritarashtra, living
under his command.


tt. Dhritarashtra also, seeing them so
humble and obedient to his commands and
acting towards him as disciples towards
preceptors, treated them also like a loving
preceptor in return.


12. Gandhari, by performing the vari+
ous rites of the Shraddha and making gifts
to Beahmanas of various objects of enjoy-
ment, became freed from the debt she owed
to her slain children.


13, Thus did that foremost of righteous
men, vis., king Yudhishthira the just,
endued with great intelligence, along with
his brothers, adored king Dhritarashtra, ,


Vishampayana said :—~

14. Endued with great energy, that
perpetuater of Kuru’s race, vis., the old
king Dhritarashtra, could not see any ill-
will in Yudhishthira.


1S. Seeing that the great Pandavas
were in the observance of a wise and
righteous conduct, king Dhritarashtra, the
son of Amvika, became pleased with them.


16. Suvala’s daughter, Gandhari, ree
nounging all sorrow for her (slain) children,
began .to show great love for the Pandavas
as if they were her own children.


17. Gifted with great energy, the Kuru
king Yudhishthira never did anything that
was disliked by the royal son of Vichitra-
viryya. On the other hand, he always
treated him in a highly agreeable way.


18—1g, Whatever acts, grave or light,
were directed by king Dtvitarashtra or
the helpless Gandhari to be done, were all *
done with respect, O monarch, by that
deStroyer of hostile heroes, wéz,, the Pane
dava king.


ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA. 5


20. The old king hecame highly pleased
with such conduct of Yudhishthica. Indeed,
he was grieved at the remembrance of his
own wicked son. -


21. Rising every day at early dawn, he
purified himself and went through his reci-
tations, and then blessed the Pandavas by
wishing them victory in battle.


22. Making the usual gifts to the Brah-
manas and making them utter benedictions,
and pouring libations on the” sacred fire,
the old king prayed for long life to the
Pandavas.


23. Indeed, the king had [never derived
that great happiness from his own sons


which he always did from the sons of
Panda.
24. King Yudhishthicra at that time


became as agreeable to the Brahmanas as
to the Kshatriyas, and the various bands of
Vaishyas and Shudras of his kingdom,


25. King Yudhishthira forgot whatever
wrongs were done to him by the sons of
Dhritarashtra, and saluted his uncle.


26—27. If any man did any thiug that was
not liked by the son of Amvika, he became
thereby an object of hatred to the intelli-
gent son of Kunti. Indeed, through fear of
Yudhishthira nobody could talk of the evil


deeds of either Duryodhana or Dhrita-
rashtra.
28. Both Gandhari and Vidura also


were well pleased with the power which
the king having no enemies showed for
bearing wrongs. ‘hey were, however, not
so pleased, O destroyer of foes, with Bhima.


29. Dharma’s son Yudhishthira, was
truly obedient to his uncle. Bhima, how-
ever, on seeing Dhritarasitra, became very
dispirited,

390. That destroyer of enemies, seeing
Dharma’s son pay his respects to the old
king, saluted him outwardly with a very te-
Juctant heart.


ee


CHAPTER IIL.


(ASHRAMAVASAIKA PARVA. )~.
Continued,


Vaishampayana said :—

1. The people who lived in the Kuru
kingdom could not mark any difference in
the cordiality which existed between king
Yudhishthira and the father of Duryo-
dhana, =


2. When the Kuru king recollected his
wicked son, he then could not but feel uu-
friendly, in his heart, towards Bhima.


3. Bhimasena also, O king, moved by a
wicked heart, was unable to put up with
king Dhritarashtra,


4. Vrilkodara secretly did many deeds
that were disagreeable to the old king.
Through deceitful servants he caused the
commands of his uncle to be disobeyed.


5—7. Recollecting the evit advice of the
old king and some deeds of his, Bhima, one
day, in the midst of his friends, slapped his
armpits, in the hearing of Dhritarashtra
and of Gandhari. The angry Vrikodara,
recollecting bis enemies Duyrodhana and
Karna and Dussbasana, gave way toa fit
of passion, and said these harsh words :+~
‘ The sous of the blind king, capable of fight
ing with various kinds of weapons, have all
been despatched by me to the other world
with these arms of mine which resemble a
pair of iron clubs.


8. Indeed, these are those two arms of
mine, looking like maces of iron, and invin=
cible by enemies, coming within whose clasp
the sons of Dhritarashtra have all beer
killed.


9. These are those two well-developed
and round arms of mine, resembling a pair
of elephantine trunks. Coming within their
clasp, the foolish sons of Dhritarashtra
have all been killed.


to. Smeared with sandal-paste and de«
serving of that adornment are those two
arms of mitie by which Duryodhana has been
sent to the other world along with all his
sons and kinsmen.’


tr. Hearing these and many other words,
O king, of Vrikodara, which were s0 many
darts, king Dhritarashtra gave way to
cheerlessness and sorrow.


1z, Queen Gandhari, however, who was
conversant - with every duty and endyed
with great intelligence, and who knew what
‘Time brings on its course, considered them
as untrue,


13. Then, after fifteen years had passed
away, Q monarch, king Diritarashtea,
afflicted (constantly) by the wordy arrows
of Bhima, became stricken with despair and
sorrow,


14. King Vudhishthira the son of Kunti,
however, kttew it not; nor Arjuna of white
horses; nor Kunti; nor Draupadi posses-
sed of great fame; nor the twin sons of
Madri, knowing every duty and who were
always engaged in acting after the wishes
of Dhritarashtra.


i MAHABHARATA.


=


tgs. Employed in doing the behests of the
king, the twins never said anything that
was disagreeable to the old king. Then
Dhritarashtra one day honoured his friends
by his confidence. Addressing them with
tearful eyes, he said these words,


Dhritarashtra said :—


16, You know how the destruction of
Kurus has happened. All that was brought
about by my fault, though the Kauravas
approved ef all my counsels.


17. Fool that I was, f installed the
wicked-minded Duryodhana, that enhancer
of the terrors of kinsmen, to rule over the
Kurus.


¥8—20. Vasudeva had said to me,‘ Let
this sinful wretch of wicked understanding
be slain along with all his friends and
counsellers.’—~I did not Hsten to those words
of great significance, All wise men gave
me the same beneficial advice. Vidura,
Bhishma, Drona, and Kripa said the same
thing. ‘Fhe holy amd great Vyasa repea-
tedly said the same, as also Sanjaya and
Gandhari. Overwhelmed, however, by
filial affection, E could not follow that advice.
Bitter repentance is now my lot for my
neglect.


2t. Lalso repent for not having bestowed
that blazing prosperity, derived from sires
and grandsires on the great Pandavas
possessed of every accomplishment.


22. ‘Thé eldest brother of Gada foresaw
the destruction of all the kings ; Janarddana,


however, considered that destruction as
highly beneficial.
23. So many battalions of troops»


belonging to me, have been destroyed !
Alas, my heart is pierced with thousands
of darts on account of all these results.


24. Of wicked understanding as [ am,
now, aftec the lapse of fifteen years, | am
trying to expiate my sins. :


25. Now at the fourth division of the
day or sometimes at the eighth division,
with the régilarity of a vow, | eata little
food for simply satisfying my thirst. Gan-
dhari knows this.


26. All my attendants believe that I eat
as usual, ‘Fhrough fear of Yudhishthira
alone I concealed my deeds, for if the eldest
son of Pandu came to know of my vow, be
he would feel great pain.


27. Clad in deer-skin, I lie down on the
Earth, spreading a small quantity of Kusha
grass, and pass the time in silent recitations.
The iltustuttious Gandhari, also, passes her
time in the observance of similar vows.


2S. Thus do we both act, we who have


derstanding,


lost a hundred sons none of whom ever
retreated from battle. I do not, however,
grieve fer those children of mine. Vhey
have all died while performing Kshatriya
duties.


29. Having said these words, the old
king then addressed Yudhishthira in parti-
cular and said,—' Blessed be you, O son of
the princess of Yadu's race! Listen now
to what FE say.


30. Cherished by you, O son, U have
lived these years very happily. FE have
(with your help) made large gifts and per-
formed Shraddhas repeatedly.


3t. I have, O son, to the best of my
power, acquired merit largely. ‘this Gan-
dhari, though destitute of sons, has lived
with great fortitude, booking all the while
at me.


32. They who inflicted great
on Draupadi and robbed you of your
affluence,——those cruel men—have all lefe
the world, killed in battle according to-the
Practice of their order.


33. E have nothing to do for them, O
delighter of the Kurus! Killed with theie
faces towards battle, they have attained to
those regions which are reserved for the
wielders of weapons,


34. TE should now, do what is beneficial
and meritotious for me as also for Gandhari.
O gteat king, you should grant me per-
mission.

35. You are the foremost of all righteous
persons, You are always devoted to virtue.
fhe king is the preceptor of all creatures.
It is for this that I say so.


wrongs


36. With your ‘permission, O hero, 1%
shall retire into the forest, clad in rags
and barks, O king, along with this Gan-
dhari.


37—38. 1 shall tive in the forest, always
blessing you. It is proper, O son, for the
members of our family, to make over sove-
reignty, when old age comes, to children
and lead the forest mode of life. Living
there on air alone, or abstaining from alk
food, I shall, with this wife of mine, O hero,
practise severe austerities.


- 39. ‘You shall be a sharer of those pe-
nances, O son, for you are the king. Kings
are sharers of both auspicious and inauspi-
cious acts done in their kingdom,


Yudhishthira said :— -

4o. When you, O king, are thus subject
to grief, sovereignty does not please me at
all. Fie on me who am of wicked wh-
devoted to the pleasures of |

¢


ASHRAMAVADSIKA PARA. 8


rule, and absolutely negligent of my true
concerns,


41. Alas, I, with all my brothers, was


ignorant of yourself having sa long been
stricken with grief, emaciated with fasts,


abstaiving from food, and lying on the
naked earth,
42. Alas, foolish that I am, I have been


deceived by you who have great intelligence,
inasmuch as, having filled me with confi-
dence at first you have latterly undergone
such grief,

43. What need have I of kingdom or of
articles cf enjoyment, what need of satri-
fices or of happiness, when you, O king,
have undergone so much affliction.


44. Ll consider my kingdom as a disease,
and myself jJalso as afflicted. Plunged
though [fo am in serrow, what, however,
is the use of these words that | am addres-
ing you?

45. You are eur father, you are otir
mother; you are our foremost of superiors.
Deprived of ;your presence, how shall we
live.


46. O best of kings, let Yuyutsu, the
son of your loins, be made king, oc indeed,
anybody else whom you may wish.


47- Ishall go mto the forest. Do you
role the kingdom. You should not burn me
. who am already burned by infamy.


48. I am not the king. You are the
king. I am dependent on your will. How
can [ dare grant permission to you who are
my preceptor ?


49. O sinless one, I eherish no resent-
ment in my heart on account of the wrongs
done to us by Suyodhana, It was ordained
that it should be so. Both ourselves and
others were stupefied (by fate).


50. We are your children as Duryo-
dhana and others were. My conviction is
that Gandhari is as muclr my mother as
Kunti.


5t. If you, O king of kings, go to the
forest leaving me, I shall then follow you.
I swear by my soul.


52. This Earth, with her belt of seas, so
full of riches, will not be a source of joy
to me when [~am deprived of your pre-
sence.

53. All this belongs to you. Bending my
head low I make my obesiance. We are all
dependent on you, O king of kings. Let
the fever of your heart be removed.

2


54. I think, O King, that all ‘this that
has come upon you is due to destiny. By


good luck, | had thought, that waiting upon]


you and executing your eommands obe-
)


diently, 1 would rescne you from the fever of .
your heart.


Dhritarashtra said :—


55. OU delighter of the Kurus, my mind
is fixed, O. son, on panances. O powerful
one, it is propec for oue family that 1 should
retire into the fatest.


56. L have lived long under your pro-
tection, O son. I have for many years
been served by you with respect. [ am
now old. You should, O king, grant me
permission.


Vaishampayana said :—

57—58. Having said these words to
king Yudhishthira the just,? king Dorita-
rashtra, the son of Amvika, trembling all the
while and with hands joined together, fur-
ther said to the great Sanjaya and the
great car-warrior Kripa, these words ;~—~
i wish to solicit the king through you.


59. My mind has become dispirited,
my mouth has become dry, through the
weakness of age and the exertion of speaks
ing.

60. Having said so, that perpetuator of
Karu’s cace, v7g., the pinus old king, blessed -
with prosperity, leaned to Gandhari and
suddenly looked like one dead.


61. Seeing him thus seated fike one.
shorn of consciousness, that destroyer of
hostile heroes, vis., the royal son of Kunti,
became penetrated by a piercing grief,


Yudhishthira said :—


62. Alas, he whose strength was equal
to that of a hundred thousand elephants,
alas, that king sits to-day, leaning on a
woman.


63. Atlas, he by whom the iron image of
Bhima on a former occasion was reduced to
pieces, leans to-day on a weak woman. ©


64. Fie on me who am exceedingly un-
righteous. Fie on my understanding. Fie
on my knowledge of the scriptures. Fie on
me for whom this king lies to-day in a man-
ner that is not worthy of him.


65. I also shall fast even as my precep-
tor. Indeed, I shall fast if this king and
Gandhari of great fame abstain fron
food.


Vaishampayana said :—

66. The Pandava king, knowing every
duty, using his own hand, then softly rub-
bed with cold water the breast and the face
of the old king,

67. At the touch of the king’s hand
which was auspicious and fragrant, and


6 MAHABHARATA.


on which were jewels and medicinal
herbs, ‘Ditritarashtra regained his consci-
ousness.


Dhritarashtra said :—


68. Do you, again, touch me, O son of
Pandy, with your hand, and do you em-
brace me. O you having eyes like lotus
petals, | am restored te my senses through
the auspicious touch of your hand,


69. O king, I wish to smell your head.
The clasp of your arms is highly gratify-
-jng to me.

qo. This is the eighth division of the
Gay and, therefore, the hour for taking my
food. For not having taken my food, O
Scion of Kuru’s race, | am so weak that I
Cannot move.


_7t. Great has been my ‘exertion while
soliciting you. Rendered cheerless by it,
O son, I Wad fainted.


72. O perpetuator of Kuru's race, {
think that receiving the touch of your hand,
which is like nectar in its vivifying effects
I have been restored to my senses,


Vaishampayana said :—~

73. ‘Thus addressed, O Bharata, by the
eldest brother of bis father, the son of
Kunti, from affection, gently touched every
pact of his body.

974. Regaining his life, king Dhrita-
rashtra embraced the son of Pandu with his
atins and smelled his head.


75» Vidura and others wept aloud in
great sorrow. On account, however, of the
poignancy of their sorrow, they said nothing
to either the old king or the sun of Pandu,


76. Gandhari, knowing evety duty, bore
her sorrow with patience, and loaded as
her heart was, O king, said nothing.


77. The other ladies, Kunti among them,
became greatly afflicted. They wept, shed-
ding profuse tears, and sat suriounding
the old king.


78. ‘Then Dhritarashtra, once more ad-
dressing Yudhishthica, said these words ;—
‘Do you, O king, permit me to practise
penances.

79. By speaking repeatedly, O son, my
mind becomes weakened. You should not,
O son, afflict me after this,


80. When that foremost one of Kuru’s
race was Saying soto Yudhishthira, a loud
sound of wailing arose from all the warviors
there present.


81—82. Seeing his royal father of great
splendour, emaciated and pale, reduced to


a state unworthy of him, worn out wih
fasts, and lvoking like a skeleton covered
with skin, Dharma’s son Yudhishthira shed
tears of grief and once more said these
words,


83. ‘O foremost of men, F do not wish
for life and the Earth! O scorcher of
enemies, § shail engage myself in doing
what is pleasant to you.


84. HI deserve your favour, if [ am
dear to you, do you eat something. I shalt
then know what to do.’

85. Gifted Dhrita-


ath great energy,

rashtra then said,to Yudhishthira,—-‘I wish,
O son, to take some food, with your per-
mission.


86. When Dhritarashtra said these words
to Yudhistthira, Satyavati’s son Vyasa
came there and said as follows,


CHAPTER IV.


- (ASHRAMVASIKA PARVA,)—


Continued.


| Vyasa said :—


1. O mighty-armed Yudhishthira, do
unhesitatingly what Dhritarashtra of Kucu’s
family bas said,


2. ‘his king is old. He has, again, been
made sonless. { think he will not be able
to bear his grief long.


3. The highly blessed Gandhari, endued
with) great wisdom and Kindly speech, bears
with fortitude her excessive grief owing to
the loss of her sons,


4. I also tell you (what the old king says.)
Do you obey my words. Let the old king
have your permission. Let him not die an
inglorious death at home.


5. Let this kiag follow the path of royal
sayes of old. Indeed, all royal sages retire
inte the woods at last.


Vaishampayana said :—

6—7.—Yhus addressed at that time by
Vyasa of wonderful deeds, king Yudhish«
thira the just, gifted with mighty energy,
said to the great ascetic these words,—
‘Your holy self is held by us in great re-


‘verence. You alone are our preceptor. You


alone are the refuge of this our kingdom
as also of our family. °


You, O holy one, are
my father! You are our king, and you are
our preceptor! ‘Ihe son should, as dic-
tated by every duty, obey the commands
of his father.


8. Iam your son.


ASHRAMAVASIKA PARV A, : 7


Vaishampayana said :—

_ g—to. Thus addressed by the king,
Vyasa, that foremost of all persons know-
ing the Vedas, that foremost of poets
gifted with great energy, once more said
to VYudhishthira these words,—‘ It is so, O
mighty-armed one! It is as yousay, O
Bharata! ‘This king has reached old age.
He is now in the last stage of life.


tr, Permitted both by me and you, fet
this king do what he wishes. Do not stand
as an obstacle in his way,


12, This is the highest duty, O Yudhish-
thira, of royal sages. They should die
either in batule or in the forest according to
the scriptures.


13. Your royal father, Pandu, O king
of kings, respected this old king as a dis-
ciple reveres his preceptor.


14. (At that time) he worshipped the
celestials in many great sacrifices with
profuse gifts consisting of hills of wealth and
jewels, and ruled the Earth and protected
his subjects wisely and well.


15. Having obtained a good number of
children and a prosperous kingdom, he en-
joyed great riches for thirteen years while
you were in exile, and gave away much
wealth.


16. Yourself also, O king, with your
servants, O sinless one, have worsltipped
this king and the famous Gandhari with
that ready obedience which a_ disciple pays
to his preceptor.


17. Do you grant permission to your
father. The time has come for him to
attend to the practice of penances. He
does not cherish, O Yudhishthira, even the
slightest anger against any of you.’


Vaishampayana said :—

18. Having said these words, Vyasa,
soothed the oldking. Yudhishthira, then,
answered him, saying,—' So be it.’ The
great ascetic then left the palace for pro-
ceeding to the forest.


19—21, After the holy Vyasa had de-
parted, the royal son of Pandu softly said
these words to his old father, bending him-
self in humility,—' What the holy Vyasa
has said, what is your own purpose, what
the great bowmen Kripa has ‘said, what
Vidura has said, and what has been asked
for by Yuyutsu and Sanjaya, I shall quickly
do. All these deserve my respect, for all of
them are well-wishers of our family.


22. This, however, O king, I beg of you
by bending my head. Do you first eat and
afterwards go to your forest-cetreat,’


CHAPTER V.


( ASHRAMVASIKA PARVA. )~
Continued,


Vaishampayana said :~

1. Having received the King’s permis
sion, the highly energetic king Dhritarastra,
then, went to his own palace, followed by
Ganohari.


2. With weakened strength and slow
motion, that highly intelligent king walked
with difficulty, like the leader, exhausted
with age, of an elephantine herd.


. He was followed by the highly learn
ed Vidura, and his charioteer Sanjaya, as
also that powerful bowman Kripa the son
of Sharadwata.


4. Entering his ‘palace, O king, he per-
formed the morning rites and, aftergpteasing
“many foremost of Brahmanas, he took some
food.


3. Gandhari knowing every duty, as
also the highly intelligent Kunti, adored
with offers of various articles by their
daughters-in-law, then took some food, O
Bharata.


6. After Dhritarashtra had é¢aten, and
Vidura also and others had done the same, -
the Pandavas, having finished their meals,
approached and sat around the old king,


7-8." Then the son of Amvika, O
monarch, addressing Kunti’s son, who was
seated near him, and touching his back with-
his hand, said,‘ You should always, O
delighter of the Kurus, act vigilantly about
everything connected with your kingdom
consisting of eight limbs, O foremost of
kings, and in which the claims of virtue
should ever be kept foremost.


g. You are, O son of Kunti, endued with
intelligence and learning. Listen to me, O
king, [ tell you what the means are by
which, Q son of Pandu, the kingdom is
capaple of being righteously protected.


to, You should always, OQ Yudbishthira,
honour those persons who are old in learns
ing. You should listen to what they would
say, and aet accordingly without any scruple.


11, Rising early in the morning, O
king, adore them with due rites, and when
the time comes for action, you should cons
sult them about your (intended) acts.


52, When, led by the desire of knowing
what would be beneficial to you about your
measures, you honour them, they will, O
son, always declare what is for your behoof,
O Bharata!


13. You should always keep your senses
as you keep your horses, They will then


8 MAHABHARATAL


prove beneficial to you, like riches that is
hot wasted, ©


4

14. Yeu should employ only those minis-
ters who have passed the tests of honesty,
who are hereditary officers of state, possessed
of pure conduct, seif-controlled,expert in the
discharge of business, and endued with
righteous conduct.”


15. You should always gather infor-
mation through spies in various disguises,
whose faithfulness have been tested, who
are natives of your kingdom, and who
should not be known to your enemies;


16. Your citadel should be properly
protected with strotig walls and arched
gates. On every side such walls; with
watch-towers on them standing close to one
another, should: be made as will admit six
personggwatking side by side gn their top,


17, The gatés shodld all be large and
sufficiently strong. Keptin proper places,
those gates should be carefully guarded.


1819. Let your putposes be accomplish-
ed through men whose families and conduct
are well-known, You should always pro-
tect your bedy also with. care in tmatiers
connected with your food, O Bharata, as
also in Ure hours of sport and eating and
itt matters connected with the garlands
you wear and the beds you lie upon. ‘The
ladies of your household should be ptoperly
ptotected, looked over by aged and trusted
servitors, of yood conduct, well-born; and
possessed of learning, O Yudhistithica,


20. You should make ministers of
Brahmanas possessed of learning, endued
with humility, well-born, knowing religion
and pceofit, and adecned with simplicity of
behaviour,


2t. Wou should hold consultations with
them. You should not, however, admit
many persons into your consultations. On
particulac occasions you may consult with
the whole of your council gr with a portion
of it.


22. Entering a chamber or spot that is
well- protected (from intcuders) you should
hold your consultations, You may bold
your consultation in a forest chat ts divested
oi grass. You should never consult at
hight tinre,


23. Apes and birds and other animals
which can imitate human beings should
alt be excluded from the council chamber,
as also idivts andlame and patsied indivi-
duals.


24. FT think that the evils which originate
from the divulpence of the counsels of kings
are such that they cannot be remedied,


a5. You should repeatedly refer, in tha
midst ef your counselors, to the evils me
arise from the divulgence of counsels,
chastiser of enemies, and tao the ee
which flow frem counsels properly kept.


26. You should, O Yudhishthira, act
in such a manner as to determine the merits
atid faults of the inhabitants of your city
and the provinces,


27. Let your Jaws, O king, be always
administered by ‘trusted judges placed int
charge thereof, who stioutd also be con-
tented and ef good conduct. Their acts
should also be asceitained by you througli
spies,


28. Let your judicial officers, O Yudhish-
thita, thete out punishments, according td
the law, on offenders after careful deters
mining the gravity of the offences.


29—30. ‘They who take bribes, they wha
are the violaters of the chastity of other
people’s wives, they who inflict heavy
punishnieats, they who are liars, they wha
ate revilers, they who aré stained by
cupidity, they who are murdeters, they who
are doets of tash deeds, they who are Ciss
turbers of assemblies and the sports of
others, afid they who bring about a con-
fusion of castes, should, according to cons
siderations of time and place, be punisned
with either flues or death.


31. In the morning you should seé those
who are employed in making your dis-
bursements. After that you should luck
to your toilet and then to your food.


32. You should next supervise yout
arms, pleasing them on every occasion.
You should devote your evenings to envoys
and spies,


33- The latter end of the night should
be devoted by you to settle what acts
should be done by you in the day. Mid-
nights and mriddays should be ‘devoted to
amusements amd sports. At all times,
however, you should think of the means
for the execution your projects<


34. At the proper tinte, adotning yout
body, you should sit prepared to make gifts
in profusion, “Fhe turns foc different deeds,
O son, ceaselessly revolve like wlreels.


35. You should do your best to fill your
treasuries of various kinds by fair means.
You should avoid all unlawful nreans for
that purpose, 2

36. Learning through you spies wha
your enemies fare who are bent on finding
out your shortcoming, you should, through
trusted agents, caue¢ theut to be ‘destroyed
from a A Aistaneey


ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA, 9


37. Examining their conduct, you should,

perpetualec of Kuru’s race, appoint your
servants. You should cause all your deeds
to be accomplished through your servitors
whether they are appointed for those acts
or not.


38. The commandant of your army
should be of firm conduct, courageous,
capable of bearing hardships, loyal, and
devoted to your well-being. *


39. Artizans and mechanics, O son of
Pandu, living in your provinces, should
always do your acts like kine and asses.


40. You should always, O Yudhish-
thifa, be careful to ascertain your own
shortcomings as also those of your enemies.
‘The shortcomings also of your own men
as also-of the men of your enemies should
equally be known,


41. Those men of your kingdom, who


are well-skilled in their respective callings,’


‘and are devoted to your yood, should be
patronized yby you with adequate means
of support.


42. A wiseking, O’chief of men, should
always see that the accomplishments of his
subjects might be kept up. They would
then be firmly devoted to you, seeing that
they did not fall away from their sleill,


CHAPTER VI.


(ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA. )—
Continued,


Dhritarashtra said :—

1. You should always ascertain the
Mandalas which belotig to you, to your
ehemies, to neutrals, and to those who are
disposed equally towards you and your
enemies, O Bharata.


2. The Mandalas also of the four kinds
of enemies, of those called Atatayins, and
of ailies, and the allies of enemies, should
be distinguished by you, O crusher of
enemies, 5


3. You should see that the ministers of
state, the people of the provinces, the gar-
tisons of forts, and the forces, O foremost
one of Kuru’s race, are not tampered with.


4. The twelve (enumerated above), U
son of Kunti, form the principal concerns of
kings. These twelve, as also the sixty,
having Ministers for their foremost, should
be looked after by the king.


5. Politicians call these by the name
of Mandala. Understand, O Yudhish-
thira, that the six incidents (of peace, war,


2? .


march, halt, sowing dissensions, and con«
ciliation) depend upon these.


6. Growth and diminution ‘should alsé
be understocd, as also the condition of
being stationary. The attributes of the
sixfuld incidents, O youof mighty arms, as
resting on the seventytwo (already enus
merated), should also be carefully under«
stood,


7. When one’s own side has become
strong and the side of the.enemy has be-
come weak, it is then, O son of Kunti, that
the king should fight against the enemy and
try lo acquire victory. :


8. When the enemy is strong and one’s
own side is weak, then the weak king, if
he has intelligence, should try to make
peace with the enemy.


9. he king should collect a large
quantity of articles (for his commissariat) .
When able to march out, he shouldson no
account make a delay, O Bharata. :


10, Besides, he should on that occasion
set his men to work for which they are fit,
without being moved by any other cons
sideration, Se should, (when obliged to
part with a portion of his territories), give
his enemy such land as are not productive
of a plentiful harvest. ,


(When obliged to pay ¢oins), he


1h.
should give gold containing much base
metal. (When obliged to surrender a


portion of his army), he should givé sicls
men as are not noted for strength, One
who is-skilled in treaties should, when taking
lard or gold or men from: the enemy,
take what is possessed of attributes the
reverse of this.


12—13- In making treaties of peace,
the son of the king should be demanded as
a hostage, O chief of the Bharatas. A
contrary course of conduct would not be
wholesome, O son, If a calamity come
over the king, he should, with knowledge
of means and counsels, try to liberate him-
self from it. The king, O foremost of
kings, should maintain the cheerless and
the destitute among his people.


tq. Himself protecting his own-kings
dom, the king, endued with great might,
should ditect all his efforts, either one
after another or simultaneously, against his
enemies. He should afflict and obstruct
them and seek to drain their treasury.


15. The king whe desires his . own
advancement, should never injure the sub~
ordinate chiefs who are under his sway. OQ
son of Kunti, you should never try your
strength with that kieg who is desirous of
couqueiing the whole Barth,


16


e


16.—17. You showld try to ‘steal a1
march by producing,. with the help your
ministers, dissensions among his artsto-
cracy and feudatory chiefs. A powerful:
king should never seek to root out weak
kings, for these do good to the world by
cherishing the good and punishing the
wicked. O foremost of kings, you should
live, conducting yourself like a cane.


“18. If a strong king advances against
a weak one, the latter should make him
desist, by adopting conciliatory and other
modes.


1g. If these measures fail, he should,
then, with the help of those who are inter-
ested in his welfare fall upon the enemy for
fighting him out. Indeed, with his minis-
ters, treasury and citizens, he should thus
adopt force against the invader.


ao. If the issue of the baitle turns against
him, be.should, then, fall, sacrificing al] his
resources one after another.


20, Renouning bis life in this way, he
will acquire freedom from all sorrow.


CHAPTER VIE.


(ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA,)—«
Continued.


Dhritarashtra said :—


1. O best of kings you should, also,
tefiect properly on war and peace. Each
is of two kinds. ‘The means are various,
and the circumstances also, under which
war or peace nray be made, are varidus, O
Yudhishthica.


2, O you of Kuru’s race, you should,
with coolness, reflect on the two (viz., thy
strength arid weakness) with regard to your-
self. You should not suddenly march
against an enemy who has contented and
healthy soldiers, and who is gifted with
intelligence. On the other hand, you should
idle carefully of the means of defeating

im.


3. You should march against an enemy
who is not provided with contented and
healthy combatants. When everything is
favourable, the enemy may be beaten.
After that, however, the victor should re-
tire.

4. He should next cause the enemy to
be plunged into various calamities, and
sow dissensions among his allies. He
should afflict the enemy and inspire terror
in his heart, and, attacking him, weaken his
forces.


+
N


MAHABHARATA.


5. Tha king, conversant with the’scrip.
tures, who marches against an enemy,
should think of the three kinds of strength,
and, indeed, reflect ot his own strength
and the strength of his enemy.


6. Only that king, O Bharata, who is
gifted with alacrity, discipline, and strength
of counsels should march against an enemv.
When his position is otherwise, he should
avoid offensive; works,


7. The king should provide himself with
power of wealth, power of alties, power of
foresters, power of paid soldiery, and power
of the mechanical) and trading classes, O
powerful one.

8. Among all these, power of allies and
powec of riches are superior to the rest.
The power of classes and that of the stands


| ing army are equal.


g. The power of spies is considered by
the king as equal in efficacy to either of the
above, on many occasions, when the tima
comes for applying each.


to. Calamity, O king, with which rulers
are overtaken, is of many forms. Listen, O
you of. Kuru’s race, as to what those varic us
forms are.


tt. Indeed, calamities, O son of Pandu,
are many. You should, always, count them,
distinguishing their forms, O king, and
try to meet them by applying the well-
known ways of conciliation and the rest.


12. The king should, when possessed of
a good army, march (out against a foe),
O scorcher of enemies. tte should, also,
mark the considerations of time and_ place,
while preparing to march, as also the forces
he has collected and his own merits,


33. That king who seeks his own growtlr
and advancement should not march unless
he has cheerful and healthy warriors.
When strong, O son of Pandu, he may
march in even an unfavourable season.


14% The king should make a _ river
having quivers for its stones, horses and
cars for its current, and standards for the
trees which cover its banks, and which is
miry with foot-soldiers and elephants. Suctr
ariver should the king apply for the des-
truction of his enemy.


15. Aceording to the science known ta
Ushanas, arrays called Shaketa, Padma,
and Vajra, should be formed, O Bharata,


| for fighting the enemy.


16. Knowing every thing’ about the
enemy’s strength through spies, andi éx-
amining his own strength himself, the king
should begin war either within his owm
territories or within these of his enemy,

ik


ASHRAMAVASIKA PARYA. Ye


17. The king should, always, plesse, his
army, and hurl all bis strongest warriors
(against the enemy). First determing the
state of his kingdom, he should apply con-
ciliation or the other well-krown means,


18. By all means, O king, should the
body be protected. One should do what
is highly beneficial for one both in this
world and in the next. | 7


19. The king, O monarch, by acting
properly according to these ways, attains to
Heaven hereafter, after ruling his subjects
piously in this world.


20. O foremost one of Kuru’s race, it is
thus that you should always seek the well
being of your subjects for attaining to beth
the worlds, a


at. You have been instructed in all
duties by Bhishma, by Krishna, and by
Vidura, TE should, also, O. best of kings,
from the affection | bear you, give you these
instructions.


22. O giver of profuse presents in sacri-
fices, you should duly do all this, You
shall, by acting thus, become dear to your
subjects and acquire happiness in the celes-
tial region,


23. That king who worships the celese
tials in a hundred horse-sacrifices, and he
who cules his subjects ‘piously, acquire merit
that is equal.


CHAPTER VIII.


(ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA, )—
Continued.


Yudhishthira said :-—


1, O king, | shall do as you order me.
O foremost of kings, I should be further
instructed by you.


2. Bhishma has ascended to Heaven,
The destroyer of Madhu, has departed (for
Dwaraka). Vidura and Sanjaya, also (will
accompany you to the forest). Who else,
therefore, save you, will teach me.


3. shall, certainly, follow those instruc-
tions which you have to-day given, desirous
of doing good to me. O lord of Earth. Be
you assured of this, O king.


Vaishampayana said :—

4. Thus addressed by the highly in-
telligent and just king Wudhishthira, the
royal sage, Dhritarashtra, O chief of the
Bharatas, wished te obtain the king’s per-


mission, n -


5. And he said,—‘Cease, O son. T have
been tired greatly.” Having said these
words, the old king entered the appact-
meats of Gandhari.


6—7. Pious Gandhari knowing the ope
portune moments, said these timely wards
to that husband of hers who resembled a
second Lord of all creatures, while resting
on a seat{:—‘You have got the permission of
that great Rishi, vis., Vyasa himself.
When, however, will you go to the forest,
with the permission of Yudhishthira ?


Dhritarashtra said :— |

8. O Gandhari, I have received the
permission of my great sire. With the per-
mission of Yudhishthira (next obtained), I
shall soon retire into the forest.


g. I wish, however, to give away some
riches capable of following the status of
Preta, for all those sons of mine who were
addicted to calamitous dice. Indeed, [
wish to make those gifts,) inviting all the
people to my palace, .


Vaishampayana said :—~

to. Having. sdid so (to. Gandhari),
Diritarashtra sent for Yudhisthira, . The
latter, ordered by his uncle, brought all tte
articles necessary,


rt. Many Brahmanas living in Kurue
jangala, many Kshatriyas, many Vaishyas,
and many Shudras faiso, came to Dhrita~
rashtra’s palace, with gratified hearts.


12. The old king, coming out of the
inner_apartments, saw them all as alse his
subjects collected together.


13—15. Seeing all those assembled and.
citizens and inhabitants of the provinces; and
bis well-wishers also thusicollected together,
and the large number of Brahmanas arrived
from vartots kingdoms, king Dhritarashtra
of great intelligence, O monarcli, said these
words :-—=jYe alt *and the Kurus have lived
together for many long tyears, well-wishers
of each other, and each doing good to the
other,


16. What I shall now say'in view of the
opportunity that has come, should be done
by you all even as disciples accomplish the
orders of their preceptors,


17. I have set my heart upon retiring
into the forest, along with Gandhart as my
companion. Vyasa has approved of this,
also the son of Kunti.


18-19. Let me have your permission
too. Do not hesitate in this. That good
will, which has always existed between you
and us, is not to be seen, [ believe, in other
kingdoms between the rulers and the ruled.


“38


1 am worn out with age on my head. I
am destitute of children.


20. Ye sinless ones,
with fasts, along with Gandhari. ‘The
kingdom having passed -to Yudhishthira,
L have enjoyed great happiness.


21. Ve foremost of men, I think that
happiness has been greaterfihan what I could
expect from  Duryodhana’s sovereingty.
What other refuge can | have, old as Lam
and destitute of children, except the forest ?
Ye highly. blessed ones, you should grant
me the permission [ seek.


22. Hearing these words of his, all the
residents of Kurujangala bewailed aloud,
O best of the Bharatas, with voices choked
by tears.


23. Desirous of telling those grief-
stricken people something more, the highly
energetic Dhritarashtra once more addres-
sed them and said as follows,


I am emaciated


CHAPTER IX.


(ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA.)—
' Continued.


Dhritarashtra said :—


1. Shantanu duly ruled this Earth.
Likewise, Vichitraviryya also, protected by
Bhishma, ruled you. Forsooth, you know
all this.


2. You know also how Pandu, my bro-
ther, was dear to measalsoto you. He
- also ruled you duly, :


3. Ye sinless ones, I have also served
you. Whether those services have come up
to the ideal or fallen short of it, you should
forgive me, foc I have attended to my
duties carefully,


4. Duryodhana also enjoyed his king-
dom without a thorn in his side. Foolish
as he* was and passessed of wicked
understanding, he did not, however, do any
wrong to you.


5. Through the fault, however, of that
prince of wicked understanding, and
through his pride, as also through my own
impvlicy, a great destruction of the Ksha-
triyas has taken place.


6 Whether I have, in that matter, acted
tightly oc wrongly, 1 pray you with joined
hands to remove all recollections of it from
your hearts.


7. This one is old; this one has Jost all
Nis children; this one is stricken with
sorriow; this one was our king; this one


MAHABAHRATA,


jis a descendant of former kings ;~—const-


derations like these should induce you to
forgive me.


8. This Gandhari, also, is dispirited and
old. She, too, has lost her children and is
helpless. Stricken with grief for the loss of
her hens, she solicits you with me.


9g. Knowing that both of us are old and
afflicted and destitute of children, grant us
the permission we seek. Blessed be you,
we seek your protection.


to, This Kuru king, Yudhishthira the
son of Kunti, should be looked after by you
all, in weal and woe.


tr. He who-has, four such brothers of
abunant prowess, for his counseliors will
never fall into distress. All of them are
conversant with both Virtue and Profit, and
resemble the very guardians of the world.


~ 12, Like the illustrious Brahman hime
self, the Lord of-the universe with all its
creatures, this Yudhishthica of great energy
will rule you. |


13. That which should certainly be said
is now said by me. I make over to you this
Yudhishthira here as acharge. I entrust
you, also, to the hands of this hero.


14. You should all forget and forgive
whatever injury has been done to you by
those sons of mine who are no tonger alive,
or, indeed, by any one else belonging
to me.


15. Ye never cherished any anger against
meon any previous occasion. I join my
hands before you who are famous for loyal-
ty. Here, 1 bow to you all.


16. Ye sinless one, I, with Gandhari by
my side, beg your pardon now for anything
done to you by those sons of mine, of rest-
less understandings, sullied by cupidity,
and ever acting as their desires prompted.’


17. Thus addressed by the old king, alt
those citizens and dwellers of the provinces,
filled with tears, said nothing but only
looked at one another,


CHAPTER X.
(ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA. j=


Continued.
Cc
Vishampayana said :—

1. Thus addressed, O you of Kuru'’s
race, by the old king, the citizens and the
inhabitants of the provinces stood somes
time hke men shorn of conscibusness,


ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA, 13


2—3. King Dhritarashtra, finding them
silent, with their throats choked by grief,
once more addressed them, saying,—' Ye
best of men, old as [ am, and sonless and
through cheerlessness of heart, bewailing
along with this my wedded wife, I have ob-
tained the permission, in the matter of my
retirement into the forest, of mv sire, the
Island-born iXrishna himself, as also of king
Yudhishtbira, who knows every duty, ye
tightecars dwellers of this kingdom.


5. Ye sinless ones, I, with Gandhari.
repeatedly solicit you with bent heads,
You should all grant us perntission,


Vaishampayana said :—

6. Hearing these pitiable words of the
Kuru king, O monarch, the assembled
dwellers of Kurujangala all began to weep.


7. Covering their faces with theie hands
and upper garments, all thosa men, burning
with grief, wept for a while as fathers and
mothers would weep.


8. Bearing in their hearts, from which
every other thoughts had been removed, the
sorrow born of Dbritarashtra’s desire to
leave the world, they looked like men shora
of consciousness,


g. Checking that agitation of heart due
to the announcement of Dritarashtra’s
desire of going to the forest, tLey gradually
were able to address one another, expres-
ing their wishes.


10. Settling their words briefly, O king,
they charged a certain Brahmana therewith
and thus replied to the old king.


uz. That learned Brahmana, of good
conduct, chosen by unanimous consent,
conversant with all subjects, master of all
the Richs, and named Samba, tried to
speak.


12. Taking the permission of the whole
assembly and with its full approbation, that
learned Brahmana of great intelligence,
conscious of his own powers, said these
words to the king.


13. ‘O monarch, the answer of this as-
sembly has been committed to my care.
I shall speak it out, O hero! Do you re-
ceive it, O king.


14. What you say, O king of kings, is
alltrue, O powerful ore, ‘There is nothing
in it that is in even slightly tinctured with
untruth, you are our well-wisher, as, indeed,
we are yours.,


15. Indeed, in this coyal family, there
never was aking who coming to rule his
subjects, became unpopular with them.


16. Ye have ruled us like fathers or


_capable of being counteracted.


brothers. King Duryodhana never did us
any wrong. .


17. Dothat, O king, which that righte-
ous-souled ascetic, the son of Satyavati,
has said. He is, indeed, our foremost of
instructors,


18 Left by you,’O king, we shalt have
to pass our days in grief and sorrow, ree
membering hundceds of virtues possessed
by you.

19 —20. We were well-protected and
tuled by king Duryodhana even as we had
been ruled by king Shantanu, or by Chitran-
gada, or by your father, O monarah, who
was protected by the prowess of Bhishma,
or by Pandu, that ruler of Earth, who was
overleoked by you in all his deeds.


21. Your son, O monarch, never did us.
the slightest wrong. We lived, depending
on that king as teustfully as on ¢tr own
father,


22. It is known ta you how we lived
(under that ruler). Similarly we have
enjoyed great happiness, O king, for thou-
sands of years, under the rule of Kunti’s
son of great intelligence and wisdom.


22—23. This cighteous-souled -king who
celebrates sacrifices with profuse gifts,
follaws the conduct of the royal sages of
old, belonging to your race, of meritorious,
deeds, having Kuru and Samvara and
others and the highly intelligent Bharata
among them. :


25. There is nothing, O monarch, that
is even slightly censutable in the matter of
this Yudhishthishta’s rule. Protected and
tuled.by you, we have all lived in great
happiness,


26-27. The slightest omission cannot
Be laid at your doors and your sons. Re-
garding what you have said about Duryo-
dhana in the matter of this destruction of
kinsmen, | beg you, O delightee of the
Kurus, (to Histen to me).’


The Brahmana continned :—


28. ‘The carnage that has overtaken the
Kurus was not caused by Duryodhana,
It was not bronght about by you. Nor
was it brought about by Karna and
Suvala’s son. -


29. We know that it was encompassed
about by Destiny, and that it was in-
Destiny is
not capable of being, resisted by human
exertion. :


, 30--32. Highteen Akshauhinis of sol-
diers, Q manarch, were collected. In eigh-
teen days that army was destroyed by the
foremost of Kuru warriors, véz., Bhishma


4t


and Drona and others, and the great
Karna, and the heroic Yuyudhana and
Dhritadyumna, and by the four sons of
Pandu, that is, Bhima and Arjuna and
the twins, This destruction, O king, could
nét bappen without the influence of
Destiny.


33- Forsooth, by Kshatriyas in particular,
should enemies be killed and death encoun-
tered in battle. By those foremost of men,
gifted with science and might of arms, the
Harth has been exterminated with he
horses and cars and elephants. .


35. Your son was not the cause of that
destruction of great kings. You were not
thé cause, nor your servants, nor Karna,
nor Savata’s son.


36. The destruction of those foremost
ones of Kuru’s race and of kings by thou-
sands, know, was engendered by Destiny.
Who can say anything else. in tliis.


37. You are regarded as the preceptor
and the master of the whole world. We,
therefore, in your presence, absolve your
righteotis-souted son,


$8. Let that king, with all ftis associates,
obtain the regions reserved for heroes.
Permitted by foremost of Brahmanas, let
him sport blissfully in the celestial region.


39. You, also, shall attain to great merit,
and unswerving steadiness in virtue. O
you of excellent vows, fellow fully the duties
laid down in the Vedas.


40. It is not fecessary for either you or
ourselves to Jook after the Pandavas, They
are capable of ruling the very Heavens,
what need then be Said of the Earth ?

4% O you of great intelligence, in weal


as in woe, the subjeets of this kingdom,
O foremost one of Kuru’s race, will obey


the Pandavas who have conduct for their |


ornament,


42. The son of Pandu makes those valu-
able gifts which are always to be made to
foremost of twice-born persons in sacrifices
and in obsequial rites, after the manner of
all the great kings of yore.


43. The great son of Kunti is mild, and
selt-controlled, and is always “disposed to
spend as if he were a second Vaishravana.
He has great ministers who attend on him,


44. He is compassionate to even his
enemies Indeed, that foremost one of
Bharata’s race is of pure conduct.
with great intelligence, he is perfectly
straightforward in his dealings and rules
and protects us like a father his children.


45- From association with him who is
the son of Dharma, O royal sage, Bhima


in-law)


Gifted 4


MAHABHARATA.


and Arjuna and others will never wrong us
in the least.


46. They are mild, O you of Kuru’s
race, to them that are mild, and fierce like
snakes of dreadful poison to them who are
fierce, Endued with preat energy, those
high-souled ones aré always devoted to the
well-being of the people.


47. Neither Kunti, nor your (daughter-
Panchali, nor Ulupi, nor the
Princess of the Sattwata race, willtdo the
least wrong to these people.


48. The affection which you have shown
towards us and which in Y¥Yudhishthira is
seen to exist in astill larger measure, is
incapable of being forgotten by the people
of the’city and the provinces.


49. Those powerful car-warriors, vis.,
the son$ of Kunti, themselves devoted to
the duties of virtue, will protect and cherish
the people even if these happen to be
unrighteous.


50. Do you, therefore, O king, removing
all anxiety of heart on account of Yudhish-
thira, set yourself to the accomplishment
of all meritorious deeds, O foremost of
men,


Vaishampayana said :—
‘ 81. Hearing these words, fraught with
virtue and merit, of that Brahmana and


approving of them, every person in that


assembly said,—' Excellent, Excellent’ and


r accepted them as his own.


52. Dhritarashtra, also, repeatedly speak-
ing highly of those words, slowly dismissed
that assembly of his subjects.


53- Thus honoured by them and looked
upon with auspicious looks, the old king,
O chief of Bharata’s race, joined his hands
and honoured them all in return.


54. He, then, entered his -own palace
with Gandhari. Listen now to what he
did after that night had passed away.


CHAPTER XI.


( ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA. )—
Continued,


Vaishampayana said :—

1. After that night had passed awiy,
Dhritarashtra, the son of Amyvika, sent
Vidura ta Yudhishthira’s palade.
~ 2—3. Gifted with great energy and the
foremost of all persons endued with intelli-
gence, Vidura, having arrived at Yudhish-
thira’s palace, addressed that foremost of |


ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA is


thet, that king of undecaying glory, in
these words :—'King Dhritarashtra has per-
formed the preliminary ,rites fer accom-
plishing his purpose of retiring into the
forest. He will start for the woods, O king,
on the coming day of full moon of the
month of Kartika,


5. He now solicits from you, O fore-
most of Kuru’s race, some money. He
wishes to perform the Shraddha of the
preat son of Ganga, as also of Drona and
Somadatta and Valhika of great intelli-
gence,
other wishers of his wha have been killed,
and, if you permit it, of that wicked king
of the Sindhus.


6. Hearing these words of Vidura, both
VYudhishthira, and Pandu’s son Arjuna of
curly hair, became very glad and applaud-
ed them highly,


7—9. Bhima, however, of great energy
and an unappeasable anger, did not accept
those words of Vidura in good Spirits, res
collecting the acts of Duryodhana. Under-
standing the thoughts of Bhimasena, the
diadem-decked Phalguna, slightly bend«
ing his face downwards, addressed that
foremost of men in these wogdsi— * O


Bhima, our royal father who is old, has


resolved to retire into the forest.


-10. He wishes to make gifts for ade
vancing the happiness of his killed kinsmen
and well-wishers now in the other world.
O you of Kuru's race, he wishes to give
away wealth that belougs to you by
conquest. :

11—13.° Indeed, O mighty-armed one,
it is for Bhishina and others that the old
king is desirous of making those _ gifts.
You should grant your permission. By
good luck it is, O you of mighty arms, that
Dhritarashtra to-day begs wealth of us, be
who was formerly begged by us. Mark
the reverses brought about by tine. That
king who was before the lord and protector
of the whole Earth, now wishes to go into
the forest, his kinsmen atd associates all
killed by enemies,
views deviate from granting the permission
asked, :


14. O mighty-armed one, tefusal, be-
sides bringing infamy, will yield demerit.
Do you tearn your duty in this matter from
the king, your eldest brother, who is lord
of all.

1§. You should give instead of refusing,
O chief of Bharata’s race!’ Vibhatsu whe
was saying $0 was applauded by king
Vudhishthira the just.


16-18. Yielding to -anger Bhimaséna
said these words :—‘Q Phalguna, it is we
+


and of all his sons as also of all


O king, tet not your®


.


that shall make gifts in the matter of
Bhishma’s obsequies, as also of king Soma-
datt@ and of Biufishravas, of* the royal
sage Valbika, and of the great Drona, and
of all others. Que mother Kunti shall make
such obsequial offerings for Karna. O fore
most of men, let not. Dhritarashtra petform
those Shraddhas. 7

|


1g. This. is what Ithink. Let not one
enemies be gladdened. Let Duryodhana
asd others sink from a miserable to a moré
miserable position.


go—2t, Alas, it was those wretches of
their family who caused the whole Earth to
be exterminated ? How have you been able
to forget that anxiety of twelve long years,
and our living in deep (forest #2 cognite
that was so painful to Diaupadi? Where
was Dhritarashtra’s affection for us then ?


22. Clad in a black deer-skin and
divested of all your ornaments, with the
Princess of Panchala in your company, did
you not follow this king ?


23. Where-were Bhishma and Drona
then, and where was Somadaita? You
had to live fer thirteen years in the
| forest depending on the products of the
wilderness,


2{—zs. Your eldest father did nat ther
look at you with eyes of parental affection.
Have you forgotten, O Partha, that it was
this wreteh of our family, of wicked undere
-standing, who- enquired of Vidura, when
the match at dice was geing on! What
has been won?’ Hearing thus far, king
Yudhishthira, the son of Kunti, eifted witts
great intelligence, rebuked hiny and told
him to be silent,


CHAPTER XII


(ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA. )}-#
Continued:


Arjuna said —-

1. O -Bhinta, you are my elder brotheé
‘and, therefore, my senior and preceptor.
dare not say anything more than what !
have already said. he royal sage Dhrita-

‘ rashtra deserves to be honoured by us i
every way.

z. ‘Ehey who are good, they whio are
distinguished above the common level, they
who break not the distinctions which
characterise the good, remember not the
‘wrongs done to them but only the benefits
they have got, :


i6 ’


_ 3-—§. Hearing these words of the great
Phalguna, thé righteous-souled Yudhish-
thira, the son of Kunti, addressed Vidura
and said these words,—' Instriscted by me,
© Kshattri, do you say to the Kuacu king
that I shall pive bim as much wealth from
iny treasury as. he wishes to give away for
‘the obsequies of his sons, and of Bhishma
and others among his well-wishers and
benefactors: Let not Bhima be dispirited
at this,


-Vaishampayana said =

6. Having said these words, king
Yudhishthira the just highly applauded
Arjuna, Meanwhile Bhinasena began to
east angry louks at Dnananjaya.


7. Then Yudhishthira, gifted with great
intelligence, ouce riore addressed Vidura
and said,—King Dbhritarashita should not
be angry with Bhimasena;


8. . This Bhima of great intelligence was
greatly afflicted by eold and rain and heat
and by a thousand other griefs while living
in the forest. All this you know.


Do you, however, instructed by me,
bay to the king, O foremost one of Bharata’s
family, that be may take fron) my house
whatever articles he wishes and in what-
ever measure also he likes.


10. You shail also tell the king that he
should not suffer his heart to remember this
show: of pride in which Biima, deeply
afflicted, has indulged,

tt. Whatever wealth E bave and what-
ever Arjuna has in bis house, the owner
thereof is king Dhyitarashtra. This you
should tell him.


12, Let the king make gifts to Brah-
manas! Let him spend as largely as he
likes, Let him liberate bimpelf from the


debt he owes to his sous and well-wishers,


13. Let him be told besides,—‘O monarch
this very body of mite is at your disposal,
and all the riches I have! Know this and
let there be no doubt in this,’


CHAPTER XIL.


(ASURAMAVASIKA PARVA. )—
Continued.


Vaishampayana said :—

1—2. ‘Thus addressed by king Yudhish-
thira, Vidura, that foremost of intelligent
persons, returned to Dhritarashtra and said
to him these} words of great significance,—
‘i at first reported your message to king
Yudhishthica, Reflecting on your words,


MAHABHARATA.


| Yudhishthira of
highly of them.


great splendour spoka


3. The highly energetic Vibhatsu, also,
places all bis palaces with all the ciches
therein, as also his very life-breaths, at
your disposal.

4. Your son, king Yudhishthira, too,
offers you, O royal sage, his kingdom and
life-breaths and riches and all else which
belongs to him.


§. Bhima, however, of mighty-arms, res
collecting all his numberless sorrows has
with difficulty given his consent, breathing
many heavy sighs.


6. That wighty-armed hero, O monarchy
was Solicited by the righteous king as also


by Vibhatsu, aud induced to treat you
cordially.
9—8. King Vudhishthira the just has


prayed you not to be displeased for thé
improper conduct which Bhima has shown
at the recollection of former hostilities.
This is generally the conduct of Kshatriyas
‘in battle, O king, and this Vrikodara is
devoted to battle and the practices of
Kshatriyas.

g—to. Both myself and Arjuna, O king;
repeatedly bey you for pardoningyVriko-
daca, Be gracious to us. You &re out
lord, O king, you can give away as you
like whatever money we have. You, O
Bharata, are the master of this kingdom
and ot all lives in it. .


ii—12, Let the foreriiost one of the Kuru
tace give away for the obsequial rites of
his sons, all those foremost of gifts whictt
should be given to the Brahmanas. Indeed,
let him niake those gifts to persons of the
twice-born caste, taking away from our
palaces jewels; gems, and kine, and slaves
both male and female, and goats and
sheep. Let gifts be made to also those
who are poor or blind or in great distress;
selecting the objects of his charity as he
likes.


13. Let, O Vidura, large pavilions be
made, rich with food and drink of various
tastes collected in abundance. Let reser-
voirs of water be made for enabling kine
to drink, and let other meritorious works be
done.’

14. These were the words said to me
by the king as also by Pritha’s son
Dhananjaya. You should say what should
be done next.


15. After Vidura had said these words,
O Janamejaya, Dhritarashtra, expressed his
satisfaction at them and made up his mind
for making large presents on the day of
full moon in the month of Kartikas


——


ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA,


CHAPTER XIV.


{ ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA. )—=
Continued.


Vaishampayana said :—

x, hus accosted by Vidura, king,
Dhritarashtra became highly pleased, O
monarch, with the act of Yudhishthira and
Johuw.


2—6. Inviting then, after proper exami-
nation, thousands of worthy Brahmanvas
and superior Rishis, for the sake of
Bhishnia, aS also of his sons and friends,
and causing a large quantity of food and
‘drink to be prepared, and cars and other
vehicles and clothes, and gold and jewels
and gems, and slaves both male and female,
and goats and sheep, and blankets and
tich articles .to be collected, and villages
and fields, and other kinds of wealth to be
kept ready, as also elephants and horses
‘decked with ornaments, and many beanti-
ful maidens who were the best of their sex,
Lat foremost of kings gave them away for
the behoof of the dead, naming each of
them in due order as the gifts were made.

aming Drona, Bhishma, Semadatta,
Valhika, and king Duryodhana, and each
one of his other sons, and all his weil-
wishers with Jayadratha as the first, those
Bilts were made in due order.


7. With the approvat of Yudhishthira,
that Shraddha-sacrifice became marked by
large gifts of wealth and profuse presents
of jewels and gems and other kinds of
riches.


8—9. Tellers and scribes on that
occasion, under the orders of Yudhishthira,
ceaselessly asked the old kKing,—Do you
command, © king, what gifts shoufd be
madé to these. All things are ready here!
As soon as the king spoke, they gave
away what he directed.

10. A thousand was given to him that
was to receive a hundred, and ten thotisand
Was given to him that was to receive a
thonsand, at the commard of the royal son
of Kunti.

ir. Like the clouds refreshing thé crops
with their downpours, that royal cloud
pleased the Brahmanas by downpours of
riches,

12. After all those gifts had been dis-
tributed, the king, U you of great intelli-
pence, then deluged the assembled guests
of ali the four dastes with repeated surges
of food and drink of various tastes.


13—14. Indeed, the  Dhritaraslitra-
ocean, swelling high, with jewels and genis
for its waters, *ich with the villages and


3


7


fields and other foremost of gifts making
its verdant islands, heaps of variows kinds
of precious articles for its rich caves,
elephants and horses for its alligators and
whirlpools, the sound of Mridangas for its
deep roars, and clothes and wealth and
precious stunes for its waves, deluged the
Earth,


15. [t was thus,’O king, that that monarch
made pifts for thebehoof,fin the other world,
of his sons fand grandsons and departed
manes as also of himself and Gandhari.


16. At last when he became tired with
the work of making such profuse gitts, that
great Gift-Sacrifice ended.


17. Thus did that king of Kuru’s race
celebrate his Gift-Sacrifice, Actors and
mimes continually danced and sang on the
occasion and contributed to the pleasuce of
all the guests. Food and drink of various
tastes were given away in profusion.


18. Making gifts in this way for ten
days, the royal son of Amvika, O chief of
Bharata’s race, became Ifverated from’ the
debis he owed to his sons and grandsons.


, eit


{ CHAPTER XV.


( ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA,)—
Continued.


Vaishamipayana said :—

1. Having ‘settled thé hour of his
departure for the forest, the royal son of
Amvika, 7g., Dhritarashtra, summoned
those heroes, the Pandavas. aa


2—3. Endued with gteat intelligence,
the old king, with Gandhari, duly accosted
those princes. Having caused the minor
rites to be-performed, by Brahmanas know-
ing the Vedas, on that day which was the
day of full moon ia the month of Kartika,
he caused the fire which he adored daily
to be taken up. Casting off his proper
dress he wore deer-skins and barks, and
accompanied by his daughters-in-law, he
feft bis palace,


4.. When the royal son of Vichitraviryys
thas started, the Pandava and the i€aurava
ladies as also other women belonging to the
Kaurava race, began to bewail aloud.

5. The king adored the palace in which
he bad lived with fried paddy and excellent
flowers of Various kinds. He also honoured
all his servants with gifts of wealth. and
then leaving that house set out on his
journey.


6. The, O son, king Vudhishthica,
trembling all over, with words choked by


38


tears, said these words in a loud voice,
vit.—'O yighteous king, where do you
xo ?’~-and’ fell down in a swoon.


qe Arjuna, burning with great grief,
Sighed repeatedly. That foremost of
Bharata princes, telling Yadbishthira that
he should not behave thus, stood cheerlessly
and with heart plunged into distress.


8. Vrikodara, the heroic Phalguna, the
two sons of Madri, Vidura, Sanjaya,
Dhritarashtra’s son by his Vaishya wife,
and Kripa, and Dhaumya, and other Brah-
manas, all followed the old king with voices
choked in grief. ~~


g. Kunti walked first, carrying on her
shoulders the hand of Gandhari who walked
with her bandaged eyes. King Dhritarash-
tea walked confidently behind Gandhari,
placing bis hand on her shoulder.


10. Drupada’s daughter Krishna, she
of the Sattwata race, Uttara the daughter-
in-law of the Kauravas, who had recemly
become a mother, Chitrangada, and other
ladies attached to the stoyal house, al} fol-
lowed the old king. ;


it. The wail they uttered at that time,
© king, from sorrow, resembled the loud
lamentations of a swarm of she-ospreys.
Then the wives of the citizens—Brahmanas
and Kshatriyas, and Vaishyas and Shudras,
also came out into the streets from all
sides,


12, At  Dhritarashtra’s departure, O
king, all the citizens of Hastinapore be-
came as distressed as they had been, O
monareh, when they had seen the departure
of the Pandavas in former days after their
defeat at tlie match at dice.


13. Ladies who had never seen the sun
Or the moon, came out into the streets on
that occasion, in great sorrow, when king
Dhritarashtra proceeded towards the great
forest.


CHAPTER XVI.


(ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA.)}—~
Continued, :


Vishampayana said :-—

1. Great was the uproar, at that time,
O king, of both men and women standing
on the terraces of palaces or on the Earth.


2. Endued with great intelligence, the
old king, with joined hands, and trembling
with weakness, passed with difficulty along
he priacipal street which was crowle d
with persons af bath sexes,


MAHABHARATA.


3. He teft the city of Hastinapur by
the principal gate, and. then repeatedly
asked that crowd of people to return ta
their homes.


4. Vidura had made up his mind for
going to the forest with the king. The
Suta Sanjaya also, the son of Gavalgani,
the chi f minister of Dhritarashtra, was of
the same heart. :


5. King Dhritarashtra, however, caused
Kripa and the powerful car-warrior
Yuyutsu to refrain from following him. He
made them over to Yudhishthira’s hands.


6. After the citizens had ceased follow.
ing the monarch, king Yudhishthira, wrth
the ladies of his house, prepared to stop,
at the command of Dhritarashtra.


7. Seeing that his mother Kunti was
desirous of retiring into the forest, the king
said to her,‘ 1 shall follow the old king.
Do you desist,


8. You should, O queen, return ta the
city, accompanied by these your daughters
in-law! ‘This king, goes to the forest,
determined upon practising penances.


9 Though king Yudhishthira said these
words to her, with his eyes bathed in tears,
Kunti, however, without answering him,
continued to go, catching hold of Gandhari«


Kuuti said :-—

10. Oking, never neglect Sahadeva. He
is very much attached to me, O monarch,
and to you also always.


tt. You should always bear in mind
Karna who never retreated from battle.
Through my folly that hero has been killed


| in the field of battle.


312. Surely, my son, this heart of mine
is made. of steel, since it does not break
into a hundred pieces at not seeing that


child born of the Sun-God.


13. When such has been the case, O
chastiser of enemies, what can I now do?
kb am very much to blame for not having
said the truth about the bicth of Surya’s
chitd.

14, Ocrusher of enemies, I hope yow
will, with al} youre brothers, make excellent
gifts for the sake of that som of the Sune


15. O mower of enemies, you should
always do what is agreeable to Draupadi.
You should look after Bhimasena and
Arjuna and Nakula and Sahadeva. The
charge of the Kurw race have now. fallen
on you, O king.


16. Ishall live in the forest with Gane
dhari,. besmearing my ly with filth, en.
f


ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA,


gaged in the practice of penances, and
devoted to the service of my father-in-law
and mother-in-law,


Vaishampayana said :—

17. Thus addressed by her, the virtu-
ous Yudhishthira, with passions under
complete restraint, became, with all his
brothers, plunged into great sorrow. Gifted
witht great intelligence, the king said not a
word,


18. Having thought for a moment, bing
Yudhishthira the just, dispirited and plung-
ed in anxiety and sorrow, said to his
mother, saying,—

19 What, indeed, is your object? Vou
should not do it. 2 can never grant you
permission! You should show us mercy.


zo. Formerly, when we were about to
leave Hastinapore for the forest, O you
of agreeable features, it was you who, re-
citing ta.us the story of Viduta’s instruc-


tions to her son, stimulated ws to exertion. f


You should not leave us now.


2t. Having killed the kings of Earth,
} have acquired sovereignty, guided by
your wise words communicated through
Vasudeva.


22. Where now is that understanding
of yours about which [| had heard from
Vasudeva? Do you wish now to deviate
from those’ Kshatriya practices about which
you had instructed us 7


23. Leaving ourselves, this kingdom,
and this iflustrious daughter-in-law of
yours, how will you live in the inaccessible
forest? Do you relent._


’

24. Kunti, with tears it her eyes, heard
these words of her son, but continued
to go ber way. ‘Then Bhima addressed
her, saying,—


25. When, O Kunti, sovereignty has
been acquired, and when the time has
come for you to enjoy that sovereignty thus
acquired by your children, when the duties
of toyalty await discharge by you, whence
has this desire entered into your mind ?


26. Why then did you cause us to
exterminate the Earth?) Why would you
leave all and wish to take up your residence
in the forest ?


27. We were born in the forest. Why
then did you bring us |from the forest while
we were children? See, the two sous of
Madri are ovecwhelined with sorrow and
grief,


28. Relent, O mother! O you of great
fame, do not go into the forest now! Do


you enjoy that prosperity which, acquired
. ’ iy <


19


by power, has become Yudhishthira’s
to-day,

29 Firmly resolved to retire into the
forest, Kunti disregarded these lamenta-


tions of her sons.


go. Then Draupadi, with a cheertess’
face, accompanied by Subhadra, followed
her weeping mother-in-taw who was proceed~
ing on from desire of going into the forest.


3t. Highly wise and firmly resolved on
retirement from the world, the blessed dame
watked on, frequently looking at her weeps
ing children, :


32. The Pandavas, with all their wives
and servitors, continued to folfow her.
Restraining then her tears, she addressed
her children in these words.


CHAPTER XVII.


( ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA.)—
Continued.


Kunti said :-—

t. What you say, O mighty-armed son
of Pandu, is, indeed, true! O kings, for-
merly, when you were all dispirited, indeed,
I excited you alt.


z. Seeing that youc kingdom was taken
away front you by & matel at dice, seeing
that yoo all felb from happiness, seeing that
you were governed aver by kinsmen, § ine
stited courage and high thoughts into your
minds,


3 O forensost of men, { encouraged you
so that the sons of Paudu might not be
tost, so that theic fame might aot be lost.


4. You are all equal to Indra. Youc
prowess resembles that of the very celestials.
f acted thus so that you might not live,
depending upon others,


5. 4 instilled courage into your hearts so
that you whe are the foremost of alt
righteous persons, who are equal to Vasava,
might not again go into the forest and —
five in misery.


x.

6. | instilled courage into your hearts
so that this Bhima who has the strength of
ten thousand elephants and whose prowess
and manliness are widely known, might not
sink into itisignificauce and tuia.


7. I instilled courage into your hearts '
so that this Vijaya, who was born after
Bhimasena, and who is equal to Vasava
binself, might mot be cheetless.


26


8. Linstitled courage into your hearts so
that Nukula and Sahadeva, who are al-
ways devoted to their elders, may not be
weakened and rendered cheerless by
hunger,


-@. I acted thus in order that this lady
ot well-developed forms and of large eyes
might not suffer the wrongs inflicted on her
in the public hall-without being aveuged.


to--tt. Before you all, O Bhima, trem-
bling all over like a plaintain tree duringfier
catamenial period, and after she had been
won at dice, Dusshasana, through folly,
dragged her as if she were a slave. J} knew
all this. Indeed, the family of Pandu had
been subjugated (by foes).


12. The Kurus, vzz., my father-in-law
and others, were cheerless when she,
desirous of a protector, bewailed like a
she-osprey,

13. When she was dragged by her fair


locks by the sinful Dusshasana without little
inttHigence, I lost my senses, O king. -


14. Know, that for increasing your
energy, L instilled that courage into yous
hearts by reciting the words of Vidula, O
my sons,


15. I instilled’ cotrage into your hearts,.


© wy sens, so that the family of. Panda,
represented by my children, might not be
lost. \


' 16. The sons and grandsons of that
persongwhojbrings a family to infamy never
succeed in acquiring the regions of the
righteous. Indeed, the ancestors of the
Kaurava race, were in danger of losing
those happy regions which had become
theirs,


' 27, As for myself, O my sons, I have,
before this, enjoyed the great fruits of that
sovereignty which my husband had won.

have made large gifts.
drunk the Soma-juice in sacrifice.


18. It was not for my own sake that
¥ bad urged Vasudeva with the sticring
words of Vidula. It was for your sake that
I had asked you to follow that advice.


19. Omy sons, I do not wish for the
fruits of that sovereignty which has been
acquired by my children. O you of great
pover, I wish to attain, by my penances,
to those happy regions which have been
acquired by my husband, ~e


20. By rendering obedient service to my
father-in law and mother-in-law both of
whom wish to take up their residence in
the forest, and by penances, I wish, O
Yudhishthira, to exhaust my body.


21. Do you cease to follow me, O fore-
Mivst one of Kuru’s race, along with Bhima


| into the forest,


I have duly.


MANABHARATA.


and others. Let your understanding he
always devoted to virtue. Let your mind
be always great.


CHAPTER XVIII.


(ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA. )—
Continued.


Vaishampayana said :—


4. Hearing these words of Kunti, the
sinless Pandavas, O best of kings, became


ashamed. .‘lhey, therefore, desisted, along
with the princess of Panchala, from followe
ing her. .


2. Seeing Kunti determined upon going
the ladies of the Pandavae
family uttered loud lamentations,


3. The Pandavas then went round the
king and saluted him duly. Fhey ceased
to follow further, having tailed to persuade
Pritha to return,


4-5. Then Amvika’s energetic son, 773.
Dhiitacashtra, addressing Gandhari and
Vidura and supporting himself on them,
said,—Let the royal mother _of YWudhish-
thira cease to go with us! What Yudhish-
thira has said, is all very true,


6. Renouneing this high prosperity of
her sons, abandoning those high fruits that
may be hers, why should she go mto the
inacéessible forest, keaving her children
like a person pf fittle intelligence ?


z. Living im the en} oyment of sovereignty,
she is capable of practising penances and
observing the great vow of gifts, Let her,
therefore, Hsten to my words.


8. OQ Gandhari, | have been much
pleased with the services rendered to me
by this daughter-in-law of mine. Conver-=:
sant as you are with all dutjes, you should
command her to return.


Qg ‘Thus addressed by her husband, the
daughter of Suvala repeated to Kunti all
those words, of the old king and added hee
own words of grave meaning.


to. She, however, conld not make Kunté
to desist inasmuch as that chaste lady,
devoted to virtue, had determined upon
living in the forest.


tr. The Kuru ladies, ‘understanding how
firm ber resolution was about her retire.
ment into the forest, and seeing that those
foremost ones of Kuru’s race (v¢z., their
own lords), had ceased to follow her, began
to bewail aloud, -


ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA.


t2. After allthe sons of Pritha and all
the ladies had returned homewards, the
higly wise king Yudhishithira continued his
journey to the forest.


13. The Pandavas, exceedingly cheer-
less and stricken with grief and sorrow
accompanied by their wives, returned to the
city, on their cars.


14. At that time the city of Hastina-
pore, with its entire population of men,
both old and young, and women, became
dispirited and plunged into grief. No
festivals of rejoicing were observed.


15. Afflicted with grief, the Pandavas
were shorn of energy. Abandoned by
Kunti, they were deeply afflicted with grief,
like calves destitute of their dams.

16. Dhritarashtra reached that day a
place far distant from the city. ‘The power-
ful king arrived at last on the banks of the
Bhagirathi and took rest there for the
night.


17. Brahmanas knowing the Vedas duly


ignited their sacred fires in that retreat of
ascetics. Surrounded by those foremost of
Brahmanas, those sacred fires shone forth
in beauty.
was also lighted up.


18. Sitting near his own fire, he poured
libations on it according to due rites, and
then adored the thousand-rayed sun as he
was on the point of setting.


1g. Then Vidura and Sanjaya madea
bed for the king by spreading some blades
of Kusha grass. Near the bed of that Kuru
hero they made another for Gandhari. —


zo. Near to Gandhari, Yudhishthira’s
mother Kunti, observant of excellent vows,
happily latd herself down.


2t. Within hearing-distance of those
three, slept Vidura and others. The Yajaka
Brahmanas and other followers of the king
laid slept on theic respective beds.


22. The foremost of Brahmanas, who
were there, chaunted aloud many sacred
hymns. ‘The sacrificial fires blazed forth
ali around. That night, therefore, seemed
as delightful to them as a Brahmi night.

23. When the night passed away, they
all arose from their beds and performed
their morning acts. Pouring libations then
on the sacred fire, they eonuinded theic
journey.


24. Their first day’s experience of the


forest proved very painful to them of
grieving hearts,—them -who were grieved
by the inhabitants of both the city and the
Ptovinces of the Kuru kingdom.


‘The sacred fice of the old king -


2k


\CHAPTER XIX.


(ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA.)—
Continued.


Vaishampayana said :—

1. Acting according to the advice of
Vidura, the king took up his residence on
the banks of the Bhagirathi which were
sacred and deserved to be inhabited by the.
righteous.


2. There many Brahmanas who had
taken up their residence in the forest, as.


also many Kshatriyas, Vaishyas, and,
Shudras, came to see the old king.
3. Sittiag in their midst, he esata


them all by his words, Having duly adored
the Brahmanas with their disciples, he dis-*
missed them all.


4. As evening came, the king, and the:
Mustrious Gandhari, both descended into
the stream of the Bhagirathi and duly per-
formed their abluuinds for purlly sa them-
selves.


5. The king aaa the queen, and Vidura:
and others, 2) Bharata, having bathed in
the sacred river, performed the ustial rites’
of religion,


6. After the king had purified himself
by a bath, the daughter of Kuntibhoja,
gently conducted both him who was to her
as her father-in-law, ‘and Gandhati, from
the water into the dry bank.


7. The Yajakas had made a sacrificial
altar there for the king. Devoted to truth,
the latter poured libations then on the fire.”


8. From the banks of the Bhagirathi
the old king, with his followers, observing
vows and with senses controlled, then pro-
ceeded to Kurukshetra.


g. Endued with great intelligence, the
king arrived at the hermitage of the royal
sage Shatayupa of great wisdom and saw
him.


ta, Shatayupa, O scorcher of enemies,
had been the great king of the Kekayas.
Having made over the ,sovereignty of his.
kingdom to his son, he had come into the
forest.


tt. Shatayupa received king Dhrita-.
rashtra with due rites. Accompanied by
him, the fatter went to the hermitage of
Vyasa,


12. Arrived at Vyasa’s hermitage. the
delighter of the Kurus received his tnitia-’
tion into the forest mode of life. Returning
he took up his residence in the hermitage
of Shatayupa,


22


13. The great Shatayupa_ instructed
Dhrjtacashtra in all the cites of the forest
mode, at the command of Vyasa.


14. Thus the great Dhritarashtra set
himself to the practice of penances, and alt
his followers also to the same course of con-
duct. ;


t5. Queen Gandhari also, O monarch,
along with Kunti, put on barks of trees and
deer-skins, and began to observe the same
vows as her husband.


16. Restraining their senses in thought,
words, and deeds, as well as by eye, they
began to perform severe austerities.


17. Shorr of alt stupefaction of mind,
king Dhritarashtra began to practise vows
and penances like a great Rishi, reducing
his body to skin and bones, for his flesh
was all dried up, bearing matted lecks on
head, and his person clad in backs and
skins. ;


_ 88, Vidura, conversant with the true
interpretations of Virtue, and gifted with
great intelligence, as also Sanjaya, waited
upon the old king with his wife. Both of
them with souls under control, Vidura and
Sanjaya alsa reduced themselves, and wore
barks and rags.


CHAPTER XX.


(ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA.)—
Continued.


Vaishampayana said :—


1. Those foremost of ascetics, v7s.,
Narada, Parvata and Devala of austere
penances, came there to see king Dhrita-
rashtra. :


2. The Island-born Vyasa with all bis
Gisciples, and other persons gifted with
great wisdom and crowned with ascetic suc-
cess, and the royal sage Shatayupa of ad-+
vanced years and possessed of great merit,
also came.


3. Kunti adored them with due rites, O
king. All those’ ascetics were highly
pleased with the adorations offered to them,


4. ‘Those great Rishis pleased the high-
souled king Dhritarashtra with discourses
on celigion and virtue. -


5. Atthe conclusion of their converse,
the celestial Rishi Narada, seeing all things
as objects of direct perception, said the
following words,

Narada said :—


t 6. There was a“ king of the Kekayas,
possessed of great prosperity and perfectly


MAHABAHRATA,


fearless. His same was Sahasrachitya
and he was the grandfather of this Shata-
yupa.

“ 7, Resigning his kingdom to his highly
virtueus eldest son, the virtuous king
Sahasrachitya retired into the forest.


8. Reaching the other end of blazing
penances, that king, gifted with great splen-
dour, attained to the region of Purandara
where he continued to live in his com-
pany.

g. On many occasions, while visiting the -
region of Indra, O king, | saw that mon-
arch, whose sins had all been consumed by
penances, living in Indra’s palace.


10. Similarly, king Shailalaya, the
gtandfather of Bhagadatta, attained to the
region of Indra by the power alone of his
penances,


11. There was another king, O monarch,
of the name of Prishadhra who resemble&
the holder of the thunder-bolt himself.
That king also by his penances proceeded
feom the Earth to the celestial region.


12. In this very forest, O king, that
king, vis., Purukutsa, the son of Mandhatri,
acquired great success.


#3. That foremost of rivers, vis., Nare
mada, became the consort of that king.
Having practised penances in this very
forest, that king proceeded to the cclestiak
region. .


14. There was another king, highly
righteous, of-the name of Shashaloman.
He, too, pecformed severe austerities in this
forest and then ascended to the celestial
region.


15. You also, O monarch, having are
tived at this forest, shall, through the grace
of the Island-born, attain to avery high
end and which is difficult of attainment.


16, You also, O foremost of kings, at the
termination of your penauces, shall become
gifted with great prosperity and, accom-
panied by Gandhari, attain to the end
reached by those great ones.


17. Living in the presence of the des-
troyer of Vata, Pandu thinks of you always.
He will, O monarch, certainly assist you
in the attainment of prosperity.


18. Through serving you and Gandhari,
this daughter-in-law of yours, possessed of
great fame, will attain to residence with her
husband in the other world.


tg Sheis the mother of Yudhishthira
who is the eternal Dharma. ‘We see all


“this, O king, with our spicitual vision.


20. Vidura will enter into the high-
souled Yudhishthica. Sanjaya also, through
€


“ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA.,


theditation, will ascend from this world into
the celestial region.


Vaishattipayatia said :—

at. That great chief of Kuru’s race,
endued with learning, having, with his wife,
heard these words of Narada, praised them
and adored Narada with unprecedented
honors, :


22, Theassembly of Brahmanas there
present became filled with great joy, and
desirous of pleasing king Dhritarashtra, O
monarch, themselves worshipped Narada
with great respect.


23—-24. Those foremest of twice-born
persons also lauded the words of Narada.
Then the royal sage Shatayupa, addres-
sing Narada, saidYour holy self has
increased the devotion of the Kuru king,
of all those people here, and of myself also,
O you of great splendour.


25. I wish to ask you something. Listen
to me as I say it. {tis about king, Durita-
rashtra, O celestial Rishi, that are adored
of all the warlds.


26. You know the truth of every affair.
Gifted with celestial vision, you behold, O
twice-born Rishi, what the various ends
are of human beings.


27. You have said what the end has’
been of the kings mentioned by you, vs., .


association with the king of the celestials.
You have not, however, O great Rishi,
declared what those regions are which will
be acquired by this king.


28. O powerful one, I wish to hear from
you what region will be acquired by the
royal Dhritarashtra. You -should tell me
truly the kind of région that will be his
and the time when he will attain to it.


29. Thus addressed by him, Narada of
celestial vision and endued with austere
penances, said in the midst of the assembly
He words highly agreeable to the minds

all, :


Narada said :—

30. Going at my will to the palace of
Shakra, 1 have seen Shakra the lord of
Sachi; and there, O royal sage, I have seen
king Pandu. _


gt. There isa talk arose, O monarch,
about this Dhritarashtra and those highly
austere penances which he is performing.


32. There I heard from the lips of
Shakra himself that there are three years
yet of the period of life of this king.  -

33. After that, king Dhritarashtra, ac-
companied by hig wife Gandhari, will go
to the regions of Kuvera and -be_ highly

’ : :


2$


honored by that king of kings. He will
go there on acar moving at his will, his
body adortied with celestial ornaments.


34-35. He is the son of a Rishi; he is
highly blessed; he has exhausted all his
sins by his penances. Gifted with a rightes
ous soul, he will roam at will through the
regions of the celestials, the Gandhatvas,
and the Rakshasas. [hat about which you"
have enquired, is a mystery to the gods.
Through my affection for you, Ihave said
this high truth,


36. You all are possessed of the wealth


; of Shrutis and have burnt all your gins by’


your penances, :


Vaishampayana said :--

37. Hearing these sweet words of the
celestial] Rishi, all the persons there assem-
bled, as also king Dhritarashtra, became
gteatly pleased.


38. Having cheered Dhritarashtra of.
great wisdom with such talk, they teft the
place, going away by the path that belongs.
to those who are crowned with success,


Salers


CHAPTER XX,


( ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA. )=
Continueds


Vaishampayana said:

1. Upon the retirement of the king of:
the Kurus into the forest, the Pandavas,
O king, afflicted besides by grief on account
of their mother, became very dispirited. .


2. The citizens. also of Hastinapore
were possessed by deep sorrow. ‘The Brahe
manas always talked of the old king.


3. How, indeed, will the king, who has
become old, .Hve itt the solitary forest 7
How will the higttly blessed Gandhari, and
Friis the daughter of Kuntibboja, live
there


4. The royal sage has always lived in
the enjoyment of every comfort.. He witl
certainly be very miserable. Arrived in
the deep forest, what is now the condition
af that personage of royal descent, who is,
again, bereft of vision ? :

5. Difficult is the feat that Kunti has
performed by separating herself from her-
sons. Alas, renouncing royat prosperity,
she chose a life.in the forest. :

6. What, again, is the condition of
Vidura who is always devoted to the


‘service of his elder brother? How also is


24


the intelligent Son of -Gavalgani who is
so faithful to the salt given him by his
master


7» The citizens, including even the
ininors, meeting together, asked one another
these questions.


8 The Pandavas also, greatly stricken
with grief, bewailed for their old mother,
and could not live in their city long.


9. Thinking: also of their old sicé, the
king, who had fost all his children, and
the highly blessed Gandhari, aiid Vidura
of great intelligence, they could not enjoy
peace of thind. _


t0. They had ho pleastire in sovereignty,
hor it wotreh, nor in the study of the
Vedas.

ti. Despair entered their souls as they
thought of the old king and as they repeat-
edly thought of that tertible’ destruction .of
kinsmes ;


‘ya—13. Indeed, thinking of. the des-


“truction of the youthful Abhimanyu on the


" field of battle, of the mighty-armed Karna


°


who fever retreated from fight, of the
sons of Dratpadi, aiid of other friends
of theirs, those heroes becartie highly dis-
pirited.

t4. They coild not get peate of tind
upon repeatedly thinking’ that the Earth
had. beconte divested of both her heroes and
her riches, :

18. Dratipadt had lost all het children,
and the beautiful Subhadra also“ had be-
come childless. They, too, wete of theetless
hearts and grieved greatly. ;

16. Seeing, however, thé son ‘af Virata’s
daughter, #$., your sire Patikshit, your
grandsires somehow lived.


CHAPTER XXIL. .


(ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA.)—
Cotitinued.
Vaishampayana said :—
1. Those foremost of men, the heroic


Pandavas,—those delighters of their mother
=became greatly stricken with gtief.  -


2. They who had formerly been always
engaged in toyal offices, did not at that
time attend ta those deeds at all in their
capital. :


3. Stricken with deep sorrow, they could
fot find pleasure from anything. If any
body asked them, they never honored him
with an answer,


MAHABHARATA.


4. Althotigh thdse irresistible herot’
Were grave like the ocean, yet they were
now deprived of their knowledge atid theit
very senses by the grief they felt.


8. Thinking of their mother, the sons of
Pandu became anxious as to how theic
emaciated titother was servittg the old
pair.

6. How, indeed, is that king, whose
sons have all been killed and who is without
tefuge, living alone, with only tiis wife, i
the forest haunted by beasts of prey ?


7. Alas, how does that highly blessed
queen, Gandhari, whose dear ones, have all
been killed, follow her blind husband in the
solitary forest.


8, Stich was thé anxiety shown by the
Pandavas when they tated with ore another,
They ther set their hearts upon beholding
the king in his forest asylum.


9g. Then bowing down to the king, Sahaa
deva said,—=' [ thitke yots wish to see out
sice,

to. Brom ty respect for you, however,
I could not speedily speak on the subject of
our journey to the forest. he time for
that sojourn is now tome.


tt. By good luck f stiall see f€untl pers
forming penances, with matted locks on het
head, practi8ing severe austetities, and emas
ciated by sleeping ott blades of Kusha aud
Kasha.


12. She Was brought tp fii palaces, and
ntirséd in every comifort and lugxary. Alas;
when shall L see my mother who is now toil-
wort atid plunged itito great misery.


13. Forsooth, O chief of Bliatata’s race,
the ends of men are eXceedingly uncértain;
since Kunti, who i8 a ptintess by birth, is
now living in misety. in the forest.’


14. Hearing these words of Sahadeva,-
queen. Draupadi, that forertiost of all women
duly honoring the king, said, with proper
salutations,


15. Alas, when shall f see queen Pritha,
if, indeed, she is alive! I shall consider
my life as not passed in vain if I succeed in
seeing her orice mote, O king,


16. Let this sort of understanding be
ever firm in you. Let your mind always
take a pleasure in such virtue as is involved,
O king of kiigs, in your desire of grant-
ing such a high boon on us,


¢ ;

17. Know, O king, that all these ladies
of yottr house ate staying with their feet
raised for the journey, from desire of seeing
Kunti: and Gandhari, and my father-in+


: lawe


ASURAMAVASIKA PARVAe ,


18. This addressed by queen Draupadi,
the king, O chief of Bharata’s race, eum-
tmoned all the leaders of his army to his
presence and told them.—


19. ‘Causemy army, fulf of cars and
elephants, to march out. 1 shail see king
Dhritarashtra who is now living in the
forest.’


20. To the officers in charge of the fadies’
ward, the king gave the order,‘ Let various
kinds of conveyances be properly equipt,
as also all my closed litters counting by
thousands.


ar. Let catriages and granaries and
wardrobes, and treasuries, be equipt and
ordered out, and let mechanics have the
command to march out, Let men in charge
of treasuries go out on the way leading to
the ascetic hermitage of Kurukshetra.


22. Whoever amongst the citizens wishes
to see the king, is allowed to do so without
any restriction, [Let him proceed, propecly
protected,


23. Let cooks and superintendents of
kitchens, and the whole culinary establish-
ment, and various kinds of edibles and
viands be ordered to be borne out on Carts
and conveyatices.


24. Let it be proclaimed that we march
out to-morrow. Indeed, let no delay take
place.. Let pavilions and resting houses
of various kinds be erected on the way.

25. These were the commands which
the eldest son of Pandu gave, with his
brothers. When morning came, O manarch,
the king started with a large following of
women and old men,


26. Going out of his city, king Vudhish-


thira waited five days for such citizens as |


might accompany him and then went to-
wards the forest.


CHAPTER XXII


(ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA ).—
Continued,
Vaishampayana said :—_
A. That foremost one of Bharata’s race,


then ordered his troups, which were protect»
ed by heroes who were headed by Arjuna,


and who resembled the very guardians of


the aniverse, t¢ march out.

2. Immediately a oud clamour arose
tonsisting of the words—'Equip, Equip’ !—
of horse-men, O Bharata, engaged in equip-
ping their horses, :

9


4


23
of


£ =
g. Some proceeded on carriages and
vehicles, some on quick-coursing horses,
and some on cars made of gold and efful«
gent like blazing fires.


4. Some proceeded on powerful elephants
and some on camels, O king. Some prow
ceeded on foot, which belonged to that
class of combatants which is armed with
tiger like claws.


5. The citizens and inhabitants of the
provinces, desirous of beholding Dheita~
rashtra, followed the king on various kinds
of conveyances,


6. The preceptor Kripa also, of Gotama’s
tace, that great leadec of army, taking
all the forces with him, proceeded, at tha
command of the king, towards thé old


| king’s fermitage.


g--8. The Kuru king Yudhishthiea, that


| perpetuater of Kuru’s race, surrounded -by
| a large number of Brahmana’s, his praises


lauded by a large band of Sutas and


| Magadhas and bards, and with a white


umbrella held ovee his head, and surtound+
ed by a large umber of cars, started on,
his journey,


9. Vrikodara, the son of the Wind-God,
went on an elephant huge asa hill, equipt
with strong bow and machines and weapons
of attack and defence,


to, The twin sons of Madri went on twa
quick-coursing herses, welt cased in mail,
well-protécted, and equipt with banners,


tt. Arjuna of great energy, with senses
under restraint, proceeded on an excellent
car effulgent like the sun to which were
yoked excellent white horses.


t2. ‘The royal ladies headed by Draupadi
proceeded in closed fitters protected by the
superintendents of women. They scattered -
showers of wealth as they went on. .


13. Teeming with cars and elephants
and horses, and echoing with the blare of
trumpets and the music of Vinas, the Patt-
dava army, Q monarch, shone with great
beauty.


14. Those chiefs of Kuru’s race pros
ceeded slowly, resting by detightful banks
of rivers and lakes, O monarch,


15. Yuyntsa .of great energy, and
Dhaumya, the priest, at the command of
Vudhishthira, were engaged in protecting
the city. ‘ee


16—17. By slow marches, king Yudhishe
thira, reached Kurukshetra, «and then,
crossing the Yamuna, that highly sacred
river, he saw from a distance the hermitage,
© you. of Kuru’s race, of the royal sage
of great wisdom and'of Dhritarashtra,


26. :


. 18 Then all the men became filled with
joy and gitickly entered the forest, filling
it with loud seunds of joy, O chief of


Bharata’s race. . s


CHAPTER XXIV.


(ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA. )—
, Continued.


Vaishampayana said:—

x. The Pandavas got down at a distance,
from their cars and proceeded on foot to
the hermitage of the king, bending them-
Selves in humitity.

2. All the combatants also, and the
citizens and the wives- of the Kuru chiefs,
followed them on foot.


3. Fhe Pandavas then reached the sacred |


hermitage of Dhritarashtra which abounded
with herds of deer and which was adorned
with plantain plants.


4. Many ascetics of rigid vows, filled
with curiosity, came there for seeing the
Pandavas who had arrived at the hermi-
tage. - :

5. The king, with tears in his eyes;
asied them, saying,—‘Where has my eldest
sire the perpetuater of Kuru’s race,
gone ? ; :


6. They answered, .O monarch, telling
him that he had gone to the Yamuna, for
his ablutions, as also fot fetehing flowers
and waters, :

7. Proceeding quickly on foot along the
path pointed out. by them, the Pandavas
saw all of them fromadistance. =.


"8. Desirows of meeting with their sire


they walked rapidly. Then Sahadeva ran
quickly towards the spot where Pritha
was, :


9. Touching the feet of his mother, he |
began to weep aloud. With tears running |


down her cheeks, she saw her darting
child, z
10. Raising her son up and embracing


him with her arms, she informed Gandhbart
of Sahadeva’s arrival. :

Ft. Then seeing the king Bhimasena,
Arjuna, and Nakula, Pritha tried to ad-
vance quickly towards then.


12. She was walking in advance of the
childless old pair, and was dragging them
forward, Seeing her, the Pandavas feil
dewn on the earti:.


43. ‘The powerful and the great monarch,
gifted with great intelligence, recognising


" amongst


MAHABHARATA.


them by -their voices and also, by touch,


comforted them one after another.


14. Shedding tears, those great princes,
with due formalities, approached the old
king ang Gandhari, as also their own
mother,


15. Indeed, regaining their senses, and
once more consoled by their mother, the
Pandavas took away from the king and
their annt and mother the jars full of water
which they had been carrying.


16. The ladies of those Jeading men,
and all the women of the royal household,
as also’ all the inhabitants of the city and
the provinces, then saw the old king.


17. King Yudhishthira presented all
those individuals-one after another to the
old king, repeating their names and fami-
lies and then , himself adored his eldest
sire with respeet.


18. Surrounded by them al}, the old
monarch, with eyes bathed in tears of joy,
considered himself as once more staying in
the midst-of the city of Hastinapore.


19. Saluted with respect by all his
dauyhters-in-law headed by Krishna, king
Dhritarashtra, gifted with great intelli-
gence, with Gandhari and Kunti became
filled with joy. ;

zo. He then reached his forest-retreat
which was highly spoken of by Siddhas
and Charanas, and that then was filed up
with vast crowds of men alk desirous of
seeing him, like the sky teeming with my-
tiads of stars,


CHAPTER XXV.


( ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA. }-<
Comtinied.


Vaishampayana said:— |:

3. The king, O chief of Bharata’s race,
with those foremost of men, vés., his bro~,
thers, who allt had eyes resembling lotus-
petals, took his seat iv the hermitage of bis
eldest sive.


2. There sat around him many highly-
blessed ascetics, coming front various ree
gions, from desire of seeing the sons of that
lord of Kurw’s race, vig., the Pandavas of
wide chests.


3. They said,—‘' We wish fo know who
these is Vudhishthira, who are
Bhima and Arjuna, who the twins, and who :
is the illustriows Draupadi ?” -


ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA. 27


4. Then the Suta, Sanjaya, in answer to ; earth, and whose eyes are as expansive as
their queries, pointed out to them the Pan- | lotus-petals, she is the wife of the eidest.
Gavas, naming each, and Draupadi too | son of Madravati.
as also the otter ladies of the Kururace. 15. This lady whose complexion is as


: a. -| fair as that of heated gold and who sits
Sanjaya said :— _| with her chiid on her ne is the daughter
5 This one fair like pure gold, who is‘} of king Virata. She is the wife of that
endued with a body which looks like that of Abhimanyu who, while divested of his car,
a full-grown lion, who is possessed of a | was killed by Drona and others fighting.
large aquiline nose, and wide and expans | from their cars.
sive eyes of a coppery hue, is the Kuru’ 16. These Eladies, "the hair on whose
king. . . heads shows not the parted Hne, and wha
6. This one whose tread is like that of | are clad in white, are the widows of the
an infuriate elephant, whose complexion is | killed sons of Dhritarashtra. ‘they are the
as fair as that of heated gold, whose frame | daughters-in-law of this old king, the wives
is of large and expansive proportions, and } of his hundred sons, now deprived of both
whose arms are long and stout, is Vrixo* | their husbands and children who have bee
dara, See him well. killed by heroic enemies,


7. The powerful bowmen who sits be- 17. 1 have now pointed them out in the
sides him, of darkish color and youthful | order of precedence. Qn account} of their
frame, who resembles the leader of an ele- | devotion to Brabmanas, theic understand-
phantine herd, whose shoulders are as high | ings and hearts are divested of every kind
as those of a lion, wha walks like a sporting | of cruotedness. Possessed of pure souls,
elephant, and whose eyes are as expansive | they have all been pointed out by men,—
as the petals of a lotus, is the hero called | these princesses of the {aurava line,—,


Arjuna. ‘ in answer to your queries.
8. Those two foremost of men, whoa are- j F
silting beside Kunti, are the twins. resem- | Vaishampayana, said :-— 1%


bling Vishnu and Mahendra. In the entire 18.. Thus that aged king of Kuru’s race,
world, they have not their equals in beauty | having met with those sons of him thac.
and strength and excellence of conduct. was a celestial among men, enquired
9. This tady having eyes expansive as | *bout their well-being after all. the ascetics
lotus-petals, who seems to have touched had departed,
the middle age of life, whose complexion 19. ‘The warriors who had accompanied
resembles that of the blue lotus, and who | the Pandavas, leaving the retreat, sat them-
looks like a goddess, is Krishna, the embo- | selves down at a little distance, getting
died form of the goddess of prosperity. down from their cars and the animals they
10. She who sits besidés her, possessed of ] rode. Indeed, after all the crowd, viz., the
the complexion of pure gold, who looks Jike | ladies the old ‘men and the children, had
the embodied rays of the moon, in the midst’| been seated, the old king duly addressed
of other ladies, O foremost of twice-born | them after making the usual polite en-
ones, si the sister that unrivalled bero who | Quittes.
holds the discus. ‘ .


11. This other, as fair as ie gold, is
the daughter of the Naga king and wife of ed
Arjuna. This other whose complexion ‘is like |- ' CHAPTER XXVI.
that of pure gold or like that of Madhuka Se olacs ;
flowers, is the princess Chitrangada. “8 (ASHRAMAVASI KA PARVAJ-~
Continued.


12, This one, whose complexion is like |- 5
an assemblage ef blue lotuses, is the sister . 1 oF eee
of that monacch, that. lord of hosts, who Dhritarashtra said: a .
used to always challenge Krishna. She is. ra oO Yudhishthira, are you in peace and
the foremost wife of Vrikodara. happiness, with all your ‘brothers ‘and the

. ae : - dwellers of the city ‘and the provinces ? ;

-2, Afe they who depend on you ‘also”
happy? Are your ministers, and servitors,
and, all youe seniors and preceptors also,
happy?
: ae fj sm 3. ‘Are those also who five in your king-
utd: Possessed of a complexian dark as| dom free-from fear? Do you follow.the,
the blue lotus, she who sits there on the| old and traditional conduct of kings? +


fae


43. This is the daugbter-of tre king of
Magadha who was known.by the name of
jarasandha. Possessed of the. complexion:
of. an assemblage of Ghampakas, shé is the:
wife of the yaungest son of M.dravati.


08


4. Is your treasury filled without dis
‘regarding the restraints imposed by justice
and equity ?. De you behave as you should
towards foes, neutrals, and allies ?


' 5--6. Do you duly look after the Brah-
manas, always making them the first gifts?
‘What need I say of the citizens, and your
servants, and kinsmen, are your foes, O
chief of Bharata’s race pleased with your
conduct? Do you, O king of kings, adore
with devotion the Pitris and the deities ?


7- Do you adore guests with food and
@rink, O Bharata? Do the Brahmanas in
yout kingdom perform the duties of their
order, walk along the path of virtue ?


8, Do the Kshatriyas and Vaishyas and
Shudras also within your kinkdom, and all
your relatives, perform their respective
duties? I hope the women, the children,
and the old, among your subjects, do not
grieve (under distress) and not beg (the
Nceessaries of life).


. 9 Are the ladies of your household duly
honoured in your house, O best of men?
} hope, O. king, that this race of royal
sages, having got you for their king, have
not fallen away from fame and glory ?


Vaishampayana said :—

t se. Yo the old king who said so, Yudhish-
thira, knowing morality and justice and
well-skilled in acts and speech, spoke as
follows, putting some questions about his
well-being.


Yudhishthira said :—

tt. Does your peace, O king, your self-
control, your tranquillity of heart, grow ?
Is this my mother able to serve you without
fatigue and trouble.


12—13. ‘Will, O king, her residence in
the forest yield ftuit? % hope this queen,
who is my eldest mother, who is emaciated
with (exposure to cold and wind and the
toil of walking, and who is now given to the
practice of severe austerities, no longer
yields to grief for her children of great
energy, all of whom performing the duties
of the Kshatriyas, have been killed on the
field of battle.


14. Does she accuse us, sinful wretches,
who are responsible for their destruction?
Where is Vidura, O king? We do not see
him here. I hope this Sanjaya, performing
enances, is in peace and happiness.


Vaishampayana said :—~

15—16.
answered king Yudhishthira, saying,-—O
son, Vidura is well. Heis practising aus-
tere penances, living on air aleac, for he


Thus addressed, Dhritarashtra,-


MAHABHARATA.


abstains from all other food. He is ema-
ciated and his arteries and nerves have
become visible. Sometimes he ts seen in
this empty forest by Brahmanas.


17. While Dhritarashtra was saying this,
Vidura was seen at a distance. He had
matted locks on his head, and gravels in his
mouth, ‘and was greatly emaciated. He
was perfectly naked. His body was be-
smeared all over with filth, and with the
dust of various wild flowers,


18. When Kshattri, was seen from a
distance, the fact was communicated to
Yudhishthira. Vidura suddenly stopped,
O king, looking towards the retreat.


19. King Yudhishthira pursued him
alone, as he ran and entered the deep forest,
sometimes seen and sometimes not seen by
the pursuer, .


20. He said aloud.—'O Vidura, O
Vidura, f,am king Yudhishthira, your
favourite’—Exclaiming thus, Wudhishthira,
with great exertion, followed Vidura.

at. Hlaying reached a solitary spot in
the forest, that foremost of intelligent men,
vis., Vidura, stood still, leaning against a
tree,


22. He was greatly emaciated. Ue re-


tained only tre shape of a human being.


Yodbishthira of great intelligence recog-


.wised him, however.


23. Standing befere him, Yudhishthira


‘addressed him saying,—' ! am Yudhish~


thira.’ Indeed, adoring Vidura property,
Yudhishthira said these words in the
hearing of Vidura.


24. Meanwhile Vidura looked at the
king steadfastly. Casting his took thus en
the king, he stood motionless in Yoga.


25. Endued with great intelligence, he
then (by his Yoga- power) enteted the body
of Yudhishthira, limb by limb. He anited
his vital airs with those of the king, and
his senses with the king’s senses,


26, Indeed, with the help of Yoga-power,
Vidura, burning with energy, thus entered
the body of king Yudhishthira the just.


27. Meanwhile, the body of Vidura con-
tinued to lean against the tree, with eyes
fixed. The king soon saw that liie had
fled out of it.


28—29. -At the same time, he felt that he
himself had become stronger than before
and that he had gained many additional
virtues and accomplishments: Gifted. with


‘great learning, and energy, O monarch,


Pandu’s ‘s6n, Xing Yudhishthica the just, |
then cecoliétted his own state before his
birth among men, ‘Possessed of mighty


ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA.


energy, he had heard of Yoga practice from
Vyasa.

go—zt. King Yudhishthira the just,
eudued with great learning, became desir-
ous of doing the last rites to the body of
Vidura, and wished to cremate it duly. An
invisible veice was then heard, saying,—'O
king, this body which belonged to him
called Vidura should not be cremated, In
him is your body also. He is the eternal
deity ef Virtue.


32. Those happy regions which pass by
the name of Santanika will be his, O Bha-
rata. He pertormed the duties of Yatis.
You should not, O scorcher of enemies,
grieve for him at all.


33. Thus addressed, king Yudhishthira
the just returned from the place, and repre-
sented everything to the royal son of Vichi-
traviryya.


34. At this, that effulgent king, all those
men, and Bhimasena and others, became
filled with wonder.


35- Hearing what had taken place, king
Doritarashtra became pleased and then,
addressing the son of Dharma, satd,—‘Do
you accept from me these gifts ef water
and roots and fruits! It has been said,
O king, that one’s guest should take what
one takes himself.’


36. Thus addressed, Oharma’s son
answered the king, saying—‘So be it? The
mighty-armed king ate the fruits and roots
which he gave.


37. Then the
under a tree an
having eaten. fruits and roots and drunk

«the water that the old monarch had given
_ them. 2 ;


all. spread their beds


CHAPTER XXVIII.


(ASHRAMAVASIKA P ARVA.)—
Continued.


Vaishampayana said :—


1. They passed that night which was
marked out by auspicious constellations
thus, O king, in that hermitage of pious
ascetics, ; : ;


2. The conversation that took place was
marked by many reflections on morality
and wealth. Consisting of delightful and
sweet words, it was graced with various
citations from the Shrutis,

3. The Pandavas, O king, leaving cost!
beds, laid themselves down, near their
a other, on bie naked earth, _


passed that night thus-


29.


4 Indeed, those herors passed Unat -
night, having eaten the food which was the
food of the great king Dhritarashtra.


5. After the night had passed away,
king Yudhishthira, having performed his
morning rites proceeded to survey that
hermitage in the company of his brothers.


6. With the royal ladies, the servants,
and bis priest, the king coved about the
hermitage in all directions as he pleased,
at the command of Dhritarashtra,


yg. Hesaw many Sacrificial altars with
sacred fires burning on them and with
many ascetics seated on them, who had
performed their oblations and poured liba«
tions in honour of the ceestials,


8. Those altafs were covered with fruits
and roots of the forest, and with heaps of
flowers, ‘The smoke of clarified butter
curled upwards from them. ‘They were
graced, besides, with many ascetics pos-
sessed of bodies which appeared like the
embodied Vedas and with many laymen.


9. Herds of deer were grazing or rests
ing here and there, shorn of fear, Counte,,
less birds also were there, engaged in
uttering their sweet notes, O king !


10. The entire forest seemed to resound
with the notes of peacocks and Datyuhas
and Kokilas and the sweet songs of other
warbiers.


11. Some spots were echoed with the
chaunt of Vedic hymns recited by learned.
Brahmanas. Some were adorned with large
heaps of fruits and roots gathered from
the forest. |


12-13. King Yudhishthira then distet
buted amongst those ascetics golden or
copper jars which he had brought for them, |
and many deer-skins and blankets and
wooden sacrificial ladles and Kamandalus
and woeden platters, aud pots and pans,
O Bharata. j


- 14. Various kinds of vessels, made of
iron, and saaliler vessels and cups of
various sizés, were also given away by the
king, the ‘ascetics taking them away, each
as many as he liked.


15. Pious king Yusdhishthira, having
thus roved through the forest and seen the
various retreats of ascetics and made many
gifts, returned to the place where his uncle
was, ;

16. He saw king Dhritarashtra, seated
at ease, with Gandhari besides him, aftee
having finished bis morning rites.


17. The righteous-souled nionarch be-
held also his mother, Kunti, seated not.


30


much remote from that place; Iike a disetple
with bent head, gifted with humility.

18. He saluted the old king giving his
name. ‘Sit down,’ were the woyis ihe old
king said. With Dhritarasltra.'s permis.
sion, Yudhishthira sat himself. down ona
mat of Kusha grass.


19, Then the other sons of Pandu with
Biima among them, you of ,Bharata’s
race, saluted the king and touched-his feet
and sat themselves down, with his order,


‘a0. The old Kuru king, surrounded by.


them_looked highly beautiful, Indeed, he
blazed with a Vedic splesdour like Verihas-
pati in the midst of the celestials.


21. After they had satthemselves down,
Many great Rishis, vts.,, Shatayupa, and


others, wha were inhabitants of Kurukshetra °


came there.


az, ‘The: illustriows and leartted' Vyasa,
gifted with great energy and respectéd
by even the celestial Rishis, showed himself
at the héad of his numerous disciples to
VYudhishtbira. : es


“23. The Kuru king Dhritarashtra,


Kunti’s son Yudbishthira of great energy, ~


and Bhimasena and others, stood pp and
yoing a few steps, saluted those guests.”

24. Approaching near, Vyasa, sucround-
ed vy. Shatayupa and others, addressed
king Diritrashtra, saying,—‘Be seated,’

"25. The-illustrious “Vyasa then took dn
excellent seat made of Kusha ‘grass placed
upon a black deer-skin and covered with
a piece of ‘silken cloth. They ‘liad reserved
that seat for him.


26 After Vyasa had been seated. All those
foremost of twice-born persons, gifted with
profuse energy, sat themselves” down, with
the permission of Krishna- Dwaipayana.


$ ememerne


CHAPTER XXVIHE.


(ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA. )—-
; Continued.


Vaishampayana said :—-

1—2z. After the noble Pandavas had,all
been seated, Satyavati’s son Vyasa said,—
‘O Dhritarashtra of -mighty-arms, have you
been able to achieve penances? Is your
mind, O king, pleased with ‘your living -in
the forest ? : te Ee

3. Has your grief begotten of the des-
truction of your sons in battle, . disappeared
frém_ your heart? Arce. all yeur-.perceps
tious, Qsinléss one, now clear ? ~


prove Painful ,to you?


’" MAHABHARATA.


4 Do you prastise the ordinances of
forest-life after having made your heart
firm? Dees my daughter-in-law, Gane
dhaci, suffer herself to be overwhelmed by
grief ?


.§. .She is endued with great - wisdom.
Endued with intelligence, that queen under-
stands both virtue and profit. Sne is well
conversant with the truths which relate to
both prosperity and adversity. Dues she
still grieve 7


64. Does Kunti, O king, who for her
deyation to the service of her seniors, left
her children, attend to your wants and
serve you with all humility?


. 9% Have ‘the high-minded and great
king. Yudbishthica, the son of, Dnarcma, and
Bhima: and, Arjuna, and the, twins, beer
sufficiently comforted ? :


8. Do, you feel delight at seeing them 7
Has, your mind become, freed from every
Steain? Flas your disposition, O king, bee
come pure. on account of the increase of
‘your knowledge ? ne


9. These three, -O king, are the fore-
vis ,,


most..of all concerns, O Bharata,


,


abstension fram injury, to any ‘creation, ,


truth, and freedom trom anger.

ro. Does your forest-life any longe™
Are you able to
acquire: with your own exertions the pro-
ducts of the forest, for your food? Do
fasts pain you now ? ‘


au.: Have you, learnt ‘0 king, how the
great Vidura, who was Dharma’s self, lefe
this world 7 ;


uz... Through the ‘curse . of, Mandavya,
the deity of Virtue became born as Vidura.
He was gifted with great intelligence.


‘Endued with high penances, he was great


and high-minded.


13. Even }Vrihaspati. among the celes-
tials, and Shukra among the Asuras, had
not intelligence like that foremdst of persons.


14. The eternal ‘deity’ of Virtue was


stupefied by the Rishi Mandavya with an.


expenditure of his penances ‘acquired for a
long time with great.cares -- , i .


‘15., At the command of the grandfather
and through my ‘own energy, the highly
intelligent Vidura was procreated by me
upon“a sail owned by ;Vichitraviryya. ~
~ 16 | A deity. of deities, and eternal, he
wae,:0; king, your brothers The learned.
know him to be, Dharma on account, of,
his practices ef concentration and abstrac-
tion, ae ae ft , * = wr

t7. He grows, with truth, self-restraint,.
tranquility of heart, mercy, andegifts, He


ASHRAMAYASIKA PARVA,


$ always engaged in penances,
eternal,


18. From that deity of Virtue, through
Yoga-Power, the Kuru king Yudhishthira
also took his birth, YWudhishthira, there.
fore, O king, is Dharnrva of great wisdom
and immeasuraple intelligence.


13, Dharma exists both in this world
and in the next, and is like fire oc wind or
water or earth or space. ’ :

20. He is, O king of kings, capable of
going everywhere and exists, pervading the
entire universe. He is capable of being


and is
t


seen by only those who are the foremost of,


the deities and those who are purged of
every sin and crowned with ascetic success.,


2t. He who is Dharma, is Vidura; and
he who is Vidura is the (eldest) son of
Pandu. ‘That son ef Pandu, O king, is
capable of being perceived by ‘you, He is
before you as your servitor, ;


22. Gifted with great Yoga-Power, your
high-souled brother, that foremost of in-
telligemt men, seeing the  high-souled
Yudhishthira, the son of Kunti has entered
into his body.


23. O chief of Bharata’s race, 1 shalt
unite you also with great benefit, Know, O
son, that 1 am come here for removing your
doubts. / ;


24. U shall show you some feat which has
never. been accomplished before by any of
the great Rishis—some wonderful effect of
my penances, eee,

25. What object is that, O king, whose
accomplishment you wish from me? Tell
me what is that which you Wish to see oc
ask or hear? O sinless one, | shall accom-
“plish it. oa ;


‘CHAPTER XXIX.


(PUITRADARSHANA PARVA)» |.


Sananicjay'a said:— | a.*. <6

t—3. Tell me, O learned Brahman, what
that wonderful feat was, witich' the great
Rishi Vyasa of great energy’ accomplished
after hé had his made promise to the old king,
when Dhritarashtca, that’ foremost one of
Kuru’s ‘race, ' had taken up his residence in


the forest, with his wife, and with his daugh- -


ter-in-law Kunti; and after, indeed, Vidura
had leit his own body and entered into
Yudhishthira, and at the time. when all the
sons of Pandy were living in the hermitage.

4. For tow many days did the Kury
king Yudhishthira of undecaying glory, stay
with his men in the forest. :


a.


5. Of what food, O powerful one, did the
great Pandavas support thernseives wittt
their men, and wives, while they lived in the
forest? O sinless one, dd you tell me this.


Vaishantpayaua said :—=.

6—7. With the permission of the Kura
king, the Pandavas, O monarch, with their
troops and the Jadies of their househoid,
lived on: ‘various kinds of food and drink
and passed about a month in great happi-
ness *in' that forest. fowards the close of
that period, O sinless one, Vyasa came
there, ' ' :


8... While all, those princes sat ‘around
Vyasa, engaged in conversation on various
topics, other Rishis came there,


_g. . They were Narada, -Parvata, Devala
of austere penances, Vishwavasu, Tumvuru, -
and Chitrasena,,.O Bharata.


10. Gifted with severe petances, the
Kuru king -Yudhishthira,; with’ the: permis
sion of Dhritarashtra, adored them accords
ing to'due rites. tig

tt. Having got that worship from
Yudhishthira, all of them sat down on ”
sacred seats (made of Kusha grass as also
on excellent seats made of peacock feathers, -


126 After they had all been -geated, the


“Kuru king of great intelligeuce took his


seat: there, surrounded. by the sons of
Pandu, :


' 43. Gandhari, Kunti and Draupadi, and
she of thie Sattwata race, and othrr tadies
of the’ royal household also sat down. ;


_ 14. The conversation which then arose
was excellent and had reference to subjects,
connected with piety, and the Rishis of old; -
and the celestials and the Asuras, 3


15—21. ..At the close of that conversation
the highly energetic Vyasa, that foremost
of eloquent men, that, first of all persons
knowing the .Vedas, highly pleased, ade
dressed the blind ntonarch and once more
said.—s' Burning as. you are with grief on
account of your children, | know, O king of -
kings, what object is cheristred by you tt
your heart. {£ know ‘the sorrow which
always exists to the heart of Gindhari, that,
which exists in the heart-of Kunti, and that
also which is cherished by Draupadi in her
heart, and that burning gcief, on account af
the death of her son, which Krishna’s sister
Subhadra also cherishes. Hearing of this
meeting, O' king, of yours with all these
princes'and princésses of your house, | have
comié ttete, O delighter of the Mauravas, for
removing your doubts. Let the eelestials
and Gandharvas and all these preat Rishis, .
see to-day the energy of those penances
F +, ot a reas 4 ag at es


~


-


whieh f have acquired for these long years.
Therefore, QO king, tell me what wish of
yours I shall grant to-day.


2223. Lam powerful enough to grant
you a boon, See the fruit of my penantes,’
‘Thus addressed by Vyasa of great under-
standing, king Dhritarashtra thoughe for
a moment and then prepared to speak.
He said,—'f am yreatly fortunate. Lucky
am I in obtaining your favour. - My life
{is crowned with suécess to-day,—=since this
theeting has taken place between me and
you alt of great piety. Vo-day I still attain
to that bigtity happy end which fs resetved
for me, sitite, ye ascetics who have

enances for wealth, ye who are equal to

rahma himself, have succeeded in
obtaining this meeti#g with you all.
is not the least doubt that this sight that
{ have obtained of you all has purged me
of every sin.


2627. O sinless ones, f have tio longer
any fear about my end in the next. world.
Full as | am of love for my children, [
always temember them. . My” «mind,
however, is always pained by the recollec-
tion of the various acts of wrong which my
wicked son of exceedingly evil understand-
ing perpetrated. Having a sintul under-
standing, he- always petsetuted tlie inno-
cent Pandavas,


a8—4o. Alas, the whole Earth has been
devastated by him, with her horses;
elephants and men, Many great kings,
rulers of various kingdoms, came for help-
ing my son and succumbed to death,
Alas, leaving their beloved father and
wives and their very tife-breaths, all those
heroes have become guests of the king of
the dead.
has been attained by those mén who have
Killed, for the sake of their friend, in batete?
What end also has attained by my sotis and
grandsons who have fallen in the battle?
My heart is always pained at the thouglit
of my having brought about the destruc-
tion of the powerful Bhishma, the son of
Shantanu, and of Droma, that foremost of
Brabmanas, through my foolish and sinful
son who was an injurer of his friends.


33. Desirous of getting the sovereignty
of the Barth, he caused the Kuru ace,
blazing with prosperity, to be-annihilated.
Thinking of all this, L burn day and night
with grief. i


34. Deeply afflicted with pain and grief,
fT am unable to get peace of mind. Indeed,
O sire, thinking of all this, 1: have no peace
of ma’.


’ Vishampayana said :— ;
“41s. 35. . Hearing these lamentations expres-


There.


What end, O twice-born one, |.


MAHABAHRATA,


aed fa various ways, of that royal saga, th
rief, O Janamejiya of Gandhari, becam
resh.


36. The grief, also, of Kunti, of the
daughter of Drupada, of Subhadra, and
of the other members, male and female,
and the daughters-in-law, of the toyal house
of Kurubecame equally green,


4738. Queen Gandhari, with banda-
ged eyes, joming her hands, addressed her
father-in-law. Deeply afflicted with Zrief
on account of the destruction of her sons,
she said,~~'O foremost of ascetics, this king
has passed sixteen years grieving for the
death of his sons and shorn of peace of
mind.


39. Afflicted | ith gtlef on account of
the destruction of his children, this king
Dhritarashtra, always breathes heavily,
and never sleeps at night, O great Rishi.


40. Through the power of your penances
you ate competent to create new worlds.
What need 1 say then about showing this
king his children who are now in the other
world? ’


4t. This Krishna, the daughter of
Deupada, has lost all her kisnsmen and
childcen. Therefore, she who is the dearest
of my daughters-in-law grieves greatly.


42, The sister of Krishna, vis., Subhas
dra of sweet words, burning with the loss
of her son, grieves as deeply. 7


43- Yhis tady who is respected by all,
who is the wife of Bhutishravas, strickea
with grief os account of the fate’ of her
husband, always indulges in heart-rending
lamentations,


44. Her father-in-law was the intelligent
Vathika of Kuru'’s race. Alas, Somadatta
also was killed, along with his father, iu
the great battle.


4$. Alas, a hundred sons, heroes who
never retreated from battle, belonging to
this 30n of yours, this kimg of great intelli-
gence and great presperity, has beer
killed in battle. :


46. The hundred wives of those sons
are all grieving and repeatedly increasing
the gtief of both the king and myself. O
great ascetic, stricken by that great
onslaught, they have gathered round me.


47. Alas, those great heroes, those great
car-warriors, my fathers-in-law, Somadatta
and others,—alas, what end has been theirs,
O powerful one, ~ é


48° Through your favour, O holy one,
that will take place for which this kings; mys
self and this daughterin-law of yours, v2 ,
Kunti, shall all become freed from our grief,


ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA,


49. After Gandhari had said so, Kunti,
Whose face had become wasted through
observance of many hard vows, began to
think of her secret-born son gifted with
solar effulgence. °

50. The boon-piving Rishi Vyasa,
capable of both seeing and hearing what
took place ata remote distatice, saw that
the royal mothee of Arjuna was afflicted
with grief.

5t. To her Vyasa said,—‘Teil me, O
blessed one, what is in your mind. Tell me
what you wish to say.’


52. Atthis, Kunti, bending her head
to her-father-in-law, and overcome with
bashfulness, said these words to him, re-
counting the past incidents of her life. :


owen


CHAPTER XXX.
( PUTRBDARSIIANA PARVA. )—=


Continued.


Kunti said :—

1. O holy one, you are my father-in-law
and, therefore, my deity of deities. ou
are my god of gods. Hear my words of
truth,


2—3. A twice-born ascetic named Dur-
vasas, who is full of anger, came to my
father’s house for begging alrns. I suc-
ceeded in pleasinig him by the ptirity of my
conduct and of my minds as also by refusing
to notice the many wrongs he did. I did
not yield to anger although there was much
in his conduct quite capable of exciting that
passion, '


4. Served with tare, the great ascetic
became highly pleased with me and dis-
posed to grant mea boon. * You inust ac-
cept the boon 1 shail give,’ were his words
to me.


§—6. Fearing his ctirse, I answered
him saying,—'So ‘be it.’ The Rishi “once
more said to ihe,—' O blessed danisel, O
you*of beaiitiful face, you will beconie the
mother of Dharma. Those deitles whom
you willsummon will obey you.’


7. Having said these words, the twice-
born one vanished away from my sight. 1
became filled with wonder. The Mantra,
however, which the Rishi gave, has lived in
my memory at all times.

8. One day, sitting withia my chamber
Tsaw the sun rising. Desiring to bring
the maker of day before me, { recullected
the words of the Rishi, ~


a


33


9. Without any consciousness of the
fault I committed, lt called the deity from
mere childishness. The deity, of a thoue
sand rays, came before me.


10. He divided himself in two parts.
With one portion he was in the sky, and
with the other he stood on the Earth before
me. With one he heated the worlds and
with another he came to me,


t1. He told me, while [ was trembling
at his sight, these words :—=‘Do you ask a
boon of the.’ Bowing to him with my head
1 asked him to leave me.


12. He replied to me, saying, I cati«
not bear the idea of coming to you fruit
tessty, 1 shall, consume you 4s also that
Bratimana who gave you the Mantra as a
boon. . ;

13. I wished to protect, from Surya’s
curse, the #rahmana who had done na
evil. [, therefore, said,—‘ Let me have a sort
like you, O god.’

14. The deity of ‘thousand rays then
efitered me with his energy and stupefied
me completely. He then said to me,—*' Yots
will have a gon,’ and then returned to the
firmament.


#3. E continued to five in the Irinet
apartments and desirous of saving tHe
honour of my father, L cast into the waters
my infant son named Karna who thus came
into the world secretly, ;


16. Forsooth, through the grate of that
god, I once more became a virgin, O twice-
born one, even asthe Rishi Durvasas had
said to me.


17. Foolish that f art, although te knew
me for his riother when hé grew up, yet I
did not try to acknowledge him. ‘This
burns me, QO Rishi, as is well-known te
you.


18. Whetlier it ig sinful ot nat so, I have
told you the truth. You should, O holy
one; satisfy the craving i feel for seeing
that son of mine, *


19. O foremost of ascetics, let this king
also, O sinless one,'obtain thefruitiots to-day
of that desire of his which he clierishes in
his bosom and which has become known to
you. ;


20. Thus addcessed by Kunti, Vyasa,
that foremost of alf persons, said to her in
reply,—'Blessed be you, all that you have
Said to me will happen. ‘


at. You ace not to blame at.all. You
were restored to virginity, ‘Lhe deities are
possessed of (Yoga} power, They ate able
enter hutnan bodies, + 4°


34


22. There are many deities. They be-
get (offspring) by thought alone. By word,
by sight, by touch, and by sexual union,
also, they beget children... “hese are the
five methods. :


23. You belong to the order of humanity.
You have no fault. Know this, O Kunti!
Let the fever of your heart be removed.


24. Everything is becoming for those
whe are mighty. Everything is pure for
those that are mighty. Everything is meri-
tortoys for those that are mighty. Every-
thing is their own for those who are
mighty,’


CHAPTER XXXI.


(PUTRADARSHANA PARVA.,)—
Continued,


Vyasa’said :-—

1. Blessed be you, O Gandhari, you
‘shall see your sons and brothers and friends
and kinsmen along with your sires this
hight like men risen from sleep,


2. Kunti also shall see Karna, and she
of Yadu’s race shall see her son Abhimanyu,
Dcaupadi shall see hec five sons, her fathers

-and her brothers also.


3. Even before you had asked me, this
was the thought ia my mind. I enter-
tained this purpose when { was urged to
that effect by the king, by you, OQ Gandhari,
and by Kunti! :


4. You should not grieve for those fore-
most of}men. They met with death on
account of their devotion to the practices of
Kshatriyas,

5. O faultless one, the work of the gods
could not but be done. It was for accom-
plishing that object that those heroes came
down on earth, They were all portions of
the celestials.


6—7. Gandhacvas, Apsaras, Pishachas,
Guhyakas and Rakshasas, many pure
persons, many individuals crowned with
‘success (of penances), celestial Rishis, deities
and Danavas, and heavenly Rishis of spot-
‘less character, met with death on the battle-
field of Kurukshetra,


8. Itis heard that he who was the in-
‘telligent king of the Gandharvas, and named
Dhritarashtra, took birth in the world ef
men as your lord Dhritarashtra.


9g. Know that Pandu of unfading glory
and distinguished above all others, origi-
nated from the Maruts. Kshattri and
Vudhishthira are beth portions of the deity
of Virtue,


| of a portion of Rudra.


MAHABAHRATA,


to. Know that Duryodhana was Kali,
and Shakuni was Dwapara. O you of good
features, know that Dusshasana and others
were all Rakshasas. =


it, Bhimasena of great power that
chastiser of enemnies, is from the Maruts.
Know that this Dhananjaya, the son of
Pritha, is the ancient Rishi Nara.


1214. Hrishikesha is Narayana, and
the twins are the Ashwins, ‘hat foremost
of Sheat-giving ones, uiz., Surya, having
divided his body in two parts continued
with one portion to give heat to the worlds
and with another to live as Karna. He
who was born as the son of Arjuna, that
gladdener of aff, that heir of the properties
of the Pandavas, who was killed by six
car-warriors (fighting together), was Soma,
He was of born Subhadra. ‘Through Yoga«
power he had divided himself in two parts.


15. Dhrishtadyumna who originated with
Draupadi from the sacrificial fire, was
an auspicious portion of the deity of fire.
Shikhandia was a Rakshasa.


16. Knowthat Drona was a portion of
Vrihaspati, and that Drona’s son is born
Know that Ganga’s
son Bnishma was one of the Vasus whe
became born as a man,


17. Fhus, O'you of great wisdom, the
deities had taken birth as human beings,
and after having accomplished theic pur-
poses have returned to the celestial region.


18. I shall to-day, dispel that sorrow
which is in the hearts of you all, about the
return of these to the other world.


tg. Do youall go towards the Bhagi-
rathi. . You] will then see all those who have
been killed on the field of battle.


Vaishampayana said :—


20. All the persons there present having
heard the words of Vyasa, raised a loud
leonine shout and then went towards the
Bhagirathi.

21. Dhritarashtra with all his ministers
and the Pandavas, as also with all those
foremost of Rishis and Gandharvas who
had come there, started as directed,


22. Arrived at the banks of Ganga,
that sea of men took up theie abode as
pleased them.


23. The king, endued with great intelli-
gence, with the Pandavas, took up his
abode in a desirable spot, along with the
ladies and the aged ones of his household.


2 t
24. They passed that day as if it were a
whole year, waiting for the approach of the
night when they would see the deceased
princes,


ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA,


a5. The Sum then reached the sacred
mountain in the west and all those per-
sons, having bathed in the sacred river
finished their evening rites.


CHAPTER XXXII.


¢«PUTRADARSHANA PARVA. }—~
. Continued,


Vaishampayana said :—


1, When night came, all those persons,
having finished their evening rites, appro-
ached Vyasa.


2. Dhritarashtra, with purified body and
with mind solely directed towards it, sat
there with the Pandavas and the Rishis in
his company.

3. The royal ladies sat with Gandhar™
in a secluded spot. All the citizens and the
inhabitants of the provinees ranged them-
selves according to theic years.


4—5. Then the great ascetic, Vyasa, of
great energy, bathing in the sacred waters
of the Bhagirathi, summoned alt the decea-
sed warriors, viz., those who had fought on
the side of the Pandavas, those who had
fought for the Kauravas, including highly
blessed kings belonging to the various king-
doms.


6. Atthis, O Janamejaya, a deafening
uproar was heard to arise from within the
waters, resembling that which had formerly
been heard of the armies of the Kurus and
the Pandavas.


7. Then those kings, headed by Bhishma
and Drona, with all their armies, arose by
thousands from the waters of the Bhagi-
rathi,


8. There were Virata and Drupada, with
their sons and forces. ‘There were the sons
of Draupadi and the son of Subhadra, and
Rakshasa Ghatotkacha.


g. There were Karna, Duryodhana, and
the powerful car-warrior Shakuni, and the
other children, possessed of great strength,
of Dhritarashtra, headed by Dusshasana.


1o. There were the son of Jarasandha,
Bhagadatta, Jarasandha of great energy,
Bhurishravas, Shala, Sbalya and Vrishasena
with his younger brother.


1t. There were prince Lakshmana, and
the son of Dhrishtadyumna, and all the
children of Sikbandin, and Dhrishtaketu
with his youbger brother.


12. There were Achala, Vrishaka, the
Rakshasa Alayudha, .Valhika, Somadatta,
and the king Chekitana..


?


35 .


13. These and innumerable others,
appeared on ‘that ‘oecasion. All of them
rose from the waters of the Bhagirathi, with
shining bodies.


14. Those kings appeared, each clad ian
that dress and equipt with that standard
and that vehicle which he had while fighting
on the field.


15. All of them were dressed incefestial
vestments and all had brilliant earrings.
They were free from all animosity and pride
and divested of anger and jealousy.


16, Gandharvas sang their praises, and
bards waited on them, ‘chaunting their
deeds. Robed with eelestial raiments and
wearing celestial garlands, each of them was
waited upon by bands of Apsaras.


17. Atthat time, through the power of
his penanees, the great ascetic, the son of
Satyavati, gratified with Dbpitatastens gave
him celestial vision.


18. Gifted with eelestial knowledge and
strength, the illustrious Gandhari beheld all
hec children as also all those who had been
killed in battle.


19. All persons assembled there saw with
steadfast gaze and hearts filled with wonder
that amazing and inconceivale scene which
made the hairs stand erect.

zo. Ht looked like a high earnival of
pleased men and women, ‘That wondrous
scene looked like a picture painted on the
canvass.

2t. Dhritarashtra seeing all those heroes
with their celestial vision obtained through
the favour of that sage, became full of j joys
O chief of -Bharata’s race. ;


.


CHAPTER XXXIIE.


(PUTRADARSHANA PARVA. J—<
Continued.


Vaishampayana said :—

t—2, Then those foremost of men, shorn
of anger and jealousy, and purged of every
sin, met with another, according to those
high and auspicious ordinances which have
been laid down by regenerate Rishis. All
of them were happy of hearts and looked
like celestials moving in celestial regions.


Son met with father or mother, wives
with husbands, brother with brother, and
friend with friend, O king.


4. The Pandavas full of joy, met with
the powerful bowman Karna as als? with
the son of Subhadra, and the children of
Draupadi.


36


5. With pleased hearts the son of Pandu
Spproached Karna, O king, and became
reconciled with him.


6. All those warriors, O chief of Bhara-
ta’s race,-mecting with one another through
the favour of the great ascetic, became re-
conciled with one another.


* 9, Renouncing all unfriendliness, they
became established on amity and peace. It
was thus that all those foremost of men,
wiz., the Kauravas and other kinsmen of
theirs as also with their chiidren. They
passed in great happiness the whole of that


—12, Indeed, the Kshatriya warriors,
On account of the bappiness they experien-
ced, considered that place as Heaven itself.

‘here was no grief, no fear, no suspicion,
no discontent, no reproach in that region,
as those. warriors, O king, met with one
another on that night. Meeting with their
sires and {brothers and husbands and
sons, the ladies renounced all grief and felt
great joy. Having sported ,wih cne ano-
ther thus ‘for one night, those heroes and
those ladies, embracing one another taking
ene another’s leave, came back to the
places they had come from. Indeed, that
foremost of ascetics dismissed that collection
of watriors,


13-15. Within the twinkling of an eye
that large crowd disappeared in the very
sight of all those persons. ‘Those great
persons, plunging into the sacred river
Bhaygirathi, proceeded, with their cars and
standards, to their respective abodes, Some
went to the regions of the gods, some to the
region of Brabman, some to the region of
Varuna, and some to the region of Kuvera.
Some among those kings went to the region
of Surya, ;


16. Amongst the Rakshasas and Pisha-
chas, some proceeded to the country of
the Uttara-Kurtts. Others, moving delight-
ee went in the company of the celes-
tials, :


17—20, Thus did all those great persons
disappear with their vehicles and animals
and with all their followers. After all of
them had departed, the great sage, who was
standing in the waters of the sacred rivers,
wiz., Vyasa of great virtue and energy, that
benefactor of the Kurus, then addressed
those Kshatriya ladies who had become
widows, and said these words,—' Let those
amongst these foremost of women who are
desirous of attaining to the regions acquired
by their husbands cast away all idleness and
quickly plunge into the sacred Bhagirathi.’—
Hearing these words of his, those foremost
ladies, placmny faith in them, took the per-


MAHABHARATA.


mission of their father-in-law, and then
plunged into the waters of the Bhagirathi,


2t. .Freed from human bodies, those
chaste ladies then went, O king, with their
husbands to the regions acquired by the
latter.


22. Thus, those !ladies of various con-
duct, devoted to their husbands, entering
the waters of the Bhagirathi, became freed
from. their mortal bodies and attained to
the companionship of their husbands in the
regions acquired by them.


23. Possessed of celestial forms, and
adorned with celestial ornaments, and wear-°
ing celestial garments and garlands they
proceeded to those regions where their
husbands were living.


24. Endued with excellent conduct and
many virtues, their anxieties all removed,
they were seen to ride on excellent cars,
and gifted with every accomplishment, they
found those regions of felicity which were
theirs by right. ~


25. Devoted to the duties of piety,
Vyasa, at that time, becoming a giver of
boons, granted to all the men there collect-
ed the fruition of the desires they respec-
tively cherished.


26. People of various kindoms, hearing
of this meeting between the hallowed dead
and living human beings, became highly
pleased.


27. That man who duly listens to this
discourse meets with everything that is
dear to him. Indeed, he obtains ali agree-
able objects both in this world and in the
next.


28—29.%That man of learning and science
that foremost of pious persons, who recites
this narrative for the hearing of others
wins great fame here and an auspicious
end hereafter, as also a union with kins-
men and all desirable objects Such a man
has not to wark hard for his maintenance
and meets with all sorts of auspicious ob-
jects in life. ‘These are the rewards reaped
Ry. a petson who gifted wih devotion to

edic studies and with penances, recites
this narrative in the hearing of others,


30—3t. Those persons who endued with
good conduct, devoted to self-control, purged
of all sins by the gifts they make, endued
with sincerity, having tranquil souls, freed
from falsehood and the desire of injnring
others, adorned with faith, belief in the
scriptures, and intelligence, listen to this
wonderful book, surely attain to the highest
end hereafter.


ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA . 37


CHAPTER XXXIV.


(PU fRADARSHANA PARVA.)=
: Continued.


Sauti said :-—

1. Hearing this story of the reappearance
and departure of his forefathers, the highly
intelligent Bing Janamejaya became greatly
pleased.


2. Filled with joy, he once more asked
Vaishampayaria on the subject of the cee
appearance of dead men, saying,—' How is
it possible for persons whose bodies have
been destroyed to reappear in those very
forms?


3. Thus asked, that foremost of twice-
born persons, viz, the disciple of Vyasa,
that first of speakers, possessed of great
energy, thus answered Janamejaya,


Vaishampayana said :—

4. This is certain, viz, that acts are
never destroyed. Bodies, O king, are born
of acts; so also are features,


5. The great primal elements are eternal
On account of the union with them of the
Lord of all beings. ‘They exist with what
is eternal. Accordingly, they have no
destruction ,when the non-eternal are des-
troyed.


6. Acts done without exertion are true,
and foremost, and yield real fruit, ‘The
soul, united, however, with such acts as re+
quire exertion for theie performance, enjoys
pleasure and pain.


7- Though united go, yet it is a certain
inference that the soul is never modified by
_ them, like the reflection of creatures ina
micror, It is never destroyed.


8. As long as one’s deeds are not ex-
hausted {by enjoyment or endurance of
their fruits good and bad), so long does he
consider the body to be his ownself. The
man, however, whose acts have been ex-
hausted, without considering body to be
self, takes the self to be something other-
wise.


9. Various existent objects, attaining to
a body, become united as one. Those very
objects become eternal to men of knowledge
who understand the difference.


10. In the Horse-Sacrifice, this Shruti is
heard in the matter of the killing of the
horse. The certain possessions of embodied
creatures, gvis., their vital airs (and the
senses, etc..) exist eternally even when they
are borne to the other world.


tr. ‘FE shall, you what is beneficial, if it
be agreeable to you, Q king. You have,


while employed in your sacrifices, heard of
the celestial paths,


12. When preparations were made for
any sacrifice of yours, the celestials became
beneficially inclined to you. When, indeed,
the celestials were thus disposed and came
to your sacrifice, they were lords. in the
matter of the passage.


13. Therefore, the eternal ones (vise,
Jivas), by adoring the deities in sacrifices,
succeed in attaining to excellent ends.
When the five primal elements are eternal,
when the soul also is eternal, he called
Purusha is equally so.


14. When such is the case, he who sees_
a‘creature as disposed to take various forms,
is considered as having an erroneous use
derstanding. He who indulges in too
much grief at separation, is, 1 uhink, a
foolish person.


15. He who sees evil in separation
should give up union. By standing aloof,
no unions are formed, and sorrow is re+
nounced, for sorrow in the world is born of
separation. _


16. Onty he who understands. the dise.
tinction between body and self, and not
another, becomes freed from the erroneous
belief, He who knows the fother vz. self)
attains to the highest understanding and
becomes freed from error.


317. As cegards creatures, they appear
from an invisible state, and once more dis-
appear into invisibleness. I do not know


him. He ‘also does not know me. As
regards myself, renunciation is not yet
mine,


18. He, who is not possessed of power,
enjoys or endures the fruits of all his deeds
itt those bodies in which he does them.

19. If the act be a mental one, its fruits
are enjoyed or endured mentally ; if it be
done with the body, its results are to be
enjoyed or endured in the body,


CHAPTER XXXV,


(PU TRADARSHANA PARVAJ««
Continued.


Vaishampayana said :—

1. King Dhritarashtea had never seen
his own sons, Getting eye-sight through
the favour of the Rishi, he saw for the


first time, O perpetuater of Kuru’s race,
those children of his who were very like his
own self, ;


33 :


2. That foremost of men, vis., the
Kuru king had tearnt all the royal duties
as alse the Vedas and the Upanishadas,
and had acquired certitude of understand-
ing.

3. Highly wise Vidura acquired great
success through the power of his penances,
Dnritarashtra also acquired great success
for haying met the ascetic Vyasa.


Janamejaya said :—

4. Ti>Vyasa, disposed to grant me a
boon, kindly show me my father in that
form which he had, clad as he used to be
clad, and as old as he was. when he
left this world, [ may then believe all that
you have told me.


§. Sucha sight will be most agreeable
to me. Indeed, 1 shall consider myself
crowned with success. I shali have gained
a certainty of conclusion, O let my iwish
be satisfied through the favour of that
foremost af Rishis !’


Santi said :—

6. After king Janamejaya had said
these words, the highly energetic andjintelli-
gent Vyasa, showed his favour and brought

* Parikshie,


9. King Janamejaya saw his royal
fathee possessed of great; beanty, brought
down from the celestial revion, in the same
form that he had and of the same age as
he was (at the time of leaving this world).


* 8. Thetgreat Shamika also, and his son
Shringin, were similarly brouehtthere. AH
the counsellers and ministers of the king
saw them.


9. King Janamejaya, performing the
final bath in his sacrifice, became highly
pleased. He poured the sacred water on his
father even as he caused it to be poured
on himself,


to—1tt, Having performed the final bath,
the king addressed the twice-born Astika
who had originated ;from the race of . the
Yayavaras and who was the son of Jarat-
karu, and said these words :—‘O Astika,
this sacrifice of mine is fraught with many
wonderful incidents, since this my sire
has been seen by me, he who has removed
all my sorrows.


Astika said:— - '


12, The performer of that -sacrifice in
which thelancient Rishi, Dwaipayana Vyasa,
that vast receptacle of penances, is present,
is sure, O foremost one of Kuru’s race, to
conquer both the worlds.


' 13. O son of the Pandavas, you have
heard a wonderful history. The snakes


MANIABITARATA. -


have been reduced inta ashes and have
followed the footsteps of your father.


14. Through your truthfulness, O king,
Takshaka has with difficulty escaped a pain-
ful ffate. ‘The ¢Rishis have been all adored.
You have seen also the end that has been
acquired by your great father.]


15. Having heard this sin-cleansing
history you have acquired abundant merits
The knots of your heart have been Suntied
through seeing this foremost of persons.


16. They who are the supporters of the
wings of Virtue, they who are of good cone
duct and excellent disposition, they on
seeing whom sins disappear, we should all
bow to them.


Santi said :—

£7. Having heard this from that fore-
most of twice-born ones, king Janamejaya
adored that Kishi, repeatedly honouring
him in every way. ‘


18. Knowing all duties, he then asked
the Rishi Vaishampayana of undecaying
glory fabout the sequel, O best of ascetics,
of king Dhritarashtca’s residence in the
forest.


CHAPTER XXXVI.
(PUTRADARSHANA PARVA,)—


Continued.


Janamejaya said :—

1. Having séen his sons and grandsons
with all theie friends and followers, what,
indeed, did that king, vis., Dhritarashtra,
and king Yudhisthira also, do ?


Vaishampayana said :-~

2. Seeing that highly wonderful spec
tacle, viz., the re-appearance of his children,
the royal sage, Dhritarastra renounced his
grief and returned to his hermitage.


3. The common people and all the great
Rishis, sent away by Dhritarashtra, came
back to the places they respectively wished.


4. The great Pandavas,laccompanied by
their wives, and with a small retinue, went
to the hermitage of the great monarch,


5--7. Then Satyavati’s son, who was
honoured by twice-born Rishis and all other
persons, arrived at the hermitagc,'addressed
Dhritarashtra, saying,—‘O mighty-armed
Dhritacashtra, O son of Kuru’s race, listen
to what I say! You have heard various
discourses from Rishis of great. knowledge

€


ASHRAMAVASIKA PARYA,


tind satred deeds, having penances for
wealth and excellence of blood, knowledge
of the Vedas and their branches, of piety
and years, and of great eloquence,


8. Do not set your mind again on
Sorrow, He who is wise is never moved at
iil luck. You have also heard the mysteries
of the deities from Narada of celestial
form.


g. Your children have all attained,
through performance of Kshatriya practices,
to that auspicious end, which is sanctified
by weapons. You have seen how they


*“ Move about at will in great happiness.


}
:


‘lang.


to. This Vudhishthira of great intelli-
gence is awaiting your permission with all
his brothers and wives and kinsmen.


11, Do you send him away. Let him
return to his kingdom and rule it! They
have passed more than a month in thus
living in the forest.


12. The station of sovereignty should
always be well-guarded, O king! O you of
Kuru’s race, kingdom has many enemies.’


_ 13—14. ‘Thus addressed by Vyasa of
incomparable energy,‘the Kuru king, well-
versed in words summoned Yudhishthira
and said to him,—‘O you having ne enemies,
blessings on you! Do you listen to me,
with all your brothers! Through your grace,
O king, grief no longer stands in my way.


15. Lam living as happily, O son, with
you here as if I were in the city of Hastina-
pore. With you as my protector, O learned
one, I am enjoying all agreeable objects.


16. I have obtained from you all those
services which a son renders to his sire.
1 am highly pleased with you. I have not
the least dissatisfaction with you, O mighty-
armed one. Go now, O son, without wait-
ing here any longer,


17. Meeting with you, my pensances are
being slackened. This my body, gifted with
penances, I have been able to sustain only
on account of my meeting with you.


18. These two mothers of yours, living
now upon fallen leaves of trees, and observ-
ing vows similar to mine, will not live


19. We have seen Duryodhana and
others, who have become dwellers of the
other world, through the power of Vyasa’s


‘penances and through (the merit of) this
‘my meeting with you,


20. O sinless one, I havé gained the ob-
jectiof my life. I now wish to practise the
austere$t of penances. You should grant
me permission.


2t. The obsequial caké, the fame and


achievements, and the family of otif ane
cestors, now depend upon you entirely,
mighty-armed one, dosyou then go either
to-morrow or this very day. Donot tarry,
O son, -

22. O chief of Bharata's rate, you hava
repeatedly’ heard what the duties are of
kings. I do not see what more I can say to
you, Ihave notonger any necessity witlt
you, O you of great power.’


Vaishampayana continued :~<

23. King Yudhishthira replied to the
(old) king who said so, saying,--‘O you wha
&now every rule of virtue, fyou should not
cast me off in this way. lam guihy of ad
fault.

24. Let all tiy brothers and followers
go as they like. With steadiast vows f
shall wait upon you and apon these two
mothers of mine.’ :


25. Gandhari then sald to hin —' O
son, let it not be so. Listen; the family of
Kuru is now dependant on you. The
obsequial ¢ake also of my father-in-law
depends on you. Depart then, O son.


26. We have been sufficiently honoured
and served by you. You should do what
the king says, Indeed, O son, you should
obey the comarand of your sire.


Vaishampayana continued :—

27. Thus addressed by Gandhari, king
Yudhishthira, rubbing his dyes which were
bathed in Mears of affecuon, said these
words bewailingly.- : re

28. The king is renouncing me, as also
the iMustrious Gandhari. My heart, hows
evet, is bound to you. How shall I, stricken
as | am with sorrow, leave you.


29. ! do not, however, at the samé time, _
venture to obst: uct your penances, O rightes
ous lady! .There is -nothing higher than
penances. It is by penances that one ace
quires tlre Supreme.


go. O queen, my heart no longer turns
as of old towards kingdom. My mind is
wholly set upon penances now. te

3t. | The entire Earth is empty now.’ 'O
auspidious lady, gshe does not please nie
any longer! Our kinsmen have been té-
duced in Humber, Our, strength is: no
longer what it was before. a

32. The Panchalas have been wholly
rooted out. Only. nominally they exist. O
auspicious lady, I do nét see any one who
may assist at their re-establishment and
growth,


23. All of them have been reduced to
ashes by Drona on the field of batile,


ee


The remnant were killed by Drona’s son
at night.


34. The Chedis and the Matsyas, who
were our friends, no longer exist. Only
the tribes of the Vrishnis are all that ce-
main, Vasudeva having kept them up.


3§- Seeing only the Vrishnis I wish to
live. My desire of life, however, is due to
my wish of acquiring merit and not riches
or enjoyment. Do you cast auspicious
looks upon us all, lt will be difficult for
"5 to see you.


36—37. The king will commence to
practice the most austere and unbearable
ef penances!? Hearing these words, that
king of battle, the ‘mighty-armed Sahadeva
with eyes bathed in tears, addressed
Vudhishthira, saying,-—' O chief of Bharata
race, I dare not leave my mother.


38—39. Do you return to the capital
goon, 1 shall practise penances, O power-
ful one! Even here & stall reduce my
body by penances, engaged in serving the
feet of the King and of these my mothers !/
To Kunti, after embracing that mighty-
armed tere, addressed him thus,—Depact,
O son! Do not say so.


49. Obey my behest’! Do all of you go
hence. Let peace by yours! Ye sons, let
happiness be yours!


4t. By your stay here, our penances
will be impeded. Fettered by the ties of my
affection for you, 1 shalt fall off from my
high penances.


42. Therefore, O son, leave us, Short
is the period of our existence, O you of
great power.


43. By these and various other speeches
of ¢Kunti, the minds of Sahadeva and king
Yudhishthira were composed. ‘Those fore-
most ones of Kuru’s race, having received
the permission of their mother as also of the
told} monarch, saluted the latter and began
to take his leave.


Yudhishthira said -—

44. Delighted by auspicious blessings,
we shall ceturn tothe capital, Indeed, O
king,?: having ceceived your permission,
we shall feave this hermitage freed from
every sin.


45. Thus addressed by the great king
Vudhishibira the just, that royal sage, viz,
Dhritarashtra, blessed Yudhishthira and
gave him permission.


46. The king comforted Bhima, that
feremost of all persons gifted with great
Strengtit. Gifted with great energy and
great intelligence, Bhima showed his sub-
missiveness to the king.


MAHABHARATA.


47. Embracing Arjuna ard clasping.
those foremiost of men, d1Z., the twiris also;
and blessing them repeatedly, the Kuru
King gave therti permission to ga.


48—~<49. They adored the feet of Gane
dhari and received her blessings alsa. ‘Tneit
mother Kunti then smelt theic heads, and
dismissed them. ‘They then went round the
king like calves, when prevented from suck-
ing, their dams. Indeed, they repeatedly
walked tourid him, looking steadfastly at
him.
. Then all the ladies of the Kaurava
household, headed by Draupadi, adored
theie father-in-law according to the rites


laid down in the scriptures, and de<
parted.
gt. Gandhari and Kunti embraced each


of them, and blessing them bade them go.
Yheie mothers-in-law instructed them as tad
how they should behave themselves. Get-
ting leave, they then,‘departed, with theit
hasband.


gz. Then fouwd sounds were heard,
uttered by the charioteers that said," Yoke,
yoke,’—as also of camels that grunted aloud
and of horses that neighed briskly.


53- King Yudhishthica, with his wives
and troops and alt his kinsmen, started for
Hastinapura.


CHAPTER XXXVIL.
( NARADAGAMANA PARVA, J=s


Vaishampayana said :—

1. After two years had passed from the
date of the return of the Pandavas (front
the retreat of their sire), the celestial Rishi,
Narada, O king, canve to Yudhishthira,


2-3. The omrighty-armed Kuru king, that
foremost of speakers, wiz., Yudhishthira,
having duly adored him, made him take
aseat. After the Rishi had rested awhile,
the king ‘asked him,!saying,—'Tt is after a
long time that F see your holy self acrived
at my court. Are you in peace and happi-
ness, U learned Bhimasena ?

4 What are those countries which you
have passed through? What can Fdo for
you? Do youtelkme. You are the fore
most of twice-borm ones, and you are oat
highest refuge.


Narada said :-— e

5. f have not seew you for « long time.
Hence it is that t have conte to you from
my asylum, 1 have seew many sacred


ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA, at


Waters, and the sacred rivers Ganga, also,
king.

Yudhishthira said :—
6. Peeple living on the Banks of Ganga


Yeport that the great Dhritarashtra is prac-
lising the austerest of penances>


7. Have you seen ‘him there? Is that |


perpetuater of Kuru’s race in peace?. Are
Gandhari and Pritha, and the Suta’s son
Sanjaya also, iv peace ?

8. ow, indeed, is that royal ‘tire
‘of mine doing ? 1 wish to heae this, O holy
‘one, if yoa have seen the king,


Narada said :—


9. Listen, O king, with ¢almness to me_


as I tell you what I have heard and seeds in
Yhat asylum,


10. After your retarn from Kurukshetra,
©O delighter of the Kurus, your sire, O king,
proceeded towards Gangadwara.


11. That intelligent king took with him
his (sacred) fire, Gandhari.and his datghter-
in-law Kunti, as also Sanjaya of the Suta
caste, and all the Yajakas.


12. Having penances for wealth, your
‘Sire set himself to the practice of severe
austerities, He held pebbles of stone in
his mouth and had air alone for his food,
and abstained altogether from speech.


13. Engaged in severe penaticés, he was
adored by all the ascetics in the forest.
In six months the king was reduced to
‘only a skeleton.


14. Gandhari lived on water alone,
while Kunti took a little food at intervals
of a month. Sanjaya, O Bharata, lived,
eating a little every sixth day.


15. The sacred fire, O rionarch, (be-
Jonging to the Kurti king) was diily adored
by the sacrificing assistants who were with
him, with libations of clarified butter poured
on it. ‘They did this whether the king saw
the rite of tiot.


_ 16. The king had rio fixed dwelling.
He became a wanderer through those
forests. “The two Queens, as also Sanjaya,
followed him.


17. Sanjaya acted as the #uidé an even
and uneven land. ‘Ihe faultless Pritha, O
king, became the eye of Gandhari.


38. One day, that best of kings went to
@ spot on the margin of Ganga. He then
bathed in the sacred river and finishing his


ablutions tumied His face towards his her-~


imitage. : :
19. ‘The wind tose high. A fierce wild
* 6


firesetin, It began to burn that forest all
around, .

20. When the fherds of animals wete
being burnt all around, ag also the shakes
which inhabited that region, herds of wild
boars began to take themselves to the
hhearest marshes atid waters. —

21. When that forest was this afflicted ©
on all sides and sich distress tame upon
all the living creatures living there, the king,
who had taken no food, was incapable of
moving or exerting himself at all. .

2224. Your tivo mothers also, exceed»
ingly emaciated, could not move. Phe king,
seeing the fire approacti him from all sides,
addressed the Suta Sanjaya, that foreniose
of skilifal charioteers, saying,—' Go, O
Sanjaya, to such a plate where the fice
may not burn you,

24. &3. As regards otrselves, we Shail
allow our bodies to be destroyed by this
fire and attain to the greatest end. ‘Io hint,
Sanjaya, that foremost of speakérs, sald.—
*Oking, this death, broaght of by a fire
that fs not Sacred, will prove calaniitous
to you. J do not, however, se@é any means
by which you can escape from this fire.

26—28, That which should fiext be
doné should be marked by you. This
addressed’ by Sanjaya the king once
more said,—‘ This death cannot be calas
mitogs td ws, for we liave left our home
of our éwit accord. Water, fire. wind,
and fabstention from food, are Isiidable
for ascetics. Do you, therefore, leave us,
© Sanjaya, forthwith, Having said these.
words to Sanjaya, the king coriceiitrated
his mind,

29. Facing the east, he sat down, with
Gandhari and Kunti. Seeing him in that
attitude, Sanjaya walked round him.

30. Gifted with ihtelligeice, Sanjaya
srid=' Do yois concentrate fyoiir mind,
O powerfial one? The sori of a Ristii, and
himself etidued -with. great wisdori, tle ~
king acied as he was told.

3i. Goverding all the senses, he re-
mained lite a post of wood. The highly
blessed Gandhari, and your mottier Pritha
too; rerhained in thé Sarte attitiidd.

42. Then yout royal sire waa ovettaken
by the wild-fire. Sanjaya, big minister,
suceeeded in eseaping frodi ttiat fire.

33. | saw tint on tlie banks of Ganga
in the midst of aécetics. Gilted with: -
great ehergy dnd gréat intelligence, he
bade then farewell and then started for
the mountains of Himavat.


94. This the great Kiirii king met with
his death, did it Waa this that Gandtati


He


and Kunti, your two mothers,
with death, O monarch.


35. Iv course of my wanderings at will,
I saw the bodies of that king’ and those
two queens, O Bharata.


jis 36. Many ascetics’came to that asylum,
having heard of the end of king Dhrita-
rashtra, They did not at all grieve for
that end of theirs,


37. There, O best of men, I heard all
the details of how the king and the two
queens, O son of Pandu, had been burnt.


38. O king of kings, you should not
grieve for him. ‘The monarch, of his own
will, as also Gandhari and your mother,
got that contact with fire. ;


Vaishampayana said :—

39. Hearing of the departure of Dhrita-
rashtra from this world, the great Pandavas
all bewailed. ‘


49. nee sounds of wailing were heard
within the} inner apartments of the palace.
The citizens also, hearing of the end of the
old king, bewailed aloud. :
41. ‘O fie,’ cried king Vudhishthira in
reat agony, raising his arms aloft. Think-
“ang of bis mother, he wept like a child.
All his brothers too, headed by Bhimasena,
did the same. .


_ 42. Hearing that: Pritha had met with
such a fate, the royal ladies bewailed aloud
in grief, .

43. Alt the people grieved upon hearing
that the olg king, who had become child ~-
keso, had béen burnt to death and that the
telpless Gandchari too had shared his fate.


44. When those sounds of waiting ceased
or a while, king Yudbishthira the just,
stopping his tears by summoning ali his
patience, said these words,


also met


‘CHAPTER XXXVIII,


(NARADAGAMANA PARVA.)—~
Continued. -


Yudhishthira said :—


I—2. When sucha fate avertook that
gteat king who was engaged in austere pe-
nances, despite the. fact of his having such
kinsmen as ourselves all alive, seems to
me, O twice-born?one, that the end of human
beings is difficult to guess. Alas, who
would have thought that the son of Vichi-
traviryya would Lhus be burnt to death.


MAHABHARATA,


3. Hehad a hundred sons each pifted
with mighty-arms and possessed of great
prosperity! The king himself had the
strength of ten thousand elephants. Alas,
even he has been burnt to death in a wild

re.


4. Alas,*he who had fermerly been
fanned with palm leaves by the fair hands
of beautiful women, was fanned by vultures
with their wings after he had been burnt
to death in a wild fire.


5. He was formerly roused from sleep
every morning by bands of Sutas and
Magadhas had to sleep on the naked earth
through the acts of my sinful self.


6. 1 do not grieve for the famous Gan-
dhari who had been deprived of all her
children. Observing the same vows as her
husband, she has acquired those very
regions which have become his.


9. grieve, however, for Pritha who, re-
nouncing the blazing prosperity of her sons,
became desirous of living in the forest.


8. Fie on this sovereignty of ours, fie
on our prowess, fie on the practices of
penstely a ‘Though alive, we are really
ead.


9. O foremost of superior Brahmanas,
the course of ‘Time is very subtle and diffi-
cult {0 understand, inasmuch as Kunti,
casting off sovereignty, became desirous of
fiving in the forest.


to, How is it that: she. who was the
mother of Yudhishthira, of Bhima, of Vijaya,
was burnt to death like a hepless creature !
Thinking of this T become stupefied.


1t. In vain was the gad .of fire pleased
at Khandava by Acjuna! Fograte that he
is, forgetting that service, he has burnt to’
death the mother of his benefactor.


12, Alas, how could that deity burn the
mother of Arjunaf Putting! om the guise
of Beahmana, he had formerly eome ta
Arjuna, for begging a favour! Fie on the
deity of fire! Fie on the celebrated success
of Partha’starsows.


13—14. This is another incident, O holy
one, which appears to me to be productive
of greater misery, for that king, met with
death by union with a fire that was not
sacred! How could such a death overtake
that royal sage of Kuru’s family who, altee
having governed the whole Earth, was. en«
gaged in the practice of penances | In that
great forest there were fires that had been
sanctified with Mantras. Atlas, my father
has made his departure from this world,
coming in contact with.an unsanctified fire,


15. I suppose that Pritha, emaciated
and redneed ta a form in which all her


ASHRAMAVASIKA PARVA.


werves became visible, must have trembled
in fear and cried aloud, ‘saying,—O son
Yudhishthira!—and awaited the terrible
approach of the fire.


16. She must have also said,—-O Bhima,
save me from this danger !—when she, my
mother, was surrounded on ail sides by that
dreadful fire,


‘ 17. Among all her sons, Sahadeva was
her darling. Alas, that heroic son of
Madravati did not rescue her !’


18. Hearing these bewailings of thé
king, all those persons who were present
there began to weep, embracing each other.
An fact, the five sons of Pandu were so
stricken with grief that they resembled
living creattires at the time of the dissolution
of the universe.


19. The sound of fatnentations iittered
by those weeping heroes, filling the spacious
chambers of the palace, escaped therefroth
and penetrated the very sky.


ae


CHAPTER XXXIX.


*‘(NARADAGAMANA PARVA.,)
Concluded.


Narada said:— —

1, The king has not been burnt to death
by an unsanctified fire. 1 have heard this
there. I tell you, O Bharata, suth has not
been the fate of Vaichitraviryya.


2. We have heard that when the old
king gifted with great intelligence and
living on air alone entered {the forest (after
his return from Gangadwara), he caused
his sacrificial fires to be duly ignited.
Having performed his sacred sites thete-
with, he abandoned them all. 2


3. Then the Yajaka Brahmanas he had
with him cast eff those fires in a solitary
part of the forest and went away as they
hked, O foremost one of Bharata’s rates


4. The fire that cast off grew in the
forest. It then produced a general confla-
gration inthe forest. ‘This is what 1 have
heard from the ascetics living on the banks
of Ganga,


gs. United with that (sacred) fire of his
own, O chief of the Bharatas, the king, as
¥ have already said to you, met with death
on the banks of Ganga.


6. O sinless one, this is what the as-
eetics have told me, those, vzs,, whom I
saw on the banks of sacred Bhagirathti,
O Vudhishthira,


_ddbas


43


7. Thus, O lord of Earth, king Dhrita-
rashtra, coming into contact with his owd
sacred fire, departed front this world and
attained to that high end that has been his.


8, Through service réndered by her td
her seniors, your mother, O king, has ac«
quired very great success. There is not thé
slightest doubt of this.

9. You should, O teing of iings, now:
perform the rites df water té their honour, .
with all your brottiers. Let, thierefote, uié
necessary steps be tales.
Vaishauipayaiia said :~

16. Then that lord of Earth, that fore-.
most of aien, that dpholder of tte burthens
of the Paridavas, went otit,, dcconipanied
by all his brothers as well as the ladies of
his household,

1i. THe inhabitarits of the city as alsa
those of the provinces; actuated by theic
loyalty, also went out, They all proceeded
towards the banks of Ganga, every one
clad in only a single piece of cloth,


12. Then all those foreniost of nien,
having plunged into the river, place
Vuyutsu at theit head, arid began to offer
ablations of water to the great king. And
they also gave siniilar oblations to Gani-
dhari and Pritha, naniing eacti separately
and mentioning their families.


13. Having finished those rites whicli
purify the living, they returned but without
entering their capital lived otitside of it.
They also sent d niuriber of trusted people
well conversant with the ordinances relating
to the gremation of the dead, to Garigaé
dwata where the old king liad been burtit to
death.


14. THe king; having rewarded those
men beforehand, commanded theni to pets
form those rites of cremation which the
bodies of Dhritarashtta and Gandtiati and
Kunti still awaited.


15, On the twelfth day, the King, proe .
perly purified, duly performed the Shras
of his deceased relations, whiclt
were marked by profuse giffs.


16. Referring to Obritarashtra, Yadhis :
shthira made many gifts of gold ard silver,
of kine and costly beds.


17. Uttering the names of Gandhari
and Pritha, the king, gifted with great
energy, made many excellent gifts.


18. Every man feéeived what thing
he wished and as much of itas he wished,
Beds and foods, and cars and conveyances,
and jewels and gems, and other wealth
were given away profusely.


44 MAHABHARATA,


tg. tndeed, the king, referring to his
two mothers, gave away cars and convey-
ances, dresses and coverlets, various kind,
of food, aud female slaves adorned with
- various ornaments.


20, Having thus made many kinds of
gitt in profusion, that king then entered his
capital named Hastinapore.


2t. - Those men men who had gone to
the banks of Ganga at the command of
the king, having disposed of (by cremation)
the remains of the king and the two queens,
returned to the city.


22. Having duly honoured those re-
mains with gartands and scents of various
kinds and disposed of them, they informed
Vudhishthira of the accomplishment of
their task,


23. The great Rishi Narada, having


comforted kitig Yudhishthira of rightedus
soul, went away to where he tiked.


24. Thus did king Obhritarashtra maké
his departure from this world after having
passed three years in the forest aid fitteen
years in the city.


28. Having lost all his children in battle,
le had made many gifts in honour of his
Kinsmen, relatives, and friends, his brethben
and own people.


26. King Vudhishthita, after the death
of his uncle, became very cheerless. De-
prived of jhis kinsmen and relatives, he
somehow bore the burthen of sovereignty.


27. One should listen with attention td
this Ashramavasika Parvan, ahd having
heard it recited, one should feed Brahmanas
with Habishya, honouring them_with scents
and garlands.”


Finis AHSRAMAVASIKA PARVA.


A PROSE ENGLISH TFRANSLATION


OF


THE MAHABHARATA.


{TRANSLATED LITERALLY FROM THE ORIGINAL SANSKRIT TEX tT.)


MAUSALA PARVA.
VOL. XVI.


EDITED & PUBLISHED BY


MANMATHA NATH DUTT, (Shasir) MLA, M.R.AS.
Rector, KesHuB ACADEMY.
Author of the English Translation of the Ramayana, Vishnu Puranam,
Srimad-Bhagavatam, Kamandakiya Nitisara, Bhagavad-Gita;


aad many other works.


40, Nayan Chand Dutt’s Street, Calcutta.
eS


CALCUTTA:


PrintTeD By H. C. Dass, Erysrem Press,
40, Nayan Chand Dutt’s Street.


1905.


MAUSALA PARVA.


TABLE OF CONTENTS.


CuarTer I.—Yudhishthira marks many
unusual portents—p. 4.

Cuarrer Il.—Vasudeva orders the
Vrishinis to make a pilgrimage to the sea-
coast for bathing in the sacred water of the
ocean—p, 2.

Cuapter I11.—The Vrishnis and the
Andhakas start on a pilgrimage and meet
with their doom—p. 3.

_, Caaprer 1V.—Ascension of Vasudeva—
Be 5s


Cuarrer V.—Arrival of
Dwaraka—p. 6,

Cuarter Vi.—Arjuna starts to see his
maternal uncle—p. 7.

Cuaprer VII.—Arjuna’s depattire: fenrnuus
Dwaravati and his adventures in the Bama
of the Five Rivers—p. 8.

Cuarrer VIIl—Arjuna sees Vyasa at
his hermitage and bemoans his loss.
Vyasa’s counsels to Arjuna—p. 11.


Arjuna at


Cail
~eraay
« wie +
StiwOer i
geaaegea
% TN aid
SS fag . ral


Ree a


THE MAHABHARATA.
(IN ENGLISH.)
MAUSALA PARVA.


eet emetic


: OHAPTER I.


Baving saluted Navayana and Nava the
best of male beings, as also Saraswati
the Goddess 6f Learning, let us cry
success, :


Vaishampayana said !—

1. When the thirty-sixth year (after the
Battle) arrived, the delighterc of the Kurus,
wis , Yudhishthica, saw many unusual por-
tents.


_ 8, Winds, dry and strong, and shower.
The gravels, blew from all sides. Birds
began to wheel, making eircles from ‘right
to left. Ss
“3. The great rivers ran in opposite
courses,
to be always covered with fog. ‘Meteors,
showering coals, dropped on the Earth from
the sky, : lt

4. 4
always covered with dust. At its rise, the
Sus was shorn of splendour and seemed to
be crossed by headless trunks.


3. Terrible circles of light were seen
every day around both tle Sun and the
Moon. These circles showed three colors.
‘Yheir edges seemed to be black and rough
and ashy-red in color.


6. ‘These and many other omens, fore-
Shadowing fear and dattger, were seen, O
king, and struck the hearts often with
anxiety. 7

. A Tittle while after the Kuru king
Vudhishthira heard of the wholesale des-
truction of the Vristiuis on account of the
tron bolt.


8. The soi of Pandu, hearing that only
Vasudeva and Rania had escaped alive,
summoned his brothers and consulted with
them as to what they should do.


c ,

6. Meeting’ with one another, they be-
came greatly stricken with sorrow upon
hearing that the Vrishnis had met with
destruction through the Brahmana’s rod of
punistimerit, me


The horizon on every side seemed”


'


The Sun's disc, O king, seemed to be:


10. Those heroes could tot believe the:
death of Vasudeva, like the drying up of
the ocean. In fact, they could not believe
the destruction of the holder of Starnga,


11. Informed of the incident about the
iron bolt, the Pandayas became stricken
with grief and sorrow. In faet, they sat
down, utterly cheerless and stricken with
blank despair,


Janamejaya said :—

_ 12. Inueed, O holy one, how was it that
the-Andiakas along with the Vrishnis,
and those great car-warriors, vis., the
Bhojas, met with destruction before the very
eyes of "Va sudeva ? -


Vaishampayana said:

13..- When the thirty-sizth yeat arrived
(after the great battle) a great €alamity
overtook the Vrishnis. Moved by Time,
they all met with destruction on account of


the iron bolt.


Janamejaya said :—

14. Crused by whom did those heroes,
viz., the Vrishnis, Andhakas and the
Bhojas, met with destruction ? OQ foremost
of twice-born persons, do you fully explain
alf this to me.


Vaishanipayana said i=

15. Que day, the Vrishni hetoes tum.
bering Sarana amongst them, saw Vishwa-
mitra and Kanwa and Narada arrived at
Dwaraka.

16—17. Afflicted by the rod of punish-
ment held by the celestials, those heroes,
causing Shamva to be disguised tike a
woman, approached those ascetics and
said,—‘* This one is the wife of Vabhru of
great energy who is desirous of having a
son. e Rishis, do you know for certain
what this one will produce ?/


18~—19. Hear now, O king, what those
ascetics, altempted to be thus imposed on,


2 4 MAHABHARATA.


said,—‘This heir of Vasudeva, by name
Shamva, will produce a dreadful iron bolt
for the destruction of the Vrishnis and the
Andhakas. :


20. O wicked and cruel ones, intoxicated
with pride, through that iron bolt you will
becoure the exterminators of yotir family
with the exception of Rama and Janarddana.


21. The blessed hero armed with the
plough will enter the ocean,:renouncing his
body, while a hunter of the name of Jara
will pierce the great Krishna while lying
on the ground.’


22. Attempted to be deceived by those
wicked ones, those ascetics, with eyes red
in anger, looked at each other ‘and uttered
those words. Having said se they then
went to see Keshava.


23. The destroyer of Madhu, informed
of what had o¢curred, summened all the
Wrishnis and told them of it. “Gifted with
great intelligence and fully acquainted with
what the end of his family would be, he
simply seid that that which was destined
would surely take place,


24. Hrishikegha haying said so, entered
his palace. The Lord of tite universe did
Not wish to ordain otherwise.


25. When the next day came, Shamva
actually produced an iron bolt through
which alf’tie jndividuals in the family of
the Vrishnis and’ the Andtakas became
reduced to ashes.


26. Indeed, -for the destruction of the
Vrishnis and the Andhakas, Shamvas
brought forth, through that curse, a dread-
ful iron bolt that looked dike a huge mes-
senger of death. The fact was duly re-
ported to the king. :


. 29. In great distress of mind, the king
(Ugeasena) caused that iran bolt to be re-
duced inté fine powder, Men were engaged,
O king, to cast that powder into the sea.


28—30. At the command of Abhuka, of
Janarddana, of Rama, and of great Vabhru,
it was, again, proclaimed throughout the
city, that from that day, among all the
Veishnis and the Andhakas noone should
manufaeture wines and intoxicating liquors
of any kind, and that whoever would secretly
manufacture wines and spirits should be im-
paled alive with aH his kinsmen.


3t. Through fear of the king, and
knowing that it was the order of Rama also
of unimpeachable deeds, all the citizens
bound themselves by a rule and abstained
yom manufacturing wines and spicits,


were rrot seen to feel any shane.


CHAPTER If.


(MAUSALA PARVA. )—
Continued,


Vaishampayana said :—

t, While the Veishnis and the Andhakas
were thus trying (to avoid the impending
calamity), the embudied form of ‘Time
(Death) every day wandered about their
houses.


z. He looked like a man of terrible and
fierce aspect. Of bald bead, he was black
and of ‘twany colors Sometimes he was
beheld by the Vrishnis as he peered into
their houses.


3. The powerful bowmen among the
Viishnis shot hundreds and thousands of
arrows at him, but none of these succeeded
in ptercing him, for he was none else than
the Destroyer of all c:eatures,


4. Day by day strong winds blew, and
many were the evil omens which arose,
awiul and foreboding the destruction of the
Veistinis and the Andhakas.


5 he streets swarmed with rats and
mice. Earthen “pots showed cracks or
broken from no visible cause. At night,
the rats and mice ate away the hair and
nails of sleeping men,


6. Sharikas chirped, sitting within the
houses of the Vristnis. ‘he noise made
by those birds ceased not for even a short
while by day or by night,

9. ‘Fhe Sarashas were heard ta imitate
the hooting of the owl, and goats imitated
the cries, O Bharata, of jackals,

8. Many birds appeared, moved by
Death, which were pale of color, but that
had legs red of hue. Pigeons were seen


tte always dispert itt the houses of the


Veishnis.

9g. Asses were born of kine, and ele-
phants ef mules. Cats were bon of
bitches, and mouse of the mungoose. ~


to. The Veishnis, committing sinful deeds,
They
showed disregard for Brahmanas and the
departed manes and the cetestials.


tr. They insulted and humifiated their
Ppreceptors and eldets. Only Rama and
Janarddana acted differently. Wives de-
ceived their husbands, and husbands de-
ceived wives. :

12. Fires, when ignited, cast their flames
towards the left. Sometimes they threw
out flames whose color was blue and red.


13. The Sun, whether when rising or


| setting over that city, seemed to be sure


MAUSALA PARVA,


rounded by headless trunks of human


beings.


14. In cook-rooms, upon food that was
clean and well-boiled, were seen, when it
wes served out for eating, innumerable
worms of various kinds.


15. When Brabmanas, receiving gifts,
blessed the day or the hour fixed for this
or that undertaking) or when great men
were engaged in silent recitations, the heavy
trend was heard of many men cunning
about but no one could be seen to whom the
sound of such sound could be ascribed.


16. The constellations were repeatedly
seen to be struck by the planets. None
amongst the Yadavas could, however, see
the constellation of his birth.


17. When the Pauchaj inya was blown
in their houses, asses uf dissonant and
awful voice, brayed aloud from all sides.

18. Seeing these signs which showed
the perverse course of Time, and seeing
that the day of the new moon cotacided


with the thirteenth (and the fourteenth)
lunation, Hrishikesha, summoning the
Vadavas, said to them these words :—


19. ‘Vhe fourteenth lunation has been
made the fifteenth by Rahu once more,
Such a day had appeared at the time of
the great battle of the Bharatas. It has


once more appeared, it seems, for our
destruction.’
20—21. Lhe destroyer of Keshi, vész.,


Janarddana, thinking upon the omens Uiat
Lime showed, understood that the thirty-
sixth year had come, and that what Gan-
dinari, burning with grief on account of the
death of her sons, and deprived of all her
kinsmen, had said was about to take place.


22. ‘The present is exactly similar to
that time which Yudlistthica bad marked
at sight of those dreadful omens which


appeared when the two armies were arran--,


ged in batile-order,


23. Vasudeva, having said so, tried to
being about those occurrences which weuld
mate Gandhari’s words true. + Phat chas-
tiser of enemies commanded the Vrishnis
to make a pilgrimage to some sacred water.


24. The messenger§ immediately pro-
claimed at the command of Keshava that
the Vristinis should make a journey to the
sea-coast for bathing in the sacred waters
of ‘the ocean. :


aerate at ence tem weeny ener erat tee yet tn en ene ene Te


CHAPTER IIE.


(MAUSAL4A PARVA.,)
Continued.


Vaishampayana said :—

x. At that time the Vrishni ladies
dreamt every night that a woman of black
color and white teeth, entering their abodes,
laughed aloud and ran through Dwaraka,
snatching from them the auspicious threads
in theic wrists. ,


2. The men dreamt that dreadful
vultures, entering theie houses and fire
chambers, gorged jhemsives on theic
bodies.

3. Their ornamments and umbrellas
and standards and armour were seen to be
taken away by dreadful Rakshasas.


4- Before the very eyes of the Vrishnis,
the discus of Krishua, given by Agni,
made of iron and having its nave com-
posed of hardest adamant, ascended into
the sky. :


5. In the very sight of Daruka, the
excellent car of Vasudeva, effulyent like
the sun, and properly equipt, was taken
away by the horses yoked to it. Those
foremost of horses, numbering four, and
fleet like the mind, fled away, dragging the
car aftee them along the surface of the
ocean. f onnes

6. The two great standards of Kcishna's
car -and Valadeva's car, having the
emblems of Garuda and palmyra, which
were reverently adored those two heroes,
were taken away by Apsatas who, day and
night, called upon the Vrishais and the
Andbakas to start on a pilgrimage to some
sacied water.


7. When these omeiss were seen ‘and
heard, those foremost of men, oés., the
powerful car-warriors of the Vrishnis and
the Andhakas, became desirous vf setting
out, with theit whole families, on a pilgti+
mage to some sacred water.


8 They prepared vari-us kinds of
viands and edibles and vaiious kinds ‘of
wines and meat.


g. The troops of the Verishnis and the
Andhakas, blazing with beauty and yiited
with fierce enetyy, then set out from the
city on cars and horses and elephants. ~


to. The Yadavas then, vith their wives,
proceeded to Prabhasa and took up their
residence there, each in the (temporary)
habitation which was assigned to hun, and
all having profuse provisiviia cunsisivg of
edibles aud diink,


: assembly, said,—' What Kshatriya is there.


4 MAHABHARATA.


it. Heating that they bad taken up
their abode on the sea-coast, Uddnava, the
wisest of méa, who was, besides, well-versed
in Yoga, went there and took their leave
(for departing).

12. Krishna, with joined hands, saluted
Uddhava, and seeing him bent on depart-
‘ing (from the world) and knowing that the
Gestruction of the Vrishnis was nigh, did
not feel any disposition to prevent him.

13. The powerful car-warriors among
the Vrishnis and the Andhakas, whose
hour had come, then saw Uddhava proceed
on his great journey, filling the entice sky
with his effulgence.

14. The Vrishnis, mixing with wine the
food that had been cooked for great Brah-
manas, gave it away to monkeys and apes,


15. Those heroes of fierce energy then
began to revel with drink, at Prabhasa.
‘The entire field echoed withthe blare of
hundreds of ttumpets and abounded with
actors and daucers._


16, In the very sight of Krishna, Rama
began to drink, with Kritavarman, Yuya-
dhana and Gada and Vabhru also did the
same


17-18, Then * Yuyudhana, inebriated
with wine, derisively laughing at and in-
sulting Kreitavarman in the midst of that


whe, 2Mned with weapons, will kill men
locked in the embraces of sleep and, there-
fore, already dead? Hence, O son
Hridika, the Yadavas will never tolerate
what you have done.”


49. When Yuyudhana had said these
words, Pradyumna, that foremost of car-
warriors, applauded them, expressing his

. disregard for the son of Hridika.


20. Greatly enraged at this, Kritavar-
man, emphasising his disregard for Satyaki
by pointing to him with bis left hand, said
these words :-—-


2k. *Professing yourself to be a hero,
how could you so cruelly kijl the armless
Bhurishravas who, on the field of battle, sat

. fasting.

22. Hearing these words of his, Keshava,
that destroyer of hostile heroes, giving
way to anger, Cast an angry look at Krita-
Variman,


“23. Then Satyaki informed the destroyer
-af Madhu 4s to how Kritavarman had be-

haved towards. Satrajt for taking away
from hita the celebrated gem Syamantaka.


24 Hearing the narrative, Satyabhama,
piving way to anger and tears, approached
Kestava, and, sitting on his lap, imctcased
his anger (for Keitavarman),


25—27. Then cising upin anger, Sityaki
said,—~ { sweac to you by Truth that PE shald
soon cause this One ta follow the five sons
of Draupadi, and of Dirishtadyumna and
Shikhandin,—they, viz., who wese killed by
this sinful wretch, while they were asleep,
with the help of Diona’s son. O you of
slender wais', Kriavarman’s period ef lie
and fame has come to an end.”


28. Having said these words, Satyaki
rushed at Kritavarman and cut off his.
bead with a sword in the vesy sight of
Keshava,


29 Yuyudhana, having performed this
feat, began to strike down others there
present. Hrishikesha ran to prevent him
trom doing fucther mischief.


30 ©6At that time, however, O king, the
Bhojas and Andhakas moved by the per-
verseness of the hour that had come upon
them, alk became as one man and sure
rounded the son of Shini.


31. Janarddana of great energy, Enow-
ing the character of the hour stood uo
moved without giving way to anger, secing
those heroes rushing in anger at Satyaki
from every side.


32. Urged by fate and inebriated with
drink, they began to strike Yuyudhana with
the pyts from which they had been eating.


- 33e. When the son of Shini was being
thus assaulted, Rucmini’s son became great-
ly enraged. He rushed forward for res-

uing Satyaki who was engaged with the
Boojas and the Andhakas.


34 Gifted with might of arms and
wealth of energy, those two heroes acted
with great courage. Butas the odds were
overwhelming, both of them were killed
before the very eyes of Keistina,


35. Seeing his own son, and the son of
Shinui too, killed, the delighter of the Vadus
took up, in anget, a handful of the Eraka
grass which grew there,

36. hat handful of grass became a
terrible bolt of iron gifted with the energy
of the thuoder-boh. With it Krishna
destroyed all those who came before him.


37. Then the Andhakas and the Bhojas,
the Shaineyas aud the Veishnis, urged by
Time, stcuck one avother in that dreadiul
fight. :


38. Indeed, O king, whoever amongst
them took-up in anger a few blades of the
Eraka grass, these, in his hands, became


soon converted into a thunder-bolt, O
powerful one,
39. Every blade of grass therd was seen


to be converted into a terrible irou bolt.


MAUSALA PARVA, 5


Atl this, know, O king, was due to the curse
imprecated by Bratmanas,


40. He who hurled a blade of grass
Saw that it pierced through even such
things as were utterly impenetrable. In
fact, every blade was seen to become a
dreadful bolt having the force of thunder,


41. Son kimMed father, and fathec killed
son, O Bharata! Inebriated with wine, they
rushed and fell upon one another,


42. ‘The Kukuras and the Andhakas
met with destruction lixe insects rushing at
a burning fire. As they were thus being
destroyed, no one among them thought of
escaping by flight,

43. Knowing that the hour of destruc-
tion had come, the mighty-armed Keshava
stood there, seeing everything. Indeed,
the destroyer of Madhu stood, raising a
bolt of iron formed of a blade of grass.


44. Seeing that Shamva was killed, as
also Charudeshna and Pradyumna and
Aniruddina, Madhava became filled with
anger.


45. Seeing Gada lying dead on the
ground, his anger became enhanced. The
holdec of Sharnga and the discus and the
mace then rooted the Vrishnis and the
Andhakas.


46. Hear, O king, what that conquerer
of hostile towns, vis,, Vabhru of great
energy, and Diuruka, then said to Keisiimna,


47. ‘O holy one, a very large number
of inen has been killed by you. Turn now
to where Rama bas gene! We wish to go
there where he bas gone.’


CHAPTER 1V.


(MAUSALA PARVA. )—
Continued,


Vaishampayana said :—

1. ‘Fhen Daruka, Keshava and Vabhru
left that place following Rama. They saw
that hero of great eneryy sitting thought-
fully, reclining his back against a tree, in
@ Solitary place.


2. Finding Rama of great soul, Krishna
ordered Daruka, saying,‘ Going to the
Kurus, inform Partha of this great car-
nage of the Yadus.


. 3. Let Acjusa come here speediliv, hear-
ing of the destruction of the VYadavas
through the Brahmanas’ curse.’ Thus
addressed Daruki, deprived of his senses
by gd:row, proceeded on a car to the capital
of We Kurus.

>


4. After Daruka had departed, Keshava,
seeing Vabhrut waiting on him, told hina
these words :—‘' Do you go speedily for
protecting the ladies. Let not robbers do
them any injury, tempted by the riches.


§ {Thus ordereded by Keshava, Vabhru,
still helpless with wine but cheerless at the
Gestruction- of bis Kinsmen, went away,
He hed rested for a while by the side of
Keshava, but as soon asjhe had gone to a
distance, the iron-bolt, attached to a mallet
in the hands of a hunter, suddenly sprang
of itself upon that solitary suivivor of the’ -
Yadava family and killed him: who alsa
had been included in the curse of the
Brabmanas,


6. Seeing Vabhru killed, Keshava of
great energy addressed his elder brother
and said,—' Do you, O Rama, wait for me
here till 1 put the ladies under the care of
kinsmen,


7. Entering the city of Dwaravati,
Janarddana said these words to his father,
—' Do you protect a. the ladies of our
house, Uil Dihananjaya cones.


8. At the skirts of the forest Rama is,
waiting for me. I shall meet him to-day.
This great destruction of the Yadus has
been seen by me even as I beheld before
the carnage of those Kshatriyas whsradce
the foremost ones of Kuru’s race.


g. It is impossible for me to see this
city of the Yadavas without the Yadu3 be-
side me. Know that going to the forest £
shali practise penances with Rama in my
company.’


lo. Having said these words, Krishna
touched the feet of his father with his bead,
and quickly lefthim. ‘Then a loud wail of
sorrow afose from the ladies and children
of his house, :


1t, Hearing that loud sound of wailing
uttered by the weeping ladies,. Keshava
returned and said to them,—Arjuna will
come here. That foremost of men will
relieve you of your sorrow,


12. Proceeding then to the forest,
Keshava saw Rama sitting in a solitary
place. -He also saw that Rama had set hime
self to Yoga and that from out his mouth
was issuing a powerful snake,


13. The color of that snake was white,
Leaving the human body, that great Naga,
of a thousand heads and having a form as
large as that of a mountain, endued ber
sides with red eyes, proceeded along the
way leading to the ocean, :


14—16. Ocean himself, and many celes-
tial snakes, and many sacred Rivers were
there, for receiving bim with honor.
Vhese were Katkotaka, Vasuki, Takshaka,


i)


Prithughravas,- and. Varuna, Kunjara,
Mishriy. Shankita and Kunrada, and
Pyndarika, and the great’ Qicitacashtea,
and: Hrada and Kratha: and Shitikantha
of fierce energy, and Cnakramanda and
Atishanda, and that foremost of Nigas
called Durmukha, and A:nvarisha, and
king Varuna himself, O king, Advancing
forward aad offering him the Arghya and
water to wash his feet, and with various
other rites, they all adored the powerful
Naga and saluted him by making the usual
enquiries.

17. After his brother had thus gone from
the (hunran), warld, Vasudeva of ecvtestial
vision, who was fully acquainted with the
end of all things, wandered for sometime
in that solitary forest thoughtfully, Gifted
with great energy he then sat down on the
naked earth.


18. He had thought before this of every
thing which had been foreshadowed by the
words uttered by Gaadhari in former days,
He also recoilected the words that Durvasas
had spoken at the time his body was
smeared by that Rishi witt the cesidue of
the Puyasa he had eaten.

1g. The high-souled’ one, thidking of
the destruction of the Veishnis and the
Audnasas, as also of the previous destruc-
tion of the Kurug, concluded that the hour
(for his own depirture from the world)
had come. He then controlled his senses
(in Yoga). oer: :

20. Knowing’ the truth of every tapic,
Vasudeva, though he was the. Supreme
Deity, wished to die for remaving ail doubts
and establishing a certainty of results,
simply for upholding the three worlds and
for making tne words of Atri’s son true. -


2t. Having ‘controlled all bis’ senses,
Speech, and mind, Krishna laid himself
down in high Yoga. A fierce hunter of
the name of Jaca then came there, ‘for find-
ing a deer, ee oye


22. The hunter mistaking Keshava, who
was stretched on the earth in bigh Yoga,
fur a deer, pierced at him at the heel with
an arrow and quickly came to that spot for
Capturing his prey.


23. Coming up, Jara saw a man dressed
in yellow cobes, rapt in Yoga, and gifted
with many arms, Considering himself an
aprender, and filied with fear, he touched
the feet of Keshava,


"24. The high-souled one comforted him
and then ascended upwards, filling the
entire sky with splendour. -

25. When he reached the celestial re-
gies, Vasava and the twin Ashwins and


|
|


MAHABHARATA,


Rudra and the Adityas and the Vasus and
the Vishwedévas, and Munis and Siddhag


' and many foremost ones among the Gan-


dharvas, with
receive him.

26. Then, O king, the illustrious Nara-
yana of dreadful energy, the Creator and
Destroyer of all, —that preceptor of Yoga—-
filling Heaven with his splendcur, reached
his own inconceivable region,


27. Krishna then met the deities and
(celestial) Rishis and Charanas, O king,
and the foremost ones among the Gan-
dharvas and many beautiful Apsaras and
Siddhas and Saddhyas. All of them bend-
ing in humility, adored him.


28. The celestials all saluted him, O
monarch, and many foremost of ascetics
and Ristis adored him as the Lord of all.
The Gandhatvas waited on him, singing his


the Apsaras, advanced to


praises, and Indra also joyfully praised
him,
“y CHAPTER V.


(MAUSALA PARVA.)—
Coutinued.


Vaishampayamsa. said :—

1, ‘Meanwhile Daruka, going to the
Kurus and seeing ’those powerful care
warriors, vis., the sons Pritha, informed
them of how the Vrishnis had -kiiled one
another with iron bolts,

‘2. Wearing that the Vrishnis along with,
the Bhojas and Andhakas and Kukuras’
had all been killed, the Pandavas, buruing


with gcicf, became highly moved.


3. Yhen the Arjuna, the dear friend of
Keshava, bidding thei farewell, started
tur seeing his maternal uncle, -He said


that destruction would soon overtake every
thing. wos

4. Proceeding to the city of the Vrishnis
with Dacuka in bis company, O poweriul,
king, that hero saw tliat the city of
Dwaraka lovked liked a woman ceft of hee
husband.

3. Those ladies who had, before this,
the very Lord of the universe for their pro-
tector, were now lordiess. Seeing that
Partha, had come for prutecting them, they
all bewailed aloud. =~

6. Sixteen thousand ladies had been
wedded to Vasudeva, Indeed, as soon as
they beheld Arjuna arrive, they “uttered a
loud cry of sérrow.


. As soon as the Kuru prince met.those
beautiful ladies deptived of the protection
4


MAUSALA PARVA. q


of Krishna and of their sons as well. he
was unable to look at them, his vision being
obstructed by tears,


8—~—i0. Phe Dwaraka-river had the
Vrishnis and the Andhasas for its water,
horses for its fishes, cats for its rafts, the
sound of musical instruments and the rattle
of cars for its waves, houses and mansions
and public squares for its lakes. Gems
and precious stones were its moss. ‘The
walls of adamant were the garlands of
flowers that fluated on it. “Phe streets and
roads were the strong currents running in
eddie¢s along its surface. The great open
squares were the large lakes in its course,
Rama and Krishna were its two mighty
alligators. ‘That agreeable river now seem-
ed to Arjuna to be the dreadful Vaitarani
bound up with Time's net.


1t. Indeed, the son of Vasava, gifted
with great intelligence, beheld the city to
look even thus, reft as it was of the Vrishni
heroes,


12. Shorn of beauty, and perfectly cheer-
less, it presented the aspect of_a lotus flower
in the season of winter. Seetng the sight
that Dwaraka presented, and seeing the
numerous wives of Kiishna, Arjuna be-
wailed aloud with eyes bathed in tears and
fell down on the earth,

13. Then Satya the daughter of Satrajit,
and Rukhmini too, O king, fell down be-
side Dhananjaya and bewailed.


14. Raising bim then they caused him
to be seated ona golden seat. he tadies
Sat around that great one, giving expression
to their feelings,

15. Praising Govinda and talking with
the ladies, the sun of Pandu comforted them
and theu proceeded to see his maternal
uncle,

ernie,


CHAPTER VI.


(MAUSALA PARVA,)—
Continued.


Vaishampayana said :—

1. The Kuru prince saw the heroic and
great Anakadundubhi lying on the ground,
and burning with grief on account of his
sons.


‘ 2. The broad-chested-and mightysarmed
son of Pritha, more afflicted than his: uncle
with his eyes bathed in tears, touched his
nunele’s feet, O Bharata,

3. The mighty-armed ‘Anakadundubhi
wished to smell the head of his’ sister’s
‘son, but could not do it, O destroyer of
enemies, * 5 :


-not die!


4. The old man of mighty-arms, deep'y
afflicted, embraced Partha with his arms
and wept aloud, remenibering his sons,
brothers, grandsons, daughter’s sons, and
friends.


Vasudeva said :-— .

3. Without seeing those heroes, O
Arjuna, who had subjugated ail the kings
of the Earth and the Daityas.a hundred
times, I am still alive}. 1 see, that I cans


6. Those two heroes who were the dear
disciptes of Arjusa, and who were much
respected by him, alas, O Partha, through
their fault, the Vrishnis have been des-
troyed, :


9—8. Those two who were considered as
Aticathas amongst the foremost of the
Vrishnis, and referring ta whom in course
of conversation you were wont ta indulge ©
in pride, aud who, O chief of Kuru’s race,
were ever dear to Krishna bimself,—alas,
those two, O Dhananjiya, have been the
chief causes of the destruction of the
Vrishnis,


I do not censure the son .of Shini of
the son of Hridika, O Arjunal I do not -
censure Akcurca or the son of Rukmint,
No doubt, the curse (of the Rishis) is the
sole cause,


tom!2, How is it that that lord of the
universe, vis., the destroyer of Madhu, wha
had shown his prowess for killing Keshin,y
KKansa, and Chaidya swelling with pride,
and Ekalavya the soiy of the king of the
Nishadas, and the Kalingas and the Magas
dhas, and the Gandharas and the king of
Kashi, and many rulers assembled togethee
in the midst of the desert, many heroes
belonging to the East and the South, and
many kings of the mountainous regions,
alas, how could he temain imdifferent to
such a calamity as the curse denounced
by the Rishis ?


13. Yourself, Narada, and the Munis,
knew him to be the eternal and sinless
Govinda, the Deity of unfading glory.


14. ‘Alas, being powerful Vishnu himself,
he saw without interfering, the destruction
of his kinsmen! My son must have hims
self allowed all this to‘happet.”

13. He was the Lord of the universe,
He did not, however, wish to falsify the
words of Gandhari and the Rishis, O des
‘troyér of enemies, —


‘16. ‘Before the very. eyes, O hero, your


grandson, who had'been killed by Ashwate


thaman, was revived through his energy.


3 MAHABHARATA.


17~18. That friend, hawever, of yours
did not wish to protect his kinsnien, Sees
ing his sons and grandsons and brothers
and friends lying dead, he Said té se
these words, O Bharata’s race,—The des-
truction of this eur family has at last comie.

19. Vibhatsa will come to this city, viz.,
Dwaravati, ‘Yeti tim what bas taken placé
vts., this great destruction of the Vrishnis.


26. ¥ have no doubt that a8 soott as Ke
witli ‘Near of ie déstruction of the Yadus,
that herd df mighty energy will come here
forthwith.


at. Know, O father, that I arh Arjuna
and Arjuna is ntyself. That stiould be
done by you which he would say.


22. Tle son of Pandu will do what is
best for the womien ard thé children. Evert
he will perform youc fusteral cites.


23. Uhis city of Dwaravati, after Arjuna’s
departure, will, with its walls and edifices,
be speedily swallowed up by the dceatt.

24. As for thyself, retiriig td sorte
sacred place, | shall pass ry time with the
fntelligent Rama ifn my company, observing
Strict vows all the while,


23. Having Said these Words td nie,
Hrishikesha of inconceivable prowess,
leaving wie witli the childret, has gore
away Sortie where which | do not know.

26. ‘Thinking of thosé two great
brothers of yours as also of the dreadful
destruction of my kinsmen, I have abstained
from all food; and am
grief,

47. 1 shalt sieittier eat, tor Jive. By
good luck you meet me, O son of Pandu.
Do you accomplish all; O Partha, that
Krishna has said.

28. This kingdom, with all thesé worhet,
and all the wealth here, is your now, O
son of Pritha! As for myself, O destroyer
of foes, I shall renounce my life however
dear it may be.


CHAPTER VIL


(MAUSALA PARVA. )=<<
Continued, -


Vaishampayatia said :—

1—2. That scoreher of enemies, viz.,
Vibhatst, thus addressed by his maternal
uncle, ie rae with great cheerlessness of
heart, to Vasudeva who was equally cheer-
fess, saying,—'O uncle, I am unable to
look at this Earth when she is reft of that
hero of Vristni’s race and these my other
kinsmen,


emaciated with |


3. The king and Bhinaséna and
Satnadeva and Nakula and Yajoaseni, are
of the sanie mind with otyself, in this
matter.

4 The tine has come for the departure
of the king also. Kuow this that the hode
of otir departure too is near. You are thé
foremost of those Who are Well conversant
with the course of time.

g. LU shall, tiowever, O chastiser of
eneniies, first remove to Indcaprastha the
women of tte Vrishni race as also the
children aud cie aged.’

6. Having said so to his dnicle, Arjuna,
text addressed Daruka, saying;—'‘ [ wist
to see forthwith the chief officers of the
Vristini heroes.’

7- Havirig uttéred these words, thé
heroic Arjuna, grieviig for those great
car-warriors, erttered the great tiall of the
Yadavas, called Sudhartita.


8. When tie had taken his seat there;
all the citizens, inchiding the Brahmanas,
attd all the niinisters of state; came and
stood surrouriditig hist.

g. Then Partha; noté griéved than
they, addressed those grieving and cheer+
les§ citiZens arid officers who were mioré
dead than alive, and said these words
which were well suited to the occasiori.


to. ‘I shall take away with nie the remisz
Hants of the Veristinis and the Atidtakas {
The sea will sooti engulf this citys


tr. Equip all your at aad pidce on
tiem all your riches. This Vajca will be
your king at Shakraprastha.


12. On thé severith day from this, at
sunrise, we shall start. Make your pre
paratiotis intimediately.’


13. Thus addressed by Pritha’s soti of
pute deeds, all of theni hastened their pre-
parations with eagerness fot securing theit


| safety. :


14. Arjuna passed that niglit in the
palaces of Keshava. He was suddenty
overwhelmed with great sorrow and stupeé-
faction. ; ,


tg. When niorning dawned, Vasudeva
of great energy and prowess - attained,
through the help of Yoga, to the highest
end.


t6. A lotid and feart-rendeting sound
of wailing was heard in Vasudeva’s palace,
uttered by the weeping ladies.


17. They were seen with dishevelled hair
and divested of orhaments and garlands,
Beating theit breasts with their hands, they
indulged in heart-rendeting lamentations.


WAUSALA PARVA. a


1B. ‘Thote foremost cf women, o7z.,
Devaki and Bhadra and Rohini and Madira
threw themselves on the bodies of their
lord.


19. Then Partha caused the body of his
uncle to be carried out on arich vehicle
‘borne on the shoulders of men.


20. It was followed by all the citizens of

waraka and the people of ‘the provinces,

all of whom, greatly stricken with grief, had

pail well-disposed towards the deceased
ero,


‘at. Before that vehicle were borne the
‘umbrella which had been held over his head
at the conclusion of the horse-sacrifice he
‘had performed while living, and also the
burning fires he had daily adored, with the
‘priests who had‘used to attend to them.


22.. The body of the hero was followed
by his wives decked in ornaments an¢
‘Surrounded by thousands of women an
thousands of their daaghters-in-law.


23. The last rites were then performed
at that spot which he liked while he ‘was
alive.

24. The foir wives of that heroic san of
Shura ascended the funeral pyre and were
‘consumed with the body of their hiacband.
All of them attained to those happy regidus
which were his.

25. The son of Pandu biurnt the hody
of his uncle together with those four wives
of his, using ‘various kinds of s¢ents and
perfumed wood,
_ 26. As the fineral pyre blazed up, a
loud sound was heard of the burning wood
and other combastible materials, along with
‘the clear chaunt of Samant and the lamen-
tation of the citizens and others who'saw
‘the rite.

27. After it was all over, the hoys of the


Vrishnis and Andhaka races, headed by


Vajea, as alsa the ladies, offered oblations
‘of water to the great hero.

28. Phaleitna, who was careful in ob-
‘Serving every duty, having caused this dutv
to be perforitied, went, O chief of Bharata’s
‘race, next ‘to ‘the place where the Vrishnis
were killed.


29. The Kure'prince, seeing them fying
‘willed all) around, became exceedingly
‘cheertess. He, however, did what required
‘to be done in view of that which had taken
place.


30. The fast rites were performed, ac-
cording to the order of seniority, to the
bodies of those heroes killed by the iran
bolts.born, by virtue of the curse denounced


by the Brahmanas, of the blades of Zraka-


glass. ’
2


31. Searching ont the bodies then of
Rama and Vasudeva, Arjuna caused them
to be burnt by expert persons.


32. Theson of Panda, having next per
farmed duly those rites that are done to tha
manes of the dead, quickly started on the
seventh day, mounting on his:car.


23. The widows of the Vrishni heroes
wailing aloud, follawed the great son of
Pandu, vis., Dhananjaya, on cars drawn
by buflocks and mules and camels.


34. All were in deep sorrow. The
servants of the Vrisnis, their horsemen,
and theie car-warriors too, followed the
Procession.


35. The citizetis and the inhabitants of
the conatry, at the command of Pritha’s
son, started at the same time and proceeded,
sirrounding that cavalcade destitwte of
heroes and nitimbering only women and the
aged and the children.


36. The warriors who fought from the
backs of elephants proceeded on elephants
as hage as hills. The infanty also set outs
‘together with the reserves,


37--38. The children of the Andhaka,
and the Vrishni races, all followed Arjuna.
The Brahmanas and Kshatrivas, od
Vaishyas, and rith Shudeas, started, keeping,
before them the sixteen thonsand womers
who had formed Vasudeva’s harem, and
Vajra, the grandson of the intelligent
Krishna. :


3g. The widows of the other heroes of
the Bhoja. the Vrishni and the Andhaka
races, fordless now, that. started with
Arjuna, numbered many millions.


40. That foremost of car-warriors, that
conqueror of hostile tawns, vis., the son of
Pritha, escorted thie huge procession of
Vrishnis, which still abounded with wealth,
and which looked tite a veritable ocean,


4t. After alf the people fad started, the
ocean, that home of sharks, and alligators,
flonded Dwaraka, which still teemcd with
tiches of every kind, with its waters, :


42. Whatever portion of the ground waa
passed over, ocean immediately flooded
over with his waters. .


43. Seeing this wanderful epectacle, the
inhabitants of Nworaka walleed faster and
faster, saying,—‘ Wonderful is the course of
fate.’


44. Dhananjava, after ahandoning Dwae
rata, proceeded by slow marches, causing
the Vrishni women to rest in charming
forests and mountains and by the sides of
delightful rivers,


45. Arrived at the country of the five
waters, the powerful Dhananjaya encamped


‘¥o " MANABHARATA,


_ ip the midst of-aland that abounded with


corn and kine and other animals.

6, Sgeing, those widows escorted _ by
Briuia’s son alone, O Bharata, the robbers
felt a great temptation,

47. Then -those: sinful wretches, with
hearts possessed by cupidity, w7z., those
Abhiras of ill omen, assembled togethe: and
held a consultation. jae

4S. They said,‘Here there is only one
bouman, vz.,.Acjuna, Phe party consists
of children and the old. . He escorts them,
alone. ‘Yhe.warttors (of the Veishnis) are
without energy.’


.49 Then those robbers, numbering by
thousands, and armed with clubs, rusted
towards the procession of the Vvishnis for
looting them. ' -


. 52: Urged by the perverse course of
time, they fell upon that party, frightening
it with loud leonine shouts aud desirous of
Slaughter. ao : :


" 5t—52. The gon of Kunti, suddenly
ceasing lo advance along the path, turned,
with his followers, towards the place where
the robbers had attached the party, Smil-


ing the while, that mighty-armed warrior |


addressed the assailants, saying, —‘Ve sin-
jul wretches, stop, if-ye love your lives!
Ye will rue this when I cut your’ bodies
with my atrows and take your lives.’


53. ‘Though thus addressed by that hero,
they disregarded his words, and though
tepeatedly dissuaded, they fell upon
Arjuna, nah ee.

54. Then Arjuna tried .to string his
large, indestructible, celestial bow with
Some effort, © ; ,


55. He succeeded with great difficulty
in stringing it, when the battle had become
furious. He then began to think of his
tclestial weapons but they would not come
to his m.nd. .


56. Seeing that furious battle, the loss
of the might of bis arm, and the non-
appearance of his celestial weapons, Arjuna
Lecame greatly ashamed.

§7. The Veishni warriors including the
itfanuy, the elephant-warriors, and the
caremen, failed to rescue those Vrishni
women who were being snatched away by
the robbers.


58. The concourse was very larges The
tronbers attacked it at diffzrent points.
A:jana Uied his best to protect it, but
could not succeed.

59 B-fore the eyes of all the warriors,
qu any foremost of ladies weré dragged away,


rea others went away with the rubbers


{ thetic own accord.


60. The powerful Arjuna, supported by
the servants of the Vrishuis, struck the
cobbers with arrows shot off Gandiva.


61., Soon, however, O king, his arrows
were exhausted. In former days his arrows
had been inexhaustible. Now, however,
they proved otherwise.


62.. Finding his arrows exhausted, he
became deeply afflicted with grief. Vhe
son of Indra then bezan to strike the robs
bers with the horns of his bow.


63.. Those Mlechcchas, however, O Janas
fejaya, in the very sight of Partha, re«
treated, taking away with them mauy fore
most ladies of the. Viishnis and Andhakas.


64--65. The powerful Dhananjaya cons
sidered it all as the work of destiny. Filled
with sorrow he breathed heavy sighs, at
the thought of the non-appearance of his
(celestial) weagoris, the ‘loss of the might
of ‘his aims, the refusal of his bow to obey
him; and the exhaustion of his arrows.


66. Considering it all-as the work of
destiny, he became greatly cheerless. . Hé
then ceased, O king, to make further efforts,
Saying, he tad ‘not the power which he
had before. *

67. The high-souled one, taking with
him the residue of the Vrishai women, and
the wealth that was still with them, reached
Kurukshetca.


68. ‘Thus bringing with him the remnant
of the Vrishnis, be established them at
different places. 7

69 He established the son of Kritavars
man at the city called Marttikavat, with
the. remnant of the women of the Bhoja
king.

70. Escorting the remainder, with childrén
and old men, and women, the son of Pandu


_established them, who were reft of: herocs,


in the city of Indraprastha.


gt. The dear. son of Yuyudhana, with
a number of old men and children and
women, the righteous-souled Arjuna estab+
lished on the banks. of the Saraswati.


72. “The rtike of Indraprastha was given
to Vaj-a. The widows of Akvsura then
wished to retire into the forest. Vajra
asked them repeatedly to desist, but they
did not hear him. ‘


73. Kukmini, the princess of Gindhara,
Shaivya. Haimavati, and queen Jamvavati,
ascended the funeral pyre.

74. Satyabhama and. the other dear
wives of Krishna entered the forest, O king,
resolved to practise penances. _¢

75. They began to live on fruits and roots
and pass their time in the contemplation of


KIAUSALA PARVA,


Hari. Going beyond the Himavat,’ they.
took up their residence in a plate called
Kalapa,


76.’ Those men who had followed Arjuna

fcom waravati, were divided into Brdups,
and bestowed upon Vajra.--
" 9%, “Having done all these a€ts duited to
fhe occasion, Ajsjund, with eyés bathed ii
tears, then éntered the hecntitage of Vyasa,
There he saw the Dwaipayana seated at
his case.


meee


CHAPYER VII.


(MAUSALA PARVA.)—
Concluded.


Vaishampayans said : ~

1. «= As Arjuna entered the hermitage of
the truthfal Rishi, he saw the son of Satya-
vati Seated in a solitary spot.


2. Approaching that Rishtof igh vows
and gifted with a knowledge of all duties,
he said —Tl am Acjuaa’—and then ote
his pleasure. ' oot


3. Satyavati’s son, -endued int high
penances, answered, saving,—'Welcome I’
‘OF tranquil soul, the great ascetic further
‘said, —' Take your seat.’


4—5. Seeing that the son of Pritha “was
‘greatly cheerless and breathing heavv' sighs
repeatedly and filled with despair, Vyasa,
addressed him, saying,—Hrave you been
sprinkled with water from anybody’s nails
or hair or the end of anvbody’s cloth, or
from the mouth of ajar? Did you know
any woman before the cessation of her
menses? Have you killed a Brahmana ?


6. Have yon been defeated in battle?
You louk like one shorn of prosperity! 1
do not know that vou have been defeated
by any one. Why then, O chief Bharata's
race, this exceedingly cCejected look! You
should, O of Pritha, tell me all, if, indeed,
there be no harm in telling it.


Arjuna said :—

7. te whose complexion was like that
of a cloud, he whose eyes were like pair of
large lotus petals, vzz, Krishna, has, with
Rama, renounced his body and ascended
to heaven.

8 At Prabhasa, through iron bolts
caused by the curse denounced by Brah-
tmanas, the desteuction bas taken place of
the Vuishei heroes. That destruction has
Leen awful and not even a single heio has
escaped,”


warriors have thus been killed.


Er


‘ o The herdeg of thé Bhi 44. Mid Asidhdka,
and the Vrishni races, O ‘Biatahians; who.
were all gifted with high-souls, great shight,
and Jeoniné pridé, have hifled> due another
in battle.


to. Possegsed of aris which toolied like


_thaceS of. irén, and capable-of bearityy the


strokes of heavy-clabs and darts, alas. they
have all Deei ‘killed with. blades of. Eraku
gtass. See the perverse coarse of Time.


41.) Five hundred thousand mighty-armed
nceanter~
ng one another, they have met with dess


truction., .. ,
12. Thinking repeatedly of thia. destruc-


‘tion of the Yadava warviors of immeasuce


able @nérgy and of the ilusttioas Kristivay,
Tcannol get peace of mind,


13 Yhe death of the holder of Sharnga .


is as incredible as the drying up of the


ocean, the displacement of a mountain,
the ‘falling down’ of thé heaves, or: the
‘cooling property of fire. :


.. 14. Deprived’ of the company of the
Verishni heroes, To wisi not to Jive in this
world,


13. ‘ Ailothet event ‘has taken place that
is move paidful thas this, O you Waving
penances for wealth. Repeatedly thinking
of it, my heart is breaking.


r6. -Invmy very sight U Brahmana,
theusands: of Vrishui fadies were ‘carried
away iby the Abhiras of the country of the
five waters, who attacked us.

17., Taking up my bow, | found myself
unequal to even sting it. The power that
had existed in ‘my arms seemed to have


disappeared on that occasion."


18. O gieat ascetic, my weapons of
various kinds failed to appear. Soon, again,
my atrows became exhausted,


1g That person of immeasurable soul,
of four arms, holding the conch, the discus,
and the mace, clad in yellow tobes, dark of
compiexien, and possessing eyes tesem-
bling lotus-petals, is no tonger seen by me |
Alas, reft of Govinda, what have 1 te hve
for, dragging my life in sorrow ?


zo. He who used to stalk in advance of
ury car, that divine form gilted with great
Splendour and unfading power, consuming
as he proceeded all hostile wairtors, can
nh» longer be seen by me.


21—22. No longer seeing bim who by
his energy first burnt ali hostile troops
whom | afterwards killed with arrows shot
off Gandiva, Iam filléd with grief and my
lead swims, O best of men! Penetrated
with cheerlessness and despais, 1 cannot
get peace of mind,


12


23. I dare not five, reft of the heroic
Janacddana. As soon as I heard that
Vishnu had feft the earth, my eyes became
dim and all things disappeared from my
vision.

24. ‘O best of men, you should telf me
what is good for me now, for 1 am now a
wanderer with an empty heart, despoiled
of my kinsmen and of my prowess.


Vyasa said :—

25. The powerful car-warriors of the
Vrishni and the Andhaka races have all been
‘cdtisumed by the Brahmana’s curse. O
‘clief of Kuru’s race, you should not grieve
for their destraction.


26. That. which has taken plate, had
been ofdained. {t was the destiny of those
great warriors. Krishna allowed it to take
place although he was fully competent to
baffle it.


27. Govinda was able to alter the very


‘course of the universe with all its mobile |


and immobite creatures. hat need then
be said of the curse of even great
Brahmanas ?


23. He who used to progeed in front of |


your’ car, armed with discus and mace,
through affection for you, was the four-
armed Vasudeva, that ancient Risht,


29. That great one of expansive eyes,
wis . Krishna, having lightened the burthen
of the Barth and cast off his (human) body,
has attained to his own high seat.


30. By you also, O foremost of men, with
Bhima for your helpmate and the twins,
O mighty-armed hero, has the great work
of the gods been done.


MAHABHARATA-


gt. O foremost one of Kuru’s race, ¥
regard you and your brothers as crowne
with success, for you have accomplished the
great purpose of your fives! The Time
has come for your departure from the world.
Even this, O powerful one, is what is bene=
ficial for you now.


32. Even this, tinderstanding and
prowess and foresight, O Bharata, arise
when days of prosperity have tiot gone.
These very acquisitions disappear when the


hour of adversity comes.


33. All this has Time for its root. Time
is. indeed, the seeds of the universe, O
Dhananjaya! It is ‘Time, again, which
withdraws everything at fits pleasure.


34. One becomes powerful, and, again,
losing that power, becomes weak. One
becomes a master and rules others, and
again, losing that position, becomes &


j servant for obeying the orders of others.


35. Your weapons, having achieved suc.
cess, have gone away to the place they
came from. They will, again, come intd
your hands when the Time for their coming
approaches, :

36. The Time has come, O Bharata,
for you all to attain to the highest end.
Tis is what I consider to be highly bene=
ficial for you all, O chief of Bharata’s race.


Vaishampayana said :—

37.. Having heard these words of Vyasa
of great energy, the son of titha, re«
ceiving his permission, returned to the city
of Hastinapur. ‘

38. Entering it, the hero approached
Vadhishthita and informed him of all that
had takew place about the Vrishnis,


Finis MAuSALA Parva,


A PROSE ENGLISH TRANSLATION


OF


THE MAHABHARATA.


TRANSLATED LITERALLY FROM THE ORIGINAL SANSKRIT TEXTE.)


ALAHAPRASTHANA PARVA.
VOL. XVII. .


EDITED X& PUBLISHED BY
MANMATHA NATH DUTY, (Shasir) MA., M.R.A-S. |
Recror, KesHusp ACADEMY.
author of the English T; ranslation of the Ramayana, Vishnu Puranam,.


Srinad-Bhagavatam, Kamandakiya-Nitisara, Bhagavad-Gita,
and many other works.


40, Nayan Chand Dut?s Street, Calcutta,


CALCUTTA:


Prinrmep sy H. C. Dass, Erysium Press,
40, Nayan Chand Dutt's Street.


1905.


YABLE OF CONTENTS,


Cuabter 1—The King leaves the world Citarrer 111.—Shakia tomes to the King
alter hearing Krishna’s departure==p. t. = | and informs that he will see all his relatives
Cuaprer 1.=The departure of Pandava | ahd kinsmen=p. 4.
princes from the world=p. 2.


THE MAHABHARATA:
(IN ENGLISH.)


MAHAPRASTHANIKA PARVA.


CHAPTER I:


Having saluted Navayana and Nara the
best of male beings, as also Saraswati


the Goddess of Learning, let us ery’


SUECESS.


Janamejaya said -—~

t. Having heard of that fighting with
iron bolts between the heroes of the Vrishni
and the Andhaka races, and having been
informed also of Krishna's departure from
this world, what did the Pandavas do ?


Vaishampayana said :—

2—3 Having heard the particulars of
the great destruction of the Vrishnis, the
Kaurava king was determined on leaving
the world,
‘O yes of great intelligence, itis Time which
cooks every creature (in his cauldron),
J think that what has taken place is due
- to the cords of Fime (with which he binds
us all), You should also see it.”

4 Thus addressed by his brother, the
son of Kunti only repeated the word—
‘Time, Time —-and fully endorsed the view
of his eldest brothers endued with great
intelligence.


5 Knowing the resolution of Arjuna,
Bhimasena and the twins fully eadorsed the
words which Arjuna had said,


. 6. Determined upon retiring from the


.world for acquiring merit, they brought f


Yujutsu before them. Wudhishthira made
over the kingdom to the san of his uncle
by his Vaishya wife,


7—8. Installing Parikshit also on their
throne, as king, the eldest brother of the
Pandavas, filled with sorrow, addressed
Subhadra, saying,—‘'This son of your. son
will be the king of the Kurus. ‘The sur-
vivor of the Yadus, viz., Vajra, has- been
made-a king,


9. Parikshit will rule in Hastinapur,
while the Yadava prince; Vajra, will tulg


He addressed Arjuna saying,~~. i


in Shakraprastha. You should protect him €
Never set your heart on sin,’


to—-11. Having said these words, king
| Vudhishthira, the just, atong with his
: brothers, promptly offered oblations of water
1to Vasudeva of great inielligence, as also
this old maternal uncle, and Rama and’
others. He then duly performed the Shrad«
| dhas of all those kinsmen,


f 12: Fhe king, in honor of Hari, and
. naming -him repeatedly, fed the Dwaipayana’
Vyasa, and Narada, and Markandeya
having penances for wealth, and Yajna-
}valkya of Bhacadwaja race, with many:
delicious food. ’


13—=@15 Iv honor. of Krishna, he also
gave away many jewels. and gems, aud”
. dresses and clothes, and villages, and horses
and cars, and female slaves by hundreds-
; and thousands to foremost of Brahmanas.
; Calling the citizens, Kripa was installed as_
the preceptor and Parikshit was made over
F to him as his disciple, O- chief of Bharata’s
race! Then Yudhishthira once more sum-
_moned all his. subjects. ee ie


16-17. The royal sage informed them
| of his desire. ‘She citizens and the villagers,
| heating the king’s words, became strickea
| with anxiety: and disapptoved of them.
‘This should neves be done'=said they ww:
ethe king.


18 The king, knowing the changes
brought about by time, did not listen to
theie advice, Possessed of righteous sod, .
| he persuaded the people to. submit his views,


19-22. He then made up. his mind to
leave the world. His brothers also formed
the same cesolution, Then Dharma’s son
| Yudhishthira, the king of the Kurus, re«
nouncing his ornaments, wore barks of trees,
| Bhima and Arjuna and the .twins, abd the
Fillusttious Draupadi similarly clad thems
' selves in barks of trees, O ging. Having
| caused the preliminary rites of religion,
'Q chief of Buasata’s race, which were ta


a MAHABHARATA.


Bless them in the accomplishment of their
design, those foremost of men rénounced
aheic sacred fires to the water. Seeing the
princes in thay guisé tlie fadies wept aloud. .


23. They seemed to look as they had
Jooked formerly when with Draypadi -form-


35 The Pandavas there saw the God
of Fire standing before them like a hill,
Closing their way, the god. stood there in
his embodied orm.


36. The deity of seven flames then ad
dressed -the, Pandavas, saying. —'O heroic


ing the sixth in number they liad left the-} sons of Pandu, know me as the God of Fire.


wapital after their defeat at dice. All the
brothers, however, were inGnitely de-~
lighted at the proSpect of ‘Weir “retire:
snent,


24-25 Aseertaining -the desire ‘of


Wudhishthira and secing the destruction of
the Vrishnis, no other course of action--could.
natisfy them thes. ‘The five brothers, with
Draupadi--forming. the’ sixth, and a dog:
Jorming the seventh; ‘started on. their
journey. “Thus did king Yudhishthira de-
part, himself heading a party of seven,
trom the city of Hastinapur. The citizens
und the royal ladies followed them: for some
Mistance,


»26:. None of them, however, could ven-
Ruce to address the king for persuading him
to give -up-his intention, “Phe citizens then
returned,


-77. Kripa and others. stood around
Buyutsa as their centre. Uiupi the daughter
ol :the, Naga chief, O vou of Kutu’s _Tace,:
entered abe waters of ‘Gatga,


28, ~The princess -Chitrangeda.. started
for the - caprak of Manipur. ‘The other.
ladies who were the grandmothers of
“Ratibohit gathered around hinr. =


Meanwhile the great Pandavas, O
etd tl Kuru's race, and the Hlustrioas
Draupadi, having -observed the preliminary
fast, started with their faces’ lowardy the
wast, :


rgo. Setting themselves on Yoga, those
‘preat ones, resolved to observe the’ religion
of Renunciation, passed -through various
wountiies’ “and tedeneS various rivers and
$cas, - 2


31-32. Vudhishthiea proceeded first.
Hehind him’ was: Bhima; next walked
skrjuna; after him were the twins in the
wrder of their bith s behind them ali, O
fecenmust ore of Bharata’s race, went
Draupadi, that first of women, endued with
prest beaaty, of “dark Complexign, and
having eyes like totus petals.


33. Whilesthe Pandavas started tae the.
forest, a dop fullowed them. Proceeding on,
Litose berves reached the: sea of ted waters,


34 ‘Daanan}: aya had not thrown off his-
celectial «bow Gandiva sor -his couple of-
Iuexpaustible quivers, .actugted, OU hing,
by the gupidity tox valuable wigs.


.37. .O mighty-armed Yudhishthira, oO
Bhimasena who Area dcorchec of enemies,
O Arjuna, and O twins of great courage,
sten to what I say!


38. O foremost ones of Kuru’s race, E
am. the God of Fire. The forest of Khandava
was biirnt by me, through the power of
Arjuna and of Narayana. himsetf,


39. Let your.brather Phalguna proceed”
to, the forest after casting off Gandiva, that
great weapon, He has no longer any neces-
‘sity for it.


40. That preciouS discus, which was:
with the great- Krishna, has disappeared
(from the world). When the time again
conres, it wilh retura into- his hands.


4t. This foremost of bows, viz., Gandiva,
was procured by me from Varuna for the*
nse of Partha, Let it be made over to
Varuna himself.” :

* 42. At this, all the brothers requested!
Dhananjaya to da'what the god said. He
then threw into the waters (of the sea) botlr
tlie bow and the couple of inexhaustible |
quivers. ,

43. Alter this. O chief of Bharata’s race‘:
the God of Fire disappeared then and theres
‘The beroic sons of Pandu, next -went cnt,
with their faces turned towards the south,

.44 Then, by the worthern coast of the.
salt sea, those princes of Bharata’s race,.
went to fhe south-west.

45. Turning ‘next towards the west, ‘they:
saw the city of. Dwaraka covered, by the
oceans = ’

46. Turning. next to the north, those,
foremost ones went on, Observant of Yoga,
they were desiruus of going round the whole
earth


CHAPTER If,


(MAHAPRAS’ YHANIKA PARVAJ=—
Continued. .


Vaisbempayane ‘said :—
“Those princes of controlled ‘soufs and
dessied to Yoxa, progeeding to the aurth,
joaW Hinavat, luet buyge uivuntalas


MAHAPRASTHANIKA PARVA-


2. Crossing the Himavat, they saw a vast.


Gesert of sand. They then saw the powerful
mountain Meru, the foremost of all high-
peaked mountains.


As those powerful ones were pro-


ceeding ‘quickly. alt rapt in Yoga, Yajna- °


seni, falling off from Yoga, dropped on
en the Earth. -*


4-5. Seeing her fallen down, Bhima- [


Sena of great’ strength addressed king
Yudhishthira the just, saying,—' O scor-


cher of enemies, this princess never did any.


sinful deed. Tell us what the cause is for
which Krishna has falen down on the
Earth.’ ‘ ‘ :


Yudhishthira said:— .

. © She had gceat partiality for Dhanan-
jaya in pacticutar. She obtains the fruit of
that conduct to-day, O best of men.


Vaishampayana said :—

3. Having said this, that foremost
-one of Bharata’s race went on. OF righte-
ous soul, that foremost of men, gifted with
great imteligence, went on, with mind
intent on itself, :


8—g. Then the all wise Sahadeva
dropped, down on the Earth. . Seeing bim
drop down, Bhima addressed the king,
saying,—‘ He who with great bumlity used
to serve ws all, alas; why is- that son of
Madravati fallen down ou the Earth ?


Yudhishthira said :—


' 10, He never thought ‘anybody "his
équal. in wisdom. It is for that sin that
prince has dropped down,


Vaishampayana gaid:— ° ;
‘th. Having said this, the king . proceed-
ed, leaving  Sahadeva there. , Indeed,
Kunti’'s son VYadhishthira went oa, with
his brothers and with the dog.


ya ‘Seéing both Krishha and the
Pandava Sahadéva fallen down, the brave
Nakula, ‘whose love for kinsimen wag very
great, fell down himself,


313—14.. Upon the falling down of the
heroic Nakula of great beauty, Bhima
once more addressed the king, saying,—
“This brother of ours who was gifted with
full tighteousness (and who always obeyed
our commands, this Nakula who was peer-.
less for beauty, has fallen down !


1S. ‘thus addressed - by Bhimasena,
Yudhishthira said, with respect to Nakula,
these words :—‘ He was of righteous soul
and the foremost of all persuus gifted with
intelligence,


3


16. -He, howéver, thought that there was
nobody . who, equalled him in personal
beauty, © ‘Indeed, he considered himself ‘a¥
superior to all in that matter.


17. Icis for this that Nakula has. fallen.
down. Know. this, O Vrikodaral That,
O hero, which has been ordained Yor ‘a
person, must have to be borne by him.” “


18. Seeing Nakula and the others falf ‘
“down Pondu’s son Arjuna of whiite horses, *
that desttoyec of hogtite heroes, fell dowm.
in great grief of hearts


19—20. When that foremost of men,‘
who was. gifted with the enecgy of Shakra,
had fallen down, indeed, when that ine
vincible hero was on the point of death, '
Bhima said to the king,—'I do not re-!
collect any untruth uttered by this great
one. Indeed, not even in jest did he say:
anything false. -What-then is that fer -
whose evil consequence this one bas
dropped down on the Earth? ;


Yudhishthira said :— aa


21. Arjuna had said that be would cons |
sunte: all our enemies in a single day.”
Proud _of his heroism, he ‘did not, how. :
ever, do what he had said. Hence has he
fallen down, ; !


az. This Phalguwa disregarded : alt:
wielders of bows. One desirous of: pros~ ‘
perity should never entertain such thoughts. ,


Vaishampayana said :—
23-24. Having: said so, the king went!


on. ‘Thea Bhima ‘fell down, Havilling «
fallen down, Bhima addressed - king i
Yudhishthira the just, saying —"O kiny,-


see! | -who.am your darling have fallen’
down? Why have J dropped down? Yeib
me if you know it.’ ‘


Yudhishthira said: ad


25. You were’ a great” eater, and vou'
used to boast of your strength. You
never did attend,~O Partha, to the wants
et others while -eating. It ts for that, aed
Bhima, that-you have fallen down, ;

26. Having satd these words, the.
mighty-armed Yadhishthira went on, with-
out looking. back. tie had only one come
panion,. vis., the Gog of which F have Fee.
peatedly spuken to you which fullowed him
now,


a MAHABHARATA.


CHAPTER IIL. :


(MAHAPRASTHANIKA PARVA,)=<=
Concluded. |


Vaishampayana said :—

it. Causing the Heaven and the Earth to
be filled. by a loud sound, then Shakra
came to the son of Pritha ou a car and
asked him to ascend it.


.2—~3, Seeing his brothers fallen on the
Earth, king Yudhishthira the just said to
that deity of a thousand eyes (hese words,—
‘My brothers have all dropped down here t
They must go with me, Without them by
me } do not wish to go to the celestial
region, O lard of all the celestials.

4. The delicate princess (Draupadi} de-
serving of every comfort, QO Purandara,
should go with us! You should permit this.’


Shakra, said :—~

5- You shall behold your brothers in the
celestial region. They have reached it
before you. Indeed, you shall see all of
them there, with Kcishna. Do not give way
to grief, O chief of the Bharatas t


6. -Having eenounced their human bodies
they have gone there, O chief of .Bharata’s
race t, As foe you, it is fordained that you
shall go there in this very body of yours,


Yudhishthira said :— ;
7- This dog, O lord of the Past and the
Present, is highly devoted to me. He should
° with me, My heart is full of mercy
or Him,


Shakra said :-~—


_8. You have acquired torday Emmor-
tality and a status equal to mine, O king,
Prosperity extending in all directions, and
high success, and all the felicities of heaven.
Do you cast off this dog. toa this there
will be no cruelty. :


s Fs e e
Yudhishthira said —

9. O you of athousand eyes, O you,
who are of righteous conduct, it is extremely
difficult for one that is of righteous conduct
to perpetrate an act which is unrighteous.
Ido not wish that union with prosperity
for which 1 shabl have to cast off one that
is devoted to me. z


-


Indra said :—

to. There is no place in the celestial
region for persons with dogs. Besides the
Krodhavashas t3ké away ail the merits of
such persons. Thinking of this, act, O king
Yudhishthira the just! Do you abandon
this deg. There is ng cruelty ta this,’


| is a bright example {


Yudhishthira said :~-


tt. Et has been said that the abandon«
ment of one that is devoted is sinful beyond
measure. ‘It is equal to the sin of Brahminie
cide. Hence, O great Indra, I shall not
cast off this dog to-day from desire of my
happiness.


12. This is my vow, vis., that f never
give up a person that is terrified, nor
one that is devoted to me, nor one that
seeks my help, saying, that he is dese
titute, mor one that is affficted, nor one
that has come to me, nor one that is weak
in protecting oneself, nor one that begs for
life. E shall never give up such a one tilk
my own life goes away.


Indra said :—

13. Whatever gifts, of sacrifices spread
out, or libations poured on the sacred fire,
are seen by a dog, are taken away by the
Krodbavashas.. Do you, therefore, re-
nounce this dog. By {renouncing this dog
you will acquire the cegion of the
celestial, ,


14. Having abandoned your brothers
and Krishna, you have, O- hero, acquired a
region of happiness by your own deeds,
Why are you so stupeficd? You have
cenounced everything. Why then do. you
not renounce this dog ?


Yudhishthira said :—

15. This is well known in all the worlds
that there is neither friendship. vor eamity
with the dead. When my brothers -and
Krishna died, lL was unable to. revive them.
Hence it was. that £ renounced them. E did
not, however, renounce them. as long as
they were alive. -


16. Fo frighten one that has sought
protection, the killing of a woman, the
theft of what belongs to. a Brahmana, and
injuring a friend, each of these four,
Shakra, is, I think, equal to the abandon=
ment of one that is devoted.


Vaishampayana sald:~ =

17. Hearing these words. of king
Yudhishthira the just, (the dog became
transformed into) the deity of Virtue, wha
well pleased, said words to him in a sweet
voice fraught with praise. “v§


Dharma said]
18. Youare well-born, O king of kings,
and endued with the intellizence and the
good conduct. of Panduf You have mercy
for all creatures, O Bhatata; of whiclt this


MAHAPRASTHANIKA PARVA, 5


18. Formerly, O sén, you were once
examined by me in the forest of Dwaita,
Where your brothers of great prowess tet
with (an appearance of) death.

20. Disregarding Both your brothers
Bhima and Arjuna, you did wish for the
tevival of Nakula from Your desire’ of
doing good to your (step) mother.


21. On the present occasion, thinking
the dog fo be devoted to you, yo have
yenouriced the very car of the celestials
instead of renouticing him. Herice, O king,
there is no one in Heaven that is equal
to you. fees

22. Hence, O Bharata, tegiotis of in-
exhaustible happiness are yours? You have
acquired them, O.chiel of the Bharatas,
and yours is a celestial and high end.


Vaishampayana said :—=

a3—24. Then Dharma and Shakira, atid
the Marut3, and the Ashwins and otter
deities and the celestial Rishis, catising
Vudhishthira to ascetid of a car, went to
the celestial region. Those beings crowned
with sticcess alid capable of going every-
Where at will, rode their respective cars.

28. King Yudhishthica, that perpetiater
of Kurt’s race, riding on that car, ascended
quickly, causing the entire sky to blaze
with his effulgence.

26—-27. Then Narada, that foreridst of
all speakers, gifted with penances, aiid con-
versant with all the worlds, from ariidst
that concourse of celestials, said these
words :—‘All those royal sages whe are here
have their achievements transcended by

hose of Yudhishtttira.


28. Covering all the worlds by his fame
and splendour and by his wealth of conduct,


he has attained to the Celestial region in
his own (human) body! None else than
the son of Pandy haa been heard to achieve
this. , ‘

29030. Hearitg these words of Narada, —
the tighteous-souled king, saluting the
celestials and all the royal sages there
present, said,—‘ Happy or ntiserable, what-
ever the région be that is sow gmy brethers,
1 wish td proceed ta. I donot wish té go
anywhere else,’


31—32, Hearing this speech of the king,
the chief of the celestials, Puranddra, said
these. words pregnant with ndble meaning, —=
‘Do you live inthis place, O king of Rings,
which you have acquired By your mieri-
torious deeds! Why da you Still cherish
human affections ?


33. You have acquired great suctéss,
the like of which no other man has ever
been able to attaig. Your brothers, O
delighter of the Kurus, have suceeded ti
acquiring happy regions. ;


34. Human affectiots still icich you.
This is Heaven. See these celestial Ristia
and Siddhas who have attaitied td the res
gion of the gods,’ ;


3536. Endued with great intelligence,
Yudhishthira answered the king of ilie
deities 6nce more, sayitig, —'O conquerot of
Daityas, I venture not to live arywhére,
sepatated from them! | wish to go there
where my brothers have gone!


37. Lwish to go there where that fore«
most of worien, ;Draupadi, of ample pro
Portions and darkish coniplexXion and gifted
with great-intelligenté aad righteousness of
conduct, has gone !’


Finis MAHAPRASEHANIKA Parvé,


A PROSE ENGLISH TRANSLATION


OF


THE MAHABHARATA.


{TRANSLATED LITERALLY FROM THE ORIGINAL SANSKRIT TEXT.)


SWARGAROHANIKA PARV A.
VOL. XVIII,


ebitED & PUBLISHED BY
MANMATHA NATH DUTT, (Shastri) M.A, M.R.A.S.
Rector, KEsHuB ACADEMY.
Aathor of the English Translation of the Ramayana, Vishnu-Puranan,


Srimad-Bhagavatam, Kamandakiya-Nitisara, Bhagavad-Gita,
_ and many other works,


40, Nayan Chand Duti’s Street, Calcutta,


CALCUTTA:
PrintEp sy H. C. Dass, Exvysitm Priss,
40, Nayan Chand Duit's Street,


1905.
BH vighis reserved J


SWARGAROHANIKA PARVA.


TABLE OF CONTENTS,


Cuapter t.—Arrived at Heaven, king

udhishthira sees Duryodhana blazing with
effulgence and seated on an excellent
seat—Iialogue between Yudhishtbira and
Narada—p. 4.


Cuarter 11.—Yudhishthira’s
for his brothers and kinsmen and the
Princess of Panchala—p. 2.


Cuarter H1I.—~The advent of the deities,
and theie adulation of the conduct of
Yudhishthira—Yudhishthira plunges in the
celestial Ganga and assumes a celestial
body—Yudhishthira proceeds, in company
with the deities, to share with his brothers
and. kinsmen the region which they have
acquired for themselves—p. 4.


Cuaptsr 1V.—Vudhishthira sees Govinda
in his effulgent Brahma-form as also
all his Lrothers and cefations—the Princess
of Panehala and her sons, his own father
and mothers—grandsire and_ preceptor,
ancle and grandsons=-the Vrishni and
Andhaka heroes—p. 5.


solicitude {


Cuarrer V.—Janamejaya’s query res
garding the period {the heroes of_Kuru-
kshetra would remain in the celestial re-
gioh—Vaishampayana’s reply Termina<
tion of Janamejaya’s Snake-Sacrifice~ His
return front Taleshashila to his capital after
having dismissed the sacrificial priests witl
profuse gifts-The merits of the Maha«’
bharataThe Savittri of ,the Mahabha«
rata~=p, 6,


Cuaprer Vi.—Janamejaya’s query as


| to the ordinances relating to the manner


of fistening to arecitation of the Bharata
and the fruits it yields+«Vaishampayana’s
reply—p.


THE MAHABHARATA:
(IN ENGLISH.)


SWARGAROHANIKA PARVA.


CHAPTER [,


Having salated Narayana and Nara the
best of male beings, as also Saraswati
the Goddess of Learning, fet us try
success,


Janamejaya said :— -

1. Having attained to Heaven, what re-
gions were respectively attained by my
grandsires of old, vis,, the. Pandavas, and
the sons of Dhritarashtra ?


2. IT wish to hear this. I think that you
know everything, having been taught by the
great Rishi Vyasa of wonderful feats.


Vaishampayana said :—

3. Listen now to what your grandsires,
Vudhishthira and others, did after having
attained ta Heaven, that ptace of the
deities.

4. Arrived at Heaven, king Yudhish-
thira the just, saw Duryodhana gifted with
prosperity and seated on an excellent seat.


5. He was effulgent like the sun and
wore all the signs of heroic glory. And
he was in the company of many celestials
of blazing -effulgence and of Sadhyas of
righteous deeds. :

6. Yudhishthira, seeing Duryodhana and
his pre sperity, fbecame suddenly overpowered


with angec and turned back from the sight. -
7. He loudly addressed his companions, :


‘saying,—'|I do not wish to share regions of
bliss with Duryodhana who was stained by
‘cupidity and possessed of little foresight.

8. It was for hitn that friends, kinsmen,
over the whole Earth, destroyed by us were
whom he had greatly afflicted in the deep
lorest. ae.

9. It was fo? him that the virtuous


princess of Panchala, Draupadi of faultless -


features, our wife, was dragged into the
midst of the courtiers before all oue elders,

lo. Ye gods, I} have no wish to even see
Suyothana! -1 wish to go there wheré my
brothers are.’


°


ar. Narada, smiling, told him, It
should fnot be so, O king of kings! In
Heaven, aif enmities cease.


12. O mighty-armed YVudhishthira, -do
not say so about king Duryodhana. Hear,
my words. :

13. Here is king Duryodhana... He is.
adored with the celestials by those righteous
men and those foremost of kings, who ace
now dwellers of Heaven. :

14. By.causing his body to bz poured
as a Jibation on the fire of battle, he has
obtained the end which consists in attain-
ment of the region for heroes. You arid,
your brothers, who were veritable gods on
Earth, were always persecuted by this one.

15. Yet through his observance of
Kshatriya practices he has acquired this
region, This king was not terrified ina
dreadful situation. |

16. -O son, you should net bear in mind
the woes inflicted on you on account of the
match at dice. You should not remem-
ber the sufferings af Draupadi.


17. You should not remember the other


| miseries which you suffered for the deeds


of your: kinsmen,—the miseries, giz., that
were due to battle or to other situations.


18—26. Do you meet Duryodhana now
politely, - This is Heaven, O king! There
can be no enmities bere!’—Though thus
addressed by Narada, the Kuru king
Yudhishthira, gilted with great intelligence,
enquired about his brothers and said,—‘1f


-these eternal regions reserved for heroes be


Duryodhana’s, that unrighteeus and sinful
wretch, that man who was the destroyer of
friends and of the whole world, that man-
for whose sake the entire Earth was devas~
tated with all her horses and elephants and
human beings, that man for whose sake
we were burnt with anger in thinking of
how best we might remedy our wrongs, [
wish to see what regions have been attained
by those great heroes, my brothers of ligh


2 MAHABHARATA.


wows, steady achievers of promises, truth-
ful in speech, and distinguished for courage.
The great Karna, the son of Kunti, in-
capable of being baffled in battle, Dhrishta-
dyumna, Satyaki, the sons of Dhrishta-
dyumna and those other Kshatriyas who
met with death in the observance of
Kshatriya duties, where are those kings,
© Brahmana? 1 do not see them here,
O Narada! 1 wish to- see, O Narada,
Virata and Drupada and the other great
Kshatriyas headed by Dhrishtaketu, as also
Shikhandin, the Panchala prince, the sons
of Draupadi, and Abhimanyu, irresistible
in battle.’


etter


CHAPTER If,


(SWARGAROHANIKA PARVA. )—
: Continued,
Yudhishthira said —

1+2. 'Ve deities, I do not see here


‘Radha’s son of incomparable prowess, as
also my large-hearted brothers, and Yudha-


manyu and Uttamauijas, those great car- wat. .


tiors who poured their bodies (as libations)


on the fire of battle, those kings and princes |


who thet with death for my sake in battle,


3. Whete are those great car-warriors
who possessed of the prowess of tigers
Have those foremost of men gained this
region ?


4. If those great car-wattiors have obs.


tained these regions, then only do you
know, O gods, that I shall five ete with
those great ones,


_ § If this auspicious and eternal region
has not been gained by those kings, .then,
know, O gods, that without those brothers
and kinsmen of ‘mine, I shall not live here.


6. At.the time of celebrating the water
tites (after the battie}, I heard my mother
say,—-Do you offer -oblations of water to
Karna! From the time of hearing those
words of my mother, I am burning with
grief. 5


7—8. 1 grieve also continually at this, |


O gods, that when I marked the resem-


blance between the feet of my mother and’


thoge of Karna of high soul, I did not im-
tnediately place myself under the orders of
that destroyer of hostile ranks! Ourselves
joined with Karna, Shakra himself would
have been unable to defeat in battle.


9. Wherever may that child of the Sun
be, I wish to see him. Alas, not knowing his
relationship with us, 1 caused him to be
killed by Arjuna. —


| then ordeted the celestial


10—11. Bhima also of dreadful prowess
and dearer to me than my life. Arjuna
too, resembling Indra himself, the twins
also who resembled the Destroyer himself
in prowess, I wish to see! fF wish to see
the princess of Panchala, of good conduct.
I wish not to stay here. I tell you the
truth,


12. O foremost of the deities, what is
Heaven to me if | am separated from my
brothers? That is Heaven where those
brothers of mine are. ‘This, in my opinion,
is not Heaven.’


| The deities said :—


13. ‘If you wish to be there, go then,
O son, forthwith. Atthe command of thé
king of the celestials, we are ready to dd


} what you like.’


Vaishampayana said :—~

14—15. Having said so, the celestials
messenger, O
destroyer of enemies, saying—‘Do you show
to Yudhishthira his friends and kins-
men’—Then the royal son of Kunti and thé
celestial messetiger went together, O fore-
most of kings, to that place where those
Chiefs of men were,


16. The celestial messenger went first,
followed by the king. The path was diffi-
cult and trodden by men of sinful deeds.


17-18. it was covered with thick darka
ness, and covered with hair and moss form-
ing its grassy vesture. Polluted with the
smell of siuthers; and miry with flesh and
blood, it was filled with gad-flies and stings
ing bees and gnats and was endangered
by the inroads of grisly bears. Rotting
corpses lay here and there,


tg. Overspread with bones and hair, it
was noisesome with worms and insects. It
was bounded all along with a burning fire.


Zo.- It was infested by crows and other
birds and vultures,'all having beaks of iron,
as also by evil spirits: .witlh long mouths
pointed like needles, And it was filled
with, inaccessible fastnesses like the Vindhya
mountains. :


at. Human corpses were scattered over
it, smeared with fat and blood, with arms
and thighs cut off, or with entrails torn. out
and legs severed.

22, Along that path so disagreeable with
the stench of corpses and awful with othe re
incidents, the righteous-souled king went
filled with various thoughts, m


23. He saw a river full of boiling water
and, therefore, difficult to cross, as also a
forest of trees whose leaves were sharo?
swords and razorse


SWARGAROHANIKA PARVA. 3


23. There were plains full of fine white
sand highly heated, and cocks and stones
made of iron. There were many jars of
iro all around, with boiling oil in them.


25. Many a Kuta-shalmalika was there,
with sharp thorns, and, therefore, greatly
painful to the touch. The son of Kunti
saw also the tortures inflicted upon sinful
men.


26. Seeing that inauspicious region full
of every sort of foulness, Yudhishthira
asked the celestial messenger, saying ,—
*How far shall we go along a path like
Ahis ?


27. You should tell me where those
brothers of, mine are. I wish also to know
what cegion is this of the celestials.’


28. Hearing these words of king Yu-
dhishthira ,thejjust, the:celestial messenger
stopped in his course and replied, saying,—
‘Thus far is your way.


29. The dwelters of the celestial region
ordered me that having come thus far, I
am to stop! If you are tired, O king of
kings, you may return with me,’


30. Yudhishthira, however, was sorely
disconsolate and stupefied by the foul
stench. Resolved to return, O Bharata, he
retraced his steps.


3t. Stricken with sorrow and grief, the
righteous-souled king turned back. Direct.
ty then he heard piteous cries all around.


32. ‘Oson of Dharma, O- royal sage,
O you of holy ‘birth, O son of Pandu, do
you stay a moment for favouring us.


33. At your approach, O invincible one,
‘a delightful breeze has begun to blow,
bearing; the sweet smell of your body. We
have been greatly relieved at ‘this.


34. O foremost of kings, seeing you,
O first of men, we have been highly pleased.
O son of Pritha, let that happiness last
longer through youre stay hee for a few.
Moments more.


35- Do you remain here, O Bharata,
for even a short time! As long as you are
here, O you of Kuru’s race, ‘tortures cease
to afflict us.’


36. The king heard there these and
many similar words, uttered piteously by
persons in distress, reaching his ears from
all sides.


37- Hearing those words of beings in
distress, Yudhishthica of compassionate
heart exclaimed aloud,—' Alas, how pain-
ful’ and the king stood still,


38. The words of those woe-begone and
afflicted persons seemed to the son of
Pandu té be uttered in voices that he had


heard before although he could not, then,
recognise them.


39. Unable to recognise the véices,
Dharma’s son, Yudhishthira, enquired,
saying,—' Who are you? Why also do
you stay here? -


40. Thus addressed, they answered him
from alf sides, saying,~-'f am Karna Paw
‘Fam Bhimasena !?—' fam Arjuna !? :


4t. ‘kam Nakula’—'! am Sahadeva !?

—' fam Dhrishtadyumna!—'[ am Dratt-
padi?—'We are the sons of Draupadi!’
thus O king, did those voices speak.


42. Hearing those cries,’O king, uttered
in voices of pain suitable to that place. the


reyal Yudhishthira asked himself—' What
perverse destiny is this ?
43—44. What are those sinful .deeds


which were committed by those great beings,
vis., Karna and the sons of Draupadi and
the slender-waisted princess. of Panchala,
so that they have been compelled to live in
this region. of foetid smelt and great dis
tress, [ am not aware of any sin that can
be attributed to these persons of avenue
deeds,


45. What is that deed by doing which
Doritarashtra’s son, king Suyodhana,’ witt
all .his sinful followers, has acquired such
prosperity 2

46. Gifted with prosperity like that of
the great Indra himself, he is reverently
worshipped. What is that deed for which
these (high-souled ones), have fallen into
Hell?


47. Allof them knew duty, were heroes,
were devoted to truth and the Vedas; were
observant of Kshatriya practices; were
righteous in their deeds; were performers of
sacrifices; and givers of large presents ta
Brahmanas,


48. Am { asteep or awake? Am I con-
scious or unconscious? Or, is all this an
aberration of the intellect 2”


49. Overwhelmed. by sorrow and grief,
and with his senses ruffled by anxiety, king
Yudhishthira eat in such thoughts for.
a long time.


50. The royat son of Dharma was, then,
filled with righteous indigatio. Indeed,
Yudhishthira then censured the celestials as
also Dharma himself.


51. Afflicted by the very foul smell,
he addressed the celestial messenger,
saying,—' Return to the presence of those
whose messenger you are,


52. Tell them that I shall not return
to where they are, but shall stay even


4 MAHABHARATA.


here; sinte, on account of my companion-
ship, these afflicted brothers of mine have
ecome comforted.”
53. Thus addressed by the intelligent
son of Pandu, the celestial messerger
returned to the place where the king of the


telestials was, vis., be of a handred sacti-_


fices.

+. 54. He represented to him the acts-of

. NMudhistthica. Indeed, O king, he inform-
neal of all that Dharma’s son had

said, 2


f


CHAPTER IIf,


‘CSWARGAROBHANIKA PARVA. )--
Continued,


jVaishampayana said :—

: & King Yudhishthira the just, the son
‘of Pritha, had not waited there for more
han a moment when, O you of Kuru’s
wace, all the celestials headed by Indra


yame there. ‘

2. The God of§ Righteousness, in his
embodied form, also came to that place
whete the Kuru king was: for seeing that
toonarch, ‘

: 3. Upon the coming of those celestials
of resplendent bodies and sanetified and


noble deeds, the darkness that had covered ;


&hat region immediately disappeared.


45. The tortures undergone by
beings of sinful deeds were no longer seen.
‘The civer Vaitarani, the thorny Shalmali,
the iron jars, and the boulders of rock, so
ferrible to look at, also vanished from sight.
‘The. vasious repulsive corpses also, which
the Kuru king had seen, disappeared at
Bhe same time, :


6. Then a breeze, delicious and fraught
with pleasant smell, pefectly pure, and
delightfully cool, O Bharata, began to
blow on that spot on account of the pre-
sence of the celestials,


q~—8. The Maruts, with Indra, the
Vaous with the twin Ashwins, the Sadbyas,
the Rudras; the Adityas, and the other
Gweller8 of Heaven, as also the Siddhas;
and the great Rishis, all came there where
Dharma’s royal son of great energy was.


gto. Then Shakra, the: lord of the
celestials, gifted with blazing prosperity,
addressed Yudhishthira and consoling him,
said,—‘*O Yudhishthica of mighty arms,
come, come, O king! These illusions have
ended, O powerful one.


) a1. You have acquired success, O


| foremost of all wielders of


eternal happy regions. Yow should not give
way to anger. Lister to these words of mine,


rz. Hell, O son, should, forsooth, be
seen by every king. ‘Fhere is enough of
good and bad, O king.


13. He whe enjoys first the frnits of his
good deeds must afterwards suffer Hell.
He, on, the fother hand, who first endures
Hell, must afterwards enjoy the celestiak
regtor.


t4. He whose sinful deeds are many,
enjoys the celestial region first. Fe is for


this, O king, that desirous of doing yow
good, I caused you to be sent for having a
view of Hell.


15. You had by a pretence, deceived
Drona about his son. You have, therefore,
been shown Hell by an act of deception.


16. Like yourself, Bhima and Arjuna
and Draupadi, have atl been shown the
place of sinners by an act of deception.


17. Come, O king, all of them have
been purged of their sins.


18. . All these kings whe had sided you
and who have been killed in battle, have
all acquired the celestial region. Come and
see them, UO foremost one of Bharata’s race.


1g. Karna, the powerful bowman, that
weapons, for
whom you are grieving, has also acquired
high success.


20. See, O powerful one, that foremost
of men, v7,, the son of the Sun. He is in
that place which is his own, O mighty-
armed one. Kill this grief of yours, O
king. Z ,

at. Look at your ‘brother, and others,
those kings, that is, who had taken your
side. ‘Uhey have all attained to their respec-
tive places. Let the fever of your heast be
removed,


22. Having suffered a tittle misery first,
from this time, O son of Kuru’s race, do
you sport with me in happiness, shorn of
grief and all ailments.


23. O mighty-armed one,do you now
enjoy, O king, the rewards.of all your
virtuous deeds, of those regions which you
have acquired yourself by your penances,
and of all your gifts. ;


24. - Let celestials and Gandharvas, and
celestial Apsaras, dressed in pure robes and
beautiful ornaments, wait upon and serve
you for yout happiness.


25. Do you, O mighty-armed one, enjoy
now those happy regions which you have
acquired through the Rajasuya-Sactifjce
performed by you and whose felicities have


mighty-armed one, and have attained to! been increased by the sacrificial, scinutar


SWARGAROHANIKA PARVA. g


employed by you. May you enjoy the
great fruit of your penances. -

26. ‘Your regions, O Vudhishthira, are
above, far above, those of kings. They
are equal to those of Harishehandra, O son
of Pritha. Comre,land sport there in bliss !


~ 29. Sharing the blissful region acquired
by the royal sage Mandhatri, king Bhagi+
ratha, Dushbmanta’s son Bharata, you will
sport there in bliss.


28. Here is the celestial river, sacred
and santifying the three worlds. It is called
celestial Ganga. Plunging into it, you will
g0 to your own regions. ise


29. Having bathed in this river, you will
be divested of your humau nature. Indeed,
your grief dispelled, your ailments conquer-
ed, you will be freed from all enmities.’


30-31. While, O Kuru king, the chief of
the celestials was saying so to Yudhishthira,
the god of Righteousness, in his embodied
Sorm, then addressed his own son and said,—-
‘O king, I am highly pleased, O you of
gteat wisdom, with you, O son, by’ your
devotion to me, by your truthfulness of
speech, and forgiveness, and self-control.

32. This, indeed, its the third test, Q
king, to which | put you. You are. incap-
able, O son of Pritha, of being swerved
from your nature or reason.


33 Before this, had examined you in
the Dwaita forest by my questions, when
you had come to that lake for recovering
a couple of fire-sticks. You stood it well.


34. Assuming the shape of a dog, I
examined you once more, O son, when your
brothers with Draupadi had fallen down.


35- This has been your third test; you
have expressed your wish to stay at Hell
for the sake of your brethers. You have
become cleansed, O highly blessed one,
Purified of sin, be you happy.

36. Osen of Pritha, your brothers, O
king, were not such as to deserve Hell. All
this has been an iHusion created by the king
of the celestials. ~


37. Forsooth, alt kings, O son, must
once see Hell. Hence have you for a little
while been subjected to this great sgrrow.


38. Oking, neither Arjuna, nor Bhima,
nor any of'those foremost of men, vés., the
twins, nor Karna, ever thruthful in speech
and endued with great couwage, could be
deserving of Hell for a long time. .


39- The princess Krishna too, O Yudhi-
thira, could not be deserving of that place
of signers. Come, come, O foremost of the
Bharatas, see Ganga, who spreads her
current oveg the three worlds,’


40. Thus addressed, the royal sage, viz ,.
your grandsire, proteeded with Dnarma
and alk the other cctesttabs,


4t. Having bathed in the celestial river
Ganga, sacred and purifying and ever wor=
Shipped by the Rishis, he renounced his
human body. ‘


42. Asseming then a celestial form, king
Vudhishthira the just, om account of that
bath, became divested of alt his enmities-
and grief. , ;

43. Surrounded by the celestials, the
Kuru king Yudhishthira then went away
from that place. He was accompanied by
Dharma, and the great Rishis uttered his
praises.

44. Indeed, he reached that place where -
those foremost of men, those heroes, vit,
‘the Pandavas and the Dhartarashtras, freed
from (human) wrath, were ,enjoying each
his respective position,


=


‘CHAPTER IV,


(SWARGAROHANIKA PARVA. )~
Continued,


Vaishampayana sail :—
+t. .King Yudhishihira, thus honored b
the celestials, the Maruts, and the Rishis,
went tq that place where those foremost ones

of Kurw’s race were,


2. He saw Govinda gifted with his
Brahma-form. It took after that form of
his which had been seen before and: which,
therefore, helped the recognition.


3- Shining in that form of his, he was
adorned with celestial weapons, such as the
dreadful and discus and others in their
respective embodied forms. :
‘+4. He-was being worshipped by the
heroic Phalgrina, who also was gifted with
a blazing effulgence. the son of Kunti
saw’ the destroyer of Madtwu in also his
own form. a ;


. Those two foremost of Beings, wor-
shipped by all the celestials, seeing Yudhish-
thira, received him with proper honours, --

6. ‘in another place, the delighter of the
Kurus saw Karna, that foremost one.
among all holders of weapons, resembling
a dozen Suns in splendour, ea

"7. Uranother part he saw Bhimasena of
great power, sitting in the midst of Maruts,
and gifted with a blazing form. :

8. He was sitting by the side of the god
of ‘wind in hig embodied form. Indegd h@ —
was then in a celestial form gified with


6 , MAHABHARATA,


great beauty, aud had acquired with highest
Succ: ss.


_+ g In the place belonging te the Ash wins,

the delighter of: the Kurus saw Nakula
and Shahadeva, eaclr blazing with his own
effulgence. >


22. These and other kings, Oson of
Pandu, wio had fought on your behalf now
walx with the Gandharyas or Yakshas or
other sacred -beings.


23. Same have attained to the diynity
_Of Guhyakas, O king. Having renounced


10. He also saw the princess of Panchala, _their bodies, they have conquered the celes~


deckéd in garlands of lotuses. Having ac-
quired the celestial region, she was sitting
tnere,- gifted with a form effulgent like
the Sun, ;

112, King Yudhishthira ’ suddenly
wished to question her. . Phen the illustrious
Indra, the king. of the celestials, spoke to
him,—' his oné is goddess of prosperity
herself, 1c was for your sake that she ‘took
birth, as the daughter of Drupada, among
human beings, caming not from any mother’s
womb, O Yudhishthira, gifted with agree-
able periume and capable of delighting the
entire wold. : :

13. For your satisfaction she was created
by the wielder of the trident. She was born
in the race of Drupada and was enjoyed
by you all.

14. ‘These five highly blessed Gan-
dharvas gifted with the: effuigence ot fice,


| Uttara, Dbrishtaketu and Jayatsena,


lial region by the merit they had acquired
through word, thought, and deed.’


CHAPTER V..


(SWARGAROHANIKA PARVA.)——
} Continued.


i


Janamejaya said :—

i—4. Bnhishma and Drona, those
great persons, ‘king Dhritarashtra,
Virata and Drupada, and Shankha


two
and
and
and
king Satyajit, the sons of Duryodhana, and
Shakuni the son of Suvala, Katna’s sons
of great prowess, king Jayadratha, Ghatort-
kacha and others whom you have not mene
tioned, the other heroic kings of shining
forms,—tell me for what period they re-


and endued witn great energy, wete, UO | mained in the celestial region.


king, the sonsot Draupadi and yourself. .


-15. Look at Dhritarashtra, the king
of the Gandharvas, endued with «great
wisdom. - Know that this one was the eldest
brother of your father. . :


16. This one is your eldest brother, the
son of Kunti, gifted with the effulpence of
fire, The son ot Surya, your eldest brother
the foremost of men, even this one was
-koown as:the son of Radha. :


17~18.. He moves in the company of
the’ Sun-God, Behvtd this -foremost of
Beings! Among the tibes of.the Shad-
dhyas, the celestials, the Vishwedevas, and
the Maruts, see, U King of kings, the mighty
car-watriors of the Vrishnis and the
Andhakas, viz., those heroes having Satyaki
foc their first, and those powertul ones
among the Bhojas. a


19. Look at the son of Subhadra; in-
vinciole in battle, uow staying with, Sema.


5. O best of twice-borns, did they live in
“Heaven for ever? What was the end ace
quired by those best of men when their acts

terminated,

6. I wish to hear this, O foremost of
twice-born persons, and, therefore, have I
‘asked you. By virtue of your blazing pen-
ances you see all things,


Sauti said :—

7. ‘tus accosted, that§twice-born Rishi,
receiving the permission of the’ great
Vyasa, began to answer the question of
the king. .
Vaishampayana said :—

8. Every one, O King, is not capable
of returning to his own mature at the end
of his deeds, Whether this is so or not,:
is, undoubtedly, a good question asked by ©
you. ~— Pes
g—to. -Hear,. O king, this which is a mys-


He is the powerful buwman Abhimanyu, j"tery of the celestials, O chief of Bharata’s


now gifted with the gentle effulgence of ‘the
Moon, : ; ;


20. Here is the powerful bowman Pandu,
now united with Kunti and Madri.. Your
father frequently comes to me on his excel-


lent car. 4


21. Look at the royal Bhishma, the son
of Shantanu, now in the midst of the Vasus,
Know that this one by the side of Vrishas-
paw is your preceptor Drona.


race! - It was explained (to us) by Vyasa of
great energy, celestial vision, and great
prowess, that ancient ascetic, O Kauravya,
whois ‘the son of Parashara and who-always
practises higl ‘vows, who is of immeasur-
able understanding, who is omniscient, and
who, therefore, knows the end of all deeds.


tt. Bhishma of great energy and great
effulgence acquired the dignity of the
Vasus. Eight Vasus, O chief of Bharata’s
tace, are now seen.


SWARGAROHANIKA PARVA. oy]


12. Drowa entered into Vrihaspati, that
foremost one of Angirasa’s descendants.
Heidika’s son Kritavarman ‘entered the

aruts,


13. Pradyumna entered Sanatkumara
whence he had Come. Dhritarashtra
obtained the regions, so dificult of acquisi-
tion, belonging to Kuvera.

14.
sainé jregions with her husband Dhrita+
Yashtra. With his two wives, Panda went
to the abode of the great Indra. ;

-19==197, ‘Both ‘Virata and Drupada, and
king Dhrishtaketu, as also ishatha,
Akruca, Shamva, Bhanukampa, and Vidu-
ratha, and Bhurishravas and Shana and
king Bhuri, and Kansa, and Ugrasena,
and Vasudeva, and Uttara, that foremost
of men, with his brother Shankha,~all
these foremost of
tials.

“18. Soma’s son of great prowess, named
Varehas of mighty energy, became Abhi-
Ymanyu, the son of .Phalguna, that foremost
‘of nen,


19. Having fought, according to Ksha-:


triya practices, with bravery such as hone
else had evec been able to show,—that
mighty-armed and righteous-souled being
entered Soma. Killed on the field of battle,
O foremost of men, Katna entered the Sun.
Shakuni entered into the Dwapara, and
Dhrishtadyumna into the God of Fire.


_ 2t. The sons of Dhritarashtra were all
Rakshasas of great power. Sanctified by
death caused by weapons, those great,
beings of great prosperity all succeeded in
acquiring the celestial region.

22, Both -Kshattri and king Yudhisha
thira ehtered into the God of Virtue. The
holy and illustrious Ananta (who had taken
bicth as Valacama) went to the region
below the Barth, 7


2g. Through the command of the Grand-
Sire, he, helped by his Yoga pawer, sup-
ported the Earth. Vasudeva was a part of
that eternal god of gods, called Narayana.
Accordingly, he entered into Narayana,


24. Sixteen thousand .women had been
married to Vasudeva as his wives.” When
the time came, O Janamejaya, they plunged
into the Saraswati.


2%. Renouncing their (human) bodies
» there, they, resascended tg the celestial
region. ‘Transformed into Apsaras, they
approached the presence of Vasudeva.


26. Those heroic and powerful car-
warriors, vs., Ghatotkacha and others,
who were killed in the great battle, attained
to tht status, some of celestials and some of
Yakshas,.


The famous Gandhari gained the |


| Bharata, of bottr


Persorts enteted the celes-- is 5 .
+4 the rites which remained to go through.
Astika, having rescued the snakes (from a


| - a7. Those who had fought on the side


of Duryodhana are ‘said to have ‘been
Rakshasa3s,- ‘Gradually, O-king, they bave
all attained to excellent regions of -happi-
ness.


28. Those forertost of men have gone,
some to the abode of Indra, some to that
of highly intelligent Kuvera of great -in-
telligenice, atid some to that of Varuna.


29. I have now told you, O you of great
splendour, everything about the acts, O
the Kurus and the

Pandavas. a


Satiti said =


30. Hearing this, O foretnost‘of twice-
born ones, at the intervals of sacrificial
rites, King Janamieya became filled with
wonder. —


3t< The sacrificial priests then finished


fiery death) becanie filled With joy.

32. King Janamejaya then pleased all
the Brahmanas with profuse presents.
Thus adored by the king, they returned
to their respective abodes.


33. Having dismissed thosé leartte
Beahmanas, ting Janamejrya returned
from Takshashila to Hastinapur.


. 34. I have now told you everythiig
that Vaishampayana described, at thé
command of Vyasa, to the king at his
snake sacrifice.


35. Galled a history, it is sacred, puri.
fying and excellent, [t has been coriposed
by. the ascetic Krishna, O Brahmana, of
truthful speech. i

36-237. He is omniscient; . conversant.
with aij ordinancés, .endued with a knowa
ledge of all duties; gifted with piety;
capable of perceiving what is beyond thd


perception of the senses, pure, having a


soul purified by penanices, possessed of thé
six high attributes, and devoted to Sankfhiya
Yoga. He tas comiposed this, seeing


‘everything with a celestial} eye which has


beet cleansed (strengthened) by varied
lore. .

38. He has done this; desiting to spread
the fame, throughout the world, of the
great Pandavas as also of other Kshatriyas


endued with profuse energy,


39. That learned man who recites this
history on sacred days in the midst of an
attentive audience becomes purged of every
sin, conquers the celestial region, and
aittains to the status of Brahma.

40. Of that man who listens with rapt |
attention to the recitation: of the whole of
this Veda composed by (the Island-born)


8


Krishna, a millioe’ sins, numbering such
gtave ones as Brahmanicide and the rest,
are washed off. . :

41. ‘The departe@d manes of that man
Who recites even a small, postion of this


history at a Shraddha, obtain inexhaustible.


food atid drink.

42. ‘The sins that one commits during
the day by one’s senses or the mind are ail
washed off before evening by reciting a
portion of the Mahabharata.


43. Whatever sins a Brahmata may
commit at night in the niidst.of women,
are all washed off before dawn by reciting
@ portion of the Mahabharata.


44. The great race of the. Bharatas
fs its topic. Hence it ts called Bharata.
And because of its grave meaning as also
of the Bharatas being its topic, it is called
Mahabharata. =


45. He who is versed in interpretations
A this great work becomes purged of every
sin. Such a man tives in virtue, profit. and
pleasure, and acquires Liberation also, O
chief of Bharata’s race. ~ :

46, That whichis in this fs elsewhere.
What which does not octur here occurs no-
where else. ‘This history is Kaown by the
name of Jaya, It should be heard by
every one desirous of Liberation.


47. tt should be read by Brahmanas,
by kings, and by women big with children.
He who desires Heaven attains to Heaven}
and he who desires victory achieves it.


48. The woman big with child gets either
a son or a daughter highly blessed, ‘The
powerful Island-born Krishna, who will not
have to come back, and who is Liberation
incarnate, made an: abstract of the Bharata,
moved by the desire of helping the cause
of virtue.


4g. He made another compilation con-
Sisting of sixty lakhs of verses,


50. ‘Thirty lakhs of these were placed in
the region of the cetestials. In the’ region
of the Pitris, fifteen lakhs, it should be
known, are current; while in that of the
Yakshas fourteen lakhs are current,


51—52, One lakh is current among
human beings. Narada recited the Maha-
bharata to the gods; Asita-Devala to the
Puris; Shuka to the Rakshasas and the
Yakshas; and Vaishampayana to human
beings. ‘This history is sacred, and of deep
significance, and considered as equal to the
Vedas. «


53. That man; O Shaunaka, who hears
this history, placing a Brahmana before him,
acquires bow fame and the fruition of all his


devices,


eran nreiiehitnysnemytettsienetnettaerepecnnenns rt Pht ttre nt pe finger


MAHABHARATA.


54—55. He wha, with fervid devotion,
listens toa recitation of the Mahabharata,
attains (hereafter) to great success on ac-
count of the merit that becomes his through
understanding even a very small part theres
of, Ail the sins of that man who recites or
listens to this history with devotion are
washed off.


56. Formerly, the great Rishi Vyasa,
having composed this work, caused his
son Shuka to read ft with bim, along with
these four verses.


87. ‘Thousands of mothers, and fathers,
and hundreds of sons and wives arise in the
world and depart from it. Otters will arise
and similarly go away.


%8. There aré thousands of occasions for
joy and hundreds of occasions for feary
These affect only him who is ignorant but
hever him that is wise.


89." With uplifted arms 1 am crying
aloud but nobody hears me. Fromm Virtue
originate Profit and Pleasure. Why should
net Virtue, therefore, be sought 2


bo. For the sake neither of pleasure, nor
of fear, nor of cupidity should any ane re-
nounte Virtue. Indeed, for the sake of even
life, oive should not renounce Virtue. Virtue
fs eternal. Pleasure and Pain are udt
eternal. Jiva is eternal. The cause, how-
ever, of Jiva’s being covered with a body
{is not so.


61. That man who, rcfsing early in the
morning, reads this Savittri of the Bharata,
acquires all the rewards attatched to a recita-
tion of this history and ultimately attains to
the highest Brahma,


62. As the sacred Ocean, as the Hima-
vat mountain, are both considered as mines
of precious gems, so is this Bharata.


63. The learned man, by reciting ta
others this Veda or Agama composed by
(the [slandaborn) Krishna, acquires wealth.
There is no doubt in this that he who, with
rapt attention, recites this history called
Bharata, acquires great success.


64. What need bas that man of a sprinka
ling of the waters of Pusbkara who attena
tively listens to this Bharata, while it is
recited to him? It represents the nectar that
dropped from the lips of the Island-born,.
It is immeasurable, sacred, sanctifying, sin-
cleausing, and auspicious,


SWARGAROHANIKA ‘PARVA. 9


CHAPTER VL


(SWARGAROHANIKA PARVA.,)
Continued,


Janamejaya said :~—

1. O holy one, according to what rites
should the learned listen to the Bharata ?
What are the fruits? What deities are to
be adored during the several Paranas ?


2. What should be the gifts that one
should make, O holy one, at every Parva
or sacred day (during the continuance of
the recitation)? What should be the qualifi-
cations of the reciter to be engaged? Tell
me all this,


Vaishampayana said :—

3. Hear, O king, what that procedure
is, and what the fruits, © Bharata, are
which will originate from one’s listening (to
a recitation of the Bharata). This, O king
of kings, is what you ask me.


4. The deities, O king, came to this
world for sport. Having achieved their
task, they ascended once more to the celes-
tial region,


5. Listen to what I tell you briefly. fs
the Mahabharata is to be found the births
of Rishis and deities on the Earth.


6--g. [n this work, called Bharata, O
foramost one of Bharata’s ‘race, are to be
seen in one place the eternal Rudras, the
Saddhyas, and the Vishwedevas; the
Adityas, the two deities named the Ashwins,
the regents of the World, the great Rishis,
the Guhyakas, the Gandharvas, the Nagas,
the Vidyadharas, the Siddhas, the diverse
deities, the Self-born visible in a body,
with many ascetics ; the Hills and Moun.
tains, Oceans and Seas, and Rivers; the
warious tribes of Apsaras; the Planets, the
Years, the Half-Years, and the Seasons;
and the whole universe of mobile and im-
mobile objects, with all the celestials and
Asuras,


lo, Hearing their celebrity, and on ae-
eount of a recitation of their names and
achievements, a man, who has committed
even terrible sins, will be cleansed.


tr—1q4. Havine, with a concentrated
soul and purified body, heard this history
duly, from the beginning, and having
reached its end, one’should make Shraddha-
offerings, O Bharata, to them (of whom one
has heard). ‘Yo the Brahmanas also, O chief
of Bharata’s cace, should, with due devotion
and accofding to one's power, be made
large gifts and various kinds of gems, and
kine, and vessels of white brass for milking
fine,’ and maidens decked with every


Fy


Ornament, and possessed of every accom.
plishment sujted to the enjoyment, as also
various kinds of conveyances, beautiful
palaces, plots of land and cloths,


15. Animals also should be given, such
as hotses and elephants, and beds, and
covered conveyances botee on the shoulders
of men, and well-decked cars.


16. Whatever objects are in the house,
of the foremost kind, whatever wealth of
great value is in it, should be given away
to Brahmanas. Indeed, one should give
away one’s ownself, wives and children.


17. One desirous of hearing the Bharata,
should hear it without a doubting heart,
with cheerfulness and joy; and as he goes
on listening to its recitation, he should,
according to the extent of his power, make
gifts with great devotion,


18. Hear how a person who is devoted
to truth and sincerity, who is self-controlled,
pure (in mind), and observant of those
deeds which lead to purity of body, that is
endued with faith, and that has subjugated
anger, acquires success,


t9—20. He should appoint as reciter
one who is pure (of body), who is endued
with good and pious conduct, who should
be robed in white, who should hav: a com-<
plete mastery -over his passions, who is
cleansed of all offences, who is conversant


“with every branch of learning, who is


endued with faith, who is free from malice,
who is possessed of handsome features, who
is blessed, self-controlled, truthful and wit
passions under control, and who is beloved
of all for the gifts he makes and the henors
of which he is the possessor. .


21—22. The reciter, seated at his ease,
free from ait bodily complaints, and with
rapt attention, should recite the text with.
out slowness, without a labouring voice,
without being fast or quiclt, quietly, witt
sufficient energy, without confusing the
fetters and words together, in a sweet
intonation and with such accent and em-
phasis as would show the sense, giving fulf
utterance to the three and sixty letters of
the alphabet from the eight places of their
formation.


23. Saluting Narayana, and to Nara,
that foremost male-beings, as also to the
goddess Saraswati, should the word Faya
be uttered,


' 94. Listening to the Bharata, O king,
when recited, O you of Bharata’s race, by
a reader of this kind, the listener, observant
of vows the while and purified by putie
ficatory cites, acquices valuable fruits.


25. “When the first Parana is reached,


16


the hearer should satisfy Brahmanas with
presents of all desirable objects.- :


25. By deing this, one acquires the
fruits of the Agnishtoma sacrifice.

26. He acquires a large (celestial): car
full of various orders of Apsaras. With a
glad heart and with the celestials in his
company, he proceeds to the celestial region,
bis heart rapt (in felicity).


27. When the second Parana is reached,
the hearer acquires the fyuits of the
Atiratra vow. Indeed, he ascends a
celestial car made entirely of costly gems.


28. Wearing celestiat garlands and
dresses, and decked with celestial unguents
and always shedding a celestial fragrance
around, he receives great honours in the
celéstial region.


29. When the third Parana is reached,
he acquires the fruits of the Dwadashaha
vow. Indeed, he lives in the celestial region
for myriads of years, like a god.


30-31. At the fourth Parana he ac-
quires the fruits of the Vajapeya sacrifice.
At the fifth, he acquires twice shose fruits.
Ascending a celestial car which resembles
the rising sun or a blazing fire, and with
the deities for his companions, he goes to
the celestial region and sports happily for
myriads of years in the abode of Indra.


32--34. At the sixth Parana, he acquires
Lwice, and at the seventh, thrice those fruits.
Ascending a celestial car which resembles
the summit of the Kailasa mountains (in
beauty), which is equipt with an altar made
of stones of lapis lasuli and other precious
gems, that is surrounded by beautiful
objects of various kinds, that is decked with
reins and orals, that moves at the will of
the rider, and that teems with waiting
“Apsaras, he roves through all}the happy
regions, like a second deity of the Sun. At
the eighth Parana he acquires the fruits of
the Rajasuya sacrifice,


35- He ascends a car as beautiful as the
rising moon, and to which are yoked horses
white as the rays of the moon and fleet
like thought.


36. He is served by most beautiful
women whose faces are more charming than
the moon, He hears the music of the
xarlands that encircle their waists and the
WVupuras encircling their ankles,


37. Sleeping with his head resting on
the laps of women of great beauty, he
awakes greatly refreshed. At the ninth
Parana, he acquires, Q Bharata, the fruits
of that foremost of sactifices, wiz., the
Horse-Sacrifice.


28. Ascending on a car equipt with a


MAHABHARatTaA.


chamber consisting of a top supported by
columns of gold, furnished with a seat made
of stones of Lapis lasulz, with windows on
all sides made of pure gold, and full of
Apsaras and Gandharvas,and other celes-
tials, he blazes forth in splendour.


39—40. Wearing“celestial garlands and
dresses, and decked with celestial unguents,
he -sports happily, with deities for his com-
panions, in the celestial region, like a second
deity himself.


41—43. Reaching the tenth Parana and
pleasing Brahmanas, he acquires a_ car
which tinkles with innumerable bells, which
is decked with ftags and banners, which is
equipt with a seat made of precious gems,
which has many arches made of lapis lagult,
which has a net-work of gold all round,
which has turrernts made of corals, which
is adorned with. Gandharvas and Apsaras
expert in singing, and which is fit for the
residence of the Righteous.


44—43. Crowned with a diadem of the
comptexion of fire, decked with ornaments
of gotd, his body smeared with celestial
sandalpaste, garnished with celestial gar-
lands, he, passes through all celestial regions,
enjoying all celestial objects of enjoyment,
and gifted with great splendour, through the
grace of the deities.


46—49. Thus accoutred, he receives
great honours in the celestial region for
many long years. With Gandharvas in
his company, for full twenty-one thousand
years, he sports in bliss with Indra himself
in the abode of Indra. He roves at pleasure
every day through the various celestial
regions, riding on celestial cars and convey<
ances, and sucrounded by celestial damsels
of great beauty. He is able to go tothe
abode of the Sun, of the Moon, and of Shiva,
O king. Indeed, he succeeds in living in
the same region with Vishnu himself, It
is even so, O monarch. There is no doubt
in this. .


50. A-person listening with faith, be-
comes even so. My preceptor has said
this. ‘To the reciter should be given all
such objects as he may wish.


§t—52. Elephants and horses and cars
and conveyances, especially animals and
the vehicles they draw, a bracelet of gold, a
pair of ear-rings, sacred threads, beautiful
dresses, and petfumes in especial (should be
given. By adoring him as a deity one
acquires the regions of Vishnu,


53-54. After this 1 shall declare what
should be given away, us each Parvan is
reached of the Bharata in course of its recitae
tion, to Brahmanas, after ascertaining their
birth country, truthfulness, and greatness,


SWARGAROHANIKA PARVA, tr


“Oo ae Bharata’s race, as also their incli-
nation*@for piety, and to Kshatriyas too, O
king, after ascertainment of similar details.


55. Causing the Brahmanas to utter
beuedictions, the business of recitation
should be begun. When a Parvan is
finished, the Brahmanas {should be adored
to the best of one’s power. .


56. At first, the reciter, clad in good
dresses, and smeared with perfumed paste,
should, O king, be duly fed with honey and
frumenty of the best kind.


57- When the Astika Parva is being
recited, Brahmanas should be entertained
with fruits and roots, and frumeaty, and
honey and clarified butter, and rice boiled
with raw sugar.


58. When the Sabha Parva is being
recited, Brahmanas should be fed with


Habishya along with Apupas and -Pupas |.


and Modakas, O king.


59. When the Aranyaka’ Parva is being
recited, great Brahmanas should be - fed
with fruits and roots) When the Arani
Parva is ceached, water-pots full of water
should be distributed.


60. Many superior kinds of sweet food,
also rice and fruits and roots, and good food,
should be presented to the Brahmanas.


61-66. During the recitation of the
Virata Parva, various kinds of dresses
should be given away; and during that
of the Udyoga Parva, O chief of the
Bharatas, the twice-born ones, after being
decked with perfumes and garlands, should
be entertained with pood food, During the
recitation of the Bhishma Parva, O king of
kings, after giving them excellent cars and
conveyances, food should be given which
is pure and well-cooked and possessed of
every desirable quality. During the ‘Drona
Parva food of every superior. kind should be
given to learned Brahmanas, as also beds,
O monarch, and bows, and good swords.
During the recitation of the Karna Parva,
food of the foremost kind, which is, besides,
-pure and well-cooked, should be presented
to the Brahmanas by the householder with
vapt mind. During the recitation of the


Shalya Parva, O King of kings, food with,


confectionery and rice boiled with raw
sugar, as also cakes of wheat and soothing
and nutiitive articles of food, and drink
should be presented. During the recitation
of the Gada Parva, Brahmanas should be
treated with food mixed with Mudga,


67—63. During the recitation of the
Stree Parva, foremost of Brahmanas should
be served with gems and precious stones:
and during the recitation of the Aishika
Para, rice boiled in clarified butter should


first be given, and then food pure and well-
cooked, and possessed of every desirable
attribute, should be presented. During the
recitation of the Shanti Parva, the Brah-
manas should be fed with Habishya.


. 69. When the Ashwamedhika Parva is
reached, agreeable food should be served
and when the Ashramavasika is reached,
Brahmanas should be {served with Habi-
shya.


go. When the Mausala is reached,
scents and garlands should be given away,
During the Mahaprasthanika, similar
presents should be made, possessed of
every good quality. .


7t. When the Swarga Parva is reached,
the Brahmanas should be fed with Habi-
shya. Upon the conclusion of the Hari-+
et as a thousand Brahmanas should be
fed.


72. To each of them should be presented
a cow accompanied with a piece of gold,
Half of this should be presented to each
poor man, Oking. ~

73. Upon the conclusion of all the
Parvas, the wise householder should give to
the reciter a copy of the Mahabharata with
a piece of gold.


94. When the Harivansha Parva is being
recited, Brahmanas should be fed with
frumenty at each successive Parana, O king,


7376. Having finished all the Parvas,
one versed in the scriptures, dressing him-
self inswhite, wearing garlands, decked
with ornaments, and properly purified,
should place a copy of the Mahabharata
on an auspicious spot and cover it with a
piece of silken cloth and adore it, according
to due rites, with scents and garlands, offer~
ing each at a time. -


97. Indeed, @ king, the several volumes
of this work should be adored by one with
devotion and rapt mind. Offerings should
be made to them of various kinds of food
and garlands and drinks and various
auspicious articles of enjoyment.


78. Gold and other precious metals
should be given as Dakshina. The names
should then be taken of all the celestials as
also of Nara and Narayana.


79. Then, worshipping the persons of
some foremost of Brahmanas with scents
and garlands, they should be satisfied with
various kinds of gifts of enjoyable and
very superior or-costly articles,

80. By doing this, one acquires the
merits of the Atiratra sacrifice. Indeed,
at each successive Parva, he acquires the
merits which belong to the performance of
a sacrifices:


i2


Sr. The réciter, O chief of the Bharatas,


should be endued with learning and endued |


with a good voice and a clear utterance
about both letters and words. --Such a man
should, O chief of-the Bharatas, recite the
Bharata,


82. After entertaining a number of
foremost Brahmatas, presents should be
made to them according to the - ordinanées.
Tha reciter also, O chief of the Bharatas,
should be decked with ornaments and fed
sumptuously.


83. The reciter being satisfied, the house-
hotder acquiring an excellent and auspici-
ous contentment. If the Brahmanas are
satisfied, all the deities are gratified. ©


84. After this, O chief of the Bharatas.
Brahmanas should be duly served with.
various kinds of enjoyable articles and
superior things. ~ td

85. I have thus indicated the ordinances,
O foremost of men, (about the manner of
reciting these scriptures) in response to
your enquiries. You should observe thei
with faith, oe -


86. In listening to a recitation of the


Bharata and at each Parana, O best of
kings, one who desires. to acquire to the


highest good should listen with the great; |


e€st care and attention,


87. One should listen to the Bharata
every day. One ‘should proclaim the
merits of the Bharata every day. One who
has the Bnarata in his house, has in his
hands all those scriptures which are known
by the name of Jaya. :

88. The Bharata is purifying and
sacred. In the Bharata are various. topics.
The Bharata is adored by the very gods,
The Bharata is the highest end.


89. The Bharata, O chief of the
Bharatas, is the foremost of all scriptures.
One acquires Liberation. through. the
Bharata. This that I tell you is. certain
truth. ©


go.- One wha proclaims the merits of
this history called the Mahabharata, of
the Earth, of the cow, of Saraswati (the
goddess of speech}, of Brahmanas, and
of Keshava, has never to languish.


gt. Inthe Veda, inthe Ramayana and
in the sacred Bharata, O chief of _Bharata’s
race, Hari is sung in the beginning, the
middie, and the end.


g2. That ia which occurs excellent dis-
course about Vishiiu, and the eternal
Shrutis, should be listened to by men
desirous of acquiring the highest end.


MAHABHARATA. |


93. This treatise is. ‘purifying. his is
the highest indicator as regards duties;
this is endued with every merit. One
desirous of prosperity should listen to it.


94. Sins committed by’. means of the
body, by means of words, and by- means of
the mind, are all dissipated (through listen«
ing to the Bharata) as Darkness at sunrise.


-95- One devoted to Vishhu acquires
(through this) that merit which is acquired
by listening to the eighteen Puranas, here
is no doubt in this.


- 96. Men and women (by listening to


‘this)’ would certainly acquire the status


of Vishnu. Women desirous of children
shoutd certainly listen to this which pro-
claims the fame of Vishnu.


.97- One desirous of .acquiring the | fruits
vthich belong to a recitation of the Bharata
shuld, according to one’s power, give unto
the reciter Dakshina as also an honorarium
in gold.


-98.. One desirous of one’s own’ behoof
should give to the reciter a Kapila cow
with horns cased in gold atid accompanied
by her calf, covered ‘with a cloth.


99. Ornaments, O chief of Bharata’s
race, for the arms, as also those for the
ears, should be given. Besides these, othe
kinds of riches should be presented. = -


100, To the reciter, O king of men,
gitt of land should: be made. No gift like
that of land could ever be or will be.


tor. The man who listens (to the
Bharata) or.that recites it to other people,
becomes purged of all his sins and acquires
at last the status of Vishnu.


toz. Such aman rescues his ancestors
to the eleventh degree, as also himself with
his wives and sons, O chief of Bharata’s
race. After concluding a recitation of the
Bharata, one should, O king, perform a
Homa with all its ten parts.


103. I have thus, QO king, told every.
thing in your presence,


104. He whoa.-listens with devotion to’
this Bharata from the beginning becomes
purged of every sin even if he-be guilty of
Brahmanicide or the violation of his pre
ceptor’s bed, or even if he be a drinker of
alcohol or a robber of other people’s gcods,
or even if he be born in the Chandala
order, ,


10g. Destroying all his sins like the
maker of day destroying darkness, such a
man, forsooth, sports happily in the region
of Vishnu like Vishnu himself,


Finis SWARGAROHANIKA PARVA.
WHE EIGHTEEN PARVAS OF THE MAHABHARATA ARE THUS CONIPLETED


—a a


Digitized with financial assistance from
Ms.Swati Thakar
on 13 March, 2020


ND
