THE  ELEMENTS  OF  POLITY
(IN  ENGLISH.  )
( LIBRARY
1 1|  | BWTEDHjj^gp^fBO  BY
|f  ^ MANMATHA  NATH  DUTT,  M.A.,  M.R.A.S.
fv  Rector,  Keshub  Academy;
| ' "
I Aldhor  °f thc  Englkh  Translations  of  the  Ramayana,  Imadhhaga-
j.,  tat  am,  Vishnu puranam,  MahabhanUa,  Bhagaval-  Gita
anZ  other  works*
■ CALCUTTA,
Printed  by  H.  C.  DassS,
Elysium  Press,  65/2  Beadon  Street,
INTRODUCTION.
:o:
* ^TJHE  superiority  of  the1  ancient  Hindus  in  metaphysical  and
theologicaWlisquisitions  has  been  established  beyond  all
dgubts.  Our  literature  abounds  in  ttea-
origin  SC^0nC6  ^ Polity:  Its  tises,  * which^  for  philosophical  discus-
sions* sound  reasonings  and  subtle
inferences  regarding  many  momentous  problems  of  existence,  have
not  been  beaten  down  by  the  modern  age  of  culture  and  enlighten-
ment. The  world  has  all  along  been  considered  by  the  ancient
Hindu  writers  as  a flood-gate  of  miseries  of  existence,  and  the
mmmum  bonum  of  human  existence  is,  in  their  view,  the  unification
of  the  humanity  with  the  divinity.  The  chief  aim  of  all  the  ancient
writers  of  India  has  been  to  solve  the  mighty  problem,  namely,  the
cessation  of  miseries  of  existence  and  the  attainment  of  the  God-head.
Admitting  their  exalted  superiority  in  matters  of  philosophical  and
theological  speculation,  some  people  of  the  present  generation  boldly
launch  the  theory  that  our  literature  lacks  in  works  which  may
serve  as  a guidance  of  practical  life.  To  disabuse  the  popular  mind
of  this  perilous  misconception,  we  might  safely  assert  that  Hindu
writers  paid  no  less  attention  to  practical  morals  and  politics.  We
find  a very  beautiful  account  of  the  Science  of  Polity  in  the  Raj-
dharma  section  of  the  great  Epic,  the  Mahabharata.
Formerly  for  the  protection  of  creatures  Brahma  tfrote  the
science  of  Polity  in  ten  million  chapters.  Siva  obtained  this  from
Brahma  and  epitomised  it  in  ten  thousand  chapters.  His  work  is
called  P aishalakshya  from  his  name  ( Vishalahsha  or  large-eyed).
Indra  made  an  abridgement  of  it  in  five  thousand  chapters.  Vrihaspatl
converted  it  into  three  thousand  chapters,  and  Sukra  into  one  thou-
sand.  Thus  it  was  gradually  abridged  by  various  sages  having  in
view  the  shortened  life  of  the  people  around  them.
It  was  Chanakya,  the  Machaeval  of  India  who  first  reformed
this  Science  at  the  end  of  the  age  of  Rishis.  His  work  consisting
of  a hundred  verses  is  a well-known  brochure  which  even  the  school
11
boys  of  India  get  by  rote.  The  author,  of  the  work  which  is  the
subject  of  our  translation,  was  a disciple  of  Chanakya  who  raised
the  first  Mamiya  king  Chandra  Gupta  on  the  throne  of  Rataliputra
(B.  C.  319.)
Tradition  fully  corroborates  this  date.  From  a report  submitted
by  Dr.  Frederich  to  the  Batavian  Society
of  arts  and  Sciences  on  the  StJnskrita
literature  of  Bali,  it  appears  that  the  most  popular  work  in  that
Island  on  Polity  is  entitled  kamandakiya  Nitisara , and  all  the  Sans-
; krita  books  thercTestant  are  acknowledged  to  be  the  counterparts  of
purely  Indian  originals.  The  researches  of  Sir  Stamford  Raffles
and  Crawfurd  shew  that  the  predominance  of  Buddhism  in  the
island  of  Java  obliged  the  Hindu  inhabitants  of  that  place  to  retire
in  the  fourth  century  of  the  Christian  era,  with  their  household  gods
"“and their  sacred  scriptures  to  the  island  of  Bali,  where  they  and
their  descendants  have,  ever  since,  most  carefully  preserved  the
authenticity  of  their  literature  and  their  religion.  It  has  also  been
shewn  by  the  same  authorities  that  since  the  period  of  their  exile,
they  have  not  had  any  religious  intercourse  with  India  ; it  would
therefore  follow  that  the  Sanskrita  works  now  available  in  Bali,
including  the  Kamandakiya  Niti,  are  of  a date  anterior  to  the  4th
century.  The  contents,  however,  of  the  Balenese  code  of  morals,
are  unknown,  and  it  would  be  premature,  from  the  similarity  of
names,  to  infer  its  identity  with  the  work  now  presented  to  the
public;  yet  the  fact  that  the  people  of  Bali  themselves  acknowledge
all  their  Sanskrita  literature  to  have  been  obtained  from  India,
would  argue  the  existence  of  at  least  a Kamandakiya  JVi/isdra  at
the  time  when  that  literature  was  imported  from  the  shores  of
Bharatavarsha.

An  internal  evidence  of  some  moment  is  in  favour  of  the  anti-
quity which  tradition  has  ascribed  to  this  work.  It  is  dedicated  to
Chandragupta,  and  the  author,  a Buddhist,  apparently  with  a view
not  to  offend  the  feelings  of  his  Hindu  patron  with  the  name  of  a
Buddhist  deity,  has  thought  fit  to  forego  the  usual  invocation  at  the
commencement  of  his  work— a circumstance  which  has  been  made
the  theme  of  much  erudite  disquisition  by  the  author  of  it,
Siddhanta  Muktavalk


m

Although  written  in  verse,  its  style  is  peculiarly  unpoefcical,  and
in  its  rude  simplicity  approaches  the  older  Smritis,  The  work  has
not,  however,  any  of  the  antiquated  grammatical  forms  and  obsolete
expressions  which  are  so  freely  met  with  in  Manu  and  occasionally
in  the  other  Smritis,  and  its  versification  is  unexceptionable.  Indeed,
had  it  to  be  judged  by  its  metres  alone  they  would  have  justified  the
inference  that  its  origin  is  due  to  a much  later  age  than  that  of
Kalidasa.  «

It  has  been  observed  by  some  that  the  use  of  the  word  hard  in*
this  work  is  fatal  to  its  claim  to  1intaquity,^that  word  having  been*
shown,  in  a paper  published  in  the  Journal  of  the  Asiatic  Soci1
(Vol.  p.  ),  to  be  of  Arabic  origin,  and  to  have  been  borrowed
the  Brahmanas  in  the  ioth  century.  Mr.  Ravenshaw’s  specula,
however,  have  not  yet  obtained  that  confirmation  which  would  justuy
our  rejecting  the  testimony  of  the  ;dedicfttion,  and  infer  the  date  of
the  work  from  the  use  of  a single  word  which  may  after  all  be  the
result  of  an  interpolation  or  a misiection.

The  style  is  condensed  and  pithy  like  that  of  proverbs.  The  es-
sential characteristics  are  its  gravity  and
sententiousness.  In  the  early  state  of
society  concise  rules  and  flashing  proverbs  “ the  condensed  conclu-
sions of  experience  ” form  better  guides  of  life  and  are  therefore  more
frequently  resorted  to  than  lengthy  ratiocinations  in  search  of  general-
truths.  Wise  men  of  old  from  Solomon  downwards  all  preferred  this*
method  of  communicating  their  ideas.

Apologue  or  fable  was  also  adopted  as  a form  in  which  moral
counsel  could  be  successfully  imparted.

Sources.  Probably  apologues  followed  proverbs

and  essays  succeeded  them  next.  Hitapodesha  the  most;  celebrated
work  of  moral  counsels  is  in  the  shape  of  apologues  ; some
scholars  hold  that  Hitopodesha  is  the  model  which  Kamandaka-
followed.  They  base  their  arguments  on  the  theory  that  apologue
was  the  earliest  form  of  literary  productions.  We  however  hold
that  Kamandakiya  Nitis&m  is  the  earlier  work,  proverbs  in  our  view,
preceding  the  apologues  as  the  form  of  literary  compositions.  Even
looking  to  the  Mahabharata  which  is  anterior  to  both  we  see  maxims
in  the  very  words  as  in  this  work.  Agnipuran  lias  a section  in  which


IV


Kamandaki  has  been  freely  quoted  though  not  by  name.  Thus  we
see  that  these  and  similar  maxims  were  among  the  Hindus  as  the
heir-looms  of  remote  antiquity.

Some  critics  are  of  opinion  that  the  moral  tone  of  the  state-

„ . , policy  is  not  worthy  of  a descendant

Moral  ton*.

of  the  ancient  Rishis.  Its  corner  stone
is  cunning  and  artifice  intended  to  favor  arbitrary  power  and  its  main*
object  is  to  put  down  party  opposition*  Chanakya>  the  preceptor  of
the  author,  was  always  qji  the  alert  to  over-thfbw  his  powerful  rival

For  this  he  took  recourse  to  one  eternal  round  of  strata-

00*

,nd  artifices  from  which  forgery,  perjury  and  even  poisoning
ot  excluded.  His  disciple  Kamandaka  could  not  shake  off  the
£e  of  his  powerful  teacher.  Rut  this  defect  is  c.onfined  entirely
sections  on  deplomacy  and  does  not  affect  at  all  his  rules
;ng  the  general  conduct  of  kings  and  their  officers.  Herein
wc~rmd  an  earnest  advocacy  of  truth,  justice  and  honesty  {which  stands


he  Synopsis  of  the  work-


a favourable  comparison  with  works  of  much  higher  pretensions.

The  maxims  of  Kamandaki  are  arranged  under  nineteen  different
heads,  and  embrace  almost  all  the  sub-
jects that  may  be  fairly  included  under
ie  term  polity,  besides  some  which  have  only  the  voucher
of  Hindu  writers  to  appear  ift  this  work.  The  first  chapter
is  devoted  to  the  inculcation,  in  princes,  of  the  necessity  of
study  and  of  controlling  their  passions.  The  second  has  for  its
‘ Subjects  the  division  of  learning,  the  duties  of  the  different  castes
^ the  importance  of  criminal  jurisprudence.  In  the  third  occurs
an\  exposition  of  the  duty  of  princ6s  to  their  subjects,  of  the  neces-
sity* of  impartial  justice,  and  the  impropriety  of  tyrannising  over
theljr  people.  The  fourth  affords  a description  of  the  essential
conWtuents  of  a good  government.  The  duties  of  masters

and  i servants  engross  the  whole  of  the  fifth  chapter,  and  the
mode,  0f  removing  difficulties  or  rather  of  punishing  the  wicked,
forms  t^e  subject  of  the*  sixth.  The  seventh  is  devoted
to  the  duty  of  -guarding  ti|e  persons  ot  kings  and  crown
princes^  and  includes  a variety  of  expedients  against  v^urpri#&s>
poisoni^  tiie  infidelity  of  servants,  wives  and  relatives,  and  the
dishonesty  0f  medical  attendants.  The  mode  of  consolidating  a


V


kingdom  by  providing  it  with  the  necessary  officers  of  state,  and
including  within  it  a number  of  dependencies  and  subordinate  chiefs,
forms  the  subject  of  the  next  chapter.  Then  follow  a series  of  rules
regarding  negotiations  and  disputes  with  foreign  powers,  conferences,
embassies  and  spies,  which  take  up  the  whole  of  the  9th)  toth,  nth
and  the  12th  chapter.  The  13th  opens  with  an  exhalation  in  favour
*of  constant  activity  and  attention  to  business,  and  the  evils,  which
attend  idleness  and  vicious  propensities.  The  latter  are  indicated
by  the  term  vydsarta,  arfd  include  a number  vices  and  frailties- —
such  as  over*fondness  for  hunting  'and  gambling,  sleeping  in  the
day,  calumny,  concupiscence,  dancing,  singing,  playing,  idlene
drinking,  general  depravity,  violence,  injury,  envy,  malice,  pride,
tyranny.  The  term  is  yery  Comprehensive,  and  when  appn
other  than  men,  is  made  to  imply  “defects"  generally,  and  the  subse-
quent chapter  particularises  the  various  defects  to  whfch  the  seven
members  of  a government  are  frequently  liable.  It  is  followed  by  a
dissertation  on  military  expeditions.  The  1 6th  chapter  has  fortifi*
cation,  entrenchment  and  encamping  of  armies  for  its  subjects,  and,
though  short,  is  highly  interesting,  for  the  rules  it  contains  an
matters  in  which  the  modern  Hindus  are  so  entirely  ignorant.  The
different  expedients  for  overcoming  enemies  such  as  reconciliation,
wealth,  show  of  military  power,  domestic  discord,  diplomacy,
feigning,  and  stratagem,  are  detailed  in  the  following  chapter,  and
those  failing,  a king  is  recommended  to  enter  into  actual  warfare,  and
on  the  mode  of  carrying  it  on,  including  surprises,  guerilla  fights,
pitched  battles,  and  military  stratagies;  the  uses  of  the  different
members  of  an  army,  such  as  the  infantry,  cavalry  and  elephants ;
the  arrays  of  soldiers  into  columns,  lines,  squares  Sec . ; the  duties  of
commanders,  and  the  principle  of  selecting  one's  ground  1 the  two
subsequent  chapters  contain  the  most  curious  details.

We  have  undertaken  to  translate  into  English  .this  great  work  of

Our  oWecfc  Kamandaka  for  it  stands  pre-eminently

* high  among  works  dealing  with  the  science

of  Polity.  It  is  thorougly  representative  in  its  character  and  the  precepts,
of  the  great  sage,  wcarc  sure,  will  prove  a profitable  reading  to  the
general  public  and  more  so  to  many  Hindu  princes  who  govern  over
the  destiny  of  a vast  section  of  the  Indian  population.  Now  that  it


fcas  pleased  the  Gracious  Providence  to  link  the  destinies  of  India
with  those  of  England  this  work  is  likely  to  give  some  idea  to  our
rulers  as  to  hOw  the  ancient  Hindu  kings  ruled  their  subjects.  In
India  we  have  glorious  traditions  of  loyalty.  In  India  loyalty  is  the
very  back-bone  of  the  Indian  races  by  whom  a king  is  regarded  as  a
god-head.  It  will  not  be  therefore  useless  both  for  the  rulers  and
the  ruled  to  know  how  the  ancient  Hindu  kings  swayed  over  ther
vast  millions  and  what  was  the  key-note  of  the  loving  fidelity  of
these  latter  to  their  king.  °


kamandakiya


SECTION  I.


-:o:-


Oalutation  unto  the  Glorious  Ganesha.
i.  *May  that  lord  of  the  earth  be  ever  attended  with
victory  over  Ins  internal  and  external  enemies,  through
whose  Regal  powerf  this  world  is  stationed  in  the  paths  of
rectitude;  who  is  rich  in  his  wealth  of  learning*  and  is


* It  was  customary  with  Sanskrit  writers  of  yore  to  euloeise  in  th»

first  instance,  the  central  character  that  would  figure  in  theS^iS

rcatises.  In  accordance  with  this  time-honored  custom  the  author
here  salutes  the 'lords  of  the  earth- for  whose  vuidanre  T

lay  down  maxims  of  practical  politics  The  r.cn  H ‘S  g°‘ng  t0

r“—  - - (B  c t 'Ttt  -

installed  on  the  throne  of  Patalinutra  bv  rtL  ' ° " 3 9 H ^ b<2en
this  brochure.  The  reader  wffl  t w P;eCept°r  °f  the  Writef «
fealutes  his  renowned  and  well-known  teac^th 1 ^ author
U»  Machiavd  of  Mi,.  *“  “*Ch'r' th'  ChS„ak,a

pre-eminent  position  of  the  king  himself  ’ (2)  Mn  + m L JCSty  or

7“  - — -f  (3)

power  of  energy.’  c.f.  1 Rajayam  nama  saktitrayayattam’  TbelJI
requites  for  a monarchy  are  the  possession  otZlZ'e  Saktl

prosiri^fl"^erc  rlytranSktedW°Uld  mea"  ‘attended  with*  Sri  or
prosperity,  the  commentator  takes  Sri  to  msm  n , ,

Shastrw,  prudence,  wisdom  &e.‘  knowledge  of  the


kamandakiya  nitisara.


god-like*  (in  prosperity);  and  (lastly)  who  (equitably)  inflirts
punishmentf  (on  those  deserving  it).

2 6.  Salutation  unto  the  highly  intelligent  Vishnugupta,f
who  sprang  from  an  extensive  and  illustrious  dynasty
the  descendants  of  which  lived  like  the  Rishis§  accepting
alms  from  nobody ; unto  him  whose  renown  became  world-
wide ; unto  him  who  was  effulgent  like  the  (highly  blazing)
lre;[|  unto  that  most  artful  and  dinning  one,  the  foremost
>f  those  conveseant  with  P a Y ant  art  ha, who  mastered  the
our  Vedas  as  if  they  were  only  one.  Salutation  unto  that  one
vhose  fire  of  energy  was  like  the  flash  of  lightning,  and
hrough  whose  magical  powers,**  that  resembled  in  potency
~nd  ltl  fury  the  thunder-bolt  itself,  the  wide-spread,  re-
nowned, powerful  and  mountain-like  dynasty  of  Nandaff  was

* 2W-AH  the  qualities  indicated  by  the  root  are  only  possible  in  a
celestial,  hence  the  word  has  ordinarily  come  to  mean  a deity.  A kine
ts  held  m as  high  and  sacred  an  estimation  as  a deity,  and  is  said  to
Possess  all  tbe  attributes  in  common  with  a o-od.

f Daniadhara.—May  have  two  meanings,  both  of  which  may  be  ac-
cepted here  ; the  first  word  of  this  compound  means  ‘a  sceptre’  as  well  as
punishment  ; and  the  second  word  means  ‘to  hold'  as  well  as  'to
deal  o„t.  So  the  compound  may  have  two  significations  (t)  holding  the
sceptre  as  a symbol  of  authority  (2)  dealing  out  punishments.  *

+ VtslmugupU.- Another  name  of  Chanakya.  He  had  many  other
designations  such  as  Droumina,  Koutilya,  Amsaola  See.

§ Riski* — A seer.

^ IJfdiaveda.—ls  one  of  the  diverse  designations  of  fire  ; it  is  so  called
t0  kn°W  a“  b6ingS  b0m  on  the  face  of  ‘he  earth.  The

t h;t  T ££*

7 **-  *-*«-“

for  malevdMpvr^s'  fmchaya  S1&nifies  ‘employment  of  magical  spells

The


^'Uj,

a mountain  is  its  peak.  N andaparvata.—
Was  ethroned  .through  the  machinations  and


KATVIANDAKIYA  NITISARA.  3

eradicated  for  good.*  Salutation  unto  him  who  resembled
the  god  Saktidharaf  himself  (in  prowess)  and  who,  single-
handed,  by  means  of  his  MantrasciMi  and  UtsahasaktiX
brought  the  entire  earth  under  the  thorough  control  of
Chandragupta,  the  foremost  of  sovereigns.  Salutation  unto
that  wisest  of  counselors  who  collated  the  nectar-like  Niti-
Shastras  from  |he  mighty  main  of  the  Arthashastras .§

7 — 8,  Culling  from  fche  Code  of  that  one  of  pure  intelli-
gence who  had  reached  the  end  & (mastered)  the  different
branches  of  learning,  we  shall  inculcate,  out  of  our  love
for  the  Science  of  Polity,  a series  of  short  and  significant
lessons  to  the  kings,  directing  them  regarding  the  acquire-
ment and  preservation  of  territory  ; whatever,  we  shall  say,
will  be  in  perfect  harmony  with  the  views  of  those  well-
versed  in  the  science  of  politics.  ||

9.  The  king  is  the  cause  of  the  prosperity  and  progress
of  this  world,  and  is  held  in  high  estimation  eveti  by  grown


intrigues  of  CMnakya.  The  dynasty  is  here  compared  to  a mountain
owing  to  its  various  branches  and  offshoots.  ( ( ^ r,

* Mulata. — The  commentator  explains  it  as  'not  to  rise  again  ; fallen
for  good.’  We  have  accepted  this  meaning.  For  Papdta  Mulata , some
read  papdidmulata ;

f Saktidham . — Is  another  name  for  K£rtikeya,  the  son  of  Siva.  He
is  the  Mars  or  the  god  of  war  of  the  Hindu  mythology.  v ti,

$ Mantrasahti  and  Utsdhasahti . — Vide  note  f to  sloka  (1).  , , .

§ Nitishdstra  and  Arthaskdstra»—ln  Sanskrit  literature  Niti  has
a diversity  of  meaning  which  is  quite  puzzling;  for  instance  it  means,
ethics,  politics,  morality,  policy,  decorum  &c.  But  in  this  connection  it
is  easy  to  find  out  its  true  signification  which  is  politics.  Shdstra  means
science  here.  In  the  same  manner,  Arthashdstra  may  have  various
meanings,  of  which  we  accept  the  following,  viz  'the  science  of  practical
life.*

||  Rdjvidyd'vidam . — The  author  alludes  to  Vrikaspati,  the  precep-
tor of  the  celestials,  and  to  Usanas , the  preceptor  of  the  Asuras  ; both
these  are  known  as  writers  on  civil  and  religious  law,  and  are  accepted!
as  authorities  on  civil  polity.


4


KAMANDAKIYA  NITI5ARA.


up  people;  he  affords  delight  to  the  eyes  of  men,  even  as
the  moon  affords  delight  unto  the  (mighty)  ocean.* * * §

10.  If  a ruler  of  men  does  not  lead  his  subjects  to  the
paths  of  rectitude,  then  are  these  latter  (hopelessly)  tossed
about  in  the  ocean  of  existence,  even  as  a (frail)  bark,  having
none  to  steer  her  through,  is  tossed  about  in  a rough  sea.  ^

11.  A righteous  king,  protecting  his  subjefts  to  the  best
of  his  resources  and  having  the  pc^ver  of  capturing  hostile

ities,  should  be  jheld  «in^  as  high  a regard  as  the  Lord
y rajafiati\  himself.

12.  The  sovereign  should  protect  his  subjects  (by  the
juitable  distribution  of  rewards  and  punishments).  Tho
ibjects  should  increase  the  prosperity  of  the  sovereign  (by

yielding  taxes  and  tributes  in  the  shape  of  agricultural  pro
ducts).  Preservation  of  good  order  is  preferable  to  a seem*
ing  increase  of  prosperity,  for  when  all  order  is  lost, J then
prosperity,  though  present,  is  of  no  use,

13.  A sovereign  discharging  his  duties  according  to  the
rules  of  Polity  soon  secures  Trzvarga § for  himself  and  for
his  subjects;  acting  otherwise  he  is  sure  to  ruin  himself
and  his  subjects.

14-  Following  the  paths  of  rectitude  king  Vaijavana||


* The  rising  and  swelling  of  the  waters  of  the  ocean  (Hood-tide)

occasioned  by  the  influence  of  the  moon  was  to  the  eye  of  the  Sanskrit

poets  an  indication  of  the  ocean's  delight.

t A.n  ePIthet  of  the  ten  lords  of  created  beings  first  created  by  By  ah  mu.
Some  times  the  word  means  Btahmd  himself.

t ‘ Tadabh&vai:— Another  reading  is  accepted  ‘ Tannasai' ; but  this
makes  .■  j

§ The  three  objects  of  worldly  existence,  for  the  attainment  of  which

these  are  Bharma  or  religious  merit,  Avtha  or  wealth
and  Kama  or  objects  of  desire.  f !

fl  Th«  allusion  is  as  follows  :-King  Indrascna  sprang  frdm  the
For  having  held  sexual  intercourse  with  his  wife  I
curing  h«  period  of.  menstruation,  he  was  on  the  point  of  being  devour-
ed by  a Rakshasa,  who  only  consented  to  relent  provided  the  king  would


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.  5

governed  this  earth  for  a long  period,  whilst  king  Nahusa,  *
treading  evil  ways,  was  condemned  to  dwell  in  the  nether
rregions  (hell).

15.  For  this  reason,  always  keeping  equity  in  view,  a

king  should  exert  himself  for  securing  prosperity  (in  the
shape  of  territorial  aggrandisement  & c).  Through  equitable
dealings,  an  empire  increases  in  territorial  wealth  ; and  the
delicious  fruit  of  this  increase  of  territory  is  all-round  pros-
perity.  *

16.  King,  minister,  kingdom,  castle,  treasury,  army
and  allies,  are  known  to  form  the  seven  constituents
•government  $ good  sense  and  unebbing  energy  are  its  primary
stay.

17.  Depending  upon  his  unmitigating  energy  and  dis-
cerning through  his  prudence  the  right  path  to  be  adop-
ted, a king  should  always  vigorously  endeavour  to  establish
a government  having  those  seven  constituents.

18.  The  acquirement  of  wealth  by  equitable  means,  its
preservation  and  augmentation,  and  its  bestowal  on  deserving
recepients — these  are  said  to  be  the  four  duties  of  a sovereign*

never  direct  or  allow  his  subjects  to  be  engaged  in  pious  deeds.  I ndrasena
agreed  ; and  his  iniquity  speedily  brought  about  his  destruction.  Several
of  his  descendants,  following  the  path  of  their  predecessor,  met  with
ruin.  Descended  from  this  doomed  line  of  kings  Vaijavana  directed
the  performance  of  virtuous  acts  by  his  subjects,  and  himself  per-
formed them.  Thus  his  virtue  saved  him,  and  he  continued  to  rule  over
his  subjects  for  a long  time.

* The  allusion  is  this.— Descended  from  the  lunar  race  of  kings,
Nahusa  was  a very  wise  arid  powerful  king  } and  when  Indra  lay  con-
cealed under  waters  to  expiate  for  the  sin. of  having  killed  Vritra,  h
Brihmana,  he  was  asked  to  occupy  Indra’s  seat.  While  there,  hethought
of  winning  the  love  of  Indrani  and  caused  the  seven  celestial  sages  to  con-
vey him  in  a palanquin  to  her  house.  On  his  way,  he  asked  them  to  be
quick  using  the  words  Sarpa,  Sarpa  (move  on),  when  one  of  the  sagea
cursed  him  to  be  a Sarpa  (serpent).  He  fell  down  from  the  sky,  and
remained  in  that  wretched  state  till  he  was  relieved  by  Yudhisthira*


o KAMANDAKiYA  NITISARA.

19.  Possessing  courage,  a perfect  knowledge  of  political
economy,  and  full  of  energy,  a king  should  devise  ex-
pedients for  attaining  prosperity.  Humility  is  the  means  of
acquiring  knowledge  of  political  economy;  and  humility
again  is  bred  by  a knowledge  of  the  SMstras.

20.  Humility  is  synonymous  with  a thorough  control  over
the  senses.  Any  one  possessing  it  becomes  Jearned  in  the
Shastras.  To.  one  practising  humility  the  mysterious  mean-
mgs  of  the  SMstras  revealrthemselves,

21-22.  Knowledge  of  polity,  wise  judgment,  content-
nent,  skilfulness,  absence  of  cowardice,  (ready)  power  of
bmprehens.on,  energy,  eloquence,  firmness  of  purpose,
atience  for  putting  up  with  turmoils  and  troubles,  Prabhdva  *
inty  of  intention,  friendliness  to  all  beings,  bestowal  of  wealth
on  worthy  recipients,  truthfulness,  gratefulness,  high  lineage,
good  conduct,  and  restraint  of  the  passions, -these  and  other
such  qualities  are  the  sources  of  all  prosperity.

23.  fn  . the  first  instance,  a king  should  himself  practise
self-restraint,  thereafter,  he  should  direct  his  ministers,  and

ol  dependents’  and  his  *>ns  and  then  his  subjects,
to.  da  the  same*  J *

to  hi!’  aA,Self;Controlled  kin?>  whose  subjects  are  devoted
. nd  7ho  1S  Careful  'n  protecting  his  subjects,  earns

great  prosperity  for  himself.  J

thet5oad°ftSh0U,Id1bring  Under  his  controI>  by  striking  with

he  goad  of  knowledge,  the  rampant  eJephant  identified  with

0(


T**  Which  “ » indissolubly  con.
t Sanskrit  philosophers  draw  a very  subtle  distinction  between  the


kamandakiYa  nitisara.


1


*1J«  The  mind,  out  of  a morbid  desire  for  the  objects  of
sensual  enjoyments  which  are  compared  to  most  palatable
dishes  of  meat,  goads  the  senses  after  their  search  ; this
(perverse)  inclination  of  the  mind  should  be  assiduously  sup-
pressed ; and  when  one's  mind  is  conquered  (by  himself),
he  4s  styled  self-controlled.

28.  Vzfndna  (means  for  realising  diverse  kinds  of  know-
ledge), Hridaya  (the  he^rt),  Chitt'Wa  (the  receptacle  of  con-
sciousness), Manas  (the  mind),  anc?  Raddhi  (the  intelligence),

* — all  these  are  said  to  convey  the  same  meaning.  With  the
assistance  of  any  one  of  these,  the  soul,  incased  inside  tbir
body,  discriminates  between  what  ought  to  be  done  and  wha
ought  not  to  be  done*  *

2g.  Pious  and  impious  deeds,  sensations  pleasurable
and  otherwise,  the  presence  and  absence  of  desire,  so  also
human  effort,  the  perception  of  sense-objects  and  the  re-
membrance of  the  impressions  of  an  antecedent  birth,*  these
are  said  to  be  the  signs  that  go  to  prove  the  existence  of  the
soul.

3d.  The  impossibility  of  the  concomitance  of  perceptions


Soul  and  the  mind,  which  it  is  difficult  to  explain  to  the  uninitiated.  The
idea  seertts  to  be  that,  the  soul  is  the  only  living  principle  that  retains
the  power  of  invigorating  the  subsidiary  faculties,  which  latter,  but  for  the
former's  help,  would  have  been  as  inert  as  matter  itself.  In  the  Ny2ya
philosophy  mind  or  Manas  is  regarded  as  a Dravya  or  substance  ; it  is
held  to  be  distinct  from  the  Atnian  or  soul.  It  is  defined  as  the  internal
organ  of  perception  and  congnition,  the  instrument  by  which  the  objects  of
the  senses  affect  the  soul  or  Atman,

* Samskarai-At  means  the  faculty  that  retains  and  reproduces  im-
pressions. But  the  word  is  more  often  "used  to  "signify  the  impressions
received  in  a previous  life,  which  the  soul  is  said  to  bring  with,  it  when
It  is  born  anew.  The  absolute  truth -of  this  philosophical  maxim  has  gone
out  of  date ; and  it  is  against  modern  philosophical  conceptions.  Asa
matter  of  fact  none  of  us  can  ever  remember  what  had  been  his  condition
In  an  antecedent  life,  even  if  the  doctrine  of  transmigration  of  souls  be
accepted  as  true.


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA,

IS  said  to  be  the  sign  that  proves  the  existence  of  the  mind.'^
The  formation  of  the  conceptions  of  various  things  and  sense-
oojects  is  said  to  be  the  action  of  the  mind.

31.  The  auditory,  the  tactile,  the  visual,  the  gustatory
and  the  olfactory  organs,  these  five  and  the  anus,  the  penis,

. 6 a.™S’  the  Iefs’  and  the  orSan  of  speech,  constitute  what

is  called  a conglomeration  of  sense-organs.

32.  The  perception  of  sound,  Jouch,  form,  taste,  and
ne  1 and  the  acts  of  discharging  (excretions,  urine  &c),  feel-
g pleasure,  takin'g  up,  moving  and  speaking,  are  said  to  be
e respective  functions  of  these  several  organs.

The  soul  and  the  mind  are  styled  to  be  the  ‘internal
:nses’  by  those  who  are  conversant  with  the  workings  of

-,uese  two  By  a conjoint  effort  of  these  two,  volition  is
engendered.

34*  The  spul,  the  mind,  the  sense-organs,  and  the  sense-
objects,  all  these  are  said  to  be  included  under  the  category  of
external  sense.’t  Volition  and  muscular  movement  L,  the-
means  of  pleasurable  sensations  of  the  soul.

f ; The  (connecting)  medium  between  the  ‘internal  and
the  external  sense  seems  to  be  a conscious  effort.  Therefore


t Jnanasyayugapatbhava-xs  a compound  formed  of  Jnana  or  nor
ception  and  Ayugapatbkava  or  non-concomitance.  In-  Sanskrit  philo

Wcwm  °f  °Pini0n  the  **£££

° me  wnters  simultaneous  perceptions  are  impossible
while  according  to  others  they  are  not  so  re  ,mPosslbIe

latter  class  of  philosophers.  Soh^  Znl'l **

the  distinct  perceptions  received  at  different  times.  onnectmg.

-4^An  apparent  contradiction  is  involved  in  Slokas  33rd  and  -uth

we  W.*?  SOut  have  defined  both  to  be  internal  and  external

phases.  Mind  andtoul  “nderst0od  « taking  two  different-

mterna  °rgans  in  resPect  of  internal  work-

deal  with  &C','’they  are  exterrtal  senses  when  they


' kAmandakiyA  nit  is  ar  A.  §

Suppressing  this  conscious  effort  one  may  try  to  become  the
master  of  his  own  mind.-*

3 6.  In  this  way,  a king  conversant  with  notions  of  justice
and  injustice,  having  subdued  his  mind  already  powerless
through  the  suppression  of  the  senses, f should  exert  himself
^ for^realising  his  own  good;

37;  How  can  one,  who  is  riot  capable  enough  of  subju*
gating  his  own  oiie  mii^d;  hope  to  subjugate  this  (extensive)
earth  bounded  by  the  oceans  themselves  ?

* The  Sloka  needs  illucidation.  What  the  writer  means  is  th|| y'
When  any  action  is  done,  the  ‘internal  senses,  supply  the  desire  and  th|
motive  only  ; the  ‘external  senses’  then  perform  what  nlore  is  needed  for
the  completion  of  the  act.  Between  the  desire  and  the  actual  carrying  out
bf  the  action,  there  is  another  step.  The  writer  calls  that  step  to  be
Yatna  or  Pravritti . Modern  philosophers  also  accept  an  analysis  of
voluntary  action  somewhat  akin  to  this  one.  We  shall  quote  professor
Sully ; — ‘The  initial  stage  is  the  rise  of  some  desire.  This  desire  is
accompanied  by  the  representation  of  some  movement  (motor
representation)  which  is  recognised  as  subserving  the  realisa-
tion of  the  object.  The  recognition  of  the  casual  relation  of  the
action  to  the  result  involves  a germ  of  belief  in  the  attain-
ability of  the  object  of  desire,  dr  in  the  efficacy  of  the  action.  Finally
we  have  the  carrying  out  of  the  action  thus  represented.1  What  is  known
as  ‘ motor  representation’  seems  to  be  the  yatna  of  the  present  author.
The  first  part  of  the  Sloka  being  understood  the  latter  does  not  present
any  difficulty.  When  one  can  suppress  this  ‘motor  representation’  which
again  is  the  result  of  experience  or  association,  no  action  becomes  possi*
ble.  In  the  absence  of  action,  the  soul  is  not  brought  into  contact  with
the  sense-objects  and  is  not  plunged  headlong  into  worldliness.

f For  Karansdnarthyat  we  have  read  Karanasamrodhdt  which  gives
a reasonable  meaning.  :

There  is  a supplement  to  this  Sloka,  Which  in  the  text  from  which
We  are  translating  is  omitted.  The  Sloka  undoubtedly  is  an  interpola-
tion as  it  does  not  occur  in  the  original  text  We  subjoin  its  translation.

“As  in  this  earth,  one  is  never  satiated  with  enjoying  any  of  the
following  viz,  rice  (food),  gold  (wealth),  cattle  and  Women,  so  one  should
ever  put  down  an  excessive  longing  for  the  enjoyment  of  any  one  of
these,’’

2


30


KAMANDAKIYA  NIfISARA.


38.  Like  unto  an  elephant  falling  in  a trap,  a king  falls
in  danger  whenever  his  heart  is  ensnared  by  the  (seemingly)

, beautiful  objects  of  (sensual)  enjoyment,  the  charm  of  which
vanishes  as  soon  as  the  enjoyment  is  over.

39.  A king,  delighting  in  the  perpetration  of  vile  acts  i

and  having  his  eyes  (of  knowledge  and  reason)  bljnded  1
by  the  objects  of  (sensual)  enjoyment,  brings  terrible  catas-
trophe upon  his  own  head.  r

40.  Sound,  touch,  r fofm,  taste  and  smell,  every  one  of
these  five  sense-objects  is  capable  of  bringing  about  the

i ruin  (of  a created  being).*


!'  41.  Living  upon  fresh  grass  and  sprouts  and  capable  of

bounding  over  wide  chasms,  the  deer  seeks  its  own  destruc-
tion from  the  hunter,  being  tempted  by  the  latter’s  charming
■ song.

42.  Huge-bodied  like  the  peak  of  a mountain,  capable
of  up-rooting  mighty  trees  in  sport,  a male-elephant,  stupified
with  the  touch  of  the  female-elephant,  submits  to  be  bound
by  chains.

43.  An  insect  reaps  death  by  suddenly  throwing  itself,
out  of  doubt,  on  the  blazing  flame  of  a lamp  that  attracts  its
attention.

44.  Staying  away  from  human  sight,  and  swimming  under-
neath an  unfathomable  depth  of  water,  a fish  tastes  the  iron-
hook  furnished  with  meat  (bait)  in  order  to  bring  about  its
own  destruction.

45.  A bee,  tempted  with  the  sweet  odour  of  the  ichor,
and  athirst  for  drinking  it,  receives  for  all  its  troubles,  lashes
from  the  elephant’s  ears  that  are  moved  with  great  difficulty.)

46.  Each  of  these  five  poison-like  sense-objects  is
enough  to  destroy  a man  separately.  How  then  can  that

*The  author  in  the  next  five  Slokas  proceeds  to  illustrate  his
remark  by  examples.*"

AslkhTaMchtTmmCUrdm  * ^ tfK  comment^y  reads


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA*-  %j

person  expect  to  reap  good,  who  is  enslaved  simultaneously
to  these  five.*

47-  A self-controlled  person  should  enjoy  in  proper
season  the  sense-objects  being  unattached  to  them.  Happi-
ness is  the  fruit  of  prosperity;  therefore,  in  the  absence  of
happiness  prosperity  is  useless.

43.  The  youth  and  the  prosperity,  of  kings  over-powered
by  an  extreme  fondness  fpr  gazing  at  the  countenanced  their
wives,  dwindle  away,  inspite  of  tkeir  shedding  profuse  use-
less  tears. t

49-_  From  a strict  observance  of  the  injunctions  and  in-
terdictions of  the  Shdstras  wealth  is  acquired;  from  wealth'
proceeds  desire  ; and  the  fruition  of  desires  brings  about
happiness.  He,  that  does  not  indulge  in  the  reasonable  en-
joyment of  these  three  objects,  (wealth,  desire  and  happiness),
destroys  these  three  as  also  his  own  self  to  boot.

. 5°-  Even  the  very  name  of  a woman  fills  the  frame  with
a joyous  thrill,  and  bewilders  the  reason  ; not  to  speak  of

a sight  of  her  with  arching  eye-brows  sparkling  with  sen-
suality j

51.  What  fond  person  is  not  intoxicated  with  Just  for
women,  skilful  in  amorous  tricks  in  secret,  soft  and  sweet
spoken  and  beautified  with  coppery  eyes.

52.  Women  can  surely  kindle  desire  in  the  hearts  of


* There  is  a Sloka  in  the  Mahabharata  that  may  be  cited  as  a parallel
to  Slokas  40—46.  It  is  this  .-

Kuvanga -matanga-fatanga-vringas,  M eenas hatasa  panchabhirha  pancha
Ekas  pramddi  sha  hatham  na  hanyate,  Ya  shivatb  panchbhiriva  pancha.

f The  construction  of  the  Sloka  would  also  allow  another  rendering
save  what  we  have  given.  The  meaning  as  explained  by  a commentator
seems  to  be  as  follows  :-'A  king,  who  is  always  fondly  attached  to  his
wife,  neglects  his  royal  duties  to  enjoy  her  company.  Then  his  enemies
opportunely  attack  his  kingdom,  and  for  his  lethargy  he  is  defeated  and
dethroned.  He  retires  to  the  forest,  and  there  with  his  wife  he  passer
tus  youth  m shedding  useless  tears,*  ^


12


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA,


sages,  even  as  evening  twilight  can  enhance  the  beauty  of
the  charming  moon  shedding  silvery  beams.

53.  Even  illustrious  persons  are  pierced  by  (the  charms
of)  women  that  enrapture  and  intoxicate  the  mind,  even  as
rocks  are  pierced  by  drops  of  water.

54.  (Excessive  indulgence  in)  hunting,  gambling  at  dice,  o
and  drinking, — these  are  condemnable  when  hound  in  a ruler

of  the  earth.  Behold  the  catastrophe  that  befell  the  king
Pandu,  the  king  of  thg  Nishadhas  and  the  descendants  of
Vrishni,  through  indulgence  in  each  of  these  respectively.*

55.  Lust,  anger,  avarice,  fiendish  delight  in  doing  injury,
morbid  desire  for  honor,  and  arrogance,  these  six  passions
should  be  victimized.

— 5 6—57-  Subjecting  themselves  to  these  six  inimical  pas-

sions, the  following  kings  were  ruined,  namely,  king  Dandaka


* Pandu.-To  'the  readers  of  the  MahAbharata  the  allusion
contained  m this  line  is  evident.  Once  during  a hunting  excursion  king
Pandu  was  very  much  disappointed  for  not  having  lighted  on  any  game
for  a long  time.  At  last  to  his  great  joy  he  found  within  an  arrow-shot
a pair  of  consorting  deer  and  he  instantly  pierced  them  with  his  shaft
To  his  horror  he  found  that  it  was  a Rishi  who  had  been  copulating
with  his  spouse  in  the  form  of  a deer.  Provoked  by  the  king's  untimely
interruption,  the  Rishi  cursed  the  monarch  saying  that  he  should
never  more  know  sexual  pleasure  on  pain  of  death.  After  a period'  the
king  died  for  having  passionately  embraced  his  junior  wife,  in  accordance
with  the  curse  of  the  Rishi.


Naishadha.  The  history  of  Nala  is  too  well-known.  He  was  poss-
essed by  Kali  who  induced  him  to  play  at  dice  with  his  brother  Puskara,
In  the  game  Nala  lost  all  he  had,  his  kingdom  and  wealth.  He  was  then
driven  to  forest  with  his  wife,  where  he  forsook  her.  After  a prolonged
separation,  during  which  each  of  them  had  t0  undergo  various  troubles

%L  'T’,-tbZ  ^ re'unitedand  Nala  was  set  free  from  the  evil
fhrence  of  Kalu  He  regained  his  kingdom  and  ruled  for  a long  time

each  3$  Eft  . SenseS’  and  for  a trifle  quarreling  with

each  other  fell  to  slaymg  each  other  and  thus  ruined  their  own  line  of

kings.  This  h, story  is  also  related  in  the  latter  part  of  the  Mahabharata.


]


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


13


met  with  destruction  through  lust,  Janamejaya  through
anger,  the  royal  sage  Aila  through  avarice,  the  Asura  V&tapi
through  fiendish  delight  in  doing  injury,  the  Rakshasa  Poulasta
through  desire  for  honor,  and  king  Dambhodbbava  through
arrogance.*

^ 58.  Renouncing  these  six  inimical  passions,  Jamadagnyaf
became  the  master  of  his  senses,  and  Amvarisa:);  of  eminent
parts  enjoyed  the  sovereignty  of  the  world  fora  long  period. §

* Dandaka . — One  day  when  out  hunting,  this  king  affected  with  lust
forcibly  ravished  the  daughter  of  the  sage  Vrigu,  through  whose  anger
he  was  killed  with  his  friends  by  a shower  of  dust.

Janamejaya. — When  engaged  in  the  celebration  of  the  Horse-saci*
fice,  he  found  marks  of  recent  copulation  on  his  wife  ; this  exasperates
him,  and  thinking  that  the  sacrificial  priests,  had  committed  adultery
with  her,  he  assaulted  them.  He  met  his  death  through  the  imprecation
.of  these  latter*

Aila.  This  monarch  used  to  persecute  and  oppress  his  subjects  for
money,  who  unable  to  brook  his  tyranny  at  last  pelted  him  to  death.

V&tapi . — This  demon  together  with  another  named  Ilvala  used  to
invite  innocent  sages  to  dine  with  them.  One  of  them  would  then
assume  the  form  of  an  animal  and  would  be  sacrificed  by  the  other  ; his
meat  would  then  be  eaten  by  the  sages.  When  inside  the  stomach,  the
^aten  up  demon  would  be  revived  by  the  Sanjivani  Maw-tra  and  would
kill  the  sages  by  tearing  open  their  abdomen.  They  thus  delighted  in
killing  innocent  people.  At  last  the  great  sage  Agasthya  ate  this  V&tapi
.up  and  digested  him.

Pozilasta.—'Ravanai  the  ten-headed  demon  of  the  Ramayana  whose
.history  we  need  not  recount  here.

Dambhodbhava— This  great  demon  who  defeated  many  of  the  celestials
in  battle  was  very  much  puffed  up  wi,th  arrogance.  Finding  none  equal
to  him  in  single  combat,  he  one  day  challenged  the.  sage  Nara  to  show
him  a combatant  that  would  be  a match  for  him  j the  sage  then  himself
.killed  him  with  a blade  of  grass.

f A son  of  Jamadagni  a pious  sage  deeply  engaged  in  study  and
said  to  have  obtained  entire  possession  of  the  Vedas . His  mother  was
jRenukd .

t A Wng  of  the  solar  race  celebrated  as  a worshipper  of  Vishnu.

§ There  is  a supplement  to  this  Sloka  ; it  is  this  < In  order  to  In-
crease  his  religious  merit  and  worldly  prosperity— which  are  eagerly


kamandakiya  nitisara.


59-  ^ Association  with  a preceptor  bestows  knowledge  of
the  Shastras ; the  knowledge  of  the  SMstras  increases  humi-
lity. A king,  modest  through  the  effects  of  culture,  never
sinks  under  troubles.

60.  A king,  serving  the  elderly  people,  is  held  in  high
respect  by  the  pious ; though  induced  by  persons  of  evil
character,  he  does  not  commit  vile  deeds.

61.  A king,  everyday  receiving  lessons  in  the  different
~“tS  from  hjs  Preceptor,  increases  in  prosperity,  like  the  moon

iCreasing  m her  digits  during  the  light  half  of  every  month.

62. . The  prosperity  of  a monarch,  who  keeps  his  passions
hder  his  thorough  control  and  who  follows  the  path  chalked
at  in  the  science  of  Polity,  blazes  forth  every  day-  his
ime  also  reaches  the  heavens.

<=.lf63\T,hUS  3 m°narch’  weII'versed  in  Polity,  practising
seltcontrol  very  soon  attains  to  that  shining  pitch  of  pros

penty  which  had  been  attained  by  other  divine  monarchsand
which  is  as  high  as  the  highest  peak  of  Mah&ratna«iri*

64.  Naturally  the  ways  of  exalted  sovereignty  "are  differ-
ent from  those  of  the  world.  Therefore  through  sheer  force

trol^eT^f  Sh:r  C°aCh  k h seIf-contro!-  And  self-con-
1 goes  before  the  successful  observance  of  the  maxims  of


65.  A self-controlled  king  receives  the  highest  of
cont^Tj  Self-control  is  the  ornament  of  kings.  A self-
eontroHed  king  appears  as  beautiful  as  a gentle  elenhant
shedding  ichor  and  moving  its  trunk  slowly.  P

leamLATPreCept°r  '*  worshiPPed  f<*  the  acquisition  of

rumenfal  in  ^ ^ ^ mastered>  becomes  ins-

trumental in  enhancing  the  prudence  of  the  illustrious.  The


himseltto, the services!^ biT prea^ton”*™111"^  *>  S6nses  shouId  devote

1 1 the  p,anets  arc

great,  - r-d^inHence its


4, Jf  ■ — ‘*1 — 1 i . 11 , 1 * -"S'*  Aw  f f',  ■


tfAMANDAKIYA  N1TISARA,


IS

liabit  of  doing  acts  according  to  the  dictates  of  prudence  is
sure  to  lead  to  prosperity.

67.  A pure-souled  person,  ever  ready  to  serve  others,
attains  to  prosperity  by  serving  his  learned  and  skilful
preceptor.  Practising  self-control,  he  becomes  worthy  of  the
royal  throne  and  capable  of  securing  peace.

68.  A powerful  monarch,  without  practising  self-control,
is  subjugated  by  his  enemies  without  the  least  difficulty  ;
while  a weak  monarch,  practising  self-control  and  observii
tue  injunctions  of  the  Shdstras,  never  meets  with  defeat.

Thus  ends  the  first  section,  the  means  of  self-coutrol  a
association  with  the  old,  in  the  Nitisdra  of  Kdmandaka.


SECTION  II.


*•  ^ K,N<b  after  having  controlled  his  senses,  should
direct  his  attention  to  (the  cultivation  of)  the  following  four
branches  of  learning,  namely  Anvikshikee,  Trayee , Vdrtd  and
bandamtt,  m co-operation  with  men  versed  in  them  and
acting  according  to  their  precepts.*

2.  Anvikshikee,  Trayee , Vdrtd  and  Dandaniti, — these
and  these  only  are  the  four  eternal  divisions  of  know-
ledge, that  pave  the  way  of.  corporeal  beings  to  happiness.

3-  The  descendants  of  Manuf  (men)  hold  that  there  are

* As  the  italicised  words  have  been  explained  by  the  author  himself
m the  nth,  12th,  13th,  14th  and  15th  Sloka  of  this  section,  we  need  not
Anticipate  him.

f Menu.— The  name  of  a celebrated  personage  regarded  as  the
representative  man  and  the  father  of  the  human  race,  and  classed  with
divine  beings.  The  word  is  particularly  applied  to  the  fourteen  successive


i6


KAMANDAK1YA  NITISAR’A.


only  three  divisions  of  learning  (namely),  Trayee , Vartd,  and*
Dandaniti ; in  their  opinion,  what  is  known  as  Anvikshikee  ■
is  to  be  regarded  as  a mere'  su  b-division  of  Trayee .

4.  The  disciples  of  the  celestial  priest  ( Vrihaspatif

postulate  the  existence  of  two  divisions  only,  namely,  Vartd ,
and  Dandaniti , as  these  only  can  help  people  in  the  acqui-
sition of  Artka. f r

5.  According  to  the  school  of  tfsanas%  there  is  only
one  division  of  learning/ namely,  Dandaniti ; and  it  has  been
said,  that  the  origin  of  all  other  kinds  of  learning  lies  in  this
one.

6.  But  the  theory  of  our  own  preceptor  is,  that  there  are
four  kinds  of  learning,  on  which  this  world  is  settled,  for
the  realisation  of  different  objects.§

7.  Anvikshikee  deals  with  the  knowledge  of  the  self,
Trayee  with  piety  and  impiety,.  Vartd  with  gain  and  loss-
of  wealth,  an4  Dandaniti  with  justice  and  injustice.


progenitors  or  sovereign's  of  the  earth  mentioned  in  Manusmriti.  I.  63.
The  first  of  these  known  as  SvayambhUvamanu  is  supposed  to  be  a sort
of  secondary  creator  who'  produced  the  ten  Prajdpatis  (vide  note  to’
Sloka  Ilth,  Sec.  I.)  and  to  whom  the  code  of  laws  called  Manusmriti  is
ascribed.  The  seventh  Manic  called  Vaivasvata  being  supposed  to  be
born  from  the  sun  ( Vivasvan )'  is-  regarded  as  the  progenitor  of  the
present  race  of  human  beings  ; he  is  also  regarded  as  the  founder  of
the  solar  dynasty  of  kings  who-  ruled  at  Ayodhyd  (modern1  O'udh).  The
names  of  the  fourteen  Mantis  are  (p)  S*vdy  ambhuva  (2)  Svarochis  (3)
Auttami  (4)  T'dmasa  (5)  Raivdta  (&)  Ckdkshusa  (7)  Vaivasvata  {S}
Sav’arni  (9)  Dakshsdvarni  (10)  Brahmasdvarni  (n)’  Dharmasdvarni  (i2>
Rudrasavarni  (13)  Rouckya-deva-savarni  (14)  Indrasdvami .

* Vide  note  to  Sloka  8th  Sec.  I.

t One  of  the  three  objects  of  existence  ( Triuarga ) meaning,  wealth-
property.  Vide  note  to  Sloka  13th  Sec.  I.

$ The  preceptor  of  the  Asuras  or  demons.  Vide  note  to  Sloka  8th*
Sec.  L ' \

* " ‘L"e  kinds  ot  knowledge  supply  us  with  the  means  for


kAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.  I?

8.  Anvikshikee , Trayee  and  Varta  are  considered  to  be
the  most  excellent*  of  all  knowledge.  But  their  presence
is  of  no  avail  where  Dandaniti  is  neglected.f

g.  When  a great  leader  of  men  attains  proficiency  in
Dandaniti,  he  becomes  the  master  of  the  other  remaining
* branches  of  knowledge.

10.  The  Vqrnasf  and  the  Asramas,\  find  their  primary
support  in  these  kinds  oLknowIedge.  For  this  reason,  a king,
superintending  and  securing  the -means  for  the  cultivation
of  these  kinds  of  knowledge;  becomes  a s£arer[|  in  the  reli-
gious  merit  earned  by  the  different  castes  in  their  differenl
modes  of  existence.

11.  Anvikshikee^ f is  the  science  of  spiritual  knowledge;  foi

* For,  says  the  commentator,  they  serve  as  means  for  the  acquire
hient  of  wealth  and  religious  merit.

f The  text  lit : translated  would  Be  ‘ where  a mistake  is  committed

with  regard  to  Dandaniti.'  What  the  author  means,  seems  to  be  this  :

‘ The  transgression  of  the  rules  of  Political  science  by  a king  is  so  dis-
astrous that  it  cantlot  be  remedied  even  by  all  his  learning  and
ingenuity.’

f Varna  means  a tribe  or  a caste,  specially  applied  to  the  four  castes,
namely  -—Brahmana  (the  spiritual  class),  Kshatriya  (governing  class),
Vaisya,  (trading  and  cultivating  class),  and  Sudra  (serving  class).  These
classes  are  said  to  have  been  born  respectively  from  the  mouth  (signifying
intelligence),  the  arms  (signifying  strength),  the  abdomen  (signifying  hun*
ger),  and  the  legs  (signifying  servitude)  of  the  Purusha  or  Supreme  Spirit.

§ Asrama— or  the  mode  of  living  in  different  periods  of  exist-
ence of  these  castes  Or  classes  ; these  are  four,  namely .(i)  Brahma-
charyya,  or  religious  studentship,  the  life  of  celibacy  passed  by  a
Brahmana  boy  in  studying  the  Vedas.  This  is  the  first  stage  of  life.
(2)  Gdrhasthya  or  the  order  of  life  of  a Grihasthya  or  house-holder.
This  is  the  second  stage.  (3)  Vdnaprastha  or  the  religious  life  of
an  anchorite.  This  is  the  third  stage.  (4)  Sannydsa  or  the  complete
renunciation  of  the  world  and  its  possessions  and  attachments.  The
first  three  classes  can  enter  upon  these  four  stages  ; but  the  Sudras  are
disallowed  to  do  so.

||  His  share  has  been  specified  to  be  one-sixth  only,

If  Modern  Metaphysics,

3


kAM'ANDAKIYA  NITISARA'.


tB


it  investigates  the  nature  of  weal  and  woe  of  mankind ;
through  its  assistance  the  real  nature  of  things  being  seen
persons  renounce  both  joy  and  grief.*

12.  The  three  Vedasf  called  Rik,  Yajm  and  Rama  are
meant  by  Trayee . A person,  living  in  perfect  obedience  to
the  injunctions  and  interdictions  of  Trayee , pros^Nks  in  this
as  well  as  in  the  next  world.  r

four  Vedas,  the
of  Nydyaf\l  t.h«


13.  Sometimes,  the  Angds,$  the
diverse  sections


Mimansas ,§


the

*,


* joy  for  their  gain  and  grief  for  their  loss.

f Vedas— the  scriptures  of  the  Hindus;  originally  there  were  only
three  Vedas,  the  Rik , the  Vajus  and  the  Santa,  which  are  collectively
called  Trayee  or  the  sacred  triad.  To  these  three  the  Ariharmn  wrt*.
subsequently  added.  The  orthodox  Hindu  theory,  regarding  the  cump«-
sition  of  the  Vedas,  is  that  they  are  ‘not  human  compositions.*  They
are  supposed  to  have  been  directly  revealed  by  the  Supreme  Bet  rig.

t These  are  certain  classes  of  works  regarded  as  auxiliary  to  the
Vedas,  designed  to  aid  in  their  correct  pronunciation  and  interpretatkm
and  the  right  employment  of  the  Mantras  in  ceremonials.  Those  arc  nix
in  number  (a)  Siksha  or  the  Science  of  proper  articulation  and -pronun-
ciation, (b)  Chandas  or  the  Science  of  Prosody,  (v)  Vydktimmt  or
Grammar,  (d)  Nirukta , or  Etymological  explanation  of  difficult  words
occurring  in  the  Vedas,  (a)  Jyotis  or  Astronomy  and  (f)  Ktdptt  m
ritual.

\ Mimdnsa— is  the  name  of  one  of  the  Six  chief  systems  of  Imfimt
philosophy.  It  was  originally  divided  into  two  systems,  the  /»„,«*.
Mimlnsd  founded  by  Jaimini  and  the  Uttam-MimdnsA  founded  by
Vddarayana.  The  two  systems  have  very  little  in  common  between
them;  the  first  concerning  itself  chiefly  with  the  correct  interpretation
of  the  rituals  of  the  Vedas  and  the  settlement  of  dubious  points  in  regard  to
Vedic  texts ; the  latter  chiefly  dealing  with  the  nature  oftheSuprvmr  i’;,uiiy.
The  Purva-Mimdnsd  is  therefore  rightly  styled  Mimdnsd  or  ’investigation
■andsettiement.’  Another  name  for  the  Vttara-Mimdnsd  is  Vedanta,  which
beiri^ardly  a sequel  to  Jaimini’s  compilation  is  now  ranked  separately


It  is


Nydyce  A system  of  Hindu  philosophy  founded  by  Qmiimmi

1 hi  several  mmhm


of  the  Nydya  philosophy  are  referred  to  herev


KAMANDAKIYA  njtisara.


19

Dha rmashasiras* * * §  and  the  Purdnas-\  are  all  included  under
Trayee.

14-  The  occupation  of  those  who  live  by  rearing  cattle
and  by  cultivation  and  trade  is  called  Vdrtd.  Well-up  in’
Varta  a man  has  nothing  to  be  afraid  of  in  a revolution.*

15.  Da da  is  known  to  signify  subjection.  A king  is
also  figuratively  called  Danda,  for  from  him  all  punishments
proceed;  the  system,  that  deals  with  the  just  infliction  of
punishments,  is  called  Dandanitd.  It  is  called  a Niti  as  it
guides  kings  in  the  right  administration  of  jilstice.§

16.  By  the  right  administration  of  justice,  a king  should
protect  himself,  and  encourage  the  (cultivation  of  the)  othei
branches  of  knowledge.  This  branch  of  knowledge  {Danda-
mli)  directly  benefits  mankind,  and  the  king  is  its  preserver.

xj.  When  a clever  and  generous-minded  monarch  realism
Chaturvarga ||  by  means  of  these  branches  of  learning
then  only  is  his  proficiency,  in  these  to  be  recognised ; the
root  md  is  said  to  mean  ‘ to  know/

18.  If  The  celebration  of  sacrifices,  the  study  of  the
Vedas**  and  the  act  of  giving  wealth  to  others  according
to  the  rules  of  the  SMstras these  arc  considered  to  be


* Dharmashdstras.- The  codes  of  morals  ,and  laws  compiled  by

Manu  (vide  Supra  note  to  Sloka  3rd),  and  Jdjnavalkya  and  other  Xisiti*
of  yore,

f Puranas— these  are  supposed  to  have  been  composed  by  Vydsa

and  contain  the  whole  body  of  Hindu  mythology.  They  are  eighteen  in
number.


$ The  reading  in  the  text  is  vicious  ;
AvrittS  for  Vriltl,


so  the  commentary  supplies


§ Niti  from  Ni  to  guide  or  direct  and  hti  suffix.

. } CAai«rvarffa~ls  Trivarga  plus  Moksha  or  salvation  ; for  Trharm
vide  note  to  Sloka  13th  Sec,  I,  *

y Hav!n£  <lnishcd  his  dissertation  on  the  divisions  of  learning,  the
author  now  proceeds  to  determine  the  duties  of  the  various  sects  in  the
different  stages  of  their  life.

f*  Vide  Supra  note  to  Sloka  12th.


20


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


the  common  customary  observances  of  the  three  sects,  the
Brahmanas,  the  Kshatriyas  and  the  Vaisyas.*

ig.  The  holy  acts  of  teaching,  of  conducting  sacrifices
on  others’  behalf,  and  of  accepting  alms  from  the  pious,  these
have  been  enumerated  by  the  sages  to  be  the  means  of  liveli-
hood for  those  belonging  to  the  superior  sect  ( Brdhmana ).

2a.  A kingf  should  live  by  his  weapons  and  by  pro-
tecting his  subjects.!  The  means  of  subsistence  of  a
Vaisya  are  cattle-rearing,  cultivation  and  trade,

21.  The  duty  of  a Sudra  is  to  serve  the  twice-born  secfsS
one  after  the  other;  his  unblamable  means  of  living
Ire  the  fine  arts  and  the  occupation  of  a ministrel,

22—23,  The  duties  of  a Brahmackdrin\\  are  to  live  in  the
family  of  his  preceptor,  to  worship  the  sacred  fires, f to  study
the  Vedas  and  their  auxiliaries,**  to  observe  vows,  to  per-
form ablutions  during  the  three  periods  of  the  day  (in  the  morn-
ing, at  noon,  and  in  the  evening), ff  to  beg  and  to  live  for  life
with  his  spiritual  guide.  In  the  absence  of  a preceptor,  he
should  live  with  his  (preceptor’s)  son  or  with  one  of' his


vide  supra,  note  to  blofca  loth,
f Is  here  representative  of  the  whole  'ruling  class’  or  Kshatriyas,
t The  subjects  living  under  the  fostering  care  of  a protect.W
sovereign  inerease  in  prosperity  and  they  willingly  pay  UxM  b*
which  the  latter  maintains  himself.  ^

§ The  Brdhmanas,  the  Kshatriyas  and  the  Vaisyas  are  so  called

SI  2TJT-  “ be  bom — “ lh°  - «*

J which  Sutn

melTfihr  r three  in  number  name,y  <0  Gurhapatya  or  do-
mestic  fire. . (2)  Ahavamya  or  sacrificial  fire,  derived  from  the  dome.

■efirejn  ,s  sometimes  called  the  Eastern  ire,  (3)  Dakshim  or  the
Southern  fire  so  called  because  it  is  placed  southwards.

*-  WF  *****  are  referred  t0<  for  which  vide  Supra  note  to  SMr.

:jtt  technically  called  Sandhyd*  These  are  th*  ik  S » *3th#

$he  Sandhis  or  joinings  of  the  day.  * ^ are  ^aown  m


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


21


fellow  Brahmcuh&rin ; or  he  may,  if  he  likes,  adopt  another
mode  of  existence.

24.  During  the  whole  period  of  his  pupilage,  he  should
wear  a Mekhala*  along  with  his  sacred  thread,  bear  matted
hair  or  a shaved-head,  carry  a Dczndct f*  and  live  with  his
preceptor.  Afterwards,  at  his  own  will,  he  may  choose  any
other  mode  of  life.

25-  The  duties  of  & house-holder  are  to  celebrate  the
Agnihotra%  sacrifice,  to  live  by.  the  profession  prescribed
(for  his  sect)  and  to  avoid  sexual  intercourse  during  the
ParvasJ*

26.  The  duties,  of  those  who  have  married  and  settler
down,  are  to  worship  the  gods,  the  ancestral  manes  and  th<
guests,  to  show  mercy  to  the  poor  and  the  wretched,  and  tc
live  according  to  the  precepts  of  the  Srutis\\  and  the  Smriiis^ \

27  28.  The  duties  of  those  who  have  resorted  to  the

forestf  are,  to  keep  matted  hair,**  to  perform  Agnihoiraff

* The  triPIe  girdle  worn  by  the  first  three  classes  ; the  girdle  of  the
Rrahmana  should  be  of  the  fibres  of  Manju  or  of  Ku(a  grass,  that  of

the  Sana1^  °f  * Murva  or  bow-s‘r*ng,  and  of  the  Vaisya  of  a thread  of

t The  staff  given  to  a twice-born  one  at  the  time  of  the  investiture
with  the  sacred  thread.  It  is  made  ordinarily  of  the  branches  of  the
Vilva  tree  (TEgle  mermelos)  and  a species  of  bamboo.

t ft  is  the  sacrifice,  the  principle  rite  of  which  is  the  consecration  and
maintenance  of  the  Sacred  fires  by  the  offering  of  oblations.

§ Parva.~~ The  days  of  the  four  changes  of  the  moon  i.e.  the  eighth
and  fourteenth  day  of  each  month,  and  the  days  of  the  full-moon  and  the
new  moon,

II  Are  the  same  as  Vedas.  From  sru  to  hear  and  kit,  i.e.  which  are
revealed  (vide  Supra  note  to  Sloka  12th).

If  Smritu— .From  smri  to’rcmember  and  kit,  i.e.  which  are  remember'.'
ed.  Vide  Supra  note  to  Sloka  3rd.

$ Technically,  who  have  entered  upon  the  Vdnaprasiha  Asvctnict
(vide  Supra  note  to  Sloka  13th).

**  The  text  reads  Jadatvam.  for  which  the  commentary  supplies
Jatiimm.  What  can  the  former  mean  ?

ff  Vide  Supra  note  to  Sloka  25th.


22


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


sacrifices,  to  sleep  on  the  bare  earth,  to  wear  black  deer  skin,
to  live  in  solitary  places,  to  sustain  themselves  on  water,  escu-
lent roots,  Niv&ra*  crop,  and  fruits,  to  refuse  to  accept  alms
to  bathe  thrice  in  the  day,+  to  observe  vows,  and  to  adore
the  gods  and  the  guests.

29—31.  The  duties  of  the  wandering  mendicants*  are,  to
renounce  all  actions,  to  live  upon  what  is  obtained  by  beg-
ging, to  dwell  under  the  shelter  of  a tree,  to  refuse  smallest
gifts, § to  do  no  harm  to  other  created  beings  and  to  maintain
an  equality  of  attitude  towards  them,  to  be  indifferent(|  alike
to  friends  and  enemies,  to  be  unmoved  by  joy  or  grief  to  be
lurked  in  mind  and  in  body,**  to  curb  thl  speech, Ho
observe  vows,  to  retract  the  senses  from  their  objects,  to  keep
the  mind  always  collected,  to  be  absorbed  in  contemplation
and  to  purify  their  intentions.

32.  Harmlessness,  the  speaking  of  sweet  and  salutary
words,  truthfulness,  purification  of  the  mind  and  the  body
and  mercy  and  forbearance,  these  are  said  to  be  the  common
duties  of  all  the  sects  in  all  their  different  modes  of  life.

33-  These  are  the  duties  of  all  the  sects  in  all  their
modes  of  existence,  (the  observance  of)  which  can  secure
paradise  and  salvation  for  them.  The  neglect  of  these

* NivS.ru  is  rice  growing  wild  or  without  cultivation.

T Supply  'after  which  they  should  perform  e,  ji  *

"Tor'  rz!  :r? pay^  vm°  ^ °c

.»  ££  ,„X  tmi  "P“ the  <•*•  supra  note

01  ■**  r°r  bi"ding

reads  'pyiydpriyd^TmgT-m-^  5 a"dS°  thc  Comt"entary

y Ch“Shb8

$ For  VakmanO'brahmachcLriid  of  thp  fr*Yf

Vd&amo  VratacMritt , The  latter  re*d,W  ^

» abetter  meaning*


kamandakiya  nitisara.


23


duties  results  in  the  spread  of  mixed  castes  and  thus  brings
about  the  ruin  of  this  world.

34.  The  king  is  the  lawful  promoter  of  all  these  right-
eous practices  ;* * * §  therefore  in  the  absence  of  a king  all  right-
eousness is  lost  and  at  the  loss  of  righteousness,  this  world
also  meets  with  destruction.

35.  A king,  protecting  the  various  Varnas  and  Asramas,  +
and  living  according  to  their  usages  and  knowing  the  duties
prescribed  for  each  of  them,  becomes  worthy  of  a-^place  ii
the  regions  of  Sakra.$

36.  §As  a self-control!ed||  king  holds  the  key  to  th<
worldly  as  well  as  spiritual  advancement  of  his  own  self  a
also  of  his  subjects,  therefore  he  should  deal  out  punishment
as  impartially  as  does  Dandi If  himself.

3 7-  Inflicting  extraordinarily  heavy  punishments  a king
frightens  his  subjects,  and  inflicting  extraordinarily  light  ones
he  is  not  feared  by  them.  Therefore  that  king  is  praise-worthy
who  deals  out  punishments  proportionate  to  the  offences.

38.  Punishments,  dealt  out  proportionately  to  the  offen-
ces, speedily  increase  the  Trivarga  of  a king,  while  dispro-


* Another  interpretation  is  possible,  namely,  'A  king  is  to  encourage
these  righteous  practices,  not  transgressing  the  limits  of  law.’

t Vide  Supra  note  to  Sloka  10th.

t Sarvalokavag  should  be  read  as  Sakralokavac,  which  is  the  reading
given  in  the  commentary.  Sakra  or  Indra  is  the  Jupiter  Pluvius  of  the
Indian  Aryans.  Of  all  the  paradises,  his  paradise  is  the  most  magnifi-
cent and  is  fraught  with  all  sorts  of  pleasures,  be  being  notorious  for
his  incontinence  and  Iasciviency,

§ The  author  now  proceeds  to  impress  upon  the  minds  of  monarchs,
the  necessity  of  the  right  administration  of  justice.

||  For  Atmata  of  the  text  read  Atmavdn  which  gives  a good  sense.
Here  also  we  follow  the  commentary.

f another  appellation  for  the  god  of  death,  wlio  Is  so  called

for  Ins  holding  the  sceptre  of  sway  (Danda).  One  of  the  duties  of  his
office  is  to  deal  out  rewards  and  punishments  to  the  souls  of  the  depart-
ed according  to  their  merits  and  de-merits  accruing  from  worldly  acts.


24


KAMANDAKIVA  NITISARA.


portionately  inflicted,  they  excite  anger  even  in  those  who
have  retired  to  the  forest.

39.  Punishments  countenanced  by  society  and  the
Shdstrati  ought  only  to  be  inflicted  on  the*  offender.  Perse-
cution can  never  bring  about  prosperity,  as  it  breeds  sin
through  which  a monarch  meets  with  his  fall.

40.  In  this  world,  where  beings  are  related  to  one  an-
other as  food  and  consumer,  when  proper  chastisements
are  withheld,  th§  exertions,  of  a king  to  keep  Ms  subjects
under  control,  become  as  futile  as  those  of  an  angler  trying
to  catch  fish  without  the  help  of  a rod.*

41.  A king,  by  the  right  infliction  of  punishments,  upholds
this  stayless  world,  that  is  being,  forcibly  drowned  into  the
lake  of  sin  by  lust  and  cupidity  and  other  such  passions.

42.  This  world  is  by  nature  enslaved  to  the  pleasures
of  the  senses  and  is  ardently  longing  to  enjoy  wealth  and
women.  Agitated  by  the  fear  of  punishments,  it  only  keeps
to  the  eternal  ways  of  rectitude  followed  by  the  pious.

43.  Upright  conduct  is  scarce  in  this  slavish  world  of
ours ; but  as  it  is,  men  only  attend  to  their  prescribed  duties
through  fear  of  punishments  $ even  as  a respectable  woman
serves  her  lean  or  poor  or  deformed  or  diseased  husband
through  fear  of  the  sanctions  specified  in  the  codes  of  mora-
lity.

44.  Thus,  like  rivers,  that  flow  through  right  courses,
falling  into  the  sea,  all  prosperity  devolves — and  never  dwin-
dles away — upon  a king  who  knowing  the  good  and  evil  of


* Another  interpretation  is  possible,  the  gist  of  which  is  as  follows'*!—'
fln  this  world  where  beings  stand  in  the  relation  of  food  and  consumer,
when  just  chastisements  are  withheld,  the  destructive  M4tsya  is  seen
to  hold  good.  The  difficulty  in  annotating  the  sloka  lies  in  the  phrase
Mdtsya  Nydya,  the  exact  signification  of  which  no  lexicographer  has*
"vouchsafed  \ no  doubt  it  is  a maxim  of  the  Nydya  philosophy.  The  refer*
ence  perhaps  is  to  the  fact  of  fishes  devouring  one  another.


tC  AM  AND  Aki  Y A NiTISARA*


as


the  infliction  of  punishments  and  following  the  path  chalked
out  in  the  Vedas*  frames  rules  of  conduct  for  his  subects,
Thus  ends  the  second  Section , the  division  of  learning , the
duties  of  the  Varnas  and  Asranias , and  the  necessity  of
punishments,  in  the  Nitisdra  of  Kdntanddkct .


Section  iih


X.  jAl  Ruler  of  earth,  impartially  inflicting  pun'ism;
hients  on  his  subjects  like  Dandi f hiniself,  should  treat  them
Mercifully  even  as  Prajdpati%  does.

a.  Sweet  and  truthful  speech,  kindness,  charity,  protec-
tion of  the  oppressed  seeking  refuge,  arid  association  with
the  virtuous,— these  are  the  praiseworthy  practices  of  a pious
person.

3.  A Mart  should  extricate  a distressed  person  out  of  his
difficulties,  being  actuated  by  tenderest  compassion  and
moved  by  the  heavy  weight  of  the  latter's  grief  that  had
touched  his  heart.

4.  There  is  no  one  more  pioUs,  in  respect  to  the  perform
mance  of  meritorious  acts,  than  those  who  save  the  distressed
sunk  in  the  mire  of  grief.

5*  Nursing  tenderest  compassion  in  his  heart,  and  with-
out deviating  from  the  path  of  duty,  a king  should  wipe  away
the  tears  of  the  oppressed  and  the  helpless.

* For  Prdptamdyga  of  the  text,  the  commentary  giveTitoa-
m&rga,  which  ktter  we  have  adopted.

f Vide  note  to  Sloka  36th  Sec.  II.

t Prajdpati,  Another  name  of  Brahmd  the  creator,'  who  naturally  \s
very  kind  to  beings  of  his  creation . 7


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


2§

virulent  poison  of  his  speech,  the  baneful  effects  of  which
cannot  be  counteracted  by  the  best  remedial  measures.

21.  A person,  seeking  his  own  good,  should  fold  his  palms
to  the  wicked,  with  humility  even  greater  than  that  with  which
he  does  so  before  his  worshipful  kinsmen.

22.  With  a view  to  completely  steal  the  hearts  of  men,
a wicked  person,  simulating  friendship  for  evesy  one,  speaks
charming  words  agreeable  to  men  and>  manners.*

2^.  A man  should  always  please  the  world  with  respect-
ful words  ; for,  a man,  speaking  cruel  words,  hurts  people's
ty-  feelings,  even  though  he  may  give  them  money.

24.  Even  though  he  might  be  sorely  oppressed,  yet  an
intelligent  person  should  never  utter  such  words  which  would
afflict  men  piercing  them  to  their  hearts.

25.  Like  sharp  weapons,  stinging  and  torturing  lan-
guage, uttered  by  ill-mannered  persons,  cuts  people  to  the
very  quick.

26.  Sweet  words  should  always  be  spoken  equally  to
friends  and  foes,  for,  by  whom  is  not  a sweet-spoken  man
loved  like  the  peacock  uttering  the  sweet  kekd  t?

27.  Peacocks  are  ornamented  by  their  sweet  and  charm-
ing kekd ; men  of  culture  are  ornamented  by  their  nielli,
fluous  speech,

38.  The  utterances  of  intoxicated  swans  and  cuckoos  and
peacocks  are  not  so  charming  as  are  those  of  a man  of  culture.

* In  rendering  this  Sloka  we  have  followed  the  commentary.
But  this  meaning  does  not  suit  the  text,  whereas  the  subjoined  translation
will  be  appropriate.  1 With  3 view  to  soften  the  heart  of  the  wicked  a
person  should  show  the  greatest  friendship  for  them  and  speak  to  them
Words  that  impart  delight  to  all.'

f It  is  the  cry  of  the  peacock  which  to  the  Sanskrit  Poets  was  very

musical.  It  is  said  to  resemble  the  Sadja  or  the  fourth  (according  to
some  authorities  the  first)  of  the  seven  primary  notes  of  the  Hindu  gamut.
It  u also  curious  to  note,  that  the  'tuneful  cry-  the  'animated  hail'  of  the

peacock  which  is  so  much  appreciated  in  India,  is  said  to  be  the  voice  of
|he  Demon  in  Italy,


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


3?

2g,  A person  strictly  redeeming  all  his  promises  and
appreciating  the  good  qualities*  of  others  and  cherishing
respect  and  kindly  feelingsf  for  them,  should  spend  his  wealth
in  the  performance  of  pious  deeds;  and  he  should  always
speak  sweet  and  pleasing  words.

30.  Those,  who  speak  sweet  words  and  offer  hospitality
to  all,  are  sujely  gods  under  human  form,  ever  prosperous
and  stainless  in  character.

31.  Unsullied  in  mind  and  in  i>ody  and  with  a soul  puri-
fied by  a belief  in  the  contents  of  the  Shdstras,  a person
should  always  worship  the  gods  and  should  regard  his  elders  ^
as  gods,  and  his  relatives  as  his  own  self.

32.  For  his  own  welfare,  a man  should  please  his  vene-
rable elders  by  bowing  down  unto  them  ; and  he  should  please
.the  virtuous  by  his  modest  behaviour;  and  he  should  propitiate
the  deities  by  acts  of  piety.

33.  A person  should  please  his  friends  by  his  (affable)
manners,  his  kinsmen  by  his  friendliness,  and  his  wife  and
servants  by  his  love  and  liberality  respectively  ; and  he  should
please  persons  other  than  these  by  his  kind  treatment  to  them.

34—36.  To  find  no  fault  with  the  actions  of  others,  to
observe  their  own  duties,  to  show  compassion  for  the  distress-
ed, to  address  sweet  words  to  all,  to  serve  faithful  friends  at
the  cost  of  their  own  lives,  to  welcome  their  enemies  coming
to  their  house,  to  practise  charities  proportionate  to  their
resources,  to  bear  up  against  all  sufferings,  to  reconciliate
estranged  friends,  to  offer  good  treatment  to  their  kinsmen
and  to  comply  with  their  requests— these  are  the  characteris-
tic features  of  the  high-minded.


37.  This  is  the  path  of  life  prescribed  for  the  house-
holders that  undeviatingly  follow  the  eternal  ways  of  the


3°


KAMANDAKIYA  NlTISARA.


illustrious.  Treacling  this  path,  they  attain  prosperity  i„
this  and  in  the  next  world.

38.  Even  the  foes  of  a king  become  his  friends,  if  |,e
strictly  observes  the  above  mode  of  life.  That  king  can

subjugate  the  world  by  his  modest  qualities,  who  is  free  from
all  feelings  of  animosity.

39.  How  vast  is  the  difference  between  jthe  kings  and
their  myriad  subjects*.  How  rare  is  a king  who  condescends
to  please  his  subjects  with  sAveet  words.  The  subjects  of  the
king  who  captivates  them  at  first  with  strings  of  sweet  words
and  then  cherishes  them,  never  deviate  one  step  from  the
course  of  rectitude.

• tke  th"d  Seeti° *■  **'  determination  of  Jmia,

m the  Nitisara  of  K dm  an  dak  a .


-:o;-


SECTION  IV.


K.


1-2  IVING,  minister,  kingdom,  castle,  treasury,  army
and  allies  are  known  to  form  the  seven  constituents  of  a
government.  They  contribute  to  one  another’s  weal,  and  the
oss  of  even  a single  one  of  them  renders  the  whole  imperfect ;

who  washes  to  keep  a government  perfect  should  study
went  their  nature.  J

3-  The  first  desideratum  for  a king  is  to  attain  royal

qualities,  and  having  attained  them,  he  should  look  for  them
in  others.

4-  A flourishing  sovereignty  cannot  well  be  obtained  by

witldT  hISSS  ’ he  °nIy'who  has  qualified  himself,  is  fit  to
wield  the  sceptre.


t


For  Shut  T,  alS°  mean  1 wcIfare’'  ‘ advancement"  ~

nanam  the  commentary  gives  Asirparikshanam.


if1


ik ;


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


3‘  I

5.  Royal  prosperity  so  difficult  to  attain  and  more  so  to
fetain,  and  which  entirely  depends  on  the  good  will  of  the
multitude,  rests  steadily  only  on  moral  purity  like  water  in  a
(fixed)  vessel.

6 — 8.  Nobility  of  birth,  equanimity,  youthfulness,* * * §  good
character,  benevolence,  activity,  consistency, f veracity,  res-
pectful behaviour  towards  those  older  in  age  and  in  knowledge,
gratefulness,  good-fatedness,J  keen  reasoning  power,  rela-
tionship with  the  great, § ability  to  conquer  his  enemies,  un-
shaken reverence,  far-sightedness,  energy,  purity,  ambitious
aims,  modesty  and  piety — these  are  the  qualities,  the  presence
of  which  in  a king  renders  him  acceptable  as  a refuge  to  the
people.

9.  A king,  possessed  of  these  qualities,  is  always  resorted
to  by  his  subjects  seeking  protection.  He  should  act  in  such
a way  as  to  secure  the  esteem  of  his  people.

10.  A ruler  of  earth,  desiring  his  own  welfare, should  keep
a retinue  consisting  of  descendants  from  illustrious  families,
pure,  upright,  and  obliging  in  character.

11.  People  seek  protection  even  from  a wicked  king  if
his  counselors  be  good,  A king  with  a wicked  counsel  is
seldom  approached  (for  protection)  like  a sandal  tree  begirt
with  snakes.

12.  Prohibiting  the  access  of  the  good  to  the  king,  his
wicked  counselors  exhaust  his  treasury. jj  It  is  for  this


* The  word  in  the  text  is  Vayas,  which  the  commentator  explains  as
'youthfulness but  we  think  it  to  mean  'old  age’  which  will  be  mote
suited  to  the  text.  A youthful  king  is  scarcely  resorted  te  as  a refuvfe.

t The  commentary  reads  Avisamvdditd  for  AstrmvmUitd  and
explains  the  former  as  1 absence  of  contradiction  in  speech.’

t Or  ‘ on  whom  fortune  ever  smiles.’

§ For  A kshudrapa richdritil  of  the  text  the  commentary  reads
A ksh  udrapa  rind  rata,  which  reading  we  accept.

||  The  word  in  the  text  Jit:  translated  will  be  ‘eat  up;’  but  the
commentary  very  properly  gives  the  meaning  we  have  cmbod.ed


3 2


KAMAtfDAKlYA  NITISARA.


reason  (if  not  for  any  other),  that  a king  should  have  pious
and  good  counselors.

13.  Having  obtained  a flourishing  prosperity,  a king
should  dedicate* * * §  it  to  the  enjoyment  of  the  pious.  For  pros-
perity avails  nothing,  if  it  is  not  participated  in  by  the  pious,

14.  The  wealth  and  prosperity  of  the  wicked  are  enjoyed
only  by  others  of  the  same  nature.  Only  crows  and  no  other
birds  taste  the  fruit  of  the  Kivipaka  t^ee.t

15 — i gt  Eloquence,  * self-confidence,  % accuracy  of

memory,  stateliness  of  stature,  superior  might, § self-control,
ingenuity  for  inventing  various  means  and  instruments  of
torture, |]  perfection  in  all  the  arts,  ability  of  easily  reclaiming
men  treading  evil  ways,4!!  the  power  of  sustaining  an  assault;
of  the  enemy,  knowledge  of  all  the  remedies  against  danger,
promptness  in  detecting  the  weak  points  of  an  enemy,  famili-
arity with  the  nature  of  war  and  peace,®  strict  observance  of
secrecy  regarding  all  consultations  and  actions,  proficiency  in
turning  into  account  the  advantages  of  place  and  time,  collec-
tion of  money  (from  the  people)  and  its  proper  expenditure,
a deep  insight  into  the  nature  of  the  dependents,  freedom  from
anger,  covetousness,  fear,  malice,  obstinacy  and  fickleness,
avoidance  of  tyranny,  depravity,  animosity,  jealousy,  and


* For  Vrajet  the  commentary  reads  Nayait .

f Kintpaka — A cucurbitaceous  plant  (Trichosanthes  palmata,  also
Cucumis  colocynthus).  In  the  following  fiveSlokas,  the  author  enumerates
the  necessary  qualifications  of  a monarch.

' X The  commentator  explains,  'audacity  of  refuting  even  the  words  of
god-like  people.’

§ Like  that  of  the  hero  Bhina  of  the  Mahabbarata.

||  For  Nipuna  of  the  text  the  commentary  gives  Niptcnam.

H For  Suvigraha  read  Swaagraha ; this  reading  is  also  suggest-
ed by  the  commentator. 1 ,

$*  By  war  and  peace  here,  the  author  means  all  the  six  expedients
to  be  used'  by  a king  in  foreign  politics*  The  expedients  are  (a)  peace
or  alliance,  (5)  war,  (c),  march  or  expedition,  (d)  halt,  (#)  seeking  shelter,,
and  (t/)  duplicity.-


KAMANDAKIYA  N1TI5ARA.


33


falsehood,  compliance  with  the  advices  of  those  older  in  age
and  in  learning,  energy,  amiable  appearance,  appreciation  of
worth  in  other  people,  and  smiling  words,— these  are  known
to  be  the  indispensable  qualifications  for  a sovereign.

20.  Under  a king  unmoved  by  the  passions  and  possess-
ed of  all  these  qualifications  and  perfectly  acquainted  with
men  and  manners,  the  subjects  live  as  happily  as  under  the
roof  of  their  own  father* * * §;  such  a sovereign  is  worthy  of  the
name  ParthivaF

21.  A kingdom  increases  in  prosperity,  having  obtained
a Mahendra- likef  king,  who  is  well-adorned  with  these  royal
qualities,  and  all  whose  acts  are  just  and  impartial.

22.  Desire  for  inbibing  knowledge, J attentive  audition  of
the  lessons  taught,  their  assimilation,  retention  and  the  com-
prehension of  their  various  meanings,§  the  discussion  of  the
pros  and  cons  of  a question,  ||  a close  application  to  the  study


* Lit.  A ruler  of  earth.  As  we  have  written  in  the  introduction,  the
author  is  indebted  to  the  Rajdharnt anusasana  Parva  of  the  Mahabhdra -
ta  for  his  treatise  ; there  occur  many  Slokas  in  the  latter  work  which
may  aptly  be  cited  as  parallels.  For  instance  here  we  give  the  transla-
tion of  a Sloka  from  the  Mahabharata  :~~“He  is  the  best  of  kings  in  whose
dominions  men  live  fearlessly  like  sons  in  the  house  of  their  sire/’

f Mahendra— -or  the  great  Indr  a is  the  Jupiter  Pluvius  of  the  Hindu
mythology.  He  is  the  god  of  the  firmament,  the  regent  of  the  atmos-
phere and  of  the  east  quarter,  and  his  world  is  called  Svarga.  In  the
Vedas,  he  is  placed  in  the  first  rank  among  the  gods,  but  in  later  mytho-
logy, he  falls  in  the  second  rank.  He  is  inferior  to  the  Trinity  Bmkmil
Vishnu  and  Mahesa,  but  he  is  the  chief  of  all  the  other  gods.  He  sends
the  lightning,  wields  thunder-bolt  and  pours  down  rain*

t This  thirst  for  knowledge  the  commentator  ascribes  to  causes  that
were  existent  in  a previous  birth.

§ The  word  in  the  text  may  have  another  meaning,  viz.,  'knowledge
of  the  diverse  ways  regarding  the  acquisition  of  wealth/

||  Uha — means  conjecture  as  ‘what  can  this  be*  tec.  Apoha—
means  rejection  of  doubtful  propositions  after  full  discussion.  The  two
taken  together  gives  the  meaning  we  have  embodied  in  out  rendering.

5 ■ ' '


34


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


of  the  real  nature  of  things  *— these  are  the  characteristic
features  of  the  intellect.

23.  Skilfulness,  activity,  living  animosity  for  an  enemy,
and  bravery,  these  are  the  characteristic  features  of  energy.
Well-accmplished  in  these  attributes  (of  the  intellect  and
energy),  a man  deserves  to  assume  the  royal  functions*

24.  Benignity,  truthfulness  and  valour,  these  are  the  three
noblestf  of  all  royal  qualities  ; possessing  these,  a king  easily
attains  the  rest.

25.  The  attendants^  of  a monarch  should  be  high-born,
pure-natured,  heroic,  learned,  loyal  and  experts  in  the  prac-
tical application  of  the  science  of  Polity.

26.  §A11  the  actions  and  omissions  of  a king  should  be
examined  by  his  loyal  attendants,  whose  honesty  has  been
tested  by  the  Upadhds\\  and  who  follow  up  their  schemes
until  they  are  successful.

27.  UpadU\  is  so  called  because  it  brings  people  near
the  king  and  can  make  them  enter  into  his  service.  Upadhds
are  the  means  for  testing  honesty,  and  by  these  a king  should
try  his  dependents.

28—30.  A person,  who  has  got  good  many  friends  to
deter  him  from  the  paths  of  vice,  who  is  not  a foreigner  by


* The  commentator  suggests  another  meaning,  namely,  ‘yearning  for
spiritual  knowledge  or  knowledge  of  the  Supreme  Being.’

t ‘For,’ as  the  commentator  explains  ‘they  are  most  efficacious  as
means  to  an  end.’

t The  word  in  the  text  is  Sachim,  which  generally  means  a minister ;

; : “mmertat0r  takes  ;t  tomean'  who  seek  the  same

interest  with  the  king/

I Having  enumerated  the  necessary  qualifications  for  a king,  the
1 liters"  Pr°CeedS  t0  d6SCribe  thS  qUaHtieS  °fS°od  ^ndants  and

0 The  Visarga  after  Upadkd  in  the  text  is  a palpable  mistake.

II  he  Upadhds  have  been  explained  as  above  by  the  author  himself.

They  are  four  in  kind,  being  («)  the  test  of  loyalty,  (*)  the  test  of  die-

interestedness,  W the  test  of  courage,  and  (d)  the test  of  continent


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


35


birth,' * * * § who  possesses  a noble  lineage  and  character  and  great
physical  strength,  who  is  eloquent  and  audacious  in  speechf
and  is  far-sighted, J energetic  and  ready-witted, who  is  free  from
obstinacy§  and  fickleness  and  is  faithful  to  his  friends,  who
is  painstaking  and  pure  and  truthful,  who  is  blessed  with
eqanimity,  cheerfulness,  patience,  gravity  and  health,  who  is
a master  of  all  the  arts,  and  dexterous  and  is  prudent  and
retentive,  who  is  unswerving  in  his  devotion  and  does  not
revenge  the  wrongs  done  to  him  by  his  sovereign,— such  a
person  should  be  elected  as  a minister.

31.  Accuracy  of  memory,  exclusive  devotion  to  the  ways
and  means  and  the  empire,  grave  consideration  of  the  pros
and  cons  of  a question,  unerring  judgment,  firmess,  and
observance  of  secrecy  regarding  all  counsels — these  are  known
to  be  the  necessary  qualifications  of  a minister.

32.  ||  A person  well-versed  in  Trayce  and  Dandaniti\
should  be  appointed  as  the  royal  priest.  He  should  accom-


* Literally  translated,  it  would  be,  ‘born  in  the  self-same  country
with  his  sovereign  / the  author  denounces  the  appointment  of  a foreigner
as  a minister,  on  the  ground  that  such  a man  can  have  no  natural
sympathy  for  his  master.  In  this  way  no  good  feeling  will  cement  their
alliance.

f The  commentator  gives  a different  meaning,  namely,  ‘unrivalled.’

X Lit.  translated  it  would  be  ‘having  eyes’  ; but  in  Sanskrit  literature
Shdstras  are  often  identified  with  the  eyes,  for  they  help  in  clearing
many  doubts  and  can  enable  men  to  divine  what  is  in  store  for
them.  c,f.

• Aneka  samsaya  chchcdi  paroksh  d rth  asya  days  amain
Sarvasya  lochanam  Shdstram  yasya  misty andka  eh  sad

Hence  the  word  in  the  text  may  mean  ‘learned  it)  the  Shdstras  or
having  the  eye  of  knowledge.’

§ The  word  may  have  another  signification,  namely,  * rigidity  of
manners/

||  The  Author  now  goes  on  to  describe  the  qualifications  of  the  royal
priest  and  astrologer.

If  Criminal  Jurispend  »ce  or  the  Science  of  chastisement.


36


kamandakiya  nitisara.


plish  Sdntica,  Poustica*  and  other  benedictory  rites  accord-
ing to  the  ordinances  of  the  AtharVa,  Veda .

33.  A person  investigating  the  nature  of  the  science
of  Astrology  and  clever  in  putting  questions  to  other,  and
proficient  in  the  computation  of  hours  and  minutes, f should
he  appointed  as  the  king’s  astrologer.

34.  An  intelligent  monarch  should  seek  information
about  the  honesty  of  his  dependents  from  men  of  their  stamp
and  position  ; he  should  have  their  artistic  acquirements  exa-
mined by  connoisseurs. J

35.  From  their  (deqendents’)  kinsmen,  he  (the  king)
should  gather  information  regarding  their  natural  tempara-
ment,  successful  career,  serviceability,  and  their  skilfulness,
capacity  for  knowledge  and  power  of  assimilation.

36.  He  should  assure  himself  of  the  measure  of  their
self-confidence  and  ingenuity : and  he  should  also  examine
their  fluency  and  truthfulness  by  holding  conversation  with
them.


. * literally  means,  that  which  brings  about  Sdnti  or  peace  ;

it  is  a special  designation  of  the  expiatory  ceremonies  or  observances
calculated  to  remove  or  avert  danger.  Poustica  literally  means  'promot-
ing growth  ( poosti ) ; hence  it  is  a name  for  those  rites  that  conduce  to

the  welfare  of  the  kingdom,

t The  word  in  the  text  is  ‘hora’  which  may  mean  -hours’  as  well
as ‘zodiacal  signs.’  If  we  accept  the  latter  signification,  then  the  text
would  mean  ‘proficient  in  interpreting  zodiacal  signs.’  The  use  of  this
word  has  given  rise  to  a controversy  regarding  the  antiquity  of  this  work,

t The  author  in  this  and  in  the  following  four  Slokas  goes  on  to
enumerate  the  sources  and  measures,  from  and  by  which,  a king  should
gather information  regarding  his  dependents  and  ministers.  The  syn-
tartmal  and  grammatical  structure  of  this  and  the  one  following  Sloka  is
^ sly  defective.  The  commentary,  though  needlessly  elaborate  at

ou  t^r  mlySilent  h6re-  S°  thereis"°  chance  of  making-

out  what  the  exact  meanings  of  the  Slokas  are  ; what  we  embody  in  eur

rendering  is  tne  product  of  conjecture  and  common-  sense.


KAMANDAKIYA  N1TISARA.


3?


37-  He  should  mark  if  they  possess  energy,  prowess,
endurance,  memory,  devotion,  and  steadiness.

38.  By  their  behaviour,  he  should  know  their  devotion,
faithfulness  and  purity  of  intention.  He  should  enlighten

lmself  regarding  their  physical  strength,  their  evenminded-
ness and  their  healthiness,  from  those  who  live  with  them.

39-  He  should  directly*  ascertain  their  tractability  and
resoluteness  and  their  power  of  keeping  their  enemies  under
control  and  their  meanness  or  gentility.

40.  The.  presence, of  secondary  qualities  beyond  direct  per-
ception, is  inferred  by  their  workings  ; and  the  success  of  their
workings  again  is  measuredf  by  the  results  they  achieve.

41.  A king  inclined  to  evil  deeds  should  be  prevented
y is  ministers ; he  should  regard  their  advice  in  the  same
lght  as  those  of  his  spiritual  guide.J

1 • 42‘  J’,e  monarch>r  lapses  with  the  collapse  of  the
king,  while  it  revives  with  his  revival,  like  the  lotus  reviving

at  the  rising  of  the  sun. §

43-  Thoreforc  ministers  endued  with  genius,  energy
and  equanimity,  and  devoted  to  the  interests  of  their  master,
should  instil  knowledge||  into  him  in  a suitable  manner.f

+ !hr0Ugh  secondary  sources,  but  personally.’

t fer  Bibhavayet  the  commentary  gives  Bibhdvyate.

* The  text,  if  translated  as  it  is,  would  be  'he  should  pay  heed  to  their
Teadtr  Wd  ^ t0  tHe  WOfdS  °f  hlS  SpiritUaI  gu!dcS-’  ‘here  is  another

reading  and  we  accept  that.  cncr

§ Sanskrit  poetry  abounds  in  instances  in  which  the  lotus  is
regarded  as  the  mistress  of  the  Sun.  This  metaphor  probably  has  its
origin  m the  fact  that  lotuses  blossom  forth  at  the  early  dawn  In  tW
na  ura  phenomenon,  the  'poet’s  eye  in  fine  frenay  roltg"' finds  th
dehght  the  sweet-heart  feels  at  the  advent  of  her  lord  that  was  away!

, II  We  would  rather  prefer  this  to  be  substituted  by  ' should  muide

IT  Thai  is,  ‘by  reciting  proverbs,  apologues  and  moral  tales  ' these
beta*  considered be  the  easiest  means  of  imparting  i™*d“  ’ '


3®


kamandakiya  nitisara.


44.  Those  ministers  only  are  considered  to  be  the  true
friends  and  spiritual  guides  of  a king,  who  deter  him  from  go-
ing astray,  disregarding  repeated  warnings  not  to  do  so,

45.  Those  who  restrain  a king  inclined  to  evil  deeds,* are
to  him  his  most  worshipful  preceptors  and  not  mere  friends.

46.  Even  persons  well-grounded  in  knowledge  are  en-
snared by  the  irristible  attractions  of  the  sensual  enjoyments.
What  wrongful  act  can  not  then  a man,  whose  heart  is  en-
slaved to  the  pleasures  of  the  senses,  commit  ?

47.  A king  perpetrating  transgressions  is  said  to  be
blind  in  spite  of  his  eyes.f.  His  friends,  assuming  the
functions  of  physicians,  cure  him  of  his  blindness  by  applying
the  collyriumj  of  modesty.

48.  When  a king, blinded  by  passions,  pride  and  arrogance,
falls  into  the  snare  set  forth  by  his  enemies,  the  exer-
tions of  his  ministers  serve  to  extricate  him,  even  as  the
support  of  the  hand  aids  a fallen  man.

49.  Like  the  Mahktas\  of  infuriated  elephants,  the
the  ministers  of  a king  are  held  to  blame,  when,  intoxicated
with  pride,  he  goes  astray.

50.  A kingdom  flourishes  through  the  fertility  of  its  soil,
and  the  king  prospers  through  the  flourishing  condition  of
the  kingdom.  Therefore,  for  his  own  prosperity,  a king
should  try  to  make  his  territory  as  fertile  as  possible,

51 — 52.  || A land  adorned  with  crops,  rich  in  mines,

* The  commentary  paraphrases  ‘acts  which  are  prohibited  by  the
ShdstrasJ

f ‘For,’  goes  on  the  commentator,  ‘he  can  not  perceive  the  sin  of  his
violations.’

f Collyrium  is  described  in  the  Hindu  books  of  medicine  to  be  a well-
tried  remedy  for  all  disorders  of  the  eye.

§ The  Mdhuta  is  the  technical  oriental  name  for  the  keepers  of  ele-
phants ; one  of  their  duties  is  to  guide  them  when  the  king  rides  on  them.
Buffon  in  his  ‘Natural  History/  calls  these  leaders  of  elephants1  Cornea.

||  Having  explained  the  necessary  qalifxations  for  monarehs  and
ministers,  the  author  now  proceeds  to  describe  what  kind  of  land  is  best


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


39


minerals,  and  commodities  for  trade,  conducive  to  the  breed
of  cattle,  copiously  watered,  (thickly)  inhabited  by  virtuous
people  and  pious  sects,  possessed  of  all  the  charms  of  nature,
abounding  in  woods  swarming  with  elephants,*  having  inland
and  navigable  communications,  and  not  depending  upon
showers  of  rain  for  agricultural  purposesf — such  a land  is
specially  favourable  to  the  welfare  and  prosperity  of  kings.

53-  A land,  overspread  with  gravels  and  fragments  of
stones;];  and* covered  with  forests  and  thorny  brush-woods,  and
molested  by  depridators,  and  arid  and  infested  with  beasts
of  prey,  such  a land  is  not  worthy  of  the  name.

54 —  56-  A country  where  living  is  cheap,  the  soil  of
which  is  fertile§  and  copiously  irrigated, ||  which  is  situated
at  the  foot  of  a mountain, which  contains  a large  number  of


suited  to  the  establishment  of  a kingdom,  and  what  kind  of  kingdom
brings  prosperity  on  the  king.

* The  necessity  of  such  woods  may  at  first  seem  incomprehensible;  but
it  will  be  obvious  when  we  say  that  the  ancient  Aryans,  like  the  Greeks
of  yore,  utilized  elephants  in  martial  purposes  ; and  invariably  these
monsters  of  the  forest  constituted  a good  portion  of  their  army.  They
were  also  used  in  pageants  and  royal  processions.

t Adevamdtrikd . — Lit.  translated  would  mean,  4 not  having  the  god
of  rain  or  clouds  as  foster-mother hence  an  Adevamdtrikd  land  is  that
which  does  not  entirely  depend  on  rain-water,  but  has  other  sources  of
water-supply,  namely,  iriigation  and  floods,  for  agricultural  purposes,
Egypt  and  the  countries,  through  which  the  Nile  flows,  can  be  cited  as
examples.  The  opposite  of  Adevamdtrikd  is  Nadimdtrikd  i\c.,  having  a
river  as  foster-mother.

t The  commentary  here  suggests  another  reading  namely  Sakkar-
osharapdshdnd  (or  covered  over  with  gravels,  saline  soil,  and  fragments
of  stones),  for  which  we  see  no  occasion.

§ Or,  as  the  commentator  remarks,  ‘ which  possesses  all  the  above-
mentioned  qualifications  /

||  I he  word  in  the  text  is  Sdrupa  for  which  the  commentary  suggests
Sdnupa .

II  ^at  ks  inhabitants  might  have  an  abundant  supply  of  fire-wood
and  fuels.


40


fCAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


Sudras  * traders  and  artisans,  where  the  farmers  and  hus-
bandmen are  enterprising  and  energetic,  which  is  loyal  to  its
ruler  and  inhospitable  to  its  enemies,  which  ungrudgingly
bears  heavy  taxation  (for  replenishing  the  treasury),  which  is
extensive  in  area  and  is  crowded  with  men  from  various
foreign  countries,  which  is  rich  and  pious  and  abounds  in
cattle,  and  where  the  popular  leaders  are  not  foolish  and
voluptuous*}* — such  a country  is  the  best  of  all  others.  A king
should,  by  all  means,  endeavour  to  promote  the  welfare  of
such  a land,  for,  with  its  prosperity,  the  other  constituents  of
government  would  also  prosper.

57.  t A king  should  settle  in  such  a fortress,  which  has  an
extensive  area^  and  is  environed  by  a wide  ditch  and  secured
with  gates  strengthened  with  high  and  massive  walls,  and
which  is  sheltered  by  mighty  mountains,  forests  and  deserts. §

58.  He  should  have  a castle  proof  against  the  inclemencies
of  the  weather,  well  stuffed  with  provisions  and  money,
and  having  an  abundant  supply  of  water.  A king  without  a
castle  is  unsteady  like  patches  of  clouds  before  a strong
wind,

59.  A fort,  containing  copious  water  and  thickly  inters
persed  with  hillocks  and  trees  and  situated  in  a desert  and

* The  serving  class.  The  fact  of  their  being  numerous  in  a country
would  render  labour  cheap,

f According  to  the  reading  accepted  in  the  note  (which  is  Markka  tec.)
the  translation  would  be  ‘foolish  and  voluptuous.’  The  commentator  goes
on  to  explain  his  curious  interpretation  by  asserting  that  such  leaders  do
not  brother  their  heads  with  politics  and  are  not  intriguing  and  capable  of
deception.  They  are  contented  with  their  lot  and  leave  the  king  free  to
govern  according  to  his  own  whim  and  caprice  ; surely  the  expiation  is
■ ■.  very  ingenious.  ■

t The  author  now  gives  directions  which  will  help  a king  to  select  a
suitable  site  for  his  castle.  These  directions,  as  the  reader  will  see,  do
credit  even  to  a military  engineer  of  the  highest  rank,

* f mountains  and  forests  and  deserts  would  stand  in  the  way  of

an  enemy  coming  to  assault  the  fort.  For  ghana  the  commentary  gives

Maru.  ■ ' \ ,


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.  4*

arid  soil,  has  been  said  to  be  impregnable,  by  persons  well-
read  in  the  Shdstras  and  by  men  proficient  in  the  art  of
castle-building,*

60.  The  Achdryyasf  hold  that  fortress  to  be  the  best
which  is  sufficiently  stored  with  provisions,  water,  weapons*
and  other  implements  of  war,  and  is  garrisoned  by  cool*
headed  soldiers^  and  has  numerous  defences.

61.  A country,  having  communications  both  by  land  and
by  water§  and  furnished  with  castles  affording  shelter  to  the
royal  family  at  the  time  of  a siege, — such  a country  is
suitable  for  the  habitation  for  a king  who  seeks  prosperity.

62 — 63.  ||  A treasury*  the  collections  of  which  are  vast
and  disbursements  limited,  which  is  far-famed,  where  adora-
tion is  offered  to  the  gods, If  which  is  full  of  desirable  things,
a sight  of  which  is  charming,  which  is  superintended  overby
trustworthy  people  and  is  enriched  with  gold,  pearls,  and
jewels,  which  redounds  to  the  credit  of  the  forefathers,  which

* What  the  author  means  is  this: — -Inside  the  fort  there  should  be
natural  hillocks  and  a large  number  of  trees,  under  the  cover  of  which,  the'
garrison  at  the  time  of  a siege  would  be  able  to  give  battle  to  the  assaulting
army.  The  site  of  the  fort  should  be  in  a desert  soil,  so  that  the  besiegers
Would  be  compelled  to  give  up  their  attempt  out  of  sheer  want  of  food
and  water.  The  garrison  should  have  abundant  supply  of  provision  and
drinking  water*  so  that  they  would  be  able  to  hold  out  long,  while  the
ranks  of  the  besiegers  would  be  thinned  by  famine.

f Achdryya  lit  r means  a spiritual  preceptor,  here  the  preceptors
of  the  gods  and  demons  (Vrihaspati  and  Sukra)  are  alluded  to.

| So  that  in  case  of  a siege,  they  will  not  rashly  venture  a battle,  for*
by  holding  out,  they  are  sure  to  conquer  in  the  long  run,

§ The  word  in  the  text  is  explained  in  the  commentary  as  follows*
1 covered  equally  with  land  and  water/  We  do  not  find  any  appro-
priateness of  the  interpretation  and  so  reject  it.

||  Here  begins  the  description  of  the  treasury,  which  is  also  very
sound  and  statesman-like.

H ‘ Specially'  goes  on  the  commentator,  1 to  Sri  and  Dhanada/  Thtf
fdrtncr  is  the  Goddess  of  prosperity,  and  the  latter  the  Lord  of  wealth*
the  Plutus  of  the  Grecian  mythology,

6


42


KAMANDAKIYA  ftlTlSARA.


has  been  filled  by  lawful  means,  and  which  can  defray  any
amount  of  expenditure, — such  a treasury  wins  the  approval
of  men  of  financial  acumen.

64.  . Persons  possessing  treasures  should  preserve  them
for  purposes  of  piety,  for  increasing  their  wealth,  for  times
of  danger  and  for  maintaining  their  dependents.

65 — 67.  An  army* * * §55,  inherited  from  the  forefathers, f
throughly  obedient  and  disciplined,  firmly  united,  well-paid,
well-known  for  bravery  and  manliness,  skilful  in  handling  all
kinds  of  weapons,  commanded  by  experts  in  the  science  of
war,  equipped  with  various  implements  of  war,  trained  in  various
modes  of  warfare,  crowded  with  legions  of  warriors,  swarming
with  elephants  and  horses  purified  by  the  Nirajana%  ceremony,
accustomed  to  stay  abroad  and  to  troubles  and  distresses,  inde-
fatigable in  fight,  having  its  ranks  filled  with  never  vacil-
lating Kshatriyas ,§  such  an  army  has  been  commended  by
persons  proficient  in  the  science  of  Polity.

68,  A kihg  should  form  alliance  with  a person,  illlustri-
ous,  well-spoken,  benevolent,  learned,  even-minded,  having
numerous  partisans,  and  who  would  remain  constant  in  faith-
fulness for  all  future  periods. |J


* The  author  now  proceeds  to  describe  the  qualifications  that  make
an  army  efficient,

t What  the  author  means  is  f which  has  served  his  forefathers’  &c.

J A kind  of  military  and  religious  ceremony  performed,  by  kings
and  generals  of  armies,  in  the  month  of  Asvina , (September,  October)
before  they  took  the  field.  It  was,  so  to  say,  a general  purification  of
the  king’s  Purohita  (priest),  the  ministers  and  the  various  component  parts
of  the  army,  together  with  the  arms  and  implements  of  war,  by  sacred
mantras . Some  time  Nirdjana  means  only  lustration  of  arms.

§ Advaidha.—lAt,  means  ‘having  no  sense  of  distinction,’  who
do  not  distinguish  between  life  and  death.  But  dvatdha  also  means
duplicity  and  a vacillating  tendency.  Kshatriyas  are  the  ruling  and

.■castes,

alliances  and  for  selecting
ig.  The  Ayatikshama  in


ngnting  caste  and  stand  second  in  the  scale  of
allies.  Here  also  he  is  very  wise  and  far-seeir


KAMANDAKIYA  N1TISARA.


43


69.  A pure-hearted  and  high-born  ally  surely  displays
ingenuity  and  versatility’^  when  great  difficulties  present
themselves.

70.  A man,  who  was  in  friendly  relations  with  his  ances-
tors, who  is  steady  and  unwavering,  and  who  has  a deep
insight  into  his  naturef  and  who  is  generous  and  unostenta-
tious, is  to  be  desired  as  an  ally  by  a king*

71.  To  come  out  to  accord  a cordial  welcome  even  from
a distance,  to  speak  agreeable  words  coveying  distinct  sense,
and  to  offer  a warm  hospitality,  these  are  the  three  methods
of  making  friends*

72.  The  realisation  of  virtue,  wealth  and  desire,  is  the
fruit  of  friendship;  and  a prudent  person  does  not  form  such
a friendship  which  is  barren  of  these  three.

73.  The  friendship  of  the  pious  is  like  a river,  shallow
in  the  beginning,  deep  in  the  middle,  widening  at  each  step,
and  ever-flowing  and  never-ceasing.

74.  Friends  are  of  four  kinds,  being  separately  deriv-
ed from  birth,  relationship,  ancestral  obligation,  and  protection
from  danger.

75*  Integrity  in  money  matters,  freedom  from  temptation,
manliness,  participation  in  weal  and  woe,  fidelity,  ingenuity,
truthfulness,  these  are  the  necessary  qualifications  for  an  ally.

7 6.  In  short,  unswerving  devotion  to  the  interests  of
fixs  friends  is  the  principal  characteristic  of  a friend.  He  is
not  a friend  in  whom  this  quality  is  not  found  ; and  a man  should
not  throw  himself  on  the  mercy  of  such  a one.

77,  Thus,,  government  and  its  seven  constituents  have
been  explained  by  us ; its  main  stay  is  the  treasury  and  the


the  text  of  this  Sloka  means,  1 the  friendship  of  whom  has  not  the
slightest  chance  of  melting  away  even  in  the  remotest  future.’

* The  world  in  the  text  lit  : translated  would  be  ‘squareness’,
f Another  interpretation  is  possible,  namely,  1 to  the  liking  of  his
heart.’


44


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


army;  and  administered  by  a skilful  minister,  it  leads  to
the  eternal  consummation  of  Trivarga.

78.  Just  as  the  spiritual  Principle  combined  with  matter
pervades  this  universe,  soaking  united  with  his  subjects
extends  his  dominions  all  over  the  earth.

79.  Thus  a king  worshipped  by  his  subjects  and  held  in
high  honor  by  them,  should  protect  his  own  kingdom.  By
promoting  the  welfare  of  his  own  kingdom,  he  speedily
reaches  the  zenith  of  prosperity  and  progress.

80.  A king,  possessed  of  loyal  subjects  and  royal  quali-
ties, is  greatly  to  be  desired*  In  the  field  of  battle  he
sweeps  his  enemies  before  him  like  chaff  1>  fore  the  wind.f

Thus  ends  the  fourth  Section , the  description  of  the  essen-
tial constituents  of  government,  namely,  king , ministers ,
kingdom,  castle,  treasury,  army  and  allies,  in  the  Nitisdra
of  ftarriandaka.


SECTION  V.


P

I.  1 ERSONS  depending  on  others  for  their  livelihood
should  enter  into  the  services  of  a king  who  is  like  the  celes-
tial  tree  Kalpa  itselfj  ; who  is  ever  devoted  to  his  duties;  and

* The  commentator  gives  a different  explanation,  viz.,  ' is  always
resorted  to  as  a refuge.’

t Literally  translated  the  passage  would  be  ‘is  as  formidable  an
opponent  to  his  enemies  as  the  strong  wind  is  to  the  clouds.’

t A tree  fabled  to  be  in  Indra’s  paradise.  1 1 is  supposed  to  grant
all  desires.  There  is  also  a creeper  of  the  same  name  possessing  the
same  qualities.  The  idea  of  comparing  a generous  person  with  this  tree
pr  creeper  is  a very  favorite  one  with  Sanskrit  poets.


KAMANDAKIYA  NiTISARA.  45

who  possesses  an  ample  treasury"* * * §  and  qualities  that  attract
his  subjects  to  him.

2.  A king,  even  when  deprived  of  his  subjects  and  sub-
stance,  should  be  resorted  to,  if  only,  he  possesses  good  quail-*
ties.f  For,  (if  not  then,  but)  after  a while,  an  honourable
living  could  be  secured  from  him.

3.  A wise  man  should  rather  remain  inactive  like  a branch
less  trunk,  and  wither  away  with  oppressive  hunger,  than  seek
a means  of  maintenance  from  the  worthless.

4.  A worthless  and  unjust  monarch  carrying  his  pros-
perity to  the  very  zenith, % meets  with  destruction  even  during
his  (apparently)  sunny  days.

5'  Having  been  once  admitted  into  the  royal  service,
a skilful, § self-possessed  and  never-veeringj|  person  can
secure  the  permanence  of  his  office,  by  being  decided  in  his
judgments.1!!

6.  A person  should  choose  such  a living  which  would
be  relished  at  present  and  in  future  ; he  should  never  select
one  that  would  be  disliked  by  the  world.$

* Here  the  commentary  differs  from  the  text  and  substitutes  another
reading,  namely  ' Vriiiastham  Vriiiisampannam1  which  we  have  accept
ted.

f The  royal  qualities  enumerated  in  Slokas  15  to  19  in  Section  IV.

+ There  is  another  reading  namely  A risa?npada  which  means  'the
prosperity  of  his  foes/  In  this  case  the  first  line  would  mean,  'an
unjust  and  worthless  king  indirectly  helps  in  enhancing  the  prosperity
of  his  foes/

§ For  Nipuna  the  commentary  reads  Nipunam  which  would  be  an
adverb  qualifying  'secure/

||  The  commentary  explains ‘never  harbouring  the  remotest  ill-will
against  his  master/

If  Lit : translated  would  be,  ‘resolving  to  do  everything  that  human
understanding  is  capable  of/

$ In  translating  the  Sloka  we  have  followed  the  commentary.  But
another  meaning  seems  possible  to  us  which  we  give  below.  The  reader
is  left  free  to  compare  and  to  judge.  " A servant  should  only  execute
$hose  behests  of  his  royal  master  which  would  be  relished  by  the  people


46


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


7.  Sesamum  seeds,  when  kept  together  with  Champaca *
flowers,  acquire  the  latter’s  fragrance;  but  then  the  fluid
that  is  pressed  out  of  them  cannot  be  taken.  Thus  all  quali-
ties  (good  or  bad)  are  contagious. f

8.  A stream  of  tastefulj  water,  having  flown  into  the
sea,  becomes  saline  and  thus  undrinkable.  For  this  simple
reason,  a wise  man  should  never  associate  with  one  of
wicked  and  impure  soul.


9-  liven  when-  hard  pressed  with  difficulties,  a wise  per-
son should  betake  to  none  but  an  honourable  living.  Through
such  a living,  he  earns  respectibility  and  is  not  cast  out  of
this  world  and  the  next.§

10.  As  a man  desirous  of  seeing  a mountain  should  go
to  the  deep-rooted,  majestic,  sacred  and  far-famed  Vindhya
hills,  inhabited  by  numberless  pious  people,  so  a person,  seek-
ing a successful  career  should  employ  himself  in  the  services
of  a master  who  is  desirable,  faithful  to  the  usages,  virtuous,
illustrious,  praiseworthy  and  served  by  other  pious  people.||

(By  strenuous  efforts)  a persevering'  personf  gets


at  present  and  in  the  future  ; and  he  should  never  do  what  would~b7iniu
nous  to  the  interests  of  the  people  in  general,*’

* A kind  of  yellow  fragrant  flower,  (Michelia  Champaca )
f In  this  and  in  the  several  following  Slokas  the  author  goes  on  to
descr'b.  co-pan,.  This  S.oka  and.h,  ar"i

m by  way  of  preamble.  *7*

R H teXt  ’It.:translated  would  be  ‘a  stream  of  Ganges  water*.
But  the  Ganges  bemg  the  most  sacred  river,  her  water  is  typically  used
to  signify  all  tasteful  water*  r y

§ There  seems  to  be  a pun  upon  the  word  W which  means  both
regions  and  persons.  If  the  second  signification  is  accepted  the  last
P0Tw°h  ‘ !iSl0kaViW0uId  mean  ‘ is  not  forsaken  by  his  friends.*’

With  this  description.  For  hTtWnl  t maSter  who  allies

the  tfetpalatablenesc  * a ^ H a WISe  se,ection  wil1  diminish

me  unpalatableness  and  rigours  of  servitude.

text  means -having  arl  accurate  memory’..-


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARAu


47


at  all  those  objects  that  he  may  desire,  even  if  they  be  hard
to  obtain.  Therefore,  assiduous  endeavour  should  always
be  put  forth  (in  accomplishing  an  action).

12,  A dependent,  willing  to  promote  the  real  service  of
his  royal  master,  should  qualify  himself  with  learning,humility,
and  knowledge  of  all  the  arts,* * * §

13 — 14.  That  person  is  only  fit  to  serve  a worthy  master
who  possesses  a noble  lineage,  learning,  proficiency  in  the
Srufa's, f liberality,  good  character,  prowess  and  patience  ;
who  is  blessed  with  an  amiable  appearance,  and  even-minded-
ness, physical  might,  healthiness,  firmness  of  mind,  honesty  of
intentions  and  kindness  of  disposition  ; who  is  beyond  the
reach  of  malevolence,  treacherousness,  a spirit  of  sowing
dissensions,  guilefulness,  avidity  and  falseness,  and  (lastly)
who  has  cast  off  obstinacy!  and  fickleness  alike.

15.  Ingenioitsness,  gentleness,  constancy,  forbearance,  §
capacity  for  enduring  pain,  cheerfulness,  good  character,
and  fortitude — these  are  the  qualities  that  are  said  to  or-
nament a dependent.

16.  Endowed  with  all  these  attributes  and  observing  a
most  scrupulous  integrity  about  pecuniary  matters,  a depen-
dent should,  for  his  own  advancement,  try  to  win  the  con-
fidence of  his  prosperous  royal  master,

17.  Having  obtained  an  access  into  the  king’s  court,  he


* Arts  must  be  taken  to  include  fine  arts  as  well  as  mechanical  arts  ;
no  less  than  sixty-four  arts  have  been  enumerated  in  Sanskrit  lexicons.

+ Srutis—sruti  means  what  is  heard  or  revealed  as  distinguished
from  Smritis  ; Snitis  or  Vedas  are  4 a-paurusheya  ’ works  or  * not
human  compositions/  They  are  supposed  to  have  been  directly  revealed
by  the  Supreme  Being,  Brahman.

t The  word  in  the  text  may  also  have  this  meaning  namely,
1 rigidity  or  stiffness  of  manners/

§ The  word  in  the  text  is  Kshanti  which  is  defined  as  Saiyapi  sdmar
thyi  apaharin  doshasahanam  or  indulgence  towards  offenders  or  ene-
mies in  spite  of  the  power  of  revenging,


kamandak!iya  nitisasa.


should  go  there  in  decent  garments,*  and  occupy  tfi&
seat  allotted  to  him  (by  the  usher) ; then  in  proper  time,  and!
with  becoming  humility,  he  should  pay  his  homage  to  his1
sovereign  lord.

1 8.  He  should  ever  shun  the  seats  and  places  of  other
Courtiers  and  should  avoid  crookedness,  gaudy  garments,
and  enviousness  ; he  should  never  discourse  with  his  superiors'
(in  age,  rank  and  knowledge),  contradicting  them  in  a dis-
respectful manner.

19.  A dependent  should  avoid  prevarication,  trickery,*
deceitfulness  and  thievishness.  He  should  do  obeisance  to
the  sons  and  favorite  attendants  of  his  royal  master.f

20.  He  should  speak  nothing  unpalatable  to  the  king's
jesters  ;J  for  then,  in  the  very  midst  of  the  assembly,  they  will*
pierce  him  to  the  core  with  their  withering  sarcasms.

21.  Occupying  a seat  adjacent  to  (that  of)  his  master,*
be  should  not  allow  his  eyes  to  wander,  but  keep  them


* ^or  Savesaifari.  the  commentary  reads  Suvesavan.  which  reading'
tve  have  accepted.

f Then  these  latter/  goes  on  the  commentator,  'will  recommend  him'
to  the  good  graces  of  the  king.'

% As  we  have  written  Narmasachiva  r means  a jester  or  more
£orrectJy,an  associate  of  amusements  of  princes  and  persons  of  high  rank.
But  the  reader  must  not  confound  him  with  English  'fools*  aud  ‘buffoons*
whose  model-type  we  find  in  the  ‘Ivanhce*  of  S.  W.  Scott.  The  position
6f  western  buffoons  is  inferior  to  that  of  the  oriental  Vidusakas . These

latter  are  recruited  from  illustrious  families  and  often  from'  amongst  the"

spiritual  caste  (Brahmanas).  They  are  exceptionally  intelligent
and  sound  counselors.  They  are  the  humour-companions  as  well1
as  confidential  friends  of  a monarch,  (some  times  of  the  hero  of  a play),
Who  excite  mirth  by  their  fantastical  motley  dresses,  their  speeches,
gestures,  appearances,  movements  &c.,  and  by  allowing  themselves  to  be
°f  redlcule  hy  almost  everybody.  In  spite  of  all  these,  they
honor  by  the  other  courtiers  and  exercise  a.  considerable
amount  of  influence  over  the  king  who  regards  them  as  his  best
oremost  counselors,,  and  who  never  goes  against  what  they  advise.*


KAMANDAKIYA  N1TISARA. '


49


riveted  on  the  countenance  of  his  master,  to  watch  what  he
would  do.

22.  When  the  king  says  ' who  is  there,'  the  retainer
should  respond  saying  ‘ here  am  I at  your  Majesty's  entire
command?’*  He  should  with  promptitude  give  effect  to  his
lord's  behests  to  the  best  of  his  abilities.

23.  Hef  should  avoid  (in  the  presence  of  his  master)
breaking  out  into  roars  of  laughter,  coughing,  expectorating,
yawning,  stretching  his  limbs  and  body,*  and  making
sounds  with  his  finger  tips.§

24.  Divining  his  affectionate  master’s  purposes,  in  a
manner  approved  of  by  others  proficient  in  thought-reading,
he  should  speak  distinctly,  when  asked  to  do  so,  upholding  his
master’s  views.

25.  Vv  hen  a dispute  or  debate  arises  among  the  assembly
of  courtiers, ||  the  idependent,  being  directed  by  his  royal
master,  should  cite  the  opinions  of  the  experts^  regarding

e point  at  issue,  and  should  ascribe  such  signification  to
the  disputed  term,  about  which  there  can  be  doubt  whatever.


* The  text  lit : translated  would  be  'I  am  here,  command  me  fully.’

cJuelvr?  sor of  our  readers  win  wonder  to  fmd  thc  r"]es  of

enqueue  laid  down  here  to  be  perfectly  at  one  with  those  recognised  in
western  society.  In  nicety  and  in  minuteness  of  detail  they  are  in  no

ment'Yt-l017  ^ WaiUln8%  In  the  Mahitbh&rata  also  we  find  a denounce-
ment of  these  actions  (laughing&c.,)  as  breaches  of  etiquette.  C.  f.  ’They

ecome  so  shameless  as  to  indulge  in  eructations  and  the  like,  and
expectorate  in  the  very  presence  of  their  master.’  See.  LVI.  s'  «
Kajadharm dn usasa n a Parva  * *

siifvrtltriginr  Td  thetext!s  Gatrabhanga,  which  is  taken  to

shL  off  idleness.'31"  b0C%  WWch  iS  Ca*Culated

and  W°rd  “ tGXt  !S  Pa™ciSfota;  parva  means  figure-joints

d a, fata  means  sound.  In  ordinary  English  it  is  termed ‘filliping.’

I I he  compound  lit : translated  would  be  ‘the  assembly  of  couriers
which  has  been  enlarged  for  the  king’s  pleasure.’

f Specially  used  for  any  expounder  of  any  particular  system.

7


5^


RAMANDAtftYA  NITISARA.


26.  Though  thoroughly  informed  on  any  point,  yet,  a
prudent  servant  should  never  speak  in  such  a way  as  to
silence  his  master.  Though  eloquent,  he  should  forego  self-
gratification on  this  score.*

27.  A dependent  should  speak  of  what  he  knows  best  as
though  he  knew  very  little.  But  with  becoming  modesty,  he
should  display  the  superiority  of  his  knowledge  by  his
actions.f

28.  A dependent,  who  is  truly  anxious  for  the  welfare  of
his  master,  should  proffer  his  wholesome  advice  uncalled-for,
only  when  the  latter  deviates  from  the  path  of  rectitude,  or
when  any  emergency  is  imminent, % or  when  a favorable
opportunity  for  any  particular  action  slips  away  unnoticed.

29.  For  the  interests  of  justice, § a retainer  should
speak  sweet,  salutary  and  truthful  words,  and  he  should  avoid
telling  what  is  incredible,  indecent, f[  uncouth  and  jarring  to
the  ear.

30.  A servant  knowing  the  proper  use  of  time  and  place,
should,  when  they  are  favorable,  do  good  to  other  people ; he
should  also  promote  his  own  interests  in  a skilful  manner.

31.  He  should  not  (prematurely)  divulge  those  counsels


* In  rendering  this  portion  of  the  text  we  have  followed  the  com-
mentary, though  another  interpretation  is  apparent,  namely,  'Even
possessing  vast  experience,  he  should  not  be  proud  of  it/

f For  a similar  sentiment  campare,

'Fitch  thy  behaviours  low,  thy  projects  high,

So  shalt  thou  humble  and  magnanimous  be.

Sink  not  in  spirit } who  aimeth  at  the  sky
Shoots  higher  much  than  he  that  means  a tree/

. George  Herbert*

* The  nature  of  the  emergency  has  been  defined  in  the  commen-
tary to  be  1 warlike  preparations  by  an  inimical  sovereign/

§ The  word  in  the  text  may  have  another  import,  rramefy  Ho
secure  religions  merit/  V - ' " ; ' '

I-  For  Asatya  or  false,  the  commentary  mteAsaihya  or  indecent.


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.  51

and  measures*  of  his  master  that  ought  to  be  kept  secret
Even  in  his  mind,  he  should  never  harbour  the  remotest
thought  of  his  master's  dethronement  and  death.

32.  He  should  shun  the  company  and  close  associatipn

of  women,  of  those  sinful  wretches  who  lustfully  gaze  at
them,  of  the  emissaries  of  a hostile  monarch,  of  those  who
had  been  turned  out  by  his  master  $ he  should  have  no
interest  to  serve  with  these  in  common,  /

33.  He  should  never  try  to  imitate  his  sovereign  lord  in
his  habits  and  habiliments*)*  $ a wise  servant  should  never
endeavour  to  emulate  his  royal  master,  even  if  he  might  be
gifted  with  royal  qualities.

34.  A servant,  understanding  signs  and  expersszons  of  the
face  and  capable  of  achieving  acts  accomplished  by  experts,
should  interpret  the  internal  sentiments,  sympathy  or  anti-
pathy (towards  himself),  of  his  master,  with  the  assistance  of
external  gestures,  appearances  and  signs.

35.  A master,  when  satisfied  with  his  servant,  rejoices
at  his  sight,  accepts  his  advices  gladly,  offers  him  a seat  near
his  own  and  enquires  after  his  health  and  welfare.^

36.  Then  the  master  does  not  fear  to  accompany  his
servant  to  sequestered  places  and  to  entrust  him  with  secret
commissions.  Then  he  attentively  listens  to  conversations
relating  to  his  servant  or  carried  on  by  the  latter.

. 37.  The  master  then  feels  proud  when  his  servant  is
praised  by  others,  and  congratulates  him  on  his  good  fortune.
The  master  remembers  him  (dependent)  in  the  course  of  any


* The  commentary  explains  the  'measures'  to  be  Avichdra  &c,
for  which  vide  supra,  See  I.  Sloka  4th  note.

f The  reading  in  the  text  is  ' Vesabhdsd 1 which  we  have  changed  in
to  ‘VesabhusaJ  The  original  reading  lit:  rendered  would  mean  'the  dress
and  manner  of  speaking.'

} In  this  and  in  the  following  Slokas,  the  author  goes  on  to
describe  the  behaviour,  a servant  is  to  expect,  in  the  hands  of  his  master,
first,  when  he  is  pleased,  and  next  when  he  is  displeased  with  him.


52


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


conversation*  and  begins,  out  of  delight,  to  expatiate  on  the
latter's  good  qualities.

38.  Then  the  master  tolerates  the  unpalatable  languagef
uttered  by  his  servant  and  puts  up  with  the  censure  passed
by  him.f  The  former  then  acts  up  to  the  latter’s  advices
and  highly  prizes  his  counsel.

39.  On  the  other  hand,  when  a master  is  dis-satisfled
with  his  servant,  he  treats  him  with  indifference,  even  if  the
latter  may  have  rendered  many  precious  services  to  him.  Acts
done  by  his  servant,  he  ascribes  to  the  agency  of  others.  §

40:  Then  the  master  incites  the  rivals  of  his  servant  and
neglects  him  when  he  is  afflicted  by  his  enemies.  When
there  is  an  act  to  be  done  by  his  servant,  the  master
encourages  the  latter’s  hopes,  but  when  it  is  accomplished,
he  never  fulfils  them.||

41.  Whatever  language,  (apparently)  sweet,  the  master
might  address  to  his  servant,  would  be  very  cruel  in  its
import;  the  former  smells  abuse  even  in  the  encomiums  the

latter  offers  to  him.

42.  The  master  shows  himself  to  be  out  of  temper  even
when  in  reality  he  is  not  so.f  When  he  is  pleased  with

* The  commentator  explains  ‘ when  others  speak  favourably  of  his
servant.’

f In  the  text  the  word  pathya  is  evidently  a misprint  for  Apathya.
Accepting  the  latter  reading  the  commentary  gives  this  meaning,  vis
■advocates  his  servant’s  views  even  if  they  be  harmful.’  But  we  do  not
see  any  reason  for  twisting  this  meaning  out  of  the  original  line,  speci-
ally as  in  the  next  line  the  author  lays  down  a similar  assertion.
Apathya  of  course  means  'unwholesome  ’;  but  if  we  are  to  accept  this
meaning,  we  are  sure  to  be  involved  in  a needless  tautology,  which  it  is
the  duty  of  every  annotator  to  avoid,

% Another  meaning  is  possible,  ‘overlooks  the  blame  that  he  (de-
pendent) may  lay  on  his  shoulders.’

1ST

n

from


Supply  ‘to  deprive  him  of  his  due  rewards.’

Lit:  translated  ‘acts  otherwise.’

So  that  , the  dependent  may  not  approach  and  solicit  any  favour

him.


KAMANDAKIYA  NlTISARAk


53'


his  servant,  he  does  not  grant  him  any  reward.* * * §  Then  the
master  sometimes  begins  to  speak  suddenlyf  and  moves
towards  his  servant^  and  casts  petrifying  glances  on  him*

43.  The  master  speaks  words  that  cut  his  servant  to  the
quick, § and  then  he  breaks  out  into  a derisive  laugh, [|
He  saddles  his  servant  with  false  accusations^  and  for  no
reason  whatever  deprives  the  latter  of  his  means  of  subsis-
tence.

44.  The  master  then  contradicts  the  words  which  have
been  very  rightly  remarked  by  his  servant;  sometimes,
suddenly  wearing  a disagreeable  look,  be  unseasonably  halts
in  the  very  midst  of  his  speech.**

45.  If  entreated  for  a favor  when  lying  on  bed,+f  the
master  simulates  sleep  ; and  even  if  awakened  by  the  servants,
solicitations, JJ  he  still  behaves  like  one  in  a dream.

46.  These  are  the  characteristics  of  a pleased  and  dis-
pleased master  respectively.  A servant  should  earn  his

* For  his  satisfaction  is  not  genuine.

f And  thus  cuts  his  servant  short.  The  commentary  substitutes
Bh avail  for  Vadati.

t So  that,  before  his  servant  can  clear  out  of  his  path,  he  may
have  a plea  for  insulting  him  saying  'why  do  you  obstruct  my  way,  take
your  detested  carcass  away/

§ The  annotator  here  very  rightly  suggests  Marma  for  Mantra,  but
gives  a different  meaning  to  the  former,  namely  'demerit  the  rendering
then  would  be  ‘ speaks  hinting  at  his  servant’s  demerits/

||  A different  reading  is  suggested  viss  " Gundn  na  Vahumanya-
or  'does  not  appreciate  his  merits’.  The  annotator  further  explains
himself  saying  'the  master  does  not  relish  the  jokes  cut  by  his  servant
and  in  lieu  of  laughing,  he  wears  a morose  face  over  them/

% Supply  ‘ to  hide  his  own  faults/
m With  a view  to  wound  the  feelings  of  his  servant.
i*f  The  commentator  thus  explains  ; 'even  if  the  servant,  for  secur-
ing a certain  favor,  attends  his  master  on  his  bed  and  there  shampoos
and  chafes  and  rubs  the  latter's  legs  and  arms,  still  the  latter  will  not  be
propitiated  and  to  baffle  his  man  he  will  imitate  sleep.

Xt  Balaina  means  ' by  virtue  of  ’ ' through  the  strength  of/


54


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


, living  from  a master  who  is  pleased  with  him,  and  forego
the  one  from  a displeased  lord.

47.  A servant  should  never  forsake  his  master  in
times  of  danger,  even  if  the  latter  be  very  worthless.  There
is  none  more  praise-worthy  than  that  dependent  who  stands
firm  by  his  master  during  an  emergency.*

48.  Firmness  and  such  other  qualities  of  servants  are
not  brought  into  relief  when  their  masters  enjoy  peace  and
tranquility.  But  when  danger  presents  itself,  the  names  of
these  very  dutiful  dependents  are  associated  with  the  greatest
glory.f

49.  The  act  of  doing  good  to  the  great  is  an  act  which
the  doer  may  feel  proud  of,  and  which  he  may  very  well
rejoice  at ; even  though  it  may  be  a very  insignificant  act,
it  will  in  proper  time  bear  splendid  blessings  for  him.

. 50.  The  commendable  duty  of  a man’s  friends,  relatives

and  dependents  is  to  dissuade  him  from  acts  contrary  to  the
Shostras  and  to  persuade  him  to  those  conforming  to  them.f

51.  Dependents  who  surround  a monarch  should  try  to
open  his  eyes  to  the  evils  of  inebriety,  incontinence  and
gambling,  by  means  of  apologues  and  moral  tales.§  But  if

* Apart  from  other  considerations,  the  advisability  of  this  principle,
even  from  interest  s point  of  view,  is  quite  evident.  For  surely  no  master
can  overlook  all  the  good  services  rendered  by  his  servant  during  an
emergency  ; and  for  the  sake  of  gratitude,  which  finds  a place  even  in
the  sternest  heart,  he  is  sure  to  reward,  if  not  adequately,  to  some  extent,
the  labours  of  his  faithful  dependent.

t What  the  author  means  is  this  :-In  times  of  peace,  courage
firmness  and  other  similar  qualities  of  a servant  have  no  scope  for  action  ;
but  when  a war  breaks  out  or  any  other  emergency  arises,  these  quali-
ties stand  in  good  stead  to  their  possessor  as  well  as  to  his  master  ; they
also  invest  the  former  with  renown  and  make  his  name  a proverb  among
nis  brother-servants*  « *

t The  author  now  winds  up  his  discourse  relating  to  the  duties  of
servants,  after  which  he  proposes  to  define  the  duties  of  masters.

§ Lit:  translated  would  be,  .'the  evils  of  drink,  of  close  association
with  women,  and  <4  dice.’


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.  - 5$

Jn  spite  of  their  endeavours,  the  king  becomes  addicted  to
any  of  these  vices,  (to  reclaim  him)  they  should  have  re-
course to  nalika * and  other  such  expedients,

52.  Those  foolish  retainers  who  neglect  a king  falling
into  evil  ways,  run  into  ruin  even  with  their  royal  master.f

53.  Out  of  regard  for  their  royal  master,  the  retainers
should  address  him  saying  ‘Victory  unto  thee/  ‘Command
thy  servant'  ‘ Long  live  the  emperor/  ‘ My  lord/  and  even
‘My  Divinity.'  Awaiting  their  sovereign's  commands,  the
dependents  should  dance  attendance  upon  his  pleasure.

54.  (Unhesitating)  compliance  with  the  desires  of  their
masters  is  the  foremost  duty  of  all  dependents.  Even
monstersf  become  graceful§  on  those  servants  of  theirs  who*
always  gratify  their  humours.

55.  What  is  difficult  of  being  attained  by  high-
souled  person  endued  with  intelligence,  even-mindedness,  and
energy  ?|j  In  this  earth,  what  man  is  ever  unfriendly  to
those  people  who  are  sweet-spoken  and  ever  ready  to  per*-
form  the  pleasures  of  others  ?

* Neither  Nddika  or  Ndlikd  (the  reading  of  the  commentary)  has
been  explained  by  any  lexicographer.  But  the  commentator  explains,
himself  by  saying  that  Ndlikd  &c  are  same  with  * Saman  8cc.'  The  latter
are  means  of  success  against  an  enemy.  There  are  four  of  them,  namely,,
(a)  Sdman  conciliation  or  negotiation,  (b)  Dana  gift  or  bribery  (c)  Bhedto
sowing  dissensions  (d)  Danda  punishments  or  open  attack.  Some
authorities  add  three  more, . namely,  ( e ) Mdyd  or  deceit  (f  ) XJpeksha
trick  or  neglect  (g ) Indvajdla  magic  and  conjuring.  We  do  not
know  whether  the  author  advices  the  dependants  to  employ  these
remedies  against  their  royal  master  going  astray.  It  may  be  that  thene
is  something  amiss  in  the  reading.

f ‘Share  his  defeat  with  him'  would  be  more  literal.

| Are  here  intended  to  tipify  the  cruelest  and  most  heartless  and
exacting  masters.

§ Lit : translated  would  be  1 are  won  over  by.*

||  Lest  people  take  exception,  to  what  he  had  said  in  the  last
portion  of  the  previous  Sloka,  saying  ‘ how  can  a man  possibly  know  the
desire  of  his  master/  the  author  puts  in  ‘ What  is  See/


56


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM.


56.  Even  the  mother  of  one  idle,  unambitious,  illiterate
and  worthless,  turns  her  face  away  from  him  when  she  has
to  give  him  something  by  way  of  assistance.*

57.  The  flourishing  prosperity  of  their  royal  master  is
throughly  participated  in,  by  those  retainers  who  are  brave
learned  and  studious  in  serving  him.

58.  The  injunction  of  the  elders  is  that  a retainer,  though
regarded  with  disfavour  by  his  royal  master,  should  still  offer
wholesome  advice  to  him.  He  that  carries  out  this  injunction
is  sure  to  ingratiate  himslf  with  his  sovereign.!

59-  Jin  this  earth,  like  the  rain-cloud  Parjanya\ , a king
should  be  the  source  of  subsistence  to  all  creatures ; when  he
is  not  so,  he  is  forsaken  by  his  people  just  as  a withered  tree  is
forsaken  by  the  birds. [|

' 60.  High  lineage,  virtuous  conduct  and  heroism,  these

are  not  taken  into  consideration  from  a servant’s  point  of
view.  People  become  attached  to  a liberal  and  charitable
person  in  spite  of  his  being  of  vile  character  and  low  extrac-
tion.^"


* Turn!nff  of  the  face  signifies  contempt  and  displeasure  ; what  the
author  means,  is,  ‘ to  an  idle  illiterate  and  worthless  person  even  his
mother  denies  the  hand  of  help.’

- f This  and  the  previous  Sloka  are  not  to  be  found  in  some  texts.

. * ,^S  have  said  before>  the  auth°r»  from  this  Sloka,  begins  to
describe  the  duties  of  a master.

§ Parjanya— is  the  chief  of  that  clan  of  clouds  that  by  pouring  their

contents  promote  the  cultivation  of  this  earth.  As  cultivation  greatly
depends  upon  showers  of  rain,  Parjanya  therefore  has  been  recog-

II  Another  reading  is  given  for  the  last  portion  viz  < Suskam

wfsee  ^’  °I  ‘ jU$t  ^ dried'Up  lakes  are  f°rsaken  by  water-fowls.’
We  see  no  reason  for  this  alteration.

■ H What  the  author  wants,  to  insinuate  is,  ‘ bravery  &c  are  thrown
away  m a monarch  who  is  niesardlv  and  .Jose-fisted


KAMaNDAICIYA  NITISARA,


*57


61.  Lakshmi*  is  the  highest  of  connectionsf  and  there  is
none  more  illustrious  than  her.  Men  resort  to  the  king  who
possesses  a solvent  exchequer  and  an  efficient  army.

62.  Only  the  prosperous  and  the  exalted  receive  homage
from  men  having  ends  to  serve.*  Like  to  his  enemies,
,what  man  ever  pays  his  homage  to  one  fallen.

63 ' Th,s  VVOr,d  of  Iiving  beings,  ever  struggling  to  obtain
a means  for  maintenance,  betakes  to  him  who  is  in  the  full
blaze  of  his  prosperity.*  Even  a calf  forsakes  its  dam,  when

her  lactation  becomes  scarce  and  she  cannot  give  it  adequate
sustenance.  ^

64.  After  the  lapse  of  short  periods, [|  a monarch  should
endow  h.s  servants  looking  up  to  him  for  support!  with
remunerations  proportionate  to  the  measure  of  their  services.

. *5*  A monarch  should  never  abolish  any  endowment
with  respect  to  any  person,  place  or  time ; for,  by  such  aboli-
tion of  endowments,  a king  brings  disgrace  upon  himself.

, 6‘.  A monarch  should  never  waste  his  riches  on  un-

deserving persons,  as  such  an  act  has  been  denounced  by  the
wise.  For,  what  else  comes  out  of  such  showering  of  wealth
on  the  unworthy,  but  the  exhaustion  of  the  exchequer.  '

and*betmyhmi~iS  ^ g°ddeSS  of  ProsPe'*y-  good  fortune

. * diverse  significations,  besides  what  we  have

given  ; for  instance  it  may  mean,  'retinue’  ‘ drift  or  tenor  ’ 'gramma-
tical order,’  &c.  So,  the  first  line  can  have  another  meaning,  if  we  take
Anvaya  to  mean  ' retinue.’  As  it  is,  we  shall  explain  clearly  the  mean-
ing we  have  accepted.  When  a man  is  blessed  with  prosperity,  and  good

r,7  6V!r  tWnkS  °f  the  famUy  he  comes  fr°m,but  takes  it  for
granted  that  he  is  high-born.  Such  is  the  magic  of  wealth  !

f n mean'ng  is  possible  viz->  ' seeking  employment,’

licence  ’ ^ C°mmentat0r  gives’  <who  is  conspicuous  for  his  muni-

. P These  wetake  to  be  the  periods  ofprobation.

„ 11  For  Anujivm&m'  the  commenator  gives  Anunartindm,  which
means  those  who  gratify  his  humour  or  perform  his  pleasures;’  this
makes  slight  difference.  '

I V 8


67.  A higb-souled  monarch  should  select*  those  men
to  be  the  recepients  of  his  favour,  about  whose  high-birth,
proficiency  in  the  three  divisions  of  learning,  knowledge  of
the  Shdsfras , bravery,  good  behaviour,  anticederits,  agef
and  circumstances,  he  had  thoroughly  enlightened  himself,

68.  A sovereign  should  never  contemn  high-born,  wise,
and  right-behaved  persons ; because,  for  the  sake  of  their
honor,  these  men  forsake  or  even  kill  him  that  slights  them.

69.  A monarch  should  promote  those  dependents  of  his,
who  are  of  mediocre  or  low  origin^  if  only  they  are  endued
with  sterling  qualities.  For,  attaining  greatness,  these  men,
(out  of  gratitude),  try  hard  to  enhance  the  prosperity  of  their
(beneficient)  royal  master.

70.  A monarch  should  never  promote  the  high-born
equally  with  the  low-born. § A judicious  monarch,  though
he  may  be  weak,  is  resorted  to  as  a refuge.

71.  In  this  blind  world||  of  ours,  the  wise  do  not  remain
there  where  a precious  gem  is  regarded  in  the  same  light
with  a piece  of  crystal.

72.  That  king  is  praise-worthy  and  lives  a long  life  and
is  attended  with  prosperity,  under  whose  fostering  care  his
pious  dependents  thrive  as  under  the  balmy  shade  of  the


* For  Adriaiia  (appreciate)  of  the  text  the  commentary  gives
S*uadriaitai  which  latter  we  have  translated.

t The  word  in  text  is  Vayas  which  may  mean  any  age  or  period
of  life.  But  the  annotator  takes  it  to  mean  youth,  which  we  do  not
accept ; he  would  have  been  more  consistent  had  he  suggested  Vayas  to
mean  old  age.

$ Another  interpretation  is  put  forth,  vk.,  ‘those  occupying  middle
and  lower  grades  in  the  royal  service.'  The  reader  is  free  to  judge  for
himself.  ■,

. § The  commentator  reads  Samvardhayait  for  Vardhayait  and
thus  Explains  himself— 'should  never  bring  together,  by  appointment/

II  Blind  or  indiscriminate  regarding  the  recognition  of  merit  and
demerit.  ,


KAMANDAKIYA  NlTlSARA.


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


59


Kalpa-tree* * * §  itself.  Prosperity  is  truly  fruitful  when  it  is-
enjoyed  by  the  pious. f

73.  What  availeth  the  ever-flourishing  prosperity  of  the
monarchs  on  whom  fortune  smiles,  if  it  is  not  enjoyed  by
their  friends  and  relatives  to  the  full  satisfaction  of  their  hearts.

74.  A monarch  should  appoint  his  kinsmen  of  tested
fidelity  to  look  after  all  the  different  sources  of  his  income. £
Through  their  assistance  he  should  collect  taxes  from  his
subjects,  like  the  lustrous  orb  drawing  moisture  up  through
its  rays.

75.  A monarch  should  employ  those  men  to  be  the
general  superintendents  of  all  his  business,  who  have  both
theoretical  and  practical  knowledge  of  all  works,  whose
honesty  has  been  put  to  the  test,  who  have  under  them
copyists, § composers  and  other  useful  hands,  and  who  are
greatly  energetic.

76.  Whoever  is  specially  proficient  in  anything  should
be  entrusted  to  do  that  thing  only,  just  as  a particular  sense
is  employed  to  perceive  its  special  objects  among  other
inumerable  sense-objects.

77.  A monarch  should  take  special  care  for  his  store*
housej  for  life  depends  solely  on  it.  He  should  not  extra-
vagantly spend  its  contents  and  should  personally  inspect  it.

* Vide  Supra  note  to  Sloka  I.

f For  Satyam  Vogafald  the  commentary  reads  Sa tsa m vogafald,
making  a slight  difference  in  import.

% The  original  Sloka,  if  taken  as  it  is,  can  give  a reasonable  mean-
ing, but  that  does  not  suit  the  context.  So  here  we  agree  with  the
commentator  and  accept  his  emendations.  For  Apaduarcsu  he  reads
Ayadvaresu  and  for  Tenya  he  reads  Taistu.  We  give  below  the
translation  of  the  original  Sloka.  *A  king  should  examine  the  fidelity
of  his  friends  at  times  of  emergency;  and  he  should  draw  money
from  them  as  imperceptibly  as  the  sun  draws  water  up  with  its  rays.’

§ For  Sujndnasammatdn  the  commentator  reads  Sujnana
samgatdn  ; the  translation,  we  have  given,  tallies  with  the  emendation.

I)  Storehouse  includes  both  treasury  and  granary.


KAMANDAKIYA  NITJSARA.


, . 7S—79-  Agriculture,  communications  to  facilitate  com-
mercial traffic,  entrenchment  of  strong-holds  for  soldiers  in
the  capital,*  construction  of  dams  and  bridges  across  rivers,
erection  of  enclosures  for  elephants, f working  of  mines,
and  quarries,  felling  and  selling  of  timber, % and  the  peopling
of  uninhabited  tracts — these  eight-fold  sources  of  revenue
a sovereign  should  ever  enhance  ; his  officers, § looking  up
to  him  for  livelihood,  should  also  do  so,  for  maintaining  them-
selves.

80.  A weak  monarch||  should  never  hamper  his  subjects
in  the  profession  which  they  might  choose,  but  should  en-
courage them  therein  ; and  specially  he  should  patronize  the
trading  class.

81.  Just  as  an  expert  farmer  intent  on  reaping  a rich
harvest  secures  his  field  of  crop  by  paling  it  with  thorny


* It  may  at  first  seem  curious  as  to  how  fortifications  for
soldiers  can  be  a probable  source  of  income.  But  we  should  bear  in
mind  that  when  merchants  and  traders  are  aware  that  a country  is  well-
protected,  they  bring  unhesitatingly  all  their  merchandise  to  sell  in  the
markets,  and  thus  unconsciously  add  an  impetus  to  the  commerce  of  the
land,  the  improvement  of  which  is  no  doubt  the  cardinal  source  of  income.

f 1 he  same  observations  we  have  made  regarding  forfications  for
soldiers  being  the  source  of  income,  apply  here  also.

} The  commentary  reads  Vandddnam  for  Dhandddnam  of  the
text;  the  latter  means  the  -collection  of  money but  it  is  superfluous
to  say  that  'collection  of  money'  is  a 'source  of  income,’  therefore
we  accept  the  emendation.  The  commentary  further  explains  the  reading
it  gives,  m the  way  in  which  we  have  translated  ; but  one  thing  suggests
itself  to  us  ; it  is  this  ; the  commentary  paraphrases  Vana  by  Saraddru
«.e.,  timber  ; but  if  the  words  of  this  latter  compound  be  inverted,  then  it
will  b * mrusdra  and  will  mean  sandal-wood,  in  which  the  Indian  forests
I i,  *b0"nd  and  whlch  15  very  precious.  The  reader  may  judge  for  himself.
jfe.4  : For  Kamnddhikai  Of  the  text  the  commentary  supplies  Karand-
which  is  more  sense-conveying.

nfa&.XktMcdt.*.  m.  „„r

r*. -«■*••**■■«!  «**»  ™>y  lotto  I,™  to  £

an  thus,  he  may  obstruct  the  progress  of  his  kingdom#


;hl,  Z.


■ imm


j ;


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA*  •


tit


plants,  and  protects  it  by  freely  using  the  cudgel  against
thieves  and  beasts  that  come  to  destroy  it,  so  should  a monarch
by  the  infliction  of  meet  chastisements  protect  his  own  king-
dom against  thieves,  depredators,  enemies  and  Foresters.  Thus
protected,  it  truly  becomes  an  object  of  his  enjoyment.*

82.  The  royal  officers,  the  thieves,  the  enemies  of  the
land,  the  king’s  favourites,  and  the  covetuousness  of  the
monarch  himself — 'these  are  the  five  sources  of  apprehension
to  the  subjects. f

83.  Removing  these  five-fold  source  of  fear,  a monarch,
with  a view  to  increase  his  Trwarga,  should  in  proper  season
ingather  tributes  (in  the  shape  of  money  and  crops)  from  his
subjects. t

84.  Just  as  cows  are  at  one  time  to  be  tended  and
* nourished  and  at  other  times  to  be  milked,  so  are  the  subjects*

to  be  helped  at  one  time  with  provisions  and  money  and  at
other  times  to  levied  taxes  upon.  A florist  both  tends  and
sprinkles  water  on  his  plants  and  culls  flowers  from  them.§

85.  A monarch  should  bleed  freely  his  subordinates
swelling  with  unlawful  wealth,  like  a surgeon  bleeding  a
swelling  abscess.  Thus  stripped  of  their  unlawful  gains,  they
stand  by  their  sovereign  like  men  standing  by  fire. ||


* For  the  sake  of  lucidity  we  have  been  a little  free  in  our  render-
ing of  the  last  portion  of  the  Sloka  which  is  very  terse  in  the  original,
f This  speaks  volumes  for  the  political  insight  of  the  author.


t This  Sloka  bristles  with  errors  and  obscurities,  and  but  for  the
commentary  it  would  have  been  impossible  for  us  to  render  it.  The
commentary  substitutes  (1)  Ityaitad  for  apyaitad , (2)  A poky  a for
Apohyam  (3)  Nripatifor  Nripate  and  (4)  falam  for  dhanam.  Wc  can  do
without  the  first  and  last  of  these  emendatious  but  the  rest  we  can  not
reject.

§ We  are  here  free  for  lucidity's  sake.

||  Ihe  last  portion  of  the  Sloka  has  been  thus  explained  by  the
annotator.  Just  as  people  though  afraid  of  keeping  in  the  vicinity  of
fire  can  not  help  handling  it  for  dressing  their  dishes,  so  these  men
though  afraid  of  living  near  the  king  can  not  help  doing  so  for  fear  of


62


•kamandakiya  nitisara.


86.  Those  foolish  and  wicked  wretches  who  injure  their-

sovereign  in  the  least,  are  burnt  like  insects  on  the  flame  of

lamps.

87..  A monarch  should  ever  endeavour  to  increase  hi«

treasures  superintended  over  by  trustworthy  persons  of  finan-
cial abilities.*  He  should  in  proper  time  spend  them  for
the  realisation  of  Trivarga .

88.  The  waning  condition  of  a monarch  who  drains  his
treasury  for  religious  purposes  is  commendable,  like  that  of
the  autumnal  moon  whose  digits  are  drank  off  by  th<fe
celestials.f

89.  The  one  essential  injunction  laid  down  in  Vrihas-
pati’s  work  on  Polity  is  t(  Be  suspicious  \ X The  measure
of  this  suspicion  should  be  such  as  not  to  hinder  in  any  way
the  work  of  administration.


being  punished  for  desertion.  The  commentary  reads  Asakta  for
Amukta

87.  For  the  first  line  of  the  text  the  commentary  reads  : —

Aptai  sam'vardhayait  Kosam}  sada  tajnairadhisttitam .

88.  The  last  portion  of  the  Sloka  is  based  on  the  tradition  which
explains  the  decrease  in  the  digits  of  the  moon  during  the  dark  half  of
a month,  by  saying  that  the  gods  suck  them  in.  We  give  below  the  trails
lafcion  of  the  Stokas  that  define  which  god  sucks  which  digit.

4 The  first  digit  is  drunk  by  the  god  of  Fire,  the  second  by  the  Sun,
the  third. by  the  Visvadevas,  the  fourth  by  the  sovereign  of  the  waters,
and  the  fifth  by  the  Vasathara.  Indra  drinks  the  sixth  digit,  the  celes-
tial sages  the  seventh,  and  the  Unborn  Divinity  sucks  the  eight:**
digit.  The  ninth  digit  of  the  moon  in  the  dark  half  of  a month  is  sucked
in  by  Yama  or  the  god  of  Death,  the  tenth  by  the  Wind  god  and  tine
eleventh  by  Uma ; the  Pitris  drink  the  twelfth  in  equal  portions  ; tine
thirteenth  is  sucked  by  Kuvera,  the  celestial  Treasurer,  the  fourteenth  fc*y
Pasupati  and  the  fifteenth  by  Prajapati.’

, ,89..  For  Shastrdrtkanischaya  (the  true  signification  of  his  work)  tine-
commentary  reads  Shastrasya  Nimaya  (the  cheese  of  this  teachings),
which  latter  we  accept.  What  Vrihaspati  enjoins  seems  to  be  tlnait
monarchs  should  never  implictly  trust  any  body  about  them.


KAMANDAKIYA  NlTISARA.


63


90.  A king  should  create  confidence  in  those  who  have
no  trust  in  him;  he  should  not  place  unusual  confidence  on
those  who  are  already  in  his  confidence.  He  on  whom  the
monarch  puts  his  faith  becomes  the  favorite  of  fortune.*

91.  Because  human  heart  is  always  susceptible  of  change
with  the  success  achieved  in  any  action,  therefore  a man
should  look  upon  such  success  as  indifferently  as  a Yogi  with
a sedate  understanding  does  regard  the  concerns  of  this  earth.

92.  The  glory  of  that  monarch  blazes  for  a long  time,
whose  dependents  are  fully  obedient  and  satisfied  ; to  whom
the  subjects  are  attached  for  his  melliflous  speech  and  ami*
able  character,  and  who  prudently  entrusts  his  nearest  and
dearest  kinsmen  with  the  task  of  governing  his  kingdom.

'Thus  ends  the  fifth  Section,  the  duties  of  master  and  ser-
vant, in  the  Nitisdra  of  Kdmandaka .


SECTION  VI.


!•  f^ERFECTLY  familiar  with  the  popular  customs  and  with
the  contents  of  the  Vedas,  and  assisted  by  skilfulf  depen
dents,  a monarch  should,  with  close  application,  direct  his
thoughts  to  the  administration  of  his  inner  and  Outer  states. £

* There  is  a supplement  to  this  Sloka  the  translation  of  which  we
subjoin—*  TheJGoddess  of  good  luck  ever  attends  him  and  follows  him  like
his  own  shadow, ;who  is  never  tired  of  striving,  who  is  aided  by  the  wise
and  who  is  endued  with  native  intelligence/

t The  commentary  explains  the  word  thus,  *who  are  like  the  king
himself,  acquainted  with  the  customs  and  the  contents  of  the  Vedas,*

I The  inner  and  outer  states'  of  a sovereign  at  first  would  respectively
seem  to  mean,  *his  dominions  which  have  been  bequeathed  to  him  by


64


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


2.  His  inner  state  is  said  to  be  his  own  body,  and  his
outer  state  is  the  territory  over  which  he  rules.  In  conse-
quence of  the  relation  of  mutual  support  obtaining  between
these,  they  are  considered  to  be  identical  with  each  other.

3.  The  growth  of  all  the  other  constituents  of.  regal
power  depends  upon  the  dominions  of  a sovereign  ; therefore
with  all  his  endeavours,  he  should  acquire  and  administrate
territories.

4.  A monarch,  who  desires  to  win  the  good-will  of  his


subjects*  should  carefully  cherish  his  body  ; the  highest
dutyf  of  a king  is  to  protectj  his  subjects  ; and  his  body  be-
comes (directly)  instrumental  in  fulfilling  this  duty.

5.  Monarchs  can  inflict  tortures  for  the  purposes  of
justice,  just  as  sages  can  immolate  animals  for  the  purposes  of
virtue  ; therefore  kings  are  not  tained  with  sin  when  they
put  impious  wretches  to  death. §

his  forefathers,  and  territorries  which  he  has  himself  acquired.  But  the
author  explains  himself  in  a different  way  in  the  next  Sloka.

* An  other  meaning  is  possible,  namely  'seeking  to  be  graceful  to
wards  his  subjects,  a king  should  preserve  his  own  body.’

f For  Dhdma  of  the  text,  the  commentator  substitutes  Dharma
which  reading  we  adopt.

t ^or  ‘ Samsaranam'  of  the  text  the  commentary  suggests  Sam-
rakshanam  which  tatter  yields  a good  signification.

§ For  the  sake  of  lucidity  we  have  been  a little  free  here  ; the
Strictly  literal  translation  of  the  passage  will  be,  ‘the  sovereigns  of  the
earth,  like  the  sages,  can  commit  lawful  harm.’  We  have  rendered  hinsd
into  harm ; the  Sanskrit  word  is  very  comprehensive  being  derived
from  the  root  hius  (to  injure  life) ; it  has  no  appropriate  equivalent  in
English,  far  it  includes  all  kinds  and  degrees  of  harm,  namely,  injuries,
torture,  persecution,  death,  slaughter  &c.  What  the  author  means
w this  ifmse  or  doing  harm  is  universally  considered  to  be  attended
with  sin  ; but  there  are  circumstances  when  even  the  doing  of  harm  *
can  be  justified,  and  is  not  attended  with  sin,  for  instance,  when  a
mg  punishes  a thief  or  a murderer,  or  when  a sage  sacrifices  an
animal.  lnese  acts  of  kinsa  are  said  to  be  done  for  the  furtherance

* * eTlc^s  °f  vutue  and  justice.  The  ethics  of  this  principle,  from  a

. worldly  point  of  view,  is  unimpeachbie.


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


65


6.  Anxious  for  preserving  justice,  and  increasing  Iris
wealth  by  lawful  means,  a ruler  of  earth  should  visit  those  of
his  subjects  with  chatisement,  who  would  venture  to  stand*  iu
his  way  (of  government).

7.  That  is  said  to  be  justice,  the  administration  of  which
is  upheld  by  venerable  people  proficient  in  the  codes  of  law,
and  that  injustice,  the  execution  of  which  is  denounced  by*
them.

8.  Thus  knowing  what  is  just  and  what  is  unjust,  and  abi-
ding by  the  decrees  of  the  pious,  a monarch  should  cherish
his  subjects  and  should  extirpate  his  adversaries.*

9.  Those  sinful  favorites  of  a monarch,  who  separately  or
in  a body  smite  against  the  regal  power,  are  regarded  as
culpable.

xo.  A monarch,  after  having  sufficiently  accusedt  the
wicked  persons  who  have  incurred  public  displeasure,  should
do  away  with  them  without  the  least  delay,  by  underhand

measures.J

Lit  : traslated  paripanthin  would  be  'standing  in  the  way*  hence
it  has  come  to  mean  an  antagonist.  The  commentator  gives  this  meaning,
viz,  those  who  persecute  the  subjects.  Pdnini  the  great  grammarian
says  that  the  use  of  this  word  is  only  admissible  in  the  Vedas,  but  as
a matter  fact  the  word  has  been  freely  introduced  in  their  compositions
by  Sanskrit  writers.  May  not  the  use  of  this  word  go  to  prove  the  anti-
quity of  this  treatise  ?

f The  reading  given  in  the  text  is  vicious,  for  it  involves  a needless
tautology.  Therefore  we  accept  the  reading  given  the  commentary  which
i $ ‘ Pradusya  cha  Prakdmam  hi*

t Such  as  assassination,  poisoning  &c.  What  the  author  advises  seems
to  be  this  : — A king,  when  he  finds  that  any  one  among  his  officers  has
incurred  public  displeasure,  should  try  to  do  away  with  him  ; but  he
should  not  use  open  violence  which  may  have  other  pernicious  results*
He  must  devise  some  means  to  saddle  the  offender  with  a serious
charge;  then  he  should  have  recourse  to  secret  measures  in  order  to
remove  the  offender  from  his  path.  In  the  next  two  Slokas  the
author  suggests  a means  by  which  a king  may  do  away  with  the
offender.


66


KA'MANDAKIYA  NIT! SARA.


11.  The  king  should  invite  the  offender  to  meet  him  in  a
-deserted  and  secret  chamber  ; when  the  person  would  enter
the  appointed  chamber,  several  menials  who  had  previously
been  instructed  and  gathered  together  by  the  king  * should
enter  after  him,  with  arms  hidden  about  them.

12.  Then  the  royal  door-keepers,  would  seem  to  suspect
these  trusty  servants  who  had  now  entered  the  room,  and
would  at  once  begin  to  search  their  persons.  There-after
those  armed  men  would  openly  declare  that  they  had  been
employed  (by  the  offender  to  slay  the  king).f

13.  Thus  imputing  criminality  to  the  offenders,  a king
should,  for  the  amelioration  of  his  subjects  and  for  pleasing
them,J  weed  out  the  thorns  of  his  government.

14.  As  a delicate  seed-shoot,  nourished  and  cared  for,  in
due  time,  yields  ample  harvest,  so  also  do  the  subjects  of  a
king.

15.  Inflicting  punishments  heavier  than  the  offences,  a
king  terrifies  his  subjects,  whilst  dealing  out  lighter  ones,  he
is  held  in  contempt  by  them.  Therefore  a monarch  should
impartially  mete  out  chastisements  proportionate  to  the
offences.

Thus  ends  the  sixth  Section , the  weeding  out  of  the  thorns
of  government , in  the  Nitisdra  of  Kamandaka*


* ¥qv  Asajnitds  of  the  text  the  commentator  gives  Asanjndta  Which
letter  reading  we  have  accepted.

+ As  We  have  said  in  the  introduction,  the  author  was  a disciple  of
the  celebrated  ChanaCkya  whose  whole  life  was  devoted  to  one  eternal
rbund  of  Stratagems  ; hence  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at,  that  the  author
should  retain  some  tortuosity  of  policy  which  he  had  inherited  from  his
preceptor,.

+ What  the  author  means  is  this  : — The  people,  when  well-cared  for
and  cherished  by  their  sovereign,  try  with  all  their  heart  to  bring  about
the  prosperity  of  the  latter.


3 * '


SECTION  VI  L


V

1.  X OR  his  o\vn  safety  and  for  the  safety  of  his  subjects,
a king  should  keep  his  sons  under  proper  control  $ for,  when
left  to  themselves,  these  latter  might  kill  him,  yielding  to  an
ardent  longing  for  the  enjoyment  of  wealth.

2.  Princes,  intoxicated  with  pride  and  having  none  to
restrain  them,  ajre  like  elephants  maddened  with  shedding*
ichor  and  having  none  to  use  the  goadf  on  them.J  Labour-


* Here  is  what  Professor  Wilson  says  regarding  the  fragrant  juice
exuding  from  the  temples  of  elephants: — “ It  is  rather  extraordinary
that  this  juice  which  exudes  from  the  temples  of  the  elephant,  especially
in  the  season  of  rut,  should  have  been  unnoticed  by  writers  on  Natural
History.  I have  not  found  any  mention  of  it  in  the  works  of  Buffou
nor  in  the  more  recent  publications  of  Shaw  ; neither  do  any  other  writer
an  this  subject  seems  to  have  observed  it.  The  author  of  the  ‘Wild
Sports,  of  the  East'  states  that  on  each  side  of  the  elephant's  temples
there  is  an  aperture  about  the  si*e  of  a pin's  head,  whence  an  ichor
exudes;  but  he  does  not  appear  to  have  been  aware  of  its  nature.”
In  the  lexicon  of  Amara  this  juice  is  termed  Mad  a and  Dunam,  and  the
elephant,  while  it  flows,  is  distinguished  by  the  names  * Pravinna  Garjjito
MattaJ  When  the  animal  is  out  of  rut  or  after  the  juice  has  ceased
to  exude  he  is  then  called  Udhantta  or  Ntrmada.  The  exudation
and  fragrance  of  this  fluid  is  frequently  alluded  to  in  Sanskrit  poetry.
The  scent  of  the  juice  is  commonly  compared  to  the  odor  of  the  sweetest
flowers  and  is  supposed  to  deceive  and  attract  bees.  c.  /.  Sloka
45  Sec  I.

f Ankusa  as  applied  to  elephants  means  the  iron -hook  used  by
elephant-drivers  to  keep  these  animals  under  control  when  they  become
unmanageable  ; these  hooks  are  technically  called  goads.

X The  adjectives,  contained  in  the  first:  part  of  the  Sloka,  are  appli-
cable both  to  princes  and  elephants,  each  of  them  having  two
meanings.


KAMANDAKIYA  N1TISARA.


6§


!ng  under  a strong  conceit  that  they  are  rightfully  entitled
to  the  royalty,* * * §  they  can  kill  their  royal  sire  or  their  brother. f

3.  A kingdom,  which,  princes  inflamed  with  arrogance
aspire  after.,  is  defended  with  great  difficulty,  like  preyf
scented  by  a tiger.

4.  When  held  under  control,  these  princes,  if  they  find
any  the  slightest  weakness  in  him  that  exercises  authority
over  them,  are  sure  to  slay  this  latter,  like  lion-cubs  slaying
their  keepers  at  any  the  slightest  inadvertence.

5.  A monarch  should,  through  the  agency  of  his  faithful
servants,  coach  his  sons  in  lessons  of  humility. § A
dynasty,  of  which  the  princes  are  immodest,  speedily  meets
with  its  falls.

6.  A son  of  his  loins,  graced  with  good  manners,  should
be  crowned  by  the  king  as  the  heir-apparent  to  the
throne  ; and  a prince,  transgressing  the  limits  of  decent  be-
haviour, should,  like  a vicious  elephant,  be  tethered  to  inferior
pleasures. II

7-  Princes  of  the  blood  do  not  deserve  disownmcnt,
even  when  they  are  hopelessly  corrupt ; for,  when  in  distress,
resorting  to  a monarch  hostile  to  their  royal  sire,  they  can
assassinate  the  latter.

8.  A king  should  cause  difficulties  to  a prince  inordi-


* The  words  in  the  text  is  Amvtaninas,  in  rendering  which
we  have  followed  the  explanation  embodied  in  the  notes.

t The  commentary  explains  ‘ that  brother  only  who  is  the  heir-appar-
ent to  the  throne  or  the  crown-prince  as  he  is  called.’

% Lit:  translated  the  word  in  the  text  would  be  ‘flesh.’

§ The  commentator  here  very  aptly  points  out  that  there  are  two
kinds  of  modesty,  one  that  is  born  with  the  man,  and  the  other  the
result  of  culture  ; both  these  kinds  are  indespensable  for  a prince.

||  'For  then' says  the  commentator, ‘ engrossed  in  low,  carnal  enjoy-
ments, he  will  have  no  leisure  to  hatch  any  conspiracy  against  his  roval
father.’


KAMANDARIYA  NITISARA*


69


lately  addicted  to  any  vyasana * by  encouraging  him  in  that
vyasana  ;f  he  should  so  torment  the  prince,  so  that  the
latter  might  be  speedily  transported  to  the  side  of  his  fore-
fathers.:}:

9.  A monarch^  should  always  be  very  careful  regarding
his  conveyances,  beds,  seats,  drinks,  eatables,  garments,  and
ornaments  and  in  every  thing  else. [|  He  should  shun  these,
even  if  the  slightest  suspicion  of  their  being  poisoned  is
present.

ro.  Having  bathed  in  waters  capable  of  counteracting
the  (baneful)  effects  of  poison, *|f  and  having  decorated  his
person  with  antidotary  gems,$  a king  should  take  thoroughly-

* The  lexicographer  Atnara  gives  the  following  significations  of
Vyasana  (1)  calamity  or  disaster,  (2)  fall  or  defeat  (3)  and  vicious
habits  engendered  by  lust  and  anger,  c.f.  * Vyasanam  mpadi  Vr  arise
dose  Kamajakopaje The  last-mentioned  meaning  is  applicable  here.
The  vices  of  lust  have  been  said  to  be  ten  and  the  vices  of  anger,  eight
in  number.  (For  a full  explanation  of  the  term  vide  Introduction.)

f Another  meaning  seems  possible,  which  is,  ' through  the  agency
of  his  boon-companions.’  The  commentator  is  silent  on  the  point.

X This  Sloka,  of  course,  suggests  the  measure,  which  is  to
resorted  to,  at  the  very  last,  when  all  others  have  failed,  for  the  correction
of  an  incorrigible  prince.  It  is  better,  in  the  opinion  of  the  author,  that  a
vicious  prince  should  die  than  live  to  add  to  the  anxieties  of  his  royal
father.

§ Having  finished  his  advices  regarding  the  training  up  of
princes,  the  author  now  begins  his  somewhat  tedious  discourse  about
the  nature  of  poisons  and  their  effects  on  various  objects  and  things,  as
also  about  the  expedients  which  are  calculated  to  guard  a monarch  from
being  administered  poison  to.

||  The  commentary  explains,  1 even  in  his  intercourse  with  respect-
able ladies.’

H At  the  time  when  the  author  wrote  it  was  believed,  that  water
guarded  and  preserved  with  the  flowers  and  stems  of  the  white  Puskara
( Nelumhium  speciosum)  could  nullify  the  effects  of  poison.  We
do  not  know  whether  mordern  Botany  ascribes  any  such  virtue  to  the
above-named  plant  or  not.

? This  gem  is  said  to  possess  antidotary  virtues  and  is  fabled  to


?o


KAMANDAKIYA  nitisara.


examined  food,  being  surrounded  by  physicians  weil-read  in
the  science  of  Toxicology.*

II.  Vringa-raja\  Suka  and  Sharik&X  these  birds
emit  distressful  notes,  being  greatly  terrified  at  the  sight  of
a venomous  serpent.§


have  been  vomitted  forth  by  Gadura,  the  great  winged  enemy  of  the
serpent  species,  on  whom  even  the  virulent  venom  of  the  snakes  can
produce  no  injurious  effect.  Even  in  these  days,  snake-charmers  are
found  to  apply  a kind  of  black  stone  on  that  part  of  their  body  where  the
deadly  reptile  they  dangle  may  happen  to  drive  its  fangs.  This  stone  is
popularly  known  as  the  visa  pathara,  or  the  poison-stone  ; it  is  believed
that  the  stone  has  power  to  extract  all  poison  that  the  system  may  absorb.
We  can  not  vouch  for  the  identity  of  the  visa  pathara  with  the  antido-
tary gem  of  the  author’s  days  nor  can  we  assert  that  really  the  stone
has  any  property  for  counteracting  the  effects  of  poison.  For  further
enlightening  our  readers  on  the  point,  we  quote  below  an  ancient  Sloka
and  subjoin  its  translation  :

* Rachito  Gadurodgqra  maniryasya  vibhusanam ,

‘ S thcivaram  jangmnam  tasya  msam  nhvisatdm  vrajetf

For  him,  who  has  adorned  his  person  with  the  gem  vomitted  forth  by
Gadura,  all  sorts  of  poisons,  either  mobile  or  immobile,  are  turned  into  no
poison  i.e.,  loose  their  baneful  power.  Probably  this  poison -stone  has
some  affinity  with  the  be^oar  (vide  infra  note  to  Sloka  14th).

* Jdnguld-rrmezins  poison*  the  word  is  very  rarely  used  ; jdnguld-
mt  is  a dealer  in  antidotes.  The  use  of  this  compound  goes  far  to
establish  the  antiquity  of  this  book,

f A sort  of  bird,  apparently  a variety  of  the  shrike  termed  malabav
— Lanius  Malabaricus.

$ Suka  (Parrot)  and  Sharikd  ( graculq  religi&oa)  are  represented  in
all  Hindu  tales  as  the  male  and  the  female,  both  gifted  with  human
speech  ; they  are  constantly  introduced,  the  one  exposing  the  defects  of
the  fair  sex  and  the  other  inveighing  against  the  faults  of  the  male  sex,
The  fancy  of  maintaining  these  pets  seems,  to  have  been  equally  pre-
valent in  the  East  and  the  West,  As  to  the  fact  of  their  crying  out
at  the  sight  of  a serpent,  to  which  the  author  alludes,  we  are  not  in  a

position  to  enlighten  our  readers.

§ The  text  of  this  part  of  the  Sloka  is  surely  vicious.  The  one
difficulty,  one  has  to  face  in  rendering  works  of  this  nature,  is  to  defect


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA,


7*


t2»  At  the  sight  of  poison,  the  eyes  of  the  chokara*

lose  their  natural  hue,  the  ckrounchaf  is  visibly  intoxi-
cated, and  the  kokilaX  becoming  mad,  pays  his  debt  of

nature. §

13.  Always  at  the  sight  of  poison,  a feeling  of  languor
takes  possession  of  creatures.  Examining,  through  one  of  these
methods,  his  eatables,  a king  should  put  them  into  his  month.

14.  Snakes  cannot  exist  where  the  droppings  of  the

peacock||  and  the  Prisata are  kept.  Therefore  a king

the  errors  that  have  crept  into  them  ; the  last  portion,  if  substituted  by
' envenomed  eatables  ’ will  convey  a meaning  appropriate  to  the  text.

* Chakora  (Perdix  rufa)  is  a crimson-eyed  bird  that  is  fabled  to
live  in  the  air  and  never  to  descend  on  earth.  It  is  said  that  the  bird
sustains  itself  on  moon-beams,  and  so  has  virtually  to  starve  during  the
greater  portion  of  the  dark-half  of  a month,  Some  authorities  identify
it  with  the  Greek  partridge.  But  the  chakora  resembles  the  bird  of
paradise  still  more  closely  which  latter  are  described  to  be  the  inhabi-
tants of  the  air,  only  living  on  the  dew  of  heaven  and  never  resting  on
earth.

X Croimcha — This  bird  belongs  to  the  genus  of  aquatic  fowls  with
cloven  feet,  ft  is  said  to  be  the  same  with  the  heron  or  the  curlew
(Avdea  jaculdtor)  ; the  Croimcha  is  well  known  among  Sanskrit  writers
for  its  connubial  affections.

% Kokila  (Cuculus  hodicMs)  :is  the  Indian  cuckoo.  As  in  the  West,  so
also  in  the  East,  the  rich  melody  of  the  note  of  this  bird  harbingers  the
arrival  o*f  the  Spring.

§ Regarding  the  changes,  which,  the  author  says,  all  these  ‘birds
undergo  at  the  sight  of'poisOn,  we  can  ndt  enlighten  our  readers.

||  The  idea  that  the  fzeces  of  peacocks  can  drive  away  snakes  has
probably  originated  out  of  the  belief  so  much  current  in  the  East,  that  the
peacocks  devout*  serpents.  Naturalists,  at  least  Ruffon,  do  not  make
mention  of  any  such  phenomenon.  Here  is  what  he  says  regarding  the
food  of  the  peacocks.  1 The  peacock  lives  on  corn,  but  its  favorite  food  is
barley.  However  it  does  not  reject  insects  and  tender  plants,  and  so
capricious  are  its  appetites  that  it  is  not  easily  restrained  from  the  most
unaccountable  depredations  on  the  dwelling,  the  firm,  or  the  garden/

5f  Prisata — is  the  porcine  deer ; regarding  the  virtues  of  the  dung
of  Prisata  we  can  not  enlighten  our  readers.  But  an  idea  suggests  itself
to  us,  which  is,  that  the  author  may  refer  to  the  bezoar  stone  produced  by


72


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


should  always  allow  peacocks  and  Prisatas  to  roam  at  liberty
inside  his  manson.*  ^

15.  In  order  to  examine  the  rice  offered  to  him  for  his
meal,  a king  should  at  first  throw  some  of  it  on  fire  ; then  he

should  throw  some  of  the  same  to  the  birds,  and  watch  the  in-
dications.


16.  f (If  the  rice  is  contaminated  with  poison)  then  the
fumes  and  flames  of  the  fire  will  assume  a blue  color,}  and
it  will  produce  crackling  sounds  ; the  birds  (that  have  eaten
the  envenomed  rice)  will  also  die  from  the  effects  of  poison.

17.  Rice  mixed  with  poison  is  characterised  by  the  ab-
sence  of  unctuousity,§  by  intoxicating  properties,  by  rapid

.a"d  tho  vapour  i«  emiJ  i,

light-blue  in  hue.


gur.lles,  antelopes,  wild  and  domestic  goal  and  shST'fwo  lInd!
stone  were  p„t,cul,rly  esteemed,  ,he  Bam  ,rim!r,I>.  , ( )

1,  ,1  ,r°”  P'r“'  S»™  have  asserted

that  the  true  occtd.,,,1  be.o.r  i,  the  production  „/  „„nke’  S.

Z°1  ZZ  P~d.Jiou.ly  in  vogue  in  Asia  „„d  J E„opc

p L Tl  “ ai.  cases  in  which  ou

present  physicians  prescribe  cordials  and  other  antidotes  Thin,
calculous  concretion  was  formerly  regarded  as  „ , r , S

to  poison.  Probably  the  beaoari  thf 1 IT  UnfaillnS  antldote

the  author  has  denominated  as  the  Ve  g T?  a Pr™«  Sloka

% n aen“mmated  as  the  gem  vomitted  forth  by  Gadura.

“•  *■ —

r-TS^r  4»i“nhr“

specify  all  the  reactions  That  will  be' prod  Ti^T*  P°iS°n'  **  Cann°t

The  i,„„  portion  “

the  highest  tempTaTure.'6^131113'  ^ n0t  boilecl  and  softened  even  in
yields  a rational  meaning^  ^ COmmentary  substitutes  Saityam  which


KAMrtNDAKIYA  N1TISARA.  73

1 8.  Curry  contaminated  with  poison  soon  becomes  jutce*
less  and  vapid  ; when  decocted  it  yields  blue  spume,  and  then
its  savoriness,  delicacy  and  sapidness  are  all  dostroyed.

19.  The  shine  of  liquid  substances  mixed  with  poison,  is
either  tightened  or  lightened;  their  surface  looks  bright*
and  fringed  with  foam.

20.  The  shine  of  envenomed  fiuidst  becomes  blue,  of
milk  and  its  preparations  becomes  coppery,  of  wine  and
other  intoxicating  drinks  and  of  water  resembles  the  hue  of
the  KoktlaX  ; their  dimples  become  blue  and  broken  and
sometimes  a little  elevated.

21.  All  hydrous  substances, § when  envenomed,  soon  be-
come  faded,  and  persons  well-read  in  toxicology  assert  that
though  not  decocted,  the  juice  of  these  substances  seems  to
be  extracted  ; their  color  turns  dark.

• 22.  All  anhydrous  substances||  when  mixed  with
pmson  becomes  withered,  and  tarnished  in  color.  All  acrid
things  (when  envenomed,)  become  delicate  and  all  delicate
things  become  acrid.  Who  can  say  that  poisoning  deslroys
a, small  number  of  animals  ? f

23.  When  smeared  with  poison,  blankets  and  carpets


* F°r  RSJirurdhd  the  text  the  commentary  gives  Rdjatdurdkam
which  reading  we  adopt.

t Says  the  commentator  ‘such  as,  the  juice  pressed  out  of  sugar-
cane &c.’  6

t Vide  supra  note  to  Sloka  12th.

§ The  word  in  the  text  is  Adra  ; the  commentary  explains  the  line  say-
ing, aw  fruits  and  paddy,  when  envenomed,  become  faded  in  color  near
them  foot-stalk  ; never  ripening,  they  appear  to  be  withered  and  their
color  turns  dark ; so  say  those  who  are  versed  in  toxicology  '

thA  r “mme"tary  himS  at  * diff£rent  signification  by  asserting
that  thmgs  mean  Katakas  (bracelets)  and  other  such  ornaments.

c J bt nl  - - no  appropriate  mean-

g can  be  made  out  of  ,t.  It  is  a marring  interpolation  which
has  been  fotstered  into  the  text  in  lieu  of  a line  in  the  original  M,S.

IO  1 '


74


KAMAMDAKIYA  NITISAR.A.


are  covered  over  with  black  round  spots,  and  stuffs  made  of
cotton*  down  and  fur,  become  totally  destroyed.t

24.  When  envenomed,  minerals  and  gems  are  tarnished
with  stains  ; and  their  spendour,  glossiness,  weight,  hue,  and
agreeableness  to  the  touch,  are  all  destroyed.

2J. — 26.  Pallidness  of  countenance,  faltering  speech, J
constant  yawning, § stumbling  steps,  |j  tremor  of  the  body^[
perspiration,**  anxiety  without  cause,  casting  of  watch
ful  glances  on  all  sides, ft  avoidance  of  necessary  occupa-
tionsJJ  and  of  their  abode — these  signs  a clever  man  should
mark,  as  they  betray  those  who  administer  poison  to  others.

27.  A king  should  take  his  medicines  and  cordials  after
having  made  his  medical  attendants  take  a portion  of  them.
He  should  take  his  drinks  and  potions  and  edibles  after  they
had  been  tasted  by  those  who  offer  them  to  himself.§§

2$.  The  female  attendants||(|  of  a monarch  should  place
before  him  only  those  articles  of  toilet  which  have  been
thoroughly  examined  and  then  (packed  and)  sealed  (by  the
ministers).


29.  Whatever  things  come  from  unknown  persons  and
sources  should  be  thoroughly  examined  (before  they  reach  the


* For  tanin  the  commentary  supplies  tarn  or  the  barks  of  trees,


which  we  cannot  accept.

f For  Dhansa  the  commentary  gives  Vransa  which  means  Ho  fall  off*
We  see  no  necessity  for  this  change*

X For  tagveda  of  the  text  the  commentary  gives  Vhgvanga  which
reading  we  have  accepted.

§ Like  one  recently  awakened  from  sleep.

|[  Supply  ‘even  in  level  tracks,1
If  Supply  Hn  the  absence  of  cold/

**  Even  when  a breeze  is  blowing.

‘'  tt  As-if  to  descry  whether  somebody  is  coming  to  punish  them.

Such  as,  cooking  of  articles  of  food.

§§v  For  lucidity's  sake  we  have  deviated  a little  from  the  text.

HI]'  For  P-aricharika  the  commentary  gives  Pancharaka  which  makes
no  material  difference.


KAMAftDAKtYA  NlTlSAfcA,


75;

king).  A monardi  should  always  be  carefully  guarded,,
against  his  friends  and  foes  alike,  by  his  body-guards.

30.  A king  should  ride  on  conveyances  and  vehicles  which
have  either  been  thoroughly  examined  by  himself  or  which
have  been  recommended  by  his  acquaintances.  He  should
never  pass  unknown* * * §  and  narrow  roads.

31.  A monarch  should  keep  near  him,  as  his  body-guards,
those  persons,  all  whose  secret  designs  are  known  to  him,J
whose  family  had  served  his  own  forefathers,  who  are
trustworthy  and  on  whom  endowments  have  been  settled.

32.  A king  should  shun  at  a distance  those  who  are  sin-
ful, those  who  are  crooked,  those  whose  faults  have- been-
detected§,  those  who  have  been  ostracised  and  those  who
come  from  the  enemy.

33  II  A king  should  not  go  on  board  a vessel  which  is
being  tossed  by  the  tempest,  the  crew  of  which  have  not
been  previously  tried,  which  is  fastened  to  any  other  vessel*!
and  which  is  frail  and  rolling.

34.  In  very  sultry  days,  accompanied  by  his  friends,  a
monarch  should  immerse  himself  into  waters,  which  he  him-
self has  examined,  which  are  pure  and  shorn  of  shoals  of
fishes  and  alligators,  and  on  the  banks  of  which,  his  own
soldiers  stand  in  a circle.


* Unknown  both  to  himself  and  to  his  ministers  and  followers.

f So  that  he  will  have  no  possibility  of  falling  into  an  ambush  laid
toy  his  foes.

J The  commentary  explains  the  word  othenvise,  viz.— ‘whose  evil
«Ieeds  have  been  seen  and  overlooked  by  the  king.1

§ The  commentary  explains,  ‘those  who  act  in  open  defiance  to  the
ordinances  of  the  ShastrasJ  -

| The  author  now  proceeds  to  give  directions  which  are  calculated
to  insure  the  safety  of  kings  during  voyages  and  sports  and  hunting
Iparties  and  meetings,  visits  &c.

Ormore  correctly  ‘which  is  being  towed  by  any  other  vessel.*


4


kamandakiya  nitisara.


. 35-  Avoiding  dense  forests*  a monarch  should  resort
to  parks,. the  inside  and  outside  of  which  have  been  thorough
ly  cleared  by  the  guards.  There  he  should  indulge  in
pleasant  pastimes  agreeably  to  his  age,  and  should  not
plunge  headlong  into  sensual  enjoyments. j"

36.  Desirous  of  hunting,  a light-handedj  monarch,  in
order  that  his  aim  might  not  fail,  should  enter,  being  followed
by  a well-disciplined  and  weil-accoutered§  army,  a wood  the
access  to  which  is  easy,  the  outskirts  of  which  have  been
reconnoitered  and  are  guarded  by  soldiers,  and  which  abound
m game  and  1S  (therefore)  a suitable  place  (to  hunt  in)

„J7'  ,E,e,“  "T"  a„  - .0  his


, . % , co  nis  own

mother  he  should  at  first  have  the  apartments  thoroughly

hC  !Tld  the"  Cnter  (thG  ^ents  **  mother)

being -followed  by  trustworthy  and  armed  guards.  He  should
never  linger  in  narrow  and  perilous  woods.||

SS.  When  a tempest  rages  blowing  dusts  and  gravels
w en  dense  clouds  swelling  with  rain  overspread  the  firma-
ment, when  the  sun-shine  is  exceedingly  severe, f and  when
he  darkness  is  impenetrable-at  these  times,  a king  should
never,  during  seasons  of  peace,  stir  out.  8 d

39-  At  the  time  of  going  out  and  coming  i«  a king
w,th  a to  display  the  elegance  of  Ms  proportions,  shonfd

that  obstruct  him  *00


* The  comn,entator  explains,  -rendered

creepers  and  underwoods.’  impassable  by  copses,

t According  to  the  commentator,  the  rendering  would  be  *

run  m pursuit  of  objects  of  sensual  enjoyment.’  ? H d "0t

V + 1 hat  is,  ‘swift  in  discharging  missiles.’

M.i!d"p£rr“'  ,l'  r“ds  S“mh‘  :■•«*  reading  «

f*  «• * — i,.  0 :„,brrE

T Supply  «««  heat  and  sultriness.’


Millie;


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISAjRA*


77


40.  A king  should  never  join  a fair  or  a festive  traiil
he  should  not  go  to  a place  where  there  is  a great  conflux
of  men.f  He  should  never  go  anywhere,  when  the  appoint*
ed  hour  for  such  going  is  past*

41.  (Daring  the  night)J  a king  should  roam  inside  his
own  seraglio,  being  attended  upon  by  hunch-backs,  dwarfs,
Kirdtas § and  eunuchs  clad  in  mail  and  graced  with  tur-
bans.

42.  Honest||  attendants  of  the  harem,  knowing  the
king’s  pleasure,  should,  with  becoming  humility,  entertain
him  with  pastimes  which  have  nothing  to  do  with  weapons,
fire  and  poison.^

43.  When  the  king  remains  inside  the  seraglio,  the
guards  of  the  women’s  apartments,  whose  honesty  has  been

* More  lit:  'Entertainments  given  by  native  theatrical  parties  at  a
fair  or  festive  Scene.’

t The  text  is  vicious  and  for  Jalasambadha  we  substitute
samb&dha.

$ It  was  a custom  with  oriental  monarchs  to  wander  at  night  inside
their  own  seraglios  and  sometimes  in  their  town,  in  order  to  inform
themselves  about  the  real  state  of  their  dominions  and  whether  the  sub-
jects are  all  in  peace  and  satisfied  with  themselves, or  they  bear  any  malice
towards  them.  The  author  now  goes  on  to  give  directions  which  will
protect  monarchs  from  being  surprised  during  such  rounds.

§ They  are  a degraded  mountain  tribe,  living  by  hunting,  fowling
&c.  At  first  it  would  seem  curious  that  a king  should  be  advised  to  take  the
help  of  the  hunch -backs  and  dwarfs,  incapable  as  they  are,  of  rendering
it,  at  the  time  of  a surprise.  But  we  should  remember  that  the  king
is’  also  guarded  by  a most  formidable  band  of  Mountaineers  and
eunuchs  who  naturally  form  the  most  faithful  and  vigilant  guards.  The
usefulness  of  the  dwarfs  and  the  hunch-backs  lies  in  their  very  great
intellectual  powers.  The  last  portion  of  our  remark  is  illustrated  by
Kuvjd  of  the  Ramayana,  the  maid  of  Kaikeyi,  The  custom  of  employ-
ing eunuchs  in  protecting  the  harems  was  prevalent  from  time  immemo-
rial in  Hindustan,  whence  perhaps  the  Mahomedans  transplanted  it  to
their  country.

||  Whose  honesty  has  been  tested  by  the  'test  of  continence/

As  these  naturally  breed  danger.


7&  KA MANdAi<IYA  NJTiSARA.

commended  by  the  virtuous  and  who  are  skilful  in  the  act
of  protection* * * §  should  protect  him,  with  weapons  ready
for  use.

44.  Men  of  the  venerable  age  of  eighty  and  women  of  the
age  of  fifty, f and  orderlies  belonging  to  the  harem  should  be
entrusted  to  look  after  the  purity  and  cleanliness  of  the
inner  apartments.

45.  Courtezans,  having  bathed  and  changed  their
garments  and  being  decked  with  pure  ornaments  and  gar-
lands of  flowers,  should  dance  attendance  upon  the  king.J

46.  An  attendant  of  the  inner  apartments  should  hold
no  intercourse  with  magicians,  Jatilas §,  and  Mundas\\
and  harlots.  (For,  being  employed  by  hostile  monarch*,
these  might  induce  the  attendant  to  do  injuries  to  his  royal
master).

47.  The  attendants  of  the  seraglio  should  be  allowed  to
go  out  and  come  in,  only  when  the  things  they  carry  would
be  known  to  the  guards  and  when,  if  questioned,  they  would
be  in  a position  to  furnish  sufficient  reasons  for  their  egress
and  ingress.^


* For  Ayuktakusala , the  commentary  gives  Ayudhakttsala .

t The  warmth  of  passions  having  subsided,  they  will  not  indulge  in
any  amorous  caprices  and  intrigues,

i The  readers  may  take  exception  to  this  Sloka ; but  admitted  or
not,  it  is  a fact,  that  with  royalty  this  vice  (of  maintaining  harlots  in
their  keeping)  is  more  or  less  prevalent.  Perfectly  aware  of  this  fact,
the  author  wisely  provides  courtezans  in  the  harem  rather  than  allow
kings  to  frequent  places  of  evil  repute  where  danger  is  possible  at  each
step.  , , ■ ;

§ Lit:  those  who  bear  matted  locks  on  their  head  ; here  the  Saimte$
ace  referred  to.

[1  Lit  ; those  who  bear  a hairless  head ; the  mendicants  and  vaish~
navites  are  referred  to.

If  The  last  line,  the  commentary  explains  thus  u to  say  that  they  arc
going  on  the  king's  errands.”  V .


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA,  ^

suffering  from"/  T ***  ^ °"e  °f  his  del>e“<l«nt8

I T S T a"y  dlsease*  when  his  principal  attend

inm'Lt i ‘^r11  any  viruient  maia,,y’ ,he  kin^  sh<»'|d  *«

” Z S taken  P^er  precautions  for  his  own  safety  - fftr

°ZTT  wiV!re  is  'votthy  °f  g d ■

mgZJ S™*„  a,U,ed  a“d  ***  — d h/pcrst  sviH,

,and  P‘r'um's  “d  decked  with  garlands  of

ir r ; thT,fic,ent  oTmMi5’  * -.id

herself  with  purl,  V""  8‘“  b»‘'“d  *"d  docked

».th  pure  garments  and  excellent  ornaments.t

to  see  „is  royal  spo  “sltoT"”'"’ < “ k'"'‘  !h°"ld  "—r  go
her.  He  sl.ould  not  place 'loo""'  °i  l i'“'.',bcrs  b'lOT8''>g  to

oven  d he  migk,  be  " “■

* I"  order  to  prevent  contagion  as  well  as  infection
T x he  commentator  remark*  . non*

k

depend  on  the  com^enury  which"-1  eXplai"'n8'  them  we  entirely
Bhaddrasena,  suspect  ^LZ!  ^ fT  T"  * ^

younger  brother  Virasena  prohibit J • n belWeen  h,s  sP°»se  and  his
This  exasperated  the  couple,  and  VirL TTh  ^ the  ’aUer  t0  his  clueen-
bybi!rrh°yal  mistress  assassinated  his  brothel  ^ Urged  and  assisted

wives,  for  having  "bequeathedhts  'kingdom  d'SpIeasure  of  °"e  of  his

wife.  The  displeased  lady  with  hf  r S0"  °f  ,is’  hy  anothtr

Piracy  to  assasinate  the  king  and  act  d,Sapp0,nted  s°n,  hatched  a cons*

King  and  actually  carried  it  into  action


Bo


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


grain  mixed  with  poison  to  eat,  assuring  him,  at  the  same
time,  that  they  were  mixed  with  honey.*

53.  King  Souvira’s  consort  slew  him  by  the  poisoned
jewel  of  her  waist-band.  King  Vairanta  was  slain  by  the
nupura f and  king  Jarusa  by  the  mirror  (which  both  were
poisoned)  of  their  queens.

54.  King  Viduratha  fell  by  the  dagger  of  his  spouse
which  she  kept  concealed  in  her  hair-knot.J  A king  should
avoid  all  serpentine  dealings  with  his  friends,  but  have  re-
course to  them  against  his  foes.

55.  A monarch,  whose  wives  are  properly  protected
(from  evil  influences)  by  his  well-wishing  dependents,  holds
in  his  possession  this  world  and  the  next  abounding  in  all
sorts  of  enjoyments.

56.  A king,  desirous  of  securing  virtue,  should,  in  due
order,  hold  sexual  intercourse  with  his  wives,  night  after
night,  having  increased  his  potency  by  the  ceremony  of
Vdjikarana.\

57.  At  the  end  of  the  day,  ascertaining  bis  routine  of
business  (for  the  next  day),  and  taking  leave  of  his
dependents,  and  having  all  necessary  acts  performed  by  maid-
servants and  women,  a king  should  moderately  indulge  in
sleep,  grasping  his  weapons  in  his  hands, ||  and  being  well-
guarded  by  his  trusty  relatives.


* The  commentary  is  silent  on  the  point  so  we  can  not  enlighten
our  readers.  *

+,A,  gird,'"  01  s™]\  be,ls«  » favourite  Hindu  ornament,  worn
round  the  ankles  and  the  wrists,  which  emits  a ringing  noise  as  the
wearer  moves.  Professor  Wilson  renders  it  into  'tinkling  zone.'

_ $ The  wordm  the  text  is  Veni, which  Professor  Wilson  explains  thus:

is  cdleald.’5  3 m H thE  ‘°ng  hair  °l  the  Hind«sta"<*  women
f The  act  of  stimulating  or  exciting  desire  by  aphrodisiacs,
reject  "“"Ogives  ashasira  which  reading  we


KAMANDARiyA  NiTiSAr'A.


8r

5&  ^heti  a ruler  of  men  in  perfect  accordance  to  the
u es  o ohty,  keeps  his  eyes  open  to  all  affairs  of  the  state,
then  do  his  subjects  enjoy  a peaceful  sleep  being  relieved
of  the  burden  of  anxiety.  But  when  their  sire-like*  sove-
re-gn  is  demented  (by  the  objects  of  plasure)  their  sleep  is

s in  U&cei  b",aPPlehe,nsi0nS  0f  the  wi<*ed+  (thieves,  assas-
. ’ & }<  When  the  k,ng  keeps  awake  all  his  myriad  sub-

jects  cannot  sleep.

59-  The  sages  of  the  past  have  said  these  to  be  the
c aracteristics  of  a perfect  monarch  and  monarchy.  In  this

^:rr?rstir a ruier  °f  men  steps  int° the  t«.

t the  foster-father  of  his  subjects.

and  his  self  \ Sectlon,  the  guarding  of  his  sons

f y a king,  m the  Nitisdra  of  Kdmandaka.


SECTION  VI II.


St


'-OO-


»rmy,  assisted  by  his^mLste'teir’ffi Jrs^f  “ '"'“"I
*ec«te  in  his  own  castle,  a central  monarch  should  j V'

imattenfon  to  the  consolidation  of hi,  ki„g()om  j
“■ Th;

we  have  adopted/  # ^ momentary  gives  AsaibhdyU  which  reading
t As  the  word  Mandala  occurs  too  often  in  thk  f-

at  the  very  outtset,  give  our  readers  an  idea  of  the  S > T Sh°U'd*

so  that  they  might  be,  hereinafter  able  meaning  of  this  word,

author  would  say.  Mandala  3,  , C°mprehend  clearly  what  the

this  meaning,  J *»

Ir  * *>n,ncation  is  ascribed  to  the  word  where


82


KAMANDAK1YA  JJITISAR/I*


2.  An  warlike  sovereign,  environed  by  a number  of  friend-
ly dependencies  and  subordinate  chiefs,  reaches  the  zenith  of
prosperity,*  while  encompassed  by  a circle  of  inimical  (royal)
neighbours,  he  wears  away  like  the  wheels  of  a chariot,

3.  Like  the  moon  with  all  her  digits  full,  a sovereign  with
the  constituents  of  his  government  perfect, f appears  agreeable
to  all  beings.  For  this  reason,  a sovereign,  desirous  of
victory, i should  keep  the  limbs  of  his  government  in  tact.

4.  Minister,  castle,  kingdom,  treasury  and  armv,— *
these  five  have  been  said,  by  persons  well-versed  in  Polity
to  be  the  principal  constituents  of  a central  sovereign.

5.  These  five  and  the  allied  sovereigns  and,  in  the
seventh  place,  the  central  monarch  himself, — these  together,
have  been  said  by  Vrihaspaii  to  compose  what  is
known  as  'government  with  seven  constituents/


it  is  used  in  political  diction.  According  to  out  author,  Mandala , in
politics,  signifies  'the  circle  of  a king's  near  and  distant  royal  neigh-
bours.’ The  number  of  foes  and  allies  included  inside  this  circle  varies
according  to  the  opinions  of  diverse  authorities  on  the  subject.  As
the  reader  will  see,  our  author  has  furnished  an  exhaustive  list  embody-
ing the  opinions  of  the  experts  on  this  point.  Generally  twelve  kings  from
a Mandala,  namely,  the  Vijigisu  or  the  central  sovereign  (lit  ; one  who
wants  to  consolidate  his  kingdom  by  obtaining  victory  over  his  royal
neighbours),  the  five  kings  whose  dominions  are  in  the  front,  and  the  four
kings  whose  dominions  are  in  the  rear  of  his  kingdom,  the  Madhyama  or
the  intermidiate  monarch  and  the  Udhsina  or  the  indifferent  king.  The
designations,  duties  and  natures  of  the  kings,  in  front  and  in  the  rear*
have  been  specified  by  the  author  himself,  and  so  we  need  not  anticipate
him.  When  the  description  of  the  Mandala  will  begin,  we  shall  furnish
our  readers  with  a diagram,  which  we  think,  will  help  them  in  under-
standing the  true  signification  of  the  word*

* The  word  m the  text  IJt : translated  would  be,  'appears  beautiful/

+ Though  the  word  in  the  text  is  Mandala,  yet  on  the  authority  of
the  commentary,  we  render  it  into  ‘government  with  its  constituents/
This  also  is  another  signification  of  the  word  in  politics.

J For  the  (rue  signification  of  word  vide  supra  note  to  Sloka  I.
also  Sloka  6th,


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


83


6.  A monarch,  who  is  equipped  with  these  constituents
(in  a thriving  slate),  and  is  endued  with  irrepressible  energy,* * * §
and  is  pains-taking  and  who,  ever  ardently,  longs  to  obtain
victory  over  others, — such  a monarch  is  worthy  of  the  desig-
nation of  Vijigisu .

7.  fNobility  of  extraction,  serving  of  the  elders  (in  age
and  in  knowledge),  energeticalness,  ambitiousness  in  aims,J
power  of  penetrating  into  the  hearts  of  others,  keeness  of
intelligence,  boldness, § truthfulness,

8.  Expeditiousness, |[  generosity,^  humility,^  self-re-
liance, conversance  with  the  propriety  of  place  and  time
(for  the  successful  execution  of  an  act),  resoluteness,**
patience  for  the  endurance  of  all  kinds  of  sufferingsff,

9.  Knowledge  of  all  thingsff  skilfulness,  physical
strengthj§§  secrecy  of  counsels, ||  ||  consistency,^  couragious-
ness,  appreciation  of  the  devotion  displayed  by  servants,,
gratefulness,

* The  reference  is  to  the  UUahasakti)  for  which  vide  note  to-  Sioka
l.  Sec.  I.

+ The  author  now  proceeds  to  enumerate  the  qualities  that  are
indispensable  for  the  Vijigisu.

+ The  commentary  explains,  ‘who  disdains  to-  give  away  things  of
very  small  value’  i.e.,  ‘who  is  very  liberal.’

§ The  commentary  explains  ‘absence  of  the  fear  of  his  councilors/

||  Lit ; translated  the  word  would  be  ‘absence  of  procrastination/

IT  Lit:  translated, ‘absence  of  meanness  (i.e.,  enviousness)/

$ Also  ‘absence  of  covetuousness/

**  The  commentary  explains  ‘determination  of  not  to  abondon  one
seeking  protection/

ft  The  commentary  explains,  -capability  for  suffering  the  pangs  of
hunger  and  thirst/

it  The  commentary  says  ‘proficiency  in  all  the  arts/,

f§  For  Sada  of  the  text  the  commentary  gives  Urjas  which  reading
we  have  accepted.

1111  ‘Owing  to  his  countenance  and  designs  being  inscrutable*  goes  on
the  commentator.

1F1F  The  commentator  explains ‘avoidance  of  sophistical  reasoning/


84  KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.

TO.  Affection  for  those  seeking  protection,  forgiveness*
avoidance  of  fickleness,  knowledge  of  his  own  duty* * §  and
of  the  ShastraSy + sagacity,  far-sightedness,

ix.  Indefatigability,  righteousness,  shunning  of  crooked
councilors,  and  a natural  swell  of  soul,!  these  are  said  to
be  the  necessary  qualifications  of  a Vijigi$u\.

12.  Though  devoid  of  all  these  qualities,  yet  a king  is
worthy  of  the  name  Rajan) ||  if  only  he  possesses  Regal  pro-
wess.T  A king,  endued  with  Regal  prowess,  inspires  terror
into  the  hearts  of  his  enemies,  like  a lion  striking  terror  into
the  hearts  of  the  inferior  beasts.$

13.  By  the  substantiation  of  his  prowess,**  a king  at-
tains to  the  highest  pitch  of  prosperity  ; for  this  reason,
always  putting  forth  his  endeavours, ft  he  should  establish
his  prowess.

14.  The  mark,  that  distinguishes  the  enemy  of  a monarch
(from  his  friends),  is  the  pursuance  of  one  and  the  same
object  by  the  former  in  common  with  the  monarch  him-


* The  commentator  specifies  the  duty  saying  it  to  be  'the  act  of
cherishing  his  subjects.'

f Shdstras  here  mean  Military  sciences.

X The  word  may  yield  another  meaning  namely  ‘geneality  of
temperament.’

§ Instead  of  every  time  repeating  a long-winded  phrase  we  propose
to  use  the  original  word,  which  we  have  explained  in  a previous  note.

||  Lit.  'one  who  cherishes  his  subjects.’  c.f.  JRdjd prakriti  ranjanht .

% Vide  note  to  Sloka  I.  Section  I.

? The  last  line  of  the  Sloka  is  hopelessly  vicious,  which,  without  the
help  of  the  commentary,  cannot  be  at  all  understood,  The  commentary
reads  " Prathpayuktdt  trasy anti  pare  singhht  mrigd  iba.f>

> **  The  commentary,  not  accepting  the  ordinary  meaning  of  the  word,
suggests, ‘the  fame  that  a monarch  earns  by  subjugating  all  monarchs
hostile  to  him.’

ft  The  commentary  adds,  'by  way  of  making  war- like  preparations,
and  Paging  wars.’


kamandakiya  nitisara.


s5

self*  And  that  enemy  is  to  be  regarded  formidable  who
is  endued  with  the  characteristic  qualities  of  the  Vijighu .

15.  A covetuous,t  and  inexorable^,  and  inactive, §■
and  untruthful, ||  and  inadvertent  and  cowardly  and  delinquent,
and  injudicious  monarch,  who  dispises  skilful  warriors,  is
said  to  constitute  an  enemy  who  may  be  eradicated  with
ease.

16.  *[[The  Ari}  the  Mitra?n)  the  Arimitram , the  Mitra -


* What  the  author  means  seems  to  be  this.  ‘A  monarch  should
regard  those  among  his  royal  contemporaries  to  be  his  enemies,  wh<*
endeavour  to  appropriate  to  themselves  the  dominions  and  wealth,  on
which  he  himself  has  set  his  eyes.  The  pursuance  of  one  and  the
same  purpose  (regarding  a certain  territory  See.)  by  two  rival  sovereigns,
goes  to  engender  ill-feeling  and  enmity  between  them.  The  truth  of
this  proposition  needs  no  lllucidation  ,*  c.  f,  ‘ Two  of  a trade  can
never  agree.’  The  reading  in  this  part  of  the  Sloka  is  vicious  and  Avi-
lakshanam  should  be  Arilakshanam .

f The  commentator  adds,  1 hence  illiberal ; and  illiberality  estranges
his  subjects  from  him,  which  again  renders  him  materially  weak.1

t Says  the  commentator,  f who  by  his  sternness  inspires  his  people
with  terror.’

§ The ‘king  being  inactive,  the  subjects  also,  becoming  lethargic  and
idle,  render  themselves  susceptible  of  an  easy  victory.

||  The  subjects  also  catch  the  same  habit  from  their  sovereign,
which  materially  diminishes  their  moral  courage.

Now  the  author  proceeds  to  describe  what  is  called  a Mandala ,
and  he  quotes  the  different  opinions  of  the  different  authorities  regard-
ing the  definition  of  the  term.  The  diagram  interleaved  represents  a
Mandala  containing  the  three  hundred  and  twenty-four  monarchies  (each
marked  by  a circle),  the  highest  number,  as  the  reader  will  see,  that  is
included  in  a Mandala . Of  these,  the  circles  marked,  1.  2.  3.  4.  5.  6.  7.
8.  9,  10.  n.  12.  are  of  importance, explanations  whereof  are  subjoined.

The  circle  marked  1.  represents  the  dominions  of  the  Vijigisu  or  the
central  sovereign,  who  wants  to  consolidate  his  empire  by  conquering
and  befriending  the  other  sovereigns  whose  domains  are  represented
by  circles  marked  2.  3.  4.  5.  6.  7.  8.  9.  10.  xi.  and  12.  The  circles
marked  2.  3.  4.  5.  and  6.  represent  the  monarchies  which  lie  in  front
of  the  domain  of  the  central  sovereign.


86


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


mitram, and  the  A rimitr amiir am , these  are  the  five  sovereigns

The  circle  marked  2.  represents  the  dominions  of  the  Ari  or  the
enemy  (of  the  Vijigisu ).  The  contiguity  of  these  two  dominions  often
gives  rise  to  disputes  regarding  the  boundaries  thereof,  and  so  ferment
an  implacable  enmity  between  the  sovereigns  ruling  over  them.  It  is
also  generally  observed  that  the  adjacency  of  two  monarchies  naturally
causes  disputes  between  their  sovereigns.

The  circle  marked  3..  represents  the  dominions  of  the  Mitram  or  the
ally  (of  the  Vijigisu ).  This  alliance  results  in  this  way.  The  dominions
■of  the  sovereign  of  the  3rd  circle  are  adjacent  to  those  of  the  sovereign  of
‘the  2nd  circle,  and  consequently,  as  before,  they  become  hostile  to  each
Other.  The  sovereign  of  the  1st  circle  or  the  Vijigisu , taking  advantage
of  this  hostility,  befriends  the  sovei  eign  of  the  circle  marked  3.

The  circle  marked  4.  represents  the  dominions  of  the  Arimitram  or
the  enemy’s  ally.  His  kingdom  being  contiguous  to  that  of  the  Vijigisu' s
ally,  he  turns  hostile  to  the  latter,  and  consequently  becomes  the  opponent
of  the  Vijigisu } and  the  ally  of  his  (Vijigisu1  s’)  enemy.

The  circle  marked  5.  represents  the  dominions  of  the  Mitramitram
or  the  ally  of  the  Vijigisu’s  ally,  whose  attitude,  as  may  easily  be
supposed,  is  friendly  to  the  Vijigisu  and  his  allies,  and  hostile  to  the
Vijigisu's  enemies  and  their  allies.  Here  also  the  rule  of  contiguity
determines  the  attitude.

The.  circle  marked  6.  represents  the  kingdom  of  the  Arimitramitram
■or  the  ally  of  the  enemy’s  ally.  His  dominions  being  contiguous  to
those  of  the  ally  of  the  Vijigisu’ s ally,  he  naturally  stands  in  unfriendly
relations  with  the  Vijigisu  and  his  allies.  This  hostility  with  the  Vijigisu
prompts  him  to  side  with  the  former’s  enemies.

The  circle  marked  7.  represents  the  dominions  of  the  Madhyama  or
the  intermidiate  king,  whose  dominions  are  contiguous  both  to  thedomi-
«ions  of  the  Vijigisu  and  his  enemy.  So  this  king  may  become  either  an
silly  or  an  enemy  to  either  of  them.  His  power  and  his  attitude  have
been  described  by  the  author  himself  and  we  need  not  anticipate  him

. The  circIes  marked  8‘  9-  I0-  and  ii-  signify  the  monarchies  situated
in  the  Tear  of  the  Vijigisu .

The  circle  marked  8.  represents  the  domain  of  the  PArshnigrhha  or
one  who  is  situated  in  the  rear.  The  attitude  of  this  monarch  has  not
been  defined,  which  may  both  be  hostile  and  friendly;  but  more  often
it  is -hostile.

The  circle  marked  9.  represents  the  dominions  of  the  ' Akranda  or
the  kmg  whose  kingdom  lies,  in  the  rear,  next  but  one,  to  that  of  the


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA,  87


whose  domains  lie  consecutively  in  front  of  the  dominions
of  the  Vijigisu ,

17*  Tho  king  just  in  the  rear  of  the  Vijigisu  is  designated
Parshnigraha  ; after  him  comes  the  Akranda  ; then  comes
the  AsdraS  of  these  two.  This  is  the  Mandala  of  ten  kings  in
respect  of  the  Vijigisu .*

18.  The  sovereign,  whose  domain  lies  interveningf  the
dominions  of  the  An  and  the  Vijigisu , is  denominated

Vijigisu,  Akranda  has  been  defined  to  be  a king  who  prevents  an  ally
from  aiding  another.  If  the  Pdrshnigrdha  be  inimical  to  the  Vijigisu ,
Akranda  prevents  the  ally  of  the  Pdrshnigrdha  to  join  him,  and  this
he  can  do  easily,  as  his  kingdom  lies  intervening  those  of  the
Parshnigraha  and  his  ally.  Akranda  is  therefore  naturally  friendly  to
the  Vijigisu,

The  circles  marked  10.  and  ti.  represent  the  domains  of  the  two
Ashrhs,  or  the  two  monarchs  who  respectively  support  the  Pdrshnigrhha
and  the  Akranda  ; they  are  respectively  called  Pdrshnigrdhhshra  and
Akrandasara,  Their  attitude  may  be  easily  divined.

The  circle  marked  12.  represents  the  dominions  of  the  Uddsina  or
the  neutral  sovereign ; his  dominions  lie  beyond  those  of  the  enemies
and  allies  of  the  Vijigisu,  The  power, nature  and  attitude  of  this  king  have
been  described  by  the  author  himself  hereinafter,  and  so  we  refrain  from
entering  into  details  regarding  him.

These  twelve  kings  ordinarily  constitute  what  is  called  a Mandala.
Of  the  rest  of  the  three  hundred  and  twenty-four  monarchies,  no  special
explanation  is  necessary,  as  their  respective  relation  may  be  considered  in
the  same  light  as  before.  The  description  of  a Mandala  has  also  been  given
y Kullukabhatta  and  MallinUha  in  their  respective  commentaries  on
anu and  Sisuphlab adha  ; Manu’s  description  of  a Mandala  completely
tallies  with  what  is  given  by  our  author.  We  need  not  quote  Mann  here,
as  the  number  of  Sections  and  Slokas  has  been  given  by  the  commen-
tator m course  of  his  explanation  of  every  Sloka.  The  reader  may
compare  Manu  at  his  leisure.


The  commentator  in  annotating  this  Sioka  says  that  the  Prkshni-

gvaha  s- attitude  towards  the  central  sovereign  is  hostile, in  spite  of  which,
he  is  called  a Prashnigrhha  or  a supporting  sovereign.

t Strictly  speaking,  the  dominions  of  the  Madhyama  do  not  inter-

diagrlm*  °‘  ^ ^ ***  ^ but  ver^  them.  Refer  to  our


88


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


the  Madhyama . His  attitude  becomes  friendly*  when  the  Avl
and  the  Vijigisu  are  united  together,  and  it  is  hostile  to
them  both  when  they  are  disunited  from  each  other,  f

19*  Beyond  the  Mandala  composed  of  these  sovereigns,  J
lies  the  domain  of  the  Udctsina,  who  is  by  farthermost
powerful  of  them  all.  He  is  capable  of  showing  grace  to
them  all,  when  they  are  united,  and  of  crushing  them  when
they  are  separated. §

20.  These  four,  namely,  the  Vijigisu , the  Art,  the  Madhy-
ama  and  the  Udasina,  have  been  said  to  be  the  principal
components  of  a Mandala. ||  This  is  the  Mandala  of  four

sovereigns  described  by  Maya  conversant  with  the  Political
science.^

2r.  According  to  Pulomaf  and  Indra,  the  Vijigisu  the
ArZ,  the  Mitram,  the  Pdrshnigraha,  the  Madhyama  and  the
Udaswa,  constitute  what  is  known  as  a Mandala  of  six
monarchs. .


This  friendliness  he  shows  by  helping  them  with  men  and  money,
f In  rendering  the  last  portion  of  the  Sloka,  we  have  been  a Httle

erae  W°U,d  b6’  ‘th!$  Madhy mnta  is  caPab,e  of  sh°wing

lf  . \Ari  3"d  theu  VlASisu  when  they  are  united, and  he  is  capable
of  slaying  them  when  they  are  disunited  P

vM&B  th""tis which  “sht  “ .*  *«*»

„J„ £"  «»,  yieid  the  propet

*■*■**»  h • •«  ma  nner,
*****

p r ' . * s counsel  and  Tantramzzns  here  the, science  of

Ws' in  „„,T'*re|,0ftl't  °r,“chersof  the  peop'o-

:»oTr:r*,ta M,ya  b““  •*"

vL'IoZkZ’vMT0'''  «'  for  Into,

note  to  Sec,  II.  Sloka  3s,  also  Sec.  IV.  Sloka  ai.


kamandakiya  nitisara.


89


r


22.  Th & Udhsina,  the  Madhyama , and  the  Mandala  of  the
WijigisU taken  together,  constitute  the  Mandate  of  twelve
kings,  mentioned  by  Usanas.t

23.  The  above-mentioned  twelve  kings,  together  with  an
ally  and  an  erjemy  of  eachjJ  constitute  the  Mandate  of
thirty-six  kings§  to  which  Maya  again  has  referred.

24.  The  djsciples  of  Manujj  (men)  enumerate  five
Prakritisfi  namely,  minister  &c,,  for  each  of  these  twelve
kings  of  a Mandate *

25.  These  twelve  cardinal  sovereigns,  together  with  their
respective  five  Prakritis } constitute  the  Prakriti  Mandate
consisting  of  seventy-two  .elements*!

36.  A common  enemy  of  the  Vifigisu  and  the  Art)  and  a
common  ally  of  them  both,  these  two,  each  of  them  again

* Vide  the  last  portion  of  Sloka  17th  supra .

f Another  name  for  the  preceptor  of  the  Demons.  Vide  note,  Sloka
8th  Section  I.

J Twelve  kings  of  the  Mandala  and  their  twelve  allies  and  their
twelve  enemies  raise  the  number  to  thirty-six.

§ The  text  before  us  has  here  sadmngsatkam  or  twenty-six,  yhfcb,  no
doubt>  is  a mistake  of  priming.

||  Vide  note  to  Sloka  3rd  Section  II.

Hitherto  we  have  rendered  prakritis  into  'the  constituents  of  a
government/  Here,  according  to  the  commentator,  the  same  meaning
applies,  B*it  to  enlighten  our  readers  on  the  point,  we  must  remark
that  prakriti  also  has  another  meaning  in  politics,  which  is  'the  circle
of  various  sovereigns  near  a king,  to  be  taken  into  consideration  in  case
of  a war/  The  number  of  the  prakritis  is,  as  the  reader  is  aware,
Sevan  in  all ; the  fiye,  here  referred  to,  are,  according  to  the  commentator,
minister,  castle,  kingdom,  treasury,  and  army.  The  reader  should
mark  that  the  allies  and  the  king  are  left  out  in  this  enumeration.
Each  of  these  seven  prakritis  is  to  be  considered  equal  to  a sovereign*
Prakritis  rendered  into  a single  phrase  would  be  'the  stamina  pf  a state**
■$  Twelve  kings  of  the  Mandalat  together  with  the  five  prakritis  of
leach,  raise  the  number  to  seventy-two.  The  last  part  of  the  text  contains
a misprint  j for  sap tatisch adik h read  dywadhikdsaptati*  This  prahriti
mandala  has  also  been  spoken  of  by  Manu.

12


go


KAMAfJDAtflYA  nitisara.


with  an  ally  and  an  enemy  of  his  own,  together  with  the
twelve  cardinal  kings,  constitute  the  Mandala  of  eighteen
nionarchs  mentioned  by  Guru.* * * §'

27.  The  six  PrakritiSy  namely,  minister,  kingdom,  castle
treasury,  army  and  ally,  of  each  of  these  eighteen  monarch’s,
taken  together,  form  the  Mandala  of  hundred  and  eight
elements,  which  has  been  recognised  by  the  wise.

28.  These  eighteen  monarchs,  each  with  an  ally  and  an
enemy,  constitute  the  Mdndala  of  fifty-four  kings,  spoken  of
by  Vishalaksba.f

29.  The  six  Prakrit  is,  namely,  minister,  kingdom,
castle,  treasury,  army  and  ally,  of  each  of  these  fifty-four
kings,  taken  together,  again  form  the  Mandala%  of  three
hundred  and  twenty-»four  elements.

30.  The  seven  constituents  of  the  government  of  the
Vijigisuy  together  with  the  seven  constituents  of  the  Art,
constitute  what  is  known  as  the  Mandala  of  fourteen  com-
ponents.

3i*  The  Vijigisuj  the  An,  and  the  Madhyama  form  the
Mandala  of  three  kings.  These  three§  monarchs,  with  an  ally


* Another  name  for  Vrihaspati,  for  which  vide  note  to  Sloka  8th
Sec.  I.

f Literally  means  'of  expanded  eyes/  but  it  is  an  especial  epithet  of
Siva,  one  of  the  Hindu  Trinity,  whose  function  is  to  annihilate  the  world
at  the  end  of  a Yuga . By  a reference  to  the  Introduction,  the  reader
will  see,  that  Siva  was  one  among  the  many  who  abridged  the  voluminous
work  of  Brahma  on  Polity.  In  explaining  this  Sloka,  the  commentary
does  not  follow  the  'text/  at  least  the  one  before  us.  It  says  that  'the
' Mandala  of  fifty-four  elements  is  composed  of  the  three  prakritis,  vizi,
minister,  kingdom  and  castle,  of  each  of  these  eighteen  sovereigns  taken
together/

3*  Over  and  above  the  meaning  of  the  Mandala  elaborately  explained
by  us,  it  seems,  that  it  may  sometimes  mean  'the  conglomeration  of
constituents/

§ For  Atais  read  AtL


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.  91

of  each  of  them,  together  constitute  what  others  call  the
Mandala  of  six  kings.

32.  The  six  Prakritis , namely,  minister  &c.,  of  each
these  six  kings,  taken  together,  compose  what  persons  conver-
sant with  the  formation  of  Mandalas  designate  as  the  Man-
dala of  thirty -six  parts;

33.  The  seven  constituents  of  the  Vijigisu , those  of  the
Art)  and  those  of  the  Madhyama , taken  together,  constitute
what  other  politicians  call  .the  Mandala,  of  twenty-one
elements.

34.  The  four  cardinal  monarchs  of  a Mandala  (viz.,
the  Vijigisu , the  Arii  the  Madhyama , and  the  Uddsina))  each
with  an  ally  of  his  own,  become  eight  in  number.  These  eight
kings  with  their  respective  Prakritis , minister  &c.,  form  the
Mandala , the  number  of  whose  components  is  as  many  as
that  of  the  syllables  contained  in  a stanza  composed  in  the
Jagati*  metre.

35.  Those  monarchs  who  are  in  the  front  of  the  Vijigisu
and  those  who  are  in  his  rear,  together  with  himself,  constitute
the  Mandala  of  ten  monarchs,  spoken  of  by  those  who  are
acquainted  with  the  nature  of  Mandalas .

36.  The  six  Prakritis , namely,  minister,  kingdom,  castle,
treasury,  army  and  ally,  of  each  of  these  ten  sovereigns,
taken  together,  compose  what  is  designated  as  the  Mandala
of  sixty  elements  by  those  who  are  conversant  with  the  nature
of  Mandalas .

37.  An  ally  and  an  enemy  in  front  of  the  Vijigisu , also
an  ally  and  an  enemy  in  his  rear,  together  with  himself,

* A kind  of  metre  with  twelve  syllables  in  a quarter  ; so  that  the
number  of  the  total  syllables  in  a stanza  is  12  by  4 or  48.  This
metre  again  is  divided  into  fifteen  subdivisions,  namely,  (1)  Indravansa
(2)  Chandrmartma , (3)  Jaladharamdld , (4)  Jaloddhatagati , (5)
Tdmarasa  (6)  Totciku  (7)  Drutavilct'Mvitarn  (8)  Pravd  (p)  Prawiid*
hshara  (10)  Bhujangapraydta  (n)  Manimdld  (12)  Mdlati  (13)  Van*
gsasthavila , (14)  Vaiswadevec  and  (15)  Sr  a gv  ini.


92


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


form  five  in  number.  The  six  Prakritis,  namely  minister
&c.,  of  each  of  these  five  sovereigns,  takeh  together,  constitute
what  is  recognised  as  the  Mandala  of  thirty  elements.

38.  Those  best  conversant  with  the  Shastras * also  re-
cognise  these  Mandalas  in  respect  of  the  Ari.  The  in-
telligent ascribe  the  Mandala  of  five  kings  and  the  Mandala
of  thirty  elements  also  to  the  Art.

39.  Parasaraf  says  that  two  Prakriti$%  are  only  to  be
recognised  in  polity  ; of  them,  the  important  is  he  that  assails,
and  the  other  is  he  that  is  assailed.

40.  In  consequence  of  the  Vijigisu  and  the  Art  assailing
each  other,  their  relation  of  Vijigisu  and  Art  becomes

interchangeable.  And  thus  there  appears  to  be  one  Prakriti
only.§

41.  Thus  various  other  kinds  of  Mandalas  have  been
mentioned  (by  the  Acharyyas  of  yore).  But  the  Mandala
consisting  of  twelve  kings  is  universally  known  and  accepted.

42.  He  is  areal  politician  who  knows  a tree  ||,  having


* For  this  interpretation  of  Dristimatam,  we  refer  our  readers  tc
an  earlier  note ; vide  note  to  Sloka  29.  Sec.  IV.

of  LApulenbrated^’theifather  °f  VyaSa  the  fartous  c°»Piler  ol
of  the  Puranas  and  the  author  of  the  MahSbhArata.  Parasara  has  a
Smrth  ascribed  to  his  authorship*

cablhlred.e  note  * Sloka  24th  ; the  second  meaning  is  appli-

hu meanS  iS  thiS*  AccordinS  to  Parasara  the
number  of  praknhs  is  two.  But  others  again  say  that,  virtually  those

tftte  same,  The  contention  of  these  latter  is  that,  as  the  Vijighu  assails

IT”  «/*»■  In

TVh'  TT-  “4U“  T.

a"  1 ,s  Mc.ndtda  of  otiz  CrakriH,  viz,,


e author  now  compares  a Mandala  to  a tree.


L _L!.  ^


'


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


93


four  roots,*  eight  branches,t  sixty  leaves,!  two  props, § six
flowers, |)  and  three  fruits. f •

43.  The  Parshnigrdha  and  his  As  dr  a (or  the  Parshnigra -
hashrd)  are  said  to  be  allies  of  the  Vijigisu’s  enemy.$  The
Akranda  and  his  Asdra**  (or  the  Akrandasbra)  maintain  a
friendly  attitude  towards  the  Vijigisu.

47.  Through  his  own  agency  and  through  that  of  the
Mitram,  the  Vijigisu  should  exterminate  his  enemy  (the  Ari) ;
and  through  the  agency  of  the  Mitram  assisted  by  his  Mitram
(Mi t r ami t ram),  he  should  crush  the  ally  of  his  enemy  (the
Arimitrarn).

43.  Through  the  agency  of  the  common  ally  (the  Udd-
stnd)  and  of  th z Mitramitr am,  a ruler  of  earth  should  crush
the  ally  of  the  enemy’s  ally  (the  Arimitramitram).

49.  Thus,  in  gradual  order,  the  Vijigisu  endued  with
unceasing  activity,  should  crush  his  ever-molesting  enemy


* The  Vijigisu,  the  Ari,  the  Madhyama  and  the  Udasina,  these
constitute  the  four  roots,  Vide  supra  Sloka  20th.

f An  enemy  and  an  ally  of  each  of  these  four  cardinal  kings,  taken

together,  constitute  the  eight  branches  of  the  tree.

J The  five  Prakritis  of  each  of  the  twelve  kings  of  a Maud  ala,  taken
together,  constitute  the  sixty  leaves  of  the  tree.  V ide  supra  Sloka  25th.

§ The  two  primary  stays  are  Destiny  and  human  endeavour.

II  The  six  expedients  to  be  used  by  a sovereign  in  foreign  politics
constitute  the  six  flowers.  For  an  explanation  of  these  expedientSP  Vide
note  to  Sloka  16th,  Sec.  IV.  f < e

..  T Ti,e  results  of  the  application  of  these  expedients,  namely,  the
diminution,  preservation  and  the  aggrandisement  of  the  territorial  wealth
of  a kingdom,  are  the  fruits.

, !,  C,°nSr,qUently  the  PhrshniSrdha's  and  his  Asara's  attitude  to-
wards  the  becomes  one  of  hostiiity,  whereas  the  attitude  of  the

Akranda  and  his  Asdra  becomes  one  of  friendliness

bv  le  ™e.C°mmentator,defi"es  Akranda  to  be  'one  who  is  called  upon

Kranda  ’T  « **  ^shnigrdka  ; from  the  root

Kranda,  to  call.  He  defines  Asdra  to  be  'one  that  comes  to  save  (the

lpgsu)  m times  of  danger.’  From  the  root  Sri  to  move,  or  come.


94


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


(the  A rz),  and  also  him  whose  dominions  lie  intervening  the
dominions  of  his  allies  in  the  front  (V.  e.  the  Arimitram).

44.  Having  at  first  caused  his  enemies  in  the  rear  (the
Pdrshnigrhha  and  his  Asdra)  to  be  engaged  in  a war  with
his  friends  (the  Arkanda  and  his  Asdra)  therein,  and,  like  his
enemies  in  the  rear,  compelling  his  enemies  in  the  front  (the
Art  and  the  Arimitram)  to  be  engaged  with  his  friends  there-
in (the  Mitram  and  the  Mitramitram)y  a king  should  march
out  for  conquest.*

45.  A ruler  of  earth  should  march  out  for  conquest,  after
having  paralysed  the  ally  of  the  enemy's  ally  through  the  ins-
trumentality of  a powerful  common  ally  (the  Udasina)  who
had  been  won  over  by  various  good  services. f

46.  The  Vijigisu  united  with  the  Akranda  should  crush
the  Pars hnigraha . J Through  the  instrumentality  of  the
Akranda  assisted  by  his  Asaray  the  Vijigisu  should  crush
the./lsdra  of  the  Parshnigraha,

50.  Thus  hemmed  in  and  opposed  on  both  sides  by  ever-
active  and  intelligent  monarchs,§  the  enemy  either  soon
becomes  exterminated  or  resigns  himself  to  the  rule  of  the
Vijigisu,  ||

51.  By  all  means,  the  Vijigisu  should  try  to  win  over  to
his  side  an  ally  common  to  him  and  to  his  enemy.  Enemies,
alienated  from  their  allies,  become  easily  extirpable,

52.  It  is  causes  that  create  enemies  and  allies^  ; there-

* Thus  the  enemies  in  the  front  and  in  the  rear  of  the  Vijigisu,  being
engaged,  they  will  not  be  able  to  watch  his  movements.  So  that
at  any  time  he  will  be  able  to  crush  them  by  surprise,

f The  explanation,  given  in  the  commentary,  being  a little  awk-
ward, we  have  rejected  it,

} Which  act  would  be  very  easy,  as  the  dominions  of  the  Parshni-
graha  intervene  those  of  the  Vijigisu  and  the  Akranda.

§ The  Vijigisu  and  his  ally.

II  For  Cha  read  Vd.

*[f  What  the  author  means  seems  to  be,  that  men  are  not  born  either
mutual  ‘fiends  or  mutual  enemies.  There  must  be  some  cause  or  causes


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


95


fore,  always,  should  the  Vijigisu  shun  such  causes  that  might
create  enemies,

53.  In  every  part  of  his  dominions,  by  far,  a king  should
cherish  every  one  of  his  subjects.*  By  cherishing  his
people,  a king  enjoys  a prosperity  developing  into  the
flourishing  condition  of  all  the  constituents  of  his  govern-
mentf

54.  The  Vijigisu  should  cultivate  the  alliance  of  monarchs
stationed  far  off,  of  those  who  constitute  his  Ma?idala , of
local  governors;}:  and  also  of  the  Foresters. § It  is  those
monarchs  welhsupported  by  their  allies  that  can  consolidate
their  empire.

55.  When  out  of  a desire  for  conquest,  the  Madkyama,
swelling  with  the  Saktis, ||  marches  forth,  the  Vijigisu
united  to  his  enemy,  should  withstand  the  former  j if  he  is
unable  to  do  so,  he  should  submit  to  make  peace  with  the
Madhyama^ [


to  establish  a relation  either  of  friendship  or  enmity.  By  causes  the
commentator  understands  UpakdrcL  or  good  service  and  Ap&kara  or
injury.  It  is  superfluous  to  say  that  the  former  creates  allies,  and  the
latter  enemies.

* What  the  author  means  is,  that  a king  should  not  only  cherish  his
influential  subjects,  but  also  those  who  are  poor  and  helpless.  The
means  of  cherishing  are  Sdma  &c.,  for  which  vide  an  earlier  note,

f The  commentator  explains  the  passage  differently  saying  'enjoys
all-round  prosperity.

% Sthdna  has  a diversity  of  meaning  m politics.  Kallukabhata
takes  it  to  signify  the  essential  requisites  for  a monarchy,  namely,  army,
treasure,  town  and  territory  ,*  but  this  meaning  does  not  apply  here.

§ Durga  ordinarily  means  a castle,  but  its  derivative  meaning  is
‘that  to  which  the  access  is  very  difficult/  The  commentator  takes
it  to  mean  ‘forest/  So  we  have  rendered  Durganivdsina  into  Foresters*
But  it  may  also  mean,  ‘those  who  hold  forts  and  castles  to  themselves/

||  Vide  note  to  Sloka  1st  Section  I*

IF  The  text  in  the  last  part  of  the  Sloka  is  vicious  ; for  Sandhim&nna «
met  read  Sandhindnarnet *


kAMAMDAKlYA  NIHSaRA.'


56.  Enemies  are  of  two  kinds,  namely,  the  natural
those  created  by  acts.  A natural  enemy  is  he  who  is  born  in  the
self-same  dynasty  with  the  king,*  and  an  enemy  other  than
the  natural,  falls  under  the  second  head*

57.  Ceding  of  his  own  territory*  weaning  away  of  the
officers  of  his  enemyf,  and  Karsanct  and  Pidana%  of  the
enemy  in  opportune  moments,— -these  four  have  been  asserted,
by  men  proficient  in  the  science  of  chastisement,  to  be  the
duties  of  the  Vijigisu  in  respect  to  his  enemy.

58.  Disablement  of  the  treasury  and  of  the  machinery
for  awarding  punishments,  and  the  assassination  of  the  prime-
minister, these  have  been  defined  by  Acharyyas  to  b eKarsana.
Acts,  still  more  oppressive  than  these,  have  been  called
Pidana .

59.  Destitute  of  all  shelter, § or  seeking  shelter  with

There  are  two  Slokas  supplementary  to  this  one,  which  have  been
omitted  in  the  text.  We  subjoin  their  translations

(a) .  When  the  Uddsina  marches  forth  for  conquest,  all  the  other
monarchs  of  the  Mandala , firmly  united  together  and  with  a sense
of  common  duty,  should  await  the  assault  of  the  former,  ff  they  are
unable  to  withstand  the  former,  they  should  bow  down  before  him.

(b) .  When  a calamity  threatens,  what  ought  to  be  done  to  avert  it,
by  mo wchs  united  together,  for  the  fulfilment  of  their  objects,  is  said  to
be  the  common  duty  of  them  all.

* Under  the  category  of  'natural  enemies 1 come  tjhe  con g*
Bates  and  agnates,  who  have  any  claim  on  the  inheritance,  The
second  class  is  the  ordinary  class  of  enemies  men  have,  and  who  ar$
made  such,  by  dealings  and  behaviours.

* * The  word  in  the  text  is  Uchcheda  which  means  extirpation.  TWf
meaning  we  should  like  to  accept,

f Another  meaning  is  possible,  which  is,  'undermining  the  strength
of  the  enemy. ' 5

; t These  words  have  been  explained  by  the  author  binoself  itj  the
ne?t  Sloka.  The  nearest  approach  in  English  to  these  words  would  be
'tormenting  and  crushing.’

§ The  'shelters’  are  specified  by  the  commentator  to  be,  castle,

treasury,  and  army.


!


KAMANOAKJYA  NITISARA*  97

the  weak,  the  Ari  of  tjie  adjacent  domain,  inspite  of  his
prosperity,  can  be  easily  extirpated.*

'•  60.  Of  a monarch  confident  of  his  shelter,  Karsana
and  Pidana  should  be  done  in  opportune  season.  Either  a
castle,  or  an  ally  of  honesty  commended  by  the  pious,  has
been  defined  to  be  a shelter*  ,

61.  An  intestine  enemy  deserves  extirpation,  in  confer
quence  of  his  having  the  power  to  rob  the  monarch  of  all
his  authority.f  Witness,  the  case  of  VibhisanaJ  and  the
son  of  Suryya,§  whose  natural  enemies  were  their  uterine
brothers  (Ravana  and  Vali  respectively).

62.  An  intestine  enemy  knows  very  well  the  laches.,
-actions,  and  resources ||  of  a monarch.  Thus  knpwing  the

f Asa  supplement  to  this  Sloka,  Sloka  15th  of  this  .Section'  has  been
repeated  here.

t The  word  in  the  text  is  Tanira , which  the  commentator  explains
,}to  be  'ministers  and  kingdom  &c/  But  Tantra  also  means  'authority/  or
more. properly,  'the  royal  prerogative/

t The  brother  of  Ravana  the  well-known  ten-headed  demon  of  the
great  epic  Ramayana.  He  was  extremely  sorry  for  the  abduction  of
Sita  by  Ravana,  and  several  times  advised  the  latter  to  restore  her  to
her  husband  Rama.  But  the  proud  Ravana  turned  deaf  ears  to  all  his
remonstrances  and  entreaties.  At  last  Vibhisana,  forsaking  his  brother,
repaired  to  Rama,  and  became  instrumental  in  destroying  his  brother
Ravana.  After  the  death  of  Ravana,  he  was  installed  on  the  throne  of
Lanka  (Ravana's  kingdom)  by  Rama.

* § The  son  of  Suryya  (Sun)  is  Sugriva  the  brother  pf  Va,li  the  great
monkey  chief  of  Kiskindhd . During  Vali’s  absence  from  the  Jcingdorp,
Sugriva  usurped  the  throne,  considering  the  former  to  be  dead.  .Rut  whpn
'Vali  returned,  he  had  to  run  away  to  the  Rishyamukha  hills.  His  wife  wjas
seized  by  Vali.  When  latterly,  he  met  Rama,  he  told  the  latter  how  he
had  been  treated  by  his  brother  and  besought  his  assistance  for  recovering
his  wife,  promising  at  the  same  time  that  he  would  assist  Rama  in  recover-
ing his  wife  Sita.  Rama  killed  Vali  and  installed  Sugriva  on  the  throne
of  \Kiskkindha.  '

||  For  Karma  and  vittam  the  commentary  reads  Marma  and  Viryyam ,
which  respectively  mean,  'vitals  of  the  state,  or  intention’  and  'prowess/

*3


98


KAMANDAKIYA  N1TISARA.


secrets,*  he  consumes  the  latter,  like  fire  consuming  a
withered  tree.

63.  fThe  Vijigisu  should,  with  all  speed,  eradicate  a
common  ally  who  behaves  with  open  partiality  towards  the
Art,  like  the  wielder  of  the  thunder-boltf  slaying‘Trisiras.§

64.  Apprehending  his  own  extirpation,  the  Vijigisu
should  render  assistance  to  his  enemy,  when  the  latter  is  in
danger,  being  afflicted  by  a very  powerful  assailant. ||

65.  The  Vijigisu  should  not  seek  to  extirpate  that  enemy,
by  whose  extirpation  there  is  the  slightest  chance  of  making
an  enemy  of  another;  but  he  should  turn  the  latter’s  domain
into  a dependency.

66.  If  a family-born^f  enemy  of  great  implacability  is


* Antargatas  literally  means  ‘ remaining  inside  or  penetrating.’
This  Sloka,  with  the  alterations  in  reading  noted  above,  has  been  quoted
in  the  Section  on  war  of  the  Hitopadesha,  Sloka  No.  62.  We  subjoin
Sir  W.  Jone’s  translation  of  it.  “ Our  natural  enemy  knows  our  former
crimes,  our  heart,  and  our  strength  ; so  that  he  penetrates  and  destroys,
as  fire  burns  a dry  tree."

f The  commentator  goes  on  to  say  that,  not  only  enemies  but  some-
times  allies  also  deserve  eradication.

t Or  Indra,  for  which  vide  note  to  Sloka.  21  Sec.  IV.

§ Trisiras  was  one  of  the  gods;  he  was  inimical  to  the  interests  of
Indra;  seeing  him  delight  in  the  supremacy  of  the  Asuras,  Indra  killed
him.  There  was  another  Trisiras,  a demon  by  birth,  who  was  killed  by
Rama.

II  What  the  author  means  is  that,  there  are  occasions  when  help
ought  to  be  given  even  to  an  enemy.  When  the  enemy  is  in  danger  of
being  extirpated,  the  Vijigisu  has  also  reason  to  fear.  For  if  the  enemy’s
powerful  assailant  succeeds  in  driving  out  the  former,  he  will  occupy
the  domain  adjacent  to  that  of  the  Vijigisu.  Then  the  Vijigisu  will  have
the  sword  of  Democlese  hanging  over  his  head.  There  are  several
vicious  readings  in  the  text  of  this  Sloka.  For  Dvisata  and  Apachaya
read  Dwisatd  and  Upachaya .

1[  Instead  of  tiring  our  readers  every  time  with  a long-winded  phrase,

take  the  liberty  of  coining  this  rnmnnutwi  u*  u * .

‘ < \ £ t "g  tms  conc*pound,  which  is  equivalent  to

natural  enemy  defined  in  Sloka  56th.


I


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.  99

seen  to  deviate  from  his  natural  course  of  conduct/* * * §  then
for  his  subjugation,  the  Vijigisu  should  incite  an  enemy  born
in  the  self-same  dynasty  with  him  (family-born  enemy).

67.  Poison  is  counteracted  by  poison,  a piece  of  adamant
is  penetrated  into  by  another  piece  of  the  same,  and  a wild
elephant  is  crushed  by  a rival  of  known  proWess.f

68.  A fish  devours  another  fish,J  so  also  does  a blood-
relation,  without  doubt,  destroy  another  blood-relation.  Rama
honoured  Vibhisana  for  the  extirpation  of  Ravana.§

69.  The  intelligent  Vijigisu  should  never  do  such  an  act,
the  performance  of  which  would  agitate ||  the  whole  Mandala .
He  should  ever  cherish  the  Prakritis *[[  and  their  ministers  &c.

70.  A king  should  please  his  own  Prakritis  by  concilia-
tion, gift  (or  bribery)  and  bestowal  of  honour ; and  he  should
crush  the  Prakritis  of  his  enemies  by  sowing  dissensions
among  them  and  by  openly  attacking  them.

71.  The  whole  extent  of  the  dominions  comprised  in  a
Mandala  is  overspread  with  hostile  and  friendly  sovereigns.
Every  one  of  these  sovereigns  is  exceedingly  selfish.f  How
then  is  neutrality  of  attitude  possible  in  any  one  of  them  ?

72.  The  Vijigisu  should  afflict  even  an  ally  having  the


* Which  would  be  ‘to  persecute  constantly  the  Vijigisu .*

f Hence  ‘domestic,’  so  says  the  commentator.  What  the  author  seems
to  suggest  in  this  Sloka  appears  to  be  that,  ‘to  slay  a family- born  enemy,
a monarch  should  skilfully  employ  another  of  the  same  nature.’

% The  reference  seems  to  be  to  the  maxim  of  Nyaya  philosophy  known
as  Mdtsya  nyaya,  vide  note  to  Sloka  40  Sec.  II.

§ It  was  Vibhisana  who  apprised  Rama  of  the  mortal  dart  being
lodged  with  Mandodari , the  wile  of  Ravana.

||  The  commentator  explains,  ‘give  reason,  to  the  other  sovereigns
of  the  Mandala , for  the  persecution  of  himself.’

IT  The  second  meaning, given  in  an  earlier  note  to  this  word,  applies
here.

• $ I-e.  every  one  is  anxious  to  aggrandise  his  own  interests  at  the

expense  of  others.  So  there  can  be  no  true  alliance  among  them.


100


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


means  for  enjoyment  * * * § if  the  latter  goes  astray.  But  when
the  latter  is  hopelessly  corrupt,  then  the  Vijigisu  should
crush  him,  for,  then  he  is  to  be  regarded  as  a very  sinful
enemy  .f

73.  The  Vijigisu  should  make  friends  even  with  his  foes,
if  they  become  instrumental  in  Ids  own  aggrandisement  He
should  forsake  even  his  allies,  if  they  are  intent  on  doing
evil  to  him.

74.  Either  he  that  seeks  to  promote  real  service,  or  he
that  is  anxious  for  the  welfare  of  a monarch,  is  to  be  re-
garded as  a-  friend. J He  is  an  ally  who  renders  effectual
service,  no  matter  whether  he  is  satisfied  or  not.

75.  After  grave  considerations,  a monarch  should  abjure
allegiance  to  an  ally  whose  offences  have  been  repeatedly
brought  to  notice.-  But  by  abandoning  an  unoffending  ally,  a
monarch  destroys  his  religious  merit  as  well  as  his  worldly
prdSjperity.§

76.  A monarch  should,  at  every  time  and  in  every
instance,  enquire  into  the  guilt  and  innocence  of  others
personally.  When  he  has  thus  personally  found  out  the
guilty,  the  infliction  of  punishment  becomes  praiseworthy. ||


* The  commentator  says,  ‘the  means  is  treasure/

f The  commentary  paraphrases  the  word  in  text  by  'still  worse/

£ The  commentary  gives  a different  reading,  for  which  we  see  nO
occasion  ; still  we  subjoin  it.  1 BandhurapyahiU  yuht as  Satrustam  Part*
'varjayet.*  'A  friend  intent  on  doing  evil  is  to  be  regarded  as  a foe,  and
fie  should  be  shunned/

§ For  hi  the  commentary  reads  Sa . The  last  portion  is  explained
By  the  commentator  thus  By  forsaking  an  ally,  a monarch  loses  the
chance  of  reaping  that  worldly  profit  which  otherwise  he  may  have
Realised/

J Compare  Sloka  142,  in  Suhvidveda  (Breach  of  friendship)  in  the-
Hitopadesha.  We  Subjoin  Sir  W.  Jone*s  translation  of  it.

'Without  distinguishing  virtues  or  vices,  let  neither  favor  be  granted
nor  severity  used  ; as  a hand  placed  with  pride  m the  nest  of  a serpent
occasions' '•*•••


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA,


ioi;


77.  The  Vijigisu  should  never  work  himself  up  with  ire,
without  having  obtained  sufficient  information  regarding
the  real  state  of  affairs*  Men  regard  him  as  a snake  who
becomes  angry  on  the  innocent*

78.  A monarch  should  be  cognisant  of  the  degrees  ofi
difference  among  excellent,  mediocre,  and  ordinary  allies.'
The  services,  done  by  these  three  classes  of  allies,  are  accord-
ingly  excellent,  mediocre,  and  ordinary.*"

79.  A monarch  should  never  accuse  others  falsely,  nor
should  he  listen  to  false  accusations. f He  should  ever  shun{
them  who  try  to  cause  disunion  among  allies.

80.  A monarch  should  be  able  to  comprehend

utterances  known  as  PrdyogikaX  Mdtsarzka ,§

* Compare  Sloka  69  Hitopadesha,  Section  Suhridveda . * Three,
sorts  of  men,  O king,  the  highest,  the  middle  and  the  lowest ,*  let  their
master  exercise  them  alike  in  three  sorts  of  employment,’  / >

f For  the  first  portion  of  the  Sloka,  compare  Hitopadesha  Sloka  141
Sec.  Suhridveda.  We  subjoin  Sir  W.  Jone’s  translation.  . j

‘ Let  not  a prince  punish  men  from  the  words  of  others  ; let  Ijiim
examine  the  facts,  himself,  and  then  imprison,  or  dismiss  with  respect/  }

J Prdyogika — Lit:  relating  to  Prdyoga  or  the  expedients  of  foreign/
policy  (Vide  note  to  Sloka  51.  Sec,,  V.) ; hence  prhyogika  utterances :
are  those  that  are  calculated  to  promote  the  interests  of  foreign  policy.
For  instance,  we  quote  below,  from  the  Drama  Mudrarhkshasa , the  words,, ,
the  Vaitalika  (ministrel)  deputed  by  Rakshasa  uttered,  with  a view  to
estrange  the  alliance  between  Chanakya  and  Chandragupta,  when  these,
latter  merely  feigned  a quarrel.  t

Bhusdnadyupabhogena  prabhurbhavati  na  prabhus,f  , ,,

Parairaparibhutojnairmanyatd  tivamiba  prabhus . j

1 Lord  are  not  lords  for  their  enjoyment  of  ornaments  &c.f  but  they  are

regarded  to  be  so  by  the  wise,  for,  their  authority  can  not  be  thwarted  by
Others.’  The  Vaitalika  knew  perfectly  well  that  Chandragupta  virtually;
had  no  authority  independent  of  the  power  of  Chanakya,  and  to  bring,
home  into  the  former’s  mind  the  subserviency  of  his  position,  he  uttered,
the  above  words,  expecting  thereby  to  sow  dissensions  between  them.

§ Mhtsarika — These  are  utterances  indicative  of  Matsara  or  indig-
nation or  spite ; by  such  expressions,  the  speaker  wants  to  thwart  the
measures  of  policy  adopted  by  an  enemy  or  his  emissary,  by  apprising


102


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


Madhyastham ,*  Pdkshapdtikam Sopanyasa}%  and  Sanu~
saya.§


the  latter  that  he  is  perfectly  cognisant  of  his  machinations  and  in-
trigues. For  instance,  we  quote  from  the  above-named  Drama,  the
words  of  Chanakya  in  reply  to  the  words  of  the  Nata  (actor).

A ! Ka  esa  mayisthite  ChandraguptaM  Abhi'uabiticmichchati,

(Chanakya  in  the  tiring  room) — What,  who  is  he  that  wants  to  crush
Ghandragupta,  so  long  as  I am  here.

* Madhyastam — These  are  utterances  expressive  of  outward  indifference
towards  a certain  matter  while  there  may  be  real  concern  about  it  in  the
mind  ; or  as  the  commentator  adds,  words  that  do  not  betray  any  malice,
but  on  the  other  hand  express  friendliness  and  a conciliatory  spirit.  For
instance,  we  quote  and  translate  from  the  same  Drama,  the  words
Chanakya  uttered,  when  he  was  apprised  of  the  movements  of  Rakshasa’s
family.

Nann  Suhrittomas  na  hyanatmasadrisesu  Rakshasa  Kalatra?n  nyasee
Karisyati.

‘Surely  our  best  friend  Rakshasa  will  not  entrust  the  protection  of
his  family  to  one  unworthy  of  his  friendship*’

f Pakshaphtika — These  are  utterances  signifying  an  excessive  partiality
for  one’s  own  party.  For  instance,  we  quote  from  the  said  Drama,  the
words  Chanakya  uttered  (aside),  when  he  put  in  his  finger  the
Signet  ring  of  Rakshasa  presented  to  him  by  his  spy.

Nanu  Rakshasa  eba  Ashmakam  Angulipranayee  Samvrittas’  ‘surely
even  Rakshasa  himself  will  now  like  our  finger.’

% Sopanyasam — These  are  words  uttered,  with  an  under-current  of
irony,  to  invite  one  to  take  his  seat  near  his  superior,  with  a view  to  throw
the  former  off  his  guard.  (From  upa  near  and  nyasa  to  sit).  For  instance,
we  translate,  from  the  same  Drama,  the  dialogue  between  the  Banker
Chandanadasa,  and  Chanakya.

Chanakya — All  hail,  O Banker,  sit  thyself  on  this  seat.

Chandanadasa  (doing  obeisance)— Dost  thou  not  know,  Q sire,  that
undeserved  welcome  causes  greater  pain  to  the  sincere  than  ev*en  the
most  biting  sarcasm  ? So  permit  me  to  sit  on  this  bare  earth  which  is
fit  for  me.'  , ;

r, Chanakya — Not  so,  not  so,  O Banker ; you  deserve  to  sit  with  us,
so  occupy  this  seat.

Chandanadasa  (aside) — I know  not  what  is  he  driving  at.  , .

, § Sanusaya— These  are  utterances  that  indicate  repentance  for:


KAMANDAKIYA  N1TISARA.


103

81.  He  should  not  openly  take  the  side  of  any. one  of
his  allies,  but  should  encourage  a feeling  of  rivalry  among
them  in  securing  his  grace.'*

82.  As  the  responsibilities  of  royalty  are  very  onerous,  a
monarch  therefore,  adapting  himself  to  circumstances,  should,
overlooking  the  prominent  failings  of  even  his  mean  allies,
attribute  to  them  qualities  which  they  do  not  possess. t


an  act  or  omission  resulting  in  an  irreparable  loss.  We  quote  and  tran-
slate from  the  same  Drama.

Rakshasa — Mayi  sthite  ' has  Kusumapuram  aharotsasi . Praviraka
Praviraka , kshipramidaning ,

Prakdran  paritas  sardsanadharais  kshipram  parikshipyatdm ,
Dwaresu  dwiradais  paradwipaghatdvedakshamais  stheeyatam
Muktd  mntubhayam  prahartu  manasas  satrorvale  durvale
Tes  nirydntu  mayasahaika  manasas yesdmabhistam  yasas •

Viradha — Amatya , Alamavegena,  Vrittamidam  varnyate .

Rakshasa — Katham  vrittamidam,  mayd  punarjndtam  sa  eba  kdla
varitate .

Rakshasa  (drawing  his  sword) — Who  dares  invade  the  city  of  Kusuma-
pura  whilst  I am  here.  Ho,  Pravirarka,  Praviraka,  ‘Let  men  with
bows  and  arrows  speedily  mount  guard  on  the  ramparts  ,*  station,  in  the
city-gates,  elephants  capable  of  rending  the  temples  of  those  of  the
enemy.  Let  those,  who  want  to  crush  the  weak  host  of  the  enemy  and
who  desire  to  acquire  fame,  follow  me  with  a singleness  of  purpose,  dis-
regardful of  the  fear  of  death.

Viradhas — Minister,  this  excitement  avails  nothing.  I was  only  re-
counting what  had  already  happened.

Rakshasa  (shyly)— What,  mere  description  ! I thought  that,  that  hour
has  come  back  again.

For  Samsaya  in  the  text,  the  commentary  gives  Sdnusaya .

* What  the  author  means  is  this.  ‘If  a king  shows  any  marked
partiality  for  any  individual  ally,  then  the  others  are  estranged  from
him.*

f What  the  author  means  seems  to  be  this ‘To  aggrandise  his
own  interests,  a monarch  may  even  have  recourse  to  sycophancy  ,*  and  he
should  neither  hesitate  to  attribute  good  qualities  to  persons  who  do  not
really  possess  them,  nor  should  he  take  notice  of  any  vice  in  any  one  of
his  allies.


KAMANDAKiY*  NITISARA,


104

83.  A ruler  of  earth  should  secure  to  himself  a large
number  of  allies  of  various  descriptions.  For,  a monarch;
supported  by  a large  number  of  allies,  is  capable  of  keeping
this  enemies  under  hissway.

84.  The  danger,  which  the  true  ally  of  a sovereign  runs
,to  remedy  the  evil  that  has  befallen  the  latter,  that  danger
is  such,  that  even  his  brother,  father,  or  other  people  cannot
face  it  (for  his  sake)  *

85.  A king  should  not  assail  an  enemy,  who  is  being
supported  by  his  allies  of  firm  vows.  This  is  the  one  duty

,to  be  observed  in  a Mandala,  and  .this  has  been  mentioned  to
be  so,  rby  those  who  know  how  to  cpnsolidate  an  empire.

86.  A Mandala  virtually  consists  of  allies  and  enemies
and  the  Uddsina ; and  the  purification  of  the  Mandala  means
the  purification  of  these  three.t

^ 87.  Thus  a monarch,  treading  the  path  of  justice,  and
bringing , about  the  purification  of  the  Mandala  with  all  en-
deavours, shines  resplendent  like  the  autumnal  moon  of  pure
>beams,  affording  delight  to  the  hearts  of  the  people.

Thus  ends  the  eighth  Section , the  construction  and
characteristics  of  a Mandala,  in  the  Nitisdra  of  Kdman -
, daka*


-00-


The  author  wants  to  insinuate  the  superiority  of  an  ally  to  one's
fatWy  brother  &c.

f Consolidation  ^means  the  subjugation  of,  and  the  alliance  with,
these  kings.


1.  hen  assaulted  by  a monarch,*  more  powerful  than
himself,  and  (thus)  involved  in  a great  jeopardy,  a ruler  of
naen,  having  no  other  remedy, f should  seek  peace,  delaying;
as  much  as  possible,  j

2.  \Kapdla , Upahdras , Santanas,  and  Sangdtas ; Upa~
hydsas,  Pratikhfas , Sarny ogas , Purushdntaras >


* In  lieu  of  Valiyasabhiyiiktastu , the  commentator  suggests  a different
reading  vis.  Valavatmgrihitastu ; this  does  not  materially  change  the
signification,  ‘Power’  must  be  taken  here,  as  before,  to  be  synonymous
with  Prabhava  or  the  Saktis,  for  which  vide  note  to  sloka  I Sec  I.

f The  commentary  explains,  ‘deprived  of  the  support  of  his  allies,
and  the  security  of  his  castles,  wherewith  to  withstand  the  invador  ; thus
highly  distrsssed.5

J The  meaning  of  the  author  is  more  clearly  explained  by  the  com-
tator  thus : The  assailed  king  should  not,  with  unceremonious  haste,

ratify  a treaty  or  peace  ; he  should  occupy  as  much  time  as  possible  in
settling  the  preliminary  negotiations,  thus  leaving  room  for  himself  to  fall
upon  the  assailant,  if  through  chance,  some  calamity  in  the  meanwhile#
overtake  the  latter  ; but  this  would  be  impossible  if  the  treaty  be  ratified
before  the  advent  of  the  calamity.5 1

In  his  translation  of  the  Hitopadesha  in  which  these  SlphAs  have  been
embodied,  S.  W.  Jones  curiously  renders  this  sloka  thus  When
a prince  is  engaged  in  war  with  a stronger  prince,  there  is  no  other
remedy.  When  he  is  in  danger,  let  him  seek  peace,  and  reserve  his  exer-
tions for  another  occasion. 5 5

§ The  author  now  proceeds  to  enumerate  the  different  kinds  of  peace#
the  number  of  which,  as  the  reader  will  presently  see,  is  so  many  as  six-
teen. These  Slokas  have  been  incorporated  verbatim  in  the  Hit  op  ode  slid
(Salutary  counsel)  of  Vishnu  Sarmari,  which  undoubtedly  is  a later  work
(see  introduction).  In  the  several  following  Slokas,  the  author  himseff
explains  these  kinds  of  peace,  and  the  provisions  for  each  of  them.*

*4


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


3.  Adrishtanaras , Adishtas , Atmamisha ,*  UpagraJiasy
Parikrayas  and  Uchchinnas  and  Pa  rib  ush  anas,  f

4.  And  Skandhopaneyas  ; these  sixteen  kinds  of  peace
are  celebrated.  Thus  have  they,  who  are  learned  in  peace-*
making,  named  sixteen  sorts  of  peace.f

5.  Only  that  kind  of  peace  is  said  to  be  Kap ala- sandhi
that  is  concluded  between  two  parties  of  equal  resources.
The  peace  that  is  concluded  through  the  offer  of  presents  is
called  Upahara.  ||

* In  the  enumeration  contained  in  the  Hitopadesha,  referred  to
above,  we  find  Atmadishta  for  Atmamisha.

f In  the  Hitopadesha  vve  have  Parahhusana  for  this  designation.

J The  slolcas  marked  2.  3.  4.  should  be  read  all  together.

§ As  to  the  interpretation  of  the  first  line,  opinions  vary  consider-
ably. The  word  in  dispute  seems  to  be  Samasandhitas , which  is  a com-
pound  formed  of  the  two  words  (lSama’J  ov  equal  and  Sandhitas  or  peace.
Some  explain  this  to  mean  (1)  “ Peace  in-  which  the  considerations  for
the  parties  are  equal  ; no  one  deriving  advantage  over  the  other  ; or
“peace  on  equal  terms.”  (2)  Others  explain  rt  to  mean,  * Peace
between  two  contending  parties  whose  resources  ( Saktis ) are  equal,  and
where  no  surrender  of  troops  or  treasure  is«  made  by  any  of  the  parties.
(.3)  Others  again,  who  number  S.  W.  Jones  among  them,  explain  it  thus,
their  explanation  being  more  etymological  “ Eapdla *'  means  a potsherd  or
a piece  of  broken  jar.  Just  as  an  earthen  jar  broken  in  some  portion  when*
repaired  by  the  placing  of  another  sherd  on  the  broken  part,  appears  to-
be  intact,  but  as  in  reality  it  is  not  so,  so  the  peace  that  is  concluded  by
mere  words  of  mouth  and  where  there  is  no  pledge  or  promise  indicating
a permanent  alliance,  is  said  to  be  Kapada*  sandhi,  This  kind  of  peace
ean  be  violated  at  any  time,  as  the  parties  to  it  are  not  bound  by  any
formal  pledge  or  promise.  Hence  it  comes  to-  what  S.  W.  Jones  has
termed  it,  viz*,  a simple  cessation  of  hostilities.  The  commentator  accepts
this  last  integration.

\\,  Upahara  means  presents  or  gifts  in  general.  Sometimes  the  use
of  the*  word  is  limited  to  ‘complimentary  gifts  or  gifts  to  a superior  alone/
The  latter  meaning  seems  to  be  more  appropriate  here,  inasmuch  as
the  .commentator  explains  Upaham-sandhi  thus:— 'Peace  that  a van-
quished monarch-  concludes  with  his  conqueror  by  surrendering  to  the
latter  his. army  and  treasury,  is  called  Upahara The  nearest  approach*


KAMANDAKIYA  N1TISARA.


I07


6.  Santdna-sandhi * is  that  which  is  concluded  by  a king
fcy  giving  a daughter  in  marriage  to  his  royal  adversary.
That  peace  is  named  Sangatas f which  is  founded  on  friend-
ship between  good  men.

7.  This  kind  of  peace  lasts  as  long  as  the  parties  to  it
live;  under  it,  the  parties  identify  their  acts  and  their
resources ; J it  is  not  broken  by  any  cause  whatever,  either  in
seasons  of  properity  or  adversity,

8.  This  kind  of  peace  namely  Sangata-sandhi  is  excell-
ent,§ like  gold  among  other  metals.  People  versed  in  peace
making  also  call  this  Sandhi , Kdnchana  or  golden.


in  English  to  Upahdra  in  this  connection  would  be,  “indemnity,  or  pre-
sents given  as  the  price  of  peace.”

* Santana  means  a child  ; therefore  Santana-sandhi  has  been  taken
to  mean  ‘peace  made  through  the  giving  up  of  one  the  female  children  of
the  family.’  The  compound  Darikdddna  means,  ‘to  give  a daughter
( Darika ) in  marriage.’  S.  W.  Jones  is  not  very  clear  in  his  translation
of  this  passage  ,*  he  renders  it  thus  : — “ Santana  is  known  by  having  first
given  up  one  of  the  family.’1

t In  the  body  we  have  given  the  rendering  of  S.  W.  Jones.  A
strictly  literal  translation  of  the  passage  would  however  be  this ; ‘That  is
called  Sangata-sandhi  by  the  pious,  of  which  the  foundation  is  laid  in
friendship.  Sangatas  means  ‘union,’  hence  Sangata-sandhi  has  come  to
denote  ‘association  and  intimacy  resulting  from  friendship.’  In  the  nex£
two  Slokas,  the  author  puts  forth  the  other  distinguishing  marks  ctf  this
kind  of  peace,  and  tries  to  prove  its  superiority  over  the  rest.

i The  word  in  the  text  is  Samanarthaprayojanas  which  is  a com-
pound formed  of  three  words,  w.,  Samhna  (identical),  Artha  (treasure)
Prayojana  or  (necessities).  The  commentator  takes  Prayojana  to  mean,
‘acts  done  for  the  furtherance  of  righteousness,  worldly  profit,  or  the
attainment  of  desires.  What  the  author  means  seems  to  be  this  : — “Those
that  are  bound  by  the  ties  of  this  particular  kind  of  peace  do  not  ob-
serve any  difference  with  regard  to  their  respective  treasures  and  acts.
They  consider  one  another’s  wealth  and  interest  as  good  as  their  own, and
act  accordingly.”

§ For  Prahnsta  of  the  text,  the  commentary  reads  Prakyista,  vtfhich
undoubtedly  is  an  emendation.


kamandakiya  nitisaka.


J08

9.  Peace  that  is  concluded  with  a view  to  bring  into  a
remarkably  successful  termination  all  the  controversies  of  the
occasion,  has  been  named  Upanydsa * by  those  acquainted
with  its  nature.

10.  (I  did  him  good,  he  will  also  do  so  to  me' — when
peace  is  concluded  under  such  considerations,  it  is  called
Pratikara-sandhi ‘t

ix.  ‘I  shall  do  him  good,  he  will  also  do  so  to  me/ — when
peace  is  concluded  under  such  considerations,  it  is  called
Pratikara-sandhi  \%  and  it  was  such  an  alliance  that  was
formed  between  Rama  and  Sugriva.§

12.  When  two  parties  join  one  another  for  accomplishing
an  act  that  is  equally  interesting  to  both  of  them,  and  if  they

* Opinions  also  vary  regarding-  the  definition  of  this  kind  of  peace.
For  Ekdrtha  of  the  text  we  have  substituted  Sarvdrtha.  The  comment
tator  however  does  not  change  the  reading,  but  explains  the  word
Ekdrthasamsidhi  thus,  r,f  the  fulfilment  of  one  of  the  objects  of
desire.  According  to  the  commentator  then  the  definition  is  something
like  this; — Upanyasa-sandhi  is  that  in  which  the  parties  come  to  con-
clude it  with  a previously-formed  resoultion  that,  by  such  conclusion  of
peace  some  of  their  objects  will  be  fulfilled,  such  as,  the  acquirement
of  a certain  territory,  &c.  The  translation  given  by  S.  W.  Jones  of
this  passage  is  incomprehensible  to  ourselves.  We  therefore  quote  it
below  for  our  readers  to  judge.  ‘Upanyasa — prosperity  through
wealth  being  given,  and  thence  peace  concluded  by  those  empowered  to
make  it.”

f To  make  our  meaning  explicit,  we  subjoin  S.  W.  JoneV  defini-
tion of  this  kind  of  peace.

u Pratihdra  is  peace  concluded  through  benefits  conferred  and  re-
ceived.” The  reader  should  mark  the  past  tense  in  'I  did  &c./  for  in
the  next  Sloka,  the  author  gives  another  definition  of  Pmtikhra  in  which
a slight  and  insignificant  change  in  tense  only  occurs.

X The  definitions  of  Pratikdra  embodied  in  Slokas  10  and  n are
both  covered  by  the  one  given  by  S.  W,  Jones.  The  .distinction  between
these  two  definitions,  is  immaterial.

§ For  the  allusion  contained  in  this  part  of  the  Sloka,  refer  to  an
easier  note  (vide  note  to  Sloka  61,  Section  VIII).  Though  it  is  not  ex^
* plained  in  full  there-,  it  will  be  enough  to  serve  our  present  purpose.


KAMANDAKIYA  nitisara.


109


enjoy  one  another’s  confidence,  the  peace  that  is  then  con-*
eluded  between  them,  is  called  Samyoga

13.  ‘The  best  of  your  troops  should  join  those  of  mine
to  aggrandise  my  interests’ — *when  under  such  a condition
dictated  by  the  conqueror  upon  the  conquered,  peace  is  con*
eluded,  it  is  called  Purusktintara.  +

14.  ‘You  shall  have  to  accomplish  this  act  for  me,  without
getting  any  help  whatever  from  me’ — when  under  some  such
condition  specified  by  the  (conquering)  enemy,  peace  is  con-
cluded, it  is  designated  Adnstapuru$ha-sandhi.%

15.  When  peace  is  made  with  a powerful  adversary
through  the  cession  of  a portion  of  the  territories,  it  is  called
Adista-sandhi  by  those  who  are  versed  in  the  principles  of
peace-making.§

Samyoga  literally  means  a ‘firm  union/  and  what  can  bring  about
a firm  alliance  but  a common  by  interest?  Here  also  the  definition
given  by  S.  W.  Jones  is  very  curious.  We  give  it  below.

‘Samyoga — Where  the  advantages  are  equal.’  If  this  definition  is
accepted,  Samyoga  virtually  becomes  identical  with  Kapala .

f For  Madavthcti  the  commentary  gives  Sadartha>  and  explains
it  to  mean  ‘acquirement  of  territory/  &c.  The  definition  of  this  kind
of  peace  would  be  something  like  this — “Purushantara  sandhi  is  that,  to
secure  which  the  weaker  party  surrenders  his  troops  to  the  use  of  the
stronger.”  S.  W.  Jone’s  definition  is  entirely  different,  and  we  know  not
what  the  cause  of  it  may  be  ; it  is  this

Purushantara — When  two  monarchs  meet  face  to  face  in  battle,
the  wealth  of  one  procures  peace.

f Adnsta-punisha  is  a compound  formed  of  Adrista  (not  seen)  and
Purusha  man.  Hence  Adrista-purusha  Sandhi  is  that,  in  which  some
of  the  conqueror’s  men  are  bound  to  help  those  of  the  conquered*
when  the  latter  called  upon  by  the  former,  goes  to  perform  some  act
for  the  former’s  benefit,.  The  definition  given  by  S.  W.  Jones  is  incom-r
prehensible.  It  is  this  : — “Adrista-purusha*— when  after  peace,  thus
bought,  the  foe  joins  in  a treaty/’

§ The  commentary  gives  a different  reading  for  Ripmarjita  viz*
Ripururjita . This  makes  the  meaning  of  the  Sloka  more  explicit  and
therefore  we  have  accepted  it.  The  original  if  translated  literally  will
stand  thus,  though  the  difference  between  the  two  translations  (one  in


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA,


*?.'  Tbe  c*mPact  thatis  formed  between  a SovPr^„
and  b,s  o»„  troops,  is  died  Aimimisk..Sandhi.  Peace  2
“ »ncl»ded  (or  tbe  preservation  of  self  by  the  sorrend  !
everything  else,  is  called  Uf^raka-mndhi*  '

ij.  Where,  for  the  preservation  of  the  rest  of  d
PraknttsA  peace  is  concluded  through  the  surrender  f *
part  or  the  whole  of  the  treasure  t or  K - • nder  of
“a"  Sold  and  silver,?  it  is  dled'L-ri^  j"*

inasl/flf”

excellent  lands  to  the  foe  L 7 ; 16  m°St

wJl-  , • , , ParMusana-sandhm  is  that

territory!  * **  “*  *‘  * of  tie  whole

money  odtitll,0'  7 *’  !"  ^ i”d™i>3'  (»

. territorial  produces)  agreed  upon  by  the  parties


enlmyt  ^hun s When  *
be  ceded  to  him  and  when  • ^ 3 portlon  of  t,le  territory  should
Adista  by  those  versed^  in “ C°nduded  accordingly,  it  is  called

Jone's  definition  is  as  follows.  ^

part."  -fkaista  where  land  is  given  in  one

f=«^aW*»l8iVen  *»■  S'  W >»»■  »'  1-  ...  hinds  <*

• *»*■« «» *»«.

t For  P,M1  .al'cTOt,  sp's'  Pr'“™'“"  “<  '«'•

* T(.  . »iae  note  to  Sloka  24  Section  VIII.
t Th,s  * also  a Prakriti  (vide  note  referred  to  above)

§ The  original  word  is  Kubyam  which  mem.  a .
any  metal,  except  gold  and  silver.  baSC  metaI«  hence.

II  The  following  is  the  definition  given  by  S W r,  • ,

he  has  omitted  one  element  i P./i  8 . ^ w»  Jone%  in  which

a*  .b.l.  of  the  ““'"to  by  a par,  „

th  » substituted  by  cue  tf

of  tbe  commentary.  s.  w tones1  d the 'tor  being  thereading
concluded  by  sl,ng  ^d"*  H"  P

eonpludesl  by  giving  UD  the  frtiii-c  ••  ! ands’  ^ Parabhuscma —

' S g P the  fru,ts  ansing  from  the  whole  territory."

V ' ■■  ■■■■  ' '


■id:  ,',;v  V'-  ■

t : ft iLt]  f ii  j v S &f* 1 ; f


r'V  1 o > t.i  m1  ,f


KAftlANDAKIYA  MTISAftA.


at

is  given  by  instalments,  is  called  Ska ndhopa ney'a  sandh i} w
by  those  who  are  conversant  with  the  natures  of  peace.

20.  Of  these  sixteen  sorts  of  peace,  the  following  four — -
viz — (i)  that  concluded  through  benefits  conferred  and
received  ( Pratikara ),  (2)  that  through  friendship  ( Sangata )
(3)  that  through  (marital)  relation-ship  ( Santana ) and  (4)
that  through  the  presentation  of  gifts  ( Upahara ) — are  mostly
recognised.

21.  In  our  opinion,  the  Up  aha  fa  is  the  only  sort  of  peace'
that  deserves  the  name.  Except  that  concluded  through1
friendship,  all  the  other  kinds  of  peace  are  only  varieties  erf
the  Upahara f.

22.  Inasmuch  as  a powerful  assailant  never  returns
without  obtaining  (considerable)  presents,  therefore  is  it  said*
that  there  is  no  other  kind  of  peace  more  excellent  than  the
Upahara.%


* Different  interpretations  of  this  sloka  have  been  suggested.  We
however  have  followed  the  commentary,  which  has  introduced  one  emen*
dation  into  the  text  viz.,  Skandhaskandhena  for  Skandhas  Skartdhena .
Another  explanation  is  this  : — Shandh opaney a- sandhi  is  that  in  which  the
vanquished  party  is  required  to  carry  what  the  conquer  may  demand  of
money  &c.,  on  his  shoulder  to  the  place  of  the  latter.  The'  framer  of
this  definition  has  evidently  erred  by  trying  to  be  too  much  true  to  the
etymology  of  word  which  is  Skandha  (or  shoulder)  and  Upaneya  (to  be
carried).  What  S.  W.  Jones  gives  is  this  u Where  only  a part  of  the
produce  of  the  land  is  given.”

t II the  reader  examines  the  definitions  of  these  fifteen  kinds- of  peace,
save  that  of  the  Sangata  (which  is  formed  through  friendship),  lie  will’
find  that  every  one  of  them  contains  the  elements  that  are  essential  to*
the  Upahara -sandh  if

t What  the  author  means  seems  to  be  this  A powerful1  monarch
invading  another’s  territory  does  so  with  a view  to  obtain  handsome
booty  and  unless  he  is  offered  valuable  presents  he  will  not  give  up  his
attempt.  And  it  is  the  Upahdra '•sandh % that  enjoins  the  weaker  party
to  offer  those  presents.  Thus  the  Upahara  is  the  kind  of  peace  that  is
ordinarily  concluded  ; hence  its  superiority.


112


KaMaNDAKIYA  N1T1SA&A.


23.  *A  young  princef,  an  old  one,  one  long  siek,|
one  discarded  by  his  cognates, § a cowardly  sovereign, ||
one  having  cowards  for  his  followers, If  one  covetous, %
one  whose  officers  and  followers  are  greedy  and  covetous^ff

24.  One  whose  Prakritis  are  disaffected, JJ  one  exces-
sively addicted  to  sensual  pleasures,  one  who  is  fickle-hearted
about  his  counsels, §§  one  who  desecrates  the  gods||||  and  the
Brahman  as,


* The  author  now  proceeds  to  specify  the  parties  with  whom  peace'
should  not  be  concluded.  These  parties,  as  the  reader  will  see,  are’
twenty  in  number.  Immediately  after,  the  author,  furnishes  reasons  why
peace  should  not  be  made  with  them*

f The  Sanskrit  word  is  Vala  and  S.  W.  Jones  renders  it  into  “ A
boy”  j of  course  what  the  author  means  is  not  an  ordinary  boy,  but  a
boy-king*

J This  is  S.  W.  Jones's  translation,  the  original  word  is  a compound^
tneaning  literally  “one  suffering  long  from  an  illness,”

§ S.  Wi  Jones’s  rendering  is  ‘an  outcast,’  Ours  is  strictly  literal,

||  Who  flinches  from  a fight.

^f  S.  W.  Jones’s  translation  of  the  original  word  is  curious  j it  is*
* a cause  of  terror/  It  is  incomprehensible,  inasmuch  as  ‘a  cause  of
terror’  is  rather  the  party  with  whom  a hasty  conclusion  of  peace?
would  be  politic.  Our  rendering  is  appropriate  and  strictly  literal,

**  A covetous  prince  naturally  appropriates  all  booties  to  himself
and  deprives  las  soldiers  of  their  rightful  dues.  Thus  he  cultivates
their  ill- will  j which  goes  to  weaken  him  materially,

tf  If  the  followers  of  a king  be  covetous,  they  do  not  hesitate  to
sacrifice  their  sovereign’s  interests  for  a paltry  consideration.  Such  a
prince  therefore,  is  always  in  danger.

tt  For  Prakriti  refer  to  an  earlier  note*  The  Prakriti's  when  dis-
satisfied undermine  the  king’s  power  and  bring  about  his  speedy  fall.
S.  W.  Jones  renders  the  original  word  into  ‘ill-natured.’

■S§  The  prince  who  divulges  prematurely  his  counsels,  renders  himself
susceptible  of  an  easy  victory.  S.  W.  Jones’s  translation  is  wide  of  the
mark  here  also  * This  i-s  it  “Be  who  has  many  schemes  and  different


Jones’s  rendering  ii  this,  a contemner  of  the  gods  and
priests.*  It  is  believed  that  when  the  gods  and  the  Brahmanas  ar#


kAMANDAKIYA  NlTISA&A,


id

25.  Oue  who  is  under  the  influence  of  adverse  fate/*
otie  who  relies  too  much  on  chance  (or  fat'e), f one  who  is
famine-stricken5J  one  whose  armies  are  in  disoi:der,§.

z6 — 27.  One  in  an  unfamiliar  land,||  one  whose  foes
number  many,  one  who  takes  not  time  by  the  fore  Iock^
One  devoid  of  truth  and  justice,**— let  not  a wise  king  con-
clude peace  with  these  twenty  sorts  of  persons,  but  let  him
ever  harass  them  in  war;  for,  these,  when  assaulted,  speedily
fall  under  the  sway  of  their  enemy;


offended  they  can  bring  about  the  ruin  of  a king.  For  ‘ gods'  some  subs-
titute ‘ his  family-deities/ these  latter  are  special  images  that  receive
homage  from  the  family  as  long  as  it  continues.

* S.  W.  Jones's  translation  is  “one  who  denies  Providence/'  Pro-
bably the  translator  has  been  misled  by  the  word  Upahatas,  which
when  compounded  with  Daiva  has  a different  meaning  altogether.

t A king  depending  too  much  on  Providence,  is  consigned  to  a
singular  inactivity  which  goes  to  ruin  him.

X What  the  author  means  is  this  “ When  the  king's  territory
is  visited  with  a famine,  his  subjects  being  starved,  he  naturally  becomes
incapable  of  fighting.

S.  W.  Jone's  translation  is  this  ‘One  who  gains  a little  by  beggary/

§ Supply  ‘ through  the  prevalence  of  maladies,  discontent  and  dis-
obedience, &c.’

||  The  original  word  is  Adesastha  which  means  ‘dislodged  from  his
natural  site/  and  hence,  deprived  of  the  security  of  his  castles  and  advan-
tages of  the  soil  and  trenches  and  ditches  and  fortifications  in  it.  S*
W.  Jonesjgives  : — “One  who  is  in  any  fereign  country/

^fl  • Jones  s O translation  is  this  ‘‘hie  who  takes  not  the  fight
time  for  action/  Some  interpret  the  word  in  a different  way  thus
“When  the  king  comes  upon  evil  times  and  hard  days/'  this  latter
meaning  is  strained.  So  we  do  not  accept  it.  Another  which  is  prosible
and  meaning  seems  to  be  a little  is  more  correct,  is  ‘one  who  fights  not  in
season.'

**  A Prince  void  of  truth  and  justice,  is  alienated  from  his  subjects
by  his  mat -treatment  of  them.

With  these  parties  a king  should  not  make  peace,  inasmuch  as  if  war
is  waged  against  them,  the  chances  of  defeat  will  be  very  little.  So  h
would  be  impolitic  to  allow  these  kings  their  liberties  through  peaces
15'


KAMANDAKIYA  NITFSARA,


28.  ^People  wish  not  to  fight  for  the  cause  of  a boy-;
king  on  account  of  his  want  of  Prabhava.\  For,  what  mas
would  fight  for  the  interests  of  him  who  himself  is  unable  to
defend  them,  and  who  again  is  not  in  any  way  bound  to  him
(by  the  ties  of  kinship).

29.  An  old  king  and  one  long  sick,  should  not  be
concluded  peace  with,  inasmuch  as  they  are  devoid  of
that  element  of  regal  prowess  known  as  Utsaha  Sakti  +

4


* Having  specified  above  the  parties  with  whom  it  would  be  impolitic
to  conclude  peace,  the  author  now  proceeds  to  show  where  the  weakness
of  those  parties  lie,  by  a knowledge  of  which  an  assaulting  monarch
is  sure  to  obtain  advantage  over  them.  The  gist  of  what  the  author
has  said  above  and  what  he  is  going  to  say,  seems  to  be  this  that,  “ Fight
with  those  who  would  fall  an  easy  prey  to  you,  and  do  not  conclude
peace  with  them.”  The  strength  of  the  twenty  different  sorts  of  persons
enumerated  above,  is  undermined  some  way  or  other,  and  they  there
fore,  are  very  susceptible  of  being  defeated  and  dethroned.  A wis,
king  therefore,  should  not  give  these  parties  the  benefit  of  the  peaci
with  him,  but  should  add  to  his  own  territorial- wealth  by  incurring  the
least  trouble  and  danger.

1"  ^ younS  prince  is  naturally  weak  and  is  unacquainted  with  the
tortuous  courses  and  consequence  of  political  measures,  such  as  war
and  peace.  His  ministers,  army,  followers,  &c.,  do  not  entertain  that
amount  of  regard  for  him  which  would  deter  them  from  violating  his  autho-
rity. He  himself  again  is  physically  incompetent  to  face  the  hardhips  of  a
war  and  to  lead  legions  to  fight.  For  these  and  many  other  such
reasons,  his  subjects  hesitate  to  risk  a battle  for  his  sake  and  under
liis- leadership.  In  this  way,  he  is  materially  weakened,  and  is  left  to
the-  mercy  of  the  assailant,  who  if  prudent,  should  not  conclude  peace
with  him,  but  would  crush  him.  (For  Prabhdvu  mile  note  to  Sloka  1,

In  rendering  the  first  portion  of  the  sloka,  &-W.  Jones  commits  what
seems  to  be  a mistake.  His  translation  is  this  Men  seek  not  to  war
with  a boy  on  account  of  his  weakness,  nor  with  an  old  man  or  an  invalid,
through  want  of  power  in  them  to  transact  business.”  But  the  author
has  been  specifying  the  parties  against  whom  war  is  to  be  waged  and  who
should  not  be  concluded  peace  with.

J-  For  Utsdhasakti,  vide  note  to  Sloka  1,  Section  I.


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


ns

and  are  sure  to  be  crushed  by  their  own  kinsmen  (or
subjects).*

30.  A king  forsaken  by  his  kinsmen,  becomes  easily
extirpable,f  moreover  they  of  his  own  family  would  destroy
him,  if  they  could  be  won  over  by  some  personal  good
service.  J

31.  A coward,  by  abandoning  battle,  flies  to  his  own
end.§  And  even  a brave  monarch  is  deserted  on  the  field
of  battle  by  his  men,  if  these  latter  be  cowards. ||

* In  rendering  this  Sloka  we  have  been  a little  free  in  the  use  of
words,  with  a view  to  make  the  sense  all  the  more  clear.

t So  peace  should  not  be  made  with  him  ; but  his  dominions  should
be  confiscated,  as  he  would  not  be  able  to  offer  the  least  resistance,  being
deprived  of  the  assistance  of  those  who  alone  would  have  fought  hard
for  him.

t The  last  word  in  the  text  is  a compound  formed  of  Swartha
(self-interest)  and  Satkrita  (gratified).  Hence  it  means, — “ Gratified
(with  'the  assailant)  for  his  having  helped  in  the  furtherance  of  his  selfish
interests.”  What  the  author  wants  to  impress  seems  to  be  this,  that
the  assailant,  when  he  proceeds  against  an  out-cast-king,  should  win
over  the  latter’s  alienated  relations  by  helping  them  in  advancinggtheir
personal  interests  ; then  through  their  agency,  he  should  pull  down  the
out-cast.

S.  W.  Jones’s  translation  is  as  follows  < ”An  out-cast  is  deprived  of
happiness  ; even  they  of  his  own  family  seek  to  destroy  him  for  their
own  credit.”

Swartha  Satkrita  may  mean  also,  “ for  subserving  their  own  selfish
interests”,  but  it  can  never  have  the  meaning  ascribed  to  it  by  S,  W.
Jones,  neither  can  Sukhocheddya  have  the  meaning  given  to  it  by  the
same  scholar.

§ A cowardly  king,  through  a natural  aversion  for  war,  ever  shuns
it ; and  that  being  the  case,  when  attacked,  he  is  sure  to  surrender
himself  unconditionally  to  the  assailant,  which  means  his  destruction.  So,
it  would  be  impolitic  to  make  peace  with  him  whose  kingdom  could  be
appropriated  by  a mere  contraction  of  the  brow.  S.  W.  Jones’s  transla-
tion is  given  below.  ft  A coward,  through  aversion  for  wars,  naturally
flies  away.”

||  A king  whose  men  and  ministers  are  so  many  cowards,  cannot


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


116


32.  The  troops  of  a covetous  monarch,*  will  not  fieri, t
inasmnch  as  he  pays  them  poorly, f And  the  king,  wlTose
officers  are  greedy  and  covetous,  is  destroyed  by  them  when
they  are  bribed  by  the  enemy.J

33.  The  king,  whose  Prakritis  are  disaffected,  is  deser-
ted by  them  at  the  prospect  of  a war,§  and  he  who  is
excessively  addicted  to  sensual  pleasures,  becomes  so  weak  as
to  be  easily  crushed.  ||

stand  before  an  assailant,  inspite  of  all  his  bravery  ; for  they  would
abandon  him  to  his  fate,  at  the  slightest  prospect  of  a war  breaking  out.
Not  even  the  valorous  achievements  and  feats  of  heroism  of  that  king
would  be  enough  to  inspire  noble  sentiments  in  their  hearts.  For  the
last  line  of  the  text  the  commentary  gives  this  line,  viz.

‘‘Beeropi  Bhirupurushais  Sangrame,  hi  Pramuchyate

S.  W.  Jones  gives-"  In  battle,  even  a,  hero  is  mixed  in  flight  with
cowards."

dents ^hC  W°rd  m thC  t6Xt  'S  Amjivinas>  wIlich  literally  means  'depen-

t The  meaning  given  by  us  in  the  body,  is  based  on  the  commen-
tary. But  another  meaning  is  possible  and  that  is  this;  “ A covetous
monarch  shares  not  the  booties  obtained,  with  his  troops,  who  therefore

na  ura  y gru  ge  to  fight  for  him.”  The  word  in  the  text  etymologically
means,  one  who  does  not  equitably  distribute  hence  the  latter  mean-
mg  seems  to  be  more  correct.

t A monarch  who  is  imprudent  enough  to  entertain  covetous

prindnledn!”6  **  ^ deStro^d  thr°“&h  their  agency  ; for  these  un-
principled fellows  would  not  hesitate  the  least  to  betray  their  king  to

leC  ““y  f°r  a pa‘try  bribe-  Hence<  « the  assailant  is  wise  enough,
makes  use  of  these  potent  tools,  and  does  not  want  to  conclude
peace  with  such  a sovereign.

by  ~ Of  bribery

ts,  &c.  ^ S.  W.  Jones  s translation  is  as  follows.

• J'The  ^ects  of  am!ser  will  not  fight,  because  they  share  not  his

We^ert  **

«;Jr;ke“;he  lm  vir“,,ly  p°ra,e“-  “d  “ -i'r

J Such  a king  occupied  with  the  task  of  gratifying  his  senses
neglects  his. royal  functions  and  thus  cultivates  the  ill-will  of  his  people,


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


1 1 7

34.  The  king  who  is  undecided  in  his  judgments  (coun-
sels),* becomes  odious  to  his  counsellors ; and  owing  to
his  infirmity  of  purpose,  they  neglect  him  when  the  time  for
(joint)  action  comes.

35.  A contemner  of  the  gods  and  the  Brahmanas,  and
an  ill-fated  monarch,  these  two  are  reduced  of  their  own
accord,  through  the  consequences  of  their  arrant  impiety.f

36.  “ Providence  is  certainly  the  cause  of  prosperity  and
adversity/  The  fatalist  arguing  in  the  above  manner,  gives
up  all  personal  exertions. J

who,  at  the  first  opportunity  join  with,  any  other  king  that  may  come
with  a hostile  intention  ; thus  virtually  the  king  becomes  helpless,  and  is
easily  disposed  of  by  his  foe.  The  following  is  the  rendering  of  S.  W.
Jones.

tl  An  ill-natured  man  is  deserted  in  the  battle  by  belter  natures,  and
the  sensualist  who  abounds  in  pleasure  is  overcome  by  it.”

* The  original  word  is  Anehachitta-mantras  which  is  a compound
meaning  “ many-minded  regarding  his  counsels.”  We  translate  it
a little  freely  in  order  to  be  consistent.  The  following  is  S.  W.  Jones's
rendering.  “He  who  has  many  projects  of  his  own  is  a foe  to  good
counsellors.”

f The  first  few  words  of  the  Sloka  may  have  another  meaning.
In  that  case  the  rendering  would  undergo  this  change  in  the  last  part
w.,  for  “ through  the  consequences,  &c.,  we  shall  read  “for  virtue
is  ever  powerful.”  The  double  meaning  seems  to  hinge  on  the  euphonic
combination  that  may  or  may  not  be  supposed  to  exist  in  Sadadharma>
&c.  What  the  author  means  is  this  that,  such  kings  are  subjugated
by  their  enemies  without  the  least  difficulty,  for,  by  their  impious  deeds
they  alienate  both  God  and  man  from  themselves.  Thus  they  form
an  easy  prey  for  the  conqueror.  S.  W.  Jones's  translation  is  this
“ A contemner  of  the  Gods  and  priests,  as  well  as  the  opposcr  of
Providence,  is  continually  tormented  with  grief  by  force  of  his  own
impiety.”

t What  the  author  means  is  this ; — A monarch  depending  too
much  on  Providences  ascribes  all  that  many  come  to  pass,  to  its  agency.
And  he  consoles  himself,  in  the  case  of  an  unfortunate  occurrence,
saying,  * what  could  my  exertions  have  done  when  Fate  was  so  much
against  me?  Surely  Destiny  is  superior  to  human  endeavours.”  This


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


118

37.  The  monarch  whose  territory  is  visited  by  a famine,
gives  his  liberty  up  of  his  own  acord .*  He  also  whose  troops
are  discontented  has  not  the  power  to  risk  a battle-f

38.  A king  in  an  unfamiliar!  land  is  crushed  even
by  a puny  adversary;  witness,  the  case  of  the  king  of
elephants  who  when  in  water,  is  overpowered  even  by  the
smallest  shark.


servile  reliance  on  Providence  prompts  him  not  to  put  forth  his  exertions
for  the  defence  of  his  kingdom.  Thus  he  remains  unprepared  when
assaulted  by  an  inimical  sovereign,  and  so  falls  an  easy  prey  to  him.

Jones  s rendering  of  this  sloka  is  : — Providence  is  certainly  the  giver
of  wealth  and  poverty  ; let  a man  therefore  meditate  first  of  all  on  Provi-
dence ; but  not  so  as  to  prevent  his  own  exertions.

* We  have  been  a little  free  here,  for  the  sake  of  lucidity.  The
meaning  of  the  author  is  this : — When  famine  rages  in  his  country  and
when  there  is  no  food  to  live  upon,  its  king  surrenders  himself  of  his  own
accord  without  offering  the  least  resistance,  merely  for  this  two-fold
consideration,  (1)  That  none  of  his  subjects  would  then  fight  for  him  ;
that  even  if  they  do  so,  they  will  be  reduced  through  their  want  of  food  ;
(2)  And  that  by  surrendering  himself  he  would  at  least  then  be  able
to  maintain  himself  and  his  people  on  the  food  that  the  conqueror  would
naturally  import  for  preserving  his  newly  acquired  domain.  S.  W.
Jones’s  translation  of  this  part  is  this:— “A  miserable  beggar  is  self-
tormented.  It  is  needless  to  say  that  it  is  wide  of  the  mark.

t The  king>  in  whose  army  discontent  and  disorder,  prevail  cannot
confidently  encounter  a foe,  for  it  is  almost  certain  that  his  troops  will
desert  him  on  the  field  of  battle.  The  commentary  parapharases  the  word
Valavyasanaksaktasya  thus " The  army  whose  ranks  number  many
warriors  who  have  not  been  duly  honored  for  their  services,  and  who,
in  consequence  thereof,  are  very  much  disaffected.”  S.  W.  Jones’s

rendering  is  as  follows  " He  who  has  a bad  army  lias  no  power  to
fight.”

J For  Aieshastha  refpr  to  an  earlier  note.  The  commentary  para-
phrases it  thus.  “ In  a country  which  is  other  than  the  one  suited  for  his
site.”  For  Hanyate  the  commentary  substitutes  Avijiyate  which  virtually
cenveys  the  same  idea.  S.  W.  Jones’s  translation  is  this.  “ A foreign
invader  is  soon  overpowered  even  by  a weak  foe.  As  the  shark  monster
of  the  lake,  though  small,  seizes  the  king  of  elephants.’  Apakarsati  in  the
Uxi  literally  means  “ draees  in”  from  krisa  to  draw,


KAMANDAKlYA  NITISARA.


i ig

39-  The  king  whose  enemies  number  many,  always

trembles  in  fear  of  them,  like  a pigeon,  surrounded  by

hawks;  and  in  whatsoever  path  he  treads,  he  is  speedily

destroyed  by  them-*

40.  One  who  unseasonably  launches-}-  upon  war,  is

speedily  crushed  by  one  who  fights  in  season.  Witness  the
example  of  the  crow  overpowered  by  the  owl,  when  at
night  the  former  is  deprived  of  its  vision-!

41.  Under  no  circumstance  whatever  should  peace  be
concluded  with  one  devoid  of  truth  and  justice,  in  as  much
as  owing  to  his  vicious  propensities,  he  will  soon  act  in
direct  contravention  of  the  treaty,  howsoever  sacred  it
may  be.§


* A king  having  many  foes  is  sure  to  be  crushed,  for  it  is  impossible-
that  one  would  stand  against  many.  S.  W.  Jones’s  rendering  is  as  fol-
lows “ He  who  trembles  among  a multitude  of  foes  (like  a pegion
among  eagles),  in  whatsoever  path  he  treads,  is  assuredly  destroyed1
even  by  him  with  whom  he  travels  on  the  road.”  The  last  portion  hr
superfluous.

+ For  Akalyuktasainyastn  the  commentary  gives  Akulyuktastwa-
chirdt,  which  latter  reading  we  have  accepted.

+ The  enmity  between  the  owl  and  the  crow  is  well  known  in  India,
so  much  so,  that  it  has  past  into  a proverb.  Irf  the  day-light  the  crow
attacks  the  owl,  that  can  not  bear  the  sun’s  rays,  while  by  night  when
the  crows  are  deprived  of  their  vision  the  owls  attack  them.  Here  is
S.  W.  Jones’s  translation  of  the  Sloka  ‘ He  who  engages  unseasonably,
is  overcome  by  him  who  fights  at  a proper  time;  as  the  crow  was
reduced  to  weakness  by  the  owl  who  attacked  him  by  night.”

§ S.  W.  Jones’s  translation  of  the  Sloka  is  as  follows  Never
make  peace  with  a man  void  of  truth  and  justice  who,  let  his  treaty  he
ever  so  sacred,  will  soon  be  led  by  his  improbity  to  a violation  of  it.”


120


KAMANDAKIYA  NlTlSARA.


42.  * A king  true  to  his  promises,-}*  an  Aryya;\  s£
virtuous  ■ prince,  an  Anaryya ,§  one  having  many||  brothers,
a very  powerful  sovereign,  and  one  who  has  come  off
victorious  in  many  wars,^[  these  seven  are  said  to  be  the
parties  with  whom  peace  should  be  concluded.

43.  He**  that  keeps  his  troth  inviolate  never  acts
in  contravention  of  the  treaty  he  concludes.  And  it  is

* The  author  now  proceeds  to  enumerate  the  parties  with  whom'
it  would  be  politic  and  wise  to  conclude  peace.  The  principle  that  under
lies  his  advice  seems  to  be  this  that,  it  is  better  to  be  in  peace  with  those
who  are  difficult  of  being  overcome  and  with  whom,  if  war  is  waged,  the
chances  of  success  will  be  limited.  The  one  consideration  that  should
always  be  like  a sacred  duty  to  a sovereign  ; is  the  prosperity  of  the*
territory  over  which  he  rules  ; and  for  its  sake  the  monarch  should  pru-
dently launch  upon  war  or  conclude  peace.  Where  there  is  the  least
chance  of  securing  any  advantage  by  peace,  it  shoufld  not  be  discarded.
But  it  would  not  be  politic  to  risk  a war  merely  in  the  hope  of  getting
some  advantage  in  case  of  victory,  which  in  war  is  very  doubtful.  The
keynote  of  the  author’s  political  creed  seems  to  be  : — u Move  in  the  line
of  least  resistance  f so  crush  them  who  are  weaker  than  yourself,  and  pay
homage  to  them  and  cultivate  their  good-will  who  are  stronger/’

f The  word  in  the  text  is  Saiya  which  means  “ true.”  Hence  he’
who  keeps  his  promises  or  troth  inviolate  even  at  the  loss  of  his  very  life.

* Aiyya  lit  means  the  Hindu  and  Aryan  people  as  distinguished
from  the  Anaryyas  or  the  aboriginies.  Hence  it  has  come  to  signify  one
faithful  to  the  religion  and  laws  of  his  country  and  of  noble  birth  and
character.  ./■

§ The  Andryyas  are  the  people  that  inhabit  a land  before  it  is
conquered  by  an  advanced  race  ; and  as  such,  they  generally  are  far
below  in  the  scale  of  civil  Nation  than  tHfeir  conquerors.  Hence  the
word  has  come  to  signify  base  fellows  of  low  moral  standard  whose
mode  of  life  is  considerably  vile.

||  His  power  lying  in  the  wisdom  of'  his  counsel's  and  in  th‘e  efficiency
of  bis  men  and  munitions.

If  He  that  has  obtained  victory  in  many  wars  is  sure  to  conquer  so
it  is  unwise  to  proceed  hostilely  against  him  . ;

**  The  author  now  proceeds  to  furnish  reasons  why  peace  should  be
concluded  with  these  parties  ; he  also  emphasises  the  fact  that  if  war  be?
waged  against  these,  defeat  will  be  the  inevitable  result.


KaMANDAKIYA  nitisara.


121


certain  that  an  Aryya  will  never  become  an  Anaryya  even
if  he  loses  his  life.*

44*  All  his  subjects  take  up  arms  for  a virtuous  prince
when  he  is  assailed.f  A virtuous  sovereign  is  invincible
owing  to  his  love  of  his  subjects,  and  to  his  piety  of  nature.J
45-  Peace  should  be  made  with  an  Anaryya, \ for,  even  he,
meeting  an  enemy, ||  eradicates  him  like  the  son  of  Renuk&k


, . ,.,That  1S’  6Ven  lf  an  honorable  and  high-born,  person  has  to  lose
his  life  he  will  not  change  his  nature  and  be  vile  like  an  Anaryya  or  dis-
honest  fellow.  S.  W.  Jones’s  translation  is  this  : —

“ who  keefs  troth  inviolate  will  not  alter  his  nature  after  a peace,
even  if  he  loses  his  life.  A good  man  most  assuredly  will  not  become
bad.”

f And  when  he  is  thus  supported  by  his  subjects,  the  assailant  has
no  chance  of  vanquishing  him  ; on  the  other  hand,  it  is  not  unlikely
that  the  latter’s  troops  will  rebel  against  him  for  his  trying  to  annoy  a
virtuous  and  beloved  monarch.

■ * A v!rtuous  Prince  naturally  cherishes  his  subjects  like  his  own

children.  So,  they  become  very  loyal  to  him  and  look  upon  him
as  their  father,  and  do  not  hesitate  to  sacrifice  their  life  and  property
for  his  sake;  such  a prince,  so  dearly  loved  by  his  people,  is  incapable
of  suffering  defeat.  Dukhochchedyas  lit  means  * he  who  is  extir-
pated with  difficulty.’  Prajanuragdt  may  have  another  meaning,  viz.,
through  the  loyalty  of  his  subjects.  S.  W.  Jones’s  translation  is  as
follows.  For  a just  man,  all  the  world  fight.  A just  prince  prevents
calamity  by  love  of  his  subjects,  and  of  virtue.’’

§ Vide  Supra,  note  to  Sloka  43.  It  may  mean  here  a bad  man.

||  The  commentary  introduces  a change  in  reading  by  substituting
5a  dwisa  prapya  for  Samprhpya.  The  change  we  have  accepted.

f Renuht  is  the  wife  of  the  sage  Jamadagni  the  mother  of  Parasu-
rdma  a celebrated  Brdhmana-warrior  regarded  to  be  the  sixth  incarnation
of  Vishnu.  The  allusion  referred  to  here,  is  this.  King  Kdrtaviryya
went  to  the  hermitage  of  his  father  an4,carried  off  his  cow.  But  Parasu-

wTa 't60,  he  r6tUrned  home’  fou?ht  wkh  king  and  killed  the  latter.
When  the  king’s  sons  heard  of  the  fate  that  had  overtaken  their  sire,
became  very  angry  and  repairing  to  the  hermitage  and  finding
Jamadagni  alone,  they  shot  him  dead.  When  Parasurdma,  who  was
not  then  at  home,  returned,  he  became  very  much  exasperated  and
16


1,22


kamandakiya  nitisara.


destroying  the  Kshatriyas.*

46.  Just  as  a thick  cluster  of  bamboost  surrounded  on
afl  sides  by  thorny  plants,  cannot  be  easily  eradicated,  so  a
king,  supported  by  his  many  brothers,  cannot  be  easily

subdued.f

47.  When  a king,  ever  so  vigilant  and  assiduous, §
is  assaulted  by  a sovereign  stronger  than  himself,  there  is  no


made  the  dreadful  vow  of  exterminating  the  Kshatriya  race.  He  suc-
ceeded in  fulfilling  his  vow,  and  is  said  to  have  ‘rid  the  earth  thrice  seven
times  of  the  royal  race/

* We  can  not  help  remarking  here  that  this  Sloka  is  not  very  definite
about  the  idea  it  professes  to  convey.  The  example  given  seems  to  be
out-of-place  ; the  reasons  furnished  are  not  cogent.  However  we  must
take  it  as  it  is.  The  meaning  seems  to  be  this  A king  should  not  hate
the  aborigines  of  a land  but  should  be  in  friendly  terms  with  them  ; for
there  may  come  times  when  he  will  profit  by  such  alliance.  To  cite
an  example  from  the  R&m^yana,  R&machandra  was  saved  from  many
dangers  through  his  friendship  with  the  Chand&Ia  Guhaka,  who  belonged
to  the  vilest  and  most  abominable  caste  existing  in  India.  S.  W.
Jones’s  translation  of  the  passage  is  as  follows  : “ Peace  should  be  made
even  with  a bad  man,  when  ruin  is  impending ; not  for  the  sake  of
his  protection,  but  from  consideration  of  time/’
f Venu  may  also  mean  ‘reeds/

% The  last  portion  of  the  Sloka  has  been  rendered  a little  freely.
It  is  superflous  to  comment  that  when  the  several  royal  brothers  live  in
amity  and  when  there  are  love  and  respect  binding  them  to  one
another,  there  is  scarcely  any  chance  for  a foreign  invader  to  subdue
such  a king.  It  is  intestine  discord  that  has  been  the  ruin  of  many  a
kingdom.  S.  W.  Jones’s  translation  is  given  below  .—“As  dust  when
intermixed  with  thorns  cannot  be  trampled  on,  so  a king,  who  has  many
brethren  cannot  be  subdued.”  The  difference  in  the  first  portion  of  the
translation  might  probably  have  arisen  out  of  a misprint  in  the  scholars
text  which  probably  substitutes  Renu  for  Venu,  the  Sanskrit  letters
(Ra)  and  {Ba)  resembling  one  another  very  closely.  Renu  means
/dust/  A;  ;;v

$ All  his  efforts  and  perseverance  avail  him  nothing  when  he  is  to
combat  with  superior  might,  and  in  spite  of  them,  he  is  sure  to  be

* lift  ip  SKI!  i $!f  * i x


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.  1 23


safety  for  him,  as  there  is  none  for  a deer  under  the  claws  of
a lion,  (save  in  the  conclusion  of  peace).

48.  When  a powerful  sovereign  wants  to  seize  a little
only  (of  his  enemy's  territory  or  treasure),  even  then  will
he  kill  the  latter,  like  a lion  killing  an  infuriate  elephant.
Therefore,  one  desiring  his  own  good,  should  conclude  peace
with  such  an  adversary.*

49.  There  are  precedents  to  prove  that  it  is  better  not  to
fight  with  a stronger  foe.f  For,  never  can  clouds  roll  in  a
direction  opposite  to  that  of  the  wind.J

50.  Prosperity  leaves  not  that  king  who  bows  low  before
a powerful  adversary  and  puts  forth  his  prowess  in  proper
season,  even  as  rivers  (that  naturally  flow  downwards)  cannot
flow  upwards. §

* The  meaning  of  the  author  is  certainly  this,  but  his  expression  is
not  clear.  'When  a powerful  adversary  invades  another’s  kingdom  only
to  get  a little  of  the  latter’s  territory  or  treasure,  it  is  advisable  for  the
latter  to  conclude  peace.  For,  like  a lion  that  cannot  possibly  feed  on
the  entire  carcass  of  the  elephant,  but  kills  it  all  the  same,  the  stronger
enemy  would  kill  the  weaker  one,  though  he  does  not  want  to  appropriate
the  whole  of  the  latter’s  dominions/  But  when  the  powerful  king  wants  to
confiscate  the  whole  kingdom,  it  is  better  to  die  fighting  for  liberty  than
to  surrender  one’s  self.

f The  first  part  of  the  Sloka  admits  of  another  construction,  which
is  as  follows  There  is  no  evidence  to  justify  the  statement  that  a
powerful  antagonist  should  always  be  fought  against.”  This  though  it
does  not  change  the  meaning  of  the  passage  materially,  is  still  worthy
of  notice.  The  construction  becomes  different  as  we  take  Na  with
Yodhvabyam  or  Asti,  The  construction  we  have  given,  points  out  the
appropriateness  of  the  example  embodied  in  the  next  line,  which  in  the
dther  case  seems  out-of-place.

f S.  W.  Jones’s  translation  is  as  follows: — "It  is  not  advisable  to
fight  with  a hero  ; even  a cloud  cannot  go  in  opposition  to  the  wind.”
The  author  enjoins  the  conclusion  of  peace  with  the  powerful,  for, trying  to
go  against  them,  a king  is  blown  away  like  clouds  trying  to  go  against  the
wind.

§ The  principle  inculcated  in  the  first  part  of  the  Sloka  is  quite
apparent.  None  can  deny  that  it  is  safe  to  be  in  peace  with  one  more


124


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


51,  Like  the  son  of  Jamadagni,*  every  king  who,  in
all  places,  at  airtimes  and  over  every  enemy,  obtains  victory
in  battle,  enjoys  the  earth  merely  through  the  prestige  of
prowess.f

52,  He,  with  whom  a king  victorious  in  many  battles
concludes  peace,  is  sure  to  bring  his  foes  under  his  sway  in  no
time,  even  through  the  prowess  of  his  new  ally. J

53,  Never  should  an  intelligent  prince  trust  his  adver-
sary even  if  he  be  bound  by  the  ties  of  a treaty, § inasmuch


powerful  than  one's  self.  But  at  the  same  time,  the  weaker  of  the  two
must  not  miss  any  opportunity  in  which,  by  the  help  of  his  prowess  ar\d
energy,  he  has  any  chance  of  crushing  his  powerful  rival.  The  author
means  this  : 'The  comparatively  weaker  sovereign  should  remain  in  ap-
parent peace  with  others  more  powerful  than  himself,  watching  opportu-
nities to  establish  his  superiority.  This  is  the  high  road  to  royal  pros-
perity. Pratipa  means,  contrary,  adverse.

* Vide  Supra  note  to  Sloka  45.

*)*  What  the  author  means  is  this,  that  a king  who  has  had  the
fortune  of  obtaining  a large  number  of  victories,  becomes  so  well-
known  and  feared  that,  he  can  enjoy  his  kingdom  even  through  his
mere  prestige  although  at  the  same  time  there  may  be  serious
diminution  of  his  strength.  S.  W.  Jones  gives  " Like  the  son  of
Jamadagni,  every  king  who  in  all  places  and  at  all  times,  obtains  victory
in  battle,  enjoys  glory."

J What  the  author  means  is  this.  A monarch  concluding  peace
with  another  victorious  in  many  battles,  enjoys  much  profit,  inasmuch  as
his  adversaries  knowing  his  alliance  with  the  ever-victorious  king,  yield
themselves  up  without  any  resistance  whatever,  as  they  know  that  that
>e  unavailing.  S.  W„  Jones's  translation  of  the  Sloka  is  as  follows  ;
who  makes  peace  with  a prince  who  has  been  victorious  In  many
wars,  assuredly  overcomes  his  bwn  enemies.  This  king  therefore  who
been  often  a conqueror  is  he  with  whom  peace  ought  to  be  made."

§ The  anxiety  of  the  author  for  the  safety  of  the  royal  personages
so  keen  that  after  embodying  such  an  elaborate  instruction  regarding
parties  to  a peace,  he  would  not  be  content ; but  warns  the
confidence  on  allies,  and  not  to  be  lulled  in  a sense  of
thought  of  the  ■ conclusion  of  peace.


KAMANDAK1YA  NITI$ARA,


12$


as,  in  the  days  of  yore,  Indra  while  openly  declaring,  a cessa-
tion of  hostility,  slew  Vritra  (when  the  latter  was  thrown  oufc
of  his  guard.)*  ,

54.  The  enjoyment  of  royaltyf  either  by  a son  or  by,
a father,  changes  his  nature  considerably,  J and  therefore  is
it  said  that  the  ways  of  princes  are  different  from  those  of
ordinary  people. §

55.  When  assaulted  by  a powerful  adversary,  a sovereign
should  seek  shelter  inside  his  castles,  whence  he  should
make  vigorous  efforts,  and  for  his  own  liberation,  invoke  the
assistance  of  another  king  still  more  powerful  than  his
assailant.||

* The  allusion  in  the  last  part  of  the  Sloka  is  obscure.  Vritra  was  a
powerful  demon  who  was  killed  by  Indra.  But  we  know  nothing  of  the
perfidy  of  Indra  referred  to  here  by  the  author.  The  reader  is  referred
to  our  translation  of  Srimadvhagavatam,  Book  VI,  where  an  elaborte
description  of  the  battle  could  be  found.

The  commentator  suggests  certain  minor  changes  in  readings
Samhita  for  Samdhita  and  Adrohe  for  Adroka .

t F°r  Rajyatnnicha  the  commentary  substitutes  Rajyalida,  which
latter  reading  we  have  accepted.

t The  first  line,  lit.  translated,  would  stand  thus  : — “A  low-minded
father  or  a son  becomes  susceptible  of  perversion  when  royalty  devolves
on  them.”

§ What  the  author  means  seems  to  be  this  .—“The  filial  or  pater-
nal affection  that  is  ordinarily  found  to  subsist  between  a father  and  a son,
could  not  always  be  looked  for  in  the  royal  father  or  son.  Their  exalted
ranks  swing  their  heads,  and  their  conduct  become  unnatural.  It  has  been
wisely  said  “Uneasy  lies  the  head  that  wears  the  crown”  for,  it  cannot
•even  find  solace  in  the  lap  of  the  father  or  the  son.  What  made  the
author  put  in  this  Sloka  here  is  this  that,  he  has  already  warned  sover-
eigns not  to  trust  allies  ; he  also  advises  them  not  to  trust  their  own  father
or  their, sons,  for  royalty  is  like  an  intoxicating  liquor  having  the  power
to  corrupt  the  whole  inner  man.

II  The  author  now  proceeds  to  describe  what  should  be  done  by  the
king  who  is  unfortunate  enough  to  be  assailed  by  an  adversary  who
vybuld  not  consent  to  conclude  peace.  The  advice  given,  as  the  reader
cm  see,  is  perfectly  politic  and  none  the  less  diplomatic.


1 26


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA,


56.  Like*  a lion  attacking  an  elephant,  a monarch
forming  a right  estimate  of  his  own  Utsahasakti^ f can  fall
upon  another  superior  to  him.  This  is  what  the  son  of
Bharadwajat  says.

57.  A single  lion  crushes  a thousand  herds  of  huge  tusked
elephants  ; therefore,  working  himself  up  into  fury  equal
to  that  of  a lion,  a (weaker)  sovereign  should  fall  upon  his
(powerful)  adversary. §

58.  {[Of  a sovereign,  who  exerting  himself  to  the  best


* The  author  now  points  out  what  is  to  be  done  in  the  absence  of
a sovereign  competent  to  help  the  one  assailed  by  a powerful  adversary.
In  this  case,  the  weaker  monarch  should  at  first  carefully  judge  his
Utsahasakti  (Vide  below)  and  then  he  should  fall  upon  the  assailant.
That  there  is  chance  of  success,  the  author  exemplifies  by  citing  the
case  of  the  lion  slaying  the  elephant,  which  latter  is  much  stronger  and
larger  in  proportion  than  the  former.

f Utsahasakti  we  have  explained  in  an  earlier  note  (Vide  note  to
Sloka  I,  Sec.  I).  But  the  meaning  the  author  here  wants  it  to  convey
is  a little  wider.  It  means  not  only  the  power  of  energy,  but  also
agility,  quickness  and  activity  which  are  the  qualities  incident  to  an
energetic  nature.  Utsahasakti  here  refers  also  to  the  other  Saktis  of  the
sovereign,  and  it  includes,  the  efficiency  of  the  army  and  the  abundance
of  the  sinews  of  war.

t The  son  of  Bharadwaja  is  the  celebrated  Drona,  the  military
preceptor  of  the  Kurus  and  the  Pandavas.  He  was  born  out  of  a


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


127


fcf  his  powers,  can  crush  his  superior  with  his  army,*  the
'other  enemies  become  conquered  by  his  (this  display  of)
prowess  only.f

59.  Where  in  war  victory  is  doubtful,  (in  that  case)  peace
should  be  concluded  even  with  one  equal  in  every  respect;!
for,  as  Vrihaspati§  says,  “ Embark  not  in  any  project
where  success  is  uncertain.,,)|.

60.  For  these  reasons,  the  sovereign  that  desires  his  pros-
perity to  reach  the  acme,l  should  conclude  peace  even
with  one  equal  to  him  in  all  respects.  The  clash  betweeft
two  unblaked  jars  surely  becomes  destructive  of  both.**

61.  Sometimesft  by  resorting  to  (uncertain)  war  both
the  parties  reap  destruction.  Were  not  Sunda  and  Upa-
sunda,  bothJJ  equally  powerful,  destroyed  by  fighting  with
each  other  ?


them  ; and  they  fall  an  easy  prey  to  him.  In  this  way,  without  the
evils  of  war,  he  succeeds  in  extending  his  empire,  which  is  the  highest
ambition  a sovereign  may  cherish.

* For  Sasainasya  the  commentator  gives  Alpasainasya .
f For  Pvatapasidhena  the  commentator  substitutes  Prai&pasidha .

+ The  sum  and  substance  of  the  author’s  advice  is  embodied  in  the
text  of  this  Sloka,  which  is  very  sound  and  statesman-like.

§ Vide  an  earlier  note.

||  S.  W.  Jones’s  translation  of  the  Sloka  is  as  follows: — “Let  a
king  seek  peace  for  the  love  of  religion  ; in  war  success  is  doubtful ; but
in  making  peace  let  no  man  doubt.  So  said  Vrihaspati/'

U"  The  commentary  suggests  some  minor  changes  in  the  readings
which  are  as  follows  : — For  Tatsamprcwiddhe  it  reads,  A$ampraviddh6
and  Abkibriddhikhma  for  Ativriddkikama .

**  The  last  part  of  the  Sloka  hints  at  the  result  that  may  be  expect-
ed when  two  princes  equal  in  prowess  happen  to  fight  with  each  other.
Apakkayo  means  ‘not  maturely  burnt/

ft  The  author  further  illustrates  the  instruction  given  in  the  last
part  of  the  preceding  sloka,  by  saying  that  war  between  two  equally
powerful  princes  is  destructive  of  both.

U Sunda  and  Upasunda  were  two  brother  demons,  the  sons  of
Nikumbha,  They  got  a boon  from  the  Creator  that  they  would  not  die


I2g  kamandakiya  nitisara.

.Even  th«  most  degraded  and  powerless  enemyt
should  be  made  peacef  with,  when  calamity  threatens  §
inasmuch  as,  attacking  at  that  time,  he  may  cause  trouble
(to  the  mind)ij  like  a drop  of  water  caus.ng  pam  when  it
falls  on  a lacerated  limb. IT


IZTtZ'U  and  while  quarrelling  for  her,  they  killed  each  other.

* The  text  of  the  Slolta  has  been  considerabty  changed  by  the  com-
mentator in  order  to  wring  out  a plausible  meaning.  The  Sloka  specks
the  occasion  when  peace  is  to  be  made  even  with  a low-born  person.  We
notice  the  changes  of  reading  in  the  following  notes.

+ The  word  in  the  text  is  Viheena  for  which  the  commentary  gives
Atiheena.  The  commentator  suggests  Atiheena  to  mean  ‘in  very  bad
mrcumstances.’  This  meaning  is  good.  The  author  has  said  before
that  peace  should  not  be  made  with  those  who  are  liable  to  be  easily
conquered  ; but  there  are  occasions  when  even  such  an  adversary  should
be  made  peace  with.

$ For ISusandhopi  the  commentary  gives  Sandheya ,

§ For  Agatas  the  commentator  reads  Agate .

| For  Himavat  the  commentary  suggests  Hi  manas.

For  Kshatam  the  commentator  gives  Kshatt.  The  whole  Sloka
with  the  changes  of  reading  noted  above  would  read  thus
“Atiheenopi  S andhey as  Vyasane  ripur agate,

Patandunoti  hi  manas  tayavinduriba  kshateH

What  the  autor  means  is  this “Ordinarily  peace  should  not  be
made  with  a weak  and  low-born  adversary,  as  he  can  be  defeated
with  ease.  But  when  you  are  threatened  by  any  grave  calamity  yoo?
Lt  conclude  peace  with  him,  so  that  your  anxiety  on  his  score  will  be
L Monarchs  weaker  than  yourself  though  ordinarily  can  do*
to  you,  yet  they  may  afflict  you  when  you  will  be  overwhelmed
sestets  catastrophe  ; just  as  water  though  it  does  not  give  pair*
“ 1 When  yosi  ate  wounded.


7i  %


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


I2g

63.  If*  on  such  occasions,t  the  comparatively  weak
monarch  refuses;  to  make  peace,  the  reason  is  to  be  found
in  his  mistrust^  (of  the  other  party).  In  that  case,  gain-
ing the  former's  confidence,  the  other  party  should  ruthlessly
crush  him.§

64.  Having||  concluded  peace  with  a monarch  more
powerful  than  himself,  a king  exerting  carefully  to  please  the
former,^  should  so>  serve  him  as  to  gain  his  confi-
dence.**

* As  in  the  previous,  so  in  this  Sloka  also,  various  changes  in
reading  have  been  introduced ; and  in  lieu  of  noticing  the  changes
separately,  we  give  below  the  Sloka  as  it  would  be|when  the  readings  are
all  amended  : —

“Heena  chet  Sandhi  na  gachchet  tatra  keturhisamsay as
Tasya  Visramvamdlakshya  praharettatinisthurarn”

The  author  here  suggests  the  measure  that  should  be  resorted  to,  in
the  case  of  the  weaker  king's  refusal  to  make  peace.  The  Sloka  as  given
in  the  text,  may  give  some  meaning,  but  that  would  not  be  suited  to  the
context.  Literally  rendered  it  would  be  this  : — ‘Never  desire  to  make
peace  with  the  low,  the  reason  being,  there  is  much  uncertainty  in  such  a
treaty  (and  hence  it  will  not  last  long).  Therefore  securing  their  confi-
dence, a king  should  smite  them  down,  actuated  by  desire  for  gain.'
Even  here,  we  have  to  change  a little  of  the  text,
f When  calamity  threatens.

t This  part  of  the  text  seems  to  be  vicious.  The  commentator  has
not  suggested  any  emendation.  The  emendation  embodied  in  the  chang-
ed reading  of  the  Sloka  is  our  own.  Samsaya  means  ‘doubt*  or  'mis-
trust* ,*  therefore  A samsaya  means  'certainty'  ‘belief'  &c.  Thus  we  can
make  out  some  sense  if  we  read  Asamsayas .

§ The  last  portion  contains  advice  as  to  how  such  refractdi*y
kfegs  should  be  dealt  with.  ^

||  The  author  now  proceeds  to  determine  the  duty  of  a weaker
monarch  when  he  concludes  peace  with  one  stronger  than  himself.

IF  For  pranisya  pratdpavan,  the  commentary  gives  Tarftanu
praiiydtnavSn . We  have  translated  the  reading  given  in  the  commen-
tary. There  is  another  minor  change  in  the  next  line  of  the  Sloka,  which
needs  no  explanation,

,**The  strain*  in  which  the  author  sings  is  this  .—“When  peace  is
made  with  a more  powerful  king,  try  to  gain  his  confidence  by  hook  or.

* 7


130


KAMANJDAKIYA  NITISARA.


65'  Unsuspected*  and  ever  watchful  and  always  ?n.
scrutable  in  his  expressions  and  designs,  he  (the  weaker  kina)
should  speak  only  those  words  that  would  be  agreeable?*
But  be  should  do  what  it  is  his  duty  to  do.J  ' ' ;

66.  Through  confidence  intimacy  may  be  secured  •
through  confidence  an  act  (of  selfish  interest)  mav  be  success’
fully  achieved. § It  was  through  her  confidence  on  him
t.at  the  lord  of  the  celestials  was  able  to  destroy  the  foetus


>}  crook;,  and  then  taking  advantage  of  the  intimate  knowledge  that

you  would  gam  of  his  affairs,  crush  him  completely.  Whether  you  nmk!
peace  with  the  weaker  or  the  stronger  king,  always  try  to  crush  him  so
hat  you  will  be  relieved  of  the  fetter  that  peace  necessarily  puts  on  ym/
It  seems  that  the  author  would  not  hesitate  to  inculcate  the  sacrifice

do  notkrf  "1  Z ^ *'  **  °f  ^cement.  ' We

do  not  know  what  ultimate  good  such  a policy  would  bring.  What  we
Llt  rendeied  would  be,  ‘confided  upon/

pon  mm.  I Inis  he  would  have  every  opportunity  for  serving  t •
own  end  to  slay  the  stronger  king.  “/Viy*”  words  are  as

J ’ v'ctory’' “Long  live  the  Rmperor”  &c.

theUersTp“TornUTTethwr’  lT  - ^

his  Ulti,nate  ■*»  of  doing  away  with  him.  ' "eVer  f°r8<!t

:z;ir:ingth;ts

Being  a confidante,  the  latter  gradually  becomes  1 hvoHte  l"

Position;  it  becomes  considerably  easy  to  achieve  ,h  / that

the  autlmr  calls  it)  he  has  in  his  heart  «...  the  destrucZ

J..™ .tree"”  *“  "■*  -

*“**■>•  to-*»  b.  hi.  ...  1 1“  "...


:;i  , ' \

i il 1 ..


•>  * i


KaMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.  I3I

6?'  Having*  formed  a firm  alliance  with  the  principal
officersf  or  the  royal  son J of  even  a coo!-headed§  assailant,
the  (assailed)  king  should  endeavour  to  sow  dissension |j
among  the  former's  party.

68.  Then  assailed  sovereign  should  try  to  saddle  the
principal  officers  of  the  assailant  with  accusations,  by  spend-
.ng  money**  lavishly  (in  bribes)  and  by  (treasonable)  letters
and  documents,  in  which  his  identity  would  be  hidden.ff

69-  Thus#  when  an  intelligent  sovereign  succeeds  in


" the  author  now  suggests  other  measures  by  which  a powerful
ssadant  may  be  overthrown.  These  measurss  naturally  fall  Jder  the

IZtTs*  ! v7TiC/  e,H;merated  in  an  »«•  (Vide  no,e  to

lion  , d ' 1 °f  th6Se  meaSU,'eS  is  t0  sow  discord  (Veda)

activity  U,eriienemy'  Wn,Chj.wiI1  considerably  reduce  their  strength  and
vity.  Tins  end,  according  to  the  author,  is  best  served,  when  a con-

assaiWs  lute!  ‘'lay  ^ ^ °f  the  pri"ciPal  officers  <*  the

JJZLZ c«.mi"“'r"  U”  *«>  •"«  ^ »r  ft.

« rz./rin?

adversary  may  be  overthrown  in  this  way,  not  speak  of  himUTfe  rlsh!

II  I he  commentary  has  introduced  an  emendation  here ; it  reads

,cxr-  ,'"e  “ding  ,n  ,he  -

iz'v'ir:  r iirrjr  r - **“

sovereign  over  the  officers  of  state  by  imputimr  u h f

these  charees  he  1 , , , > p t g Ialse  charges  to  them  ;

bribe,  and  by’forged  letter'd  d --1"

drawn  up  as  not  to  cast  the  slightest  suspicion  0,1  him.-  %

*7  z"  - - — -

' ..++,  I he  result  of  sowing  distrust  among  the  adversary's  Dari v « *

SluU.  We  have,  m our  translation,  been  a little  free


132


KAMANDAKIYA  n IT  ISA  r a.


accusing  the  principal  officers  of  the  assailing  monarchy  the
Jafter  in  spite  of  his  being  formidable,  relegates  all  activity,
inasmuch^as  he  loses  confidence  over  his  own  people/*

70.  Intriguingf  with  the  ministers  of  the  enemy,  the
assailed  king  should  tone  down  their  efforts  to  crush  him.J
He  should  kill  his  enemy  by  weaning  over  his  physician, §
or  by  administering  poisonous  liquids. ||

71.  The  assailed  king  should,  with  all  his  efforts,  try  to
enkindle  the  wrath  of  the  monarch  whose  dominions  lie  just
behind  the  assailatit-s.^T  Then,  through  his  agency,  he


.regarding  the  construction  of  the  original,  but  this  make  the  translation  all
the  more  lucid.

* The  last  portion  of  this  Sloka  would  have  been  unintelligible  but  for
the  reading  suggested  in  the  commentary,  which  reads  Yhtyaviswdsam
;for  Yasya  mswasa.  When  a sovereign  cannot  trust  his  own  people,  he
can  scarcely  risk  a battle  with  his  enemy.

f What  the  author  says  in  this  Sloka  is  this  “The  assailed  king
should  form  secret  alliances  with  the  minister  Sec.  of  the  assailant,  so
that  they  would  not  fight  to  the  best  of  their  abilities.  It  was  this
.principle  which  Lord  Clive  followed  in  making  Mirzafar  apathetic  to-
wards the  interest  of  Siraj  during  the  battle  of  Plassey.  As  is  well-
known,  Mirzafar  during  the  course  of  the  battle  remained  with  his  soldiers
' as  inert  as  a* wall.  This  conduct  was  of  course  due  to  the  league  he  had
formed  with  Clive  previously.”

$ For  Tadmastham  Samunnayet  the  commentator  gives  Tad&~
ramvam  Samam  nayet , which  indeed  is  an  emendation.  The  former
hardly  gives  any  sense,

•'§  Who,  of  course,  is  able  to  treacherously  kill  him  without  the  least
. difficulty.

||  The  last  mentioned  alternative  seems  naturally  to  be  connected
with  the  other.  But  we  have  faithfully  followed  the  construction  of  the
u original.

IT  The  text  of  the  Sloka  is  obscure  inspite  of  the  emendations
given  in  the  commentary.  The  translation  given  above  is  suited  to  the
t and  to  the'  teachings  already  inculcated  by  the  author.  The  Sloka
' d ‘admit  df  another  meaning,  which  will  nearly  tally  with  what  is
givm  above,  differing  in  rnlnor  details  only.  That  rendering  would  be

between


KAMANDAKIYA  N1TISARA


*33


should  heedfully  bring  about  the  assailant's  destruction  *

72.  The+  assailed  king  should,  through  spies  disguise!
as  astrologers}:  inhabiting  the  assailant's  country§  and
possessing  all  the  auspicious  marks  of  inspired  Seers,  cause
predictions  to  be  made  before  the  latter  to  the  effect  that
dreadful  calamities  would  soon  overtake  him.

73.  Taking]]  into  consideration  the  loss, If  the  ex-
penditure,** the  difficultytt  and  the  destruction^  &c.t

the  assailant  and  him  who  is  looked  upon  with  disfavor  by  this  latter.
Then,  through  the  agency  of  the  person  out  of  favor,  he  should  crush  the
enemy.”  What  the  author  refers  to  is  that  expedient  of  foreign  policy
which  is  known  as  Veda.  What  he  means  is  this  that,  when  a weak
monarch  is  assailed,  he  cannot  but  seek  external  help,  and  this  he  should
find  in  the  Parshnigrdha  of  the  assailant,  whose  anger  against
the  latter  he  should  try  to  rouse.  Then  united  with  the  Parshnigrdha  ho
should  crush  the  foe.

m The  commentary  gives  Pradharsayet  for  Prasadhayet ; we  have
accepted  the  emendation,

f This  Sloka  suggests  a means  that  would  act  as  a deterrent  to  the
assailant  and  induce  him  to  adjourn  active  operations  against  the  assailed,
and  thus  giving  the  latter  time  to  secure  others'  help  &rc.  The  meaning
is  this  As  soon  as  he  is  assailed,  the  king  should,  by  bribing,  win
over  some  of  the  subjects  of  the  assailant's  dominions ; he  should  then  put
them  in  disguise  as  venerable  astrologers  with  all  the  exterior  marks  of
holiness.  They  should  then  repair  to  the  assailant's  camp  who  would
naturally  seek  their  help  in  determining  the  finale  of  the  war  he  is  going
to  wage.  Now  the  disguised  astrologers  would  tell  him  that  the  stars
are  impropitious  and  forebode  great  danger.  In  this  way  the  assailant’s
spirit  will  be  damped  and  he  will  not  launch  immediately  on  war.

§ Naimitiikai — means  those  who  can  read  the  signification  of
Nimiitas  or  omens.  Hence  an  astrologer.

t For  Uddesa  kritasamvdsai  the  commentary  reads  Taddesakrita -
samvasai;  and  for  Sadhulakshanai  it  reads  Siddhalakshanai .

II  The  author  now  proceeds  to  delineate  the  evil  effects  of  war,
which  he  thinks  will  dissuade  kings  from  risking  wars  rashly.

If  Such  as  the  death  of  the  principal  and  trustworthy  officers.

**  The  draining  of  the  treasury  and  the  devastation  of  the  crops  &c.

ft  Such  as  the  inclemency  of  the  weather,  &c.

Of  men  and  munition.


134  KAMANDAKIYA  N1TISARA.


involved  in  a' war,  arid  weighing  seriously  its  good  as  well  as
evil  effects,  the  assailed  king  would  rather  do  well  to  will-
inglv*  submit  to  certain  hardships,  than  launch  upon  war;
for  war  is  ever  prolific  of  evil  consequences.

74.  The  body,  the  wife,f  the  friends  and  the  wealth
of  a sovereign  may  cease  to  be  of  any  avail  to  him,  within  a
wink’s  time,  when  he  launches  on  war,  (in  which  there  is, everv
possible  danger  of  his  life).J  These  again  are  constantly
jeopardised  in  war.  Therefore  an  intelligent  sovereign
should  never  engage  in  a war.

75.  What  king,  who  is  not  a fool,  would  put  his  friends,
his  wealth,  his  kingdom,  his  fame  and  even  his  own  life  in
the  eraddie  of  uncertainty  by  embarking  on  war?  ||

76,.  When  assailed,  a sovereign  desiring  peace,  should
conclude^  a firm  treaty,  by  means  of  conciliation,  gifts  or
or  bribery  or  by  sowing  dissension**  among  the  enemy,  at
a time  when  the  latter  s array  of  troops  would  cross  the
boundaries  of  his  territory  ; before  this  should  not  betray  his
peaceful  intentions. ft

77.  Protecting  himself  and  his  army  effectually  and  con-
•centrating  all  his  forces,  a brave  king  (when  assailed)  should


i ec  for


* \\  hen  there  is  no  other  alternative  except  war,  it  is  better  tc
make  peace  even  with  certain  inconveniences  to  one’s  self,

j What  the  author  means  is  this  : — When  a king;  engages  in  wat
there  is  every  danger  of  his  being  slain,  in  which  case  his  body,  wife,  &c,
I be  of  no  use  to  him,

t For  Valam  (army)  the  commentary  gives  Kaiaiyam  or  wife.

I he  reading  in  the  text  is  Vidyht  which  certainly  is  vicious.  The
mentator  gives  nothing.  We  substitute  Vidvoan .

As  soon  as  a king  engages  in  a war,  these  things  become  uncer-
, and  he  may  lose  them  any  moment,  being  slain  of  defeated.

at  the  commentator  gives  Samsthapayet  which


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


135


perform  many  mancevours  to  afflict  his  assailant ; then  when
the  latter  shall  be  involved  in  great  dangers,  let  him  make

proposals  of  peace.  For  it  is  with  hot  iron  that  hot  iron
becomes  fused.*

78.  These  are  the  different  kinds  of  peace  (and  the
modes  of  forming  them),  which  have  been  enumerated  by
anc.entf  and  mighty  sages.  By  putting  forth  his  prowess,
a ruler  of  men  should  subdue  his  refractory*,  enemy.  He
•should  act  after  having  discerned  (through  his  prudence)
what  is  good§  and  what  is  .bad. ||

. Thus  ends  the  ninth  Section,  the  dissertation  on  peace ,
tn  the  Nitisara  of  Kamandakiya.


But  if  the  assailant  refuses  to  make  peace,  the  author  says,  the
ssailed  should  not  surrender  unconditionally,  but  to  the  best  of  his

7 m 1 !7  mtelI,rCrence’  fi?ht  and  ann°y  his  adversary.  If  at  the  time
o is  efeat  he  wants  to  make  peace,  the  victor  would  be  exacting  in

„ * 'T'S‘  ^°’  e<JuaI  fierceness  only,  can  he  conclude  a firm  treaty,

b.  V\ . Jones's  translation  of  the  Sloka  is  as  follows.

“Preserving  his  secret  unrevealed  and  In's  forces  well -united,  let  a
hero  march  and  annoy  his  enemy,  for  hot  iron  may  form  an  union  with
hot  .ron  ; so  he  by  equal  fierceness,  at  a time  when  his  foe  is  fierce,  may
conclude  a firm  peace.”

For  SamlcLpam  in  the  last  line  the  commentator  gives  Sandhanam,
which  evidently  is  the  true  reading.  The  commentator  quotes  Chanakya
in  support  of  the  author.


" Nhtapiam  Loham, : Tuptena,  SandhatteA
‘ Cold  iron  cannot  become  fused  with  hot  iron.'
f For  Purvatana  the  commentator  reads  Parvcitama.

**•  I hat  is,  unwilling  to  make  peace.

§ I he  last  portion  of  the  Sloka  has  been  considerably  changed  in
the  commentary.  For  the  last  two  lines,  it  reads  ’ *

Valatf  2 adenam  Vmayet  N&reswctras
Samikshya  Karyyam  Guru  Cketaratd'widhu.

We  have  adopted  the  reading  of  the  commentary  ; still  the  context
secerns  to  be  vicious.

, 11  The  word  is  Guru  whicf'  lit:  means,  ‘that  which  redounds  to
the  credit  of  the  performer.’


SECTION  X.


X OSSESSED  by  thoughts  of  revenge,  and  with  hearts
burning  with  anger  engendered  by  the  infliction  of  mutual
wrongs,  people  proceed  to  fight  with  one  another.*

2.  One  may  also  launch  upon  a war,  for  the  amelioration,
of  his  own  condition,  or  when  oppressed  by  his  foe,f  if  the
advantages  of  the  soil  and  the  season  be  in  his  favor.J

3.  ^Usurpation  of  the  kingdom,  abduction  of  females, (|
seizure  of  provinces  and  portions  of  territory,^  carrying  away


* The  author’s  meaning,  explained  by  the  commentator,  seems  to  be
this: — “ Wrath  and  resentment  caused  by  the  infliction  of  injuries,  are
th6  chief  causes  of  war.”

t What  the  author  means  to  say  is  this  : — Wrath  and  resentment  are
not  the  only  causes  that  breed  war,  but  a desire  for  elevating  one’s  posi-
tion, or  excessive  oppression  by  the  foe,  may  also  lead  one  to  hazard  a
war.  But  there  is  a provisio  in  the  latter  case,  which  is  this*  that
before  declaring  war,  one  must  see  that  the  advantages  of  the  land  and
time  are  in  his  favor;  if  they  are  not  so,  he  must  not  go  to  war,  for,  in
that  case  defeat  will  be  inevitable,

i Desakalavalopetas^-^ Another  meaning  of  this  compound  different
frOtn  what  we  have  embodied  above,  is  suggested  by  the  commentator  ;
it  is  this : — Supported  by’the  advantages  of  the  lahd  and  the  Season,
and  by  an  army  well -equipped  with  men  and  munition*,

§*  This  and  the  following  two  STokas  should  be  read  together.  The
author  now  enumerates  all  the  causes  and  occasions  when  war  is
launched  upon  by  kings  and  sovereigns.

||  For  example  the  commentator  cites  the  case  of  the  abduction  of
Sita  by  Ravana,  (refer  to  Ramayana).

Sthana  and  Desa  mean  almost  the  same  things  in  our  rendering


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


*37


of  vehicles  and  treasures*  arrogance,!  morbid  sense  of'
honor,J  molestation  of  dominions, §

4*  Extinction  of  erudition, |j  destruction  of  property:,
violation  of  laws, If  prostration  of  the  regal  powers,  influence
■of  evil  destiny,  the  necessity  of  helping  friends  and  allies  **
'disrespectful  demeanour,  the  destruction  of  friends, ff

5-  The  want  of  compassion  on  creatures,!!  disaffection
of  the  Prakrifz  Mandetla ;§§  and  common  eagerness  for
possessing  the  same  object,  these  and  many  others  have  been
said  to  be  the  (prolific)  sources  of  wan

6,  The|| ||  means  for  extinguishing  the  wars  caused  by

Yana  lit  means  ‘that  which  carries,’  hence  conveyance  of  any
kind,  including  horses,  elephants  &c„  Dhana  the  commentary  explains
as  gems  and  jewels.

f The  word  in  the  text  is  Mad. a,  explained  by  the  commentator  to
mean,  arrogance  engendered  by  the  sense  of  personal  courage  and
heroism  !

! Like  that  of  Ravana,  who  thought,  “What,  shall  I,  Ravana  the
king  of  the  three  worlds,  make  over  Sita  to  her  husband,  out  of  sheer
fear  ?”

§ The  original  word  is  Vaisayikipida- — which  lit  ; means  ‘some  dis-
order in  the  kingdom/  When  caused  internally,  it  breeds  civil  wkr.
Visaya  here-  means  ‘kingdom/

|)  The  original  word  is  fndna-vighdta  which  the  commentary
explains  to  mean  the  destruction  of  the  literary  class,  who  are  instru-
mental in  the  cultivation  and  spread  of  knowledge.

IF  1 he  commentator  explains, — the  infringement  of  the  social  laws,
and  customs.

^ The  word  in  the  text  is  Mitrdytham  which,  the  commentary  takes  to
moan,  'for  the  sake  of  friends/

ff  rhe  word  in  the text  is  Bandhuvindsam  ; the  author  means  this,
that  when  an  ally  is  destroyed  by  his  enemy,  a king  takes  up  the  cause
of  his  ally  and  avenges  his  destruction  or  ruin.  ’ ’

!!  The  commentary  explains  ‘To  abandon  creatures  to  the  mercy
of  their  enemy,  having  at  first  given  them  full  assurances  of  safety/

§§  Prakriti  Mandala — refer  to  an  earlier  note,

||  [|  Having  enumerated  the  sources  of  war,  the  author  now  goes  an
-to  describe  the  measures  by  which ;such!:wars;ihay  be  put  an  end  to.  We  F
fiave  rendered  this  Sloka  freely  for  making  the  sense  clear.

18


138


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


the  usurpation  of  kingdoms,  abduction  of  females  and  seizure
of  provinces  and  portions  of  territory,  have  been  specified
by  those  skilled  in  the  expedients  of  policy,  to  be  the  relin-
quishment of  the  kingdoms,  the  restoration  of  the  females
and  the  evacuation  of  the  provinces,  respectively.* * * §

7.  The  means  for  pacifying  the  wars  caused  by  the
violation  of  laws  and  the  spoliation  of  porpertyf  are  the
restoration  of  the  laws  and  the  restitution  of  the  property,
respectively.  The  means  for  putting  an  end  to  a war  caused
by  the  molestation  of  the  kingdomf  by  the  foe,  is  to  molest
the  kingdom  of  the  latter  in  return.

8.  Of  wars  caused  by  the  carrying  away  of  treasuresg
and  by  the  destruction  of  knowledge  and  the  prostration  of
the  regal  powers,  the  end  is  reached  by  the  restitution  of  the
things  taken,  by  forgiveness  and  indifference. ||

, 9.  Wars  brought  about  by  allies  through  their  oppression
and  persecution,  should  be  looked  upon  with  indifference^ ;


* For  Madena  of  the  text,  the  commentary  gives  Daviena .

t The  word  in  the  text  would  mean  lit : “The  war  arising  out  of  some
cause  detrimental  to  the  interests  and  government  (of  one  of  the  parties
concerned).”  We  have  translated  this  Sloka  also  freely.

t Visaya  here,  as  before,  means  'kingdom  or  the  dominions  of  a
monarch/

§ For  Yana  of  the  text  the  commentary  gives  Dhana}  which  we  have*
accepted.

I)  The  second  line  ift  the  original  bristles  with  bad  readings.,  The
commentary  has  suggested  certain  emendations  but  for  which  it  would
have  been  difficult  tOimake  any  sense  out  of  the  line.  For  Shama  it  gives
Sqma  and  for  Tadarthaschangena  gives  Tad  a rth  a tyhgena . Both  these
emendations  we  have  accepted.

The  sense  of  the  author  is  this  When  the  allies  of  a king  bring
about  a war  through  their  wanton  behaviour  and  policy,  he  should  not
join  theki,  but ' reimain  indifferent ; so  that,  none  of  the  evils  of  the  wat
mky  overtake  'him.  It  is  always  the  duty  of  a sovereign  to  make
. common  cause  with  his  allies  ; but  not  so  in  this  case.


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA*


but,  for  a generous  ally*  even  the  very  life  may  be  risked. f

ID.  War  caused  by  the  offer  of  insult  should  be  extin-
guished by  the  offer  of  honor.  Conciliation  and  propitiation
are  the  means  for  pacifying  a war  caused  by  pride  and
arrogance  of  one  party.

11.  A brave  king  should  reach  the  end  of  a war  caused,
by  the  destruction  of  a friend  or  an  ally,t  by  the  applica-
tion of  underhand  measures,  or  by  having  recourse  to  incan-
tations and  magical  spells. §

12.  For  pacifying  a war  having  for  its  cause  the  eager-
ness for  possessing  the  same  object  (by  two  kings),  a pru-
dent king  should  give  up  that  object,  provided  that  his  royal
prestige  does  not  suffer  thereby  [|

13.  The  war  caused  by  the  spoliation  of  a portion  of
the  treasures^!  should  not  be  prosecuted  in,**  inasmuch  as


* The  commentary  gives  Atmavatmitravar garth  am  for  Atamvat -
mitravargetu .

f But  when  a generous  and  faithful  ally  is  involved  in  a war,  a sover-
eign should  offer  him  aid,  even  if  such  conduct  may  cost  him  his  very  life.

J When  the  ally  of  a king  is  destroyed,  it  is  prudent  for  him  not
to  declare  open  war  against  his  ally's  foe,  but  to  apply  secretly  the  expe-
dients of  policy  and  thereby  undermine  his  (the  other’s)  strength.

§ One  line  of  this  Sloka  is  omitted  in  the  text.  The  line  as  given
by  the  commentator  is  this  : —

Rahasyena  prayoghta  Rahasya  karanena  rua.

Rahasya-prayoga  is  the  use  of  covert  measures.  Raliasyakaran  is  the
employment  of  incantations  and  charms  for  some  malevolent  purpose  ; it
includes  Marana , Vasaekarana  Sc c.

||  What  the  author  means  is  this  : — When  two  kings  set  their  heart
upon  possessing  one  and  the  same  object,  war  becomes  inevitable.  To
avoid  such  a war,  one  of  the  contending  sovereigns  must  withdraw  him-*
self ; but  the  withdrawing  monarch  must  be  careful  that  his  royal  prestige
is  not  prejudiced  by  his  falling  back  ; in  that  case,  he  should  fight  to  the
last  rather  than  lose  his  prestige  and  honor.

For  Dhan ap ach hrajhie  the  commentator  gives,  KoshpaharajaniU ,
The  meaning  is  not  materially  changed  by  this  change  in  reading.

**  For  Tanntrodham,  the  commentary  substitutes  Virodham , which
makes  the  Sloka  intelligible.


KA.MANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


140

by  carrying  on  a war,  a man  may  lose  all  his  treasures.*

14.  When  the  party  against  whom  war  is  waged  is
numerous-, t its  end  should  be  , reached  by  sowing  dissen-
sions in  the  enemy's  camp,  by  gift,  bribery, $ reconciliation,
tempting  offers,  and  other  such  expedients  of  policy. §

15.  War  caused  by  the  want  of  showing  compassion
to  creatures,  should  be  extinguished  by  speaking  agreeable
and  pleasing  words  to  them.|[  The  means  approved  of  by
the  pious  for  pacifying  a war  brought  about  by  the  evil  in-
fluence  of  Fate,  is  to  propitiate  Fate.U

16—18.  War  incident  to  the  rebellion  of  the  dis-


* What  the  author  wants  to  emphasise  is  this  ' When  the  cause  of
the  war  is  the  seizure  of  a portion  of  the  treasure,  it  should  not  be
carried  on. ; for,  if  prosecuted  in,  there  is  every  chance  of  the  rest  of  the
treasure  being  drained  out  to  meet  the  expenses  of  the  war  * moreover
there  is  no  certainty  about  success.  ■ .

t The  word  in  the  text  is  Maltajarta,  which  the  commentator  takes
to  be  equivalent  to  Vahujana,

t The  first  half  of  this  Sloka  again  has  been  omitted  in  the.  text.
The  commentary  supplies  it.  It  is  this

TrishnopanyasayuUbna  Samadanadikenagha.

§ The  author's  meaning  is  this -When  war  is  inevitable  with  a
numerically  strong  party,  then  one  should  not  hazard  pitched  battles,  but
try  to  produce  intestine  discord,  among  the  enemy's  troops  and  generals,
and  wean,  over  spme  o£  them  to  his  side  by  gift,  bribery  &c.  Thus
weakening  the  odds  against  him,  he  will  compel  them,  to  conclude  peace.

H'  The  commentary  quotes  another  reading  for  the  first  part  of  the
$>lbka>  to  be  found  in  the  Benares  Edition.  It  is  this

Bhuianugrahavich chedajdtsydniam  Vrajefi  vasee.

It  means — 'One  who  can  control  his  passions,  can  reach  the  end  of  a 1
war  engendered  by  the  failure  of  showing  compassion  to  creatures.'


It  When  through  the  influence  of  Destiny  war  becomes  inevitable,
the  means  tor  pacifying  it,  is  the  performance  of  ceremonies  calculated


ltl^eifl^v^r,se  ^ate  anc*  rec^und  t0  the  peace  and  tranquility  of  the
m.  These  ceremonies  are  technically  called  Shnti,  Sastyayana  &c


KaMANDAKIYA  NIT1SARA.


141


affected  Mandala  * is  to  be  pacified  by  the  application  of
one  or  the  other  measures  of  policy.}

Hostilities}  have  been  said,  by  those  who  know  how  to
remove  them,  to  be  of  five  kinds (1)  That  produced  by
a spirit  of  rivalry,!  (2)  that  caused  by  some  dispute  about
JandsJ  (3)  that  having  women  at  the  root/f  (4)  that  pro-
duced by  irresponsible  spies,**  (5)  a„d  that  consequent  on
some  fault  or  transgression  on  one  side.ff  The  son  of
ValgudantiXX  speaks  of  four  kinds  of  hostilities  only,  viz.,  (1)
that  caused  by  the  invasion  of  one's  territory,  (2)  that  caused

* The  word  in  the  text  is  Mandalakshova  ; Mandala  of  course  here
refers  to  the  Prakriti-mandala,  and  Kshova  means  agitation  or  distur-
bance the  commentator  exp,ains  Mandalakshova  to  mean>  Prakyitlnim

Vtdroha , or  the  rebellion  of  the  subjects.

f The  word  in  original  is  Uphya  (Vide  note  to  Sloka  53  Sec  V).

% Having  enumerated  the-  general  causes  of  war  and  the  means
for  pacifying  them,  the  author  now  proceeds  to  define  and  describe  the
several  kinds  of  hostilities.

§ The  priginal  word  in  the  text  is  Sapatnyam  ; S&patnya  is  Satru.
or  a foe  ; the  commentary  explains  it  to  mean-'hostility  ordinarily  to  be
found  existing  among]foes.'  ■

||  Vastujam  etymological ly  means  ‘originating  from  some  Vastu  or
territory  &c  COn,rae'Uat°r  sPecifies  tte  objeects  to  be,  land,  treasure,

this1  ^ °(  thC  aUth°r'  38  exPIained  by  the  cemmentator  is

~7-  Th  S ^ US  ^ the  !ntri&ue  illicit  love  of

..  ' T ,S  meanm8'  although  appropriate  is  not  comprehensive--

would  mean  that  land  of  hostihty  that  has  anything  to  do  with

?**■  Here  the  commentator  has  introduced  a change  in  the  read
mg;  he  reads  Charajams  for  Vdjnatam.  Chara  means  spies  scouts  or

sorinTuS;h  ?Ce  ^ W°Uld  mean>  hostiIity.  which  spies  cause  to

r^ie^rtwories- Thecwi ^ *»£**»*.«

therebysowh

kind  - ^ *»  *~

“ Indrai  readine  i"  th.  KX.  i*
ntt  for  which  the  commentary  gives  Valgudanti.


142


KAMaNDAKIYA  N1T1SARA.


by  something  (done  by  others)  prejudicial  to  the  exercise
of  the  regal  powers,*  (3)  that  resulting  from  some  dispute
About  the  boundariest  of  dominions,  (4)  and  that  produced
by  some  disturbance  of  the  Mandala.%

19.  Men  take  cognizance  of  two  kinds  of  hostilities  only

viz.,  (1)  that  which  is  hereditary, § (2)  and  that  bred  by  some

fault  or  transgression. ||

War*[f  from  which  the  benefit  derived  will  he  a lit tler
that  from  which  it  will  be  nothing,  that  in  which  success  is
dobtfiil,**

20.  That  injurious  at  present, ft  that  without  any  future
benefit, JJ  that  with  one  whose  strength  is  unknown,  that  with
a wicked  person, §§


; * The  original  word  is  Sakti  Vighatajam , which  means,  originating

from  the  deadening  of  the  Saktis ; our  rendering  is  a little  free.

f The  original  word  is  Bhumyanantarajatam  which  the  commen-
tator explains  thus.  1 Resulting  in  consequence  of  the  territories  border-
ing on  one  another/  Hence  the  meaning  we  have  given  above.

X Mandala  referred  to  here  is  the  Mandala  of  twelve  kings  (Vide
an  earlier  note).  The  disturbance  of  this  Mandala  is  equivalent  to  the
disturbances  of  the  balance  of  power  that  is  ordinarily  found  to  exist  in  it.

§ That  is,  handed  down  by  the  father  to  the  son  ; ever  constant  in
the  family.

||  This  is  the  common  sort  of  hostility,  bred  by  the  offer  of  insult
and  offences.

H The  author  now  goes  on  to  describe  what  kinds  of  wars  are  to  be
avoided.

**  The  text-word  lit  translated  would  be,  1 the  result  of  which  is
uncertain/  •

tt  That  is,'  * war  that  alienates  friends  and  disturbs,  the  balance
of  power  existing  among  the  kings  of  the  Mandala / Taddtwa  means,
for  the  time  being.

XX  For  the  first  line  of  this  Sloka,  the  Benares  Edition  substitutes,
Ayatyam  cha  tadatwe  cha  dosa  Samy amanam  Tathh .

§§  The  commentary  paraphrases  Dusta  by  deceitful ; for  the  sake  of  a
good  construction , here  we  omit  to  translate  one  word,  and  have
rendered  it  in  the  first  half  of  the  23rd  Sloka.


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA


Hi


. 21.  That  for  the  sake  of  others,*  that  for  the  sake  of
a female,t  that  extending  over  a considerable  length  of
that  against  illustrious  Brahmanas,§  that  which  is
unseasonable, |J  that  against  one  aided  by  the  gods,^  that
with  one  having  allies  and  friends  proud  of  their  prowess**

22.  That  'beneficial  for  the  present  but  without  any
future  good,  and  that  from  which  advantages  may  be  derived
in.  future  but  not  so  at  present,

23.  These  are  the  sixteen  kinds  of  war  that  should  not
be  launched  upon  and  tenaciously  adhered  toff  by  a prudent


* It  is  rather  difficult  to  ascertain  what  the  author  means  by
Parartham  ; ordinarily  it  would  have  the  meaning  we  have  already
embodied  in  our  translation.  The  sense  the  writer  wants  to  convey,  is
that  a king  should  not  without  much  deliberation,  take  up  the  cause  of
others,  and  even  if  he  does  so,  he  should  not  prosecute  the  war  for  a long
time.  Another  meaning  hinted  at  by  the  commentator  is,  Tor  the  sake
of  snatching  away  (or  guarding  and  preserving)  the  properties  of  others.'
A war  for  the  only  object  of  depriving  others  of  their  properties  and
rights,  should  not  be  waged  and  adhered  to.

f Lit  translated  the  text-word  would  stand  thus  ‘ Having  for  the
cause.'  The  commentator  explains  'war  brought  about  by  the  eager-
ness of  two  monarchs  to  possess  one  and  the  same  women.'

} A lengthy  war  should  be  avoided  for  at  the  end  it  leaves  both
the  parties  ruined.

§ It  was  believed  in  ancient  India  that  Brahmanas  had  the  power
to  destroy  their  enemies  by  mere  words  of  their  mouth.  So  it  is  no  use
waging  war  against  them.  j

||  The  original  word  is  Akala , which  the  commentator  explains
thus  : — In  seasons  of  the  year  that  are  not  fit  for  declaring  war,  such  as
the  rainy  season  & c.  Autumn  is  the  best  time  for  declaring  war  in  India.

If  The  word  is  Daivayuhtena  which  according  to  the  commentator  is
equivalent  to  Daivasakti sampannena.  It  was  believed  that  the  gods  fight
for  men  j or  the  word  may  mean  ‘possessing  divine  or  God-like  power,
obtained  through  boons  &c'.

**  For  Valodhritasakhnena  the  commentary  gives  Valodhwata~
sakhena .

tt  The  word  omitted  in  the  last  part  of  the  20th  Sloka,  is  here  ren-
dered. For  Stovita  the  commentator  gives  Stamvita,


144


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


king.  A wise  king  should  wage  only  such  a war,  from  which
advantages  may  be  derived  both  at  present,  and  in  the
future,

24.  He  should  ever  set  his  heart  upon  performing  acts
beneficial  both  for  the  time  being  and  in  future.  By  accom-
plishing such  acts  productive  of  present  and  future  good,  a
king  never  brings  shame  on  himself.*

25.  A learned  man  should  perform  acts  conducive  to
his  good  both  in  this  and  the  next  world.  Tempted  by
trifling  wealth  and  objects  of  enjoyment  in  this  world,  he
should  never  do  any  thing  detrimental  to  his  welfare  in  the
,next.f

26.  A man  acting  in  a way  prejudicial  to  his  welfare  in
the  next  world,  should  be  shunned  at  a distance.;):  The
Shastrasf  bear  testimony  to  the  truth  of  the  above  propo-
sition. Therefore,  one  should  perform  pious  and  benefi-
cient  acts.

27.  When  an  intelligent§  monarch  finds  his  own  army
happy  and  efficient)!  and  that  of  his  foe  in  the  reverse  state,
then  may  he  launch  upon  war.


* In  the  original  Sloka  the  verb  is  omitted.  The  commentory  there-
fore supplies  Ydti  after  Vdchyatdm.

f The  translation  given  above  is  advisedly  made  free  in  order  to
bring  out  the  meaning  of  the  sloka  clearly.

+ The  meaning  of  the  another  is  explained  by  the  commentator
thus  A person  acting  in  a manner  detrimental  to  his  spiritual  welfare
is  thought  to  be  bold  enough  to  perpetrate  any  sin  whatever.  So  every
body  suspects  and  is  afraid  of  him.

§ In  this  and  the  next  two  Slokas,  the  time  and  the  circumstances
under  which  war  may  be  declared,  are  specified.  The  original  text-word
Matiman  is  explained  by  the  commentator  thus one  who  can  judge
what  would  conduce  to  his  good  and  what  not.


he  word  in  the  text  is  Hrista-pusta,  a compound  of  Hrista


with  men  and  mu*


Kamandakiva  nitisara


145


. 28,  When  he  finds  his  own  Prakriti  Mandala*  swelling

in  prosperity  and  very  loyal  to  him.f  and  that  of  his  enemy
In  the  reverse  condition,  then  may  he  embark  upon  war.

29.  Territory,  allies  and  wealth,  these  are  the  fruits  of
war+;  When  by  War  the  gain  of  these  three  is  certain,  then

only  may  it  be  hazarded.

30.  Wealthy  is  desirable, ||  allies  are  more  desirable
and  lastly,  acquisition  of  territory  is  most  desirable.  All-
round prosperity  is  the  out-come  of  territorial  possessions,
and  friends  and  allies  come  in  the  train  of  prosperity.

31-  Against  an  adversary  equally  prosperous,  a prudent
king  should  employ  the  expedients  of  policy.  Even  war  against
him  when  carried  on  agreeably  with  these  sure  and  infallible
measures  of  policy,  is  commendable. f

32.  When  war  has  already  come**  a politicff  king


* R?akritimandala  refers  to  his  numerous  subjects.

t That  is,  enjoying  health  and  plenty  and  cherishing  the  greatest
respect  for  their  sovereign.

? ‘By  fruits  of  war’  the  author  probably  means  this,  that  a king  risk-
ing a war,  has  the  chance  of  acquiring  territory,  allies,  or  treasures.

§ The  author  now  institutes  a comparison  between  the  three  fruits  of
war  and  thereby  ascertains  their  relative  importance.  The  acquisition
of  territory,  as  the  reader  sees,  is  the  highest  good  resulting  from
war.


II  The  word  in  the  text  is  Guru  which  has  numerous  meanings  ; here
probably  it  means  ‘ importance,’  but  we  have  for  the  sake  of  lucidity
rendered  it  a little  freely.  7

IT  Previously  the  author  has  advised  that  war  with  one  equal  in  every
respeet  should  be  avoided.  When  it  is  inevitable,  pitched  battle  should
not  be  fought,  nor  should  war  be  declared  openly.  But  even  if  war  is  to
be  declared  openly  and  battles  fought,  then  the  measures  of  policy  should
be  adhered  to,  in  order  to  undermine  the  streugth  of  the  enemy.

**  That  is,  when  inspite  of  all  previous  efforts  to  avoid  it,  war  is
declared,  then  the  measures  of  policy  should  be  had  recourse  to,  for  the
pacification  of  the  war.


ft  The  text-word  is  Vidwan  explained  by  the  commentator  to  mean,
R&janitivisdrada  or  a sound  and  a veteran  statesman.


19


SI


146


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


should  pacify  it  by  means  of  the  expedients  of  policy.  Victory
is  a thing  uncertain ; therefore  one  should  not  suddenly*
fall  upon  another.f

33.  A king*  desirous  of  enjoying  never-leaving  pros-
perity when  assailed  by  a stronger  adversary,  should  have
recourse  to  the  conduct  of  canesg  and  not  to  that  of
snakes  || .

34.  Having!  recourse  to  the  conduct  of  canes,  one
gradually  reaps  immeasurable  prosperity,  whereas  one  who
behaves  like  a snake  brings  down  destruction  on  him.

35.  A wise  king  waiting  like  one  mad  or  intoxicated**
for  the  opportune  moment,  should  when  such  moments  come,
suddenly  fall  upon  and  devour  upff  even  an  enemy  whose
strength  has  not  suffered  any  diminution.


* That  is,  without  mature  deliberation.

f The  gist  of  the  Sloka,  given  in  the  commentary  is  this  Victory
in  war  is  uncertain,  therefore  even  though  there  arc  ample  resources
for  a king  to  carry  on  a war,  he  should  pacify  it  with  his  best  endeavours

t The  author  here  advises  what  is  to  be  done  when  the  weak
monarch  is  assailed  by  the  strong.

§ The  original  text-word  is  Vaitasee  which  means—"  cane-like."
Vaitasee  Vriti  therefore  means  this  Just  as  a cane  when  forcibly  bend
yields  easily  and  offers  no  resistance,  so  when  assailed  by  a stronger  foe
a king  should  be  yielding  and  pliant.

||  Voujangi  Vriti, , is  the  serpentine  conduct  which  is  explained
thus  by  Chanakya  himself.

Amarsawa  Sonitakdnkhayh  kirn  paid  Spvisantam  dasati
Duijihva,

Serpents  would  never  suffer  any  injury  inflicted  on  them  ; on  the  other
hand  they  bite  men  without  any  provocation  and  without  any  gain  to
themselves.

IT  The  author  now  describes  the  effects  of  cane-like  and  serpentine
conduct.

That  is,  as  if  quite  indifferent  and  careless  of  what  is  going  about
him.  This  is  merely  a feint.

tt  That  is,  crush  completely.

t+  — -c  *«•-  kings  when  assailed


■'ill


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


147


36.  A weak  king,  should  patiently  bear  the  thrashing  by
the  enemy,  like  a tortoise  contracting  within  its  shell  when
beaten  ;*  but  when  the  right  time  comes,  the  intelligent
king  should  behave  like  a crooked  serpent.f

37.  Judging  of  the  times,  a king  should  be  forbearing
like  the  mountain,  or  furious  like  fire. J Sometimes  it  is  advi-
sable to  bear  the  foe  on  one's  shoulder  and  speak  sweet  and
flattering  words  to  him .%

38.  A king  ingratiating  himself  into  the  favor  of  his
foe§  and  by  conducting  himself  like  one  solicitous  of  his
welfare,  should  know  the  purposes  of  the  latter,  which  are
ordinarily  difficult  of  being  known  ; then  exerting  himself  in  the
right  hour,  he  should  catch  hold  of  the  locks  of  the  goddesses


Is  to  keep  his  eyes  wide  open  for  any  opportunity  that  may  occur.  Act-  !

ing  in  season,  he  may  even  crush  this  powerful  enemy.  He  should  I

seem  to  he  indifferent  to  the  state  of  affairs  around  him,  only  to  create
a belief  in  his  adversary’s  mind  that  he  is  quite  innocent.  j

* The  advise  given  here  is  only  a continuation  of  what  is  embodied
in  Sloka  (33).  Kurina  Samkocham  means,  the  way  in  which  tortoises,
contract  themselves  within  their  shells  when  beaten  or  injured  by  men
or.  any  other  animal.  So,  a king,  if  he  finds  himself  weaker  than  this
assailant,  should  behave  like  a Kurma  or  tortoise,  that  is,  he  should
take  shelter  in  his  castles  or  seek  it  with  is  allies,  &c.

t The  serpent  attacks  others  with  fury  and  shows  no  liniency  for  its
victim  ; so  should  the  intelligent  king,  acting  in  the  right  moment’  should
be  unrelenting  and  stern  towards  his  foe,  and  would  not  stop  until  the
Jatter's  destruction  has  been  completely  achieved.

t The  forbearance  or  the  fury  of  the  king  should  depend  on  the
season  and  his  own  strength.  When  hard  pressed,  it  is  politic  to  so
humiliate  himself  as  to  flatter,  and  bear  on  his  shoulder  his  strong
adversary ; of  course  he  is  not  to  bear  his  foe  literally  on  his  shoulders,  but
the  phrase  is  used  to  signify  the  depth  of  humiliation.

§ The  commentary  differs  from  the  meaning  we  have  given;  it  ex-
plains Prasachriiya  to  mean,  by  showing  that  he  is  contented  with  his
subjugator.


148


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


ill.  Y

If;

iff;'

il  il;

' );!■:
if.


of  prosperity^  drag  her  over  to  him)  by  means  of  his  right
hand  of  deplomacy.*  S

39-  A high-born,  truthful,  highly  powerful,  resolute
grateful,  forbearing,  energetic,  greatly  munificient  and  affec”
tionate  (towards  his  subjects)  king  is  said  to  constitute  a foe
difficult  of  being  subdued  or  defeated.

43-  Untruthfulness,  cruelty,  ungratefulness,  fearfulness
carelessness,  idleness,  cheerlessness,  useless  pride  or  pique*
and  extreme  procrastination,  and  addiction  to  gambling  and

the  company  of  women-these  are  the  causes  that  ruin
prosperity. f

4I\  When  a Prudent  king  finds  these  evil  habits  and
faults  in  his  foe,  he  shall,  equipped  well  with  his  three  S aktis
march  against  the  latter  for  conquering  him.  Disregarding

this  a king  brings  about  his.own  destruction  ; this  is  what  the
sages  say.J

. 42<  InsP!red  with  a (laudable)  desire  for  the  ameliora-
tion of  the  condition  of  his  kingdom,  and  the  exaltation  of
h.s  own  position,  ever  seeing  the  affairs  and  movements  of  the
(rings  of  his)  Mandala  by  means  of  his  eyes  constituted  by
the  spies, § a monarch,  with  all  his  efforts  concentrated,  and


* Knowing  the  enemy’s  plans  and  mode  of  worldnv  frr  s.  „
be  fa  fa  ..bfad  .overdgn  ..

contains  a metaphor,  divested  of  which  it  would  mean  tbl  IT
gam  victory  and  be  prosperous.  3t  he  WOud

t The  last  portion  of  the  Sloka  has  been  rendered  a little  freelv  for

r-  Ths“ babiB  - S£5£-

•he'ish•  "»»'»•  *»■  «„e

§ Charas  or  spies  are  said  to  be  the  eyes  of  the  kW  • ...  .

their  agency  he  can  know  what  is  rain.  „ • * g’  Ue''  throuSh

or  anywhere  else.  C.f.  Ramavanag  « In  e,Very  ,part  of  his  kingdom,

ing  far  away,  come  to  know  of  even/  kmgS  th°Ugh  remain'

spies  thev  are  VY  ^ °bject  and  affair  through  their

spies,  they  are  said  to  have  eyes  constituted  by  the  spies.”

/ jU  Y ’ ' ’ ; 1 r , . ^ ' 1 Vi  * - t £ t 4 1 ‘

; : '•  ' Y./.  > ' J-  ' . , " / ' ’ ; . - / Y YU?. . i'.':  lY'.  . / Y;h

'^4  ,;f  i,  ■ ‘ ^ ' ’■  V 'Y  : v - r-f  -v  1 r ' v ' ’ ;

Y.YY  :,v.  Y • v ? - S- . ,t  / : : \ *«K^iY::Y#

J,  '.If-,  f ■ <*».>  (■C«k2.!«Y  a vSi ? • ■


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


I49


resolute  sho-uld,  betaking  to  the  path  of  war,  exert  his
utmost  in  order  to  win  success.

theTtZ  ends  th*  tenik  the  dissertation  on  war,  in

the  Nitisara  of  Kamandaka.


SECTION  XI.


Z


ene  1 r 1 HE  eXped,t,on  which  an  eminently  powerful  and

o hi  tf  STr?n+  Wh0Se  SUbjeCtS  are  W'y  -tached
ohm  through  his  many  excellent  qualities,  sets  out  upon,

in  order  to  obtain  victory, J is  called  Yana  § P

2.  Vigrihya,  Sandhaya  Sambhuya  Prasanga  and


he  original  word  is  Uiknstavala  viryyasya  which  mav  havp

0te  lh"  ’"<*«*'»»>"  «T  » £

7 “ " “ “ *»  »te.  prom,  is  great.’

a **  d in  on  * d““y  b»

tinl  in  fo^r’pomicsl'thl  “ by  *

■—eh  against  „ ' IT""*

soveregm  with  martial  intentions.  ‘The  othe  r 7 * ement  of  a

Sandha  peace  or  alliance, '(2)  Vigraha  or  war' A eXpedlentf  are>  (1)
(4)  Samsraya  or  seeking  shelter  with  olhers  ■ and  ZT'iI  haIt

duplicity.  C.  F.  Amorakosa ; “Sandhirnl  R f Dy^hzbhava  or

Wagas-t  .he  pr^TZ^.^tZ^"
fons  on  peace  and  war ; in  this  have  been  7 u l \ 6 d,S<JUIS'-
character  of  the  other  expedients.  desenbed  the  nature  and


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISAKA.


150


Upeksha ,*  these  have  been  said  by  eminent  politicians, f*
to  be  the  five  different  kinds  of  Yana .

When  a sovereign  marches  forward  for  crushing  his


host  of  enemies  by  the  sheer  dint  of  his  prowers,  it  is  called
Vigr iliy a-y ana, % by  the  Acharyyas § conversant  with  the
nature  of  Yanas. |[

4.  Whenir  a monarch  supported  by  his  own  allies,**
marches  forth  for  completely  crushing  the  allies  of  his
enemiestf  by  force,  it  is  said  to  be  Vigrihya~gamana.% %


* As  the  author  subjoins  elaborate  explanations  of  these  several
kinds  of  Yana , we  need  not  anticipate  him.

f The  text  word  is  Neepuna  which  lit : means  clever,  skilful*  But
here  it  means,  proficient  in  politics.  The  reference  here  is  perhaps  to
Vrihaspati , Sukra  and  others.

t Vigrihya  comes  from  the  root  graha  to  take,  with  the  prefix  ot';  it
means — to  quarrel,  fight ; vtgraha  or  war  also  comes  f rom  it.  There
are  two  different  kinds  of  Vigrihyaydna  ; the  first  of  these  (as  defined  in
the  sloka  to  which  this  is  a note)  has  been  defined  by  the  commentator
thus  : — “The  expedition  for  the  conquest  of  bellicose  and  assaulting  foes/
The  other  has  been  specified  in  the  next  Sloka.

§ Acharyya — generally  means  a teacher  or  preceptor,  hence  one  who
expounds  a particular  science  and  teaches  it  to  others.  Here  it  means
the  preceptors  of  the  military  science,  such  as  Drona  was*

11  The  original  word  is  Yhnajna  which  means  'one  who  knows  ymas
the  translation  given  above  is  free  inorder  to  bring  out  the  meaning
clearly.

H This  is  the  second  sort  of  Vigrihya-yhna  referred  to  above.  In
the  first  kind,  the  march  is  against  the  foe  himself,  and  in  the  second  it  is
against  his  allies.

**•  For  the  first  half  of  this  Sloka  the  following  line  is  sometimes
substituted  : —

u Atimiirani  Sarvani  Sumitrai  Sarvaias  Valhtf1  the  translation  would
ithen  stand  thus : — “The  march  for  crushing  the  treacherous  allies  with
the  help  of  ones  means — those  who  have

trangressed  the  bonds  of  alliance  and  have  wandered  astray.

|H;  tt  The  word  In  the  original  is  Ari-mitra  for  an  elaborate  explanation
•of  which,  vide  note  to  sloka  16,  Sec  VIII.

Synonymous  with  Vigrihya*  Yana-  Gamana  being  equivalent  to

Yana


x ana


'S'.v.v,  ■'
v,i,  Vfi  < v


tCAMANDAKIYA  N1TISARA.


151

5.  When  after  concluding  a treaty*  with  the  foe  .in
the  rearf,  the  Vi]igisu%  out  of  a desire  for  victory, § ad-
vances upon  another  foe,  [J  it  is  said  to  be  Sandhhya -
gamana%.

6.  When  a monarch,  in  collusion  with**  Sdmaniasff
faithful, JJ  warlike§§  and  powerful,  marches  against  a (com-


PavshinS^hena.Satrun'a  for  an  explanation  of
which  vide  not  to  Slokai6,  Section  VIII.

^J,The0r'gn,aIWOrd!sW^a  Which  ls  derived  from  Sa-m  (com
pletely)  and  DU  to  join  or  unite.  Samlhaya  lit  : means  in  collusion

t For  Vijigisa  Vide  note  to  Sloka  16  Section  VIII.

thj “7mentaf0r  exP,ains-  " Expecting  victory  over  his  foe
that  is  ready  for  the  fight.”

II  For  Yairdyamam  the  commentator  substitutes,  Yatyanam.

Ht:  meanS’  Gamana  (Y4na)  or  march,  after
Jandkl  r tr'aty  or  alliance  hence  expedition  against  a powerful
adversary,  in  collusion  with  the  Parshuigrahas.  Although  the  Parshui-
jgvtiha-  s attitude  is  hostile,  yet  for  the  sake  of  encountering  a stronger
foe,  alliance  must  be  formed  with  him.

**  Ak^uya\it  means,  < being  one,'  z.e.  being  of  the  same  opinion
(commentary).  But  we  take  it  to  mean—'  united  together.’

ft  Sdmanta  may  mean,  both  a neighbouring  or  a feudatory  prince  :
the  commentary  accepts  the  former,  explaining  it  as  “ Kind’s  ruline

aIotheemt0neS  b0rfHngr  Up°n  those  of  his  <>""■"  But  Shmanta  has
other  meaning  winch  may  be  equally  appropriate  here  and  that
is,-a  general  entrusted  with  the  command  of  the  army.

U The  ongmal  word  is  Soucha-yuhtai  which  lit  means— Possessed  of

tesritv  °r  pUnty'”  Punty  here  of  course  equivalent  to  political  in-
tegrity.  Hence,  it  comes  to  “ faithful.”

j§  Sdmparayikai\\t  means, renting  to  Samp«,dya  or  war;  hence  'war-
means-Po  gIn  commentary  substitutes  Sdmabayikai  here,  which
it- would  beUnSe  °rS  °r  ministers-  If  this  emendation  be  accepted  then
firsr  t " apPr°Pnale  t0  take  Sdmanta  to  mean  generals  ; the

far*  ,the  translation  would  then  stand  thus-'  When  a monarch
unite  with  his  faithful  and  powerful  generals  and  counsellors,”  &c.


152


KaMandAKIYA  nitisara.


mon)  foe,*'  it  is  called  Sambhuya-gamana .f
_ ^hen,  like  Suryya  and  Hanumat^  two  kifi'gs;&
jointly  undertake  an  expedition  against  a foe  that  threatens
the  safety  of  the  Prakritis  of  both,  it  is  called  Sambhuya -
■yam z.

8.  When  after  winning  over  Sdmantas\\  of  little  prow-
ess by  the  promise  of  reward  in  case  of  success,^  a king
marches  against  his  foes,  it  is  called  Sambhuya  gamana.


* The  word  is  Akatra  or  one  against  whom  all  should  march,
f Sambhuya- Gamanam  lit  means  a united  advance,  there  are  three
kinds  of  Sambhitya-Gaman  one  is  defined  here  and  the  others  in  the
next  two  Slokas*

% Suryya  or  the  sun  is  represented, in  the  Hindu  Mythology  as  the
son  of  Kasyapa  and  Aditi.  He  runs  his  daily  course  through  the  heavens
on  a chariort  and  four  with  Arena  for  his  charioteer.  Rahu,  a demon,
is  his  inveterate  enemy  who  wreaks  vengence  on  him  at  the  time  of  the
solar  conjunction  and  opposition.  Hanumant  is  the  great  monkey
chief  who  played  a prominent  part  in  the  Ramayana  of  Valmiki.
He  once  got  the  sun  under  his  armpit,  for  the  latter  trying  rise  in  the
heavens  when  Hahumant  wanted  him  to  remain  below  the  horizon.
Thus  they  were  not  the  best  of  friends.

The  allusion  referred  to  here  is  obscure;  but  the  commentary  ex-
plains  it.  It  says  that  in  one  occasion  Suryya  and  Hanumant,  jointly
went  to  war  against  Rahu  who  wanted  to  swallow  the  sun  as  also  the
ace  of  Hanumant  which  latter  he  probably  mistook  for  the  moon.  Then
though  Suryya  and  Hanumant  were  not  the  best  of  friends,  they  joined
together  against  their  common  foe.

§ The  commentary,  says  that  the  two  kings  are  the  Vijigisu  and
the  Art.  Although  their  attitude  is  ordinarily  hostile  to  one  another
yet  when  both  of  them  are  threatened  by  a powerful  adversary  they
join  together  and  make  a common  cause.

II  S&mania  here  means  ‘ neighbouring  kings.’

If  For  Falodayam  the  commentary  gives  Falodaye.  If  the  former
then  the  translation  wouId  be  ‘promising  them  sure

s*


; : ; : ■'  f v-;  ';..  'vfW  v, w f ^ '''  ■'  ;


> .„Cft  ; ‘‘


KAMANDAKIYA  nitisara.  153

9.  When  a king,  originally  inarching  against  a particular,
foe,  afterwards  through  some  contingency,  proceeds  against
another,  it  is  called  Pi'asanga-Yana*  Hereof  king  Salya
is  the  example. f

10.  When  a powerful  king  marching  against  a foe
has  every  chance  of  success, J but  disregarding  them,  he
proceeds  against  the  latter’s  friends,  it  is  called  Upeksha - .
Ydna.§

11.  Having))  had  recourse  to  this  Upeksha-yana , Dhanan-
jaya  slew  the  dwellers  of  the  Golden  city,*[[  sparing

* Prasanga  means  here,  'some  event,  or  cause/  What  the  author
means  is  this: — A king  sets  out  on  a march  against  a particular
foe,  but  owing  to  some  incident  on  his  way,  he  changes  his  original  in-  *
tention  and  proceeds  against  another,  although  at  the  time  of  setting
out  he  had  no  such  intention.  • /

f King  Saly^t,  the  ruler  of  the  Madras,  was  the  maternal  uncle  of  the
Pandavas,  being  the  brother  of  Madri  the  second  wife  of  Pandu.  As  is
natural,  on  the  declaration  of  the  great  war  between  the  Kurus  and  the
Pandavas,  be  set.out  to  join  Yudhisthira,  intending  to  fight  against  Dur*,
yodhana.  But  on  his  way  there,  he  was  artfully  won  over  by .Duryo-
dhana  .and  subsequently  fought  on  his  behalf.  He  maintained  the  field
for  one  day  during  th'e  latter  end  of  the ; war,  but  was  at  last  slain  by
Yudhisthira  himself.

t.  The  original  word  is  Abiskritam  fcdam  which  lit:  means 'sure
victory/

§ Upeksha  means  ‘indifference’  or  ‘disregard’.  Hence  Upekshd -
Yana  is  the  march  undertaken  by  a king  in  utter  disregard  of  another
decided  advantage  which  he  may  have  turned  to  profit  at  his  will  What
the  author  means  is  probably  this  A king  at  first  marches  against  a
certain  enemy  of  his  and  obtains  victory  over  him,  but  without  making
the  best  of  the  occasion  and  completely  crushing  the  foe,  he  assaults  the
latter’s  allies,  who  all  the  time  thinking  him  to  be  satisfied  with  the
victory  obtained,  were  off  their  guards

^ |)  The  author  now  explains  Upeksha- Yana  by  an  example.

IF  The  allusion  though  obscure,  is  explained  by  the  commentator
thus  The  Nivatakavachas,  a clan  of  powerful  demons,  were  attacked
by  Dhananjaya  the  third  of  the  Pandavas.  They  were  defeated  and
compelled  to  fly  to  the  nether  regions.  But  Dhananjaya,  though  then  he
20


154


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARa.


the  Nivhtkavachas  who  had  already  been  vanquished  by
him.*

12.  Women, -f  (intoxicating)  drinks,  hunting,  gambling};
and  diverse  kinds  of  scourges  of  Fate,§  these  are  called
the  V y asanas \ He  who  is  under  the  influence  of  these,  is
called  a Vyasamn, ; and  is  the  right  person  against  whom
march  with  hostile  intentions,  should  he  directed.^


was  quite  competent  to  slay  them,  did  not  do  so  but  left  them  alone  ; he
at  the  same  time,  attacked  the  dwellers  of  the  Golden  city  (a  celebrated
residence  of  the  Danavas,)  and  completely  crushed  them  having  taken
them  quite  unawares.

* After  the  eleventh  sloka,  thirteen  new  slokas  are  to  be  found  in  the
commentary,  which  do  not  occur  in  the  text  before  us.  These  slokas,  with
some  slight  differences  here  and  there,  correspond  to  the  thirteen
slokas  of  Section  X,  beginning  with  the  twenty-second.  To  avoid
unnecessary  repetition,  we  do  not  translate  those  slokas  here  again  but
refer  our  readers  to  their  translations  in  Section  X.

f Having  defined  and  described  the  different  kinds  of  Yhna,
the  t.author  here  specifies  the  party  against  whom  YUna  should  be
directed.

$ % the  enumeration  of  the  simple  names,  the  author  really  means
to  express  that,  excessive  love  for  women,  indulgence  in  intoxicating
liquor,  and  addiction  to  gambling,  hunting,  &c.,  are  culpable,  and  it  is
not  they  (i.e.  women  &c)  that  are  the  Vyasana,  but  over-fondness  for
them  that  constitutes  the  Vyasanas.  According  to  the  commentator,  there
are  four  kinds  of  Vyasanam,  viz.,  Stri-vyasanam  or  excessive  love  for
women,  Panavyasanam,  or  over  indulgence  in  intoxicating  drinks,  Aksha-
lyasanams  or  addiction  to  gambling  and  Daibopaghdta  vyasanam  or
calamities  inflicted

§ The  original  word  in  the  text  is,  DaibopagUta  which  the  commen
tary  explains  saying— Daim  Ap at,  or  calamities  inflicted  by  Fate,  such
^'Parnine^.lPestilence '-&cV.

||  For  an  elaborate  explanation  of  this  word  vide  note  to  $Ioka  $
section  VII.,  and  also  the  Introduction.

If  For  Sa  gamyas  of  the  text,  the  commentary  reads  Sugamyas ; but
there  is  no  necessity  for  this  change  ; of  course  a vyasanin  would  be  more
liable  to  be  defeated  by  his  foes.


i f IS!  S3


“ISiiiiiiii


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA


*55


13,  When'56,  in  consequence  of  the  diminution  their
strengths  suffer, t both  the  Art  and  the  Vijigisu%  stop  for  a
while  (either  in  the  beginning  or  during  .the  progress  of  a war),
it  is  called  Asana.%  There  are  five  kinds  of  Asanas.\\

14,  When  each  (of  the  Ari  and  the  Vzjigisu)  endeavours
to  thwart  the  plan  of  operation  of  the  other,  it  is  called
Vigrihyasana ."If  When  again  a king  beseiges  a foe  it  is
called  Vigrihyasana .**

15,  Wheuft  it  becomes  impossible  to  capture  a foe
secure  within  the  stronghold  of  his  castleJJ,  then  a king


* The  author  now  goes  on  to  define  and  describe  what  is  known  as
Asana  among  the  measures  of  policy.

f The  text  reads  Sdmarthyhvighdtht  for  which  the  commentary
gives  Samarthyabighatat . The  former  reading  means  ‘when  the  strength
of  either  has  not  suffered  any  diminution. * We  have  accepted  the
reading  of  the  commentary.

4 Vide  note  to  Sloka  16th  Section  VIII.

§ Asana — From  Asa  to  halt  or  stop. — It  is  one  of  the  modes  of
policy  against  an  enemy.  A lexicographer  defines  it,  ‘maintaining  a
post  against  an  enemy.’  It  means  the  halt  or  stop  in  active  operations
against  an  enemy  owing  to  some  cause  or  other  ; or  a halt  in  course  of  a
march  against  an  enemy.

(1  The  five  kinds  of  Asana  are  (i)  Vigrihydsanam  y (2)  Sandhdyd -
sanam , (3)  Sambkuyasanam , (4)  Prasangdsanam  and  (5)  Upekshhsanam .

The  original  definition  of  Vigrihyasana  admits  of  another  render-
ing vis,  ‘the  act  of  attacking  each  other  is  called  Vigrihydsanam The
commentary  explains  this  in  another  way,  taking  it  to  be  identical  with
the  definition  of  Asana  as  embodied  in  the  previous  sloka.

'**  The  last  part  of  the  sloka  also  admits  of  a different  rendering
vis'.  “When  a king  capturing  or  crushing  a foe,  halts  for  a while,  it  is
called  Vigrihydsanam J*  Thus  two  kinds  of  Vigrihydsanam  have  been
specified  here.

ft  The  author  now  mentions  the  time  when  Vigrihydsanam  should
be  had  recourse  to.

tt  For  Durgasthitas  thecommentary  gives  Durgagatas  which  makes
no  difference  in  meanii^


i$6


kamandakiya  nitisara.


•should  lay  seige  to  it,  cutting  off  the  Asara*  and  block-
ading the  roadf  (by  which  supporting  forces  from  the
.country  are  likely  to  advance.)

16.  CuttingJ  off  the  Asdra  and  the  communication  with
the  country,  reducing  the  strength  of  the  enemy§  and  dis-
uniting his  Prakritis,  ||  a monarch  should  gradually  bring
him  (his  foe)  under  subjugation.


**  Ashrd  is  the  combined  force  of  the  allies  of  the  beseiged.  Vide
• note  to  Sloka  16th  Section  VIII ; the  author  says  that  the  forces  sent  by
the  allies  of  the  beseiged  foe,  should  be  smitten  down  and  crushed.

; j f The  original  word  is  Veevadha.  For  Asaraveevadhdn  of  the  text
the  commentary  reads  Asaraveevadhou  which  seems  to  be  gramatically
, correct.

f $ The  another  now  points  out  the  results  of  the  interception  of  the
v.  helping  troops  and  the  prohibition  of  all  egress  from  and  ingress  to  the
beseiged  fort.  Cutting  off  the  Asara  is  intended  to  mean  the  complete
discomfiture  of  the  troops  that  come  to  help  the  beseiged  king.

§ The  original  word  is  Prakshina-yava~$aindhavam — a compound
of  Prakshinas  (utterly  weakened)  Yava  and  Saindhava . Now  there  is
some  difficulty  about  the  meaning  of  the  Tast  two  Sanskrit  words.  The
commentary  takes  Yava  to  denote  Vega  or  fleetness  and  Saindhava  to
mean  ‘horses  of  the  Sindhu  breed.'  It  therefore  gives  the  compound  the
meaning  we  have  embodied  in  the  translation,  taking  horses  to
‘ signify  the ‘whole  army.  But  Yava  (as  spelled  in  the  text)  cannot  mean
Vega  ; it  means,  ‘barley-corn.'  Saindhava  can  also  have  a mean-

* ing  other  than  horses  of  the  Sindhu  breed,  viz.,  a kind  of  rock  salt*

* In  the  age  of  the  author  there  was  no  imported  salt*  It  was  this
rock-salt  which,  -the  people  of  India  used  in  their  meals.  These
considerations  lead  us;  .to  ascribe  a tota:Uy  different  meaning  to  the
wordy  which  is — ‘When  Yava  or  barely-corn,  the  staple  good  of  the

, garrison,  and  the  stock  of  salt  are  greatly  reduced.'  This  meaning  is
«:§ll;the  more  appropriate,  because  when  food,  runs  short  in  a garrison,
there  is  no  other  course  open  to  it  but  unconditional  surrender.  In
I ncepting  this  meaning  it.  must  not  also  be  forgotten  that  all  egress  and
, ingriss  have’ been  cut  off."  ; ^ . . ' . * , .

1 1 ||||  Pot*  Vigrihyamdna  Prakritim,  the  commentary  substitutes,

\Pmkritim  which  means  ‘dividing  the.  main  stays  of  the  ■
.kingdom  by  dissensions  &c,’

:V.'

..i..


i $ t


' IP  *


KAMANDAK1YA  N1TISARA.


J57


17.  When  the.'Ari  and  the  Vijigisu  both  suffering  loss
in  a war,  stop  it  by  the  conclusion  of  an  armistice,*  it  is
called  Sandhayasanam .f

18.  Even  RavanaJ  the  crusher  of  his  foes,  had  recourse
.to  the  Sandhayasanam,  offering  Brahtn§.§  as  his  hostage,
when  he  had  to  fight  with  the  Nivatakavachas.||

19.  When  a monarch,  thinking  the  Uddsina  and  t.he

Madhyama^  to  be  . equal  to  himself  ; in  respect  of  power,
awaits,  mustering  all  his  forces,**  ready  for  an  attack  , from
either  of  them,  it  is  .called  Sambhuydsawnit  ' ;

20.  If  the  (J vayan'if  desires  the  destruction,  of  the  Art
and  the  Vijigisu , being  himself  more  powerful  than  they


* For  Sandhaya  Yadavasthdnam  the  commentator  givesy  Sandhaya
Samavasthanam,  >

t Sandhayasanam  etymologically  means  'to  stay  a. while,  by  con-
cluding a peace.1  . ,'j  i • , ,

+ Vide  an  earlier  note  and  our  translation  of  the  Ramayana.

§ Brahman,  in  the  Hindu  mythologies,  (and  not  in  the  Philosophies)
is  described  as  the  creator,  .the  first  deity  of  the  sacrecl  Trinity.  He
is  described  to  be  very  merciful  and  the  only  god  who  awards  boons
giving  their  receiver  the  least  trouble.  It  was  from  Brahma  (who  is
also  called  the  grandfather  of  the  gods)  that  Rdvana  obtained  the  boon
of  conditional  immortality,  .

||  The  NivataJcavaehas  were  a very  poweful,  clan  of  demons  al-
ways delighting  in  harassing  the  gods.  They  were  at  last  extirpated  by
KuntPs  son  Arjuna  one  of  the  central  figures  of  the  great  epic  Mah^-
, bharata.

The  allussion  here  is  not  so  clear  and  well-known.  What  the  com-
mentary gives  is  put  ,in  English  for  the  information  of  the  readers.  There
was  once  a war  between  Ravana  and  the  Nivatakavachas,  in  which
the  former  was  badly  attacked  and  d.  fe  ited  by  the  latter.  Ravana  then
.concluded an  armistice. by  offering  Brahma,  his  family-preceptor,  as  a
postage.  .7 rV.:i.v: •••

. - ,H'  Vide, note  to  Stokai6fh  Section  VIII.

**  F°r  Samjnuthdnam  , the  .commentary  reads  Vy avast] ulnam  which
is  more  intelligible  and  appropriate.

•hj-  This  is  another  name  for  ,tjie  Madhyama  who  is  so-called  in  conse-
quence pf  his  hostile  attitude  to.bpth  the  An  and  Vijigisu,


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


15^


both,  he  should  be  withstood  by  what  is  known  as  Sangha-

dharman .*

21.  When  a monarch  desirous  of  going  to  a certain
place  (or  person),  halts  through  some  contingency  or  other,
at  a place  different  from  where  he  intended  to  go  at  first,
it  is  called  Prasangdsana  by  those  versed  in  the  science  of
Polity.f

22.  The  (apparent)  indifferent  attitude  of  a king  before  an
enemy  more  powerful  than  himself,  is  called  Upekshdsana.%
Indra§  treated  with  indifference  the  carrying  off  of  the
Pdrijata\\  from  him.


* Sanghadharman— means  ‘to  do  an  act  in  conjunction  with  others.’
Sangha  means  ‘together.’  The  commentary  defines  it — Vahubhir
Mihtwa  ekakdryyakaranam  or  ‘the  performance  of  an  act  by  many  united
together.’  The  reading  given  above  is  suggested  by  the  commentary  in
lieu  of  Tat-wadharman  which  can  have  no  possible  meaning  in  this
connection.  There  is  another  emendation  introduced  by  the  commentary
in  this  part  of  the  sloka  which  is  Sambhuyainam  for  Santbhuyena,

f What  the  author  means  appears  to  be  this  : — A king  marches
out  with  a view  to  join  one  of  his  allies,  or  to  crush  one  of  his  foes.  But
through  some  contingency  or  other,  he  is  compelled  to  stop  at  a place
quite  different  from  where  he  intended  to  go.  As  this  halt  or  stoppage
(Asana)  is  the  result  of  some  contingency,  it  is  called  Prasaugdsana.

£ Upehshasana  means  halt  (or  more  properly  here,  want  of  active
movements)  seemingly  the  result  of  indifference,  i.  e.  when  a king  finds
that  his  foe  is  stronger  than  himself,  he  assumes  an  indifferent  attitude,
which  in  some  measure  goes  to  deter  the  latter  whose  confidence  in  his
own  efficiency  receives  a shaking.

§ Vide  an  earlier  note.  Indra  and  Upendra  (Krishna)  were  said  to
be  the  two  sons  of  the  Rishi  Kasyapa  begotten  Upon  Aditi.  Upendra
was  more  powerful  than  Indra.

||  Pdrijdta  Is  the  name  of  one  of  the  fi-Ve  trees  Obtained  by  the
churning  of  the  ocean.  It  was  appropriated  by  Indra.  The  Pdrijdta
flower  is  the  most  fragant  and  charming  and  is  always  described  to  be
the -favorite  of  the  celestial  damsels  Who  love  to  put  them  Oil  their  hair-
knots,'  and  to  wear  garlands  made  of  them.

The  allusion  here  is  as  follows : — On  one  occasion  Narada  the  celestial
sage,  when  wandering  through  the  heavens  was  honored  by  Indra  with


“ ■ — & IK


SIJSJS


ICAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.  j^g

■ . . i

• 23.  When  again  a king,  through  some  other  cause*
being  led  to  treat  with  indifference  certain  acts,  remains  in-
active like  Rukminf  (or  does  not  have  recourse  to  vigorous
measures)  it  is  called  UpeksMsana.%

24.  Hemmedg  in  between  two  powerful  enemies,  a king

a garland  of  the  Parijata  flowers.  This  garland  he  gave  to  Krishna
who  in  his  turn  handed  it  over  to  Rukmini  his  beloved  wife  who  was
then  near  him.  Then  Narada  who  was  very  fond  of  brewing  quarrels
went  to  Satyabhama  another  .wife  of  Krishna,  and  related  the  incident
. to  her,  leaving  her  to  conclude  that  she  had  been  shamefully  neglected
by  her  husband  who  instead  of  giving  the  garland  of  Parijata  to
her,  had  given  it  to  her  rival.  When  Krishna  came  to  her,  she
reprimanded  and  chided  him  and  lamented  piteously ; whereupon
Krishna  promised  to  fetch  for  her  the  Parijata  tree  itself  from  heaven.
He  accordingly  asked  for  it  from  Indra  the  lord  of  heaven  who  refused
to  part  with  it.  A battle  was  thereupon  fought  and  afterwards  through
the  mediation  of  other  gods,  the  Parijata  tree  was  allowed  to  be  trans-
planted into  the  garden  of  Satyabhama,  and  Indra  was  advised  to  treat
that  act  of  Krishna  with  indifference.

Such  as,  affection,  love,  &c.  Here  the  emendation  given  in  the
commentary  must  be  accepted,  which  is  Anyena  for  Anyaistu.

t Rukmin  was  the  son  of  Bhishmaka  and  brother  of  Rukmini  one
of  the  favorite  wives  of  Krishna.  Rukmini  was  at  first  betrothed  by  her
father  to  Sisupala,  but  she  secretly  loved  Krishna,  and  on  the  day  of  her
marriage,  according  to  a preconcerted  plan,  was  snatched  away  by
Krishna.  Her  brother  Rukmin  who  was  engaged  to  protect  her,  did
offer  no  resistance  (the  account  here  varies)  but  suffered  her  to  be  taken
away,  thus  assuming  an  indifferent  attitude  for  the  love  of  her  sister
although  he  might  have  successfully  opposed  Krishna.

1 The  transition  given  above  lias  been  advisedly  made  free  for
lucidity's  sake.

§ Having  described  what  is  known  as  Asana,  the  author  proceeds  to
defme  Dvatdhzbkava.  It  is  also  a mode  of  foreign  policy  defined  in
...  (,)  doubl,  „ d„plicky,  ppp„J”

ly  friendly  relations  simultaneously  with  two  adversaries  ; (b)  dividing
one  s army  and  encountering  a superior  enemy  in  detachments  ; harasring
the  enemy  by  attacking  them  in  small  bands,  something  like  the  present
guerrilla  mode  of  fighting.  * 11


KAMANDAKlYA  NITISARA*


l6o:


surrendering  himself  (to  both)  only  in  words*  should  like
the  crow’s  eye-ball, t carry  on  a double  dealing  without
being  detected  by  either  of  them.J

25.  (Of  the  two  powerful  foes)  the  one  who  is  (danger-  j
ously)  at  hand3§  should  be  put  off  assiduously  with  empty  :
promises.il  But  if  both  of  them  assail  him  simultaneously,

a king  should  surrender  himself  to  the  stronger  of  the  two.^f

26.  When**  again  both  of  them,  seeing  through  his  •


* What  the  author  means  is  this:  The  assailed  king  should  by  all
sorts  of  flattering  speech  make  the  assailant  believe  that  he  is  entirely
under  bis  command.  But  really  he  should  entertain  no  feelings  of
friendship  for  the  latter.  Long-sounding  and  empty  words  should  be  used
to  beguile  the  assailant  only  for  the  time  being.

f The  allusion  referred  to  here  is  founded  on  a very  curious  belief
current  in  this  part  of  the  world.  But  how  far  this  beleif  is  correct,  we  can
not  say.  It  is  supposed  that  the  crow  has  only  one  eye  ball  (c,/.  such
words  as  Ekadristi,  Ekakshi)  which  it  moves  as  occasion  requires  from  one
socket  to  another.  From  this  supposition  a maxim  of  Nydya-philoso-
phy  has  obtained  currency,  which  is  applied  to  a word  or  phrase  which'
though  used  only  once  in  a sentence  may  if  occasion  requires  serve  two
purposes.  Naturalists  should  do  well  to  ascertain  whether  or  not  there
is  any  truth  in  the  above  belief.  1


{ The  author  means  to  say  that  when  a king  is  simultaneously  as-
sailed by  two  powerful  adversaries,  he  should  not  surrender  himself  to
either  or  exasperate  either,  but  carry  on  a double  dealing  keeping  appa-
rently friendly  relations  with  both  ; of  course  he  should  be  careful  as  not
be  detected  in  his  duplicity  prematurely.

§ For  Sannikristaram  some  read  Sanmikristamarim .

||  The  meaning  of  the  author,  as  explained  by  the  commentator  is
this:  ‘When  a foe  threatens  immediate  attack,  he  should  be  put  off  with
promises  of  whatever  he  wishes  the  assailed  to  do.  But  those  promises,
should  never  be  fulfilled,  as  they  are^mere  dodges  to  gain  time.

{ The  last  portion  lit  .-  translated  would  be  ‘should  serve  the  stronger

v ■ v : ’■ ' ’ ■; \ 1 ' s

**,  This  SI  oka  embodies  the  advice  as  to  what  should  he  done  when
s' duplicity  of  a,  king  is  seen  through  by  his  foes.  The  first  thing  he
1 then  is  to  befriend  a sovereign  or  sovereigns  inim  ical  to  his
ice  of  such  parties,  he  shduld  surrender  himself  to


; ■


"A


m


Kamandakiya  nitisara.


161

double-dealing  and  becoming  convinced  of.  his  duplicity*
reject  all  overtures  of  peace,  then  he  (the  assailed  king)
should  go  oyer  to  (befriend)  the  enemies  of  them  both  ; or
if  that  is  not  possible,  should  seek  shelter  with  the  stronger
of  the  two  {as  before).*

27.  Daidhibhava\  is  of  two  kinds,  Swatantra  and
Paratantra.%  What  has  been  described  above  is  Swatcintru
Daidkibhava  5 Paratantra  Daidkibhava  is  of  him  who  re-
ceives remuneration  from  two  kings  inimical  to  each  other.§

28.  When  ||  a king  is  assailed^  by  a very  powerful**

* The  translation  is  free.  The  last  portion  of  the  Slokais  different-
ly put  in  some  texts,  which  does  not  materially  affect  the  sense.

t F°r  an  explanation  of  this  word  refer  to  an  earlier  note.  'Daidha'
means  ‘double’  and  bhava  the  state  or  condition.

t The  meaning  of  the  author  is  not  so  clear.  The  kinds  of  Dai-
dhibhava  mentioned  by  him  do  not  tally  with  the  two  classes  explained
by  us  in  a previous  note ; the  commentator  offers  some  explanation
which  also  is  not  comprehensive.  We  suggest  below  what  seems  best  to
us.  Swatantra  means  independent.  Hence  Swatantra  daidkibhava
would  mean  the  duplicity  of  a king  who  for  effecting  his  own  safety  has
recourse  to  it,  not  under  anybody’s  instructions  but  out  of  his  free  and
independent  .will.  He  has  not  been  deputed  by  others  to  play  a double
game  and  to  ascertain  the  purposes  of  both  the  assailing  monarchs.
Paratantra  means  ‘dependent.’  Hence  this  kind  of  Daidkibhava  is  the .
double  dealing  that  spies  practice  being  commissioned  by  their  employer.
The  double  game  which  servants  in  obedience  to  the  orders  of  their
masters  play,  is  Paratantra  daidhibhdva,  which  does  not  bring  any
direct  personal  benefit  to  them.  The  commentary  explains 'the  Daidhi-
bhdva of  an  independent  person  is  Swatantra  and  that  of  a dependant
person  is  Par  at  a n tra .

§ For  Wwachetana  of  the  text  which  is  quite  unintelligeible  in  this
context,  the  commentary  gives  Uvayavetana  which  we  cannot  but  accept.

||  The  author  now  proceeds  to  describe  another  mode  of  policy
which  is-known  as.Samsraya  or-seeking  protection  at  others'  hand.

:1I  The  text  word  rendered  literally  would  be, ‘in  the  course  of  being

exterminated  or  destroyed.’

**  The  commentary  explains;  ‘ Upachita  Saktimata'  i.  e , one  possess-
ing  swelled  to  the  highest  degree.

21


162


KAMANDARIYA  NITISAKA.


enemy  and  has  no  other  means  or  measure  open  to  him
avert  the  calamity,  then  and  then  only,*  should  he  seek
protection  from  one  who  comes  from  a noble  family  and  is
truthful,  generous  and  highly  powerful.f

ag.  To  assume  worshipful  attitude^,  at  the  sight  of  his
protector,  to  be  always  at  one  with  his  protector  in  his
thoughts  and  purposes^,  to  do  alll  his  works  for  him  and  to
be  obedient  to  him fl  these  are  said  to  be  the  duties  of  one
who  seeks  shelter  with  another.

A.  ‘ffBeing  attached  to  his  protector  as  if  to  his  own
preceptor,**  the  protected  should  pass  some  timeff  with  the


liliii


* The  stress  put  on  this  part  of  the  sentence  is  advised  ; for,  as  the
commentator  points  out,  when'  there  is  any  other  means  whatsoever  for'
Self-preservation  available  to  a king  he  should  not  throw  himself  at  the
mercy  of  other  kings,  inasmuch  as  “Mahddosahi  visisfavalasuni&gntcc'
Rdjnam"  i.  e.  for  kings  to  implore  highly  powerful  rival's  (for  protection)
fs  the  source  of  great  evils.

f This  king  must  be  more  powerful  than  the  assailant.

t Such  as  bows,  obeisance,  safamas,  &fc.

§ TaiShavabha-vita  lit : means  to  be  inspired  with  his  thoughts  and
sentiments.  Whatever  the  protector  would' think  or  intend  to  do,  must
also  occupy  for  the  time  being  the  attention  and  thought  of  the  protected^
In  this  way  the  Tatter  would  be  able  to  ingratiate  himself  into  the  favor
of  his  protector,  who  if  satisfied  with  him  might  give  him  his  independence
back.

II!  Frasarayita  lit ; means,  "courteous  and  polite  in  behaviour,”  .or
tearing  affection  or  love  for  the  protector.”  The  obedience  must  be
one  of  love  and  not  of  fear.

^1  Some  twenty-two  Slokas  have  been  omitted  here  in  the  printed
book ; of  these  fifteen  come  within  the  nth  Section  of  the-  Manuscript
copy  and  seven  fall  in  the  next.  The  Slokas  marked  A.  B.  &c.  are  the
wanting  Slokas.

**  That  is,  for  the  time  being  he  should  behave  towards  his  protector
as  if  he  were  his  spiritual  preceptor,  who  is  the  person  deserving  the
highest  esteem  and  respect  at  the  hand  of  the  Mantra  Sisyas  or  “pupils
cf  sacred  initiation.”'

•jrt  That  is,  live  for  some  time  with  the  protector,  just  as-  a Brahraana


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA-


163

former  like  one  very  meek  and  gentle*  Then  gaining
strength!  by  such  association,  he  should  once  more  become
independent.

B.  Nott  to  remain  without  a refuge, § a king  should
seek  it  with  the  peace-breaking||  assailant  by  surrendering
to  him  his  army  or  his  treasury  or  his  lands  or  the  products
of  the  lands.^f


lives  with  his  preceptor  for  a time  after  his  investiture  with  the  sacred
thread.


* The  commentator  says  that  the  meekness  and  humility  should
■only  be  outward  and  not  the  outcome  of  any  real  affection  or  feeling.
We  do  not  agree  with  the  commentator  here,  in  as  much  as  affection  and
love  have  been  said  to  be  the  feeling  that  the  protected  should  entertain
towards  the  protector.

f The  text  word  is  “ Paripurna ” which  lit:  means  "filled  to  the
lghest  degree.”  Here  as  the  commentator  states,  it  means  "swelling
w.th  strength  and  powers."  What  the  author  means  is  that  while  living
under  the  protection  of  a stronger  sovereign,  the  army  and  resources  of
the  protected  would  gain  strength  and  become  numerous  everyday  ; for
meanwhile  no  strain  would  be  put  on  them.  Some  substitute  Puma-
sakti  for  Paripurna ; this  reading  makes  the  text  clear  as  day-light.

t The  author  now  lays  down  the  course  of  action  to  be  adopted  in
case  of  the  absence  of  a protector  possessed  of  the  qualifications  enumer-
ated  by  him  hereinbefore.

§ The  word  is  Anapasraya  ; Apasraya  means  ‘'without  a refuge.’
Hence  Anapdsraya  means  ‘not  without  a refuge.’  The  author  wants
to  say  that  a monarch  threatened  by  a powerful  adversary  should  not
remain  without  a protector  and  in  the  absence  of  a good  one  he  should
choose  the  very  assailant.  The  advisability  of  the  principle  is  apparent
for, la  king  whose  weakness  is  once  betrayed,  becomes  like  a piece  of  meat
which  all  hawks  pounce  upon.

||  The  original  word  is  Visandhim  t.  e.  one  who  violates  the  provi-
sions of  a peace  or  treaty,  and  acts  in  contravention  of  it.  Some  read
Visandhis  here.

• IT  According  to  the  commentator  the  "products  of  the  land”  are  the
rents  and  revenues  flowing  into  the  imperial  exchequer.  But  Bhumi-
sambhava  certainly  has  a wider  significance.


164


fCAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


C.  Involved  in  difficulties,*  all  these  things  (army
treasury,  lands,  products  of  lands,  &c.,):should  be  given  up
simultaneously  for  the  preservation  of  the  self.f  For,  living,
there  is  every  chance  of  regaining  the  kingdom!  at  the
end,  like  king  Yudhisthira.§

D-  ‘To  a living  man  joy  shall  come,  even  if  it  be  after
the  lapse  of  a century/  is  a blessed  verse  said  to  be  very  com-
monly known,)!

E.  For  the  sake  of  one’s  family  some  particular  person

* The  Sanskrit  word  is  Arta  which  means  “distressed.”  The
dommeatator  takes  it  to  mean,  'oppressed  and  assailed’  ; the  difficulties
must  be  such  as  to  threaten  the  safety  of  life  and  limb,

f It  will  be  pertinent  to  note  here  that  the  principle  of  self-preser-
vhdon  was  not  only  the  key  note  of  Hindu  polity  but  also  of  Philosophy
Numerous  saws  and  sayings  can  be  quoted  in  support.  Even  the  author’s
preceptor  the  celebrated  Chanakya  has  said  so  in  one  of  his  slolcas.
c,  'Always  preserve  yourself  in  preference  to  your  wives  and  wealth.1
The  principle  is  not  the  outcome  of  abject  selfishness  but  of  the  belief
(which  is  right)  that  self  is  the  source  all  happiness,  spiritual  and  earthly,
and  is  instrumental  in  achieving  religious  merit.

“ ' t ' word  in  the  original  is  Vasundkard  which  means  fit : that
which  contains  treasures,  ft  is  a special  epithet  of  the  earth;  it  was^
given  to  her  as  treasures  were  supposed  to  remain  within  her  bowels.
Here  of  course,  it  means  “a  kingdom  swelling  with  prosperity.”

§ King  Yudhisthira,  the  eldest  son  of  Pandu,  after  haviiog  suffered;
numerous  wrongs  and  injuries  at  the  hands  of  his  cousins,  the  Kouravas

who  for  a time  deprived  him  of  his  lawful  inheritance  to  the  throne.,  obr

tamed  it  back  after  a severe  battle  extending  over  eighteen  days,.  The
reader  is  referred  to  our  translation  of  the  Mahabharata.  For  the  last,
line  of  the  sloka  the.  following  is  substituted  by  the  commentator  “Yudhis-
thira  Jigayadou  Puttarjibau  Vasundkar&mJ'

I)  What  the  author  says  is  this  that  there  is  a verse  full  of  signi,
ficance  known  to  very  body  that  if  a man  lives  he  is  sure  to  have  joy  even
the  lapse  of  a huhdred  years.  The  author  wants  to  impress  tl re  fact
thit  the  lot  of  man  cannot  be  uniformly  miserable  or  happy;  This
existence  has  aptly  been  called  diecquered.  Weal  and  woe  come  to  man
f 1 »fi:%,^ofing  «m  a,  wheel.  A man  surviving  the  misrks  ^ suffer-  .
p®*’ ' ^ !|d v neap . joy; atdasfiw . -Hence  themecessitu  of


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA


should  be  forsaken,  for  the  sake  of  his  village-  the  family
should  be  forsaken,  for  the  sake  of  the  country  his  village
should  be  forsaken- and  lastly  (if  need  be)  the  earth  should
be  forsaken  after  due  deliberation  (for  self-preservation).*

F.  fWhen  his  own  strength  increases  or  when  some
calamityt  threatens  his  foe  (the  assailant  with  whom  he  has
sought  shelter),'  the  (protected)  king  should  fall  upon  hte
former,  or  acquiring  power,  he  should  smite  his  foe  down  by
means  of  saiuhee  vritti^

G.  Never  fushinto  an  union  either  with  a stronger  Or  3
weaker  rival  king  without  sufficient  cause  or  reason;  for*  in
such  union  there  is  danger  of  losing  men,  money  and  muni-
tions and  of  oeing  treacherously  treated. |[

* The  author  now  institutes  a comparison  among  the  several  inter-*
ests  that  is  likely  to  clash  against  one  another.  If  the  king  finds
that  his  family  will  suffer  in  consequence  of  his  friendship  to  a
certain  individual,  he  should  forsake  him.  And  in  this  way  he  should
even  give  up  his  territory  in  the  interests  of  his  self-preservation^  This
last  measure  of  course  must  be  had  recourse  to  after  cool  and  mature
deliberation*  Here  also,  as  before,  ^he  refrain  is  that,  self-preservation
is  the  best  of  all  virtues.

f The  author  now  describes  how  the  shelter-seeking  king  is  to
effect  his  liberation.  After  a period  of  servility  during  which  be  should
try  to  strengthen  his  position  and  watch  opportunities,  he  should  fall
suddenly  upon  his  protector  and  crush  him.

$ The  commentator  takes  Vyasana  to  mean  here  'excessive
fondness  for  wine  and  women  and  gambling  &c.  but  we  take  it  to-  mean
* Vipat  or  calamity.*

§ Sainhee  means  etymologically  'pertaining  to  the  lion’  (Sinha)  or
lion-like  and  vritti  means  conduct.  The  lion  before  taking  the  leap  upon
his  prey  musters  all  strength  and  strains  all  his  nerves.  So  a king
bfefore  falling  upon  his  foe  should  gather  all  his  strength  and  leave  no
stone  unturned  to  crown  his  effort  with  sudcess.  Earnest  endeavour
ever  meets  with  the  desired  result.  The  last  part  admits  of  another
construction  which  rs  as  follows,  '‘Acquiring  strength' by  Sinkavritti  a
king  should  assail;  his  enemy,* *

|ji  The  rendering  is  free*  The  author  advises  against  hasty  unions^
pointing  out  the  dangers  thereof.  t * -


i


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


166


H.  Even  going  to  a father  for  union,  a king  should

not  believe  him  j The  wicked  when  the  good  confide  on
them,  almost  always  play  these  latter  false.*  ;

I.  These  are  the  six  gunas  or  the  modes  of  foreign  I

policy. t But  some  say  that  there  are  only  two  Gunas,  Yana  |

and  A sana  falling  within  the  category  of  Vigraha , and  the  !

rest  (Daidhibkdva  and  Asraya)  being  other  forms  of  !

Sandhi  only.

J.  In  as  much  as  the  assailant  king  marches  (Yana)  and
halts  (Asana)  in  course  of  a war  (Vigraha),  accordingly
Yana  and  Asana  have  been  described  by  the  wise  as  forms  of
Vigraha .%

K.  And  in  as  much  as,  without  the  conclusion  of  some
sort  of  a peace,  double-dealing  ( Daidhibhdva ) and  shelter-
seeking (Samsraya)  are  not  possible,  therefore  these  two
also  are  said  by  the  wise  to  be  merely  other  forms  of  peace. §

L.  Whatever  is  done  after  the  conclusion  of  some  sort
of  a peace  is  surely  to  be  reckoned  as  a form  of  peace
(Sandhi)-,  and  whatever  is  done  after  the  declaration  of  a war
is  certainly  to  be  considered  as  a part  of  the  war  (Vigraha).

M.  Those  who  hold  that  there  are  only  two  Gunas  or
modes  of  foreign  policy,  specify  them  to  be  only  Sandhi
(peace)  and  Vigraha  (war).  But  others  again  hold  that  there


* The  last  part  lit:  would  be, 'when  the  good  come  to  confide  on
the  wicked  they  generally  injure  the  former.

t The  author  concludes.  The  six  modes  are,  Sandhi,  Vigraha,  .
Yana,  Asana , Daidhibhdva  and  Asraya .

% Yana  and  Asana  are  strickly  speaking  operations  included  in.
«rars.  it  is  in  a war  that  a king  marches,  halts  or  lays  seige  to  his
enemas  territories.  ■■■#*>

ir -{  Unless  there  is  some  kind  of  a union  between  two  parties,  one
cannot  play  the  other  false,  nor  can  one  seek  refuge  from  the  other.  It
■ mutusd, agreement  exists  that  they  can  have  any  dealing

1‘  1 ' t . 'u  . * - ' „ ; , , j !,  .


KAMANDAKIYA  NiTISARA.  15/

are  three  Gunas  namely  the  above  two  ( Sandhi  and  Vigraka)
and  Sams  ray  a .*

N.  When  oppressed  by  a powerful  assailant,  a king  is
obliged  to  seek  protection  from  another  more  powerful  than
the  former,  it  is  called  Sams  ray  a ; the  other  forms  of  union
are  said  to  be  Sandhi  (Peace).f  Thus  said  Vrihaspati.

O.  Strictly  speaking  there  is  only  one  guna,  viz.%
Vigraka  (war).  Sandhi  (Peace)  and  the  others  come  out  of
it ; and  therefore  these  latter  are  only  the  results  of  the
former  (Vigraka).  Modified  according  to  circumstances  (and
stage)  the  one  guna  Vigraka  multiplies  itself  into  the  six
gunas.  [This  is  the  opinion  of  our  own  preceptor.^

P.  A king,§  conversant  with  the  nature  of  the  six
gunasy  ||  possessing  spies1!!"  and  versed  in  consulta-

* This  latter  class  of  politicians  do  not  include  Samsraya  or  shelter^
seeking  in  Sandhi , hence  the  difference.

f Vrihaspati  the  preceptor  of  the  celestials  (Vide  note  to  Sloka  8
Section  I.)  draws  a distinction  between  Sandhi  and  Samsraya . That
form  of  union,  if  it  may  be  called  an  union  sit  all,  that  a weak  king  is
compelled  to  effect  with  a stronger  one,  inorder  to  save  himself  from  the
persecution  of  a strong  foe,  is  called  Samsraya ; whereas  Sandhi  is
concluded  between  two  contending  parties,  the  assailed  and  the  assailant.

$ As  the  reader  is  aware,  the  author’s,  preceptor  is  Chanakya.  The
fifteen  Slokas  that  have  been  said  to  be  included  within  the  nth  Section
of  the  Manuscript  copy  end  here.  In  the  Manuscript  the  12th  Section
begins  with  the  next  Sloka.

§ Having  finished  his  disquisition  on  the  six  modes  of  foreign
policy,  the  author  now  proceeds  to  impress  the  necessity  of  holding  con-
sultation and  counsel.  As  in  these  days,  so  in  the  past,  counsels  used
to  be  held  before  any  king  proceeded  to  do  anything.  It  was  after
mature  deliberation  that  any  project  was  taken  in  hand.

|]  The  original  word  lit.  rendered  would  be,  one  whose  understand-
ing has  comprehended  aright  the  nature  of  the  six  gunas,  and  who  has
no  doubt  left  about  their  working,  employment  &c.

If  Th4  text-word  is  Guraprachdrabdn , Gurahpracharas  are  they
whose  movements  (Prackdra)  are  secret  and  undetected  by  others.  Hence
the  word  has  come  to  mean  * Secret  emissaries,  and  spies.'  These


Jt58


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


tion*<  should  hold  counsel  regarding  some  secret  plan  or  affair
with  his  ministers  skilful  in  offering  advice.

Q ! A king  conversant  with  the  nature  of  counself  reaps
prosperity  easily,  and  one  of  a contrary  nature  even  itfhe
be  independent. is  put  down  by  his  learned  (rivals). J

R.  Just  as  Rakshasas  destroy  a sacrifice  in  which  the
mantras  (sacred  hymns)  used  are  attended  with  flaws,  so  his
enefiiies  destroy  a king  from  all  sides  whose  mantra
(counsels)  is  bad. § Therefore  one  should  be  very  careful
about  his  counsels.

Sv  Counsel  about  state  affairs  should  be  held  with  trnst*
worthy H as  well  as  learnedlf  persons.  But  a trustworthy
fo6l,  so  also  a learned  but  untrustworthy  person  should  be
avoided.

T.  (In  matters  of  counsel)  a king  should  not  deviate
from'  the  Skastra* approved  path,  by  which  pious  men  of  the
past,  whose  actions  were  ever  crowned  with  success  and  who
ever  trod  the  road  of  rectitude,  travelled  to  success.


wiJI  keep  the  king  informed  of  the  state  of  affairs  in  his  own  as  well  as
in  his  enemies'  dominions,  thus  helping  considerably  in  arriving
right  conclusions  in  his  deliberations.

* Mantra jna  means  one  who  know  Mantra ; this  last  word  has
been  explained  elaborately  by  the  commentator.  Any  secret  eonsuita^
tion  about  the  interests  of  the  kingdom  is  called  Mantra*  *

f The  text  word  means  lit : “one  who  knows  how  to  hold  consulta-
tions and  how  to  profit  by  them."

| The  original  word  is  VtdwaPvi  which  means  'r  by  the  learned/'
For  Avabhuyate  some  read  Avadhuyate.  ■

§ The  Rakshasas  being  evil  doers  are  as  a race  inimical  to*  the  -
performance  and  spread  of  religious  acts.  They  watch  opportunities
for  doing  evil  and' whenever  there  is  the  least  flaw  in  the  Mantras t *fca,  of
a sacrifice,  they  speedily  destroy  it.  There  is  a pun  upon  the  two*  mean*-
of  the  word  Mantra  here.  -

may  also,  mean,  a relative  Or  one  in  some  way  related  to  the

here.

leads  'sound  politicians;'  - ■ ^


KAMANDAKIYA  nitisara.  169

U.  A monarch,  who  disregarding  the  rules  confined
in  the  Shastras*  suddenly!  falls  upon  a foe,  never  returns
without  feeling  the  sharp  edge  of  this  latter’s  sword4

V,  The  power  of  good  counsel  is  superior  to  powers  of
energy  and  dignity.§  Witness  the  case  of  Kavya||  who
though  possessed  of  dignity  and  energy,  \yas  foiled  by  the
priest  of  the  .celestials^  by  means  of  his  power  of  counsel.

* The  phrase  in  the  orignal  lit  : rendered  would  be— going  astray
from  the  foot-prints  impressed  in  the  Shastras ; this  indeed  is  meta-
phorical.

f That  .is,  without  mature  deliberation.

+ That  is,  ‘feels  to  his  great  pain  the  sword-cuts  of  the  enemy  which
means  nothing  short  of  death.’  There  are  several  changes  of  reading  in
this  Sloka,  which  for  their  minority  we  omit  to  note.

§ The  author  now  -lays  stress  on  the  superiority  of  the  Mantra
Sakti  over  the  other  two  Saktis , viz.,  Prabhu  and  Utshka.  Prabhava  is
explained  by  the  commentator  to  mean  ‘power  originating  from  the  pos-
session of  an  efficient  army  and  a solvent  treasury.

||  Kavya  is  another  name  of  Sukra  who  was  the  preceptor  of  the
Asuras  (Vide  note  to  Sloka  8 Section  I).

IT  The  allusion  referred  to  is  as  follows  In  their  long  warfare  with
the  Asuras,  the  gods  were  oftentimes  worsted  and  rendered  quite
helpless.  But  such  of  the  Demons  as  would  be  slain  in  battle  were
restored  to  life  by  Sukra,  their  preceptor,  by  means  of  his  mantras  or
mystic  charms,  which  he  alone  possessed.  Seeing  this,  the  preceptor  of  the
gods  resolved  to  secure  this  charm  if  possible,  and  so  he  sent  his  own  son
Kacha  to  Sukra  in  order  that  he  might  learn  it  from  him  by  becoming
his  pupil.  So  Kacha  went  to  Sukra  ; but  the  demons  fearing  lest  he
should  master  the  lore,  murdered  him  and  mixed  his  ashes  with  Sukru's
beverage  and  offered  him  as  a drink  to  their  preceptor.  Kacha  was
drank  in  by  Sukra.  But  at  the  intercession  of  his  daughter  Devayani,
who  had  fallen  in  love  with  the  youth,  Sukra  promised  to  restore  Kacha  to
to  life.  He  instructed  Kacha  in  the  mystic  charm,  when  he  was
within  his  bowels  and  then  ordered  him  to  come  out.  Kacha  accordingly
came  out  tearing  open  the  abdomen  of  his  preceptor  who  died  in  conse-
quence. But  now  Kacha  restored  him  to  life  by  means  of  the  same
charm  he  had  learned  from  him.  Kacha  then  returned  to  the  gods  and
used  his  learning  in  their  benefit.  Thu?  Vrihaspati  by  his  power  of
counsel  got  the  better  of  Sukra,  The  last  portion  of  the  history  as  giv&t>
22


I?0


KAMANDAKlYA  nitisara.


30.  A lion  untaught  in  the  lessons  of  polity  kills  the

elephant  only  through  his  superior  physical  strength*  And
an  intelligent  and  learnedf  man  succeeds  even  in  taming
and  subjugating  hundreds  of  such  lions.j:  °

31.  An  act  maturely  deliberated  upon  by  learned  men,
who  can  read§  a coming  event  (from  a distance)  and  who
always  reap  success  by  the  employment  of  commendable
means,  can  never  fail  to  bear  fruit.

. 32’  ProPer  means, |1  a king  should  desire  to  obtain
his  ends  ; considering  (the  advantages  or  otherwise  of)  the
times,  he  should  fall  upon  an  enemy.f  Over-much  reliance

on  valour  and  energy**  often-times  becomes  the  source
of  repentance.fi*


by  the  commentator  is  not  to  be  found  in  the  mythoIogfeTlTiT^d
that  when  Kacha  was  restored  to  life  he  resisted  the  advances  of  Deva
yam,  Sukra’s  daughter,  who  thereupon  cursed  him  saying  that  the  charm
he  had  learnt  would  be  powerless  at  his  hands.

• ^ firSt°f  the  sentences  is  intended  to  impress  upon  the  readers
mmd  the  strength  and  brute  force  of  a lion.  These  are  of  no  avail  against
the  cultured  intelligence  and  cleverness  of  a man  who  foils  them  by
means  of  his  schemes  &e.  y

f That  is,  one  who  is  possessed  of  Mantra  SahtL

J The  first  part  of  the  sloka  bristles  with  bad  readings,  for  which
the  commentary  reads,

“Asikshitanayas  Singha  Hantivam  Kevalam  Valat,"

This  reading  we  have  accepted.

§ The  word  in  the  text  is  “who  can  see.’’

. if  Thf  °ng:!nal  word  is  UPdVa  which  means,  the  measures  of  policy
to  be  used  against  a foe,  viz  conciliation  &c'(vide  an  earlier  note).

I commentator  explains,  'should  march  against  him.’

The  °nginal  Phrase  Ut : translated  would  be,  “one  who  knows  the
taste  of  only  one  liquor  viz  Vikrama  or  power."

vJlWw  the  au^r  means  m ^y  is,  that  mere  power,  energy  or
valour,  whatever  it  might  be  called,  is  not  sufficient  to  secure  success
any  undertaking.  The  advantages  of  time  and  policy  cannot  safely
be  overlooked;  those  who  overlook  them  and  think  that  unaided

‘JLf  and  act  according,y’ reap  onIy  ®ricf  and


5>\


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.'


i 71


33-  A distinction  must  always  be  made  between  what  is
j capable  of  being  done  and  what  is  not  so,  by  the  light  of

i a serene  intelligence.  The  butting  of  a elephant  against

! a roc!<>  results  only  in  the  breaking  of  its  tusks  * * * §

34.  Whatf  fruit  save  distress  can  there  be  in  store
for  him  who  undertakes  an  impracticable  act?  What  mouth-
ful,  indeed,  can  he  expect  to  get,  who  tries  to  snatch  a
mouthful  from  (empty)  space  ?J

35.  Fall  not  on  fire  even  like  (foolish)  insects  t Touch
only  that  which  can  be  touched  (with  safety) ! What  indeed
does  an  insect  falling  on  fire  reap  but  (thorough)  burning  1

36.  The  dangers  attending  the  acts  of  one  endeavour-
ing, out  of  foolishness,  to  get  things  difficult  to  obtain,  are
sure  to  bring  sorrow  in  their  train. §

37.  By  the  employment  of  knowledge  proportionate  to
the  thing  to  be  known, ||  a person  whose  steps  are  well-
calculated, If  attains  to  the  pitch  of  prosperity  as  high  as
the  highest  summit  of  a mountain.


* What  the  anthor  means  is  this  that  before  undertaking  a thing
a king  should  judge  whether  it  is  at  all  capable  of  being  done  or  not.  To
try  to  do  an  act  incapable  of  being  done,  is  as  useless  and  attended
with  danger,  as  the  butting  of  an  elephant  with  its  tusks  against  a rock.

f This  Sloka  virtually  consists  of  three  Slokas,  its  two  lines  being,
the  first  and  last  of  a series  of  Slokas  ; four  lines  have  been  omitted  after
the  first  line  here.  We  translate  the  three  Slokas  in  order  to  preserve
the  continuity  of  thought;  the  numbers  of  the  Slokas  change  accordingly.

% The  second  line  as  given  in  the  commentary  literally  rendered
will  be  “How  can  he  who  wants  to  taste  space,  have  a mouthful.”  A
man  trying  to  bite  off  a portion  of  space  can  have  no  mouthful.

§ A man  trying  to  get  things  difficult  to  obtain,  surely  repents  for
his  mad  endeavours  afterwards,

II  The  commentary  reads  Bodhya.nuga.taya  for  Bodhanugataya.
The  original  lit : rendered  will  be  “by  intelligence  guided  by  knowledge
or  prudence,”-

H The  original  lit ; translated  will  be,  as  the  commentator  says,
'one  whose  footsteps  are  pure.  ■ *


ij2


kamandAkiya  nitisara.


38.  The  status  of  royalty  is  a thing  very  difficult  to
ascend  to  and  is  done  homage  to  by  all  persons.  Like  sacer-
dotal dignity,*  it  is  blotted  with  stains  at  any  the  slightest
transgression.

39.  Acts  (such  as  acquisition  and  preservation  of  terri-
tory) undertaken  by  kings  conversant  with  the  nature  of
Asanas,  in  perfect  conformity  to  the  rules  of  polity,  ere  long,
like  (good)  treesf  yield  desirable  fruits.

40.  An  act  duly  (in  conformity  to  the  prescribed  rules)
undertaken,  even  if  it  fails  to  bear  fruit,  does  not  become
so  much  the  cause  of  distress  as  the  one  begun  Out  of
foolishness.^

4r*  When  an  act  commenced  in  the  right  Way  is  fol-
lowed§  by  results  contrary  (to  all  expectations),  the  per-
former is  not  to  blame,  in  as  much  as  his  manliness  there  is
handicapped  by  fate.||

' 42*  In  order  to  secure  success,  a man  of  pure  intelligence
should  (in  the  first  instance)  put  forth  his  exertions,  the  rest
lies  with  Fate  which  can  cut  him  short  at  any  stage.

43.  A wise  V ijigisu  after  critically  reviewing  his  own


* The  Sanskrit  word  is  Brahmanya  or  the  character  or  position
of  Brahmana.

f The  word  in  the  text  is  Vdna  or  forest.

$ VYhat  the  author  means  is  this— a foolish  act  brings  greater
sorrows  on  its  performer  than  the  one  which  though  ultimately  barren  has
been  commenced  in  the  proper  manner.

. § For  Atut  the  commentary  reads  Ati  which  change  is  in  dls-
pensably  necessary  ; this  part  lit : rendered  will  be  "If  when  only  com-
menced, an  act  meets  with  reverse  results,"

||  This  part  literally  translated  will  be,  "whose  manliness  is  separated;
from  him  by  Fate."  After  this,  one  Sloka  is  again  omitted  of  which  the
translation  is  given  below  : —

"Just  as  a chariot  cannot  move  on  one  wheel,  so  Destiny  unaided  by
wman  exertion  can  yield  no  fruit."  Liick  and  labour  must  go  hand  in


imm  ■


: from  the  other  is  a ddad  stock.

1


'A


KAMANDAKIYA  N1TISARA.  173


condition* * * §  as  well  as  that  of  his  enemies,  should  set  out  on
an  expedition.  This — that  is  to  know  his  own  as  well  as  his
foe’s  strength  or  weakness,  is  to  be  conversant  with  the
essentials  of  good  counsel.

44.  An  intelligent  politician  should  never  do  an  act  that
Would  be  totally  barren,  or  attended  with  great  dangers ;
or  about  the  success  of  which  there  would  be  any  doubts,  or
that  would  bring  inveterate  hostility  in  its  train.

45.  An  act  unblamable  at  the  time  of  its  being  done
and  in  all  times  to  come,  pure  and  performed  in  the  proper
manner,  and  bestowing  innumerable  blessings  (both  here
and'hereafter),t  such  an  act  is  always  praised  by  the  pious.

46.  An  act  that  would  be  attended  with  uninterrupted
good  ahd  that  would  bring  no  blame  on  its  performer,  such
an  act  should  be  engaged  in,  although  for  the  time  being  it
might  not  be  agreeable.^

47.  To  crown  an  act  with  success,  it  Is  always  better  to
have  recourse  to  one's  knowledge  of  means,  from  the  very
beginning.  Sometimes  one  who  is  always  successful  may
have  recourse  to  the  conduct  of  a lion.||

48.  The  acquisition  of  wealthy  from  wicked  persons

* The  things  he  is  to  look  to  are,  as  the  the  commentator  says,  his
three  Saktis,  the  advantages  of  the  season  and  soil,  the  signs  of  coming
victory  or  defeat  indicated  by  planets,  birds  &c.

f Literally  translated  will  be — bringing  a chain  of  good.

X The  commentary  explains  this  portion  otherwise,  it  says  'al-
though for  the  time  being  it  does  not  bring  any  friendship  with  it.*

§ The  original  word  lit : translated  would  be,  “who  is  the  friend
of  success

[|  That  is  Violent  means/  The  author  means  to  say  that  know-
ledge is  a more  powerful  agent  than  violence  in  bringing  about  success.
But  sometimes  Violence' may  be  used  also.  There  are  several  minor
changes  in  reading  suggested  by  the  commentator.

H The  word  is  Sampat  i.  e . wealth  in  the  shape  of  territory  or
treasures  or  any  thing  else.


174.


KAMANDAKIYA  NIT1SARA,


by  precipitate  assault*  is  ever  difficult.  But  with  the  help
of  the  measures  of  policy,  one  can  plant  his  feet  even  on  the
head  of  an  infuriate  dephant.f

49.  Here  (in  the  earth  of  ours)  there  is  nothing  that  is  in-
capable of  being  achieved  by  the  learned  and  wise.J  Me-
tals (such  as  iron  &c)  are  known  to  be  incapable  of  being
penetrated  ; but  by  suitable  (scientific)  measures  (heating  &c)
they  also  are  liquified. §

50.  A (unsharpened)  piece  of  iron  carried  on  the  shoulder
does  not  cut  it  at  all.  But  as  soon  as  it  is  sharpened  a little,
it  is  turned  into  a means  for  fulfilling  desirable|(  ends  (such
as,  slaughter  of  foes  &e).


51.  That  water  extinguishes  fire  is  a fact  well  known
on  earth.  But  assisted  by  the  employment  of  proper  mea-
sures, fire  can  also  desicate  water  up.f

52.  Poison  is  incapable  of  being  taken  internally  and
when  it  is  taken  so,  it  produces  fatal  results.  But  even  poi-


* Without  taking  into  consideration  the  nature  of  the  Season  and
Soil.  The  author  means  that  rash,  inconsiderate  attacks  are  seldom  at-
tended  with  success.

t sI°ka  is  differently  read  in  many  other  texts.

_ I Lit:  there  is  no  such  thing  that,  is  beyond  the  abilities  of  the
wise  as  regards  its  performance.

§ The  refrain  is  the  same  as  before,  that  policy  is  better  than
violence.  Avedyam  may  have  another  meaning  v{g  diamond.  The  trans-
ition then  will  be,  "even  metals  and  diamonds  (the  hardest  of  things

knc^njaremeltedbypropermeasures.

||  The  appropriateness  of  the  Sloka  in  this  connection  may  be
questioned.  Although  it  seems  out  of  place,  its  bearing  to  the  present
discourse  is  thus  sought  to  be  established  by  the  commentator.  So
long  as  the  piece  of  iron  is  unsharpened  u e.  so  long  as  no  measusc  has
been  taken  to  turn  it  into  usefulness,  it  cannot  cut,  but  as  soon  as  by  some
means  or  other  it  is  sharpened,  it  becomes  a very  useful  weapon.  It  is

in, the  means  employed  to  turn  it  into  usefulness  lies  the  true  worth
• Of  the  thing,  f

mm'


KAMAlMDAlCIYA  nitisara.


*?3

son  beirig  mixed  with  other  things  and  ingredients  is  turned
into  and  used  as  a medicine.

53.  To  know  what  is  unknown,^  to  decide  and
tesolve  upon  what  is  already  known,  to  dissipate  the  doubts
about  any  doubtful  subject  and  to  know  the  rest  of  a thing
when  only  a part  of  it  is  known,— these  should  be  the  duties  of
ministers.

54.  Abiding  by  the  rules  laid  down  by  wise  politicians,  a
person  should  never  contemn  or  despise  any  body.  He
should  hear  every  body's  words  for  culling  salutary  counsels
out  of  them.

55.  The  acquisition  of  unacquired  things,  and  the  pro*
tection  of  things  already  acquired, — these  are  the  two  fields
in  which  the  ingenuity  and  prowess  of  the  Vijigisu  should  be
exercised.

56.  The  magnificence  and  luxuries  a successful  sove-
reign are  really  a beauty,  but  these  are  mockeries  in  respect
of  a king  who  has  never'been  successful  (victorious  over  hisf
foes).f

57*  +The  king,  who  arrogant  and  foolish  in  his  acts,
crosses  his  own  ministers,  is  himself  soon  crossed^  by  his
enemies,  his  counsels  being  totally  futile.

58.  The  seed  of  counsel  should  be  carefully  preserved,
inasmuch  as  it  is  the  seed  of  kings. ||  The  destruction  of
the  seed  of  counsel^  is  always  followed  by  the  destruction


* The  minister  should  collect  information  regarding  unknown
things  by  means  of  spies  and  secret  emissaries.

t This  and  the  previous  Sloka  are  not  to  be  found  in  the  original
before  us.  The  first  line  of  the  first  Sloka  is  sometimes  differently  read*

J ' The  translation  is  ’ free.

f That  is,  as  the  commentator  says,  defeated  and  despoiled  of  his
kingdom.  -

||  Counsel  is  here  compared  to  a seed  out  [of  which  the  tree  of
royalty  grows.

H Which  means,  the  betrayal  or  breach  of  counsel.


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA*


of  the  kings  ; while  it  preservation  preserves  them  excel*
lently.*

59.  Himself  acting  like  a lion  and  conversant  with  policy,
the  monarch's  acts  should  only  be  known  to  his  family
members,  when  they  are  in  a fare  way  of  being  done,  and
to  others  when  they  are  already  accomplished. f

60.  The  wise  hold  as  commendable  such  counsel  that  is
desirable,  that  does  not  entail  future  sorrow^  that  yields  a
series  of  good  results  in  long  succession!  and  that  doe$
not  extend  over  a long  period. ||

61.  A Mantra  or  counsel  is  said  to  consist  of  five  part$
mz.y  support,  means  to  ends,  division  of  time  and  country,
averting  of  calamities  and  final  success.1]]'


* That  is  the  preservation  of  strict  secrecy  regarding  counsels  is  of
vital  importance  in  the  preservation  of  a kingdom*

t The  commentator  explains A lion,  when  enraged,  invisibly
concentrates  all  its  energy  before  it  takes  the  final  spring*  So  also
should  a king  do.  The  author  means  to  say  the  movements  and  plans  of
& king  should  not  even  be  known  to  the  members  of  his  own  family
before  they  are  actually  put  into  action.  Strict  secrecy  should  be  impose
ed  here  and  in  all  other  matters  of  state.

t That  does  not  become  the  cause  of  future  repentance*

§ The  commentary  here  substitute  Anuvandhifalaprada  for  Anu -
rahtifalaprada , which  latter  means  ‘good  results  in  the  shape  of  the  good  ,
will  of  the  subjects.'

||  A counsel  extending  over  a long  period  is  in  greater  danger  of
being  betrayed  than  one  extending  over  a short  while.

H What  the  author  means  is  that  when  any  deliberation  or  counsel
is  to  be  held  regarding  any  undertaking,  these  things  namely  the
support  in  the  shape  of  men,  munition  and  magnificence,  the  means,
the  advantages  or  otherwise  of  time  and  territory,  the  advent  of  any
unforeseen  event  and  final  success,  should  .be  given  the  best  considertion
to*  The  king  should  see  whether  he  is  well  supported,  whether  his
means  are  efficient  enough,  whether  the  advantages  of  soil  and  $ea$qp
are.  in  his.,  favor,  whether  there  is  change  for. any  untoward  event- to  cut
:hitti;  short  and  whether  there  is  any  doubt  about  the  final  success.  The
fifth  or  last  part  is  not  .mentioned  in  the  text*


kamandAkiya  NITISARA.  177

62.  When  an  act  is  at  all  undertaken,  it  should  be  duly
accomplished;  when  it  has  not  been  begun,  it  should  be  at
once  taken  in  hand  ; and  when  it  is  accomplished,  its  results
should  be  made  permanent  and  enduring  by  commendable
means/* * * §5,

63.  Persons,  conversant  with  the  nature  and  importance
of  counsel, f should  be  directed  to  hold  consultation  about
the  measure  to  be  employed  for  performing  a certain  act  ;$
and  that  measure  regarding  which  is  their  minds  agree,
should  be  had  recourse  to,  as  soon  as  possible.

64.  Acts  regarding  which  the  minds  of  the  counselors

agree§  and  do  not  entertain  any  misgiving,!!  acts  which
are  not  blamed  by  the  pious, — only  such  acts  should  be  1

undertaken.

65.  When  any  counsel  lias  been  duly  resolved  upon  by
the  ministers,  it  should  again  be  seriously  weighed  by  the
king  himself  (in  order  to  avoid  flaws  and  faults).  A wise*!

* The  author  her  specifies  the  primary  duties  of  ministers.  They
should  direct  the  accomplishment  of  all  undertakings  ; they  should  take
new  undertakings  into  hand  ; they  should  turn  into  advantage  works  or
acts  already  done.

f The  original  word  as  explained  by  the  commentator,  includes,
ministers,  spies  and  emissaries  of  kings.

J The  text  word  is  Kdryyodwesfa  which  the  commentator  thus
explains— “the  door  by  which  such  business,  as  ruling  of  the  earth
&c.,  comes.”  Whatjhe  means  to  say  is  that  spies  and  ambassadors  and
ministers  should  watch  the  movements  of  the  foe  and  the  Uddsirta  &:c.,
and  at  the  right  moment  should  fail  upon  them,  employing  measures,
agreed  upon  by  all.  We  take  the  word  to  mean,  the  means  to  an
end.  The  translation  is  free.

§ That  is  4<  where  there  is  no  difference  of  opinion.”

(j  It  is  believed  that  the  mind  can  intuitively  become  aware  of  the
probable  faifure  of  an  undertaking.  It  feels  hesitation  and  there  is
some  sort  of  a trepidation  in  it.

The  text  word  is  Tatwajua  for  which  the  commentator  substi-
tutes, Mantrajnas  or  sound  counselor.


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISAKa.


I78

monarch  should  so  conduct  himself  as  not  to  prejudice  his
own  interests  in  the  least.

66.  Ministers,  for  the  advancement  of  their  own  interests
desire  a prolonged  campaign.  A king  that  protracts  his
business  over  a considerable  length  of  time,  becomes  a puppet

in  the  hands  of  his  ministers.* * * §  j

67.  Cheerfulness  of  the  mind,  earnestness,  the  quicken-  j

ed  condition  of  the  sense-organs, f united  action  with  j
the  supporters  and  allies,  and  a prosperous  state  of  affairs,  i
these  are  signs  that  indicate  coming  success.  j

68.  Rapidly-working,  uninterrupted  antecedents,  prolific  !
of  sources  of  prosperity,  are  antecedents  that  foretell  the
success  of  an  undertaking  or  act.

69.  A counsel  should  be  again  and  again  discussed
(before  it  is  finally  disposed  of);  it  should  strictly  be  pre,
served  (kept  secret)  with  scrupulous  zeal.  A counsel  care-
lessly kept,  being  prematurely  divulged,  destroys  the  king
(concerned)  even  like  fire  itself.J

70.  A counsel  that  has  not  yet  found  its  way  among  the
people,  should  be  mutually  preserved  (by  the  king,  the
ministers,  spies,  &c.)  A counsel  that  is  not  scrupulously  pre-
served, is  given  publicity  to,  by  the  friends  and  relatives  (of
the  counselors).!


* This  part  is  freely  translated.

+ Thi.s  is  brouSht  about  only  when  a man  expects  something
which  will  be  pleasing  to  him.  When  some  adverse  result  is  expected
the  senses  become  dull  and  apathetic.

f This  sloka  is  substituted  in  the  commentary  for  sloka  64  of  the
text.  ' .

§ It  is  no  use  trying  to  keep  a cousel  secret  that  has  once  been
given  air  to.  The  counselors  concerned  should  help  one  another  in
preserving  its  secrecy.  It  should  not  be  trusted  even  to  a friend  or
a relative,  who  in  his  turn  may  also  communicate  it  to  his  friend.  Thus
it  will  be  trumpeted  over  the  town  and  reach  the  enemy's  camp.  Tftis
sloka  is  omitted  in  the  text.


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


m

71.  Inebriation,  inadvertence,  anger,* * * §  talk  during  sleep,
courtezans  (cherished  with  too  much  confidence)!  and
creatures  who  are  despised  or  looked  upon  with  indiffer-
ence, J these  sometimes  divulge  a counsel  prematurely-§

72.  A king  should  hold  counsel  in  a place  on  the  roof  of
his  palace  or  in  a forest  where  there  are  no  pillars  (to  re-
sound the  conversation),  no  windows  (to  let  the  speeches  go
out)  and  no  nook  or  corner  (to  conceal  an  inquisitive  eves
dropper). ||  He  should  also  see  that  he  is  not  watched  by
any  body.

7 \ A room  which  has  no  loop-holes  or  out-lets,  which
is  situated  in  a secluded  spot,  where  there  is  no  fear  of  over-
hearing enemies,  or  no  strong  breeze,  or  no  pillars  or  no
frequent  coming  and  going  of  men, — in  such  a room,  a pros-
perous king,  having  purified  himself1!!  should  hold  his
councils.


* The  text  word  is  ( kama ) which  the  commentary  substitutes  by
Kopa.

f Another  meaning  is  possible  viz  wives  having  masterly  influence
over  their  husbands  i.e.,  females  whose  husbands  are  henpecked.

t These  creatures  are  never  suspected  of  being  able  to  take  notice
of  any  thing.  So,  one  talks  carelessly  before  them  ; stories  are  said
of  parrots  and  other  birds,  which  hearing  a man  talk,  imitate  him,  and
as  soon  as  a stranger  steps  in,  repeats  his  words.  Indian  tale-parrots
are  said  to  possess  intelligence  equal  to  that  of  men.

§ The  author  wants  to  say  that  when  a man  is  extremely  drunk,
or  when  he  is  careless,  or  when  he  is  angry,  or  if  he  has  the  habit  of
talking  in  sleep,  he  is  liable  to  disclose  his  counsels  against  his  will.  A
courtezan,  or’  a female  too  much  confided  upon,  often  gives  air  to  a
secret,  which  her  lover  out  of  fondness  might  have  told  to  her.

||  For  the  text  word,  the  commentator  substitutes,  Nirbhinndn -
tarasamsraye  which  reading  we  have  accepted.

IT  Purification  of  the  body  before  going  to  do  something  important,
is  considered  to  add  to  the  powers  of  the  mind,  which  belief  can  not  be
looked  upon  as  purile  in  view  of  the  subtle  and  inexplicable  relation
between  the  material  and  the  psychical.  This  sloka  is  omitted  in  the
text.


KaMaNDAKIYA  N1TISARA.


180

74.  Manu  says,  twelve,  Vrihaspati  says  sixteen,  and
Usanas  says  twenty,  ministers  should  form  a cabinet.*

75.  Others  again  say  that  as  many  good  and  deserving
counselors  as  are  available  (lit : possible),  should  be  admitted
into  the  cabinet. f Duly  entering  the  cabinet  and  with
mind  (attention)  undivided,  a king  should  hold  counsel  for
facilitating  the  success  of  an  act  or  understanding. J

76.  Some  say  that  for  a particular  act  or  mission,  a king
should  engage  ministers  to  the  number  of  five,  seven  or
more,  all  severally  entrusted  with  several  portions  or
charges. §

77.  A king  seeking  his  own  welfare  should  discuss  the
subject  of  a consultation  severally  with  each  of  his  ministers  ;
after  which,  he  should  take  into  his  serious  consideration  (or
weigh  in  his  judgment) ||  the  opinion  of  each  by  itself.

78.  A king  should,  aftenhaving  weighed  the  opinion  of
other  counsellors,  act  upon  that  counsel  that  should  be
proffered  by  a highly  intelligent,  well-wishing  and  numer-
ously-supported minister  who  ever  acts  in  conformity  to  the
Shastras.


* 'Mantra  in  the  last  compound  word  of  the  text  is  a misprint  for
Mantri .

f This  part  is  freely  rendered  for  lucidity’s  sake.  What  the
author  says  is  that  there  is  n®  hard  and  fast  rule  regarding  the  number
of  ministers  to  be  taken  into  consultation.  Really  deserving  men  should
be  selected  and  heard.

+ For  Yatha  in  the  first  line  and  Karyyasidhi  in  the  second,  some
read  Tathd  and  Karyyabhudhi.

§ What  the  author  means  is  this.  Several  ministers  should  be
entrusted  to  carry  on  particular  work.  The  portions  of  the  work  should
again  be  divided  among  them  according  to  their  capabilities.  In  one
word,  the  writer  advocates  the  principle  of  “Division  of  labour”  here  as
elsewhere.  This  sloka  does  not  occur  in  the  text.

11  Lit : “Enter  into”  hence,  comprehend  &c.

'•  5F  The  first  line  is  vicious,  for  which  the  commentator  substitutes  ;

Akaikena  hi  Karyyani  Subicharyya  punas  punas.


KAMANDAK1YA  NITISARA.


1 8 1

79-  Having  once  formed  a resolution,*  never  let  the
proper  time  for  carrying  it  into  action  pass  awav.  But  when
in  some  way  or  other,  that  time  is  past,  the  resolution  should
again  be  formed  anew  in  due  manner.

80.  An  intelligent  prince  should  never  let  slip  the  season
for  doing  any  action,  for,  combination  of  circumstances
favourable  to  an  act,  is  to  be  found  very  seldom.f

81.  Following  the  footsteps  of  the  pious,  an  intelligent
king  should  carry  out  his  projects  in  proper  season.  Exerting
in  the  right  way  and  in  the  right  time,  he  enjoys  the  deli-
cious fruits  of  his  actions.

82.  Viewing  carefully  the  dark  and  the  bright  side  of
his  project,  a king,  with  the  advantages  of  time  and  place
in  his  favour,  and  supported  by  his  faithful  allies,  should  fall
upon  things  (such  as  town  and  villages)  calculated  to  con*
duce  to  his  aggrandisement.  He  should  never  be  rash  in
his  acts.J

83.  A rash  prince,  without  judging  the  strength  or  other-
wise of  his  foes,  and  arrogantly  thinking  “I  am  the  most
powerful'’  and  disregarding  the  (salutary)  counsel  of  his
ministers,  attacks  his  enemies  only  to  meet  his  own  fall ; such
a prince  is  narrow-minded  and  impudent  and  knows  not  what
he  does.

84.  He  only  who  mistakes  evil  for  good  and  whose
understanding  is  shallow,  disregards  the  counsel  of  his
ministers.  A rash  king  attacking  rashly,  is  soon  entangled  in
inextricable  difficulties.

85.  Thus  an  energetic  monarch  betaking  to  a course  of


* Lit : “having  once  decided  upon  a certain  counsel’*  i.e.,  when  a
definite  conclusion  has  been  arrived  at,  regarding  a counsel.

f The  author  here  points  out  the  soundness  of  the  saying — “Delay
is  dangerous.**

t The  translation  is  a free  one.  Several  minor  changes  of  reading  i«i
noticed  in  the  commentyar.


i82


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


true  policy,  should,  by  the  power  of  his  counsel*  bring  into
subjection  his  foes  resembling  vicious  snakes.

Thus  ends  the  eleventh  section . the  dissertation  on  coun-
sels, in  the  Nitisara  of  Kamandaka.


SECTION  XII.

■t 0

aving  previously  held  the  necessary  counsel  a
wisef  king  should  depute  to  the  monarch  against  whom  he
intends  to  march,  an  ambassador  confident  of  his  special  abi-
lities.t  whose  selection  would  be  approved  by  the  cabinet.§

2.  A person,  dauntless, ||  accurate  in  memory,  eloquent,
accomplished  in  arms  and  in  the  Shastras,  and  well-exercised
in  all  sorts  of  works,  such  a person  only  deserves  to  be
a king’s  ambassador,

3.  Ambassadors  are  said  to  be  of  three  kinds,  viz.,  those
invested  with  full  powers ; f those  with  restricted  powers**
and  those  merely  carrying  the  errands  of  their  masters. tt

* There  is  a pun  on  the  word  Mantra  which  means  both  counsel  and
charms  and  incantations  for  taming  snakes.

f Lit:  “Skilful  in  counsel.”

% Lit : “Proud  of  his  missionary  powers.”  The  text  is  vicious,  for
which  the  commentary  gives  doutyabhimaninam .

§ Another  meaning  is  suggested  by  the  annotator  viz.,  one  among
the  ministers  who  selected  by  the  rest.

||  The  original  word  is  Pragalva.

^|  That  is  a plenipotentiary,  such  was  Krishna  when  he  was  deputed
by  Yudhisthira  to  negotiate  with  king  Dhuryodhana.

**  This  class  of  ambassadors,  as  the  commentator  says,  can  do
nothing  of  their  own  accord.  Thier  conduct  is  prescribed  for  them  by
their  soveriegn,  whose  orders  they  are  unable  to  put  aside.

, jf-f.  These  m p ordinary  messengers  who  merely  repeat  what  they  are
instructed  by  their  masters,  and  nothing  more  or  less.


KaMANDAKIYA  NltlSARA.


183


respect  of  rank,  the  Utter  are  inferior  to  the  former  respec-
tively, in  consequence  of  the  smallness  of  the  powers  vested
in  them.* * * §

4-  In  accordance  with  the  commands  of  his  masters,
an  ambassador,  after  (mature)  deliberation  as  to  the  effectf
of  his  contemplated  measures  upon  the  dominions  of  his
king,  and  on  those  of  his  enemies,  should  go  to  (visit)  these
latter  one  after  another.


5-  He  should  befriend  the  frontier^  as  well  as  the
forest  tribes,  and  should  find  out  the  inland  and  navigable
communications  and  easy  routes,  all  for  facilitating  the  un-
impeded progress  and  march  of  his  (master’s)  army.

6.  He  should  not  enter  the  enemie’s  city  or  the  court
without  knowing  its  whereabouts.§  He  should,  for  accom-
plishing his  purpose,  wait  for  opportunities,  and  when  per-
mitted,  enter  the  foe^  territory.

7.  He  should  inform  himself  about  the  stability  of  the
foe's  kingdom,  about  his  forts  and  castles  and  their  defences
and  defects,  and  also  his  army,  allies  and  treasuries.

8.  He  should  deliver  the  orders  of  his  master,  word-
per  word,  even  if  weapons  be  raised  (to  smite  him
down). ||  He  should  also  apprise  himself  of  the  loyalty  or


* The  last  portion  is  not  so  clear.  What  the  author  means  seems

to  be  that  in  respect  of  rank  a plenipotentiary  is  superior  to  an  ambas-
sador with  limited  powers  and  so  on.  But  this  is  self-evident.

f For  this  compound  some  subsiitute  Swate'achyapara  vdkydndm,
which  means  ‘his  own  as  well  as  others'  words.’  This  change  of  reading
is  not  necessary.

t 1 word  in  the  text  is  a misprint  for  Antaspala .

§ Two  explanations  of  the  text-word  are  given  in  the  commentary.
The  one  embodied  in  the  translation  is  not,  as  it  appears  to  us  appro-
priate ; the  other  is  ‘unknown  and  unperceived  by  the  enemy.’  This
strengthens  the  antithesis  in  the  last  portion  ; what  the  author  means  is
this,— that  an  ambassador  should  not  like  a spy  covertly  enter  an  enemies
dominions  but  would  do  so  with  his  open  permission.

II  What  the  author  means  is  that  the  ambassador  should  not  lie  even


kamandakiya  nitisara.


184

disloyalty  of  the  enemy’s  subjects  (by  watching  their
movements  of  the  face  and  hands  &c).

9.  He  should  not  let  any  one  else  know  the  disaffeo-'
tion*  of  the  enemy’s  prakritis  (subjects)  towards  their
master,  but  should  himself,  unpercievably  do  what  he  would
think  fit  to  do.t

10.  Even  when  questioned  on  the  subject,  (by  the
inimical  sovereign)  he  should  not  speak  anything  about
the  disaffection  (or  weakness)  of  the  Prakritis  of  his  own
lord,  but  should  in  flatteringt  language  say — “Your  majesty
knows  everything  well.”

it.  He  should  eulogise  the  enemy  in  four  ways — by  com-
paring him  with  the  Vijigisu,  (i.e.j  the  ambassador’s  masters)
in  respect  of  his  high  lineage,  his  fame,  his  substantiality,
and  his  commendable  deeds. §

12.  Coming  into  contact  with  the  treacherous||  element
of  the  enemy’s  state  under  the  pretence  of  instructing  them
in  the  four  branches  of  learning  and  the  five  arts,  he  should
(with  their  help)  know  the  former’s  movements  as  also
which  party  could  be  easily  weaned  over.^f

when  his  life  is  threatened  ; it  is  his  duty  to  deliver  the  message  he  has
been  entrusted  with,  without  the  slightest  mutilation.

* The  text-word  lit:  means — ‘falling  off'  hence  ‘want  of  allegi-
ance’ &c.

f The  author  means  this,  that  when  an  ambassador  comes  to  know
that  the  enemy’s  Prakritis  are  not  what  they  should  be,  he  should  not  let
the  fact  take  the  air,  but  should  himself  take  advantage  of  it  and  covertfy
do  what  would  be  conducive  to  the  good  of  his  master.

$ It  may  also  mean  ‘modest,  humble’;  the  translation  is  free.  .

§ The  author  intends  to  say  that  to  ingratiale  himself  into  the
favor  of  the  foe,  the  ambassador  should  praise  him  saying  that  he  is  in
no  way  inferior  to  the  Vijigisu  his  master.  For  Falena  the  commeentary
reads  Kulenat  which  reading  we  have  accepted.

(I  The  original  word  means ‘one  receiving  wages  from  both  sides/
Hence  one  who  is  a hypoerete  and  treacherous.

Or  it  may  mean  ‘where  dissension  could  be  easily  sown/  The
explanation  given  in  tne  commentary  supports  this  view.


kamandakiya  nitisara.


185

13.  He  should  keep  up  communications  with  his  own
secret  agents  remaining  disguised  as  ascetics  in  pursuit  of
knowledge  in  Tirthas ,* * * § **  Asramas,  + and  Surathanas.%

14.  He  should  point  out  to  the  alienable  party  (in  the
enemy's  country)  his  own  master’s  manliness, § high  lineage
prosperity  (affluence),  forbearance,  great  energy,  magnani-
mity and  gentility. ||

15.  He  should  put  up  with  insulting  language  and  avoid
the  influence  of  anger  or  lust  (on  all  occasions).^"  He
should  not  lie  down  (to  sleep)  with  others-5*"* ; he  should
keep  his  own  purposes  strictly  secret,  but  know  those  of
others.

16.  An  intelligent  ambassador  should  not  be  depressed
and  hopeless  regarding  the  accomplishment  of  bis  projects,
although  he  would  have  to  wait  a considerable  length  of  time.
But  by  various  tempting  offers  and  baits  (to  the  subjects  and


* Tirtha  ordinarily  means  a holy  place.  Here  it  means  specially
a place  where  two  or  more  sacred  rivers  fall  into  one  another,  and  which
in  consequence,  becomes  a place  of  pilgrimage.

f Asrama — is  the  place  where  ascetics,  dwell ; hermitage  &c.

J Surasthdna — lit : a place  of  a god  ; hence  a sacred  place  where
temples  are  built  and  images  of  gods  enshrined  and  consecrated.
This  is  the  reading  of  the  commentary  for  Asrayasthana .

§ For  Sant  dp  the  commentator  gives  Pvatdp .

||  What  the  author  means  is  this  that  as  soon  as  the  messenger  or
whatever  he  may  be  called— finds  that  there  is  a section  among  the
enemy’s  subjects  that  may  be  weaned  over,  he  will  at  once  begin  to  work
by  pointing  out  the  superiority  of  his  own  employer  over  their  sovereign
in  every  respect.  The  word  ‘alienable’  has  been  used  for  the  word
Vedya  which  lit:  means  that  which  may  be  easily  penetrated, or  separated
from  its  main  stock.

For,  in  anger  and  in  lust  a man  looses  himself,  and  knows  not
what  he  does.

**  The  author  prohibits  this,  as  he  thinks  that  the  messenger  may  be
a sumnumbulist  and  he  may  speak  out  his  mind  during  sleep.

24


1 86


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


officers  of  the  enemy),  he  should  study  the  passing  times; *

17 — 1 9. — If  during  these  days  that  pass  away  unprofit-
ably,  he  does  not  find  any  defectf  in  the  administration  of
the  ruler  of  the  earth  (the  enemy),  the  ambassador — if  he  is
a sound  politician  and  earnestly  desirous  of  the  advancement
of  his  own  party  (king) — should  wait  (patiently)  for  advant-
ages of  time  and  place,  during  a period  when  the  enemy
(disgusted  with  his  own  idleness)  would  himself  intend  to
undertake  something,  such  as,  the  provocation  of  his  own
Parsnigraha , the  pacification  of  the  disaffected  section  of
his  subjects,  the  storing  of  his  forts  with  stocks  of  food
grains  and  their  repairs.:}:  He  should  console  his  mind
with  the  thought  that  the  foe  would,  of  his  own  accord,
march  against  his  (ambassador's)  master,  and  he  should  en-
deavour accordingly. §

20.  When  day  after  day  the  time  for  action  is  deferred,
an  intelligent  ambassador  should  consider,  whether  or  not
the  enemy  is  procrastinating,  only  to  let  the  opportunity  for
his  (ambassador's)  master  to  attack  him  (enemy)  slip  away.||

* What  the  author  means  is  that  delay  should  not  deter  an  intelli-
gent messenger.  He  should  make  the  best  use  of  that  time  by  studying
the  state  of  the  enemy’s  Raj  in  various  ways.

f Anothor  meaning  is  possible  viz. — if  any  calamity  overtake  the
enemy,  affording  a good  opportunity  for  his  rivals  of  fall  upon  him.’

X During  the  progress  of  any  of  these  undertakings,  the  ambassador
has  every  chance  of  lighting  upon  some  secret  or  of  getting  hold  of  some
thing  likely  to  be  beneficial  to  the  interests  of  his  own  master.

§ The  author  means  to  say  that  if  the  ambassador  finds  no  flaw  in
the  enemy,  he  should  not  despair  but  content  himself  with  the  thought
that  even  the  enemy  himself  may  one  day  march  against  his  master,
when  the  informations  gathered  by  him  would  be  turned  to  profit.

1|  The  translation  is  free.  The  author  means  in  case  to  say  that  the
ambassador  finds  the"enemy  deffering  every  thing  to  a future  period,  he
should  seek  an  explanation  of  this  conduct  in  another  direction  viz.,
Whether  or  not  the  enemy  is  gaining  time  to  deprive  his  rival  of  the
advantages  of  a seasonable  attack.  When  once  the  proper  time  slips
away,  the  opponent  will  have  to  await  long  for  another  such  opportun  ity.


KAMANDAKIYA  NITiSARA.


187


21;  When  it  will  be  evident  that  the  time  for  action
has  arrived,  he  should  go  back  directly  to  the  kingdom  of  his
lord;  or  remaining  there  (in  the  enemy's  territory),  he  should
communicate  to  his  master  all  the  important  points  of  his
information.

22 — 23.  To  find  out  the  foes  of  the  enemy,  to  alienate
his  allies  and  relatives  from  him,  to  know  (exactly  the  state
of)  his  forts,  finances  and  army,  to  determine  the  course  of
action  to  be  taken,  to  wean  over  to  his  (ambassador's)  side
the  governors  of  the  provinces  of  the  enemy's  territory,  and
to  know  all  the  particulars  of  the  route  (country)  through
which  march  (against  the  enemy)  is  intended, — these  are
said  to  be  the  duties  of  a Duta *

24.  A ruler  of  earth  should  harass  his  enemy  by  means
of  his  own  Dutas\‘f  on  his  own  part,  he  should  be  perfectly
aware  of  the  movements  of  the  enemy's  Dutas.

25.  A person  skilled  in  the  interpretation  of  internal
sentiments  by  conjecture  and  by  external  gestures,  accurate
of  memory,  polite  and  soft  in  speech,  agile  in  movements,
capable  of  bearing  up  with  all  sorts  of  privations  and  diffi-
culties, ready-wittedj  and  expert  in  everything, — such  a
person  is  fit  to  become  a spy,

26.  Sly  spies  disguised  as  ascetics,  traders  or  artisans
should  go  about  in  all  directions§  apprising  themselves
of  the  opinion  of  the  world  (t\e.3  the  subjects  or  the  public
at  large).

27.  Spies  well-informed  in  everything  {i.e,,  important
topic  or  question  of  the  times),  should  every  day  come  to


*“  Hitherto  we  have  been  rendering  Duta  into  ‘ambassador/  but
really  duta  is  more  generic— comprising  scouts  and  spies  within  its
meaning.  It  means,  'any  one  deputed  to  do  something/

f These  dutas  penetrating  through  all  the  secrets  of  his  counsel,
would  cause  the  enemy  considerable  anxiety,
f That  is,  possessing  presence  of  mind  ;

§ The  commentator  says  'in  the  mandala  of  the  twelve  kings/


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA,


and  go  away  from  ( i.e . communicate  with)  the  ruler  of  earth,
for  they  are  the  eyes  of  the  king,  that  enable  him  to  look  at
distant  things.*

23.  In  order  to  penetrate  into  and  divulge  the  secret
of  secrets  of  the  enemy,  one  (a  spy)  should  cautiously  and
covertly  watch  his  (enemy’s)  movements.  A ruler  of  earth,
having  the  spies  for  his  eyes,  is  awake  even  when  he  is
asleep. f

29.  A king  should  have  all  his  and  his  enemy’s  domini-
ons pervaded  with  spies  who  resemble  the  sun  in  energy
and  the  wind  in  their  movements^  and  whose  selection  is
approved  of  by  the  public.

30.  Spies  are  the  eyes  of  the  ruler  of  earth  ; he  should
always  look  through  their  medium§ ; he  that  does  not  look
through  their  medium,  stumbles  down,  out  of  ignorance,  even
on  level  grounds||  ; for  he  is  said  to  be  blind.

31.  Through  the  medium  of  his  spies,  a king  should  know
the  growth  and  advancement  of  his  rivals’  prosperity,  their
movements  in  all  circumstances,  and  the  purposes  and


* I he  text  lit:  rendered  would  be — “for  they  are  the  king's  eyes
that  remain  at  a distance"  ! The  author  means  that  the  spies  are  the
medium  through  which  a king  perceives  things  that  being  away  from  his
own  sight,  cannot  be  directly  perceived  by  him.  The  idea  of  descri-
bing spies  as  the  king's  distant  eyes  is  a very  favorite  one  with  the
Sanskrit  poets.

t What  the  author  means  is  this  that  although  the  king  sleeps  yet
his  emissaries  are  wide  awake  and  are  working  ; so  when  he  wakes  up
he  will  come  to  know  everything  important  that  may  have  transpired
during  his  sleep.

-t  That  is,  who  act  and  move  in  as  imperceptible  a manner  as  the
wind.

§ That  is,  whatever,  he  should  do,  should  be  done  in  consultation
with  the  spies  who  always  look  to  the  state  of  affairs  for  him.

[|  That  is,  even  in  the  performance  of  ordinary  work.  Just  as  a blind
man  stumbles  even  on  level  grounds,  so  does  a king  meet  with
difficulties  in  all  undertaking  when  he  does  not  use  the  spies  as  his


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.  1 8.9

intentions* * * §  of  their  subjects  (lit:  of  those  who  inhabit  their
dominions).

32.  Emissaries  are  said  to  be  of  two  kinds — viz.,  secret
and  public.  Secret  emissaries  have  been  particularized  above;
a public  emissary  is  called  a Duta  or  an  ambassador.!

33.  Guided  by  his  spies,  a king  should  proceed  to
any  work,  like  Ritvzjas%  in  a sacrifice  being  guided  by  the
Sutras. % The  spy-service  is  to  said  be  well-established  when
the  ambassador  is  kept  well-informed  by  the  spies.

34.  A Tikshana}\\  a religious  mendicant,  a sacrificer  or
a person  of  purest  character — these  are  the  disguises  (under
which  spies  roam  through  a king’s  mandalafi  ; when  they
(the  spies)  are  thus  disguised,  they  do  not  recognise  one
another.

35.  For  the  successful  termination  of  their  missions,
a site  for  the  habitation  of  the  spies  should  be  selected,  where
there  is  a constant  conflux  or  gathering  (of  people).  There
the  spies  should  stay  being  duly  served  and  looked  after.**

* Literally  *what  they  want.*

f The  author  includes  ambassadors  under  the  category  of  'spies’  or
i vharas — which  etymologically  means  those  who  walk  through  the
king’s  dominions  ( mandala ).  The  difference  between  a Chara  and  a
Duta  is  that  one  is  a secret  agent  while  the  other  is  a public  one.

$ Riivijas  are  the  priests  who  officate  at  sacrifices  ; ordinarily  four
are  mentioned  viz  the  Hotri , the  Udgatri,  the  Adhvaryu  and  the
Brahman  ; at  grand  ceremonies  sixteen  are  enumerated,

§ That  part  of  the  Vedas  containing  aphoristic  rules  for  sacrifices
and  other  ceremonies.

||  Lit : pungent,  sharp  ; here  a person  of  fiery  or  passaonate  tem-
parament.  Probably  there  was  a class  of  ascetics  of  this  description.

What  the  author  means  is  this  that  the  spies  ordinarily  simulate
the  appearances  of  these  persons,  when  they  roam  through  the  enemy’s
territory  in  order  to  hide  their  identity.

m The  last  line  of  this  Sloka  is  extremely  vicious  in  the  text ; for
which  the  commentary  substitutes : —

*T isteyuryaim  Sanchards  paricharyyabab&hina$>
which  we  accept.


KAMANDAKIYA  N1TISARA.


i go

36.  In  the  residence  of  the  spies  there  should  stay
persons  disguised  as  traders,  merchants* * * §  husbandmen,  con-
vent-heads, (religious)  mendicants,  professors  (of  religion) ;
pure-hearted  (ascetics),  and  mercinaries.

37.  Spies  skilled  in  studying  the  hearts  of  men,  should
be  posted  in  the  territory  of  all  kings  who  are  within  the
mandala  of  the  Vijigisu  or  within  that  of  his  enemy.

38.  The  king  that  does  not  know  (watch)  the  movements
of  the  kings  of  his  own  mandala  or  of  those  of  his  enemy's
mandala , is  said  to  be  asleept  although  he  is  wide  awake,
and  he  never  wakes  up  from  such  sleep  of  his.

39.  (Through  his  spies)  a king  should  know  (watch)  those
(Enemies)  who  have  reason  to  be  exasperated  with  him  and
also  those  who  are  so  without  any  reason  whatever^ ; he
should  by  secret  measures  of  punishment  (assassination  &c..)
do  away  with  those  among  his  own  household,  who  are  sedi-
tious and  angry§  with  him  without  any  cause  whatever.||


* For  Vala  of  the  text  the  annotator  gives  Vanik , and  explains  it
to  mean  a ‘foreigner.’

f There  is  a pun  upon  the  words  Jdgran  and  Susupta  here,  The
author  means,  a king  ignorant  of  the  movements  of  his  rivals  is  as
good  as  one  asleep,  although  he  may  literally  be  awake  and  working.
Such  carelessness  results  in  his  being  subjugated  ; and  his  inactive
nature  can  never  in  future  throw  off  the  yoke  of  thraldom.

$ The  author  distinguishes  between  classes  of  foes — those  who  are
born  enemies  and  those  who  are  made  so  by  some  cause  or  other,  such
as  the  withholding  of  a promised  thing  &:c.

§ This  is  strictly  literal — the  meaning  is — disaffected  towards  him
although  they  have  never  been  maltreated.

||  It  sounds  absurd  that  we  may  have  enemies  although  we  have
never  done  anything  to  create  one.  The  commentary  cites  a Slolca
here  in  order  to  clear  any  doubts  on  the  point ; the  translation  of  the
Sloka  is  as  follows  : — “When  even  an  innocent  Muni  (sage)  does  his
own  duties,  he  creates  thereby  three  parties — friends,  foes,
and  neutrals.”


tCAMANDAKlYA  NITISARA.


19T


40.  Those  who  have  reasons  to  be  exasperated  with
the  king,  should  be  conciliated  by  gifts  and  the  bestowal  of
honors  &c.,  and  then  the  king  should  live  together  with
them,  having  thus’}  subjugated  them  (won  them  over  to  his
side) ; and  in  this  way  he  should  amend  his  own  faults*
(which  might  have  given  his  enemy  a hold).

40A.  He  should  preserve  the  peace  of  his  kingdom  by
giving  the  wicked  and  the  seditious  (t.e.  the  disturbing
element)  the  snub  they  deserve.  With  all  his  endeavours,  he
should  mend  his  weakness  by  conciliation,  gift  or  (bribery). t

41.  Taking  advantage  of  the  slightest  laches  of  even  the
most  powerful  enemy,  a king  should  cause  his  (enemy's)
kingdom  to  sink  completely  (in  the  sea  of  distress  and  des-
tructions), even  as  water  causes  a drinking  cup  to  sink  down
in  it  by  entering  it  through  even  the  smallest  hole.

4 2.  Persons  simulating  to  be  idiots or  deaf,  or  blind
or  dumb  or  eunuchs,  and  Kiratas%  and  dwarfs,  and  hunch-
backs and  such  other  agents||.

43.  And  (disguised  religious)  mendicants  and  Charanas\
and  maid-servants  and  men  versed  in  all  arts  and  acts,  should
gather  undetected**,  the  informations  regarding  a king's
household.

44.  (Persons*  disguised  as)  bearers  of  the  royal  Parasole

* Lit:  ‘And  thus*  should  he  fill  up  the  gaps  i.e.f  holes  or  weak
points  of  his  administration.

f This  Slokajis  omitted  in  the  text.  The  commentator  explains  the
last  part  thus — the  anger  and  disaffection  of  the  subjects  and  servants
are  as  itjwere  the  breach  through  which  the  enemy  effects  his  entrance.

f The  word  is  Joda,  which  the  commentator  takes  to  mean — ‘deaf
and  dumb/

§ The  most  degraded  class  of  mountain  tribe  obtaining  in  ancient
India.

||  The  commentary  here  reads  KayaCas  which  means  ‘those  versed
in  fine  arts/

Lit : A wandering  singer  or  actor.

**  Lit:  “unseemly."


192


kamandakiya  nitisara.


yak-tails  (lit:  fans),  pitchers,  and  palanquins,  and  horse-boys
and  grooms  and  other  such  servants,  should  keep  information
about  the  doings  of  the  high  state  officials.

45.  The  cooks,* * * §  the  bed-room  servants,  the  vigakds : —
the  Valet  de  chambre,t  the  attendants  at  the  table,  the
shampooers,

46.  And  the  orderlies  entrusted  with  serving  up  water,
betels,  flowers,  perfumes  and  ornaments,  these  and  others  like
them  that  always  keep  near  the  king,  should  be  made  instru-
mental in  administering  poison  to  him.J

47.  Cool-headed  spies  should  study  the  conduct  (of  all
the  high  state  officials)  through  signs,  gestures,!  bodily
appearances,  the  secret  tokens  they  use  and  the  letters  they
write.

48.  Spies  versed  in  all  acts  and  in  all  arts,  assum-
ing various  disguises,  should  roam  (in  every  part)  of  a
mandala  imbibing  public  opinion  like  the  solar  rays  im-
bibing moisture  from  the  earth.

49.  An  [intelligent  Vijigisu conversant  with  the  Shastras
and  the  ways  of  the  world,  should  be  cognisant  of  the  fact  that
as  he  through  his  spies  (lit : by  some  means)  strives  to  play
his  enemies  false,  so  these  latter  also  try  to  pay  him  back
in  his  own  coin,  by  engaging))  spies  to  watch  over  him.

Thus  ends  the  twelfth  section , the  rules  regarding  em-
bassies and  the  spies}  in  the  Nitis&ra  of  Kamandaka .


* Lit : “those  who  prepare  highly  seasoned  dishes.”

f That  is  spend  thrifs.

$ The  last  line  is  vicious  in  the  text — the  commentary  gives,  Kart-*
tcwya  Rasadh  which  reading  we  accept.

§ For  Murchchita  of  the  text  the  commentary  gives  Mudritais .

||  For  Vijtujyamdna  the  commentary  reads— Niyujyamdnam


SECTION  XIII.


I*  HEN  a monarch  would,  from  the  daily  reports

of  the  spies,  come  to  know  of  the  failure  of  his  embassy
to  the  foe,  he  should  set  out  with  hostile  intentions  against
this  latter,  according  to  the  prescribed  rules  of  march,
relying  on  his  own  keen  intelligence  as  his  only  guide.*

2.  Like  fuelsf  producing  fire,  a keen  and  resolute  under-
standing dominated  over:}:  by  equanimity  and  perseverance,
produces  many  happy  results.

3.  Just  as  metallic  ores§  are  sure  to  yield  the  precious
gold,  and  the  churning  (of  the  curd)  butter,  so,  earnest
endeavour  supported  by  intelligence  and  perseverance  is
sure  to  be  crowned  with  success.

4.  An  intelligent  and  “energetic  king  possessed  of  the
Prabhiisakti (|,  becomes  the  excellent  receptacle  for  all  pros-
perity, even  as  the  mighty  main  is  for  all  waters.

5.  Like  wealth  of  waters  preserving  the  lotus,  it  is
intelligence  alone  that  preserves  the  royal  prosperity;  and
this  prosperity  is  carried  to  magnificence  only  by  energy  and
perseverance.^]"

* Purassara  literally  means — ‘that  which  walks  before';  hence  a
‘guide.’*  The  sloka  bristles  with  bad  readings,  and  but  for  the  emen-
dations of  the  commentary,  it  would  have  been  impossible  to  make  out
any  meaning.  The  correct  text  would  be  : —

Anvaham  Char  a ch  a ryyabh  i i"u  if  ale  Dutachestite
Yay adyathoktay anastu  Sukshma  vudhip assay  a,

f The  text-word  Aranee  literally  means  two  pieces  of  Sami  wood
used  for  kindling  sacred  fire  by  a attrition.

J That  is, — governed.

§ The  original  word  is  Dhdtu  which  the  commentator  takes  to  mean
earth,  stones  and  other  worthless  things  obtained  with  crude  minerals.

||  Vide  note  to  sloka  x and  22,  Section  I.

The  commentary  adds — “even  as  the  lotus  is  caused  to  bloom  fully
by  the  influence  of  the  wind  and  the  solar  rays.”

25


*94


KAMANDAKIYA  nitisarA.


6.  Prosperity  never  leaves  an  energetic  king*  who
follows  the  dictates  of  his  intelligence,  even  as  its  shadow
never  leaves  the  body  ; but  it  goes  on  increasing  (every  day).

7-  Like  rivers  flowing  into  the  ocean,  prosperity  ever
flows  down  on  a king.f  who  is  free  from  the  influence  of
the  Vyasanas  and  is  indefatigable,  highly  energetic,  and
intelligent.

8.  An  idle  king  whose  mind  is  affected  by  the  influence
of  the  Vyasanas  is,  in  spite  of  his  possessing  many  good
qualities  and  a (keen)  intelligence,  cast  off  by  (the  goddess  of)
prosperity,  even  as  eunuchs  are  cast  off  by  women.

g.  By  constant  activity  he  should  add  to  his  everything
(*>.,  prosperity,  happiness,  &c,),  even  as  fire  is  added  to  by
the  putting  of  fuel  in  it.t  Even  a weak  king,  if  he  is  ever
energetic,  reaps  nothing  but  prosperity.

IO.  For  enjoying  prosperity  which  is  like  a faithless
lady,§  a king  should  ever,  with  all  his  manliness,  desire
activity,  and  should  not  behave  like  one  impotent.

It.  An  ever-energetic  king  by  having  recourse  to  the
Sainhee  V riti\\  should  bring  prosperity  under  his  own  con-
trol as  if  dragging  her  by  the  hair,  like  a man  dragging  his
wicked  wife.

12.  Without  planting  his  feet  on  his  enemy’s  head
graced  with  crowns  adorned  with  diverse  kinds  of  gems  and
and  jewels,  a person  (king)  cannot  reap  prosperity'  (lit.
blessing).

13.  Where  can  there  be  any  happiness  (for  a king),

* The  reading  Utsihasampannan  is  vicious;— read  Utsahasampannit,

1"  Literally,  the  translation  would  be  “prosperities  enter  into  him  like
rivers  entering  into  the  ocean."

t The  author’s  meaning  seems  to  be  this  that  the  more  you  add  fuel
to  the  fire  the  more  its  flames  blaze  forth  ; so,  the  more  a king  exert*
himself,  the  more  does  he  advance  on  the  ladder  of  prosperity.

$ Prosperity  is  compared  to  a faithless  lady,  for  itj  is  never  steady
with  a man,  ■ V,.-''.:"-

)1  Lit 'lion -like  conduct’  e.  ever  active  and  manly  conduct.


KAMANDAKIYA  NITlSAKA,


*95

unless  the  deep-rooted  tree— his  enemies — be  eradicated
by  the  mighty  elephant — his  intelligence — goaded  by  the
guide — his  earnest  endeavours  !

14-  Prosperity  can  only  be  brought  home  (captive)  by
a strong  arm,  resembling  the  graceful  trunk  of  an  elephant
and  glittering  with  the  dazzling  lustre  of  an  easily  drawn
sword  (that  it  wields)  j

15.  A high-minded  person  desirous  of  ascending  to  a
great  height  (in  the  ladder  of  prosperity),  plants  his  feet
higher  and  higher,  whereas  a low-minded  one  apprehending
fall  and  destruction,  plants  them  lower  and  lower.

16.  Like  the  lion  planting  his  paw  on  the  head  of  an
elephant,  one  (a  king)  possessed  of  great  energy  may  plant
his  foot  on  the  head  of  another  excelling  him  much  in
bulk.*

17.  Fearless  like  a serpent,  a king  should  make  such  dis-
play of  his  magnificence  a*  to  strike  terror  into  the  hearts  of
his  foes.  According”  to  the  measure  of  his  strength,  he
should  undertake  the  chastisement  of  his  foes.f

18.  A king  should  fall  upon  his  foe  first  having  re-
moved the  cause  of  disaffection  of  his  people.J  These
causes  are  bred  by  the  absence  of  good  and  the  following  of
offensive  policies  of  administration,  as  also  by  adverse  Fate.

* The  authors  means : — A highly  energetic  and  active  monarch  is
capable  of  subjugating  even  a foe  whose  territories  are  more  wide-spread
than  his  own.

f Although  the  author  exhorts  in  favor  of  constant  activity,  yet  he
warns  king?  against  rashness.  Before  undertaking  an  attack,  a king
should  judge  his  own  strength  in  comparison  to  that  of  his  foe.  Energy
of  course  goes  a great  way  in  securing  success  ; but  it  cannot  work
miracles.

t Prakritivyasana  lit : mean's  the  Vasyana  or  defect  in  his  Prakritis
or  the  constituents  of  his  government."  What  the  author  means  is  that
before  going  to  fight  with  an  external  enemy,  a king  should  put
down  the  causes  that  tend  to  procuce  internal  enemies,  and  to  breed  civil
fueds.


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


196

19.  Vyasana * is  so-called  for  ft  retards  the  material
well-being  (of  a kingdom  (one  a king)  under  the  influence
of  the  Vvasanas  goes  down  and  down  (the  depths  of  de-
gradation) ; and  therefore  the  Vyasanas  should  be  avoided  (as
much  as  possible).

20.  Fires,  floods,  famine,  prevalence  of  diseases,  and
plague  and  pestilence — these  are  the  five  kinds  of  the  Vyasa-
nas (calamities)  that  proceed  from  Fate;  the  rest  come  from
human  sources.

2 1.  The  evils  proceeding  from  Fate  should  be  averted
by  means  of  manly  efforts  and  the  celebration  of  propitia-
tory rites  ; and  a king  knowing  what  should  be  done,  should
remove  the  evils  coming  from  human  sources  by  his  ener-
geticalness  and  adoption  of  wise  measures  of  policy.

22.  From  the  king  {Swamy)  to  the  alliesf — all  these
constituents  form  t \vz  Prakriti  Mandalas  (or  government'),
I shall  now  in  due  order,  enumerate  their  functions  and  their
frailties.

23.  To  hold  counsels, $ to  secure  the  results  of  counsel,!
to  direct  others  in  the  performance  of  actions,  to  ascertain
beforehand  the  effects  (good  or  bad)  of  future  events  and
occurrences,  to  look  after  the  income  and  expenditure  (of
the  kingdom),  to  administer  justice, ||  to  subjugate  enemies,

24.  To  avert  threatening  evils  and  calamities,  and  to
protect  the  kingdom,^— these  are  the  functions  of  a minister.
But  a minister  when  he  is  under  the  influence  of  the


KAMANDAKIYA.  nitisara.


'97

Vyasantts  (vicious  propensities.)  fails  in  all  these  (func-
lions  of  his).

25.  A king  who?**  minister  possessed  by  the  Vyasanas'
is  weaned  over  (by  the  foe)  ,* * * §  becomes  incapable  of  resisting
the  enemy  by  the  application  of  the  measures  of  policy,  like
a bird  incapable  of  flying  when  its  wings  are  cut  off.

26.  Gold,  corn,  cloths,  conveyances  and  all  other  such
things  (that  the  king  enjoys),  arise  from  tbe'(prosperity  of  the)
people.

27.  The  people  promote  the  trade,  commerce,  cultiva-
tion  and  other  such  means  that  conduce  to  the  prosperity
of  a kingdom. f These  totally  depend  on  the  people.
Therefore,  when  the  people  are  in  danger  (or  under  the
influence  of  evil  propensities'!  no  success  can  b'e  achieved.  ,

28.  Castles  are  the  places  of  refuge  for  the  people  in
times  of  danger;  they  are  protections  for  the  troops  and  the
treasures  ; with  a view  to  take  refuge  into  them,  the  citizens
(seek  to)  oblige  their  rulers  (by  gifts,  presents,  &c.)

29.  That  which  is  a means  for  carrying  on  Tushttt
warfare,  that  which  affords  protection  to  the  people  (in
troublous  times),  that  which  can  tak  • in  friends  and  foes
alike  and  that  which  is  a check  against  the  attacks  of  the
neighbouring  forest  tribes — is  called  a Durga  (castle). §

30.  A king  safe  within  the  recesses  of  his  castle  (or  a
king  possessing  numerous  castles)  is  respected  both  by  bis

* Several  important  change  of  reading  are  to  be  noted  here.  For
Amaiyais  vyasanopafais  hriyamdno  read  Amatye  vyasanopete  hriyomanS
and  for  Asahta  ebotpaiaU  read  Asakta  cbotpatitam .

f The  origmal  word  is  Vartd  which  lit:  means,— the  occupation  or
profession  by  which  one  earns  his  livelihood.  We  have  rendered  the
the  word  freely.

% When  a king  concealing  himself  in  his  casStle  in  ahnanner  undetect-
ed by  the  enemy,  suddenly  falls  upon  the  latter,  such  a sort  of  assault  is
called  Tushni  Yudha.

§ Durga  etymologically  means  that  which  is  approached  or  taken
with  difficulty.  : ,


KAMANDaKI'YA  nitisara.


I9&

own  and  his  enemy’s  partizans.  But  when  Durga-vysam
exists  none  of  these  exists.*

3r<  The  act  of  maintaining  dependents,  acts  of  muni-
ficence, (personal  and  other)  decorations,  purchasing  of  con-
veyances (horses  and  elephants),  stability  (of  the  kingdom*),
facility  for  sowing  dissension  among  the  enemy  (and  hi&
allies),  repairing  of  castles,

32.  Construction  of  bridges  and  cause-ways,  trade  and
commerce,  the  acquisition  of  friends  and  allies  and  the  love
of  the  people,  and  lastly,  the  accomplishment  of  right iows
and  desirable  acts — all  proceed  from  the  treasure  (i.  e . all
these  depend  entirely  on  a solvent  financial  condition.)

33.  ‘ The  foundations  of  royalty  are  laid  in  the  trea-
sures”— this  is  a popular  saying  well-known  in  all  regions.  A
ruler  of  men  whose  treasury  is  in  danger  (of  being  insolvent)
loses  all  prospects  of  success  in  the  above-mentioned  acts,

34.  A king  with  a solvent  treasury  increases  his  forces
reduced  (in  consequence  of  wars),  and  he  naturally  wins  the
good-will  of  his  people.  He  is  even  respected  and  served
by  his  enemies.

35.  To  add  to  the  number  of  friends  and  foes,  and  to
the  amount  of  gold  (/.  e . wealth  and  the  territorial  possessions
of  a kingdom),  to  accomplish  with  alacrity  acts  deferred  to
an  indefinite  future,  to  protect  what  is  acquired  or  gained,

36.  To  destroy  the  army  of  the  foe,  and  to  save  the
forces  of  its  own  side, -—all  these  acts  proceed  from  the  army.

j So  when  the  army  is  under  the  influence  of  the  Vy&mnas
\i  e . when  it  is  defective),  these  (the  above-named  acts)  run  to
ruin  (z\e.  are  never  accomplished  with  any  degree  of  success),

37.  The  foes  even  of  a king  possessing  an  efficient  army,
are  turned  into  his  friends  (seek  his  friendship).  A king
possessing  a large  army,  rules  the  earth  (unmolested)  after
having  (properly  conquered  it).

* That  is.,  when  castles  are  not  repaired  and  properly  looked  after,
the  king  and  his  people  lose  all  respect  and  chance  of  safety.


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.  199

38.  A faithful  ally  restrains  others  throwing  off  their
affiegiance,  and  destroys  the  enemy.  He  serves  the  king  (to
whom  he  is  allied)  by  risking  his  own  dominions,  treasures
troops  and  his  life  even.

39.  By  ties  of  mutual  affection,  he  succeeds  in  securing
•numerous  other  friends  and  allies.  When  therefore  the  ally  is
•under  the  influence  of  the  Vyasanas>  his  function  is  no  longer
•duly  discharged.

40.  A true  ally  promotes  the  welfare  of  his  allied  king,
without  expecting  to  he  remunerated  in  return.  A king
having  (faithful)  allies,  succeeds  with  the  greatest  ease,  even
in  most  difficult  undertakings.

41.  Pursuit  of  knowledge,  protection  of  the  Varnas  and
Asramas  of  his  own  kingdom,  ability  of  using  pure  (unpoison-
-ed)  weapons,  accomplishment  in  all  the  modes  of  warfare,

42.  Habits  of  hardiness,  knowledge  of  the  implements
of  war  (offensive  and  defensive)  and  of  the  characteristics  of
acts  (such  as,  testing  the  strength  of  armours  &c),  ability  for
•riding  properly  on  horses,  elephants  and  chariots,

43.  Skilfulness  in  wrestling,  the  art  of  clearly  seeing
•through  the  purposes  of  others  (lit:  entering  into  other's
heart),  crookedness  with  the  crooked,  and  honesty  with  the
honest,

44.  Consultations  and  reconsultations  (with  the  cabinet,
regarding  a certain  project),  preservation  of  the  secrecy  of
counsels,  healthiness  (of  the  mind),  disregard  of  (such  modes
of  policy  as)  conciliation,  gift  or  bribery,  and  application  to
(such  modes  as)  sowing  dissensions  and  inflicting  punish-
ments,

45.  Knowledge  of  the  movements  and  intents  of  the
commanders  and  other  officers  of  his  troops,  and  of  the
•counsellors,  ministers  and  priests,  imprisonment  of  the
wicked  (among  the  above-named  officers),

46.  Observation  of  those  who  come  to  and  go  away
from  him  as  ambassadors,  the  removal  of  the  calamities  that


200


K AM  AND  AIC I YA  NITISARA.


1:


threaten  t !i e people,  and  the  appeasing  of  the  angry  or  dis-
affected element  (of  the  state),

■ 47-  Obedience  to  the  preceptors,  bestowal  of  honours  and
respects  on  those  worthy  of  them,  administration  of  justice,
•suppression  of  the  disturbing  factor  of  the  kingdom  (lit:  the
taking  out  of  the  thorns  of  the  state,  such  as  the  thieves,
•robbers,  murderers,  &c.,

48.  Knowledge  of  what  exists  and  what  does  not,  ex-
amination of  what  is  done  and  what  is  left  off  undone,  in-
vestigation as  to  who  is  satisfied  and  who  dissatisfied
among  his  dependents)

49.  Complete  'acquaintance  with  the  movements,  (and
character)  of  the  Madhyama  and  the  Udasina * and  the  act
of  turning  this  acquaintance  to  means  for  establishing  firmly
Ills  own  rule,  (or  to  means  for  the  success  of  his  under-
takings), acquisition  of  allies  and  tiie  chastisement  of  the
enemies,

50.  The  protection  of  his  sons  and  wives  and  his  own-
self,  entertaining  amicable  feelings  towards  his  relatives  and
friends,  the  promotion  of  such  measures  of  revenue  on  which
his  own  material  progress  depends,

51.  Infliction  of  hardships  on  the  wicked,  and  to  afford
facilities  for  the  advancement  of  the  honest,  abstinence  from
doing  injury  to  any  being,  and  the  avoidance  of  sin  or  un-
righteousness,

52.  Prohibition  of  evil  deeds  and  the  promotion  of  good
ones,  the  giving  away  of  things  fit  to  be  given,  and  the  ac-
cumulation of  those  that  should  not  be  parted  with,

53.  Withholding  of  punishment  from  those  who  do  not
deserve  them,  and  the  infliction  of  them  on  those  who
rightly  merit  them,  acceptance. of  things  acceptable  and  the

* rejection  of  those  unacceptable,

54.  Performance  of  fruitful  deeds,  and  the  rejection  of


K AM  A N D A tCl  Y'A  NiTiSAKA.


20 1

fruitless  ones,  the  just  levying  of  taxes  and  their  remission
in  bad  seasons,

55.  The  preferment  of  high  officials  of  state,  and  the
removal  of  those  who  deserve  dismissal,  pacification  of
calamities  (such  as  famine,  pestilence,  &c.,)  and  the  estab-
lishment of  friendliness  among  his  servants,

56.  To  know  what  is  unknown,  and  to  be  assured  of
what  is  known,  to  undertake  good  acts,  and  to  see  to  their
ends  acts  undertaken,

57.  Desire  for  acquiring  what  remains  unacquired  and
facilitating  the  advancement  of  what  is  acquired,  and  the
proper  consignment  of  a thriving  object  to  the  care  of  a
deserving  person,

58.  Suppression  of  wrong  and  the  following  of  the  paths
of  rectitude,  and  (lastly)  the  doing  of  good  to  one  who  does
good  to  him, — these  are  the  functions  of  a ruler  of  earth.

59.  An  energetic  king  following  the  paths  of  true  policy,
leads  to  eminence  these  and  his  government  and  minis-
ters; but  influenced  by  evil  propensities,  he  leads  them  to
destruction.

60.  But  when  a king  becomes  busy  in  the  performance
of  religious  deeds  and  in  acquiring  wealth,  or  when  he  is
demented,  all  these  functions  ought  to  be  discharged  by  his
ministers.

6 1.  Excessive  harshness  in  the  words  spoken  and  in
the  punishments  meted  out,  defect  in  the  administration  of
finance,  inebriation,  (excessive  love  for  the  company  of)
women,  and  for  hunting,  and  gambling  (at  the  dice), — these
are  the  Vyasanas  of  a king.

62.  Procrastination,  sluggishness,  conceit,  carelessness,
cultivation  of  (other's)  ill-will, — these  and  those  enumerated
above  (viz.,  the  vyasanas  of  the  king),  are  the  vyasanas
of  the  ministers.

63.  Excessive  rain,  want  of  rain  (drought),  locusts,  rats,
mice  and  parrots  (and  other,  such  corn-destroying  agents)

26


20  2


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


unjust  taxation,  confiscation  of  the  properties  of  the  people,
foreign  invasion  and  depredation,  and  thieves,  and  robbers,

64.  Abandonment  of  the  king  by  his  forces  and  his
favourites,  distress  brought  about  by  the  prevalence  of
diseases,  and  the  death  of  cattle,  and  the  ravages  of  the
murrain, — these  are  the  vy asanas  of  the  kingdom.

65.  Disorder  and  decay  of  the  implements  of  war  and
of  the  ramparts  and  ditches,  want  of  weapons  in  the  arsenal,
and  failure  of  the  stock  of  food  and  fuels, — these  are  the
vyasanas  of  the  castle.

66.  Extravagance,  outlay  (in  different  projects),  mis-
appropriation (by  the  officials  and  servants),  want  of  accumu-
lation, robbery,  and  remoteness  (of  the  flowing  in  of  money), —
these  are  said  to  be  the  vyasanas  of  the  treasury.

67.  To  be  besieged  (by  the  enemy),  to  be  surrounded
on  all  sides  (by  hostile  forces),  to  be  disgraced,  to  be  de-
prived of  a being  duly  honoured,  to  be  disaffected  (or  badly
paid),  to  be  diseased,  to  be  fatigued  or  over-worked,  to  be
returned  from  distant  lands,  to  be  newly  recruited,

63.  To  be  reduced  in  unmber,  to  be  deprived  of  its
leaders,  to  have  its  brave  warriors  killed,  to  be  excited  with
hopes  and  disappointments,  to  become  faithless,

69.  To  have  women  with  it,  to  be  scattered  over  differ-
ent countries,  to  have  thorns  (z.  <?.,  spies  &c.,  set  by  the  foe)
in  its  ranks,  to  be  torn  by  dissensions,  to  be  sent  to  fight  in
foreign  Mandalas , to  be  undisciplined,

70.  To  have  its  senior  officers  enraged,*  to  be  commanded
by  men  differing  in  opinion,  to  have  foes  in  its  own  ranks,
to  be  united  with  the  enemy,  to  be  careless  of  its  own
intersts  and  those  of  the  allies  (of  its  monarch),

71.  To  fie  cut  off  from  the  supplies  of  food  and  the  sup-
port of  allied  troops,  to  be  destitute  of  shelter  (wherein  to

* The  word  in  the  text  is  Krudha-maulam . Moulam  as  explained
t»y  the  commentator,  means  soldiers  who  have  served  the  royal  dynasty
from  generation  to  generation,


tCAMANDAKlYA  NITISARA,


203


secure  the  families  and  properties  of  its  soldiers),  to  hazard
battles  without  the  consent  of  its  master,  to  put  forward
different  excuses  (for  its  delinquencies),

72.  To  have  bad  ParshnigrahaSj  and  to  be  ignorant
of  the  country  (where  it  is  dispatched) — these  are  said  to  be
the  vysanas  of  the  army.  Of  these  some  are  irremediable  and
some  remediable;  of  this,  I am  speaking  presently.

73.  When  relieved  or  set  free,  a beseiged  force,  becom-
ing  highly  efficient  may  fight;  and  an  army  surrounded  on  all
sides  and  without  any  egresss,  must  also  fight  (out  its  own
way).

74.  An  unhonored  army  when  duly  honoured,  will  fight  ;
but  a dishonored  army,  with  its  fire  of  indignation  burning,
will  never  do  so.

75.  An  army  badly  paid  will  fight,  when  it  is  duly  paid
up  to  date;  but  a diseased  and  disordered  (inefficent)  one,
will  not  do  so;  for  then,  it  will  be  defeated.

76.  After  enjoying  proper  rest,  an  overworked  and
fatigued  army  will  again  face  the  compaign  ; but  an  army  re-
turned from  distant  lands  with  its  energy  drooping,  becomes
incapable  of  using  weapons  (i.e.  active  service,)

77.  A newly  recruited  force  will  flight  when  united
with  older  regiments  of  the  realm  ; but  an  army  with  its  brave
warriors  killed  and  reduced  in  number  will  not  fight.

78.  A routed  army,  supported  by  brave  heroes  will  again
face  the  battle;  but  an  army,  with  its  leaders  slain  and  its
vanguard  slaughtered,  will  turn  away  from  the  fight.

79.  When  its  hopes  are  realised  and  its  disappointments
removed,  a force  will  not  fight,  for  then,  there  will  be  nothing
inducing  it  to  risk  a battle.  When  confined  within  a
small  area,  an  army  will  not  fight,  in  consequence  of  the
narrowness  of  the  field.

80.  An  army  at  first  beseiged  and  then  set  free,  will
fight  when  equipped  with  the  implements  of  war  (horses,
conveyances  and  weapons);  and  an  army  having  women


204


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


with  it*  becomes  capable  of  fighting  when  the  women
are  removed.

81.  An  army  scattered  over  different  kingdoms,  and
away  from  home,  will  not  fight  (heartily) ; and  one  with
the  thorns  (spies  &c.)  set  by  the  enemy  within  it,  becomes  in-
capacitated for  active  service.

82.  An  army  torn  by  dissensions,  with  its  soldiers  op-
posing one  another,  does  not  fight  (is  unfit  for  battle)  ; so
also  an  army  despatched  to  a foreign  mandala  or  realm  (does
not  fight). f

83.  An  army  that  had  not  travelled  to  foreign  lands,
and  one  that  has  fled  away,  cannot  fight.  An  army  that  has
served  the  forefathers  of  a king,  will  not  fight,  when  it  is
enraged;  but  when  satisfied,  it  will  fight  (most  gladly)*

84.  An  army  hemmed  in  on  all  sides  by  the  foe  and
confined  in  one  place,  cannot  fight;  and  troops  whose  camp
is  assailed  by  the  enemy  also  become  incapable  of  fight-
ing well.

85.  An  army  with  the  enemy  within  its  ranks,  will  not
fight ; but  when  these  thorns  (the  foes)  are  removed,  it  will
fight  ; an  army  though  corrupted  by  the  enemy,  will  fight,
if  led  by  courageous  warriors. J


* The  original  word  is  Kalatra  Garvam— which  means  ‘to  have  wo-
men within  it/ The  commentator  explains  Kalatra  as  Kulastri  or  ladies,
— his  meaning  being,  that  when  the  wives  and  families  of  soldiers  areal-
lowed  to  travel  with  them,  they  fight  reluctantly,  ever  watchful  for  saving
their  lives  whosejmportance  is  enhanced  as  they  look  upon  their  objects
of  affection.  But  when  these  latter  are  faraway,  the  soldiers  in  the  excite-
ment of  the  battle,  totally  forget  them  and  fight  heedless  of  their  lives,
thus  paving  the  way  of  victory  for  their  king.

j-  The  commentator  explains — for  it  is  worn  out  with  the  fatigue
and  hardships  of  the  journey.

X The  texts  of  Slokas  84  and  85,  are  vicious,  the  commentator  gives
the  following  two  for  them.

;-\V^  &jt.  Misram  Salr ubhirekaskham  iadahrdntatayd  hshamam,

,t  SMrorupanibista m Vat  sdmarthy&nnaksham  Fudhu


KAM ANDAKI Y A NlTlSARA.


205


86.  An  army  is  said  to  be  neglectful  of  its  own  interests
when  in  times  of  danger  it  remains  inactive.  An  army
engaged  in  serving  an  ally  in  consequence  of  its  excellent
advantages  regarding  time  and  position,  cannot  be  properly
used  (in  any  other  purpose).

87.  The  supply  of  food  and  clothing  is  called  Bibadha
and  Asdra  means  the  troops  of  the  allies.  An  army  cut
off  from  the  supply  of  food  and  clothing  and  from  the  sup-
port of  the  troops  of  the  allies,  cannot  fight.

88.  The  troops  that  have  no  shelter  (to  secure  their
families  and  properties)  will  fight  when  shelter  is  provided
by  the  citizens  for  them.  An  army  that  acts  without  the
orders  of  its  master,  is  not  attached  to  him  (is  faithless),  and
will  not  fight.*

89.  An  army  becomes  leaderless  when  every  one  in  it,  is
his  own  master,  (and  no  one  is  accepted  as  leader);  such  an
army  is  incompetent  to  fight;  so  also,  a disabled  army  and
one  with  a bad  Parshnigraha , are  incapable  of  fighting.

90.  An  army  ignorant  of  the  state  of  affairs  (about  it)
is  said  to  be  blind,  and  tor  this  reason,  it  is  incompetent  for
fighting.t  These  are  the  Vyasanas  of  the  army;  carefully
looking  into  them,J  a king  should  undertake  a war.

91.  An  ally  is  said  to  be  the  under  the  influence  of  the
vyasanas  when  he  is  suffering  from  the  afflictions  of  Fate,
or  is  assailed  on  all  sides  by  the  forces  of  the  foe,  or  is
possessed  of  the  defects  arising  out  of  lust  and  anger,  which
have  been  enumerated  above.

92.  Beginning  with  the  king,  of  the  seven  constituents  of

£5.  Dusyayuktam  na yudhyeta,  Yudhyetodhritakantaham ,

Pradhdna  Yodha  samguptam , Ditsyamchapi  Samutpatet .

* This  part  is  understood.  The  commentator  supplies  a different
reading,  which  we  do  not  accept.

f The  text  is  vicious  ; the  commentator  gives,

Adesikam  Smritam  hyandham , tanmulatwdt  Kriydksh a m am .

* For  when  they  exist,  no  endeavours  can  bring  about  victory.


206


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


a government  that  have  been  described  above,  the  vyasanas
of  each  preceding  constituent  is  graver  than  the  one  fol-
lowing it.*

93.  A king  should  be  cognisant  of  all  these  vyasanas  of
the  members  of  his  Government  ; and  he,  without  letting  the
right  opportunity  slip  away,  should  exert  himself  in  removing
them  to  the  best  of  his  powers,  intelligence  and  endeavours.

94.  A monarch  desirous  of  the  welfare  and  prosperity
of  his  government,  should  not  overlook,  out  of  error  or  arro-
gance, the  vyasanas  that  may  overtake  the  Prakritis . He
that  neglects  the  vyasanas  of  his  Prakritis , is,  ere  long,
defeated  by  his  enemies.

95.  Weighing  gravely  what  should  be  done,  a king
should  apply  himself  to  the  performance  of  his  duties.  En-
deavouring his  best,  he  should  see  the  end  of  all  his  under-
takings. A ruler  of  earth,  the  ‘constituents  of  whose  gov-
ernment are  purged  of  all  their  defects  and  drawbacks!
through  his  wise  policy,  enjoys  for  a long  time,  the  three
objects  of  existence.^

Thus  ends  the  thirteenth  chapter,  the  description  of  the
vyasanas  and  the  means  for  remedying  them,  in  the  Nitisar
of  Kamandaka.


,*  The  original  Sanskrit  construction  would  admit  of  no  other
rendering.  The  meaning  is,  that  the  Vyasanas  of  the  king  are  prolifi  cof
greater  evils  than  the  vyasanas  of  the  ministers,  and  so  forth.

t The  text  word  lit:  rendered  would  be  “ whose  holes  are  filled
in  with  wise  policy.”

% The  objects  are,  Dharma  or|  virtue,  Ariha  or  wealth,  Kdma , or
objects  of  enjoyment.


SECTION  XIV.


The  Prakritis , beginning  with  the  minister  and  ending
with  the  ally,  are  said  to  be  the  constituents  of  a government.
Of  all  the  weaknesses  of  the  government,  the  gravest  is  the
weakness  of  the  ruler  of  earth.

2.  A monarch  free  from  all  weaknesses,  is  capable  of  re-
deeming the  weaknesses  of  the  government  ; but  a prosper-
ous government  can  not  rescue  its  head  (the  king)  from  his
weaknesses.

3.  A king  who  does  not  possess  the  eye  of  political
knowledge  is  said  to  be  blind;  it  is  better  to  have  such  a
blind  king  than  one,  who  though  possessed  of  such  eyes,
transgresses  the  path  of  rectitude  out  of  pride  or  careless-
ness.

4.  Such  a blind  monarch  may  be  rescued  from  ruin  by
his  ministers  skilled  in  giving  advice.  But  when  a king,
though  possessed  of  the  eye  of  political  knowledge  blinded  by
pride,  he  completely  ruins  himself.

5.  For  these  reasons,  a king  possessed  of  the  eye  of
polity,  following  the  advices  of  his  prime  minister,  should
avoid  the  weaknesses  that  mar  (the  realisation  of)  virtue  and
wealth.

6.  Too  much  harshness  in  speech  and  in  the  punishments
meted  out,  and  unjust  seizure  of  property  and  withholding  of
what  is  due, — these  are  said  by  those  conversant  with  the
nature  of  weaknesses,  to  be  the  three  weaknesses  arising  out
anger.

7.  Excessive  indulgence  in  hunting,  gambling  (at  dice),
women’s  company  and  drinking — these  are  said  by  those  un-
derstanding the  meaning  of  weaknesses,  to  be  the  four  kinds
of  weaknesses  bred  by  lust.


KAMANDAKIVA  N1TISARA.


208

8.  Among  men,  harshness  in  speech  causes  great
trouble  and  is  prolific  of  much  harm  ; it  should  therefore
not  be  practised.  On  the  other  hand,  a king  should  win
(the  good-will  of)  the  public  by  his  sweet  and  mellifluous
speech.**

9.  He  that  by  fits  and  starts,  often  speaks  too  much  in
anger,  causes  thereby  much  anxiety  to  his  subjects, dike  a fire
shooting  numerous  sparks.

10.  Sharp  daggerlike  words  penetrating  into  the  core
of  the  heart  and  cutting  to  the  quick,  excites  a powerful
person  and  thus  excited,  he  turns  into  an  enemy.

11.  A monarch  should  not  excite  the  public  by  harsh
words;  he  should  be  sweet  in  his  speech;  even  a miserly
monarch,  acting  in  a kind  and  friendly  manner,  is  (faithfully)
served  (by  the  people).

12.  The  shbjugation  of  the  unsubjugated  and  their
chastisement,  is  called  Danda  by  the  wisej.  One  should
deal  out  Danda  according  to  the  rules  of  polity  ; for,
infliction  of  punishments  on  those  deserving  them  is  prai-
seworthy,

13.  A king  hard  (cruel),  in  the  infliction  of  punishments
excites  (fear  in  the  heart  of)  the  people  ; thus  troubled,  they
seek  the  protection  of  the  enemy.

24.  In  this  way  affording  shelter  to  the  people,  the  enemy
rises  to  power;  and  a powerful  enemy  causes  destruction.  For
these  reasons,  a monarch  should  not  excite  (the  anxiety  of)
his  subjects.


1 This  Sloka  contains  many  vicious  readings for  Parusya  read
Pdrmyam  and  for  Loka  read  Lobe.

2 The  first  part  of  the  last  line  oi  this  Sloka  is  bad,  for  which  the
commentator  supplies : —

Tejasvinam  dipay  ati.

3 The  word  Sarbhi  in  the  text  is  a misprint  for  Sadbhi . Danda  is  the
last  of  the  four  expedients  of  foregn  policy  (vide  Supra).


KAMANDAKIYA  NJTlSARA.  20g

15.  Rulers  of  earth  doing  good  (kindness)  to  the  people
grow  in  prosperity;  their  growth  depends  on  the  growth  of
the  people,  and  their  ruin  on  these  latter’s  ruin.

16.  Except  in  the  case  of  the  dispoliation  of  the  kingdom,
a king  should  avoid  the  infliction  of  the  capital  punishment,
even  in  the  gravest  of  offences.  In  the  aforesaid  instance
only,  such  punishment  is  commendable.^

17.  The  expenditure  of  a considerable  amount  of  money
in  order  to  exculpate  a culpable  offender,  is  said  to  be
Arthadusanaf  by  those  conversant  with  the  essentials  of
polity.

19.  The  jostling  of  the  conveyances,  their  destruction  ;
the  sufferings  caused  by  hunger,  thirst,  fatigue,  exertion,
cold,  heat  and  the  wind;

20.  The  infliction  of  much  distress  arising  out  of  Ydna~
vyasana  on  the  army  ; heated,  sandy  ancf  thorny  soils;

21.  Injuries  done  by  collision  with  trees,  scratches  from
thorns  and  plants  ; difficulties  caused  by  rocks,  creepers,
trunks  of  trees  and  earthen  mounds  ;

22.  Capture  or  deathj  by  the  hands  of  foresters  and  foes
hidden  behind  rocks,  or  in  the  beds  of  rivers  or  inside  under-
woods and  copses  ;

23.  Assassination  by  his  own  troops  weaned  over  by  the
enemy  ; danger  of  falling  a prey  to  bears,  serpents,  elephants,
lions,  and  tigers  ;

24.  Choking  of  the  breath  by  the  smoke  of  the  forest-
conflagration  ; and  mistaking  the  way  or  direction  and  the
consequent  wandering — these  are  said  to  be  the  Mriga-


* For  Jiiktadandai  the  commentator  gives  Tatra  dandaywhlch  appears
to  be  an  emendation  true.

j-  The  word  lit : means  some  flaw  in  the  collection  and  expenditure
of  money— Arthadusana  occurs  when  money  is  unjustly  collected  or
unnecessarily  expended.

X Pariklesai  is  a misprint  for  PariUUsa .

27


2 10


KAMANDAKIYA  nitisara.


yavysana  (or  the  evils  attending  too  much  indulgence  in  hunt)
of  rulers  of  earth.

25.  Indefatigability,  physical  exercise,  the  cure  of  phlegm
fat  and  indigestion,  and  excellent  sureness  in  shooting  ar-
rows at  moving  or  steady  aims,

26.  These  are  spoken  of  by  others  to  be  the  goods  pro-
ceeding from  hunting ; but  this  view  can  not  he  accepted.
The  evils  of  hunting  are  almost  all  of  a fatal  nature.  So,
hunting  is  a great  Vyasana .

27.  Indigestion  and  other  such  physical  complaints  may
also  be  cured  by  constant  healthy  exercise  on  horseback  ;
and  sureness  in  shooting  arrows  at  moving  aims,  can  also  be
mastered  in  other  ways.

28.  But  if  a king  is  ardently  desirous  of  (enjoying  the
pleasures  of)  the  hunt,  let  a beautiful  park  be  constructed  at
the  precincts  of  the  town,  for  his  sports.

29.  The  park  should  be  surrounded  on  all  sides  by  ditches
and  walls  incapable  of  being  crossed  or  leapt  over  by  the
game.  In  length  and  breadth  it  should  extend  to  half  a
Yojana  (or  about  eight  miles).

30.  It  should  be  situated  near  the  foot  of  a mountain  or
the  bed  of  a river,  and  should  abound  in  water  and  soft  green
grass.  It  should  not  contain  thorny  plants  and  copses,  and
should  be  free  from  poisonous  trees  or  plants.

31.  It  should  be  decorated  with  beautiful  and  well-known
trees  loaded  with  blossoms  and  fruits  and  spreading  cool,
pleasing  and  thick  shades.

32.  The  burrows,  pits,  and  cavities  should  be  filled  up
with  dust  and  gravel,  leaving  no  chasm  or  declivity  in  the
soil;  and  it  should  be  levelled  by  the  removal  of  trunks  of
trees,  earthen  mounds,  and  rocks,  &c.

33*  The  lakes  and  other  expanses  of  water  inside  the
park,  should  be  freed  from  sharks,  crocodiles,  &c.,  and  they
should  be  deep,  and  adorned  with  diverse  acquatic  flowers
and  birds.  ||  t


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.  21 1


34.  The  park  should  abound  in  such  game,  as  she-ele-
phants  and  elephant  cubs,  tigers  with  their  teeth  broken
and  claws  pared  off,  and  horned  beasts  with  their  horns
cut  off.

35.  It  should  be  beautified  with  creepers  crested  with
flowers  and  blossoms  within  easy  reach,  and  should  be
adorned  with  nice  little  plants  growing  on  the  sides  of  the
ditches.

36.  Outside  the  park,  the  fields  stretching  to  a great
distance,  should  be  levelled  and  cleared  of  trees.  The  park
itself  should  be  inaccessible  to  the  forces  of  the  enemy,  and
thus  afford  a feeling  of  safety  and  comfort  to  the  mind.

37.  Such  a park  when  guarded  by  hardy  and  resolute
guards,  faithful  in  allegiance  and  capable  of  reading  the
hearts  of  spies,  becomes  the  source  of  immense  pleasure  to
the  monarch.*

38.  Strong  and  hardy  men  well-versed  in  the  art  of
hunting,  should  for  the  sport  of  the  king,  introduce  into  the
park  various  kinds  of  game.

39.  A king,  capable  of  bearing  up  against  the  fatigue
of  a morning  walk,  should  enter  into  the  park  for  sport  ac-
companied by  his  faithful  and  favourite  attendants  and  without
detrement  to  any  other  function  of  his.

40.  When  the  monarch  enters  the  park  for  sport,  then
outside  it,  sentries,  should  be  placed,  ready  and  arranged
(for  action)  and  watching  the  boundaries  far  and  distant.

41.  The  king  pleased  with  the  sport,  would  then  reap
those  good  results  that  have  been  said  by  the  wise  to  proceed
from  hunting.


42.  Regarding  hunt,  these  are  the  rules  that  I point  out.
Transgressing  these,  a king  should  not  go  about  hunting  like
a common  professional  hunter.


* The  Sloka  bristles  with  bad  readings.  For  Tadbanan  read  Tat*
banam , and  for  bhutibhutaye  read  bhutoyebhavet.


202


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA*


43.  Speedy  flowing  out  (loss)  of  money  in  spite  of  all
care  to  pieserve  it,  untruthfulness,  feelinglessness  (cruelty),
anger,  harshness  in  speech,*

44.  Covetousness,  neglect  of  righteous  ceremonies,  dis-
continuance of  (commenced  public)  works,  separation  from
the  company  of  the  good  and  union  with  the  wicked,

45.  Certain  draining  of  the  treasury,  endless  hostility
(with  the  defeated  party),  feeling  of  destitution  when  still
there  is  money  enough  (to  meet  the  requirements  of  the
game),  and  a sense  of  affluence  when  indeed  there  is  no
money  in  the  fund,

46.  Anger  and  joy  at  every  moment,  remorse  at  each
step,  distress  at  each  moment,  and  questioning  of  the  wit-
ness at  every  doubtful  cast  of  the  dice,

47.  Disregard  of  such  (indispensable)  acts  as  bathing,
cleansing  of  the  body,  and  of  sexual  enjoyment,  want  of
physical  exercise,  weakness  of  the  limbs  and  the  body,  over-
looking of  the  precepts  of  the  Sh&stras,

48.  Retention  of  the  discharge  of  urine,  sufferings  front
(the  pangs  of)  hunger  and  thirst, — these  are  said  by  persons
versed  in  polity,  to  be  the  evils  of  gambling.

49.  Even  Pandu’s  son  Yudhisthiraf  that  very  virtuous


* Lit  : — ** Words  cutting  like  the  dagger.”

+ The  story  of  king  Yudhisthira’s  gambling  with  Duryodhana  is
contained  in  the  Mahabharata.  These  two  were  two  cousins,  one  ruling
in  Hastinapur  and  the  other  in  Indraprastha.  Duryodhana  who  was
jealous  of  the  prosperity  and  advancement  of  Yudhisthira,  invited  him  to
a game  at  dice  (of  which  Yudhisthira  was  particularly  fond),  hoping
thereby  to  rob  him  of  all  his  possessions.  In  that  gambling  match
Duryodhana  who  was  ably  assisted  by  his  maternal  uncle  Sakuni,  won
from  Yudhisthira  everything  that  be  staked  till  the  infatuated  gambler
staked  himself,  his  brothers,  Droupadi  (his  wife)  herself,  all  of  whom
shared  the  same  fate,  and  as  a condition  of  the  wager  were  forced  to
serve  the  Kouravas.  But  afterwards,  Dhritarastra,  Duryodbana's  blind


PM


tCAMANDAKlYA  NITISARA.


213

and  learned  monarch  resembling-  a second  Lokapala,4*  lost  his
lawful  wife  in  wicked  gambling.

50.  The  very  powerful  monarch  Nala  having  lost  his
prosperous  kingdom  (as  a wager)  in  gambling,  abandoned
his  lawful  queen  in  the  woods,  and  afterwards  did  the  work  of
a menial. f

5 1.  Prince  Rukmin  of  golden  complexion,  who  was
equal  to  Indra  himself  and  a bowman  whose  match  was  not  to
be  found  on  earth,  even  that  prince  met  with  his  destruction
through  the  evils  of  gambling. J

52.  The  foolish  Dantabakra,  the  ruler  of  Kousikarupa*
had  his  teeth  broken,  in  consequence  of  excessive  indulgence
in  gambling  (at  dice).§

53.  From  gambling  causeless  hostilities  proceed;  through
gambling  love  and  affection  wither  away;  and  as  a . con*


* The  Lokapalas  are  the  divine  Regents  that  are  supposed  to  ruler
over  the  quarters  of  heaven.

-f  Nala  was  a very  noble-minded  and  virtuous  king.  He  was
chosen  by  Damayanti,  inspite  of  the  opposition  of  gods,  and  they  lived
happily  for  some  years.  But  Kali  a god,  who  was  disappointed  in
securing  her  hand,  resolved  to  persecute  Nala,  and  entered  into  his
person.  Thus  affected,  he  played  at  dice  with  his  brother,  and  having  lost
everything,  he  with  his  wife  was  banished  from  the  kingdom.  One  day
while  wandering  through  the  wilderness,  he  adandoned  his  almost  naked
wife  and  went  away.  Subsequently  he  was  deformed  by  the  serpent
Korkotaka  and  thus  deformed  entered  the  service  of  king  Rituparna  as  a
horse-groom  under  the  name  of  Vahuka.  Subsequently,  with  the  assis-
tance of  this  king,  he  regained  his  beloved  and  they  led  a happy  life.
(Apte).

% Rukmin  was  the  brother  of  Rukmini  Bhismaka’s  daughter,  one
of  the  wives  of  Srikrishna.  The  allusion  is  obscure ; the  commentary
only  says  that  Rukmin  was  slain  by  Valabhadra,  Krishna’s  elder
brother,  in  consequence  of  a quarrel  arising  out  of  a game  at  dice.

§ Here  also  the  commentary  is  not  elaborate.  It  is  said  that
Dantabakra  also  played  at  dice  with  Valabhadra,  who  some  how  or
other  was  enraged,  and  broke  his  teeth  with  a blow  of  the  dice.  'The
allusion  is  obscure.


214


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


sequence  of  gambling,  dissension  is  sowed  even  among
strongly  united  parties.

54.  For  these  reasons,  an  intelligent  monarch  should
avoid  gambling  which  is  productive  of  evils  only.  He  should
also  prohibit  other  proud  rulers  from  challenging*  him
to  a gambling  match.

55.  Delay  in  the  discharge  of  duties,  loss  of  money,
and  the  abandonment  of  virtuous  deeds,  provocation  of  the
Prakritis  caused  by  the  king’s  continued  absence  in  the
seraglio,

56.  Divulgence  of  the  secrets  (by  the  women  with  wham
they  are  fondly  confided),  inducement  to  commit  culpable
deeds,  jealousy,  intolerance,  anger,  hostility  and  rashness,

57.  These  and  those  enumerated  above,  are  said  to  be
the  evils  arising  out  of  excessive  fondness  for  the  company
of  women.  Seeing  this,  a monarch  desirous  of  the  welfare
of  his  kingdom,  should  shun  the  company  of  women.

58.  The  energy  of  the  low-minded  who  are  ever  hanker-
ing after  a look  at  the  face  of  women,  dwindles  away  with
their  youth.

59.  (Aimless)  wandering,  loss  of  self  control,  senseless-
ness, insanity,  incoherence  in  speech,  sudden  illness,

60.  Loss  of  energy,  loss  of  friends,  perversion  of  the
understanding,  intelligence  and  learning,  separation  from
the  good  and  union  with  the  wicked,  coming  across  misfor-
tunes,

61.  Faltering  steps,  tremor  of  the  whole  body,  giddiness
(lassitude),  excessive  enjoyment  of  women, — these  are  the
evils  of  the  i ndulgence  in  drinking,  which  have  been  strongly
denounced  by  the  wise.

62.  The  Vrishnis  and  the  Andhakas  of  illustrious  fame,
endowed  with  power  and  learning  and  good  behaviour,  met


* For  Sdmdbbhayam  the  commentary  gives  Samdkuyam  which

.... I.


we


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


115

with  their  destruction  in  consequence  of  the  evils  of  drink.*

63.  The  illustrious  Suka  the  son  of  Bhrigu,  that  best
of  asceties  who  was  equal  to  his  father  in  intellegence,  ate  up
through  excessive  intoxication,  his  very  favourite  disciple
(Kacha).f

64.  A person  intoxicated  with  drink,  does  anything
and  everything  indiscriminately ; and  in  consequence  of  his
indiscriminate  conduct,  he  is  excommunicated  (from  public
society).

65.  Beautiful  women  and  drink,  may  be  enjoyed  within
the  bounds  of  moderation  ; but  a learned  king  should  never
indulge  in  hunting  and  gambling,  for  these  are  full  of  greater
dangers.

66.  These  are  the  seven  kinds  of  rampant  evils  retard-
ing the  material  prosperity  of  a kingdom,  that  have  been
enumerated  by  those  who  are  conversant  with  the  science
of  omens  and  prognostics.  The  presence  of  one  of  these
(in  a sovereign)  is  enough  to  cause  his  immediate  ruin,  not  to
speak  of  the  simultaneous  presence  of  all  !

67.  These  seven  kinds  of  vyasanas  ending  in  evil,  in-
crease the  longing  of  the  senses  for  their  respective  objects
of  enjoyment,  and  destroy  the  superiority,  wisdom,  and  ex-
cellence and  the  evergrowing  prosperity  even  of  those  who
are  endowed  with  intelligence  equal  to  that  of  the  Gods.

6s*.  The  enemies  of  a king  always  under  the  influence  of
the  Vyasanas , defeat  him,  and  themselves  become  invincible  5. ■


* The  Vrishnis  and  the  Andhakas,  were  the  two  offshoots  of  the*
Yadu  dynasty.  When  at  Probhasa , they  drank  too  much,  and  then  slew
one  another  through  excessive  intoxication.  The  story  is  contained  in
the  Mahabharata.

f Kacha  was  Vrihaspati's  son.  He  went  to  Sukra  to  master  the
secret  lore  of  reviving  the  dead.  But  the  Asuras  becoming  jealous  of
♦%n,  slew  him,  and  when  Sukra  was  intoxicated,  offered  Ivacha's  cooked
flesh  to  him.  He  ate  up  without  knowing  what  he  was  eating.  For  a
fuller  story,  vide  supra.


2l6


KAMANDaKIVA  N1TISARA.


but  the  wise  monarch  who  is  free  from  the  influence  of  the
Vyasanas,  vanquishes  his  enemies,  and  hitnself  becomes
unconquera  hie.

Thus  ends  the  fourteenth  Section , the  seven  kinds  of
Vyasanas.  in  the  Nitisara  of  Kamandaki.


SECTION  XV.


I.


T'1


Jl  REE  from  the  influences  of  the  Vyasanas,  and
fully  possessed  of  the  matchless  regal  powers,  a ruler  of
men  desirous  of  victory,  should  set  out  against  his  wicked
enemy  suffering  from  the  influence  of  the  Vyasanas.

2.  In  almost  all  cases,  the  wise  advise  military  expedi-
tions against  the  foes,  when  these  are  overwhelmed  with
calamities  but  when  a king  is  confident  of  his  own  powers
and  is  in  highly  prosperous  state  he  may  fall  upon  the  foe,
though  this  latter  may  not  be  afflicted  by  the  Vyasanas.

3-  When  a monarch  would  be  sure  of  his  ability  to
forcibly  slay  even  his  foe  swelling  with  powers,  then  (and
then  only)  should  he  start  on  a military  expedition,  inflict-
ing injuries,  such  as  loss  and  distress,  on  the  latter.

4.  A king  should  first  set  out  to  conquer  that  part  of
the  enemy’s  territory  which  teem  with  the  wealth  of  corn
and  is  thus  a thing  to  be  sought  out.  It  is  considered
sound  policy  to  deprive  the  enemy  of  his  supply  of  food
by  the  destruction  of  the  corn,  and  thus  to  add  to  the
strength  of  a king's  own  army;

5*  rear  safe  and  secure  and  avoiding  dangerous

countries  in  front,  a cool-headed  king,  cognisant  of  the  move-
ments of  the  chonlrJ  Ante-  *.',4.  *. t


its  of  the  foe,  should  enter  such  territories  of  the  enemy


KAMANDWm'A  NITISARA.  21/

where  there  would  be  no  difficulty  on  the  route  for  the  supply
of  food  and  the  support  of  the  allies.

6.  Indefatigable  and  fearless,  an  intelligent  monarch
well-provided  with  food  and  drink  and  with  detachments*
ready  for  action,  should  march  through  all  places — level
countries,  uneven  tracts  and  low  lands, — being  always  guided
by  a reliable  vanguard.

7.  In  summer,  a monarch  should  march  through  woods
abounding  in  waters,  in  which  the  elephants  of  the  armv
may  perform  their  ablution  ; for,  if  they  do  not  get  water
(for  washing  their  huge  bodies),  leprosy  will  affect  them,
owing  to  the  severe  heat  of  Summer.

8.  An  internal  heat  burns  inside  the  bodies  even  of
elephants  employed  to  perform  easy  work  ; this  heat  when
increased  by  the  toils  of  heavy  work,  soon  kills  them
(elephants).

9.  When  there  is  want  of  sufficient  water  in  Summer,
all  creatures  are  reduced  to  great  distress, f and  elephants
when  they  are  deprived  of  drinking  water,  soon  become
blind,  in  consequence  of  the  heat  that  scorch  their  bodies.

10.  The  kingdoms  of  the  rulers  of  earth,  rest  on  ele-
phants resembling  in  effulgence  masses  of  blue  clouds,  from
whose  temples  the  fragrant  ichor  exudes  j and  who  are  capable
of  ’rendering  asunder  rocks  with  the  stroke  of  their  tusks.

11.  One  elephant,  duly  equipt,  trained  in  the  ways
of  war  and  ridden  by  the  bravest  of  persons,  is  capable  of
slaying  six  thousand  well-caparisoned  horses.

12.  Armies  having  elephants  in  them,  are  sure  to  achieve
success  on  water,  on  land,  in  narrow  defiles  crowded  With
trees,  on  ordinary,  even  or  uneven  grounds,  and  in  such


* Gulma  means  a detachment  of  troops  consisting  of  45  foot,  27
horse,  9 chariots  and  9 elephants,
f Lit : ‘the  last  state  of  existence.’

t For  an  explanation  of  Dana,  Vide  Supra  note  to  Sloka  2,  Sec.  VII.
28


21$


KAMANDAKIYA  NIT1SARA*


acts  as  creating  breaches  in  the  ramparts  and  towers  (lit :
harmya  is  a mansion).

13.  For  these  reasons,  a king  should  march  slowly  and
without  causing  fatigue  to  his  troops,  through  such  countries
where  there  are  routes  on  which  there  is  plenty  of  food
and  drink,  and  where  there  is  no  danger  or  difficulty — there
by  increasing  his  own  efficiency.

14.  Even  the  smallest  of  prosperous  enemies  causes
great  difficulty  from  behind.  So,  coolly  reviewing  his  con-
dition, a king  should  undertake  military  expeditions.  He
should  not  ruin  what  he  possesses,  for  what  is  uncertain.

15.  Difficulties  at  the  back,  and  success  in  the  from,
of  these,  the  former  is  of  greater  moment  (and  deserves
early  attention.)  Those  (kings)  who  transgress  this  prin-
cipal (i.e.  act  otherwise),  enlarge  the  holes  (defects  of  their
administration).  For  these  reasons,  weighing  these  things
well,  a king  should  set  out  on  an  expedition.

16.  When  a monarch  is  strong  both  in  his  front  and  his
back  (t.  e.  when  he  is  capable  of  subjugating  his  foes  both
in  front  and  rear)  then  only  should  he  launch  upon  an
expedition  bearing  great  fruits.  Otherwise,  marching  for-
ward with  the  enemy  at  his  back  unchecked,  a king  suffers
signal  loss  in  the  rear  portion  of  his  army.

17.  On  setting  out  on  a expedition,  a king  should  place
in  the  van,  an  army  of  many  detachments,  whose  ranks  teem
with  many  brave  heroes.  There  is  unity  in  an  army  of  great
heroes,  and  unity  (z>.  united  army)  is  unconquerable  by  the
enemy,

ig.  When  a foe  must  be  marched  upon,  an  energetic
king  should  not  be  afraid  of  the  difficulties  that  may  be
at  his  rear ; he  should  depute  in  the  front  his  commander-in-
Chief  or  the  prince  with  a portion  of  the  army  (and  himself
remain  to  watch  the  foe  in  the  rear).

19.  Of  internal  and  external  defects,  the  internal  is
graver — (*.*.  should  be  first  atte  nded  to).  Amending  the


KAMANDAKIYA  NlTlSAFU.


219

internal  ones  and  providing  necessary  measures  for  the
(removal  of  the)  external  ones,  a king  should  set  out  oa  an
expedition.

20.  The  priests,  the  ministers,  the  princes  and  the
noblemen — these  are  the  principal  leaders  of  the  army  ; their
disaffection  of  which  no  sign  is  outwardly  perceivable,  and
which  is  caused  by  some  change  of  policy,*  is  said  by  the
sages  to  be  internal  defect. f

21.  The  other  kind  of  disaffection  of  which  the  fury  is
outwardly  perceivable,  is  the  disaffection  of  .the  frontier
guards,  foresters  and  border  tribes.  When  this  sort  of  dis-
affection is  generated,  a king  should  meet  it,  assisted  by  their
ministers  and  counsellors  of  skilful  ways  (weaning  them  over
to  his  side).

22.  Internal  disaffection  should  be  pacified  by  such
measures  of  policy  as  conciliation,  gift  &c,  and  external  dis-
affection by  the  causing  of  disunion  and  dissension  among
the  disaffected  party,  A wise  monarch  should  pacify  dis-
affection in  such  a manner  that  the  disaffected  do  not  resort
to  the  enemy's  side.

23.  The  loss  of  men  and  munition  is  said  to  be  destruc-
tion 5 and  the  loss  of  money  and  corn  (food)  is  said  to  be
drain.  A wise  and  prudent  king  should  never  betake  to  a
troublous  policy  prolific  of  (such)  destruction  and  drain.

24*  He  should  follow  such  policies  as  are  sure  to  be
crowned  with  success  and  attended  with  much  beneficial  re-
sults, and  whose  termination  would  not  be  delayed  and  future
effects  would  be  conducive  of  much  good.  But  he  should
never  resort  to  such  troublous  policies  which  involve  the
evils  of  destruction  and  drain.


* Lit : — proceeding  from  Mantra  or  counsel.

+ Prakopajii:  means  the  morbid  irritation  or  disorder  of  anything  ; it
is  usually  preceded  by  such  words  as  Vdt,  pitta  &c,  which  are  the
humours  of  the  body.


220


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


25.  Attempt  to  accomplish  what  are  incapable  of  being
accomplished,  want  of  attempt  for  what  are  capable  of  being
accomplished  proceeding  out  of  imprudence,  and  attempt  in
inopportune  moments  for  what  are  capable  of  being  accom-
plished— these  are  said  to  be  the  three  kinds  of  Vyasanas
attending  the  performance  of  acts.

26.  Lust,  want  of  forgiveness  and  forbearance,  too  much
tenderness  (of  feeling), Jbashfulness,  crookedness,  and  want  of
straight-forwardness,  arrogance,  self-conceit,  excessive  pious-
ness, poorness  of  the  army  and  its  dishonoring,

27.  Malice,  terror,  negligence,  and  carelessness,  incapa-
bility of  enduring  the  inclemencies  of  the  weather,  hot,  cold,
and  rainy, — these  (causes)  favored  by  the  advantages  of  the
season,  are  sure  to  hinder  the  achievement  of  success.

28.  The  wise  say  that  there  are  seven  kinds  of  party —
vis — that  which  is  the  kings  own,  that  which  is  of  the  allies,
that  which  has  sought  the  kings  protection,  that  which  has
been  created  by  some  act  or  other,  that  which  arises  out  of
some  relationship,  that  which  was  a party  before,  and  that
which  has  been  weaned  over  by  various  services  and  display
of  politeness  and  courtesy.

29.  A loyal  party  is  to  be  recognised  by  his  ready
obediennce,  his  singing  in  praise  of  the  (king’s)  merits,  his
not  putting  up  with  the  insults  and  blame  offered  to  the
king,  his  efforts  to  fill  up  the  holes  (i.e.,  redeem  the  weak-
nesses) of  the  king,  and  by  his  conversations  regarding  the
richness,  energy  and  courage  of  the  monarch.

30.  One  of  high  lineage,  straight-forward,  learned  in
the  Shastras , polite,  high  in  rank  and  position,  firm  in  his
allegiance,*  grateful,  and  endowed  with  power,  intelligence,
and  wisdom, —such  a one  should  be  recognised  as  a faithful
and  well-behaved  party.

31.  Energy,  an  accurate  remembrance,  contentment,

* Lit.  'never  intending  to  forsake  the  king.’


\\  .L  ! V l , , 1 f1  »* ' !t f i . 1 * \


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.  221

Courage.,  truthfulness,  liberality,  kindliness,  firmness,  dignity,
self-control,  endurance,  bash  fulness,  and  eloquence  (or  . bold-
ness in  speech) — these  are  said  to  be  the  qualities  of  the
(king's)  self.

32.  Its  management  according  to  the  commendable  rules  ,
of  polity,  is  said  to  be  the  power  of  counsel.  The  solvency
and  the  efficiency  of  the  treasury  and  the  army  respectively,  .
are  said  to  be  the  povyer  of  the  king,  and  strong  and  powerful
exertion  is  said  to  be  the  power  of  energy  ; the  possessor  of
these  three  kinds  of  powers  becomes  the  victor.

33.  Expeditiousness,  skilfulness,  courage  in  seasons  of
adversity  and  coolness  in  prosperity,  an  infallible,  matured
and  social  wisdom  resulting  from  close  study  of  the  Shastrqs*

34.  Energy,  boldness,  perseverance,  exertions,  resolute-
ness and  manliness  in  the  performance  of  acts.,  healthiness,,
the  ability  for.  the  achievement  of  the  ends  of  action,  a favor,-  .
able  fortune  and  cheerfulness— these,  are  qualities,  worthy  ofj  .
a king*

3’5r  paying  hold  of  the  enemie’s.  treasury  by,  sowing
dissension  at^ong.  hisj  partisans,  a king  should  march  yppn,,
the  foe  disunited  fre^m  his,  supporters.  Always  nctipg  ip  this  ,,
way,  (1.  e.,  undertaking  such,  expeditions,,  only),  a,  king  oh^ip^
the  dominion  of)  the  earth  washed  by  the  waves  of  the  qce^n.,
(h  rules  over  the.  whole  length  and  breadth  of  the  e^rth,
surrounded  by  the  ocean).

3,6.  Xhe  best  season  fpr  the.  marching  out  of  tfiqrqlq- .
phants  is  when  the  sky  is  overspread  with,  masses  of  ■
clouds ; seasons  other  than  this,  is  suitable  for  the  march
of  the  horses ; and  the  proper  season  (for  military  expedi-
tion), is  that  which  is  neither  too  hot  nor  too  cold,  nor  rainy
nor  dry,  and  when  the  earth  is  covered  with  corn.


% These  two  Slokas  are  hopelessly  elliptical— having  no  connection  with  ,
those  preceedipg  or  following  them.  The  last  portion  must  be  supposed
to  be  understood.


222


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


37.  At  night,  the  owl  kills,  the  crow ; and  the  crow
kills  the  owl  when  night  passes  away.  Therefore  a king
should  set  out  on  an  expedition  marking  well  the  (advantages
or  disadvantages  of  the)  seasons.  It  is  in  proper  season  that
attempts  arc  crowned  with  success.

38.  A dog  can  overpower  a crocodile  when  it  is  on  land,
and  the  crocodile  can  overpower  the  dog  when  it  is  in
water.  Therefore  one  (a  king)  exerting  with  the  advantages
of  the  place  in  his  favour,  enjoys  the  fruition  ot  his  acts.

39.  On  horses  on  even  tracts,  and  on  elephants  on
watery  (marshy)  lands  and  countries  abounding  in  trees  and
covered  with  rocks,  and  united  with  the  army  of  his  partisans
and  reviewing  his  own  strength,  a king  should  march  out,
for  the  conquest  of  countries.*

40.  On  desert  tracts  when  the  rain  falls,  in  Summer
through  countries  abounding  in  water,  and  mixed  up  with
allied  troops,  a king  should  march,  as  it  pleases  him,  for  the
conquest  of  countries.t

41.  Following  a route  on  which  there  is  not  too  much
water  or  which  is  not  totally  destitute  of  water,  which
abounds  in  corn  and  lire-woods,  and  where  plenty  of  car-
penters are  to  be  found,  a king  should  proceed  towards  the
enemy  by  easy  marches.

42.  That  portion  only  of  the  enemy's  country  should  be
inarched  into,  where  there  would  be  no  difficulty  for  the
supply  of  food  and  for  the  support  of  the  allies ; which  would
.abound  in  water,  and  whose  watery  expanses  would  be


The  last  portion  is  understood.  This  and  the  following  sloka?
may  be  taken  together ; but  then  their  construction  will  be  still  more
..clumsy.  ;/

t We  confess  we  have  not  been  able  to  make  out  any  very  good
construction  of  this  and  the  preceeding  sloka — what  we  have  embodied  in
§|$  a clumsy  and  forced  one,  but  it  is  calculated  to  give  the


reader  some  idea  of  the  author’s  meaning.

, 1 i,1!  * / ) ;>  ^ * ^ 4 1'*!"  Y 'S  v**11*'  <*  t r f ’


tCAMANDAKlYA  NITISARA.


223


free  from  sharks  &c.,  and  crossed  over  by  faithful  followers  ;
and  whence  the  sick  and  wounded  wood  not  shrink  back.

43.  Those  incorrigible  fools  who  without  much  delibera-
tion, rashly  enter  into  the  enemy's  territory  which  is  long1
way  off,  soon  feel  the  touch  of  the  edge  of  the  enemy’s*
sword.

44.  Posting  sentries  on  the  route  and  in  the  camp,
arranging  duly  for  his  safety,  and  with  brave  warriors  lying
by  his  side  ready  for  action,  a king  should  enjoy  a balmy
sleep  undisturbed  by  dreams.

45.  When  from  the  enemy's  camp  the  neigh  of  moving
horses  and  the  roar  of  a elephants  proceed,  and  when  the
sound  of  bells  reaches  his  ears,  he  (the  king)  should  then
even  in  his  sleep,  call  out  saying — fsvhat  brave  hero  keeps
watch  there.’*

46.  Then  awaking,  he  should  purify  himself  and  offer
adoration  to  the  gods;  cheerful  and  dressed  in  beautiful
garments,  he  should  then  be  duly  paid  homage  to  by  the
prime-ministers,  priests,  allies  and  friends.

47.  Then  deciding  with  their  help  as  to  what  should  be
done,  that  possessor  of  beautiful  conveyances,  should  march
out  riding  on  a (first-classs)  vehicle,  and  surrounded  by  foot-
soldiers  of  noble  extraction  who  are  equal  to  himself  (in
prowess).

48.  The  king  should  himself  look  after  the  tending  of  the
horses  and  elephants  and  the  repairing  of  the  chariots,  and  the
comforts  of  the  detachments  and  the  soldiers  severally.  He
should  see  that  the  favorite  horses  and  the  leader  elephants
are  supplied  with  Bidhana,  +


49.  The  king  should  be  accessible  to  all  and  his  speech


* The  text  is  vicious — the  translation  is  free.  The  author  means
that  even  during  sleep  the  king  should  be  watchful  so  that  at  the  slightest
alarm  he  may  be  ready  for  self-defence.


t Bidhana  is  the  food  given  to  horses  and  elephants  in  order  to  nto-
xicate  them.


224


KAM'ANDAKIYA  N1T1SARA.


should  invariably  be  preceded  by  smiles.  He  should  speak
sweet  kind  Words,  and  pay  (the  soldiers)  more  than  their
wages.  Won  over  by  sweet  words  and  liberal  payment,  the
troops  will  gladly  lay  down  their  lives  for  their  lord.

50.  Bv  constant  practice,  ohe  becomes  quite  competent
to  ride  upon  chariots,  horses,  elephants  and  boats,  and  at-
tains great  mastery  in  bdwftVanship  ; constant  practice
bestows  on  the  intelligent  ability  for  performing  even  most
difficult  acts.

51.  Riding  on  a huge  elephant  duly  equipped  and  with
foil 6 We rs  and  soldiers  accoutred  in  mail,  and  with  the  ranks
of  the  army  teeming  with  brave  heroes,  a monarch  should
march  forward,  having  at  first  held  consultation  With  the
ambassadors  of  the  feudatory  kings.

52.  He  should  bring  to  light  the  latches  Of  the  foe
through  the  agency  of  his  highly  intelligent  and  liberal-mind-
&pieS.  A ruler  of  earth  abbndoned  by  his  spies,  becomes  like
a man  deprived  df  his  sight.

53*  The  ally  of  the  enemy  should  be  own  over  by  tempt-
ing offers  or  by  the  giving  of  some  trifling  thing ^ that  portion
bf  the  enemy's  party  that  may  be  bought  off,  should  be  bought
off  by  the  payment  of  a prope'r  price/*

£4.  If  the  foe  is  not  unwilling  to  enter  into  a treaty,
a king  should  establish  peace  with  him  by  deputing  his
/ambassadors,  and  finish  What  he  has  undertaken  as  desirable,
as  soon  as  possible.  Gn  the  other  hand— (if  the  foe  is  unwill-
ing to  enter  into  a treaty),  he  should  sow  dissension  among
his  partizans  and  thereby  help  his  own  advancement.

55-  A king  should  wean  over  to  his  side  by  gifts,  concilia
tion  &c.  the  foresters,  and  frontier  tribes  and  commanders  of
castles,  whom  he  may  come  across  on  his  route.  U difficult
aihd  intricate  tracts  and  when  one  is  confined  within  them,

. these  become  the  guides,  and  point  the  way  out


- * We  have  not  been  able  to  make  out  any  plausible  meaning  of
this  sloka.  The  text  is  hopelessly  vicious  ,*  what  is  given  above  is  ottfy,:a
rational  conjecture.


tC A M A NI) A K I Y A NITISARA .


225


56.  Oi  any  person  who  for  some  reason  or  without  it,

has  gone  over  to  the  enemy’s  side  forsaking  his  former  alle-
giance, the  movements  should  be  watched,  when  he  comes
near  armed  with  weapons/'

57.  One  possessed  of  the  power  of  counsel  and  desiring
his  own  advancement,  should  at  first  hold  deliberate  counsels
(and  then  undertake  any  act).  Power  of  counsel  is  of  greater
importance  than  that  of  the  arms  (i.e.  brute  force).  Indra  Con-
quered the  Asuias  through  the  power  of  his  better  counsel.

58.  A wise  monarch  conversant  with  the  principles  of
polity  should  in  the  proper  season  undertake  an  act,  being
guided  by  his  keen  and  pure  intelligence,  and  putting  for-
ward evey  effort  for  a successful  termination.  It  is  in  proper
season  only  that  success  cam  be  .achieved.

59.  The  divine  majesty  of  the  powerful  and  high-souied
monarchs,  who  are  possessed  of  knowledge  and  heroism;  and
who  walk  on  the  duly  lighted  path,  is  said  to  hang  on  their
own  arms  resembling  serpents  in  length.

60.  When  the  earth  would  be  adorned  with  plenty  of
corn  and  filled  with  prosperity  and  cheerful  men,  when  there
would  be  no  rain  and  consequent  muddiness  of  the  soil,  and
when  the  woods  would  seem  to  blaze  forth  with  the  beauty  of
the  blossoming  inarigo  trees, — in  such  a season  putting  forth
his  endeavours,  a king  should  march  out  for  conquering  the
enemy’s  territories.

61.  Thus  with  his  best  efforts  and  his  mind  totally  con-
centrated on  the  attack,  a monarch  should  fall  upon  his  foe.
A foe  whose  posssssions  have  been  snatched  away,  gets  back
his  territory  if  he  serves  the  victor  faithfully.

Thus  ends  the  fifteenth  section , the  dissertation  on  mili-
tary expedition,  in  the  Nitisara  of  Kamandaki .


* That  is  the  power  of  counsel  and  of  wealth  are  better  means  for
subjugating  the  foe  than  the  strength  of  the  army.

29


SECTION  XVI.


I.


M

ATA arching  into  the  vicinity  of  the  enemy’s  town
a king  acquainted  with  the  ways  of  encamping,  should  pitch
ins  camps  on  grounds  recommended  by  the  wise.

2.  The  camp  should  be  quadrangular,  with  four  en-
trances; it  should  not  be  either  too  spacious  or  too  narrow
and  should  be  surrounded  on  all  sides  with  highways,  bul’
works  and  mtrenchments.  ^

3-  The  pavilhons  inside  the  camp  should  be  made  square*
crescent-shaped,  circular  or  long,  according  to  the  advant-
ages and  measure  of  the  ground  (on  which  they  are  erected)

4-  Decorated  with  broad,  disjointed  and  several  tops,

at  orned  with  tents,  having  a secret  chamber,  and  easy  out-
lets  on  all  sides,  y

S'  P°ssessin«  a treasure-chamber  inside,  and  capable
of  imparting  a sense  of  cheerfulness  and  comfort,  the  king’s
pavillion  should  be  erected  there,  and  be  protected  by  mighty
and  veteran  troops.  ® "

nlarf*  Hav'""  recerved  them  with  welcome,  a king  should
\ ace  near  us  own  pavillion,  the  old  soldiers  serving  the
royal  line  for  generations,  the  rank  and  file,  the  trofps  of

fores J * weaned  and  classes  of

foresters,  m successive  order.

JL*  formidable

i ‘ "Q  have  been  handsomely  paid

and  won  over,  sh„uId  be  p,aced  io  circu|ar  ' *

the  i P"(a?  °'  »»<i  horses  fleet  a,

glances  of  the  mind,  both  under  the  management  of  faith'.


Hm mfrJif  T“n*  * f»r  roads  cut  one

, Jgmfi«at.on  embodied  above.  It  may  also  mean  de


another,
elevated.


kamandakiya  nitisara.


227


ful  dependants,  should  mount  guard  at  lh%  vicinity  of  the
monarch's  pavillion.

9.  For  his  own  safety  a king  should  day  and  night
remain  armed  with  weapons  and  prepared  for  action,  being
ever  on  his  guard,  and  with  the  interior  of  his  pavillion
cleared  of  soldiers.*

10.  An  elephant  with  huge  tusks,  trained  in  the  modes
of  warfare,  duly  equipped  and  ridden  by  a brave  guide,
and  a fleet  steed,  should  ever  be  kept  ready  at  the  entrance
of  the  king's  pavillion.

11.  With  a portion  of  his  own  troops  and  with  those  of
the  allies,  and  placing  the  commander-in-chief  in  his  front
and  accoutred  in  mail,  a monarch  should  at  night  fall  upon
the  enemy  out-side  his  own  encampment,  (in  order  to  take
them  by  surprise).

12.  Swift  horsemen  capable  of  running  to  distant  boun-
daries and  border-lands,  and  of  great  fleetness,  should
ascertain  the  movements  of  the  enemy's  troops.

13.  Strict  watch  should  be  made  to  be  kept  by  faithful
troops  at  the  entrances  decorated  with  flags,  flag-staffs,  and
porches  adorned  with  garlands  of  flowers.

14.  Every  body  should  go  out  and  come  in  keenly
watched.  The  enemy's  spies  should  dance  attendance  upon
the  king,  ready  to  receive  his  commands.

15.  Prevented  from  drinking,  gambling  and  useless
noise-making,  the  men  should  stand  prepared  for  all  acts,
ready  with  all  accessories  and  instruments.

16.  Leaving  grounds  spacious  enough  for  the  drill  and
exercise  of  his  own  good  swordsmen,  a king  should  destroy
all  other  lands  outside  his  own  intrench  ments,  for  the  purpose
of  destroying  the  enemy's  troops.

17.  The  ground  around  the  camp  should  be  pervaded,  at


^ This  word  may  have  another  signification  •viz,  guarded  by  self-
controlled  soldiers.


kamandakiya  nitisara.


2 zS

places  with  thorny  branches  of  trees,  at  places  with  iron-
pointed  pegs  (caltrops),  and  at  places  with  secret  holes  and
crevices,

1 8.  Every  day  the  drilling  of  the  soldiers  should  be
performed,  with  various  appliances  and  on  grounds  cleared
of  trees,  shrubs,  stones,  trunks,  earthen  mounds  and  water.

19.  The  place  where  desirable  grounds  for  the  drill  of
the  king’s  own  troops  can  be  obtained  and  where  all  the
disadvantages  will  be  on  the  enemy’s  side — such  a place  is
said  to  be.  the  best  (for  encamping  purposes).

20.  Where  grounds  equally  advantageous  for  the  drill
of  one’s  own  troops  and  tho^e  of  the  enemy  can  be  found—
that  place  is  said  by  persons  interpreting  the  Shdstras , to  he
of  middling  merit.

21.  Where  there  are  spacious  grounds  for  the  drilling  of
the  enemy’s  troops  and  where  the  reverse  is  the  case  with
regard  to  a king’s  own  troops, — that  place  is  .said  to  be  the
worst  of  all  places.

22.  Always  wish  to  have  the  best  encamping  ground  ;
in  its  absence,  try  to  get  a middling  one  ; but  never,  for  the
sake  of  success,  use  the  worst  place,  which  is  no  better
than  a place  of  imprisonment.

23.  A camp — -which  seems  to  be  within  the  clutches  of
some  body,  where  numerous  diseases  prevail,  where  suddenly
hostilities  spring  up,  and  heavy  frosts  fall,

24.  Which  is  blown  over  by  unfavourable  winds,  where
suddenly  dusts  begin  to  fall,  where  each  tries  to  injure
another  and  where  the  drums  do  not  sound  (well),

25.  Where  there  are  constant  alarm  and  frght,  where
pealing  thunders  roar  and  where  meteors  fall,  where  the
(king’s)  Parasol  appears  to  be  on  fire  and  emits  smoke  and
where  yelping  of  jackals  is  heard  from  the  left  side,

26.  Which  is  infested  by  flocks  of  crows,  vultures  and
other  such  birds  of  ominous  note,  where  great  heat  is  sud-
denly felt  and  showers  of  blood  fall,


KAMANDAKIYA  NLTlSARA.


22 9

27,  Where  the  Raj-nakshatra*  is  seen  to  be  surrounded
on  all  sides,  by  other  baneful  portentuous  planets,  and  whence,
headless  trunks  are  seen  in  the  sun,  and  where  the  vehicles
and  draught  animals  are  suddenly  stupified,

28.  And  where  the  ichor  exuding  from  the  temples  of
elephants  in  rut,  suddenly  dries  up, — a camp  where  these
and  such  other  kinds  of  omens  ill  do  prevail,  is  a very  bad
one  (is  not  commended  by  the  wise)..

29*  A camp — where  the  inmates,  men  and  women,  are
all  cheerful,  where  the  drums  and  kettle-drums  sound  aloud
where  horses  neigh  deeply  and  elephants  duly  equipped  roar
tremendously,

30.  Which  rings  with  music  of  the  Vedic  chaunts  and
the  saying  of  Piinypha,  + where  melodious  harmony  of  songs
and  dances  rise  up  in  wave  after  wave,  where  there  is  no
cause  of  alarm  and  great  excitement  prevail,  and  where  the
expected  victory  is  indicated  by  good  signs

31.  Where  there  is  no  dust-storm  but  excessive  rain  falls,
where  the  Grahas  are  seen  to  be  on  the  right  ride,  and  no  un-
usually portentuous  phenomena,  either  heavenly  or  earthly,
are  viewed,

32.  Where  favourable  winds  sing  auspiciousness  by
their  blowing,  where  the  troops  are  well-fed  and  cheerfyl,
and  where  incenses  are  burnt  on  blazing  flames,

33.  Where  the  elephants  are  mad  without  having  drunk
intoxicating  liquors  and  where  the  Asaras  are  in  highly
prosperous  state, — a camp  where  these  auspicious  sings
prevail,  is  praised  by  the  wise.

* Pajnakshatra — may  mean  the  moon  ; but  we  are  not  sure.  The
allusion  is  to  the  belief  that  when  certain  star  are  seen  in  certain  positions
it  portends  evil  and  no  act  is  to  be  undertakes  while  their  influence-
lasts.

f Punyahas  mean  auspicious  days— here  it  means  the  prayer  for
an  auspicious  day.— May  this  be  an  auspicious  day,  the  Hindus  rise  from
their  beds  with  this  prayer  on  their  lips.


230


KAMANDAK1YA  nitisara.


34.  When  good  and  auspicious  signs  are  seen  in  the
camp,  the  foe  is  sure  to  be  routed,  and  when  they  are  bad
and  inauspicious,  reverses  are  to  be  suffered  by  the  king.
It  is  omens  that  indicate  good  or  bad  results.

35.  For  these  reasons,  a monarch  versed  in  the  Shastras
should  mark  all  the  omens.  When  the  augeries  are  good
and  the  king  exerts  with  a pure  heart,  he  leads  to  success
the  commendable  works  undertaken  by  him.

36.  Victory  is  of  him,  who  possesses  allies,  wealth,
knowledge,  prowess,  favourable  fortune,  perseverance  and
manly  efforts.

37-  The  king  is  called  the  Skandha  inasmuchas  he  is
said  to  be  the  root  (of  the  prosperity)of  the  people.  The
functions  of  the  ministers,  the  army  and  other  members  of  a
government  are  said  to  be  Abdra.

38-  When  for  the  advancement  and  prosperity  of  the
people  the  Skandha  or  the  king  is  supported  or  helped
forward  by  the  great  Abdras  or  ministers,  armies  &c,  it  is
said  to  be  Skandhdbara.

39.  The  destructions  of  the  privillions,  the  clothing,  tin?
drinking  water  and  the  food  grains,  and  of  the  supporting
troops  of  the  allies, — these  are  said  to  be  the  deaths  of  the
Skandhdbdray — these  therefore  should  be  Carefully  guarded
against.

40.  Thus  the  army  should  be  carefully  encamped  and
its  good  or  bad  state  viewed;  this  (good  or  bad  condition)
should  also  be  carefully  watched  with  regard  to  the  enemy’s
army.  When  no  evil  omens  would  be  seen,  a king  should
begin  (action).

Thus  ends  the  sixteenth  section,  the  desseration  on  en-
camping, in  the  Nitisara  of  Kamandaki.  *


SECT.ION  XVII.


j i P £

\ *■  OSSESSED  of  a keen  intelligence  and  armed  with

j manliness  and  a favorable  fortune,  a monarch  with  proper

endeavours  and  perseverance,  should  bring  to  bear  against  the
enemy,  the  expedients  for  subjugating  them.

2.  A solvent  treasury  and  a good  counsel,  fight  better
than  an  army  consisting  of  the  four  kinds  of  forces.  There-
fore a king  of  sound  political  knowledge — should  conquer
his  enemies  by  the  power  of  counsel  and  treasures.

3*  Conciliation,  gift  (or  bribery),  display  of  military
power,  and  domestic  discord,  these  four,  and  deceit,  neglect
and  conjuring— these,  seven  in  all,  are  said  to  be  the  means
of  success  against  an  enemy.

4-  The  enumeration  of  the  good  services  done  mutually,
the  extolling  of  the  merits,  the  establishment  of  some  reia-
tionship,  display  of  majesty,

5-  And  to  say  in  sweet  and  smooth  words— “I  am  yours”
&c,  these  are  said  to  be  the  five  kinds  of  concilation,  by
those  who  know  how  to  apply  it  (conciliation).

6.  To  give  away  acquired  wealth  in  good,  bad  or
middling  manner,  to  give  in  return  for  what  is  obtained,  to
suffer  to  be  taken  what  has  been  taken  away,

7.  To  give  away  some  wonderful  thing,  and  the  remmis-
sion  of  what  is  due — these  are  said  to  be  the  five  kinds
of  gift.

8.  To  cause  affection  and  love  to  wither  away,  to
generate  rivalry,  and  to  threaten,  these  are  the  three  modes  of

• sowing  domestic  discord.

.9.  To  kill,  to  plunder  wealth,  and  to  inflict  loss  and
distress,  these  are  said  to  the  three  kinds  of  display  of  military
power,  by  those  who  know  how  to  use  it  (military  power).


k


t'i  2


KAMANDAKIVA  N1T1SARA*


10.  Danda  (or  infliction  of  punishment),  is  said  to  be
of  two  kinds  vis.,  open  and  secret.  Tire  enemies  (of  the
state]  and  those  who  are  disliked  by  the  people  should  be
openly  dealt  with.

11.  Those  who  cause  anxiety  to  the  people,  those  who
are  the  kings  favorites,  and  those  who  stand  very  much  in
the  way  of  the  material  prosperity  of  the  state  should  be
dealt  with  secretly  {i\  e.  secret  punishment  should  be  inflicted
on  them).

(2.  By  poisoning,  by  the  help  of  mystic  ceremonies  (e,g.
Mar  ana  &e.)  by  assasiuaiion,  (lit.  by  weapon)  and  by  throw-
ing down,* — oy  these  methods,  secret,  punishments  should
be  so  meted  out  that  no  body  could  come  to  know  of  them.

13.  On  Braiunauas,  or  on  any  other  caste,  on  pious
people  and  on  low  and  mean  classes  of  men,  an  intellegent
loing,  should  not — for  the  advancement  of  his  material  (spiri-
tual) welfare,  inflict  the  capital  punishment.

. 14*  Those  against  whom  secret  punishment  is  recom-
mended, may  also  be  done  away  with  by  neglect*  But  a
prudent  person  should  avoid  to  show  this  neglect  out-wardly
(or  in  a prominent  manner  so  as  to  attract  attention),

15.  Thoroughly  scanning,  reviewing  and  studying  their
hearts  and  speaking  sweet  words  and  thereby  appearing  to
be  shedding  nectar — a king  should  employ  conciliation  as  an
expedient  against  the  foe.

16.  Sweet  and  melliflous  speech  is  said  to  be  concilia-
tion itself.  Euloguirn,  truth,  sweet  speech,  these  are  synony-
ufOCis  Wi t It co i vci liaii on v

17.  Appearing  to  view  the  undertaking  of  the  enemy
in  the  light  of  bis  own,  a king  should  enter  into  his  heart
(lit  penetrate  him)  unperceived,  like  water  penetrating
into  the  mountain.

reading  found  in  same  books,  menus  by  the  throwing  of


fcAMANDAKIYA  NitlSAitA;  #


±33

i&.  The  immortals  and  the  Danavas  succeeded  in  churn-
ing the  ocean  of  milk  and  obtained  desirable  results  only
through  conciliation.*  The  sons  of  Dhritarastra  who  were
against  the  policy  of  conciliation,  were  soon  slain  by  (the  sons
of  Pandu).f

19,  An  intelligent  and  wise  king  should  pacify  a threaten*
ing  foe  by  means  of  gift  or  (bribery).  When  intent  on  ruining
Indra,  Sukra  was  pacified  through  gift.J

20,  When  Bhrigu's  son  was  enraged  in  consequence  of
the  fault  of  Sarmistha(VrishaparVa,,s  daughter),  Vrishaparavan
the  lord  of  the  Danavas  made  himself  happy  by  giving  her
over  (to  Sukra  so  that  she  may  serve  this  one's  daughter.)^

21,  One  desirous  of  peace  should*  even  approaching  the
powerful  king  uninvited,  give  away  things  to  him  for  pleasing


An  eternal  hostility  exists  between  the  gods  and  the  Bdnavas


‘(the  demons)  who  always  fight  with  each  other.  But  when  it  was
decided  to  churn  the  ocean  of  milk,  they  were  reconciled,  but  for  which
ino  churning  could  have  been  accomplished.  It  is  by  the  policy  of  con-
ciliation that  the  gods  won  the  Bananas  over  and  persuaded  them  to
help  in  the  matter.

t The  sons  of  Panda  were  ever  for  peace  and  Conciliation.  But
the  sons  of  Dhritarastra  stubbornly  refused  all  overtures — so  much  so,
that  they  declined  to  give  even  [five  villages  only  to  the  five  Pandava
brothers.  They  were  completely  ruined  and  slain  in  the  battle  that
followed— the  great  battle  of  Kurukshetra.

$ The  allusion  is  obscure.  Sukra  Was  the  preceptor  of  the  Demons
and  consequently  the  enemy  of  Indra;

§ Sukras  daughter  Devayani  and  Vrishaparvan's  daughter  Sarmistha
were  fast  friends.  Once  u'pOn  a time  Devayani  and  Sarmistha  went  to
bathe  keeping  their  clothes  on  the  shore.  But  the  god  Wind  changed
their  clothes— and  when  they  were  dressed  they  began  to  quarrel  about
the  change— until  Sarmistha  so  far  forgot  herself  that  she  slapped  her
companion  on  the  cheek— and  threw  her  into  a well.  There  she  remained
until  she  was  seen  and  rescued  by  Yayati  who  married  her  with  the
consent  of  father;  and  Sarmistha  was  ordered  to  be  her  servant  as  - a
irecompertsefor  the  insulting  conduct  she  ofered  to  Devayani.

30


234


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


him  ; the  sons  of  Gandhari*  refusing  to  give  (to  the  Pandavas
a portion  of  the  kingdom)  met  with  their  complete  des-*
truction.

22.  Alluring  by  mighty  hopes,  but  fulfilling  little  of
them,  a king  should  wean  over  the  four  kinds  of  alienable
parties,  knowing  them  through  spies.f

23.  The  greedy  who  have  been  deprived  of  their  dues,
the  honorable  persons  who  have  been  dishonoured,  the  irri-
table persons  who  have  been  angered,  and  those  who  have
been  extremely  abused,

24.  These  are  the  four  kinds  of  alienable  parties,  who
should  be  won  over,  each  by  the  fulfilment  of  his  particular
desire.  But  to  establish  peace  in  his  own  party  as  well  as  in
the  party  of  the  foe— is  a better  policy.

25.  With  all  efforts  and  carefulness  a king  should  effect

the  alienation  of  the  ministers,  counsellors,  and! priests;  and
when  these  have  been  alienated,  the  highly  powerful  princes
should  be  tried.  ,

26.  The  prime-minister  and  the  crown  prince  are  said
to  be  the  two  arms  of  a lord  of  earth;  the  former  is  also  said
to  be  the  king’s  eye, — and  the  alienation  of  this  one  can-
not be  compared  to  the  alienation  of  any  body  else.

27.  An  intelligent  king  should  with  all  endeavours  try  to
vitiate  (alienate)  one  of  his  rival  monarch's  own  family  ; such

a one  when  vitiated  destroys  his  own  dynasty  like  fire  des-
troying the  fuel  which  produces  it.

28.  One  highly  disaffected  at  heart  is  equal  to  one  of
the  rival  monarch’s  own  dynasty,  (so  far  as  the  facility  of  '
alienation  is  concerned).  Therefore  a king  should  wean


» Gandhari  was  the  wife  of  Dhritarastra  and  the  mother  Duryo-
dhana  and  his  brothers.  They  refused  to  give  to  the  Pandavas  even
^♦.villages  only— see  Supra.

t Ubhaya-betana  means  one  receiving  wages  from  both  masters— »
hence  treacherous  spies.  . . .

•'  ’ " ',>•  ......

. . ^ - ■ . - ' ^ ^ 1


tCAMANDAKlYA  NITISARA.


235


him  over  in  any  way  and  maintain  peace  and  conciliation
among  his  own  ranks.

29.  Secret  overtures  should  be  made  only  to  one  who
is  capable,  of  doing  good  or  bad.* * * §  But  with  keen  and
scrutinising  intelligence  it  should  be  at  first  ascertained
whether  he  is  a straight-forward  or  a hypocrete  person.  '

30.  A straight-forward  person  should  try  to  fulfill  his
words  to  the  best  of  his  power.  But  a hypocrete,  in  conse-
quence of  his  longing  for  wealth,  would  betray  both  parties.

31.  Qua7idom  commanders,  mean-minded  persons,  those
who  serve  the  king  only  to  pass  the  time  any  how  or  other, +
those  who  have  been  punished  without  rhyme  or  reason,
those  who  long  for  (personal)  prosperity,  those  who  are  in-
vited and  then  neglected  (or  dishonored),

32.  One  of  the  king’s  own  family  (dynasty)  who  is  jealous
of  (hostile  to)  him,  he  that  is  found  fault  with  by  the
monarch,  those  who  have  given  up  their  business  (idlers),
and  those  on  whom  heavy  taxes  have  been  levied,

35.  Those  who  love  to  fight,  those  who  are'  rashly  bold,
those  who  are  self-conceited,  those  who  are  severed  from
virtue,  wealth  and  desire,:}:  those  who  are  of  a excitable
nature,  the  honorable  persons  who  have  been  dishonored,

34.  Those  who  are  cowards,  those  who  live  in  constant
fear  (of  being  punished)  for  their  offences,  those  who  have
created  enemies  through  want  of  kind  treatment^  those
who  love  the  company  of  those  inferior  to  them,  and  who
-drive  away  their  equals,


* The  original  word  lit : translated  would  mean-one  who  is  capable
of  showing  wrath  or  mercy ; lienee  “having  much  influence.-'’

f Ihese  people  do  not  feel  for  the  king,  and  may  be  weaned  over  by
the  offer  of  petty  advantages.  The  word  may  mean  also— those  who
are  procrastinating.

% That  is,  whose  [existence  have  been  blasted  and  who  have  no  love
for  life.

§ The  text  is  vicious,  the  translation  is  free.


S36


KAMANDAKJYA  N1TISARA,


35.  Those  who  are  imprisoned  without  cause  and  who
have  been  specially  favoured  for  some  reason  or  other,  those
who  have  been  apprehended  without  reason,  those  worthy
and  worshipful  persons  who  are  disregarded,

36.  Those  whose  family  and  possessions  have  been  plun-
dered ( i.e . confiscated),  those  who  are  inflamed  by  a strong
desire  for  enjoyment,  those  who  have  been  ruined,*  those
who  are  friends  outwardly,  those  whose  goods  and  chattels
have  been  taken  off,f  and  those  who  have  been  driven
out,

37.  These  are  said  to  be  the  alienable  parties.  When,
any  of  these  is  found  with  the  foe,  he  should  be  weaned  over,.
Those  who  come  over  to  the  king’s  side  (ie.  are  won  over),
should  be  honored  by  (the  present  ofj.those  things  they  may,
desire  to  have;  in  this  way  also, a king  should  maintain  unity
and  concord  among  his  own  partisans.^

38.  To  find  out  what  is  coveted  by  both  (the  king  and
the  alienable  party),  and  to  see  what  both  fear  and  are
apprehensive  of,  and  chiefly,  bribing  (giving  presents)  and
honoring— these  are  said  to  be  the  means  for  effecting
alienation.

39.  Assailed  by  a powerful  enemy,  an  intelligent  king,
should  try  to  effect  alienation  among  the  former's  party.  The
powerful  Sanda  and  Amarka,§  alienated  from  each  other*
were  vanquished  hy  the  gods.

40.  Causing  disunion  in  the  united  army  of  the  foe*  a,
king  should  annihilate  it  by  open  attack.  Disunited,  it  is,


(riends


and


y mean — -those  ■ who  have
s outside  the  dominions  of  the


The

The


! yn
re :


atter  portion,

ably  they  were  two  demon  brothers*
gods  finding  them  united,  applied  the  policy  of  alienation  against
and  afterwards  slew  them.


kamandakiya  nitisara;


237


destroyed  like  a piece  of  wood  which  is  set  fire  to  with  dried
grass.

4t.  Supported  by  faithful  allies  and  favored  by  the
advantages  of  the  soil  and  the  season,  and  inflamed  with
energy,  a king  should  drive  his  enemy  to  destruction  by  open
attack,  even  like  king  Yudhisthira  himself.

42.  Reviewing  the  measure  of  his  own  strength,  a
monarch  should  regulate  his  attacks  (lit.  lead  his  army  to
battle).  In  the  days  of  yore,  Rama*  possessed  of  strength,
and  energy,  slew  the  Kshatriyas  single  handed.

43.  Those  who  are  idle,  those  who  have  lost  all  power
those  who  have  exhausted  their  efforts  in  an  undertaking,
those  who  are  suffering  from  extensive  destruction  %nd  loss*
those  who  are  routed,

44.  And  cowards,  fools,  women,  boys,  pious  men,  and
wicked  and  brute-like  persons,  as  also  those  of  a friendly
nature  and  of  a peaceful  turn  of  mind — these  should  be
won  over  by  conciliatory  measures.

45.  The  greedy  and  the  poor  should  be  brought  under
subjugation  by  being  honoured  with  gifts,  so  also  those
wicked  ones  who  are  disunited  being  afraid  of  one  another
and  through  fear  of; the  punishments  inflicted  on  them.

* The  allusion  is  to  the  story  of  Parasurama  son  of  Jamadagni.
This  Brahman  is  said  to  have  been  the  sixth  incarnation  of  Vishnu.
While  young  lie  cut  off  with  his  axe  the  head  of  his  mother  Renuka  at  the
command  of  his  father,  when  none  of  his  brothers  was  willing  to  do  so.
Some  time  after  this,  king  Kartaviryya  went  to  the  hermitage  of  his
father  and  carried  off  his  cow.  But  Parasurama  when  he  returned  home
fought  with  the  king  and  killed  him.  The  sons  of  the  Kartaviryya
bearing  of  the  fate  of  th'eir  father,  came  to  Parasurama's  hermitage  and
shot  his  father  dead  in  his  absence.  Thereupon  Parasurama  made  the
dreadful  vow  of  exterminating  the  whole  Kshatriya  race.  He  succeeded
in  ridding  the  earth  twenty  one  times  of  the  warrior  race.  He  is  said
to  have  penetrated  through  the  Krouncha  mountain.  He  is  one  of  those
who  will  never  die — and  is  believed  at  present  to  be  engaged  in  austeri-
ties on  the  Mohendra  mountain.


■1


til


23S


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


46.  Sons,  brothers,  and  friends,  should  be  won  over
by  persuasive  words  (or  wealth),  for,  who  can  be  equal  to
them,  although  they  may  be  made  distant  by  the  enemy?

47.  If  per  chance  these  (sons,  &c.,)  fall  off  from  their
allegiance,  conciliation  should  be  employed,  against  them.
Indeed,  sometimes  they  are  incorrigibly  vitiated  through
pride  and  boastfulness.

48.  They  in  whom  nobility  of  birth,  good  conduct,
charity,  kindness,  piety,  truthfulness,  gratefulness  and  harm-
lessness are  to  be  found,  are  said  to  be  A chary y as.

49'  A king  conversant  with  the  policy  of  gift  and  alien-
ation and  knowing  the  ways  of  inflicting  punishment,  should
win  over  the  citizens  and  the  people  and  the  leaders  of  the
army  by  gift  and  alienation.

So.  Offended  friends  should  be  reconciled  by  honouring
and  gifts  and  kind  words  ; others  should  be  won  over  by  the

proper  employment  of  the  policy  of  alienation  or  bribery
or  gift.

51—52.  Men  hidden  inside  the  images  of  gods,  pillars,
and  holes,  men  dressed  in  the  clothes  of  women,  and  assum-
ing terrible  appearances  at  night  and  appearing  in  the  sem-
blance of  Pisachas  (demons),  and  gods,— in  this  way  do

persons  practise  the  policy  of  deceit  and  this  is  known  as
M dya.

5J.  To  assume  different  appearances  at  will,  to  shower
down  weapons,  iron  balls  and  water,  and  to  be  hidden  in
darkness,  these  also  are  the  artifices  practised  by  men.

54.  Bhima  killed  Kichaka  by  being  disguised  as  a woman*

While  Droupadi  in  the  guise  of  Sairindri  was  residing  at  the  court
' of  king  VirAta,  his  brother-in-law  Kichaka  saw  her  and  her  beauty  ex-
cited wicked  passions  in  his  heart.  He  became  enamoured  of  her  and
.;#rough  his  royal  sister,  tried  to  violate  her  modesty.  Droupadi  com-
Dlamed  of  his  unmannerly  conduct  to  the  king,  but  he  declinedto  in  fere;

herselfnfIvoura^r  hU8^"d  Bh,mVs  assistance,  who  told  her  to  show

' r

rfV!  * » ; t Si  jSi


■ ' ■ ■


An  appointment  was  then


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA,


239


The  god  of  fire  also  remained  hidden  for  a long  time  by
practising  divine  Maya  *

55.  Not  to  prevent  one  from  wrong,  from  war  and  from
danger — these  are  said  to  be  the  three  kinds  of  Ufieksha  or
deplomatic  neglect,  by  those  who  are  conversant  with  its
nature  and  use.

56.  Intent  on  the  performance  of  an  misdeed  and  blind-
ed by  lust,  Kichaka  was  neglected  by  Virata  and  allowed  to
be  slain  (by  Bhima).

57.  Afraid  of  the  unfulfilment  of  her  own  desire,  Hidim-
va,  although  seeing  Bhimasena  ready  for  the  combat,  allowed
her  own  brother  to  be  slain  and  thus  neglected  him.f

58.  The  exhibition  of  clouds,  darkness,  rain,  fire,  mount*
ain  and  other  strange  shapes,  and  of  troops  which  are  at  a
distance  marching  with  flowing  banners,

59.  And  the  exhibition  of  cut  off,  severed  and  slaughter-
ed troops*  and  of  highly  efficient  armies— all  these  kinds  of
conjuring  should  be  resorted  to  for  inspiring  terror  into
the  enemy’s  host.

60.  These  are  said  to  be  the  expedients  that  serve
various  purposes  of  the  monarchs  ; of  these,  a king  convers-
ant with  the  nature  of  conciliation,  should  employ  it  when-
ever it  pleases  him.

61.  At  first  the  policy  of  gift  (or  bribery)  should  be
employed  and  then  conciliation  and  alienation.  But  these
latter  two  when  united  with  the  former,  are  sure  to  bring
about  success.


made  between  Kichaka  and  Draupadi  that  they  should  meet  in  the
dancing  hall  of  the  palace  at  night  .;  pursuant  to  this  appointment  Bhima
disguised  as  Draupadi  went  there  and  when  Kichaka  tried  to  embrace
him  taking  him  for  Draupadi — he  was  crushed  to  death.

* This  allusion  is  obscure.

t Hidimva  was  a demoness  ; she  became'enamoured  of  Bhima — and
to  satisfy  her  lust  she  induced  Bhima  to  slew  her  brother  Hidimva.

The  story  is  contained  in  the  Mahabharata.

: . , 1

1

. . ■ . . . ■ • , 1


240


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA,


62.  Tlie  policy  of  conciliation  without  the  support  of  the
policy  of  gift  seldom  brings  success  in  an  undertaking.
Conciliation  without  the  help  of  gift  cannot  produce  the
desired  effect  even  when  it  is  employed  against  one’s  own

wife.

63.  These  expedients,  a king  conversant  with  the  science
of  polity,  should  skilfully  bring  to  bear  against  the  enemy’s
troops  or  in  his  own  forces.  A king  exerting  without  em-
ploying these  expedients,  proceeds  towards  his  end  like  a
blind  man.

64.  Prosperity  is  sure  to  come  into  the  possession  of
those  wise  persons  (kings)  who  employ  these  expedients  }
nay  it  swells  (every  day).  When  properly  managed  with
the  help  of  these  expedient  efforts  of  kings  bear  fruit.

Thus  ends  the  seventeenth  section,  the  use  and  employ *
ment  of  the  expedients,  in  the  Nitisara  of  Kamandaki.


SECTION  XVIII.


T HE  three  policies  of  conciliation,,  gift  and  ali'ena--
tion  having  failed,  a king  conversant  with  the  principles  of
polity  and  the  ways  of  punishing,  should  lead  his  army  against
those  who  deserve  punishment.

2,  Having  worshipped  the  gods  and  the  twice-born1
Elrahmanas  and  with  the  planets  and  the  stats  shining  propi-
ous,  a,  king  should  march  towards  flip  fog,  with  his  si#
kinds  of  troops  arrayed  in  due  order,

■ ' : • ' .


r>:


kamandakiya  nitisara.


241


3.  The  Moula  the  mercenary,  the  Sreni  the  allied,
those  belonging  to  the  enemy  weaned  over  and  the  forest
tribes,  these  are  the  six  kinds  of  forces;  each  preceding

is  of  greater  importance  than  each  following  - so  also  is  their
Vyasana.

4-  For  their  respect  and  love  for  the  king,  for  the  fact  of
their  helping  in  the  removal  of  the  dangers  that  may  happen
to  him  and  for  their  being  inspired,  with  the  same  thoughts

and  sentiment,  the  Moula  troops  are  more  reliable  than  the
mercenary,

5-  The  mercenary  troops  again  are  more  reliable  than

the  Sreni  troops,  for  the  former  depend  on  the  king  for
their  livelihood.  &

6.  The  Sreni  troops  are  again  more  reliable  than  the
troops  of  the  allies,  for  these  latter  do  not  enjoy  a share  of  the
king's  victory,  whereas  the  former  .participate  in  his  joy
and  grief,  and  moreover  live  in  the  same  country  with  the

king.

7-  The  allied  troops  again  are  more  reliable  than  the
troops  of  the  enemy  weaned  over,  inasmuch  as  the  former
persue  the  same  object  with  the  king,  and  their  country  and
time  of  action  are  known,  whereas  the  latter  often  differ  in
opinion.

8.  The  low  forest  tribes,  are  by  nature  faithless,  greedy,
and  sinful  ; for  this  reason,  the  weaned  over  troops  of  the

enemy  are  better  than  they,  who  are  wild  and  undiscip-
lined.

9*  Both  the  forest  tribes  and  the  weaned  over  troops
of  the  enemy,  follow  the  king  waiting  for  the  moment  when
to  accomplish  his  ruin  ; so,  when  all  chances  of  their  causing

any  difficulty  will  be  over,— victory  is  sure  to  embrace  the
king.

xo,  A king  has  great  cause  of  apprehension  from  these
two  (the  forest-tribes  and  the  weaned  over  troops  of  the
enemy),  for  secret  overtures  may  be  directed  towards  them
3t


242


KAMANDAKIYA  N1TISARA.


by  the  foe.  From  his  own  side  also,  a king  should  commence
intriguing,  for  intrigue  is  ever  sure  to  give  victory.*

11.  An  enemy  highly  powerful  in  consequence  of  his
being  possessed  of  Mould  troops  swelling  with  energy  and
faithful  in  allegiance,  should  be  encountered  with  the  same
kind  of  troops  capable  of  enduring  loss  and  destruction. f

12.  When  the  march  would  be  long,  or  the  campaign
will  be  a protracted  one,  a king  should  proceed  with  the
Moulds  duly  protected.  The  Moulds  being  of  long  standing
are  capable  of  bearing  up  against  loss  and  destruction.

13.  In  these  matters  (l.e.  in  protracted  marches  and
campaigns  and  the  like)  an  intelligent  king  should  not  depend
much  upon  (lit:  leave  off),  the  mercenary  and  other  kinds  of
troops;  for  when  they  are  worn  out  with  the  toils  of  the
protracted  march  or  campaign,  their  alienation  (by  the  foe)
majr  be  apprehended.

14*  When  the  troops  of  the  enemy  are  numerous,  when
the  fatigue  and  toil  are  excessive  and  protracted,  and  when
the  army  is  always  sent  abroad  and  put  to  difficult  tasks— its
alienation  (by  the  enemy)  follows  as  a matter  of  course.

15.  A king  is  virtually  powerless  when  his  mercenary
troops  are  numerous,  and  Mould  troops  are  small  in  number.
So  also,  an  enemy  is  powerless,  when  his  Mould  troops
are  small  in  number  or  are  disaffected. J

16.  Battles  should  be  fought  more  often  with  the  help
of  the  power  of  counsel— for  then  victory  is  obtained  with
little  difficulty.  < When  again  the  soil  and  the  season  are
unfavorable,  the  destruction  and  loss  become  immense.

17.  When  the  enemy’s  troops  give  up  their  efforts  in  the
direction  of  alienation  and  become  trustworthy,  the  merce-


* The  Sloka  as  given  in  the  text  is  uninteliigble.  It  is  after  comparing
several  readings,  that  we  could  make  out  the  meaning  embodied  above.

t What  the  another  means  is  this  that  when  the  enemy  leads  out
Mould  troops  the  king  should  meet  with  his  own  Mould  troops.

t 1 1 IB  f St  r P 1 j 4 j , ?r|  ,


KAMANDAKIYA  NITlSARA.


2 4 3


nary  troops  defy  them  saying: — 'They  are  of  base  mettle
and  should  be  slain.”

18.  Three  kinds  of  troops  {viz.,  the  forest-tribes,  the
troops  of  the  enemy  weaned  over  and  the  Sreni)  may  be
induced  to  excessive  drinking  and  thus  rendered  incapable  of
service.  With  his  own  troops  who  have  been  duly  drilled
and  who  have  not  stayed  in  foreign  lands  for  a long  time  (for
then  they  would  have  been  worn  out),  a king  should  fall  upon
the  foe.

19.  A king  whose  resources  for  battle  are  small  may  by
his  power  of  counsel  make  the  allied  troops  like  his  own  ; and
thus  his  strength  may  be  increased.

20.  Acts  in  which  the  king  and  the  allied  monarch  are
both  equally  interested,  acts  whose  success  depends  on  the
ally,  and  acts  in  which  clemency  and  cleverness  are  to  be
displayed,  such  acts  should  be  undertaken  in  conjunction
with  the  ally.

2r.  Supported  by  a large  host  of  the  enemy’s  troops
weaned  over,  a king  should  march  against  a powerful  enemy.
Then  like  a dog  waiting  to  kill  a boar,  he  should  bring  into
action  conciliation  or  other  kinds  of  policy.

22.  The  troops  of  the  enemy  that  have  been  weaned
over  should  be  employed  in,  and  oppressed  with  the  task  of
rooting  out  the  thorns  of  the  difficult  paths  ; for  otherwise,
there  is  danger  of  their  being  morbidly  irritated.

23.  The  foresters  also  should  be  employed  in  similar
tasks  ; and  when  entering  into  the  territory  of  another,  a
learned  king  should  always  place  them  in  the  front.

24.  These  are  the  six  kinds  of  troops  and  these  con-
stitute a complete  army  together  with  the  cavalry,  infantry,
car-warriors  and  elephants.  Such  an  army  supported  by
the  power  of  counsel  and  a solvent  treasury  constitutes  a
Sadanga  vala  or  an  army  of  six  members.  >

25.  A powerful  monarch  arranging  these  six  kinds  of


m.


244  KAMANDAKiYA  NITISARA.

troops  without  the  least  defect,  should  proceed  to  encounter
an  army  stronger  than  his  own.

26.  By  his  power  of  counsel,  &c.,  a king  should  know
its  (his  army's)  connections  and  he  should  also  apprise  him-
self of  what  his  generals  do  or  do  not.

27.  One  of  high  extraction,  belonging  to  the  king's  own
country  (t\  e .,  the  king's  own  subject),  conversant  with  the
rules  of  counsel  and  acting  in  conformity  with  them,  a careful
student  of  the  science  of  Dandaniti  and  its  administrator,

28.  One  possessed  of  the  qualities  of  energy,  heroism,
forgiveness,  patience,  amiableness  and  richness,  one  endowed
with  power  and  manliness  and  ,who  is  depended  upon  by
his  followers  for  their  support  (z.  en  one  who  has  got  fol-
lowers and  dependants),

29.  One  who  has  got  numerous  friends  and  whose  re-
lations and  cognates  are  many,  whose  countenance  reflects
genersosity,  and  who  is  large-hearted  and  a thoroughly  prac-
tical man  mixing  freely  with  the  people,

30.  Who  never  cultivates  other's  ill-will  or  enmity  without
any  reason,  whose  number  of  foes  is  very  limited  and  who  is
of  pure  character,  and  is  a profound  scholar  of  the  Shastrast
and  acts  according  their  precepts,

31.  One  who  is  healthy,  stout,  brave,  forbearing  and
acquainted  with  the  opportuneness  of  season,  and  is  possessed
of  a noble  appearance,  and  has  full  reliance  on  his  own
power,

32.  One  who  knows  how  to  tend  horses  and  elephants,
and  repair  chariots,  and  is  indifatigable,  and  skilful  in  fight-
ing and  duelling  with  swords,  and  can  move  with  agility,

33.  Who  knows  the  divisions  of  the  field  of  battle,  and
whose  power  remains  unperceived  till  the  time  of  action  like
that  of  the  lion,  and  who  is  not  procrastinating  and  is  watchful
humble  and  self-controlled,

V $4.  Who  knows  the  marks  (good  or  bad)  of  horses,  ele-

plants,  chariots,  and  weapons  and  is  fully  acquainted  with  the


tCAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.  245

aticons  and  movements  of  the  spies  and  scouts,  and  is  grate-
ful and  conversant  with  all  alternatives  (of  acts),

35.  One  who  observes  all  pious  ceremonies  and  is  skil-
ful and  followed  by  skilful  dependants,  who  is  expert  in  all
modes  of  warfare  and  is  competent  to  manage  the  army,

36.  One  who  having  been  naturally  gifted  with  the
power  of  reading  others'  heart,  can  perceive  what  the  men,
horses  and  elephants  want,  who  also  knows  their  designa-
tion and  can  supply  them  their  food,

37.  One  who  knows  all  countries,  languages  and  human
Characters,  and  can  decipher  all  writings  and  is  possessed  of
a retentive  memory  ; one  who  is  thorougly  competent  to  lead
nocturnal  attacks  and  who  can  ascertain  by  his  keen  intelli-
gence what  should  be  done,

38.  One  who  knows  the  times  of  sunset  and  sunrise,
and  the  position  of  the  stars  and  planets  and  their  conse-
quent influences,  and  who  is  fully  acquainted  with  the  routes,
the  directions,  and  the  countries  (though  which  the  army  is
to  pass,)

39.  One  who  is  neither  frightened  nor  fatigued  by  the
pangs  of  hunger  and  thirst  and  the  inclemencies  of  the
weather,  hot,  cold,  and  rainy,  who  can  bear  up  against  alarms
and  weariness  and  who  gives  asurances  of  safety  to  the  good,

40.  One  who  can  create  breaches  in  the  army  of  the
foe,  and  who  can  undertake  difficult  acts,  and  can  detect
and  remove  the  cause  of  alarm  of  his  own  troops,

41.  One  who  can  protect  the  camp,  and  is  capable  of
bringing  into  light  any  (underhand)  act  of  the  troops,  one
who  fully  knows  the  disguises  and  the  pretences  put  forward
by  the  spies  and  messengers,  and  who  reaps  success  by  his
great  exertion,

42.  One  who  always  accomplishes  successfully  acts
undertaken  by  him,  and  enjoys  their  fruition,  and  who  is
disregardful  of  near  or  remote  consequences,  but  is  only
anxious  about  the  material  prosperity  of  the  kingdom, — *


KAMANDAKIYA  N1TISARA.


246


43.  One  possessed  of  these  characteristics  should  be
made  the  leader  of  an  army.  The  army  should  always,  day,
night,  be  carefully  protected  (from  evil  influence).

44.  Wherever  in  rivers,  mountains,  forests  and  difficult
regions  there  will  be  any  chance  of  danger,  the  general
should  proceed  there  with  his  army  arranged  in  due  order.

45.  The  guides  supported  by  a detachment  of  heroic
troops  should  march  in  the  van  ; the  king  and  his  camp,
and  the  treasury  solvent  or  insolvent,  should  be  in  the
middle.

46.  The  horses  should  march  in  both  the  flanks  aud
they  should  be  flanked  by  the  chariot  warriors ; these  last
again  should  be  flanked  by  elephants  whom  the  forest  tribes
should  flank.

47.  The  accomplished  general  thus  having  placed  every
body  in  the  front  should  march  slowly  in  the  rear,  arranging
the  host  of  troops,  and  breathing  comfort  to  the  wounded
and  the  weak.

48.  When  there  should  be  danger  in  the  van,  the  troops
should  be  disposed  of  in  the  Makara  (crocodile-shaped),  or
in  the  two-winged  Syena  or  (hawk-shaped),  or  in  the  Suchi
(needle-shaped)  array  and  then  marched  forward.

49.  When  there  would  be  danger  in  the  rear,  the  Sakata
(or  chariot-shaped)  array  should  be  formed  ; when  the  danger
would  , be  in  the  flanks,  the  array  called  Vajra  should  be
formed;  and  in  all  situation  the  array  known  as  Sarvato-
bhadra  that  frighten  the  enemy,  should  be  formed.

50  When  the  troops  are  fatigued  in  consequnce  of
protracted  marches  through  long  routes  and  over  hills  dales
forests  and  narrow  woody  defiles  and  through  rivers  and
river-beds,  when  they  are  afflicted  with  hunger,  thirst,  and
cold,

51.  When  they  are  harassed  with  raids  of  robbers  and
essed  with  diseases,  want  of  food  and  pestilence  and
when  on  the  route  of  march  they  get  muddy

t:  -i  'Ml  All  A • : „ ikMiA , > -


j '.i  ■ •

%■:  . •


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.  ' 247

unclean  water  for  drink,  and  when  they  become  separated
or  huddled  together,

52.  When  they  fall  deeply  asleep  and  become  busy  in
preparing  their  meal,  when  they  are  not  in  the  proper  ground
and  are  not  prepared  for  attack  ; when  they  are  afflicted
with  the  fear  of  thieves  and  fire,  and  when  they  are  over-
taken by  rain  and  storm,

53.  When  all  these  calamities  overtake  his  army,  a king
should  protect  it ; but  when  the  hostile  troops  are  overtaken
by  them,  he  should  fall  upon  them  and  annihilate  them.

54.  Having  effected  an  alienation  between  the  foe  and
his  Prakritis  and  with  the  advantages  of  the  season  and
the  soil  in  his  favour,  a king  should  fight  a pitched  battle  ;
otherwise  he  should  fight  in  underhand  ways.

53.  In  unfair  warfare,  the  foe  when  busy  in  pitching  tents
on  unfavourable  grounds,  should  be  slain  by  the  king  who  is
on  favorable  grounds;  when  a king  is  on  his  own  grounds
he  is  said  to  be  on  favourable  grounds.

56.  A king  who  is  cheerless  in  consequence  of  his
Prakritis  being  separated  from  him  should  be  slain  through
secret  agents,  foresters,  and  brave  soldiers,  who  should  em-
ploy against  him  gift  or  bribery  or  alienation.

57.  Displaying  himself  in  the  front  and  thence  having
ascertained  the  mark,  a king  should  slay  his  enemies  from
behind,  falling  upon  him  with  agile  and  heroic  troops.

58.  He  may  also  placing  the  greater  part  of  the  army
in  the  enemy's  back  (where  consequently  his  attention  will
be  drawn),  slay  this  latter  from  the  front,  falling  upon  him
with  the  best  part  of  his  troops.  In  this  way  the  flanks  also
may  be  assailed  in  unfair  warfare.

59.  If  the  ground  in  the  front  be  unfavourable,  a swift-
moving  king  should  (change  position  and)  slay  the  foe  from
behind.  A king  should  slay  his  foe  going  over  to  his  side
who  foolishly  believes  that  he  has  conquered  him.

60.  Alluring  the  troops  of  the  enemy  out  of  their  camps,


248


KAMANDAKIYA  nitisara.


villages  and  castles  into  pastures,  a cool-headed  king  should
slay  them.

61.  Concealing  the  inefficient  portion  of  the  army,  and
with  the  rest  of  it  supported  by  the  allies,  a king  should  crush
the  foe  falling  upon  him  even  like  a lion.

62.  Remaining  hidden,  a king  should  slay  his  foes  when
he  is  engaged  in  hunting ; or  he  may  slay  him  enticing  him
away  by  the  hope  of  plunder  and  then  blockading  his  route
of  return.

63.  The  troops  that  could  not  sleep  through  fear  of
being  attacked  in  the  night  and  that  have  been  worn  out
through  the  toils  of  night-keeping  should  be  assaulted  and
annihilated  on  the  day  following.

64.  A king  knowing  the  rules  of  nocturnal  attack,  should
lead  out  a night-attack  with  the  fourth  part  of  his  army,
against  the  foe  unsuspectingly  locked  in  the  arms  of  sleep.

65.  With  agile  swordsmen  inflamed  with  wrath,  a king
should  slay  the  foe  whose  eyes  are  blinded  in  consequence  of
the  sun’s  rays  falling  on  them  or  the  wind  blowing  against
them.  k . : :

66.  In  this  way,  a king  possessed  of  agility  should  slay
his  foes.

67.  Mist,  darkness,  herds  of  kine,  pits,  hillocks,  under-
woods, and  river-beds — these  indicate  the  foe,  for  they  are
the  seven  kinds  of  hiding  places.

68.  A persevering  sovereign  exerting  in  the  right
manner,  should  slay  his  foes  by  the  different  kinds  of  war-
fare, knowing  their  movements  through  the  agency  of  his
spies.

69.  Thus  always  a king  should  slay  his  foes  by  unfair-
wap  The  slaughter  of  foes  by  deceitful  measures  is  not
detrimental  to  one’s  righteousness.  The  son  of  Drona  with
his  .sharp  weapon  slew  the  troops  of  the  Pand.avas  when


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA,


249

they  were  unsuspectingly  locked  in  the  arms  of  sleep  at
night.*

Thus  end  the  eighteenth  section , the  inodes  of  war-
fare, the  movements  of  the  generals,  surprises  &*c.f  in  the
Nit sara  of  Kamandaku  ^


SECTION  XIX,


rn

l*  lo  go  in  front  in  all  marches,  to  first  enter  into
forests  and  difficult  tracts,  to  create  roads  and  passages  where
there  are  none,

2.  To  descend  into  and  swim  over  watery  expanses,  to
conquer  the  body-guards  (consitituting  a part  of  the  enemy's
army),  to  break  through  united  ranks,  and  to  gather  to  their
own  side  the  routed  troops,

3 To  ward  off  sources  of  danger,  to  break  down  walls
and  gates,  to  protect  the  treasury  and  the  uniform  adherence
to  the  policy  from  all  dangers,  these  are  the  functions  of  the
elephants.

4.  To  investigate  the  woods,  the  different  directions,
and  the  routes,  to  protect  the  supplies  of  food  and  the
supporting  troops,  to  effect  with  promptitude  the  acts  of
pursuit  and  retreat,

5.  To  approach  and  help  the  distressed  portion  of  the

* The  son  of  Drona  promised  to  Duryodhana  to  slay  the  sons  of
Fan  cun  One  night  he  went  to  their  camp  and  instead  of  slaying
the  Pandava  brothers  slew  the  five  sons  of  Draupadi  and  brought  their
heads  to  Duryodhana.  This  upset  Duryodhana  and  he  died  soon  after,

32


352


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA.


employed  together.  Foot-soldiers  should  be  employed  with
them  at  the  interval  of  one  and  horses  at  the  interval  of
three.

24.  Elephants  and  cars  should  be  placed  at  the  interval
of  five.  This  kind  of  division  is  commended  by  all  masters
of  polity.

25.  The  horses,  men  and  car-warriors  and  elephants
should  fight  in  such  a way  that  their  efforts  in  case  of  re-
treat may  be  unobstructed.

26.  When  dangerous  irregular  fight  ensues  it  should  be
fought  with  mixed  troops.  In  fierce  wars,  the  mighty  and
noble  dynasties  should  be  sought  shelter  with.

27.  Three  men  should  always  be  made  antagonists  and
an  elephant  should  a! way  be  opposed  by  five  horses.

28.  Fifteen  men  and  four  horses,  these  are  said  to  be
capable  of  withstanding  an  elephant  or  a chariot.

29.  The  weakness  of  a force  is  said  to  be  Panehachdpa
by  those  who  are  conversant  with  the  forming  of  arrays  and
are  accomplished  in  the  art  of  war-fare.

3°-  Flie  UfciS)  the  two  li.akshcts , the  two  wings,  the
centre,  the  back,  the  rear  .and  the  Kotee— these  are  the  seven
limbs  of  the  Vyuha  or  array  mentioned  by  those  conversant
with  their  nature.

31.  According  to  our  preceptor  the  Vyuha  has  the
Uras,  the  Kaksha  and  the  wings  and  the  rear  parts  only  \
according  to  Sukra  it  is  devoid  of  the  Kakshas.

32.  ‘Unalienable,  nobly-born,  pure-hearted,  accomplished
in  smiting,  sure  of  aim,  and  competent  to  fight  with  resolute-
ness, such  men  should  be  made,  leaders  of  divisions.

33.  Surrounded  by  these  heroic  and  brave  persons  a king
should  stay  on  the  field  and  should  fight  unseperably  and
protecting  one  another,-

34.  The  flower  of  the  troops  should  be  placed  in  the

centre  of  the  array  and  the  fighting  materials  should  be
placed  in  the  Jaghana.  1,  • . . , , ,

: :


: - :


it  '


■HR -.".4  ■’


KAMANDAKIYA  NITlSARA.


253


35.  The  fiercest  of  the  forces  accomplished  in  war  should
be  employed  in  the  fight.  A good  general  is  said  to  be  the
soul  of  the  battle,  and  it  is  lost  if  there  is  no  general

36.  The  Vyuha  that  infantry,  cavalry,  chariots  and  ele-
phants constitute,  one  at  the  back  of  another,  is  said  to  be
Achalcr,  that  formed  by  elephants,  horses,  cavalry,  and
infantry  is  in-capable  of  being  withstood.

37.  The  cavalry  in  the  centre,  the  chariots  in  the  two
kakshasy  the  elephants  in  the  flanks, — such  an  array  is  said
to  be  Ant  avid.

38.  In  place  of  chariots  horses  may  be  posted  and  in
place  of  horses  foot-soldiers  may  be  posted;  and  in  the
absence  of  chariots,  an  intelligent  king  should  arrange  the
elephants.

39.  The  foot-soldiers,  the  horse,  the  chariots  and  the
elephants  should  be  thrown  in  the  middle  in  divisions.  The
elephants  surrounded  by  the  infantry,  cavalry,  and  cars
should  be  placed  in  the  centre.

(Slokas  40 — 57  contain  descriptions  and  names  of  the
several  kinds  of  array  and  the  ways  of  using  them),

58.  Where  the  enemy's  troops  are  weak,  separated,  led
by  vicious  persons,  there  it  should  be  assailed — and  thus  a
king's  own  strength  should  be  added  to.

59.  The  enemy  should  be  pressed  by  doubly  strong
forces, — ^nd  he  should  be  oppoesd  when  united  together,  by
furious  detachments  of  elephants.

60.  Unconquerable  elephants  (of  the  enemy)  should  be
slain  by  elephants  besmeared  with  the  fat  of  lions  or  by
groups  of  elephants  ridden  by  brave  guides*

6t.  The  troops  of  the  enemy  should  be  slain  by  foremost
of  elephants  duly  equipped,  furious,  caparisoned  with  iron
net-works,  ridden  by  brave  warriors,  and  irisistible  in  conse-
quence of  being  in  rut.

62.  A leader  elephant  in  rut  and  possessed  of  courage,
can  slay  detachments  of  the  enemy's  troops.  The  victory  of


254


KAMANDAKIYA  NITISARA,


the  rulers  of  earth  depends  on  the  number  of  the  elephants-
Therefore  the  armies  of  the  kings  should  teem  with  elephants.
Thus  ends  the  ninteenth  Section — the  arraying  of  troops,
the  functions  of  elephants,  horses  &c,  in  the  Nitisara  op
Kamandaki.

finis.


CONTENTS.


-


Introduction,

Science  of  polity:  Its  origin:  Date:  Style  : Sources  : Moral  tone :
I he  synopsis  of  the  work.— P.  i.

Sectien  I.

Inovcation,  Description  of  a king.  His  duties.  The  constituents  of
a good  government.  The  acquirements  of  a king.  An  account  of  mind
and  other  organs.  The  dangers  of  a king.  The  danger  from  a woman.
I he  passions  that  should  be  avoided  by  a king.  The  accomplishments
of  a king. — P.  i — 15,

Section  II.

fhe  four  divisions  of  learning.  The  customary  observances.  The
duties  of  the  four  orders.  The  duties  of  a Brahmacharin.  The  duties
of  a householder.  Those  of  married  people.  Those  living  in  the  forest.
I hose  of  the  wandering  mendicants.  An  account  of  the  punishment. — *
P.  15—25.

Section-  III.

acco;  ..  of  the  pious  and  wicked  persons.  How  they  behave.
The  virtue  of  sweet-speech.  The  characteristics  of  a high-minded
man. — P.  25—30.

Section  IV.

An  account  of  the  essential  constituents  of  government  namely  king,
ministers,  kingdom,  castle,  treasury,  army  and  allies. — P.  30 — 44.

Section  V.

The  duties  of  master  and  servant. — P.  44—63.

Section  VI.

How  the  thorns  of  the  government  should  be  weeded  out.— P.  63—66.

Section  VII.

How  a king  should  protect  himself  and  his  son. — P.  67 — 81.

Section  VIII.

The  construction  and  the  account  of  Mandala. — P.  81 — 104.


Section  IX.

The  characteristics  of  peace  and  how  it  should  be  obtained,— P.
*05 — 135.


Section  X.


The  dissertation  on  war. — P.  136 — 149.


Section  XI.

How  a king  should  hold  counsels  with  his  ministers  and  their  bearing
on  good  government.-^P.  149—182,  .


Section  XII.

Rules  regarding-  embassies  and  spies. — P.  1S2 — 192.

Section  XIII.

A description  of  Vysanas  and  how  to  remedy  them.— P.  193—206.
Section  XIV.

A complete  account  of  the  seven  kinds  of  Vysanas. — P.  297 — 216.
Section  XV.

A description  of  the  military  expedition. — P.  216 — 225.

Section  XVI.

An  account  of  the  system  of  encamping. — P«  226—236.

Section  XV1L

The  use  and  employment  of  various  expedients. — P.  231—240.
Section  XVIIL

The  various  modes  of  warfare,  the  movements  of  the  generals  and
surprise. — P.  240—249.

Section  XIX.

to  a^ranSement  tr00Ps'  th®  Unctions  of  elephants  and  horses.—


.iifl
