Egypt: Descriptive, Historical, and Picturesque, Vol. 2 (Ebers, 1878)
=====================================================================
Georg Ebers — Egypt: Descriptive, Historical, and Picturesque, translated by Clara Bell, Vol. 2 (London, 1878), public domain. Scan via Internet Archive (gri_33125010533756). Raw OCR, not proofread.

ape ig PEN AEO
HS ec Toate
Suiarse zs


rat


WY YAS
OXY)
EN fe


NOY


te


YY
ONO


peichlal neel


iu gaggle dasg atte tide


rap olen ir te els le


Macy


EGY PY;


DESCRIPTIVE, HISTORICAL, AND PICTURESQUE.


FODLOOVODLPODPEDIC2IYS


ca


ALI.


MOHAMMED


KG Ae.


DESCRIPTIVE, HISTORICAL, AND PICTURESQUE.


BY


Gh BE es:


€ranslated from the Original German


BY


Cup AG AS 3 bialivlin


WITH AN INTRODUCTION AND NOTES


BY


5.) BERCEE MDC, embas cHiSeAy
per of the Department of Oriental Antiquities in


the British Museum, President of the Society of Biblical Archeology,
etc ete. ete.
Vou. II.


CASSEL Brrr e GALI Ne -& Cor
LONDON, PARIS & NEW OUR Ke


ALL RIGHTS RESERVED,]


3
+x


THE KHEDIVE TAWFEEK,


PREFACE TO VOL. II.


JOW that the second volume of this work lies finished before
me, and I once more glance over its contents, I feel irresistibly
impelled to address a few words of explanation to the reader,
for the production of such a book is a slow process, and events
crowd on each other's heels in the East with a rapidity unknown
in any other part of the world ; they have, in fact, outstripped


the publication of these pages. The man who for many lustres


governed Egypt has yielded without a blow to the decisive


interference of foreign powers; he has descended from his throne to set his son


in his place, and has been forced to quit his home and dominions as an exile, This


€


vi EGYPT.


hapless fate has not, indeed, fallen on an innocent man, for the recklessness with
which the Khedive Ismail squandered and exhausted the enormous resources of his
country led him at last to ruthlessly plundering his subjects and damaging their
best interests, to a contempt for pledges that ought to have been binding, to coups
@éat, to ignoble intrigues, to favouring worthless adventurers, and, finally, to bank-
ruptey and disgrace. And hardly was the tree—to use a bold image—felled to
sarth—the much-belauded tree, whose branches had afforded shelter and shade and
a harvest to so many of the denizens of the wood—than it was deserted by all
those who had been wont to resort to it with thanks and praise, and those very
songsters which previously had sung it the sweetest and most flattering lays were
those which now wheeled round it in its fall with the loudest shrieks and bitterest
reviling. The shade it had bestowed, the fruit it had borne, all was forgotten ;
and the verdict of its judges was so loud and stern that, at the present time even,
a thoughtful spectator of the end of the Egyptian tragedy is inclined to include
the fallen potentate among those princes of the East who, living in indolence, sloth,
and lavish self-indulgence, while squandering with heartless cruelty the sweat of the
people’s brow, pursued no aim with zeal but that of ruining themselves and their
nation. It is the duty of history to lighten the tints of this dark picture of a
fallen man.

In these pages much has been said of all that Egypt owes to this most
extravagant of her rulers; nor need I here withdraw the due meed of praise, for even
in the days of his greatest splendour and good fortune the exiled Khedive was an
indefatigable administrator, and of the millions he spent, a considerable fraction was
applied to really productive undertakings. Without his support the Suez Cana
would have remained unfinished; he constructed numerous railways, and establishec
telegraphic communication for long distances on the shores of the Nile and the
Red Sea; his additions to the network of canals cost many thousands of pounds,
as did the magnificent works in the new port of Alexandria. He devoted vas


sums to the disinterment and preservation of the monuments of antiquity, and he


constantly endeavoured to raise the standard of public education with patient gooc
sense, liberal assistance, and excellent judgment, which was displayed in his choice
of Dor Bey as head of the council of education. He even aided ‘the Christian
communities in Egypt by building schools and churches; and many scientific societies
are indebted to him for liberal pecuniary assistance, heartily bestowed.

The frontiers of Egypt were, under him, considerably extended ; forced: labour
was—at least: nominally—remitted, and actually claimed with much greater modera-


tion; slavery was suppressed with energy and determination—all this must not be


forgotten to his credit. Many of these achievements, it is true, were certainly not


PREFACE. vil


performed solely for the advance of culture and the benefit of his country, but in
order to attract the eyes of Europe, and more for the advantage of his own family
than that of his people; still it is indisputable that he did undertake them, and—
to return to the figure of speech I have already employed, and to compare him
once more to a fallen tree—these deeds were its fruit, and the exiled ruler may
demand of posterity that it shall weigh and allow for them before recording judg-
ment against him.

Great expectations have been formed of the Khedive Tawfeek, his eldest son—


as of so many young heirs to a throne—and there seems to be some foundation


for them, for all we learn of his private life from trustworthy witnesses, to whom
the Khedive Tawfeek is well known, gives us a favourable impression of his
character.

I here give the reader a short account of him, chiefly founded on information
received from Pastor Transvetter, for many years the estimable and energetic
minister of the German Protestant community in Cairo.

No member of the family of the Khedive Ismail has ever been less a subject
of report and gossip than the heir-apparent to the throne, Tawfeek, for until
within a short time he led a quiet and unobtrusive life, never appeared in public,
and consequently was not sought by the ambitious or adventurous, although the
succession was secured to him by the firman I have had occasion to mention. But
this document was never regarded as good for much, and its execution was looked upon.
as extremely doubtful. Besides this, his brothers, Hasan and Huseyn, now exiled
with their father, made much more display than he did, and many thought they
saw in them the real successors to the throne. Many were highly displeased because
Tawfeek was never sent to Europe for his education, as the others were; but in this they
were wrong, since experience has shown that young Egyptians, when transplanted to
the capitals of our more cultivated countries, generally lose their happiest natural
gifts, and gain nothing in exchange but the knack of chattering in a few languages,


a thin varnish of superficial cultivation, a t


aste for the dissipation and extravagance
of our great cities, and indifference to religious matters. Tawfeek has been pre-
served from this moral poisoning; and, nevertheless, he has acquired in Egypt, from
competent tutors, a really estimable store of knowledge in every department. He
is a cultivated man, even in the European sense of the words, and at the same
time a good Moslem. In spite of his strongly-marked Mohammedan tone of mind,
he has remained singularly free from rigid fanaticism, as is proved by the circum-
stance that he has assumed the honorary presidency of the free schools—gratuitous,
and for all denominations’"—now existing in Cairo, and founded, for the most part,


' Ecoles libres, gratuites, et universelles.


vill EGYPT.


by a Franciscan sisterhood. In this respect he has distinguished himself favourably
from his brethren by his moderation. Perfectly content with a charming country
estate, he always refused to have any splendid palace built for him, in spite of his
father’s reiterated desire, and was so disinclined for the society of the harem—the
fertile cause of ruin to many an Oriental dynasty—that up to the present time he
remains content with one wife, a woman of remarkable education for an Eastern
lady, who is even equal to the duties of superintending the education of her chil-
dren; and his domestic life is said to be a happy one. It follows from all this
that far fewer adventurers have crowded round this reserved and domestic prince


7


than round the former more splendid and extravagant nobles and rulers of Hgypt.
This speaks volumes in his favour; not less so the other fact, that he was the
first of his family to put his property at the disposal of the commission for the
discharge of his country’s obligations, when it was necessary to find means to cover
both the floating and consolidated debt. Those who know him praise the honest
and frank nature which he is said to have shown also in the late change of ministry.
We must hope that he will justify all this favourable augury, and that he may be
so happy as to overcome all the enormous difficulties and hindrances which he will
meet with on every side.

These are the last supplementary words which I desire to add to this book;
and now that it lies complete before me, and I contemplate the work of my pen,
I feel as though I had honestly accomplished my share of all I could venture to
promise, in the publisher’s name and my own, in the Preface to the First Volume.
The work—though carried through at so much cost, with so much pains, and, at
the same time, with so sincere a love for its subject—cannot but have defects
and deficiencies; still it may, on the whole, be said that it has been successfully
accomplished, since it has won the suffrages of such admirable judges of all relating
to ancient Egypt as the great Lepsius, Dr. Maspéro of Paris, and Monsieur E.
Nayille of Geneva, and of the learned Von Kremer with reference to the modern
portion.

The friendly reception accorded to it in Germany, and far beyond the frontier,
is amply proved by the fact that two editions have already been called for, and
that it is found worthy of translation into French, English, Italian, and Spanish.

I close my task with feelings of gratitude; and I must not omit to avail
myself of this opportunity of expressing my heartfelt thanks to the admirable artists
who have placed their best services at our disposal, to draw what was old and


invent what was new; to the publisher, who has made great pecuniary sacrifices,


and whose leading thought it has been to make this work worthy of its pretensions,


and to carry the artistic portion of it to the highest pitch of perfection possible ;


PREFACE. ix


and, finally, to those gentlemen to whom I owe the material assistance of contribu-
tions and information. To Dr. Goldziher I owe a valuable notice of the mosque-
university of El-Azhar; to Dr. Spitta of Hildesheim—known in Cairo as Spitta Bey
—librarian to the Khedive, an admirable essay included in the chapter on the life of
the people in Cairo; to Dr. Klunzinger, author of an interesting work on Upper
Egypt, some important information on the Arabian Desert, which he knows better
than any one. Dr. Hommel of Munich has afforded me valuable aid in establishing
an orthography for Arabic names in German; and I owe also particular acknow-
ledgments to Professor Gnauth of Nuremberg, whose artistic knowledge and instinct
has been of inestimable advantage in “delineating” the country that I have
“ described.”

With these grateful acknowledgments I close the Preface to the Second and
last Volume of my work on Egypt.

GEORG EBERS.
August, 1879.
‘ “Upper Egypt: its People and Products.” Blackie & Co.


* To these names the translator must add that of Dr. Edward Meyer, to whom she is indebted for a pains-


taking revisal of the orthography of Arabic names and words in English.


For the guidance of the reader, it may be said that the vowels are sounded as follows :—
A as in ant; ee as in seen; ey as in skein; i as in sin; oo as in boot; u as in put; y as in yet. G is


always hard.


Vou. I. B


TABLE OF CONTENTS


-—_>- 2 + @ +


THE REGENERATION OF EGYPT 5 4 é : é 0 ° : 7 : 5 : 6 . 136


The French Expedition to Egypt under Napoleon (3). Battle of the Pyramids (3). General Kleber The French Expelled by


the English; Mohammed Ali (4). Becomes Governor of Egypt; the Massacre of the Mamelukes (6). Ibrahim Pasha Conquers the Morea (9).


A Firman of Hereditary Rights is granted to Mohammed Ali in 1841 ( The Summer Palace at Shubra (11). Character of Mohammed Ali


His Mosque on the Citadel (14). His Successors, Ibrahim, Abbas, and Said, 1849— Ismail Pasha, 1863—79 (17). His Railways, Sugar-
). The


about 2,0C0 n.c.; Ismaecleeyah (23). Sunset on the Ataka Range (24). The Town of Suez; the Well of Moses (25). The Passage of the


Factories, and Canals; the Suez Canal (19). Monsieur de Lesseps; the Opening of the Canal (20). A Voyage down it (2 st Canal


elites (26). The Donkey Boys of Cairo (26). The Ezbekeeyeh Square (29). Chiteau of Ghezeereh (33). Innovations, Reforms, and


Extension of Commerce, under the Khedive Ismail (35).


THE RESURRECTION OF THE ANTIQUITIES OF EGYPT : . : : : ‘ : 37—62


Early Notices of the Antiquities of Egypt (37). Buonaparte’s E


xpedition; the Rosetta Stone, the Key to Hieroglyphics (38). Champollion
ature (42


(45). ‘The Laws of Proportion in E


and his Followers


Character of Egyptian Writing (39). Coptic; the Extent of Egyptian Lite


Ancient Egyptian Art; the
s of the


Museum at Boolak (42). Their Plastic Art (44). Head-Shaving and Wi:


ptian Art (46). Imag


Gods; a Comparison between the Art of the First and of the Later Empire-(47). Historical View of tho Eg


yptian Monuments (49). Orna-


ments (49), The Decree of Kanopus (53). Stel, Sarcophagi, and other Objects relating to the Services of the Dead (54). Papyrus Rolls (67).


The Book of the Dead (57). Magical Formula and Amulets (


Medicine, Alchemy, and Astrology (61).


THE UNIVERSITY AND MOSQUE OF EL-AZHAR c : 2 ts “ 5 : 2 63.


78


The Way to the Mosque (63). Books and Slippers; the Gate of the Barbers (64). The Interior; the Teachers and their Disciples (66).


Mode of Teaching and Lecturing (67). The Character of Mohammedan Learning (71). History of the Univ y; the Four Sects, or Rituals, of


the Mohammedan Religion (73). Details as to the Foundation, &c. (75). The Life of the Students ( Statistics of the University (78).


CAIRO: THE LIFE OF THE PEOPLE bs c E : 0 : 5 4 : 5 : . 80—132


General Account of their Customs and Manners (80). I.—The Home; Simple Exterior of the Houses
The Ka’a (


(81). The Mandaras (93). ‘The
II.—Marriage (87). The Khatbeh (87). The Dowry; the Betrothal (88). Wedding Festivities (89). The Pro-


Hareem (


cession of the Bride (90). estivities at the Bridegroom’s House (93). His Meeting with the Bride (96). III.—Burial (97). Wailing for the
Dead (97). Prayers (98). The Official Administrator (100). The Interment (102), Mohammedan Ideas as to a Future Life; Mourning Customs (103).
IV.—The Birthday of the Prophet (104). Solemn Assembly in the Kadi’s House to Fix the Duration of the Festival (105). Preparations for


105). A Walk on the First Night of the Festiva


Tents of the Officials and


al (107). The Religious Exercise known as a Zikr (109).


mitaries (112). The Dawsah, or “treading,” the End of the Festival (114). V.—Ramadan and Bairam (117). Ramadan, the Month of Fasting;
the Night in the Middle of Sha’aban (117). Procession to the House of the Kadi at the beginning of the Month (117). Festival of Little
Bairam ; Visits, Presents, and Congratulations (124). VI.—The Festival of the Pilgrimage (12
the Kaaba at Mecca (1 The Caravan with the Mahmal (126). The Start (1


of the Saceri:


Preparation of the Kisweh, or Hangings for


Worship of the Mahmal (128). Festival in Commemoration


fice of Rams at Mecca (130). The Return of the Pilgrims (131),


THE START FOR UPPER EGYPT . i 3 < z 3 5 d : 2 e é . 183—150


Different Modes of Travelling (133). Travelling in a Nile Boat, or Dahab


sh; Guides and Dr:


gomans (134). Purchasing Neces-


saries for the Journey (135). A Parting Glance at Street Life in Cairo (137). The Crowd in the Muskee (138). Feeding Cats; Shopping in
the Sooks, or Bazaars (142). A Money-Changer (144). An Excursion to the Mokattam Range and Petrified Forest (145). Geology (146). Harbour


of Booluk (148). Embarking in the Dahabeeyeh (149).


Xil EGYPT.
cide

THE TOMBS OF BENI HASAN AND THEIR TEACHINGS 7 J A ‘ ; = - 151—178
Up the Nile (169). The Quarries of Tourrah (153). Baths of Helwan; Pyramid of Meydoom (154). Excursion to the Oasis of
Fayoom (155). The Labyrinth and Lake of Moeris (156). Benisuef and Gebel et Teyr; the Khedive's Sugar Plantations; Recruiting in
Mineeyeh (160). Zaweeyel-el-Meyteen, the Cemetery of Mineeyeh (160). Bakhsheesh (161). ‘The Rock Tombs of Beni Hasan (164). Pillars
and Capitals (165). The Tombs and Pictures in them’ (169). Egyptian Culture during the XIth, XIJIth, and XIIIth Dynasties (170). Decorative

Art (175). Antinoé (178).


ON TO THEBES ‘ 5 : . : b é ‘ : Z 5 . 2 a 5 - 179—237


The Arabian Range and the Passage


e of the Straits by Aboo-Fawduh (179). The Crocodile Cave at Maabdeh (182), The Doom
Palm (183). Arrival at Siout (184). Visit to the Necropolis of the Ancient City (186). Egyptian Wolves (187). Modern Siout (189). The
Culture of the Shores of the Nile in Ancient and Modern times (190). The Revolt in Gow-el-Kebeer in 1865 (193). Shooting Wild Ducks (193).


Sohag and the Koptic Monas


(195). Monasticism in Egypt, and its Ori
Church (201). A Koptic House (2


yin (196). Arrival at Girgeh
3). Ride to the Ruins of Abydos (205). Buffaloes (206). Arabat el-Madfoonch; Earliest Mig:
Asiatics into Egypt (206). This-Abydos; the Osiris Myth (207). Temple of Abydos (211). List of Kings (215). El-Khargeh and the other


(201). Divine Service in a Koptic


ration of


Oases (217). The Libyan Desert (221). Keneh (222). The Road from Keneh to the Red Sea and Koseyr; its Importance in Trade and


to the Pilgrims (223). Dendera, its Great Temple of Hathor (224). Its Architecture (227). Festivals (230). Worship, Pictures (231), and


Inscriptions


THEBES A é 2 5 5 6 - 5 3 é 3 E i : 5 a - 239.
Ar


304
ighbours; the Fellaheen (240). The
Amon Ra (247).
yptian Trade with the Tait, called Pun-t ( Thothmes IIT.,
Pharaoh Amenophis III. (266). Temple of Luksor (269).


Statues of Memnon (271). Amenophis IV., or Khu-en-Aten (274). Hor-em-Heb, or Horus (274). ‘The Ramesside Kings and Temple at


al at Luksor; Move from the Dahabeeyeh to a Rock-Tomb at Abd-el-Kurnah (239). Our N


Extent of Ancient Thebes (242). The Necropolis, with its Graves and Temples (244). History of Thebes and its Builders (24


Mausoleum of Queen Hatasu (251), The Memnonia of the Pharaohs (254).


his Wars and his Bnildings (260). Civilisation in Western Asia in his time


Karnak (27!


House of Seti (277). Rameses II.


78). The Ramesseum (280). The Literature of his Age (283). His other Buildings; Rock
Rameses IIL; Medinet Haboo (286). Allia


against Rameses IIT. (289). Coronation and “Feast of Steps” (290). Wealth and Splendour of Rameses IIT. (293)


Temple at Aboo Simbel (284). Menephtah and his Successc ce of the Nations of the Mediterranean


). Excursion to the Kings
»s IIL. (300). Tomb of Rameses VI. (301). History of the XXIst
and XXIInd Dynasties (Bubastides), and of the Zithiopian Dynasty which succeeded to them (302). Latest History of Thebes, and its ultimate
Decay (303).


Tombs (294). The Tomb of Seti, or Belzoni’s Tomb (300). Tomb of Rames


FROM THEBES TO THE CATARACT : , é a ‘ 5 2 5 i é 5 - 3805—375

Hermonthis (306). Esneh and the Village of el-Kab (307). Ruins of the Hall of Columns (308), Singers and Dancers of Esneh (311).
Almis, a Famous Singer (314). Across the Nile to el-Kab, the Ancient Nekheb(317). ‘The Eastern Range; the Tombs of el-Kab (318). The
Moon-Goddess, Nekheb, and her Worship (320). On to Edfoo (321).
Gebel Silsileh (829). ‘The Stelae, with Hymns to the Nile (331). The Tribe of Ababdch (831). Geological and Physical Character of the
Range, on the Eastern Side, dividing the Arabian Desert and Nile Valley in the Fast (333). Ancient Roads and Passes to the Red Sea, and
thence to Arabia and India; Wadee Hamamat (Rohanu); Quarries there (335). Emerald and Gold Mines (339). Inhabitants of the Desert (341).
The Nubian Nile; Kom Omboo (343). The Ancient Nubi (343). Assouan (346). The Scenery near ne (346). The
Shadowless Well (349). The Modern Town and its Inhabitants (351). Island of Hlephantine (3:


Mausoleums in the Desert (354). Syenite and the Ancient Granite Qu: (856). Ancient W


‘emplo of Horus (328). Strife between Horus and Seth-Typhon (325).


jouan, the Ancient Sy


). Its Southern Declivity (3
all of Bricks (357). Philae and the First
Cataract (359). Villages of Shellal and Mahada; Islands of the Cataract (362). Philae and its Charm (363). Worship of Isis (364). Buildings
and Temples (364). Island of Bigeh (374). Conclusion (375).


3). Tombs and


List oF ARTISTS EMPLOYED IN THIS VOLUME.


BERNINGER, E.
BRUNE, E.
BURGER, Lupwie.
DILLON, Frank.
FIEDLER, Bernuarp.
FRERE, Tu.
GENTZ, Witneth.
GENTZ, Ismazt.

Dr GIRONDE.
HECHT, Witeerm.


HILDEBRANDT, Epwarp.


HOFELICH, L.


2 +2 <_


HUBER, C. Ropotr.
JERICHAU-BAUMANN.
KORNER, Erysr.
KRETZSCHMER, Herm.
KUHN, Gusrav.
LENBACH, Franz.
LORIE, Victor.
MACHYTKA, Hans.
MAKART, Hays.
MULLER, Leop. Cart.
NEUBERT, L.


PORTAELS, J.
RAMSTHAL, Aveusr.
RICHTER, Gustav.
SCHMORANZ, F:
SCHONN, Ators.
SEEL, Anotr.
STRASSBERGER, B.
SWOBODA, R.
TADEMA, L. Atma.
WEIDENBACH, E.
WELSCH, F. C.
WERNER, Cant.


Mohammed Ali

The Khedive Tawfeek

Ornament from a Koran of the time of Scha’aban (from a MS. in the Vice-regal Library
at Cairo .

A Mameluke in Full Armour

Near Gizeh, between the Nile and the Pyramids

Ss


atue of General Kleber at Strasburg


Albanian Mercenaries
The Mameluke’s Leap
Scene of the Mameluke’s Leap .
A Gardener’s Boy


The Avenue at Shoobra


Pavilion in the Garden of Shoobra
1e Dam of the Nile, called the Barrage
Court of the Mosque of Mohammed Ali in the Citadel


iz


Chamber in the Mustaffir Khana, in which the Ex-Khedive Ismail was born .

The Citadel of Cairo, from the Nile .

The Egyptian Boys’ Sugar-stick

Telegraph Wires in the Desert .

Portrait of Monsieur de Lesseps

Among the Reeds by the River b 4 Z : 5 S . : : ss 7
The “Suez Canal” of Seti I, (from a Bas-Relief on the North Wall of the Temple of
Karnak, Thebes)


Farm at Ismaileeyeh


The Ataka Mountains

Street in Suez

Arab Shoeblacks

The Well of Moses

Donkey Boys and Foreigners

Shephard’s Hotel

The Trespasser Punished

Hasan the Donkey Boy

Mohammed Selim, Kawass of the Austrian Consulate
Old Aqueduct


The Chateau of Ghezeereh .


By


PAGE


J. F. Porrarts rontispiece


G. Ktun


v
R. Hurustemer To face p. 1
WILHELM Gr 2
Ernst Kirner 3
Gustav Kin 4
WILHELM GENTZ
C. Rupotr Huser 7
t K6ORNER 8
Lropotp Carn MULiEr 9
C. Rupotr Hur 0
B. Nal
12h B
B. 14
ApoLr GNAUTH 15
Ernst Kirner 16
Leopotp Carn MU.ier if
WILHELM GENTZ 8
Gustav Ktun 9
HSCs Wi 20
3, STRASSBERGER 21
F. C. WEtLscH 21
Ernst Korner 22
EF. C, WeEtscH 23
Leorotp Cart Mier 24


F. CO. Wetscu

C. Ruporr Huser
B. SrRASSBERGER

©. Rupotr Huser
Gustav RicHTER
Herm. KrerzscuMer


BERNHARD FIEDLER


B, SrRAssBERGER


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. XV


PAGE
Kiosk in the Chateau of Ghezeereh . : 4 3 : 3 c ‘ . By B. SrrassBerGer 33
The Khedive Ismail’s Country Drive é ‘ é A ° . 5, ©. Ruporr Huser 34
‘View on the Suez Canal . : 5 ; s 5 : - ‘ . 4, ADOLF GNAUTH 36
Slave Market . 2 ; : E . a cs - 3 , ; » H. Krerzscumer To face p. 36
Ancient Egyptian Necklace 4 : ‘4 5 : 4 > é 5 . 5 ApboLF GNAUTH 37
Sacrificial Vessel of Bronze 5 2 : P : " 4 ; : . 5, ADoLF GNAUTH 37
Frangois Champollion < : 3 e 2 : 6 ‘ 5 : 8 . » Gustav Kian 39
Court of the Museum of Antiquities at Boolak 3 5 & c “ , 3 . 4, WILHELM GENTZ 40
The Sheykh-el-Beled . d : : A ‘ ? ‘ 5 : é . » B. SrRAssBERGER 42
Wooden Statue from Sakkarah . 7" ‘ 3 4 P : ; » AvuGust RAMSTHAL 43
A Married Couple, Ra-hotep and the Lady Nefert, from Medoum . - 5 5 . ,, Aveust RamsTHaL 43
Shaving Small Boys in Cairo. . z , ‘ % : : A 5 ? . » WILHELM Gentz 44
Old Egyptian Lady’s Wig in the British Museum . 3 5 : 5 . » B, SrrassBercer 47
Wood Carving in Relief from Sakkarah . 5 : 5 ns 5 : . 5, B. Srrasspercer 48
Representation of Geese in Relief from Sakkarah : : . G - ‘ . 5, ADoLF GNAUTH 48
Lion, in Bronze 5 ‘ A : : : : a 7 ' 6 . 4, B. SrrassBeRGER 48
Old Egyptian Representation of the Making of Two Statues and a Sphinx. » WEIDENBACH 49
Amon and Osiris r : E 5 F 3 zi é ; : ; . 5, Auveust RamMstTHAL 49
Composite Figure of the Later Empire . * ‘ f A 3 : . 5, B. SrrassBERGER 49
Portraits from Likenesses of the Times of the Pharaohs . = é F é ° - 4, Lupwie BurcEr 50
War Axe and Dagger of the Queen Aah-hotep 5 © A Pi : f - 4, WEIDENBACH 51
Gold Boat with Silver Rowers . é é - % s és . 5 A a - 5, 3B. STRASSBERGER
Meneptah . ; 5 6 4 : 2 . a 4 c = : é 5 . ,»  Avcust RamstHAL
Ra-hotep é 4 A 4 3 5 : . 5, Avueust RamsTHaAL
Head of Taharka, the Ethiopian A r ; i a 6 5 fi : : . 5 Auveust RAamMsTHAL Sy
The Queen Ameniritis ey : : <j ; . 2 3 . 5 . 5, Auveust RamstHaL 53)
Hathor, as a Cow. 3 3 3 é é y é : ‘ 2 , A . 4 Aucust RamsTHaL 54
Isis . ‘ 4 ‘ - 4 ; F . fs 5 3 $ & . , Aveust RamsrHan 54
Osiris P : é 3 é é é ci . : E 5 Gg . 5, Auveust RamsTHaL 54
A Mummy Case rl $ z 3 . : : B : 3 A : 4 . 4 Auveust RamMsTHAL 55
Toilet Vases 5 ° ” 5 4 s : . : A ‘ . 5 Aveust RamsTHaL 55
Kanopus (Sepulchral) Vase, with Human Head ; : j 5 . : . » Auaust RAMSTHAL 55
Ointment Vase, with Monkey : j » B. SrRASsBERGER
Necklace with Scarabeus (Title of Thothmes IIL.) . 4 5 s . A . »5, Aueust RamsrHan 56
Box and Board for Draughts  . ; ; F 2 3 é 3 d 4 . 5, B. SrrassBeRGER 56
Shebti, or Sepulchral Figure. : i 3 : a A , 4 . - 5, B. SrTRAssSBERGER
Mummied Ibis . ; 7 3 é i a 5 7 5 - 3 . 5, B, SrRASsBERGER 56
Tibisiaee é é fi ¢ 2 5 . 5 $ 5 8 ‘ 5 : . 5 3B, SrRassBERGER 57
Thoth and Safekh (Goddess of History) writing the Name of Rameses II. on the Fruit

of the Persea . é ° 5 ri 2 B 3 f ‘ 4 : . 4, B. SrrassBercEr 57
Palettes. 5 . : 4 ‘ 5 _ 2 3 j 5 é - . 5, B. SrrassBeRGER 57
Representation of the Egyptian Judgment of the Dead . 6 : 4 5 3 sf) 3IDENBACH 58
Horus on the Crocodiles . : é é 3 3 5 p 5 : F ass 7 RAMSTHAL 59
Chiromancy i \ ‘ ‘ ¥ : 4 = i 3 a 5 , : . 5, Leopotp Cart MULier 60
Portrait, Statue, and Relief of Amenophis IV. : 5 5 2 ‘ : . ,, Lupwic BurcEer 61
Banks of the Nile . . : c : : 5 , 5 : é : a fe eAoe me bates 62
Entrance to the Khan el Khalil 3 3 3 : ‘i n é ‘ 3 : + 9, CARL WERNER To face p. 62
An Ornament from the Title-page of a MS. of the Koran in the Viceregal Library, Cairo ,, H. F. Batprncrr 63
Initial Letter “I.” From the same : 5 : a i y : i ‘ » G. THEUERKAUF 63
Public Letter Writers c 4 é 2 P < : 5 3 : “ . 5, ©. Rupotr Huser 64
Gate of Pottage, Mosque of el-Azhar < é ‘ ‘ F : : F - 5, CARL WERNER 65


Xvi


Ornament of the Title-page of an old MS. of the Koran in the Library of the Viceroy,


Cairo
A Learned Cairene
Lecture in the Mosque of. el-Azhar


Mosque of Werdanee .


Title-page of a MS. of the Koran of the time of Sultan el-Moyad (a.p.


the Viceregal Library of Caire


Title-page of a MS. of the Koran of the time of Sultan Sha’aban (A.D.


the Vicer
Recess in the Ka’a of the Sheykh el-Mahdee


Mandara of the Muftee (Sheykh el-Mahdee)


¥


gal Library of Cairo


Aisha


Well of a House

Elephant Over the Door of a House
Open Hall in an Old Mameluke Palace at Cairo
Plan of an Arab House in Cairo
Ka’ah in the Harem of Sheykh Sadat
Mr. Frank Dillon’s Studio.

Father’s Darling

The Khatbeh

Cairene Maiden

Entrance to a Bath for Women
Pastime in the Harem

Bridal Procession

A Water Carrier

Arab Metal Utensils


Interior of an Eastern Bath


Aisha’s Younger Sister

Street in Cairo .

Lamentation for the Dead (Ancient Egyptian) .
Lane in Cairo

Bewailing the Dead


‘ion.


Funeral Pro


Blind Singers, from the Representation of an Old Egyptian Tomb


Female Mourner:
A Street and Mosque

Distribution of Dates in a Cemetery at Cairo .
Court and House of the Kadi .

Snake Charmer . z d : 3

A Lady of Rank Driving Out after Sunset
Sais

Father and Son

Zikr with Inclinations

Ziky with Whirls

Dervish Eating Scorpions

Tent of a Dignitary .


The Dawsah or Treading . 5


The Night of the Ramadan—The Hour of Prayer


The Watchers
The Mesahhar


1412—1421), in


1366—1377), in


s, from a Representation in the Grave of Ptah-hotep at Thebes


”


”


»


”


”


”


”


”


»


”


”


”


”


”


»


”


”


”


PAGE
3y H. F. Barpincer 66
Axots Scuénn 67
Cart WERNER 68
ADOLF GNAUTH 70
F. Reiss 72
H. F. Batpincer 74
Frank Dinion 76
Frank Ditton 79
(Gusray RicuTer and) 30
me §
(Apotr GNAUTH i)
Leorpotp Carn MULirr 81
C. Rupotr Huser 82
Frank Ditton 82
Apotr GNAUTH 83
Frank DInion 84
Aveust RaMsTHAL 85
IsmarL GEntz 86
TsmarL GEnvTzZ &8&
Lrorotp Cart Mier 89
Lrorotp Cart MULLER 90
Dr GrRONDE Qt
WILHELM GENTZ 92
Gustav RicHTrer 93
ApoLr GNAUTH 93
ADoLF SEEL To fuce p. 94
Gustay RicHTER 94
BernHarp FIEDLER 95
saust RamsrHan 97
Cart WERNER 98
WILHELM GE 99
WILHELM GE 100
Avausr Ras 101
Aveust RamstHaL 01
Car~L WERNER 02
WILHELM GENTZ = 10 face p. 103
Frank Ditton 04
Herm. KrerzscoMer 05
C. Rupotr Huser 106
Gustav RicHTER 08
Lrorotp Cart MULLER 09
C. Rupotr Huser 110
C. Rupotr Huser iit
WILHELM GENTZ 112
WILHELM GENTZ 113
C. Rupotr Huser 15
Wituerm Gentz 118
Franz Lenpacn 19


”


”


IsmaEL GunTz


LIST OF


An Eating House
Arabian Pantry

A Provincial Coffee
The Pilgrims’ Place of Meeting


A Family and their Guests Waiting for the Mahmal


House


The Return of the Pilgrims


Suburb at the Bab-en-Nasr

Waiting for the Pilgrim Ship near Suez
Cairene Milkman

Jewish Money Changer

Orange Seller

A. Jew of Cairo

Cobbler

Itinerant Dealer

The First Camel Ride

The Road to the Petrified Forest


Petrified Wood


ILLUSTRATIONS.
By


Fossil Shell Fish »
Limestone with Shells ”
Window near Cairo »
Harbour of Boolak ”
Abyssinian Slave Girl ”
Ahmed-Aboo Nabboot, the Dragoman Fe
The Tombs of Beni Hasan ”
Cairo from the Left Bank of the Nile »
Tourah Pa
The Pyramid of Meydoom . »
Ruins of the Labyrinth and its Pyramid 3
Flour Dealing at Beni Suef a
Sugar Cane Harvest %
A Bath House

Gebel el Teyr Ie ,
Keeruiting under Mohammed Ali A
A Fellah Ploughing "9
Entrance of Tomb at Beni Hasan ”
The Valley of the Nile at Beni Hasan

Polygonal Columns at Beni Hasan 9
Lotos Column : a
Calix Column at the Ramesseum ”
Papyrus Column ”
Plant Type Capital »
Portico of the Tomb of the Monarch Ameni at Beni Hasan 9
Colonnade from Medamot at Thebes %
Herd of Cattle brought before their Owner. (From an Egyptian Tomb) 5 Sy)
Semites entering into the Nome of Mah . ”
Hoeing of the Soil, Ploughing, and Reaping with the Sickle . 5 ? MES
Women Weaving and Washing, with their Overseers
Mural Ornaments from an Old Egyptian Sepulchral Chamber 5p
Coloured Mural Ornament from a Grave at Sakkarah % on
Sculptured Pillar from the Temple of Karnak i)
Playing at Ball . ”


Vor, IL. C


BernuarD FIEDLER
Cart WERNER


Herm. Kr


SCHMER
LeopotD Cart MULLER


WiLHELM GEN


Lropotp Cart Mtiirr
BERNHARD FIepLEr
Witnetm Gentz

C. Rupotr Huser

C. Rupotr Huser
Lrorotp Cart Miirr
IsMAEL Gruntz

C. Rupotr Huser
Winer Heour

C. Rupotr Huser
BERNHARD FIEDLER

B. STRASSBERGER

B. SrRASSBERGER

B. SrRassBERGER

C. Rupotr Huser


WitLHELM GEN


WA


WILHELM GENTZ


Gustav RicHTEr — 7o fuce p.


BerNnHarD Finpier
Ernst Korner

Ernst Korner

W EIDENBACH

B. STRASSBERGER
Lreovotp Cart MUvier
EK. Bernrncer
HK. Brernincer
WILHELM GENTZ — 1o fave p.
WILHELM GENTZ

C. Rupotr Huser
BERNHARD FrEpLer

Ernst Korner


B. Srrass


3ERGER
B, SrRAssBERGER
B, SrRASsBERGER
B. SrRassBERGER


B. Srrass


3ERGER
BERNHARD FIEDLER
Cart WERNER
Avueust RamsriaL
EK. WerIDENBACH
E.


EK. Werrpensacu


B. SvrRassBERGER
B, SrrassBeRGER
B. SrRASSBERGER


WEIDENBACH


XVili EGYPT.


Valley of the Speos Artemidos .

The Grotto of Artemis (Speos Artemidos)
Head of Antinous

Crocodiles Napping

Eagle and Jackals

Manfaloot

Gebel Aboo Fawdah .

Crocodile over Door of a House

Jate and Doom Palms

A Court at Siout

Before the Gates of the Town . é . ° . :
Egyptian Wolf (Deeb) : j 3 4 p 3 ‘ :
Siout

Midday Prayer in Siout

Threshing Sled .

Village in Upper Egypt
Young Wife of a Fellah


Palm and Sycamore:
A Seller of Turkeys
ellah Baby and its Watcher


Teads of Rebels


Sohag .
Deserted Koptic Monastery near Assouan. b F :
Girgeh .
Writing Room at Gizeh

Koptic Woman 5 A


Interior of a Koptic Church

Riding Ass

Pigeons Drinking Fe 3
Buffaloes Watered in the Nile . P 3 “ ‘
Rubbish Bearer .

Isis, Osiris, and Horus

Great Hall of Abydos

Bank of the Nile in the Neighbourhood of Abydos

Plan of the Temple of Osiris

Seti I. offering Incense and a Libation


Forecourt with Pillars of the Temple at Abydos


Table of Kings at Abydos.
Camel Market


Group of Gazelles


A Spring in the Desert
The Min
Hoo


Fellaheen Riding to Market


ge


A Gipsy Tent
A Seller of Pottery
Fellah Ferry between Keneh and Dendera


Landed Proprietor Returning from a Pilgrim


Ground Plan of Dendera
Ground Plan of Edfoo


Gate with Propylon


Thinnest and thickest of the Trees of the Nile Valley


Lupwie Bureer


C. Rupotr Huser
F. C. Wetscu


BRNHARD FIEDLER


Erxst Korner
Leopotp Cart MU Lier
Ernst KURNER

Cart WERNER
Bernuarp FIEpLeER

C. Rupotr Huser
1h NW


WILHELM. GENTZ


LSCH


C. Rupotr Huser


WILHELM GED
C. Rupotr Huser
WILHELM GENTZ
Hans Makarr To. fuce p
WILHELM GENTZ
WitHeitm GENTZ
Ernst KGrNER
3ERNHARD FIEDLER

F. C. Wetscr

Cart WERNER

Gustav Ricurer*
Bernard Frepier
Epwarp Hitprpranpr
WiLHerm Gentz


WitHELmM GENTzZ


Gustay RicHTER
WEIDENBACH
WEIDENBACH

Cart WERNER
WEIDENBACH

B, SrrassBERGER

B. SrrassperGer
WEIDENBACH

Leorotp Carn MULLER
C. Ruporr Huser


E. Berni


E. Berniycer

Tu. Frere

C. Rupotr Huser
Leororp Cart MiLirr
JERICHAU-BAUMANN

©. Rupotr Huser


©. Rupotr Huser 70 face y


WEIDENBACH


WEIDENBACH


Z% To face p.


LIST OF


Propylon at Dendera

Great Court of Heaven, Dendera

Mamisi, or Place of Birth of Dendera
Sistrum

Cleopatra, from a Greek Coin

Cleopatra, from an Egyptian Representation
Cleopatra

Lion of Dendera

Figures from an Egyptian List of Districts or Nomes
A Water Wheel

Koornah

The Nile near Thebes

Donkey Boys of Thebes

The Street Door Key of the Fellaheen
VallaceeDocs

Mohammed, a Boy of Abd-el-Kurnah


Tourists


Grand Plan of the Principal Group of the Great Temple


Transport of Stone
Sanctuary in the Great Temple of Karnak


The Horse in the Heat of Battle


ILLUSTRATIONS.


of Karnak


Four-horse Chariot of a Private Person, from Abd-el-Kumah . 5


The Obelisks in the Oldest Part of Karnak
sal of Thothmes II. .


Christian Tower at Deyr-el-Bahree

Old Egyptian Representation of a Party

The Last Honours

Ancient Egyptian Dancing Girl

Dependants bringing in the Produce of the Land
Temple of Deyr-el-Bahree (Imaginary Restoration)
Ship of Hatasu Laden with Produce from Pun-t

Fish of the Red Sea, from the Deyr-el-Bahree .

Huts Built on Piles in Punt

A Fellah Woman of Karnak

Inverted Calix Capital

The South Pylon and Sacred Lake of Karnak .


Prisoners of War en


Finger Ring
Earrings

A Tray for Rings
Mirror

Comb


Piece of a Corselet with Plate Armour


Ruins of the Temple of Amada in Nub


raged on the Buildings of Thothmes IIT. .


A Dealer in Antiquities on the Road from Luksor to Karnak .


Congress of Cats in the Sun
The French Quarter in the Temple of Luksor .


Christian Place of Worship in the Temple of Luksor


Nursery for Chickens and Children in the Ruins of Luksor


Figures of Sekhet at the Temple of Mut, Karnak


The Statue of Memnon and its Companion at the time of High Nile


y Bernuarp FrepLer


B


BERNHARD FIEDLER


NHARD FIEDLER


WEIDENBACH
F. C. Wetscu
F.C. Weiscu


Hans Maxarr


B, SrrassBerGer
WEIDENBACH


Herm. Krev:


3CHMER


BrerNHARD FIEDLER


Epwarp HinpEBraNnpT


F.C. Wi


oH


Leoporp Cart MiLLer


C, Rupotr Huser
Gustav RicuTer
©. Rupotr Huser


B. SrrRASsBERGER


Rupotr Huser
B, SrrassBeRGER

Avucust RamsTHan
Avucust RaMsTHAL


B. SrrassBerc


B. Srrass


ERGER
Ernst KOrNER
B, SrrAssBERGER
Atma TapEMA
Hans Makarr


Avuaust RaMsTtHAL


WEIDENBACH
WELDENBACH
WEIDENBACH
Gustay RicHTEer
B, SrrassBeRGER
BERNHARD FIEDLER
WEIDENBACH
Avucust RamstHaL
Aveust RamsTHau
3, STRASSBERGER
Aveust Ramsruan
Aucust RamsTHAL
Avucust RamsTHaL
4. NEu


Cart WERNER


aRT


WILHELM GENTZ

3ERNHARD FIEDLER
3ERNHARD FIEDLER
Herm. KrerzscuMer


Cart WERNER


L. Horenice


To face p.


To fuce p. 267


SOR EGYPT.


Statue of Amenophis IV., Khuenaten é : ‘ é
Sphinx at Karnak

Great Hall of Pillars at Karnak

Queen Tuaa Fs
Forecourt and Entrance of the House of Seti (Temple of Kurnah) .
Plan of the Ramesseum


Ruins of the Ramesseum


A Battle, from the Ramesseum .


Bust, from the amescera

Pylons and Obelisk of Rameses IL. at Luksor .

Head of Queen Aahmes Nefertari, from Aboo Simbel

Village of Karnak

Plan of the Temple of Medinet Haboo

Interior of the so-called Pavilion in the Temple of Medinet Haboo
Court with Remains of a Christian Church at Medinet Haboo
Snake Charmer in the Second Court of Medinet Haboo

Begging Dervish

Egyptian Bats 7 5 2

A Water Carrier from Abd-el-Kurnah

Entrance to the Valley of the Tombs of the Kings .
Entrance of a King’s Tomb in Biban-el-Mulook

Plan of the Tomb of Seti J.

Menephtah

Arm-chairs (represented in the Tomb of Rameses III.)


Sarcophagus in the Tomb of Rameses VI.


Sheshank (Shishak) Holding his Enemies by the Hair (from the Hall of


Column in the Great Court of Karnak

Interior of the so-called Temple of Ape-t at Karnak

Shepherd at Karnak

Voyage to the Nekropolis .

A Nile Landscape

Huts of Fellaheen Roofed with Pots

Temple of Hermonthis

Dog, at Erment

Boy, at Esneh

In the Bazaar of Esneh -
Pillared Hall of Esneh  . : : : :
Market at Esneh

Village Dancers


Almas, a Distinguished Singer


Dance in the Ruins of Karnak 7 :
Village Musicians 5 5
A Swing . ¢ ‘ 3 = - : z 6


A Tilt, or Roundabout

Fellah Boy from el-Kab_ . 5 2 . fs A

Fellaheen at Meals

Fellah of el-Kab 3 - z ‘ 4 : 5 °


Tomb of a Sheykh


Coin of Berenike z 3 i ; 5
Plan of Edfoo
Temple of Edfco : : é 4 : 5 a :


the Bubastides)


By Aucust RAMsTHAL
BERNHARD FIEDLER
BERNHARD FYEDILER
, Lupwie Burcer
BERNHARD FIEDLER
» L. NEuBERT

L. NEUBERT
WHEIDENBACH
Avuaust RaMsTHaL


» BERNHARD FIEDLER


5, WILHELM GENTZ
» ©. Rupotr Husrr
E. WEIDENBACH


» CARL WERNER


» CARL WERNER


» WitnEetm Gentz

» ©. Ruvotr HuBer
,» Auveust RamsTHau
» BERNHARD FIEDLER
» CARL WERNER

» BERNHARD FIEDLER
>» WEIDENBACH

» Lupwieg Burcer

» B, SrrassBERGER

» BERNHARD FIEDLER
» W2EIDENBACH

» Bernwarp FiepLer
» CARL WERNER


» Ernst Kor


oR

» Lupwic Burcer

» Bernuarp Frepier
» WILHELM GENTZ


», BERNHARD FIEDLER


To face p. 2


,, Cart Ruvotr Huser


» Gustav RicwTEer

F. C. Wetscu

», CARL WERNER
Cart WERNER

» ©. Ruporr Huser

» Victor Lorie

a


» J. F. Porrarts


» Gustav RIcHTeR
» BR. Swopopa

>» R. Sworopa

» Gustay RicuTer
» ©. Rupotr Huser
5, Gustav RIcHTer
» FE, ©. WeELscn

;» Lupwic Burcer


> WEIDENBACH


» Cart WERNER


LIST


Egyptian Sparrow-Hawk

Winged Solar Disc

Old Egyptian Musicians

Reading the Koran in an Ancient Temple
Corn Barge

Gipsy Woman of Ghawazee

The Nile Tablets at Gebel Silsileh

The Narrowest Part of the River at Gebel Silsileh .
Fellah Woman

Ac


cia of the Desert (Acacia Seyal)
Gazelles

On the Shores of the Red Sea .

Transport of a Colossus, from a Tomb at el Bersheh
Camel Rider

The Camel and its Double 7
Village near Assouan, on the Border of the Desert
Ababdeh Arab

On the Bank of the Nile

Going to fetch Water

Temple of Kom Omboo

Coin of Cleopatra Tryphaena

Bank of the Nile at


Port of Assouan


Kom Omboo
Flower Spray of the Date Palm
Bazaar at Assouan
Hashim, a Native of Assouan
Dancing Ape

Our Nubian Servant Mahommed Saleh
Nubian Official

The God Khnum

Coffee House

Nubian Boy of Good Family
Mausoleum in the Desert, near Assouan


An Unfinished Obelis


An Abyssinian
Mosque Tomb near Assouan
Assouan and Philae


In the Desert between


The F


irst Cataract
Nubian Swimming on a Bundle of Reeds


Wandering Huckster .


Village between Assouan and Philae
Philae

Cow of Isis : :

The Kiosk on the Island of Philae


Koptie Woman going to Church


Rock Temple of Girsheh


zade of the Rock Temple of Aboo Simbel
Plan of the Island of Philae
Peristyle of the Temple of Isis in the Island of Phi


Capital with Foliage


Capital with Masks of Hathor .


OF


lae


ILLUSTRATIONS.


Aveust RamstHaL


Aveust RamsrHau


Aveust RamsrHan
WILHELM Grentz
©. Rupotr Huser 327


Gustav RIcHTEr

BERNHARD FIEDLER 330
Gustay RicuTEr 330
Gustav RicHTEr 332
B. SrrassBerGER 333


Leorotp Cart Mtiier


Ernst Korner To face p. 38
WEIDENBACH
Gustav RicHTER


Leorotp Cart Micrer


HARD FIEDLER

av RicHrer 339
F. C. Wetscr 340
BERNHARD FIEDLER 341


Cart WERNER To fuce p.
Lupwie Burcer 343
Kp. Hitpepranpr

BERNHARD FIEDLER 344
B. Srrasst aR 346
BERNHARD FIEDLER 347
Anois ScHunn 348
B. Swosopa 349
AvGt RAMSTHAL 349


Gustav Ricutrer


AvGust RAMsTHAL


Lrorotp Cart Mitier 351
IsMAEL GENTZ 352


BrernuarD FIEpLer


BERNHARD FIEDLER
Axois ScHONN

Bernuard FIEpLEr
BERNHARD FIEDLER


Brernuarp Frepier


C. Rupotr Huser
Lrorotp Carn MUtxirr


BERNHARD FIEpLER


Bernwarpd Frepier


Avcust RAMsTHAL
BERNHARD FIEDLER 7 fue
Gustav RicHTER


L. News:


Cart WERNER
W EIDENBACH


WERNER


TRASSBERGER 369


B, STRASSBERGER


an | xxii EGYPT.


, Coin of Ptolemy Philometor ‘ - : F 2 . By Lupwia BurcEr 369


Ismael, the Nubian . : ‘ : ; P . 5, IsMAEL GENTZ 370


Thoth ‘ E 3 * : é 2 . q : . ,, B. SrrRAssBERGER 370
From the Temple of Isis at Philae . $ = Z . 3, CARL WERNER 371
Coin of Ptolemy Philopator F : d : ’ ;, Lupwic BurGcERr 372
Temple of Kardasseh in Nubia : : : : ‘ : » L. NEvBERT 372
Le Island of Bigeh 2 4 : 3 i ‘ n A . 5, Bernwarp Friepier 373
m Ruins of a Koptic Monastery near Philae 3 : Z : : . 7 - » FE. C. Watsce 374


wi


i


oT


ZN


As ING


DW AN A


A |
|
) |
|
a
om ||
my |||
|
i |
| | .
“~
+e Wa
<i |
ny |}
q | |
A |
til
at |
HHH
>| 1)
til
a iil
> Bi


NEN ON ENARE NON IED


WARS


ORNAMENT FROM A KORAN OF THE TIME OF SCHA’ABAN.
(From a MS. in the Vice-regal Library at Cairo.)


THE REGENERATION
OF EGYPT.


ae


EJECTION and loss of freedom could
not avail to quell the most warlike of


peoples, and when the French army,
under Buonaparte, made its adventurous
attempt on Egypt, the love of military
glory prompted them to forget their
bondage and to turn their thoughts to


glory, and was he thinking


fresh deeds of arms. Long before this
date Leibnitz, in a very ample memorial addressed to
Louis XIV., had enlarged on the idea of taking pos-
session of Egypt, and Buonaparte obtained the consent
of the Directoire for this project by convincingly showing
them that the power of England would be most
effectually combated on African soil, and that France,
if once in command of the Nile Valley, would find it
easy to hamper the British trade with India, and to
conquer that peninsula. And how dazzling must the
boldness and novelty of this enterprise have appeared
to the soaring ambition of the young general, who is
said to have declared, before the French fleet sailed
from Toulon, in May, 1798, that a great name was only
to be won in the East. Was Europe too narrow for his
of the Great Alexander, whose deeds are as memorable


as his own from East to West? It is certain that he was following the example


of the Macedonian king when he organised a body of more than a hundred artists


b


2 EGYPT.


and savants to accompany his invading army to Egypt. This band of students—admir-

: ably selected representatives
ie ; of almost every branch of
science—earned for their
nation the right to boast of
the Egyptian invasion as a
great and productive enter-
prise, solely through their
own indefatigable and de-
yoted energy, which was


crowned by the fullest suc-
cess. It was they who once
more brought to light the
cradle of human culture, after
long centuries of oblivion,
and by their great work,
well-known by the name of
“Description de IEgypte,”
they taught us to retrace the
history of the human race,
and opened out new paths
of research and new roads
to the intercourse of nations.

The Republican fleet
sailed from Toulon, ~-but its
destination was a profound
and well-kept secret. On the
2nd of July it reached Alex-
andria, and only nineteen
days later the famous battle
of the Pyramids had changed the destinies of Egypt. We have seen how deplorable
was the condition of the country at that time, drained by the greed of the Turkish
Pacha and the Mameluke Beys; its population, which at the present day has again


A MAMELUKE IN FULL ARMOUR.


THE REGENERATION OF EGYPT. 3


doubled, was reduced to two and a half millions of souls. Nevertheless the French
found they had no light task before them, for the Governors at that time—Ibraheem
and Murad Bey—more particularly the latter, at the head of a force greatly
outnumbering the French, fought with a chivalrous and heroic valour which won
them the sympathy of many of the European nations. But the stormy attacks
of the swift and splendid Mameluke cavalry were of no avail against the
strategic genius of the Corsican and the stolid strength of the French battalions.
The Republican regiments decided the fate of Egypt (as the Fatimide army of Djauhar


NEAR GIZEH, BETWEEN THE NILE AND THE PYRAMIDS.


had done so long before) not far from Gizeh, between the Nile and the Pyramids
—those Pyramids within sight of which it is said the general addressed his troops
in these burning words of encouragement—Songez que du haut de ces monu-
ments quarante siécles vous contemplent.” (Remember that from the height of
these monuments forty centuries are looking down upon you.)

The result of the battle of the Pyramids was that Cairo and the command
of the Nile valley fell into the hands of the French, who for three years maintained
their position there, in spite of the total destruction of their fleet in the Bay of
Aboukeer, by Nelson’s squadron, on the Ist of August, 1798. After Napoleon’s
return to France,‘ the command was given to General Kleber—a brave and talented


1 22nd August, 1799.


4 EGYPT.


Alsatian, the finest officer of the whole French army; and on the 20th of March,
1800, that memorable battle was fought at Matareeyeh, near the ruins of Heliopolis,
in which 10,000 French put to flight a Turkish army of more than six times the
number. In one of the streets of Cairo the dagger of a young fanatic from Aleppo
pierced the heroic heart of Kleber, and a few months later the English forced his
incapable successor, Menou, to capitulate, first in Cairo and then in Alexandria,
September, 1801.!. France was obliged to resign all political pretensions in Keypt ;
but her influence remained powerful there,
and when we see Huropean culture gaining
on the upper classes of society in Egypt far
more rapidly than in any other Oriental country,
and even weaning the populace from many old
customs, we must attribute this, in the first
instance, to the French, whose influence was
felt partly through the various measures intro-
duced by Napoleon, and partly, too, through
A the amiable manners characteristic of their
nation, and by which they won the hearts of
the Viceroys. Above all, they succeeded in
gaining the favour of that remarkable man
. who guided the vessel of Egypt’s fortunes into
‘a new channel, and who founded the family of
rulers who to this day govern Egypt. I
mean Mohammed (or Mehemet) Ali, the most
highly lauded and most terribly vilified of all
the princes of Egypt.
This exceptional man was born at Kavala,’
a small town in Macedonia, in 1769, in a


mm
Wh


home which, though poor, was by no means
base, as has often been asserted. His uncle
took charge of the gifted boy, who was early
left an orphan. After his uncle’s death he was
sared for by the deputy-governor of his native
town. He never had the advantage of any proper schooling, but in the diyan of his
foster-father his practical talent for affairs found ample opportunity for development.
The circumstance that Mohammed Ali, in order to increase his income, applied the
fortune brought him by his first wife to speculating in tobacco—the most valuable
produce of his native town—has led many of his biographers to say that he was at one
time a “tobacconist.” In the year 1799 he went to Egypt to fight against the French,
with the contingent furnished by his parental friend, and commanded by that friend’s
son, then in his twenty-ninth year. It was in battle that he first met those who became
his future friends; and even his enemies acknowledged that his bravery and prudence
had well earned him his early promotion to the rank of Bin-Bashey, or Major.


STATUE OF GENERAL KLEBER AT STRASBURG.


1 By the Convention of El-Arish. ? Salonica,


ALBANIAN MERCENARIES.


EGYPT.


Being well recommended to the new Governor sent to Egypt by the Porte,
Khosrew Pacha—whose most dangerous opponént he ere long became—and being
favoured also by the admiral of the Turkish fleet, his keen eye soon detected his
master’s weakness, and the untenable political position held by the Beys then
governing the valley of the Nile. He first obtained such an ascendency over the
Turkish mercenaries disbanded by the avaricious Khosrew, as greatly encouraged his
ambitious designs; and he then succeeded in forcing his master to appoint him to
the chief command of the whole body of police in the country. In this influential
position he could serve every party; to-day, the officials of the Porte and to-morrow
the Mameluke Beys, who, after the departure of the French, returned to their old
rapacious tyranny. He neglected not the smallest circumstance that could render
him indispensable to either party, till at length he succeeded in grasping the
government of Lower Egypt, in shaking off Khosrew and every other rival, and in
having himself proclaimed Pacha by the Cairenes,* now driven to extremity by the
oppressions of the Mamelukes and of the unpaid Turkish mercenaries. He then
entrenched himself in the citadel, and obtained his appointment from the Porte, first
as Governor and subsequently as hereditary Viceroy.

He put an end to the resistance of the Mameluke Beys—whom he had frequently
beaten, and whose arbitrary rapacity kept the prosperity and progress of the country
in perpetual danger
most horrible of which history has preserved the record. On the Ist of March, 1811,
Mohammed Ali invited all the Mameluke Beys (480 in number) to a banquet in the
citadel of Cairo, and the whole knightly company arrived on their handsome and richly
caparisoned horses, in gorgeous dresses, and all the splendour of arms. Hardly had
they entered the narrow street, shut in by high walls, which leads up to the gate
of the citadel, called el-Azab, than a cannon, fired from the old walls, gave the signal
for Mohammed Ali’s Albanian soldiers to begin the massacre. Suddenly, from every
window and loop-hole, well-aimed shots flashed and rattled from the guns of the
Albanians, who were well entrenched behind the walls. Hundreds of Mamelukes
and wounded horses lay wallowing in blood on the paved way of the little street.
Volley after volley was fired; death reaped a fearful harvest; those who escaped
the murderous bullets sprang from their horses, snatching their sabres from the
sheath and their pistols from their belts—but there is no foe to face them but the
hard perpendicular walls, constantly dealing out a new dole of death. In unutterable
confusion, horses and men—living, dying, and dead—gather, roll, and tumble into’ one
mass, one heap ; at first shouting and screaming; then silent, convulsed ; and at last,
as it grows in size, still, rigid, and stark. In half an hour Mohammed Ali had
quenched the swift pulse, the haughty vigour, of 480 lives, as he might have wiped
their names off a slate. One—only one—survived, Ameen Bey, who was saved by
his noble horse, which took a tremendous leap over the breastwork of the citadel.
The Cairenes firnily believe in this leap, and show the spot where it took place.*

When the great tragedy was ended, and the last groan had died away by the


by a stroke of despotic power which was in truth one of the


1 1806.
® There is % graphic account by M. Ch. Didier (“Les Nuits du Caire, 1860”). According to this account Ameen Bey
did not enter the citadel, but fled with his suite to Bagatyn, between Mokattam and the Nile, and thence to Syria.


THE MAMELUKE’S LEAR


8 EGYPT.


Bab-el-Azab, Mohammed Ali’s Italian physician offered him his congratulations ; but
the Pasha did not answer, he only asked for drink, and drank a deep draught.

The end he had prepared for the Mamelukes was indeed a climax of horror ;
but it is impossible to deny that if he had left them in power, Egypt would
have been a prey to miseries without end. The deed, as I have told it, is
history and not legend, a story of our own time and not of the dark ages; but
he who instigated it was no bloodthirsty ruffian—only a keen politician, not imac-
cessible to many kindly emotions, but pursuing his end ruthlessly ; a man who,


SCENE OF THE MAMELUKE’S LEAP.


when he had a great aim in view, paused at no step, no means, however
horrible.

The after-piece to this tragedy was almost more shocking; for, after the
massacre in the citadel, the rest of the Mamelukes in the provinces, above six
hundred in all, were put to death by Mohammed Ali’s orders, and the governors
sent their heads to the capital as a sort of “receipt in full.”

The Porte, which now began to regard the unlimited power of its reigning
vassal in Egypt as more and more dangerous, commissioned Mohammed Ali to
conduct an expedition against the Wehhabites—a sect founded by one Abd-el-
Webhab, in Central Arabia, and which still exists. It endeavours to maintain,
with puritanical strictness, the original purity of Mohammedan monotheism, especially
combating the worship of saints. At that time it had grown to such importance,


THE REGENERATION OF EGYPT. 9


particularly in Arabia, that its members had succeeded even in possessing them-
selves of the holy cities of Mecca and Medina, and in driving out the orthodox
believers. Mohammed Ali’s son, Tufoon, and his adopted.son, Ibrahim Pacha—one
of the greatest military commanders of this century—brought this war to a
successful issue.’

In the battles subsequently fought by Ibrahim, his soldiers were no longer
Albanians but native Egyptians, recruited from among the Fellaheen; for his
father had succeeded in ridding himself of the overbearing mercenaries. Many
of them perished in the expedition against Nubia and the nations of the Soudan,
and with them one of the sons of the Viceroy ; but the survivors, on their return
home, found a new and powerful host against
which they were helpless. It was with fellah-
soldiers that Ibrahim Pacha went, in 1824, to
, to support the Sultan against the Greeks,
then fighting for their independence, and reduced
the Morea to subjection; but in 1828 he was
forced, by the interference of the European powers
to abandon it. Four years later his father
seized the opportune moment, when the Turks
had suffered much from a fatal war with Russia,


Gree


to assert his independence, and. shake off the
supremacy of the Porte. An excuse for war
was readily found, and his son would have
conquered for him, not only the greater part
of western Asia, but the very throne of the
Sultan, after the decisive battle of Nisibi, in
1839 (in which the German General Moltke
bore a part), if the Kuropean powers, and more
particularly England, had not once more inter-
fered. Mohammed Ali was obliged to be satisfied
with the “Grand Firman” of 1841, which pro- Ce aad grote
claimed him hereditary ruler of Egypt, and


granted him many and extensive privileges. This treaty, it is true, also contained
many vexatious conditions, most of which were mitigated under the Khedive Ismail.
In 1848 Mahommed Ali, then in extreme old age, handed over the govern-
ment to his son Ibrahim, and he died in August, 1849, at his Castle of Shoobra,
which his son, Haleem Pacha, inherited from him. At the present day the gardens
of this summer palace are the favourite drive of the Cairenes and of the foreigners
staying in the city, and it is both amusing and astonishing, before sundown, during
the winter months, and under the broad shade of magnificent trees, to see the
elegant European “world” meeting the African. The hired open carriages and
private equipages that crowd the famous Shoobra Avenue would seem wholly European
were it not for the runner, or Sais, in front, as we have already seen in Cairo. The


* It began 1812, and lasted six years,


A.


THE AVENUE AT SHOOBE


THE REGENERATION OF EGYPT. 11


closed carriages are worthy of notice for the sake of their occupants, who generally
are the lightly-veiled beauties of the harems of the wealthy. Eunuchs often clear
the road for these vehicles, eunuchs sit by the coachman and look fiercely at the
European youth who, on foot or on horseback, or even on the humble but sturdy
donkey, endeayour to catch a glance from beneath the long lashes of the fair ones
under their charge. At the side of the avenue Arab men and women sell oranges
and other refreshments; gardeners’ lads, with a bouquet stuck in their turbans,
offer flowers for sale to the passer-by; and often there is to be seen some peasant


{ ii


PAVILION IN THE GARDEN OF THE PALACE AT SHOOBRA.


or pilgrim, an Oriental, but a stranger to Cairo, staring, open-mouthed, at the
strange throng.

The Palace of Shoobra and its gardens were newly laid out for Haleem
Pacha; and though the arcades and kiosks which surround a large basin of water
have a very pleasing effect, the eye of the true connoisseur is not thoroughly
satisfied in any respect. Within the palace we found nothing worthy of remark.
Even the picture of Mohammed Ali, on the wall of one of the saloons, is of very
moderate merit, and certainly far less successful as a likeness than the portrait
of the great Viceroy preserved to us in the description by Prince Pitckler-Muskau,
who was in constant intercourse with Mohammed Ali. “His Highness,” says the


author of “ Briefe eines Verstorbenen,”’ “received me in a saloon on the ground


“Letters by a Dead Man.”


12 EGYPT.


floor of the palace, which was full of a reverential throng of court and state
officials. When I had made my way through them, I perceived the Viceroy
standing apart, on the dais in front of his divan; only Artim Bey, his dragoman,
was by his side. My surprise was extreme, for all the busts I had seen in Alex-
andria, and a few portraits said to be like him, had made me expect to see a
stern or even a hard-looking man, in magnificent Oriental costume, and with
features—as I noticed in the busts—strongly recalling the portraits of Cromwell.
Instead of this I found a kindly-looking, little old man, whose well-proportioned
person had no adornment beyond a scrupulous, almost coquettish, freshness and
neatness. He was dressed plainly in a brown furred coat, his fine white beard flowed
down on the white fur trimming, and seemed to mingle with it; on his head he wore
a simple red tarboosh, without any turban or jewels; no rings were on his fingers,
nor did he hold in his hands—which were so fine and delicate that a lady might
have been proud of them—a costly rosary, as is often done in the East. His
features were expressive of calm dignity and benevolent good-humour, and although
his keen and brilliant eyes seemed to see through me, the affability of his smile
and the courtesy of his demeanour were irresistibly attractive, and inspired not the
least alarm. It is not to be denied, however, that notwithstanding Mohammed Ali’s
invariably humane demeanour, and his generally mild and gentle glance, which make
him look like one of the most good-natured of Christian kings, that glance, sometimes
—and particularly when he thinks he is unobserved—assumes a peculiar expression
of bitter mistrust, in which the somewhat uncanny Turkish nature, of which he
undoubtedly has a considerable share, is very conspicuous. Much may be read in
that look of what constitutes, no doubt, the dark side of his character; but I
cannot attribute any particular blame to him on that account, for there is a dark
and a bright side to every great man, as well as to other mortals.”

So far Ptckler-Muskau, who at all times shows a disposition, in his general
judgment of Mohammed Ali, to throw the light of a certain glamour on the very
long shadows cast by the mighty figure of his hero. No one, of course, can refuse
to allow that the great Viceroy had the highest military and statesmanlike gifts,
restless industry, unfailing energy, and an unwearied determination to win the
highest position for himself and for his country; but the means adopted by the
talented Regent often outraged all moderation.

Whenever—as was the case with him—an Oriental nature, full of ambitious
imaginings, and not warned by any teaching to restrain its upward flights, or to
dread too close an approach to the sun, has the means at command for successfully
accomplishing all it has planned, then danger lurks at every step. Mohammed Ali
often had to succumb; but when he fell it was not because his leap was too short,
but always because it was too long; his arrow never fell short of the mark, but it
flew beyond it again and again. Many a time it was his impatience that was his
ruin. He wanted the harvest to follow hard on the sowing ; he set the reapers to
work before the ears were ripe. No doubt his first object was to enrich himself and
his family, but it was not his only one; he aimed also at raising the commercial and
industrial activity of his country, and he himself became landowner, merchant, and
manufacturer on the most extensive scale; but by monopolising all the industrial


THE REGENERATION OF EGYPT. 13


and mercantile energy of his subjects, he undermined their prosperity instead of
raising it, and crippled trade and exchange instead of promoting them. At the
beginning of his rule he met with efficient support, particularly from the French ;
their knowledge and skill brought him consideration, their modes of d ealing brought
him credit, and he gratefully gave them the preference over all other nations. He
would willingly have introduced the people he governed to that culture and
civilisation of which the French are the leaders; but, instead of first laying the
foundations, and then raising the structure, roofing it in, and decorating it, he
proceeded on the contrary plan ; for he did not begin his work in the national schools,
but founded educational institutes for the higher classes on the French pattern, and
sent young fellaheen to Paris, there to “learn” science, and to become engineers,
physicians, diplomatists, &. That many of these men, sons of peasants, showed
astonishing capacities cannot be denied ; but their rapidly-acquired knowledge, with an


THE DAM OF THE NILE, CALLED THE ‘‘ BARRAGE.”


insufficient grounding of elementary teaching, could but ill stand the new and difficult
circumstances under which it was to be applied. Many of the best pupils of the
Paris “Egyptian Mission,” as it was called, lost all confidence when they returned to
their own home, and were given up as hopeless, because offices and posts were
entrusted to them which were of a totally different nature to those special branches
in which they had been educated. But in spite of numerous failures in this
particular department, Mohammed Ali did not give it up, and in the military schools
at any rate he could boast of success. He was most fortunate in his selection of
engineers for his buildings by land and water, among whom De Cerisy and Linant
de Bellefonds deserve special mention. What the former achieved for the harbour
of Alexandria, and the latter for the network of canals throughout the country, and
especially in the Fayoum, can never be forgotten. If Linant’s plans had been
adopted for that huge combination of bridge, dam, and sluice known as the
“Barrage” of the Nile, instead of Mougel Bey’s, this, the most costly of Mohammed
Ali's water-works, might perhaps have been completed, and have served its purpose
better than is actually the case.’ This structure, erected to the north of Cairo, where


Tn 1847,


14 EGYPT.


the Nile divides, has a fourtold object :—so to regulate the amount of water in the
river that, so far as the effects of the dam extend, irrigating by machinery should
be unnecessary ; to keep up the water, so that the shallow branches of the Nile in
the Delta should be navigable in the dry season; to serve as a bridge across the
river; and to afford a point @appwi against any army advancing on Cairo from the
north, by means of the fortresses which were to be connected with the structure.


COURT OF THE MOSQUE OF MOHAMMED ALI IN THE CITADEL.


Unfortunately, the whole thing was ill-devised from the first. It remains unfinished ;
and though it serves, indeed, as a bridge, instead of serving any other useful purpose,
it impedes the navigation. I have already described the Mahmoudeeyeh Canal, and
the enormous advantages which Alexandria derives from it at the present day.

The greatest and most celebrated monument erected in Cairo by Mohammed
Ali is the mosque in the citadel known by his name, whose two tall and over-
slender minarets: are conspicuous from a great distance. No expense was spared in
building this magnificent mosque, in which we find the tomb of the founder,
surrounded by an elegant railing. The beautiful yellow alabaster, which the ancient


i ;


CHAMBER IN THE MUSAFFIR KHANA IN WHICH THE EX-KHEDIVE ISMAIL WAS BORN.


ad


16 EGYPT.

Egyptians wrought in so many ways, was here so lavishly employed that this
building has acquired the name of the Alabaster Mosque. The pale marble polish
of this stone gleams everywhere—in the court enclosed by vaulted arcades, in the
fountain rising in its midst, and in the finely-proportioned body of the mosque,
planned after the pattern of Hagia Sofia (the mosque of St. Sophia). Here the
walls are lined with panels of alabaster, and in the middle four noble pillars support
a dome that springs boldly above them. Unfortunately this building remains in
many respects unfinished, and though, as a whole, it has an imposing effect, its
details do not wholly satisfy the utmost requirements of the educated connoisseur


THE CITADEL OF CAIRO, FROM THE NILE.


or artist. Standing in front of the sarcophagus of the great man, which is placed,
and with justice, on the highest spot of the soil of Cairo, I could not but recall his
own words, which need very little qualification :—‘ Only my grandchildren can reap
what I have sown. Where such fathomless confusion exists as did here—such a
total disorganisation of all the healthy conditions of the polity—where a people lives
so wholly neglected, ignorant, and unfit for all wholesome labour, civilisation must
be slow in growth. You know that Egypt was once the foremost of the nations
of the earth, whose light shone upon the world; now Europe fills that place. In
time, perhaps, that sun may dawn here again; everything in the world shifts and
changes.” With these words, spoken by the great man himself—great alike in good
and evil—we take our leave of him, only observing that his fame might have
resounded farther, and have been more glorious, if he had exerted his strong will
and his genius for statecraft, in the first place, for the benefit of his country, and


THE REGENERATION OF EGYPT. 17


had not, as in fact he always did, staked everything for the aggrandisement of
himself and his family.

Of his successors one only wholly neglected to foster the seed his great
forefather had sown. This was Abbas Pacha. This inferior man—a narrow fanatic
—was succeeded by Said Pacha, whose tastes all tended to European culture,
and whose character, deeds, and tomb, I have already discussed in speaking of
Alexandria. After Said’s death, in 1863, Mohammed Ali’s grandson, the son
of the great commander Ibrahim; came to the throne—the Khedive Ismail, whose son


now rules over Egypt. He was born at Cairo,
in 1830, in the Musaffir Khana, which, during
the winter of 1874, was the residence of
the German artists Makart, Lenbach, Huber,
Gnauth, and L. C. Muller. It must be left
to posterity to pass a final judgment on one
so lately dead; it only remains for me to
speak of the great works which have been
carried out in Egypt under his government.
Even those who had not the advantage of
knowing him personally can easily see from
them alone that, thanks to his European
education, he strove to obtain for the country
he governed the advantages and benefits of
that Western culture which he fully appreciated.
Often, and justly, has he been blamed for his
total lack of the economic sense; still, it ought
not to be forgotten that the enormous sums he
spent were applied to productive purposes.
But he cannot be wholly exonerated from the
worst reproach that attaches to his grand-
father; namely, that even in his noblest
undertakings—and their number was not
small—he seems to have had less regard to
the benefit of his subjects than to the ageran-
disement of his name and of his family.


THE EGYPTIAN BOYS’ SUGAR-STICK,


The most universally beneficial public works of Ismail are the numerous rail-
ways which intersect the Delta, and which he laid down in Upper Egypt and the
Fayoum. ‘Telegraph wires follow all the roads where the steam-horse toils, and
pass along the desert shore of the Red Sea and the shore of the Nile, as far as
Khartoum. The traveller in Middle and Upper Egypt will detect, among the fields
of juicy canes to the right and left, numerous sugar factories, with their tall,
smoking chimneys. It was Ismail who built most of them, on the most approved
European models, and, while working for his own profit, it is true, made sugar one
of the staple products and exports of the country. The Indian cane is now a
thoroughly Egyptian product, and thousands of fellaheen are employed in the harvest
and refineries. In the fresh state it is a favourite sweetmeat with the women and


THE DESERT.


N


TELEGRAPH WIRES I


THE REGENERATION OF EGYPT. 19


children, and it is a droll sight when two boys are sucking the sweet juice from


the same cane. For size and sweetnes


s this giant lollypop would suffice one of our
confectioners for a whole shopful of small wares. The Khedive was, beyond a doubt,
the greatest sugar-boiler and merchant in the world, and he did not neglect the
indispensable means for watering the fields that produce the precious cane.

But the canals and sluices constructed by Ismail occur in great numbers in
spots devoted to other produce; they are placed in well-chosen situations, and
admirably constructed. The great canal navigation and irigation—all supplied with
drinkable water—which connects the Nile with the Red Sea, could never have been
completed without his co-operation; it has restored a large district of desert, now
called Wady Tumilat, to tilth and fertility. It was formerly a part of the Biblical
Goshen. When the workmen, under Lesseps,
were employed in cutting through the isthmus,
which parted rather than united Asia and
Africa, .this watercourse saved them from
perishing, and -it still affords an abundant
supply of fresh water to the inhabitants of
Suez, who formerly were obliged to buy bad
and dear water from a great distance. The
canal, fed by the waters of two seas, is com-
pleted, and steam vessels of every nation now
find their way through it from the Mediter-
ranean to the Red Sea and the Indian Ocean,
or from the ports of Southern Asia to those
of Europe. A similar canal was opened, or
at any rate projected, so long ago as in the
time of Seti L'—the most splendid period of


ancient Egyptian history—and again under
Pharaoh Necho, whose captains sailed round M. DE LESSEPS.

the Cape of Good Hope. Necho, who belonged

to the twenty-sixth dynasty, a race friendly to the Greeks, is said to have
commanded that the work should be stopped, because the priests predicted that
it would only benefit foreigners.”


The present times seem to be wondrously like the


old ones. The Kgyptians are still Egyptians; but while in the seventh century
before Christ the foreigners benefited were Phoenicians and Greeks, in the nine-
teenth after Christ they are English and French. Under the Persians, the


Ptolemies, and the Romans, the old canal was at times navigable ; and even under
the earlier Khalifs it seems to have been possible to reach the Red Sea from the
Nile, at least we are told that the old water-ways were re-opened under the rule
of Amroo, in order to send Egyptian produce as quickly as possible to Arabia. It


is said that one part of the city canal of Cairo, known as the Khalig, was once part
of this ancient navigable water-way.


' Second monarch of the XIXth dynasty ; reigned about p.c. 1400. From the appearance of fortresses and the great


wall of


pt, it is supposed that an old canal existed as early as the Vth dynasty ; according to some chronologists B.c. 4000.


* Bc. 611. It is supposed the old canal of Seti IL, or Sethos, had been silted up by sand,


EGYPT.


It was reserved to our century, with its enormous technical resources, to solve
the problem of joining, not only the Nile, but also the Mediterranean to the Red
se in a way which wholly excludes any farther fear of its being closed by neglect

‘ by the action of the elements. A Frenchman of genius and determination, and
of the most attractive demeanour—Monsieur de Lesseps—during the tedium of
quarantine, read an essay by Le
Pere which led to his forming
the resolution, so pregnant with
results to the whole commercial
world, to attempt to cut through
the Isthmus of Suez.’ All the
world knows that he succeeded ;
but the enormous difficulties with
which he had to contend are not
so well known, nor how liberally
Said Pacha from the first sup-
ported the labours of this remark-
able man, and how intelligently
and devotedly he was seconded
by the Khedive. In 1868, in spite
of the opposition of English states-
men, and the distrust of the
whole European world of finance,
both the fresh-water and the
maritime canal were so far com-
pleted that steamships of moderate
size could pass through the latter ;
and the Viceroy Ismail held a
festival of inauguration, which
exceeded in splendour everything
in the way of hospitality and
entertainment that had been seen
within the last century.” It has
been described again and again
—day after day of speech-making,
balls, illuminations, fireworks,
and reviews, the tables never bare of food, with Nile excursions at the expense


AMONG THE REEDS BY THE RIVER.


of the most generous of hosts. I saw it all, and am bound to confess that
no Oriental scene ever reminded me so vividly as this of the Thousand-and-one
Nights. Such a festival, swallowing up many millions, might be regarded as


merely a freak of reckless extravagance, or of vainglorious pride, but perhaps
the host had calculated, more calmly than many would believe, on the results
of his unlimited liberality ; for besides princes and grandees, he bid the represen-
tatives of the press from all parts of the globe as his guests. As long as the


Commenced in 1859. In 1869.


THE REGENERATION OF EGYPT. 21


festivities lasted, every newspaper in the world knew all about them, and in
the course of a few days, as if by magic, the attention of every man, near and


wai
Ma


UE Te


oe


sbEte


E


AUTRE


Ki


THE SUEZ CANAL oF SETI 1. (From @ bas relief on the exterior north wall of the Temple of Karnak, Thebes.)


far, great and .small, was centred on the Suez Canal. At the present day a constantly
increasing number of ships of every nation incessantly navigate it; and since England
has acquired the lion’s share in the concern, the maintenance of this great monument
of the enterprise and skill of our day is absolutely secure.

The voyage down the canal offers little of interest till we reach Suez. Port
Said is the harbour through which every vessel must pass which, coming from the


c


north, needs to make her way from the
Mediterranean to the Red Sea The
lighthouse to guide the pilot, and the =
moles and quays constructed here by
the Compagnie Lesseps, cost huge sums,
and may be reckoned among the greatest
works of their kind.

The town of Port Said grows but
slowly, and offers small attraction to the
traveller, unless, as a sportsman, he wishes
to visit that “happy hunting ground,”
the Lake of Menzaleh, of which I have


already spoken. The canal passes in a :
direct line along the eastern shore of FARM AT ISMAILBEYEH,

this shallow lake, which is dotted with

islands, and its waters cover broad plains, where, in years long gone by, stood
flourishing cities and fertile fields of corn bowing to the wind. Now dykes, brackish,
reedy pools, and desert tracts of land are all that meet the eye as far as el-Kantara
(or the Bridge). The caravan route, leading in ancient times from Syria into Hgypt,
passed near this important neutral frontier district; and the ruined towns of


‘SNIVINDOW VMVILV ANG


~
Co


THE REGENERATION OF EGYPT.


Tell es-Semoot, to the east of it, and of Beer Magdal farther to the south, occupy
spots where stood the fortified watch-towers (Migdol), which were erected under
the Pharaohs on the Isthmus of Suez, as a protection against the marauding hordes
from Asia. In the immediate vicinity of the town some fragments have been
preserved of a building erected by Seti I. to his father’s honour. Rameses II.,
Seti’s son, completed the monument to which they belonged, and which very likely
had some connection with the oldest Suez canal, which Seti restored, and caused
to be represented on the north outer wall of the temple of Karnak.
In this picture—which, in spite of its apparent simplicity and naiveté, is |
of the greatest significance and importance—
we see him returning victorious from Syria,
and received at the fortress which protected
the canal, by the priests and princes of
Egypt with garlands and homage. An in-
scription designates the canal as the “cut
through.”

When the vessel has got through the
Balah Lake, to the south of el-Kantara, it
reaches the bar of el Ghisr, the part of the
canal which presented the greatest difficulty
to the engineers and labourers, for up to
that point they had found but small diffi-
culty with the level ground of the isthmus,
while here they had to cut through a hillock
nearly fifty feet high.

On the northern shore of the blue
waters of the lake of Timsah, which the ship
now enters, stands the town of Ismaileeyah,
which, during the making of the canal, served
as head-quarters for the leader of the enter-


prise, as being the central point of the canal ;
while troops of labourers also found a home
there, as well as the traders and innkeepers
who had followed the train of workmen
into the desert to supply the wants of
such a vast number of souls, and to


STREET IN SUEZ.


derive profit from their need both of refreshment and° recreation. The place
started into life as if by magic, and ere long the thirsty soil, watered from the
fresh-water canal, was laid out in avenues and gardens. The Khedive had a


vastle erected for himself; and Monsieur de Lesseps’s residencé in the city, his
farm in. the country, the pretty houses of the inspectors and engineers, the
railway station, the hotels and shops wore a pretty and pleasing aspect, par-
ticularly when dressed in flags during the festivities of the opening. Ismaileeyah
was chosen as the centre and head-quarters on this occasion, and its appearance
as a whole was full of promise. Unfortunately this promise has never been


e


24 HGYPT.


fulfilled: and this Flower of the Desert will, it is to be feared, wither as rapidly
as it blossomed. .

We now steam past some ruins which are supposed to be those of the
Temple of Serapis mentioned by classical authors. On our right we see the
gleaming waters of the fresh-water canal, on the banks of which many ruins have
been found of the Persian period; we traverse the long basin of the old Bitter
Lake, and leaving it behind us late in the afternoon, we do not cast another
glance at the bare and dreary shore on each side, for before us to the west lies
the narrow bay of Suez—which was formerly a mere fishing town, but within
the last few years has grown to be a really
flourishing centre of commerce. The bay opens
out before us, a picture of indescribable
splendour of colouring; the sun will presently
set behind the steep cliffs of the mountains
of Atakah, on whose heights no’ doubt, long
ages since, Phoenician lors, before setting
forth southwards to Ophir, lighted fires and
brought sacrifices to Ba’al Zephon (Zapuna),
the god of the north wind. There is no
spot on earth where the orb of day surrounds
his death-scene with greater splendour. The
Red Sea, which at noon has a greenish hue,
on clear evenings—and in this latitude they
are rarely cloudy—assumes a deep-blue colour,
and when a light breeze curls its surface each
crisp wave is touched with golden glory. It
is hard to take one’s eyes from the delicious
colour of the sea, but we are still more spell-


n


te


bound by the wonderful scene now being dis-
« Ss)
played in the west where the heights of Atakah


ANAK SHOE-BLACKS.


close in on the view. “The mountain looked


This


as if composed of a glowing flux of melted rubies, garnets, and amethysts.
was mirrored and repeated in the waves that danced and sported at its foot as
they gradually retired in gentle ebb, showing more and more of the walls and
quays that enclose the harbour and the entrance of the canal. The raised jetty,
on which is the railroad running from the anchorage for large ships to the town,
stands up above all the other walls and the banks and shoals which now, at
low tide, form so many islands. Men on asses and with camels pass across it, and as
the sun sinks lower their figures stand up more sharply against the glowing horizon,
till at last the effect is as if black silhouettes were moving across a translucent
crystal wall of violet and gold. At last down comes the night, and darkness
falls on the scene.” Thus I wrote in my diary some years ago, face to face
then with just such a sunset.


Darius (B.c. 511) re-opened the canal, and inscriptions in the Persian cuneiform have been found there, as also the
signet cylinder of that monarch, now in the British Museum.


THE REGENERATION OF EGYPT. 25


I found comfortable quarters in the great hotel at Suez. Indians in light-
coloured garments, “handsome and silent” and with dark dreamy eyes, waited
upon us noiselessly. On the following morning the passengers from a large vessel,
after a long voyage, came noisily bustling into the court and rooms of the hotel,
calling for food and drink, making the shoe-blacks clean their boots, and snatching
up the papers; and still the servants moved calmly in and out without any confusion
—like the wheels of a machine, which turn just as steadily in a storm as in a calm.

A walk through the city brings us first into the handsomer streets, with their
European shops, counting-houses, and cafés, then past the slightly-built pleasure
resorts where the sailors and labourers squander their earnings. Three-quarters of the
city are Huropean, but the fourth and poorer part belongs to the Arabs, who offer
their wares for sale in the little bazaar, and hold a market for vegetables, fruit, and
cakes, for charcoal and date-cakes from the peninsula of Sinai, for fowls—from
turkeys down to pigeons—and in certain spots a great variety of strange-coloured
fishes and sea-crabs of excellent flavour, as well as shells and pieces of the coral in
which the Red Sea is especially rich. All the service in the houses and streets, and
in the harbour, is done by the Mohammedan natives. In the camel-market, held at
the city gates, we meet free Bedaween, representatives of most of the small tribes
who thinly people the peninsula of Sinai. A dyke, on which there is a railway,
joins the railway station with the mole where the big ships lay to. An enormous
quantity of goods lie at the station under the free heaven or a slight shelter, and
most of the travellers who get out of the trains as they arrive are pious Moslems
making the pilgrimage to Mecca, who usually make the passage to Djidda by sez
from Suez.

We, too, will get into a boat managed by an Arab boatman and his boy. The
wind fills the ragged brown sail, and after a short voyage we find ourselves on the
Sinaitic peninsula. We soon are standing in front of an oasis hedged in by Opuntia
(the prickly pear), where, near a muddy spring, palms, tamarisks, and acacias, are
growing, and vegetables are thriving in small plots tended by a few families of
Bedaween. This green spot, with its flow of moisture in the midst of the desert
sands, is called “Oyoon Moosa,’ or Moses’ Well, and was for a long time held to be
the spot where the Jews rested after their escape from the fury of Pharaoh, whose
horses and chariots were drowned in their pursuit in the Red Sea. Here, too, it
was said that the children of Israel sang that glorious hymn of praise which still
rang from their lips many centuries after the rescue it celebrated, and which is pre-
served in the fifteenth chapter of Exodus, the second Book of Moses.

The Red Sea—so translated in the English Bible—or, more properly, the Reedy
Sea, was, until lately, universally supposed to be the Red Sea now known by that
name, and the Gulf of Suez was assumed to be the scene of the passage of
the Hebrews; but quite recently Brugsch Bey has attempted to show that the
Sirbonian Lake is the Red Sea of the Bible


this lies between Egypt and Syria, and
is divided from the Mediterranean only by a narrow strip of land—and to prove
that Pharaoh’s host was overwhelmed by a high flood tide in the Barathra abyss),


‘ Better known as the Ain Moosa.


26 EGYPT.


or quicksands, which, as we are told by the ancients, used here to open treacher-
ously, and proved fatal to other armies than his." These views are supported with
much talent and zeal, but he has not succeeded in overthrowing the old theory ;
and the traveller who, at the present day, crosses from one shore to the other at
the top of the Gulf of Suez, may still enjoy the conviction that he is following the
same route as that by which Moses led the people under his charge. Before the

Lesseps Canal was cut it


was possible to cross at this
spot, where there are many
shallows, on the back of a
camel, or even on foot, from
one shore to the other ; but
the rapidity with which the
tide rises has, even in quite
recent times, threatened
danger to many lives—nay,
even to that of Buonaparte,
who, after escaping very
narrowly from the sudden
incursion of the waves, is
said to have lamented ironi-
cally that his escape had
deprived the preachers of an
admirable theme for their
sermons.

I could find much to
tell concerning the history
of the Sinaitic peninsula
and the Red Sea; but we
must get back to Cairo, for
a great deal remains to be
seen there before we set
out for Upper Egypt.

German hosts receive us
at the Hotel du Nil, which
is chiefly frequented by
Germans, or at Shephard’s Hotel, which has a more open situation. As soon as we
set foot in the street we are besieged by that pushing host of donkey-boys, of
which every traveller has something to say, and which has been drawn a thousand


THE WELL OF MOSES.


times, but, as I think, never so vividly and faithfully as in the accompanying sketch
by Huber. Two traits are quite peculiar to these gamins of the Egyptian cities—
inexhaustible lungs, which allow of their following the most rapid rider for hours,
and a perfectly marvellous ethnographical instinct. Never do they make a mistake


1 That of Artaxerxes, about B.c. 455.


28 iE) Gales


as to the nationality of the traveller ; they address the Frenchman, German, English-
man, or Italian in the scraps of their mother-tongue which they have contrived to
pick up; and it is impossible
to forbear a smile when these
merry fellows shout the praises
of their beasts: “ Beautiful
donkey,” ‘Bon asino,” or “ Bis-
marck Esel”—as the case may
be. We leap into the saddle
without any aid from the
stirrup, and if we have hit


on a good choice away we go
on our grey steeds, which are
as swift as they are enduring,
outstripping many carriages in
the broader roads, and passing


through the shady streets which
SHEPHARD'S HOTEL. are much too narrow for any

vehicle. Before or behind
ging his quadruped with shouts and


runs little Hasan, Alee, or Ahmed, encourag
drubbing, or thrusting, or, in the busier thoroughfares, warning the passers-by to
make way. The donkey in this land is no sluggard; exceptionally fine asses
command as high a price as good horses, and, in the provinces particularly, the
wealthiest citizens ride on asses quite as often as on horseback. In Upper Egypt
we constantly meet with donkeys with their ears slit; these are the “harameeyeh,”


or “thieves” that have been caught
trespassing on meadows not their
own, and that have been punished
by slitting their long ears. A
swift and easily mounted ass is,
beyond a doubt, one of the plea-
santest modes of locomotion, and
we are well satisfied to be borne
on such a steed through the newly-
built quarter of Ismaileeyah, which
may be regarded as the special
work of the Khedive

It has throughout a Euro-
pean aspect, and sprang into life
with astonishing rapidity, for the
Viceroy gave the building land
for nothing to every one who


THE TRESPASSER PUNISHED.


pledged himself to build, within a year and a half, a house worth at least £1,200
In order to plan wide thoroughfares, the example set by Baron Hausmann in Paris,
was only too closely followed. Whole quarters of the city were demolished to make


THE REGENERATION OF EGYPT. 29


way for new ones, handsomer, in the modern European style. The lamentation of
the lovers of antiquity over this impious proceeding are only too well justified ; but
certainly the city has gained in healthiness and pleasantness as much as it lost in


HASAN, THE DONKEY-BOY.


venerable and picturesque character, particularly by the construction of very good new
aqueducts in the place of the old ones, which were insufficient, by the opening of
new canals, and by the abundant planting of umbrageous trees. The most complete
transformation was in the Ezbekeeyeh Square. Stately buildings—some really mag-
nificent—and among them a theatre, the largest hotels, several Consulates, and the


30 EGYPT.


Cairo Bourse, handsome private houses and splendid shops surround it on every
side, and the public garden in the middle is one of the loveliest in the world.
One that has more quickly sprung into life and perfection certainly nowhere exists.


MOHAMMED SELIM, KAWASS OF THE AUSTRIAN CONSULATE.


In the quiet early morning hours the visitor may enjoy a solitary walk under the
broad shade of its spreading trees; charmed with the beauty of the shrubs that
border the well-kept paths, the growth of every zone; in the afternoon he mixes
here with the crowd, listening to the finest compositions of European musicians
performed by the Egyptian band—not forgetting to admire the vegetation that sur-


AQUEDUCT.


OLD


i )


32 EGYPT.


rounds him, to look into the artificial grottoes, and to walk round the large basin
in the middle of the garden; and he will find it difficult to believe the fact,
when he is assured that this park, now fully grown, was not planned till 1870,
by Barilet, the chief gardener of the city of Paris, now lately dead. It is un-
necessary to say that such a city as Cairo now is, is lighted with gas, and no
one who has seen the Ezbekeeyeh lighted up with its 2,500 jets in their coloured
tulip-shaped glasses, can ever forget that wonderful scene. It is very delightful, too,
in the afternoon, to observe the different visitors in this beautiful garden, representing


|B. Strassboreer TTLINS- JoD|


CHATEAU OF GHEZEEREH.


as they do, every class of the population of Cairo. The largest contingent is furnished
by the Europeans, but there is no lack of Orientals; Levantines with their wives
dressed out in the most conspicuous finery, Kopts in sober colours, the veiled women
from the citizens’ harems, Arab and European children with their dark attendants,
Egyptian soldiers, and square-bearded, martial, and truculent-looking Kawasses, of
which the finest are in the service of the different Consulates.

This garden is given up to the people; others, not less beautiful and extensive,
are attached to the numerous palaces belonging to the Khedive and his family.
None of these is more worthy of mention than the Chateau of Ghezeereh—i.c., “the
island ”—being in fact situated on an island in the Nile. It was built by a German,
Franz-Bey, and is a princely residence furnished with Oriental magnificence ; at the
opening of the Suez Canal the Viceroy’s most distinguished guests lived in it, and


THE REGENERATION OF EGYPT. 33


splendid balls attracted a vast number of guests. There are chimney-pieces of onyx
in this palace, each of which cost a perfect fortune (about £3,000), and nothing
prettier can be imagined than the room furnished with light-blue satin, which was
prepared for the Empress Eugenie. The wall decorations, painted from the designs of
C. von Diebitsch, are very handsome, and so are the rich Lyons stufis from patterns
by Franz-Bey ; but, strange and gorgeous as everything is in this magnificent palace,
all is forgotten in a moment when we see the Kiosk of Ghezeereh, for in splendour,
charm, and peculiarity it leaves far behind it everything that has been produced


KIOSK IN THE CHATEAU OF GHEZEEREH.


by Oriental architecture in modern times. Even the path leading to this fairy
palace is beautiful, for an incomparable display of plants and flowers border it,
with here a cool grotto—where the visitor could easily fancy himself resting in
the rude lap of some wild mountain—and there an elegant aviary, crowded with birds
of gay plumage which delight the eye; at last, passing by a tank of translucent
water, we see before us the lightest and airiest of structures, a hall in the style of
the Alhambra. Lingering here in the cool evening hour, soothed by the plashing


of the fountains, we can realise the sweetest of romantic dreams.

How lofty and airy, too, is the interior of this true summer palace
and saloons! how perfectly its fittings accord with all its surroundings! Among
the objects it contains many are of historical interest; for instance, there is a
table of Roman mosaic, presented to Mohammed Ali by the Pope.


its halls


“TATU


AYINDOO


STIVNSI DAIGHHY


aTLL


i


I


M1
it)


een KYO


N


(es)
Or


THE REGENERATION OF EGYPT.


It is hard to tear oneself from this Kiosk and these gardens; but the guide
presses us to retire, for the Khedive is expected in an hour. Just one more
glance at the halls, a visit to the lions, giraffes, and ostriches, kept in numbers
in the western part of the park, giving it the stamp of a peculiarly characteristic
life, and then we find ourselves at the gate, mount our asses, and trot across the
handsome suspension bridge.

We have hardly reached the principal barrack of Cairo, where also the
Khedive had a splendid residence, than we see the Kawasses pushing back the
people, and are ourselves thrust aside, but become the spectators of a brilliant
scene. The Viceroy himself, quitting the palace where his honoured and revered
e, driven by an English


mother lives in royal state, drives past in his carriag
coachman. There is no lack of noble horses and rich harness; but where, oh!
where, are the old picturesque dresses of silk and the decorative turbans? what
has become of the Ameers with their splendid arms? I know too well. It was
to do homage to that caricature of true culture—to “ civilisation’”—that they were
all exchanged for laced uniforms and liveries of European art. The tarboosh, which
is supplanting the turban more and more, and which is already worn by all the officials
and men of mark in Constantinople, and even by the ex-Khedive, is an importation
from Constantinople. Stamboul is indeed now the metropolis of the Moslem East,
and all that is “Stambuleenee,” 7.¢, from Constantinople, passes for the best.
Every reform, even those which relate to the most intimate and vital changes, are
here begun from the outside—from the surface downwards. It must be said the
efforts in one department—and that one of the most important—have lately been
conducted on very sound principles; the reforms in the constitution and conduct of
schools undertaken by Dor, a Swiss, are worthy of all praise, as are, too, his attempts
to rescue the female population from utter ignorance, and to set the fine library of
Darb-el-Gamameez on a level with those of Europe for completeness and arrangement ;
but what difficulties are put in his path at every innovation! first by the general
public, who are passionately prejudiced in favour of their old customs and ways, and
against everything European ; then by the Ulema, the privileged chiefs and guardians of
Moslem jurisprudence. However, even these have been forced to consent to a reformed
mode of justice—which, in the first instance, applied only to the intercourse between
foreigners themselves, or between them and the Egyptians—and to the introduction
of a code elaborated on the foundation of the French and Italian law ; while formerly,


under the Mohammedans, theology and jurisprudence were almost synonymous, and
the judges pronounced sentence, even in civil cases, in obedience to the rule of the
Koran.

I must mention, as one of the ex-Khedive’s best actions, the abolition of the slave
trade, which was flourishing in Egypt only a short time since. Very few years have
gone by since I myself was one of those who saw the court of an okella well supplied
with the human commodity. I am only too glad to leave it to the artist to give a
picture of the tragical scene, of which he was a spectator even before I myself was.
At the present time this scandalous trade can only be carried on in the profoundest
secrecy, and the judges are bound to restore every male or female slave to liberty
who claims the right. It is true that many of these poor wretches do not avail


36 EGYPT.


themselves of their rights, nor can it be denied that the lot of a slave under the influ-
ence of Mohammedanism may be regarded as comparatively an easy one. Any one
who knows how completely the institution of slavery had grown to be part and parcel
of Eastern life and customs will not refuse the due meed of praise to the man who
seriously set to work to oppose it.

The ex-Khedive’s success in carrying out his most important reforms was due
principally to his restless industry and to the zeal and talent of his distinguished
minister, Nubar Pacha, who also brought to a happy termination those transactions
with the Porte which secured to the Khedive and his family the perpetual right. of
succession of the eldest son, the privileges of coining money, of raising loans, of con-
cluding national treaties, and of maintaining an army of 30,000 men at most. This
firman cost the ruler of Egypt untold millions, and laid him under a requisition to
pay to the Porte an annual tribute of 133,635 purses, about £700,000; but it was not
bought too dearly, for it was not till then that Mohammed Ali’s plans, which had previously
failed again and again in consequence of the opposition of the European Powers,
were realised; and the throne of Egypt was secured to the family of the Khedive,
who increased his now independent territory by the addition of important harbours
in the Red Sea, by taking. possession of the Somali coast—which is bathed by the
Indian Ocean, and rich in almost every kind of produce—and by acquiring the kingdom
of Harar and the Abyssinian provinces of Bogar and Galabat. He extended the
limits of his kingdom still farther by the conquest of the Negro States near the
White Nile, and of Darfoor, in the heart of Africa, till then an impenetrable region ;
and the extent of his frontier was not reduced even by the unfortunate issue of
the last Abyssinian war. Not even the most prejudiced adversary can refuse the
ex-Khedive the title of “ Increaser of the Kingdom,” and no one can venture to
grudge him the fame he well earned by his liberal concessions and grants to
those Huropean savants who made his country their study, and by the intelligent
care he bestowed on the monuments of antiquity which had so long been
abandoned to neglect and ruin.


VIEW ON THE SUEZ CANAL,


MARKET.


SLAVE


i|


)
i)


THE RESURRECTION OF THE
ANTIQUITIES OF EGYPT.


(Oe


T the time when the Khedive Ismail came to the throne


the antiquities of Egypt, which for many centuries had
been utterly neglected, had already begun to attract the
attention of the learned men of Europe. They had never
been totally forgotten, for the Bible narrative had _pre-
served the memory of Pharaoh and his court, and clas-
sical writers spoke of the “ Wonders of the World” that
stood by the shores of the Nile; both in Rome and
Constantinople, on more than one conspicuous spot, stood
tall obelisks brought thither from Egyptian temples, while
smaller relics—sarcophagi, ‘mummies, and fragments of
papyri—were preserved and shown in the cabinets of
princes and in the glass cases of public libraries. Curi-
osities had been brought home by pilgrims, merchants,
or adventurous travellers in the. East; while Christian
pilgrims, even in the earliest times, had related in .
their itineraries all the wonders they had seen by the
Nile. The Coptic tongue had been preserved by the
Roman missions, and had been scientifically studied and


elaborated by the gifted Jesuit Athanasius Kircher, of Fulda, and other students ;
the old Coptic version of the Gospels was first printed at Rome, and when Pococke,


‘av. 1644, An excellent account of the revival of Coptic literature is given by Ludwig Stern, “ Koptische Grammatik.


8yo, Leipz.: 1880. inleitung.”


38 EGYPT.


Niebuhr, and other scientific and educated travellers visited the Hast for the express
purpose of research, we in Europe learned, with profound surprise, that many other
monuments of extreme antiquity, besides the Pyramids, existed on both shores
of the Nile. Shortly after Buonaparte organised his expedition into Egypt, and
the savants and artists that accompanied his army undertook, with a restless
energy that no hindrances could check, to measure, draw, and describe with admirable
accuracy every monument they might meet with. It is to them that the resur-
rection of ancient Egypt is due. The outward appearance and the written symbols
of the most ancient of nations became known to us, and ere long we were made
familiar with its history, its life, its thoughts and sentiments, for, by the discovery
of the Rosetta stone by Captain Bouchard, the possibility was given of reading
and understanding the writing of the ancient Egyptians, and soon after realised.’

The deciphering of the hieroglyphics is such a splendid instance of the
achievement of modern methods of research—while without it any true compre-
hension of ancient Egypt would have remained so utterly impossible—that I feel
it is due to the reader to give him some short sketch of the way in which it
was accomplished.”

The “Rosetta Stone” has on it three inscriptions, two of which are in
Egyptian and the third in the Greek character and language. This last contains
a sacerdotal decree or proclamation in honour of Ptolemy V. (Epiphanes I.), who
reigned from 204—181 8.c., and it ends with an injunction that the said decree is
to be engraved on a tablet of hard stone in three characters: the hieroglyphic,
the demotic (or popular), and the Greek, and thus to be preserved in each of the
ereat temples. Thus the inscription informs us that, side by side with the Greek,
there is to be a version in hieroglyphic and another in the demotic writing of
the ancient Egyptians, and both in fact are here. The hieroglyphics consist of
representations of objects of every kind, and drawn from every imaginable source ;
the demotic of strangely-formed letters, of which it was at that time impossible
to guess at the prototypes. At an earlier date, students of hieroglyphics had
‘curred in the inscriptions enclosed in a
ally called), and even before the
discovery of the Rosetta stone it had been presumed that the groups thus distin-
guished from the rest might be the names of kings or of gods. In the Greek text
the name occurring most frequently was Ptolemaios; in the hieroglyphic version


already observed certain groups which o


sort of frame (or cartouche, as it is now univers:


ia) 2s
fe


the cartouche most often repeated was this ( — {| qf and it was probable


that this might be the sign for Ptolemaios. A misinterpretation, or the mis-state-
ments of certain classic authors, had given rise to the erroneous assumption that the
hieroglyphic character was of a purely ideographic or symbolic nature, and had no
affinity with the phonetic or vocal method of modern writing and spelling.

A due study of that part of the inscription which was engraved in the demotic
character proved this idea to be totally incorrect, and presently another bilingual
inscription came to support the evidence afforded by the Rosetta stone; this was


* See foot-note, Vol. i., p. 79.


* The account is given in Birch’s “ Introduction to the Study of the Hieroglyphs.” 12mo, London, 1857.


RESURRECTION OF THE ANTIQUITIES. 39


discovered on the plinth of an obelisk in the island of Philae, and in it the name
of Cleopatra occurred in the Greek, which could only answer to this cartouche in the


hieroglyphics (ee l¢ U ALK NON ao thus the lever was found for which science had
been waiting to wrench open the door which for so long had remained locked on the
secret of the Egyptian Sphinx. Two great men set to work at once, but indepen-
dently—in England, Thomas Young,’ a man distinguished "in various branches of
science, and in France, Francois Champollion2 The happiest results crowned their
labours ; but Champollion must with justice be regarded as the successful decipherer
of hieroglyphics rather than his English rival, for what Young succeeded in detecting
by mere ingenious conjecture, Champollion
treated by scientific method, and at his
death, in 1832, he bequeathed to us a
grammar and an extensive vocabulary of
the ancient Egyptian language. We can-
not forbear repeating the noble eulogy
spoken by no less a man than Chateau-
briand in praise of this distinguished man,
so early snatched from his labours: “Ses
admirables travaux auront la durée des
monuments quwil nous a fait connaitre.”

It was by the following method
that he achieved his object. If the two


names thus written


€ 2 MWiceQKEe a were really Ptole-


maios and Cleopatra they must include
several identical signs or letters; in Ptole-
maios, the quadrangular figure [_], being the
first, must stand for P, and this in Cleo-
patra was found to occur in the right place,
standing fifth in order. The third sign $} in Ptolemaios must be an 0, and the
fourth #: an 7. This theory was strikingly proved, for the lion for Z occurs second
in Cleopatra, and the knotted cord for 0 in the fourth, both quite right. In this
Way, proceeding by comparison with other names, that of Alexander, or Alksantrs,


and


FRANGOIS CHAMPOLLION.


was next discovered, A \ and by degrees a whole Egyptian alphabet
SA . é od


was constructed. This, it is true, was not available for the purpose of reading ae
pictorial inscriptions, for it was soon seen that, besides the alphabet, hundreds «
other signs were used, of which, as Champollion was the first to observe, man y na
no phonetic value, but had reference to the whole signification of the groups to
which they were an adjunct.
This is not the place for any further discussion of the laborious investigations


ap. 1818. ? A.D, 1822.
g


AT BOOLAK


NTIQUITIES


A


t OF


MUSEUM


RT OF


COUE


RESURRECTION OF THE ANTIQUITIES. 41


which finally led to a perfect comprehension of hieroglyphic writing. The French
and English students were ere long associated with German, Italian, and Scan-
dinavian colleagues, and their united labours have led to the most brilliant results.
It is known now that in hieroglyphic inscriptions, added to the words themselyes—
which are written with letters denoting single sounds or syllables—there are certain
determinative signs, both general and special, which inform the reader to what class
of ideas the separate words belong. This ideographic element, which is unknown
to our modern methods of writing, was almost indispensable in ancient Egyptian,
for it became concrete at an early stage of its development, and remained a poor
language, full of homonymous and synonymous words. The root ankh, for instance,
signifies to live, “to swear,’ “the ear,” a “mirror,” and a “goat,” much as the German
word thor means “a fool” and “a gate,” and is at the same time the name of a
Teutonic god ; or as our word bow stands for a tree, a chest, a blow, and, in certain
combinations, for a gift and a-seat. The reader might therefore easily fall into
error, and read “ankh nefer” as meaning “a beautiful goat,’ when it meant “a beautiful
life,” if he were not guided by the above-mentioned determining or class signs.
Frequently—and particularly in the inscriptions on stone, which could not be made
as simple as a writing on papyrus—special determining signs occur: signs, that is
to say, which represent the object or idea pictorially, without any written vocable


. r . ee eZ ” . .
being added; thus, instead of ha sem sem—=“a horse,” we find the picture
= 7)
4 . 5
only #5. In this case, though there can of course be no doubt as to what the
a


sign stands for, the reader will be quite in the dark as to the name of it till he
meets with it elsewhere with the phonetic sound attached.

Thus a number of ideographic signs, symbolical in their nature, have been
introduced as supplementary to the system of written vocables which we find amply
sufficient for the expression of our thoughts, and the usage was persisted in_ till
the period of the Roman Emperors, by which time the Egyptians had long been
familiar with the Greek character. The ancient writing was retained, particularly
in the case of inscriptions applied to the decoration of tombs and temples; for the
hieroglyphic character was from the earliest times treated as an ornamental character
in the fullest sense of the word, and architects used the long rows of pictures
forming the inscriptions, for decorating walls, partitions, architraves, pillars, and
doorways, as being a style of ornament which satisfied the demands of the artist
and, at the same time, the inquiring mind of the beholder. The small number
of twenty-four regularly recurring signs would evidently have been quite insufficient,
and have fulfilled their requirements far less completely than the abundant variety
afforded by more than two thousand various symbols, which at the same time
answered the purpose of making the inscriptions much more difficult to be read
by the laity, and so of preserving the mysterious character of the hieroglyphic
writing.

With the possibility of reading off hieroglyphic texts we obtained, at the same
time, the power of understanding them, for in the Coptic tongue we find the very
same language as was spoken by the Egyptian Christians in the first century of


e
we


EGYPT.


our era, and which used to be written in the Greek character with a few additional
signs, intended to facilitate the expression of certain Egyptian sounds foreign to
the Hellenic tongue. ‘Translations have been handed down to us of most of the
Biblical books, and of some other works, in the Coptic language, of which the
Monophysite Christians still make use in their form of worship; and this language,
which is perfectly known, does not differ more
from the Egyptian of the Pharaohs than Italian
differs from Latin.

There is hardly one of' all the monuments
of the Nile valley which does not bear some
inscription, and in that dry atmosphere they are
wonderfully preserved; an immense number of
closely-written papyri have also been found, and
even on the vessels used by the people there
were not unfrequently inscriptions ; so it happens
that at the present day we have a very con-
siderable mass of ancient Egyptian literature.
A building almost as large as the British
Museum might be filled with copies of all the
known inscriptions in portfolios, &&, and of the


rolls of papyrus preserved under glass. Every
kind of literature except the dramatic is known
to us as having existed among the ancient
Egyptians ; and it is to the hieratic writings
particularly—that is to say, writings in the old
sacerdotal dialect, usually on papyrus, with
peculiar abbreviated signs\—that we owe our
intimate knowledge of their literature.

Within the last few years our knowledge
of Egyptian art’ has also been established on
a sure foundation, having in fact undergone a
complete transformation ; this was owing, in the
first place, to the intelligent liberality of the
ex-Khedive; but, in the second place, more
especially to the indefatigable zeal, learning, and
genius of the man to whose discriminating care
all the monuments of the Pharaonic period have been given over, and who conducted
the excavations which have brought so many of the most important of them to
light. In the course of our expedition to Sakkarah we have already become ac-
quainted with the desert home of the late illustrious Mariette Pacha, and we
saw there one of the most fertile fields wherein he has laboured. To him, too,


THE SHEYKH-EL-BELED.


' Cursive or written characters.
* One of the latest works on the subject is Prisse d’Avennes’ “Histoire de Art Egyptienne,” fol. Paris: 1870.


Texte par P. Marchandon de la Faye.


RESURRECTION OF THE ANTIQUITIES. 45


we owe that grand work, founded under the auspices of the Khedive, the Museum
of Antiquities at Boolak, from its first planning to its final
arrangement.

Of all the known collections of antiquities that at Boolak
is the most important, and not one in Europe can boast of the
same advantage, namely, that for every object in it the place
where it was found can be pointed out.

Boolak is the harbour of Cairo, and now almost forms
a part of it—Cairo itself not lying actually on the Nile bank—
and it is at Boolak that we shall find the various institutions
founded by Mohammed Ali—the vice-regal printing press, the
iron-foundries, industrial schools, and lunatic asylum. + From
the Ezbekeeyeh to the Museum is a good half-hour’s ride on
a donkey; its garden and western wall are washed by the
Nile, and so seriously threatened, indeed, by the inundations
that it has been found necessary to decide on building a new
Museum on the left shore of the Nile, near Ghizeh, to which,
in a short time, the monuments and relics will be transferred.

We cannot linger here from room to room, from monument
to monument, from cabinet to cabinet, and show the reader woven sramvz, rnom saxxanan.
all the wealth of treasures they contain in detail. Mariette has


made it easy to the visitor to recognise the
most important pieces in the collection, for he
distinguishes each by the mode of exhibiting
it, and the ample catalogue he has written per-
fectly fulfils its object of guiding and instructing
the layman.’ Latterly many Arabs have joined
the European strangers in visiting this museum,
and even the veiled inhabitants of the harem ;
though from these, it must be owned, we may
hear very strange remarks upon the “heathen
work” which has no charm nor appeal for them,
and which they despise much more than they
admire it. The lover of art from the Western
shores who, when he first treads Egyptian soil,
has made up his mind that no art is worth
anything but the Greek, and that Egyptian sculp-
ture is barbaric, mannered, and only worthy to
be smiled at, finds himself obliged to change
his opinion as he looks at the treasures of this


collection ; nor is he deserving of reproach, even
MAKKIED COUTLE—RA-MoTEP AND tHe ray Nzrent, rroxn though he may not have done justice to the


MEYDOOM.
artis


s of Pharaonic times until he sees them


‘ There is an excellent catalogue by Mariette, “ Notice des Principaux Monuments du Musée & Boulag.” 8vo. 1869.


Also a photographic album of the same.


44 EGYPT.


here, for no European museum can offer him such another opportunity of studying,
comparing, and estimating the best specimens of the plastic art of every period
of the history of the Pharaohs. In front of these long rows of statues, each definitely
ascribed to a certain date, it is easy to form a perfect conception of the art of
sculpture as exercised by the ancient Egyptian artists, and to distinguish the cha-
racteristics of each great epoch of artistic development.

At the first glance it would almost seem as though the plastic arts in


SHAVING SMALL BOYS IN CAIRO,


ypt had produced the finest results at the earliest period of all, a period of
which we have already seen the traces during our visit to the ruins of Memphis ;
and it is true that no more life-like figures than those disinterred at Sakkarah
and in the Mausoleums of Ghizeh—among which are many fully 5,000 years old
—have ever been found in the valley of the Nile. I have already mentioned the
Seribe, which is preserved in the Louvre,’ and the beautiful statues of Chefren
found in the excavations not far from the Sphinx—one of which has been placed


1 Vol. L, p. 131.


RESURRECTION OF THE ANTIQUITIES. 45


in this museum; but both these masterpieces are even surpassed in realistic
power by the very remarkable figure in sycamore wood representing a high
official of mature age who, with his staff of authority in his hand, seems to
look down on the people whom he was wont to command; the feet have been
restored. This venerable gentleman may have been the affectionate father of a
family, but he certainly was not deficient in determination when it was necessary
to exercise it. This statue is called by the people, significantly enough, the
Sheykh-el-Beled, or village magistrate, because Mariette’s labourers, when they came
upon this statue, exclaimed ‘Here is our magistrate!” No better testimony to
the life-like vigour of the ancient master’s work could be required. The torso
of a wooden statue of a beautiful type, found also in the sand at Sakkarah, is
worthy of equal praise; it represents a young Memphite under one of the
older dynasties, and of quite equal merit is the interesting pair representing the


young prince Ra-hotep and his wife Nefert.

This monument, enclosed under glass and occupying a prominent position,
was found near the pyramid of Meydoom, and was executed in the reign of
King Snefru, who ruled before the builder of the Great Pyramid. There is not
in the whole world any older work of plastic art than this, and yet it must
be admitted, even by those who find no charm in the features of the couple
whom it has preserved from the common lot of oblivion, that it displays sound
views of realistic art, and must be regarded as one of those portraits which
we feel at once must be like the originals. Both the figures are painted,
the man brown, the wife pale and_ sallow. The mode of dress in those early
times and among the most conservative people in the world changed less often
than in our day. The heavy wig which Nefert wears remained in fashion, as
we see from the monuments, for more than three thousand years; and even later
it was worn, but more frequently by men, who were compelled by a religious
statute to shave their heads at a certain age, than by ladies. Wigs have been
found on the skulls of mummies, and one of the finest is to be seen in the
British Museum.? The custom of shaving the head seems to have been handed
down by the ancient Egyptians to all the nations of the East. To this day the
mothers bring their small boys to the barber, and it is most amusing to look on
at the operation of shaving a baby. At the present day, the Egyptians wear a
turban instead of a wig to protect the head.

We have already made acquaintance with several pictures in relief of a very
early date in the course of our visit to the Necropolis of Memphis. There is no
lack of such pictures in the museum of Boolak, and we remark in them, as in the
statues of the same date, that the artist, uninfluenced by any ideal conceptions,
has had no aim in view beyond that of giving a true and vivid picture of real
life. The conditions of the method of working in relief, howeyer, have necessitated a
particular mode of treatment, and so much importance has been attached to the
plain presentment of facts that in many instances beauty has been sacrificed. In


Viol) Ee, sp. 150!
* No. 2560. It was found in a rectangular box or basket (No. 2561), made of the kind of reeds used for writing


at Thebes.


46 EGYPT.
the face, which is always drawn in profile, a front view of the eye is always given
so that the whole of it may be seen ; the body is represented as facing the spectator
so as to do full justice to both arms, while the legs of standing figures are drawn
in profile, so as to show the whole of both. Even on reliefs that are crowded with
figures no deviation is allowed from this mode of depicting them. As a case in
point I here give the reader an illustration of a figure of a general in command, from
a highly-finished carving on a piece of wood found at Sakkarah,’ and of very early
date; and also a representation of some geese beautifully cut in very slight relief on
stone ; they, too, are shown, as animals always are, in profile.” Even those sculptors
who made statues were fettered in their work and method, for the most ancient
statues that have come down to us show us that the artist was obligéd to form
every limb of the human figure, or even of animals, in accordance with certain rules
which were declared to be sacred, and therefore never to be infringed. This “canon of
proportion” was well known to the Greeks. Throughout the long history of Egyptian
art it only twice underwent alteration. Under the older dynasties it produced
somewhat short and powerful forms; under the New Empire, after the expulsion of
the Hyksos, the figures were taller and slighter. The French savant Charles Blanc
believed he had discovered that the finger-length was the fundamental unit of these
proportions for the human figure and the claw for that of the lion; hence
the well-known saying “Ex ungue leonem.” This application of a fixed rule of
proportions can hardly be considered discreditable to the Egyptian artists when we
recollect the canon of Polykleitos* and Albert Durer’s treatise on the proportions of
the human figure.2 No doubt the strictness of the method must be regretted, for
the artists bound by it were much fettered in their efforts, and it hindered them
from animating their works by variety of movement and position, and from dis-
tinguishing the elastic contour of youth from the withered forms of old age. With rare
exceptions these statues give us portraits of men in middle life, and the figures
of women always exhibit a youthful and maidenly form. Standing and _ sitting
figures alike always are placed in the same position, and the universal application
of the artistic canon results in every one being of the same height and having
a certain breadth of chest, and length of arms and legs. Those critics are
perfectly in the right who accuse Egyptian sculpture of being limited and
monotonous ; but they must remember that in the very earliest times the Hgyptians
had far outstripped all the surrounding nations in their artistic development, and
being proud of their achievement, their most earnest endeavour was to protect it
against the barbaric influences that pressed in on them from all the nations
round them. Their dread of retrogression clogged their progress, and the canon of


An officer of high rank, holding many offices—scribe, priest, and superintendent of dockyards, His name was Ra-hesi.


* These are accompanied by their numbers—1200, 1110, 1


° In the first or oldest canon, that of the age of the Pyramids, the height was reckoned from the sole of the foot


to the crown of the head, and the subdivision we


taken at a half or a third of the foot. The second canon, which
commenced about the XIIth and terminated at the XXIInd dynasty, made the height eighteen parts of the half-foot. The
third canon, of the XXVIth dynasty, mentioned by Diodorus, reckoned the height at twenty-one halves of the foot,

* See Bonomi on the Proportion of the Human Figure according to the canon of Waka with a diagram by the
sculptor Gibson, 8vo. London: 1872.


5 «De Varietate Figurarum.” fol. Nurmberg. 1534


RESURRECTION OF THE ANTIQUITIES. 47


proportion was the chain by which they fettered themselves to the summit they
had laboriously attained. Nevertheless they were far from remaining mere servile
copyists of the established pattern. They constructed the anatomical proportion of
man and of animals from a free and exact observation of the different limbs,
reserving the right of reproducing the countenances of the men they represented
with perfect freedom and with all their natural and characteristic details. To this
most fortunate circumstance we owe our knowledge—nay familiarity—with the princes
and kings of the Pharaonic period; for
portraits of most of them, at any rate
of the greatest, have been handed down
to us, and allow of our comparing
the outline and expression of their faces
with the deeds and characteristics re-
corded of each. The Egyptians succeeded,
too, in seizing on the phy
on the physiognomical aspect—nay even
on the details of dress—of those foreign
nations with whom they came into
contact, and they reproduced all their
peculiarities in the most characteristic
manner. <A recent French historian has
attributed the long stagnation of Eeyptian
sculpture as to style to the inefficiency
of their tools; and yet we cannot but
frankly admire the skill with which they
worked and polished the hardest stones—
such as granite, grauwacke, diorite, basalt,
and other mineral products—which our
sculptors find very difficult to work. Pic-
tures that have come down from Pharaonic
times, show us the sculptors in full acti-
vity. The figures which are least pleasing
to our taste are those monstrous images
of gods with human bodies and animal heads, with head ornaments and sym-
bols, which were intended less to affect the sense of beauty than to excite the
religious feelings of the devout, to whom the hidden meaning of the sensible
image was familiar, even under the disguise of the most grotesque figures. The
Museum of Boolak is filled to overflowing with images of gods of every kind
and of every size; in metal, base and noble, in wood and terra-cotta, and among
them some are truly beautiful works of art; some bronzes inlaid with gold are
wonderfully finely cast and sharply chiselled, but they, and indeed most of the
best-finished figures of gods, are of the New Empire.


cal and even


OLD EGYPTIAN LADY'S WIG, IN THE BRITISH MUSEUM.


All the monuments surviving from the period before the incursion of the


‘Some old bronze figures have been discovered, and fine ones of the XIXth dynasty, about 1300 3B.c.; but the
greater number are later, especially of the XXVIth dynasty, B.c. 700.
h


48


Hyksos are distinguished by a grand simplicity; this also applies


i


Se


|


Mt
iM


EN i i
STNG


WOOD CARVING, IN RELIEF, FROM SAKKARAH,


EGYPT.
to the style
of the hieroglyphic inscriptions preserved on
them, and a genuine fidelity to nature is com-
mon to them all. In the portrait figures of
that date, with their strongly-marked individu-
ality, ‘no trace is perceptible of any feeling
for the ideal, while on the other hand the ideal,
the outcome of mind and sentiment, is by no
means undiscernible in the statues of the Later
Empire, which were less realistic and less natural
in style. This foreign element seems to have
first influenced the Egyptian mind at the time
of the Hyksos, and it is remarkable not in the
works of sculpture only, but also in the fan-
tastical decorative details of the gigantic under-
takings of their architects, in their elaborated
modes of speech, in the greater depth of their
religious feelings, and in their theology and the
belief in another world, which they wrapped in
the most luxuriant imagery. We possess statues


of every kind of the time of the Later Empire—standing and sitting, as tall as hills or


quite minute—made of grau-
wacke as hard as iron as well
as of soft soap-stone or of
wood.

The most colossal and
best known are of very various
merits, and generally are falsely
estimated because they are
judged of as separate and
independent works, while they
were in fact designed to be


REPRESENTATION OF GEESE, ON A RELIEF, FROM SAKKARAH.


seen in combination with huge architectural masses. From the earliest times


LION, IN BRONZE.


sculpture in Egypt was the hand-
maid of architecture, and even
under the First Empire the pic-
tures in relief, like the hiero-
glyphic inscriptions, had a purely
decorative purpose. All the colossal
statues bore certain architectonic
relations to the great public build-
ings, and the places they filled were
carefully chosen; and when we
complain that their gravity and


calm amount to lifelessness we forget that this stamp of monumental peace and


RESURRECTION OF THE ANTIQUITIES. 49


solemnity reigned over all the architectural surroundings, and was highly appropriate


OLD EGYPTIAN REPRESENTATION OF THE MAKING OF TWO STATUES AND A SPHINX,


to the places they usually occupied at the gateway of the Temple, where they looked
down on the crowd of worshippers. No one can really
judge of the effect of the colossal statues of the Egyptians
who does not conceive of them in connection with the
structures with which they formed part of a grand whole.

If we glance over the whole collection of Egyptian
remains we shall find no difficulty in distinguishing the fol-
lowing periods of art :—lIst, the work of the older empire ;
2nd, that of the Hyksos period; 3rd, that of the Liberators,
down to the XIXth Dynasty ; 4th, that of the best period,
under Seti I. and his immediate successors; 5th, the deca-
dence, down to the XXVIth Dynasty; 6th, the renaissance,
under the Saite Kings; 7th, the work of the Ptolemaic
period.

The only sculptures remaining from the Hyksos period
—if we except a bust in the Villa Ludovici at
Rome, and perhaps a specimen that is to be found

AMON, osints. in the Louvre—are preserved in the Museum of
Boolak. The most important of all has already been
mentioned in speaking of Tanis,
the capital of the foreign sove-
reigns.’ The Viceregal Museum is,
however, very rich in works of the
period immediately following the
expulsion of the Hyksos. In the first
place, in the Salle des Bijoux, or
Jewel-room, we find a great number COMPOSITE FIGURE OF THE LATER EMPIRE.
of valuable specimens of goldsmiths’
work, most of which were found—213 pieces in all—by Mariette on the mummy


D Vol. paisley


TTT


MMM TTT TTT TMT


Gj


TIN l
TTT AA ATA ic


K KJ


PORTRAITS FROM LIKENESSES OF THE TIME OF


THE PHARAOHS.


RESURRECTION OF THE ANTIQUITIES. 51


of Queen Aah-hotep, the wife of Pharaoh Aahmes, one of the conquerors of the
Hyksos.' These objects command the. admiration even of our modern jewellers.
There is a gold bracelet, richly set with coloured stones; a necklace, 90 centi-
métres (or nearly a yard) long, of the finest workmanship, and hanging to it a
most beautiful scarabeeus, a masterpiece of gold filagree with blue enamel; here,
again, an ornament exhibits an uncommon design of golden flies; there lie a
dagger and an axe of ceremony, of admirable style and
execution, the cedar-wood handle of the axe is covered with
gold plating, a favourite device in the decorative arts of the
ancients. For mere costliness we must observe a massive
golden boat on wheels, with twelve silver oarsmen. Was
all this unheard-of magnificence of liberated Egypt gained
from the Semitic peoples of Western Asia, whom she had now
for the first time vanquished ?

The liberators of their country came from Upper Egypt,
and the god under whose auspices they had marched upon
the Hyksos was Amen of Thebes; hence, at this time, we
see him preferred above Ptah and Ra, the old gods of
Lower Egypt, and merging into one with the latter. The
XVIIIth Dynasty worshipped him above all other gods ; and
the hymn addressed to him by Thothmes III.,* and graven on
a tablet of stone preserved at Boolak, far exceeds in poetic
inspiration every composition of the elder empire. At Thebes
we shall find a great number of works of this king and
of his immediate successors, all distinguished by their simple
and yet dignified grandeur. There, and at Abydos, we shall
meet with the finest productions of the highest period of
Egyptian sculpture under Seti 1% Most of the European
museums contain some examples of the numerous statues
executed by the orders of this King and of his successor,
Rameses II. (Sesostris).‘ I have already given the ideally-
treated portrait of the youthful Rameses, which is now at — war axe axp pacer or mp qunex
Turin,® and I have here accurately reproduced the bust of Be See
Menephthah T., his son,° preserved at Boolak; it is interesting to compare the
gentle spiritualised countenance with the frank realistic treatment of that of the
Prince Ra-hotep.

The decay of the plastic arts had already begun under the XXth Dynasty,
although very good work was still executed under the wealthy and luxurious
Rameses III.,7 and the head of Taharka* the Ethiopian, brought from Thebes, is well
worthy of admiration; the same must be said of the alabaster statue of Queen


1 Published in colours by M. Desj
E. Kiddle, “ Facsimiles of Egyptian Relics in the Tomb of Queen Aah-hotep.” London: 1863.


ardins in Daly’s “Revue d’Architecture.” 1860: pp. 98—l11. And again by


? An interpretation is given in the “Records of the Past,” II., p. 29. Thothmes lived about B.c. 1500,
® About Bo. 1430. 4 3.0, 1380! Se Violtlr spy 00:
® po. 1320. 7 gc, 1260. 5 Bc. 690.


52 EGYPT.


Ameniritis found at Karnak (XXVth Dynasty), for notwithstanding the ill-propor-
tioned figure, the head and various details show excellent workmanship. A renaissance
of no mean character revived
Egyptian sculpture under the sove-
reigns of the XXVIth Dynasty.
These were the Kings of Saite
origin, and many of them have
remained famous—Psametik, or
Psammetichus, the First,’ from the
narrative of Herodotus; Necho*
for his fleet, which is said to have
doubled the Cape of Good Hope,
and for his defeat at Carchemish,
CODE OR MAN Iarag SITY Er EEOMIES, spoken of in. the Bible (2 Chron.

xxxv. 20); Amasis for his pru-

dence in administration, and for his friendship with Polykrates, the Tyrant of
Samos.’ It certainly cannot be denied that the work of this period bears no
comparison with the best productions of the time of Seti I., either for truth to


RA-HOTEP. MENEPTAH.


nature or for grand simplicity; but, on the other hand, it displays a grace
and tenderness of modelling never attained at the earlier periods. At no
time did the hieroglyphic character bear the stamp of a finer style than under


' Bo. 664. F150 O10, 5 Bc. 528,


RESURRECTION OF THE ANTIQUITIES. 53


the Saite Kings, whether graven in the hardest stone or traced on papyrus, and
the art of polishing stone was never brought to
such perfection. The sarcophagi of basalt and
grauwacke prepared for the mummies of certain
great personages at the time of the XXVIth
Dynasty are covered with intaglios—both inscrip-
tions and pictures—which are quite marvellous;


and Mariette has done well in assigning a place
of honour in this collection to the beautiful group
discovered by him in the tomb of the noble official
Psametik, at Sakkarah. Isis and Osiris stand to
the right and left of Hathor, represented as a
cow; she bends her head, which is crowned with
the disc and double plume, in mild protection over
the dead figure of
Psametik. The
form and head of
the heifer, and the |
faces of the divine HEAD OF TAHARKA THE ETHIOPIAN.
brother and sister,


are among the very finest productions of the sculp-
tor’s art.

Under the son of Amasis Egypt was incor-
porated by Cambyses with the Persian kingdom ;*
but its peculiar style of art remained perfectly
unattected by that of the Asiatic Empire, under
which it remained a satrapy for two hundred years.
All the monuments of this period found in the
Nile valley and the Oases are wholly and purely
Egyptian, and as long as the nation clung to the
religion of its fathers it successfully resisted the power-
ful influence even of Greek art, which, after the
conquest of the Nile Valley by the great Mace-
donian, found a home favourable to it in the new
vapital, Alexandria. When we visit the temples of
the Ptolemaic period we shall see that thence-
forward Egyptian art did borrow something from
the Greek. The two most important monuments
of that date preserved in the Museum of Boolak
are two tablets covered with inscriptions, one of


THe QUEEN AMENTRITIS, which commemorates the bounties bestowed by

Ptolemy I. or Soter,? when Satrap, on the Temple

of Buto before he mounted the throne, the second being a trilingual decree pro-

mulgated at Kanopus in honour of Ptolemy Euergetes I.° This tablet, commonly
1 B.0. 527. * “Records of the Past,” IL, p. 29. *\ Records,” VIIL, p. 81.


called “the Decree of Kanopus,”


SBN


HATHOR AS A COW.


and Roman periods, for i
cially that the fury of the Christian Iconoclasts


OSIRIS.


grave of the deceased.


Elegantly


was against these espe-


EGYPT.


is a record of quite inestimable value, for like


the Rosetta Stone, it contains a sacerdotal pro-
clamation in Egyptian hieroglyphic and demotic
writing with a translation in Greek ;' it is larger
and fuller than the Rosetta Stone, and is, besides,
quite uninjured. It was found, in 1866, by
Lepsius among the ruins of Tanis, and was at
once a test and a proof of the accuracy of the
method pursued by Champollion and his disciples,
for every Hgyptologist did, in fact, translate the
decree exactly as had originally been done by


the Greek inter-


preter.

The Boolak
Museum is com-
paratively poor
in relics of the
Greek style of
the Ptolemaic


was directed
with virulent
zeal, and the
finest of them
were stolen
away to Rome
and Constanti-
nople. But it
abounds in those
inscribed tab-
lets, rounded at the upper end, and commonly
known as stele,” in sarcophagi, coffins, and


IsIs.


mummy-cases, in altars and in small relics of
every period which have been found in mum-
mies and tombs and among the sand and rubbish
of ruined cities, and which are more often the
work of the artisan than of the artist.

The curious visitor will here find a vast

collection of all that the piety and affec- ©


f)


tion of the survivors were wont to deposit in the


decorated cabmets and glass cases are filled with


vessels of all kinds, ornaments and articles for the toilet. There are head-rests, to


7 B.C.


238.


2 Tombstones, called hut.


RESURRECTION OF THE ANTIQUITIES. 55


which a symbolical meaning was attributed, and such as are stilt used in Nubia;
the vases known as Kanopic, in which the entrails of the dead
were preserved,’ with lids
formed of the heads of
jackals, dog-faced or cyno-
cephalous apes, hawks,
and men ; scarabzei of every
conceivable substance,
which were laid in great


numbers on the bodies of
the dead in the place of
the heart, while small ones
were attached to the limbs ;
because the Scarabzeus was
regarded as the symbol of
the reproductive forces of
Nature, and had the power
attributed to it of filling
those who seemed to be
dead with a new vital po-
tentiality ; the little figures,
too, known as Shebti,


which were set up against
atts A the walls of the tombs, and BOS R=
often placed in considerable

numbers in the sarcophagus itself, enclosed in little caskets. These mummy-shaped figures
do not occur before the New Empire.? Most of them are of glazed clay,’ and carry
in their hands a plough and a pick, and on their back a sack. =
The inscription which they bear, almost without exception,
informs us that their duty was to till the ground for the dead
in the fields of the blest.

The amulets preserved here, most of which were found


* Four in number made the set; they were dedicated, and in form of the genii of


the dead Amset, Hapi, Tuantmutef, and Kabhsenuf.


* Or sepulchral figures: their name meant “respondent.” They were inscribed


with the 6th and sometimes 5th chapter of the Ritual, and supposed to do the work of


the dead in Hades.


® Mariette has recently attributed some to an earlier period. “ Catalogue des Monu-
ments d’Abydos.” 1880: p. 45.


* Of an enamelled fayence, or so-called porcelain.


KANOPUS (SEPULCHRAL) VASE, WITH
TOILET VASE, HUMAN HEAD.


56 EGYPT.


on mummies, and the commonest of which is the Uta Hye <=> (or Symbolic Hye),
we shall find again in abundance at Thebes. Almost all have
some reference to the future life,
and are intended to protect the
deceased from the perils he may
expect to meet with on the way
to the hall of judgment in the
nether world. Some beautifully- \
omrexr vase, wits wossey, Made draughtsmen and _ boards inane
with drawers were found in some
game is spoken of in the Egyptian myth which treats of the
creation of the world; a hidden signi-
ficance was attributed to it, and it was
one of the hopes of the Egyptian that
he might be permitted to play it in
the Elysian fields. Many cases are filled
HOX AND HOARD FOR DRAUGITS. with statues and statuettes of the innu-
merable strange divinities of the Egyptian
Pantheon; there are a few mummies, and numbers of figures, large and small,
with sacred animals, among which we come upon the
strangest and most monstrous combinations. I give a


NECKLACE, WITH SCARABAUS (TITLE OF THOTHMES II.)


of the tombs. This


figure of the mummy of an ibis, which
was sacred to the ibis-headed god
Thoth. This god, the Hermes Trisme-
gistos of the Greeks, was at first
worshipped as the Moon God, and—
because the phases of the Moon served
as the basis of the first methods of
reckoning—time, measure, and number,
and then all that was subservient to
their law, finally even science, the art
of writing, and all the outcome of
human intelligence, were attributed to
his dominion. He was the scribe of
the gods, and held the palette and
reed, and it was he who at the
judgment of the dead drew up the
protocol He, in conjunction with
Safekh, the goddess of history, com-
posed the record of the deeds of
princes, and was the guardian of libra-
ries and of scribes. Many objects in use


SHEBTI, OR SEPULCHRAL


MUMMIED 1BIS. by the hierogrammatists have been VIGURE.
preserved, particularly palettes with
red and black colours, the red (the rubric) being used for the beginning of sentences
2 g aos


RESURRECTION OF THE ANTIQUITIES. 57


Fortunate circumstances have led to our being happily possessed of a vast
mass of manuscript works of the ancient Egyptians written
on papyrus. The museum of Boolak is actually less rich in
these venerable rolls than many European collections, but among
them there are several of great value and importance. Copies
of the chief work of the Egyptian religion, well
known as “The Book of the Dead,” are par-
ticularly abundant here; they have commonly
been found on mummies, among the wrappers
and bandages in coffins; chapters of this work
occur too on the walls of tombs and the sides of
sarcophagi and on small articles of the furniture
of the dead. I will only mention here that this
book, of which the extant copies exhibit various
arrangements—written sometimes at full length
and sometimes abridged,
and in very various order
—has been rightly called
a traveller’s guide for the Fees
departed soul in its wan-
derings in the nether world. The most perfect copy extant,


| ian |r is


Fe Sze ro Ad


(ane I7~


THOTH AND SAFEKH (GODDESS OF HISTORY) WRITING THE NAME oF ES II, ON THE FRUIT oP
PALETTES THE PERSEA, (Kelief from the Rameseum at Thebes.)


58 EGYPT.


by which Lepsius was enabled to number and arrange the separate chapters, is
at Turin,’ and the most remarkable and interesting chapter of it is the 125th,
in which a representation of the judgment of the dead in the nether world is
generally introduced? The departed soul stands by the side of a balance; in
one scale his heart is placed, in the other a figure of Truth. Anubis and Horus
watch the weighing, which is satisfactory when the heart and the statue of Truth
balance each other. Thoth-Hermes declares the result, and restores the’ heart to
the justified soul that has been found true. Osiris, as president of the subterranean
court of justice, opposes the justification of the dead man, who must declare himself


10


i


REPRESENTATION OF THE EGYPTIAN JUDGMENT OF THE DEAD. (Vignette of the 125th chapter of the Turin Ritual.)


innocent of as many crimes as there are bystanders* assisting at the judgment—
namely, forty-two. These forty-two asseverations, each of them beginning with
“T have not,” are set forth in the 125th chapter of the text, and afford us the
quintessence, as it were, of the moral principles of the Egyptians, which show a
close affinity to the Mosaic law. It is only by a study of the “ Book of the Dead”
that we have found it possible to fathom the basis of the Egyptian theology and
doctrine of eternity.

Besides ‘“‘ Books of the Dead,” many other hieratic papyri are preserved at
Boolak. One of the most important contains a great number of moral precepts,
which may be compared with the Proverbs of Solomon; the knowledge of life,


1 Published by him under the title of “Todtenbuch.” 1844.
2 A very interesting specimen is to be seen—framed, and with a translation below (into French)—at the Louvre.
3 Deities and demons, the Assessors.


RESURRECTION OF THE ANTIQUITIES. 59


dignified morality, and purity are deserving of all praise.’ Another manuscript, of
older date, contains a beautiful and elevated hymn to Amen;? while a much later
demotic papyrus relates a romantic tale, known as the “Story of Setnau.”® Others
contain accounts; some, magical formule. These last were of frequent use, parti-
cularly in later times, and were often inscribed in the sacred colours on amulets
or stone tablets; the stele known as representing Horus on the crocodiles are
full of them; a well-preserved specimen exists in the Boolak Museum, and the
power was ascribed to them of protecting the owner against evil and injurious
influences." Amulets against the “evil eye” are common, and _ horoscopy has
bequeathed to us whole calendars, in which every
day of the year is marked as lucky, unlucky, or fatal,
for certain undertakings, and as favourable or un-
favourable to the destinies of the human race.’
Many of these monstrous births of superstition
have outlived the religion of the ancient Egyptians,
and it may be pointed out as a strange phenomenon,
admitting, however, of proof, that while the adhe-
rents of the different confessions dwelling by the
Nile were always staunch in their opposition to the
religious doctrines of other creeds, they were only
too ready to adopt foreign superstitions. I can
here only make a passing reference to this subject ;
but will refer the reader to Lane’s classic work and
Klunzinger’s admirable book,’ in which the last
chapter is devoted to its discussion. The modern,
like the ancient Egyptians, wear pious sentences illu-
minated in colours as charms against sickness and
disease, they conjure up spirits, use various love-
philtres and charms, and guard themselves by magic
against sword and bullet. To this day the people
relate that their great commander Ibrahim Pacha,
the father of the Khedive Ismail, went through the
bloodiest battles unharmed because he possessed a powerful talisman. Lane is credu-
lous enough to tell us wonderful things of the divination by ink; a piece of paper


HORUS ON THE CROCODILES.


is used with numbers on it, into this is poured a large blot of ink, in which


a boy, by the aid of magic, sees all sorts of things which his master causes to
appear on the black surface. At Lane’s request that the boy might be able to
see Admiral Lord Nelson, of whom the boy had certainly never even heard, he
looked into the ink and said, “A messenger is come back, and has brought


' Published by Chabas, “ L’Egyptologie.” 1875. * Translated in “ Records of the Past,” IL., p. 127.
8 “Records of the Past,” IV., p. 131. * “Zeitschrift fur Aegyptische Sprache,” 1868; p, 99.
* The papyrus of this nature in the British Museum has been published by Chabas,


“Le Calendrier Sallier.”
° The “Dies Aigyptiace ; or, Egyptian Days of the Medieval Calendar.”
* “Upper Egypt, its People and Products.” Translated by Dr. Schweinfiirth. Blackie and Co.


Nee


RES


c=
=
~s


RESURRECTION OF THE ANTIQUITIES. 61


& man in a black European coat, and the man has lost his left arm.” Then,
after considering for a few seconds, he added, “No, he has not lost his left arm,
only laid it acer


ss his breast.” “This amendment,” adds Lane, “makes his descrip-
tion more striking than it had been at first, for Lord Nelson was in the habit of
wearing the empty sleeve fastened up to the breast of his coat; but it was the
right arm he had lost.”


This and many other wonders worked by the magic mirror! ave difficult to


TO


TL


CELT RAL GAARA


ill i ih alk
i Mh HN


EGSNOE ~ = —


Eile


HMEOOGENGNAEOA GEOG AGE


PORTRAIT STATUE AND RELIEF OF THE FANATICAL KING AMENOPHIS IV,


explain, and certainly testify to the skill of the men who practise the art. But,
indeed, there is no lack both of men and women skilled in raising the veil of
futurity, a subject of curiosity not peculiar to the Oriental mind. Chiromancy, or
palmistry, is a favourite method, and is frequently practised on the impression made
by the hand in soft dough.

Magical preparations of all sorts are frequently used as remedies in illness, and
in even serious cases the patient is made to swallow pieces of paper inscribed with
texts from the Koran, and to try various similar absurd means, before a physician
is applied to. Lane enumerates a variety of such remedies. The ancient Egyptians,


‘The mirror was used at least as e


y as the Romans by Didius Julian, a.v. 193. In a magic Greek Papyrus
published by C, W. Goodwin (1852) the divination was by a boy, a saucer, and a pit—or in a pit.


62 EGYPT.


though medical science was zealously studied by them, also thought that the efficacy
of the treatment was enhanced by magic formule. In the Ebers Papyrus, an
important and very ancient manual of Egyptian medicine, the prescriptions for
yarious medicaments are accompanied by the forms of exorcism to be used at the
same time, and yet many portions of this work give evidence of the advanced know-
ledge of its authors.

Even their alchemy and their astrology have not been wholly forgotten by
their descendants ; both were eagerly practised at the period when Cairo, with its
famous university attached to the mosque of El-Azhar, flourished as the centre of
all the learning of the Hast.

We will now see what this magnificent seat of learning has become in
modern times, and what fruits of knowledge at present ripen under its shelter.


BANKS OF THE NILE.


CCT


ENTRANCE TO THE KHAN EL-KHALIL.


% N a former section I have spoken
of the founding of the Mosque
and University of El-Azhar by
Djawhar, general under Mo‘izz,
and have said that this famous
foundation was the source and
centre of all the scientific life
of the East. So it has remained
from the time of the first of the
Fatimides to the present day, and
it is with pleasure that I now
undertake to conduct the reader
through this institution, unique in its kind, under
the guidance of the illustrious Ignaz Goldziher, who
himself belonged to this college as a disciple, though
in many respects no doubt far the superior of his


teachers.

To reach those famous halls from which Moslem
lore and learning radiate to the uttermost ends of
the Mohammedan world we must now quit the western-
looking quarter in the vicinity of the Hzbekeeyeh
Square, and plunge into the half-Oriental, half-EKuropean
throng in the main street of Cairo, called Muskee.
There, in the lower storeys, European shops, with gaily-
dressed windows, are arrayed one after another. Seldom
can we glance up at the balcony of an upper storey or down in the swarming and
bustling side streets, for the vehicles, riders, and pedestrians that throng around us
absorb our whole attention. Just now, however, we have not time to study and

j


64 EGYPT.


describe this wonderful and struggling crowd. But on the way to our destination
we presently turn down a street to the right, riding between two rows of booths,
dukkans, where two articles very dissimilar in nature are exposed for sale: books
and slippers. What can be the circumstances which bring together these very
different wares—not here only, but in Syrian shops too—in the same propinquity ?
“ Books,” says the wise man “are usually bound in red leather, and slippers are
made of the same red leather; ergo, books and slippers are found in the same
shop, and the bookseller and slipper dealer are one.”

Gladly would we step into the stall of our friend Hasan or of his neighbour
the merchant from Mecca,
and bargain with him,
over a cup of coffee and
the smoke of a nargileh,
for a fine Boolak edition
or for one of those antique
manuscripts, not rare in
Cairo, of which the finest
examples—decorated with
exquisite ornament—have
come down from the time
of the Mameluke Sultans
and are preserved in the
vice-regal library. But
> to-day we do not seek to
buy books, but to visit
the retreat which for cen-
turies has enshrined the

PUBLIC LEYTER-WRITERS. learning and cherished the

intelligence to which most

of these works owe their origin; and many ornaments derived from venerable manu-

scripts of the Koran will grace this very chapter which is devoted to the subject of
Arabic learning,


We have now reached the Mosque—glancing as we passed at the public
scribe who sits at a street corner writing a letter at the dictation of an artisan.
By which of the six gateways shall we enter? The eastern, known as Bab-esh-
Shurbeh or the “Gate of Pottage” is delightfully picturesque, but we will prefer
the “Gate of the Barber,’ the imposing great gate of the institute; and we


cross its threshold in a sobered mood, as we read the inscription which appeals


to the visitor in the following words: “Deeds shall be judged by their motives,
and every man shall have his reward meted to him according to the motives
of his heart.” :

After taking off our shoes and exchanging them for a pair of straw slippers,
the gatekeeper shows us through an alley, where we see the barbers shaving their
customers’ heads, into the vast and beautiful fore-court of the Mosque, panelled
with marble. Here, by the side of the basins or cisterns which serve for the


i Whi
Ne li
M


VCH AIA


“GATE OF POTTAGE”


AT THE MOSQUE OF EL-AZHAR.


66 EGYPT.


prescribed ablutions of the faithful before prayer, sit half-grown boys behind their
large leaden tablets, incessantly swaying their bodies with a pendulum see-saw while
they learn the rudiments of Mohammedan lore. The students proper we shall not see
till we are within the Mosque itself. ;

We are surrounded by a quite peculiar phase of life. We are in a vast hall,
of which the roof is supported on three hundred and eighty pillars ; from the ceiling
hang no less than twelve hundred lamps; and on the floor, which is covered with
mats, an innumerable crowd of youths and men squat in groups. The boys sit
in semicircles round a sheykh, their teacher, who leans against a pillar. Their
eyes are fixed on his as he ex-
plains to them some one of the
many texts and commentaries on
the books of the canon law of
Islam. This he does in the
sing-song tone characteristic of
Oriental teaching, of which we
may hear a very similar instance
among the Talmudic Jews in
Europe. If we pause for a fur-
ther inspection of this great hall,


we perceive, besides the desks
and the pulpits such as we have
seen in other mosques, two much
lower platforms, on one of which
a venerable old man is deep in
the explanation of a’ book of
law. The number of his audience
is evidently greater than that
of the young disciples of his


colleague. This is the revered


ORNAMENT FROM THE TITLE-PAGE OF AN OLD MANUSCRIPT OF THE KORAN,


IN THE LIBRARY OF THE VICEROY AT CAIRO, Sheykh Ashmoonee, renowned for

his learning and ascetic life, and

one of the chief ornaments of the institution. A profound grammatical treatise,
printed at Boolak, and of which he is the author, is evidence of his learning,


and his celibacy is proof of his temperate life; and while his colleagues deliver
their lectures sitting on a mat, and are recognisable as professors solely by their
position close to a pillar (“take the seat by the pillar” is here the equivalent for
“filling a professor's chair”) the privileges of a raised seat is ungrudgingly accorded
to him, for his superiority is acknowledged by all.

The other platform is at this moment unoccupied—it is reserved for the oldest
sheykh in the mosque, the venerable as-Sakkah, whose infirmities and advanced
age prevent him from taking his place by a pillar. The populace attribute to him
an age of more than a hundred years—in fact, he is about ninety. He now usually
holds his classes at his own residence, but in former years not only was he
distinguished “by the pillar” but famous as a Friday preacher, for the subtlety


MOSQUE AND UNIVERSITY OF EL-AZHAR. 67


and eloquence of his discourses. He is regarded as the most learned Mohammedan
in Egypt, and would beyond a doubt—so says the world of Cairo, which is ever
ready to discuss the concerns of the mosques—long since have attained the dignity
of Chief Muftee, or direc-
tor of the mosques, if he
had not in his youth
exercised the calling of a
corpse-washer. Other rea-
sons, connected with his
form of faith, have, how-
ever, stood in the way ot
his promotion. The only
detail that is of any impor-
tant interest to us is the
fact that the contempt and
aversion felt by the ancient
EKgyptians for all who were
occupied in the dressing
and opening of the dead
have been preserved un-
diminished among their
modern successors.

Many fine and ex-
pressive heads, and not a
few grey-bearded old
stagers are to be remarked
among the sheykhs and
their thousands of dis-
ciples. Notably worthy of
remembrance is the blind
Sheykh Ahmed es-San-
hooree ; the youngest gene-
ration of students have
gathered round him, and
the text he is expounding
is read by one of his
scholars. The blind peda-


gogue listens attentively, 4 LEARNED CAIRENE,

and is gifted with so accu-

rate a memory that at the smallest slip or error he raises his staff—which even
while sitting he never lays aside—with a threatening gesture.

Not to-day only, but for many another, will we linger here, going from pillar
to pillar and listening to the professors, and we shall soon observe that not one of
them treats of any independent branch of science in a separate and connected series
of lectures. This method of instruction which, among us, has found elaborate


P a
mM os)
FAN <
GN i

v


cn
i) i


EL-AZHAR,


jo)
Ss
i=)
Zz
~T
=
DH
[SI
Zz


IN THE UNIVER


LECTURE


MOSQUE AND UNIVERSITY OF EL-AZHAR. 69


development, is foreign to the Orientals, and even the most learned among
them, now that the creative and constructive spirit has gradually become extinct,
are content merely to interpret certain texts, or to comment on commentators,
or even upon the commentators on commentators. They derive their pabulum from
the elder literature, and exercise their wits on it. The professor recites text and
commentary alike in his monotonous drone; he announces the former with the
words, “The writer says—may Allah bless him and introduces the latter
with “The commentator says ——.” Now and then his discourse is interrupted
by the timid question of a scholar, and at difficult passages the teacher will pause
to ask “Hast thou understood?” to which usually he gets the emphatic answer
“God be praised—I have understood.”

Such a lecture lasts from an hour and a half to two hours; it commonly
closes with the words: “So far, and may Allah give us understanding.” Then the
students all rise, go up to the teacher one by one, kiss his hand in leave-taking,
and lay their copies of the text in their portfolios. The contents of these portfolios,
“in black and white,” are valued even by these youngsters, and among the notices
affixed to the pillars by the permission of the superintendent, an appeal, pathetically
worded, is often to be seen for the restoration of a lost portfolio to the owner.
Such an appeal, copied by Dr. Goldziher, began as follows: “Oh! neighbours
(mugawireen) of the noble Mosque of el-Azhar; oh! seekers after knowledge! alas
for the loss suffered by a poor servant of God. I have lost a case in which there
were two kuras* of the commentary, ete; the finder may deliver it to the
gate-keeper, as religion requires of him, and will receive a douceur (which is the
literal translation of the Arabic word hal&wa—a sweet) from his humble servant
(meaning the advertiser) as soon as the folio is restored to my hands.”

In the hours of relaxation the students walk up and down the court of the
mosque in lively conversation, stand together in groups, bargain with the pedlars,
or chat with the visitors who are admitted. Here a water-seller, with his clanking
metal cups, supplies the needs of a student who thirsts not for knowledge only ;
there a young disciple is buying eatables, and out there a third is talking to a
deeply-veiled woman—his mother, or some near relation. Suddenly the clear voice
of the muezzin shouts the call to midday prayer (es-Suhher). All hasten to the
cisterns in the fore-court to perform the prescribed ablutions, and then prostrate
themselves with their faces in the direction of the kiblah.

After the mid-day rest the lectures begin again, and are not ended till evening
prayer (el-Magrib). The last of the five indispensable acts of worship is performed
by the students in their homes, many of which, as we shall see, are within the
precincts of the mosque itself.

This description of the life in the University of el-Azhar applies only to week-
days. On Fridays work is suspended; but at mid-day thousands of the faithful
may be seen in the vast pillared hall, engaged in prayer led by the Imam, or


listening to the preacher.
In former chapters we have become familiar with the mosque as a place of


1 Hach kuras consists of ten leaves of paper fastened together. The Arabs write with a reed pen on a piece of


paper laid on the palm of the left hand. See the woodcut of the letter-writer, page 64,


THE MOSQUE OF WERDANEE.


MOSQUE AND UNIVERSITY OF EL-AZHAR. 71


prayer, though consecrated by no outward ceremony; we here see it in its primary
and principal function as a home of learning. Certainly those who reproach Islam
for not favouring learning are either ignorant of its aims or do it an injustice, for,
according to the conception of the Mohammedans, learning is an essential part of
the faith, and of the highest human nature. “Men,” says a text of Mohammedan
tradition, “are either learners or learned, and he who belongs to neither of these
classes is a reptile, and good for nought.” So inseparable, indeed, is knowledge from
faith in the estimation of the Moslem, that in Arabic histories the pericd before
the introduction of Islam is called the “epoch of ignorance.” The learning thus
intimately connected with Islam is, to be sure, for the most part mere religious
science; but this is a tree with many branches, and from the profound zeal with
which it is studied from the very rudiments, it may well absorb the whole of a
man’s lifetime. Besides, other and profane branches of study are by no means
excluded ; nay, are warmly recommended, and an Arabic precept says, “ Learn
magic, but do not practise it. A man must know everything, and remain ignorant
of nothing.”

The closeness of the tie which here unites learning and faith is very con-
spicuous in this: that the place of prayer—the mosque and the lecture hall—
the university—are one and the same; and at the founding of a house of worship
it is generally connected with a school. Such bequests (awkaf), to which are frequently
attached certain conditions as to the nature and mode of instruction to be observed
in the establishment, are by law inviolable; but princes, devoid of conscience, have
nevertheless sometimes infringed them, and _ servile experts have attempted by
specious arguments to give such encroachments a false semblance of legality.
Thus it has come to pass that many of the numerous mosque-schools of Cairo have
been forced to disperse. Others, as for instance, the mosque of Werdanee, in which
only the beautiful interior and the minaret are in good preservation, have fallen
into disuse, and the endowments appertaining to them have either passed into the
hands of the State authorities, or have been granted to other similar institutions,
to which the teachers and scholars were at the same time transferred.

It is to a concurrence of such circumstances and acquisitions that the high
school of el-Azhar owes its almost incredible concourse of pupils. Almost the whole
of the scientific life and energy which was formerly distributed among several
mosques, has now centred in this. Beside it the other schools of Cairo are hardly
worthy of mention; and in what other city in the world shall we find a college
where the professors number three hundred, and the disciples more than ten
thousand ?

I have spoken of. the building of it in a.p. 909; the last of the many
restorations it has needed and undergone was in 1720. The theological course was
opened only seventeen years after its first foundation, and it has been constantly
enriched by endowments bestowed to enable the young to deyote themselves to
study, free from petty mundane cares. The eccentric and semi-divine Hakim!
devoted the income of several noble estates in Egypt, Syria, and other provinces


| Vide Vol. I., p. 299.
k


| i
ANNOHP,


if


TITLE-PAGE OF


as Zs OS

S é

Sy S Sa ae 5 j= =
oF
& p
9) Oe 0 y, 0 6) y,
A

“vy a nan acta cam me ma a |


A MANUSCRIPT OF THE KORAN OF THE TIME OF THE SULTAN EL MOYAD (A.D. 1412—1121)
IN THE VICE-REGAL LIBRARY OF CAIRO.


MOSQUE AND UNIVERSITY OF EL-AZHAR. 73


to the uses of this mosque. After the overthrow of the Fatimide Khaleefs, who
had clung to the Shiite confession, the Sunnite believers gained the upper-
hand, and, after some difficulties, attained such unconditional supremacy that they
soon converted the Shiite school of el-Azhar into the fountain-head of Sunnite
learning. And such it remains to this day, though in a liberal and comprehensive
spirit such as would be impossible in any other creed, for Islam is a religion as
tolerant of the shades of belief which develop within its pale as it is intolerant
of all that lie outside it.

We must divest ourselves of all ideas of dogmatic orthodoxy if we would
understand that in the mosque of el-Azhar four distinct sects, or rather, the
adherents of four separate rituals, are all recognised as orthodox, and pray in peace
side by side; and all the four systems, as represented by learned professors and
devout disciples, are taught and practised under the same roof without any painful
friction or discord. The orthodox Islam of the Sunnites, in fact, includes four
different schools or rituals, which, far from encouraging enmity and contention,
teach and expound the tradition of the Moslem faith and the law of Moham-
medan righteousness with the tenderest consideration and tolerance for each other,
though very often on the most diametrically opposed methods. The Hanbalees, so
called from the Imam Ahmed-ibn-Hanbal, their founder, adhere to the interpretation
of the Koran which personifies God in the form of man. This sect, having far
fewer adherents than any of the others, is the nest of fanaticism against all that
is foreign and not Mohammedan, a fanaticism which is falsely assumed to be the
universal stamp of Islam; it also was the centre of those religious outbreaks to
which belong the well-known raids of the Wahhabees in Upper Arabia and India.

The school of the Malikees, founded by the Malik-ibn-Anas, of Medina, bears
aloft the banner of Mohammedan tradition; it was formerly strongly represented
in Andalusia, and now is conspicuous at Algiers, and widely distributed in the
provinces of Northern Africa and Upper Egypt. The sect most distinguished for
free thought, and for its deviations from the rigid standards of original tradition,
is that of the Hanafees; it was founded in Irak, by the Imam Aboo Haneefa, and
in numbers and importance is above all the other confessions; the official circles
belong to it. Between the broad and the rigid schools stand the Shafe’ees, founded
by the Imam Shafe’ee, whose tomb we saw in the Karafeh. Before the conquest
of Egypt by Seleem, theirs was the predominant ritual, but since the incursion of
the Turks, who are all of the sect of Hanafees, the chief Sheykh—the warden, or
principal, so to speak, of the college of el-Azhar—is always of that confession ; and
the same is the case with the Muftee of the Nile provinces, whose nomination has
long been in the hands of the Government of Egypt.

It is not only in dogmatic views and questions of right that these sects
differ, but in their cultus and ritual as well, and yet all four have their represen-
tative Imams in this central focus of Islam. In the mosque of el-Azhar it is a
thing of daily occurrence that two professors of different sects stand side by side,


by the same pillar, interpreting the same chapter of the canon law according to
the antagonistic conceptions of their schools.
The mosque of el-Azhar is to Moslem science what Mecca and Medina are to


4 EEE


ESL


BIE


SHA’ABAN (A.D. 1366—1377)


SULTAN


JATRO.


ME OF THE
Y Or ¢


iB
Ge
ag
eies|
qa
cae
a 4
os
4%
is
os
as
aa
HZ
ome
y
a
ia
a
Oo
5
P
4
q
=
4
&
3
<3)
o
=
FB
a
ct
3
Ie


|
(NA


MOSQUE AND UNIVERSITY OF EL-AZHAR. 75


its devotional practice. It is frequented by Mohammedans of every language and
nationality, and there is not a province where Islam is professed, from the coast
of Morocco, bathed by the Atlantic, to the islands of the Indian Archipelago, that
is not represented in this mosque. Of the 7,695 disciples who studied there in the
course of the year 1877 there were 1,240 Hanafees,’ 3,192 Shafe’ees, 3,240 Malikees,
and 23 Hanbalees.

As the Mosque itself evidently cannot contain so vast a mass of students,
many lectures are delivered in another mosque close to that of el-Azhar. The
maintenance of the teachers and pupils is supplied not only from the endowments
of which I have spoken, but also from gifts and contributions from those localities
whence the students at the university are most frequently sent. The last great
bequest bestowed on this foundation were the possessions of the wealthy mosque
and fountain-school of Abd-er-Rahman Keypah, whose tomb is to be seen in a side-
walk of the Mosque; this foundation became extinct 107 years since; later, indeed,
only sixteen years ago, Rahib Pasha endowed what is known as the Rewdk-cl-
Hanafeeyah, in which at the present time 135 students are maintained. The same
pious man provided that in addition to the 4,000 loaves daily supplied by the
administrators of the endowments, 500 more should be distributed. The former
governor of Upper Egypt, Aboo Sultan Pacha, also caused 200 loaves a day to be
baked for the students,

Tt has often been asserted that Mohammed Ali confiscated the endowment-
money belonging to the Mosque of el-Azhar, and applied it to his own purposes ;
but no accusation can be more unjust, for this great statesman did in fact put
the property (Wakf is the Avabic name) of the University under the supervision
of the Government, and supplied the not inconsiderable deficit out of his own
coffers. And the bold reformer, whose constant effort it was to subordinate every
factor in the intellectual life of the nation to the service of his leading idea of
the State, did not think that he had paid too high a price when he thus purchased
his influence over the Academy of el-Azhar, that stronghold of the ancient faith,
a world in itself. The same conditions obtain to the present day, for the Khedive’s
Government administers the endowments of the Mosque, and sacrifices considerable
sums in order to preserve the right of regulating, at any rate, the external concerns
of the society which has it in its power to offer dangerous opposition to his projects
of reform.®


Far from plundering this venerable institution, the Viceregal Government
supports it liberally; indeed, one of its greatest services is that it brought the


"This comparatively small number of Hanafees is to be explained by the circumstance that the district where
they ave most numerous is in Central Asia, far away from Cairo. The Shafe’ees of Egypt and the Malikees of North Africa
can easily send their sons to Cairo, Of the 231 professors at present attached to the Mosque of el-Azhar, 49 are
Hanafees, 106 Shafe’ees, 75 Mali , and 1 Hanbalee.


* I am indebted for these details to Dr. Goldziher, who, on his part, obtained them by the kindness of Dor Bey
the worthy reformer of Egyptian schools, and of the Baron Franz von Révay.

* The whole receipts of the administration of this Mosque, including the farm-rents from the estates belonging
to the foundation, amounted to 27,564,614 Turkish piastres (about £2,490), the expenditure 39,083;428 Turkish piastres
(about £3,520). The deficit of 11,488,814 piastres (about £1,030) was covered by, the Minister of Education ; the
expenses of the administration are not included, 3,944,933 piastres (about £350).


76 EGYPT:


course of instruction pursued in the Mosque to some sort of system, if not as to its
outward forms, at least by exercising some control as to the capabilities and
qualifications of the teachers and pupils. Instead of the superannuated mode of


RECESS IN THE KA’AH OF THE SHEYKH EL-MAHDEE.


obtaining admission in use among the Arabs, since 1871 a method of examination
has been introduced, which cannot but be beneficial to Oriental culture, and by
which the candidate has to pass a test of proficiency in the presence of one of six
sheykhs belonging to the different sects. The Government reserves to itself the
right of ratifying the election, and can subsequently promote the candidate from
the third to the second and from that to the first grade of professorship. When a


MOSQUE AND UNIVERSITY OF EL-AZHAR. ag


man reaches the highest dignity, the Khedive, in true old Oriental fashion, sends
him, with his firman, or diploma, a robe of honour. The latest report of the college -
‘shows only three professors in the first rank. The superintendence of the whole
course of study is a function of the Muftee of the Nile provinces, who also enjoys
the rank and title of “ Sheykh el-Gami” (principal of the mosques), and who may be
regarded as the most highly-considered and influential member of Moslem society
in Cairo. The present Muftee is the Sheykh Abbasee, a dignified and learned
man, surnamed el-Mahdee—~e., “the well guided”—an interesting epithet borne by
families who have been converted to the true faith ; in point of fact the Mutftee’s
father was a distinguished and learned Jew, whose apostacy occasioned the greatest
excitement in the Hebrew circles of Cairo. Abbasee’s predecessor—Mustafa-el-
Aroosee, who is still living, a most cultivated and amiable old man—was the
author of several scientific and poetical works; he lost his office in consequence of
a collision with the Ulamas on the subject of the Code Napoléon. Abbasee’s office,
which he has held since 1871, is one of the best paid in Egypt, giving the
incumbent an annual income of 1,730 pounds Egyptian (about £1,800 sterling) besides
a splendid old Arab palace to reside in. It is easy, therefore, to understand why
an Egyptian, as he blesses his boy, says: “Allah grant thee to become the Sheykh
el-Gami.”


The salaries of the professors are much smaller, never rising beyond 500
piastres a month (about £5), but other subsidiary offices are open to them, as
imams, preachers, muftees, or in the administration of the establishment ; they also
have their share in the distribution of bread. Nevertheless, the outward
circumstances of life to a teacher of the third class in the chief college of Islam
are very modest. Dr. Goldziher had ample opportunity of convincing himself in
their dwelling-rooms that these laborious and truly high-souled men, though they
take no formal vow of poverty, are indeed examples of the motto ascribed to the
founder of Islam: “Fakree fahree”—‘ My poverty is my pride.”

Although in the professional department of the Mosque many of the forms of
modern European collegiate life have been introduced, the classification of the
students reminds us of the division according to their “nations” of the students
in German universities in the middle ages. The life of the alumni of the Mosque
is, in the strictest sense, that of a college, divided into nationalities, in combination
with a system of boarding-houses, which to us Europeans is extremely remarkable.
These, known as the riwaks, or tents, are in the side-wings and out-buildings of the
Mosque; in them the students have their modest quarters, divided according to
their nationality ; but they have become much too narrow for the immense number
of students, and so the more well-to-do of them have their lodgings outside the
institution in private dwellings, of which there are plenty in the immediate vicinity.
There are at present forty-one riwaks and harat (streets), that is to say, portions of
the precincts not enclosed by walls. The most populous riwAk, with one thousand
four hundred and two students, is the Upper Egyptian, and there among the fullest
_ are that of el Fashneeyeh, with seven hundred and three students from the Kgyptian
province of Beni Suéf; and that of the students from Tebrees, numbering one
hundred and sixteen. Of course the outlying districts of Islam send a smaller


78 ; EGYPT.


number of representatives. Thus, from Bagdad there is one, from India seven, from
the two Holy Cities eight, and from Darfoor six. In 1871 there were six students
from Java, but they quitted the college in 1875. Several of the riwaks are classified,
not according to fellow-nationality, but by community of opinions; thus there is a
separate riwdk of twenty-three Hanbalees; one of the blind, of which there are
two hundred and five; these for many centuries have earned a bad name for their
fanaticism and wild demeanour. <A particular riw&k is open to those students for
whom no special riwak affords a home in the Mosque academy, and this now has
no less than eight hundred and ninety-seven inmates. The statistics of the university
up to the year 1877 showed on the whole an increase in numbers.


In 1871 there were 314 professors and 9,668 students.


1873 5 321 fs 10,216 A
1876 m 325 M 11,095,
But in 1877 only 231 eS (eCobmane,


The cause of this diminution in the force of teachers (ninety-four) and the
little army of learners (three thousand four hundred) was by no means due to a
diminution in the interest taken by the Moslem population in religious learning,
but merely to the old truth, “Inter arma silent Musae.” The Russo-Turkish war
appealed to all the youth of Islam, called them to arms, and rendered it impossible
for the inhabitants of whole districts to send their sons to Egypt. Under the
beneficent sunshine of Peace, el-Azhar—ineaning “the blooming’”—will once more
thrive and flourish; and only superficial misapprehension, narrow prejudice, and
blind bigotry, can deny its value and its right to exist.


MANDARA OF THE MUFTEE SHEYKH EL MUHDI.


Me
1h


CAIRO.
THE LIKE OF THE PHOPLE.


>> +e<__—


HOEVER desires to learn some-
thing of the character of a
nation must take part in its
diversions, and study the
people at their festivals—
public and private—and on
occasions alike of mirth and
of sorrow. This advice should
be taken especially to heart by those whose
duty it may be to observe the life of a
nation, and to describe the manners, the
being, and doing of Oriental civic com-
munities, among which the foreigner is only
in the rarest cases admitted into the house,
and never—or hardly ever—into the family.
On occasions of public festivity the street
becomes the place of assembly, and the
private life of the Eastern home is turned
for the time out of doors. Every one pos-
sessed of unwearied feet, eyes to see, and
ears to hear, is at liberty to assist at the
scene and to take such advantage of it as
he may. To obtain admission to a family
festival no doubt something more is re-
quired ; the habit, above all, of living with
the natives, and of such confidential inter-
course as can usually only be attained by


sharing in their labours either as their superintendent or fellow-workman, and by


acquiring an intimate knowledge both of their customs and manners, and of their


CAIRO—LIFE OF ‘THE PEOPLE. 81


language. All these qualifications are found combined in the distinguished German
savant, Dr. Spitta, of Hildesheim, who for many years has lived in the city of the
Khaleefs as librarian to the Khedive, and has collaborated with his Arab subordi-
nate officers in preserying and arranging the manuscripts and printed books of the
library of Darb el-Gamameez with scientific care. He is now our guide, and under
his conduct, after viewing the interior of an Arab home, we will first endeavour
to obtain access to their family solemnities, and then joi in the public festivities
of the Cairenes.


SOC THE HOME.


E are introduced, not into one of those ancient palaces of the
Mamelukes, which have already been depicted to the reader, but
into the house of a well-to-do
Arab of the merchant class, and
we note with some surprise the
simplicity and bareness of the
outside facing the street. On the
lowest floor there are either no


windows at all, or only narrow
ones, strongly barred, and above them there are the
Mashrebeeyeh balconies, which we have observed
before. The narrow door is shut and bolted, or, if
it is open, nothing is to be seen but a long passage
with a seat for the door-keeper—an old and trust-
worthy servant who, even at night, keeps his post


as guardian of the entrance, lying on a bed of palm-
branches. Any glimpse into the interior is carefully
screened, for the Arab’s house is his jealously-cuarded
sanctuary, and however rich the interior may be its
external aspect must be as simple as possible. These
precautionary measures are a relic of the time of the
Mamelukes, when the aim of every citizen was to
avoid attracting the eye of the marauding despot,
or exciting his cupidity. Wooden figures, paintings,
mottoes, or stuffed animals over the doorways, are
supposed to protect the inhabitants from evil in-


WELL OF A HOUSE.


fluences ; a whole crocodile is seen in several instances; and over one, not far from
the Hotel du Nil, a young elephant, stuffed, is to be seen.


EGYPT.


The passage leading into the interior rarely goes straight into the court, lest
any one should see into it from the street. The door-keeper, after warning the


ee


a


ELEPHANT OVER THE DOOR OF A HOUSE.


women—who fly screaming at the approach of
a man—conducts us into the court, which is
roofed by the blue sky, and in many houses
filled with plants and surrounded by light seats
and couches. A servant is lifting the bucket
from the draw-well, which, however, yields a
brackish water, serviceable only for cleaning
purposes. Passing by him—for we desire to speak
to the master of the house—we now, as it is
summer-time, go up a few steps into a hall or
gallery open to the north, and with pillars to
support the roof. We take a seat on the
divan, but are shortly invited by a young eunuch
to follow him to the Mandara, the private sitting
and reception room of the master. ‘This is on
the first floor—very often on the ground floor
—and as we enter our guide pulls off his


shoes, for it is regarded as a piece of Frankish ill-breeding to soil the clean
floor of the sitting-room with the dust of the streets. We return the master’s


OPEN HALL IN AN OLD MAMELUKE PALACE AT CAIRO.


CAIRO—LIFE OF THE PEOPLE. 83


greeting, touching our forehead, lips, and breast
—a symbolic action, signifying that in thought,
word, and heart, we are his.

The room in which we now find ourselves
is richly furnished, and admirably adapted to
its purpose. It is cool and spacious, and the
niches without windows in the farther wall
seem constructed for conversation not to be
overheard. The middle of the paved floor
is hollowed to a lower level, inlaid with a
mosaic of marble, and constantly moist with
the sp of a gracefully-constructed fountain
that cools the air. We sit at the raised end
of the room, the Leewan, which is covered
with carpets, and where luxurious divans
invite us to rest; and while we converse with
the host the eye dwells with pleasure on the
richly decorated ceiling, the various patterns
of the earthenware tiles which line the lower
part of the walls, the elegantly-carved brackets
and shelves, on which are arranged all kinds
of finely-wrought vessels, and the inlaid wood-
work of the doors. This room is lofty and
airy, but the adjoining rooms are so much
lower that there is above them an attic floor
for the servants, under the roof, which is
on the same level as that of the Mandara.
Even the most intimate friends of the master
are forbidden an entrance to the rooms of
the harem. Harem, or haram, originally sig
nified something forbidden or unattainable ;
and his home is to the Oriental in the truest
sense of the word a sanctuary. When the
European visitor hears it said that the master
is in the harem, he usually conceives of some-
thing quite the reverse of the truth, for this
reply simply conveys the fact that he has
withdrawn into the bosom of his family, the


refuge where none of the cares and worries
of business can pursue him, where he can
give himself up wholly to an undisturbed sense
of rest and to the tranquil joys of domestic
life. Any one who has lived in the East for a
lengthened period learns to recognise this feel-
ing of the sanctity of home and to understand


B Street
1 Rooms.


A ‘ond Floor.


3 rem,
4 Space over Mandara | if


4 Fi


BR Stree!


1 Servants’ Rooms. | {™ 00) lent


Mandara


over Rooms. | 6


8 Strangers’ Rooms.


PLAN OF AN ARAB HOUSE IN CAIRO,


KA’AH IN THE HAREM OF SHEYKH SADAT.


CAIRO—LIFE OF THE PEOPLE. 85


its necessity ; he must have a retreat where the turmoil and stress of life
cannot penetrate


and this place, where the children spring to meet their father,
and where he finds the women, who never have any part in his business cares,


MR. FRANK DILLON’S STUDIO.


is the harem, .whose inhabitants by no means regard themselves as prisoners,
however unworthy their existence may seem to their European sisters—an existence
devoted to the care of their children, to dress, to smoking their nargilehs, and
to trifling amusements—and many of them have assured the ladies of our European
circle who have visited them that they would not exchange lots with them.
The harem is commonly situated in an upper storey, and its principal room, the


86 EGYPT.


Kawah, is furnished like the reception-room; nay, in wealthy houses it is even
more richly fitted. Above the hollow basin with the fountain rises a cupola, and
if the house is in a street, pierced mashrebeeyeh allow the ladies to observe the life


* going on in the street without being seen. The divans are covered with fine stuffs,


and costly vessels of metal and porcelain are generally displayed on the shelves
against the walls. The harem is led up to by steps from the court and from
the master’s apartments. In, addition to the print of the Ka’ah, richly decorated
and fitted by a master-hand, and given in Vol. L, p. 220, I here set before the


bs %
fos x
Ve
,\ wh
\ \ Pe
oe
a Wy
co Ade” ia
Atos Aye)


FATHER’S DARLING.


reader that in the house of Sheykh Sadat, to which Mr. Frank Dillon obtained
access. This gentleman—my excellent friend in Cairo and companion in many
expeditions in Egypt—has fitted up his studio in London in a style well worthy
to be called Arabian in the best sense of the word. An artistic cabinet-maker,
Parvis of Turin, is engaged in Cairo itself in making furniture on models derived
from the time of the Khaliffs, or elaborated by a faithful and loving study of
the decorative arts of the Arabs, and these at all our international exhibitions
have excited the admiration of every connoisseur; but these carefully finished
objects are costly, and the Cairenes prefer to destroy the effect of the beautiful
old decorations of their houses by cheap wardrobes and so forth imported from
France or Germany. The costly furniture stuffs of former times have long since
been utterly displaced by the fabrics of England, Austria, and Germany, and


CAIRO—LIFE OF THE PEOPLE. 87


particularly of Saxony. The back rooms of the house consist of the kitchen
and offices, among which there is often a mill and a bakehouse.

We will endeavour to become acquainted with the most important events
of life under the roof of a house of this class, and see how the owner procures
himself a wife, how he dies in the bosom of his family, how he keeps the high
festivals of his faith with his fellow Moslems, passes the month of Ramadan, and
how he testifies his sympathy with the pilgrims to the holy places.


Ne Ns ea SSIES.


MARRIAGE.


VERYWHERE in the East it is the custom that a young
man, as soon as his beard is grown and he can earn a main-
tenance, should set up housekeeping. As life is on the whole
simpler and less pretentious than in Europe, and it is possible
to manage with a smaller income, this object is easily attained,
and there are few men of twenty who are not husbands and
fathers. A man capable of making a living, and who has
entered on no marriage ties, runs the risk of being regarded
as a ne’er-do-weel and rather “loose fish.” It is evident that
these customs and opinions are sound and natural. Far be it from me to laud
the morality of the Mohammedans or to advocate polygamy, a custom in every
respect objectionable ; still, I cannot forbear speaking in the highest terms of their
strong family feeling and domestic life.

Those tranquil joys which the Cairene is wont to seek and to find in his
harem have been already described, and we ought not to think ill of him if he


endeavours to set up a home of his own at an early age, and solicits his
relatives to aid him. The choice of a suitable wife is certainly much less easy
to him than to us, since all intercourse between youths and maidens is
impossible; hence, the youth desirous of marrying can never be allowed to see
his future bride. Under these circumstances he must have recourse to a go-between,
the khatbeh, or betrother, who is celebrated in a thousand love-songs. She, as
his ambassadress, visits those families who have marriageable daughters, and she
never lacks an excuse for her visits, even when she is not—as most of her class
are—a dealer in cosmetics or ornaments. The object of her visit is soon discovered,
and then the mothers exert themselves to set their darlings in the best possible
light under the keen and critical eye of the inspectress. The result of their efforts
is communicated without delay to the youth about to marry and to his family, as
soon as one suitable has been found; the mother, sisters, or other near female
relations of the candidate for matrimony take an opportunity of convincing


me


88 EGYPT.


themselves by ocular demonstration of the truth of the khatbeh’s report, and if
they come home satisfied, the khatbeh discloses the purpose of her visits—long
since divined—and proposes in form on the part of the young man for the hand
of the fair Aisha, or whatever the desired damsel’s name may be. Her parents
give their consent after no long consideration, for they knew beforehand what the
betrother wanted, and would have dismissed her earlier if her errand had been
displeasing to them. The bride herself is scarcely consulted, and although she has
the right of refusal, any objection on her side is of the rarest occurrence, indeed
an almost inconceivable thing. And what should make the husband undesirable,
whose advantageous qualifications the
khatbeh now paints in glowing terms?
Perhaps Aisha may already have seen
him as a boy; this, however, is only
possible when he happens to be her
cousin, a case of very frequent occur-
rence, for among the Arabs marriage
with an “uncle’s daughter” is regarded
as particularly auspicious and honour-
able.

Among the Fellaheen and la-
bouring classes, whose daughters also
must do some handiwork, and cannot
therefore lived veiled and in retire-
ment, the husband, of course, chooses
his wife according to his own views.

When the two families have
come to a general agreement, the
various bargains, treaties, and dis-
cussions, begin between the bride-


groom and Aisha’s father or guardian ;
ae Ganka and first and foremost as to the

bride’s dowry. The bridegroom must

secure a fixed sum to his future wife, of which he usually pays down two-thirds at
once; the remainder he retains, and it is only paid in the event of divorce. The
family pay the bride’s dowry wholly or in part out of the money thus received ; and
certainly there is no idea whatever of purchasing the girl from her parents, for the
wife's position as mistress of her own fortune is perfectly free and independent of her
husband, and is strongly protected both by law and custom. Unfortunately, the
determination of the amount of the dowry is seldom effected without much keen
bargaining, but when it is at last agreed upon the chief difficulty is overcome,
and the marriage contract is concluded. Although this is known by the name of
“the book,’ it is, in fact, an oral declaration, made before a magistrate or legal
authority and witnesses, by which it acquires legal validity. On a day soon after
this the bridegroom goes at about midday to the home of his betrothed, ‘accompanied
by two friends; there he is received by his father-in-law, who also brings two


CAIRO—LIFE OF THE PEOPLE. 89


witnesses and a Fikée, or reader. The party is usually increased by the presence
of friends of both families, among whom, however, of course, no woman is to be
seen. After reciting the Fatkhah, the first chapter of the Koran, the bridegroom
announces the sum agreed upon as the bride’s settlement. He and his father-in-law
kneel opposite each other on a carpet in the midst of the spectators, clasp each
other's right hand, and lifting up their thumbs, press them closely together; they
remain in this attitude while the Fikée, after covering the clasped hands with a
napkin or handkerchief, first delivers a short discourse, consisting usually of a few
verses from the Koran, and then pronounces the very short formula of betrothal,
They then partake of a meal to-
gether, the witnesses on the bride's
part have presents made them, and
the bridegroom “ratifies” the Fikée
with a handkerchief, into one corner
of which a piece of gold is knotted.

The marriage is now legally
accomplished, and all that remains
to be done is to introduce the bride
to the bridegroom and marry her
to him. All friends and neighbours
take part in the grand festival of
the “night of entrance,’ as it is
called; we ourselves are invited
guests. A longer or shorter period
elapses between the solemnity of
betrothal and that of marriage,
depending on the amount of the
dowry to be given, and among the
wealthy the bride’s gifts are made
the occasion for displaying the
greatest luxury; indeed, some CATRENE MAIDEN.
Oriental princes have given dowries


to their daughters which, by reason of their magnificence, have been described with
the most exact detail by Arabian historians. The present Viceroy, when his daughter
was married a few years since, showed himself in this respect a true Oriental.
Our acquaintances do not move in quite so exalted a sphere, but are of the citizen
and official middle-class, who are more modest in their pretensions ; but among them
the old customs are kept up in a more characteristic and primitive form than among
the wealthy, who, in their craving for luxury and love of strangeness and novelty,
have let the old traditions die out. The festivities for the two sexes are, of course,
independent of each other; and it is quite right and fitting that at a wedding feast
the women should be more highly considered than the men. We must therefore,
before taking our pleasure among the company, endeavour to learn something of
the proceedings within the-sacred precincts of the harem.

There, pleasure and rejoicing have already taken possession since the day


90 EGYPT.


before. The bride’s invited friends—all ladies, of course—have solemnly escorted
her to the bath; this progress, known as the “bath-procession,” is, according to
time-honoured custom, performed on foot, and the European carriages so much in
favour with the Arabs are on this occasion discarded. Very slowly—often coming
to a stand-still in the busy thoroughfares—do they wend their way: a long way,
though it seems only too short to those who take part in the procession. It is
headed by Arab musicians with little tambourines, flutes, and a clarionet; then
follow the married women, looking like bats in their black silk wrappers. Behind
them come the young girls in white veils, and close upon them follows the bride
herself; she is so closely and carefully enveloped in a red cashmere shawl that it
is hardly possible to discover the faintest out-
line of her figure even. The only ornament
she wears is a brilliant gold coronet. Two of
her relations walk one on each side of her
with much dignity; a canopy of bright red
stuff borne on four poles waves over her and
behind her, and embroidered scarfs hang from
it and flutter in the wind; more musicians
follow in the rear. This procession halts from
time to time with much complacency, to afford
a treat for the ears of the inhabitants of the
streets through which it passes, and it finally
disappears in the bath-house, which has been
hired for the occasion, and where a handker-
chief fastened up over the doorway indicates
that it is to be visited by women only.

In the bath they abandon themselves
to enjoyment, and when they have cleaned
and refreshed themselves they are wrapped in
white sheets, to rest from the fatigue which
succeeds a Turkish bath, to sip hot coffee,
smoke fragrant cigarettes, and listen to singing-women, whose songs are of love and
longing, of the accomplishment of long unsatisfied dreams, and of the joys of marriage.

When we reach Upper Egypt we shall meet again with these performers; the
best of them are very highly paid, and I shall have more to say about them in
that place.

When the wedding party have dressed themselves again, they play games,
in which each one eagerly takes part, and the merry laughter of the women and
girls may often be heard even in the street. Several hours are thus spent in the
bath-house ; then the procession returns home in the same order to a banquet,
where again there is no lack of music and singing. When the last dish is removed
the bride takes a large piece of henna paste in her hand, and all the guests stick
into it a large or small gold coin. Finally, the nails of her hands and feet are
reddened with this well-known cosmetic, and she takes leave of her friends, who
share the remainder of the henna among them.


ENTRANCE TO A BATH FOR WOMEN.


92 EGYPT.


The forenoon of the following day is devoted to the arts of the toilet,
which certainly absorb no less time and attention in the life of an Eastern lady
than in that of a European. Towards the middle of the afternoon the carriages
and camels appear, the remainder of the dowry which has not been already
sent is packed on to the camels, the bride, with her nearest female relatives,
gets into a carriage closely curtained with a red shawl, the rest of the company,


BRIDAL PROCESSION,


women and children, are squeezed pell-mell into other vehicles, and the procession
sets out for the bridegroom’s house. Musicians playing Arab melodies on Euro-
pean brass instruments—a hideous and ear-splitting innovation—accompany the bride.
The great trumpets blare out their resounding notes, and the admiring Cairenes
shout “Allah!” as it passes. In spite of carriages and brass bands—those
usurping invaders—two traditional and very typical personages have not been
forgotten—the two half-naked wrestlers and the man with the water-skin. At
each pause in the progress of the wedding party the wrestlers exhibit for the
benefit of the public, which collects often in so dense a crowd as to bar the


CAIRO—LIFE OF
way to foot-passengers; they do their
showing off the strongly developed
muscles of their arms and torso. The


sakkah carries on his business in another
fashion. He carries the skin filled with
water and sand, and weighing some hun-
dredweights, on his back. With this load,
which he has carried from quite early in
the morning, he performs a graceful sort
of dance backwards and forwards, first one
foot in front and then the other, stand-
ing first on the right leg and then on
the left: no easy achievement with such
a burden as carries. A. third cha-
racteristic personage sometimes joins the
wedding procession—this is a tumbler,
who can stand on his head, or more
usually walks backwards and forwards
with a face of tragic dignity, balancing
his long pole with marvellous skill, or
making it quiver and spin between his
fingers.

At last they reach the bridegroom’s
house, into which the ladies and the
with movyables, disap-


he


samels loaded


THE PEOPLE.


best


93


in performing a mock


struggle,


THE WATER-CARRIER.


pear ; in front of it the street is usually screened with a red and green awning, under


ARAB METAL UTENSILS.


mation.


which hang lamps and lanterns.
Under this temporary roof high
wooden benches are erected for the
numerous guests of the masculine
gender who there await the arrival
of the bride; we have seated our-
selves among them, avail ourselves
of the offered coffee and cigars,
and take a part in the conver-
sation, which is far from flagging ;
such an entertainment is highly
relished by the Oriental, who pre-
fers witty and intelligent talk to
every other amusement.
Even the time of
Khaliffs a “word spoken in
son’— (“how good it is,”
Solomon) was held in due


the
sea-


in


Says
esti-


Tt could win pardon for the criminal, mollify an angry potentate, and protect


94 EGYPT.


persecuted innocence. And at the present day, even in the decadence of that
pre-Asiatic culture, it is very interesting and delightful to note the care which even
a common man gives to his language, how skilfully conversation is carried on, with
what geniality and point an anecdote is related, and the pleasure the Arabs take in
conversation, tasting each word, as it were, like connoisseurs. In this respect they


AISHA'S YOUNGER SISTER.


are certainly the most gifted race in the world; and among the wedding guests
there are two or three venerable Sheykhs whom it is a real pleasure to listen to.
The bridegroom, who has invigorated himself during the forenoon by one of
those baths so dear to the Oriental—of heated air and warm water, followed by
a course of shampooing and delightful languor and rest in clean linen Wwrappers—
now moves among his guests, dressed very simply, greeting each one, and
fulfilling all the duties of an amiable host. Towards sundown a repast is served,
of which all the guests partake, sitting in groups; they take their seats on the
carpet round large circular tea-trays of green lacquer—or rather, tables, as they


INTERIOR OF AN EASTERN BATH.


7


CAIRO—LIFE OF THE PEOPLE. 95


are somewhat raised—and they help themselves with their hands from the dishes
set upon it. As soon as one is done with another takes its place, so that we
have to do justice to ten or twelve altogether. A little loaf is placed before


==


STREET IN CAIRO.


each guest, from which he breaks off a piece, and uses it as a spoon, when the
dish is of a liquid nature. Sour salad serves to whet the appetite in the short
intervals. Water is the only drink that relieves the severe labours of degustation ;
hence the excellent coffee and cigarettes with which we are subsequently refreshed
are doubly enjoyable after we have thoroughly washed our hands and_ faces, in
the Oriental fashion, with soap and water which are handed to us in vessels


vi


96 EGYPT.


of elegant form. For two hours the feasting has continued, uninterrupted by
anything worthy of remark; now the noise of the Zikr mingles with the tinkle
of the kanoon and sounds of song from the women’s apartments; the gaudy
tent-cloth is fitfwlly lighted up in every direction by lamps that swing gently to
and fro; a fresh night breeze blows down the street, fanning our cheeks and lips.
A short time before the Muezzin is heard calling to evening prayer the bride-
eroom disappears for a few minutes; torches and tapers are lighted, and a
number of his friends make ready to accompany him to the mosque, where he
must go through the prescribed prayers. In a short time he reappears in festal


5


attire, and sets out with his companions, preceded by musicians. We stay behind
with some other guests.

The procession to prayer lasts a full hour, for it is not considered decorous
to hurry on the way back; on the contrary, it halts several times to listen to a
singer, who celebrates the praises of the young couple.

Aisha, since her arrival at her husband’s house, has sat in perfect silence
and with downcast eyes, for this is what etiquette and custom requires of her.
Her friends and relations gather round her, exhorting her energetically, and
representing to her that now she has left her father and mother to belong
exclusively to her husband; but she must not answer a. word. By degrees the
female guests retire, till none remain but the nurse, or bellaneh, who has waited
on her yesterday and to-day, and her mother and sister. These now leave her ;
Aisha is left alone, trembling and blushing, with the bellaneh. The nurse throws
a shawl over the girl’s head, gives a signal, the door opens, and the bridegroom
comes in. The dellaneh then withdraws; man and wife remain alone face to face.
Now is the moment for lifting the veil that conceals the bride’s face. Saying the
words, “In the name of God, the compassionate, the merciful,’ the husband raises
the shawl and greets his young wife, saying, “Blessed be this night;” she thanks
him with the answer, “God bless thee.” This is the first time he has seen her
unveiled, and it is an anxious question whether her beauty has not been described
in too glowing colours; or, instead of the Rachel he desired, Leah has not
been brought to him. But Aisha’s pretty face is pleasing in the eyes of her
husband ; indeed, the bridegroom is usually content, and announces the fact to
the anxious group of women waiting outside, who immediately set up a shrill cry
of delight.- In the opinion of the Semitic races this shout of the triumphant and
satisfied bridegroom is one of the most delightful sounds that can be uttered by
the human breast, and we learn that this idea is no growth of to-day or of
yesterday, from the passage in St. John’s, Gospel, chapter iii., verse 29: “He that
hath the bride is the bridegroom: but the friend of the bridegroom, which standeth
and heareth him, rejoiceth greatly because of the bridegroom’s voice.”


NRELENTING death is calling our friend Sheykh Alee; he is
dangerously ill. He lies on his bed of sickness with the calm


19


ignation of the true Moslem; only the exclamation “ Allah !
that breaks from him now and then, betrays that he is suffer-
ing; thus it was when we quitted him yesterday. LHarly this
morning a common acquaintance brought the information that
during the night death had released him from his sufferings.
As he felt his end approaching, with his sons’ help he per-
formed his ablutions as if for prayer; his wives and children
stood round him in deep grief; when he was at his latest
breath they turned his face towards Mekka, and cried out incessantly, “There is
no God but Allah, and Mohammed is his Prophet. There is neither might nor
power but with the almighty and exalted God. We are the Lord’s: we return unto
Him.”

Hardly had he breathed his last, with the rites prescribed by his faith, than
the women set up their lamentation—the “ Walwalah,’—with hideous cries, which
sound out far into the night and announce the
melancholy event to all the neighbourhood. With
loud cries of “Oh, my master! oh, my garment!


re;


oh, my camel!” they tear their hair and beat
their breasts, while the men of the household—
sons and servants—make the necessary prepara-
tions for the funeral on the morrow, with grave
composure, on the contrary. Custom, it is true,
requires that Eastern women should express their
grief in a passionate manner, but these vehement
and wholly untrained natures are also, in fact,
incapable of controlling their feelings. Self-com-
mand is required only of men, but “woman's
hair is long, and her wits are short,” says an
Eastern proverb.

It is with difficulty that the weeping women
can be induced to leave the room of death, and
then they sit down in the hall or court, cowering


LAMENTATION FoR THE DEAD (Ancient Egyptian).


round a lantern and continuing their discordant wailing. Meanwhile the corpse is
undressed, wrapped in sheets, and carefully covered with cloths, and then, muttering
pious texts, the watchers await the morning. Then friends and acquaintances begin
to stream in, the circle of wailing and shrieking women increases, while in the upper


98 EGYPT.


chamber many dignified turbaned heads surround the bed of death in silent sorrow
and reeret. The son of the house gets many words of sincere sympathy, many a
text of comfort or counsel for the coming day, of which the duties will indeed
be far from light. Then two Fikées (reciters of the Koran) make their appearance,
and with them the corpse-washer, and these proceed at once to their tasks. The
former, in an adjoining room,
recite the sixth chapter of
the Koran, beginning with
the words: “Praise be to
Allah, who hath created the
heavens and the earth, and
hath made darkness and
light,” and of which the
twelfth verse runs thus :—
“Say: to whom belongs what-
ever is in the heavens and
the earth? Say: to God; He
hath inscribed mercy on his
soul. Verily He shall guide
us at the last day, and there
is no doubt of that.” As soon
as the corpse-washer has ful-
filled his duty, the dead is
ready for his last journey.

So far we have heard of
the proceedings from a friend,
but we may now set forth
and join in paying the last
honours to the dead. The
narrow street, which still re-
sounds with the cries of the
women from the house of
death, is filled with mourners,
to whom we join ourselves.
All round the customary com-
LANE IN CAIRO. monplaces on death fall upon


the’ ear: “Yea, such is
the way of all men!” “Good luck to thee that it is not thou for whom we weep!”
“Death is terrible!” “What is life? what is this world?” with texts from the Koran.
Parables, too, are recited, or suitable verses, as :—
« Awake, O man, nor trust the world,
That keeps its faith with none ;
A fragile skiff by tempests hurled,


And wrecked—and thou art gone.”


Meanwhile the son of the deceased goes from one to another of his friends ;


BEWAILING THE DEAD.


100 EGYPT.
each one presses his hand and says a few words of sympathy. Presently, on an
ass, arrives an official of the Beyt-el-mal, the office for the distribution of inheritance,
and enters the house. It is no doubt the duty of every Moslem to make a will
before his death, but the deceased Sheykh, like most Mohammedans, has shrunk
from this act as being of evil omen; hence it is necessary that the law should
undertake the administration of his property. First of all his seal—which is
tantamount to his signature—is destroyed after several impressions have been
taken from it in a large register, which also receives a brief summary of the state


FUNERAL PROCESSION,


in which our deceased friend has left his affairs. The creditors now make their
claims, for it is the custom first to satisfy those demands which are preferred while
the corpse is still above ground; hence his friends in business and the dealers who
supplied him hasten to inscribe their names and claims in the register, and during
these proceedings the house of mourning becomes the scene of the most revolting
haggling and bargaining. Presently a violent squabble breaks out among some of
the creditors, which is carried on with uproarious shouts, and continued even in
the street. The noise is frightful, for the wailing of the women is not yet reduced
to silence, and the poor Sheykh’s dwelling is more like an auction mart than the
house of the dead.

At last two or three sheykhs have brought the disputants to some sort of
agreement. The corpse is now laid in the bier, wrapped in cloths and covered


CAIRO—LIFE OF THE PEOPLE. 101


with a red cashmere shawl. The bier is a simple wooden box or trough, without a
lid, somewhat broader before than behind, and attached to two bearing poles. The
head is borne foremost. It is brought
down to the house-door, and the proces-
sion soon falls into order. It is opened by
boys, one of whom carries a desk of
palm branches covered with a cloth, on
which lies a copy of the Koran; the
others chant incessantly the same text
again and again: “My heart adores
the Prophet and Him who bends over === ~ : =

him to bless him” (i.e, God). Then fol- PIED SIN GERG.( (EE OM) IHS) ERERESENTATIONE) OFVAN( OUD)


EGYPTIAN TOMB,


low men who, as was the case in ancient
Egypt, are frequently blind, and they continually rehearse in a monotonous way
the Mohammedan confession of faith After them, in no regular order, come
the male members of the family and the friends and acquaintances of the sheykh,
and the street boys crowd round them. Immediately in front of the bier walk
four youths with coloured silk handkerchiefs round their loins, who carry vessels
full of rose-water, and censers in their hands, to sprinkle and perfume the escort
of the dead. The whole motley and clamorous train does not move with the
solemn slowness usual in Europe on such occasions, but goes through the streets at
a round pace.

Its first destination is the mosque, where the funeral prayer must be said.
The bier is set down in front of the kiblah or prayer-niche, and the crowd, after
performing the necessary ‘ablutions, falls into order behind the reciter of the prayer.
Four times—once with a loud voice and three times softly—the cry “Allahu
akbar” is repeated (“God is great”), and then a prayer is said for the repose of
the dead man’s soul, ending with the usual greeting to the Prophet—“ God greet
and bless our Lord Mohammed, his family
and his companions!”

Next follows a peculiar custom—a sort
of judgment of the dead, which has, however,
degenerated into a mere form—as with the


ancient Egyptians. The reciter turns to the
assembly and asks “ What is your testimony
of him?” The answer is, “ Our testimony is


that he was one of the pious.” No other


FEMALE MOURNERS, FROM A REPRESENTATION IN THE GRAVE answer is ever given, for it is believed that
OP PTANNOLER AT ‘THEHES


even if the deceased were ungodly, God the
Most High will nevertheless judge him more favourably for the united testimony


of the faithful—perhaps even have mercy upon him. The whole ceremony has
occupied but a short time. The procession hurries on again through the tumult
of the streets, out to the cemetery in the desert. There the grave-maker has


*The boys usually chant passages from the Hashriyeh, a poem describing the Last Judgment.


102 EGYPT.


already made the grave, a low structure of bricks lying north and south, with
an arched top and covered with earth. After a short prayer the body is taken
out of the bier, still wrapped in its cloths, and pushed into an opening at the
northern end of the tomb, so that the head lies to the south-east—z.e,, towards Mecca,


STREET AND MOSQUE.


and the body rests on its right side.’ As soon as the opening is closed with sand
and stones nothing remains to be done but to remind the dead how he is to
comport himself towards the two angels of the tomb, a custom which is, however,
condemned by many. One of the Fikées crouches down in front of the closed
opening, and says: “Oh! servant of God, son of a servant of God and of a
handmaid of God! know that now two angels will come to thee to question thee.


1 Jn family vaults one side is for the men, the other for the women.


fe


18


DATES IN A CEMETERY AT CATRO.


OF


DISTRIBUTION


CAIRO—LIFE OF THE PEOPLE. 103


When they ask thee, ‘Who is thy master?’ answer, ‘Allah is my master!’ If
then they ask thee, ‘Who is thy Prophet?’ answer, ‘Mohammed is my Prophet!’”
and so forth. Those who are acquainted with the “Book of the Dead”* will find
much of the ancient Egyptian spirit in the formula, which is to serve as a defence
or talisman for the dead in the other world.

The Mohammedan believes that the human soul, immediately after death, is
borne by angels appointed to that service, either into the presence of God or to
hell, and there has a foretaste of the lot which awaits it, but then returns to
the body and remains with it,? lying in the breast of the deceased under the grave-
cloth. It hears all that is said to it, and so can be prepared for that which is
to come. In a short time the two angels of the tomb appear to it—Munkar, or
Nakir, and Nekeer—two black forms with fearful teeth, long hair down to the
ground, eyes like lightning, and voices like thunder, holding enormous iron rods
in their hands. When the soul perceives them—the soul being conceived of as no
larger than a bee (that of the wicked, however, being of baser matter is somewhat
larger)—it creeps into the nose of the corpse, which is thereby revived, and _ sits
up to undergo the trial now about to begin. If he passes through it successfully
his grave is made wide and easy to him, a glimpse is allowed him into Paradise
and its joys, and at the same moment he loses all sense of time, so that the
interval till the day of judgment passes “like the winking of an eye.” If he fails
to answer the five questions put by the angels they beat him with their iron
rods so severely that he sinks into the seventh limbo; but this soon ejects him,
he returns to his grave, and the same torment is repeated seven times. Oriental
fancy has expended itself lavishly on these scenes, and has described the vicissitudes
of the soul in various narratives which are frequently perfectly contradictory.

May the earth lie lightly on Sheykh Alee! The Fikées, the bearers, and the
wailing women, are all paid at once, by his freshly-closed grave, and bread, dates,
and grease, are distributed among the poor who have meanwhile collected. The
procession disperses, and its members return separately to the city. We accompany
the son of the deceased to his house, which continues to be the scene of
lamentation and bewailment ; for, during three evenings in succession, friends meet
there and sit in silence side by side, listening to recitals of prayers or of the
Koran, or thinking of the dead. On every succeeding Thursday, till the sun has
set forty times, the female friends and neighbours assemble in the house of
mourning to set up a wail for the dead; and early in the morning of every
Friday the survivors go forth to the cemetery to lay palm branches or reeds on
the tombstone; and they distribute bread, dates, and other food, to the poor. This
is their duty for forty days; after that, even, as we already know, the grave of
the dear departed remains a bourne of pilgrimage, and on such occasions his
memory is perpetuated by the beautiful custom of making benevolent donations.


1 P. 57, Lepsius, “Todtenbuch,” 4to, Leipz, 1842. Taf. xlix. c. 125; again, taf, xxxv. c. 99.
2 For a night after the burial.


€ THE BIRTHDAY OF THE PROPHET.


of:


E have come to the twenty-sixth day of the month Safar, which


this year is a true spring month, for it coincides with our
month of March, when the sun of Egypt shines in the cloudless
sky not less brightly, but with much less scorching heat than
it does in the summer-time. Fine weather makes a gay
festival, and we purpose to share in the enjoyment of the
Cairenes during the holiday-time that is about to begin.

In the street of the “Mosque of the Daughters”’ we
meet a little cavaleade. A man with a green banner rides


in front, and behind him, on a mule, comes a dignified white-bearded sheykh, followed
by a number of turbaned heads—some are riding on asses, some are on foot. The
street boys crowd round the little procession, shouting and screaming. What is it?


What is happening ?


Before we have time to open our lips to inquire, behold a


second troop exactly similar, and the throng grows thicker and thicker ; nay,


COURT AND HOUSE OF THE KADI.


close


to the mosque which gives its name to the street it is so impenetrable that we


‘Gama el-Benat, “Mosque of the Girls.”


CAIRO—LIFE OF THE PEOPLE. 105
find ourselves obliged to come to a stand-still among the Moslems who are gazing
devoutly at the door of the sanctuary, At last we succeed in pushing by a returning
party, and in getting close to the door—opposite to it indeed—but instead of the mar-
vellous something we expected to find there, we see nothing but a simply-dressed young
man sitting on a stone seat, and who has his hand kissed by all the bystanders one
after another. This is the Sheykh Mohammed, son of the deceased and famous saint
Abd-el-Ganee, who, by his piety and his exemplary life as chief of the sect of the
Bayyoomees, acquired great fame and influence, and whose place has recently been
filled up by his younger son. Faithful to his father’s habit, he is sitting before


the door of this mosque, and the believing populace, eager to be blessed, crowd to
kiss his hand. The excitement marked in every countenance indicates an unwonted
occurrence, and, in fact, an important event is happening, a Great Maglis—or
meeting—is being held in the house of the Kadi to determine the beginning and
end of the festival of the birthday of the Prophet. All the guilds and sects have
their share in it, and these it was whom we saw arriving in holiday dress with their
sheykhs at their head to take part in the deliberations. At the door of the
mosque they obtain a blessing on this important work, which is brought to an
end quickly enough, for after a short discussion a protocol is drawn up and signed,
and the deputations go home again.

Pleasure and rejoicing reign already; but a series of splendid holidays is
about to begin, a right merry spring festival, to which God’s blessing cannot be
wanting since it is in honour of “the best of men—the great and elect Prophet.”
No other festival is carried through with so much spirit, with such elation and
rejoicing ‘as this one. Outside the city, to the right of the Boolak road, a large
open space is already being surrounded with those magnificent tents, in erecting
which the Easterns dis-
play the skill of a
master. In the middle
of the square high masts
are erected, fastened
together and to the
ground with ropes, on
which thousands of
lamps are hung. In
front of them are fan-
tastically constructed
seaffoldings for fire-
works, which play a
conspicuous part in the
magnificence of the fes-
tival ; in the streets stall
after stall is rapidly con-
structed: confectioners, cooks, coffee-sellers, sherbet-mixers, buffoons, jugglers, snake-
charmers, tumblers, and the owners of see-saws and roundabouts, hasten to take pos-
session of the best places, for large profits are in prospect when the night of the


SNAKE-CHARMER,


ant Mg
TN


i\|


A LADY OF RANK DRIVING OUT AFTER SUNSET.


CAIRO—LIFE OF THE PEOPLE. 107


festival has fairly set in, and jovial trains with torches wend their way through the
city proclaiming the praise of the Prophet in chanted strophe and anti-strophe.

The first day of Rabee-el-awwal—the day determined by the Kadi and the
elders of the city as the first of the festival—is come; or rather, let us say, the
first night, for with the Mohammedans each day begins at sunset, and it is not
till evening falls that labour and business are at an end, and that they abandon
themselves to pleasure; indeed, the night, with its soft though cooler air, is a
perfect invitation to relaxation and enjoyment.

By about eight in the evening we set out: the streets, just now so full, are
deserted and still; but in the Muskee street we come upon a few groups of merry
Cairenes hurrying to the scene of festivity; then—a really singular sight and not
easily to be forgotten—the carriage of some princess, escorted by torch-bearers and
eunuchs, flashes past like some fiery goblin train. The throng thickens at the
Ezbekeeyeh gardens. Soon a dull uproar strikes the ear, we turn the corner by
the New Hotel, and see a long roadway filled with men, lined with stalls, and
brightly lighted up with torches and lanterns. In a few seconds we are drawn
into the stream, and, shoving and pushing, strive to move on with it. A hired
carriage, with a little Sais hardly more than ten years old running in front to
make way, tries to part the crowd. Air! air! this is suffocation! The mob
closes up again behind the carriage, the pressure is relieved, and once more we
are pushing and struggling among the turbans. The gentle and amiable nature
of the Egyptians is here conspicuous. In Europe such a crowd would inevitably
lead to violence and accidents, while the Cairene who meets with a severe blow
revenges himself merely by saying, “Can you not look where you are going, son
of a dog?” to which the other replies placably, “Ma, ’alesh” (“It does not
matter”), a platitude which the offended man readily adopts. However, even here
it sometimes comes to active warfare. Two cocks-of-the-walk get a tight grip of
each other’s throat, and each swears by Allah and his Prophet to have the life of
the other. The neighbours shriek, the combatants scream “Murder!” the row is
terrific—when up goes a rocket in the distance, exploding into red and green stars,
eyery eye is at once religiously bent on the glittering display, there is a unanimous
“Oh!” of admiration, the quarrel is forgotten, the combatants rub their bruises,
and address themselves once more, as meekly as children, to the delights of the
entertainment.

On both sides of the street the booths are brilliantly lighted, and in every
direction refreshments are being sold from jars or fruit baskets. Coffee is made
in this red and white tent, while the customers listen to the story-teller; and
from yonder marquee, which is so closely curtained, and where Karakush’ is carrying
on his too graphically natural performances, proceed sounds of song and laughter.
Close beside it a baker has established himself, and draws his beautifully-browned
round cakes out of his little oven under our very eyes, and, all hot as they are,
they are excellent eating. However, we do not pause, for some Dervishes, with
music and torches, on the way to their religious performances, attract us to follow


‘The Egyptian Punch, already described.


are detained by a pretty
scene. An artist in


But before reaching the tent set up for them we


missed with paternal obduracy


confectionery stands
behind a high pedes-
tal supporting a
round wooden tray,
in the midst of which
is a large circular
lantern. Round this
are set out in little
saucers the most
ravishing sago pud-
dings, stuck full of
almonds, in such
dainty array that
their aspect cannot
fail to tempt the
Arab eye and tooth.
Two little boys stand
exactly opposite this
erection, fixing their
pretty, wide eyes on
the sweet objects of
their desire; but,
alas! with no hope
of its fulfilment, for
though the two have
made common stock
and combined their
capital, two copper
piastres are inade-
quate to soften the
obdurate heart of
the man behind the
lantern. Still, with
true Arab volubility
and pertinacity, they
dispute his right to
demand more than
two piastres for his
almond puddings,
and they are on the
point of being dis-


when one of our party crowns their desires by


extracting


a copper coin from his pocket.


CAIRO—LIFE OF THE PEOPLE. 109


From the other side of the road comes the shrill tinkle of bells. The crowd
of children—all children alike, great and small—are enjoying the delights of a
round-about, of a so-called Russian swing, and of an ordinary pendulum-like see-saw.
Close by, a sturdy crier, with a stentorian voice, hails us to the incomparable
performance of an athlete; we push by the backs of a knot of children who are
vainly endeavouring to catch a glimpse of this great treat through a hole in the
curtain, and are borne on towards the plain somewhat lower down, which is,
properly speaking, the scene of the festival. When we reach it, our eye is charmed
by the brilliant and perfectly unique spectacle: round us is a wide circle of tents,
beautifully set up and lighted by lamps without number, and from the middle of
this dazzling circle, where the fireworks are let off, rockets innumerable, like blazing
Jacob’s ladders, seem to lead up from the festively illuminated spot to the star-
spangled southern sky, and join earth to heaven. We escape from the crowd for
a moment to draw a deep breath of the fresh aromatic air of
the spring night, and then fall into the line again to see what
is going on in the side alleys hastily run up all round the
large enclosed space. ‘To the left hand are the tents of the
police, the governor, the ministers, and the viceroy, and at
the opposite side are those erected for private persons and
for the religious congregations. We will choose the road to
the right in order to visit these ; every tent we pass is full of
men engaged in their devotions. They sit in large circles
round a reader, who discourses on the history of the birth of
the Prophet and all the signs and wonders that accompanied FATHER AND SON.
it ; this is an ancient custom, handed down from the earliest
days of Islam. Or they themselves take part in performing the religious exercise
called a Zikr, which we have already seen elsewhere. This consists of a constant
repetition of the name of God, of the Moslem confession of faith, or of a form of
praise of Mohammed, with the accompaniment of a measured movement of the
body in time to the chant, inclining it forwards or to the left or right, or round
and round on its axis. The director of the whole performance, the Munshid, stands
in the middle, and conducts the consentaneous utterance of the words and the
motions of the body by calling out and by clapping his hands to the measure.
The religious excitement is often increased by music and singers. To Europeans,
the participation in these exercises seems to have something degrading in it, and
not altogether without reason; but, as in other religions, a deep spiritual meaning
ibes to the Mohammedan a


underlies these senseless usages. The Koran pr
constant mention of the name of God, just as the apostle Paul exhorts Christians
(ia) Fo) naming” is conceived of by some as
a mental and spiritual exercise, while others, and by far the greater number,
explain it as being the audible utterance of the name of Allah. Thus was first
instituted the ordinance of the Zikr, for this Arabic word is that used in the
Koran itself; but even at the present day the most conscientious and learned
Mussulmans assert that the ordinance ought to be carried out only by slow long-
drawn cries of Allah, and they avoid all rhythmical movement or even musical


7 ee


y without ceasing.” This constant


110 EGYPT.


accompaniment as a pernicious innovation. It was originally said of any particularly
pious man that he constantly mentioned the name of God—ie., that his thoughts
were constantly occupied with the contemplation of the Most High; but with the
generality of people this expression has lost its original purity of meaning. The
formation of numerous religious communities and orders led to the introduction
of a congregational “naming of God,’ and as the Orientals—as we saw when


ZIKR WITH INCLINATIONS.


visiting the college at the mosque of el-Azhar—are always addicted to swinging
and rocking their bodies with a view to invigorate and incite their mental faculties,
the primitive quiescent meditation gave way to more or less rapid movement. The
introduction of Mohammedan mysticism, which took its rise under foreign influences,
was favourable to such aberrations, for, according to its doctrines, the believer must
strive to become wholly absorbed in the Divinity, to be “clothed with it as with
a garment,” to be bereft of all his senses, and to feel and think only, “Allah.” To
this end spinning and swaying the body to an immoderate extent are a very
efficient auxiliary, for they stupefy the brain, producing giddiness, nervous excitation,
and even convulsions; and when one of the faithful taking part in the Zikr falls


CAIRO—LIFE OF THE PEOPLE. 111


down, foaming at the mouth in violent convulsions, it is said with admiration
that he is “Melboos”—that is, possessed or “clothed” with the Divinity. These


religious exercises spread very rapidly among the Egyptians, who from the remotest
antiquity were highly susceptible to mystical emotions, and at the present day we
meet with them in every direction and at every opportunity ; nay, they have come
to have something of the character of popular festivities. The rhythmical movement
may no doubt be pleasurable, as the youth of our own country often indulge in
simultaneous shouting ; but the performer soon feels that his senses are dulled,


ZIKR WITH WHIRLS.


that he is turning giddy, and his nerves quiver, that he is becoming “ melboos,”
the joyful excitement reaches its height of perfect inebriation, and finally all the
physical powers are overcome by exhaustion. This usually supervenes in about a
quarter of an hour, and a fresh performer immediately takes the place of the one
who has retired ; indeed, the circle grows larger and larger. It frequently happens
that women take a part in the exercise. Dr. Spitta saw such a circle, among which
were an old woman and a blooming young girl. The old woman incited the
bystanders to perform by signs and hand-clapping; the young one was absorbed
in the Zikr: she swung her body up and down incessantly, and her movements
increased constantly in wild and ungoyerned violence. After more than half an
hour—my friend stood by with his watch in his hand—she had become like a
raving lunatic; her head-cloth fell off, her splendid black hair fluttered wildly
p


112 EGYPT.


round her, her gown fell loose, and she looked like a raging fury, with her face as
white as a ghost’s, and eyes that glowed like coals of fire. This was too much for
the. older woman and the conducting dervish: they laid the poor creature flat on
the ground, with merciless slappings and thumpings, to bring her round. Other revolting
excesses are practised by the Dervishes after a wild Zikr; in their ecstasy they pierce
their cheeks, and eat scorpions and other poisonous or disgusting creatures.

But we will now quit these melancholy aberrations, and look into a tent in
which, while a party of believers are whirling in a Zikr, a singer is performing
to the accompaniment of a flute; the words are verses of the mystical song of
Omar Ibn-el-Fareed,
which has already
been mentioned.’ Its
glowing imagery is
familiar, for it is sung
in merry tones all
about the streets;
but it also bears a
mystical interpreta-
tion, and is therefore
quite in place at the
performance of a Zikr.

Story-tellers and
reciters must not
detain us to-day, but
we will step for a
i moment into the tent

Dee eames of the swarthy Ber-
bers, who have a Zikr
of their own. The choral song, which they repeat incessantly while carrying on the


usual spinning, runs as follows :—


ps eg :
—————
Se oleae —


=a


Mo- ham- ma-dun mé- 1a - na, Mo- ham- ma-dun mé - 1a - na, bi - ga - hi man ta- wal - la, ‘a - 1é-hil-la-hu fal - la.


That is, “Mohammed is our Lord; Mohammed is our Lord, invested with dominion.
May God incline to him and bless him.”

We have now reached the tents of the Egyptian dignitaries and ministers.
The first is, of course, that of the Khedive (in which, on the evening in question,
the present Khedive was to be found as the representative of his father, who was
too much occupied to come). The highest personages and most distinguished sheykhs
there pay him their official visits, and enjoy the fireworks which incessantly illu-
minate the spot until far into the night; for of this entertainment the Arabs are
never weary. I+ is long past midnight, but the stream of men flows round us
undiminished, when at last, fatigued but not weary, we turn our faces homewards.


1 Vol. I, p. 314


CAIRO—LIFE OF THE PEOPLE. 113


The scene here described is repeated for twelve successive nights, and each
time is more splendid, more crowded, and of longer duration. The dealers in the
bazaars close their stalls earlier ; even the ladies of the harem make their appearance
on the scene in their closed carriages, escorted by eunuchs. At about midnight
on the last night of the festival, an immense torch procession, got up with great


magnificence, literally fills the whole of the Boolak road. The last display of


TENT OF A DIGNITARY.


fireworks is the finest of all; all Cairo is on foot, and the crowd perfectly
impenetrable. The tents are filled to overflowing, and in some, which lie hidden
in the background, men are smoking hasheesh to induce flattering dreams. Every
one is eager to express his joy at the advent of Mohammed, and thus win his
favour and secure his intercession with God; for while this whole month is fraught
with good, the twelfth day is especially sanctified by Allah.

The next day brings an extraordinary finale to these festive scenes—the
Dawsah or “Treading.” The celebrity which this religious ceremony has acquired,
even in Europe, and the numerous accounts that have been given of it by superficial


114 EGYPT.


observers, render it by no means surprising that false impressions should have been
disseminated as to its significance. It is supposed that there is something in it
essential to Islam, and that it is an organic offshoot of that faith, while, in fact,
it is only to be regarded as an excrescence from that saint-worship and superstition
which have grown up among the inhabitants of Cairo only, and which are repudiated
by all other “true believers”’—if we except only the villagers of Berzah near
Damascus, who likewise have their festal ceremony of “Treading.” So singular
and isolated a proceeding must have taken its rise in some local cause, and the
following legend affords such an explanation. “The second sheykh of the Sa’deeyah
order of Dervishes, and the immediate successor of its founder, Sa’ad, ‘rode one day
—but wherefore no man knoweth—from the citadel of Cairo to his rather distant
dwelling over vessels of glass without breaking one of them.” This nonsensical story
must probably have had a foundation in some fact unknown to us; at least, it is
difficult otherwise to see why the privilege should have been conceded to every
chief of this sect to ride on horseback with impunity, not merely over glass but
over living men. At any rate, the whole ceremony has no other object than the
glorification of an order of Dervishes, and the superstition of the populace willingly
offers a sacrifice to it, for each one who has been touched by the horse’s hoof
believes himself to have been distinguished by a special miracle. The Sa’deeyahs
assert that—like the glass of the legend—the bodies of the men are uninjured by
the “Treading.” In point of fact there is ample proof that the Dawsah is never


accomplished without some crushing and injury, though it is said the miracle is
performed all the same both on believers and on unbelievers; but in this instance,
as with regard to similar miracles in other religions, the “noes” do not count.
We may, at any rate, assert to the honour of the more educated Cairenes, and
particularly of the professors of the Mosque of el-Azhar, that they denounce the
whole affair as contrary to the law, and as an imposture, and have made repre-
sentations to the Viceroy again and again as to his permitting the Dawsah to take


place. This has not, however, so far, prevented an enormous concourse—and among
them many Europeans—from assembling to see the performance. When we arrive,
at about ten o'clock, in the enclosure, there is already on one side a long array
of equipages full of ladies from the harems, and foreigners, while on the other
several tents, and among them one kept for the Government, are fast filling with
spectators. We take our places in this tent, and have fully two hours to wait
before the sheykh of the Sa’deeyah—who has passed the night in prayer and fasting
to render himself worthy of the miracle to be accomplished in his person—has ended
his mid-day prayers in the Mosque of Huseyn, and mounted his palfrey. Up to
this moment the people have wandered up and down the road on each side,
unchecked by the soldiers. But the nearer it gets to noon and the higher the


scorching sun mounts in the sky the denser grows the throng. Now we hear the
cannon fired which announces from the citadel that the sun is at the meridian,
and a troop of excited men, with flags flying and trumpets sounding, hurry past ;
these belong to the dervish orders of Sa’deeyah and Refa’eeyah, and are joined by
many volunteers. The dense crowds of lookers-on line the road, closely packed ;


more wild troops succeed the first, their excitement reacts on those who have


CAIRO—LIFE OF THE PEOPLE. 115


hitherto preserved their equanimity, and we are soon closely surrounded by a


PBL MP IECIT


THE DAWSAH, OR ‘ TREADING.”


crowd of Mussulmans, all incessantly praying or repeating verses of the Koran.
By this time the Via Dolorosa is paved with men’s bodies, and the Moslems in


116 EGYPT.


front of us, too, prepare to fling themselves in the way. All lie with their heads
towards us, and their legs the other way, resting their faces on their arms and
incessantly crying “Allah! Allah! Allah!” at the same time they lie as close as
possible to each other, that the horse’s hoofs may not slip on their ribs and cause
serious injury. The elastic forms of the Arabs, thus lying side by side, compose a
narrow undulating roadway, which generally yields under the pressure of the horse’s
feet enough to prevent serious mischief. The bystanders fan the half unconscious
victims—who gasp out their hoarse cries of Allah—with their robes, to cool them.
Presiding Dervishes bustle hurriedly up and down this living roadway, inciting
the crowd with fanatical outcries. The excitement rises higher and higher, and
presently we feel even our own nerves begin to thrill. A. pious frenzy overcomes
a man standing opposite, the dull echo of many voices groaning out “ Allah!” comes
up from the men stretched on the ground before us, the crowd all around us is
praying or muttering texts from the Koran. In front, behind, and in every direction,
we see the rolling eyes and death-like faces of the victims.

Then a Dervish runs past; “Call on the name of God, O faithful!” he
shouts. In the distance comes a man on horseback. For an instant he is forced
to halt, for the horse on which he rides shuns treading on the bodies of men, but
the beast, urged from behind and tugged by the bridle, presently conquers its
repugnance, and with long strides over the backs, loins, and shoulders of the men
it ambles onwards and past us. The sheykh is a venerable-looking old man, he
sits on his horse weary and oyerstrained, but with a look of ecstasy on his handsome
features. He wears a large olive-green turban decorated with a white diagonal
stripe, this head-gear being proper to his sect. The horse is a large strongly-built
animal, but its hoofs are not shod. :

Hardly is the miracle fairly accomplished than the bystanders hasten to raise
the prostrate martyrs. Pale faces, streaming with tears or twitching with nervous-
ness, then come to light. One is severely hurt in a very pitiful way, while the
dislocated right arm of another has a very hopeless aspect. A third poor wretch,
limping very badly, has even less cause to glorify the miracle, and he is hastily led
away among the crowd, now dispersing.

It has often been asserted that the religious and nervous excitement of which
we have just been witnesses are the result of smoking hasheesh ; but this certainly
is only the case in very exceptional instances. The vigil of the previous nights, the
perpetual reciting of the Koran, and the excitement before the slowly-ad yancing
danger, are certainly sufficient to produce a nervous state and convulsions, par-
ticularly when we take into consideration the extraordinary predisposition of the
Oriental character for religious transport—a state of mind so unintelligible to us.
The East was originally the fatherland of the mysterious phenomena of “ Possession,”
and so at the present day, under the promptings of superstition, hundreds are ready
to fling themselves before the hoofs of the sheykh’s horse.


ERY few Moslems at the present day conscientiously fulfil the five
Mohammedan duties,’ called the “pillars of Islam.” Only
fasting and prayer are still regarded as unavoidable obliga-
tions on a pious Moslem, and even those who are, in fact,
indifferent, carefully observe these two duties. A whole month
is dedicated to the duty of fasting—the greatest and most
sacred of the whole Mohammedan year, the month of Ramadan.
Before it is ushered in, festivals of peculiar significance are
kept, as, for instance, the solemn night of the middle of the
preceding month, Shaaban, in which the destiny of men’ is

weighed and determined, and when God separates the yellow leaves from the green

on the tree of humanity, while the faithful keep their vigil in prayer and trembling.

A number of Moslems begin the fast in this month, and all look forward with much

eagerness to the blessed month of Ramadan. For it is blessed indeed. “It is the month

of my people, in which their sins are forgiven them,” said the Prophet Mohammed. In
this month all the canonical books of the Moslem religion were revealed : the revelation
to Abraham, the Law of Moses, the Gospel of Christ, and the Koran of Mohammed.

It is during the last third of this month that the “night of dignity” occurs, in

which all seas become sweet, the gates of Paradise are opened, and God grants

pardon to the world. Therefore, many a wanton sinner makes use of this time,
and endeavours to make up for his misdeeds by an exact observance of the command
to fast. Although Ramadan often falls in the middle of the hottest summers, the
command forbids the tasting of any food from the rising till the setting of the
sun. Not a morsel must mitigate the most gnawing hunger, and not a drop of
water pass the burning lips; nay, even the beloved cigarette is forbidden, for the

Arab “drinks” his tobacco smoke. Only such as are sick, travelling, or in the

field of battle, are exempt from this ordinance, and then only on condition that they

take the first favourable opportunity of repairing the omission.

The last day of Sha’aban is drawing to a close, in a few hours the first night
of Ramadan will have begun. A solemn procession will receive the proclamation
from the house of the Kadi that the month of fasting is begun, but this will not
be declared till the pale sickle of the new moon has been seen by at least one
man, and, therefore, in the course of the afternoon people are sent out to Mokattam
to watch for the first glimpse of the slender crescent in the pure clear sky over
the Desert. Near the citadel, in front of the native palace of justice, Beyt-el-Adil,
and in many of the streets, thousands assemble and impede the progress of the


1 These are, war against unbelievers, pilgrimage, alms-giving, fasting, and praying.


A NIGHT


OF


THE RAMADAN—THE


HOUR OF


PRAYER,


CAIRO—LIFE OF THE PEOPLE. 119


procession, up to the very doors of the Kadi’s house, where it draws up. The chiefs
of guilds, the captain of the soldiers that accompany the procession, and the Minister


THE WATCHERS.


of Police are admitted, and solemnly take their seats on the Kadi’s divan to hear
the decisive “Fetwa.” The emissaries have seen the young moon on the horizon,


a


120 HGYPT.


their testimony is taken down in writing, and not till then does the Kadi deliver
the written declaration that the Month of Fasting has begun. Cannons are fired
from the citadel, the procession divides into several portions, with bands of music
at their head, and they walk through the city in every direction, incessantly crying
to the passers-by: “Fast, fast, ye followers of the best of men.” Now begins that
peculiar restless excitation which characterises all Arabs during Ramadan, and
which is easily explained when we consider that every one tries to make up for
his day of fasting by the gayest
festivities and abundant feasting
during the night.

The busiest streets are bril-
liantly illuminated ; lamps visible
from afar are hung from the
minarets, and the lights of the
mosque in the citadel shine out
like stars over Cairo, lying at
its foot. The cafés can hardly
hold the multitude of smoking
and chatting customers, and in
the mosques the faithful throng
round the reciter. In the houses
of the rich and great tables are
prepared for guests—who are not
wanting; in a side room the
Koran is recited, or a Zikr is per-
formed. Every one is more cheer-
ful and talkative than usual,
and, regardless of the swiftly
flying hours, no one thinks of
rest or sleep. Presently a little
drum rattles outside, and the
gleaming of two lights shines
through the open house-door. It is the Mesahhar, the messenger of the morning,
who all the year round parades every quarter of the city, announcing the approach
of sunrise. He comes now for another purpose; he chants in a sort of rhythmic prose
the praises of the family who dwell in the house, wishing them happiness and
blessings, and for himself a handsome bakhsheesh at the end of the month.
Towards midnight the “Abrar” rings out from the minarets: this is a call to
voluntary prayer, and is named from its first word “ Abrar”—“Verily the faithful
shall drink a jar of wine.” Shortly after midnight the second voluntary prayer
is proclaimed with a formula known as “the greeting,” because it consists entirely
of texts in blessing of Mohammed. After that, in most of the mosques, the lamps
are extinguished and the doors closed, but the brilliantly-lighted mosque of Hoseyn
remains open all night, and el-Azhar has only four of its six doors closed. The
hours slip on; a’ fresher breath stirs the night air, the harbinger of morning;


THE MESAHHAR.


CAIRO—LIFE OF THE PEOPLE. 121


and soon we hear from the minarets the call at dawn, which, during Ramadan,
always warns the faithful a full hour before daybreak, that they may strengthen
themselves with food and drink for the long day’s fast. Everything that can be
thought of for satisfying hunger and allaying thirst is served at this hour, for
this breakfast before sunrise is the principal meal of the whole day, and is eagerly
discussed.

Presently the Mesahhar reappears; this time it is to announce the coming:
morning. Replete and tired, every one now awaits the moment when, in the words
of the Koran, a white thread can be dis-
cerned from a black one—the first gleam,
that is, of daylight. The stars begin to
pale, “the breath of morning” fans the
tired worn-out faces, and from the neigh-
bouring mosque the shout is heard:
“TListen—the Fast is begun.” What can
a man do better than betake himself to
bed and make up for his lost night’s rest
by a long spell of sleep. This, in fact, is
what happens, and even if a man wakes
up again before the hour of mid-day prayer,
after a night spent in making merry, he is
but ill-disposed for labour. The dealers
sit, peevish and muddle-headed, in the
almost deserted bazaars, so do the officials
in their bureaux. Thirst, hunger, and a
longing for tobacco, increase every hour,
and with these three evil possessions comes
the ill-humour which never urges the
faithful to evil deeds more often than
during the “blessed month of Ramadan.”
Slowly, much too slowly, sinks the sun,
and before it has touched the horizon the
shops are closed and the offices deserted ;
cigarettes have to be rolled and the water-jar filled. Wherever we turn we see
men expectantly waiting, with unlighted cigarettes in their hands, and standing in
front of the cook-shops, coffee-houses, and public fountains. Great and small watch
with anxiety for the moment when Heaven will reprieve them from the severe duty
of fasting. The cannon is fired at the citadel, announcing sunset, the signal of
release; a groan of relief breaks from every breast, the water-jar is applied to
parched lips, and half a minute later thousands of cigarettes and pipes are burning.
Young and old besiege the orange-sellers, and pillage the baskets of their refreshing
contents, and the keeper of the café requires a double supply of cups and of
waiters. And now, with all the mirth that has been absent during the exhausting
day, night is ushered in with an abundant meal to satisfy the much-tried stomach ;
but extreme hunger must be cautiously dealt with. As an introduction to more


AN EATING-HOUSE.


122 EGYPT.


serious work a few dried fruits, nuts, dates, and the like, are eaten, then the
evening prayer is performed; a full and satisfying meal follows. This consists
more largely than is usual of sweetmeats and pastry, and any one who has been
a guest at such a repast must retain a pleasant recollection of many dishes,


hi


|


i
MI


ARABIAN PANTRY,


particularly of the kunds and kataif, apricots dried and pressed, and other preserves
of fruit, which are never wanting from the store-room of a Cairene; those who
cannot prepare these delicacies at home have them brought in from the cook-shops
in the street.

In the succeeding nights of Ramadan people usually go to bed by twelve
o'clock ; but the coffee-houses, which are crowded to overflowing, and where singers


A PROVINCIAL


124 EGYPT.
and story-tellers may be listened to, remain open till morning, as well as the shops
for eatables.

In this fashion pass thirty days and nights, like one long holiday. No serious
work is undertaken during the whole of this time, and the satiated soul longs for
the end of this much-lauded month and for the feast of Little Bairam, when the
baleful spell of fasting is removed, and the world returns to its natural course. The
cannon announces the close of the Ramadan at sunset on the last day; the places
of worship are lighted up and full of devotees; Zikrs are performed in the Mosque
of Mohammed Ali and elsewhere, and once more a high family feast is held.

The next morning is devoted to visits, as New Year's morning is with us, and
these visits are often extended to the deceased who rest in the cemetery.

The great reception in the viceroy’s palace in the citadel begins soon after
sunrise; it is his custom to perform morning prayer at Little Bairam in a
neighbouring mosque, and as soon as he returns from thence the thunder of cannon
announces that he is about to receive in state the members of his family, the
ministers, the Ulamas, and dignitaries of learning, and all the long list of higher
officials. After these the consuls for foreign powers, foreigners of distinction, and
European merchants, are received; coffee is presented in costly services, with
chibouques magnificently ornamented. The audience is over by eleven, but the
rolling of carriages through the streets goes on till evening, for after the Khedive,
the princes, the ministers, and, above all, the viceroy’s venerated mother, must be
called upon.

This lady used to be represented by the grand eunuch, Khaleel Aga, who
received in her name; he was one of the greatest personages in the state, and even
pachas humbly kissed his hand.

In more modest circles, too, the houses are full of visitors; even in the poorest
families cakes have been baked, and all the world is in holiday attire, for it is the
custom to make presents of new clothes and shoes at Bairam, particularly to children
and house-servants. It is most amusing to see the little ones showing each other
their red and yellow slippers, and to observe the conscious pride with which the
old door-keeper struts about in his new blue robe, which will rarely be taken off
his back before the end of next Ramadan brings him another. Everything that we
see looks clean and festive, and merry faces shine and grin under the turbans.
Indeed, even the foreigner whose creed is farthest removed from that of the Moslems
feels some ray of joy penetrate his soul at this festival, the Easter of Islam.


—v


<o THE FESTIVAL OF THE PILGRIMAGE. Z a


IVERS Arabic historians tell us of a beautiful and wise
woman, Schagaret-ed-durr (the pearl-tree), who, at the
beginning of the rule of the Mamelukes, governed despotically
as Sultana for eighty days after the death of her husband,
till she was married again to the Emir Eybeg (Izz-ed-deen),’
and, bestowing the throne on him together with her hand,
withdrew herself into the retirement of the harem. To this
day the Cairenes owe a grand festival to this lady, that of
the Mah’mal or “the litter”; this is in honour of her having, in fact, undertaken
the pilgrimage to Mecca in a magnificent litter borne between camels. At a later
period the rulers of Egypt annually sent a litter with the great caravan of pilgrims
to the Holy City as a mark of their royal dignity. After the conquest of the
Nile valley by the Turks under Sultan Selim,’ the continuance of this custom was
expressly conceded, and it has been handed down even to the time of the present
Viceroy. The Mah’mal is always accompanied by the cover or hangings, which the
Viceroy, as representative of the Sultan, must send every year to the Kaabah.
The solemn occasion of its departure immediately precedes the festivities associated
with the starting of the pilgrims, and we may, therefore, assist at them all,
without much loss of time, before we set out for Upper Egypt.

The preparing of the hangings takes place in the citadel, and its transfer to
the Mosque of Huseyn, where they are embroidered and lined in a consecrated spot,
offers an opportunity for feasting and rejoicing, and with all the more reason
because, subsequently, unless by making ‘a journey to Mecca it will no longer be
possible to see it.

This covering for the Kaabah, the Kisweh,* consists of three parts, namely, the
curtain or covering for the walls of the cubical sanctuary itself, the broad border
which is bound round it, and the veil, which is the curtain that hangs before the
door of the Kaabah. First of all the heavy rolled-up bales of cloth, of which the
curtain is to be composed, are carried past without any pomp on humble asses. A
coarse, thick brocade, all black, is usually selected for the Kisweh, and it is decorated
with texts from the Koran surrounded by arabesques in elaborate embroidery. The
gazing crowd, and particularly the women, give shouts of joy as the valuable and
pious gift goes by, and their shouts are repeated when, one after the other, the four
portions of the broad girdle or band of the Kaabah make their appearance,


tap, 1250. 2 ap. 1517.
* The most sacred sanctuary in the interior of the Temple of Mecca
* Manufactured at Constantinople.


126


magnificently worked


EGYPT.


with texts in gold and


PLACE OF MEETING.


THE PILGRIMS)


and sanctified by religious feeling, for the Mah’mal is held in special veneration by the


ornaments in silk. These are carried
by several men on a sort of scaffolding
of wooden poles. Then follow, but in
no particular order, the different people
who have been occupied in making
the Kisweh, or who still have to take
charge of it, and last of all a troop
of strange figures, who excite our
curiosity, though still several are
absent whom we shall certainly meet
with at the festival of the “starting,”
two or three weeks hence. Meanwhile
the embroidering and lining proceed
zealously in the Mosque of Huseyn,
and the caravans of pilgrims gradually
collect and form on the open space
below the citadel. By the end of the
month of Shawwal all is ready for
the journey ; the hangings are packed
as soon as they are all finished; the
pilgrims have entered their names on
the register kept by the leader of the
pilgrimage, victuals and tents have
been procured, bundles are tied up,
and the calendar notifies the day of
departure. On that day all Cairo is
on foot the first thing in the morning.
The streets leading from the citadel
to the  Bab-en-Nasr swarm with
humanity ; the shops are shut, and
in every spot where the caravan will
pass, heads piled behind heads crowd
every window in the public foun-
tains and mosques and in every private
house. Women in great numbers mix
among the inquisitive gazers, and dark
eyes sparkle from every lattice-window
in the Mashrabeeyeh balconies. Cheery
and festive voices sound on every side,
with the kindly greeting, “May you
always be in health,” and the simple
answer, “ And you too.” The love of
spectacle and the curiosity inherent in
the Cairene nature is to-day heightened


CAIRO—LIFE OF THE PEOPLE. 127


Moslem, although it is a symbol of regal dignity only, and has no religious
significance. It has now so often made the meritorious pilgrimage to Mecca that
it has assumed the character of a relic, of which the touch, or even the sight,
brings a blessing. On the present occasion it brings the procession, of which it
is the principal feature, to a solemn close. The procession opens with soldiers and
kettle-drums, proudly perched on tall camels, and a whole herd of the hump-backed


si


il


aqui!


A FAMILY AND THEIR GUESTS WAITING FOR THE MAH’MAL.


beasts follow, bearing all the necessary baggage of the pilgrims, with water-skins,
tents, and the like, as well as the hangings for the Kaabah carefully embalmed
and packed. One could fancy that the camels marched on this occasion with
additional dignity, and that they were proudly conscious of having been decked
with bells, stained orange-colour with henna, and dressed up with palm-branches,
which sway pleasantly as they go forward. On one of them, covered with a red cloth,
is the pilgrims’ coffer, which serves to defray the common expenses of the caravan,


r


128 EGYPT.


a burden borne by the Government. The procession passes by in divisions, and
often many minutes elapse between one group and the next. In these pauses
water-bearers and sherbet-sellers provide for our refreshment, wrestlers and fencers,
clad only in short leathern breeches, perform furious sham fights for the amusement
of the multitude. We too look on at the entertaining scene; but it is soon
interrupted, for a troop of Dervishes, classed according to their sects, are now
approaching with drums and fifes, performing their Zikr, violently excited, and
stirring up the sympathy of the crowd by cries and gestures. The people shout
louder and louder, for now the litter of the “ Prince of the Pilgrimage” appears
on the scene, swinging between two camels, one in front of the other. This official
is entrusted with the conduct of the expedition. Then follows the leader of the
pilgrims, who, in the desert, goes first to lead the way; behind him follows a gay
troop of officers, Dervishes, citizens, and all sorts of performers for the entertainment
of the people. The asses and horses are festally painted like the camels, and decked


with little flags and green boughs.

Next come several regiments of cavalry and infantry, who, in their fullest
uniform and with their new and brilliant weapons, have a splendid efiect, as though
prepared to defend the most important part of the procession; they are succeeded
by the head of the police surrounded by mounted Kawasses, and behind these comes
the chief of the pilgrims riding on a magnificently-caparisoned horse in front of his
three scribes and the Imams of the orthodox schools; the Imams are accompanied
by an endless file of Dervishes of different orders, distinguished by the colour of
their turbans, and carrying standards, and by the various guilds with their
emblems and standards. The long stream of men as they pass by, augmented by
people of every rank and condition, seems as though it would never come to an
end. Each new division is headed by a band of music, and revives the flagging
enthusiasm of the bystanders. We are growing impatient, and prepare to quit
our place, when from afar a swelling roar, like that of beating surf, makes itself
heard. As we listen we become aware of an inextricable medley of noises and
yoices, which increase in strength and loudness as they approach us in billows of
sound. Presently we distinguish the cry, “ The Mah’mal! the Mah’mal!” and in
a few minutes the same word is on every lip. Every eye is turned down the
street in the greatest excitement, when a broad erection is seen on the back of a
camel, making its way amid the tumultuous whoops and shouts of the people; it
passes by us in the midst of a crowd of men, all striving to touch it and so benefit
by its blessing. Handkerchiefs are let down from the windows that their edges
may reach the litter and be sanctified by that contact. Prayers rise from lips
innumerable, and the monotonous murmur, sounding like the roll of distant thunder,
is broken by the high-pitched shouts of joy of the women. And all this is in
honour of a mere empty litter of old-fashioned shape and make, a quadrangular
shrine with a steep-roofed top hung round with coloured cloth embroidered at the
sides with texts from the Koran. The religious enthusiasm all round us runs high,
but even if we felt tempted to share it the sight of the two personages who next
make their appearance would quell it at once. First behind the Mah'mal we see a
half-naked man with his head uncovered, save by his matted hair, and slowly riding


MS.


PILGRI


RETURN OF THE


THE


130 EGYPT.


forward on a camel. This is the Camel Sheykh, who accompanies the pilgrims every
year in this very unpresentable costume ; and behind him, a grotesque “ tail piece”
closing the procession, comes the Sheykh or Father of the Cats, of whom I have
spoken before, with his four-footed party." We escape from the crushing throng
that follows in the rear, down a silent side street, while the procession pushes
on to the Bab-en-Nasr, and passes out of the city beyond that gate. After
resting outside the walls for two or
three days under tents, the caravan
sets out, and makes its first day’s
journey of scarcely more than four
hours as far as the first station at
Birkett-el-Hage, or the “ Pilgrims’
Lake,” where the last stragglers can
join the caravan, where the skins
are re-filled with water, and the
leader at last gives the definite
signal for a final start eastwards,
across the sandy waste of the
Arabian desert. For thirty-seven
days they march across the country
till they reach the Holy Places,
and at least three months will pass
before they once more see Cairo
on their return. The thoughts of
those who remain behind follow
their friends on their journey, and
during their absence we are once
vividly reminded of them and of
the ceremonies in which they, at
Mecca, are bearing a part, for on
the tenth day of the month of
pilgrimage the whole Mohammedan
world celebrates its most solemn
festival, the sacrificial feast, which is to remind every believer in Islam of the
sacrifice of rams offered by the pilgrims at the Mountain of Arafat near Mecca.
Rams innumerable must bleed on that day, for even the most impecunious collects
his remaining piastres, buys a lamb for his family, slays it, and eats it on the
following feast day. On this occasion the poor are provided for with true
Mohammedan benevolence by public endowments, and thus it comes to pass that
there is scarcely a Moslem who has not his portion of roast mutton.

The day of sacrifice is followed by a quieter time, but a certain excitement
is kept up by the letters which reach the stay-at-home relatives of the pilgrims,
and which tell of the fatigues of the journey, of the crush and cram in Mecca—


Seen VOladh pro.


CAIRO—LIFE OF THE PEOPLE. 131


overcrowded as it is with humanity—of the splendour of the festive ceremonies,
of the visit to the tomb of the Prophet in Medina, and similar matters. The longing
for the return of the travellers grows every week, for those left at home know
too well that every pilgrimage costs the health and life of numbers. Particularly
perilous are the acts of devotion to be performed at the black stone, for the head
must be bared, and the believer is accustomed always to the warmth of his turban,
and there is danger too of epidemics in the poisonous air of the over-crowded city.
But the anxious must be patient, for since the melancholy introduction of cholera
in 1867,no home-bound pilgrim can re-enter the country without having performed


WAITING FOR THE PILGRIM SHIP NEAR SUEZ.


a Jong quarantine. Thus it comes to pass that the caravan with the Mah’mal
seldom reaches the capital before the end of the month Safar. Many of the pilgrims
who return by sea are met at Suez by their relatives, who crowd the strand—a
strange coast-guard—when the pilgrims’ ship is due.

At last news comes of the great caravan, which is to leave the Pilgrims’ Lake
the next day; early in the morning, escorted by bands of music, great troops of
men with eatables and clean new garments for their relations—whose raiment is
greatly impaired by the long journey—go forth to meet the pilgrims. These meet
the caravan half-way, and then there is a tumult—a hubbub—a Babel—an excitement
quite unparalleled. But amid all the rejoicing of those who here meet once more


to greet and welcome each other with Oriental yehemence, there are anxious
questionings, heart-breaking lamentations, and loud cries of sorrow. Here a wife
is seeking her husband, in vain her eye turns from camel to camel anxiously seeking
the long-looked for face; no familiar features meet her gaze. There is her husband’s
friend, but the place next him is empty; a glance, a word reveals the terrible
truth ; and so it is with hundreds. Drums and trumpets drown their cries of erief,


132 EGYPT.


and the procession moves on, not halting till it reaches the gate of the city. There
once more the pilgrims camp out. Before the sun has set thousands pour out of
the city to the tents, and then, with many tears of joy, many too are the tears
of anguish. The eyes of the mourners, it is true, are slower to dry than those of
the happy.

Many of the richer classes, at the present day, avail themselves of the railway
and steamboat to reach Djidda, the harbour of Mecca. Only the poor now undergo
the dangers and fatigues of the land journey, or the pious who fear to diminish
the meritorious character of the pilgrimage if they deviate from time-honoured
custom, or such as are afraid of a sea voyage. Not the rich peasant merely, but
the poorer fellah is proud to join the caravan; he packs his whole harem—mother,
wives, and children—on the back of a camel, which carries all his household goods
and victuals as well; by day the women sing songs in praise of the Prophet, in
the evening they prepare the meal for their lord and master. Then many a morsel
falls to the share of the beggars who accompany the caravan, and of the wandering
Dervishes, of whom numbers perform the pilgrimage year after year. Among these
there are commonly several half-witted oddities, which are not merely endured and
treated kindly, but venerated to a certain extent as Walees; but now and then we
may also meet with an Al Hafee.’ One thing all pilgrims have in common, whether
beggars or lords of the soil, namely, that they are proud of their visit to the Holy
Places, and are delighted when any one gives them the title of Hagg (in Syrian
Hadjee), which they have earned by performing the pilgrimage.


' A barefooted pilgrim.


—___>. +e +__


NCHANTING as Cairo is and hard as it is to part
from it, the mighty ruins of a grand and remote
past, arrayed on both shores of the Nile in Upper
Egypt, have so powerful a spell to tempt us, that
we are not unwilling to say farewell to the city of

the Khalifs, and are impatient to make the necessary

preparations for the long journey southwards. Three
modes of progress are open to the traveller who
desires to visit these monuments of the splendour
of the Pharaohs, to see the broad levels that spread
on each side of the Nile above the Delta, with their
fertile plains and singular villages and towns, and
to tread the narrow gorge with its ramparts of


granite, which hems in the stream as it tears and
tumbles past Syene* and forces its way into Egypt proper.
The traveller who desires to reach the second cataract,
lying at about two degrees within the tropic, must necessarily
select the third means of transport—which is in every respect
preferable to the two others. The “tourist” who travels
merely to say that he has been and seen, and to carry home
a general idea of “foreign parts” will choose the steamboat, in which in three short
weeks, during which he is taken the utmost care of, he can reach Philae from
Cairo. He will be conducted from one sight to another with a large party of
companions, and in accordance with a prescribed programme, and will gain his end
with the smallest possible outlay of time and money.

Other travellers now proceed by railway as far as Siyut” in Upper Egypt, and
then go on, on asses or in a boat, to Thebes; quarter themselves there in the


1 Assouan, * The ancient Lycopolis.


134 EGYPT.


newly-opened hotel, and avail themselves of the steamboat for the return journey.
But any one who likes to be his own master, and to whom it is possible to halt
and to stay where he pleases, will secure one of the Dahabeeyehs, or Nile boats,
which lie for hire at anchor in the harbour of Boolak—large or small, cheap or dear,
quite plain and simple, or fitted up with every comfort. Those who are ignorant
of Arabic must trust to a dragornan for management and provisioning. Among
these dragomans there are many capital fellows who speak several languages—
English, French, and often German too—and they all know how to procure and
arrange everything required by a foreigner, and especially by a Briton, to make
him feel perfectly comfortable; but of the monuments these successors of the
dragomans of the time of the Saite kings know absolutely nothing beyond the
names. The dragomans or Hermeneis already existed under that dynasty, which
was friendly to the Greeks, and created a class or caste of interpreters who could
explain these structures, with more or less aid from imagination, to the Persian,
Macedonian, or Roman traveller. At the present day these guides still constitute
a guild, of which the members usually dress in the picturesque old Turkish fashion,
and many of whom have attained considerable wealth—as, for instance, the worthy
Nubian, Ahmed Abu-Nabboot, who, in youth, served the great Lepsius, and after-
wards Gustav Richter—to whom we owe the accompanying portrait—and who
once accompanied me through the Sinaitic peninsula. This most worthy man,
whose surname signifies “the father of the big stick”’—he is said in his youth
to have triumphed in a fray with several soldiers by the aid of his nabboot—is as
faithful as stalwart, and as powerful as a Tyrolese, and still continues his labours,
though he is now a rich man, “for,’ says he, “it is wrong to cut off the hand
that feeds us.” The handsome and elegant Abd-el-Medjeed ; the clever and zealous
Mohammed Saleh, who served me admirably well some years ago; the swarthy
Alee, excellent too in his way; and many more of these worthy people, are Nubians ;
while Abd-el-Melik, for instance, a very clever fellow, is a Syrian and a Christian ;
and Omar, who is a favourite with the English, is a native-born Cairene; he
served Lady Duff Gordon—the writer of the charming “ Letters from Egypt” *—for
many years with the greatest fidelity, and owed the foundation of his fortune to
the gifts of that much-lamented lady and the acknowledgments of her relatives.
The dragomans less in request hang about the hotels, waiting for travellers; the
proved and approved ones wait till they are sent for by those strangers to whom
they may have been recommended by former customers, by consuls or hotel-keepers.
It is an understood thing that, like all Orientals in their dealings with Europeans,
they have a keen eye to their own advantage; but they are scarcely ever guilty
of any actual dishonesty, and the dread of a bad testimonial, and even of expulsion
from the guild, checks their avarice and goads their zeal. The traveller who has
found a clever and experienced dragoman, who has made a good agreement with
him, and has succeeded from the first in making him clearly understand that he,
the traveller, is the master, will be ready to admit when he quits the dahabeeyeh
that he would nowhere in Europe have met with a better courier and manager


1 An account of a residence at Thebes and elsewhere.


THE START FOR UPPER EGYPT. 135


than his companion on his Nile voyage; for, though he can neither read nor write,
and generally has been brought up in indigence, he can always conduct himself
with tact and sagacity in his capacity of interpreter, even with the most distinguished
of his own countrymen.

Only the very wealthy and luxurious, however, should trust him to hire the
dahabeeyeh. It is far better for any one who has an acquaintance with a Cairene
to ask his ass


istance in selecting one of the numerous barques which lie at anchor
at Boolak, and to make a bargain in his own person with the Re’ees or captain at
his own consulate.

We do not need a dragoman, and for a dahabeeyeh we will have none other
than that of the worthy Re’ees Huseyn, who long ago conducted Wilkinson—that


most accomplished student of the manners and customs of ancient Egypt—and who,


a few years since, on my last expedition down the Nile, conveyed me with the
utmost care and attention. Re’ees Huseyn will see to manning the boat, we
will ourselves seek a cook and a servant, and return once more into the city to
supply ourselves with provisions of all kinds for some months. The list of our
requirements is a long one, for everything can be bought both cheaper and better
in Cairo than up the Nile, and we are in no mind to starve by the way. A hired
carriage conveys us back to the Ezbekeeyeh and then to the Muskee, full of shops.
Our first visit will be to Cécile, marchande de modes, for there we shall procure the
flags, without which no one would dream of starting whose bosom feels one spark of
patriotism. Our dahabeeyah shall, with your permission, display a black-white-and-red
flag, and a pennant of the same, though an Englishman hoists the Union Jack.

We look out of the window of the shop, which is on the first floor, down upon
the surging, noisy, and ever-changing sea of humanity in the busiest street in the
world, and the richest in the variety of aspect and figure of the passers-by. We
just glanced at it on our way to the Mosque el-Azhar, and now, as we are
about to quit it, the scene is no less novel and delightful than when we first
saw it, some time since. Nay, the bustle and throng between these two rows of
houses is perhaps even more attractive now than it was then; for, just as when


we first set foot in a country of which the language is strange to us, we seem at
first to hear only a medley of sounds, but presently distinguish certain words, and
at last comprehend the beauty and sense of each phrase, so the European who has
drifted into this swift torrent requires some little time to enable him to distinguish
and comprehend the separate parts which compose the bewildering whole. The
Muskee has been described a thousand times. The impression it makes upon the
novice has been painted with incomparable vivacity, almost with extravagance,
by Goltz;* and other writers have vividly set before the reader the long and
strange procession of figures that succeed each other throughout the day,
crowded into this narrow space. Goltz must be allowed to speak for himself :—
says he, “a rather good friend of mine—put me in exactly the right


“ Chance ”
way of seeing Cairo. During the first quiet morning hours I had been studying the
houses in the less-frequented streets, when suddenly I found myself at the entrance


* Bogumil Goltz, ‘Ein Kleinstadter in Aegypten,” Berlin, 1853. 12mo, p. 166.


136 EGYPT.


of the main street which leads with endless windings from the Muskee to the Citadel,
and which Napoleon is said to have driven through in a phaeton with six grey horses
—but this must be reckoned with his other fabulous exploits—amid a surging and
medley torrent of men and beasts; a sort of whirlpool above which the camels only
could lift their exaggeratedly long necks, swaying backwards and forwards, and
supporting their heads horizontally stretched out—like pilot boats on the stream.
And as the massive and machine-like ‘ships of the desert’ cut their way through
the human mosaic with its thousand voices, their blubbering, roaring, dreary groaning


CAIRENE MILKMAN.


and sighs rose through the air, while the ear-splitting yells of the donkeys seemed
to be a higher note in the same hideous diapason. In the boulevards of Paris or on
London Bridge I had had a faint image of such a Bal yylonian chaos, and in Alexandria
I had seen a kind of prologue to it—even the carnival in Rome or Venice is a mere
joke in comparison. Here every one, without respect of persons, is in danger of his
life, and, above all, the too inquisitive stranger; he would need eyes in front and
behind, and the steady shoving power of the camel into the bargain, to get himself
out of the scrape in case of accident. In the main stream of Cairo it is quite out
of the question to dream of gazing heavenwards to study mashrabeeyehs and details
of architecture; every one must keep his wits about him or he will be tumbled
over and over by some pushing, blindly-zealous street porter, or trodden down by a


THE START FOR UPPER EGYPT. 137


heavily-laden, heedless, blundering, trampling dromedary, loaded perhaps with stones,
or coals, or even buildine-timber ; or if by chance he is riding a donkey, suddenly
from round a corner a galloping cavaleade of other donkey-riders will rush past,
putting his knee-cap out of joint, or performing some other equally pleasant
osteological demonstration on the living skeleton, going far beyond a joke.”

The spectator who is himself a waif in this living stream is certainly quite
incapable of watching its waves as it flows round him. A safe corner in a window
is the right place; there the strange
mosaic may be sorted into its motley
elements by constant and repeated
gazing all day long; the significance
and value of each may be discerned,
and at last we may even succeed in
detecting how the living whirlpool


originates, swells to its maddest height,
regurgitates and subsides again to
perfect stillness. We may be per-
mitted to give a slight sketch of the
scene aS we may observe it from our
coign of vantage on the first floor,
before we finally turn our back on
Cairo and the Muskee, the main
artery of its vitality.

As soon as the sun is up,
Bedaween lads first appear on the
scene with their goats, which they
milk in the still empty street into the
vessels belonging to their customers,
shouting, open-mouthed, “Milk ! milk !”
The tea-seller, generally a Persian with
bright and tempting utensils of brass,
follows close on his heels. Not less
betimes comes the baker with his flat


JEWISH MONEY-CHANGER.


circular grey-brown cakes of durrah
flour. He earns a few paras from labourers and artisans, but those whose means allow
of it apply to the pedlar-cook, who supplies them with boiled turnips, stewed beans,
pickled cucumbers, little cutlets of meat, hard eggs, and similar delicacies, and a
clove of garlic is eagerly munched as a relish to the meal. Then the shops begin
to be opened, the palm-branch seats are set out in front of the cafés, and the first
comers of the better-clad classes will be the Effendis, the clerks and employés of
public offices, and the Coptic accountants and shopmen, betaking themselves to
their bureaux and counting-houses. Youthful shoeblacks, with their wooden blocks
and brushes, offer their services, and glance contemptuously at the bare feet of
the water-carrier, who is likewise one of the earliest frequenters of the Muskee.
As the sun rises higher and the world grows thirsty, trade flourishes for him and


138 EGYPT.
for the numerous dealers who, with noisy cries, sell lemonade, fruit-syrups, grape-
water, sweetened water, liquorice-water, rose-water—with infusions of tamarinds,
dates, and orange-peel. Lately, iced drinks have also been sold in the Muskee during
the heat of the day, prepared with artificial ice. But it is still early morning,
as we may see, indeed, from the presence of the citizens’ wives in their white
dresses, with their dusky attendants carrying baskets; they are going to make their
purchases in the market, which is not yet perfectly fuil, for heavily-laden peasant
women are still swarming in the Muskee, in their long blue gowns. Their faces are
hidden by black veils, and they carry huge baskets on their heads, with fowls,
chickens, and pigeons, a turkey perhaps, or vegetables. Some of them balance on


their heads high piles of cakes of dried dung, which in Egypt, where wood is scarce,
is used for heating ovens. Fisher-boys follow them, with their scaly wares wriggling
and fresh from the Nile. The donkey riders and hired carriages increase in
numbei
denser every minute, the cries and shouts louder, for by this time the whole chorus


soldiers and splendid equipages make’ their appearance ; the mob grows


of dealers and sellers are on the scene, crying every kind of produce in only too
audible voices; vegetables of every kind, grapes, dates, water-melons, bunches of
bananas from Upper Egypt, pomegranates and tomatoes, figs and prickly pears.
Girls without veils and with bright black eyes tempt the passers-by to try their
oranges; blind old men feel their way through the throng, and ragged beggars
mutter pious sentences—their way of demanding alms. Children fix their longing
eyes on the confectioners’ stalls, where fans are incessantly plied, but grown up
customers, too, buy a stick of barley-sugar—or they follow at the heels of a beast-
tamer, who carries a whole family of tamed apes on his shoulder, and leads by a
cord a goat which has been taught to balance itself on a bottle. A strange detail
in the scene is a Nubian loaded with the produce of his native land: panther-skins,
ostrich-eges and feathers, lances, stuffed crocodiles and Nile lizards, chains of shells
and painted wooden bowls. A rat-catcher dances on before him, balancing a tam-
bourine hung round with rat-skins, in which a live rat runs and jumps about. All
of these differently-dressed men and women do their best to attract the attention of
the householder or the passer-by, and to that end each one adopts a different cry.
The words made use of by the different vendors were noted down and collected by
Lane, who has immortalised many of these street cries. For instance, that of
the pistachio-seller, who invites purchasers with the saying, “The rose was a thorn-
bush; the sweat of the Prophet caused it to blossom.” Only those who have had
much practice in the Cairene dialect can understand these cries, and indeed the
ear, as well as the eye, is not at leisure to give undivided attention to one thing
only at a time; in fact, it is much more difficult to disentangle the confusion of
tongues and sounds in the Muskee than the confused medley of living figures that
fill and animate the scene.

The crowd reaches its height at about an hour before noon; a fluctuating
sea of white and coloured turbans ebbs and flows below, and just as the sea is
navigated by ships and boats, the human stream is parted here and there—by a
long train of camels—by a carriage rushing on with reckless haste, while runners
make way for it—by riders with splendid saddle-cloths bright with velvet and gold


ORANGE-SELLER.


140 EGYPT.
embroidery—by wedding processions or funeral cortéges with music and singing,
shouts of joy and cries of lamentation in quick alternation. The donkey-boys
following the European riders, who try to force a way for their grey-coated steeds
through the heaving crowd, and constantly repeat their cries: “ Riglak !”
“Shemalak,” or “ Yeminak!” — “your foot!” “to the left!” “to the right!” The
Jewish sarraf, or money-changer, who sits at the smallest of counters and tempts
the passers-by with the chink of his coins, anxiously covers his gold with his hands ;


he is ready to take every kind of coin known, for as every nation, race, colour, and
tongue on earth has its
representatives in the Muskee,
coins bearing the image and
superscription of every sove-
reign in the world are current
in Egyptian business transac-
tions: Turkish and Egyptian
piastres, francs and Napoleons,
shillings, rupees, and guineas,
marks and guilders, Maria-
Theresa dollars and Austrian
gulden, nay, even silver
roubles, which in Russia
itself are a rarity, here pass
from hand to hand, and are
recognised and taken eyen
by small dealers.

However, the eye lingers
only for a minute on the
money - changer’s table, for
there is still something new


and amusing to be seen.
A JEW oP CArRO. Two ladies from a harem have
been squeezed up against the
opposite house by a squadron of cavalry, for which every one makes way. They
shriek and scold, though their faces are covered with their gauze veils, and as they
fling their arms about, the domino-like cloak that enwraps them flies open, revealing
the coloured silk dress within: but the last horseman is passed, the road is open to
them again, and with their little red morocco slippers they vehemently punish the
flanks of the ass that blunders up against the legs of a European, who has not
yet acquired the art of getting out of the way. Europeans are here in numbers,
but who would look at their dingy and unbecoming costume when there are so
many others to be seen—Turkish Pashas, Bedaween, Armenians, Persians, Indians,
Greeks, and Negroes of every shade of blackness.
The sun is by this time declining, the human stream is beginning to ebb, the
tumult subsides, and the shades of night fall far more rapidly than in our latitudes.
In the shops, the apothecary with his smart glass jars, the cook, and the cafés, light


THE START FOR UPPER EGYPT. 141


up their gas lamps or lanterns, and the ownerless dogs sneak out of their murky
hiding-places, and stay their hunger with the scraps innumerable which have
collected on the dusty and unpaved street. Before midnight—unless during Ramadan
—all is silent in the most bustling street in the world; all the shops are shut, and
even the door-keepers, who make their beds of palm-branches in front of the houses


Hl


COBBLER,


they guard, have ceased to chatter, while the cry of the hundred Muezzins of the
city of the Khaliffs rings out clear and solemn, unmixed with any other sound,
through the silent night.

Early next morning we must once more repair to the Muskee; it is as yet
very empty, but the old cobbler is already seated at the corner of a side street in
a niche in the wall, where many a picturesque scene of low life has met our eyes;
a man with food for cats has also made his appearance. We know already that at


142 EGYPT.


the time of the Pharaohs! the nimble mouser was held sacred, and to this day
Eeypt is the El Dorado of cats. Not so very long ago a legacy was left for feeding
them; and a German nobleman, who made a pilgrimage through Eastern lands,
mentions a soldier who, though close to tempting shade, allowed himself to pant
and suffer under the mid-day sun, because he would not disturb a kitten that was
sleeping in his lap. The
extension of the Muskee
beyond the city canal
(Khaleeg) is known as the
New Street; we follow
this street till we reach
the street of the copper-
smiths’ bazaar, Sook  en-


i


Nahhaseen, which turns
out of it to the left, and
where are the Moristan


of Kala’oon and the Mosque
of Barkook. Here we turn
down, for here, in the
stalls and workshops, we


shall find a variety of


vessels such as we need,


and others we may pro-
cure in the contiguous
bazaar, called “Sook” by


the Cairenes, for dazaar
is a Persian and not an


| Arabic word. To - day,
being Wednesday, it is not


| crowded with purchasers,


for Monday and Tuesday
are the market-days ; on
| these days the stalls are


Si besieged with customers,

ITINERANT DEALER. and the wandering auc-
tioneer* moves about among

the buyers and sellers, crying wares, taking bids, and knocking down the
goods to the highest bidder. The Sook being commonly covered in, is cooler
and shadier, even at mid-day, than the open streets, and we will see what
is to be seen there. The rows of stalls which compose a bazaar are generally
placed round a khan, a large building with a wide interior space, and it is
only when we know this that we can comprehend how it is that the dealer,


‘ Appears as a pet in the time of the XVIIIth Dynasty, Bc. 1500.


* Called the dalldl. He carries his lots on his head or shoulders,


RIDE ON A CAMEL,


FIRST


A


144 EGYPT.


sitting in such a tiny shop, can produce such a supply of goods, and fetch out more
in a few minutes. The sign-boards of the dukkans (or shops) bear not the name
of the owner, but a pious text. A light net-work protects the front of the stall
from thieves when the merchant has occasion to quit it by day; and at night, as
we know, the Sook is closed, and guarded by a watch. In Upper Egypt we shall
require large supplies of copper money, and here we shall be well served by a
Jewish money-changer to whom we have been recommended. He is one of the
strictest members of his synagogue, and is dressed in true Oriental fashion, though
like most of the turban-wearing Israelites in Egypt, he is a native of Palestine.
The Jewish quarter, where the chief street is that of the sarrafs or money-changers,
is only inhabited by those Hebrews who prefer to live among their fellow-believers,


ROAD TO THE PETRIFIED FOREST.


for under the Khedive Ismail they share all the rights and liberties granted to other
religionists, and some of the richest and most respected merchants of Cairo are
Israelites. They are said to number altogether between six. and seven thousand.
The thirteen synagogues which they have built, and the two sects into which they
are divided, are alike under the control of a grand Rabbi. In the towns of Upper
Hgypt we have seldom met with a Jew; but, in fact, it is difficult to distinguish their
features from those of the Arabs, their congeners in descent. Our venerable
friend has served us reasonably, and will send a whole sackful of copper money
down to our Nile boat; so now our cares are ended, and everything is ready for
our start.

We will embark in our dahabeeyeh early to-morrow morning; this afternoon
we will devote to visiting one of the wonders of Egypt, the petrified forest ; to
gazing once more from the height of Mokattam on the picture of Cairo in its halo
of evening light, enjoying its beauty and stamping it deeply and for ever. on our


THE START FOR UPPER EGYPT. 145


memory. To make this excursion many Europeans make their first attempt at a
camel ride, thus affording an infinity of amusement to the unconcerned bystanders.
For our part, brisk donkeys shall carry us
through the Bab-en-Nasr, and past the tombs
of the Khalifs; still it is not injudicious to
mount a dromedary, for the road across the
desert is so sandy that I once saw a four-
horse carriage fairly stranded there. To our
left we leave the red mountain (Gebel el
Ahmar), which is one of the most remarkable
features of Egypt; to geologists and minera-
logists, indeed, quite the most remarkable, for they compare the sandstone which
here rests on marl to the grés calcaire of the Paris basin; it is hard and sonorous,


PETRIFIED WOOD,


micaceous, siliceous, and
of a reddish-brown colour,
and stonemasons have
quarried it for thousands
of years and for every
sort of purpose. Oscar
Fraas asserts that the
celebrated musical colos-
sus of Memnon at Thebes and its twin—both of which we shall presently become
acquainted with—were, beyond a doubt, derived from this mountain, which is now
connected with the city and the mill-harbour by a
railway, and which yields mill-stones in any number,
and all the material for the macadamised roads in
Cairo and Alexandria. The crater formed in the
hard rock by the requirements of hundreds of gene-
rations is perfectly enormous, and has been compared
with that of Vesuvius. It is to the ordinary visitor FOSSIL SHELL-FISH.

a far more exciting and riveting object of interest

than the famous “ petrified forest,’ which may be reached after a ride of an hour
and a quarter, over bare hills and yellow sand, and past sloping cliffs, red and


PETRIFIED WOOD,


blackish, interspersed with nodules of gypsum and traversed
by seams of chalcedony. The traveller who expects to find,
as the goal of his excursion, a grand mass of large trees
felled to the ground and transformed by the magic of Nature
from soft wood to a hard mineral, will be sadly disillusioned,
even if he does not shun a still longer ride, on to what is
known as the “


great petrified forest ;” for though thousands
and thousands of large and small fragments of silicified trunks
lie around him, on or under the sand, or 7m situ in the miocene sandstone rock, there
is nothing whatever imposing to be seen. Even the geologist can only compare this


LIMESTONE, WITH SHELLS.


' At the bebel Kashab, where is the little petrified forest; the
Wadi-et-Tih,


eat one is at the Bir-el-Fahmeh, near the


146 EGYPT.


famous spot with one of the layers of lignite or peat in central Germany, and any
one who has seen such a place knows how far it is from being picturesque. Certainly,
when we learn from the botanist that these brown flakes of stone, as hard as iron, were
flourishing trees many, many thousands of years ago (Wicolia Aegyptiaca, a species of
Balsamodendron) waving greenly in the sun on wooded heights and bowing in the
wind, our imagination is strangely stirred, and we confess with admiration that
Nature, when she will, knows how to preserve her works—even organic forms—with


WINDMILL NEAR CAIRO,


a more successful hand than that of man; ay, even in Egypt, the land where
so many structures have wonderfully survived, which in other countries would
rapidly and inevitably have perished. Our return road leads over the ridge of
Mokattam, and the eye of the rider still turns frequently to the soil, for it is crowded
with fossil marine shells, a fact that did not escape the eyes of the venerable
historian Herodotus, and the observant traveller Strabo. The heights, which are
the bulwarks of Cairo to the east, belong to the system of nummulitic mountains
which extends from the north-west of Africa across Egypt and India, and as far as


‘ Said by Unger to be akin to the cotton plant.


148 EGYPT.


China and Japan. This nummulitic range belongs to the earliest formations of the
Eocene or Tertiary period, and lies immediately above the Chalk. It is distinguished
for the abundance and variety of its fossils, which are extremely well preserved, and
among which marine bivalves and univalves, with crabs and sea-urchins (Spatangus
and others) catch the eye even of the ignorant. The main mass is composed of
myriads of nummulites, large Rhizopoda of the group Polythalamia. The largest
species attain the size of a crown piece, the smaller are about as big as a lentil.
On breaking open the fossilised shells we find them elegantly chambered. Many
such natural sections may be seen on the Pyramids, of which the stones were
principally quarried—as I have said—in the nummulitic rock of Mokattam.

Again and again we would willingly linger, and stoop to pick up a fossil of
singular form, but the sun is now rapidly approaching the western range on the
farther side of the Nile, and dipping down over the Pyramids, and we gaze with
unmingled delight and admiration out into the distance ; for if the view over Cairo
from the citadel remains in our minds “a joy for ever,” that from Mokattam must
be remembered with rapture. Everything that meets the eye is picturesque and
strange: close before us is the lonely mosque on the bare hill of Giyooshee, like
the ruined castle of some magician; and farther away the citadel of the Khalifs
stands proudly up, its buildings with their multiplicity of detail looking like some
crystalline offshoot of the rock itself. It is to this feature, erandly crowning the
landscape, that the view from the Mokattam owes its superior charm to that of the
view from the citadel itself But it is difficult to say why it is that also—not to me
alone—the colour of the sky and of the desert, as seen from this bare limestone
ridge, of the garden land and of the river, of the cities of the living and of the
dead, the very quality of the atmosphere that floats over the scene—seem more
splendid, varied, and subtle, than from the famous platform by the mosque of
Mohammed Ali.

We ride home past thousands of graves, and hundreds of cupolas crowning
their mausoleums. Formerly how still it was in this Necropolis, how silent and
solemn! now trains clatter across it, and the whistle of engines breaks the silence
of the dead. Before we can reach the city the evening star has risen in splendour,
the wild dogs and jackals are barking and howling, and the sails of the mills on the
heaps of ruins have a ghostly movement. Windmills are not in fact indigenous ;
the French were the first to teach their use to the Egyptians in the beginning
of the century; but these people cling so closely to the traditions of the past,
that in the provinces richest in corn neither the windmill nor the water-mill has
superseded the primitive hand-mill of the peasantry.

How much, too, that has long been familiar to us from the monuments and records
of antiquity do we see next morning, when we make our way down to the harbour
of Boolak. Above all, the ships coming from the south, which have preserved their
ancient form; eyen the shape of the dahabeeyehs has undergone little change since
the time of the Pharaohs. They lie here in numbers, and so close together that it
is difficult to understand how, when they are ready to start, they find a way out into
the river. Nor is there any lack of steamboats in the inner harbour. The largest
are tugs to tow heavily-laden barges up the stream; the most elegant is destined to


THE START FOR UPPER EGYPT. 149


convey some distinguished guest of the Khedive’s up to Assouan; others accommodate
the sight-seeing tourists; this one carries a freight of sugar; and that one is
chartered by Mariette for a journey into Upper Egypt. The Nile, though
falling, still fills its bed to the very margin, and the river trade is still at its
height; one loaded vessel after another comes into the harbour, and scores are
only waiting for a favourable wind ere weighing anchor. The banks swarm with
sailors, captains, and Cairene merchants, with fellaheen, Nubians, and Negroes, with
camel-drivers and their beasts, donkey-boys, salesmen, and beggars. A number of
ships’ captains are crowding round a well-known merchant who has come down to
meet them, having secured the right of purchasing their freights of guns, senna-
leaves, ivory, and hard woods. In another spot dates are being sold by auction, the
supply having exceeded the demand, as well as pottery from Sioot and Keneh. The
dragoman of an English family is conducting two camels loaded with luggage towards
the dahabeeyeh, and his master’s family follow in a gaily-painted and very comfortable
hired carriage. A Greek is embarking on a Nile boat, something like a dahabeeyeh,
with a number of heavily-laden porters ; in this vessel he will voyage from one city
to another with his cargo of spices and drugs, the master of a floating Wakkal. It
is worth while to come down to the harbour, if only to see the negroes of every
hue of duskiness ; nowhere else have I ever seen so many and such various shades
of black.

Even among our eight sailors some are very dark in colour. Seleem, from
Dongola, is as black as ebony; the decently-garbed Saleh, who is major-domo of
the establishment, and performs the offices of housemaid, valet, washerwoman, ironer,
and housekeeper, and Ismaeel the cook, whom we named the “ Nubian footman,”
are very dark brown. These both came from Wadee Halfa, near the second cataract.
amel, are Cairenes.


Our worthy captain Huseyn and his brother, the steersman or mz
The ship’s boy, Ghilanee, whose business it is to fill our pipes and supply “fire,” 7.e.,
a red-hot coal for the same, is a jolly little fellah, whom we often laugh at and
all like.

With Saleh’s assistance we establish ourselves in the saloon cabin, which is
furnished with two divans, a dining-table and a hanging-lamp, and make ourselves
at home in the sleeping cabin which has a bath adjoining, and then we sit down
to breakfast—Ismaeel’s first effort, and deserving of all praise; we can look forward
with satisfaction to the future achievements of the black “chef,” so we go out on
the fore-deck. The forepart of the vessel is occupied by the hands, who sleep here
in the open air. The kitchen is placed at the extreme end of the dahabeeyeh, and
behind it is the stumpy mast, with a lateen sail attached to a huge yard. The roof
of the cabin is so high that it must be mounted up to by steps, and it is our favourite
sitting place; here, under a linen awning for shade, there are a stuffed seat and
two cane stools. From the little mizen floats our national flag, while the pennant
flies at the yard. The sailors are pitching a quantity of black objects into a large
green chest ; this is their bread, which they will eat, either dry as it is or soaked,
till they can bake a fresh batch at Girgeh. Their dinner to-day
consists of lentils, to-morrow they will have peas—and so on.

The captain has for some time been standing at the stem of the dahabeeyeh,


for fourteen days


150 EGYPT.


watching the wind. He gives the signal—the sail is loosened, Ghilanee climbs the
yard like a cat, and is followed by another sailor; we push our way with poles and
hands through the tangle and crowd of boats and ships—we reach the open stream,
and a light wind swells the heavy triangular sail. Three other Nile boats follow
our example; at Saleh’s urgent request we fire half-a-dozen shots into the air, a


feu de joe in which the Nile sailors take extreme delight, and soon sail past a heavy


Nubian dahabeeyeh which—as Saleh opines—is laden with Abyssinian slaves for
the Cairo market.


ABYSSINIAN SLAVE-GIRL.


(ef Ate) (at Alo) Lav ANai ier Aa) faa


THE DRAGOMAN


OOT,


NABI


AHHMED-ABOO


S
S


THE TOMBS OF BENI HASAN
AND THEIR TEACHING.


———>2+e<.—___


CAR PESCHEL, the German geographer,


who died too young for the interests of


science, proved that those rivers which form
deltas as they discharge themselves into
the sea are, generally speaking, of more


recent origin than those which mingle with

| the sea in an estuary. According to this

z WV EY view, the Nile would not be one of the oldest
SOE ERNE BIA ; of rivers, and yet, in the very earliest ages, none
Ne = was regarded as being of more venerable antiquity
= than the Nile. And this circumstance is easily


oe explicable, for everything in the world or in the
Rae universe, the smallest as well as the greatest, is of
no more account than a buried treasure until the
Z SS | intelligence of man is brought to bear upon it, and
drags it from its obscurity into light. The great


river Amazon—the largest, and perhaps the very
oldest in the globe—having only taken its place in
the knowledge of humanity within a few hundred
years, seems a mere infant among streams when
compared with the venerable Nile, which for six
thousand years has mirrored in its waters those
mighty structures which we shall sail past as we
ascend it, and which is spoken of in the oldest and
grandest writings of the East or West—the Bible and Homer,


Much has already been said in these pages of the rising, the falling, and the
wu


152 EGYPT.


fertilising effects of this river; the whole magical spell, however, which it exercises
on eyery thinking man whose privilege it is to be borne southwards on its mighty
flood we could not appreciate till now, when the turmoil of the metropolis is
behind us, and deep silence reigns around—while we glide past verdant fields and
hoary ruins, palm groves bowing in the wind, and naked sterile rocks, busy villages
and towns, and vacant primeval tombs, dingy manufactory chimneys, and gaudily-
painted temples. Sometimes the mountain wall comes so close to the river that the


CAIRO, FROM THE LEFT BANK OF THE NILE,


rock is bathed by the stream ; sometimes it retires to a distance, but never more
than a few miles from the banks. Wherever there is a level of soil, be it never so
small, the peasant brings it into tilth, and a village grows up there. Meadows,
hamlets, rocks and islands, the groves of palm and sycamore, ships and sails, dykes
and contrivances for raising the water, numerous as they are, are all so much alike
that it is impossible to distinguish them, and yet the attention is never wearied,
for the lights and colours are more various and brilliant in this valley and on these
hills than anywhere else on earth: whether seen in the tender haze of early morning,
in the golden glory of noon, in the evening hour, when the setting sun turns the
over-arching sky to a purple canopy, or in the refreshing night, when Hesperus shines


THE TOMBS OF BENI HASAN. 153


like & younger moon, and the moon with a calm silvery light, like a cooler sun,
while the planets and stars sparkle with astonishing brightness in the pure deep
blue heaven. How various, too, are the figures and occupations of the men in
the towns and villages we stop at! and our astonishment and delight are ever new
at the works of the Pharaohs, of the Greeks and Romans, which tempt every lover
of history to visit them and linger.

During the first hours of our voyage it is the Pyramids, above all else, that
attract our attention; these we know, however, so we turn to look at the eastern
shore, where lie the quarries of Tourah and El-Masarah ; from the limestone range


TOURAH.


beyond the blocks were brought across for building the Pyramids. In ancient times
the blocks and slabs were quarried from the very heart of the rock; at the present
day, however, they are hewn and blasted from the face of the cliffs. The halls
and passages hewn out by the masons of Pharaoh’s time are vast beyond every-
thing. Many an inscription in these has perpetuated the name of some royal archi-
tect ; and history tells us of the State criminals and prisoners of war who laboured
here. The lepers who were banished to the quarries are said to have suffered
and sorrowed here. Egyptian reports, intentionally distorted, tried to identify these
victims with the Hebrews led by Moses into Canaan; and I have already men-
tioned that the ancient Egyptian name of Turrah—Ta-roueh—recalled that of Troy
to the Greeks, and a myth soon arose that the prisoners of war from Ilion landing
in Egypt with Menelaos had been sent to work in these quarries.

The blocks, when ready, are conveyed, even at the present day, on two-wheeled


154 EGYPT.


carts, drawn by oxen, either down to the Nile, or to the railway which runs to
Helwan, on the margin of the desert; here there are sulphur and vapour baths.
These very ancient mineral sources, curative of skin diseases, have also been regarded
by some writers as the place of banishment of the lepers previously spoken of
Many consumptive patients from Europe pass the winter in this place, which is
comfortably arranged, and which is fanned by the fresh pure air of the desert ;
and many an invalid, given up by European doctors, here finds relief, or even a
cure. Numerous small and _ carefully-formed instruments of flint (Celts), were
discovered by the German physician, Dr. Reil, in the vicinity of the sulphur-springs,
and under his guidance I myself saw and collected several.*


THE PYRAMID OF MEYDOOM.


The village of Bedrasheyn and the ruins of Memphis lie exactly opposite
Helwan. The Pyramid of Steps at Sakkarah and the broken Pyramid of Dahshoor
attract the eye, and early next morning we shall see the peculiarly-constructed
Pyramid of Meydoom, built in several storeys, which is considered—and, no doubt,
with reason—as the oldest of all the mausoleums of the Pharaohs. Mariette
found in the immediate vicinity the mastabas of several members of the family
of Senefru, who reigned before Cheops. The statues of Prince Ra-hotep and of his
wife, Nefert, were found here.?

We frequently catch a glimpse of the railroad on the left shore of the Nile,
which connects Cairo with Upper Egypt. We disembark at the village of Wasta,
for there the railway into the Fayoum branches | off, and the difficult excursion

' See Lepsius in the “ Zeitschrift fiir Algyptische Sprache,” 4to, 1870, p. 89; and Sir John Lubbock, in the “Journal


Anthropolog. Inst.,” Vol. I.
2 PASE


THE TOMBS OF BENI HASAN. 155


through this province will amply reward the traveller. It is a vast oasis, at the
present time supporting 150,000 human creatures, originally wrung from the desert
before the incursion of the Hyksés—that is to say, at least between four and five
thousand years ago. An arm of the Nile, diverted into an artificial bed, was
conducted westward through a lock at El Lahoon, and ramifying and dividing, like
the stem of an umbel of flowers, into a vast number of channels and ditches, bore
the fertilising mud, and deposited it on the soil of the desert. This branch, which
turns off at Siout, is known as Bahr Yoosuf—Joseph’s Canal—because the people
attribute its construction to Jacob’s prudent son, the prototype of all wise governors.


RUINS OF THE LABYRINTH AND ITS PYRAMID.


To this day it supplies moisture to the province, which is, literally, the “ gift of
the Nile.” The land falls at three distinct levels down to the salt lake of Horus,
Birket-el-Karoon, and the Sahara. The great reservoir, the famous lake Moeris,1
which in ancient times dispensed irrigation not to the Fayoom alone, is long since
dried up, and there, where formerly the pious Egyptians of Crocodilopolis (afterwards
Arsinoe) fed and tended strangely-adorned crocodiles,’ rich crops are now gathered
in fields and gardens. There is no district in Egypt more fertile than this, and
yet, in the geographical lists of the ancient temples it is passed over as “ typhonic,”
no doubt on account of the worship of the crocodile that obtained there. Strabo
praises the olives produced there in thriving olive-groves, and olive-trees still grow


' Linant Bey, “ Memoire sur le Lac Moeris.” Alexandria, 1843.
* With earrings and bracelets. Herodotus II. 69.


156 EGYPT.


there in the thousand gardens, with lemons, oranges, and every sort of fruit, such
as we saw in the Delta, as well as immense quantities of magnificent roses; but the
essence prepared from them in earlier times was, no doubt, better than that now
made there. Nevertheless, during the past year far more than half-a-million piastres’
(about £10,000) worth was exported. The sugar-cane, cotton-tree, and all the nutri-
tious products of Egypt, flourish in the fields of the Fayoom, which owes its
Koptic name—meaning the lake land—to Lake Moeris; close to this lake stood
the famous Labyrinth’ and its Pyramid. Near the village of Hawara Lepsius
discovered the remains of this “wonder of the world,’ which Herodotus declared
to be incapable of description, and which, he says, had cost more tabour and wealth
than all the works of the Greeks put together. If we scramble up the grey-looking
pyramid of bricks—once encased with slabs of polished granite—which, as Strabo
informs us, stood at the end of the Labyrinth, and hence look down on the ruins
at its foot, we plainly see that the ground-plan of this enormous palace, where


FLOUR-DEALING AT BENI SUEF.


from time to time the representatives of the Egyptian provinces assembled round
their king, had the form of a horse-shoe; but nothing more can be determined, for
the centre and left wings of the building are completely destroyed, and the right
wing, where the sun shines down into ruined halls, is a confused mass of wretched
erey bricks, made of sun-dried Nile mud; the people of Hawara will tell us that
these ruins are the deserted bazaar of a town now vanished from the face of the
sarth. Only a few stone chambers remain, and some fragments of large pillars and
columns, with an inscription which tells us that King Amenemhat III., of the
XIIth Dynasty, built the Labyrinth. This king, who also erected an obelisk not
far from Crocodilopolis—and of which the ruins may be seen by the village of
Ebgeeg—took particular interest in measuring the height of the Nile, and in ascer-
taining its course, and it was he who planned that vast reservoir which we know
of by its Greek name—Lake Moeris. In Egyptian the inundation is called “meri.”
Amenemhat, in consequence of his favourite interests, was called “ King Meri,” or


>


' Built by Amenemhat IIT. and I
ruins. This name connects it with the worship of the crocodile-headed god Sebak. Mer also means a “labyrinth,” or winding


V. The name of the queen Sebakncfre, or Scemiophris, has been found amidst its


street, in Egyptian.


THE TOMBS OF BENI HASAN. 157


King of the Inundation, and thus it was that the Hellenes, making the Egyptian
word ‘‘meri” easy to their tongue, called him Moeris. Heinrich Brugsch has also


recognised an origin for the word “labyrinth ”—previously strangely unintelligible—in
the Egyptian word erpa-lo-hunt—* the temple of the mouth of the lake.”

Before Lake Moeris and the sluices at each end of it fell into ruin, it was
possible to irrigate a much wider extent of the Fayoom than now. This cannot
admit of a doubt to those who have crossed the salt waters of Birket-el-Koroon


and climbed the ruins of Deemeh; or, like myself, have set out from its south-


SUGAR-CANE


- western end to visit the temple standing in the middle of the desert, and now known
as Kasr Karoon. A wide space round this remarkable structure, which dates from
the time of the Romans, is covered with innumerable ruins of human dwellings,
tanks, and terraced vineyards, and strewn with fragments of vessels in clay and
glass. But the yellow drift-sand has long since choked all germs of life, and here
Set has won a great and signal victory over Osi

At Medeenet-el-Fayoom, the pretty capital of the province, we will give up
our steeds, and exchange the roughly-constructed skiff of the fisherman from Senhoor
for the railroad. Near the town many highly interesting antiquities have been found,


is.


? As Erpa-lo-hun for the modern Il-lahoun.


158 EGYPT.


chiefly of the Roman and early Christian periods, and very recently some valuable
papyrus rolls.

We left the dahabeeyeh at Wasta, and will now resume our Nile voyage. In
the distance we see the Pyramid of Ellahoon, close by which the Bahr Yoosuf
enters the oasis of Fayoum, and early next morning we find ourselves anchored under
a shady bank in front of the town of Benisuef. The castle of the Khedive,
towering above the little houses, does not tempt us to visit it, but we will give the
captain time to land, in order to purchase some flour; the bargain is carried on
close to the moorings, and conducted with as much vehemence as though it were
some furious quarrel.

A fresh north wind having risen to swell the lateen sail, the dahabeeyeh cuts


A BATH-HOUSE.


through the water against the stream as swiftly as a steamboat. In one place, where
the eastern range approaches the shore, we see a monastery perched on the steep
and rocky height. This is Gebel-et-Tayr, or the Bird-mountain, and, in fact, a sand-
bank near the shore swarms with pelicans and other feathered folk. They flap their
spread them, and finally many of them rise, startled by a swimmer, who cuts
through the water with powerful strokes. He soon has reached the dahabeeyeh, has
clambered into the little boat at her stern, and, all naked as he is, stretches out
an arm to show us a cross tattooed on it in blue. He is a Koptic monk, who
demands an alms of us as fellow-Christians. He puts the piece of money we give
him in his mouth, and swims back to his monastery—an old foundation, where the
inhabitants do shoemaking principally. The legend tells that on a certain feast-day
the Bookeer birds collect in the neighbourhood, and one after another stick their
heads into a cleft in the rock, till one is caught and hangs there; then they all fly
away, and come again the following year.


win


20


EL TAYR.


GEBEL


ALT.


MOHAMMED


UNDER


RECRUITING


EGYPT:


All the fields are as green as in the favoured islands of the Delta, particularly
on the left bank, and the many smoking chimneys, both on the shores and inland, prove
that man here knows how to take advantage of Nature’s bounties. Certainly one
individual profits above all others by all that is reaped here, viz, the Viceroy,
on whose estates—up to Mineeyeh in one direction, and as far as Roda in the other
—the sugar plantations are irrigated by steam-pumps, and tilled and reaped by fel-
laheen. The heavy canes, streaming with syrup, are conveyed on tramways to the
factories, and in an average year 500,000 hundredweights of cane sugar are produced
in Egypt. When the canes are ripe for cutting every peasant from far and near is
salled into requisition—not actually to forced labour, since they are all paid, but
not as free journeymen, since come they must, and are levied like soldiers. Those
only are exempt who can read and write, and this excuse is deemed sufficient.

We will not get out to visit any of the great factories as we sail by, but will
go on to Mineeyeh, one of the most important towns on the Nile, for we long for
a Turkish bath. In the vicinity of the Government House, the residence of the
Mudeer, we find a large crowd collected. “They are levying recruits,” says Saleh ;
and melancholy as the scene is, curiosity prompts us to remain and look on. The
poor brown youths who are mustered here certainly look miserable enough, with their
trembling limbs and pale lips, and it is positively heart-breaking when one of them
is passed on as “able-bodied,” and led away. His female relatives, who have accom-
panied him into the town, lift up their voices in lamentations, as if they were
mourning for the dead. “Oh, my son!” “Oh, my brother!” “My husband!” “My


5


camel!” cry the women, melting into tears, often bowing and writhing with theatrical
gestures, and waving their black veils. Of five recruits, indeed, scarcely one, perhaps,
will return to his home, and many a mother bids her darling a last farewell. Still,
Xe’ees Huseyn, who perceives my sympathy, assures me that these people are well-off
in comparison with the recruits in Mohammed Ali’s time, when they were carried
off with wooden collars round their necks and fetters on their wrists, like criminals.
He himself, he said, had evaded the conscription, and he showed me his maimed
hand. I subsequently observed many old men whose fingers lacked a joint or two ;
they had had them cut or shot off, to escape military service, and at last this crime
became so common that mutilation was punished, and the culprits impressed all the
same.

We leave the town, refreshed by the bath we have taken in an establishment
which is very prettily got up for a town of about 10,000 inhabitants ; but before
proceeding on our voyage we will inspect the magnificent vice-regal sugar-factory,
under the guidance of its French principal, and peep into the courtyards of the houses
which look so unpretending from outside; then we continue our voyage southward.
We should like to land once more at the Zaweeyet-el-Meyteen (the Zaweeyet of
the Dead)—a spot lying obliquely opposite to the town, and where the inhabitants


bury their dead in a handsome cemetery filled with cupolaed sepulchres—and close to
it, behind the “red ruins” (Kom-el-ahmar), venerable tombs are cut out of the face
of the rock of the Arabian mountain, and decorated with carvings. But we must
take advantage of a favourable wind, and endeavour to reach Beni Hasan by


to-morrow morning. It seems worth mentioning that the ancient Mineeyeh (Menat),


THE TOMBS OF BENI HASAN. 161


formerly built here, was transferred to the other shore of the Nile, but remained
faithful to its necropolis, and still conveys its dead across the river.

Saleh wakes us early; the dahabeeyeh is moored by the bank; a fellah, who
carries a staff in his hand to give himself the aspect of a guide—here perfectly
unnecessary—and some brown boys with asses, with vile saddles, have been attracted
to the shore by the sight of our pretty boat and the hope of money to be earned,
and we soon are mounted and trotting across the green fields towards the mountain,
from which long rows of open tomb-doors look down on us from afar.


A FELLAH PLOUGHING,


The air is wonderfully fresh and pure ; merely to breathe is a pleasure, and every
glance round, near or far, brings some new delight. A plougher, who has yoked together
a camel and a buffalo, availing himself of their unequal powers of draught, shouts to us
“Bakhsheesh ya khawadje !” for a “bakhsheesh,” or present, though he has not rendered
us the smallest service; and this cry for bakhsheesh, of which thousands of travellers
have spoken, has met our ears incessantly ever since we disembarked at Alexandria.
To-day we shall hear it still again a score of times. It is originally a Persian word,
signifying “a present,” and is equally applied to the 200,000 piastres by which some great
entrepreneur bribes a pasha, and to the copper alms flung to a crippled beggar. Pro-
fessor Paul Ascherson—a botanist, who accompanied Rohlfs on his excursion into the
Libyan Desert—declares that the word “bakhsheesh” is the natural outcome of the


162 EGYPT.


reflex action of the speaking apparatus of every Egyptian, which is set in motion as
soon as he catches sight of a European, and particularly of an Englishman. The
observation is both keen and witty, but, as I have said elsewhere, during many months


ENTRANCE OF TOMB AT BENI HASAN.


which I spent living among the fellaheen, and
in intercourse with them only, I arrived at a
conviction that it is not mere avarice that
makes them shout this ill-favoured word at
every European. The very poorest fellaheen
are proud, above all things, of their religion,
and believe that they are of more value in
the eyes of God than the cleverest and wealthiest of the Christians whom they see
making money in their country or patiently travelling across it. They regard them-
selves as the elect and distinguished people of God, and every disbeliever in Islam a
reprobate. The Koran requires that the true believers shall be just and kind to each
other, but it contains not a single passage which enjoins any feeling for man as man


THE TOMBS OF BENI HASAN. 163


and a “neighbour.” The fellah would think he was committing a sin if he vouchsafed
to bestow on an unbelieving stranger one of the usual pious and really beautiful
greetings. So, in most cases without any hope of a gift, he shouts out “bakhsheesh!”
rather as greeting than as a demand—an expression, in fact, of his feeling towards
a stranger. He has in general no good wishes for him, but still he is welcome,
particularly if any profit can be made out of him. But the bearings of the native
to the European, and the expression of his feelings also, soon change when they are
thrown into friendly intercourse. At the time I speak of I was in the habit of
receiving from my neighbours, instead of “bakhsheesh,” all those good wishes and


THE VALLEY OF THE NILE AT BENI HASAN.


blessings which by right every Moslem ought to reserve exclusively for his fellow-
believers.

The houses of an abandoned village, itself built among ruins, are passed on
our left; it used to have a bad reputation for robbers, but a perfectly harmless
population moved nearer to the river some years since. We now quit the saddle,
for the path to the tombs over the limestone pebbles is not a long one, though steep
and broken. When the great Champollion—now fifty years ago—climbed this path,
he proposed to devote twenty-four hours to the tombs of Beni Hasan,’ but they
chained him to the spot for fourteen days; and he may well be called their discoverer,
for though they had in fact been visited and mentioned by Europeans before him,
it was left to him to recognise their full importance. In the infancy of that science


“Lettres Ecrites,” pp. 72—74. Paris, 1833.


164 HGYPL.


of Egyptology which he created, the highway to error stood open, and even he, in
his descriptions of these celebrated. tombs, read names of personages and nations
incorrectly, and was completely mistaken as to the periods of the kings mentioned in
the inscriptions; still, with that almost superhuman insight into the heart and
marrow of a matter that genius bestows, and a marvellous tact in feeling out and
following up every clue, he discerned and pointed out everything that these monu-
ments might do for us, though it was reserved to later investigators to detect
their full value in detail. The importance of the pillars of Beni Hasan in the
history of the development of architecture, and the interest of the tombs for the
as Champollion plainly indicated—may in this place


history of the human race
briefly engage our attention.’

On the occasion of our visit to the necropolis of Memphis we have already seen
both large and small rock-tombs. These are, almost without exception, older than
those of Beni Hasan, for most of them date back to the end of the fourth and
the beginning of the third millennium s.c., while the inscriptions in the tombs at
Beni Hasan show that they were hewn in the rock or painted with stucco for
the illustrious hereditary governors of the district of Mah, who were related to the
royal family, and who governed under the Pharaohs of the Twelfth Dynasty, between
2354—2194 zc. A long series of centuries separated them from the earliest Greek
work in the style we term Doric; and yet, who that has seen Paestum and other
buildings of that class, can fail to be reminded of these when he sees the tombs of


Beni Hasan ?

When Champollion first saw the fluted polygonal shafts wrought out of the
living rock which support the roof of the antechambers and inner rooms of these
tombs, he styled them proto-Doric; and as the first intimate intercourse of the
Hellenes with Egypt coincided with the date of the erection of the earliest Doric
temples known to us, the suggestion was obvious that. the Greeks had derived
the first idea of their simplest and most beautiful order of columns from the valley
of the Nile. But though it must at once be admitted that the independent genius
of the Greeks must have been quite competent to assimilate forms borrowed from
foreign nations, and reproduce them under a new aspect, those who cherished a
blind devotion to Greek art still refused to recognise any affiliation of the Greek
Dorie to the columns of Beni Hasan, convinced that Greek art was, in every
branch and fibre, the unmixed offspring of Greek genius alone. Neither in this nor
in any other department could their favourite nation have borrowed the least
feature from the barbarians; and yet it must be supposed that the judicious,
vivacious, and keen-eyed Greeks became suddenly unsympathetic and purblind as
soon as they touched foreign soil, and remained blind and idiotic after their return,
if they derived nothing from their travels. No doubt, a general resemblance in the
primitive form of all columns may be assumed, and explained by the common
instinets of the human mind as brought to bear on a common problem, or even by
a mere concurrence of chances; but Lepsius has convincingly shown, with the
acumen that distinguishes him, that while it is possible to trace the origin and
significance of every portion of the columns in the Egyptian rock-tombs—of which


1 « Lettres Ecrites,” p- 75.


THE TOMBS OF BENI HASAN. 165


those at Beni Hasan may be considered the finest—step by step, from the very
beginning, there are in the Doric columns which resemble them
certain elements which only become intelligible to us when we con-
sent to study their genesis on Egyptian ground.

In the first place, we must clearly bear in mind the wide dif
ference between the rock-dwelling—which in Egypt is almost syno-


nymous with the tomb—and the erected house (or temple) of hewn
stone, with its infinitely richer variety
of forms.


Let us look back on Memphis
and the oldest tombs in its necro-
polis. We there find no supports for


the roof but plain quadrangular pillars.
These originated in the desire to let
the light into the second and third
chambers, as it could only be admitted
by the doorway, and with this view
i soll openings were cut in the dividing
sae at GARG ee walls that supported the roof; thus

the block of stone left standing to

keep it from falling in assumed the character of a pillar. The piece of wall above


LOTOS COLUMN,


the opening, or door, being left undivided,
became then and there the entablature.
Subsequently, the desire for more and more
light in the interior, behind the pillars,
led to the reduction of the angles; but
here again the process was similar to that
of first cutting through the wall, for the
pillars, which .now had acquired a_ pris-
matic shape with a polygonal section, were
not cut away so high as to the architrave,
but at the top a portion was left of the
original quadrangular outline. Thus the
idea of the first form was preserved, and
at the same time a connecting member was
supplied which was. perfectly adapted to its
purpose, and at the same time significant
and suitable—the abacus.


The column thus called into being in
a new form could be separated from the
abacus in a more definite way, since it


ERT RPE ce try 5: was easy to introduce various levels and — rarxavs comm.
surfaces below it in the guise of mould-

ings ; and we find this done in a few rare instances in columns of the very earliest

times. From a still further addition to the angles of the octagonal column, one


166 HGYPIT.


with sixteen sides was derived, which we also meet with at Beni Hasan. ‘The
mechanical difficulties in the way of cutting sixteen surfaces with obtuse angles with
perfect sharpness and accuracy—or, probably, a desire to
render these sixteen angles more prominent to the eye,
and to procure a more brilliant play of light and shade
in an architectural feature of increasing value and impor-
= tance—finally suggested the idea of fluting the sides, and
: so turning the obtuse angles into sharp ridges. I cannot
here give a detailed account of the further development of
the order: how it was that the anterior surfaces parallel
to the abacus never were hollowed or bevelled, but allowed
to remain an unaltered portion of the original pillar, and
often decorated with a line of hieroglyphics; and how
the circular base—which is wanting in the Doric column
—was left in the rock to connect the shaft with the
ground. But enough has been said to show how the
development of the column can be traced step by step, even in its details.

The plant-like pillars, such as we have already met with at Sais and Tanis in
buildings of a later date, of course could not have originated from the cave or rock
structure. We find them, no doubt, though
generally singly, in tombs, but never earlier
than the time of the kings of the XI1th Dynasty,
and. never in combination with the polygonal
column. Where they occur in tombs—and they
are to be seen even at Beni Hasan—it is at
once perceptible that they have no organic con-
nection with the character of rock architecture.
Like the vegetable prototypes from which they
borrowed their form, they must have grown in
the open air: at first, probably, as supports for


PLANT TYPE


verandahs and pergolas attached to those gaily-
painted and airy houses of wood and brick in
which the princes and great men used to live;
then they were constructed in stone, and applied
to supporting the architraves of the temples
which the worshippers always desired should be
as eternal as their Divine inhabitants. Where
we find polygonal columns in a temple, they
are never associated with the plant type, and :
we may conclude that the edifice which they SOLED OS TEE RO TOS TEE SOTENIE LUE
decorate is of an early period; for though they pons
survived the rule of the Hyksos, they were certainly no longer in use after the end
of the XVIIIth Dynasty.

The lotos columns, as they are called, which support the roof of one of the tombs at
Beni Hasan are strictly characteristic of external architecture, although they are here


w


THEBES.


OF MEDAMOT


COLONNADE


168 KGYPT:
hewn out of the rock. The shaft, which rests on a circular plinth, ris
like a bundle of four fasciated stems, beautifully rounded, and diminishing towards
the top, where they are bound round by five strips, or fillets. The swelling buds
form the capital, and the points support the abacus, which projects very little


s slenderly,


beyond them. Those known as papyrus columns are similarly constructed. They,
too, were of early origin, for a few examples have been found in the neighbourhood
of the Labyrinth, of the date of Amenemha III, by whom it was built, and of
whom I have spoken as the King of the Inundation. They are distinct from the
lotos column, in the first place, by having a shaft representing several thin stems,
usually eight, with their angles turned outwards, and which in section are triangular,
like those of the papyrus; and secondly, by their insertion in the plinth, which is
an unmistakable imitation of the growth of a plant surrounded at the base by root-
leaves. From these rises the shaft, which diminishes more or less towards the top.
The tips of the papyrus, which they represent, are bound together with from three to
five bands. The buds form the capital, and the lower portion is sheathed in leaves,
as a flower is in its calyx.’

The shafts are not invariably sculptured; on the contrary, in later periods
particularly, their parentage is only indicated by the insertion, and the root-leaves at
the base, and by the fillet-bands of the capital. Then, instead of the capitals I have
described, we not unfrequently see them take the form of some. bell-shaped flower ;
but the artist indicated the derivation of these also, enfolding the base in calyx-leaves,
from which grow the slender tufts of the papyrus; and many other forms of bud are
indicated in colour, even when they are not in sculptured relief. The abacus then
occupies the middle of the disc, which is enclosed in the cup-shaped capital. We
may designate this type as caliciform. At later periods, these and similar capitals
were often overloaded with ornament alike by the sculptor and painter, who de-
corated them with the leaves and stems of various water-plants indigenous to the
Nile ; still, the architect never lost sight of the original idea so far as to forget to
introduce the fillet at the top of the shaft, thus retaining the “motive” of a
bundle of stems tied together to form the shaft, with a connected tuft of leaves
composing the capital. These bands also struck the eye of the Greeks; but while
the Egyptians, of course, never applied them to their fluted polygonal columns,
the Greeks adopted them in their Doric column, where we see them as the
annulet, just below the capital. Indispensable as these rings, or bands, were to the
Egyptian plant-column, those antiquaries who insist on the independent origin of
the Doric have never found an adequate explanation of them there. The types of
columns which deviate from those above described I will mention and discuss when
we meet with them in the temples; but each and all, various as they are, could only
have originated on Egyptian soil. We have been able to trace the tomb-pillars
step by step; and those plant-forms which were copied by the Egyptian architects in
external buildings belong, without exception, to the native vegetation of the Nile.

We will now proceed to visit the tombs, which lie in two groups near each
other. The northernmost includes the most interesting tombs, and of these, two in
particular are the most attractive. Even the antechamber, or approach to the rock-


1 They are also given, Rosellini, ‘Mon. Ciy.,”


THE TOMBS OF BENI HASAN. 169


tomb, which the hereditary prince-goyernor, Amenemha (also called Ameni), had
made for his eternal rest, attracts our observation. ‘Two beautiful polygonal
pillars support the arched roof, hewn out of the living rock, while its inner side rests
in the smooth and polished face of the cliff within which the tomb is excavated.

We enter this mortuary chapel through a door crowned with the hollowed-out
Egyptian architrave, and here we find several neatly-fluted sixteen-sided columns,
which support the ceiling of the vast cave.. It is hewn into three vaults, and
richly decorated with coloured ornaments. At the back, in a niche, stand the
mutilated statues of the deceased and of his wife. The mummy-shafts, which occur


HERD OF CATTLE BROUGHT BEFORE THEIR OWNER.


(Erom an Egyptian Tomb.)


in these tombs as well as in those of Memphis, have long since been pillaged; but
the pictures and inscriptions with which the walls of this tomb are covered from
floor to ceiling—even the door-posts being painted—make us so perfectly acquainted
with the name and circumstances of the noble family: who departed this life four
thousand years ago, that we can specify of each member of it what office he held,
and under what king, who was the woman he wedded, what relationship the
different individuals bore to each other, what their possessions were, and in which
they took most pleasure, on what day of the calendar the feasts fell which they
held most sacred, what incidents in their lives they deemed the most important,
and the mode of their interment. And the same is equally the case with the neigh-
bouring tomb of Khnumhotep the son of Nehera, and with every other tomb.!


* The inscriptions of these tombs will be found translated in “ Records of the Past,” Vol. XII, 59—65.


EGYPT.


As in the necropolis of Memphis, so here, at Beni Hasan, the pictures and
inscriptions refer not yet to the fate of the soul in the life to come—as in the tombs
of later date—but only to the details of this temporal existence and the interment
of the body. These noble princes of the district of Mah’—who were indeed related
to the Pharaohs by marriage—served under the kings Amenemha and Usertesen,
who belonged to the Twelfth Dynasty, and whose residence was no longer Memphis,
in Lower Egypt, but Thebes, the capital of Upper Egypt. The first of these—
Amenemha I.—had wrested the sceptre from the kings of the Eleventh Dynasty, who
had likewise lived in the city of Amon—to the great benefit of the land, which seems


WAN oA qa sy lou
mae Gass 00


latay(


SEMITES ENTERING INTO THE NOME OF MAH.


to have progressed internally in every direction under the care and wisdom of his
successors. Though it is not within the purpose of this volume to give a list of the
kings or of the peoples they subdued, or to enumerate the victories they won, I
shall endeavour to point out everything that may interest the student of human
culture, or seem of importance in the history of its development; and _ precisely
at the period when the tombs of Beni Hasan were hewn and constructed, great
advances were made in matters well worth studying from this point of view.
Already, under the kings of the Eleventh Dynasty, the great high road had been
constructed which connected the Nile with the Red Sea, leading through the Wadee
Hamamat,’ as it is now called, of Koptos to Leukos-limen (Kosayr). The traveller
across the desert was wont to halt at five chief stations, and the Pharaohs superin-


1 The Nomos Hermopolites of the Greeks.
* El Hamamat, the Egyptian Ru-an, “valley mouth,” of the inscriptions.


THE TOMBS OF BENI HASAN. 171


tended the forming of wells by the way. Commerce with the Somalee coast and
Southern Arabia—Punt'—was thus opened up, the gold-mines of Aithiopia and the
mines on the Sinaitic Peninsula were now worked, the division of the land into
districts was perfected—of which more will be said presently—and the’ care devoted
by Amenemha’* III. (Moeris) to the irrigation of the country has already been
mentioned. Side by side with the active progress and practice of the other arts,
architecture, which in the Nile Valley enlisted all the others in her service, found


1S


HOEING OF THE SOIL, PLOUGHING, AND REAPING WITH THE SICKLE.


new opportunities. The founding of the great national sanctuaries of Thebes, of
the Temple of the Sun at Heliopolis, and of the Labyrinth, took place at this
period, from which, too, the first great obelisks date. Numerous inscriptions in the
quarries tell of the great buildings undertaken by the Pharaohs of the XIIth
Dynasty ; the style of the hieroglyphics on the monuments of this date that have
come down to us is grand and simple; and of all the works of Egyptian sculp-
ture, not one can surpass the fragment of a sitting statue of Usertesen L., of which
the upper portion is lost. It was discovered at Tanis, and now excites the admira-
tion of every connoisseur in the Museum at Berlin. The sculptor who executed
its right leg was an artist in the highest sense of the word. In painting, the artists
still remained deficient in the power of drawing things as they appear from one general
point of sight, and up to the end of the rule of the Pharaohs the laws of perspective
were never applied by them,
but their industry with the
brush is sufficiently proved
by the innumerable paint-
ings on plaster which line
the tombs, and which show
us, too, how with humble
means and appliances they


succeeded in producing the
most characteristic types.
Unfortunately, they are fast
fading, and being blackened by the torches of travellers and spoiled by the irreve-
rent hands of vain and culpable fools. Those of Beni Hasan, among others, are


WOMEN WEAVING AND WASHING, WITH THEIR OVERSEERS.


* Brugsch, “Egypt under the Pharaohs,” Pepa Liss * Or Amenemhat.


172


EGYPT.


suffering more and more, and we have only outline copies of them; but they are
in no respect inferior in truthfulness and vivacity to the representation of a herd
of cattle here given, which was detached, plaster and all, from the rocky wall of


MURAL ORNAMENT FROM AN OLD EGYPTIAN


SEPULCHRAL CHAMBER.


The men are armed in
has a piece of wood for flinging—a kind of boomerang—and


manners; one in particular


MURAL ORNAMENT FROM AN OLD EGYPTIAN


SEPULCHRAL CHAMBER.


a tomb, and is now to be seen in the British
Museum.’ Among the thousands of pictures which
line the tombs of Beni Hasan, one is of special
interest. It is the earliest representation that
has been met with of a family of the race of
Amu (Semitic). These, conducted by their Prince,
Absha, crave admission into the district of Mah.
Khnumhotep, the governor of the district, re-
ceives the strangers with caution, for his scribe,
Neferhotep, is presenting him with a deed or


|


Hl HIT
The Semites are bringing Hi (0 A 0 HA


gifts of eye-pigment (mes- NW
tem—.e., antimony), with
a roe-deer and a gazelle.


tablet, on which the num-
ber of the travellers—
thirty-seven—is inscribed.


they have bows, lances,
and a target. Women :
on foot, and children on FD ha il

;


an ass, with another ass Sa Pi
to carry the weaver's ) VY wis
beam and shuttles, ac- Wy
company the tribe, and <> <> 4
a minstrel strikes the Ma
lute in honour of their ~— 7
ceremonious introduction. \
HI

I]


The sharper features of
the Semitic race are
clearly distinguished from wn ii
those of the Egyptians. | il | | | | |
ie HH !

In other pictures in the

MURAL ORNAMENT FROM AN OLD
same tomb, among the EGYPTIAN SEPULCHRAL CHAMBER.


HN


soldiers we see red-haired


men in a peculiar garb, and these, too, seem to belong to the Semitic tribe? It
is remarkable that among the Jews in Egypt, to this day, very blonde hair is
not uncommon, while among the Arabs and fellaheen it is extremely rare; and
in the time of the Pharaohs it roused the utmost aversion, for red was the colour


' No, 137. It is from the tomb of a scribe named Anenhotep, of the XVIIIth Dynasty.


* Or else Libyan.


THE TOMBS OF BENI HASAN. 173


of Seth, or Typhon, and red-haired people (particularly among the hated foreign
interlopers of Semitic origin) were looked upon as “ Typhonic.”

Not only in the case of Absha and his party, but on all occasions, the utmost
caution was exercised as to admitting foreigners into the sacred Valley of the Nile.
Even the harmless negroes of the interior were met at Semneh by a warning
inscription of the time of Usertesen II, which forbade their crossing the frontier,
unless they were bringing cattle into Egypt or intended to hire themselves out to
service.. But the strict exclusiveness of the earliest periods was broken through in
many ways at the time of which we are now speaking. A
papyrus in the Berlin Museum relates the history of the ad-
venturous Sinah, who passed beyond the frontier fortresses
to the East, and wandered on, still eastwards ; who
settled in Edom,
won and married
the daughter of
the prince of that
country, and at
last returned to
Egypt, and was
received with hon-
our by the king.”

Travelling was
no longer regarded
as an unheard-of
and fearful thing ;
after the time of
the Herakleopoli-
tans, strangers be-
come common in
the Delta, while a
few, though these


mM


Mn


ry
Ad SM
in


are rare, venture
peng Pe Hemera even into Upper SCULPTURED PILLAR FROM THE TEMPLE OF KARNAK.
Egypt. Then they
get the control of the harbours on the Mediterranean coast, and multiply with a
rapidity proportioned to the relaxation of the strict prohibitions by which previously
they had been kept at a distance.

The XIIth Dynasty comes to a close with a queen—Sebek-nefru-ra.* The first
king of the XIIIth appears to have acquired his rights of succession by his mar-
riage with her; but little of any mark is recorded of his successors. Under them,
Lower Egypt—by this time swarming with the Semitic settlers—fell into the hands
of the Hyksés, who, driven westwards by one of the great migrations of the nations


1 Given, Lepsius, Denkm. Abth. 11 BL.
* Translated by C. W. Goodwin and Chabas, “Records of the Past,” Vol. IL, p. 107.
® Scemiophris of the Greek lists. Her name occurs at Crocodilopolis.


174 EGYPT.


of inner Asia, overthrew the frontier garrisons of the Pharaohs, and were very likely
hailed as deliverers by their Semitic brethren in the Nile Valley. They arrived on
foot and on horseback; for before their incursion no horse is to be seen on any
of the monuments, and after their expulsion what noble steeds we find depicted
in the wall-paintings! At Beni Hasan there are tombs particularly distinguished
by the abundance and variety of the animals represented in them, but there is not
a single horse to be seen. The horse is the warrior’s friend, and at the period
when these pictures were painted all breathes of peace, and the little we hear of
deeds of arms is petty and unimportant. It is thought a grand achievement to
march out at the head of four hundred men, and the stubborn individuality of
the various Nomes, both in politics and religion, and the power possessed by the
governors, must have rendered it difficult for the Pharaoh to collect an army from the
different provinces of his country. The hands of the peasants grew hard and horny
by holding the plough and other instruments of peace, and not by wielding the
sword. Nevertheless, an Egyptian army did exist even at that time, and even at

Beni Hasan we see soldiers represented, a_ little
4 siege, the manufacture of various weapons, and the
icultural


| punishment of refractory warriors. But ag
| scenes are ten times as numerous. The ploughman
with his span of oxen is followed by the sower,
and the corn is trodden into the earth, softened by
the inundation—not by swine, as Herodotus tells us,
but by goats. At harvest-time the ears are cut with
sickles, and the flax is beaten on the earth. Cattle
tread out the corn, the crops of the year-are stored
SS Aes in great lofts, and the amount of the vast herds is


registered by stewards. Every official carries his


writing-reed and papyrus-roll, and we know, from the records which have been
so marvellously preserved—certainly, they are the oldest of any papyri—that the
reed was neyer wielded more accurately and surely than at that time. Round
the houses were planted magnificent gardens, in which fruit was grown on
standards and espaliers, and various sorts of vegetables were reared; the houses
themselves, built of bricks and wood, and gaily painted, with their verandahs
and store-houses, were well furnished with neatly-wrought tables, seats, vases,
and other vessels. Dogs, from the slender greyhound to the bow-legged turn-
spit, and cats, as we have seen, are family pets. Apes are kept as playthings,
and dwarfs to make sport with. In the kitchen, meat and ducks are slaughtered,
stewed, and roasted; and the master of the household has many to provide for,
for the Governor of Mah—like the nobles of Memphis—had numerous serfs, who
understood every description of handiwork. Carpenters and shipwrights fell and
cut up trees; joiners and wheelwrights are to be seen at more delicate work ;
stonemasons, sculptors, and decorators are hard at work; brickmakers mould the
clay with their hands and knead it with their feet; potters make vessels for
domestic use, turning and baking them to perfection; while glass-blowers make
vases for finer uses. Tanners and shoemakers are busy; and in the women’s rooms


THE TOMBS OF BENI HASAN. 175


they are weaving at the looms under the inspection of fat overseers, whom we
perceive to be eunuchs. Very elegant ornamental patterns are to be seen on the
garments of the immigrant Semitic family, of which mention has been made; but
the Egyptians were in no respect behind the Asiatics in the arts of weaving and
dyeing. Even on the primeval monuments of Meydoom we see garments stamped
in gay colours, and in elegant patterns, which leads us to imagine that the art
ascribed by Pliny to the Egyptians, of dipping cloth of a uniform colour into a
fluid and bringing it out again with a pattern on it, must have been known there
at even this early period. The consideration of the ornaments I have mentioned


VALLEY OF THE SPEOS ARTEMIDOS.


justifies us in supposing that the art of weaving had reached a high degree of
perfection in Egypt at a very early date. They also confirm, beyond a doubt,
Semper’s observation that the working up of the material in weaving and _ pottery
by technical processes first gave rise to varieties in form, and then to figures and
patterns, which subsequently found a wider application in the decorative arts; and
as we contemplate the designs here reproduced—designs which to this day are
applicable as patterns for -stuffs—and which are copied from the walls and ceilings
of tomb-chambers, which in every other respect are perfectly bare and devoid of
all architectural detail, we are irresistibly led to the conclusion that the first idea
of the painter who transferred them to the plaster with pencil and brush was to
produce the effect of a room lined with hangings, such as are never absent from an
Oriental palace. As surely as weaving is a more primitive art than architecture, so
surely were these designs transferred from stuffs to these walls, and not from the walls
a


EGYPT.


to stuffs; hence the regular repetition of the figures, in which we might sometimes
almost fancy we see the line of the threads. Now, compare these primeval patterns
with those of modern weavers, and it will be seen that the Egyptians of 4,000
years ago had no reason to be ashamed of their work.

If, too, we compare the sculptured campanulate ornament on the pillars of the
temple at Karnak with these much older painted decorations which are now before
us, we have ocular demonstration that the ornaments first devised by the weaver
and then adopted by the painter have finally been transferred by the sculptor and
architect to the decoration of the pillar. Anton Springer says that ornamentation is
the true parent of art, and he adds, that art was not born of the struggle for
existence but of delight in existence; and we have never met with a more vivid
illustration of this principle than in the cave-dwellings of the dead at Beni Hasan,
which survive from the period when architecture created her most characteristic
element—the column as a composite member.’

Those must haye been happy times, when even the tomb was made _ bright
with pictures. How fine are the grapes that the merry vintagers cut from the
luxuriant vines! The juice is trodden and pressed out, stored in jars, and deposited
in airy lofts; for subterranean cellars are not in Egypt. Singers, and harp and flute
players perform their strains, and, as at the present day, the music is accompanied by
measured hand-clapping. Dancing is an artistic exercise by men and maidens. The
strength of the youth is tested by wrestling-matches, and even in these early times
the ball flew from hand to hand. Draughts, morra, and hot-cockles, and other
games, are represented (these were carefully collected by Minutoli in an essay devoted
to the subject), and the Nile resounds with shouts over boat-races, fishing excursions,
and bird-shooting. All this, of course, relates to the nobles and wealthy, who found
their last rest in these tombs; but the lot of the serfs was not a hard one, for it
is especially insisted on in the inscriptions that their masters were mild and bene-
volent. The noble Ameni—whose grave we first entered—says of himself that he
was a good master, a prince that loved his people; that he did no wrong to the son


of the poor man, nor oppressed the widow; that he distressed not the peasant and
turned away no shepherd ; that he never took away the labourers of any small man
(the master of only five serfs) for his own works, and that no man was miserable or
hungry in his time; but that when a time of famine came he caused all the fields
of the district of Mah to be tilled as far as its boundary-stones to the north and
south (to the east and west the desert. and the Nile marked its limits); that he
supported the inhabitants and provided them with food, so that no starving man was
found within its borders, and the widow was as well supplied as the woman with a
husband ; and that in all he spent, the great man was not preferred before the small.’

To feed the hungry, to give drink to the thirsty, and to clothe the naked’
were the principal and reiterated requirements of the Egyptian moral law, and it


1 The representations of these tombs have been extensively published by Champollion, Rosellini, and Lepsius, in
their plates of the monuments of Egypt.

2 A full translation of this inscription will be found in the “Records of the Past,” Vol. XII, 59. The limits were
defined by landmarks or tablets (Awtw), and as many as fifteen were set up here. This was during the XIIth Dynasty.


® To which is sometimes added remedies to the wounded and sick.


THE TOMBS OF BENI HASAN. 17


~]


would seem that at the time of which we speak they were not only preached but
practised.

Little is said about death in the tombs of Beni Hasan; however, we are
shown the whole scene of the obsequies and the conveyance of the bodies to the tomb
of Osiris at Abydos; but I shall take another opportunity for enlarging on these
subjects.


Rock-tombs innumerable are found in the limestone ranges on each side of
the Nile, but I wiil not invite the reader to accompany me through them, for he
would soon be weary of the
repetition, while the student
is always finding something
new and interesting amid the
apparent monotony, and the
more thoroughly he investigates
every detail the better he will
succeed in making a selection
and extracting all that can
be learnt from the monuments.
To wander wearily, and often
in vain, from one to another ;
to sift, elaborate, and rehabili-


tate his discoveries must be THE GROTTO OF ARTEMIS (SPEOS ARTENIDOS).
his portion, while it is the
reader's share to enjoy the result. But I will not here give him a history of
Egyptian civilisation; I propose, on the contrary, to take him as my companion,
and to show him, in the very presence of the sources of our knowledge—the
monuments themselves—how, after a youth spent in peaceful content and modest
retirement, and devoted—as we have seen in the monumental records of Memphis
and Beni Hasan—to the improvement and development of its inner life, after
centuries more of foreign dominion, the kingdom of the Pharaohs started for-
ward with a mighty leap, like a coiled spring suddenly released, and rose to a
pitch of splendour which threw all the other empires then existing into the
shade. At Tanis we saw the descendants of the foreigners who overthrew
Egypt; in Thebes we may admire and wonder at the culminating glories of the
Pharaonic period ; now, however, we will proceed on our way to Siout (Lykopolis),
where we shall find the monuments of those hapless princes under whom the Nile
valley was subjugated by the Hyksos. We will hasten on thither, passing by many
important monuments, which shall be described when we speak of the history of
their founders. I am sorry to deprive my companions of a visit to the transverse
gorge lying within an hour's ride of Beni Hasan, where the cave temple of Pakht
or Sekht' is to be seen—‘the great Pakht,’ as she is here designated, “the
mistress of Set, in her rock temple.” But the reader is already familiar with this
' The name of this goddess, formerly read Pakiht, or Pasht, one of the names of the lion, was discovered to be Sekhet.


She was a form of Bast, or Bubastis, and bore other names, as Merenptah, “beloved of Ptah,” of whom she was the


wife, and mother of Nefer-Tum. She also had the appellation Menhi and Urheka.


178 EGYPT.


primeval divinity, and has seen at Bubastis the head-quarters of her worship, as
well as the cat-headed or lioness-headed statues of the goddess. She was named
Artemis by the Greeks; and Speos Artemidos, or the Grotto of Artemis, was the
name they gave to the sanctuary hewn out in the mountain-side, and the caves
iscovered. In Champol-


in its vicinity, where formerly many mummies of cats were d
lion’s time there was a whole necropolis of dogs and cats here, buried in the sand.

If we now turn southwards we come upon the remains, scattered and few, of
the town of Antinoé, in one of the most lovely palm-groves in Egypt. This city
was built by Hadrian close to, the ancient Egyptian town of Besa, on the spot
chosen by his beautiful favourite Antinous for sacrificing himself for the Emperor's
sake. An oracle had warned Hadrian that he was threatened with a great trouble,
and the faithful Bithynian youth threw himself into the Nile’ to fulfil the prophecy,
and so avert from his master any greater danger. It is no wonder that the Emperor
deplored him extravagantly, and had numberless statues made of the heroic youth,
even under the form of various divinities.

Proceeding still farther southwards we find ourselves at el-Bersheh, where, in a
tomb, we may see the picture of the transportation of a colossus, which I shall refer
to again when we are face to face with the giant statues at Thebes. At Tel-el-
Amarnah we will embark once more on the dahabeeyeh, after visiting the founda-
tions of some mighty structures which Time with his relentless besom has swept off
the face of the earth. These formed part of the residence of the eccentric reformer,
Chu-en-Aten (Amenophis IV.), of whom we shall learn more at Thebes; his chief
officers had themselves interred in rock-tombs, which are richly decorated with cha-
racteristic pictures well worthy of study.


= Gy 133


at Rome. They have also been made the subject of Dr. Ebers’ last novel, ‘The Emperor.”


The fate of Antinous, and honours rendered to him, are mentioned on the obelisk of the Monte Pincio


ON TO THEBES.


——>20e <—-


IGHTLY and noiselessly our dahabeeyeh cuts
; her way against the swiftly-rushing stream.
Herodotus mentions that all the winter
through the north wind swells the sails of
ships going up the Nile, and at the present
day the voyage is constantly made before
the breeze till the middle of February. Till
we reach Manfaloot—a spot where the Nile
has carried away considerable portions of
land—we while away the time with much
enjoyment on the cabin roof; for here the
Arabian mountains come down near the
river and assume a variety of picturesque
forms, while in more than one place the
stream bathes the foot of the bare rock, in whose rifts the swallows and wild
ducks find shelter. When these winter visitors of the Nile valley are re-
turning in the evening to their roosting-places, their twittering and chattering
somewhat harshly breaks the stillness which reigns all round, though we might
almost deem that they were spirits in bird form, and watch them, not without a


180 IME NET


shudder, as they shoot out of the hard rock itself in rapid flight, or disappear into it as
completely as if it had swallowed them. Pilot and captain have to keep their eyes
open between this and Siout, for many a reach must be cleverly steered round; and as


for the cataracts, there is no passage
there more dangerous than the eddy
that rushes round the cliffs of Aboo
Fawdah. No careful Rees will ever
make the passage through this gully—
the head-quarters of violent and vari-
able squalls—after dark ; and our pilot,
Houseyn, loves to tell wild stories of
boats that have been wrecked on the
cliffs of Aboo Fawdah, and the history
of the rash captain who laid a wager

at Boolak that he would pass the dreaded mountain, “which he knew as well as
« his own eye,” without any damage; but miserably lost all he had in the world ; for

his boat was caught by four contrary blasts at once in this fatal spot, and though it

was sheathed with iron, it was dashed to pieces against the rocks. The ruined


ABOO FAWDAH.


GEBEL


182 EGYPT.


captain returned home with nothing but a beggar’s staff to call his own, saying with
many sighs, “Gebel Aboo Fawdah—I know thee now!”—a saying that has become
a proverb to the sailors of the Nile.

We will quit the dahabeeyeh here, where the much-dreaded mountain slopes south-
wards, and just below the fellah town of Manfaloot, which stands on the river bank.

We pause before an opening in the rock at the summit of a bare cliff; the
fellaheen who have guided us hold out a helping hand, and we find ourselves within
the mouth of a dark cavern. Breathing is difficult in this hot, heavy, dusty atmo-
sphere, charged with odours of resin and pitch-tar, while the tapers burn dull, and
hardly light it, and the foot stumbles against some unknown objects.

We are in the celebrated Crocodile Cave of Maabdeh, and surrounded on
every side by rubbish, skeletons of beasts, bones of dead
creatures, rags of mummy-cloths, and lumps of resin.
Here we discern the large outline of an embalmed cro-
codile, there a human mummy, and a gleam from the
tapers now and again reveals fragments of gold mixed
with the dust at our very feet. Have we not wandered
into the cavern of some magician, where gruesome mon-
sters keep watch over the precious metal? Stooping
down, we find many skulls, arms, and legs, thickly gilt,
of ancient Egyptians, who had themselves interred in the
htly tell us why?


tomb of the crocodiles—who can rig
Were these mummies buried in this inaccessible and
ghastly hiding-place in time of internal disturbance by


the sacred


their ancient descendants? Was the crocodile


dangerous gales, with special honours, flattered and en-
treated, and expensively buried? There is no doubt that


CROCODILE OVER THE DOOR OF


ites all that is malignant and destructive in nature, and con-


sequently drought and storm, were the attributes of


Typhon, and we know, too, that the voracious reptile was worshipped as a sacred
animal in many places in Egypt.”

At the present time a crocodile is but rarely seen in the neighbourhood of this
cave; but it is not long since these creatures—which are being driven farther and
farther south, particularly by the steamboats—were frequently to be met with at the
foot of Aboo Fawdah. So lately as in 1871 Lord Ducie killed one fourteen feet
in length. Of the innumerable embalmed specimens in this sepulchre, many have
been conveyed to Cairo and sold, to be taken to Europe, or to be hung up over
house-doors as a talisman. The cave of Maabdeh probably conceals many other
treasures of antiquity. The first man who boldly defied all the repulsive details


1 The presence of gilding on these mummies shows that they are of a later period, probably the Ptolemaic times
of third century pc. Khamus, the second son of Rameses II., of the XIXth Dynasty, about B.c. 1300, was found buried
in the tombs of the bull Apis, in the Serapeum at Sakkarah.

2 Emblem of the god Sebak, or Sebakra, the favourite deity of the kings of the XIIIth Dynasty. He was supposed


to represent the terrible fire of the sun.


animal of Seth-Typhon—worshipped here in the home of


ON TO THEBES. 183


which are inseparable from such an undertaking, and searched this cavern, was the
English consul, Mr. Harris, and he found a papyrus with a book of Homer written
upon. it.

In the course of our voyage southwards we presently are struck by isolated
specimens of a new species of tree which becomes commoner as we approach the
cataract. I mean the doom-palm (Hyphena Thebaica) whose range, properly speaking,
begins at Keneh. The trunk of the date-palm is crowned by a single magnificent
tuft of graceful, bending, feathery leaves, under which the blossom and huge bunches


DATE AND DOOM PALMS,


of fruit grow and ripen; but the columnar trunk of the doom-palm divides about
half-way up into two branches, each of which bears its bunch of feathery leaves and
nuts about as large as a duck’s egg. Every portion of this tree is of use—the wood
is used by carpenters, the eatable fibrous kernel of the nut tastes like a sweet cake,
its hard shell is turned into buttons and such small wares, the fellaheen roof their
hovels with the leaves, and the bast of the doom-palm is highly-prized and applied
to many purposes." The range of this tree is southwards, and in Equatorial Africa
there are forests of it, extending for miles, far beyond the limits of Egypt.

We now discover, on the west shore of the Nile, the minarets of Siout, a very
populous city, at which begins Saeyed, or Upper Egypt proper, and behind it lie the


1 Mentioned in the garden of a personage of rank of the XVIIIth Dynasty. It was called the mama, or mum (Brugsch,
“ Mon.,” L, taf, xxxvi, p. 49). The peculiarities of its fruit are described in the Sallier papyrus at the time of the XIXth Dynasty.


y


184 EGYPT.


spurs of the Libyan range of mountains. Before we can run in to el-Homra, the
harbour of Siout, the river winds so frequently that it appears to lie first on our
left and then again on our right; but at last we reach our destination. We steer
in towards land between two steamboats and among a host of Nile boats. We
keep off the swarm of
sellers of pipe-bowls, jars,
and other articles in pot-
tery—which are made here
of excellent quality and
beautiful shapes — and
mounting the best of the
asses which are waiting
for hire, we ride into the
town, over a dyke road
shaded by fine sycamores,
and past the huge Govern-
ment buildings. The long
bazaar, well furnished with
goods, is swarming with
people, for to-day is Sun-
day, and a market-day
in Siout, and crowds of
country-folk have come
into the town, which has
30,000 inhabitants of its
own. There is plenty in-
deed for a European to


gaze at in this motley as-
semblage, but the street-
life of Cairo is still fresh
and vivid in our memory,
and, knowing the greater,
we are apt to under-esti-
mate the lesser, so we
do not think much of
the Sook of Siout, with
its crowd of citizens, pea-
sants, and Bedaween, and
pay small need to the shopkeepers, who make signs to us to inspect their
little stalls, where they watch over many pretty articles of native workmanship,
particularly beautiful embroidery on leather and velvet, and we soon make our
way out again into the open air. Many new buildings attract our attention, and
we see several courtyards, of which the extent and handsome decorations are
very surprising, when compared with the wretched brick walls that the houses
they belong to turn towards the street. We submit to being refreshed by a


RY AT sour.


186 EGYPT.


course of ill-usage in a bath—for this is the process in all such establishments—
and then we follow a funeral procession that fills the whole street; we will follow
it out of the town and visit the particularly well-kept Arab cemetery, with its
crowd of cupolas, and the ancient tombs in the Libyan range. We are willing enough
to moderate our donkey’s pace, and have no wish to outstrip the mourners by
passing them on the broad country road, for in all the East no more beautiful
songs of mourning and no finer bass voices are to be heard.

At last, however, we must leave the funeral train, and climb the slope to the
mountain which served the natives of heathen Siout as a necropolis. For there
was an ancient Siout—or Sayut, for so the town is called—four thousand years ago,
though only a few miserable remains of it are now visible. This we learn from the
inscriptions in the tombs we are now about to visit, which were constructed under
the XIlIth dynasty.

When they were exca- ; : . =e

vated in the limestone, ;
Siout was one of the
most powerful cities of
the kingdom, and this
was not long after the
extinction of that race
of Pharaohs who were
the lords of those prince-
governors for whom the
tombs at Beni Hasan
were constructed ; but
as we stand in these
caverns we can see that
they were hewn not
long before ruin over-
took the founders. They are planned grandly and magnificently, but not one is more
than half finished. Large masses of rough unhewn rock in the walls and roofs
stand out bare and ugly, while other portions are beautifully smoothed, and the
surface covered with carefully-engraved inscriptions. The niches intended for
mummies, statues, and sacrificial vessels, have long since been robbed, and under


EGYPTIAN WOLF (DEER).


the Mamelukes a great deal was wilfully damaged.

Under the incursion of the Hyksos the nobles probably fled to the south,
with the sovereigns of the XIIIth dynasty, and the troubles that pressed upon
them in the present prevented their thinking of finishing the dwellings dedicated
to the future life, whether for themselves or their fathers. The Arabs call the largest
of these rock-tombs “the stable of Antar,” and the next in size “the bath.” Antar
is the Siegfried, or Roland, of Arab story, who conquered heroes and demons, and
his adventures are listened to with even greater eagerness than the thousand and
one nights by the modern Egyptians, who would rather hear them recited than any-
thing else, excepting the poems of Aboo Zeyd.

The view from the entrance of these tombs is magnificent ; across the cemetery,


ON TO THEBES. 187


the city crowded with minarets, the broad meadow-land—which is nowhere better
cultivated and irrigated than here—to the Nile, and, on one side of it, the Libyan
range, on the other the Arabian mountains. The geologist finds many interesting
fossils by the road-side; and the lover of antiquity may discover, in numberless
artificial caves, great and small, inscriptions and remains of embalmed animals, par-
ticularly of dogs and jackals, for Siout was the city of Anubis, the “opener of paths,”
to whom Cams niloticus was sacred, and the god was represented with this animal’s
head. The Greeks thought this “grave-watcher” was the wolf, and hence called
Siout Lykopolis—“ the city of the wolf.” Many bones of wolf-mummies have indeed
been found here, and to this day there are many species of the dog tribe wild in
Egypt, among which the wolf may be included, though it is a smaller variety than


ALAA LI RL ADL?


the sheep-stealing villain of Europe. The zoologist calls it Canis lupaster, the fellah
name is Deeb, and it would seem to have been the creature worshipped at Lyko-
polis and represented at Beni Hasan. The jackal, ubiquitous in the East, is Canis
aureus ; Cams niloticus is a light-coloured and long-eared variety of the fox, which
it resembles in size and form, and it is to be seen in the old monuments guiding the
bark of the Sun. The fenek of the Arabs—Canis zerda—is only about half the size,
and has very long ears. Skeletons of domestic dogs have also been found in the
same cavern.”

If we venture still farther into the rocky gorges of the Libyan chain we shall
find caves, distinguished by Christian symbols and little Koptic inscriptions, which
served as dwellings for those anchorites whose lives, after they had fled from the


* An account of the dogs known to the Egyptians will be found in the “Transactions of the Society of Biblical
Archeology,” Vol. IV., p. 19.

* The head of the mummy of a dog, wrapped in bandages, is in the collection of the British Museum, “ Guide,”
p. 60, No. 6,740.


IN SIOUT.


PRAYER


Est
a
a


ON TO THEBES. 189


turmoil and temptations of the world, are narrated by Rufinus and Palladius, with
details more edifying than credible. John, the Hermit of Lykopolis, being one of
the most favoured by heaven, is said to have had the gift of prophecy, and to have
foretold to Theodosius his victory at Aquileja in 394.

Returning to the town to seek once more for some traces of the ancient
Lykopolis—where Plotinus, the greatest of the Neo-Platonic philosophers, first saw
the light, a.p. 205—at most we shall find a fragment of marble here and there
built into a modern house, or a few pillars of Greek workmanship in the principal
mosque.


Some years ago I saw many strange figures here at Friday noonday prayer,


THRESHING-SLED.


throwing up their arms in the ecstacy of worship, and I sat—the only Euro-
pean—in front of a café listening to the tales of a capital story-teller. Now
we may meet a great number of Huropeans in this same spot, for since then
the railway has been extended to Siout, where it now terminates. It is difficult
to say whether it will avail to revive the failing trade of the town, where
the long famous manufactures of damask and carpet hangings have fallen into
utter decay. At any rate, Siout must still be, as it has always been, the
emporium for all the wares and produce brought in from the oases of the
Libyan desert, from Darfoor and Kordofan; and at any rate, Roomeyla, which is
the camping place and depot of the caravans to the north of the sepulchral
mountain, can never lose its active commerce so long as the railway extends no
farther southwards. Siout is the prettiest of all the towns on the Nile, excepting


190 EGYPT.


Keneh, and yet, as we walk through its bare and ugly streets, it is difficult to
understand the lines of Ibn Saeed :—


“ But one short day and one short night
I spent in Siout; yet I say
All life besides cannot outweigh


Those fleeting hours of delight.”


Our amiable consul, to whom we have paid a visit, escorts us back to the daha-
beeyeh, and tells us for what incredibly high sums the palm-groves and fields in the
neighbourhood are farmed out. We are astonished, but we cannot doubt, for the
produce of well-cultivated ground in this country is perfectly amazing.

A few hours after quitting Siout, and leaving el-Homra behind us, the wind
fails us; the sail must be furled, and the sailors set themselves to the laborious
task of towing the dahabeeyeh up the stream. We may disembark, and gladden
our eyes with the fresh verdure of all the fields, the rich harvests, the industry of
the fellaheen, who carry the jars of water for irrigating them, the judiciously-planned
waterworks on the land of the larger holders, or owners, and the picturesque aspect
of the villages which, with their tall pigeon-houses, might be mistaken at a distance
for the remains of huge temples, with several pylons, such as we shall see at Thebes,
and which earned for that city its title of “the hundred-gated.”

It is the beginning of December. The durrah harvest—the staple food-stuff
of the Egyptians—is being reaped, and vast flocks of pigeons wheel round the dove-
cots which stand high above the houses of their owners, float like swift clouds


across the sunshine, and settle down on the fields to claim their share of the grain
that encumbers the earth. The fellah keeps these swarms of pigeons for the sake
of the manure, but it is calculated that they consume more than they can return
at the best. Still he does not give them up, for no creature can be more tenacious
than he is of ancient customs. Can it be believed, that in spite of all the improve-
ments in agricultural implements, the fellaheen still use the very same plough, pick,
and sickle, as their forefathers under the Pharaohs ; that the harvest is never carried
in waggons, but always on the back of asses, camels, or men; and that the corn is
threshed to this day with the selfsame threshing-sled, the primitive nawreg 2? The iron
shod semi-circular runners crush out the grain, it is true, but they also cut and
spoil the straw. A picture at Thebes shows us that the ancient Egyptians yoked
the horse to their plough, while at the present time, throughout Upper Egypt, the
horse is never used in harness. Rohlfs’ expedition into the oases of the Libyan
desert led him to Siout at the same time of year, and we owe much of our know-
ledge as to the cultivated produce of this region to the information supplied by his
guide, and its accuracy is vouched for by the reputation of Professor Ascherson, who
accompanied him as botanist to the expedition. The fields of wheat, barley, and clover,
have a lovely appearance from the tender green of the young plants—they show
like rows of emeralds against the darker colour of the sugar-canes and the black soil,
The durrah is reaped, but other crops are grown in the fields—poppy, onions, beans,
and lentils, and in the gardens, tomatoes, egg-plant (aubergine), capsicum, gulgas
(Colocasia antiquorum), coriander, dill, bammiah, basilicum, and the Luffa cucumber
(Lua Afgyptiaca). To these we may add flax, hemp, maize, lupines, saffron, indigo,


ena


et


|
i
|


Wil
My

Hit
isi:


VILLAGE IN UPPER EGYPT.


ON TO THEBES. 191


and tobacco. The fruit-trees and groves are a special feature of the country round
Siout; date and doom palms, orange and citron trees, covered with fragrant flowers
and shining fruit, and in the gardens, figs, mulberries, pomegranates, and the nabuk
(the jujube, Zizyphus lotos). Acacias have been planted in the Nile valley from
the earliest times, and their pods, resembling a string of beads, are represented in
hieroglyphic inscriptions; and side by side with these, which to this day bear a
name derived from the ancient Egyptian,’ we see the Acacia Farnesiana—a native
of America, with tresses of gold-coloured flowers that breathe a
The libbakh, or lebbek, which we
saw before in the Delta, spreads its
deep shade, the broad-armed syca-
more throws a more doubtful shadow.
Rohlfs calls it an ugly tree, on


scent of violets.


account of the wide spaces between
its spreading branches; and it cannot
be denied that by the side of the
graceful palms it is not conspicuous
for elegance.

At this season of the year the
fields are alive with labourers, who
sing as they work. Eye and ear
alike are charmed with the gay and
lively scene. Among the men we
see many heads full of character,
and many pretty faces among the
women and girls, who often go
unveiled ; but the prettiest sight in
all the Nile valley is that of the
young boys and girls here, who up


to the age of about five generally


run about perfectly naked — the YOUNG WIPE OF A PELLAN.
sweetest little brown pets. The


babies in arms are less pleasing; their mothers generally carry them about on their
shoulders, and they are rarely kept clean. Many women when they go out to their
work leave the babies behind to take care of themselves, and the traveller who
wanders through the streets of a fellah village in harvest-time, deserted by the
inhabitants and guarded only by the shabby dogs, may come across more than one
cradle and nurse as strange as that transferred to his portfolio by Herr Gentz, and
here set before the reader. I myself once came on an infant lying on a scrap of carpet
by a heap of durrah in the middle of a field, kicking its little legs, and minded only
by a dog. Not a fellah mother would have passed by it without offering it the
breast, and its own mother would no doubt come and fetch the little screaming
thing in due time. At this time of year the country is full of a picturesque


* Acacia nilotica : Ancient Eg., “ Shent ”; Modern, “ Shonteh,” or ‘ Sont.”


a


192 EGYPT.


charm, which stamps it deeply on the memory, from the incessant bustle of men
and women, and children, of buffaloes and camels, asses and dogs, which swarm in
every field. Man and beast seem closer companions here than with us ; the work
done by one to-day is carried on by the other to-morrow, and we are reminded of


‘the lost paradise of Eden as we see the snowy flocks of egrets, standing or stalking


fearlessly among the labourers—though these indeed eat their bread in the sweat
of their brow—or watch the dogs, which have a great likeness to wolves, playing
with lambs, whose piebald colouring recalls the craftiness of Jacob. And yet, in this


PALM AND SYCAMORE—THINNEST AND THICKEST OF THE TREES OF THE NILE VALLEY.


very spot, so richly blessed by nature, the malignity of man has made men’s lives
a very hell.

We sail between two places called Gow'—“ the largest,” Gow-el-Kebeer, is the
Antaeopolis of the ancients, but only a few ruins are left of its stately temple, which
still excited the admiration of travellers only a few centuries ago. In the year 1821
the river carried away the last remaining portion of this building, and many columns


5


of the hypostyle with fine palm-capitals. The Greeks gave the name of Antaeus
to the Egyptian “Horus, the Victorious” (Hor-nub). The other—“ western town ”—


1 In ancient Egyptian, Kv, “the hill” in Coptte, tkdou, “the hill,” called also by some Nai ent bak nub, “ City
of the Gold Hawk,” but this is really, or so-called, Har-nub, according to Brugsch (‘ Dict. Geogr.,” p. 1,009), The Greek
“Hierakon,” not Antaeopolis, struck coins in the reigns of Trajan and Hadrian, their type a crocodile, or deity holding one.
—Langlois, “Num. des Nomes,” p. 17.


A SELLER OF TURKEYS.


ON TO THEBES. 193


Gow-el-Gharbeeyeh, lies on the Libyan shore of the Nile, opposite the city of Antaeus,
and was the scene of a tragedy in bloody earnest. In 1865 an insurrection broke
out, accompanied by robbery and violence, and at its head was a certain Ahmed
Tayyib. The Government sent out a troop against the rebels, reduced them to a
handful, and inflicted the most fearful
punishment, not only on the conspirators,
but on all their relations and belongings,
who were condemned by hundreds to forced
labour, or to death. Lady Duff Gordon’s
picture of the scenes of horror at Gow are
quite heartrending. Ahmed Tayyib is said
to have been killed, but the fellaheen believe
that he still lives, having fled into Abyssinia.
A mass of legends promptly grew up and
attached themselves to his memory, and the
common people speak of him as of a sort of


Messiah, and look for his reappearance
among them.


Below Gow the dahabeeyeh must once
more be towed against wind and stream. We
walk on, from village to village, gun in hand,
and the sailor we take with us is soon
heavily loaded with wild ducks, shot on a
canal we cross, and with the pretty pigeons
hit as they fly from one palm tree to another.
These pretty creatures, with their lustrous
necks surrounded by a dark band, are kept
by us in cotes and cages; on the Nile we
prefer to meet with them, accompanied by
olives, in a pie such as our black chef excels
in making. A bit of game, too—snipe, larks,
or ducks—tastes uncommonly nice when for
weeks no meat has been obtainable but
mutton and fowls. Beef is rarely to be got
on the Nile, even in the large towns, and
many Arabs regard it as unwholesome. Sohag
is the next place we stop at, after a long run FELLAM BABY AND ITS WATCHER.
in a perfect calm, and here it is market-day,
and we can have the pleasure of superintending in person the purchases for our
boat. The turkeys are particularly fine which are offered for sale by the women
and girls, and the best cost not more than from four to six shillings of English
money. Fowls and pigeons are extremely cheap; butter is to be had in little


1 The old Egyptian pigeon of tombs, called mena t, “the collared,” is so represented. The pigeons were also called
har-en-pe, “birds of heaven”—Coptic, sjroompe and “ari-en-pe,” “guardians of heaven.” Four were let fly at the royal
coronation, a ceremony like the flight of the white dove at the coronation of the French kings at Rheims.


3ELS.


REE


HEADS OF


ON TO THEBES. 195


pats, each on a green leaf, but it must have a thorough washing to make it fit
to eat.

If we were not too sorely tempted to hurry on southwards and get to the
venerable monuments of Thebes, we would certainly linger at Sohag long enough
to visit the two monasteries in the neighbourhood—the White Monastery near the
town, and the Red Monastery somewhat farther to the north—for their ancient
chapels, which I visited on a former occasion, are generally, and very justly, regarded
as the oldest Christian basilicas in Egypt. The Kopts assert that the chapel of


er


SOHAG,


the White Monastery was built in the fifth century, and very likely they are
right. Very good evidence of its antiquity is to be found in the gradual slope of
the outer wall—built of hewn stone


and in its cornice, which reminds us of the
ancient Egyptian architecture, though the torus between the wall and the hollow
ogee is absent. The flat roof of the interior—which is divided into three aisles—
is supported on columns, most of which are of granite; the tribune projects, and the
chancel is elaborate in detail. The Red Monastery, built of burnt bricks, resembles
the former, inasmuch as it has some beautifully-wrought capitals, and it is said to
have been founded by Aboo Bishay, the tutor of Aboo Shanooda, who, as the legend
tells, was the founder of the White Monastery. It is certain that the middle apse
is decorated with pictures of St. George, the dragon-slayer, and it may be supposed
that at the period of the persecution of the Christians under the Mameluke rulers,


196 EGYPT.


the Kopts, here as elsewhere, may have given their patron saint the name of a
venerated. Arab sheykh, to render their church sacred in the eyes of the Moslems.
There are to this day a considerable number of Koptic monasteries in Egypt,
although several of the eighty-six enumerated by Makreezee have been ruined, and
deserted by the monks. Each one is possessed with a desire to refer its origin to
as early a date as possible, and the Holy Mother is said to have rested on her flight
into Egypt, not only by the tree at Matareeyeh, but also in the crypt of the Church
of the Holy Virgin at Cairo, and on the spot where the monastery of el-Maragh,
west of Manfaloot, now stands. In this last establishment, which seems to be rich,
five hundred monks still reside; the Prior showed Herr Gerhard Rohlfs an ancient


DESERTED KOPTIC MONASTERY AT ASSOUAN,


register, written in Arabic, in which it is said that the Holy Family lived here
until the. death of Herod, and that the monastery was founded in the fourth
century.

Several of these monasteries boast of having been founded by the fathers of
monasticism, Paulus of Thebes and St. Anthony,’ the history of whose life is ascribed
to Athanasius ; and this is very positively maintained by the two pious houses in the
Arabian Desert not far from the Red Sea, and lying east of Beni Sueyf These
—and particularly the cloister of St. Anthony, though it only harbours forty monks
—enjoy a great reputation, and they certainly may boast of extreme antiquity.
But though the cave of the great anchorite is pointed out in their vicinity (as on
Sinai the mould of the golden calf is shown), it is certain that the first monasteries
were not established until many decades after the death of Anthony, and the very
existence of Paulus of Thebes has, under the test of criticism, been removed from the
province of history to that of legend.


? About a.p. 365.


ON TO THEBES. 197


At any rate, not only these two monasteries—which have recently been visited
and described by Schweinfurth—but all the cloisters founded in the desert bordering
on the Nile valley, may well be proud of the victorious resistance they have made
from time to time to the most furious attacks. Each of them has its stronghold
(kasr) and fortified walls, and often enough must the ruhbdn,’ or Koptic monks,
have been forced to take shelter in the tower when the rapacious Blemmyes, or the
troops of the intolerant and avaricious sovereigns, swooped down to plunder their
peaceful retreat. The monasteries in the Nile valley itself had a somewhat less
stormy and precarious existence, and there was a time, at the beginning of the
fifth century, when the country lying between Girgeh and Keneh—and which we
shall pass through on our way—was so full of monks and anchorites that at
Tabenna alone 50,000 are said to have gathered together to keep the Easter festival.
There were not less than 100,000 monks in the whole of Egypt, who lived in
ascetic mortification and retirement from the world—some in remote and solitary
hermitages, some in lauras, consisting of rows of contiguous cells, each occupied by
an anchorite, some in monasteries or large establishments where a number of
recluses dwelt together; some again, as embooth, wandering about in twos and
threes. Monasticism has been called “Egypt's last contribution to the history of
human development”; its root, as I showed in the first volume, has been traced
to the penitential cells of the Temple of Serapis, but without the sunlight of
Christianity it could but have remained a tree with crude fruit. All that we
learn of Paulus, Anthony, and Hilarion,’ the two Macarius,* Arsenius, Ammonius,’ and
their companions, reveals much transcendental exaggeration, much overweening
spiritual pride, ostentatious vanity, and melancholy surrender to the spiritual foe in
their own souls; still, that which drove these men out of the cities and into the
desert was a noble impulse, and in their time and in the state of society then
existing was by no means without excuse. The man who regards these wrestlers
for their salvation as idle dreamers and as madmen, and the anchorite ‘“ movement”
—as we say nowadays—as a diseased outcome of the mind of the people, does not
understand those brave and struggling spirits. They fought for their salvation as
they thought, through abstinence and suffering, far from the world; and who can
smile at Moses the Moor,’ who overcame the robbers who attacked him, and then
carried them one by one into his monastery, because he might do no one any
hurt; or at the recluses, haunted by visions, flaying their shoulders with scourgings,
vowing chastity and poverty, and enduring every privation and disgrace—not patiently,
merely, but joyfully—because He who had borne the cross had suffered still more
sorely! They knew nothing of vicarious repentance, and they fought the hardest
of all battles, planted firmly on their own feet. The man who cannot appreciate
these brave souls is either ignorant of history, or forgets—at a time which is too
much inclined to regard the tangible and material as the only essential element


Singular, rahib.

* A pupil of Anthony. He sprinkled “holy water on the horses of his party, and enabled Christianity to outrun Paganism
in the hippodrome at Gaza.”—Sharpe’s “ History of Egypt,” p. 519.

* One of Egypt, the other of Alexandria, Al! lived about a.p. 370.

4 Martyred a.v, 414. ® About A.D, 469,


198


of life


EGYPT.


that we, at the present day, are still enjoying that


“olimpse of the super-


natural” which the Church of the Middle Ages shed over science, and which we can


GIRGEH.


hardly regard as the
most ignoble of those
stars that rose in the
Hast, of which the
proverb speaks.’
Palestine was the
cradle of Christianity,
Alexandria her school.
She expiated in the
cells and monasteries
of the Nile her days of
youthful extravagance
and exc “Tn Keypt,”
writes one who knows


this period well, “all
religious life touched
one of two extremes ;
escaping, after a severe
struggle, from the
bigotry of Paganism,
the Egyptian knew no
bounds in his recoil
against it, and believed
that he must devote
himself to the new faith
in a sense analogous to
the symbolic and abject
cultus of his forefathers.”
In Egypt Pachomius,’
the first founder of a
religious order, ventured
to require the monks
who attached themselves
to him—in number
much above a thousand
—wholly to sever them-
selves from their towns
and families, and to


submit to his strict rule. The first nuns assembled round his sister. Similar
orders were instituted on the Nile by Orus, Anuph, Serapion, and others, and
spent in coarse handiwork and prayer, far from


the lives of the monks were


' Ex Oriente Lux.


* About A.D.


169.


aa


AT GIRGEH.


WRITING-ROOM


200 EGYPT.
all spiritual activity, devoted only to personal salvation. Religion became a


passion, and history witnesses how stiffnecked and warlike this people could be—
though long-suffering above all others under the tyranny of its rulers—as soon as


aida


A KOPTIC WOMAN.


any attempt was made to touch even a tenet of its faith. Through thousands of
conflicts all those Egyptians who have not adopted Islam have remained Mono-
physites, and the same Koptic Litany which was used in lonely hiding-places during
the persecutions is sung to this day at divine service by the priests. Between Siout
—where the largest Koptic church exists—and Thebes there is now the most
extensive Koptic population in the whole of the Khedive’s dominions, and at Girgeh,


ON TO THEBES. 201


which we are now nearing, we shall have an opportunity of assisting at the sacra-
ment of the Eucharist as solemnised by our Koptic fellow-Christians in the church
of St. George—to whom the town owes its name.

Near the fine mosque on the Nile bank—which, however, will probably ere
long fall a victim to the force and rapidity of the current—we quit the dahabeeyeh,
for the sailors wish to take the opportunity of baking a fresh batch of bread,
Girgeh being exactly half-way between Cairo and Assouan. A friend at Cairo has
entrusted us with a present for a
Kopt who is concerned in the
administration of the Mudeereeyeh,
and with it we have a letter of
introduction. We find him in his
writing-room or office at the Govern-
ment House; the window opens on
to a view of the Nile and the
Arabian range, which here assumes
a very striking outline. The Mudere


of the province has transferred his
residence from Girgeh to Sohag, and
his divan, or council, resides there
with him, presided over in his absence
by his representative, a Wekeel. Our
Koptic acquaintance is one of the
accountants, and we learn from him
that his colleagues, the actuaries and
collectors, are also of the Christian
faith. He kindly offers himself as
our guide, shows the modest bazaars,
and then, at our request, accompanies
us to the keneeseh, or Koptic church.
Service has already begun when we
cross the forecourt and enter that Deen wa wee eee

portion of the venerable building

which is reserved to the men. The women are separated from them by a trellis,
resembling that of a mashrebeeyeh window; the /eykel, or holy of holies, is
shut in by a wall decorated with hangings and pictures; there are two very bad
but very old pictures of the Virgin and of St. George, and the altar is within this
sanctum.


Most of the worshippers have grave, kind faces, less sharply cut and of a lighter
shade of brown than those of the Arabs, and they are dressed in dark colours; it
is rare to see a turban of any shade but blue or black. The first time we enter a
keneeseh we are shocked to see so large a number of men supporting themselves
on crutches, but we are relieved to learn that the Kopt, who is obliged to stand
all through a service that is often interminably long, uses these supports to save
himself from being worn out with fatigue. Our companion kisses the priest’s hand,


202 EIGYeRAS


as does each one that comes in, bends the knee before the pictures of the saints,
and then remains standing near us among his co-religionists, who pay so little heed
to the service that they eagerly discuss all sorts of worldly business; but in fact
the Koptic chant is understood by none of the congregation, and only in a very few
instances by the priests, and it is performed solely and entirely by a few clerks and
schoolboys. In the women’s division of the church, where many faces of great beauty
may be seen, the chattering and squabbling are so loud that even individual voices


and words can be distinguished, and when at last a child begins to ery, the priest


is obliged to make a raid upon them, and command silence.

We are beginning to envy our neighbour the use of his crutch; for although
the odious medley of gossip, singing, and bell-tinkling, which the Kopts call divine
service, had begun fully two hours before we arrived, we have stood through more
than an hour of it before the chief ceremonies begin. The high-priest, a fine-looking
old man, now comes out of the heykel, and walks about among the congregation,
swinging a censer, and laying his hand on the head of those nearest to him—on
ours among others. Nothing approaching to sincere devotion is to be seen in any faces
but those which bow under this favour; and, indeed, what is more worthy of vene-
ration than an old man’s blessing? Still, not a Kopt quits the church; for the
Lord’s Supper is administered—in a way, indeed, which it is painful to remember.
Instead of wafer, small cakes stamped with a Koptic cross & are distributed, and
the priest, after washing his hands, partakes of the bread and wine both together,
breaking the bread into the wine and eating the sop with a spoon. He also offers
a spoonful to such of the laymen as are near the heykel. Finally, that no particle
may be lost of the sacred elements that represent the body and blood of Christ, the
priest fills the cup with water, rinses it round, and after pouring it over his hands,
drinks it up. Verily, as this unclean fluid is to pure wine, so is Koptic Christianity
to the other creeds of Christendom. Before we quit the keneeseh alms are collected
for the poor, and we also are expected to give. I took no part in the love-feast,
which closed the ceremony, and which, in the early days of Christianity, was so
full of sacred fellowship and significance. I assisted at it once at Luksor, and
saw my fellow-Christians buy fresh bread, hot from the
oven, and share it amid much bargaining and quarrelling.
On that occasion a brawl took place in front of the
church, and was particularly horrible as occurring in
such a spot. But, alas! these communities have retained
little of Christianity but the name, and though their
members fast most conscientiously, and devote more time
to the services of the Church than any other sect, the
true spirit of their faith is wholly wanting, and it is not
surprising that, in Upper Egypt particularly, all the
noblest and best elements of the Koptic community have
been diverted and absorbed into other confessions. The American Missionary Society
—a Presbyterian body from the United States—has been particularly active and
successful among them, and there is hardly a town in Upper Egypt where they have
not succeeded in winning over many Monophysite Christians to evangelical orthodoxy,


ON TO THEBES. 203


in forming a congregation, and establishing schools. At Koos, south of Keneh,
which we shall shortly reach, the whole Koptic community, with their priest—a
venerable old man,


whose personal ac- RE oes st ENAdre 2)
quaintance I had the : ee |
honour of making—
went over to the |
Protestant confession.
The Roman Catholic
Propaganda has been
no less zealous among
them, but less suc-
cessful. At Girgeh
there is an ancient
monastery, with a few
monks who adhere to
the Latin Church.
The largest Romanist
community is at Ne-
gadeh, between Keneh
and Thebes, living side
by side with Kopts and evangelical Protestants; and one of the most delightful
surprises I ever experienced I owe to the church bells
sent out to them from Europe: Delightful and never-
to-be-forgotten are their beautiful tones, as I heard them


RIDING Ass,


here one evening, after having for months been a stranger
to the sound that calls the Christian to worship. It
was Christmas Eve, during a magnificent sunset, and
their solemn harmony sounded far and wide, and like
a greeting from home in my startled and eager ear.!
After service our friend guides us through the
narrow streets —where many delightful pictures of
humble life strike our fancy—and home to his own
house; he invites us to a dinner which the women of
the house are not permitted to share, and instead of
wine he gives us very good date-brandy, which our
fellow-Christians on the Nile are apt to enjoy somewhat
too freely. The finest Huropean vintages are to be met


1 The service, which is performed in the Koptic—now a dead language—and
Arabic, often lasts for three hours, the congregation beginning by paying their
homage to pictures of saints and the Virgin. There is a frequent celebration of
the Eucharist, which is administered in both kinds; and on Palm Sunday basins
of water are consecrated, in which the congregation dip palms, and the wreaths


made of them are used as amulets for a year. Fasts are common; the ordination of


priests, and exposition of the body of the defunct patriarch attended with exciting


PIGEONS DRINKING. demonstrations.


2ED IN THE NILE.


ON TO THEBES. 205


with at the tables of the rich Kopts, and of these there are many, not only in
Cairo and Alexandria, but in U pper Egypt, and particularly at Girgeh. A Koptie


household is conducted precisely like an Arab one; the women and children live
apart from the men, in their


own rooms, and the reverence
which the fathers exact from
their children is so great that
the sons never venture to dine
at the same table with their
parent till they are married
men.


Next day I rode, through
the perfumed freshness of an
Egyptian winter's morning, to
the famous ruins of the ancient
Abydos, mounted on a fine and
artistically-shorn ass, the pro-


perty of my new acquaintance.
The steamboat passengers gene-
rally make this excursion from
Belianeh, which is somewhat
nearer, and not from Girgeh ;
but this is a mistake, for a
European will derive great en-
joyment on a fine day—and in
these latitudes it hardly ever
rains—from a ride through the
highly-cultivated country, and
the large villages with their
huge pigeon - houses. In the
villages reside the magistrates
(Sheikh el beled) in really fine


houses; and such a ride will
allow of his becoming better
acquainted with “the granary of
Kgypt,’ and with the character-
istic methods of tillage and
irrigation here, than in any RUBBISH HEARER,

other part of the Nile valley.

Eyen in this favoured district there is no lack of miserable hovels, of rubbish
heaps and filth; but though we turn with disgust from the neglect of the
peasant, who leaves the carcases of dead beasts in the village high street, to
be devoured by the dogs and vultures, in another place we shall be filled with
sincere admiration for the industry, the cleverness, and the perseverance of these
men and women, who grow up untaught and undisciplined, but who so well under-


206 EGYPT.
stand the value and management of their water supply, and to resist its inroads,
as to have constructed the dyke along which we ride, and at the same time the
thousand rivulets which intersect the fields, and the water-wheels, with their buckets,
which stand by the margin of the larger canals. In a spacious and well-built farm
belonging to a rich Kopt, we find an official in the act of counting the stock of
horses, camels, buffaloes, asses, and sheep, and it almost looks as if they might vie in
number with those of the “man in the land of Uz,” whose “substance was seven
thousand sheep, and three thousand camels, and five hundred yoke of oxen, and five
hundred she asses, and a very great household.” Unfortunately, the enormous herds
of buffaloes have been of late years greatly reduced. They were formerly watched
in troops by the fellah boys, and ridden into the Nile by women, but the pressing
demand for cotton during the American war, and the introduction of new breeds
of cattle, have led to their diminution. A ride of scarcely two hours brings us
to the borders of the Desert, and tothe village of Arabat-el-Madfooneh, which nestles
under a palm-grove on the very margin of the Libyan waste. Near the very first
houses we detect the traces of the labours of the great “ excavator,’ Mariette, for
we meet men, women, and children loaded with the precious dust, thickly mixed
with natron, which they procure from the ancient site of Abydos, and carry in baskets
on their heads, or load on to the backs of asses, as an invaluable manure for the
fields. We dismount before the indefatigable Frenchman’s house—which serves as
a temporary museum for the smaller objects that have lately been dug out from
the sand—and then visit the sites of the ancient This, the oldest city of
Egypt, and of Abydos, one of its most sacred. If the Asiatic race, to which the
Nile valley owed its primitive and most wonderful culture, came to Africa—as I
believe—across Arabia and the Straits of Bab-el-Mandeb, travelling at first west-
wards, and then moving northwards, no more eligible spot could have offered itself
for the foundation of a fortified capital than the broad, open valley which was
sheltered by the Libyan range from the sand of the Desert, and at a safe distance
from the inundation of the river, while in front of it, spreading eastward, lay a
wide plain, easy to irrigate, and unsurpassed in extent by any strip of arable land
on the shores of the Nile south of the Delta. Probably the immigrant hordes
found here an indigenous population, subjugated them, and appropriated their
women as soon as they had established themselves on the soil. In no other way
“an. we explain the physical resemblance of the Egyptians to the original inhabitants
of North Africa, which have been called the “handsome families” of the Ethiopian
races; but on the other hand, no one—not even Robert Hartmann, who has
attempted, and with much cleverness, to establish the idea that the Egyptians were
an indigenous African race—has been able to explain in any other way how it is
that the form of the skulls of the subjects of the Pharaohs, which are well known
from mummies, at the remotest periods, approach most nearly to the Caucasian
type, while those of later time are more decidedly Ethiopian ; why, on the earliest
monuments, the women, who are less


exposed to the burning rays of the sun, are
represented with a fair and yellowish skin; whence it comes that not individual
roots and inflexions only, but the whole spirit of the Egyptian language, is closer
to the Semitic than to any other family; and finally, how it happens that of all


ON TO THEBES. 207


the other national races of Africa, not one besides the Egyptian possessed those


qualities of enduring laboriousness, intelligent subordination, scientific inventivene
and strong artistic instinct, which are the outcome of a bent and capacity of the
soul and intellect that characterise none but the races of Asiatic origin, and which
we should seek for in vain among any other of the native races of Northern
Africa.

The whole Nile valley and the indigenous population south of the Delta were
first subjugated by the invading race, and their princes established their residence at
This—Abydos. The first of these kings, according to every chronicler known to us, was
Menes, or Mena, a native of This.’ Mariette’s excavations have brought to light
monuments of this ancient city from the superincumbent soil of fragments, and
these must be of an antiquity equal to that of the oldest discoveries in the Necropolis
of Memphis. The city of This, of which the ruins lie somewhat to the north of
Abydos, was the centre of all political life in the valley of
the Nile, and the seed-bed of the strange and characteristic
religion of the Pharaonic era. The immigrants were probably
adherents of Sabzean creeds—worshippers of the sun, the
moon, and the brighter stars—when they settled by the Nile,


which also they soon learned to worship as divine; but, be
this as it may, when once they were settled the religious
instincts of the people took a different form in every district
in the country. The god Ptah, of Memphis, stands at the
head of the oldest series of divinities; at This Osiris was


worshipped, and with him Shu and Tefnut, the children of
the Sun; still, Lepsius is right when he says that every


TT TT
HA HT


ISIS, OSIRIS, AND HORUS.


advance in the religious and philosophical doctrines of the
Egyptians was intimately connected with the worship of Osiris
at Abydos, and that this city was the birthplace of every national and mythological
(religious) movement which was gradually diffused, and overspread the whole country.

Osiris, the lord of Abydos, was also the centre and crown of those Egyptian
doctrines of immortality which were so elaborately developed at Thebes at the height
of its glory,’ and so he continued to be down to the time of the Roman emperors,
and even when the Egyptian temples were beginning to be emptied of worshippers,
and the first Christian communities were beginning to be formed. The beautiful
myth of Osiris and Isis, as related by Plutarch and confirmed by the monuments,
erew up by degrees on the soil of Abydos where its hero was worshipped, and was
not complete certainly till a somewhat late date. There can be no more appropriate
spot for repeating it than here, while standing by the most sacred of all the tombs
of Osiris.

1 His date : 5004 B.c., Mariette ; 3982 B.c., Lepsius ; 2700 B.c., Wilkinson.


* Consisting of nearly 2,000 objects, a catalogue of which was published in 1881.


Fe( was also worshipped at Memphis at the earliest period, and the numerous inscriptions recently found in the
pyramids of Sakkarah by M. Maspéro are all connected with the myth of Osiris and the gods of the circle of Osiris, Seb, or
Saturn; his father, Nut or Rhea; his mother, Anubis; Thoth; the constellation Orion; and the Dog-star. Three of the


pyramids of Merenra, named Haremsaf, published by Brugsch-Pacha in the Zeitschrift fiir Agyptische Sprache, 1881, March,


mention a tree of life and the immortality of the soul.


bb


HGYPT:


wo
S
oO


Osiris, conjointly with Isis, who was his sister and wife, was king over the Nile
Valley, gave it laws, and taught the world, which he journeyed all over, the arts of
peace. At a feast after his return he allowed himself to be persuaded by his hostile
brother Typhon to lie down in a chest which was ready for the purpose. Hardly
had he got into it, when seventy-two conspirators, the accomplices of Typhon, flung
down the lid, locked it, nailed it down and tied it up, and threw it with its living
contents into the Tanitic mouth of the Nile, which carried it into the sea. It was


y


Nh. "


GREAT HALL or anypos. [¢ 1. KEY oF THE PLAN.]


borne to Byblos, on the Phoenician coast, and stranded close to an Erica shrub (a heath).
The noble plant quickly grew round the chest, and became such a magnificent tree
that the king of Byblos afterwards caused it to be cut down, and used as a beam to
prop up his house. Meanwhile Isis travelled all over the country in search of her
husband, found his coffin, revealed herself to the royal owner, removed the chest from
the Erica, lifted it, weeping, on to her shoulders, and bore it away in a ship. As soon
as she reached Egypt, and was in solitude, she opened the chest, and laid her face,
bathed in tears, on that of her dead husband, and kissed him. At last she quitted
the body to seek her son Horus, who was brought up in Buto, and to rouse him to
vengeance. During her absence Typhon discovered the corpse, tore it into fourteen
pieces, and strewed them all over the Nile valley. As soon as Isis learned this she


BANK OF THE NILE IN THE NEIGHBOURHOOD OF ABYDOS.


210 HGYPT.


gathered together the beloved fragments, and wherever she found one she erected a
monument to her husband. Hence, as some say, there are many tombs of Osiris in
Egypt, but others assert that all the limbs of Osiris were laid together in one place,
and that Isis erected monuments where she found them only to mislead Typhon when
he should endeavour to discover the real tomb. The most important of these tombs,
even under the Pharaohs, was that of Abydos, where the head of Osiris was said
to be buried.

While Isis was lamenting for her husband, and attending to his obsequies, Osiris
had remained in the under world, and his son Horus had strengthened and armed
himself for revenge. A furious struggle took place ;
between him and Typhon, which lasted four days, and
resulted in the overthrow of Typhon. Horus gave
over the foe in bonds to his mother, Isis; she,
however, granted him his life, and was re-united to
her husband, Osiris.*

Under the image of a husband and wife, this


pretty legend very subtly represents the course of the phenomena
of Nature in Egypt—the circuit of the sun, and the fate of the
human soul. The inundation of the Nile, and the fertility of the
earth, the illuminating power of the sun, the fundamental prin-
ciples of human life, the ultimate triumph of goodness and truth,
as figured by Osiris, are apparently assailed and vanquished by
Typhon—that is, by drought and the encroachments of the desert,
by the darkness of night, mists, clouds, and storms, by death,
by lies, and all the evil and restless stirrings of the soul; but
as soon as the diminished flow of the river swells again, the


PLAN OF THE TEMPLE


young crops grow green, a new sun lights and cheers the world, eae
and disperses the mists, the human soul rises again in the other

world to a new and everlasting life, truth triumphs over falsehood, and good
conquers evil. Horus has overthrown Typhon, avenged his father, and restored
him to his throne. Isis, the mother, is the feminine, and sympathetic element,
formative, not begetting, the conceiving element of Plato, overflowing with love
for the first and highest essence, which is goodness itself, though it must use
that which is base and evil as its material and vehicle, even while it hates
and shuns it. In this myth of the Divine family, which is amply illustrated
by the monuments, every Egyptian saw a figurative representation of the fate
of his own soul, and every dying man believed ina resurrection like that of
the risen god. No wonder, then, that the grave of Osiris attracted all the
pious souls in the country, and that devout princes and citizens commanded that
their bodies should be brought to Abydos to be consecrated or interred under the
shadow of the sanctuary. The vast cemeteries in which Mariette Pacha found
graves of every period of Egyptian history from the very latest up to that of the


1 Plutarch de Iside. The principal facts are scattered through the hieroglyphical texts, and have been given by M.


Lefébure, Le Mythe Osirien. In hieroglyphs Typhon is called Set. Many other interpretations have been given of this myth.


ON TO THEBES. 211


builders of the Pyramids, are the asylums where the dead, who were always conveyed
by water, hoped to find eternal rest.

The celebrated Temple of Abydos which was consecrated to this purpose, was
built by Seti I. Itis near the village of Arabat el Madfooneh, and in 1859 Mariette
undertook the difficult task of disinterring the western portion, which was entirely
covered by the detritus from a hill of the Libyan chain.! El Madfooneh means “the
buried.” Did the village
of Arabat acquire this
name from its ruined
buildings, or from its as-
sociation with the grave
of Osiris.”

Most of the Egyp-
tian temples are built on
the same ground - plan,
which I will presently lay
before the reader, but the
Temple of Abydos deviates
from it completely; the
forecourt and pylons which
lead up to its main en-
trance are destroyed, but
the interior of the temple
is wonderfully preserved,


and. still deeply impresses SEIT I, OFFERING INCENSE AND A LIDATION.

the beholder. Seven

chapels, all side by side (V., e—d) form the centre and core of the structure, and
each of these must be regarded as a special sanctuary. The sanctuaries of Abydos
were roofed over with well-rounded arches hewn out of blocks of stone, just as the
large stone sarcophagi were covered with lids hollowed out on the inner side, and
intended to represent the starry heaven that bends over the world and over the dead.
At the farther end of each a hollow niche may be seen where stood formerly
a statue of the Divinity, and in the door-post the holes are still visible to which the
hinges of the brazen doors were fixed. In each of these sanctuaries a great god
was especially worshipped. In the centre one (a) it was Amon, whom we shall
hear more of in Thebes; to his left (¢


g) were Harmachis, the god of Heliopolis,
Ptah of Memphis, and the king, Ra, being the earthly personification of the sun-god ;
to his right (/—d), Osiris, Isis, and Horus. These shrines lay outside the sepulchre
of Osiris, which has not hitherto been discovered, any more than the shaft to which
Strabo descended through a vaulted way. This tomb itself was the end and object
of the voyages of the dead, and of the pilgrims who came from Upper and Lower
Egypt to visit this, the most famous of the graves of Osiris. Seven doors, all walled
Published by Mariette, in his work, Abydos, two vols., folio with plans and inseriptions.


* After the XVIIIth Dynasty, B.c. 1400, every deceased Egyptian was cailed “ Osiris,” or “ Osirian”—ie., in the


same condition as Osiris.


212 EGYPT.


up but one (e—d, IIL) led into the temple through the two vast pillared halls,
which must be passed through (III. and IV.) to reach the sanctuary. In the first


FORECOURT WITH PILLARS OF THE TEMPLE OF ABYDOS, [II, OF THE PLAN. ]


hall the ceiling was supported by twenty-four columns, and in the second, which was
larger and finer, by thirty-six. In the former there were four, and in the latter six


seta Salas eS Mahe Na |


ec ree ve. TAA, TOR HOE


Tie Vie te 4 rams $n dere in ey ae pays


5 AV aade Alf ral a y y r
Sasa VU We q
‘ Ti i ft & of o ff


ae Ree ee
peen ¥r000n Frveon Ypoern Treen


—
kp
8


aes (ae


S(E


b


Bh


awe oS


TABLET OF KINGS AT ABYDOS.


groups of six, and the ways left open between these groups of columns led straight
up to the door of the sanctuary, as did those between the outer columns and the wall.


ON TO THEBES. 218


The visitor who desired to approach the chapel of Amon through the centre
opening saw, to the right and to the left, and wherever his eyes might turn, nothing
but pictures and inscriptions, all concerning Amon, while any one approaching the
sanctum of Osiris between the rows of pillars to the right, saw nothing but what
referred to the ruler of the nether world; and each of the roads leading up
towards the seven vaulted chapels, at the farther end of the second great hall,
was richly decorated on the same principle.

Many were the ceremonies to which the devotee was subjected who desired to
be admitted to these sacred halls, which no unsanctified or uninitiated layman—
as the inscriptions tell us—was permitted to approach. None but the highest
priests and the king might enter the inner sanctuary, while the processions waited
in the outer hall, and gazed with pious awe at the ceremonies performed in the


vaulted chambers. No song, no music of flute or harp, might ever be heard in
this temple, which was erected as a kenotaph, or honorary monument, by Seti L,
probably on’ the site of a more ancient sanctuary, for we are told of such a res-
toration in inscriptions of the XIIth Dynasty. His body rests in Thebes; but his
name was to be preserved near the head of Osiris, here at Abydos, with those of his
forefathers, that he might here receive, under the auspices of the god with whom his
spirit was united, the reverence and sacrifices of his descendants. The mummy was
probably brought to Abydos,’ and placed in front of the holy of holies—at any rate,
the inscriptions tell us that the priests had to make the circuit of every chapel, to
perform thirty-six ceremonies, to recite sacred litanies, to raise the veils that shrouded
the statues of the gods, to dress them with scarfs, wreaths, and garments, and to
worship and do them homage in very definitely prescribed spots. The space behind
the seven sanctuaries was the scene of much preparation; and this seems to have
been most indispensable for the services performed in the chapel at Osiris, since it
is only from that one chapel that a door leads into the hall with ten columns
adjoining it at the back (VI.) and several rooms connected with it. On the columns
and walls of both the great halls the Pharaoh is represented bowing forward to
pour out a libation to the gods, burning incense, or kneeling to receive their gifts
—the attributes of sovereignty or the symbols of the highest joys of life. These


representations are in low relief, executed with unsurpassable care in a fine-grained
limestone. Seti’s face is always given as a portrait, not in any way idealised, and
his likeness to his son—Rameses II.—(Vol. I. p. 100), is unmistakable. Every
sculpture of his time bears the stamp of careful finish; but soon after his death
the great masters who here handled the chisel in his service seemed to have ceased
to work, for the numerous reliefs of the time of Rameses II., preserved in the first
hall and the outer hall, where\twelve pillars support the roof—both pictures and
hieroglyphics—are far behind those of Seti’s reign as works of art. He survived
the completion of the general planning and erection of his kenotaph in the rough,


age through the
XIst Dynasty,


' The sarcophagus of Seti I., of fine alabaster, covered with inscriptions relating to the sun’s passe


Hades, is in the Soane Museum in London. The mummy has been just discovered in a gallery made by the


near the Deir-el-Bahari, in a good state of preservation, and in one wooden mummy case with an inscription in “ hieratic
recording that it had been deposited there during a foreign inyasion in the reign of Her-hor, about p.c. 1100. First published by


Duemichen in the Zeitschrift fiir Ayyptische Sprache, 1862.


MARKET.


3
a
<a
oO


ON TO THEBES. 215


as is proved by the wooden braces, in the form of swallows’ tails, which were
intended to strengthen the connection of the blocks of stone, and which are all
marked with his name. On the other hand, Seti must have left the larger portion
of the interior decorations of this magnificent structure to his successor, and how
that son acquitted himself of his task he has recorded for posterity in a great
inscription, which is preserved on the inner wall of the fore-hall (II.), and which I
will refer to again on a later page.

Though Mariette, and Mariette alone, deserves the credit of having cleared
this noble edifice from sand, we owe the discovery of the most important of all
the documents yet found on Egyptian soil to the learning of Professor J. Duemichen
of Strasburg. It consists of the long series of names of all the legitimate and


GROUP OF GAZELLES.


acknowledged Pharaohs who had ruled over Egypt up to the time of the builder
of the kenotaph of Abydos, and was found in one of the southern side chambers.
(VIL) of the temple of Seti. Just as the head of some noble house in our day
might stand in the ancestral hall of his castle, and gaze at the portraits of his
forceps so Seti, with his son and successor, stand before this list of names ;
the father sacrifices before them with incense, while the son approaches them with
songs of praise.

Some time previously another similar tablet’ had been found, among the ruins
of the kenotaph which Rameses II. built for himself to the north of his father’s,
with all the most costly materials—granite, alabaster, graywacke, and limestone
from Mokattam. This list contained sixteen perfect names, and six injured ones;
a larger one had been found at Sakkarah, with thirty-nine perfect cartouches, and


1 By Oailliaud in 1822, now in the British Museum.


ec


216 EGYPT.


only three damaged; but that discovered by Duemichen includes seventy-six car-
touches, beginning with Mena, the first king of Egypt, and ending with Seti. The
immense importance of this monument in restoring the long catalogue of sove-
reigns who ruled over the valley of the Nile is at once evident, but it derives
its great practical value from the list of Pharaohs which has come down to us as
the work of Manetho, a native of Sebennytus (now Semmenood). He, being a
learned priest, and equally familiar with Greek and Egyptian, compiled it for


A SPRING IN THE DESERT.


Ptolemy Philadelphus, who desired to learn the early history of the land of which
he—the son of a Macedonian—found himself the ruler. The history of Manetho has
been lost, all but a few fragments, but his list of kings was preserved by Christian
chroniclers, and it can now be verified and restored by the help of the list at
Abydos.*

The name of Jfemnonium, which was given by the Greeks to the temple of Osiris
at Abydos, I will discuss when I speak of Thebes, where it was also used.

On the road back to the dahabeeyeh we meet a large caravan from the oases of
the Libyan desert, bringing fresh dates (there are 65,000 fruit-bearing palms in the


1 Manetho flourished some time between B.c, 294—-246,


ON TO THEBES. 217


single oasis of el Khargeh), natron (native soda), and large bowls turned out of a
single piece of wood, which come from Darfoor, and find a ready sale among the
fellaheen and boatmen.


Since the residence of the Mudeer has been removed from Girgeh to Sohag,
where a great camel market is held, most of the caravans proceeding to the oasis of
el Khargeh prefer to start from Sohag.

The western oases run north and south, parallel to the course of the Nile, like a
duplicate or outskirt of its fertile valley, broken up by broad belts of desert; but


THE MIRAGE,


until very recently nothing accurate or satisfactory was known about them, though
they are divided from the Nile towns by no more than five days’ journey across the
desert. Lately, however, G. Rohlfs and his companions, in their expedition into
the Libyan desert, have made us acquainted with them, with the ocean of sand in
which they lie like islands, with their primitive condition of society, and with the
plants and animals inhabiting them, from the hyzna and gazelle to the fossil marine
remains preserved in the soil. The monuments existing in the oases themselves, and
of which copies are now in the possession of every student, give us information upon
the earliest history of the oases. The ancient remains of el Khargeh were examined by
Brugsch on a subsequent journey, and admirably treated by him; and his researches,
with those of Duemichen, enriched our knowledge of ancient geography by the discovery
of the names given to each oasis in Pharaonic times. Ut was their general


218 EGYPT.


designation, and this means the concealed or enclosed, probably in allusion to the
desert surrounding them. Later they were called wah, or plantations, whence the
Koptie uah, or wahe, a dwelling or settlement, from which the Greek oasis is derived.
The kings of Egypt took possession of these desert islands at an early period, and
appointed governors to rule them. Thothmes IT., one of the early kings of the
XVIIIth dynasty, who expelled the Hyksos from the Valley of the Nile, erected
a temple here to the Egyptian gods; but the finest of the monuments preserved in


HOO.


the oases date from the period of Darius I., king of Persia. The two other kings
of this name, both surnamed “the Great,’ restored the sanctuaries founded by the
son of Hystaspes,' and they were kept up with care till the time of Trajan.’ As, at
a later period, the Romans and Byzantines banished heretics to the oases—for instance,
Nestorius, the bishop, who was sent to Hibis, ¢., el Khargeh—so the Pharaohs used
them as a place of exile for personages held to be suspicious on political grounds;
and Christian graves and ecclesiastical buildings prove that the citizens: of the oase
whose culture is highly lauded by Olympiodorus, were principally Christians before


and Darius II., or Nothos, B.c. 425—405.
is that of Brugsch Pacha. There is another by Professor Duemichen,


1 Darius I. Hystaspes, or Darius T., B.c, 521—48:


2 The fullest and most recent accounts of the oas
It has been often visited by travellers, as Cailliaud, Von Minutoli, and Edmondson; but the journey of Brugsch Pacha and


his work gave the first scientific and Egyptological description.


FELLAHEEN RIDING TO MARKET.


220 EGYPT.


the incursion of Islam. At the present day they are almost without exception
Mohammedans, and the sect of the Senoofees is active among them, and intent on
inflaming and stirring up their fanaticism and intolerance.

Wheat, barley, rice, and clover, cotton, and indigo shrubs, date and doom palms,
lemon, orange, and fig trees, and the Sont acacia, all flourish in the oases. The vine,
which yielded a noble juice in the time of the Pharaohs,is now grown only for the
sake of grapes for eating; and in the great oasis of el Khargeh, which has 6,000
inhabitants, this luxurious vegetation is watered from 150 springs, whose waters are
diverted into numberless channels. This island in the desert, called by the Greeks
Hibis, would seem to have been intimately connected with Abydos in former times, both
religiously and politically, for the same governor ruled them both. In the Temple
of Heb—ze., Khargeh—built by Darius, which was especially dedicated to the gods
of Thebes, the children of the sun, Shu and Tefnut, who were the gods of This, were
also worshipped, and the mysteries of Osiris were performed in the upper storey of
the Temple, which none but priests were permitted to enter. The five hymns to
Amon engraved in stone, with which Darius decorated this temple, come down
from an earlier period, and we shall have the opportunity of studying them when we
visit the monuments of Thebes.*

Few readers would thank us for leading them from one oasis to another
across the thirstiest region of the Sahara; and though, even in this wide waste,
the details of a desert journey are not devoid of pictures of natural beauty, of
camping scenes, and exciting incidents, well suited to the pencil of the artist, no
artist has hitherto penetrated into the Libyan desert. In other parts of the Sahara,
on the other hand, caravans are frequent; and their camels drinking at the wells,
the Bedaween on foot or on horseback, the black-eyed girls and active youths,
and, above all, the wonderful phenomenon of atmospheric refraction known as the
“Fata Morgana” or mirage, have all been painted, and more than one spirited
traveller* has given a vivid verbal picture of the waste that divides the oases. It
has been proved, too, that the Libyan desert, before it assumed its present aspect,
was covered by an ocean, that the waves of a vast sea moulded these shallow
basin-shaped hollows and the dry torrent-beds (Wadees) with worn and rounded
margins which are everywhere met with, and piled up the heaps of sand and
pebbles, which occur in abundance, washing away the soil, and leaving the strange
island-like “witnesses.” These “witnesses” give the part of the desert which imme-
diately surrounds the oases a quite peculiar character. On the way from Sioot to
Farafra, G. Rohlfs and his party passed a dripping cavern, with stalactites from
three to four feet long hanging from the roof, and then came upon a whole town
of such formations, which had a quite fairy-like effect, exhibiting the forms of pillars,
towers, obelisks, houses, py:


-amids—in short, to use Rohlf’s own words, “every shape
and aspect which imagination could attribute to them.” They could not weary of
gazing at this magical scene, where it was difficult to decide whether it was the
work of men’s hands or a sportive trick of Nature. A picturesque range of heights


1 Translations have been published by Brugsch ha, and in the Records of the Past, viii. p. 135. They are pantheistic.


assumed the title of Son of Amon, about B.c, 334.


Alexander the Great visited the oasis of Amon, and afterwar


* Among them Zittel, the geologist.


ON TO THEBES. 221


runs north and south, and the scene is diversified by mountain passes, isolated
groups of rocks, sandy dunes, and precipices where calcareous spars glitter in the
sun like a crystal mirror or like clusters of diamonds; these vary the monotonous
yellow-and-grey level of the desert, where, however, a great number of dwarfed plants
and creeping creatures contrive to exist; while the bleaching bones of camels now
and again in some perilous spot serve to show the traveller that he has not missed
his way. A journey across the Sahara is no doubt a toilsome and anxious business,
but the air of the desert is so pure and light that it is a pleasure merely
to breathe; and how delicious is the rest, after a weary day’s march, when
evening cools the air, and stars innumerable look down from the clear sky on
the wanderer’s tent! I, even I, have crossed wide tracts of desert, and I count
the hours of undisturbed musing, of still possession of Nature unbroken by a


LN :


A GIPSY TENT.


sound, and of beneficent repose that I have enjoyed there, as among the happiest
of my life ! ,

I have often heard the great African traveller Heinrich Barth declare that
he never felt better or lighter-hearted than in the desert. On no other spot on
earth may a man attain to a more perfectly collected mind, or to greater concen-
tration of all his energies and faculties ; and it is not mere accident that represents
the founders of most Oriental religions as having received their revelations in the
desert.

The fearless and proud Arabs of the western Sahara, on their swift high-
bred horses, are rarely to be met with in the Libyan desert; on the contrary, the
tribes living near the Nile, who escort travellers with their camels, as drivers or
as servants, are a very wretched and by no means wild people. However, a more
manly bearing, and greater feeling for independence distinguish them very con-
spicuously from the fellaheen, on whom they look down with great pride, calling
themselves Arabs, in memory of the cradle of their race whence their more glorious


222 - EGYPT.


ancestors came into Egypt, and accommodating themselves with great difficulty to
the fixed agricultural life of the descendants of the old Egyptians, who earn their
bread in the sweat of their brow.

We re-embark from the shore near Belianeh, and sail on past Farshoot: we
allow our Re’ees to carry a present to a famous saint, who lives in the town of
Ho. We stop to visit a few ancient tombs in the Libyan range near Hasr-es-Sayad,
gaze with delight at the magnificent palm-groves which increase in size and beauty


A SELLER OF POTTERY.


as we proceed southwards, and finally run into the harbour of Keneh, the Keno-
polis of the Greeks. Huge stacks of earthen pots and jars of every size, and a
number of smoking kilns, show at once what is the principal business of the town
and neighbourhood. Many walls, roofs, and pigeon-houses, are actually built of jars ;
and a little way from Girgeh we saw the first of those rafts of jars, by means of
which pottery is conveyed from Keneh to Cairo. Here we may watch the con-
struction of such a raft. It is made of large pots, placed mouth downwards, tied
together, and then strengthened by the addition of a square wooden framework,
with a strong tiller; this is loaded with a quantity of vessels of all kinds. Most
of the plain porous jars and water-jugs used throughout Egypt have been manu-
factured at Keneh from the very earliest times; they are skilfully turned and


ak.


Rud a u ea


LANDED PROPRIETOR RETURNING FROM A PILGRIMAGE.


ON TO THEBES. 293


ornamented by hand, and were known in the time of the Pharaohs by a name
still retained—seer , though the Arabic word ballas is now often used instead. The
town is at about a quarter of an hour's ride from the harbour, and is the largest
and handsomest in Upper Egypt next to Sioot; it is said to have a population
of more than 10,000. There is a fearful magnificence about the house of the great
Koptic merchant, Bishara, who is both French and German consul, for it lacks
nothing of the decoration and splendour which the ingenuity of modern Arabic
tastelessness can devise. The fagade is covered with a perfect menagerie of beasts
in red, orange, and yellow; and if it could be trans sported to a European town it


would be thought that some lucky schoolboy, with whole vats full of paint, had been
turned loose to work his will upon it. Here it excites the most ardent admiration,
and the Nile boatmen, and camel-drivers talk of it with rapture as they rest and
gossip. In the reception room of this mansion M. Bishara not unfrequently invites
“fantasia,” as it is called—a performance of singing and dancing ; and


‘


guests to a
Keneh is particularly famous for its dancing and singing gipsy girls, known as
Ghawazee, some of whom we have already seen at the fair at Tanta. They are
collected out of the most wonderful caves, and tents, and open-air encampments.
Many of the families whose daughters they are live in the vicinity of the cattle
markets; their fathers frequently deal in horses, camels, and asses, and the demand
for these beasts is considerable in Keneh, which has long since supplanted the
ancient Koptos (now Kuft) as the starting-point of the caravans travelling from
the Nile to the Red Sea and the harbour of Koseyr. In former times great quan-
dd


224 HGWPT


tities of corn were exported from Egypt to Arabia by this route—of which I will
give a fuller account when we make an expedition into the province of Ababdeh
—but now the grain destined for Djiddah is more commonly sent round by Suez.
The traffic between Keneh and Mecca is still very considerable at the season
of the pilgrimage, for many pilgrims from Upper Egypt, Nubia, the Soodan, and
the Mohammedan provinces of Central Africa, prefer the route by Keneh and Koseyr,
and Djiddah is easily reached from that port by sailing or steam vessels. The pilgrims
returning from their pious expedition are wont to abandon themselves in this gay
city of pottery to an unbridled enjoyment of Oriental pleasures, and to discount
very considerably the merit they have acquired by their dutiful visit to the Kaabah.
Instead of wine a kind of mead is prepared here, and greatly relished ; it is a primi-
tive means of intoxication made from honey. It is only the pilgrim accompanied by his
harem who lives temperately, lingers no longer in Keneh than is absolutely necessary,
and is welcomed home solemnly and affectionately by his relations and fellow-citizens.

In the fair at Tanta we could trace a survival of the extravagant festivities
of Bubastis; and here at Keneh it is impossible not to refer the dissipated pleasures
in which the pilgrims revel to the excesses practised in the worship of Hathor,
whose temple at Dendera was just opposite to Keneh. That city—called Ta-en-tarer
by the Egyptians, and Tentyris by the Greeks—has vanished from the earth, but
the temple, where the “fair of face,’ the “golden” goddess was worshipped, is
wonderfully well preserved—a fact which seems all the more extraordinary when we
remember that it was close to Dendera that the first great communities of monks
were formed, the sworn foes of all the works of the heathen.

A ferry barge will convey us and a few stragglers from a caravan across the
river, asses and all, and after a brisk ride of rather more than an hour we alight
in front of the beautiful and graceful Temple of Hathor, which enables us to become
acquainted with the whole internal arrangement of an Egyptian temple in the
minutest detail, and almost to be spectators of the worship of the goddess. The savants
of the French expedition long ago described this wonderful and beautiful temple
with admiration and delight. Its architects, it would seem, had inspiration from
the genius of Greek art. We owe our full appreciation of its treasures in inscrip-
tions, which cover every chamber, hall, and passage of this temple—nay, even the
subterranean crypt—to the erudite Johannes Duemichen, who devoted himself
repeatedly and for months at a time, to investigating them, and gave whole years of
zealous and successful industry to studying this temple, and its twin brother,
the Temple of Horus, at Hdfoo. To him, too, we are indebted for a complete
history of the building of this sanctuary, a comparatively late structure, though
still of extreme antiquity, as derived from the inscriptions that cover its walls.
The first plan for its erection was made, it would seem, under Cheops (Chufu),
the builder of the Great Pyramid of Gizeh, and not upon papyrus, but on
the skin of an animal. The building was worked at during the second half of the
old Empire, and down to the time of the XIIth Dynasty, which we have already
heard much about at Beni Hasan; and after the expulsion of the Hyksos Thothmes ITI.
undertook its restoration. In the course of centuries it suffered so much dilapidation
that it had to be rebuilt under the Ptolemies, and certainly earlier than Ptolemy X.


“c


ON TO THEBES.


225


(Soter IL.), whose name we find in a few of the series of hieroglyphics which cover
the subterranean chambers. The later Ptolemies and the Roman emperors,
down to ‘Trajan, continued to add to its interior decoration and inscriptions.
The latest of these is of the time of Trajan; and thus this


ra
|
|
:
:
I


=


GROUND PLAN OF DENDERA.


temple, as we now see it, is in fact,
a work of the later Greek and Roman
rulers of Egypt. It may, neverthe-
less, be regarded as an example of
an ancient Egyptian temple, for its
ground-plan agrees exactly with that
always adopted in the time of the
Pharaohs ; and a few architectural
features which are wanting in the sanc-
tuary of Hathor can be supplied by a
reference to those of Edfoo and Thebes,
of which the external portions are
better preserved than those of Dendera.
As regards the condition of its interior,
no other temple is more perfect than
this, and only that of Edfoo can at
all compare with it.

Here, as on every occasion of lay-
ing the foundation of a temple, the


I
i VW
all,
Seo, eee


mm
jOvoeo} [OP ORO


GROUND PLAN OF EDFOO.


io)
&
w I:
fa]
i@
'@
t
ia]
IG)


B seee


OROLOLOFOIOR ORO OOOO}


king, or his representative, had to perform certain prescribed ceremonies with particular
implements. Duemichen, in his history of the Temple of Dendera, has given us an


PROPYLON AT DENDERA.


GATE WITH PROPYLON,


account of the most important. They are represented on the northern and southern
walls of that temple in the same order in which they were performed. First of all,
the boundaries of the site were marked off with a rope, and then the kneading of the
first brick out of the soil of the sacred enclosure was begun, the earth being mixed


1 This was called “ stretching the rope” in the ancient inscriptions.


THE GREAT COURT


OF


HEAVEN.


DENDERA.


ON TO THEBES.


ww
vw
~I


with grains of incense and myrrh, and moistened with wine. The ceremony of
strewing gravel, which then followed, seems to have been imitated by the Macedonian
conqueror when he founded the city of Alexandria (Vol. L, p. 4). The fifth solemn
office benefited the endowment of the Temple ; it consisted in an offering made by
the Pharaoh, of bricks made of precious metal and precious stones. At the sixth
ceremony the Pharaoh laid the first stone, setting an upright block in its place with
the help of a crowbar. The seventh was the purification of the Temple; the
Pharaoh with his right hand strewed a handful of natron and grains of incense,
prepared expressly for this purpose, between the statue of Hathor and the model
of the temple. Finally came two ceremonies, which figured the offering or dedication
of the temple to the Divinity. First (the eighth office), the king stretched out his
right arm over the model which stood between him and the goddess; and then (the
ninth and last of the ceremonies), he bent his right arm in protection over the model.
This model has the form of a shrine crowned with a hollow cornice, and is the
hieroglyphic sign for the general idea of a temple or sanctuary.

In all these ceremonies the king did not use the actual tools of the mason and
labourer, but only elegant models of them, easy to handle, as our modern royalties
use a silver trowel when they lay foundation-stones. Such miniature tools have been
found, and are preserved in the museum at Leyden.’ The structure was begun at
the sanctuary, the Holy of Holies, the inmost core and centre of the whole building
(I in the plan); then the crypts, and the passages and rooms adjoining the sanctuary
were constructed. In front of the Holy of Holies came, first, two small halls (1 and 2)
with side chambers, then a spacious hall (II) with a roof supported by six pillars ;
this opened into three rooms on each side, and, in front of all, the vast hypostyle (111),
with twenty-four pillars, was erected the last. A straight flight of steps, and a winding
stair both led to the roof, on which there were six rooms and an airy pavilion. It
was usual to add to the hypostyle a paved court with a colonnade on two, three, or
on all four sides—the peristyle—and this was done at Edfoo, of which also a plan
is here laid before the reader (see the plan of Edfoo, IV). This extensive space was
entered by the propyla (Edfoo, V and Va), huge door-posts, each consisting of a
tower in the form of an oblong truncated pyramid. Between these was the gateway,
and obelisks, and colossi were frequently erected near this great entrance, which was
approached between two rows of sphinxes, that guarded the broad paved way along
which processions passed, and this road was not unfrequently interrupted by large
independent gateways, such as we call triumphal arches, built of stone.

At Dendera,? which was not finished till the time of the Roman emperors, who
were far less liberal to the Egyptian priesthood than either the Pharaohs or the
Ptolemies had been, the building had neither a peristyle nor propyla. However,
Domitian and Trajan caused a propylon to be erected in front of the main entrance
to the temple, and this remains well preserved to this day. It was decorated with
tall wooden masts, of which the inscription states that they were tipped with


‘ Leeman’s Mon. Egypt. du Musée des Pays-Bas & Leide. Models of those used by Thothmes IIT. on the occasion of
erecting one of the pylons at Thebes, like those at Leyden, are in the British Museum. They are inscribed with the name of the
monarch, and of the ceremony. Others are in the Museum of the Duke of Northumberland at Alnwick Castle,


* The temple of Dendera, plans, views, and inscriptions, have been published by Mariette.


228 EGYPT.


copper! “to break the storms of heaven.” Can it be, as Brugsch and Duemichen sup-
pose, that these were in fact lightning conductors? The propylon, before which these
remarkable poles were placed, interrupted a high enclosing wall of bricks of Nile mud,
which formerly ran round the whole extent of the temple precincts, which were 300
metres or about 900 feet square, and which was intended here, as in every other sanctuary
of the Nile, to exclude the profane, not merely from setting foot on sacred ground, but
from catching a glimpse of it. It is difficult to believe, but it is confirmed by many
inscriptions, that the temples of Egypt, whose construction, maintenance, and en-
dowment, made such vast claims on the powers and wealth of the people, were open
only to a small number of the elect, but were absolutely impenetrable to the uninitiated
and the common people. - These last were only permitted to prostrate themselves
on the temple highway before the great processions, when the god was carried abroad,
and on certain festivals, after endless purifications, they were admitted to the forecourt
of the temple, there to offer up gifts and prayers. The interior of the sanctuary,
which more immediately interests us here, since, as I have said, the outer courts,
as they exist at Edfoo, Thebes, and Philae, are wanting at Dendera, might never
be entered but by the three orders of the initiated, and even these were forbidden
to penetrate beyond the door which led from the great hypostyle (III.) into the
smaller pillared hall (IL). In this last, which was called “the Hall of the Presence
of her Majesty,” the goddess, the statue of Hathor was revealed to the elect; not
the head only, which was made of gold and precious stones, and preserved in the
inmost sanctuary, but a full-length figure, from whose beautiful bosom the veil was
raised on special occasions. The elect collected in crowds on great festivals at the
door, leading into the second hail, to catch a glimpse of the “beauty of the goddess.”
The lay populace, who were admitted to the outer court, could only see into the
hypostyle, called in the inscriptions the “Great Court of Heaven,” and care was
taken that even those who stood nearest to the great gate should not see over
the whole extent of the enclosure of the temple precincts, for the columns of the
outer row were connected together by a wall’ reaching half-way up their height. Thus
those who visited the temple had to guess much more than they saw. The layman
could catch a glimpse of forms whose proportions greatly transcended those of the
every-day world that surrounded him, but he could neither take in their magnitude
nor discern in the dim distance where they ended ; the initiated might glance round the
vast extent of the hypostyle, but even to him the interior of the temple was closed,
and his heart quailed with reverent dread when his eye ventured to turn towards the
mystical and impenetrable gloom of the veiled Holy of Holies.* Looking round the great
hall, where he was privileged to stand, his trembling soul seemed to expand before the
mystery of the Divinity, so close to him, and yet so incomprehensible ; for the place he
stood in was lofty, spacious, harmonious, and grand, a fitting abode for the presence of
Hathor, with whose attributes he, as a well-educated believer, was perfectly familiar.


1 Or the metal wasm, supposed to be brass or bronze.
? These were of basalt, and ornamented with figures of Nectanebo in the temple of Rosetta, dedicated to Atum,
Three of these slabs are in the British Museum.


* A description of the arrangements of a temple, and the appropriate decorations of each chamber, is given by Mariette,
in his Monuments of Upper Egypt.


ON TO THEBES. 229


The goddess’s name signifies “the abode of Horus,” ze, the external world,
the presentment of the divinity in which it dwells and is revealed. Hence, it has
been said with justice, that she had a primeval cosmical significance, and her
worship in Egypt is undoubtedly primeval, for sacrifices were offered to her by the
builders of the first Pyramids and their contemporaries. She was worshipped not
only as Neith, the local goddess of Sais, but throughout the valley of the Nile, as
one of the immortals of the cycle of Osiris. She is Isis, and yet her essential
attributes are not perfectly identical with those of that. goddess, although Horus is


® BIRTH OF DED


her son, as well as that of Isis, and she, too, is frequently represented with the head
of a cow, which was the animal sacred to her. She, also, may be defined as the
female element of the fundamental essence of all being; but Isis is the earth made
fruitful by Osiris, the formative power that bestows growth, development,. and
quickening ; Hathor is the zsthetic element, that makes her offspring fair to look upon.
Isis is Nature purposive, fitting the means to the end; Hathor is Nature beautiful,
inviting us to contemplation. Both the goddesses personify alike the course of
development and decay, but Isis is matter in its universal sense; Hathor is the
harmonious development of being. Both on the monuments are called “the mother”
and “the nurse,” for they receive into themselves the forms of things and cherish
them as a nurse does a child: Isis by nursing them at her breast and in her
arms, so that they are incessantly transmuted into ever new forms; Hathor, not


230 EGYPT.


merely by fondling and cradling and feeding them, but by training them in truth,
beauty, and goodness. We meet them in the under world as well as in the upper
world; again as the cow, which as it gives birth every morning to the young Sun,
the child Horus, also leads the soul of the deceased to a new life. The fate and
history of the human soul are everywhere symbolised by the course of the Sun,
and as the old sun must find its grave every day behind the western horizon, to
rise anew next day, so the departed soul is laid in the lap of Hathor, to rise again
to “a beautiful portion.” Hence Hathor is called the mother of Horus; but she, who
appears to have been originally a celestial divinity, is also the wife of the Sun god,
for her son, who symbolises the ever-recurring cycle of re-creation, is his own father.
It was this primeval Egyptian conception of the divinity of Nature which gave rise to
the fact that in no temple on the Nile was
shipped. The celestial personages are always in groups of at least three—usually son,
father, and mother-wife—and we constantly meet with such triads or trinities. At Den-
dera eleven divinities are united to form a cycle, besides many other objects of worship,
among which we find personifications of the elements hold the highest place. This
eycle consists of four forms of Hathor and five of Horus, and, besides these, of Ahi,
the great son of Hathor—the beautiful child with the lotus-flower, who appears in
the morning, and is the nearest representative of the Eros of the Greeks—Osiris,
the “good spirit” (Un-nefer), called “the deceased,” and Isis, the great mother of the
gods. These were those principally worshipped, and their chief was Hathor, of Den-
dera, the sovereign of gods and goddesses, who existed from the beginning, who filled
earth and heaven with her beneficence ; the


only one divinity or pair of divinities wor-


od, true, and beautiful; at whose
appearing God and men rejoiced; the golden, the fair-faced goddess of love, the
mistress of women, the aid of those in childbirth ; who, when the feast ran high,


stirred all hearts as queen of garlands, perfumes, song, and dancing. By her side
stood the Horus of Edfoo, as her husband, and her son was another Horus called
the “uniter of the two worlds” (Sam tau).

From the time of Thothmes III, on the occasion of a particular festival, the
Horus of Edfoo received a visit from Hathor, whose statue was conveyed in a boat
with a solemn procession up to that place. The temple there is no less rich in
inscriptions referrmg to Hathor than that of Dendera, and if we consider them as
a whole we are brought to the conciusion that although some Greek ideas have
become incorporated with the conception they disclose of the essence and attributes
of this goddess, every portion of the fundamental notions on which it rests had its
roots in Egyptian soil. The ancient goddess of heaven and of love became at a later
period, and by processes easy to trace, Aphrodite and the daughter of the Sun; the
queen of song, dancing, and festivity, became the muse of each art ; but long
before there was any intercourse between the Egyptians and Hellenes she owned
those attributes which still are hers on the latest inscriptions, even those of the
seven Hathors, who stand like fairies by the cradle of the new-born infant, and
foretell its fate through life.*


* In the different fairy tales or folk lore found in hieratic papyri, the “seven Athors,” or “seven cows” of the goddess,
appear at the birth, and prognosticate, like fairy godmothers or Fates, the future of the child. Probably Pharaoh dreamed of


these seven cows before the years of plenty and famine, as prognosticated by Joseph. As the cow, she was “the great cow, the


ON TO THEBES. _ 231


In most of the Egyptian temples, where a triad of gods was worshipped, there
was a particular structure (bekt, or mamisi) which was designated as the birthplace of
the young god. Such a structure is to be found at Dendera, though, unfortunately,
for the greatest part covered by sand. It was a small shrine by the side of the great
temple, and it was here that the joyful moment was hailed with joy when it was said
that Horus first saw the light, and flatteringly referred to the young prince, whose
father, at the time, wielded the sceptre of Egypt as the vicar of the sun-god, Ra.
It is worthy of mention that these side temples used formerly to be called Typhonian ;
but they have nothing whatever to do with Typhon. Champollion first detected their
true significance, and we know now that the voracious deity, which was formerly
supposed to represent the foe of Osiris, and of which a presentment is to be seen
in most of the birth-places, was called Bes,’ and is said to have been introduced into
Kgypt from the land of incense, and presided over the toilet of women.

If we now return to the great hall of Dendera, we can understand the profound
impression it must have produced on believers. Wherever the eye
turns it meets an image of the goddess; even the capitals of the
columns were decorated with faces of Hathor, and the abacus had
the form of a little temple. The ceiling, on which all the stars
of the Egyptian night were carefully represented in relief, as
travelling across the celestial ocean in barques, attracted the
glance of the worshipper, and his senses were ravished by the
incense, the songs of priests, the music of lutes and pipes, that
reached him from the inner sanctuary.

In the tomb temple of Osiris, at Abydos, no sound but a soft
murmur ever broke the stillness of the sacred spot; but at Dendera
the gay goddess was worshipped gaily; and when, on great festi-
vals, she emerged from her sanctuary, and was revealed to the
initiated, and then, concealed in her barque, was borne among
the people, every head was crowned with flowers, and every cup was filled with wine.
We are shown these festivals in many of the inscriptions, and one of these says:
“The gods of heaven rejoice ; both banks of the Nile triumph. The heart of all
that lives on earth is enlarged, the Hathors use the tambourine, and the Isis goddesses
their drinking-flasks. The people of Dendera are drunk with wine, wreaths of flowers


SISTRUM,


are on their heads.”

The inner chambers of the temple itself, however, had no share in these wild
festivities. They may be justly considered as a vast and highly elaborate sacristy
surrounding the calm retirement of the holy of holies; in them the sacred vessels
were kept, and the incense and the water of purification prepared which were required
for the service of the gods and in the processions. The lower storey alone of the
temple of Hathor included twenty-seven rooms, and several corridors, which we
may arrange in five groups :—l, the “Great Hall of Heaven” (III. in the plan) ; 2, the


mother of Ra, or the sun, her first-born,” In the monuments she has generally cow’s ears on account of this relationship, and
sometimes the head of a cow. Her worship was as old as the [Vth Dynasty or age of the Pyramids.
zems to mean “the hide of the lion,” with which he was


1 Bes, or Bessa, came from Punt or Somali. The word Bes s
covered, Deprived of the leonine attributes, his type is that of a child, like Ptah—Socharis—Osiris.
ee


EGYPT.


smaller pillared hall of the presence of the goddess, and the two halls (prosekoi),
behind it (Il, 2 and 1); 3, the Sekos, or Holy of Holies (I.); 4, the twenty-two
chambers surrounding this and its ante-chamber; 5, the steps leading to the roof
(3 and 4). Each of these rooms was devoted to a special use, bearing some reference
to the gods of the temple ; and the inscriptions on their walls, as well as the history of
the building, which were cleared from rubbish and interpreted by Duemichen with
immense labour, inform us—new comers into their old world—what was the name borne
by each room, what was kept or prepared in it, and how large it was in Egyptian
measurements. Calendars inscribed in the temple inform us of all the festivals held
there, and other records tell us who were
the princes who finished each chamber
of the sanctuary. Even the darkest cor-
ridors and hardly accessible crypts are


covered from top to bottom with pictures
and inscriptions in high relief, which prove


CLEOPATRA, FROM AN EGYPTIAN REPRESENTATION, CLEOPATRA, FROM A GREEK COIN,

that the priesthood paid the same honours to the Ptolemies and to the Roman emperors
as they had formerly done to the Pharaohs. Though the sculptures in this and the
other temples of the same period are not to be compared for grandeur and’ simplicity
we admired so much in the tombs of the First Empire and in the


of style with those
temple at Abydos, they are very carefully executed, and attract the eye by a variety
in the written symbols which was unknown in earlier times. The crowd of new
hieroglyphics indeed render them rather difficult to decipher; and this was done
on purpose, for the priests endeavoured to express the mystical things, which at an
earlier period they hesitated to write even on the temple walls, in such a way
as to baffle the comprehension of the laity. Thus it happens that when once the
great difficulties in the way of deciphering the inscriptions of the Ptolemaic period
had been overcome, they yielded far more knowledge of the Egyptian mythology and


234 EGYPT.
religion than those of an earlier date, and things that those do not reveal are explained
by these in an intelligible language, though written in an obscure cypher.

How enchanting it is to wander from room to room, for any one who is able
to learn from the records that surround him all that took place in each of them
centuries ago; who seeks in the prosekos, behind the hall of the presence, the spot
where stood the table of sacrifice, on which the offerings of the pious were laid ;
who finds the names of the next following chamber, the middle room, and of the
sanctuary—the concealed and mysterious hiding-place of the sacred bark, Tes-nefru, in
which the statue of Hathor was borne out into the air on the shoulders of priests, who
reads that none but the king and the ministering priests might enter this, the very
heart of the sanctuary. The sacred sistrum of the goddess was also preserved here.

Of the smaller rooms, that next to the centre hall was used for keeping the
priests raiment and scarves. In two rooms to the right of the sanctuary (I) the
treasure of the temple was preserved, one of the three to the left.of the hall of
the presence was called the laboratory, and served for the preparation of incense
and essences for the worship of the goddess. We could even imitate all the pre-
parations here concocted by the priest-chemists, for the old recipes by which they
worked still exist, chiselled in the stone walls of their laboratory. The holy water
used in the services of the temple was kept in a special room; in another, costly
vases and vessels; in a third, the sacred sistrum of Hathor; a fourth was the
workshop, where the vessels of the priests


were made or repaired; and, besides
these, many chambers, like the side-chapels of a Roman Catholic cathedral, were
dedicated to particular gods, and to services in their honour. Among these we find
the throne-room of Ra, and outside the chambers of the other gods, the “birth-
chamber of the wife of Osiris”—where the high festival was held on the day when
Isis first saw the light, “to the joy of all the gods and goddesses.” his, the
greatest of all the festivals held in this temple, was celebrated on the fourth of the
five intercalary days of the Egyptian year, and inaugurated the new year with a
joyful “St. Silvester’s night,” so to speak. Then there were processions, of which we
have as full particulars as of the other festivals held in the sanctuary of Hathor,
all of which are set down in a special calendar of festivals. There was a New
Year's Feast on the two first days of the first month—Thot; a feast of Horus,
the “uniter of the two worlds,” with which was connected a festival of the dead;
a great feast of Osiris, which began in the evening and was carried on on the
sacred lake, and which reminds us of the nocturnal feast of Osiris at Sais, of which
Herodotus speaks. Other processions on various occasions were made to the “birth-
chamber temple,” of which mention has been made, to the city of Dendera and its
southern portico, and to the city of Horus—Apollinopolis, Edfoo—whither Hathor
was annually conveyed to visit her husband in the festal barque. Often the
priests marched round the roof with the sacred images, barques, and emblems.
Here there were two sets of three rooms each, all dedicated to Osiris. The northern
row of chambers were frequented by the representatives of the districts of Lower
Egypt, the southern set by those of Upper Egypt, who resorted here to testify their
reverence for the grave of Osiris, which was the foremost uncovered room among
those lying to the north.


ON TO THEBES. 235


Tt may be remembered that the god was divided into pieces, and each district
named, including, of course, that of Dendera, long regarded itself as the possessor of a
portion of a limb which had been buried within its territory. These inestimable relics
seem to have been carried about from one tomb of Osiris-to another in costly re-
liquaries or caskets, and thus to have been brought here.’ A small and airy pavilion
on the roof of this temple, which appears, like another and still more beautiful one in
the island of Philae, to have been built after a Greek model adapted to Egyptian
requirements, was the scene of the solemn services of the great New Year's festival,
which was dedicated to Hathor.?


It is true there is nothing purely Greek in this temple ; still it exhibits throughout
such a subtle relation and proportion of parts and
such a harmonious co-ordination of the whole struc-
ture, that we cannot but feel that influence which
was undoubtedly exerted by Greek architecture over
the Egyptian under the later Ptolemies ; though no
doubt, setting aside a few Greek inscriptions, which
occur among the hieroglyphics, no part of the rich
ornament lavished in every portion of the temple is
other than HKgyptian, and the decoration of the great
sanctuary of Hathor must have been of truly Oriental
magnificence. It was in no respect second to that
of Edfoo, and of that, the hieroglyphic records of its
building give a wonderful description. The walls were
decorated with gold, and the inner chambers with
gorgeous colours, the doors were of brass, and the
door-posts and bolts overlaid with gold, and all the
sacred vessels were of precious metals and stones, The
light of the innumerable lamps which burned in its
chambers was softened by the clouds of odorous vapour
that rose from censers and vases of perfume; and the
libations of grape-juice and wine which were offered
there were so lavish that it is said they loosened the LION OF DENDERA,
slabs of the pavement. And everywhere what an
abundance of flowers and wreaths, jubilation, singing, and music, are heard on all
sides in the worship of the Goddess of Beauty !

Following the procession in fancy down from the roof, and marching with it round
the temple precincts, we first admire the industry of the stonemasons who covered
even the outer walls with inscriptions from top to bottom. From among these
Duemichen disinterred records of the building, of the highest importance; those,
however, relating to the famous Cleopatra and her son by Cesar, Ceesarion, have


"On the ceiling of one of the southern rooms the famous Zodiac of Dendera, the age and value of which were at
first greatly overrated, was discovered ; it is now preserved in Paris. It is of the age of Nero,

* The inscriptions and plans of this temple have been fully published by Mariette in his “Denderah,” 4 vols. fo..
Paris, 1870—1873 ; and Duemichen, “ Bauurkunde der Tempelanlagen yon Dendera,” 8yo, Leipzig, 1865, gives an abstract of


some of the principal results.


236 EGYPT.


the greatest interest for the general public. The reader sees here the portrait of this
famous woman as rendered by an Egyptian sculptor, and may compare it with that
on a Greek silver coin, and with Hans Makart’s imaginary picture of the celebrated
and gifted princess.

On the external wall of most of the temples of the Ptolemaic period, as in those
of the temple at Dendera, we see lions with the fore-part projecting from the wall,
which seem to have been intended as supports for carrying the gutters. They were
certainly first devised in Lower Egypt, where heavy storms are more frequent, and
introduced from thence into the almost rainless provinces of the south, to which Dendera
belongs. These also refer, as Brugsch was the first to detect from the inscriptions by
which they are surrounded, to the zodiacal sign of the Lion as the bringer of the
inundation.

To those unaccustomed to such matters it must seem hardly possible for even the
student to find a clue through the hundreds and thousands of inscriptions and of

pictures which cover this building inside and out like


a web thrown over every single stone; but this is, in
fact, far less difficult than it would seem at the first
glance, because in every Egyptian temple the same
subjects are treated of in the pictures and inscriptions
which occur in analogous places. Just as the architect
was compelled to subordinate the building to a certain
plan, so was the sculptor bound by certain ancient
and sacred regulations. Any one familiar with
one of these structures, can easily find the clue
in the others, and it is for this reason, and to avoid
repetitions, that I have described the temple of Den-
dera with so much detail, and adopted it as a type


FIGURES FROM AN EGYPTIAN LIST OF
DISTRICTS OR NOMES.


and example.

The propyla are, unfortunately, absent. It was usual to cover their broad
sloping sides and external walls with pictures and inscriptions, illustrating the victories
of the Pharaohs over foreign enemies in such a way that they were visible and
intelligible even to the people to whom an entrance into the temple precincts was
denied. The great temple at. Thebes will afford a favourable opportunity for the
contemplation of these warlike scenes, while, on the other hand, the temples built
under the Ptolemies—like this at Dendera—exhibit another class of paintings and
inscriptions, which, being displayed at a level where they are easily seen, both on the
outer walls and within the different chambers, can be more thoroughly investigated
here than elsewhere. Their object and purpose is to exhibit in a special manner the
religious and political distribution of the land under the Pharaohs, and they consist
of a long series of female or of hermaphrodite figures, at the head of which marches
the king, often accompanied by his wife, offering gifts to the image of the chief
divinity of the temple, who looks down upon him. Hach of these figures represents a
Nomos, or district, and they are identified by the structure borne on their heads, which
in each consists of the symbol of a tract of land intersected by canals, of a sort of
pedestal ornamented with a riband, and, above this, an animal or an object, which


ON TO THEBES. 237


serves as a badge to distinguish the district each represents. By the side is given a
more or less detailed description of the sub-divisions of the provinces, of their chief
towns, canals, fields, and the back-land, as it was called; with its pools and tanks.
Besides this, we learn the names of the chief divinities of their temples, of the graves of
Osiris they possess, and what portions of the god were buried there; of the snakes,
trees, and barks sacred to the gods of the Nomos, with those of their high-priests and
priestesses. Finally, they enumerate the great feasts of the gods, and the persons,
animals, and objects held reprobate in the chief temple of each province. The number
of the districts varied at different times—there are generally twenty-two of Upper, and
twenty-two of Lower Egypt. The former are easily and certainly determined, for
they follow each other in an unbroken series by the side of the Nile, the natural
meridian of the country; but the limitation of the districts of the Delta presents
great difficulties, from their situation beside each other. The exactitude with which
the nomes were measured is proved by the first exact measurement of the earth, which
was accomplished by Eratosthenes' in Alexandria, and to which I shall have further
occasion to allude. We have learned from the temple of Hathor at Dendera all that
can be derived of most importance to the general visitor, and must now quit it. Ere
leaving Keneh we must buy some of the finely-formed jars for the friends we have left
at home. But then who would linger when Thebes is his next destination ?—Thebes,
and the monuments preserved there from the period of Egypt’s greatest glory.


* Principal Librarian of the Museum of Alexandria in the time of the Ptolemies, in the time of Philadelphus.


about B.c. 300.


f
AS


WATER-WHEEL.


Cousrsereltet Sei


THEBES.


ete


AYS and weeks fly fast, and the
heat is now very great, for months
have slipped by since we arrived
in Thebes. The dahabeeyeh lies
at anchor not far from the Temple
of Amon at Luxor, and our Re’eis
and sailors have had a good time
of it, for their vessel lay close
to the bank, where other Nile
boats in succession take up their moorings for a
time. But the Nile every year carries away a new
tract of the shore; even the ruins of Luxor must
sooner or later fall a prey to the river if the
Government continues to leave the destructive
current to its own will and way.

The day after our arrival in Thebes we hunted
through the tombs in the Libyan range to find
one suited to our purpose, and then took up our
abode in it with our trunks and_ book-boxes,
kitchen utensils, beds, tables, and chairs, from the
dahabeeyeh, after one of the sailors had cleared our
cave-dwelling of the accumulated dust of centuries.


The Kopt Todrus—the German consular-agent—and his son Moharreb—a remarkably
efficient man, who speaks a variety of languages, and who during our long


if


240 EGYPT.


residence among the tombs did not fail to forward our letters, whether coming or
going—assisted us with their advice during the move. The consul’s brother, a
highly-accomplished and charming man, who lives not far from our tomb, and with
whom we soon were friends, lent us the necessary camels for the removal of our baggage,
and we soon felt quite at home in our
new and not inconvenient quarters. My
bed stood in the innermost chamber over
the ruined sarcophagus or mummy-case,
and the niche which formerly contained
the statue of my predecessor—a prominent
official who, after his death, took posses-


sion of this, his “everlasting abode ”’—was
arranged to Yeceive my washing appa-
ratus. The friend who accompanied me
slept in a side chamber, and our sitting
and dining room could at any time be
closed, by drawing a curtain, brought
hither from the saloon cabin of the daha-
beeyeh. The large ante-chamber was the


scene of Ismael’s and Saleh’s achieve-
DONKEY-OY AT THEBES. ments at the improvised fireplace, and

there our men lived. These were two

sailors, and a man from Abd-el-Kurnah, a good-tempered, handy, and capital
fellow, called Alee, who had formerly been servant to my colleague Duemichen, and
who had learnt from him the art of taking off incised inscriptions and pictures
with blotting paper and a sponge and brushes. He was, of all the fellaheen I
ever saw, the biggest and tallest, and his long arms reached up to a
height which no other mortal could have touched without the aid of a
ladder. Then we had three asses and their drivers; two of the beasts
served us to ride on, and the third was employed in fetching water.
To this staff in our legitimate employ a considerable contingent of
volunteers was added ere long; fellah lads, who held the lights for our
work in the tombs, and who grew wonderfully clever in following the
direction of our eyes or our fingers as we copied and wrote; little
girls who, for a few pieces of copper, brought us drinking-water in
graceful pitchers ; Abd-el-Rasool, the hunter, who knew the haunts and
the tracks of the jackals; and all sorts of people from the village ’
of Abd-el-Kurnah, the village to which our cave-dwelling belonged.


REET-DOOR KEY
OF THE FELLAHEEN,


These men collected every evening in large numbers outside the tomb, and,
sitting round the fire, chatted and told each other stories. They were invariably
civil and friendly, took advantage of our medical advice and store of remedies,
and in return obliged us whenever it was in their power. They almost all lived
in tombs closed with wooden doors, in front of which their naked children, their
asses and goats, sheep and fowls, scrambled through life on a little enclosed plot of
ground. ach of these people either owned or farmed a piece of ground, which he


THEBES. 241


tilled, and the produce—peas, perhaps, or lentils—was preserved for use in huge
cylinders of dried Nile mud, of which a goodly array may be occasionally seen in
the little forecourt, and which the hasty traveller might take to be anything rather
than store-tubs. And it is expressly for the protection of their contents that the
numbers of dogs are kept, which guard every fellah’s domain, and which at the
beginning of our sojourn at Abd-el-Kurnah were wont to display much hostility
to us as new neighbours when we came home after sun-down.

The homes of these people which I visited were dusty, but not dirty, and we
found in them many touching scenes of family happiness, and many traits of neigh-


VILLAGE bUGs.


bourly kindness. There are even some very well to do among these simple folks, who
all content themselves with a single wife. Most of them make a secondary business of
the search for antiquities, of which the best specimens are sold to the dealers in
Luxor. Many hire out their asses to visitors during the winter, and allow their
children to run after them with water-jars to beg of them, and to offer for sale the
sham antiquities which they themselves make very cleverly, or procure through agents
from Cairo and Europe; and these little rascals will continue to find a sale for
their wares so long as Egypt is visited by hasty tourists, who rush through the whole
of Thebes in two or three days, and desire to carry away with them “souvenirs of
the times of the Pharaohs.” It is these tourists that the children of Abd-el-Kurnah
follow with such persistent and urgent cries for “baksheesh” as might exhaust
the patience of the most long-suffering; but this same saucy crew, whose aptness


242 EGYPT.


and intelligence far surpass those of our peasant children, built up, with the help of
the sailors, a stone seat close to the entrance of our tomb, which we had decorated with
our flag; and although several of the little fellows kept their bright black eyes inces-
santly fixed on us so long as we were at work, so as to miss no opportunity of earning
a possible reward, none of


paces Sn aan eNOS them would ever disturb
us while we sat on our
| seat, looking out over the
wide plain, where once
stood that city of Thebes,
known in the Bible as
the city of Amon, and
which Homer calls ‘the
city of the hundred gates.”
Even now grand ruins of
temples, and numerous
magnificently-decorated
tombs, testify to its ancient
splendour ; but of the
dwellings of its citizens,


and the castles of its
princes, no vestige remains,
and when we ask an in-
habitant where Thebes is,
he has no answer ready,
for he only knows of
Abd-el-Kurnah, Medinet-
Haboo, Karnak, Luxor,
and the other fellaheen
names of the villages which
have grown up hear or
among the larger groups of


ruins. From the door of
our tomb—one of the finest


points of view of all the
range west of the city of
Amon, rich in views as it


MOHAMMED, A BOY OF ABD-EL-KURNAH.


is—we can look over the
whole plain of Thebes, and command both the left shore on which we stand, and the
country on the opposite side of the river. The low ground of the long valley smiles
with verdure as far as the inundation has reached ; palm-trees, singly or in groves, stand
up among the thriving fields which are neatly laid out in beds, and various other
trees flourish to perfection. Like a tempting dish in a deep-rimmed bowl, like an
oyster served between its shells, the fertile land lies between the dry and barren desert-
ranges which hem it in to the east and west. Here and there the yellow desert-sand


c=


TOURISTS.


244 EGYPT.


stands out as sharply from the green fields as a marble floor from the coloured carpet
lying in the middle. On the eastern side of the valley, and reaching to the very foot
of the Arabian range, with its fine outline as a background, stood once a living city,
with streets, roads, and squares, royal palaces and temples. Of all these nothing
remains but the ruins of the temples; somewhat to the south, those known as Luxor,
from the name of the village that has been built among them, and, farther to
the north, those of the great national sanctuary, which now bear the name of the
wretched village close by—Karnak—where more than half of the enormous mass of
buildings is hidden by palm-groves.

On the left or western shore of the Nile stood the Necropolis, the city of the
dead. The Libyan chain lying behind it has been compared to a piece of cork, a
pumice-stone, a sponge, and a honeycomb; and certainly its eastern declivity, and
every cross valley that intersects it, is pierced by openings in endless rows. Each of
these leads into a tomb, and, besides these, thousands of graves, covered with dust
and rubbish, are crowded together in the plain at the foot of the mountains. The
principal groups of this vast cemetery are now named after the villages that have
grown up among them (going from south to north)—Kurnet-Murrai, Abd-el-Kurnah,'
and el Assasseef. The famous valley of the Tombs of the Kings lies on the farther
side of el Assasseef, in a transverse gorge of the range.

Looking downwards we see huge relics of the buildings of a former time on this
shore of the Nile. Farthest to the south there are the splendid temple of Medinet
Haboo, the colossi of Memnon, the beautiful Ramesseum, and the House of Seti, which
now is known as the temple of Kurnah.* On a rocky amphitheatre of the Libyan
range, and to the west of Kurnah, stands the terraced temple of Queen Hatasu.*
All these edifices on the western shore were dedicated to the services of the dead, and
with them were connected schools and libraries. Their situation here was probably


determined by the quiet of the surroundings; and, besides these, there were the
stables and store-houses of the temples, the embalming houses, the dwellings of the
Kolchytes employed in preparing the bodies of the dead, the bazaars and markets for
the sale of sacrifices in flesh and bread, of libations, essences, flowers, and amulets ;
the manufactories of coffins and of sacred vessels; inns, too, for visitors to the
Necropolis, where indeed there can have been no lack of life. Each of the temples
on the western bank of the Nile was the centre of a group of smaller buildings, which
gathered round it in connection with the services of the dead, as children gather
round their mother; and thus it came to pass that Greek travellers gained an
impression that Thebes consisted of a number of separate villages.

Here, on the Libyan shore of the stream, we find the oldest traces of the city,
which, though it was called in a sacred legend the birth-place of Osiris, is but little
older than the tombs of Beni Hasan. The kings of the XIth* Dynasty were buried
here; and at Karnak, on the other side of the Nile, a few portions of an ancient structure
have been preserved, not far from the great temple, which prove that the building


1 Known also as Gournah or Goornah.

* Given in Mariette Bey’s “ Kurnah,” fo., 1875.

® At the Deir-el-Bahari, also published by Mariette, fo., 1877.

Lord Dufferin found monuments of the XIth Dynasty in an excayation he made at Medinet Haboo.


THEBES. 245


of that great national sanctuary must have been begun before the incursion of the
Hyksos. Terribly as this has suffered from dilapidation and wilful injury, it must
always be studied as a vast and valuable record in stone by every one whose aim and
object it is to learn the history of Egypt’s glory from the monuments it has bequeathed
tous. Hvery event of any importance in influencing the national life of Egypt since
the expulsion of the Hyksos has left indelible traces on this structure, and the in-
scriptions and pictures on its walls record and depict many events, and give us much
information as to the New Empire, as it were
in a mirror. We will transport ourselves in
\\ fancy into the heart of this huge edifice, and
| | I will attempt—as I did at Cairo—to set

Thebes before the reader’s mind while relating


\ SACRED LAKE,


\


the history of her native princes.

The Hyksos drove the race of the Pha-
raohs out of Lower Egypt. The exiled kings,
bereft. of glory, ruled during four centuries and
a half, in dull inaction, over the southern pro-
vinces of the country, and there cherished the


ancient religion, culture, and arts of their
people. The two last, indeed—the culture and
art—nay, even the science of the Egyptians,
must have been adopted and assimilated by the  less-
advanced intruders, and there can be no doubt that many
new ideas and methods of execution, many new instruments
and models, were introduced by them into the Nile valley ;
but they were invariably hostile to the gods of Egypt, and,
of them all, selected only Set, who bore some affinity to their
own divinity Baal, and served him with sacrifices and prayers.
wt It was, of course, inevitable, at the same time, that many
struggles as to the frontier line should arise between them and

the legitimate but expelled Pharaohs. A papyrus, now preserved in
London,’ tells us that some discussion gave rise to hostilities be-


din


fin


tween the Hyksos prince Apophis and the Egyptian king- Ra-se-kenen-
souxp-rras or tH Tan, which led to a contest that terminated, as it would appear,


OUP


- favourably to the Egyptians; and an inscription im the tomb of

Aahmes, a “chief of ships,” or admiral, at el-Kab, south of Thebes,
completes the records of the release of Kgypt from the yoke of the Hyksos, which
remain to us in the work of Manetho.

Amon was at an early period the chief god of Thebes, as Ptah was at Memphis,
and Ra at Heliopolis, and it was under his egis that the princes of the south country
took the field against the strangers in the north. A Nile fleet was formed ; Kames,
the successor of Ra-se-kenen, continued the war of liberation. Aahmes, his son, suc-
ceeded, after a tedious siege by land and water, in reducing Abaris, the fortress of


or
PLE OF KARNA


1 Galled the Sallier Papyrus from its possessor, published in the ‘Select Papyri,” Pl. 1 to 3. A translation is given
in the ‘Records of the Past,” Vol. VIII., pp. 1—4.


246 EGYPT.


the Hyksos on the Pelusiac branch of the Nile, and in forcing the intruders to retreat
to the south of Syria, whither he pursued them. He subdued the petty kings ruling
in Lower Egypt, and reduced to obedience the disaffected provinces south of the first


C Rid Vader.


TRANSPORT OF STONE.


cataract. The “chief of ships,” whom we mentioned already, Aahmes, took part
in many of these campaigns, and it is extremely interesting to read the account given
by the old general of the struggle for freedom, as delivered to us by his grandson Paher,
who had the inscription engraved ;
how when young he entered the
army, then, after he had risen to
command, had established a house-


hold, had bravely led many ships of


war against the enemy, and when-
ever he distinguished himself by any
great achievement by land or water,
had been decorated by the Pharaoh


with the order of the golden necklace,


and rewarded with other gifts.
How rich the booty was which


King Aahmes' was able to share with


his conquering warriors is proved by
the magnificent parwre of his mother,
Aah-hotep, which we saw in the
museum at Boulak. It was the king’s
first duty and care to render due


Aahmes I. (B.c. 1700) has been
recently found at the Deir-el
Sekenra. It has been engraved from a photograph in the


Illustrirte Zeitung, of Berlin, 17th September, 1881, p. 236.


1 The mummy of


-Bahari, along with that of


SANCTUARY IN THE GREAT TEMPLE OF KARNAK,


THEBES. 247


honour to the god to whose aid he owed his glorious successes; he, therefore, in
gratitude, called his son and successor Amen-hotep (Amenophis), ze, the peace of
Amon, and opened a quarry—as an inscription on the spot informs us—at Turrah,
south of Cairo (which we
have already visited), for
the supplying materials for
that great national sanctuary
at Thebes, which seems not
to have been dedicated to
its uses till the time of his
successor,


The mode in which
blocks of stone are now car-
ried to the Nile, drawn by a
pair of oxen, seems simple
enough, but in ancient times
they seem to have been in-
variably conveyed on carts
or sledges.

Nefert-ari, the wife of
Aahmes, received divine
honours long after her death,
as having been the consort of the liberator of the land, and as ancestress of one of the
most famous and victorious families that ever wielded the sceptre of Egypt.’ Under
Amenophis I.,° who was her son, Amon assumed the high position which he ever


THE HORSE IN THE HEAT OF BATTLE.


FOUR-HORSE CHARIOT OF A PRIVATE PERSON FROM ARBD-EL-KURNAH.


afterwards held among the gods of the Nile. He became one with Ra of Memphis,
and was called Amon Ra, and his essential attributes were gradually sublimed, till
at length, in the later centuries, he represented the omnipotent divine Intelligence—a


1 The mummy of this queen has also been found at the Deir-el-Bahari.
2 Also his nummy at the Deir-el-Bahari. He reigned about xB.c. 1666.
gg


248 EGYPT.


transcendental aspect that was, no doubt, in part derived from the influence of the
Asiatic races that had settled by the Nile. The poets who composed the hymns to Amon
sing his praises as the one and indivisible, by himself alone; and when it is said of


him that he is sole king among gods, whose names are legion, what is meant is that
the attributes and functions of every other celestial being are subordinate to him.
The other great gods of Egypt—Tum, Harmachis, and their fellows, were regarded
merely as emanations or mani-
festations of his all-compre-


hending majesty. He it is
who stirred the concealed and


productive energy of the


primeval waters to preg-
nancy and life, and through
him they brought forth all
things. His word gave the


worldits manifold forms, and


as he named them, each part
of it separated itself from the
rest. As the “living Osiris,”


he breathed the breath of


life into things created, which
thus by him rose to the


higher orders of being. He
was benevolent and _ beauti-
ful, and the enemy and des-
troyer of evil,
and he was
gratefully wor-
shipped as the
personification
of the mys-
terious power
which pre-


serves that
which is good
and annihi-
lates that which is evil, under which the Egyptians included hostile and foreign
nations. Mut (the maternal Isis) and the youthful form of Chunsu’—who was first
worshipped as the moon-god—were his associates (as Isis and Horus were those of
Osiris). Amon, Mut, and Chunsu, form the triad, or trinity, of Thebes, which, at
Karnak, stood at the head of all the divinities worshipped there.

The ancient “Holy of Holies” of Amon, which at Karnak, as elsewhere, was
the first portion of the temple to be built, has long lain in ruins; but close to it, and


THE OBELISKS IN THE OLDEST PART OF KARNAK.


SEAL OF THOTHMES I,


1 Called by the Greeks Chons.


THEBES. 249


more to the west, another sanctuary was erected at a much later date. This was a
double chamber of granite, which, at the present day, may be regarded as the nucleus
of the whole structure, which has been built round it at very various periods. (See
plan I.)

Amenophis I., the son, as has been said, of Amasis I. (Aahmes, and of his wife
Nefert-ari), undertook no great wars of
conquest, but he secured and fortified
the southern and western frontiers of
his kingdom, and began those additions
to the great national temple which were
zealously carried on by his son Thothmes


IL,’ who decorated it with subsidiary
pillared halls, with pylons and obelisks
(III). This was after Amon had vouch-
safed him victory, not only against the
nations of the Soudan, but also
the Semitic inhabitants—a kindred race,
therefore, to the Hyksos of Western Asia
—against whom he desired to “ wash his
heart—7.e., to satisfy his vengeance. He
led his armies as far as Mesopotamia ;
and his troops no longer consisted, as
under the old empire, of foot soldiers


only, but of a great number of war-
riors who went forth to battle in war
chariots drawn by two horses. The
horse had been introduced into Egypt
by the Hyksos, and was known by its
Semitic name, soos. It throve there ad-


mirably, and the sacerdotal artists soon
learned to represent its noble form, not
merely in positions of rest, but in all
the energetic movement of onset and


ISSSRSS


attack. The making of carriages is also
indigenous to Asia; but the Syrian and
Pheenician wheelwrights and smiths, who
constructed the two-wheeled chariots, and inlaid them with precious metals and
stones, found in the Egyptians apt pupils, who soon not only equalled, but excelled
their teachers.

Thothmes I. left three children—a daughter, Hatasu (or Hatshepsu, as it may
be read), and two sons, of whom the younger was still a boy at his father’s death.
The elder mounted the throne under the name of Thothmes II. ; but though he boasts
of victories, though he caused buildings and statues to be raised at Karnak, and


CHRISTIAN TOWER AT THE DEYR-EL-BAHREE.


1 The name Thothmes is Greek, the Egyptian form being Thahutimes. His mummy and coffin were found in


the pit near the Deir-el-Bahari.


259 EGYPT.


though his seal—a beautifully-engraved signet, now preserved at Paris—shows him as
a warrior shooting a bow from a chariot, and as over-mastering a lion, while he adopts
the epithet of kent, or “the brave,” we learn from the monuments that he was com-


pletely governed by the bold and enterprising spirit of his sister, and was compelled
to share his throne with her, against his will as it would seem; for after his death
Hatasu caused his name to be defaced or cut out on many of the buildings he had
erected." While she herself was acknowledged as queen—nay, actually as king—of
Upper and Lower Egypt, she exiled her younger brother, afterwards Thothmes IIL,


OLD EGYPTIAN REPRESENTATION OF A PARTY.


keeping him at Buto, a spot in the marsh district of the Delta. She caused
herself to be represented with the head-dress of the Pharaohs, and even with a beard,
and her officials were ordered to speak of her as a man. And as though she were in
truth a man, she would not merely project grand undertakings, but would control and
conduct them, and bring them to a successful issue. The glories of the battle-field
had no temptations for her, but in building she strove to leave behind her all that was
newest and most vast, and as she required enormous funds, she sought and invented
new means of procuring them. She erected two obelisks in the midst of that part of
the temple of Karnak which had been built by her father, a part which is now


1 His coffin was also found at the Deir-el-Bahari, but the mummy had disappeared, and was replaced by that
of Pinotem I., whose reign is placed 1033 Bc. by Brugsch; but this is possibly too high, as the seal of Pinotem I. or IL.
was found at Kouyunjik.


HONOURS.


LAST


THE


THEBES.


251


more utterly ruined than many others, and one of these is the tallest monolith of any


now standing upright (VII. in the
plan). The perfection with which
the hieroglyphics have been chiselled
in the polished granite of this monu-
ment has never been surpassed ; but
the inscription beyond a doubt states
the exact truth in saying that only
seven months were required to hew
it out of the “red mountain” at
Assouan, and to erect it complete
and perfect. While her brother,
Thothmes II., was still living, she
began another great work on the
further side of the Nile, and subse-
quently carried it out, single-handed,
with perseverance and _assiduity.
This was a structure destined to
receive her mortal remains and those
of her family, and to be, at the same
time, a temple where her deeds
might be remembered, and sacritices
offered to her manes, and where
Hathor might be worshipped as her
favourite divinity, and as being the
goddess who, above all others, must
be invoked whenever prayers were
to be offered for the resurrection
and new birth of the dead.

Deyr el Bahree,’ or the Northern
Monastery, is now the name of the
mausoleum of Hatasu, so called from
an ancient monastery built by monks
that settled there, of which nothing
remains but a brick tower. At the
time of the Greeks it formed part
of those Memnonia which called forth
the admiration of travellers, stand-
ing on the western shore by Thebes,
and all devoted to the same pur-
poses. ‘he whole declivity of the

1 The Deir el Bahari of Mariette Bey. It
is here that in a concealed pit have been found the
mummies and coffins of distinguished princes of the


XVIIIth Dynasty, including those of Thothmes ITI.
and other personages of the period.


ANCIENT EGYPTIAN DANCING GIRL,


|


252 EGYPT.


Libyan range west of the Necropolis, called by the ancient inhabitants “the
coffin mountain,” is, as the reader knows, full of sepulchres, most of which were made
under the sovereigns of the XVIIIth Dynasty—to which Hatasu belonged—for the
interment of different noble families of Thebes. Though these tombs differ greatly
as regards their size and the richness of their mural decorations, they resemble each
other perfectly as to plan and distribution, and the arrangement of the pictures and
inscriptions they contain is identical. The first and largest chamber was always the
tomb chapel, in which the survivors assembled to keep green the memory of the dead,
with prayer and sacrifices. In this ante-chamber, and in the smaller rooms next to
it, as in the tombs of the older empire, only the life on earth was recorded and


DEPENDENTS BRINGING IN THE PRODUCE OF THE LAND.


depicted. All the possessions of the deceased, his favourite occupations, his household,
and the offerings to be brought to his manes, as represented in the pictures with
which we have become familiar in the Necropolis, both of Memphis and of Beni-Hasan,
we again meet with here; but the pictures of the funeral ceremonies take up more
room than formerly. We come upon new titles, the paintings, which bring before us
the festal family meetings, exhibit a certain refinement of form. We see the men
and women taking their pleasure together; flowers are handed to all, with dishes
and drinks of various kinds; music and singing charm the hearers, and female dancers
delight the eye; vessels of new forms stand on the drinking-tables, and many of them
seem Asiatic in type; and we see from many pictures, which exhibit in the most
naif manner the unpleasant consequences of excess, that the temperance and
moderation of the earlier times are no longer prevalent in these days of political
triumph. We find horses and carriages among the possessions of private persons,


THEBES. 253


and the inscriptions tell us that the


=


greater part of the nobility of Thebes serves
in the army, and has accompanied the Pharaoh in his expedition into Asia. The great
officials are enriched by the divisions of the spoil and the exaction of tribute, and the
foreign peoples governed by the king’s deputies are often represented in a highly
characteristic manner. Distinguished families kept their own household minstrels,
whose duty it was to play the harp on all solemn occasions, and praise the destiny
of the deceased, both in this life and in the next. The funeral processions are


TEMPLE OF DEYR-EL-BAHREE (IMAGINARY RESTORATION, BY E, BRUNE).


splendidly arranged; the coffin of the deceased is conveyed across the Nile in a
magnificent barque to the Necropolis. Waiting-women stand on the deck of the
vessel, priests, relatives, servants, and serfs accompany the sarcophagus through
the cemetery to the entrance of the tomb, and the serfs form a long train, bringing
every kind of produce to lay on the altar before their departed lord." The arts of the
embalmer were improved by the use of the numerous resins and essences which
poured into Egypt from the countries now opened up; new forms and rituals, which
have been preserved in the “Book of the Dead,” were introduced, and the doctrine of
the immortality of the soul was developed in detail with an astonishing power and


Manners and Customs,” New Series, Vol. IIL, Pls. 83—88. Maspéro, “Etude sur quelques


? Given in Wilkinson’


Peintures et sur quelques Textes relatifs aux Funerales.” 8vo, Paris, 1881.


254 EGYPT.


play of imagination. The nether world, which under the old empire had been little
thought about,’ was now peopled with gods and daimons, and the pictures and texts
on the coffins, on the papyri placed in them, and on the walls of the sepulchral
chambers, refer only to the life beyond the grave. The sepulchre was always placed
at the extreme end of a shaft, leading inwards and downwards, which was carefully
arranged so as to be most difficult for intruders to find and explore, and in the tomb
itself no mention is ever made of the earthly life of the deceased, as in the chambers
where the survivors met. Thus it is in quite distinct and separate chambers, though
in the same tomb—the “everlasting mansion” of the Egyptian citizen—that his earthly
and his heavenly life are brought to mind. The tombs of the kings of the new empire
are also quite differently arranged. Before the incursion of the Hyksos they con-
structed, even in Thebes, pyramids of moderate dimensions, of which time has
spared nothing but the merest traces. At a later time they also hewed deep shafts


ks ESSE
aS (=| > oral |


i


7a
own


3 aS


laa


SA


MU mi yy
So
SSSR


SHIP OF HATASU LADEN WITH PRODUCE FROM PUN-T,


in the mountain, to make a secure receptacle for their mummies at the inmost end.
We shall make acquaintance with these cave mausoleums, and we shall find that
every picture and inscription they contain refers, with scarcely an exception, to the
other world. They were to the kings what the ordinary sepulchre was to the private
individual. The tomb-chapel of the Pharaoh could not be an adjunct to his tomb,
where his survivors might assemble to celebrate his memory, for the king’s mourners
were the whole Egyptian nation. The princes, therefore, built splendid temple-like
structures for the services to their manes in the Necropolis itself, between the Nile
and the “coffin mountain,” and these were called in the Egyptian tongue mennu—that
is to say, permanent structures, monuments or memorials. The Greeks gave them
the name of memnonia, thinking that the word mennu was the same as the name of
Memnon, the Homeric hero; and they supposed the musical statue, of which T shall speak


harah, already cited, have proved that the nether world was thought


1 The recent discoveries at the pyramids of
but that the future state was more allied with sidereal elements and the course of the constellations.


about, as also the Elysium ;
The doctrine of the immortality of the soul, and the identification of the deceased with Osiris is also distinctly affirmed in


these early texts, but not the terrors of the Egyptian hell.


THEBES. 255


presently, to be a statue of him. In such a Memnonium the life of the Pharaoh on
earth was kept fresh in men’s memories, though the principal events of his life were,
of course, different to those celebrated in the case of a private individual. All that
these had to record for their descendants related to their household, estates, family
and personal duties, to their recreations, and the relations of the subject to his
sovereign ; while in that of a king historical events were perpetuated, and in his
Memnonium we shall find nothing but records of his expeditions into foreign countries,
of the battles he won, of the siege and capture of fortresses, of the spoil he conquered,
and of the thank-offerings of the king to the celestial powers. Here we see a picture
of the king’s coronation, of the ancestors and children of the sovereign who is
consecrated, and of the gods to whom he sacrifices, from whom he receives gifts,
and who will for ever uphold his name; this, however, will also be preserved from
oblivion by the schools and library of his Memnonium. The oldest of these ‘places
of perpetual memory,” and certainly the most singular Memnonium we know of, was


a aaa


Ke
| Coe oo a ‘in |


FISH OF THE RED SEA, FROM THE DEYR-EL BAHREE.


the terraced temple of Deyr-el Bahree, built by the great Hatasu, against a finely
curved amphitheatre in the yellow and gleaming limestone rocks to the north-west of
the Necropolis. The rock-tomb, in which her mummy, and those of her father and
brothers were formerly preserved, has not as yet been discovered, though the chapel,
hewn out of the living rock, which must be regarded as the most ancient and sacred
portion of the whole edifice, stands open to the visitor. This sanctum, where the
parents of Hatasu were kept in memory, was the end and goal of the procession which
came from Karnak to the Memnonium of the great queen. They must have embarked in
the decorated boats at the
southern end of the great
temple, for the rapidity of
the current necessitated


an oblique course in cross-
ing it. On reaching the
shore the prince and his Dp la

accompanying priests quit- INAS

ted the boats, and marched a) Beenie

in procession along the

broad road leading in a

straight line up to the

propyla, which have now disappeared from the face of the earth; on each side of


HUTS BUILT ON PILES IN PUN-T.


the road stood a row of sphinxes with ram’s heads.
M. Mariette! disinterred the ruins of this structure, and Brune Pasha, the


1 Given in the work of Mariette on the Deir-el-Bahari, already cited.
hh


56


EGYPT.


French architect, has attempted to restore it, on paper, as it must have appeared
shortly after its completion; this he has done with great skill and success, but though
this drawing is welcome as

= SS ee an aid to the imagination,

= : we who have in our “ mind’s
eye” a vivid picture of the
stupendous ruins of Deyr-
el Bahree, can well aftord
to dispense with it. These
much-injured remains, even
at the present day, are full
of character and impres-
siveness, from whichever
side we approach them ;
but the finest effect cer-
tainly is that obtained as
we go up from the Nile,
or that again which they
afford to the  foot-pas-
senger, who looks down
upon them from the bridle-
path that leads high above
them and over the moun-
tain, into the valley of
the king’s tombs. Much,
indeed, is ruined and
destroyed ; but the four ter-
races remain, and the gentle
slope, which formerly, per-
haps, was mounted by steps,
is still recognisable. This
divided the building into
two wings. The proces-
sions which passed along
it went up from terrace to
terrace, and each of these
platforms had eight colon-
nades to the right and left.
At the top of the fourth
terrace the train of priests
had to pass through a


ELLAH WOMAN OF KARNAK. granite archway, which led
into the quiet temple cham-
bers, and behind this again through a vault built of porphyry, at the back of


which was the opening into the ancient rock-tomb of which we have spoken. In


THEBES. 257


this, the most holy spot of the Memnonium of Hatasu, the walls were adorned with
various masterpieces of sculpture, among which the cow of Hathor,
from whose udders Hatasu herself drinks the milk of life, deserves
especial mention. The halls on the platforms, and at their ends, will
particularly attract the lover of Egyptian architecture, and the
student of its development; for he will here meet again with the
same polygonal columns as we lately saw in the tombs at Beni-
Hasan. This style of column having survived the rule of the
Hyks was transferred from the rock-tombs to independent
buildings ; they were adopted even at the oldest portion of the
temple of Karnak, and it was not till the end of the XVIIIth
Dynasty that they gave way to a different type. The pillars
that support the roof are also worth notice, being ornamented
with masks of Hathor, which were not used again till the time
of the Ptolemies. I must earnestly direct the attention of any
one who is interested in the growth of culture in the Egyptian
nation to the numerous pictures and reliefs which Hatasu' caused
to be executed on the inner walls of the halls and colonnades, par-
ticularly those on the top of the third terrace; for these, which
were first appreciated and published by Duemichen,® narrate, for the
information of posterity, how the great queen, anxious for the exten-
sion of commerce and the increase of the country’s wealth, fitted INVERTED

out large fleets, and sent them to Pun-t—that is to say, South a tte

Arabia and the coast of Somali, as far as Cape Gardafui. These pictures prove


* Her name has been also read Ha-sheps. ‘The Fleet of an Egyptian Queen.” Leipsig, 1868.


THE SOUTH PYLON AND SACRED LAKE OF KARNAK.


258 EGYPT.
how much Hatasu had at heart the desire of perpetuating the memory of the
success of the enterprise down to the smallest details, for they show us the
ships which must have been built in the Red Sea, and the various treasures and
produce they brought from Pun-t to Egypt; and the inscriptions give the names
of all the objects represented by the artist, and tell us how large a portion of
all this wealth the queen dedicated to Amon of Thebes, and had meted out for
that purpose. We see growing incense-trees carried by the sailors, with their
roots in earth, and these were to be naturalised, if possible, on the soil of
Egypt ;’ heavy bags full of odorous resins are borne into the vessels, which are
already laden with bales, jars, elephants’ tusks, bars of metal, and the other
“marvels of Pun-t.” All sorts of valuable woods from those regions are men-
tioned as contributing to compose the freight of the queen’s fleet, with various
resins already known by the name Awami (gummi or gum), ebony, ivory, pure gold


YA Ala Al


5 =I FA a


TT TTT
LOTT TT TTT
TTT TT
CCEA OT TE TCT


val Tt it
CTL TET LU RMEEEEYAENMBUOE
i +
COTO on oo 1
al 1 | a A AE [=r
COO COT a oo
I [oan] i jal
MITT Tn oo
it I 1 1 i I I i af it I [ _]


PRISONERS OF WAR ENGAGED ON THE BUILDINGS OF THOTHMES III.


from Asia, Teas wood (2), Chesit (perhaps cassia), Ahem, and sacred incense (neter senter),
antimony for the eyes, Anau, apes, and Aefu, monkeys, apes, greyhounds, panther
skins, and the natives (of Pun-t), with their children. Under no former ruler—says
the inscription—was the like brought into Egypt, but the construction and rigging of
the ships prove nevertheless that they were the work of no apprentice hands. Solomon’s
fleet sent to Ophir eight hundred years later irresistibly occurs to the mind as we look
at these pictures ; and, looking attentively at all the figures here represented, we see at
once that even in the time of Hatasu* the artist could observe all he saw in a foreign
country, and endeavoured to represent it for the information of his fellow-countrymen.
The invasions and voyages of the XVIIIth Dynasty unlocked the treasures of the
East to the Egyptians, just as the Crusades in later times opened up its wonders to
marvelling Europe, and their outcome was a certain scientific zeal, which, however,
became extinct in a very few centuries, and did not revive till the Ptolemies re-illumined
the flame in Alexandria. There are at Deyr-el-Bahree representations of the fishes
of the Red Sea, so characteristic in outline that modern zoologists can easily recognise
their species; and in one picture we even see a village built on piles by the natives


1 Probably in the courts of the Temples, as appears from the great papyrus of Rameses IIT.
* About 1500 or 1600 Bc.


THEBES. 259


of Pun-t. The conical dwellings are raised on beams, and the doors are reached
by ladders ; birds unknown in Egypt are depicted, and other paintings show us the
sharply-cut features of the
men of Pun-t, and the dis-
gusting obesity of the wife ;
of a prince of that country. )
In the “ Book of the Dead,”
Pitan uae! allusion is made to a certain
description of Pun-t written
at this time." Hatasu’s brother, Thothmes III, had representations’ executed at
Karnak of the strange plants he had met with in his Oriental expeditions ; in a


EAR-RINGS.


AN ORNAMENTAL TRAY FOR RINGS.


medical papyrus, written in the time of this king, some receipts are given from an
Asiatic physician at Byblos; and the writing of various foreign names and words
proves that the Egyptians understood the language of
their Semitic neighbours. Could it
be a mere accident that led to the i
erection of the great terraced temple !
of Deyr-el-Bahree within a short
time of the first expedition from
Egypt having visited the land
of Mesopotamia, where more than
one terraced building ornamented
the great cities? Why should
the Egyptians, who so constantly
and faithfully repeated their own
old types that they even lost the
capacity for inventing new ones,


never have reproduced this magni-
ficent and effective style of temple ?
ai 5 unless it was that it reminded them


PIECE OF A CORSELET WITH SCALE ARMOUR.


* The coffin of this king was found at the Deir-el-Bahari. It had been usurped by Pinotem II. Lepsius, “ Todtenbuch,” iv.
chap. 15, line 10, Mention is also made of the Lake of Pun-t ; perhaps one of the Central African Lakes, Lepsius, “Todt.”


SnCr Wi(gudenos * Known as the Ebers’ papyrus.


260 EGYPT.
of foreign ones, and so was abominable in their eyes. The productions of art at
this period of Egyptian history bore the same relation to those of the old Empire
that we saw in the tombs as the works of a young, independent, and vigorous
lad might bear to those of an industrious youth that had never been out of
his father’s house. Powers that had lain in fetters for centuries now broke loose,
political landmarks were overthrown, seas and rivers whose very names men had for-
merly been afraid to mention, were crossed and navigated, and the mind of man sought
untrodden roads. The tallest obelisk and the most remarkable building in Thebes have
rendered Hatasu’s name famous to a late posterity; but the glory of her peaceful
enterprises was soon thrown into the shade by the achievements of her younger brother,
Thothmes IIL, whom we do not hesitate to pronounce to be the greatest of all the
warrior kings of Egypt. He has been called the Alexander of the Pharaohs, and with
justice, for in the thirteen campaigns that he undertook he succeeded in subjugating
the nations of Western Asia, on whom his forefathers had vowed vengeance for the


degradation of the Hyksos supremacy ; he made them tributary to his own sovereignty,
and raised Egypt to the position of the greatest power of his time. He wore the crown
of the Pharaohs for nearly fifty-four years, and the monuments of Thebes tell us of all
his deeds of valour, and of his achievements with his troops of war-chariots, his heavily-
armed infantry, and his corps of archers.

In the inscriptions which cover the walls of the much-injured chambers that
surround the sanctuary at Karnak, in those on the southern pylon (V. and VI.), and
in those in the eastern temple buildings (behind X.), his name is constantly repeated.
His predecessors had added one hall after another to the great temple, always on the
side towards the Nile; he extended it in the opposite direction, adding to it a
magnificent hall (at X.), where thirty-two pillars at the sides, and two rows each of
ten columns in the middle, supported the roof. In the capitals of these columns we
can detect efforts to introduce new forms; but we cannot regard the architects of
Thothmes as happy in their attempt, for the inverted caliciform capital is not beautiful,
and never found any imitators. There were a number of smaller halls and chambers
adjoining this great hall, and in them records of the highest importance have been
met with in the inscriptions. The hall itself was called chu mennu, “the splendid
memorial.” The sacred lake was also surrounded by buildings, now utterly ruined,
but the tank still has water in it, and in ancient times the statue of Amon in
a magnificent barque was rowed here on certain great feast-days. To the west of this
sacred tank was the great causeway along which processions marched up from the
south, and at a later date than that of Thothmes this was decorated on each side by
a long row of sphinxes, and interrupted by four immense propyla. Two of these
mighty gates were built by Thothmes III.: one, indeed, was begun by his father. The
two colossi of Thothmes I. and of Amenophis, his father and grandfather, which
Thothmes II., his elder brother, caused to be executed in different materials and on
a grand scale, still keep guard in front of the walls, which crumble year by year. The
inscriptions discovered by Mariette on the fourth pylon, and on a doorway on the
western side of the temple, have proved of the greatest historical importance. They
contain long lists of the tribes of the south reduced to subjection by Thothmes, and
of those he conquered in Syria. Of these last alone we find no less than 119, and


THEBES. 261


as they are three times enumerated there is no difficulty in completing the lists ; among
them we find names familiar to us in the Bible, as Megiddo, Joppa,’ Damascus, Mamre,
and others. All these were fortified cities, and each was governed by a prince ; but
these sovereigns formed a confederation, subordinate, as it would seem, to the most
powerful of their number. Thothmes permitted most of these petty kings to retain
the crown so long as they paid their tribute punctually, but some lost both crown and
life, and others were forced to send their sons to Egypt as hostages. A detachment
of Egyptian troops kept watch over the tributary sovereigns from Aradus, at the foot
of the Lebanon ; and as a further means of securing peace, the able-bodied men were


RUINS OF THE TEMPLE OF AMADA IN NUBIA.


carried into captivity, and had to work in the fields and at building instead of the
sons of Egypt, who now went forth to fight in the wars undertaken by their kings.
The list of southern nations informs us that Thothmes sent troops to the Indian Ocean,
where they penetrated as far as Cape Gardafui; and other inscriptions relate how
he attacked Phoenicia, and Tyre, its capital, Babylonia, and Assyria, conquered them,
and compelled them to pay him tribute. The form and amount of this tribute is given
in detail in the “statistical tablet of Karnak,’ as it is called, an inscription engraved
by the stone-workers of Thothmes on the wall of a room adjoining the holy place.
This important record has suffered greatly from dilapidations, and from large portions


"The romantic account of the taking of Joppa by placing soldiers with cords in jars is told in a, hieratic
papyrus in the British Museum, a translation of which will be found in the “ Transactions of the Society of Biblical


Archeology,” iii. pp. 340—348, by C. W. Goodwin, and M. Maspéro’s “ Etudes Egyptiennes,” p. 39.


ROAD FROM LUXOR TO KARNAK.


ANTIQUITIES ON THE


IN


DEALER


THEBES. 263


having been transported to Europe; but its most important portions have been com-
pleted by careful research, and the most superficial observer cannot fail to perceive
what important revelations it must have afforded us with regard to the status and
culture of the different countries whose produce it describes.! I cannot here enumerate
in detail how many slaves, male and female, and domestic animals, what produce of
the soil, what metals and stones, ornaments
and vessels, were to be surrendered to the
Egyptian collectors of tribute ; but it is worthy
of mention that even at that early period
Phoenicia produced artistically-wrought metal
vessels, and Syria richly-decorated chariots,
armour, and weapons, besides various articles
of furniture, finely inlaid and carved, such as
the Egyptians were glad to possess, and use
for the decoration of their tents and houses.
Even in Mesopotamia chariots were built,
weapons forged, and elegant vessels manu-
factured ; and if the word Ashmara? (Hashmal,
and in Assyrian Ishmaru) is correctly rendered,
they understood the art of enamelling. It
may be seen that the nations of Western
Asia were not far behind the Egyptians them-
selves in the arts of life, but the happy natural
conditions of the valley of the Nile have pre-
served from destruction much which must
have perished under the influences of a damp
or inclement climate. It is due entirely to
Egyptian records that we know that many
arts flourished in Mesopotamia and Phoenicia,
even as early as the XVIIth century Bc,
and that an advanced civilisation prevailed


there, while in the dry atmosphere of Egypt
thousands of tangible evidences survive to
prove what its condition was—as finger-rings,
earrings, necklaces, and bracelets, toilet vessels,
mirrors, and combs, weapons, and portions of


A CONGRESS OF CATS IN THE SUN,


armour, among these a fragment of a scale-

plate breast-plate. Even a whole chariot of the time of the Pharaohs has escaped
destruction, and is preserved in the Egyptian collection at Florence. Thebes is
even still an inexhaustible mine of these relics of an advanced civilisation ; and
as the traveller approaches. Karnak he will be implored by the antiquity-mongers of


1 A translation of this will be found in “Records of the Past,” ii, p. 17, and pp. following.

? Other interpretations, however, have been given of this word. The Egyptians did not enamel metals, but inlaid
them with colour.

3 Bearing the name of Sheshang or Shishak, of the XXIInd dynasty.


été


264 EGYPT.
Luksor to buy a great variety, some of which are genuine, though many more, no
doubt, are spurious imitations.

Amon of Thebes, his temple —which Thothmes strove to beautify by every
means—and his priests, naturally profited largely by the rich booty spoken of on the
tablet of tribute. The inscriptions tell us that the king was very liberal in his gifts
of land, gardens, corn, cattle, fowls, gold, silver, precious stones, costly vessels, and


THE FRENCH QUARTER IN THE TEMPLE OF LUKSOR.


instruments, among which a harp set with jewels is particularly mentioned. He also
endowed the temple with the revenue from three towns in Syria. Three new festivals
of victory were instituted, and added to the former holidays, which were not few
in Thebes. And Thothmes was open-handed to his subordinates in the field as well
as to the gods, and individual deeds of valour are recorded of them during this, the
age of Egyptian chivalry. One of the bravest of his warriors was the noble Amen-
em-heb, whose tomb, with its inscription, it was my own good fortune to discover.
This hero held a command in every expedition; he distinguished himself by his per-


THEBES. 265


sonal courage before the enemy and in the hunting-field, and after every glorious
achievement he was rewarded with orders of merit and with gifts.’ The account of
his life supplements that of Thothmes ITT. in an unexpected way, and supplies us
with correct information as to the length of his reign, during which the great warrior-
prince found leisure for the completion of numerous splendid works of peace. Thothmes
built the oldest portion of the Temple of Medinet Haboo, on the western side of Thebes.
We meet with his name at Dendera, at Memphis, and Heliopolis, at Erment, el-Kab,
Edfoo, Esneh, and Kom Omboo, His workmen were actively employed on the island of


THE CHRISTIAN PLACE OF WORSHIP IN THE TEMPLE OF LUKSOR.


Elephantine, and in various other spots, even in Nubia, particularly at Amada, between
the first and second cataracts, where he restored the temple already existing, and
decorated it with wall pictures, among which we find his portrait and hieroglyphic


inscriptions, which to this day retain the freshness of their colours, and are remarkable
for their grandeur of style and beauty of execution. He also erected many obelisks;
the most famous of them have been transported to KEurope—Cleopatra’s Needle to
London, one to the Lateran in Rome, and a very noble one to Constantinople.

It cannot be wondered at that such a king as this should, long after his death,
still have divine honours paid him, and that many Egyptians should have chosen his


' He destroyed an elephant at Nii, probably in Northern India. See ‘Records of the Past,” ii. p. 62.
2 The other obelisk, formerly at Alexandria, has been remoyed and set up in New York, in the United States of


America.


266 EGYPT.


first name, Ra-men-cheper, as a motto or device to engrave on their seals and scarabzeus
amulets, as being of good omen.

His son, Amenophis, mounted the throne the day after his death, as we learn
from the tomb of Amen-em-heb. His part was to preserve what his father had won.
An attempt at revolt in the conquered cities of Syria called him into Asia, and an
inscription at Amada tells us how terrible was the punishment he inflicted on the
insurgents.


==>)


i


i
Hi


==


SA


NURSERY FOR CHICKENS AND CHILDREN IN THE RUINS OF LUKSOR


The tablet found between the fore-legs of the great Sphinx at Ghizeh informs
us, as the reader may remember, that Thothmes IV., who succeeded Amenophis IL.,
freed that monument from sand after he was visited in a dream, while resting from
«the chase, by the god Ra-Harmachis, who commanded him to do so. We know little
of any great exploits of this prince, and they are quite thrown into the shade by those
of his powerful successor, Amenophis III., who, though he was anticipated by his pre-
decessor, Thothmes III, so far as the opening out of new roads was concerned, did


* The body of this monarch, broken probably by Avab rapacity, has been recently found in a pit at the Deir-el-
Bahari, or Devyr-el-Bahree.


THE TEMPLE OF MUT, KARNAK.


NEAR


SEKHET STATUES


THEBES. 267


his utmost to equal him as a warrior, and to excel him as a founder of new buildings.
The landmarks of his empire, as they are given in the records, prove that he maintained,
if he did not extend, the frontiers of Egypt. Four qualities in particular distinguish
this prince as the most chivalrous figure of that heroic period, at once its crown and
its close—‘a strong arm, a brave temper, a heart faithful to its love, and a delight
in works that should survive his own span of life.” Such a description sounds as
if it were that of a Christian hero of medieval chivalry, but many a monument gives
proof of its justice as applied to this king. The great-grandfather of Amenophis
had had himself represented as holding up by the tail a living lion that he had
vanquished, in imitation, perhaps, of a picture he had seen somewhere in Asia. The
reader has already seen a seal of Thothmes IL., which shows him mastering a lion,
and Thothmes IV. is famous as a hunter; but Amenophis III. surpassed them all, for
on large scarabeei—and many such have been preserved—he boasts that during the
first ten years of his reign he had killed no less than one hundred and two lions.
Similar objects record the facts that he took to wife Tii, the daughter of Iuaa and
of Tuaa.' The monuments represent this lady, who was probably of Asiatic origin,
as fair-complexioned and blue-eyed, the most beautiful of all the women depicted on
them; and how tenderly this wife—though not of a royal family—must have been
beloved by her husband is sufficiently proved by the monuments of this king, for
she is represented much more frequently than is usually the case, and always named
and placed next to himself. If we wish to study the works of this chivalrous and
devoted knight among the Egyptian kings, we must once more visit the great national
temple. The row of stately pylons south of Karnak show us that the king’s palace and
the city of Thebes proper lay to the south of the great Temple of Amon, for they
themselves indicate the route taken by the king when he had occasion to visit the
temple in solemn procession, Amenophis took upon himself the task of adorning this
highway, and he selected the goddess Mut? from the great triad of Karnak, and built a
temple to her especially, which had the form of a horse-shoe bent round a tank of
the same form. Next to this goddess, the cat-headed or lion-headed Sekhet seems to
have enjoyed the highest honours in this sanctuary, which has fallen a prey to time and
violence, so that only a few remains are left. Mariette, who had the foundations exca-
vated, has proved that no less than 572 statues of the feline wife of Ptah must have
stood in its two fore-courts and along the eastern and western outside walls. These
were all of black granite; and even to this day a number of these grotesque monsters
stand among the ruins and rubbish of the ancient sacred tank, and have a most weird
appearance, particularly in the moonlight, when they look like a troop of witches or
spell-bound queens sitting on their thrones, and they have an ominous aspect of malig-
nant magic as they stand up above this ruined and deserted scene. The swarms of
living cats which are constantly to be met with inthe cities of the Nile may indeed
be forgotten, but no one can ever forget this silent company of cat-faced women.*


1 Some later scarabiei record the offering of the Chief of Mesopotamia, named Kirikarba (Kirgep), who sent his
daughter Sath-arna and 327 women to Egypt. “Records of the Past,” xii. p. 40.

* The mother goddess, wife of Amen Ra, and mother of Khonsu or Chéns.

® Many of these statues are now in the British Museum, which contains also a gigantic head of Amenophis III., and
a colossal statue of the same monarch. The monarch Shishak, who flourished about 500 years later, placed his name upon


some of them,


mee


HIGH NILE.


OF


TIME


THE


AT


AND ITS COMPANION


MEMNON


STATUE OF


THE


THEBES. 269


Amenophis was not content with building this temple, and another which was
erected to the extreme north of the great sanctuary: he also undertook the construction
of a new great temple close to the shore of the Nile. This, too, was begun by building
the holy place, which is removed by a full hour’s walk to the south of that of Karnak.

Apiu, or the seat of the gods, was the ancient name of the great Temple of
Amon, and from this word, with the feminine prefix tape, came the Greek name
0} Ba,’ or Thebes.

The new temple founded by Amenophis was called the “ Apiu of the south.”* It
is known to many of my readers as the Temple of Luksor; but the name “ Luksor” is
merely a corruption of an Arabie word, al-kusoor, meaning castles, and it served to
designate this village, which was first built up in the very midst of the courts, halls,
and colonnades of this ancient temple, and then extended gradually to the north
and east. The temple of Luksor is seen to most advantage from the Nile, but it is
exceedingly difficult while wandering among the ruins of the interior —all jumbled
up as they are with dwelling-houses, huts, and even a church—to form any idea
whatever of their original plan and design. The old holy place was destroyed long ages
since, and restored in the name of Alexander IL, son of the Macedonian conqueror.
Dwelling-houses have sprung up on the roofs of the halls and chambers which stand
round this sanctum, and one of these, known as the French fort (Aas fransawee), was
inhabited by the engineer who superintended the removal of the obelisk of Luksor
to Paris.

The original pronaos, which lay between the holy of holies and the grand
hypostyle, with its thirty-two columns (four rows of eight), served at a very early date
—certainly before the VIIth century—as a church for a Christian congregation ; the
altar was erected in the closed chamber at the further end, between new columns of
a bastard Corinthian order, and its walls were plastered with stucco, partly to conceal
the works of the heathen, and partly to afford a surface for new paintings. Of these
a few heads still remain, so well painted and so fine in expression, that they, with
a few fragments of Greek inscription which have been found near them, must be
regarded as the work of some capital artist of the time of the Byzantine emperors.
The figures to the right of the altar have black velvet shoes, and to the left a picture
with horses and riders can be made out. Where the plaster has fallen the effect
is singular enough, for we have a mixture of Christian figures and Egyptian gods.
Stranger still has been the fate of the Christian paintings at Wady Sebooah, in Nubia,
where a break in the plaster has left Rameses II. offering a sacrifice to an evangelist.
Adjoining this hall of the thirty-two pillars was a still more extensive fore-court,
enclosed on the west and east by a double row of pillars, and on the north by a
single row, with a pylon. The papyrus-stems which compose the shafts of these columns
are well sculptured, but there is no spot from which we can obtain a complete view
of this grandly-planned peristyle. The colonnade that leads from it northwards, with
seven pairs of stately campanulate columns, and the great court farther north still,
with the grand pylon that terminates it, are all of a later date, and I shall refer to
them again presently. The later portion of the building lies at an obtuse angle


1 This word, according to Mariette, was applied to Luksor. * «The Southern Cattle-stalls.”


270 EGYPT.


with the older part, perhaps in order to obtain a direct line of sight for the rows of
sphinxes connecting the main entrance with that of the temple at Karnak ; or perhaps
merely to avoid injuring other buildings which may at that time have occupied
the site.

The traveller who wishes to form some idea of the size and beauty of this temple
—which in ancient times must have presented a magnificent appearance, as it was
approached from the river—should take a boat at sunset, and, crossing to the farther
shore, look eastward. The columns, walls, and gateways of the Temple of Luksor are
veiled in hues of indescribable tenderness and
delicacy ; the dewy breath of evening and the
filmy twilight float over the huge outline of this
noble structure, and cast a glamour even over the
rags and tatters, the rubbish and patch-work, with
which it is desecrated and defaced by a miserable
race.

Still there is a certain charm in spying-out
the cuckoo’s brood in the eagle’s abandoned nest,
and we find here, among columns and_ pilasters,
lofty gateways, and sculptured walls, all the charac-
teristic details of a small Egyptian town. I have
passed many pleasant hours in the handsome house
of Mustafa Agha, in the very heart of the temple
at Luksor. I saw the old heathen gods looking
down from their walls and pillars into the very
books of the reciters of the Koran; I saw the
little boys making sham antiquities under the very
eyes of the goddess of Truth; I saw goats and
sheep, dogs and fowls, desolating the holy of holies ;
and children—which absolutely swarm at Luksor


—playing -in the most secret chambers of the


divinity, from which even the initiated were ex-
cluded. Mud and dust everywhere defile the
“pure” dwelling of the god, whose image looks


STATUE OF AMENOPHIS IV., KHUENATEN.


down with disgust on the hatching oven which a
Kopt keeps here on the same primitive plan as that described by Aristotle. In the
hot climate of Egypt the hens readily abandon their eggs, and so it is generally
thought preferable to hatch out the chickens by artificial heat. As for the children,
they grow up as best they may, shirtless and untaught.

We will now take the one step from the mean to the sublime, from the squalor
of modern Luksor to the gigantic edifice which Amenophis erected in the Nekropolis
on the western shore of the Nile, as the Memnonium of himself, his mother, and his
wife. The vast halls of this temple are totally destroyed, but their remains compose so
huge a mass that we are justified in supposing that this Memnonium must have
exceeded all others in size and extent. On the site where it stood numerous fragments
of building and statues are strewn on the soil, and on the spot, which perhaps was the


THEBES. 271


sanctuary, lies an enormous stone engraved with hieroglyphies, which tell us how rich
and splendid the interior of this building must have been. In front of its main entrance
stood those two gigantic statues, which were reckoned among the wonders of the world,
and which still fill their original places, the northernmost being the celebrated “ vocal
statue of Memnon.” What a magnificent sight this building must have been, with these
colossal statues, its sempiternal and immovable guardians, seated on their cubical
thrones, on whose sides we may still see the figures of the mother and wife of the king.
Each of them is fifteen metres fifty-nine centimetres! high, and was still higher
before the tall crown of the Pharaohs fell from their heads. The breadth of shoulder
is six metres seventeen centimetres, the length of their feet is three metres twenty


SPHINX AT KARNAK,


centimetres, and it has been calculated that each statue must weigh about 1,280 tons
7 cwt. The northern statue is the most famous, being the vocal colossus of Memnon,
which, in the time of the Czxsars, was thought as well worthy of a visit by the Roman or
Greek traveller in Egypt as the great Sphinx or the Pyramids. In the year 27 B.c.
part of this statue was broken away by an earthquake, and from that time till the
reign of Septimius Severus’ it is said that every morning shortly after sunrise it emitted
certain sounds, of the nature of which we are ignorant, since cautious travellers, like
Strabo, call it merely a noise, others a musical tone, while the more enthusiastic even
dignify it as a song.* Connecting the statue with the Egyptian word mennu, the
Greeks designated the colossus as the statue of Memnon, the Homeric hero, the son
of Tithonus and Eos (the dawn), the confederate of the Trojans, who, after killing
Antilochus, the son of Nestor, stayed the avenging arm of Achilleus. As soon as


1 More than fifty feet. 2 ap. 194.
* It has been heard in recent times. See Hay’s Diary in the British Museum, Manuscript Department.


Hi)


272 EGYPT.


the rosy-fingered morn appeared over Thebes, said the Greek legend, she shed her tears
—the morning dew—on the statue of her son, who gratefully greeted his mother with
a soft song. The throne, the plinth, and the legs of the colossus, which are wetted
by the Nile at the time of the inundation, are covered with Greek inscriptions in prose
and verse, commemorating the names of those who have visited the statue, the feelings
with which it has inspired them, and whether and when its tones were heard by
them. The most ancient dates from the eleventh year of Nero | the longest is a poem,
composed by the court poetess Balbilla on the occasion of her accompanying Hadrian
and his wife, Sabina, on a visit to Thebes ;? and the best verses are those of the imperial
procurator, Asklepiodotus. These may be rendered as follows :—


“ Know, O sea-born Thetis, that Memnon could not die. When the hot rays shed by his mother (Eos) fall


brightly upon him, his clear song rings out from where the spreading Nile parts the Libyan hills from hundred-gated


Thebes, while thy son Achilles, who longed for endless fighting, speaks not in Troy’s plain, nor in Thessaly.”


The portion of the colossus that had been thrown down in the earthquake was
restored under Septimius Severus by building it up with blocks of stone, and this caused
the sounds to cease. It would seem that the vocal phenomenon was genuine and
natural, and not a trick of deluding priests. It appears to have resulted from the
action of the rays of the sun, which, even at its first rising, are very powerful in these
latitudes ; these striking on the broad inclined surface of the broken part of the
statue while it was wet with the dews of night, the siliceous particles of the stone—which
is a quartzose sandstone conglomerate—having shrunk by cooling in the night, then
suddenly expanded with a ringing noise. If this is the correct explanation, the sound
would naturally cease as soon as a new upper part was cemented on to the broken
surface. There seems to be no doubt whatever that the material of which these
are made was quarried in the Red Mountain, near Cairo (Vol. I, p. 141), and


statues
we learn from inscriptions that the chief official personage under Amenophis II1.—
Amenophis, the son of Hapu, who seems to have been the greatest architect, the greatest
statesman, and at the same time the greatest general of his time—had it transported
across the Nile on eight boats, and erected, as it would seem, at the time of the highest
Nile flood in front of his king’s Memnonium. ‘This same dignitary also founded the
small temple behind Medinet Haboo, which was rebuilt by the Ptolemies, and which
is now known by the name of Deyr-el-Medeenet. His sovereign, Amenophis IIL,
made many demands on his energy and genius, for he caused temples to be erected
to the gods of his native land in many remote places, even on Mount Barkal, in the far
south of Nubia.’

It is difficult to understand how it was that this pious king’s son and successor
should have displayed such violent hostility to the gods of Thebes, and particularly to
the god most venerated by his father, the great Amon himself. He renounced his name
of Amenophis, “the peace of Amon,” and had the word Amon chiselled out of many
inscriptions in stone ; took the name of A/w-en-Aten, “ the light of the sun’s disk,” quitted
Thebes, and built a new residence for himself south of Beni Hasan, at the place now
known as Tell-el-Amarna, and there erected a splendid temple to the sun Aten, whom
he worshipped to the exclusion of all other gods. Can it have been the influence of


Va. 65. 2 ap. 130. See “The Emper


;” a romance by Georg Ebers. % Amenophis flourished about B.c. 1500.


THE GREAT HALL OF PILLARS AT KARNAK,


274 EGYPT.
his mother Tii, who, as we know, was of foreign origin, which led to his apostacy? or
was it his aversion to the increasing tendency, in Thebes especially, towards spiritualising
the conception of the divinity, which made him return to the simple and primitive
sun-worship? In the numerous wall pictures in the tombs of Tel-el-Amarna, we see
him repeatedly in adoration before the sun-disk, which has arms given to it, and his
unhealthy development, as well as the type of his features, show us at once that he was
a fanatic. His subordinates had to render him a deeper and baser homage than
they had ever done to his forefathers ; but in return he loaded them with gifts and
honours. He wisely invited the best artists—we find
one named Bek, and another Puta—to live in his
capital, and the pictures are quite delightful in which
they perpetuated the memory of this prince
was not unwarlike, in spite of his religious pecu-
liarities—and of his seven daughters, who could drive
their own chariots with two horses on expeditions.
He died leaving no male issue; and the priests of
Amon took revenge for his sins against their god
by destroying his name wherever they found it. Of
the remaining kings of the XVIIIth Dynasty, only
one is worthy of mention—Horus, known from the
monuments as Hor-em-heb. He completed the south
pylon at Karnak, and had the eastern row of
sphinxes placed,- which led from the temple there,
past that of Amenophis, with the statues of Sekhet,
to Luksor.* An inscription with a picture extant at
Gebel Silsileh informs us that this Hor-em-heb was
victorious in an expedition against the people of the
south; but in the last decade of the XVIIIth
Dynasty, of which the details have not yet been
thoroughly investigated, the tributary races of
Western Asia took advantage of the religious dif:
erences occasioned by the heresies of Khu-en-Aten,
and of the disputes for the throne and other internal
dissensions in Egypt, which could not fail to arise on the death of a king leaving no
male successor, to form a new confederation, and to resuscitate their broken spirit of
resistance. At the head of these revolted nations stood the Khita; at the time of
Thothmes III. these had been already a powerful race,* and they were now ruled by
valiant kings, who led mighty troops of war-chariots and foot-soldiers into the field.
These Khita seem first to have revolted under their prince Saplel,’ and very probably


who


QUEEN TUAA,


? The obscurities and difficulties of the reign of Horus are well known ; his queen Notemmut is the only one represented
as a female sphinx on a monument at Tursis, and with a peculiar head attire.

* The great race of the time of Thothmes ITI. were the Rutennu, who brought an elephant, possibly a white one,
to Egypt; but no elephants existed in Asia beyond the confines of Northern India, and this animal was brought as
tribute to Mesopotamia in the days of Shalmaneser, B.c. 850, so that the elephant hunt of Thothmes III. must have been
on the borders of India. The Rutennu also bring the light bear (Ursus Syriacus).
® Or Sapruru, Sapor.


THEBES. 275


Rameses I., who was the founder in his own person of a new royal family, may have
earned his claim to the throne by his successful generalship of the Egyptian army.
He was the ancestor of a great family of warriors, not apparently of pure Egyptian
origin; on the contrary, there are strong reasons for believing that Semitic blood
flowed in the veins of Rameses I., and that he came from Tanis, in the Delta. Little
is told us of his own achievements, but a great deal of those of his son, Seti I., and
his grandson, Rameses II.; and when the Greek historians speak of the time of
Sesostris, they mean the period of these two kings, who both kept the same ends in
view, and who for some years reigned together. Rameses I. was a usurper, and not
even related to the old family of Pharaohs; but his son Seti gained a right to the
throne by marrying Tuaa, a princess descended in a direct line from Thothmes and
Amenophis ; and as soon as a son was born to him he was: appointed co-regent with
his father, as is recorded in a great inscription in the fore-court of the temple at Abydos.
In this way he satisfied the requirements of the priesthood; but he also succeeded in
winning for himself their affections and suffrages — first, by his victories in battle,
and then by the unheard-of magnificence of the gifts and temples with which he
honoured Amon of Thebes. The princes of the XVIIIth Dynasty had already, indeed,
decorated the great national temple with works of great size and extent, but these
sink into nothingness when compared to the immense hypostyle (IV.) begun by
Rameses I., carried on by Seti, and finished by his son Rameses II.! This far exceeds
in grandeur any other portion of the temple, either earlier or later, and there is not
in the whole world a hall which can be put into the remotest comparison with it.
It is a banqueting-hall for gods or giants, and not for petty mortals. No less than
a hundred and thirty-four columns, of huge height and thickness, supported the
architraves and the immense stone slabs with which it was roofed over. Six pairs
of columns, with fine caliciform capitals, formed the colonnade, by which processions
passed from the fore-court, through the old buildings, to the sanctuary ; while the other
one hundred and twenty-two columns were somewhat lower than these twelve central
ones, and were crowned with foliated capitals. The internal rows of columns to the
right and left supported windows of stone trellis-work, which reached as high as
the top of the abacus of the twelve large pillars, and, with them, supported the roof-
slabs of the centre portion of the hall, which thus received some of the daylight it
needed. In this hall the worshippers must have felt as though they were standing
in a forest of gigantic flowers left from the wreck of some huge primeval world.
The sunlight shone through the windows at the side, but the roof over their heads—
supported on leaves and flowers—glittered with the stars of the midnight sky strewed
on a blue ground. Wherever the eye turned it fell on pictures of the king offering
to the gods, and receiving gifts at their hands. Many of the columns are now over-
thrown, and others tottering to a fall; but perhaps this marvel of architecture may
have been less impressive at the time of its newness and use than it is now, when
we are able to see it as a whole, and in connection with the half-ruined chambers
and obelisks in the background. While the hymns in praise of Amon were yet sung
in this hall, and perfumed resin burnt before him, at Thebes—as at Dendera—none


About sB.c. 1320.


FORECOURT AND ENTRANCE OF THE HOUSE OF SETI (TEMPLE OF KURNAH).


THEBES. 277


but the initiated were admitted to the hypostyle, and here, as there, the outer walls
were used forthe display of historical pictures and inscriptions. On that lying
towards the north ([V.a $ in the Plan), six pictures have been preserved, with
their inscriptions, relating to Seti’s victories in the East ; they show us the Pharaoh
passing the fortified frontier of Egypt (Ahetem, t.¢., Htham), overthrowing the robber
tribe of the Shasu, and penetrating across Palestine to Syria ; the inscriptions tell us
how he took the cities of the conquered nations, built new fortresses to enable him
to control them, drove away the flocks and herds, with their pastors, took possession
of Kadesh, the capital and stronghold of the Kheta, had cedars felled on Lebanon
for importation into his own timberless land, and returned
to Egypt loaded with spoil and with the heads of his
enemies. I have already spoken of his enterprise in be-
ginning to make a Suez Canal. He re-conquered Canaan,
Syria, Phoenicia (with Tyre), Mesopotamia, and even the
island of Cyprus, concluded a treaty with Mautanar, prince
of the Kheta, and carried home such vast treasure that he
could indulge his love of building to any extent. He erected
a fine Memnonium in the Nekropolis of Thebes, as he did at
Abydos ; it was exactly opposite the temple to which he made
such magnificent additions, and in it his names and those of
his father, Rameses I., were to be held in reverent memory.
The inscriptions call this the House of Seti—in the plans of
Thebes it is known as the Temple of Koornah ; the central
portion is well preserved, but most of the sphinxes that
marked out the roads for the processions have perished,
with the pylons, under the hand of time.

The temple proper was approached by a hall like
that of Abydos, but this was not supported on square
pillars, but on ten deeply-fluted columns of the plant-
like type, of which only eight now remain. On the
back wall we see twelve pairs of gods, eight of which 1 ts:
are, beyond a doubt, personifications of the branches pes pease
of the Nile that intersect the Delta, and correspond to
other figures on the left, representing the Nile of Upper Egypt. Of these figures
the inscription says :—“ As they approach the king, their arms are filled with choice
produce and stores, and all the good things that the earth brings forth are gathered
by them to add to the joy on the great feast-day of Amon, the father.”

These words refer to the great “feast of the Valley,” heb en-ant, when, on the 29th
day of the second month of the inundation, the statue of Amon was brought forth
from the sanctuary with much magnificence and solemnity, and conveyed across the
Nile to the Nekropolis, that the god might there offer sacrifices to his ancestors in
the other world. The priests of the house of Seti received the procession with the
splendid bark Sam, the most sacred of all the vessels that were preserved in the
temple of Karnak; in this the statue of the god was placed, and borne first to
the Memnonium of Seti, and then round and about the Nekropolis, preceded by a


e@e Koloss
© ©Ramses 1,


278 EGYPT.


crowd of temple servants, who strewed the way with sand. The solemnities ended
with a grand nocturnal spectacle, on the great sacred lake of which traces may
still be seen to the extreme south of the Nekropolis.

The Egyptian religion prescribed to all its followers that they should visit the
tombs of their dead and bring offerings, in grateful remembrance of their parents
and forefathers; and as, day after day, millions of suns had gone to rest—as men
do—behind the realm of tombs in the Libyan hills, the god himself was brought to
do honour to his departed ancestry, and to sacrifice to them. The young sun
might not forget its departed predecessor, and the god’s visit to the Nekropolis set


OF THE RAMESSEUM,


men the example of a pious remembrance of their forefathers. Three groups of


halls and chambers formed the nucleus of this Memnonium, and the most ancient
of its pictures and inscriptions appear to be executed by the same artists whose
masterpieces we admired at Abydos, and whose work we shall again meet with in
the tomb of Seti. The work done under Rameses IL, in completion of this Mem-
nonium, which was unfinished at the time when its founder died, are far behind
those of his father’s time in finish and style. Extensive school buildings were
attached to the house of Seti, but they were constructed only of brick, and have
totally disappeared. If we are to believe the statement of Diodorus, that the father
of Rameses II. (Sesostris) had him brought up with all the boys born in the
country on the same day, and exercised in all the most arduous mental and physical
labour, we may assume that the house of Seti was the scene of this wise prince’s
training; nay, if the Exodus of the Jews under Moses is rightly placed in


THEBES. 279


the time of Rameses’ successor, and if the lawgiver was in fact brought up with
A Daa alee ele + Pace ee
the Pharaoh’s children, this must have been the school where he passed his youth.’


A BATTLE, FROM THE RAMESSEUM.


We know from inscriptions that Rameses enjoyed royal honours from the day
of his birth, that he was called a “captain of armies” when he was only ten years old,
and that he proved his valour as a warrior
in very early youth. We need not here
follow his career in his expeditions to the
countries of the north and south, or relate
in detail how, treading in his father’s foot-
steps, after his father’s death when he ruled
alone, he endeavoured to work the gold
mines between the Nile and the Red Sea,
and to supply the road across the desert
with new wells.” At Memphis and Helio-
polis, at Tanis—his usual residence—at
Thebes and Abydos, in the hot regions of
Nubia beyond the cataract, and wherever a
city was founded in obedience to his com-
mands, he built temples and chapels to the
gods ; his image was carved in rocks far in


1 The details and inscriptions on this building are all
given in Mariette’s “ Karnak.”

* The inscriptions relating to the wells are given by
Pris >
“Denkmaeler,” IIL, pl. 139141. They have often been trans-
lated: “ Records of the Past,” Vol. VIIL, p. 67; Brugsch Bey’s
“History of Egypt.” BUST, FROM THE RAMESSEUM,


kk


in his “Monuments Egyptiens,” pl. 21, and Lepsius,


280 EGYPT.


the interior of Asia, and his name was perpetuated on all those buildings founded by
his father, which he, like a dutiful son, completed. One of his own works, however,
must be here particularly mentioned, for it is one of the noblest creations of Egyptian
architecture and the found-
ing of it was connected with
the most highly praised of
his achievements. This’ is


the Ramesseum, as it is


called, of which the remains


are a conspicuous ornament
of Western Thebes. In a
furious battle near Kadesh,
the capital of the Kheta,
he was cut off from his army,
and by the might of his own
“vight arm,” he defended
himself against a consider-
able number, forced his way


through the enemy who sur-
rounded him, and then set-
ting himself again at the
head of his troops, he de-
feated the Kheta army, and
forced them backwards into
the river. Pentaur, the chief
poet of his time, sang of this
great deed of arms in an


epic, which was inscribed on
temple walls and in papy-
rus rolls'—the Iliad of the
Egyptians. “I was alone,
and none was with me,” is
the cry that the poet puts
into the mouth of the king ;
but Amon stood by the dis-
—— : tressed Pharaoh and fought

PYLONS AND OBELISK OF RAMESES Il, AT LUKSOR, for him, and so the rescued

king built a magnificent

temple in the Nekropolis as a thank-offering, and to keep his own glorious deed in
remembrance. On the principal architecture of this votive building the often-repeated
burden of Pentaur’s epos may still be read: “I was alone, and none was with


’ The principal one is the third Sallier papyrus, in the British Museum. It has been translated by several Egyptologists,
and the translations will be found in the “ Records of the Past,” IL, p. 65, and following, and Brugsch Bey’s “ History of Egypt.” The
war is supposed to have happened about B.c, 1380, The papyrus is in the Hieratic character, but the texts in hieroglyphics
appear on the walls of Karnak,


THEBES. 281


me.” His artists have carved rich and vivid battle-scenes on the broad surfaces of
the walls of the pylons, representing the fight at Kadesh, the camp of the Egyptians,
the flight of the Kheta and their allies, and the king himself as of colossal stature,
towering above his foes. The turmoil of the battle, the fiery onset of the horses, the
heroic stature of Rameses, by whose side two lions are raging and fighting, the terror
of the vanquished, and the hurry of the fugitives, are vividly depicted.

In the first court (A in the plan), the king had a statue erected, which now lies
in fragments on the earth, but which once exceeded even the statue of Memnon in
size, and this one, too, was made, not of sand-
stone, but of granite. The whole was seventeen
metres and a half (about forty-six feet) in height ;
one ear, which is well preserved, is three feet three
inches long. Diodorus speaks of the Ramesseum
as the tomb of Osymandyas, and describes it very
accurately on the whole.

The second court (IIL) is distinguished by
its colonnade, which encloses it on all the four
sides, the roof being supported by columns on the
east and west; but on the north and south sides
by pillars, which are crowned by mummy-shaped
statues of Osiris, with their faces towards the
court. I may here take occasion to observe that
figures are never employed in Egyptian architec-
ture as Caryatides, but are always supported against
the pillars or pilasters which serve to carry the
superstructure. On the upper portion of the eastern
side of the pylon, which closes this court is another
wonderfully animated representation of the conquest
of the Kheta, and topmost of all, there is a picture
of the ceremonies at the coronation of the king ;
but’ we find this repeated, and in much better ‘
preservation, at Medinet Haboo. \ c

The great hypostyle (IV.), “the Hall of the HEAD OF QUEEN NEFERTARI, FROM ABOO LINBEL,
Presence,” is unique in its way. Diodorus called
it the Odewm, or concert-hall, and it is led up to by a few steps. It is on
the same general plan as the great hall of Karnak, having taller columns,
with floral capitals in the middle, and lower columns with bud-formed capitals
on each side, and the same arrangement for equalising the height of the
columns and obtaining light; but while Seti’s vast hall takes the senses
and imagination by storm, filling the beholder with astonishment and awe, this
hall, with its more modest dimensions and wonderfully pleasing ensemble delights
the most fastidious taste. Probably it was under its astronomically decorated
roof that thirty judges of the tribunal of Thebes met under their president, for
the administration of justice. Nothing, however, remains of the statues of the judges
which are said to have stood here; these are said to have been figures without


SVNYUVM AO


THEBES. 283


hands,’ to show that they were incorruptible, and their president was represented
with closed eyes, as being inexorable even to entreaty. The Egyptians were the. first
to understand that Justice should be blind, for they hung round the neck of their
chief judge an image of their Themis with her eyes closed. A few plinths for
statues still remain in this hall, and in the fore-court which opens out of it some
heads in grey granite have been preserved, of very fine workmanship, and with a
charm of expression in the eyes and mouth which it is difficult to describe.

While in general it’ is only on the outer walls of temples that battle-scenes
occur, we find one of remarkable beauty in this hall. How bravely the horses
prance onwards—how furious is the fighting on the walls, which are being scaled
with ladders, while the vanquished foes are flung down from the battlements. Many
of the king’s sons take part in the battle, and all his sons are depicted on the
farther wall of the hall, with their names, titles, and dignities, in long array. It
was the thirteenth of his many children whose fate it was to succeed his father on
the throne at a ripe age. Among his daughters, who are also represented, Bent-anat
was the most beloved and respected; to her even the cartouche of the queens is
granted.” Many very interesting pictures are to be found in the smaller chambers
of this building. One of these, on which the name of the great Pharaoh is being
inscribed on the fruit of the Persea-tree by the god of learning and the goddess of
history and books, has already been given to the reader. The small pillared hall
in which this picture in relie


f occurs was probably the library of the temple, of
which Diodorus tells us that it was inscribed with the words “the sanctum of the
soul !”

Extensive ruins and rubbish-heaps are all that remain of the great structures
in brick which adjoined the Ramesseum—lecture-halls and houses for teachers and
disciples, and residences for the priests; the tombs of some of the librarians have
also been found, and numerous rolls of papyrus, of various contents, show us that
the college attached to this votive temple may be regarded as a great centre of all
the intellectual life of the time. The most famous of the writers engaged here
were Pentaur, Kagabu, Anana, Hora, Mer’apu, Bek-en-ptah, and others.’ In the
romance of “Uarda”* I have attempted to reproduce, from the data on the
monuments, as faithful a picture as possible of such a nursery of Egyptian learning,
and I selected for my purpose the House of Seti, which grew up and flourished
before the Ramesseum ; this was not founded till after the battle of Kadesh.

On the eastern bank of the Nile Rameses not only finished the buildings
begun by Seti, but decorated with statues of himself the great gate which led up
to the immense hypostyle constructed by his father—see the plan of Karnak (V.) ;
he also surrounded the oldest part of the temple with a wall, and extended it by


1 No perfect ancient statues of this description, except such as are seated on the ground, and entirely enveloped in
drapery, have been found.

* There is some mystery about Bent-anat, or, as her name means, “daughter of Anaitis,” the daughter of Rameses IT.
Her mother was probably an Asiatic, but it is uncertain if of Khita or Hittite origin.

® The compositions of these authors are found in Hieratic in the different museums of Europe. The most important
are in the British Museum and Turin, and have been published in fac-simile, as the “Select Papyri of the British Museum ”
and the “ Papyrus de Turin,” by M. Pleyte.


4 “Uarda: a Romance of Ancient Egypt.”


284 EGYPT.
adding some fine buildings to the north. Then he finished the great temple founded
at Luksor by Amenophis III, adding, as an approach to it, a large court and an
immense pylon, in front of which he erected a colossal statue of himself and two
Obelisks; one of these has become famous by haying been carried to Paris, where
it stands in the centre of the Place de la Concorde. Rameses here commemorated
his victories over the Kheta, covering the walls of the propylon
of Luksor with pictures of camps and battles, and the epic poem
of Pentaur was also inscribed here in a place which is now
unfortunately inaccessible.

A stela was discovered in the wall to the south of the
great hypostyle at Karnak, on which was a copy of the treaty
which put an end to the war between Rameses II. and the
Kheta. This document’ excites our respect and admiration for
the Asiatic nation, which must have reached a high pitch of
civilisation, and it raises our opinion of the high political status
of both the nations who were parties to such a treaty. The
Kheta king secured the alliance thus effected with the


Fey
Meeeee


Egyptian sovereign by giving him his daughter in mar-
riage, and this greatest of all the Pharaohs was thus
enabled to enjoy the results of his successes in the field,
and to spend the last decades of his reign—which lasted
sixty-seven years—almost without interruption in the
exercise of the arts of peace.


I have spoken of all that Rameses did in beauti-
fying Thebes, but one more of his works is worthy of
special mention ; this is the rock temple of Aboo Simbel,
on the western shore of the Nile, by the second cata-
ract. This sanctuary is hewn out of the ferruginous
reddish-brown sandstone of a cliff in the Nubian hills.
The attempt was here made to produce the same effect
by hewing and carving out the stone, as was attained at
Karnak by free construction, and with perfect success ;
no one who has once seen the fagade of the temple
of Aboo Simbel—which shall presently be put before

PIAN OF THD TEMPLE or MEDINET wanoo. the reader—can ever forget it; no one, as he stands
in front of it, can find in his fancy or his memory any

image to compare with it, and the traveller, even in Egypt where he has been satiated
with all that is most huge, is filled with fresh and frank admiration as he stands in
-like slope it


the rock-hewn halls of this temple. In front of it, where with a fortres
faces the Nile, stand colossal statues exceeding that of Memnon in size. They are
worked in the living rock, and represent Rameses II. and his wife Nefert-ari ; and
between his feet, on a smaller scale, are his children. The art and skill with which
these gigantic statues are executed, both as to their general effect and their finish in


1 The original is stated to have been engraved on a plate of silver, and was probably in Egyptian and Khitan, or Hittite


hieroglyphs, but no duplicate out of Egypt has been identified.


HABOO.


MEDINET


TEMPLE OF


THE


IN


SO-CALLED PAVILION


OF THE


INTERIOR


286 EGYPT.


details, are quite marvellous; magnanimity and dignity joined to gracious sweetness
mark the features of both king and queen, and when we tear ourselves from
contemplating them, and enter the temple, our admiration rises at every step; three
halls—in the first of which large statues of Osiris enthroned sit in state—and ten
smaller chambers open one out of another, and the torches carried by our guide
light up an endless gallery of pictures and inscriptions sculptured in the rock and
covered over with a thin coating of plaster and paint; these refer to the same
scenes and events as are recorded on the walls of the Ramesseum. We see the
king with his lions rushing on the Kheta; and in the sanctuary at the innermost
end of the cavern we see the Pharaoh worshipped with divine honours by the side
of Harmachis (Hor-em-Khuti), Amon of Thebes, and Ra of Memphis.’

Following the example of his father, Menephtah, the son of Rameses IL, often.
went from Thebes to Tanis in the Delta, and finally made it his capital. In his
reign the scholars of the house of Rameses w orked with zeal, and greatly developed
the resources of their institution, which may be remanded as the precursor of the
museum of Alexandria. We have already seen that at Tanis, in the midst of a half
Semitic population, the Hebrews in particular were driven to many kinds of forced
labour, of which we also have an account in the Bible. I have said that Menephtah
was the Pharaoh of the Exodus, and it is not difficult to assign a reason for the severity
he displayed towards the Semitic population of those eastern provinces of his
dominions which bordered on the lands of other Semitic nations, for we know that
at this time the Libyan tribes to the west of the Nile had allied themselves with
the inhabitants of the islands of the Mediterranean to attack Egypt. An inscription
in the great temple of Karnak tells us that he defeated these enemies in a great
battle near Prosopis ;? but we learn from other documents, of the years following the
reign of Menephtah, that the event known to us as the Exodus of the Israelites had
had a decisive effect on the history of Egypt, for soon after it had taken place,
revolts and usurpations of the princes of the Delta districts distur bed the empire
to the utmost. The Delta was for some time subject to a Syrian named <Aarsu,
and ambitious pretenders from time to time snatched the crown from the legitimate
sovereign. At last the vigorous hand of Set-nekht restored peace to Egypt. His
son, Rameses II]., was the founder of a new dynasty, which was destined to an end
as gloomy as its beginning was happy and hopeful.

Among all the temples on the western shore of the Nile, that of Medinet
Haboo is distinguished by the grandeur and originality of its plan and the excellent
preservation of its most important parts. It was Rameses ae who erected this
noble structure close to a small temple built by Thothmes III. (1. in the plan) in the
south of the Nekropolis. Under the Ptolemies and the Romans this was enlarged


1 The mummy of Seti I., whose alabaster sarcophagus, removed from his tomb in the Biban-el-Melook, is in the Soane
Museum in Lincoln’s Inn Fields, was found in the pit of the Deir-el-Bahari, whither it had been hastily removed in the reign
of Herhor, of the XXIst Dynasty. The mummy of Thothmes ITI. was also found in the same place; but another mummy,
supposed to be that of Rameses IT., has been attributed to Rameses XII.

* This inscription has been published by Duemichen, “ Historische Inschriften,” 1867, and translated by De Rougé in


e avant notre ére” in the Revue Archeologique, Paris, 1867.


his “ Mémoire sur les Attaques dirigées contre ngypte vers le XIV. Sié


Brugsch, “ Egypt under the Pharaohs,” IL, p. 123 rts that they were races of the Caucasus allied with Libyans, an opinion


not to be universally accepted.


eee
ey


COURT WITH REMAINS OF A CHRISTIAN CHURCH AT MEDINET HABOO.


THEBES. 287


with much magnificence; and after the doctrines of Christianity had dethroned the
old gods of Egypt, a Christian congregation established itself in its halls, and built
a church in its courts. Mariette’s forced labourers uncovered much that had been
overthrown at that time, and to this day the villagers of Medinet Haboo bring
away the nitrogeneous rubbish from the interior and use it as manure for the fields.
The pictures and inscriptions which cover all the walls supplement the knowledge
derived from Harris's great papyrus,! and make the inquirer perfectly acquainted
with the deeds of Rameses III., of whom Herodotus relates many stories, calling him
“Rhampsinitus the wealthy.” A curious structure opens into the temple of Medinet
Haboo, which has often been supposed to be a king's palace (a. in the plan), and
which the French called the “Pavilion.” The king, however, no more lived in this
than in any other Memnonium or temple. The whole building, such as we see its
remains, with its numerous pylons, courts, and halls, was dedicated to the memory
of its founder and of his achievements, and served as the scene of various festivals,
more particularly of the great coronation festival, or Feast of Steps. The Pavilion,
in front of which are two little watch towers and a wall with battlements, consisted
of two high wings in the form of truncated pyramids, and a building connecting
them with a roadway through it. The interior of this very interesting structure is
divided into two floors or storeys, with steps leading to the upper one, and is divided
into several rooms with many remarkable pictures in relief on the walls. Among
these there are some pictures of the private life of the king; one, for instance,
showing him as engaged in playing at draughts with young ladies. But these
pictures do not in the least prove that the rooms in which they occur were inhabited
by the king; they were analogous to the pictures we have before met with in the
tomb chapels of private families, and it would appear that this so-called Pavilion
was used as a place of meeting for the descendants of the Pharaoh when they
visited his Memnonium.

Tf we stand in the road-way that passes through this structure and look
westward, we obtain a grand picture; through a gate in a massive pylon we look
across one great court to another beyond it, and then over broken pillars, fragments,
and ruins to the very foot of the Libyan range, which shuts in this stupendous
scene.

Going through the gateway we find ourselves standing in front of the second
largest pylon in Egypt (111). Not pausing there, we enter a spacious enclosed court
(tv.) with a colonnade on each side, that on the left formed by a row of floral
columns, and that on the right by a series of pillars with figures of Osiris. The
next court has a colonnade all round. Here we find the columns of the Christian
church before mentioned, most of them on the ground; and beyond this again are
the broken columns of a hypostyle (v1), out of which open some well-preserved
chambers, while behind them lie other ruined halls and rooms. This temple cannot
fail to impress deeply any lover and connoisseur of architecture as a noble and
grandiose production of the art. In its second court—if anywhere—with its


1 ‘Translated in the “Records of the Past,” Vol. VI, p. 21, and following. This document, dated in the thirty-second year


of Rameses IIJ., describes the antecedent political state of Egypt, and the gifts the king made to Heliopolis, Memphis,


and Thebes.
ul


HABOO.


MEDINET


OF


COURT


SECOND


THE


IN


A SNAKE-CHARMER


THEBES. 289


colonnades, its pillars, and its statues, he must feel how admirably skilful the old
masters were in producing novel and happy results by varying the forms of the
supports in their buildings. The hollow cornice, bending over and closing in the
space, which has no roof but the blue sky, has a fine effect, and gives the spot a
particular effect of calm retirement. To many visitors, no doubt the pictures and
inscriptions with which the whole of the rooms and every wall and pillar are covered
will be still more attractive than its architectural beauties, if he understands their
meaning and can interpret their language; for in the Pavilion, on the pylon, and
on the north wall of this Memnonium, all the triumphs achieved by Rameses III.
in the fifth, eighth, and eleventh years of his reign, are recorded for posterity,


graphically and in long inscriptions. Fierce fights, and not on land only—as at


Karnak, Luksor, and the Ramesseum—but by water also, are here represented in
relief in stone, and heightened by brilliant colouring. The peoples against which
the Egyptians defend themselves are of very various races; some of them they
attack in their own dominions, and their dress, armour, and type of features are
depicted in the most characteristic manner. New foes, whom we met for the first
time under Menephtah, call the Egyptians into the field. Their old adversaries
the Kheta and Shasu are still to be seen among the Pharaoh’s enemies; but they
sink into insignificance by the side of the great confederation of nations who gather
under the standard of the Libyan princes. The tribes of the east seem to haye been
driven to the west and south before a great migration of the hordes of Western Asia ;
and the nations to the west of Egypt joined hands with them to reduce the
supremacy of that powerful kingdom. But the arm of Rameses was mighty by the
grace of Amon; the Libyans were defeated, and their dismembered limbs counted
before the king. Hardly three years later a combination of many tribes poured
down upon the mouths of the Nile, arriving by land from Asia Minor through Syria,
‘and by ship from the coasts and islands of the Mediterranean; but they were
signally defeated by sea and land. Egypt, however, was again attacked by the
Libyan tribe called the Maxyes (Mashuasha); she had to defend herself against the
attempts of the Tyrrhenes (Tuirsha of the Sea) and other islanders; and from the
names that have been preserved of races conquered by Rameses, it would seem that
his armies penetrated as far as Cilicia, and that his fleets subjugated Cyprus and
other islands. Among the nations mentioned as hostile to Egypt are some whose
names and position we know from the Greeks, while others cannot be positively
determined as corresponding to any nations of antiquity.’

In the pavilion we see portraits of the princes of these people; on the north
wall is a picture of the sea-fight in which they fell or were taken captive, and we also
see Rameses III. represented—perhaps allegorically—as conquering a lion.


' Brugsch thinks that most of them are races of Colchio-Caucasian origin, but, as I believe, wrongly. This is not


explain that I maintain that the “Tuirsha of the Sea”


the place for a discussion of ow: different opinions, but I must here
are Tyrrhenes or Tyrsenes, the Schardana Sardinians (who always boasted of their Libyan origin, and who remained there


till a late period under the name of Chartanoi), the Shal na Sicilians, the Akaiuasha Achzans, and the Danaau Danaoi
(Greeks). The Pulasatha have been supposed to be Philis


may be perhaps merely a colony of the original Pulasatha left to settle in Africa after the destruction of their fleet, and who


nes or Pelasgoi, or a Libyan race, the Prosodite. These last


designated themselves, in contrast to the Egyptians, as Pelagioi, or men of the coast. It is quite open to us to suppose that


they may be the same as that famous nation of the Pelasgoi who are so often mentioned, and whose origin is not yet established.


290 EGYPT.


Nor is there any lack of peaceful scenes among the pictures in the
Temple of Medinet Haboo, which amply repays the most careful research.
ES Among these I must especially mention the series of paintings which
represent the coronation of the Pharaoh at the Feast of Steps. These
cover the wall at the back of the court in which we find the columns of
the Christian Church (V.). In order to prevent the congregation of the
faithful from being distracted at their devo-
tions by the works of the heathen, they were
daubed over with Nile mud, and we owe the
preservation of their colours to this protecting
coating.

This great feast was held at the new
moon of the first month of harvest (Pashons),
in honour of the god Khem,’ the creative form
of Amon. The king, sitting in a litter, is
borne out of his palace into the open air,
accompanied by his body-
guard, his fan-bearers, and
the princes of his family.
Musicians swell the pomp
and festivity with the sound
of trumpets and drums, bald-


headed priests burn incense,


and the preacher or reciter
leads the singing with his


book of hymns in his hand.


The continuation of the pic-
ture shows the statue of the
vod Khem as the end and
=


object of the procession. Once


he is shown under a canopy,
but afterwards he is con-


cealed under hangings on a
sort of platform or scaffold, decorated with garlands, and borne by priests and fan-
bearers, while other priests follow with ornamental plants and a sail, the emblem of


EGYPTIAN BATS


! The name of this divinity has been read as Min, or Amsi. He was also a form of Amon and Horus united.


the breeze of freshness
and delight. The king
brings incense and drink-
offerings to the god, and
over his head soars the
vulture of victory, which
we almost invariably
find when the Pharaoh
is depicted as showing
himself to his people or
as going forth to battle.
Then comes the white
bull of Khem, with the
king’s favourite wife and
the festival reciter. <A
long train of Pastophoroi
precede the sacred bull,
bearing various emblems
—images of the gods,
vessels of sacrifice, and
the statues of the king’s
ancestors. This solemn
procession goes out to
meet the sovereign, be-
fore whose eyes one of
the ceremonies of coro-
nation is now performed.
Four geese,’ called by
the names of the child-
ren of Horus,’ are let
fly, in order that they
may carry to the north,
south, east, and west,
the news that Rameses
has set the crown upon
his brow. More to the
right there is a picture
of the second ceremony,
in which the king cuts
with a sickle a sheaf of
corn offered him by a
priest. The queen looks


THEBES. 291


on at this proceeding, which, as we see from a picture in the Ramesseum, had been


1 Or pigeons. * Amset, Hapi, Tuautmetef, and Kabhsenuf, the so-called genii of the Karneter, or Hades. One


: E ‘ Ee
of the names of a bird was Ari-en-pe, “guardian of the Heaven.


THE KINGS.


OF


Ss


THE TOMI


Or


VALLEY


THE


ENTRANCE TO


THEBES. 2938


in use by earlier Pharaohs; a second picture of the white bull and another train
of the king’s ancestors, complete this part of the paintings.

Farther on we see Rameses ITI, with all his children—eighteen sons and fourteen
daughters—bound to their father by a long sash or tie. Inscriptions explain the


pictures in every instance, and these have a very splendid effect, although, of course,
only a-small number of soldiers


stand for a vast army, and a whole
choir of singers and musicians can
only be represented by a small
number, since the wall, though of
considerable extent, is limited.
Kallixenos, a Greek writer, has
described a similar procession which
was got up by Ptolemy Philadel-
phus, and from the accounts given
by him, who was an eye-witness,
we are fully justified in assuming
that each man here represented
stands for a hundred men in the


king’s train. It is very remark-
able that to this day the inhabit-
ants of the Nekropolis select this
temple to assemble in, when any
sight is to be seen, in preference
to any other spot.

Rameses was certainly the
most splendid, and apparently the
wealthiest, of the Pharaohs. Who
does not know the delightful story
of the treasure-house of Rhamp-
sinitus and the architect’s son?

Duemichen has lately dis-
covered onthe left side of the
broken columns of the hypostyle
of Medinet Haboo (VI.) four con-
nected chambers (3 and 4), in
which, as the inscriptions tell us,
the more than royal gifts were stored which this generous king dedicated to Amon
in his Memnonium. And the endowments enumerated in Harris’s papyrus are no
less enormous with which he enriched the temples of Memphis and Heliopolis and
the great sanctuary of Karnak.' At Karnak he added to the buildings a small
temple (L) to the west of the great hypostyle. and a larger one dedicated to the
god Khunsu,* which, if it were not overshadowed by the gigantic edifices around it,
would be admired and praised as a wonderful effort of architecture.


ENTRANCE OF A KING’S TOMB IN BIBAN, EL-MULOOK.


? Translated in the “ Records of the Past,” Vol. VIIL, p. 5. * Or Chons, the Moon god, son of Amon and Mut.


204 _ EGYPT.


Rameses III. won most of the treasure that he applied to these immense works
from the enemies he conquered; part he derived from mines, quarries, and commercial
enterprises: for his fleets, like those of Hatasu, brought spices and rarities from the
rich shores of the Indian Ocean. For thirty-two years he filled the throne of the
Pharaohs, and during the last part of his life, which was undisturbed by any great war,
he devoted himself to the domestic welfare of the Valley of the Nile, which he caused
to be planted with umbrageous trees—a deed which won him perpetual gratitude. The
fame of his wealth has outlasted that of his achievements, and it was the super-
abundance of riches which alienated him and his children from the severe simplicity of
an earlier time. He lived surrounded by a harem, in whose pestilent soil conspiracies’
were constantly fostered, to which he was near falling a sacrifice, and he ended his days
as the mere tool of the priests, enervated and enfeebled, and scorned by his contempora-
ries, after sharing his sovereignty with his son. Even during his lifetime the greater
part of his treasure was transferred to the temples; the sacerdotal power struggled
for the mastery with the royal authority; and his successors, who, like him, all bore the
name of Rameses, were at last reduced to surrender the crown of Egypt to the high
priest of Amon. The great man’s descendants were but an ignominious race,’ of which
few memorials survive
beyond a few additions
1/7 to the temple of Khunsu


YY /
Yi HL . = 3
Z yy and their tombs.
fl _
yyy yyy ry ate Sia DOH IN
[eee YIU’ YY D4 The famous Biban-


el-Mulook, or Valley of
the Kings’ «fombs, is at,
some distance from Medi-
net Haboo; we ride northwards, coasting the “coffin mountain,” and passing by
many tombs and the hovels of the fellaheen. Before reaching that part of the
Nekropolis known as el-Assasseef, we come upon an old dervish with his banner, asking
alms of the fellaheen for his order. We saw this same man again on a pretty little
horse, and accompanied by a servant, but still pursuing his calling as a beggar.
El-Assasseef is full of tombs, one of which is the largest of all the tombs of private
personages. A millionaire of the time of the Saite kings*—Pet-Amen-hotep by name—
had it hewn out in the beautiful white limestone hill of this part of the Nekropolis. The
chambers are numerous, and the corridors are interrupted by deep niches; but at the
present day the inscriptions which cover the walls, and which all refer to death and
the future life in the nether world, are quite blackened, and myriads of bats inhabit
this and the neighbouring tombs. At sundown they fly to the Nile to drink in dense
masses, like a dark cloud driven before the wind, but by day they hang head downwards
from the roofs of the tombs, and make it both difficult and unpleasant to visit them,
for they exhale a disagreeable sour smell, and it is not easy to copy and work where


PLAN OF THE TOMB OF SETI I.


, a Z


YY
YY
ML
Vl


1 Described in a papyrus at Turin, also translated—* Records of the Past,” Vol. VIIL., p. 53.

? The Ramessids of the XXth Dynasty.

® These, however, present great interest, from their astronomical representations, and the scenes they represent of the
Egyptian Hell, or Hades.
* About B.c, 600.


THEBES. 295


TCC


these creatures, startled by the torches,
flutter uneasily round the light, and often
beat it out; not unfrequently I have
known them end by hanging themselves
on to my beard. However, they do no
farther harm, and a light blow with the
hand is sufficient to disengage them.
Adjoining el-Assasseef lies the hilly
soil of Drah abool Neggah, which has
been turned over in every direction by
Mariette’s labourers. It contains the most
ancient of all the Thebain tombs, and it
was here that the coffins of the kings
called Antef (XIth Dynasty), now at Paris
and London, and the richly ornamented
mummy of Queen Aah-hotep, were disin-
terred. At that time more importance
seems to have been attached to the adorn-
ment and preparation of the corpse itself
than to the tomb, which before the
XVIIIth Dynasty here often bore the form
of a pyramid, supported on a cubical base.
We may reach the Valley of the
Kings either by the somewhat difficult path over the cliff separating el-Assasseef
from Biban-el-Molook, or by following the road of the Pharaohs, which still
exists in the plain, and starting
north of the house of Seti,
leads up a steep slope into the
famous gorge. By choosing the
steep mountain path, we obtain a
magnificent view opening into the


ELIE?


TCO


MENEPHTAH,


rocky amphitheatre and ruins of
Dayr-el-Bahree, as well as a wide
and beautiful prospect over the
Nekropolis, the Nile, and Eastern
Thebes; but riding round by the
lower road, we see the narrow pass
through which, in past ages, the
mourning train followed the bier
of the Pharaoh by a_ well-kept
road into the valley of death.t
The gorge into which this
pass opens is indeed a valley of


ARM-CHAIRS (REPRESENTED IN THE TOMB OF RAMESES II,).


1 Tt is at the narrowest point of this mountain pass that I have laid the scene of the overthrow of Paaker’s chariot in
the romance of “Uarda,” when Uarda herself is run over by the Princess Bent-Anat.


meme


EGYPT.


296


death. It is closed in on both sides by bare walls of yellowish limestone, streaked with
dark stains, which are as black, particularly at the edges of the rocks, as if the sun
had scorched them ; and these cliffs, which sometimes approach and sometimes recede,
are never at any great distance apart. Not the smallest herb or blade can strike
root in the rocky cliffs or on the
soil of the valley; all the creative
activity of nature seems para-
lysed in this realm of death. Still,
it is not devoid of inhabitants ;
here and there a snake wriggles
across the sand, a scorpion lurks
under blocks of stone by the
path, long rows of vultures perch
on the topmost ridge, and in
the early morning, or after sun-
down, jackals sneak out of the
tombs and caves where they lurk
during the day. But no pleasing
object meets our gaze, and the
black nodules of flint that lie
embedded in the yellow lime-
stone look down on the wan-
derer like sinister Argus-eyes.
The intense heat of the midday
sun pours down into the narrow
and dismal gorge, and its rays,
falling on the rocks, heat them
like the walls of a gigantic oven.
Presently, however, the gorge
opens out on to a small plain,
from which a cross valley runs
up into the mountain in a
westerly direction, and it is there
that we find the most ancient of
the kings’ tombs. Leaving this
to our right, we soon perceive,
at a few feet above the soil
of the valley, the cpening of a
tomb in the rock, and there another, and yet more; these doorways are all higher
than those of the graves of wealthy citizens which we saw at Abd-el-Kurnah.
The Greeks called these rock-tombs Syringoi, for they compared the walls of
Biban-el-Mulook to the reed of a Pan pipe, in which the holes are in a row side
by side.

But now we jump from our saddles—from afar we see the number 17, and
we know that the seventeenth tomb, which was hewn out by order of Seti I. to


SARCOPHAGUS IN THE TOMB OF RAMESES VI.


THEBES. 297


contain his mummy,’ exceeds all the others in size and magnificence, though
that of Rameses III. is indeed hardly second to it? That is No. 11. It was
Wilkinson, the historian of antiquity, who numbered the rock-tombs of Biban-el-
Mulook.

I devoted many weeks to the study of these tombs, but years would hardly
suffice for copying the endless series of inscriptions that cover their walls. The
tomb of Seti I. is the oldest in this part of the valley; that of his great son,
Rameses I]., has not as yet been discovered,’ but those of his successors, down to
the last Rameses of his family, have long since been found and opened. They
are all constructed on the same general plan, but differ in the number and _ size
of the chambers hewn in the rock, and in the number and finish of the inscrip-
tions and pictures which cover the walls. They are, in fact, as we may say,
pyramids dug out instead of built up; and just
as the real Pyramids testify by their magnitude
to the length of the reign of their builders, so we
may infer from the depth and completeness of
these rock-chambers what wealth and means were
at the disposal of the king in whose time they
were hewn out. The simplest consist of a passage,
a hall for the sarcophagus, and an inner chamber ; my WW ant
the largest have a long range of corridors, halls, ie
and chambers, which we go down into by steps
or sloping planes, while the fellah boys precede us
with lights. The sculptures and paintings on
plaster only seldom refer to the earthly career of
the deceased, while, on the other hand, Zwat, or
“the abyss ’-—the nether world and all the busy
life that fills it—are fully represented. The prin- )
cipal personage in this “divine comedy” is the SHRGHANK (S1ISHAR) MOEDING. HIS
glorified king, “the flesh of Ra.”' It is not till Se Lara ae LE
he reaches his destination, after his journey through
the nether world, that he is filled with the very spirit of the Most High, and
becomes wholly divine. The boat in which he crosses the abyss, under the
guardianship of a serpent, is guided by the gods of the nether world, prayed
over by their worshippers, and imperilled by the evil demons of the abyss.
Anubis, the guide of the soul, the Hathor of the under world, Isis and


1 His mummy has been recently discovered in the pit of the Deir-el-Bahari with others already mentioned. His


alabaster sarcophagus, the finest of the class yet discovered, is in the Soane Museum, its inscriptions referring to the sun’s


passage through Hades during the hours of the night, have been published by Sharpe and Boncmi, and translated by
Lefebure, “Records of the Past,” XII, p. 5 and following. The mummy of Seti I. was found in a single wooden coffin,
wrapped up in an inscribed shroud, at the Deir-el-Bahari.

2 The rose granite sarcophagus of this king has been removed. The cover is in the Fitzwilliam Museum, at
Cambridge ; the chest is in the Louvre, at Paris. The fate of his mummy is unknown.

5 It has probably been long rifled, as vases of gilded wood, part of the sepulchral furniture, are in the British Museum.
It is doubtful whether the mummy and coffin with his name found at the Deir-el-Bahari belong to Rameses IT.


4 Af en Ra, or Af. He is represented with the head of a goat.


EGYPT.


Nephthys conduct him, and after he has submitted to his trial and justification,
and gazed at the torments of the reprobate, he is permitted to enter the
Empyrean, the heaven of fire and abode of the blest. Here his apotheosis is
accomplished, and he becomes a radiant spirit, whose name is the name of God, who
is one with the gods of heaven, differing from them in nothing. There the pious
rejoice over him, and all the nations of the earth do homage to him—Egyptian


COLUMN IN THE GREAT COURT OF KARNAK,


and Semitic, Negroes, and the light-hued Libyan races; hymns resound in his
praise, even the gods bow down to him, the stars rise and set in his presence,
and years and days pass by him. The inscriptions and pictures in the tombs of
Biban el-Mulook are the “Book of the Dead” of the kings. Certain texts and
symbols recur in the same parts of them just as they do in the temples. The texts,
of course, differ from those in the tombs of private persons as the nature of “Ra
made flesh,” the God incarnate and seated on the throne of Egypt, differs from
that of the ordinary mortal. Among these texts the long hymn which is usually
inscribed on the walls of the corridor beyond the antechamber is particularly worthy
of notice. It is called “The praises of Ra in Amentis” (the nether-world), and


ca


\V


i


i i


KARNAK.


E AT


ra
=


THE SO-CALLED APE-T


OF


IOR


300 EGYPT.


.


has been admirably deciphered and interpreted by Naville' from four different texts ;
it contains seventy-five adjurations, composing a sort of Litany addressed to seventy-
five personifications of Ra. This, which constitutes a book or chapter by itself, is
introductory to all the others, and served to remind the initiated—for only the most
privileged even of these were permitted to enter the tombs of the Kings—in pictorial
language, of the pantheistic and fundamental views of their mystic doctrine, according
to which Ra is the all-embracing, the “Pan” who includes all things and all the
gods in himself. Out of him nothing exists, and whatever is is a manifestation of
his manifold forms. These forms, as we here learn—but on what grounds we know
not—were supposed to be seventy-five in number. To each of them a small statue
was dedicated, and the departed soul must know their names by heart and the
appropriate invocation in order to attain to a perfect union with Ra. If he accom-
plished this he would live for ever; he was permitted to assume any form he pleased,
and appear as the god animating the universe, as the sun or a star, aS a man,
animal, or plant. His mummy was carefully preserved, and his statue erected, so
that he might when he desired it mingle in the common life of men in the same
form as he had borne while alive; this was called Ka, and regarded as something
independent and self-subsistent.

The splendid tomb of Seti I. is often called Belzoni’s tomb, after its discoverer.
That numbered 14 exceeds it in size—it is, however, nearly two hundred feet in
length—but in no other tomb are the sculptures so fine in style or so admirably
executed. A steep flight of steps leads down into it, and the plan laid before the
reader (ante, p. 294) will afford an idea of the enormous labour which Seti required of
the workmen who hewed these chambers and galleries out of the rock, and covered
every portion of them with pictures and inscriptions. The “Golden Hall” was the
name given to the cubical room in which Belzoni found the empty alabaster
sarcophagus of the great king, now preserved in Sir John Soane’s Museum, London.
The walls of a side chamber, where there is the picture of a cow, are covered
with mythological texts of value and great importance,* and a rough-hewn corridor
at the end of the tomb proves that the deceased king proposed to extend it still
farther; a few of the pictures even remain unfinished; they are lightly outlined
with red, and the boldness and decision with which they are sketched excite our
admiration to this day.

The tomb of Menephtah (No. 8), the Pharaoh of the Exodus and the grandson
of Seti I., is rich in inscriptions of great interest; but it was never finished, and is
unfortunately much injured by travellers, who are in the habit of making pic-nics
there.

The tomb of Rameses III. (No. 11), the builder of Medinet Haboo, is commonly
known as the tomb of the harp-player, from a picture preserved in it. Its pictorial
decorations are uncommonly rich, but cannot be compared as to style and finish
with those of the tomb of Seti. A peculiarity of this sepulchre is the arrangement


‘ «Ta Litanie du Soleil.” 4to. 1875.

* Referring to the destruction of mankind by the gods, and the subsequent creation of the human race by Hero. The
hieroglyphic texts and their translation have been published by M. Naville in Zhe Transactions of the Society of Biblical
Archeology, Vol. IV., p. 1.


THEBES. 301


of eight chambers adjoining a large hall. One of these was dedicated by this the
wealthiest of the Pharaohs to the gods of the harvest, of blessing, and of the
inundation; another, in which the king’s weapons are represented, is like an
armoury, and a third is of particular interest in the history of civilisation and the
industrial arts, for in it are representations of the furniture and domestic utensils
of Rameses III., such as vessels and baskets, metal and cabinet work, among
which we see elegant and costly
seats. These pictures of objects
relating to the earthly life of the
deceased sovereign are quite unique
in Biban el-Mulook, which was dedi-
cated so exclusively to the dead;
and they show us how hard the
wealthy Rhampsinitus found it to
part from his worldly possessions.
There is a very famous tomb
which was constructed for Rameses
VI, of the XXth dynasty, and
which the English, for no reason
but that they follow the example
of the Romans, designate as the
grave of Memnon. A multitude
of mystical pictures cover its walls,
and even the ceiling in the “golden
hall” is covered with astronomical
signs." Names and mottoes, scrib-
bled in both Koptic and Greek,
make us acquainted with many
admirers of this tomb who visited
it even in the first century of the
Christian era. Among the pictures


—which are, however, much debased
in style—the most interesting are
those which refer to the punish-
ment of the wicked. The picture
of a boat out of which an ape is
dragging a pig has given rise to the name, bestowed by the French, of the
“Tomb of metempsychosis”; and it does in fact offer a picture of the condemned
soul which, metamorphosed into the unclean swine, is driven out of the company of
the blessed by the dog-headed ape, the animal sacred to Thoth, whose duty it is
to supervise the weighing of hearts.

We must leave the tombs of the XXth dynasty, and even those of the XVIIIth


A SHEPHERD AT KARNAK,


1 The rising of the stars during the hours of the night, described by Lepsius in his “ Kinleitung,” s, 203. The
heaven was supposed to be in shape of a female, and the stars to rise on the places corresponding to the eyes, ears, and


other parts of her body.


302 HG:
dynasty, in the western branch of the Biban-el-Mulook, unvisited, I regret to say,
as well as the smaller tombs of the queens, and those lately discovered of the high+
priests. of Amon, who expelled the Ramesside sovereigns from the throne and
governed Egypt as an independent dynasty, the XXIst.' Their names are to be met
with at Karnak, and particularly in the temple of Khunsu, begun by Rameses IV.
and finished by his sons and g
they may have done, but Herr Brugsch discovered at Abydos an important monument,


randsons. History is silent as to any famous deeds


from which we learn that the kingdom, weakened and impoverished under their
rule, fell a prey to an Assyrian king called Nimrod. Very possibly this event put an
end to the sacerdotal rule, and it may have been the exiled kings of the Ramesside
family who invited the assistance of the Asiatic foe. At any rate, the crown fell
into the hands of the Assyrians, for the founder of the XXIInd dynasty, which made
its residence at Bubastis in the Delta, was a son of Nimrod, who died in Egypt.
This prince, Sheshenk, who accustomed himself and his followers to Egyptian manners,
and who appears to have governed it quite independently of his Asiatic fatherland,
is the Shishak of the Bible, who assisted Jeroboam against Rehoboam the son of
Solomon, invading the kingdom of Judah and besieging and capturing Jerusalem.
The names of the petty kingdoms overthrown by Shishak—among which we find
that of Judah—were engraved by command of Shishak on the south wall of a


building (3) adjoining the pylon opening westward from the great hypostyle of
the Temple of Karnak. Amon gives his enemies into his hand, and he holds
them by the hair of their heads, that he has collected into a bunch in his grasp.
This building contains other pictures and inscriptions of the same date, and
Sheshenk also built the two colonnades (c¢ d and e f) to the south and north
of the first great fore-court (VI.) at Karnak. His house reigned over Egypt for
174 years.

Internal dissensions would seem at last to have wrought the ruin of the
Bubastide dynasty, and it was only a few decades after their fall when the
enfeebled kingdom of the Pharaohs—in whose northern provinces Semitic princes
still continue to rule—fell a prey to the Ethiopians, who had for a long time
appropriated to themselves much of the culture of Egypt in their southern home
and in Napata their capital. They also added to the splendour of the national
sanctuary at Thebes.

The tall caliciform pillars in the first court (VI.g), which border the great
causeway leading from the western pylon (VI.) to the great hypostyle—and many
of which are fallen—bear the name of Taharka, the last of the Ethiopian kings
of the XXVth dynasty, but they were probably erected before his time.’


‘ The discovery of the mummies and coffins of the kings of the XXIst Dynasty at the Deyr el Bahree, or Deir
el Bahari, is quite recent. Amongst those discovered were the Queen Netem-mut, wife of Herhor, in a gilded coffin ; the
coffins and mummy of Pinotem, high priest of Amen Ra; the coffins and mummies of Makara and her baby ; the mummy
of Pinotem II.; the mummy and coffins of Pinotem III., grandson of Herhor; coffins and mummy of Masharuta, son of
Pinotem II., the same of a Queen Hathorhantaui, and those of the Queen Hes-em-hib
1000 B.c.


all living from about 1100 to


Very doubtful, no Assyrian king named Nimrod having been identified either in the Assyrian or Babylonian lists.
* The vicissitudes of Tirhakah, and his conflicts with the Assyrians, are found in the annals of Esarhaddon and Assur-


hanipal or Sardanapalus. Absolute chronology begins with Tirhaka, B.c. 738.


THEBES. 303


The growing power of Assyria soon absorbed the vassal kingdom, which was
thus lost to the Ethiopians, and they kept possession of it until Psammeticus I.
formed a league with twelve other governors of provinces, and, with the aid of Greek
and Karian mercenaries, succeeded in throwing off the Asiatic yoke; he then
governed liberated Egypt as Pharaoh in Sais, his native town and capital. I have
already made my readers acquainted with the revival of the arts which took place
under him and his successors. We find evidence of this in the small temple to the
north of the great sanctuary of Karnak. Under Psammeticus IIL, the son of the
great and wise Amasis, Kgypt fell into the hands of the Per ans, and their king,
Cambyses," who has been most unjustly accused of being the destroyer of the great
temple; the worst injuries it has received—besides those from earthquakes, floods,
and Christian bigotry—were inflicted by the Macedonians, who, however, erected
many buildings in Thebes, as the northernmost portion of Medinet Haboo (VII.), the
little Temple of Dayr el Medeinet, and the Temple of Ape-t, as it is called, dedicated
to Osiris, in the great temple of Karnak, where it adjoins the Temple of Khunsu.
This building was formerly used by Mariette Pacha as a museum, and the great hall,
filled with mummy-cases, stele, and statues, has a very picturesque appearance.
The granite holy of holies (I.) was rebuilt under Philip Arridzeus, the feeble suc-
cessor of Alexander the Great. The proplyon in front of the Temple of Khunsu
is worthy of remark, and the additions to the high gateway of the hypostyle (h),
due to the Lagides, are of fine proportions.

When the inhabitants of Thebes revolted against thé Macedonian yoke—as
Révillout has lately discovered that they did—and for nineteen years withstood the
kings in Alexandria, under native Egyptian princes, and when again, at a later
period, a new revolution broke out in the city of Amon under Ptolemy Lathyrus,
the Macedonians ruthlessly attacked the rebellious city, which could not forget the
traditions of its supremacy; and many a temple-wall behind which the insurgents
had intrenched themselves, many a gateway, and many a column, was overthrown.

Under the Roman emperors little was done for the ancient capital of the mightiest


sovereigns of the world, now reduced to the condition of a provincial city ; and when
Christianity was introduced into the valley of the Nile many of the rock-tombs became
the cells of recluses, many venerable monuments and noble statues were reduced to
ruins as being the works of the heathen, and many temple-halls transformed into
Christian churches.

Under Islam Thebes has lost its position as a city. Shepherds feed their
flocks where palaces once stood, and the inhabitants of the villages that have sprung
up amongst its ruins have so little respect for the remains of antiquity that they
burn the finest fragments in their lime-kilns, cut up statues, pillars, and columns, into
mill-stones, and build their huts with the finely-hewn blocks. But in spite of this vast
process of destruction, which has been carried on for centuries, there is not in the
world a ruined site which can compare with Thebes in grandeur. If we go to the top
of the great pylon to the west of Karnak (VII.), and look down and round on the
vast sanctuary and the buildings that surround it, we are irresistibly reminded of
the words put by Homer into the mouth of the indignant Achilles. The son of


1 B.C. 527.


nn


304 EGYPT.


Peleus declares that he will never again meet or join in counsel or deed with
the Atrides. :
© “Tn circuit of Egyptian Thebes, where much hid treasure lies,


Whose walls contain an hundred ports.! of so admired a size,


Two hundred chariots may a-front with horse and chariot pass.”’*


The hundred gates, it is true are overthrown, but a great number of pylons have
remained, and highest of them all is this one from which we survey the whole sanctuary
of Karnak in its entirety. It is enclosed by a circumscribing wall of bricks of Nile
mud. Five gateways, each possessing a pylon, lead to the interior. The two southern
gates were connected with the temple of Luksor by rows of sphinxes, and a cause-
way bordered by sphinxes led from the western door of our vantage-ground towards the
quay and steps by the Nile, where the processions embarked in festal barges when
they had to cross the river to the Nekropolis. The vast forecourt lies at our feet ;
colonnades shut it in to the east and west, and in the middle a few yet remain of
the gigantic columns which bordered its central pathway, and which in former times
perhaps were overshadowed by a velarium, or awning. We look through the high
gateway of the second pylon in the most spacious hypostyle ever planned, and on the
most ancient part of the temple, with its obelisks—some still erect, more fallen—its
polygonal columns and pillars, with statues of Osiris, on to the granite chamber forming
the holy of holies. To the south stand more pylons, and the sun is mirrored in the
sacred lake of Amon. If we turn our eyes towards the west we still see smaller
temples outside the enclosing wall. Never to be forgotten is the picture of this gigantic
structure, whether by daylight with its sparkling and shining granite, or by moonlight,
when the doubtful light exaggerates the outlines, when the statues and pillars cast
blacker shadows, and the mysterious spell of the night adds its charm to the stu-
pendous scene.


1 Gates. » Chapman’s translation of the “Tliad.”


VOYAGE TO THE NEKROPOLIS,


FROM ‘THEBES


—————_>23 > +


HUT OF A FELLAH, WITH ROOF OF POTS.


TO THE CATARACT.


IHEBES as a city has
vanished from the face
of the earth Not a
king’s palace, not a citi-
zen’s house, remains of
it; but the ruins of
the temple of Medamot,
which formerly apper-
tained to one of its suburbs, and
which lie at quite an hour's dis-
tance from Karnak, prove how far
northwards the roads and _ streets
of the “city of a hundred gates”
must have extended. The Nekro-
polis, particularly in later times, was
prolonged to the south. It is as
though it stretched out a long arm
towards Hermonthis, which may be
called the Versailles of Thebes, and
regarded as both predecessor and
heir of the city. We have allowed
ourselves to linger longer than we
originally intended over the marvels
of the city of Amon, but at last


the mooring rope is loosened which tied our dahabeeyeh to the bank by Luksor,
we wave our adieux to our Koptic friends Todros and Moharreb, who have
brought us a farewell offering of new wheat-bread and a few fine antiquities


306 EGYPT.


as tokens of remembrance; we return the salvo of muskets by which our good
friends of Luksor and the village of Abd-el-Kurnah do us such honour as
they can at our departure, and proceed on our voyage southwards up the
river, which has by this time become perceptibly narrower. On horseback
Hermonthis—or Erment—may be reached in two hours, but the journey by water
is much longer, in consequence of the windings of the river. Still, we reach it
before sundown. We. have soon wandered round the town and its little bazaar,
and next morning we ride to the ruins of the town which once was the proud
neighbour of Thebes. Beyond a few ancient columns and blocks of stone, there is
little now to be seen of the Temple of Menth, the sun and war god, with the
Mamisi by the side of it, and these have been described by former travellers, or


depicted—as in the accom-
panying cut—with pen or
pencil. About sixteen
years since an audacious
entrepreneur sacrilegiously
overthrew this venerable
sanctuary and used its
stones, all covered with
ancient sculptures, for the
foundations and walls of
one of the Viceroy’s sugar
factories. The name of the
place has, however, been
preserved—in Greek Her-
monthis, in old Egyptian
An Menth—easily recog-
nisable in the Arabic name
Erment. It is much to
be lamented that the pic-
tures should have perished
which decorated the Mamisi (v. page 229), and which represented the “Sun
of both worlds,” the wife of Menth, who, with the aid of various divinities
and in the presence of the famous Cleopatra, gave birth to the child Horus.
This event, attributed to the divine triad of Hermonthis, was a servile allusion
to the birth of Ceesarion, the son of Julius Cesar and Cleopatra;°* and another
picture of the finest workmanship showed the infant son of the greatest hero
and the most enchanting woman of their day nursed at the breast of his
divine foster-mother. I was not able to find the profile of Julius Cesar, which was
seen so lately as in 1871 by Baron yon Holler, on the front of a chest ; but
coins of the province of Hermonthis are well known which bear the sacred bull
of the war-god Menth rushing into battle head down and tail in air. Hermonthis,


TEMPLE OF HERMONTHIS.


1 Mentha, or Mentu, It is said of Rameses II, that his hand was firm on his chariot, like Mentha. This god, also
called Mentu-Ra, was a solar deity.


> Ra-ta-ta. * The first century B.c.


THEBES. B07


which at an earlier period belonged to Thebes, rose under the Lagides to be the
chief town of a district and the seat of a great revenue oftice.

The modern town
of Erment is at about
half an hour’s ride from
the scanty remains now
left of the ancient city.
In the villages we pass
through we often are
obliged to beat off the
woolly grey dogs, which
are very superior in
courage and beauty to
the fellah curs, and are
highly prized in Lower
Egypt both as house
dogs and as guardians
of the hearth and home.

Between Erment
and Esneh, which we


A DOG AT ERMENT,


soon reach as we sail

southwards, we pass the first narrows of the Nile. The swift current here passes
the foot of the Arabian hills, which force it against the overhanging cliffs of the
western shore, where we see the tomb of
the Sheykh Moosa. This spot was known
to the ancient Egyptians as Avwti, or the
two rocks, and the Arabs call it Gebeleyn,
meaning the two mountains.

Hsneh, one of the most important of
the Nile towns, lies on the left bank, and
on the right bank, a few miles farther
south, stands the village of el-Kab, with
the remains of the ancient town of Nek-
heb, from which it seems to have been
derived by a general migration of the in-
habitants after the final expulsion of the
Hyksos. This seems to be indicated by
the old Egyptian name, Sem, which was
first explained by Duemichen ; this, mean-
ing “the passage from one place to another,”
has become Esneh, and it probably refers
to the circumstance that the town was
situated under the old empire—as_ the
monuments inform us—on the eastern shore
of the Nile. However, any one who has


A BOY OF ESNEH,


308 EGYPT.


seen the tine hall of the temple at this place—of which unfortunately every other
portion is buried in rubbish—will easily understand that it -is quite possible
that the ancient Egyptians should have also called Esneh Ani, or the city of
columns. ‘The chief sanctuary of this temple was dedicated to the triad Khnum (or
Khnum Ra), Nebuu (one of the forms of Neith of Sais), and her son Kahi. The
Greeks called Esneh Latopolis, from the fish Latus, which. was held in particular
veneration here; it is represented on the coins of the province.’ Though this sacred
animal and the worship accorded to it are not in fact mentioned in the great hall
with columns, which is approached from the harbour through the town, this omission
need not surprise us, for the hall is only a small part of a great temple, the whole
of which is completely buried in sand, stones, and rubbish. The sanctuary and ad-
joining chambers, the courts and pylons—much indeed lies actually underneath the
streets of the modern town, and to restore the ruins to the light of day half of Esneh
would have to be destroyed. Even the hypostyle, which still exists, is buried up to
the capitals of the columns in earth and rubbish. The approach is through a narrow
closed alley belonging to the revenue collector of the district, and down a flight of steps
lighted from the gaps between the capitals of the outermost row of columns, we reach
the interior, which is perfectly uninjured, and we are amazed at the extent of this
solemn and grandiose hall, while we are charmed with the harmonious co-ordination
of the details, and admire the fertility of invention and indefatigable industry of the
sculptors who covered every inch of this vast space with pictures and inscriptions.
The architraves and roofs are supported on twenty-four columns, each of which is
above 38 feet in height and raised on a high plinth. The shafts have a particularly
slender and graceful effect, growing slightly thinner
towards the top, and they are covered all over with
inscriptions. All the capitals are different, but all
formed on the same type; a large flower-bell sur-
mounts the column, each decorated with some details
of plant-growth—as palm-branches, grapes, bunches
of dates, the severed stems of some water-plant, fungi
even, and the ribs and venation of leaves. Most of
these capitals vary in depth, and yet the eye is not
dissatisfied with the effect, for the annulets or fillets
at the top of the shafts, which seem to tie up the
leaves or branches, are all on the same level. The
architect who designed this temple—where now, as
the sun sinks, the level shafts of light throw long
shadows—well understood the indigenous art of his
native land, but he had, too, his eyes well open to
the works of the Greeks, who at that time
ruled in the Nile valley.

Thothmes III. had founded an earlier
temple at Esneh, but the fine hall I have


1 All these provincial coins of Egypt were struck in the reign


IN THE BAZAAR OF ESNEH. of Trajan, Hadrian, and the Antonines, a.D. 97—179.


peri ieea


{
i | " a |
lM ; )
Z é ‘ 2 4 . |
\ il ‘
i A a = =
HN, == 2 |
i == it
Hii


HALL OF ESNEH.


PILLARED


310 EG YPO.


just described was not begun till the middle of the Ptolemaic dominion, and was
finished by the Roman emperors. The inscription in the hypostyle of Esneh which
mentions the name of the Emperor Decius is the very last ever chiselled in hieroglyphics
on the wall of any Egyptian temple. The hieroglyphics which cover every part of the
pillared hall of Khnum-Ra are full of peculiar complications and flourishes, but they
will reward the attention of the student in many respects. Particularly noteworthy is
the calendar set forth on the inner wall of the front, which makes us acquainted with
all the festivals and processions held here and in the neighbouring towns in honour


MARKET IN ESNEH.


of the triad of Esneh. On the tenth day of the first month—Thot—the statue of the
goddess Nebuu—.e., the Neith of this district, whose name signifies “the universal,”
was veiled, and this custom reminds us of the inscription on the statue of Athene, or
Neith of Sais, which, according to Plutarch, ran as follows :—“I am all in all, and
my veil hath no mortal ever raised.” The figure of the Pharaoh catching birds by
throwing a net, which occurs in the sanctuary of Karnak, and in many other temples,
is repeated here. The calendar of festivals at Hdfoo teaches us what these pictures
mean, strange though they seem as a decoration for a sacred spot. The unclean fish
are symbolical of the hated foreign nations, and the captive birds are an allegorical
representation of evil spirits.

Crossing the market and bazaar of Esneh, we reach the quarter of the town where
the Ghawazee most do congregate, for since Saeed Pasha banished the whole class of singers


FROM THEBES TO THE CATARACT. 311


and dancers from Cairo to Esneh it has remained one of their favourite head-
quarters, though the curious traveller may see these girls exercising their art,
and hear the concomitant minstrelsy on the various native Oriental instruments,
at ta » <Sor. Bh eV © yy “147 a " j 7 7
Keneh, Luksor, and even among the ruins of Karnak, in strange association


VILLAGE DANCERS.


and contrast with the surrounding scene; indeed, opportunities of seeing them offer
in almost every village of Upper Egypt. Certainly the rhythmic movements and
measured tremblings, writhings, bendings, and gestures, of these dancers, with the
declamations of the singers, are ill adapted to a taste accustomed to other per-
formances, even when we see the most famous of these artistes, and these are


00


312 EGYPT.


certainly not to be met with at Esneh, nor in any other of the Nile towns—nowhere,
in fact, but in Cairo itself.

In that capital the performers who entertain parties of ladies and gentlemen
with singing and dancing are not merely Ghawazee, but members of an ancient
guild, to which the story-tellers also belong. Among them certain laws of the art
of singing have grown up,
which are hardly intelligible
to a European, and which


every singing-girl learns to
obey, whether she sings in
Keneh, Luksor, or Esneh.
And, indeed, the passionless
chant of irregular intervals,
though it is not beautiful


to our taste, is not devoid
of art. The voice is pro-
duced with a nasal intona-
tion, and the chant always
ends with a long cadence.


Even the performances of
the skilled artists that are
commonly educated among


the musicians of Cairo, on
the flute and clarionet, the
lute and the kanoon, appear
strange to our ears; but the
skill and accuracy with which
several of them play together
in unison excites the frank
admiration of connoisseurs.
The singing and dancing
gipsy-girls of the provinces,
with their smart clothes and
not too severe morals, who,
nevertheless, affect a special
BEERS ERA SISUS a) SESE purity of accent in their
Arabic when they sing and


recite, are quite excluded from the better classes of society ; while the singers who
form the highest class of musicians in the capital, if they are really distinguished
performers, are held in high esteem, and often make a rapid fortune. Here, as in
Europe, among these favoured mortals the women hold their own against the men in
number and estimation. The women, who are known as Awalim, or, in the singular,
Almeh—/e., a learned or instructed woman—hbegin their career in the house of some
great personage, and when the first bloom of their charms is faded, and they are
discarded by their master, they adopt his name, and remaining connected with him,


KARNAK,


or


UINS


F


THE


DANCE IN


314 EGYPT.


to a certain extent, as his clients, they sing in public with more or less profit. They are
in request at all festivities, particularly at weddings, and sing to the ladies in the
harems, or even to men, but then they are usually concealed behind a curtain
or a lattice. When they have a good reputation they are highly—nay, even extra-
vyagantly—paid ; frequently marry, and have the advantage of a man’s protection ;
and when the freshness and charm of their voice is worn out they retire into
private life, and end their days in comfort and peace. If they cannot rise to the
first rank they must be content to sing in cafés, and to live on the contributions
of the audience.

By far the most famous and respected of these singers within the last quarter
of a century was a remarkable woman who called herself Almas, or the diamond, and
whose portrait, as it was painted by a German artist named Lorie, we are here able
to put before the reader. I myself never heard the Almas, but my friend Gentz not
only heard her, but was allowed to draw her. According to this painter's account she
sangat a party at the house of a rich Cairene, hidden behind a curtain, and always
only a few verses at a time, and the more eager the sympathy and applause of her


turbaned audience the more impassioned was her singing. But I must give the reader
Gentz’s lively description in his own words :—“‘God send thee applause !’ cries one.
‘Sing again, enchanting nightingale !’ says another. ‘Sweet dove,’ exclaims a third,
‘charm us with your cooing a little longer!’ And really it seemed as if we were
listening to the cooing of doves, the fascinating notes of the nightingale, the caressing
songsters of the woods. Just as the nightingale pipes forth her melancholy song in
the silence of the night, every now and ag
passionate Almas would pause from time to time, apparently without any rule, but
quite conscious of the effect she was producing. Had she learnt it from the bulbul,


ain bursting out into louder melody, so the


or from the diamond her namesake, which will not sparkle under every light? When
she sang a song, which says, ‘I murmured and cooed, and lulled thee as a dove, but
thine ear was deaf to me, the feelings of the audience were so deeply ex-
cited that at the end of the song, which is particularly touching, they were all
sobbing with emotion. The agitation rose to its highest pitch when the singer de-
claimed the story of her life. When she was young and fair she met a Persian, a
physician, fell violently in love with him, and hoped to share the joys of affection by
a marriage with him; but the beautiful dream was dispelled.’ She parted from the
man she had so ardently loved, and became an Almeh. Even now the remembrance
of that time of first love fills her soul with anguish ; her unsatisfied longing and love
are the source of her inspired song.”

In the East, the land of lavish liberality, the golden harvest reaped by such
a singer is no less abundant than the applause she gains. A noble German
lady who was so fortunate as to hear Almas sing in a harem told me that the
ladies forming the audience vied with each other in pouring handfuls of gold
pieces, rings, and other trinkets, into her lap, and that she was paid quite
as much for an evening’s entertainment as Patti or Gerster. Even the male
singers have an outwardly prosperous lot, but it is only fora short time that
they can maintain themselves at the same level as their female competitors, for the
fully-developed voice of a man is far less pleasing in combination with the falsetto


[USICIANS


X


VILLAC


316


EGYPT.


tones of Arab music than the higher pitch of a woman’s. The clear voices of boys and


youths, on the contrary, are particularly charming, and their singing is often preferred


even to that of women.’

The gipsy girls, or Ghawazee, of
Esneh, who sing and dance gaily dressed
and ornamented with jewels of thin gold,
are satisfied with a more moderate remu-
neration. They do not hide behind a
curtain, and rarely succeed in gaining even
the approbation of their European hearers,
much less in charming them ; but their per-
formance is often by no means lacking in
feeling and expression. In many of their
dances they display an extraordinary sup-
pleness of body and limb, and their ges-
tures, which are not devoid of grace and


sentiment, reveal a fervour of passion,
which often rises to the verge of frenzy,
and then certainly far outsteps the limits
of the beautiful Among the minstrels
who accompany them I shall never forget


A swine. an old man at Luksor, who played the


rebabeh,


and who used his little instru-


ment with such skill and power that the Europeans in the audience would join
sincerely in the loud cries of “Y’a salam” of his Arab hearers. One merit is con-


spicuous even in the lowest grade of singers, male
and female, who lift up their voices to the accom-
panying clang of the darabukkah and hand-clapping,
even when their dancing can excite no sentiment
but utter disgust ; they keep perfect time, and give
themselves up entirely to the matter in hand. The
modern Hgyptians are, in their way, an extremely
musical people, as their ancestors were before them.
Eyen the labouring classes, and particularly the
sailors, sing at their work. Music accompanies every
pleasure they take part in, and even the recitations
of the story-tellers, round whom they love to gather
when the turmoil of the day is lulled to rest. These
performers, who also belong to the guild of singers,
are always to be found in front of the coffee-houses
in the evening. They sit on a low platform covered
with a carpet, and commonly two of them go about
together, carrying a rebabeh, the time-honoured ac-
companiment of the story-teller—a sort of violin


1 Attention has been called to the lavish rewards bestowed on singers by the early Khalifs.


A TILT, OR ROUNDABOUT.


FROM THEBES TO THE CATARAOT, 317


strung like a violoncello. The stories they tell change from time to time. At the
present day the heroic romances of Antar, Sayf e Yezen, and Aboo Zeyd, have almost
entirely supplanted the beautiful stories of Sheherezadeh., ,

I should like to invite the reader to come with me some warm starlight night,
and listen to these highly-coloured romances, or to accompany me beyond ‘the walls
of the city and see the bustle and throng of the annual fair which, just at the time
of year I write of, is held at Esneh—as’ at Cairo—in honour of the Prophet's birth-
day, and attracts all the
inhabitants to the scene of
the festival. The children
particularly are a delight-
ful sight, riding in the
swings and roundabouts—
but time is flying, and we
must not even wait to visit
the beautiful gardens that
enclose the Viceroy’s palace,
the bazaar, the Koptic
church, and the market-
place—for a fresh north
breeze is blowing, and early
to-morrow morning we hope
to visit the remains of the
ancient Nekheb, now e/-Kuad,
z.¢., the town, from which
Esneh seems to have been
an oft-shoot.

By daybreak next
morning we have reached
our destination ; we disem-
bark on the eastern shore,
and repair, in the first place,
to the ruins of the fort of
Nekheb, a mighty quad-
rangle enclosed by a wall which has no equal for solidity; each of its sides
measures 2,080 feet in length, and is more than 36 feet thick, so that many
chariots might drive abreast on the top of this wall, as on a broad dyke-road.
Behind it stood the temples that have now totally vanished, and probably also
the palaces of the king, protected from any attack, while thousands of citizens, at
any rate, could here find safety in case of danger. The bricks of which this gigantic
structure is composed have no stamp or inscription to tell us the date of its erec-
tion ; but the valley of el-Kab is full of ruins, from which we learn that the old


FELLAH BOY FROM EL-KAB,


‘ Known to the Greek as the city of Hileithyia, the Egyptian Nekheb being considered the Hileithyia or Lucina of
the Pantheon. She was the antithesis of Uat or Buto, as the Greeks called the goddess of the North. Nekheb was represented


by a vulture and ureus, wearing the white crown or the atef; The city was the capital of the Lalapolite nome.


318 EGYPT.


town of Nekheb existed in the time of the builders of the Pyramids, and was
famous as the city where the goddess of the south was worshipped whose name
it bore.”

A ride eastwards, to the Arabian hills, is full of interest both to the anti-
quarian and the mineralogist, for on no spot in the Nile Valley is there a
ereater variety of mineral forms, and a richer treasure in inscriptions is hardly
anywhere to be met with. These are to be found on the bare face of two rocky
hills, as well as in some small temple-buildings of high architectural merit ; and
in other places we meet with them in some very remarkable rock-tombs. The


FELLAHEEN AT MEALS.


cubical temple dedicated to the Moon-god Thoth by Rameses the Great is minute,
and not much bigger is the little desert-temple which was built at the time of
Thothmes IV. and his son Amenophis III. Here we again meet with the sixteen-
sided polygonal columns, decorated like those at Deyr el Bahree with the mask
of Hathor. It was not till the time of the Ptolemies that this ornament, after being
neglected for centuries, was once more adopted; we saw it at Dendera, where it
acquired fresh development in the Hathor capitals, as we may call them.
Between the little temple of the XVIIIth dynasty and the chapel of
Rameses II. two bare rocky mounds stand up from the midst of the waste, on
which hundreds of the contemporaries of the builders of the Pyramids have left
inscriptions more or less roughly executed. Of these, though sorely let and


1 In the reign of Amenophis I. El-Kab or Nekheb, like Kush or Aethiopia, was governed by a succession of princes.


FELLAH OF EL-KAB.


pp


820 EGYPT.


hindered by a violent storm of wind, I obtained some impressions ; and we learn
from them that even at that early period the service of the “white” or
“translucent” moon-goddess Nekheb attracted numerous pilgrims, who sacrificed
to her in the desert by the pale light she afforded them.

On our way back we glance at a rock-temple dedicated in honour of the same
divinity by Rameses III, and subsequently beautified by Ptolemy LX. (Physkon) ; and
we may visit the row of tombs facing the Nile which were made for the members—
male and female—of a great family who during peace served as priests and
priestesses of Nekheb, and as instructors and nurses to the Pharaohs, while in war
they distinguished themselves among the brave hosts who freed Egypt from the yoke
of the Hyksos. This is particularly related of the “chief of the ships”—admiral,
as we may say—Aahmes the son of Abna, who, under Aahmes IL. took part in
the siege of the Hyksos’ fortress of Abaris, and in the subsequent events of the war

of emancipation made him-


self so famous that, as I
have already mentioned, he
was honoured with special
distinctions." In the time
of his father Abna—as we
learn from the inscription on
his tomb—EKgypt was visited
by a severe famine, lasting
many years; and Heinrich
Brugsch has adduced weighty
reasons to prove that this


: period of dearth is to be

TOMB OF A SHBYEE: identified with the seven

years of famine of which

Joseph, the prudent son of Jacob, made such wise use for the advantage of the
Pharaoh.

In the other tombs of El-Kab, most of which belonged to the wealthy officials
related to the “Admiral” Aahmes, we find many interesting representations of
the private life of the Egyptians, and among the inscriptions which accompany
them we meet with the song—near a picture of a harvest—which the labourers
were wont to sing while the oxen were treading out the corn.” In this primitive
specimen of Hgyptian popular verse the same rhyme-like consonance is observable
which at a later period was adopted by the priestly poets to charm the ear of their
listeners.

A thing that strikes us in these tombs is the vast number of swine kept by
the priests of Nekheb, though from a very early date under the Pharaohs they were
abominated as the most unclean of all beasts. Herodotus, however, explains the
circumstance by informing us that pigs were sacrificed to Selene or Nekheb—the moon-
goddess—at the full moon. He does not mention the origin of this custom; but


‘ The inscription has been repeatedly translated by Egyptologists.


* “Tread, O ye oxen, the straw for yourselves, the corn for your master.”


FROM THEBES TO- THE


ATARACT. 321


the monuments inform us that the Egyptians believed that Seth-Typhon, in the
form of a wild boar, endeavoured to overcome and swallow the full moon, which is
exposed all by itself to the perils of an eclipse. The killing of the swine at the full
moon gave symbolic expression to the pious desire to injure the moon’s enemy, and
to support her against her antagonist.’

After the expulsion of the Hyksos, the worship of Nekheb-Selene underwent a
complete transformation ; for, like the sun-god Amon of Thebes, the moon-goddess
Nekheb had conducted the armies to freedom and victory, with the Pharaohs, who
had been brought up under her aegis, at their head. Amon thus acquired the
dignity of king of the gods, and Nekheb that of the goddess of victory, whom we
see soaring in the form of a vulture before the Pharaoh as he goes forth to battle
or performs any solemn ceremony; she protects the king
with her extended wings, and lends her aid to other mortals
also, but especially to women in those straits and times of
peril when they most need support. To the Greeks she was
known as Hileithyia. She is patron goddess of the south
country, as Buto is of the north; and just as Buto is identi-
fied with Isis, Nekheb is with
Hathor.

I hired a fellah and the
boys whose donkeys we rode
to assist me in my labours at
El-Kab, and it was very
amusing to see the light-
COIN OF DERENIKE, footed lads chasing the sheets


io


of paper that were carried
away by the wind. Before starting for Edfoo, I was obliged,
in spite of all I could say to the contrary, to accompany
the elder man to his home in order to see his son, who
was ill, and to cure him if possible. I found the family petits mth
squatting round a bowl, and eating its contents with their


[OROIOFOROOION ORO}


hands. The lad was half blind, and in order to cure him a coin had been tied
to his tarboosh with a thread, but as it hung it more often rested on his nose
than on his eye.

A voyage of a few hours brings us to Edfoo,? which is distant about thirteen
miles from El-Kab. It lies on the western bank of the Nile, surrounded by villages
and hamlets, and a rich and well-tilled champaign; but the eastern bank at this
point lies so high that it is rarely overflowed, excepting in a few spots, and so is
little cultivated. Here and there only do we see a green field, a village, or, close
to the shore, the dome of a sheykh’s tomb. From some distance off we catch sight
of the tall pylons of a magnificent temple, which we reach in a quarter of an hour
from the landing-place. Not very many years ago this famous sanctuary was almost


" Portions of the tombs at El-Kab’ are published in the “Description de l'Egypte.”


* The Hut of Egyptian inscriptions, Apollinopolis Magna of the Romans. It has not been published in the same
SY} I at Pp s ]


complete manner as Denderah and Abydos.


‘OOAda AO ATANAL


FROM THEBES TO THE CATARACT. 323


impenetrable, for the fellaheen had established themselves in its courts and_ halls,
and even on the roof, and sand and rubbish choked all the chambers and passages.
Mariette succeeded in obtaining the viceroy’s consent to his clearing it; and when
he had driven the sparrow’s brood out of the eagle’s abandoned nest, and settled
them anew in the plain of Edfoo, he accomplished the disinterment of the temple
of Horus so successfully, that at the present time it may be said to be the most
perfect, the best preserved, and the best cared-for building in the whole of Egypt.
Nay, it may be asserted, without any exaggeration, that if the priests of Hdfoo
could rise from their graves with all their sacred paraphernalia, once more to do
honour to the supplanted gods of the Nile valley, they would here find every
chamber, every crypt, and every step just as they left it 1,600 years ago. Without
replacing a single stone, the votaries of the divinity might march in solemn
procession and in the prescribed route throughout the sacred precincts which have
so long been desecrated; and should they have forgotten, during their long sleep,
the purpose and use of each chamber, the inscriptions, marvellously well preserved,
would inform all who could read the hieroglyphics, of the object to which each hall
and cabinet was devoted. As regards preservation, Edfoo is superior even to
Dendera, for there the outer portions of the temple have disappeared, all but one
propylon, and here no part has suffered any considerable injury.

The sanctuary of Edfoo was dedicated to the great god Horus, who overthrew
the evil principle Seth, or Typhon, for his father’s sake; and the town to which it
belonged was therefore called by the ancient Egyptians Hut, after the winged sun-
disc, or the city of the throne of Horus, or the city of the raising of Horus (to the
throne of his father Osiris), or sometimes the city of the piercing (¢ew)' of Typhon, in
the form of a river-horse. The Greeks compared Horus to their Apollo, the god of
light or the sun, and called the city of Horus Apollinopolis.

The great sanctuary in which we are now standing seems to have been founded
at a very early date; indeed, Ptah, the oldest of the gods, is said to have built it for
Ra. Kings of the XIIth Dynasty, as well as Thothmes III, took part in the
services carried on in it; the venerable structure was still intact at the time of the
Persian dominion, but under the first Ptolemies it had become necessary to erect a
new temple on the old site.

Euergetes I, the third of the Lagide kings, whose wife Berenice is frequently
named in conjunction with him, began the building in accordance with the plans of
one of the best Egyptian architects (a high priestly official, whose name, Imhotep-ur-
se-Ptah—Aisculapius the great, son of Ptah—has been preserved in an inscription.”
It is a mighty structure, which was not finished till 180 years later, under Ptolemy
Dionysius, or Auletes, the father of the famous Cleopatra, in the year 57 B.c. Huge


pylons stood at the entrance, facing those worshippers who approached the sanctuary,
decorated with the likeness of the Pharaoh as victor over his enemies, and having
in front of them obelisks and standard-poles, that have long since disappeared. The
visitor entering the bronze portals found himself in a vast peristyle (IV. in the plan),
surrounded on three sides by colonnades, and at the upper end of it rose a tall hypostyle


1 Tebu, meaning piercing, is the Koptie Atbo ; hence the Arabic Edfoo. * The great Aisculapius, son of Ptah.


324 EGYPT.


‘s which closed


(III)., into which no glimpse was possible, since wails connected the pille
in the peristyle in front. In this court, as its name tells us, sacrifices were offered,
and the image of the god and his sacred barque were displayed to the pious. The actual
temple-building is closely allied to that of Dendera as to the arrangement and deco-
ration of the rooms; only here at Edfoo, in the place of Hathor, who is ubiquitous
at Dendera above all other divinities, we find Horus, whose name is written with the
figure of the bird sacred to him—the sparrow-hawk. Innumerable representations
of this bird meet the eye, here in large images of granite, there in gaily-painted figures
of the god, and everywhere as a hieroglyphic sign; and it is impossible in this place,
above all others, to glance otherwise than kindly at these wide-winged and bold-eyed
hawks, which are common throughout Egypt, and
which we meet with every day sitting on the hollow
cornices that crown the colonnade of the great
courts, or wheeling round the towers of the lofty
entrance.

After passing through the hypostyle, which
at Hdfoo is the great fore-court, of which the roof
is supported by eighteen columns, we come to a
prosekos with twelve columns (I1.), which is called
the great banqueting-hall; thence we proceed
through the hall of sacrifice (2) and the central
hall of the “repose of the gods,” and reach the
sanctuary (1.), and the grand throne, which consi


of a huge block of porphyry, brought to Edfoo
during the Persian dominion by the native Egyptian
king who ruled in opposition to them—Nectanebos L.
It reminds us of the shrine, likewise hewn out
of one block, which, according to Herodotus, was


brought, under King Amasis, by 2,000 men from
EGYPTIAN SPARROW-HAWK. Elephantine to Sais, where it had to be erected
outside the temple. Among the rooms which


adjoin those here mentioned, there are many that are dedicated to separate


gods. In others certain ceremonies were to be performed; and in others, again,
the garments, vessels, and treasure of the temple were preserved. The inscriptions
in the laboratory and the little library are of the greatest scientific interest. The library
was full of papyrus and leather rolls, and it adjoined the front wall of the hypostyle
lying to the right of it ; in the corresponding chamber to the left the king was purified
by two priests with holy water and incense before he might enter the sacred interior of
the temple. As at Dendera, the roof was reached by a straight stair and by a spiral
flight of steps, and here, as there, not the smallest spot is bare of inscriptions and
pictures. Among these, the most worthy of mention are the account of the wars
of the gods, on the inner western side of the outer wall, which is finely con-
structed of fitted blocks of stone (VI.); the lists of districts—which have essen-
tially contributed to our knowledge of ancient Egyptian geography—and the
calendar of festivals.


FROM THEBES. TO THE CATARACT. 825


In the great inscription, which is devoted to a description of the wars of the gods,
it is minutely related how the god of Edfoo— here named Hor-Hut, went forth to
battle against Seth-Typhon, to fight for his father Ra Harmachis,' and how he
vanquished him in many battles in various
parts of Egypt—nay, even on the farthest
shore of the Mediterranean.

By the side of Ra, and second to
him, stands Thot, the incarnation of reason, SN aera
the Logos of a later period; he is his


counsellor, and he gives to each battle-field a new name, with some figurative sig-
nificance. The first battle was fought in the district of Edfoo ; at the beginning of
it Hor-Hut transformed himself into a winged sun-dise, and on his right side and
his left side the goddesses Nekheb of the south and Buto of the north, in the form
of the deadly Uraeus snakes, cling to him to help him. After Seth-Typhon had
been. completely overthrown by his wonderful antagonist, Ra commanded that, in
memory of the heroic deeds done by Horus in this form, and of his victory, the
winged sun-dise should be represented in all dwellings and cities where man worshipped
the gods, so as to
protect them against
the approach of evil.
Thoth fulfilled this
command, and so it
came to pass that
the winged sun-dise
is to be seen over
the entrance to every
holy place of anti-
quity in Egypt*—a
talisman against evil.
But it is not only
over the temple doors
that this symbol oc-
curs, but in many
other sacred spots—
as, for instance, on


sarcophagi, and on
Se erg es es the pediments of

tombstones—as a

charm against the foe of Horus the god of light, who conducts the dead to their new
life. Seth-Typhon was vanquished in the form of a river-horse, and this pachydermatous
monster was therefore held in special horror at Edfoo, where


besides the secondary gods


ulled the soul of Ra.
also Lefébure, “ Le Mythe Osivien.”


’ A long description of the Hut or winged dise is given in Brugsch, “ Dict. Geogr,” pp. 539-—40, where it is stated


ne earthly embodiment of Osiris, who ww:


' The sun-god here stands for Osiris, being h


tl
* Details of these events ave to be found in Naville, “ Textes relatifs au Mythe d’ Horu


that when above sanctuaries it signifies that these sanctuaries belong to Hor-Hut, Horus of Apollinopolis Magna,


826


HGYRT


of the cycle of Hor-Hut—Hathor, Horus, “the uniter of the land,” and Ahi, the god
of love, were especially worshipped. The calendar of festivities at Edfoo gives a very
exact account of the form of worship of these divinities, for they name every fee day,
indicate the route to be followed by the processions, and declare what the offerings


st


READING THE KORAN IN AN ANCIENT TEMPLE,


to be brought on each solemn occasion were to consist of. Besides bread, beer, wine,
cattle, and geese, which were the gifts laid on the altar on every occasion, Swine were to
be sacrificed here at the full moon, just as they were to Nekheb; and from the same
idea, on a certain festival an ass was slaughtered, as being an animal dear to Seth-
Typhon, the enemy of Horus.

We find frequent mention of the visits paid by the Hathor of Dendera to her
husband, the god of Edfoo, every year at the new moon, when the Nile began to rise ;
nay, we can point out the very door through which she made her entrance into the


FROM THEBES TO THE CATARACT. 327
sanctuary. One of the gods of Edfoo—* Horus, the uniter of the two countries’—
returned this visit once a year, at the new moon of the month of Pashons, accompanied
by his companion gods. All that took place on the occasion of the “beautiful festival
of the journey to Dendera” is minutely detailed in the calendar. The god was
to remain with Hathor for five days, and as “the brave annihilator of evil,” he was to
destroy everything in her province that was inimical to good. Music and song were
heard at this and many other festivals—indeed, on all joyful occasions; and we also learn
that it was sometimes the duty of the chief musician of the temple to play the harp


CORN-BARGE.


himself in honour of Hathor. On certain days the rolls of manuscript were opened; on
others herbs were gathered and eaten by the pious; and on others, again, certain solemni-
ties were performed, which had reference to the swelling of the Nile and the gathering
of the produce of the soil. What a splendid sight this noble building must have pre-
sented when, in accordance with an ancient ordinance, it was illuminated, much like the
great “lamp-burning ” by which the Saites turned night into day in honour of Neith !

It is hard to tear ourselves so soon from this magnificent temple, whose inex-
haustible abundance of inscriptions tempts us to months and years of study, and we
think once more with gratitude of Mariette’s labours and the liberality of the Khedive,
which combined to effect the disinterment of the temple of Edfoo, to drive out the
fellaheen who had taken up their abode in this venerable monument, and to settle


Ui,


GIPSY WOMAN OF GHAWAZEE.


FROM THEBES TO THE CATARACT. 329


them outside its precincts. Now the sacred places belong once more to the ancient
gods, who may perchance overhear the sheykhs, who not unfrequently recite the Koran
there to a circle of Moslem listeners,

The Nekropolis of Edfoo has not yet been discovered. It lay to the west of the
city, and the desert-sand, which entirely chokes and covers it, defies excavation. After
looking into the Mamisi? and the sacred spring by the side of the temple of Horus, we
make our way back to the Nile, where our dahabeeyeh awaits us close by a corn-barge
that carries a party of fellaheen and a wandering family of Ghawazee, with their
mother, a tall and handsome woman.

We shall be willing to break our farther progress southwards soon after we have
begun it, in order to spend a few days in following the ancient road across the desert
Redeseeyeh, on the eastern bank towards the Red Sea; for this we must mount the
camel of an Ababdeh, and on our way we can visit the small rock-temple erected by
Seti L, at the spot where he had caused a well to be dug for the refreshment of the
thirsty traveller. The most important of the inscriptions which decorate this structure
informs us of the successful accomplishment of this undertaking, and states that the
water flowed in as abundantly as in the “spring-caves” of Elephantine at the first
ataract. The Egyptian word, which has the meaning “ spring-cave,” is kert’, or kerker ;
hence the Koptie celcel, in which the Arabs supposed they had found their own
word silsileh, 2 chain. We shall ere long reach the Narrows, known to this day by the
process of corruption above indicated as Gebel Silsileh, or the Mountain of the Chain.
It is aremarkable spot, at a few miles south of Redeseeyeh, where the rocky shores of
the Nile close in so much that a legend has grown out of the meaning of the Arabian
name Silsileh, to the effect that in ancient times the passage could be barred by a chain
thrown across from one side to the other. The stream here rushes wildly and
tumultuously through the rocks that hem in its waters, and which, on both sides of the
river, consist of a handsome yellow fine-grained sandstone. Hitherto the heights that
coast the river have been of limestone or of chalk formation ; still, it has not escaped
our notice that in almost all the great temples those parts of the building which were
exposed to the air were constructed of sandstone, and not of limestone, and of sandstone
precisely similar to that which forms the eastern and western walls of the narrow
rapids at Gebel Silsileh. And if we walk along the Libyan shore, where we have
disembarked, and after looking round us, cross the swift and narrow stream, and mount
to the ridge of the hills on the Arabian shore, scrambling by the bad foot-path from
rock to rock, we shall soon be convinced that every block of sandstone which was
employed in building the highest temples ever raised—in a country, too, where there are
more temples than in any other part of the world—was hewn by the masons who obeyed
the mandates of the Pharaohs out of these yellow hills, which now have the appearance
of the empty husks of innumerable pomegranates, out of which pips without end have
already been picked, while an inexhaustible supply still remains. The open halls and


galleries are of vast extent, and in the smooth walls the traces of the mason’s chisel
are still to be seen where, with wonderful skill, he separated the blocks from the living
rock. The surfaces from which the slabs were divided are as smooth and level as
sed the secret of softening the stubborn rock ;


if in those primitive days man had poss


* Place where the birth of the god is represented.


EGYPT.


THE NILE TABLETS AT GEBEL SILSILEH.


and yet we find none but bronze tools, none at all of iron or steel—possibly, indeed,
because these have perished more easily in the course of centuries than those of pure
copper, or of copper alloyed with zine.


THE NARROWEST PART OF THE KIVER AT GEBEL SILSILEH.


FROM THEBES TO THE CATARACT. 383


The city to which these quarries anciently belonged was called Khennu, or the
“place of passage,” and the town and harbour, in which barques innumerable must
have been crowded, lay on the eastern shore. On the western bank, near to smaller
Latomize, was the Nekropolis, with a few rock-tombs and several buildings dedicated to
the service of the gods ; for the narrow pass was regarded as the gate through which the
Nile (which at Khennu—now Silsileh—was called the “pure or sacred water”) entered
Egypt proper from Nubia, and so it happened that here solemn worship was paid to the
Divine Nile, and sacrifices in abundance were laid upon his altars. Close to the western
margin of the stream, we find to this day three remarkable tablets with inscriptions, in
which different Pharaohs caused hymns in praise of the Nile to be incised, and which
differ little from each other in form and substance. The stele erected by Rameses II.
and his son Menephtah I. are particularly well preserved. They are framed, as it were,
with sculptured pilasters, and have at the top a hollow ogee cornice, in the middle of
which the sun-dise spreads its wings. The hymn, which is almost identical in all, is
full of poetic glow and power. ‘The sacred stream is invoked as the Father of the gods,
as the Abundance, Blessing, and Benefactor of Egypt. Anana, the greatest poet, next to
Pentaur, of the Ramesseum, thought this fine hymn worthy to serve as the basis of a
new hymn which is preserved in a papyrus roll.’ Besides the enjoyment of its poetical
contents, it has yielded very important data as to the periods of the rise and fall of
the Nile in early times.

Farther to the north, and near the top of the cliff, a remarkable rock-chapel
invites the attention alike of the antiquarian and of the unlearned visitor; of
the former by its numerous, and not unimportant, inscriptions of various periods,
in both hieroglyphic and demotic character; of the latter by the beautiful
pictures in relief, representing the king, Horus (Horemheb), returning from his
victories in the south on a throne-like litter, borne on the shoulders of twelve nobles
of the realm.


On landing at Gebel Silsileh we found the bank, which in former times must have
swarmed with labourers, boatmen, priests, and pilgrims, absolutely deserted. At last,
however, a woman made her appearance near the quarries on the Arabian side, tempted
forth by the sight of our flag from afar—a fellah woman; and presently two ragged men,
whose type of countenance bore no trace of the true Egyptian. These were people of
the Begah tribe—Ababdeh Arabs, of those families who have given up their nomad life
in the desert, have settled in Egypt, and now speak bad Arabic instead of the language
of their own people (the To Bedeeyaweeyeh). We had already met with these tamed
children of the Desert and of Nature at Redeseeyeh, divested of all their genuine
character. Those who want to see them in their original wild freedom must seek them
in the desert, which is their home, and there we meet with a remnant of human life
which recalls the days when our race lived in closer intimacy with Nature, and enjoyed
all the delights of which idyllic poets sing, and which could only flourish undisturbed
where man, in his narrow experience, asks little more than the daily necessaries of
life. The Begah race—of which I am now speaking—has but a meagre share even of
these, for the mountains and valleys, and the strip of shore lying between the Nile and


1 A translation of these inscriptions is given in the “ Records of the Past,” Vol. IV., p. 107; and Maspéro, “Hymne au
Nil,” 1868.


FELLAH WOMAN.


FROM THEBES TO THE CATARACT. 333


the Red Sea, where they dwell, all lie within the hottest and most arid district of the
Arabian Desert. This poverty-stricken land is nevertheless well worthy of more
thorough investigation, and G. Schweinfurth has
recently travelled through it several times; but
the best description of it is that given by Dr.
Klunzinger, who lived for six years at Koseyr, on


the Red Sea, busily occupied as a physician and
naturalist. In the following meagre account of
this remarkable district I have incorporated a
great deal derived from the treasures of infor-
mation which this amiable and learned gentleman
put at my disposal, many of his notes being as
yet unpublished.

The range of hills enclosing the Nile valley
to the east were known as early as the time of
Herodotus as the “Arabian mountains,” and the
backbone, so to speak, of the great ridge that
composes them consists of primitive rock, granite,
syenite, porphyry, diorite, micaceous schist, and
others of lighter or darker hues. To the south this
ridge is connected with the highlands of Abyssinia ;
to the east it is separated from the mountain mass
of Sinai and the Arabian peninsula by the vast
fissure which is now filled by the Red Sea. This rocky chain has been tossed and
rent by Nature into a number of mountain ridges difficult to distinguish and
identify, and intersected by a labyrinth of long and often deeply-cut valleys, crossing


ACACIA OF THE DESERT.


(Acacia Sey


each other in the most confused manner. Here and
there it shoots up in dome-shaped or boldly-jagged
peaks, a few of which reach a height of more than
6,000 feet. It is full of natural beauties, of pictu-
resque mountain scenery, and stupendous cliffs of the
most gorgeous colours, intersected with veins of every
hue. The splendour of the rocks displays itself,
unveiled by any clothing of soil, and bare of every
vegetable growth or deposit; here in soft and graceful
forms, there in wild and bold ones, and everywhere
in its original mould. But it is not absolutely devoid
of all the charm of organic life, for from time to time


—rarely, indeed, and in most cases only once a year,
CLELIE: in the winter months—dark storm-clouds gather round

the heads of the mountains, and soon the rain

pours down with such violence on the hill country that it seems as if all the
collected vapours of the year were being restored to the earth in one tremendous
torrent. The brooks and cascades that tumble down the rifts and crevices in
the mountains collect in the valleys, the streams form a regular system of little


|
|
|
|
|
|


334 EGYPT.


rivers, and at last gathering in one main valley, the flood rolls on either slowly
and majestically, or vehemently, ruining all it meets with on its way, till it
loses itself in the Red Sea or the Nile—according to the direction it has taken,
east or west, as it fell from the water-shed. But the triumph of the waters is brief in
the desert, and within a few days after the sluices of heaven have been opened, after a
y valley, the


torrent has foamed down every gorge, and a river danced through eve
desert is as dry and as arid as before. But the beneficent element .has waked the
slumbering germs of vegetable life; by every rivulet and declivity millions of green
things are sprouting, and the soil of the valley is alive with growing herbs. Shrubs and
trees even, as acacias and Marh (Leptadenia) tamarisks, forming whole groves, and all
the biennial and perennial plants, acknowledge by the fresh green of their branches and
shoots how deeply they feel refreshed. Ere long, in the fresh breath of the spring—


>


from January to March—loyely flowers unfold their gems of yellow and rose, tempting
out the gay butterflies, wild bees, and wasps that flutter round them, and the beetles,
lizards, and ants that creep among them. ‘The skin of the gazelle and antelope grows
brighter at this season, as does that of their cruellest foe the wild cat of the desert.
All the natural wells and tanks are full; here and there a brook still trickles,
or a tiny cascade is dying, drop by drop, where a few weeks since a mighty cata-
ract came roaring down. Now is the time to rejoice in spring in the desert, to
go forth into the still valleys of the free and open wilderness, and to drink in
that glorious pure air which is peculiar to the desert, and to be met with nowhere
else on earth. The citizens, and the villagers too, love to hold their spring festival
on Easter Monday in some desert valley—Shimm-en-neseem they call it, or air-breathing,
for soon—too soon—the scorching breath of the simoom will blow, the shrubs and


herbs will dry up into thorny hay, and only the brushwood and trees will remain
to give any sign of life.

Light-coloured stratified rocks of marine origin, and mostly of a calcareous
nature, have been deposited above the crystalline formation of primitive rock on
the east, west, and north. Thus, the whole western margin of the Arabian Desert,
which falls precipitously towards the Nile in almost every part, presents the aspect
of an elevated limestone plateau all the way from Cairo to Gebel Sisileh, where,
as I have said, sandstone hems in the river, and on to Assouan, the southernmost
town of Egypt, where the primitive rock comes down to the shore. This high plain,
for the most part, exactly resembles the eastern portion of the great Desert of
Sahara, and it may indeed be regarded as a continuation of this desert, interrupted
by the valley of the Nile. These spring torrents of rain are, however, peculiar to
it, and almost unknown in the Libyan waste. Where the eastern declivity of the
Arabian range slopes down to the shore of the Red Sea, light-coloured stratified
rocks lie over and between the black primary formation. These hills rise in long
ridges, belonging partly to the upper cretaceous series, but partly, too, to the more
recent deposits of the Red Sea, which once covered this range, but has gradually
receded, in consequence of the upheaval of the land. This is proved by the vast
quantity of fossils found in this formation, all of recent forms, such as still exist in
the Red Sea; it is probably the decomposition of these organisms that has converted
the more recent strata of these deposits into gypsum.


RED SEA,


THE


THE COAST OF


ON


27


FROM THEBES TO THE GCATARACT. 335


The Arabian Desert is almost everywhere unavailable for any purposes of
extensive commerce. It igs arid, barren, and pathless; and thus it is that only the
most recent maps reproduce the features of this district with any approach to
accuracy, close as it lies to the fertile shores of the Nile. In parts the range is
intersected by steep transverse gorges running east and west—here coalescing to
form a wider valley, leading from the Nile to the Red Sea, and there a defile, hemmed
in by a not insurmountable pass; and here it was that at a very early date the
traffic—frequently spoken of in these pages—between the Nile Valley and the sea,
and thence with Arabia and India, first flourished, and grew to be a by no means
insignificant commerce. Several such high roads might be mentioned as existing
in Upper Egypt.

There is also a road which for the most part follows the ridge of the mountain
range from Cairo to Koseyr, and even farther south. Under Mohammed Ali there


Nag


Wt
R AB

Hes s i Af :
CEN (AGIAN a


1 i]
(ae eae


TRANSPORT OF A COLOSSUS, FROM A TOMR AT EL BERSHEH,


still existed on this road a postal service, now long since given up, and the men
on dromedaries who served on the line travelled from Koseyr to the capital in no
more than eight days.

The oldest and most famous of all these highways is that which led from Koptos
to the Red Sea, through the valley now known as the Wadee Hammamat, and called
by the ancient Egyptians Rohanu. It was a busy high-road, not alone for trading
caravans, but from time to time for stonemasons and soldiers, whose task it was to
hew the costly building materials from the hard rocks, which here abound, and to
prepare the vast monoliths which were finished im situ, and then to convey them all to
the residence of the Pharaohs. A remarkably beautiful kind of alabaster, of a fine
honey yellow or white as snow, is found in these mountains. This was quarried in the


* The most important were—and to a certain extent are still—the road leading from Esneh or Edfoo to the old sea-
port of Berenice and ancient Mohammedan town of Aydab, and those starting from Kuft (Koptos), Koos, or Keneh, on the
Nile, and ending at Koseyr, the Leukos Limen of the ancients. A road also runs from Keneh in a north-easterly direction
to Safageh and Gimsheh, near to which it is probable that the sites of the Ptolemaic ports of Philoteras and Myos Hormos
must be sought for.

Ky


CAMEL RIDER.


FROM THEBES TO THE CATARACT. 3387


Mons Alabastrites of the ancients, to the east ot Sioot, and applied to various works
of art; and from the Mons Porphyrites of the ancients—Gebel Dukhan, probably —

fine red porphyry, justly prized by the Greeks and Romans, was procured. In ee
quarries, in times of persecution, many unflinching Christians expiated their constancy
by torments, sufferings, and death. The ancient Egyptians themselves particularly
valued the saeco diorite and dioritic breccia which a ‘op out here, and of which
sarcophagi, statues, sphinxes, and other works of art were made
on the spot. In the Valley of Rohanu, near which this business
seems to have been especially active, we find numerous inscrip-
tions incised, with more or less skill, in the rocks by the way-side,
and recording for the benefit of posterity what works they were
that were executed here, and for which Pharaoh ; under which
particular official, by whom—as especialky selected for the task
and in how long a time. The most ancient of these memorials
are of the period of the end of the Vth and beginning of the
ViIth Dynasty, and the latest are of the Roman period. No
quarries with any regular establishment of labourers ever existed
in Wadee Hammamat; but when a particularly fine and durable block was required
for some very special purpose, an expedition was sent out commissioned to select it,
to hew it, and to transport it to the Nile. The transport of these masses is one
of the achievements of Egyptian labour which we find it most difficult to conceive
of as feasible, when we reflect that it involved conv eying the most stupendous weights
over mountain and valley, without the aid even of camels. The stret igth of men—and
of men alone—was available to move the mighty mass, and it was employed with lavish


THE CAMEL AND.ITS DOUBLE,


and reckless prodigality. Provisions for the overseers and labourers were carried
into the desert on ox-carts or men’s shoulders, as we learn from a picture already
spoken of in a tomb in El Bersheh, representing the transport of a colossus; this picture
we now put before the reader. In the Valley of Rohanu we find a long Teor to the
same effect, incised in a rock in hieroglyphies by an official under Rameses IV. A
troop of 8,365 men were sent forth, under an unlucky star, by the successor to the
great founder of Medeenet Haboo, to bring durable stone to Thebes for the magnificent
structures founded by him, but either never completed, or now altogether vanished
from the face of the earth. There were 5,000 soldiers, 2,000 serving-men, the labourers
to drag and push the sleds on which the blocks were loaded, and 800 H ebrews, whom
we must suppose were prisoners of war condemned to forced labour; these formed the
nucleus of the Surin. which was conducted by high civil and military officials, and
was accompanied by fifty drivers, each conducting a cart drawn by six yoke of oxen,
and by a large number of swift-footed bearers, who had to supply the labourers with
provisions. Highly-skilled Eg
130 masons; and as the dying gladiator greeted the Roman emperor with a joyful
salutation, so the captains of this host of labourers address the Pharaoh in words of
solemn gratulation in these inscriptions, although they are forced to admit that 900
of their host—that is, more than one man in every ten—have fallen victims to the


yptian artists accompanied this train, among which were


‘ These quarries were first opened in the reign of Claudius, a.p. 41—54.


DESERT.


AN


<


g OF THE


on


=


FROM THEBES TO THE CATARACT. 339


journey through this wilderness.!. Even in our own days an equally numerous army of
labourers would scarcely fare better in this waste if it relied on oxen, and not on camels,
for its supplies of food and drink, To Leopold Karl Muller, one of our most experienced
Orientalists, the camel seems so absolutely inseparable from the people who make use of
it that he even fancies
he has discovered a
certain resemblance of
affinity between them,
and he has reproduced
this in a picturesque
and comical manner.
The fact, nevertheless,
remains that the in-
habitants of the Nile
Valley, at the time of
the Pharaohs, never
used the camel, which
now seems so indis-
pensable an element
in their life. And yet
there were stronger
temptations than those
already mentioned to
attract the caravans
of Egypt into the
Arabian ‘Desert; for
what loadstone has
ever proved so power-
ful to prompt the en-
terprise of splendour-
loving despots as gold
and precious stones ?
and in ancient times
both were to be found
in the range between
the Nile and the Red
Sea: the latter in the
famous emerald mines
between Koptos and Berenice, which Cailliaud thinks he re-discovered at the foot of
Gebel Sabara, at four days’ march south of Koseyr, though he only found here a
little fine serpentine and heliotrope. Gold was procured from gold mines, of
which numerous accounts have been handed down to us from both early and
later antiquity. They are mentioned in hieroglyphic inscriptions; a papyrus at


AN ABABDEH ARAB.


1 This interesting inscription will be found translated in Brugsch’s “ History of Egypt under the Pharaohs,” Vol. II.,” 168—170.


340 EGYPT.


Turin’ contains the most ancient of all known maps, which represents the neigh-
bourhood of the gold mines as near the sea, and in a very characteristic projection ;
while the Greek Agatharchides, who flourished in the earlier half of the second
century before Christ, gives a graphic and heart-rending picture of the dismal fate
of the convicts who were condemned to work in
these mines.

These have, perhaps, been re-discovered at
Gebel Olaki, in the Wadee Lekhooma, near Berenice;
at any rate, there are there some
abandoned and perfectly exhausted


gold mines, which were still worked in
the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries
of our era, under the Mamlook Sultans.
As soon as Mohammed Ali heard of
the re-discovery of these ancient work-
ings, he sent one European savant after
another — Cailliaud, Belzoni, Figari,
Linant—to endeavour to discover pre-
cious metals, or at any rate coals,
somewhere in his dominions ; and even
under the Khedive Ismail, Wadee
Hammamat was diligently searched for
coal not many years since. <A private
company did actually for some time
procure sulphur from the limestone
coast near Gimsheh, and also obtained
petroleum from Gebel-ez-Zeyt (the oil
mountain) ; but all these attempts and
undertakings have met with shipwreck
in modern times, partly from the
slender yield of the different openings,
partly from the difficulty of keeping
the labourers supplied with food and
drink, and of transporting the produce obtained. Throughout the
southern portion of the Arabian range, which is habitable by reason
of its larger supply of water, we find traces of former traffic,
such as highways, wells, tanks, and ancient mines, and the remains of the
desert stations already mentioned as established by the Pharaohs, and which, at
the present day, are called by the Egyptians Wekkalat en nusard, “ Caravanserais


ON THE BANK OF THE NILE,


of the Christians.” The small stone fortifications, or towers, which Klunzinger
met with high up on mountain ridges, and more particularly in spots where


? Published by Lepsius, ‘‘ Auswahl Taf ;” and, subsequently, Chabas “Les Mines d’Or.” These mines were worked in the
days of Seti I. and Rameses IL, about B.c. 1320. The translation of the inscriptions relating to them at Redeseeyeh, has


alr


dy been pointed out, as in the “Records of the Past.” Other inscriptions relating to them have also been published by
Cailliaud, “Le Voyage & l’Oasis de Thebes,” 1822-1824.


FROM THEBES TO THE CATARACT. 341


roads divide or cross, he supposes may have served as guide-posts, watch-towers, or
signal-stations.

1 . ye ames : é :

; The population now living in the desert is very thinly scattered ; its hamlets
consist of perhaps one permanent dwelling, with two or three—or at most six—tents


GOING TO FETCH WATER,


or wretched huts, and only one real village is to be seen on the road from Keneh
to Koseyr, called Lakeytah. The tribe of Makaseh, now consisting of not more
than 3,000 souls, wander restlessly about among the mountains of the northern part
of the range; they are of Semitic blood, and nearly allied to the Bedaween of the
Sinaitic peninsula. The district in which they live in family groups ends—towards


342 EG YeeEn:


the south, at the latitude of Gimsheh. The Ababdeh, the nomadic tribe which
occupies the more southern district of the eastern desert as far down as the Tropic
of Cancer, are at least ten times more numerous. They are of totally different origin,
and are rightly included among the Nubio-Ethiopian tribes, to which the Begah
also belong who are distributed. over the mountain belt of Nubia and towards
Abyssinia, between the Nile and the Red Sea. The Bisharee and Hadendoah are
distinguished among the Begah tribes by their well-made, though rather lean, figures,
and by a refinement and regularity of features, so that, in spite of their very dark
skins and their elaborately dressed hair, they are among the finest of the human
race. Their hair they either twist into artificial curls or allow to hang down in
small tight plaits. These are the descendants of the Blemmyes, who are described
by Greek writers as being the next neighbours of the Egyptians to the south, and
who are most frequently spoken of in connection with their sudden and bloody raids
on the frontier districts. In the middle ages—nay, even at the beginning of this
century—it was dangerous to traverse the strip of desert occupied by them, but they
are now the most peaceable of mortals, and even a solitary traveller or foreigner
may wander among them without peril to life or property. It was Mohammed Ali
who tamed them, by forcing their chiefs and sheykhs to settle in the valley of the
Nile, and by holding them responsible in life and estate for the good conduct of
their tribe. Their wants are few, and they are gentle and abstemious; they only
seek a spot of pasture-land in the desert for their little flocks of sheep and ill-fed
camels, and they solace their leisure by performing sham fights and war dances with
swords and shields to the thin and feeble melody of a flute. Their modest existence
is a true desert idyll, which might inspire a poet’s verse if only the pangs of hunger
could be overlooked which they and their lean kine are condemned to suffer, and
which make their inhospitality—a rare defect in nomadic tribes
sin. Their huts, built of laths covered with ragged cloths, their cave-dwellings, and
their household goods, are to the last degree wretched, and equally miserable is the
pittance they earn as camel-drivers and hangers-on to caravans, or by dealing in
the meagre produce of their country, such as herbage for fodder, camels’ dung, water,
gums, and wood, which they sometimes burn to make charcoal. Those among them
who live in the vicinity of the Red Sea, like their forefathers the Ichthyophagi, live
on the fish and other creatures that the waves may throw up on the shore, for they
never venture out to sea to catch them.


a very pardonable


The Ababdeh, whom we meet at the quarries of Gebel Silsileh, stare in mild
astonishment at our operations, and escort us back to the dahabeeyeh that is wait-
ing to carry us farther southwards.

As we go on, the shore on each side of us gets yellower still, and more and
more deserted ; the men and women who are working the water-wheels grow darker
in colour and scantier of clothing, the villag
farther apart. Everything that meets the eye now is Nubian, and no longer Egyptian.


and palm-groves are smaller and


The noonday sun is scorchingly hot; out there on a sand-bank two crocodiles lie
motionless ; and as the sun sinks in the west the glowing hues of the evening sky
no longer tinge the tall pigeon-houses of Upper Egypt, and we look in vain for the
fellah-women coming down to the river in long files to fetch water, for the stream


— —


FROM THEBES TO THE CATARACT. 343


is either hemmed in on both sides by bare rocks, where white patches of sand
shine in the fissures like snow-fields, or these are divided from the shore by stretches
of desert, interspersed with small patches of arable land.

Long do we gaze at the glories of the flaming west, but now, looking eastward,
we catch sight of an ancient temple high up ona_ bare
cliff, and bathed in the glow of the departing sun; then
night falls, and the dahabeeyeh comes to an anchor among
overthrown blocks and pillars, over which the water rushes
and tumbles. The sanctuary above us, which now looks
down through the unbroken silence of the night, lighted by
the dim white rays of a crescent moon, and looking like coe ee ts imaiige, Ton
some ghostly stronghold, is the famous Temple of Wubi,
the Egyptian “city of gold,” from which name, in the form of Unbi, came the
Greek Omboi and Ombos. The Arabs call this abandoned sanctuary Kom Omboo,
or the ruin-heap of Omboo; but of the populous city which once belonged to it
they know nothing, for it long since fell a prey to two mighty enemies—the
desert sand and the current. Not a stone, not a trace of a foundation wall is
left ; nothing but the temple, with its inscriptions, remains to bear witness of its
former existence. And the two insidious foes which have destroyed the abodes


BANK OF THE NILE AT KOM OMBOO.


Z
<4
S
RQ
nD
<4


OF


PORT


FROM THEBES TO THE CATARACT. 345


of man will, sooner or later, not spare the temple of the gods. In a few centuries
the Temple of Kom Omboo will have ceased to exist; for while the sand of the desert
fills up its halls and chambers more and more, the stream carvies away the front, piece
by piece ; it has swallowed up the adjoining buildings, and threatens to undermine the
cliff on which it stands. When Duemichen stood once in the mild and tender moonlight
of a Nubian night at Kom Omboo, these were the words he wrote in his diary :—
“This splendid temple on the height looked to. me like a magnificent sarcophagus ready
for its interment ; the moon and the stars were the lights on the bier, and the figures
of the gods and kings on the walls stood like a solemn mourning train on the pale and
ghostly light. The river rushing at the foot of the cliff was the open grave destined
to receive it, and the dash and roar of the waters its funeral lament.”

Soon after sunrise we disembark, and even at this distance the singular arrange-
ment and architecture of this sanctuary is a conspicuous feature. It was founded by
Thothmes IIL,* finished by Rameses III.,2 and rebuilt under the Ptolemaic kings.? It
may be divided longitudinally into two quite distinct parts. We see two gates
instead of only one on the side facing the Nile, and over each of these the characteristic
hollow cornice, decorated with the winged sun-disc. The back part of this double
temple is also in two divisions, and each terminates in a sanctuary corresponding to
the gateways. This disposition of the plan of the Temple of Kom Omboo is sufficient
to suggest that two independent divinities were worshipped here; and this was, in
fact, the case, for one-half of it was dedicated, as the inscriptions tell us, to the great
Horus (Zar-uwr; in Greek, Arueris), and the other half to Seth-Typhon, who was
worshipped here in the form of a crocodile, or of the crocodile-headed Sebek. The
latter ruled in the darkness, and Horus ruled in the light. Horus and Seth were called
the hostile brothers, who, after their reconciliation by Thoth, were established side by
side—and not at Kom Omboo only—as personifying the double power of the gods and
kings alike to reward and to punish, to set up and to put down. The district of Nubi,
like that of the Fayoom, was regarded as Typhonic, because a form of Seth was
worshipped there with the crocodile, which was sacred to him, and it was often omitted
in the religious portion of the lists of districts.

The capitals of the columns of Kom Omboo are richly decorated with foliage
ornaments, and the astronomical ceiling paintings in the hypostyle are particularly
worthy of observation; they have been left unfinished, and it can still be seen how
the small design was copied and enlarged by the aid of squaring out the surface.
A very remarkable alteration is perceptible in the proportions of the figures adopted
during the whole of the New Empire. Here’ we find the human figure no longer
divided into eighteen parts but, as Lepsius has found, agreeing with the data given
by Diodorus, into twenty-one parts and a quarter, from the sole of the foot to the
top of the forehead. Greek influences are visible in many parts of the decoration of
this temple; nay, in the architrave of the back wall of the first prosekos we find a
Greek inscription in fine bold uncial letters, which “the foot-soldiers, horsemen, and
others stationed in the province of Omboo caused to be incised for the god Arueris, the


1 About B.c. 1503. ? Bo. 1200.
® By Ptolemy V., Epiphanes, 204 to 181 3.c., till Ptolemy XIII, Neos Dionysos (81


in Kom Omboo is called Tryphena.


51), and his wife Cleopatra, who


846 EGYPT.


great Apollo, and the gods worshipped with him, in consequence of their goodwill
towards them in honour of the royal Ptolemaic couple”* (Auletes and Cleopatra
Tryphzena). The pylon, which was erected by Tiberius Cesar,’ has long been over-
thrown ; the bases of a few columns in the fore-court were dug out in 1873. Besides
these, nothing remains of the exterior of this fine double temple, excepting a portion
of the outer wall in burnt bricks, in which there is a window ; this never has been met
with in the enclosing wall of any other temple.

As we proceed on our journey southwards, we are tempted to think that in this
region Seth has won a long-enduring victory over Horus, and that some mysterious
power here forbids the beneficent river to open the stores of
its mercies. How arid and sandy are its shores, how few and
far between its villages! The eye wearies of the intense yellow
of the plains, from which, at noon, some very fiend seems to
have chased every vision of shade. A soft air bears us slowly
up the stream that rushes to the sea, and night falls once more
before we can reach Assouan, the city of the cataracts, and
the frontier town of Egypt; but when we wake next morning
we find that the dahabeeyeh is moored to the quay of this
river-port. We hurry out of our cabin, and as we glance on
the scene around us, we seem to have been transported by magic into
a perfectly new world, and abandon ourselves unreservedly to surprise,
admiration, and delight. The Nile here looks as if it had come to a sudden
end, and the dahabeeyeh is lying in a land-locked lake of beautiful outline.
Exactly opposite, the rocks and cliffs rise from the water, piled one upon.
the other. These, like all the rocks in this neighbourhood, are of a shining
reddish-brown, for we are here in the harbour of the ancient town of
Syene, the native land of syenite, and in the very heart of the great dyke
of granite which protrudes from the Arabian range westwards, as if on
purpose to check the course of the Nile. But the brave stream has
succeeded in breaking through its prison of primzeval rock at the first
cataract, of which we shall soon hear the roar. From the purple tone of th
rocks the fresh rich green stands out in lovely relief where the palms are just


ese


opening their huge sprays of flowers. Assouan, to our left, is surrounded by
palm-groves, which completely conceal the lower part of the town, but not the
grey houses of the higher quarter. From the eastern shore of the Nile, where the
town stands, and exactly opposite to us, a noble fragment of a wall—perhaps
the last vestige of a ruined bath-house of the time of the Byzantine Emperors or
of the first Khalifs—projects into the stream towards the island of Elephantine,
which—shaped, it is said, like an oleander-leaf—is brightly and refreshingly green with
fields, shrubs, and palm-trees. Behind this island the landscape to the west is closed
in by a ridge of hills belonging to the Libyan range, and crowned by a ruined Arab
castle. The dark-coloured walls of this ruin stand out in picturesque contrast against
the yellow sand of the desert, which makes us wonder what indeed this verdant valley


1 The inscription is given, Letronne, “ Recherches pour servir a l'Histoire del’Egypte,” 1823, p. 7. The above translation


is free. 2 av, 14-37.


FROM THEBES TO THE CATARACT. 347


would have been without the river which here enters Egypt after surmounting the
mighty barrier Nature has set to its flow at the first cataract. Assouan is, in fact, at
the very threshold of Egypt, and the Egyptian name Souwn seems admirably well-chosen,


BAZAAR IN ASSOUAN.


meaning, “allowing the entrance.” From this name Soun came the Greek Syene, and
then Assouan, from the Koptic Suan.’ In very early times the chief town of the
district to which it belonged stood on the island opposite, and was called, like it, Ad


1 Many foreign names beginning with a consonant have received the prefix of A in Arabic, to facilitate their pronun


ciation by the Arab tongue: thus, Sioot has become Asioot.


348 EGYPT.


the town of elephants, or of ivory, probably from the abundant supply of that material,
which was the most important article of commerce with the Soudan. Under the
reeks, who gave the beautiful island the still familiar name of EHlephantine, the
garrison town on the eastern shore of the Nile took precedence over that on the island,


HASHIM, A NATIVE OF ASSOUAN,


and in spite of the many attacks it suffered from the Blemmyes and their successors,
it continued a flourishing town, while that of Elephantine fell into decay. There is not
much to be seen now, it is true, of what was famous among the ancients as Suan—
Syene. The granite quarries, which I have so often mentioned, and which we will
presently visit, have lain unworked for centuries, for we know only too well how far it
lies from the idea of the Mohammedans to erect buildings for posterity. The vineyards,


FROM THEBES TO THE CATARACT. 349


which in the time of the Pharaohs produced the highly-esteemed wines of Suan, have
disappeared to the very last vine-stock, and the celebrated shadowless well of Syene
has shared the same fate. This well must have been
situated exactly under the tropic line, since no shadow
was cast there at noon; and this circumstance was
taken advantage of by Eratosthenes' (276 and 196 B.c.)
for the purpose of measuring the surface of the earth
by the method which is still pursued, and the accuracy
of his results can only be accounted for by the exacti-
tude with which the distances of the boundary-stones
on the northern and southern frontiers of each district
were measured, and registered in the books of the
Government or of the administrator of taxes. This
well, lying directly under the noon-day sun at the
summer solstice, would seem to have been very ancient
even in the time of Eratosthenes, for the supposition
seems well founded that so long ago as in 700 B..
the Egyptians had sunk the shaft to mark the time
when the northern margin of the sun at the solstice
stood exactly above Syene.*

Among the celebrated men who in former times
dwelt at Syene may be named Juvenal, the famous satirist, who was exiled as prefect
of this remote frontier city in order to remove him from Rome; but he was not
happy among the Egyptians, and lashed their superstitions and more particularly
their worship of animals in verses of cutting severity.
We find some lines which clearly prove how heavy the
poet’s heart was in his exile on the frontier of the
torrid zone. They run as follows :—


DANCING APE.


“ Mollissima corda
Humano generi dare se Natura fatetur
Que lacrymas dedit ; hee nostri pars optima sensus.”


(“Nature herself confesses to have given the tenderest hearts to the
human race, as she gave them tears; this is the best part of our faculties.’’)


At the present day Assouan, the successor of ancient
Syene, is not distinguished from the other cities of
the Nile by anything but the extraordinary variety of
its inhabitants. This strikes the eye the moment we
attempt to quit the dahabeeyeh, and go on shore—yes,
OCR NUBIAN SERVANT, MAWOMMED SALEM, attempt, for the boat is besieged by a perfect host of


' He was invited to Alexandria by Ptolemy Euergetes I.
2 Eratosthenes knew that on the longest day the sun casts no shadow at noon in Syene, while in Alexandria at the


same time the angle of the gnomon marked the fiftieth part of a circle. From this he inferred that the distance between
Alexandria and Syene was the fiftieth part of a meridian—7° 12’, According to the latest measurement the exact distance


is 7° 6° 30”,


N OFFICIAL.


UBIA


N


FROM THEBES TO THE CATARACT. 351


people, all striving to detain us, and direct our attention to the various wares they
display. Many offer ostrich-feathers and eggs, others ivory rings, and simple, but by no
means inelegant, bracelets, made of silver and gold, and manu-
factured in Nubia ;- others, again, the native arms of the Soudan, e
panther-skins, painted wooden bowls, and a great variety of fine
basket-work and mats. Even the strange petticoats, or aprons, of
the women of these provinces, made of strips of leather, arranged
to overlap each other, and form a thick fringe, are offered for sale
under the quaint name of “ Madama Nubia.” An Egyptian sailor is
making a trained ape, that he has brought from farther south, dance
to the sound of a tambourine ; while a dusky Bisharee, with nothing
on but his loin-cloth, tries to attract attention by performing a
war-dance, wriggling his hips, and flourishing his lance and shield,
a knife is fastened to his arm, with a number of amulets; and
some men from Dongola are eager to induce us to buy similar
talismans.

All the language of these Children of the Sun is perfectly
unintelligible to us, for most of them speak only one of the three
Nubian dialects, Kenoos, Mahas, or Dongolauee. The Berberines,
as they are called, whose native district may be regarded as THE GOD KENUK.
extending from about Kom Omboo to the fourth cataract, do not
learn Arabic till they have travelled to the
cities of Egypt proper —Cairo generally, or
Alexandria. Arabic is not used in Nubia
itself, nor understood except by the citizens,
by men who have travelled, or by the Shey-
geezeh, or other tribes of Arab race who
have wandered into Nubia. These Berberines
might be called the Savoyards of Egypt, for,
like those mountaineers, they frequently quit
their home in quite early youth to seek the
busy life of cities, whence, after earning what
they consider a sufficient sum, they return to
their native land. In Cairo and Alexandria
they are commonly met with as servants,
door-keepers, cooks, and coachmen. The little
Sais, whom I have already introduced to the
reader, and most of his fellows, are Berbers ;


for so long as they are young their lungs
and legs are more indefatigable even than
those of the native Egyptian boys. They
are, indeed, generally endowed with all the
gifts we most look for in a servant. Even
honesty is one of their attributes, and they
hang together so closely in their voluntary


COFFEE-HOUSE.
tt


EGYPT.


exile that, on the one hand, they always succeed in keeping black
flock, while, on the other, they are so ready to help and support each
officials of consideration, wealthy dragomans, restaurant keepers, and


belong to their race. In Assouan itself particularly t


are of quite equal importance among the well-to-do


sheep out of the


other that many
carriage owners,
he Arab and Nubian element

citizens; nay, most of the


principal merchants, who carry on an extensive trade in ostrich-feathers, ivory,


gums, senna-leaves, wax, tama-


ril
an


tir
to
tr¢


wl
sic


fit


ra.


al
sh


fo


E


NUBIAN BOY OF GOOD FAMILY,


ruinous


are of Nubian descent.


house


more
little creatures than this gentle-


man’s


ids, skins, horns, dried dates,
d other produce of the Soudan,
A. dis-
guished personage in the town,
had a letter of in-
took into the

Nubian merchant,


whom I
oduction, me
of


1ich, though plain enough out-


a


le, as is usual, was beautifully
ted and furnished within ; and


and graceful


bewitching


brown children I have


rely seen.


The streets and bazaars of


Assouan offer nothing remark-


We will pay them but a


ort visit, and then


yle.
take a boat


r the passage, of only a few


minutes’ leneth, to the island of


How lamentably
this site of the


ephantine.


is


former capital of the southern-


most Egypt! Here, where formerly s
mentioned on hundreds of monuments, we now find ¢
The beautiful


es of the


province of
a population of halfnaked Nubians.
god Khnum (with whom the goddess catarac
worshipped), which owed their foundation to Thothm
IIL, and which still few centuries since excited
are destroyed, all but a gateway of granite and a sta


a


materials have been used for a palace built at Assouai
the river-wall there are several blocks to be seen, covere


€


ood the of
x few wretched villages, with


streets 1 city


sanctuaries of the ram-headed


5, Sati and Anuke, were here
es the Great and Amenophis
the admiration of travellers,
ue of Osiris, and part of the
1 by Mohammed Ali. Even in


d with inscriptions, which have


been removed from venerable structures, and applied


o baser uses. A kinder fate


has, however, protected the ancient Nilometer, and Mahmood Bey, a skilful and


learned astronomer, educated in Europe, has been able
the Khedive.


to restore it, by command of


He set upa new standard of measurement by the side of the old one


of Pharaonic date, and restored the venerable monument to public utility, with its


fifty-three steps and eleven scales.


It stands on the west side of the island, opposite


FROM THEBES TO THE CATARACT. 353


the town of Assouan. At the time of the Pharaohs it was a good inundation when
the Nile rose to twenty-four ells and three inches by this standard.

All the remains of antiquity existing in this island do not repay the traveller
nearly so well as a walk to the southern declivity, covered as it is with rubbish and
ruins, for here we obtain a view of a landscape of indescribable wildness and quite
peculiar charm. A perfect labyrinth of granite crags is opened out at our feet, and
among them the Nile, dividing into a hundred arms, here rushes in a tumultuous torrent,
and there, hemmed in by a barrier of rocks, calmly mirrors the sun. A soft roar falls


MAUSOLEUM IN THE DESERT NEAR ASSOUAN.


on the ear, reminding us of the old time when men believed that at this spot the
Egyptian Nile took its rise from two caverns, while its cradle in the far south was to
remain a mystery unsolved by mortals, until it was revealed to him by Isis at the
twelfth gate of the nether world. Magnificent festivals, lasting for seven days, were
held on the island of Elephantine, in honour of the beneficent river, and Greek
historians record that on these occasions two bowls, one of gold and one of silver,
representing, perhaps, the sun and the moon, were flung into the roaring waters. The
Pharaohs were wont to assist at these solemnities, and among the names recorded
in an inscription on the rocks south of Elephantine as having been present on such
an occasion we find those of Rameses the Great, with his favourite children, his son
Khamus, and his daughter Bent-Anat.

As yet, however, we have not seen the cataract itself. In order to reach it we
must return to Assouan, hire some good asses, which we wait for in front of the most
modest of cafés, and ride through the town into the open country. On our way we


354 ’ EGYPT.


are met by men who offer the native pottery for sale; and I must allow that the clay
vases and pipe-bowls made here are very little inferior in elegance to those of Sioot
and Keneh. Just outside the palm-groves, which surround the city, we will dismount,
in order to visit a small temple which lies a little off the road to the left. This was
founded by Euergetes I.’ the third of the Ptolemies, and dedicated to the goddess
Tsis-Sothis, who was venerated as the lady of the dog-star, Sirius, which was to the
ancient Egyptians so important an element in reckoning time. She also was often
worshipped as Sati, “the sender,” or “swift-shooter ” (sending the Nile as the hunter


SHED OBELISK.


sends the arrow). After this we soon leave behind us the city and the buildings on
the outskirts—one of which is the country-house of a wealthy Hebrew—with the palm-
eroves that give the landscape its smiling and verdurous aspect, for the Abyssinian
asses are swift and spirited. A new picture now opens before our eyes: the desert
lies all round us, broken only by bare granite rocks and tombs, on which the sand lies
like a yellow shroud. The thousands who sleep here are not ancient Egyptians, but
Moslems, many of whom lived within the first centuries of the spread of Islam in
Egypt, and whose survivors decorated their graves with tombstones which perpetuate
their names to later generations.

The oldest of these tablets bear inscriptions in a venerable Kufic character, and
date from the ninth and tenth centuries of our era. Texts from the Koran may be read
on many of them, which is a singular circumstance, for the prophet desired that such
texts should not be inscribed on tombs. Parallel to this vast burial-place, along the


1 B.0. 247,


FROM THEBES TO THE CATARACT. 355


middle of it, and in the heights which divide the Nile from the desert, stands a row
of more or less handsome mausoleums and tomb-mosques, dating, for the most part,
from the time of the Mamelook Sultans. Although they are ill-kept and falling
into ruins, they are a great ornament to the landscape, and bear witness to the
flourishing condition of Assouan under the dominion of the Khalifs. Many of them


ARYSSINIAN.


remind us of the graves of the Mamelooks in the vicinity of Cairo; and the
cemetery of Assouan is not much inferior in extent to the Karafeh at the foot of the
citadel, in the capital of the Khedive.

Before proceeding any farther on our ride southwards, we will diverge to the
east, and visit the quarries, which were worked with equal perseverance by the
Pharaohs who built the Pyramids, by the exterminators of the Hyksos, by the


356 EGYPT.


Ramessides, the Saites, the Ptolemies, and the Roman emperors. The granite found
here derived its name of syenite from Syene, the ancient name of Assouan, and was
already called so by Pliny; but, strangely enough, modern mineralogists give the
name to a quite different mineral, in consequence—as I am informed by my friend Herr
Zirkel—of a curious error on the part of the mineralogist Werner, who thought he had
found in the rocks of a formation near Dresden all the characteristics of the granite
of Assouan, and so called it syenite. The rock from the Saxon capital was consequently
regarded as typical syenite, until it was proved by Wad that the rock occurring at
Assouan is not syenite at all in that sense, since its properties are wholly unlike those


MOSQUE-TOMB NEAR ASSOUAN.


of the rocks of the Dresden formation. When Rozitre found a similar mineral on
Mount Sinai, he suggested the adoption of the name sinaite, instead of syenite, which
it resembles in sound; but this designation has never come into vogue.

Even to this day we find in the old granite quarries very remarkable traces of
the industry and skill of the masons who wrought for the Pharaohs—here a huge
block, there an obelisk with three sides hewn out. Both remain attached to the
living rock by the nether side, and afford a proof that the ancient Egyptians executed
these granite monuments in the quarry itself. How admirable must the skill have
been which enabled these handicraftsmen to disengage the gigantic mass of stone,
so laboriously wrought, from the granite wall of which it had formed an integral part !

In these quarries—which, on the whole, are much less imposing and grand than
those of Turrah and Gebel Silsileh, because the granite has all been hewn from the
face of the rock —I sought for a long time up and down, and could not discover
a single instance of a fractured block hanging unfinished in its place as witness of


FROM THEBES TO THE CATARACT. 307


any failure in the process of quarrying; on the contrary, the economy with which the
blocks were squared out 7m sitw excites our utmost admiration. On the upper surface
of one block, of which three sides are ready hewn, it is easy to detect the exact outlines
traced by the master mason, and which seem to indicate that it was destined to form
a roof slab and two uprights or traverses; and where the three portions were to be
separated holes have been drilled, as it would seem, with a gimlet or gouge, in a
straight line across the block. Were these for the introduction of wet wedges? Was
it by this means that obelisks even were riven from the rock? or was fire employed
for this purpose ?

On our farther ride to Philae we are met by a party of Nubian men and women,
riding on camels, and a
few Abyssinians, bring-
ing asses to sell at As-
souan. The road is
sandy, and much used.
The asses and camels
tread with such accu-
racy in the footsteps of
their predecessors that
long ruts are formed
side by side along the
road, like deep grooves
made by a wide heavy
wheel.

The surrounding
scene is wilder and


gloomier at every step,
for cliffs rise up on


IN THE DESERT BETWEEN ASSOUAN AND PHILAE.


each side of us, many

of which have a sort of vitreous brown lustre, as if burnt by the sun, while others
are dismal and black. But even here traces of human activity are not wanting,
for we come upon inscriptions innumerable left by travellers, pilgrims, princes setting
out or returning home, warriors, and grandees of every date of Egyptian antiquity,
hastily engraved for the most part in the hard rock on each side—invocations to a
god, or memorials to posterity of how far their travels had extended.

Now the tomb-mosques in the range of hills have disappeared, though the
hills still part us from the stream, but a new object of human workmanship attracts
our attention: a high, strong wall, breached in several places, and built of bricks
of Nile mud; this, which we first see on our left, twice crosses the road, and only
ends close to the shore, opposite Philae. It is many, many hundred years old,


though Strabo, who travelled to Philae in his carriage, and by a better road than
that on which we are now ambling along, makes no mention of it. The object
with which it was erected is unknown; some think it was built to protect the
Egyptian frontier against the raids of the robber tribes of the Blemmyes and Nobates,
and some suppose it was a frontier limit for tolls and duties. Burckhardt was told


“LOVUV.LYO


FROM THEBES TO THE CATARACT. 359


that it formed the bank of an artificial canal, by means of which water was con-
veyed from the Nile to the plain of Syene; and the natives, knowing no names of
pre-Islamite rulers but those of Pharaoh, Alexander the Great, and Cleopatra, have
told other travellers a wonderful fable of how Cleopatra dwelt at Syene, sent her
son to school at Philae, and built this wall to protect the road her darling must
travel by from wild bea


In ancient times, certainly, there can have been no
lack of wild beasts in this region; and they have given rise to another no less
absurd legend that the Pharaohs drove many criminals into the desert, there to
be devoured by lions and their fierce companions, and that this mysterious wall was
erected to bar their return.

Wilder, drearier, and more utterly deserted at every yard, we advance farther
into the desert; the midday sun pours down with fierce heat on the dark rocks


NUBIAN SWIMMING ON A RUNDLE OF REEDS.


by the roadside, the fiery wind drives burning sand in our faces, and man and
beast long for water. Weary and thirsty, presently we turn the angle of a rock
that seems to bar the road, and lo! before us stands a clump of sycamores; their
leafy crowns cast a broad shade, while waving palms cluster round a neat house, the
residence of the Austrian Missionary Society. The waters of the Nile are shining
before us, so enclosed by mountains as to look like a lake, with the loveliest of
all islands—Philae, the templed isle of Isis—mirrored in their surface. A com-
fortable boat is by the bank; merry boys, clothed less than scantily, as brown and
shining as bronze, and as lithe as “troutlets in a pool,” take the oars, and sing as
they ply them, and in a few minutes we land on the beautiful spot where I once
passed several memorable and indescribably delightful weeks.

The cataract is now behind us; until now it has been hidden by the hills
which border the road all the way to Philae; and now, before we give our atten-
tion to the Temple of Isis, we will visit the rapids. The route usually followed by
travellers is to turn off to the west, about half-way down the desert-path by which


uu


360 EGYPT.


we rode to Philae, thus coming out close to the rapids, on which the proud name of
cataract is most undeservedly bestowed. The falls of the Nile are not like those
of the Rhine at Schaffhausen, where the river flings itself from a high ledge into an
abyss; the course of the Nile is broken here by a vast accumulation of granite
boulders, and the waters rush in divided torrents, eddying and roaring through the
rocky chasms. The swift flood in many places is dashed back from the stubborn
stone, and tossed into spray with a thundering blow; and though the ancient
legends of the deafness of the dwellers by the cataract, who lost the sense of hearing
from the noise and tumult of the waters, are mere myths, the voice of the torrent
as it forces its way through the Biban-esh-Shellal (the Gate of the Rapids) is no

= gentle one. Yet it does not drown the
: shouts and songs of the Nubians, who,
when the water is low, collect in hundreds,
pulling, shoving, heaving, hauling, to get a
large Nile boat over the cataract; nor is
the noise of the waters so loud as to over-
power the cries of “bakhsheesh” shouted
at us by the half-naked boys and men


who come swimming through the rapids,
some astride on logs or on sheaves of
canes, while others trust to their own
strength and agility. This feat of strength
should never be attempted by any Euro-
pean. Mr. D. Cave, a promising young
traveller, lost his life in doing so, and his
body—which now rests in the Koptic ceme-
tery at Assouan—lay for eight days in
the guilty waters before it was thrown on
shore. I myself made a rash attempt to


shoot the rapids in a small boat, and I ex-
tract the following description from a letter
written a few hours after, when it was still


WANDERING HUCKSTER.


fresh in my mind. “TI had on board two of our own boatmen, besides an experienced
sailor and a half-grown Nubian lad. An old Re’ees, used to the cataract, took the
tiller. Behind the village of Shellal we could hear the roar of the waters, which
grew louder every instant. The rocks and boulders in the river are of a reddish-
brown, but in spots where they are constantly wetted by the torrents, and rapidly
dried by the fiery sun of these latitudes, the surface shines like the black mirror
of a muddy pool, or, as Robert Hartmann s the polished surface of a well-worn


S)


smoothing-iron.* Before, behind, all round, above, and below, I saw nothing but


rocks, little pools, and the wide blue sky; my ears seemed filled with the spell of
roaring waters, and as the boat approached the rapids this rose to dull thunder,


enamelled surface on granite was also observed by A. von Humboldt at the cataracts of the Orinoco. According


ver, it is caused by an oxide of iron; according to Delesse, by a siliceous deposit from the waters of the Nile on


the face of the stone.


‘AVTIHI


aNV


NVL


362 EGYPT.
like that of surf on a rocky shore. Here the men had a few minutes of tremendous
effort, while they cheered and encouraged each other by constant appeals for help
to their saints, particularly to the holy Seyyid el-Bedawee, who is regarded as the
rescuer of those in imminent peril. At every stroke of the oar they shouted “ya
Seyyid!” or “ya Mohammed!” and the poor creatures at the ropes dared not pause
a moment, for we must surmount the strength of the mid-current, or be dashed to
pieces against the rocks. The Re’ees who guided the boat was a sinewy man of
about sixty; as long as we were in any danger he kept his brown neck at full
stretch, and he looked like an eagle watching his prey, with his keen eye keeping a
sharp look-out, and his lean aquiline features. All went well at first, but on the
left side there were only a man and a boy to row, and on the right two men. Just as
we passed the second fall, and had to turn into a fresh channel, though the sailors on
the left pulled with all their might, their strength was insufficient, and the current
gave the boat such a lurch that it turned stern foremost. This was the crowning triumph
of the passage for the Re’ees, who never for an instant lost his presence of mind, but,
holding on to the tiller with his foot, helped the weaker oarsman with his hands, turned
the boat round again, steered us into the right channel, and then down the lower and


>


tab


calmer reach of the river as far as Assouan. The whole passage lasted forty-two
minutes.”

The two villages on the eastern shore of the rapids, and in which the cataract
boatmen live—Shellal and Mahudah—are wonderfully pretty, lying among palms,
sycamores, and green shrubbery, which stand out in charming contrast from the red-
brown rocks and cliffs; and in and near the Nile numbers of dahabeeyehs and Nile
boats here lie ready for travellers who have come to the cataracts by land, and now
gage to the south by boat. The
neat houses, too, in these villages, and the huge heaps of dried dates which le by
the landing-place, prove that the natives of the district know how to take advantage of
their favourable position. They are not so far advanced as to have a bazaar of their
own, but I bought of a wandering huckster at Mahudah, who dealt in the greatest
variety of wares, a tinder-box, on which was the familiar name of a town in Thuringia


wish to be conveyed in person or to send on their lug


and a picture of Prince Bismarck !

The islands of the cataract lying between Assouan and Philae are some of them
most picturesque in structure and appearance, and offer a rich field for historical
inquiry in the numerous inscriptions which cover the walls of rock. The two
largest are Sheyl and Konosso; the former is particularly remarkable by the immense
variety in the colour and form of the rocks, and the abundance of incised inscriptions
we find on them; but on Konosso also many governors of the Ethiopian provinces,
the princes of Kush, and other high personages have immortalised their names. It
was called the “Island of Libation ”—Aebh—probably with reference to the river,
which the divinity here seemed to pour forth like wine from a sacrificial vessel, and
it was dedicated, like the other islands, to the divinities of the cataract, Khnum,
Ankeh, and Sati. It was in their service that the pilgrims whose names we find cut
in the cliffs were wont to visit these rocks, and climb up them—an undertaking which,
as I can testify, is not one of the pleasures of lite, particularly under the noon-
tide sun.


THE KIOSK ON THE ISLAND OF PHILAE,


FROM THEBES TO THE CATARACT. 363


Let us now turn our back on the whirling rapids and the scorching rocks, and
visit that loveliest of islands, the often but never sufficiently praised Philae.


PHILAE,


I once for some weeks set up house in the peristyle of the Temple of Isis, which
is quite secluded, being enclosed on every side. With the help of some boatmen and
Saleh we pitched our tent on the shady side of this beautiful court, contrived a
kitchen and larder for ourselves in one of the
temple chambers on the rez-de-chaussée, and estab-
lished a small commerce with the natives of the
island of Bigeh, on the western side, who supplied
us with milk, eggs, and fowls. The moon grew
to fulness, and began to wane again during our
stay, and the silent nights which it was our
happiness to spend in this wonderful and lovely
spot were full of unutterable delight.

What is it that gives this island the
charm which no one ever disputes? Is it the
splendid buildings which stand on its soil? Is
it the wreath of delicious verdure that decks its
shore, and which made that illustrious landscape-
gardener Prince Pickler Muskau long to turn
Philae into a park? Is it the sparkling, laughing,
dashing waters of the river, that has rescued and enclosed it from the desert, and that
dances round its shores? Is it the jagged crown of granite peaks and boulders which
form its rampart on the northern side, or the smiling plain which turns its face to the
south? Is it the glorious blue sky of this rainless region, which is never dimmed,


THE COW OF ISIS.


364 EGYPT.
summer or winter, by a shadowy cloud? All these separately may be met with in no
less perfection—nay, in even greater perfection—in other spots in Egypt. Still, where
in all the wide world is there another place where all these beauties are so combined


and harmonised to one lovely


yy y Way whole, and sanctified, as it were,
Yj


by the reverend associations and
historical memories that pervade
the very atmosphere of the spot ?

It was a true instinct that
led the priests of Pharaonic times
to dedicate this pearl of the Nile
to a feminine divinity —to Isis,
who stood foremost of a trinity
with Osiris and Horus, while many
subsidiary deities were added to


the cycle. The ancient name of
this island was Alek, or, with the
article, P-alek, and Ph-alek; hence
the Greek Philai and the Latin
Philae. This name signifies “the
island of ceasing,” or of “the end,”
in reference to the pilgrims travel-
ling from Egypt proper, whose
journey commonly ended at the
sanctuary of Isis, which, with a
tomb of Osiris, was erected on this
island. There can be no doubt
that there were temples here al-
ready at a very early date—at
least as early as the XIIth
Dynasty—and that the island was
then the goal and end of pil-
grimages ; but the earliest monu-


ments now remaining, and which
replaced others that had fallen into
decay, are of the date of Nectane-
bos II.,* who reigned, in defiance
of the Persians, a native king over
his fellow-countrymen. The centre
of the Temple of Isis was built by the Ptolemaic princes, and further enlarged
and decorated by Roman emperors down to Diocletian, who visited Philae in
person. To this day, on the northernmost angle of the island (XI. in the plan; see
page 367), there stands a triumphal arch, built on the Roman model, which bears
his name, and which was perhaps intended to commemorate his victory over the


KOPTIC WOMAN GOING TO CHURCH.


1 Bo. 352. 2 ap, 284.


FROM THEBES TO THE CATARACT. 365


Blemmyes. In order, however, to subdue the enemy to his own ends, he granted them
favourable conditions of peace, such as cannot have been pleasing in the eyes of the
priests of Philae, since he gave their wildest and most dreaded neighbours per-
mission to take part in the worship of Isis, and even to carry away with them into
their own district the beneficent and efficacious image of the goddess— most likely
a figure of a cow, the animal sacred to Isis—in order to solemnise certain festivals. |
The ancient heathen creed held its own against Christianity, and this, in its turn,
resisted Islam, longer here above the cataract than in any other spot throughout the
Valley of the Nile. It was not until the sixth century, and under Justinian, that


ROCK-TEMPLE OF GIRSHEH.


the worship of Isis was forcibly overthrown at last and for ever, and the doctrine
of the Redeemer established in its stead. The beautiful hypostyle was turned into
a church, the inscriptions and pictures on its walls being plastered over with Nile
mud, and so the eyes of the faithful were preserved from pollution. Later on, a
separate Christian church was built, where, for several centuries, the Koptic Christians
met for worship; but it is now destroyed, as well as the village that clustered
round it.

Philae is now totally uninhabited, but there was a time when it was crowded
with pilgrims and voyagers. The Pharaohs who were going forth to war against the
peoples of the south came here to sacrifice and pray to the highly revered goddess.
Many temples of antiquity may still be seen between the first and second cataracts—
as well as others hewn in the rock of the Nubian shore.


free architectural structures


SIMBEL.


TEMPLE OF ABOO


OF THE ROCK


FAGADE


FROM THEBES TO THE CATARACT. 867


J can here merely allude to most of these ; but I have put before the reader a view
of the grand fagade of the rock-temple of Aboo Simbel, of which I have already
spoken, and one of the temple at Girsheh.

It is beyond a doubt that the Egyptian artists who conducted these great
works, and the kings by whose command they were carried out, can never, when visiting
them, have neglected to worship at the shrine of Isis, At the time of the Ptolemies
the priests were obliged to appeal to the kings for protection against the enormous
number of pilgrims, who consumed all their pro-
visions, and threatened, as they averred, to reduce
them to want, and to deprive the gods of the
offerings due to them. When, at a later date,
the worship of Isis and Serapis was adopted in
Rome and the most various parts of the world,
the number of votaries who desired to visit the
high temple and home of the great and bene-
ficent goddess, and the grave of Osiris at Philae,
would not, of course, at all diminish ; even the
Greeks in Egypt used their sacred names to at-
test the most solemn oaths.

It was natural, too, that many of these pil-
grims to the island should desire to leave behind
them some witness of their visit, and so it came
to pass that among the pictures and hieroglyphics
of Hgyptian style we find an immense number
of inscriptions in prose and verse. Most of these
are composed in Greek, and some of them are
remarkable in form or matter, and they are incised
in all parts of the temple of Isis. Most of them
occur in the south of the island, where the most
ancient remains of the sanctuary stand. The banks
of the island, which in shape somewhat resembles
the sole of a shoe, are protected against the force
of the rising waters by a strong wall of ancient
masonry, beautifully fitted, and well preserved in
almost every part. The processions which formed
here to do honour to Isis, and which escorted the gifts from the different
provinces of Egypt and the cities of Ethiopia, must have approached the island
down the stream: that is, from the south; and thus we see that on the southern
shore there was a flight of landing-stairs and a sort of reception quay, deco-
rated with pillars and obelisks of sandstone (I. in the plan), and enclosed only
by a low wall between the columns. This was built by Nectanebos; and it was
here that the priests assembled to await the decorated barques, with their pas-
sengers and freights. These were next conducted by a long court (II.) to the
first propylon (IIL), which was erected by Nectanebos, and its noble size and
proportions gave it a commanding pre-eminence over the rest of the building.


PLAN OF THE ISLAND OF PHILAE,


UU


PHILAE.


ISIS IN THE ISLAND OF


OF


TEMPLE


THE


PERISTYLE IN


WN
Ht


| |


i


/


hi


FROM THEBES TO THE CATARACT. 369


Formerly two obelisks' stood in front of the centre gateway, guarded, as it were,
by granite lions; but only the lower portion of one now remains, and the lions
are overthrown and mutilated. In Roman times this long and sunny processional
way was closed in by a colonnade on each side. That to the west (a—b) coasted
the stream, and was planned by Tiberius, and finished under
Caligula, Claudius, and Nero. The stone ceiling was coftered
after the Roman model; the colours of the pictures and hiero-
glyphics on the inner side of the
wall next the river have been
splendidly preserved; and the va-
riety of form and decoration of
all the capitals is quite extraor-
dinary in the row of columns—
now thirty-one—on the side next
the causeway.

The colonnade corresponding
to it on the eastern side (c—d), for
some undiscoverable reason, could
not be made to run parallel with
the first, and was never completed.
Of the sixteen columns originally
placed there, only three have
finished capitals ; the others were
only rough-hewn, and intended to be finished after being placed on the shafts,
The median line of this court deviates greatly from that of the rest of the temple,
and throughout the structure the general direction of the different parts varies
greatly, oniy coinciding occasionally. This circumstance is only explicable by supposing
that here, as at Luxor, more ancient buildings had to be considered. The facade of


CAPITAL, WITH FOLIA


CAPITAL, WITH MASKS OF HATHOR,


the pylon which turned towards the cause-
way (III.) here, as everywhere else, displays
a grand war scene, representing Ptolemy
Philometor slaying his enemies. The pro-
cession next made the circuit of the beau-
tiful enclosed peristyle (IV.), in which our
tent was pitched. Coming to it from the
south, we see on the centre gate of the pylon
the inscription which was engraved by the
soldiers of the first division of the army led
by Napoleon into Egypt, in memory of their
great expedition, “in the seventh year of the Republic” (March 3rd, 1799). The
words “République Frangaise” and the name of Buonaparte were subsequently


1 The obelisk with the Greek inscription, removed by Belzoni for Mr. W. C. Banks in 1815, From the name of
Cleopatra. on the obelisk being the same as that in the Greek inscription, it aided in the decipherment of the hieroglyphics.


‘lyphical inscription by Lepsius was made before the Royal Society of Literature about 1838, and


ation of the hierog


published in the Literary Gazette.


EGYPT.


erased, but they have since been restored, and this motto written above them
in black: “Une page dhistoire ne doit pas étre salie” (No page of history should
ever be defaced). This peristyle being enclosed to the south by the great pylons,


ISHMAEL, THE NUBIAN.


it is shut in on the other three
sides by three independent buildings.
On the west is a cella (V.), divided
into four chambers, enclosed by a colon-
nade on all sides but the south; on
the east is a colonnade, of which the
capitals bear masks of Hathor, and
behind it are some small rooms (VL.) ;
to the north is the temple itself (VIIL.),
the hypostyle being divided from the
court where we were living by two
pylons. In the right-hand wing of this
pylon a large slab of granite, rounded
at the top, is built into the wall, on
which, as an indestructible document,
a list is recorded of the gifts in land
made to the priests of Isis by King
Ptolemy Philometor, and his wife and
sister Cleopatra. It was the same
sovereign who built the edifice which
lies on the western side of the court,
and to which belong the above-men-
tioned seven Hathor-faced columns (V.)
The Emperor Tiberius also added to the
decorations of this structure, which is
correctly regarded as being the Mamisi,


or birth-house, of Philae, for most of the pictures and inscriptions remaining in it
relate to the birth of Horus and the rearing of the divine child by Hathor and
Nepthys. The sweetest and tenderest of maternal duties are here depicted, always


with reference to the young prince and his sovereign mother. Thus
we see the child Horus being taught to play the nine-stringed lute
by Hathor, while Isis-stands behind him, and seems to superintend


the lesson.


The little chambers lying opposite to this building, in one of
which a duplicate of the demotic text of the Rosetta stone was dis-
covered, are of some interest.
adopted as his larder, and Ishmael, the black cook, used as_ his
kitchen—the king, and with him, no doubt, the whole body of the
initiated, had to submit to certain ceremonies of purification before
he could be permitted to enter the hypostyle and the inner halls
of the temple. It was called,
Next to it was another room, designated as the library in the


In one


indeed, the


of these


Q


that which Saleh


G


‘room of purification.”


THOTH,


FROM THE TEMPLE OF ISIS AT PHILAE,


EGYPT.


inscriptions on its doorway and walls—Safekh, the goddess of history, being the presiding
deity. A niche on the north wall, with the sacred ibis of Thoth above it, and the dog-


COIN OF PTOLEMY PHILOPATOR,


headed ape below, contained the various
sacred rolls. The rows of hieroglyphics
which we read all round the door of
this book-room inform us that besides
these manuscripts, which refer to the
entrance and departure of those who
ame to the temple, and ten books brought
from Nubia, the deeds and documents of
the temple were preserved there, written
on leather or parchment, and the records
of the gifts offered there to Isis by the
kings. At the southern end of the colon-
nade, and behind these chambers, is a


doorway, where we find, incised in the stone, instructions for the door-keeper and
the visitors admitted by him into the sanctuary.

Returning to the court, we now pass through the middle door of the second pylon
(VII.) into the hypostyle, which is light and gaily painted—well suited, in short, to
this, the most pleasing in style of all the great temples. It has four rows of three
columns, with beautifully-painted foliage-capitals, and being only half roofed in, it
is well lighted from above; but the full glare was probably moderated by a velarium—


TEMPLE OF KARDUSSEH IN NUBIA.


FROM THEBES TO THE CATARACT. 373


indeed, the holes are still visible through which the ropes to haul the awning were
passed. On the roof there are astronomical devices, and in the stone walls we see crosses
cut out. These and a Christian altar-niche. decorated with the same symbol, and
constructed by a Byzantine architect, prove that this hall at some time served as a
house of prayer for the inhabitants of Philae after their conversion to Christianity.
The rooms which open from the back of the hypostyle, and which terminate in
the sanctum, and the chambers connected with it are richly covered with inscriptions.
The little treasure-rooms and the hieroglyphic records all over their walls show that
the temple of Isis was richly endowed by the Ptolemaic princes. The second and


THE ISLAND OF BIGEH,


third of the Ptolemies—Philadelphus and Euergetes I—caused the central portion of
this temple to be built; but other members of this royal house—of whom we need
only name Ptolemy Philopator—took an interest in its adornment. On its roof was
the chamber of Osiris, in which the god—out of whose mummied corpse flowers
blossomed, while the gods of the nether world stood ranged beside him—was expected


to resuscitate to new life.

Among the smaller buildings of Philae, by far the most famous is that known as
the Kiosk, or “ Pharaoh’s bed,” a pavilion on the eastern bank of the island (X.), built
by Tiberius, and which stands up in the pure and balmy air, a slender and airy structure,
that delights the eye from afar. It was in a happy hour that that union was
effected of Greek and Egyptian art which gave birth to this work.

The columns of this building are the slenderest that we meet with in any building
in Egypt; and although it is sometimes said that the architect who designed it


BT4 EGYPT.


made the imposts above the capitals which support the architrave too tall—they
crown, indeed, the slenderest pillars that are met with in any building in Egypt—we
are ready to forgive him this error of judgment, since it adds to the airy effect of this
true pleasure-house, which was surrounded by palms, and was in its right place under
this cloudless sky. At Kardasseh, in Nubia, south of Philae, there is an imitation of
this kiosk, and it is not devoid of charm, though it has never been quite completed.
Opposite the western shore of Philae, from which it is divided by a narrow arm
of the river, is the rocky island of Bigeh, called by the ancient Egyptians Senem,
and, as the inscriptions record, it was a place of pilgrimage as early as in the time of


RUINS OF A KOPTIC MONASTERY NEAR. PHILAE,


the kings of the XVIIIth Dynasty. A statue of Osiris of this remote period was found
here, made of the fine rose-granite of this island, and with the name on it of
Amenophis II. The small Ptolemaic temple on the eastern declivity of Bigeh gives
a peculiar charm to the little island ; a family of Nubians have made their home in it.
The picture offered by this island, as we look at it from the western shore of Philae is
highly characteristic, and even grand in its way. The best view is obtained from
an outbuilding of the Temple of Isis, which stands between the river and the hypostyle
(IV.). This also deserves particular mention for two pictures on its walls, one of which
represents the naked cliffs of one of the islands, with the Nile-god in a cave at the foot
pouring out the waters of the river, while a serpent guards him ; the other represents
the mummied form of Osiris carried across the Nile by a crocodile. This latter picture
undoubtedly refers to the ancient myth which, in my opinion, is to be found again in
the “Arabian Nights.” The name of Philae is unknown in Egypt and Nubia; the


FROM THEBES TO THE CATARACT. 3795


natives call it Anas el-Wugood, and Anas el-Wugood was beloved by the fair Zahar el-
Ward (Flower of the Rose). The legend of this pair, of how they were parted, and
how at last they found each other again, which is put into the mouth of Sheherezade,
originated, beyond a doubt, on the shores of the Nile ; indeed, the modern story-tellers
begin it to this day with these words :—“I will build thee a castle in the midst of the
great waters (Bahr) of Kenoos”—ie., Northern Nubia. The castle here meant is the
Temple of Isis; and in the story of Anas el-Wugood it is related that the young hero
of the story reached his beloved, who was imprisoned in a castle on an island, by
swimming on the back of a crocodile. Must not this story have grown out of the
legend of Isis and Osiris, who loved each other, and were parted, and the myth of the
god who rejoined Isis, and the legend of the god who, by aid of a crocodile, reached
the abode of Isis. The Osiris room in the temple of Philae is even at the present
day held by the Arabs to be the bridal chamber of the happily-united pair.

Thus here—as is the case throughout Egypt—the new is grafted on to the old.
It was to give each its due, and, wherever it might be possible, to point out how the
one had grown out of the other, that I undertook to write this book; and I have
constantly endeavoured to carry out my purpose during our journey to the utmost
frontier of Egypt, from stage to stage and chapter to chapter, to the end.


ww


GENERAL INDEX.


Aahmes L., or Amosis, king, begins
against hes Asiatic Dynasty, iby OILS
history of.

Aahmes-Nefertari, px nit of, ii., 50.

Aah-hotep, Queen, ii., 51; war axe and
dagger of, 7b. ; mummy of, ii., 295,

Aarsu, Syrian ruler of the delta, ii.,
286.


Ababdeh Arabs, tribe of, ii, 331, 339,


aris. See Pelusium.

Abbas Pacha, policy of, i., 45;
Ole salire

Abbasee, Sheykh, ii., 77.

\e h, barracks of, i., 182, 183.

Abdallatif, or Abd-al-Lateef, the 1 ian,
notice by, of obelisks, i., 23; his des-
cription of Memphis, i., 125; his des-
cription of the rt of the pyramids,
i, 130; his deseription of the Sphinx,
i, 159 ; his notice of Cairo and Helio-
polis, i., 186, 190.

Abd-El-Kurnah, ii, 241 ;


character


portrait of a


boy of, ii, 242.
Abd-e Rahman Keyjah, wealthy mosque
of, ii. 75.


Aboo Bekr, coin of, i. 5

Aboo Fawdah, dangerous cliffs
—182; view of the Gebel, ii., 181.

Abool-Feda, the historian, i. Gh

Aboo Mandoor, palm groves and hill of,
i, 79

Aboo Roash, destroyed pyramids of, i
120.

Aboo-Simbel, head of a queen from, ii.,
281; temple of, ii, 284; facade of the
temple, i 367.

Aboukir, site of the lake, i, 60;
of, i, 60, 61.

Abraham, the patriarch,
cerning, i., 202, 210.

Abrar, or call to y q

Abuser > pyramids

Abydos, excavations at, 207 ; view of
the great hall, ii, 208; view of the
neighbourhood, ii, 209; plan of the
temple of Osiris, ii., 210, 211; fore-court
of the temple, ii, 212; tablet of the
kings at, ii, 212, 215; description of
the temple, ii., 213.


of, ii, 180


battle


legends con-


| Ahmed-ibn-Tuloon,


>. 0e<


Al


sinia, female slaves from, i.,
77; portrait of a slave girl, i
account of sl


y: a, the, of the desert, ii., 333.

Achilleus, usurps the empire, i.
coins, i., 64,

Acrobatic exercises, i., 166.

Adonis, description of the festival of, i.,
hh ns Ae

Alsculapius, Greek
i., 123.

“Ethiopian monarch, portrait of an, ii.,
50, 51.

Ahmed, portrait of, i, 217.


name of Alexandria,


Ahmed-aboo Nabboot, the dragoman, por-


trait of, ii, 119, 134.
Ahmed-es-Sanhooree, Sheykh, ii., 67.
views and notice of
the mosque of, i., 208—213 ; notice of,
i, 210, 214, 215; Ibn-Tuloon, minaret
and court of the mosque, i., 217 ; mosque
of, i, 296,


ait of her
ye of, typ
a, tribe of,
Albanian mercenarie
Alchemy, use of, ii.,
Alciphron’s epistles, quotation from, i., 16.
Alee, Khalif, coin of, i., 221; notice of,
hp SHEL,
Alee Bey, history of, 1, 296.

Alee, Sheykh, death and burial of, typi-
ce ally c bed, ii, 97—103.

ider, founder of the city of Alex-
a, i, 2, 3; portrait of, i, 3; his


andr
body taken from Babylon to Alexan-


dria, i, 11; coin of,i., 13;
name of, ii, 39.
Alexandria, ancient history of, i,
founded by Alexander, 8. Beary
view of the ruins of the city wall, i, 4;
of, i, 7; group among the
; modern light-house of, i.,
6; description of the Bruchium, Tear
view of the catacombs, 7b. ; festival of
Adonis at, i, 9, 11; the body of Alex-
ander brought to, i, 11; festival of
Dionysus at, i, 12 ; lady of, in a trans-


hieroglyphic


1—30;


aquec
ruins of,


ves, 7b. ; portrait of a |


parent silk robe (il lustrated), aby, lee
advance and summit of its glory, i:,
15; adorned by Philade sIphus, ib.; the
museum at, i, , 16; library at. je
literature fostered at, ib. ; the library
burned, i., 19 ; the library of Pergamus
transported to, 7. ; y of, with the
Needle of Cleopatra, i, 21; wall ¢
the city, erected by Cs seals)
notable person: ages oh Tese2
ite “commerce, i,


of the moder!
isu Hy


4; purne ad by Ne h
by the Mohammedans,
y of the burning of the
ew of the old harbour,


42,

attendant, i., g

Suez Canal to the cit

terminus at, i, 47 ; public institu-

s of, i, 48; view of the German
Protestant church at, i. ; natives of
(illustr ted), 2 Arabian cemetery at,
i, 50; variety of the nationalitie: at,
ib. » palace of the Khedive, i., 51; em-
broidery and weaving, arts of, ths
siege of, i, 61; flooded by the English
in 1801, %., effect of its foundation, i.,
123 ; Amroo begins to build a palace at,
i,, 193.

Allah, the name of, constantly repeated in
Deeser, ii, 109, 111, 116.

ngulshed Arab singer, por-
314.

Wease or Ainpens of Cairo, i., 82.

E ancisco de), gle Portuguese

g India

Alnwick Castle, museum a Egyptian an-
tiquities, belonging to the Duke of
Northumberland, at, ii., 227.

Amada, ruins of the temple at, ii, 261,


lady of, and her black
advantages of the
i, 46—48 ; rail-


Amasis erects a statue of Neith, i, 73.

Ameen Bey, the last of the Mamelukes,
ii., 6.

Amenemhat T., king, his works, i, 187 ;
history of, ii, 170.


378


Amenemhat III. and IV. build the laby- |
rinth, ii., 156, 168.

Ameni, nomarch, portico of, at
Hasan, ii, 166; tomb of, ii, 176.

Ameniritis, queen, alabaster statue of,
51, 53.

Amenophis I., king, notice of, ii.,

9, 266, 269.

Amenophis IT., name of, on a statue of
Osiris at Bigeh, ii, 374.

Amenophis ITI., makes statues of the god-
dess Sekhet, i., 91; oldest sepulchres of
the date of, i, 161; events in his time,
in, 272.

Amenophis IV., statue and portrait of,
ii, 61; identical with Khuenaten, ii.,
270.

Amon, god, figure of, ii, 49; worship of,
ii, 51, 247, 248, 249, 264; details of
the worship, ii., 277.

Amroo-ibn-el-Asee, Mohammedan general :
his treatment of the Alexandrians, i., 38 ;
anecdotes of, i., 39, 195,199, 206; founds
Cairo, i, 118; events in the life of, i,

view of the court in the mosque

198; description of the court, i.,

his tent, the origin of the city of

Cairo, i, 40; illustrations of his tent,

his exploits, ib.; mosque of, i,

207, 212.

Amsi, or Khem, god, procession of the
festival of, i, 13.

Amulets, ii, £

Amusements, modern, in Egypt, ii., 316.

Anas el Wugood and Zahar-el-Ward,
legend of, ii., 375.

Animal life in Egypt, ii., 167

Animals, ii., 174.

Antaeopolis, ruins of, ii, 192.

Antinoe, remains of the town, ii., 178.

Antinous, notice and portrait head of, ii,
178. |

Antiphilus, the sculptor, at Alexandria, |
i, 14. |

Antiquities,
et seq.

Antoninus Pius, coins of, for Egyptian
nomes, i., 64.

Antony, events in the time of, i, 195; hi
debauchery, i, 20, 2 iis death,


Beni-


247,


i


resurrection of the,


92,

Anubis, guardian of the lower world
figure of, i., 158 ; inscriptions addressed
to, i, 170; functions of, ii. 58. |

Ape, dancing, ii., 349, 351.

Apelles, the painter, at A’ exandria, i., 14,


Apis bull, figure of the, i, 121; supposed
to be buried in the Pyramid of Sakkarah,
ib. Apis, description of the, i, 122 ;
tomb of the, i., 158 ; expenses connected
with the funeral ceremonies of,
visit to the tomb of an, i, 160; dia-
critical marks of the, i, 161; visit of
Mariette to the sepulchre, 2b.

Apollonius Dyscolus, t grammarian,
a ete

Aqueduct at Cairo, ancient, ii, 31.

Aqueducts of Alexandria, i, 8

Arabat-el-Madfooneh, visit to, i

Arabia, traffic between Eg:


he


., 206.
ot


and, i,


an cemetery, i., 3 view of an, i.,
26; widow, ib.; carved device, i., 31 ;


159%; |


conquest of Egypt, i, 38—40; spread


of Islam in E;
68; portrait of a v


88;
Thy
the
Arab
pric
Arabe
87,
72
anir
Aradu
Arcac


GENERAL INDEX.


40; decoration,
led beauty, i
legends concerning the
47; horse, i, 2115; des
desert, ii., 33.
of rank, portrait of an, i.,
le and independence, ii.,
esque ornament, and patterns, i, 59,
213, 2 218, 227, 314; ii, 63,
74, 80, with huntsman and
nals, i., 173.

is, Christians expelled from, i., 253.
es of the Liwan of Ibn-Tuloon, view


sypt, i.


amids,


29


ols


3


of the, i, 213.


Archi
doo
Cai


house,


tecture—see Mosques; window and
r, i, 77; mashrebeeyeh window at
ro, i, 175; view of an old Arabian
., 195; the mosques of Amroo


anc
old


in


i, 2
of a balcony,


th
26


has:
colt
colt


166 ; portico at Beni-ha:


of,


Arm-chairs, ancient, ii.,


Armo
Arsin


gate of a mosque,


Ibn-Tuloon, fine specimens of the
style, i., 201, 212; harem of a house
the time of the Khalifs, illustrated,
220; styles of, i, 227, 228; cons
., 228; stalactite capi
of the Mameluke period, i.,
264; domestic, ii. Boe, ;
64; of the I
an tombs, ii., 164—169; polygonal
imns, lotos columns, and papyrus
umns, ib. ; plant-like columns, iL,

san, ib. ; beauties


3eni-


at Karnak, ii., 2


ured corselet, ii., 259.
oe II., wife of Philadelphus, portrait


of, i, 50.
Arts and sciences, i., 135—139, 219, 221;
progress of ancient, ii., 45, 46; E;


is
Ascal
Ashn


1,
Asnath, daughter of Potiphar, i., 187.


for riding, ii.,


fication of, ii., 49.
51; renaissance of, ii.
on, the port of,
kh, ii, 66.


1oonee, She


143.


03.


Asses, illustration of a herd of, i., 133.
As-Sakkah, Sheykh, ii., 66
Assouan, view of the monastery at, ii.,


19¢


Hibs


3; a village near, ii, 338; port of,


, 344; scenes on the way to, and at,


346—357 ; bazaar in, ii, 347; a


native of, ii, 348.


Assur


inihabla, the one-


rbanipal, or Assur!


humped camel in As at the period
of, i, 55.

Assyria, the camel of, i, 55; supremacy
of, ii, 303,

Astrology, pra of; ii, 62.

Astronomical ideas of the ancient Egyp-
tians, ii., 301.


Atak:
Atha
Athe’
Athe


ah mountair 4
nasius, notice of, i


37.


na, philology of the name,


. 74.
27; on the Ma-


meus, the author, i.,


reotic wine, i., 60.


Aufal


rl


Auto
ter
Aver


Ayheg, history of, i.,


k, a favourite singer, i, 285, 287.
istus makes Egypt a Roman province,


yin and derivation of the
wank iy} i, 3.
1ue of Shoobra, ii


crat, or
22


219.
i, 186, 190.


Aydab, on the Red Sea, i
Ayn Shems, or Heliopoli


B.


Baal, worship of, i., 100.
Bab-el-Footoh, view of,


231; suburb
of the, ii, 130.
Babylon, a site so called in Cairo, i., 181,
190.
Bahr Yoosuf, the, ii.
Bairam, feast of, ii., 117-
Bakhsheesh, use and signification of the
word, ii, 161—163, 241.
Barge for corn, ii., 327.
Barkook, minaret of the memorial mosque
Oe Gh) ; history of, i,


2; 59, 270 ;
tomb and mosque of, i, 270, 271.

Barth (H.), traveller, his testimony respect-
ing the camel, i., 57; his enjoyment of
desert life, ii, 221.

Bath, view of an interior, ii,

women, i

Bath-house,


Bats, varieties of Egyptian, ii.
Bat


a, i., 279.

Bazaar i ouan, iL, 347.

Bedaween, or pilgrims, camels of the, i.,

57 ; tent of the, i., 88 ; portrait of

view of a camp, i., 164

., 172; at morning prayer,
Gaironaiey 13%.

Bedrasheyn, notice of the fellah village of,
i., 118120; view, i, 119.

Begah, a race, ii., 331.

Beggars, varieties of, i., 2

Behar Ed-deen Zoheyr, poet,

Behbeet el Hagar, description of the site,
i, 114

3ehemoth, or the hippopotamus, i., 169.

Bek, an ancient artist, i 4,

3elhit, or the Sphinx, i., 1

Belzoni (G.), the traveller, ii., 369.

3eni-Hasan, account of the tombs of, ii.,
151 et seg.; entrance to the tombs, ii,
151, 162; valley of the Nile at, ii., 163.

Beni-Suef, flour dealers at, ii., 156.

3enjamin, Monophysite bishop,
doings, i., 38.

Bennu, or pheenix, i., 187—189.

Bent-anat, daughter of Rameses IL, ii,

03.

Berenice the Macedonian, wife of Ptolemy
Soter, i., 14; derivation of words from
the name of, i, 14; coin of, ii., 321.

Berenice, a port of di

Bes or Bessa, vase in form of the head of,
ii, 151; mythology of, i., 231.

3iban-el-Mulook, or tombs of the kings,
ii, 292295.

3ier and the four


ioe tor


290, 294.


caravan,
209 ; in


Ss


a his


ars of the Amenti, i., 117.


Bigeh, island of, ii, 374.

Birds on the lake of Menzaleh, i, 106;
described, i., 108.

Birket-el-Karoon, or Koroon, land level


at, ii., 155, 157
Blane (Charles), his
portions, ii., 46.
Blind, condition of the, in Egypt, i

singers, ii., 101.

Boat of Cleopatra on the Oydnus, illus-
trated, 20; figures of boats, i, 134;
golden, with silver rowers, i1.,


dea of Egyptian pro-


Bolbitine mouth of the Nile, i., 64.

Bombyx, or transparent silk, i, 14, 15.

Bonaparte, Napoleon, in Ezypt, i, 42;
ii, 1; anecdote of, i, 61; saying of,
concerning the Nile, 67; oa tRey of,
to the French troops, ii., 7.

Book-rests or portfolio stands, ii, 68.

Books and libraries, ii., 64.

Boolak, monuments preserved at, 1,79;
portrait of Menephtah at, i, 103; an-
tiquities in the museum of, ie 1% Ih, ii,
40, 41, 45; harbour of, at
179; court of the museum at, i


2, 53, 54, 58 ; view of the harbour

147 ; harbour described, ii., 148.

Bouchard, Captain, discovers the Rosetta
stone, i, 79 ; 38.

Boys, Eeyptian, mes IEG

B made by the Israelites, still extant,
i, 103.

Brickmaking by the forced labourers of
the Semitic race, a painting at Thebes,
illustrated, i., 104.

Bridal procession, ii., 92.

Bridge over Nile, ii., 1.

Brocardi, his testimony concerning the
sycamore of Matareeyeh, i., 184.

Bronze, carving in, ii., 48.

Bruchium, or Proucheium, signification of
the word, i., 7; fight at the,i, 19; des-
troyed in A.D. 273, i., 2

Brueys (F. P.), admiral, defeat of, at
Aboukir; i, 60.

Brugsch Bey (H.), his discovery of the site
of the Red Sea of the Bible, ii. 2, 25, 26.

Bryaxis, sculptured statue by, i th

Bubastis, festivals of Sekhet, at, i. 35, 91,
92; site of, i, 90, 91; finding statues
of the goddess Sekhet, at, i, 91.

3uffalo, ploughing with the, ii., 161.

3uffaloes watering, ii., 204; herds of, ii.,
20

Bugia, in Algiers, description of the castle,
i, 228.

Burckhardt (J. LL) grave of, i., 230.

ove, Sie WO}
Bey, history of, i, 275, 277.
ntium, eunuchs introduced from, i,


Gh

Cactus, views with specimens of the, i., 41,
225.

Cesarion, son of Antony and Cleopatra,
i, 19, 23; iL, 235.

Cairo: origin and growth of the city, i.,
40; eunuchs abundant in, i., 52; view
of the mosque of Werdanee at, i., 61 ;
historical notice of, 117, 118, 173, et
seg. ; view in a lane of the Copt quarter,
i, 174; mashrebeeyeh, window, 7. ;
street dogs, ib. ; general view of, i., 176;
view of a drive through, i, 177; por-
trait of a learned Koranist of, i., 178 ;
mosque of the university, i, 179 ;
modern state of, 2b. ; view of the public
school, i, 180; early history, i, 181;
the Nilometer of, 1, 193, 195, 197;
progress of the city,i., 195 ; view of the
court of the mosque of Amroo, i., 198 ;
description of the mosque, i., 201, 202,
203; view of the old town, i, 193;
conquest of, 2b. ; view of an old Arabian


|


GENERAL INDEX.


house in, i, 194; the mosques of, i,
199, 209 ; visited by Mamoon, i., 209;
view of an alley of the old time, i., 210 ;
history of under the Fatimites and
Eyoobides, i, 218 e¢ seg.; caravan
commerce with, i., 219; silk manufac-
ture encouraged at, i., 221; view of a
princely garden in, i., 225; view of the
citadel, i., 233; door of the Mamelukes
in the citadel, i, 236; improvements
effected! by Saladin at, i, 234; citadel
of, i, 239; embellishment of i, 253 ;
view of a street in, i., 256; old houses
of, view on the old canal, i,
259; view of a country house at, i,
278; the okellas or khans of, i., 282 ;
modern phases of, i, 294, 303; deca-
dence of, i, 294 et seg.; vaulted
cellar in an old street, i, 308; the Ka-
rafeh outside the city, he
1e city of the dead at,


a


1; the
slave market, i, 313; the citadel, ii
14, 16; Shephard’s hotel at, ii., 28;
shaving of boys in, ii., 44; life of the
people of, ii., 80 ef seg. ; home life in,
ii., 81—87 ; view of a street in, ii. 95,
102; view of a lane in, i, 95, 102;
view of a lane in, ii., 98; street life
in, il, 136—138, 140; windmill near
the city, ii, 142; view of, from the
Nile, ii, 152; rarity of the crocodile
iis ai., LB2Ze
Calix, column in form of a, ii
capital of the inverted calix, ii.
Callimachus, quotation from, i., 22.
Callixenus, testimony of respecting the
feast of Dionysus, i., 12.
Cambyses, inscription relating to the his-
tory of, i., 73; notice of ii., 5
Camel: abundant in Alexandria, i., 52 ;
historical notice of the, i, 55 ;
tration of the mode not iphces
figure of a, i.
upon the. 29 297 ; uses of ane aie
36, 137; ‘first ride on a, ii, 143;
ploughing with the, 161; with a
driver, ii., 194 ; market, ii, 214, 217;
with a howdah or carti ii,, 215;
group at a spring, ii., 216; examples
of the, ii., 217, 219, 221; the
its double, ii., 337, 339 ; rider, ii., 336.
Canals, historical view of the Egyptian,
ii. 19, 21.
Canopic vase, ii., 55.
Canopus, decree of, i., 104.
Capitals, of columns, various, i., 214; of
columns at Phile, ii, 369.
Caracalla, massacres by, i., 27.
Yaravan, routes, i., 219; scenes, ii., 131,


Psammetichus I.,i., 74.

scription of a valuable, i., 222.

r pigeons, first mention of, 30.

(t. F.), his ideal restoration of a

mid, i, 140.

Castigation, practice of, i., 168, 170.

Cat, mummy of a, i., 90; the “father of
the cat ay eals encouraged in Egypt,
ii., 142.

Catacombs of Alexandria, view of, i., 7.

Cataract, view of the fi ii., 358.

Cattle, scenes of, i., 163; management of,
as food, i., 168; herd of, a wall paint-
ing, ii, 169.


Cemetery, Arabian, at Alexandria, i., £
51; at Damanhoor, i., 61, 62 ; at Cairo,
ii, 95,

Censer, or swinging vase, arabesque, i,,
244,

Ceremonies connected with temple build-
ing, ii., 227.

Chalcedon, council of, i., 34.

Champollion (Frangois), his discovery of

the hieroglyphies 80; his labours

on the Egyptian language, ii, 39;

portrait of, 2b.; visits Beni-hasan, ii.,

163, 164.

Character of modern Egyptians, i. 297—

299, 301.

Chariot scenes, ii., 247.

Chefren, builds the second pyramid, i.,

132; statue of, i, 150; view of the

buildings of, i., 145.

Cheops, builds pyramids, i, 120, 141;

long duration of his life, i., 141,

Children, loosing the tongues of, i., 251.

Chiromancy, practice of, ii., 60, 61.

Chonsu, god, golden statue of, i., 125.

Christian, church at Medinet Haboo,


287 ; symbols in caves, ii., 187.
Q) nity, spread of, i., 32—36.
Cinderella, origin of the tale, i., 77.
Circassian Mamelukes, — 271.


Claudius Ptolemeus, the astronomer, his
system of cosmogony,
Clemens of Alexandria, i., 37.
Cleopatra, history of, i, 17, 19; carried
into the palace, illustration of, i., 18,
19; encourages sciences, i, 19; her
boat on the Cydnus described and illus-
trated, ; needle of, illustrated,
il i, ; name of, in
hierogly 39; portraiture of,
notice of, i, 235,
236; name of, on an obelisk, ii., 369.
Cleopatra Trypheena, coin of, ii., 343.
Cleopatra IL., portrait of, ii, 50.
Cobbler, a, ii, 141.
Coftee-houses, ii., 122, 123.
ns: Alexander the Great, i, 13; An-
toninus Pius, a.p. 145, i., 64; Berenike,
, 321; Cleopatra Tryphena, ii., 343 ;
Hadrian, i, 27; figured, i, 221; of
the Delta towns, i., 64; of Ptolemy, i.,
14, n. 1.; of the Ptolemies, ii, 369,
372; introduced by Ptolemy Soter, i.,
14; Ptolemy Soter, i, 13; Ptolemy V.,
Epiphanes, i., 16.
College near the Ramess
Colonnade of Medamot,
Colonnades in the mosque of Amroo, i.,
203.


2


| Colossus, method of transporting a, ii., 335.


Colours, Egyptian, i., 113.

Comb, a, ii., 259.

Composite fig ure of later empire, illustra-
tion of > 49.

Consort of the Sultan, portrait of the, i,
216.

Constantine, Emperor, his last effort to
save Alexandria, i., 39.

Constantinople, books for the library of
Alexandria taken to, 1, 39; fall of the
city, i., 278.

Cooks, port ait of the wife of the Sheykh
of the, i., 223.

Coptic, portrait of a maiden, i., 33; re-
ligion, i, 34; portrait of a Copt, i., 35;


380


i, 192; literature, revival of, |


revolt


, 37; language, notice of, ii 4.2 ;
a monk, ii, 158; a woman, ii, 200;
characteristics of the people, ii, 201 ;


interior of a church, 7
Coptos, on the Nile, carrying trade of,
2


Corint , 271.

Coronation ceremonies, ancient, ii., 193.

eavers of, and their wares, i., 14, 15.

Costumes at Alexandria, 43—45,

Cotton, cultivation of, i, 92; illustration
of the plant, id.


lian architecture, i


Cos, w


Court of an Egyptian house, illustration
Ofptaro

Cow, the, in relation to Hathor, ii, 231 ;
of Isis, ii. 363.


Cranes, specimens of, i., 161, 167.
Crocodiles, cave of, at Maabdeh, ii., 182 ;
on the Nile, i., 134, 138; basking on
the sand, ii., 179; on door-way, ii., 182.
Crops, variety of, i., 69, ii, 190, 191.
Ctesibius of Alexandria, his inventions.
30.
Cynocephalus statues, i., 153.
Cyprus, the emporium of
silk stuffs, i., 57, 58.
Cyril, the Bishop, martyrs Hypatia,


Alexandrian
., O4.
D.
Dahabeeyeh, or Nile boat, ii, 134, 135, |
149.
Jahshoor, py


141.


Jakheleeyeh,


amid of, i, 121; view of, i,


wealthy province of, i., 113.


Damanhoor, or Apollinopolis Parva, rail-


Gis


wi


y station and cemetery at,
fertility of, i., 67.

Jamietta, view in the neigh
i, 110; description of, i,
wall at, on the Nile, i., 112.
Jams on the Nile, traces of,
Danaan, the tribe so called, i
Dancers of a village of Upper E
311, 316; dance in
nak, ii, 313


ibourhood of,
111; river |


eis


pt, ii,
the ruins of Kar-


Jancing girl,
Jarb-el-Ahmar, view of, i
Jarb-el-Gamameez, libra
Jarius reopens Suez Car
Jate-bread, a seller of, i, 79.
Jates, mode of gatheri

tion of, in a cemete


i, 5
‘ ., 95; and food
distributed at a funeral, ii., 103.


5; distribu-


>


Dawsah, or treading on the faithful,
ceremony of the, ii., 113—115.

Dealer in antiquities, a, with his treasures,

li., 262.


Death of the first-born, the, i., 265.


Deir-el-Bahari, or Deyr-el-Bahree, roy
mummies of,
251,


213, 246, 247, 249—
286, 297, 302; Christian
249, 251; notice of, ii,
, 206, 2E imaginary

restoration of the temple, by Brune

Pasha, i1., 253, 7.
Deities of ancient Egypt, ii, 207 et seg.
Delta: highly cultivated state of the, i.,
62; earliest colonisation of the, i., 63,
64; view of a dyke during the inunda-
tion, i., 63; government, manners, and
customs of the, i, 64 ; deterioration of
the, i., 67.


259,


t, ii.


,


GENERAL INDEX.


Demetrius Phalereus, the Athenian lawyer,
suggests of a library
Alexandria, i., 14.

Dendera, plan and propylon of the temple,
ii, 225 2265


described, ii., 2


formation at


great court of heaven, ii.,


; eestasies of
the, 1, 313
rious orders
290, 294.


Dervishes : 72s
the, i, of
eating scorpions, ii., 112;
of, ii, 114, 128; be

Desaix (L. C. A.), ane

Desert, a ride throug
93
95. See Telegraph.

Desert life, charms of, ii 2

Desook: view of the market, i.

scription of the town, i., 74;

of the Holy Ibrahim at, i., 75.

Jevotees, figures of, i., 294.

I riety of, i, 209.

Dillon (Frank), view of his studio, ii., 85,

86.

Dinocrates, the architect of Alexandria, i., 4.

Diocletian, the Emperor, pillar erected in
honour of, at Alexandria,
in his reign, ib.

Jiodorus, his account of the Odeum, ii.,
281.


figures 0!
297 -


tombs


ii.
lote of, i., 61.

1 the, illustrated, i.,
herdsman in the, illustration of, i.,


ging,


3; de-


mosque


ec


; events


Dionysus, splendour of the feasts of, i., 12.
Diorite, extreme hardness of, i., 152,


Jioscorides, the phy n, his works, i,
HER
Dioscorus, patriarch of Alexandria, his


religious views, i., 34.
Divination, arts of, ii, 59—61.
Djawhar, the general, victory gained by,
additions by, to the city of
his palace, now
destroyed, ; founds the mosque
and university of El-Azhar, ii., 63.
Djins and Ghouls, at San, i., 94
Dobrudscha, the, camels at, i.,
Dogs, of Cairo, i, 175; village.
their uses, 7).; of Erment,


ii, 241 ;
307.


’


Domestic scenes: an Arabian pantry, ii.,
122; manners and customs of the


natives, ii, 174.
Donkey, hobbled, ii., 28; drivers, ii., 26,
3 portrait of the donkey-boy, Hasan,
ii, 29; boys of Thebes, ii., 240; party
on donkeys, ii., 243.
Dor, his efforts to improve the schools, ii.,
35.


Dragomen, ii.,

Drah Aboo'l
ii, 26

Draughts, box’and board for the game, ii.,
56.

Drawing, Egyptian art of, i., 167.

Drinking fountains, views of, i,
described, i 5

Dromedary, race with the, i, 182;
durance of the, i., 1

Duck, Egyptian, illustration of, i, 115.

Duemichen (Professor J.), his reproduction
of scenes in the tomb of Ptah-hotep, i.,
169 ; discovers list of kings at Abydos,
ii. 215, 216 ; labours of, it, 224.


, ancient tombs at,


Eagle, double-headed, great antiquity of
the symbol, i, 241; on the wing, ii,


179.


Earrings of Abyssinian slave girl, ii., 150.
121.


, note of his romance, ‘“ The


Eating-house, an, ii.,
(G
Sisters,


Ebers


, 159.
Edfoo, temple of, ii.,
visited and described


321


ii.,
Edkoo, Lake of, canal of the, i, 43.
Kgypt: description of the northern coast,


, 10
province under Augustus, 1,
Egyptian girl, i., 25; female
with two illustrated,
spread of Christianity in,
domestic architecture of, i., 37
of the Egyptians in Alexand1
portrait of a youthful follower
Prophet, i., 49; panorama of,
from the great pyramid, i, 131; arts
and sciences, manners and customs of,
i, 135—139 ; plan’ of the new g
ment of, i, 295; relations with
Porte under Ismail, ex-Khedive, ii
increased limits of the kir
incorporated by C
Persian kingdom, ii.,
favourite child, ii.,


2; women drawing water, i


Roman
99.


vase!


the


4S seen


yvern-
the


om,


ambyses with the
; portrait of a
860; a


Cairene


maiden 89; description of Upper
Egypt, ii, 133 ef seg.; geographical
condition of Upper Egypt, ii, 334;


fertile sites of, ii., 1
El-Ass
fl-Azhar, foundi
mosque of,
university of,
El-Beleed, Sheykh, statue of the, i., 42.
Elephant, in Egypt, Y
ELGhisr, bar of, on the Suez Canal, ii.
I


seef, tombs of, i1., 294.

g of the university and
17, 218; mosque and
li., 63 et seq.


itara, notice of, ii
l-Khargeh, ancient rem:
220)


El-Lahoon, arm of the Nile at, ii
El-Mahdee, Sheyk, ka’ah of the, ii.,


El-Matareeyeh, visit to the fishing town

of, i, 108; traits of native

at,i, 110. See Matareeyeh.

El-Meks, the site of the stone works for

the Suez Canal, i., 46.

El-Mo’azzam Tooranshah, Sultan, defeats

Louis IX., i., 114.

El-Moyad, Sultan, illumination of MSS.

in his time, ii., 72.

El-Muhdi, Sheykh, mandara of the.

Embroidery at Alexandria, i, 57 ;
mens of, i., 58.

Enamelled gl
i., 243,
Enamelling, ii.
in-Nasir, history

istratus, the phy:


character


rity 3)
speci-


cup, old, of Arabic style,


2


OL 260.
cian, at Alexandria,


14.

Eratosthenes, of Alexandria, measures the
earth, ii., 237, 349.

Erbkam (G.), designs the German church
at Alexandria, i, 49; discovers mode of
building the pyramids, i., 141.

Erpa-ha, title of hereditary chiefs, i,

Esneh, description and illustration of,

)7—310; portrait of a boy of,
307.

Euclid at Alexandria, i., 14.

Eudoxus, of Cnidus, the Apis omen of, i,


Euergetes, governor of Alexandria, i., 4.


Euergetes I., events in the time of, thy ANG?
Ii, O20 ‘

Euergetes IL, Physcon, events of his
time, iy We


rear harbour of, at Alexandria, i., 6;


traffic of the, i, 28.
Eunucehs, historical notice of, i, 51,
their duties, i., 11 ; notice we ii, 82.
Euphrates, Egyptian expeditions to the,

i, 101.
European immigrants at Alexandria, i,
50; art, influence of, i, 290.
Europeans at Mansoorah, i., 113


2


Eutyches, his views of religion, i, 34,
Byil eye, amulets against the, ii, 59.
Eybeg, Emir, ii, 125.

Eyoob, rise of the dynasty of, i., 230.


Hzbek, history of, i, 2
of, 1., 228, 279, 280.

Ezbekeeyeh, gardens, holiday scene at, Thy,
107; square, at Cairo, i, 178, ii, 29,
32.


278— 3 mosque


Fagade of a tomb, view of the, i., 120,
‘air, at Desook, i., 76; at Tantah, i.


Fakoos, or Phacousa, description of, i., 93.

Family of Arabs among the ruins, view
of a, 1, 298 ; group, ii, 127.

Fanatical destruction of antiquities, i.
125 ; fights, i, 192.

Fasting, duration of, ii, 120, 121.

Fatima, portrait of, i, 86; legend of the
tree of, i., 201.

Fellaheen: portrait of a fellah,
huts and household companion:

; recruits, ii, 9; characteristics

-, 191—193 ; young wife of a

, 191; riding to market, i

at a ferry, ii., 223; occupations of

Thebes, it, 241 ; woman of Karnak, itt

56 ; desecration of ruins by the people.
ii, 278; hut of, with roof of pots,
305; of Elkab, ii., 317—319; a fellah
woman, ii., 3° 32,

Female rubbish-bea:

Ferry, scene at a, ii,
224.

Figures of animals over doorways, custom
of placing, ii., 81, &

Fikees, or reciters of the Koran, ii., 98,
101, 102, 103

Firmus of Alexandria, historical notice
OE, thy WI,

Fish: market for, at Tanis, i, 104, 105,
108 ; varieties of, with illustrations, i.,
104, 105, 108 ; ii., 255.

Fishing-boat on the lake of Menzaleh,
illus ed, i, 109.

Fishing with the net, illustration of,i., 134.

Flavius Vopiscus, quotation from, i, 29.

Fooa, view of, i., 74.

Food, varieties and method of preparing,
i., 222, 223; an eating-house, it, 121;
a pantry, ii, 122; a provincial coffee-
house, ii., 123.

Foom-el-Mahmoudeeyeh, branch of the
Nile at, i., 43 ; waterworks at, i., 77.

Foreign, trade of Egypt, i elements
in Egyptian art, ii, 4
Seti, ii, 277; tribes


>


205.
; described, ii.,


and enemies of


Egypt, ii, 289.


GENERAL INDEX.


Foreigners in Egy, pt, ancient, ii, 143;
modern, ii., 26,

Fort St. Tulien, at Ros

Fossils, specimens of, ii

Fostat, or “The Tent,
i, 193, 195.

ipa ains in Cairo, views of, i., 255, 264,
271.

France, domination of, in Egypt, i., 42;
French army in Egypt, ii, 2; the great
French work on Egypt, 2b.

Frank (Sebastian), his account of the
cooking in Cairo, i.,

Franz Bey, builds the chateau of Ghe-
zeereh.

Frederick, own Prince of

sits Alexandria, i., 49.

| Freudenberg, poem by, i, 83.

Funeral ¢ ceremonies, the ‘last honours at,

39 5 proc mn, ii, 100; a widow

emphis lamenting before the

mummy of her husband, i., 144; scenes,
iP AOS LTs


a name of Cairo,


Germany,


=e


of


ch,


Ga, or spirit, notions concerning the,
138.

Gabari, Castle of, i., 45.

Galatz, camels at, i., 57.

Gama (Vasco da), notice of, i., 292.

Gama-el-Benat, the powers of the mosque
so called, i., 306; notice of, ii, 104.

Game of ball, ii., 174.

Games, variety of, ii, 176.

Game, feathered, ii., 193.

Garden, view of a princely one in Cairo,
i, 225; view of one on the road to
Heliopolis, i, 22

Gardener's boy, a, ii., 9.

“Gate of Pottage,” at a mosque,
65.

Gazelles, group of, ii., 215; notice of, ii.,
217 ; in Upper Egypt, ii, 333.

Gebel-el-Tayr, or Gebel-et-Tayr, view of,
ii, 142 ; or the Bird Mountain, deserip-
tion of, i, 1

Gebel Silsileh, notice of, 329—331.

Geese, representation of, ii., 48.

Gem, with portraits, illustration of a,


ii., 64,


29,


Genii of the Karneter, ii., 291.
Genoa, growth of her ports, 42; sup-
plied with silk stuff from Alexandria,


TOY

German colonists and church at Alexan-
dri

Germanicus, ithe ill one
Apis Bull to,

Ghawazee or gies

Ghaziyeh, or dancer,

Gheezeh, village of,
pyramids, i., 120,

Ghezeereh, island and bridge of,
chateau of, ii, 32, 33.

Ghizeh, castle and gardens of, 126;
door of a tomb at, i., 131 ; destruction
of the small pyramids, i, 234; view
near, ii, 3; battle near, 7b.

Gibbon (E.), his remarks upon Alexandria,
iby Pash

Gipsy life in Egypt,

Gipsies in Egypt, occurrence of, ii., 316,
328.

zeh, view of, ii., 198 ; writing room at,

ii, 199 ; monastery, ii, 203.


given by the


223,


82.
S name


to the


126;


Gi


nl


|


381


Gliddon (G. R.), his account of the building
of pyramids, i, 141.

Glycera, the lover of Menander,
pondence, i., 16.

Goats kept for milk, ii., 130,

Godfrey, the Knight Templar

Golden mask on the face found in a tomb,
i, 164.

Goldsmith’s work, 49, 51, 52

Goldziher (Dr. Ignaz), his researches into
modern Egyptian character, i., 297 ; hi
account of the Sunnite sects, ii., 75
testimony of to the poverty of Arab

Map alles adie

Goshen, historical note of the land of, i.,
87 et seq.

Gothic details in the mosque of Hasan,
290,

Gow, or Antwopolis, visited, ii, 192, 193.

Greece, immigrants of, to Nee LS
4; arts of, at Alexandria, i, 14; de-
generation of Gre at Ale: i
28; element at xandria,


her corres-


137.


Al
improvement of Egyptian art,
Greeks attacked in Alexandria, i


Egypt
Grotto of Artemis, ii, 177. See Speos


Artemidos.
Gyges, king of Lydi
Chismlien diya


ists Psammeti-


H.


Hades, scenes of, ii., 294.
Hadrian, Egyptian events in his reign, i.,


27; his coinage, i, 27, n. 3; his re
marks upon the activity of Alexandria,


i., 29 ; testimony of, respecting the Alex-
andrians, i., 50; the camel on the coins
of, i., 55 ; saved from death by the sacri-
fice of Antinous, ii., 178,
Hagar Gamoos, or the
Hebit, i, 115.
Hagg, title of, ii., 132.
Has ev jents in his time, i., 229 ; mosque
Oly eiyy pmbis effort to encourage
learning, i., 299; ii, 71.
Hall in a Mameluke slices li., 82.
Hamida, a Cairene maiden, portrait of, i.,
303.
Hanafees, sect of the, ii., 73, 75.
Hanbalees, sect of the, ii, 73, 75.
Harem, at Alexandria, i., 51 ;
the “Jewel of the Harem,”
window in a, i, 77; Egyptian, i, 13.
interior of a, i., 220; notice of the, ii.,
83, 84; pastimes in the,
Hares, ii,
Harmachis, or the Sphinx,
Harris papy
Hartmann (Robert),
anthropology, ii
Harvest described, ii.,


of Pa


ruins


iL,
Hasan, mosque of, its Gothic details, i.


190,


,


the donkey-boy, ii., 28, 29.
Hasheesh prohibited, i., 224.
Has: Saydd, tombs ne:
n yd, his garden, i,
Hatasu, Queen, notice of, Hie 249—
57, ; ships of, ii., 254, 257,
Hatching, artificial 266, 270.
Hathor, myth of, ii, 229—237 ; as a cow,
figure of, ii., 54,


, 198


Hathorhantaui, Queen, mummy of, i
Ha-uar, Egyptian name of Pelusium, i.
Hawking, 1., 258, 261.

Hay (Robert), his testimony respecting the
vocal Memnon, ii., 271.

Heliopolis, obelisk of, 23, 188; notice
of, i., 181—190; view of a garden on the
road to, i, 183 ; mentioned, ii., 279.

Hellenion, or sanctuary of the Greeks,
rhs (fie

Heptastadion at Alexandria, notice of the,

i, 4.

icleopolis, rise of, i

men in the deser

Her-hor, foreign invasion in the reign of,
ii, 213.

Hermes Trismegistus, 56.

Hermonthis, and the temple there, ii,
305 7.

Hero, portrait of a young and popular.
289.


>


Herodotus, account of the building of
Memphis, given by, i., 121; account of
the inundation of the Nile, i, 197.

Heron, of Alexandria, his inventions, i.,
30.

Herophilus, the physician, at Alexandria,
i, 14.

Herschel (Sir J.), observations on the Great
Pyramid, i, 147.

Hes-em-hib, Queen, mummy of, ii., 302.

Hieroglyphics, study of, ii, 38—44.

Hippopotamus on the Nile, i., 134, 1:

Holiday scenes described, ii, 105—109,
126.

Home life in Cairo among the natives, ii.,
81_87.

Homer, quotation from, i., 3.

Hoo, view of, ii., 218.

Hooker (J.) and Ball (J)., note of their
“ Journal of a Tour in Morocco,” i., 30,
nm, 3.

Horace on the Mareotic wine, i

Horse: an Arabian, i., 211; x
J60}ewarvintroduction and usevof ii,
247, 249 four
horses, ii., 247.

Horticulture encouraged, E c

Horus, and Isis, illustration of, i., 32 ; his-
torical facts connected with, i, 66; the
worship and myth of, i., 127 ; functions
of, ii, 58; on crocodiles, tablets of, ii.,


60.


cing, i., 258,


chariot, for two and


6.


59; figure of, in a triad, ii, 207 ; myth
of, ii, 207—211, temple and
myths of, i, 224 ; reign of, ii,


274; worship at Edfoo, ; land
level at the Salt Lake of, ii., 155.

Hospitals, i., 249, 251

Hykshos, rise of the, i., 99101 ; colonies
of the, i, 101; art of the period, ii.,
46; period, art of the, ii, 48, 49; re-
cords of the, ii, 245 ; horses introduced
by the, ii, 249.

Hykshos-Sphinx, figure of the, i.,
scribed, 1., 100.

Hypatia, martyrdom of, i

Hugo of Cwsarea, i, 23
234.


Hunting scenes,


99; de-


Tiberias, i,


i, 166 ; described, i., 169.


15


Talemos, or dirge, i., 12.
This, ii., ; mummy of an, ii., 56.


GENERAL INDEX.


Tbn-el-Mw'tazz, quotation from his poetry,


iby 4, 226.
Ibn Tuloon, See Ahmed-ibn-Tuloon.
Ibrahim, mosque of, at Desook, i, 75 ;
succeeds his father Mohammed Ali,


iis, 9)
Ibrahim Aga, tomb of, i.
Ibraheem Pacha, sarcophagus of, i., 312;
legend of, ii., 59.
Imam, duties of the, i., 207.
Immigration discouraged in ancient times,


, 306,


ii., 173 ; theories respecting, ii, 206.
Imouthes, Greek name of Alexandria,
i, 123.


Incense, expensive nature of, i.,

India, trafiic between Egypt and, i., 28 ;
Turkish, events in, i., 2

Inundation, view of the, i. 137
the, ii., 156, 157.

Tonians assist Psammetichus I, i., 74.

Tron tools used in building the Pyramids,

i, 145.

tion, methods of, i., 68, 69.

Isis, suckling Horus, illustration of a figure
of, i, 32; worship of, at Pa-Hebit, i,
114; myths of, 148 ; statue of, ii, 54;
figure of, in a triad, ii., 207; myth of,
ii., 207, 211, 229, 231; cow of, ii., 363 ;
temple of, at Bigeh, ii., 374.

Ismail Pacha, events during’ the govern-
ment of,i., 46; his benevolent rule, i,
67 ; room where he was born, i., 15, 17 ;
character and public wor'
19; his effort to suppr
trade, i ; his reforms, i
ing a drive, ii., 34, 35.

Ismaileeyeh, view of the farm at, ii., 21 ;
town of, 28.

Israel in Egypt, illustrated, Fr

Italian element at Alexandria, i., 50;
itinerant dealers of Cairo, ii., 136--142.


notice of


the


36; tak-


slave |


?


’


ie


Jackal described, ii., 187
Janus, king of Cypru
Jedda, trade and fair of,i., 275

Jesus Christ, illustration of the flight into

Egypt, i., 185.

Jew, money-changer, ii., 137, 140,144; a,
of Cairo, ii, 140, 144; element at
Alexandria, i., 50,

Jockeys, group of two, i
i, 182.

Jomard (E.), his ideas concerning the pyra-

147.
vents in the life of, i., 101.
Joseph and Pharaoh, an illustration, i., |


, 181; described,


mi


Joseph, €


Joseph’s well, view of the shaft of, i., 240 ;
details of the apparatus for drawing
water, 7b.; described, i., 241.

Judgment of the dead, the Egyptian, ii,


Julian era, its calculation, i., 19.
Julius Cesar, events in the life of, i., 19. |


K.


uh, or sanctuary of Mecca, ii.,


or principal room, i.
84 ; of the sheykh El-Mahdee, ii., 76.
Kadi, court and house of a,


Kafoor, a slave, governs Egypt for a time,
i, 215.

et Zayat, railway at, i.,

oon, history of, L, 248—

Kamaru, or Kamalu, the
name of the camel, i.,

Kanopus, decree of, ii., 54.

Karafeh, the, near Cairo, i

Karakoosh the eunuch,
tion of the name, 7d.
234236; or Punch, ii., 107.

Kardasseh in Nubia, ii., 374.

Karnak, inscription in the temple of,
records, history of Seti 1.,i., 101; ba
relief of the canal of Seti I. from, ii,
21; sculptured pillar from the temple
of, ii, 173; view of the obelis
248; great temple of, ii, 245; sanctu
of the temple, ii, 246; fellah woman
of, ii, 256; south pylon and sacred
lake, ii, 2£ 260; history of the
monuments, 260, 267, temple
of Mut, one of the triad of, ii, 267;
view of the village, ii, 282; the stela
OG iL, £; column in the hall, ii,

298; interior of the Ape-t temple, ii,

299.

Kasr Karoon visited, ii., 15

Kayt-Bey, pulpit in the of, i

y of, iL, 278—280 ; mosque


dL.
monumental


necdotes of,


s of, ii,


fp


mosque


Keneh, or Kenopolis, visited, i1., 222, 2
described, ii., 224.

Khatra, or Chefren, account of his pyra-
mid 151, atues of, at Boola
tis th

Khafra-Ankh and Herneka, pictures in
the tomb of, i., 138,

Khaleeg, or Cairo 182, 190.

Khaleel Aga, the grand eunuch, ii., 124.

Khalif el-Mutawakkil, restores the Nilo-
meter, 197.

Khalifs, history of the,
the, i, 300.

Khamus, son of Rameses, historical notice
of, i, 122; his body found, with a
golden mask, i., 164 ; notice of, ii,

Khan el-Khaleel, view of a carpet dealer's
stall in the, i., 267 ;* entrance to the, ii.

57.


Khe
286 ; his mosque, i., 28


leum of, i, 290, 292;
292;


.» 209; tombs of


Heh


’


mosque of,
; events in his life, 7b
Khatbeh, or Go-between, a, ii., 87, 88.
Khedive, origin of the title, i, 46; palace
at Alexandria, i., 51.
Khem, god, ceremonies connected
the worship ¢ , 290, 291.
Kheta, or Khita, history of the race, ii.,
274, 280, 286.
Khnum, worship of, at
310; figure of, ii., 351.
Khosrew Pacha, ii., 6.
Kiblah, or Prayer-niche, i., 204, 207.
Kircher (Athanasius), his study of the
Coptic language, i


with


Hsneh, ii, 308,


Kleber (J. B.) General, victory of, at Mata-
reeyeh, ii, 4; murdered, 7b., statue
of, 2b,


Klysma, on the Red Sea, i., 219.

Kochome, age of the pyramid of, i., 137.

Kenig Bey, the tutor of Said Pacha,
L, 45.


Kom Omboo, view of the temple, ii., 335;
des ‘iption of, 11, 343—345,
Koornah, view of "the temple, ii, 238 ;


temple of, ii, 276, 277.
Koos, near Keneh, ii., 203
Koran, title-page of MSS. of the, ii, 72,

74.
Kriosphinx, a, ii
Kubbeh, or holy

miraculous power
Kuhn (T. Ch.), his ideas concerning the

pyramids, i, 147.

Kutb, ruler of the Walees, i., 85


b, ) ) ; super-
stitious belief in the, i, 274; tale of a,
11, 304.


262.


site, i
Paty blsy


306; their


L.


Laby: vinth, ruins of, with its pyramid
156 ; derivation of the word, ii,


Ladders, ancient, ii,, 255, 259.

Lady of rank, driving out after sunset, ii,
106, 107.

Lamentation for the dead, ii., 97, 99.

Lane (E. W.), the historian, credulity of,
ii., 59, 61

Language, s

2


ch of the Egyptian, ii, 38


Learned Cairenes, ii., 67

Learning, how valued, ii, 7].

Lebanon, cedar from, for shipbuilding, i.,
14.

Lebbek-tree,
179, 18

Lecture in the university mosque, ii, 68,
69.

Leewan, or Liwan, the raised end of a
room, ii, 83; holy of ho in the
Mosque of Amroo, i., 203; view of, i.,
204 ; of mosque of Ibn-Tuloon, i., 2

Legend, of the temple of t Pa-Hebit,

, 114, 115; of the pyramids, i, 150,
151; of monasteries, and their relics,
i, 196; concerning the building of the
new town of Cairo, i, 217; of a bird,
fey

Legendary tales, i, 302

Leontopolite nome, coins

Le Page Renouf (P.
the inscription
statue, i., 73.

Lepsius (Professor), discovers mode
building the pyramids, i, 141;

1es on Egyptian architecture,


i, 70; trees of Cairo, i,


ies,


304, 306, 313.
of the, i., 64,
), his translation of
of the Pastophorus


of


sps (M. de), his scheme of the Suez
Canal encouraged by Said Pacha.


portrait of, ii, 19; his works, ii,
20.

Letter-writers, public, ii., 64.

Leyth-ibn-sid, miraculous tomb of the
Iman, i., 313.

Libyan desert, explored, ii., 217.

Limestone, with fossil shells, from Mo-
kattam, i, 145.

Lion carved in bronze, ii .

Literature, Egyptian, ii, 57—59; of
ancient Egypt, ii.,

Lotus, gradual disappearance of the, i.,
66; symbolism of the, 7b.; illustrations


of the, i, 111; columns in the form of
the, ii, 165, 166.

Louis IX. of France defeated before Man-
soorah, i., 114,


i ot


GENERAL INDEX.


Liittke (M.), fir
church at Alexandria, i.
Lykopolis, ii., 189.
Luksor, or Luxor, obelisk of, at Paris, i
sncident at, ii, 202 ;
notice of the temple, tila
ruins of, ii,
of, ii, 280.
Lucian, the author, at Alexandria, i, 27.


minister of the German


ae


views
264—
270; pylon and obelisks


M.


Maabdeh, Crocodile cave of, ii., 182.
Mah’mal, or litter, ceremony of the, ii
125, 128.
Ma nmoudeyeh Canal at Alexandria
43 ; view of the banks,
Makhbooba Bey, Lady Pre: ident of the
Almehs, i., 8
Makreezee, his testimony concerning the
old Nilometer in 1417, i, 195; his
testimony concerning the rising of the
Nile, i, 199.


Malabar fic with Egypt, i., 28.
Malikees, sect of the, ii, 73, 75
Malkafs, i, 239, 240.

Mama, or Doom palm, ii., 183.


Mamelukes, portrait of an emir,

their history, 1, 242, 245, et seq
events in the rule of the, i, 29
defeated by the French cayalry
massacre of the, ii, 6—8 ; Mamelu
tomb, i, 309; full. armour of, iL, 2;
hall in a palace, ii., 82.

Mamisi, or birthplace of Horus, ii,

231.

Mamoon, son of Haroun-el-Rasheed, pene-
trates into the pyramid of Cheops, i,
149 ; resto: the Nilometer, i, 197;
notice of events in his life,

Mandara, or private room, of the Sheykh-
el-Mahdi, ii., 79, 82.

Mandoorah tree, rema
view of, i., 200 ;

Manetho, notice of, ii.,

Manfaloot, visited, ii.,
ii, 180.

Manners and customs, i, 13
168.

Mansoorah visited and described,
114,

Manufactures of Alexandria, i., 28—30.

Mareus Aurelius, events in Egypt during
the time of, i., 25.


229)


179


18 2; view of,


5—139, 167,


i., 113,


Mareotis, Lake, site of, i, 3; commerce
and tyaffic on the, i., 28, 29 ; account of,
i, 59, 60; vineyards and wines of,


60.
Mariette Pacha (A), his testimony respect-
ing the lotus, 1, 66 ;
Sais, i, 73; his means of


his ex


Sais, clearing the
sand from monuments, i., 97 ; his labours
and discoveries, i, 151, 152; view of
his house, i., 154; his house noticed, i,
156, 157; discoveries of, i, 157, 158,
notice of, ii., 42, 43; result of his
avations at Abydos, ii., 207, 210,


211, 215.


“Market at Desook, i, 72; at Esneh, ii,
310.
Marriage, means to obtain, i., 307 ; cere-


monies,
Mary,
184,


i., 87 et seq.
the Blessed Vir; gin, tree of the, i,


ations at |


383


Maryoot, summer palace at, i., 45.

rah, quarries at, i, 142.

shrebeeyeh, or lattice window, i., 175.
Mashoota, remains at, i., 101.


Maslamah, governor of Cairo, i., 201.
r-el-Kahira, view before the walls of,
Massacres by the Mamelukes, i, 245 ; of


the Mamelukes, ii, 6—8.
ba, or independent mausoleums, i.,
136; of Ti, view of the doorway
general view, i., 160;


159 ;
i, 164, 167; of Ptah-hotep, i.,
astabat-el-Faraoun, or Mastaba Far’oon,


notice


164.


=


the pyramid of Dashoor, so called, i., 121,
ide

Matareeyeh, sycamore tree of,
El-Matareeyeh.

eals, customs of, ii, 94, 96.
ecca, mosque of, i., 202; miraculous
flight of a pillar from, i., 206.
edamot at Thebes, colonnade at, ii.,
edeenet-el-Fayoom, visit to, ii, 1!
Medical knowledge, ii., 6
academy of Sais, i., 73.
Medinet Haboo, Temple of, ii. 293,
Melboos, or religious man possessed by the
spirit, ii., 111.

elek El-kamil, sultan, builds Mansoorah,
i, 114.

lik-el-Adil, history of, i., 241 ; coins of,
242,

Melik Es-salih, history of, i., 242, 243.
Melikites, views of the sect of,
jury done by, to Alexandria,
Melilot, the divine wreath of
Memnon, statues of the Vocal, ii., 268
sounds emitted by, ii.
of, ii, 271; account of the statues, ii.
271, 272.

Memnonium, notice of the, ii,
emphis, illustration of a citizen of, i., 97 ;


184, See


ie


167.


7.
work by the


a)


eI


fall of, i., 118; description of, i, 123 ;
notice of, i, 179181; temple of,
ig PATS),

Menander, Athenian comic poet, his letters,
i, 16,

Mendes, coins of, i., 64.

Menephtah, the Pharaoh of the Exodus, i.,


101; bricks stamped with his name, i.,
102; portraits of, 1, 105, i1., 525 his-
tory of, ii, 286; figure of, ii, 295;
tomb of, ii., 300.

enes, founder of Memphis, i., 121.


Pinus,


be


enkara, or Myce
i, 148, 149 ;
149,150; h


wooden coffin of,
sepulchral chamber of, i.,
sarcophagus, lost at sea,


i, 149; inscription on the wooden
chest of, i, 149; builds the third pyra
mid, i, 132; destruction of his pyra
mid, i 4,


Mentha, or Mentu, god, ii., 306.

enzale’ in the vicinity of the
lake of, i. birds on the lake of, i.,
107; fishing boat on the lake, i, 109.
erienptah, or Sekhet, goddess, i., 91.
Mesahhar, or Messenger of Morning, ii.,
120.

etal utensils,
Meydoom, pj
tuary from, ii,


change
88


te


=


Arab, ii.
mid of,


43, 45.


121, 142; sta-


Mihrab, or prayer-niche, 04, 207.
Mikyas, or the Nilometer, i,, 195.
Milkman, a, ii, 136, 137.


384


Mimbar, or pulpit:
Mineeyeh,


visited,


, 340,
Mirage, view of a, ii., 2


Mithridate fs exploits 0!
Mitraheeneh, Arab ville
Mney Bull, adored


of emerald and gold, ii.,


339 ; sites


17 ; described, fi.,


19;


at Heliopolis, i,


Moeris, Lake, ii., 156, 1


Mohammed, the prophet,
the birthday of the, i
Mohammed Ali: commences


moudeeyeh canal, i.,
i, 31; view of the ‘
honour of, i., 39 ; his
i., 42; founds the pr
public works underta
tolerance, 48 ; his
sperity, i,
4—9 ; his work:
his mosque, i, 14;
tomb, ii, 16;

protects the mosque


15.


Mohammed-el-Ihsheed, history of,
Mohammed, son of Kayt-Bey, ee of,


Mohammed Selim, Kawas:


consulate, ii., 30.


his plans re:


57.

ceremonies on
i, 104,

the Mah-
2; mausoleum of,
“Place” named in
influence in Egypt,
esent dynasty, 7b. ,
ken by, i i, 43; his
care for Egy ptia an


67 ; events in his time,
3 ii, 13; court of


iption of his
ised, iL, 36 ;


ot LNA, i,


2


s of the Austrian


Mo'izz Khalif, his attempt to subjugate


Egypt, 215 ; trans:
new city of Cairo,
arts during his time,


alors


srs palace to the


Mokattam limestone, used for the Pyra-
mids, i., 145, 146; the range. 179,
181; view of, i, 191

Molid, or birth y festive il, i, 76, 82.

Monasteries at Sohag mee Assouan, ii.,
195, 196.

Monastic institutions of Alexandria, i.,
32, ¢

Monasticism, phases of, ii., 197, 198.

Money-changers, i., 49, 50, ii., 137.

Monophy ite here > the. 34; proceed
ings of the sect,

Monuments at Tani j L, 105.

Moore (Thomas), quotation from, i., 150.

Moristan of Kala’oon, view of the door-
way, i., 247; ornaments of the, i; 248;


window of, i., 249; c


Moses among the rush
of, i., 102.

Mosques, notices of,
vices of the, i., 207 ; «


et si


view of the interio
details of the,
38; detai
seribed, i.,
Ibn Tuloon, i,
interior of the, i,
Pacha, i, 47; of V
in a street, view of a,
Mourners, ii., 99, 100 ;
Muezzins, their call to
diction, i., 1


201, 2


of Hakim, i,
1h


3 illustre fae of,
Muiizz, stream so called, i


‘ourt of, i,
es, i, 87; finding


2, & -
of El-Azhar, ii

; of Hasan,
2%; ornamental
of the, i,
269; de.
5, Ol


26


view


of Said
Verdanee, ii., 70;
i, 102.

boat with, ii, 101.
prayer, and bene-


5.
2


Be


progress of


| Nimrod, ii.,


GENERAL INDEX.


Mukaukas, Egyptian governor of Alexan- {
dria, his proc dings, i Governor of
Cairo, negotiations for peace by, i., 193,
Mummny, of a cat, illustration of a, i., 90;
of a crocodile, ii, 182; of a wolf, ii.,
187.
Mummy-ease, inscribed,
Munkav, the angel of the oats ii,
Musaflir Khana, chamber in the, ii
NURSES Ga ee m PeyPt, L, 215.
5 1S: 169.
id Egyptian,


103.
15, 17.


Misa the author, ii
Mutemua, Queen, portrait of,
Mycerinus. See Menkara.
Myos Hormos, the fleets of,
Mythological notes, ii., 248
the sculptures at Edfoo, ii.,


N.


103.


Nakir, the angel of the tomb, ii.,

Nakyoos, Arab victory at, i., 39.

Narcot use of, i., 224.

Narses, burns the city of Alexandria, i., 37.

Naucratis, historical notice of, i., 76, 77.

Naville (M. Edward), his labours on the
“ Ritual,” ii., 300.

Necho, canal of, ii.,

Necklaces, ancien

Necropolis of C: Teron:
a rich site of discovery, i., 171; illus-
tration and description of the voyage to
a, ii, 304,

Nectanebo, figures of, i1., iS

Neterhotep, Princess, i., 167.

Nefert, wife of Ra-hotep, statue of, ii., 43,
45


of Memphis,


Nefert-ari, wife of As ae notice of, ii.,
247, 249; head of, 281.


Neith, godd
temple of,


of Sais, figure of, i., 71;
ro 1S megalithic statue of,


ib.; philology of the name, i, 74;
worship of, at Esneh, ii., ne 310.


Nekeer, the angel of the tomb,


Nekheb, ruined fort of, ii ‘
Nelson, Lord, his victory at Aboukir, i,
ii, 3 anecdote o: 59, 61.


Nephthys, sister of Isis, the myth of, i,


302.
(K.), his opinions discussed, rik,


Netem-mut, Que en, mummy ‘okie

Niebuhr
38.

Nile, River, statues of, with the sixteen
cubits infants, i, 17, 197 ; statue of
the, exhibited at Rome, i., 19; changes
in the condition and direction of the
67 ; views on the, i, 66, 67; view on
the main stream, i., 116; sacrifice to
the, i., 197 ; legend concerning the, i.,
199; dam of the, 13, 14;
the banks of the, ii., 62; scenes on the,
ii, 149; theory of the of the, ii,
151; at 163 ;
watering buff scene
at Abydos, i the
Cataract, ii., 305 ; scenes on the banks,
i, 340, 343 ; description of the upper
parts, i, 346; Father, illustration of,
thy Wf

Nilometer, views of the, i.,
i, 195—199. |

302 |

|


’


view on


age


Beni-hasan, ii.,
oes in the, ii., 204 ;
208 ; scene


view


1


near


193 ; described,


Nisibi, battle of, ii, 9

Nitocris, Queen, of the 6th dynasty, i.,
150.

Noah, legends of the ark of, i., 210.


Nomes, figures from a list of, i


3


Norden (F. L.), t the traveller, his remarks
on Alexand , a4.

Nubar Pacha, i

Nubi, Temple ¢ 3,


; coffee-hous:


Nubian ale ;
349, 350, 3f


portraits of Nene il

of good family, ii., 35

Netamnbliis in the stone of the pyramids,
, 145.


boy,


Niele formation, ii., 146, 148.
‘OF

Oases, description of, ii., 2

Obelisk, an unfinished one, ii.


of He-


Obelisks, account o
liopolis, i1., 186, 18».
Obeyd-Allah founds a new Shiite dynasty,
i, 215. sa
Octavian conquer
Omar, the Khalif, his
library of Alexandria, i.,
the capital f
i, 40; coin of, i 1; legends of, i
199, 206 ; the pilot, portrait of, i.,
Omar Ibn-al-Fareed, the Sheykh, tomb of,
described, i, 314.
Omen of birds at th
andria, i., 4.
Orange-seller,


on. ane
} remove


38
om Alexandria to C


65.


e foundation of Alex-


portrait of an, ii, 12


Ordeal, the ren of, i., 206.
Origen, notice of, i., 37.
Orion, Saint, rising 3 of the Nile attributed


by the Christians of Egypt, to, i, 199.
Ornament, i., 245; from an ancient manu-
script, ¢ various mural, ii,
173.
sup, or Osiris-Supt, myth of, i
myths of, i, 148; ii, 207—


oy


187.


211,


229; use of the name as applied to the
dead, i, 157; figures of, i1., 49, 54;


functions of, ii., 58 ; firiroot 4 in a triad,
ii., 207 ; nite statue of, 1i., 374.

Osmanlees, rise of the power of the, i.
292.


rose gr


,
Othman, coin of, i., 221.
Owls, i., 301.
Oyoon Moosa,


oasis of, or well of Moses,


PY


founder of
198.


Pachomiu
cism, ii.,

Pa-Hebit, remains of the temple at, i

Painting, excellence of Arabic, i
in tombs, ii., 101.

Palaces of Alexandria, i, 11.

Palettes, ii., 56, 57.


Egyptian monasti-


114.
21;


Palm, leaves of, carried by mourners, i,
2 branches in burial ceremonies, i.,
62; ii., 99, 101; view, with examples


of the, i


2 yundant in
Alexandria, i


group of palim-trees,


3; another, 41 ;


4; description and uses of the, i., 54,
illustration of a capital, derived
by


from the, i., 71; utilisation of the


the natives, i, 119, 120; trees, i., 22
li, 192; trees, scene of, i. 301; beds
made of branches of, ii., 141; date and


Paper, Bea ies of, i.,
Papu, or the papyrus,
Papyrus, view of

torical notice of the,


64.
a thicket, i, 64; hi
i, 64, 66; rarit;


of the, i, 112; illustration of the, id. ;
its uses, 7b. ; columns in form of the,
16


59; magical, ii., 61,

y on the way to the country, a,
279; representation of a festival,
250, 252.

Pasht, goddess, ii., 177 ; cave temple of, ib.


Pelasgoi, the,

Pelicans, ii.,

Pelusium,
bour of,
the Asi 99 ; capture of i, OTs

Penance, favourably received in Al
andria, i., 32.

Pentaur, ancient poet, ii

Peplum, the city of Al
a, i, 4.

Perfumes, i., 224.

Pergamus, the library of, transportec

Alexandria, i., 19.

Perring (J. S.), measurement of pyramids
by, i, 141.

Persian supremacy in Egypt, ii.,

ee 1 (Oscar), his views respec

151.

Pekan notes tomb of, ii, 294.

Petrified forest, view of the road to the,
ii, 144; details of its formation, ii.,
145.

-haraoh

moe

-*haros in ancient Alexandria, view of

the, i., 1; notice of the, i, 2; site of

the island of, i., 3, 6, 46; at Alexandria,
built for Ptolemy Philadelphus, by

Sostratus, of Cnidus, i., 6; a model of,

exhibited at Rome. ily,

1aros, island of, chiefly inhabited by the

Turks, i., 51.


158.
notice of the site of the har-


xe


280.
xandria in form of


to


ng deltas,


and Joseph, an illustration, i.,


i)


harsalia, battle of, i, 19.

hiladelphus, governor of Alexandria, i,
4; son of Ptolemy Soter
adorns the city of Alexandria, i, 15.
rile, desc


larHar)


and Berenice,


‘iption of the island and its
359—374.
and grammarian, i., 15.
uilippi, result of the battle OlLuiselios


Pheenician shipbuilders at ‘Alexandria. 15
14.
igeons, i, 167, 170, 230; uses and
varieties of, ii, 190, 1935 flock of,
inking, 203.


ims and ‘pilgrimage, i, 88; festival
the pilgrimage, ii, 124; meeting


of
place of the pilgrims, it, 126; return


of the, ii, 128, 2
for a ship, ii., 131.
Pillar, anecdote concerning a, i., 206.
Pillow, or rest, a, ii, 54.
Pinotem L., renee of, found at Deir-el-
Bahari, ii, 250; II., mummy of, found
at Deir-e -Bahari, i ii, 259,


4; pilgrims waiting | pyramid of Cheops, i., 126 ;
i an


GENERAL INDEX


P. inotem, mummies of kings of that name,

ry
Pipe, or hookah, illustration of a, i.
Plague, or black death, i., 261, 26:
Plan of a private house in Cairo,


E l ., 83.
Ploughing scenes, i., 163, 168, ii, 161.
Ploughing, ancient method of, ii, 171.


ococke (R.), the traveller, ii., 37.
Poem on the palm-tree, i, 55; ona girl


weaving, i, 58; by Freudenberg, de-
scriptive of the fair at Tantah, i., 83.


Pompey, history of, i., 17.
Pompey’s pillar described,
not of Pompey the Great, but a Roman
prefect, i., 27 ; illustration of, i, 24.
Pontius, architect, re-erects the obelisk
known as Cleopatra’s Needle, i., 23, 1.
9.


Poor, condition of the, i.


Por ‘raiture, Egyptian, art of, ii, 47, 48,


Port Said, growth of, ii., 21.
ortuguese in India, i, 292
ottery, female seller of, ii
dance of, at Kene h, a
attitudes of,
scene of,


222 ; abun-


69, 70; at mid-


3 niches, i, 267,


Prisoners of war, ii.,

Proportion of figures in Egyptian style,
rule of the, ii, 46.

Protestant German church at Alexandria, |
view of the, i., 48.

Psammetichus I., note relating to, i., 74.

Ptah, god of Memphis, figures of, de-
scribed, i, 121, and notes.

Ptah-hotep, Mastaba of, i, 164 ;
from his tomb, i., 169 ; boat of mourners
represented in the tomb of, ii., 101.

Ptolemy, hieroglyphics in the name of, ii.,
38, 39; son of Lagus, first governor of
Alexandria, i., 4 ; introduces the camel,
Ty 53),

Ptolemy Soter, coin of, i., 13; founder of
the edifices on the Bruchium, i., 13
system of municipal and commercial life |
at Alexandria, 14, |

Ptolemy IL., Philadelphus, builds the
tuary of Isis at Pa-Hebit, i., 11¢
Arsinoe, portraits of, on a gem,


scenes


; his


‘Alex:


orders the construction of the
andrian Pharos, 1., 6.

Ptolemy V., Euergetes, coin of, i, 16;
events of his time, ib.


Ptolemy I
i, 50.
Piickler Muskau, Prince, his description
of Mohammed Ali, ii.,,11, 12.
Pulasatha, the tribe of, ii., 289.
Punt, huts in, ii,

with, ii., 258. |

Puta, an ancient artist, ii, 274.

Pyramids, battle of the, i, 42 ; historical
and descriptive notice of the, i., 117, |
et seq. ; views of pyramids and sphinx,
i, 117, 121; eighty in view at Mem-
phis, i, 121; view at the foot of the

visit to the,

i, 126—128; illustration showing me-

thod of ascending them, i,

measurements and proportions,

view of the second and third, i, 13

during inundation, iss


., Euergetes II.,


portrait of, |


commerce


view of,
mode of


building, i, 140; cost and


145-

concerning, i.,
of
tle
of the chan-


deteils of their constrvetion, i
147; erroneous
147 ; illustration of the
pyramid of Cheops, i, 145 ;
gallery of, i, 146 ; names
bers of the pyramids of Cheops, i., 147 ;
real use of, i, 148; exploration of, i
149 ; account of the third pyramid, i.,
149 ; view of the pyramid of Sak uh,
i., 155; description of, i, 156, 1


ideas
discovery
of


description of the pyramid of Kochome,
Is


156; destroyed by Karakoosh, i.
34; notice of, ii, 154,


the pyramid of Meydoom, #b.


,
3 view of


Q.
and El-Masarah,


2s of Tourah


Ra. hotep, atatue of, portrait
of, ii.,
Ramadan, fe ast of, ii., 117.
Rameses I., historical events in his time,
ey LOM seats ia)
Rameses IT. : re-erects the obelisk
as Cleopatra’s Needle, i., 23 ; portrait of,
i., 100; historical events in his time, i.,
101; ii, 278, 279; military prowess
of, i, 103; bricks made with his name
stamped upon them, i, 103; illustra-
tion of the, i., 104; fallen colossus of, at
Mitraheeneh, i, 120; his name in-
scribed on the fruit of the Pe
57; gilded vases from his tomb, ii., 297.
Raméses III., portrait of, ii, 50; builds
the temple of Medinet Haboo, ii., 286 ;


-124,


known


history of, ii,, 293, 294; tomb of, ii,
300, 301.

Rameses VI., sarcophagus in the tomb of,
ii., 296; tomb of, described, ii., 301.


Ramesseum, column at the, ii., 16.
of the, ii., 277; ruins of the, ii
280; details, scenes, and statues of the,

79—281.


plan


station at,
camels at, i


Ramleh, railway
campments of

Rains, sacrifice of, ii., 130.

Ras-et-Teen, or Cape of
the ee live’s palace,
i,

Rayah fie stile mode of cultivating, i., 68.

Readin: nd, illustrated, i, 31.

Reaping, ancient, scene of, i, 171.

Rebels, the fate of, ii, 194.

Recruiting under Mohammed Ali, ii,, 159.


3, the site of
a Dione Ge


Redeseeyeh, desert, ii., 329, 331.

Red Se: e at night, i., 28; fleets on
the, 129; description of the, ii, 25, 26 ;
shown to be the Sirbonian Lake, %b.;

310.


view on the coast of the, ii.,
Reeds, among the, a view, ii., 20.
Rekhmara, paintings from the tomb of,

i, 104.

Relics, vastness of their number,


; sGarattives ear sects in ee

if a ii., 202204; rites and services,
i., 207, 208,

Resheed, or Rosetta, visited, i, 77.


Revenue of Egypt, i., 212.


< Rhacotis, Egyptian port of,
Rhodopis, the Greek beauty, legends of,
\ 150, 151.


a Rings for fingers and ears, ii., 259.
Ritual, or book of the dead described, ii
57, 58.
c Riwaks, or students’ tents, ii
eypt, anc: ient, ii.
. Rock-tombs, ii., 177, 186.
Roda, view Bene ena i, 189; retreat
of the garrison of Cairo to the island of,
= i., 193; its bridge of boats, i., 195 ; the
Nilometer of, i., 195 ; tomb in the island
305.
: Rohanu, valley of, ii.,
7 Rohlfs (G.), explores th
< ii., 217, 2
; Rohrbach,


Roads in


D, Oot,
e tear desert, |


testimony concerning the


papyrus, i, 66. |
Roomeleh Place, view of, i, 238; de-
scribed, i., 239.
Roomeyla, activity at, ii, 189.
~| Roses, essence of, exported, ii, 156. |
i Rosetta, gate at Alexandria, the fashion-


able ride, i., 43 ; view outside the gate,


vi


i., 74; illustration of a house in, 76;
illustration of the stone, 7.; visited,
> historical description of the
literary value of the stone,
5 view on the Rosetta branch
of the Nile, 1., 67.


Rougé (Visct.

7 rency, i, 64,
Rubbish in the district of Upper Egypt, |
i, 205, |
Cordova, palm


E. De), on Egyptian cur-


3 Ruhzafa, near
planted at, i.
Ruined state of 0


Syrian


Hino,
301, 302.
Rutennu, the race of, ii., 274.

|
|
q |
|

Sacrifice to the e, human, an illustra-


tion, i, 197; described, i, 199.
Sadat, Sheykh, house of, ii., 23 ;
the harem of, ii., 84, 86.
Safekh, goddess of history, i
= Sahara, land level of the, ii, 155.
8 of the fifth dynasty, builds the
pyramids of Abuseer, i., 120.


Ka’ah in


Saices, or runners, ii., 106—108.
fi Said Pacha, events in the time of, and
public works of, i, 45; mosque of,


illustrated, 47 ; richly embroidered
tent of, i, 58; character of, ii., 17.
sais, a, or running footman, figure of, i
4; description of the, ii., 351.
view of the ruins of, i., 70;


deserip-


tion of, i, 71; historical notice of, i.,
71, note; profound learning of the
members of the academy at, i, 74; |


present state of, i., 7

Sakeeyeh, or water-w. healt, 4 i, 68.

Sakkara, or Sakkarah, wall painting from
a tomb at, i, 60; pyramid of, i,
142; derivation of the name, i., 1
Khamus buried in the Serapeum at, i.,
122; view of Mariette’s house at, i, |

D4 5 of the pyramid, i, 155;

note on, i, 157; wooden statue from,

e ii, 43,:44, 45, 46; carvings from, ii.,

48; mural ornament from, ii, 179;


view


GENERAL INDEX.


result of recent discover:

54,

Saladin, his influence in Egypt,
history of, i, 230,
period, i., 241.

Salting food, method of,

Sam, or priestly title, 1,

San, or Zoan, description of,
fishing hamlet of, i., 97 ;
a sojourn in, i, 97.

San-el-hager, canal of,

ndstorm in the d

Saplel, Prince, ii

Sarcophe

Sarcophagi described,

sien


67


i”
; events of his


, 164.


illustrated, i
122.


des


ription of


97.
97.


or money
, 140, 144.
uvabeeus beetle, figure of the, i, 14
Scarabei,
Scemiophris, Queen, ii., F
Scha’aban, or Sh’aaban, history we i
261.
Schagaret-ed-durr,
Schardana, the, ii.
Schmoranz (Herr), anecdote of, 1.,
School, rosette of a, i., 251; view of a, i,


engraved, ii.


legend of, ii


Schools, ancient, ii., 27

Schopenhauer (Arthur), his ides
ing the py ds i, 140,

Se hweinfurth (G.), his observations concern-
ing the Lebbeh tree, i., 183.

Scribe, seated figure of a, found at Mem-
phis, i. 131, 1

Sebak, worship of
1D>6R

Sebasteum,

9°


concern-


, at the Labyrinth, ii
emblem of, ii., 1
at Alexandria,
burned in a.p. 36
Sekhet, unite statue

mythologi ul notice of, i

of, at Karnak, ii., 263, 267.

Selim incorporates Egypt with the Otto-

man empire, i., 67.

Semitic, colonists,
99:

ii., 206.
Semites entering
Senoofees, sect of the,
Septimius Severus,
Septuagint version of

its completion, i.,
Rerabe um, at
5 libre ary ie the;
tion of the, i,
from the, i
156 discovery of the, i
head of, illustrated,


described, i.,


Hao One


statues


black


of,
Chl


63; colony at This,
nature of the Egyptian language,


ii, 220.


the
15;
Alexandria,


Bible, notice of


described, i.,
destruc-
a sphinx
in the, i,
57, 158.
yy ohh


24,


Serapis,


cluses in the temple cells of, i., 32.
Sesostris preserved from destruction, i.,
2
23.
Set, antiquity of the name, i, 100: or


Seth, worship of, i, 100, 101.
Seth, or Typhon, held in abhorrence at
Edfoo, ii., 323, 32
Seti Tmlesente in the history of, i, 101 ;
canal of, ii, 19, 21; and the Suez
Canal, ii., 23; or Sethos, port ,
ii, 50; figure of, of
211; sarcophagus of, ii.,
of, Deir-el-Bahari, <b., ii


ing incense,


13 ;


mum


at 286; view
of the forecourt and entrance of his
“house” at Kurnah, ii., 276; events
of his reign, ii., 277 ; plan of his tomb,


iL, 294 ; description of his tomb, ii.,300,


84,
vaban, Sultan, illuminated MS. of his
time, ii, 74.

shafe’ee, mausoleum of the Imam, i., 313


shafe’ees, sect of the, ii., 7
1akalsha, The,
Shakespeare, quotations from, describing
the boat of Cleopatra, i., 20.
Shalmaneser, the two-humped

ssyria at the period of, i.,
ham fights, enormous ae nse of, i.
iarakee, or hi¢ )


ii, 289.


camel in


44, 45. D.
| Shaw er, events in his life.
Shebti, or sepulchral figur
ii illustrated, ii


deh, tales of, i
| Shephard’s hotel, Cairo, ii, 26, 28
Shepherds, ii., 301, 303.


Sherkook, i., 230.

h, tomb of a, i
i-Beled, the title of,
Ship-building scene, de:
Shipping of Hate
ii., 62 ; scenes, ii.,
Shishak and his enemies, ii., 297.
Shoeblacks, Arab, ii., 24.
Shoobra Castle and avenue:
Sidon, the port of, choked, i
Silk, manufacture of,


96.
162, 168.


7; native,


9—]1.


encour


yptian, ii
ake, the, ii., 2
i


Situlus, ancient inscribed, ii., 37.
Siout, or Siyut, railway to, ii, 133; view
of a court at, ii, 184; visited, ii, 184


—189; view before
ates view of, ii.,
at, i, 188.


Slave ai ade, sholiion of the, ii.


the gate, ii, 185 ;


|
|
j 187 ; midday prayer
|

|


Smyth (Prof - Piazzi), his ideas con
cerning the ay pyramid, i., 147.
Snake, charmers, ii, 105, 288; dervish


with a, ii, 112
Snefru, or Sene:
of Meydoom,


time, ii, 45.


builds pyramid
statuary of his


Soane Museum, ii, 286.
Sohag, visit to, ii., 195; view of,


Solar disk, The, ii., 3
| Somali coast, ii


Ceylon trafic of, with


| Egypt,

| Song of the Zikr, ii. 112.

| Songstress, a favourites i,, 287—289.

| Sook, or bazaar, ii., 142.

| Sosigenes, astronomer, assists Casar in the


new calendar, i., 19.


Sostratus of Cnidus builds the Pharos,
thy Wo
Soul, Mohammedan belief concerning the,


OB:

Spain, palm-trees in

Sparrow-hawk, Egyptian, i

Speos Artemidos, valley of, ii
of, ii, 176—178.

Sphinx, figure of a Hykshos Sphinx, i.,
99; described, i., 100 ; view of the, i.
151; account of the, i., 153—155 ; from

156 ; re-


grotto


the Serapeum, figures of a, i,


presentation of sculpturing, igh atl
figure of a, ii, 262; at Ghizeh, i
at Karnak, ii., 271.
Sphinx-like face, portrait of a, i, 152.
Spitta (W.), describes the Ziky, ii, 111.
Sshnin, or lotus, i., 66.
Stalactite ornament, origin of the, i., 227;
employment of the, i, 228,
Stalactites, ii., 220.
Stamboul, marble pillars sent to, i., 237.


Statuary, ii, 42, 43; and sculpture, an-
cient, ii., 48, 49, 51.
Stone, methods of tr: asportation and


weighing of, 142, 143; ii, 246, 335,
337; colos at pMlompius belonging to
England, i., 123; figure of, i., 12 ym

Strabo on anes Ma rates w ine, ily 5 60.

Straton, the philosopher

Students, nativ , 66, 67; life of at El-


‘Azhar, Tbe Tee diminishing in number,


Suez Canal
Pacha, 1., 45 ;
the, i, 46.

Suez, a street in,
the isthmus of,


entertained by Said
of construction of


fortifications of

23; passage of the
canal described, ii., 24 ; hotel life at, ii.,
25; walk through the city, ib.; view on
the canal banks, ii., 36,

Sugar-cane, harvest, ii., 157, 160.

, view of the door of the alley of,


Sun, worship of the, i., 127.
Sunnites, success of the, ii., 73.

word of ceremony, a, i., 283.
amore-tree of Matareeyeh, i., 184.
amore-trees, ii, 192.
Syene, well of, ii., 349.

Syria, caravan commerce with,


a


Tablets with kings’ names, ii., 212, 215,
216.

Taboot, or water-wheel, i., 68.

Taharka, or Tirhakah, King, ii., 303;
portrait statue of, ii, 52, 53.

Tale-telling, the art of, encouraged by the
rapid changes of Egyptian fortunes, i.,

7, 288.


Tangier caravans, i., 219.

Tantah, fair at, ; historical descrip-
tion fof, They, te) 82; view of the market
at, 1, 81.

Tanis, noti

1arbour,


of the site of its ancient
i, 2; view of the ruins of, i,
96; the tablet of, i., 104; historical
notice of the site and monument, i., 97,
98—103; view of the excavations at,
i., 98 ; notice of, ii, 279.

Tapestries, excellence of the, i


219.


iy;
Tartars


introduce the camel into the


Taus, priestes: of Isis, 1, 159.

Telegraph posts in the desert, view of, ii.,
8.

Tel-el-Amarna, ii., 178.

Tel-el-Heyr, Hykshos camp at, i., 101.


Tenees, or the city of Isis, ruins of, i.,


09; celebrated for its gold tissues, i.,
110.


Tents


GENERAL INDEX.


of dignitaries, ii, 112, 113. See


Amroo.
Tewtik Pacha, origin of his dynasty, i., 42.


Texts


of the chapters of the ritual in


tombs, ii., 298, 300.


au ais, the hetaira, wife of Ptolemy Soter,


14
a ees priestess of Isis, i., 159.
Thebe:


tom
visi


Theor


this,
in,


Thom:


Thoth
IE,


348


10th
10th
56

250


destroys the


city of, ii, 207


Thothmes III., event
103; erects the obe


8, testimony of the paintings in the
ibs, i., 103 ; views at, ii. 239 et seg. »
ancient buildings of.


ited, ib, ,


244 ; dei les of, ii, 245 ; antiquities
Oraas
Theoe:
Theodosius,
images, i., 25.

Theon, the mathematician, i., 34, . 2.


63 ; fall of, ii., 303305.
ritus, quotation from, i., 9, 11.
decree of, against heathen


hilus, Archbishop of Alexandria,
erapeum, i.
in Upper Egypt, rise of the Pharaohs
i., 99 ; Memphis colonised from, id. ;
211.


as, ‘the patriarch, dedicates a church


in Niksennkity to the Virgin, i., 34.


, god, writing the name of Tamas
on the fruit of the Persea, ii, 57 ;


figure of, ii., 370,
hoth-Hermes, functions of, ii., 58.


mes I., notice of, ii., 260.

mes II., name os on a scarab, ii.
; seal of, ii., 248 ; notice of, ii, 249 j
))


s in his hi a
k known as Cleo-


patra’s Needle, i, 23; notice of, ii,
250, 260, 261; buildings of, ii, 258,
260.

Thothmes IV. and the sphinx, legend of,


i, 154.
Thousand and One Nights, The,
Threshing, mode of, ii.,


189.


Thya wood, notice of the, i., 30, . 3.

Ti, Mastaba of, i., 159, 160, 164, 167.

Tii, wife of Amenophis III., portrait of,
ii, 50.

Tochon d’Annecy, on Egyptian currency,

, 64.

Todrus, the Kopt, and his son Moharreb,
ii, 240.

Tomb of Ibrahim 306; of the


isto


Tools,
Tooma
246,


ait 5 69, 300 ; of a Mameluke, i.,
sulous, i, 308—311; of a


; of the Apis pull, i 55


visited, ii., 169; paintings, de-
struction of, ii, 171; subjects on the
wal
iL,


Is of, ii, 176; scenes depicted in,
252; styles and arrangements, ii.,
description of interiors of, th,


, 298.
variety of, ii., 227.
in. Bey, ast of the Mamelukes, i.,


Tourah, quarries at, i, 142; quarries of,


Tike, Ul
captives in the quarry
y for rings, in shape of a female, ii.,


view of, ib. ; legend of Greek
s, i, 186.


259.


Trees
the
Triad


Tribes of Nubian Es
gual tablets


Trilin:
Tuaa,


Tuirshi


of the Delta, i, 70; illustration of
mode of felling, i., 134.

of Esneh, ii., 308.

ypt, ii, 341, 342.


portrait of
a, the, ii., 28


Tunisian pilgrim, portrait of a, i., 89.
Turkey seller, a, ii., 191.


Turkeys, ii., 191, 193.
Tutmosis, or Thothmes, I., portrait of, ii,
50.


ee myths of, i, 148; ii, 210.


Tyre, the port of, choked, 3.
1
Una, Tomb of, i., 133.
anes builds pyramids of


Ureus, or ee s ae description and
figure of, i, 1

Urbib, a converted Jew, his benevolence,
shy Bite},

Urkhu, a nobleman, inspecting his fields,
an illustration, i, 133; described, i.,
138.

Userenra, or Rathures, builds pyramids
of Zaweyet-el~Aryan, i., 120.

Usertesen. I, erects an Obelisk, i, 186;
statue of, ii, 171.

Utahorresenet, an Egyptian officer of
state, narrative of, i., 73.


We


Valley of the Speos Artemidos, ii., 175 ;
of the kings, description of the approach
to the, ii., 295, 296.

Vansleb (G. M.), notes of his visit to
_ Egypt, 1, 184,

ancient, illustrated

r the toilet, ii, 54, 55
ii, 56.

Vatican, Pastophorus statue of Neith in
the, i., 73.

Venice, growth of her ports, i.,
plied with silk stuffs from Alexandria,
i,é 57.

‘Victims.
aby le

Vienna, Arabian embroidery at, i.,

Village, description Ob aye)
the none view of a, i., 68;
Egypt, ii., 167.

Vintage, ehuieae Egyptian representation
of the, i., 60.

Virgil, quotation from, i., 60.

Volney (G. F.), note of his visit to Alex-
andria, i Trews
Von Kremer, his

the camel, i. f

Von Minutoli (H. M.), Pru
his explorations, i., 156, 157.

Vyse (Col. H.), measurement of pyramids
by, 1 1, 141.


129; 20)
; for ointment,


illustration of the slaughter of,


>
3,


57.
70; in
in upper


imony respecting


i


an general,


W.
‘Wady Sebooah, temple at, i, 269.
Wahhabee sect, The, i, 312,
Walee, legend of a, i
W: alees, half- witted, ii., 1:
Wall pictures and sculptures from tombs,
i, 162—168.
Wasta, village of, ii, 155, 158.
Watchers for the new moon, ii., 119.
Water, enjoyments on the, i, 164; de-
scription of scenes on the, 170; and
wells, public supply of, i, 253.
Water-carrier, a, ii, 93, 291


———-


388


Wi


leh


Water vess


Wa


hood


By an


er-whe:


for irrigation, in the
of Damietta, i., 110.


erfowl, abundance of, at Lake Men-
pele LOS: 7 |
figures of, i., 10. |

illustrations of a, i, 69, iL,


neighbour


Watering roads, method of (illustrated), i.,


13.
Wealth


Weapons, v
Quee:


of Egyptian princes, 1., -


n Aah-hotep, ii, 51


peli:


rious (illustrated), i, 22


cient method of, ii, 171 ;


art


Wehhabites, expedition against the, ii., 8.


Well of a house, ii


1e0, mosque of,


Wezeers, rise of the power held by the, i,


230.
Wheat,
Widow


62


illustration of an ear of, i.
illustration of


mourning,


| Women, ¢


GENERAL INDEX.


ancient use of the, ii, 45; of an |

ptian lady, ii, 47.

Wilkinson (Sir J. G.), numbers given by,
to the tombs of the kings, ii.,

William of Tyre, his account of the palace
of Cairo, 1, 237 |

Wine of Egypt, i, 60; (Oe
226.

Winkler (Wilibald), his description of the
poet “Freudenbe B.


use


Wolves,


187,


, 13865


yptian, ii., 186,

group of, illustrated,
devotion of, i, 249.

Wood, petrified, ii, 145, 146.

Wood-cearving, specimen of ancient, 11,
18.


i, 134; method of,
iL, 69.


among


NG
Young (Thomas), studies the hieroglyphies,
ily, VA thle aE
Z.
Zaka, mivaculous tomb at, i, 309,


Zakazeek, description of, i., 88, 89.
Zaweyet el’Aryan, Pyramids of, 1.,
Zaweeyet el-Meyteen, ii., 160.

Zemzem, legend concerning the


120.


spring, L,


Zeuab, portrait of,
Ziky, or mystical re Han
iption of the, ii, 109


ties of the, ii, 110, 111
>, head of S in a, illustrated,
30 ; of Dendera, ii., MH

(G.) on Egyptian currency, i.,


apis. in


G4,


UL, PETTER, GALPIN & CO., BELLE SAUVAGE WORKS, LONDON, E.C.


»


potenti


GETTY RESEARCH INSTITUTE


| ET


3 3125 01053 3756


DAVIS & SCHORR


ANTIQUARIAN HOOKSELLERS
ASSOCIATION OF AMERICA


ae


=e


ante


NEEL LESTE


Ea Ae (Ra Ta
lode the the


