Egypt: Descriptive, Historical, and Picturesque, Vol. 1 (Ebers, 1878)
=====================================================================
Georg Ebers — Egypt: Descriptive, Historical, and Picturesque, translated by Clara Bell, Vol. 1 (London, 1878), public domain. Scan via Internet Archive (gri_33125010533749). Raw OCR, not proofread.

| qeeeees. 


EGYPT: 


DESCRIPTIVE, HISTORICAL, AND PICTURESQUE. 


Fa MGr gees eS alee 


DESCRIPTIVE, HISTORICAL, AND PICTURESQUE. 


BY 


G. EBERS. 


Translated from the Original German 


BY 


CG GAR 7 beh ie: 


Wai SAIN SPINE TEs OLDS UROL: ON SRAPNED SSN ORIEE SS, 
BY 


S, JaIURCIs, IDVCUIG., JbIEJID,, IRSA, 


Keeper of the Department of Oriental Antiquities in the British Museum, President of the Society of Biblical Archeology, 
ete. ete. ete. 


iViorele 


CAS SaMaie = Pie haG Ae Nae COe: 


LONDON, PARIS §& NEW YORK. 


[ALL RIGHTS RESERVED,] 


Mi 


— —. + =<. 


“HEREIN lies the mysterious attraction which is peculiar to 
the land of the Pharaohs? Why is it that its name, its 


history, its natural peculiarities, and its monuments, affect 


the other nations of antiquity ? 

Not only the Jearned and cultivated among the in- 
habitants of the Western world, but every one, high and low, 
has heard of Egypt and its primeval wonders. The child knows the names of the 
good and the wicked Pharaoh before it has learnt those of the princes of its own 
country ; and before it has learnt the name of the river that passes through its native 
town it has heard of the Nile, by whose reedy shore the infant Moses was found in 
his cradle of rushes by the gentle princess, and from whose waters came up the 
fat and lean kine. Who has not known from his earliest years the beautiful 
narrative, which preserves its charms for every age, of the virtuous and prudent 
Joseph, and heard of the scene of that story—Egypt—the venerated land where the 
Virgin, in her flight with the Holy Child, found a refuge from His pursuers ? 


But the Holy Scriptures, which first familiarise us with the land of the Nile 


and interest us in a quite different manner from those of 


iv EGYPT. 


valley, say nothing of its Pyramids and other monuments of human labour, which, 
apparently constructed to endure for ever, seem as if they were not subject to 
the universal law of the evanescence of all earthly things. And yet who has not, 
while yet a child, heard of those monuments, on which the Greeks bestowed the 
proud name of “ Wonders of the World” ? 

The name “Pyramid” is given to a simple mathematical solid form, which 


frequently occurs in Nature, and the name was derived from the Egyptian structures 


which have that form, not vice versd; just as we call any confused and complex 


arrangement a “Labyrinth,” from that magnificent palace, built by Egyptian kings, 


Nex from whose intricate series of chambers it was difficult to find an issue. Thus, too, 


“Hieroglyphic” has come to mean any idea veiled by its mysterious mode of 


< exposition—another metaphor derived from the picture-writing of the ancient 


Egyptians. Every day and every hour, though generally unconsciously, it is true, 
we have something to do with objects and ideas whose first home was the land of 
the Pharaohs. The paper on which I write these words owes its name to the 
Egyptian Papyrus, which was also called Byblos, whence the Greek word B:A)os 


and our word Bible. A hundred other current words and ideas might be men- 


tioned whose native land is Egypt, and if it were here possible to go deeper into 
the matter and to lay bare the very roots of the artistic possessions and learning 
of the West we should find more and more reason to refer them to Egypt; but 
we must not in this place linger even at the threshold of this inquiry. 

We invite the reader, in these pages, to accompany us to Egypt. Enchanting 
and quite peculiar it remains to this day, as when Herodotus, the father of history, 


declared that the valley of the Nile contained more marvels than any other country ; 


and just as the climate of Egypt is exceptional, and the great stream itself differs 
in character from every other river, so the inhabitants of the land differ in almost 
every respect from other nationalities, as much in their manners as in their laws. 
The Nile with its periodical fertilising overflow, the climate of the country, 
and many other circumstances, remain just as Herodotus described them, and the 


lapse of time has had but little effect even to this day in counteracting the influence 


of the natural peculiarities of Egypt. The customs and laws, it is true, are wholly 
changed, and only a diligent inquirer can find in those of the present day any 
relics or records of antiquity. 

To the Pharaonic period succeeded the Greek, the Roman, the Christian : and after 
all these came the dominion of Islam, the unsparing revolutioniser. At the present 
day a sovereign sits on the throne of Egypt who is striving with success to adapt 
the forms of European culture to his Mohammedan subjects; but Civilisation, that 
false and painted daughter of the culture of the West, with her 


horror of ali 


PREFACE. v 


individuality and her craving for an ill-considered and monotonous equality, has 
forced her way into Egypt, and robs the streets and market-places in the villages 
and towns of the magical charm of their primitive character, sprung of the 
very soil of the East; she finds her way into the houses, and in place of the 
old luxurious abundance of space she introduces a meagre utilisation of it; she 


strips the men of the stately splendour of their flowing robes and decorated 


5S 


weapons ; and makes the women covet the scanty draperies and smart clothing of 


their envied European sisters. The whistle of the steam-engine, as it drives across 


plain and desert, laughs to scorn the patient strength of the camel and the docile. 


swiftness of the Arab horse; the uniform and arms of the soldiers are made to 
resemble those of the West more and more. The people's festivals still preserve 
their peculiar character, but European carriages are beginning to supplant the 
riding horse, and Egyptian military bands play airs by Wagner and Verdi. In 
well-appointed Arab houses sofas and cabinets from Europe are taking the place 
of the divans and beautifully carved or inlaid chests, and coffee is no longer sipped 
from a “Fingan” of finely chased metal, but from cups of Dresden china. All the 
stamp and character of the East in great things and small are being more and 
more destroyed and effaced, and are in danger of vanishing entirely in the course 
of years. 

As yet, however, they have not entirely disappeared; and the artist; as he 
wanders on through the towns and villages, by streets and houses, under the wide 
heaven and in the tent, among the magnates and the citizens, the peasants and 
the sons of the desert, at the solemn occasions of rejoicing or of mourning; as 
he watches the labours or the repose of the dwellers by the Nile, may still 
detect forms of antique, various, picturesque, attractive, and characteristic beauty. 

Glorious remains of the three great epochs of art—the ancient Egyptian, the 
Greek, and the Arab—still survive in Egypt. The last, indeed, will endure a little 
longer; but much of what is most fascinating in the peculiarities of Oriental life 
will have disappeared within a decade, much even before a lustrum has passed 
—everything probably by the beginning of the next century. 


For this reason the writer of these pag 


s, who knows and loves Egypt well, 
has with pleasure undertaken the task of collecting all that is most beautiful and 
venerable, all that is picturesque, characteristic, and attractive, in ancient and 
modern Egypt, for the enjoyment of his contemporaries and for the edification and 
delight of a future generation. 


Yes! for their delight; for the pictures, which it is his duty to explain in 


words, are unsurpassed of their kind. Our greatest artists and most perfect 


connoisseurs of all that the Hast can offer to the painter’s art have produced them 


EGYPT. 


vi 


for us, and Egypt is thus displayed not merely as it is, or as it might be 
represented on the plate of the photographer, but as it is mirrored on the mind 
of the artist. 

In treating of the solemn festivals held by the Cairenes, and of the tales 
they narrate, Dr. Spitta, of Hildesheim, the librarian to the Khedive, has given 
much valuable assistance; and Dr. J. Goldhizer, of Buda-Pest, an accomplished and 
well-known Orientalist, who was himself one of the students in El Azhar, the 
University of Cairo, has contributed a fine chapter on that centre of Mohammedan 
life and Mohammedan science in Cairo. 

Those who already know Egypt will in these pictures find all that they have 
seen illuminated by the magic hand of genius; those who hope to visit the Nile 
valley may learn from these pages what they should see there, and how to see it ; 
and those who are tied to home, but who have a desire to learn something of 
the venerable sites of antiquity—sacred and profane—of the scene of the ‘Thousand 
and one nights,” of the art and magic of the East, of the character and life of 
Orientals, will here find their thirst for knowledge satisfied, and at the same time 
much to interest them and give them the highest kind of pleasure. 

GEORG EBERS. 
Lerpsic, 1878. : 


TRANSLATOR’S NOTE. 
I have had the advantage of the assistance of Dr. Epwarp Meyer, long a resident in the East, in the 
orthography of the Arabie words and names that oceur in this Work. The vowels are pronounced as follows :— 


A as in ant; aw as im jaw; ee as in seen; ey as in skein; i as in sin; oo as in boot; y (consonant) as in yet. 


TABLE OF CONTENTS. 


(ete 


: 
PREFACE . : % 0 é : . é é é ; : ; 5 : 0 : 9 . 

INTRODUCTION BY DR. S. BIRCH . é 3 b . 5 9 0 c 6 A 3 3 5 bavall 
ANCIENT ALEXANDRIA a 5 e 5 5 6 . . . ‘ ‘ : 5 2 1 


The Position and Importance of Alexandria as a Centre of Commerce (p. 1). Founding of the City (3). Its Rapid Progress ander the 


Ptolemies; the Island and Pharos (4). A Glance at the Site of Ancient Alexandria; Gates and Main Strects; the Brauchium (7). Festival of 
Adonis, and Syracusan Ladies of Theocritus (9). Dionysiac Festivals (12). Its Magnificence under the first Ptolemies; Protemy Sorer, 323— 
284 n.c. (13). Commerce, Art, and Science under him (14). His Son, Purnapenruvs, 284—246 n.c. (15). The Height of Alexandria’s Splendour; 
(16). Euergetes, 246—221 n.c. (17). Ptolemy V. Epiphanes, 204—181 x.c. (17). Euergetes II., Physkon, 169—116 


nc. (17). The Last Period of Alexandrian Trade (17). Pompey; Murdered 40 n.c. (19). Cx 


its Museum and Library 


and Cleopatra; Roman Influence (19). The 
Burning of the Library (19). Antony and Cleopatra, 42—30 nic. (20). Octavian: Egypt a Roman Province, 30 u.c.—a.p. 302; 
Suburb of Nicopolis (22) 
Hadrian, 117—138 (2 
Industry (30). 


Building of the 
Ha, 211—217. 
His Letter to Servianus (29). The Science and Commerce of Alexandria under the Romans (30). The Produce of its 


2 


Serapeum; its Library, and Destruction (24). Pompey’s Pillar (25). Diocletian, a.v.284—305. 


MODERN ALEXANDRIA - , 5 “ : : : “ ° 2 é é S 3 C 31 


ected Condition during the last Centuries until the Accession of the Khedive (31). First Century; its favourable position as 


Persecutions; first of the Christians, and then of the Heathen (33), Sr. Caruertne, and Hyparra (34). Dogmatic 


(35). Alexandria as a Rival to Byzantium; Hatred of the Copts for their Greek (Byzantine) Oppress join 


they 


the Arabs, and Alexandria falls under the Dominion of the Mahommedans (38). Founding and Growth of Cairo; Ruin of Alexandria as an Emporium 
(40). Its Recovery at the Beginning of the Nineteenth Century; French Invasion (42). Mohammed Ali; Mahmoudeeyeh Canal (42). The 


Present Position, Trade, and Splendour of Alexandria (43). Sa’tp Pacwa (45). Suez Canal. Ismam P» 


HA, the Khedive, 1863; Completion 


of the Suez Canal (46). Water Works and Gas Lighting. Hospitals and Christian Churches (48). Peculiar Ct ster of Alexandria among the 


Cities of Egypt even at the Present Da 


Merchants, and the Struggle for Wealth (50). Suppression of True Oriental Character. Hareems (51). 


Palms; Camels (52). Embroidery and Weaving (57). 


THROUGH THE DELTA E 6 c ‘ é S 6 : : 5 é 5 6 S . : 59 


tailway from Alexandria through the Delta (59). Vineyards (60). Aboukir (61). Damanhoor (61). The Nile (62). Excursion Inland 
(63). Culture of the Delta under the Pharaohs; Romans (64); Byzantines; Islam (66); at the Present Day (67). Fertility of the Soil; an 
atis (74). Reshid (Rosetta), Rosetta Stone (79). Tantah (80). Fair at 
Tantah, and Pilgrims to the Tomb of Seyyid el Bedawee (80). History of Ahmed cl Bedawee (84), 


Egyptian Village (69). Ruins of Sais (71). Desook, Ancient Nauc 


GOSHEN : 5 , < 2 6 6 5 3 : J 88 


From Tantah to Zakazeck (87). Nature of the Country; Pi 


rims to Mecca (88). Ancient Bubastis, the Centre of the Pilgrimages to 
Aphrodite (91). Fakoos (92). Ride through the Desert; its Charm and its Terrors (94). Crossing the Mu’izz Canal (97). Ruins of Tanis; 
History of the City (97). The Hyksos (100). ypt (103). Tablet of Tanis, or Decree 
of Canopus (104). Fish Auction (105). A Trip on the Lake of Menzalch (108). Damietta and its Neighbourhood (110). Papyrus and Paper 


sett I. and Rameses II. cir. 1400 n.c. (101). Jews in 


(111). Mansoorah; Ruins of the Iseum, now Behbeet el-Hagar (118). 


MEMPHIS AND THE PYRAMIDS. ° é 7 5 e 5 f 117 


Ruins of Memphis and its Necropolis, Bedraschén (118). Mitrahine; a General View of the Necropolis (118). Founding of Memphis ; 


Menes; Temple of Ptah; Apis (121). Memphis at the Theban Period (123). Its Fall after the Rise of Alexandria, and subsequently of Cairo (12 


Abd-al Latcef on the Ruins of Memphi 


From Cairo to Ghizeh (126). Size of the Pyramid; Climbing the Pyramid of Cheops (129). View 


from the Top (130). Pyramids of Chefren and Mykerinos (132). Pictures in relief in the Tombs (133). Mastabas of the Egyptian Nobles (135). 


viii EGYPT. 


Country and Domestic Life of the Period (138). The Pyramids not an Evidence of Oppression (139). Mode of Structure (141). Materials (142). 
Cost of Feeding the Labourers (145). The Interior of the Pyramid of Cheops (145). Significance of the Pyramidal form (147). Plundering 
of the Pyramids in Later Times (148). The Coffin of Mykerinos (149). Legends of Rhodope; Pyramid of Chefren (151). Sphinx (153). 
Visit to Sakkara and Beth Mariette (156). Pyramid of Sakkara (157). Serapeum; Origin of Monasticism before Christ (158). The Apis Bulls 
and their Tombs (161). Mastaba of Ti; Paintings on its Walls (167). Shipbuilding Site among the Ancient Egyptians (168). Games (169). 
Music (169). The other Antiquities at Sakkara (171). Mastaba Far’(in (171). 


CAIRO: THE FOUNDING AND RISE OF THE CITY . 6 0 = é é 5 9 a ee 

The Praises of Cairo by the Orientals (173). Its Attractive Charm for Europeans (175). Memphis, the Mother of Cairo; Taroue and 

Babylon (179). Ride to the Ruins of Heliopolis (182). The Virgin Mary’s Sycomore (183). Temple of the Sun at Heliopolis (186). Obelisks and 

Ancient Worship (186). Benu-bird or Phoenix (189). Old Cairo or Fostat. Babylon, and the Island of Rodda (190). Conquest by Islam (193). 

The Tent of Amxoo (195). Nilometer (197). Measuring the Height of the Nile (197). Fatima’s Tree in Roda (199). Mosque of Amroo (201). The 

Oldest Specimens of Arab Mosques (203). The Three Famous Pillars in the Mosque of Amroo (206). Prayer among Moslems (207). Rapid Progress 

of Arab Influence in Egypt (209). Of Science under Mamtn a.p, 813—833; Aumep-rpy-T'vLoon, 870—884 (210). His Mosque (212). Oxem 
Azan and his Great Grandson, Muv’1zz (215). Djohar Conquers Egypt, and Founds Cairo Proper to the North of Fostat (217). 


CAIRO UNDER THE FATIMITES AND EYOOBIDES ; ; 4 E P é 3 5 . 218 
Mv’izz and the Beginning of the Fatimite Dynasty, a.p. 969—1171; Djohar Founds the Mosque of el-Azhar (219). Trade and 


Industry of the Nile Valley under the Successors of Mu’izz, 219. Persian Luxury, Delicacies of the Table (222). Perfumes, Opium, Hashish, 
and Wei. (242) Gardens (226). Buildings and Decorations (227). Mosque of Haxrm, A.D. 996—1020; Power of the Wezeers (230). Sataprn, 
1169—1193, and the Eyoobide Dynasty, a.p. 1171—1250 (230). ‘The Citadel of Cairo (234). The Eunuch, Karakoosh (234). Erection of thé Palace 
of the Khalifs; Joseph’s Well (241). Metix zx-Apm, a.p. 1193—1218 (241). Matix us-Sariu, 1240—1249 (242). The Mamelooks; Poet; 
Beha ed-Din (243). 


CAIRO UNDER THE MAMELOOK SULTANS . 5 Fi ‘ . - a : 3 : : » 245 


Bahrite Mamelook Sultans, a.p. 1250—1380. Ermee (245). Binanrs, a.p. 1260—1277; General Character of the Mamelook Rule (246). 
Kataty, .p, 1277—1290 (248). His Hospital (251). Be, En-Nasir, A.p. 1293—1341 (253). His Second Reign; 
His Victory over the Mongols; Oppressions of the Christians (254), Improvement of Cairo by Nasir (258). His Love of Horses and Sport (258). 
His Patronage of Learned Men (Abu ’I-Feda), and Admiration of the Fair Sex (259). Suiran Hasan, A.p. 1346—1361 (261). The Plague in the 
Year 1348 (261). Mosque of Hasan (264). Tombs of the Khaleefs and of the Mamelooks (269). The Burgite, or Circassian Sultans, a.p. 1382—1517; 
Banxoox, 1382—1399 (270). Fara; Mv’arvan (270). Mosque of (271), Burs Bry, a.p. 1422—1438, is made Protector of Mecca (275). Djidda and 
Alexandria, the Two Great Marts for the Trade with India (275). Wealth, Luxury, and Expenditure under Burs Bry (277). Karr Bey, a.v. 1468— 
1496 ; His General, Ezbek (278), The Ezbekiye Square in Cairo (278). Okella and Mosque of Hait-Bey (282). Munamaep, his Son (285). Kansuwz-r1- 
Guoorr, A.D. 1501 to 1516 (285). The Period of Arab Legend and Romance; Origin of the “1,001 Nights” (287). Annihilation of Egyptian Com- 


rs, Schools, and Fountains (252). 


merce by the Portuguese (292). 


Conquest of Egypt by the Turks, 1517 (292). Courageous Defence by the last of the Mamelook Princes, Terman Bry. 


Meik EL-Ascurar (293). 


CAIRO: ITS DECADENCE AND TOMBS b 2 2 7 s a z S : E : ‘3 . 294 
Turkish Governors (294). The Beys and their Mamelooks; Ali Bey, A.p. 1771 (296). The Decay of all Ancient Splendour, and its Causes 


(296), Rel 


ious Character of the Cairenes (297). Their Indifference to the Ancient Monuments (299). Absence of the Historical Spirit (302). 
Architecture of the Turkish Period (301). Legends Attaching to the Old Buildings (304). Powers attributed to Certain Buildings (806). Tombs of 
the Welis (306), Dervish Dance (07). Tombs of the Companions of the Prophet (311). Worship of Tombs on the Karifeh (311). ‘Tomb of Seyth 
ibn Sa’ad and the Legend Attaching to it (313). ‘Tombs of the Chiefs of the Dervish Orders (313). Tomb of El-Farid (814). 


LASS 
eohonroncencaccnenscecencom 


List oF ARTISTS EMPLOYED IN THIS 


BERNINGER, E. 
BURGER, Lupwic. 
DILLON, Frank. 
FIEDLER, Brrnuarp. 
GENTZ, Wituetm. 
GNAUTH, Avotr. 
HECHT, Wituerm. 
HEYN, Ernst. 
HUBER, C. Ruvote. 


JERICHAU-BAUMANN. 


ao SS os 


KELLER, Fervinanp. 
KORNER, Erysv. 
KRETZSCHMER, Hern. 
KUHN, Gusray. 
LENBACH, Franz. 
LOFFLER, Avevsr. 
MACHYTKA, J. 
MAKART, Hans. 
MULLER, Leor. Cart. 
RAMSTHAL, Aveusr. 


VOLUME. 


RICHTER, Gustav. 
SCHMORANZ, F. 
SCHONN, Atos. 
SEEL, Apotr. 
STRASSBERGER, B. 
TADEMA, L. Atma. 
THEUERKAUFR, G. 
WEIDENBACH. 
WELSCH, F. C. 
WERNER, Cari. 


OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 


* 

————>~+e+___ 
sd PAGE 
Israel in Egypt . r i F . ¢ 5 E fi s “ 6 A . By E. J. Poynter, R.A. Frontis. 
Ancient Alexandria 0 5 é 5 3 3 s : 9 5 5 6 . 4, ADoLF GNauUTH il 
Pharos in Ancient Alexandria 2 6 2 5 : 7 2 9 : 3 . 4, ADOLF GNAUTH 1 
Head of Alexander 6 : - ° 5 : : : : 5 3 E . 4, Lupwic Burcer 3 
Ruins of the City Wall of Alexandria : M 6 F 3 0 A $ 3 . 5, Lerororp Cart Miiuer 4 
The Muezzin’s Call to Prayer ; “ : ‘ é ; , 3 F é . 5, WILHELM GENTZ 5 
Modern Lighthouse at Alexandria ‘ é i c E ; F 2 x 3 . 3, Lerorporp Cart MULuer 6 
Catacombs in Alexandria. 5 ; A 5 é : : : ; é 3 . 5, Leroponp Cart MUnier if 
Group among the Ruins of Alexandria é f es 6 é 5 8 6 f - x, Bernuarp FIepLer 8 
A Greek Lady of Alexandria : E 6 : 4 & i ; 5 : c . 5, FERDINAND KELLER 9 
Egyptian Women Drawing Water 7 3 2 4 : & : ‘ E : - 5, Hans Maxart 10 
Dionysiae Trophy i 5 4 A . 5 5 5 é 3 5 . : + 4) Ferprnanp KeELLer 12 
Coin of Ptolemy Soter ; a . ‘ : * E , 5 2 . s - 5, Lupwic Burcer 13} 
Coin of Alexander the Great 7 » Lupwie Bu R 13 
A Lady of Alexandria in a Robe of Transparent Bombyx Silk . é . ‘ é . 5, FerpInaAnD KELLER 14 
Coin of Ptolemy V., Epiphanes . $ 5 3 4 : P R é D P . », Lupwie Burcer 16 
“Father Nile” . 2 5 5 : 5 ‘ ‘ 6 . A : 5 : - 5, August RamsrHaL tye 
Cleopatra Carried into the Palace fi 5 , é - 5 , a 3 ° - 5, Ferpinanp Keer 18 
© Alexandrian Ornaments c : é : f : 4 . a 5 5 . . 5, FERDINAND KELLER 19 
Cleopatra on the Cydnus ‘ : 6 2 , Fi : 5 : b 5 3 - 4, Hans Maxkarr 20 
Cleopatra’s Needle 6 2 F é Z ; ¢ A ‘ : ‘ " e - 5, Cart WERNER 21 
Pompey’s Pillar. c 3 3 3 : 5 . dj . ° 5 3 : - 5, Gustav THrurrKaur 24 
An Egyptian Girl . 5 : é é 5 : ‘ : : 5 5 + 9 Gustav RIcHTER 10 face p. 25 
Avab Cemetery. . a 5 P 2 P . 5 5 . 3 4 3 - 5, Leoporp Carn Miuter 26 
Night on the Red Sea . 3 : 3 F F 5 é 7 m5 : . ie ee tee Gs Warrser: 28 
Old Egyptian Vase 6 6 ' é 6 5 5 2 ‘ 2 0 ° 5 - x» Aveust RamstHan 29 
Gem, with Portraits of Ptolemy Philadelphus, and Arsinoé, Daughter of Lysimachus . - >, Lupwic Burcer 29 
Head of Serapis, and Zodiac » Lupwic Burcer 30 
Frieze from an Ancient Arab Mosque » F. Scumoranz 31 
Desk for the Koran . é 4 . : é : 3 F : : E ‘i . 5, Apotr GNauTH 31 
Tsis Suckling Horus » Auveust RamsrHaL 32 
Coptic Maiden » Gustav Ricuter 33 
A Copt é ‘ : 3 » Leoporp Cart Mitrer 35 
The Palm, the Characteristic Tree of the East » EF. C. Wetscu 36 
Court of an Egyptian House of the Time of the Khalifs . 5 : c 4 3 - 4, Gustav RicuTer 37 


ee a 


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 


“Place Mohammed Ali” 

The Old Harbour of Alexandria . 
The Banks of the Mahmoudeyeh Canal 
Watering the Roads 

A Sais, or Running Footman A 


Alexandrian Lady with her Black Attendant 


Mosque of Said Pacha . 

What will come of it all? . 3 fs z 5 
Protestant Church at Alexandria . é : 

A Youthful Follower of the Prophet . : 5 : 
Sarraf, or Money-Changer 

Arabian Cemetery : 4 é 0 4 6 
Window of the Harem ‘ a . 

Palace of the Khedive . ‘ 3 : c 3 : 
Eunuch . 2 : : . 

The Jewel of the Harem. 

Palms . ‘5 0 éj 5 c 3 
Gathering Dates . r 3 é 5 j 5 


Shearing Camels. 


A Silk Embroidere 


r 
Embroidered Slippers “ 2 3 
Ornament from the Mandarah of the Mufti at Cairo 
A Nargileh . 5 ; $ 2 3 é 


Ancient Egyptian Repr 


sentation of the Vintage . : 
Minaret of the Mosque of Werdanee, at Cairo 

Widow Mourning E a : 2 2 : 7 5 
A Dyke in the Delta at the Time of the Inundation 

A Papyrus Thicket ‘ ‘ 4 5 ° . 

Bronze Coin of the Leontopolite Nome. : 2 : 
Bronze Coin of the Mendesian Nome 

The Pilot Omar 
Tomb of a Sheikh at the Time of the Khalifs 

On the Rosetta Branch of the Nile 

Arabic Decorative Painting . 5 2 : 

Village in the Delta 

A Water-Wheel 

Ruins of Sais 

Palm Capital a A fi 7 és 6 E 5 : 
Neith, Goddess of Sais 

Market at Desook. ‘ 5 8 é é a 

Fooa 
Outside the Gate of Rosetta . 5 P 5 6 - 2 
Mosyue of the Holy Ibraheem at Desook . : ; b 
House-in Rosetta with Projecting Storeys 

The Rosetta Stone ; ci és . 3 3 
Window of a Harem 

Door of an Arabian House . ‘ 4 ; é 5 é 
Zenab : 
Seller of Date Bread 
Market at Tantah . 


Fatima 


Frieze from the Gama es-Soon, Cairo 


Moses among the Bulrushes . 


X1 
PAGE 
3y B. STRASSBERGER 39 
Cart WERNER 40 
WiLHEeLmM GENTZ 4] 
Leropotp Cart Miiiter 43 
Lrorotp Cart Mitten 44 
Leopotp Cart Mtrtiuer 45 
BernuarD Frepier 47 
Lrorotp Cart Mitier 48 
B. SrrassBeRGER 48 
Gustav RIcHTER To facep. 49 
Leopotp Carn Minter 49 
F. C. Wetscu 50 
F. C. Wetscu 50 
B. SrrassBERGER 51 
WILHELM GENTZ 52 
Leorotp Cart Miurer 53 
Gustav RicuTer 54 
Leopotp Cart Minuer 55 
WILHELM GE 56 
Cart WEE 57 
Apotr GNAUTH 58 
F. Scumoranz 59 
ADOLF GNAUTH 59 
WEIDENBACH 60 
BF. ScHMORANZ 61 
Leorotp Cart Miniter 62 
Leorotp Cart Miter 63 
B. SrrRassBERGER 
Lupwie Burcer 64 
Lupwie Burcer 64 
Gustay RicuTer 65 
Cart WERNER 66 
F. C. Wetscu 67 
Lerorotp Cart Mitirr 68 
BERNHARD FrEDLER 68 
F. C. Wetscu 69 
B. SrRAssBERGER 70 
B. SrrassBERGER 71 
Avueust RaMstHaL (As 
Leopotp Cart Minter 72 
F. C. WeELscH 74 
F. C. Wetscu 74. 
Leoporp Cart Minter 75 
B, SrrRAsSsBERGER 76 
B. SrrassBerGer 76 
BernuHarD Frepier 77 
BERNHARD FIEDLER 17 
Gustav RIcHTER 78 
Leoporp Cart Mtrier 79 
Leoporp Cart Mitier 81 
Gusray RicuTer 86 
BF, ScHMORANZ 87 
ADOLF GNAUTH 87 


xil 


Tent of Bedaween Arabs 


A Veiled Beauty 


Tunisian Pilgrim 

Black Granite Statue of Sekhet 
Mummy of a Cat 

The Father of the Cats, with the Caravan of Pilgrims. 
Cotton Plant. 

A. Ride through the Desert 

Egyptian Wheat 

Terdsman in the Desert 

Ruins of Tanis 

Joseph and the Pharaoh 

Excavations at Tanis 

Lykshos Sphinx 

tameses IT. 

The Finding of Moses 


Brick with the Prenomen of Rameses IT. 


EGYPT. 


Forced Labourers of the Semitic Race stamping out Bricks . 


Forced Labourers of the Semitic Race making and carrying Bricks 


Menephtah 

Malapterurus Electricus—Electrical Shad 
Tetrodon Hispidus . 

Head of the Pimelodus Auratus 

Assembly of Birds on the Lake of Menzaleh 
Fish Auction at San 

Mormysus Oxyrrhynchus 

Polypterus—Finny Pike 


Fishing Boat on the Lake of Menzaleh 


Water Wheel for Irrigation, in the neighbourhood of Damietta 


Nymphea Nelumbo—Lotus Flower—with Fruit 


Nymphza Lotus—Lotus Flower 

Papyrus Plant 

River Wall on the Damietta Arm of the Nile 
Native of the Nile 


The Main Stream of the Nile 


Sarcophagus 

Pyramid and Sphinx 

The Village of Bedrasheyn 

Fagade of a Tomb . 

A. Citizen of Memphis 

Ptah, the god of Memphis 

Bull Apis 

Sacred Ureus Snake 

Fallen Colossus of Rameses I. 

At the Foot of the Pyramid of Cheops 
Bedaween and Fellah 

The Pyramids and Sphinx 

AS 


Second and Third Pyramids 


ent of the Great Pyramid 


Door of a Tomb at Ghizeh 
Seribe 

Slaughter of Victims 

Herd of Asses 


, Leoporp Cart MULier 


F. C. Weiscu 
Axois ScHéNN 


B. Srra 


B, SrrassBERGER 
WILHELM GENTZ 
B. SrrassBER 
F. C. Wa 


ER 


B. SSBERGER 
AMA TADEMA To face p, 
B. STRASSBERGER 
B, SrrassBERGER 
Lupwic BurcEer 


Frrpivanp KELLER 


‘W EIDENBACH 


‘WEIDENBACH 


Lepwic Burcrr 

Aveust RamstHaL 
Avucust RamsrHaL 
Avcust RamsTHaL 


WituEetm GE 


TZ 
Lrorotp Cart Mitier 
AUG 


August RamsTHAL 


t RaMsTHAL 


l 


Brernyarp Frepier 
Bernuarp Firpier 
B. SrrRAssBeRGER 
B. SrrassBerGER 
B. SrRAssBERGER 
F. C. Wenscu 

F. C. Weiscu 
BrernHard FIEDLER 
Lupwic Burcer 
ApoLtr GNAUTH 
Bernuard Freprer 


B, SrrRAssBERGER 


Atma TADEMA To face p. 


Avcust RamsrHaL 


B. SrrAssBer 


ER 
Aveust RamsTHaL 
Brrnuard FIEpLer 


Cart WERNER 


TAV RicHtER 


C. Ruporr Huser 
Ernst Hryn 

B. SrrassBerGer 
B. St 


,ASSBERGER 
WEIDENBACH 


WEIDENBACH 


RNHARD FIEDLER To face p.1 2 


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 


The Nobleman Urkhu inspecting his Fields 

Bondmen Felling Trees . 

Fishing with Net 

Crocodiles and Hippopotamus in the Nile 

Group of Eastern Women 

The Two Great Pyramids at the Time of the Inundation 
The Building of the Pyramids 

Pyramid of Dashoor 

Quarries of Tourah 

Weighing Stones : 

Lamentation of a Widow of Memphis at the Coftin of her Husband 


Ruins of Chefren 


Fossil Limestone, with Shells, from Mokattam 


) 
Entrance to the Pyramid of Cheops 
Gallery in the Pyramid of Cheops 
Wooden Coffin of Men-ka-ra . 
Sepulchral Chamber of Men-ka-ra . 
Statue of Chefren . 

The Sphinx Cleared from the Sand 
Modern Sphinx-like Face 

House of Mariette Pacha at Sakkarah 
Pyramid of Sakkarah 

Sphinx from the Serapeum 

Scarabeeus Beetle 

Tomb of the Apis. 


Anubis, the Guardian of the Lower World 


Door of the Mastaba of Ti . ; ‘ 5 6 é : 3 : 
Mastaba of Ti 

Cranes. c 3 : % “ 6 2 é é 6 

Bringing in the Overseer for the Reckoning. 


Ship-building . 

Ploughing 

Cattle Treading out Corn 

Horned Cattle driven through the Water 
Enjoyments on the Water 

Salting Fish 

Wrestling 

Bedaween Camp 

Acrobatic Exercises and Game of Morra 
Enjoyments of Hunting 

Captured Animals of the Wilderness 

A Musical Entertainment 

Salting Fish 

Pigeons . 

Flock of Pigeons 

Sandstorm in the Desert 
Huts and Household Companions of the Fellaheen 
Mastaba Far’oon 

Funeral Ceremonies 

A Border, or Frieze, in Wood, from the Moristan of Kala’oon 
Lane in the Copt Quarter 


Mashrebeeyeh Window 


By 


xiii 
PAGE 
WEIDENBACH 133 
WEIDENBACH 134 
WEIDENBACH 134 
WEIDENBACH 134 
Hans Maxkarr 136 
WELSCH 13F 
PAV RIcHTER 140 
3, STRASSBERGER 141 
3. STRASS 142 
Gustav Ricurer 143 
AumA TAapEMA 144 
CarL WERNER — o facep. 145 
B, StRASSBERGER 145 
BERNHARD FIEDLER 145 
B. STRASSBERGER 146 
B. SrRASSBERGER 148 
B. SrrasspERGER 149 
B. SrRaAssBERGER 150 
B. SrrassBerGeR 151 
Gustay Ricurer 152 
Leopotp Carn Minirr 154 
BERNHARD FIEDLER 155 
Avcust RamsrHan 156 
Aucust RamsTHan 157 
Lropotp Carn Mitrer 158 
Avaust RamsrHan 158 
B, SrrassBerGER 159 
KORNER 160 
RAMSTHAL 161 
WEIDENBACH 162 
WEIDENBACH 162 
W EIDENBACH 163 
WEIDENBACH 163 
WEIDENBACH 163 
WEIDENBACH 164 
164 
WEIDENBACH 164 
Lrorotp Cari Mitier 165 
W EIDENBACH 166 
WEIDENBACH 166 
W EIDENBACH 166 
‘WEIDENBACH 167 
W EIDENBACH 167 
WILHELM GENTZ 167 
WILHELM Gentz 167 
Avaust LirrLer o face p. 170 
WiLHEetm GEnrz 170 
B. SrrassBerGEr 171 
Lupwie Burerer 172 
ADOLF GNAUTH 173 
BERNHARD FIEDLER 174 
B. SrrassBERGER 175 


xiv EGYPT. 


Street Dogs 

General View of Cairo . 

Driving through the Town 

A Learned Man absorbed in the Koran 

Public School in the Heart of Cairo 

Black and White Jockeys 

Dromedary Race 

Garden on the Road to Heliopolis 

Sycamore of Matareeyeh 

The Flight into Egypt 

Representation of the Bennu : 3 : c 
Obelisk of the Temple of the Sun, at the old Heliopolis 
The Island of Roda 

Mokattam 

The Tent of Amroo 

Old Cairo 

The Nilometer 

Old Arabian House 

Scale of the Nilometer 

The Sacrifice to the Nile 

Court of the Mosque of Amroo 

Sacred Tree of Fatima 

Minaret of the Memorial Mosque of Barkook 
Liwan, or Sanctuary of the Mosque of Amroo 
Mimbar, or Pulpit of the Mosque of Kayt Bey 

The Pillars of Ordeal 

Row of Suppliants 

Morning Prayer of Bedaween 

Alley of the Old Time . 

Arabian Horse 

Arch Ornament from the Mosque of Ibn-Tuloon 

The Liwan or Sanctuary of the Mosque of Ibn-Tuloon. 
Capitals of Columns from the Mosque of Ibn-Tuloon 
Pattern of the Mimbar in the Mosque of Ibn-Tuloon 
The Consort of the Sultan 

Ahmed 

Minaret and Court of the Mosque of Ibn-Tuloon . 
Ornament 

Tripod 

Ancient Egyptian Vases 

Harem of a House in the Time of the Khalifs 
Egyptian Coins (Aboo Bekr, Omar, Othman, Alee) 
Halberd and Spear for Lion Hunting, Time of the Fatimites 
Arabic Silk Damask of the 11th Century 

Arab Stuf 

Wife of the Sheykh of the Cooks 

Princely Garden in Cairo 


Garden on the Road to Heliopolis 


Console of the Balcony of the Minaret of the Mosque of Ezbek 


Perso-Turkish Stalactite Capital 
Mosque of El-Hakim 
Bab en-Nasr . 


Bab el-Footoh 


By Leororp Carn MULier 


BerNHARD FIEDLER 
C. Rupotr Huser 


WitHetm GE 


Z 

BERNHARD FIEDLER 
C. Rupotr Huser 
C. Rupotr Huser 
BERNHARD FIEDLER 


B, SrRASSBERGER 


FERDINAND KELLER 
Avuaust RamsTHaL 
Car~L WERNER 

Ernst Korner 
BERNHARD FIEDLER 
WILHELM GENTZ 

F. ©. WeELscH 0 face p. 
Leoporp Cart Miiier 
Gustav RIcHTER 
Aveust RamsTHaL 
Wituerm Gentz 

ERNst Hryn 

F. 0. Wexscr 


F. Scumora 


NZ 
Ernst Hry 
B. STRASSBERGER 
Lropotp Cart Mirier 
C. Rupotr Huser 


LEOPOLD CARL MULLER 


BERNHARD FIEDLER 


C. Rupotr Huser 


Aveust RAmsTHaL 


J. F. Porrarts 


sTAV RIcHTER To face p. 2 
B, SrRASSBERGER 
ADOLF GNAUTH 
ADOLF GNAUTH 
AvuG 


ADoLr § 


vt RAmsTHAL 


L 
F. Scumoranz 
Apotr GNAUTH 
ADOLF GNAUTH 
ApDoLF GNAUTH 
Gustav RicHTer 
BERNHARD FIEDLER 
BrrNHARD FiepLer 
F, Scumoranz 

F. Scumoranz 


B. SrrassBerGer 


BERNHARD FIEDLER 


Cart WERNER 


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. XV 


Citadel of Cairo . . g A % j j “ 3 é : 3 : . By Franx Ditton 

Door of the Alley of Sukkarije . 3 P 3 : 4 ¢ : ; . 4, ADoLF SEEL 

Door of the Mamelukes in the Citadel of Cairo . 8 - - z : 3 . 5, Herm Krerzscumer 236 
Roomeleh Place and Mosque of Hasan : ' 5 0 : F 5 : , . 5, Bernyarp Firpier 238 
Malkafs . ‘ 4 5 4 4 é . 4 , 5 a 5 é . 5, B. SrrAssBerRGER 239 
Pot from Joseph’s Well A > : i 5 3 . 5 : 5 B . 5 August RamsTHaL 240 
Shaft of Joseph’s Well . : 5 3 : 5 . 4 A : 5 3 . 5, Aucust RAMsTHAL 240 
Coins of Melek el-Adil : ; A : 2 ' P 3 ‘ é A . 5 ADOLF GNAUTH 249 
Old Arabic Enamelled Glass Cup. : : fi : : : : a : : . » ADOLF GNaUTH 243 
A Mosque Lamp ApoLr GNAUTH 244 
Mameluke Emir . 5 2 : 2 > ‘ ‘ 4 : A é - 5, Hans Makarr § To facep. 245 
Tassel Ornament . 5 4 : és ? a : 9 é F F : . » Avot GnauTH 245 
Arab Saddle and Trappings . 6 é : “ ; 5 é r 5 c 5 . ,, ADOLF GNAUTH 245 
Door of the Moristan of Kala’oon 2 4 & , A 3 . 5 A +, Cart WERNER 247 
Ornamental Girdling, Moristan cf Kala’oon . : c ° 2 : 6 ’ 5 . 4, EF. Scumoranz 248 
Window in the Mausoleum of Kala’oon 6 é : : : é 6 ° . 4, EF. Scumoranz 249 
Interior of the Mosque of Kala’oon . _ : : ' c c 5 5 ‘ + 5, J. MacnyrKa 250 
Rosette of a Primary School in Cairo é é a : 5 5 A . - » FE. ScHmoranz 251 
Public Drinking Fountain . 3 > A ; 5 3 7 0 ’ f . y Leroporp Cart MU Lier 252 
Court in the Moristan of Kala’oon 6 : : . A 7 : 3 i . . 5, ApboLtr GNauTH 254 
Fountain and School  . 2 4 é é A ; - i 3 6 : . 4, FE. Scumoranz 255, 
A Street in Cairo : A fs , ‘ : : 3 ‘ 4 6 é : . 5, Bernwarp Frepier 256 
A Blind Beggar . 7 iQ : F 4 2 A . % m 5 , & - », Leopotp Cart MULLER 257 
Among the Old Houses d 6 5 6 5 4 i ° 2 s 6 - 5 Bernuarpd Frepier 258 
On the Old Canal at Cairo . 5 3 : ; , : 5 5 S 4 4 - » FE. C. WeEtscH 259 
Horse Race . r 5 s . A $ . ® : = r ef . . 5, ©. Rupotr Huser 260 
Hawking of the Heron ei : : ' 3 : ‘ F 5 4 : 7 - y» C. Rupotr Huser 261 
Interior of the Mosque of the Sultan Hasan P . P F bi é é . 5, Cart WERNER 262 
Ornament of the Headpiece of a Door of the Mosque of Schaban ‘ ‘ 6 4 . », FE. Scumoranz 263 
Frieze in the Mosque of the Sultan Hasan . . 5 3 ; a é . . 4, EF. Scumoranz 263 
Remains of Constructions of the Time of the Mameluke Sultans, in a Modern Fountain. ,, Cart WERNER 264 
The Death of the First-born Fi F F 6 » ALMA TADEMA  o facep. 265 
Ornament from a large Porch of the Mosque of the Sultan Hasan . 5 : + . 5, FE. Scumoranz 265 
Carpet Merchant in the Khan el Khaleel  . : 3 b 3 5 ‘ ; a . 5, CARL WERNER 266 
Niche for Prayer . 2 ; ! . 6 D : F 6 ' 3 é ‘ . 5, Bernward FiepLer 267 
Porch of the Mosque of the Sultan Hasan . 2 5 ; ‘ , 5 . 5 . » G. THEUERKAUF 268 
Ornaments from the Great Porch of the Mosque of the Sultan Hasan . F ; . FF. Scumoranz 269 
Tomb, with Mosque, of Barkook . F ‘ / - é 3 é és 3 S . 3 B. SrrassBERGER 270 
Ornaments from the Mosque of Barkook 5 : . e S 4 ; 5 . 5, F. Scumoranz 271 
Fountain at the Tomb and Mosque of Barkook . 4 ‘ 4 ‘ 5 : 5 . 5, Brernnarp FIEDLER 271 
Necropolis at the foot of the Citadel . c 5 : : A 6 P 2 - - 5, Herm KrerzscoMer 272 
Niche for Prayer in the Mosque of the Sultan Mo’ayyad . a 3 4 ‘ ° . 5 J. Macuyrra 273 
Details of the Principal Door of the Mosque of Mo'ayyad . 3 : - 5 ; . », B. SrrassBeRGER 274 
Abyssinian Female Slave : P 5 é : ‘ ‘ : ; . 5 é aed eng ePORTARLS 276 
Country Residence and Water Wheel at Cairo . 5 5 : é z c 5 - 5, Brernuarp Frepier 278 
Spouse of the Sultan on her way to the Country Residence 5 é » Rupotr Huser 279 
An Architectural Detail from the School of the Mosque of Ezbek . , 5 5 . 5 FE. Scumoranz 280 
Interior of the Mosque of Ezbek . A 9 5 : 5 A ; : : : . 4, Apotr SEEL 281 
Minaret of the Mosque of Kayt Bey . : : 4 ‘ z i : 5 : . 4, EF. Scumoranz 282 
Arab Sword of Ceremony . A 3 : : ; 6 : 6 , c 3 . 5, Apotr GNAUTH 283 
Ornaments of the Mosque and Tomb of Kayt Bey A A 8 ; : 6 “ . 5, FE. Scumoranz 283 
Interior of the Mosque and Tomb of Kayt Bey . ‘ 3 : ° ‘ 5 5 . » ADOLF GNAUTH 284 
The Sultan’s Favourite Songstress . . C 5 4 : : A : 6 . 5, De Brervi 285 


Portal of the Mosque el Ghooreeyeh 


Ornament of the Mimbar of the Mosque of el Ghooreeyeh 


Eastern Story Teller 

Darb El-Ahmar : 

A Young Popular Hero of To-day 
Mausoleum of Kansooweh el Ghooree . 
An Arab of Rank 

Trophy of Arms 

Dervishes and other Strange Devotees . 
Before the Walls of Masr-el-Kahira 
The Ruined Mosque of Ibn-Tuloon 
Arab Family among the Ruins 

The Tombs of the Khalifs 

Night Birds 

Fragments of a Column 

Hamida, a Cairene Maiden 

Tomb of a Sheykh on the Island of Roda 


Tomb of Ibraheem Aga. 


A Dervish in Eestatic Excitement piercing his Cheek 


Vaulted Cellar in an old Street 
Mameluke Tomb 

The Karafeh, outside Cairo 
Sarcophagus of Tbraheem Pacha 


Part of the House of the Sheykh Sadat 


y F. ScHMORANZ 


F, ScuMoRANZ 


vT: 


WILHELM G 


GarL WERNER To facep. 2 


Gustav RicHTER 
B. Srras 


©. Rupotr Huser 


SRGER 


ApoLF GNAUTH 
WILHELM GENTZ 
©. Ruvotr Huser 
B. Srrass 3ER 
F. C. Wetscu 
Frank D1Lion 
F. C. Wenscr 


Cart WERNER 


Witnetm Hecur 
F. C. WeiscH 


3, STRAS 


WILHELM GENTZ 
ADOLF SEEL 

Cart WE 
F. C. Wetscu 


3, STRASSBERGER 


To face p. 


PAGE 
286 


287 


289 
290 
291 
293 
294 
295 
296 
298 
300 
301 
302 
303 
305 
306 
307 
308 
309 
310 
312 
313 


INTRODUCTION. 


>. + = <@__ 


OW often has that wonderful land—the subject of the 


present work—been visited and described, from the time 
of Herodotus in the sixth century before Christ to the 
nineteenth after! What numerous narratives of its 
history, its monuments, its physical condition, and its 
political state, have flowed from a thousand pens! 


How many eyes have scrutinised its remotest nooks, 


with a view to its condition—past, present, and future! 


What, after all, is EKgypt—the gift of the river, the 


products of the Nile, the bed of that old serpent 
of the waters, varying with the change of season, broad in winter, narrow in 
summer, by turns sheeted with water like a lake, or the slimy dark alluvial of 
a marsh, or else verdant with vegetation, or yellow with the harvest—the granary 
of the Old World, the cotton, tobacco, and indigo field of modern times, with its 
five millions of acres of cultivable land and its four millions and a half of 
population, with a river of fifteen hundred miles for its highway, at the edge of 
the Libyan Desert, close to the Red Sea, remote from the Atlantic, bathed on its 
north coasts by the Mediterranean, clinging to Asia by an isthmus, which, now 
divided by the thin streak of a canal, makes Africa a gigantic island? Egypt, too— 
the result of the outpour of the great African lakes—the reservoirs of the tropical 
rains—with its rainless sky, its tropical climate, has from times remote had the 
_ charm of historical recollections—the first cradle of the human race, the earliest 


4 v i 


xvill EGYPT. 


evolution of civilisation, the oldest theatre on which the great drama of mankind 
was played, with all its shifting scenes and startling incidents. To Egypt also point 
the arts and sciences as the cradle of their earliest infancy: sculpture, architecture, 
and painting, there first started forth from small beginnings ; literature there began ; 
and religion, the mental bond of civilised communities, there sprang into life, with 
all its Protean phases of polytheistic forms. 

Whence came the first man who trod its alluvial plain? Was he a rude savage, 
clad with skin, and equipped for the chase with implements of stone, to do battle with 
the hippopotamus and the crocodile, with which the stream and its estuaries 
abounded, or to spear the African lion, hunt the howling hyena, or shoot the 
countless flocks of birds of the banks of Nile? Came he as a Nigritic wanderer, 
from Equatorial Africa, from the fringe of the Libyan coast, or from the Semitic 
races beyond the Suez isthmus? Was he an aboriginal—some type of mankind 
which, blended with all sorts of races, has melted away and left no representative 
except some occasional and abnormal form, such as Nature throws out from time to 
time like a recurrent thought in the cosmic mind, some dim recollection of a vanished 
past? The long duration of civilisation has cleared away, even from the preserving 
valley of the Nile, nearly all the evidences of paleothetic ages or neolithic remains, 
although here and there fragments attest the use of stone prior to the employment 
of metal, but so rare as to cast shadows of doubt on the existence of prehistoric 
man. 

This Egypt, whose tradition recounts the reign of gods and demi-gods, first 
gives evidence of its existence by its Pyramids—those tombs of geometric form which 
prove the highest knowledge of the exactest of the human sciences, raised with 
wonderful care, and evincing unrivalled knowledge of the principles of construction. 
They show an enormous population, a long antecedent period of human experience, 
and a development of technical skill in its way unrivalled at the present day, a 
combination of profound thought and trained dexterity evolved by motives of intense 
belief and religious enthusiasm, while at the same time everything necessary to an 
advanced civilisation marked the period, minute divisions of the religious systems 
and civil administration, a practical knowledge of all the arts and sciences, without 
which architectural conceptions would be failures, the conquest of the Arabian 
peninsula and search for mineral wealth, the subjugation of the South, and the 
successful extract from its primitive rocks of the granite and basalt required to case 


the pyramid or mould into sarcophagi, and these blocks transported in vessels of 


INTRODUCTION. ; xix 


great size down the river at its highest flood or annual increase, to their destina- 
tion. Civil and military requirements were met with careful organisation, and the 
sable races of Egypt’s southern border drilled to expel the hostile tribes that 
infested its adjoining deserts. Since Ebers wrote three more pyramids of the 
Sakkarah group have been opened, and have revealed, by the details of their long 
inscriptions, that at the remote period of the VIth Dynasty the religious thought or 
belief in the circle of gods was as complete as at the close of its faith, of its poly- 
theism. Pepi or Phiops, Merenra or Haremsaf, and Neferkara or Nephercheres had 
their costly sepulchres adorned with prayers and formulz from the myth of Osiris, 
and direct declaration of the doctrine of the immortality of the soul. 

The age of pyramids once past, and Egypt assumes another feature: the arts 
still improve, architecture rises to a higher conception. The temple surpasses the 
tomb at the time of the XIIth Dynasty, and the Doric column springs into life. 
The South is conquered for its gold and slaves; the North is advanced on for its mineral 
wealth; the Libyan or African wanders, as an itinerant juggler or a mercenary soldier, to 
Egypt. The Semitic families render obeisance to their Hamitic superiors, and enter 
Egypt as friends or vassals. The grasp which held the valleys of the Sinaitic peninsula 
retains it still more tightly, and Egyptian adventurers receive a lordly welcome 
at the court of Edom. The hereditary nobility are fostered by the Pharaohs of this 
and the subsequent line. Hydraulic engineering constructs vast reservoirs for irrigation, 
and the lake Mceris alone marks an era. The Labyrinth and the Obelisk, which attain 
a world renown, complete the circle of its civilisation, and are imitated by the other 
races of mankind. Literature still flourishes, religion retains its ancient features. From 
hence till the XVIIIth Dynasty there is a decline or an eclipse; but in the long 
interval, and towards its close, a new race of men—the so-called Shos, or Shepherds, 
Nomads, or Crossers—make their appearance. They seize the Delta, subdue the 
Egyptians, whom they drive back upon the swarthy Ailthiopian. The ethnological 
relations of the Shepherd races are as obscure as the Egyptians. They resemble in 
type the Semitic; but some have endeavoured to connect them with the Hittites. 
Inferior in civilisation to the Egyptians, they adopted Egyptian arts, and their 
ascendency does not seem to have influenced in any remarkable degree Egyptian 
civilisation. The religion was also connected, through the god Set, with that of 
Egypt. At Tanis, their capital, are their remains; and the only distinctive marks of 
their rule is the appearance of the horse, which, brought from the plains of Asia, had 


probably contributed to the conquest of the valley of the Nile. Egypt expels the 


38s EGYPT. 


Shepherds, and a new native dynasty—the XVITIth—surpasses the glories of those 
which preceded it. Thothmes IIL. defeats at Megiddo the combined hosts of Eastern 
Asia, and marches to the Euphrates. Nineveh and Babylon become his tributaries ; 
and the world known to the Egyptians contributes its united wealth to the treasuries 
of the Temple of Amen. His sisters had already sent embassies and naval expeditions 
to the eastern coast of Africa. It is no longer an age of gigantic pyramids, but one 
of colossal temples. Thebes inflates to overwhelming proportions ; stones and temples 


are piled on one another, and the statue of Amenophis III, lisping to the rising sun, 


adds another wonder to the list of Egyptian marvels. Subject to vicissitudes, religious 
animosities impair the extent of empire, the Delta falls into anarchy or foreign hands ; 
but a new dynasty, itself of Semitic origin, wrests back the country, re-conquers Palestine, 
and breaks the strength of its great rival, the Khita, or supposed Hittites. One heroic 
figure—Rameses IT., the Sesostris of Greek legends—stands out in the fierce glare 
of historic light. Poems and official inscriptions record his unwonted prowess, and 
his great battle of Kadesh, on the banks of the Orontes, restores the independence, if 
not the supremacy, of Egypt. The canal to join the two seas is commenced by his 
father, a long wall is built to resist the return of Asiatic hordes to Egypt. The 
Exodus takes place’ under his successor; and Egypt, now attacked by Libyans and 
other Mediterranean nations, victorious at the brunt, again relapses to another 
decadence, to be again restored to its pristine condition. After an intestine struggle, 
another Rameses ITI.—equally devoted to the life of the camp and the palace—drives off 
the invaders. From north and south, east and west, Libyans, Asiatics, Europeans, and 
negroes are all repelled. Thebes especially, the quarter of Medinat Habu, is embellished 
and increased. But here end the glories of the line; a long and inglorious suite of 
feeble successors led to sacerdotal usurpation. Assyria, emerging from its Western 
struggles, directs its attentions to the Hast, and in Egypt a dynasty with ambitious 
views and powerful armies marches its hosts into Palestine, under Shishakh, and 
pillaged Jerusalem. Henceforth possession of Egypt was alternately disputed. Assyria 
and Aithiopia, Sabaco and Tirhakah (p.c. 727) appear on the scene, to retreat before 
the victorious hosts of Nineveh; and when Assyria succumbs to Babylon, Nebuchadnezzar 
defeats Necho at Carchemish—Necho, who renews the attempt of the canal of Seti, 
and first endeavours to circumnavigate the continent of Africa. But Babylon has 
fallen to the Persian Cyrus, and Cambyses conquers Egypt (8.c. 527); the supremacy 
of Persia, shaken and contested for almost two centuries, is riveted, in B.c. 340, on the 


country, and the fall of Persia to the Greeks (s.c. 330) ends by the establishment of 


INTRODUCTION. Xxi 


the Greek rule of the Ptolemies: the whole civilisation changes—arts, language, and 
organisations, are Hellenised. It is no longer Memphis or Thebes, but Alexandria, that 
is the capital; wealth accumulates, but men decay ; the religion is not altogether effete, 
for splendid temples of inferior art are still erected, as evidences of a failing faith. 
Pedantic disputes and philosophic sophisms replace the mysterious dogmas of the old 


the Pharos or 


religion at the Court of the Ptolemies, and one monument alone 


ss of civilisation. The dramatic incidents 


Light Tower—marks an addition to the progre 
of the ultimate fall of the Ptolemies, and the final conquest of Egypt by the Romans 
after the battle of Actium, are the story of a foreign race, and no magnificent ruins 
attest the Greek rule in Egypt. The Roman sway was a mere continuation of the 
Greek in its development. A superstitious veneration of Egyptian polytheism 
repaired or added to some of the older monuments, and built some newer temples, or 
continued those of the Ptolemies, but arts and sciences declined, and the rise of 
Christianity was the signal for the neglect or abolition of the devices of Paganism, 
without adorning the country with monuments of architecture or art, and subtle 
disputations on points of faith replaced Egyptian culture and Greek philosophy, while 
monks and hermits meditated in deserts political revolution, or the destruction of 
ancient edifices, and the Patriarchs of Alexandria consented to the pillage of its 
temples and its libraries. 

But the conquest of Egypt by the Arabs in s.c. 630, although at first attended 
by destruction and disaster—owing to the religious fanaticism of the Mohammedan 
victors—gave an entirely new phase to the arts and sciences; and if sculpture dis- 
appeared, architecture took a new development. Manners, customs, and civil organi- 
sation, were all remodelled or absolutely changed. Under the Abbaside khalifs in 
the eighth century a.p. it had attained the highest grandeur during the reign of 
Haroun-er-Rashid, and continued still to develop under the rule of the Touloonide 
and Fatimite khalifs. The present work illustrates all this in the most striking 
manner, and exhibits all the peculiarities of Arab life and art—the marked influence 
in architecture which the pointed arch, in metallic products the damascened or 
inlaid work, in pottery the brilliant glazes, in the woof the embroidered garments, 
and in design the fantastic and interlaced patterns—exercised on the material civili- 
sation of the West. The age of the khalifS was an age alike of poetry and romance, 
of enormous wealth and capricious prodigality to favourites, poets, and musicians, 
intermingled with vain ostentation, love of learning, and public oppression, which 


preceded the arrival of the Crusaders in the Hast, and their entrance into Egypt 


XX EGYPT. 


in A.D. 1217. These warriors, however, left no memorial more important of their 
advent than a rare and insignificant coinage struck at Damietta. This was, however, 
the age of Saladin, Richard Coeur de Lion, and Louis the Saint of France, and the 
termination of a vain enterprise of a rival fanaticism. The Sultans of the different 
dynasties have left, however, behind them magnificent mosques and_ splendid 
sepulchres, fallen into neglect and destined to ruin unless the interposition of public 
sentiment in Europe demands that they shall be preserved. The Turkish rule in 
Kigypt, which began in the sixteenth century, had no great influence on the country, 
and collapsed under the rival intrigues of the Mamelukes and the Porte, but the 
French Expedition in 1798 renewed the old acquaintance with Egypt, which had 
been much impaired and almost Jost since the first Crusade. For the conquest of 
Egypt by the French under Napoleon, the enlightened administration and_ scientific 
inquiry which accompanied the arms of France opened the eyes of Europe to the 
vast interest revealed by the oldest centre of human civilisation. All the ancient 
remains of Egypt were studied; those apparently most important were correctly 
engraved, and, for the first time, accompanied by scientific descriptions. 


The French Expedition discovered the trilingual inscription known as the 


Rosetta Stone—the key to the interpretation of the hieroglyphs—and this monu- 
ment enabled Young and Champollion to decipher and interpret the lost language 
of ancient Egypt, which, up to the beginning of the nineteenth century, had been 
laid aside as a problem apparently hopeless to solve, or taken up as a toy for 
the amusement of pedantry. The solution of the question in its fullest details by 
Champollion is one of the great literary discoveries of the century, and, when accom- 
plished, astonishment and delight possessed all inquirers not inveterate in error or 
malignant by design, and a new charm pervaded every inscription, for the meaning, the 
age, and the object of which had been previously obscure, was rendered intelligible 
and plain. Religious history, manners, and customs, all were illustrated in a novel 
and surprising manner ; the very walls, hitherto inarticulate, appeared to be endowed 
with speech. Stores of information contained in the various texts on the monuments, 
—mythological, historical, or explanatory—the speech of the noble and the exclama- 
tions and replies of slaves and peasants, were revealed. The papyri relating to the 
mythology, or the ritual to the funeral ceremonies, hymns to the gods, historical 
documents of all kinds, lists of monarchs, the epic poems of Pentaur in honour of 
Rameses II., the record of the donations of Rameses III. to the principal shrines 


of Egypt, an extensive literature and correspondence of scribes during the XIXth 


INTRODUCTION. 


Dynasty, and earlier treatises on ethics, even works of fiction, sales, marriage 
contracts, and accounts, have, in consequence of the discovery, stood exposed to the 
eye, and form a new and extensive literature.* How much the charm of Ebers’ work 
is enhanced by his deep acquaintance, not only with the monuments and works of art, 
but with their interpretation of them, and with all that has been said or written on 
the subject ! 

The modern period, from the ascension of Mohammed Ali in 1811, after the 
destruction of the Mamelukes, is distinguished by the plans of that ruler for the 
civilisation of the country on the European model, and the efforts of his successors 
to improve its prospects and attractions by excavations of the principal ruins, and 
the preservation of its antiquities by Said Pasha; the completion of the Suez 
Canal by Ismail Pasha, in 1869; the grand scheme of M. Ferdinand de Lesseps; and 
the extension of the limits of the country on its southern confines. The adminis- 
tration of its finances, and the consequent improvement of the country by the joint 
action of France and England, close the history of a period of nearly seven thousand 
years. 

The modern Egyptians, the manners and customs of the different races, have 
been already described by Lane, Poole, Whately, Audouard, Goltz, Klunzinger, Zincke, 
and innumerable authors and travellers; and the personal experiences of Professor 
Kbers, besides his extensive knowledge of the principal authors in Arabic literature, 
have been added to the labours and remarks of his predecessors. His discovery 


of the ancient medical treatise of the old Pharaonic period, written in Hieratic, known 


as the Papyrus Ebers, and his scientific and philological works on Egypt and the 
books of Moses, hieroglyphical system of writing, in the “Zeitschrift fur A%gyptische 
Sprache” of Berlin, attest his researches into old Egypt; and his successful novels, “ An 
Egyptian Princess,” besides ‘“‘ Homo Sum,” “Uarda,” and “ The Sisters,’ published in 1870, 
prove the power he possessed of popularising a subject hitherto deemed recondite. In the 
present work is the latest account of the Egyptians, for whom there will probably be a 
more brilliant future as civilisation advances, and more correct principles of political 


economy, and the importance of European civilisation as a means of political 


* The archeological discoveries of Egypt are by no means exhausted, for quite lately the tombs of the monarchs of 
the XXIst dynasty accidentally revealed at Thebes, with thirtymine mummies and their coffins, comprising kings of the 
XVIIth and XVIIIth and XIXth dynasties, and the remains of the great Thothmes IIL, and the heroic Ramesses IL, 
or Sesostris, and the sacerdotal monarchs of the XXIst line, with their papyri and other objects, receive illustration from 


the labours of Champollion. 


XXxiv HGYPT. 


regeneration, become diffused in the far East. The interest offered by modern Egypt 
from all points of view, the comparison of its past and present condition, the striking 
difference between them and European costume and custom, receive a striking illustration 
from the aid afforded by photography and engraving, which give precision to descriptions 
however brilliantly animated or severely exact; and although Egypt, like the rest 
of the East, is intensely conservative, gradual change still insinuates itself, though 
rapid improvement lingers on its path. 

It has been necessary in the English edition to add occasional notes to guide 
the reader as to the dates and other facts mentioned in the German text, which will 
thus receive illustration of points which might otherwise appear obscure ; for although 
Egyptian chronology has been long debatable ground, and opinions on the remotest 
period vary to the extent of at least one-third of the whole chronology, history without 
some chronological indications presents only a hazy succession of events to the mind. 
Tn all cases, however, a probable date has been given, and even at the remotest period 
of the vast antiquity of the age of Pyramids the most recent discoveries tend to show 
the hoar antiquity and great age of these monuments, already preceded by a long 
duration of civilised human life and knowledge of arts and sciences. The importance 
of Egypt, both past and present, increases daily in the minds of Europe, as well as 
the conviction that it rivals with Greece and Rome, and shares with Assyria and 


Babylonia, the claims of attention to the past and future of the present day. 


Aucustr, 1881. S. BIRCH. 


ANCIENT ALEXANDRIA. 


—————>-2*# oe 


HOEVER arrives in Egypt, be he a native 
of the North or of the West, must first set 
foot on the soil of Alexandria. Weary of the 
long sea-voyage and of all the novel pictures 
that meet his eye in this strange quarter 
of the world, he retires to his night’s rest, 
and closes his eyes to think of home. 
Suddenly, a clear resounding song breaks the silence 
of the night; it is the Muezzin’s call to prayer—the 
bell’s chime of the East—nature having bestowed on man 
a tongue and tone fitted to rouse a response in the heart 
of every hearer. 

The Muezzin sings out his benediction over the 
sleeping city in deep long-drawn tones. “ Prayer is better 
than sleep,” he cries to the sleepless; and his voice rises to 
its highest pitch when he shouts with three-fold iteration : 
“There is no God but God !” or “ Allah, Allah, Allah !” as 
introductory to a beautiful prayer. 

Before rising from bed to make acquaintance with 
the Alexandria of to-day—the half-European threshold of 
the Nile valley—let us turn our minds to the past, and 
attempt in some degree to depict to ourselves the great 
Greeco-Egyptian city, the most celebrated spot of later 
antiquity. 

Alexandria, one of the youngest cities of the ancient 
world, was at the same time the largest and the most 
brilliant. The rate of its increase in extent, population, 


and commerce was in no way behind that of the greatest cities of the New 
World; and as regards the rapid development of the higher gifts of humanity— 


1 


2 EGYPT. 
the arts and sciences—no American city even can offer anything approaching a 
parallel example. 

Was it to its happily chosen situation that this great centre of learning and 
commerce owed its marvellously rapid growth? This is hardly evident ‘at a first 
glance. 

The northern coast of Egypt is flat, uniform, and unlovely, and though the 
waves of the Mediterranean sparkle in the sunshine in the harbour of Alexandria 
no less blue than on the orange-scented shores of Sorrento, or in the sunny bay of 
Malaga, they here break on many and dangerous rocks. In spite of the far-gleaming 
beacon of the Pharos of Ras-et-Teen, no vessel at the present day can enter the 
harbour of Alexandria by night. 

An artificial canal begun by Mohammed Ali, the founder of the Vice-regal 
house, and named after the then reigning sultan the Mahmoudeeyeh Canal, washes 
the city precincts—but it is no branch of the Nile—and yields drinking water which 
could not be otherwise procured by digging wells, for from the soil of Egypt only 
salt springs rise. The coast in the vicinity of Alexandria, during the winter months, 
is beaten by storms of wind and rain; and the sky, whose pure azure is, at Cairo, 
rarely veiled, and then only by clouds that are dispersed in passing showers, is 
not less often obscured at Alexandria than in the peninsulas of southern Europe. 
Besides these drawbacks, the spot chosen by Alexander to be the site of a mart 
where the riches of Egypt might be exchanged for the treasures and marvels of 
the Indies, was at the extreme north-west of the Delta, equally remote from the 
Red Sea and from the high-road of the caravans by which Egypt and Syria 
held communication. 

Nevertheless, the site selected by the genius and penetration of Alexander 
was the only one in Egypt which combined all the conditions indispensable to such a 
metropolis as he dreamed of, and such as, in fact, arose in fulfilment of his purpose. 

A great Greeco-Egyptian city, according to his idea, was to fill a double func- 
tion ; first, its harbour was to be a central mart both for the produce of the Nile 
valley and for goods imported from the south by way of the Red Sea, and these 
wares were to be dispersed throughout. the world by the Greek merchants ; while, 
in the second place, all the beauty of Hellenic life and culture in the new emporium 
was to be brought to bear upon Egypt. He had found the ancient realm of the 
Pharaohs still and stark as its mummied dead; in Alexandria the genius of the 
Greek was to find a new home, to release Egypt from the bonds of centuries, and 
to transform the barbarian nations of the Nile country, making them a controllable 
member of that mighty body of universal Greek dominion, which was the end he 
had proposed to himself as the goal of his heroic course. 

On the eastern Egyptian coast lay the ancient harbours of Pelusium and 
Tanis on arms of the mouths of the Nile. He selected neither of these for the site 
of the new Greek city; for it did not escape his observant eye, or that of the 
scientific men who accompanied his armies, that the current of the Mediterranean 
bathing the Egyptian coast sets from west to east; and that, by carrying the alluvial 
earth annually brought down by the inundations of the Nile constantly eastward, it 
was destroying the harbours to the east of the delta. 


ANCIENT ALEXANDRIA. 3 


How just was 
his foresight has since 
been proved; for at 
the present day, while 
thousands of ships 
crowd the quays of 
Alexandria, the ports 
of older fame—Pelu- 
sium and Ascalon, 
Tyre and Sidon—are 
choked by alluvial 
deposits, barred and 
useless. 

In the year 332 
B.c., Alexander laid 
the foundation of the 
new city, encouraged 
to the great work by 
dreams and omens 
which promised it a 
glorious future. 

Directly oppo- 
site to the Egyptian 
port of Rhacotis to 
the north, close to the 
coast, lay the island 
of Pharos, of ancient 
fame ; and behind the town, to the 
south, the Lake Mareotis, connected 
with the western arm of the Nile by an artificial canal which it 
would be easy to extend. The bay where the island lay offered 
ample space for many sea-going vessels, and thousands of Nile- 
boats could find room in the inland lake. A city rising between 
the two would be situated advantageously alike for imports and 
for exports, and Hellenic life would thrive and flourish unhindered ; 
all the more because the Egyptian town on which it would be 
grafted was an insignificant one. 

In Homer’s Odyssey we find these lines :— 


ALEXA 


“A certain island call’d 


Pharos, that with the high-waved sea is wall’d, 


Just against Egypt... 
And this island bears a port most portly, where sea-passengers 
Put in still for fresh water.” 


CHapMan, 


These lines, it is said, were heard by the sleeping Alexander at Rhacotis, uttered 
by a venerable old man who appeared to him in a dream. 


4 EGYPT. 


Orders were given for the measurement of the ground and foundations, and the 
architect Dinocrates was commissioned to prepare a plan. This took the form of a 
Greek peplum, or of a fan, and the work of indicating the direction to be followed by 
the roads, and the extent of the market-places, was begun by strewing white earth 
on the level ground. The supply of this material falling short, it was supplemented by 
the assistants of the architect taking the meal which had been provided in abundance 
for the labourers. The legend goes on to say that hardly had this been sprinkled on 
the soil when numbers of birds came flying down to feed on the welcome supply of 
food. Alexander hailed the appearance of these feathered guests as a favourable 
omen, signifying the rapid prosperity and future wealth of the city. 

And in truth, as birds fly to corn, so, from all Hellas, enterprising immigrants soon 


RUINS OF THE CITY WALL OF ALEXANDRIA. 


came streaming in; merchants and fugitives from Syria and Judea, labourers and 
dealers from Egypt crowded to the new mart ; and Alexander's distinguished general 
Ptolemy, the son of Lagus—who received the surname of Soter, or the preserver 
fixed his magnificent residence there, first as governor’ and then as king.” His talented 
successors, Philadelphus*? and Euergetes,* not only did their utmost to promote the 
external power of Egypt, as well as its wealth and commerce, but strove eagerly to 
concentrate in Alexandria the culture and genius of their time; so that the learned 
men of the East and West crowded to the city, and learning and commerce vied with 
each other in the splendour of their bloom. 

There is no city of antiquity of which we have such abundant records, and yet 
of which so few recognisable remains are left as of Alexandria. In vain we seek for 
an island opposite the city, although the little islet of Pharos does in fact still exist. 
The Ptolemies connected it with the mainland by a mole of quarried stone; and this 
huge mass of masonry was called the Hepta-stadion, from measuring seven stadia’ 
in length. It contained the aqueduct by which the island was supplied with water, 


1po. 324, 25.0, 305. 3 Bo. 284. 43.0. 247, > About 1,410 yards, or { of a mile. 


a 
if 


l 


THE 


MUEZZIN’S CALL 


TO PRAYER. 


6 EGYPT. 


and divided the harbour into two basins, which still exist. The Eastern, or New 
Harbour, which is no longer used, was in ancient times called the Great Harbour ; the 
Western basin, in which the traveller from Europe disembarks, and which is being 
greatly extended by the Viceroy of Egypt, is now known as the Old Harbour, and in 
the time of the Greeks was called the Harbour of Eunostus, as it would seem after the 
son-in-law of Ptolemy Soter and Thais; this name, meaning “good return,” survived 
for a long period. The two communicated by channels that were bridged over; they 
have long since been closed up by mud and detritus, and a broad tongue of land has 
been formed by the falling in of the piers of the bridges erected by the hand of man, 
and by the pebbles and ruins flung upon them by the waves, supplemented by artificial 


MODERN LIGHTHOUSE AT ALEXANDRIA, 


additions. Many houses of the modern Alexandrians stand on the ancient Hepta- 
stadion, and its soil is the first to be trodden by the newly-arrived stranger; for the 
largest of the western steamships cast anchor by its eastern quay. 

The Pharos island now forms its northern point ; it still bears a lighthouse, but 
this stands at the western angle, while the old renowned structure of Sostratus—which 
from its site was named “the Pharos,’ and from which we to this day call a light- 
house a Pharos—stood at the opposite end of the island. It served to show the way 
into the rocky harbour, and was reckoned one of the most remarkable wonders of 
Alexandria and of the ancient world. It surpassed even the Pyramid of Cheops 
in height; but, thanks to the advanced state of science in our day, the light of 
the present lower tower shines out farther into the night than the beacon-fire 
which flared from the summit of its predecessor. Ptolemy Philadelphus caused 
it to be constructed of white marble by Sostratus of Cnidus, and he dedicated it 
to his deified parents. The famous architect carved his name, with an inscription, 
in the stone at the top of the tower. Over this, it is said, he spread plaster, and 
wrote on that the name of the royal builder or architect, so that when the more 
fragile material should have perished his own name might be read by future 
generations. 


= SS ";...”.. ain 


ANCIENT ALEXANDRIA. Uf 


Let us now return to the mainland and seek the traces of the principal 
quarters, streets, and public buildings of the city. 

By far the most magnificent portion was the Bruchium, bathed by the waters of 
the Great Harbour, and adjoining the oldest part of the city, namely, the original 
fishing port of Rhacotis. This old quarter was always the residence chiefly of 
Egyptians ; and, as in all Egyptian cities, on its western side lay its “City of the Dead.” 
For, as the sun after its day’s course sinks in the west, so the soul, after its life’s 
course, found its rest there where spread the desert inimical to all life, and where 
the realm of death was supposed to lie. The colonists, following the example of the 


CATACOMBS IN ALEX 


Egyptians, interred their dead there too, until late Christian times; and the traveller 
who at this day visits the neighbourhood of Pompey’s Pillar, and wanders west- 
ward along the sea-shore, will come upon tombs hewn in the rock, and farther 
inland will find catacombs of considerable extent. Even in Alexandria the native 
Egyptian citizens had their dead embalmed, while the Greeks adhered to their national 
custom of cremation. 3 

In the eastern part of the Bruchium dwelt the Jews; they had their own 
quarter, kept up but a slight connection with their brethren in Palestine, and at 
some periods exceeded in wealth and influence all the rest of the population, though 
at other times they suffered severely, and not altogether without fault on their part. 


1 The name of this quarter has been given by different classical authorities as Bruchion, Bruchium, Proucheium, and 
Puroucheion. Its name is supposed to mean the granary or height. 


8 EGYPT. 


These quarters were connected by a maze of streets, in which riders and vehicles 
could move with comfort; they debouched on two main thoroughfares that crossed 
each other. The longer of these, running south-west and north-east, went from the 
City of the Dead to the Jews’ quarter, and ended, eastwards, at the Canopic Gate— 
the Rosetta Gate of the present day ; the other, cutting it at a right angle, led to the 
two gates of the Sun and Moon, and a layer of mould which has lately been dis- 
covered mingled with the pavement seems to indicate that both roads were ornamented 
with plantations. They must have been unusually broad and handsome. The vehicles 
of the rich, the loaded waggons, and the lordly processions on horseback which entered 

the city from the Hippodrome by the 
Canopic Gate, found ample room on 
the paved way of square granite, 
forty métres’ broad ; and when the 
sun was blazing hot, or when violent 
storms of rain fell, the pedestrian 
found shelter, for the wide side-paths 
were overarched by colonnades. 

The gates of the Sun and 
Moon have vanished, the colonnades 
are overthrown, and recent layers of 
soil overlie the ancient pavement ; 
however, the aqueducts under that 
pavement were, a few years ago, 
restored to their original purpose. 
Little remains of the houses of the 
inhabitants ; yet the inquirer, if he 
quits the quarter occupied by the 
well-to-do Europeans, and betakes 
himself to the more modest Egyptian 
quarter on the western side of the 
city, and follows the line of the coast, or, passing through the Canopic Gate 
(the Rosetta Gate), walks across the open country, may come across many traces 
of ancient houses and public buildings. He has only to look round him. It is cer- 
tainly vain to expect to discover monuments of any particular artistic merit ; 
but he will find tanks of very early structure, traces of the foundation-walls of 
temples and palaces, thresholds, door-posts, and architraves in marble; in the 
mosques beautifully carved pillars from the Greek sanctuaries ; a stone sarcophagus 
serving as a trough from which an ass quenches his thirst; the shaft of a 
pillar on which some Arab mother sits nursing her child, or which lies before a 
doorway, half covered with sand and overgrown with the herbs of the desert. The 
daily traffic of the Alexandrians was from the inner harbour by the Lake Mareotis to 
the sea and back again ; on high festival days they betook themselves principally by the 
larger streets to the Bruchium. Here stood the Palaces of the kings with the Museum 


GROUP AMONG THE RUINS OF ANCIENT ALEXANDRIA, 


1 About 136 feet. 


ANCIENT ALEXANDRIA. 9 


and its library, the noblest temples of the Greek gods, the Mausoleum called the 
Soma, containing the body of Alexander the Great, the circus and the theatre, the 
gymnasium, the Hippodrome with its winding course, and many other public buildings 
to which the principal officials, the learned and the artists, the freeborn youth, and the 
pleasure-seeking crowd constantly flocked. 

Theocritus* has given us a picture of the crowd on the day of the festival of Adonis, 
which two women—intimate acquaintance, and wives of citizens of Syracuse settled in 
Alexandria—have gone to assist at together. Gorgo and Praxinoa? behave under 
the circumstances exactly as if they 
had been born in the nineteenth century 
after Christ instead of in the third 
century before. 

Gorgo appears and Praxinoa 
orders her maid-servant :— 


“ Quick, Eunoa, find a chair, 


And fling a cushion on it.’” 


When Gorgo has taken her 
place and recovered her breath, 
she sighs out— 


“Oh what a thing is spirit! Here I am, 


Praxinoa, safe at last from all that crowd 


And all those chariots 


every street a m 
Of boots and soldiers’ jackets. Oh! the road 


Seemed endless, and you live so far away.” 


Praxinoa laments over her “odious pest of 
a husband” who has taken this dwelling at 
the end of the world (probably near the 
Gate of the Sun). Gorgo warns her not, 
in her child’s presence, to speak thus of its father, and Praxinoa 
calls out to the boy :— 


“There, baby sweet, I never meant papa.” 
But the small citizen is too sharp, and his “aunt” Gorgo says :— 
“Tt understands, by ’r lady !§ dear papa!” 


At last Praxinoa has completed her toilet with the help of the maid, who does 
not get through the business without a scolding, and Gorgo exclaims :— 


“My dear, that full pelisse becomes you well. 
What did it stand you in, straight off the loom ?” 


VIdyll 15, * As they speak in Doric their names are spelled so, instead of Praxinoe, Eunoe. * Proserpine, 


2 


ne 


EGYPTIAN WOMEN 


DRAWING 


WATER. 


ANCIENT ALEXANDRIA. 11 
To which her friend replies :— 


“Don’t ask me, Gorgo; two good pounds? and more; 


Then I gave all my mind to trimming it.” 


The smart lady then has her mantle thrown round her, her sun-shade elegantly 
put up, and when all is done she gives the child in charge of the nurse, desires her 
to call in the dog and to lock the door, and then hurries off with her friend, down 
the road towards the royal palace on the Bruchium. They get through the crowd 
unharmed as far as the palace gate, but there the mob and confusion are much greater, 
and Praxinoa cries out :— 

“Your hand please, Gorgo. Eunoa, you 
Hold Eutychis—hold tight or you'll be lost. 


We'll enter in a body—hold us fast! 


Oh! dear, my muslin? gown is torn in two, 


Gorgo, already! Pray, good gentleman, 


(And happiness be yours) respect my robe.” 


The gentleman appealed to is gallant, and when they have reached their desti- 
nation Eunoa says, laughing :— 
« We're all in now, 


As quoth the goodman, and shut out his wife.” 


We will follow the Syracusan ladies to the Bruchium and the king’s palaces, 
which stood on the eastern side of the harbour, and eastward of the spot where 
Cleopatra’s Needle lately stood, southwards from the peninsula of Lochias, which, 
however, can now hardly be recognised. Magnificent gardens surrounded the palaces 
of the Ptolemies, and adjoining them stood the most celebrated of all the institutions 
founded by the dynasty of the Lagide, the Museum with its library. If the Syra- 
cusan ladies had in fact come from the neighbourhood of the Gate of the Sun, they 
must have crossed the market-place, and thence have followed the Canopic way a little 
to the east ; then they would have turned to the left by a side street, have passed 
the huge Circus of the amphitheatre—where tickets and programmes of the games to 
be performed would be offered them for sale, and horn or ivory passes for the per- 
formances at the festival. But Gorgo and Praxinoa resisted the temptation, and did 
not rest till they reached the grove of trees which was planted on the top of the 
artificial mound of Soma, the Mausoleum of Alexander. 

The body of the great founder of the city had been already brought from 
Babylon® by the first Ptolemy,‘ and it remained in its golden sarcophagus till a 
degenerate son of the Lagide sacrilegiously melted down the metal and substituted 
a glass sarcophagus for the golden one. 

The ladies went up by the citizens’ steps, for the levelled way which led out 
from the palace through the Bruchium to the high streets might be used only by 
members of the court. It was called the “Royal Road,” and it was in reference to 


' Mine, or 200 drachme, about £7 10s. 
* The Theris 


*Tt was visited by Augustus, who touche 


ion, or thin summer garment, covering the head and face. 


and so injured the nose of the corpse. 


‘Supposed to be represented on the gold staters or didrachms of this monarch. 


12 EGYPT. 


this that Euclid made the famous reply to Ptolemy Soter, who asked him for some 
easy method of attaining to a knowledge of his propositions—* There is no Royal 
Road to mathematics.” 

The gymnasium to the right as they go on, is empty to-day, for all the youth 
of Alexandria are taking part in the festival; even in the courts and halls of the 
Museum, which for the present we will pass 
by, all is still; for the king has invited the 
most illustrious of those who dwell there to 
be his guests. Our Syracusan ladies: are 
allowed to enter the vestibule of the palace, 
where the statue of Adonis lies on costly 
drapery spread on a silver framework, and 
surrounded by beds of flowers, and where 
the form of the lovely Cypris’ is to be seen 
on a not less magnificent couch. They are 
permitted to hear the festal song of the 
noble singer who was crowned mistress of song 
in the Ialemos? the year before; but they 
have to hasten home, for Gorgo’s husband 
has not yet broken his fast, and “ without 
his supper,” says she, “ Diocleides is simply 
vinegar.”® 

Just as the feast of Adonis tempted 
the two ladies to the Bruchium, so the greatest 
festival of the Alexandrians, the Feast of 
Dionysus, brought all the men to the palaces 
and their vicinity. This Feast of Dionysus 
was celebrated with even greater delights 
and tenfold more splendour than at Athens 
itself, though, no doubt, with less of the 
true sentiment of beauty. The Ptolemies 
made it the occasion for displaying the full 
extent of their wealth, and all the wild 
enjoyments of life and sensual desires that 
fermented and seethed in the souls of the 
excitable inhabitants of the metropolis of the 
world, at these feasts threw off all control, 
and rioted and revelled without restraint. Moderation was accounted a crime, and 
the Bruchium was the scene of a vast orgy. 

Only a privileged few could share in the magnificent banquets within the 
precincts of the king’s palaces; but every one was free to partake of the bounty 
bestowed on the people at the festal procession. The account of this feast as given 
by Callixenus, who was an eye-witness, sounds quite fabulous; nevertheless it must 


1 Aphrodite or Venus. 7” “In singing the dirge.” Jalemos is the dirge or threne. * Theocritus in English verse. C. S. Calverley. 


ANCIENT ALEXANDRIA. 13 


have some claim to be believed, even though it is allowable to make deductions from the 
numbers he gives. The representations given on this solemn occasion were connected 
with the myth of Dionysus, not however kept free from all admixture with Egyptian 
traditions and customs. 

The procession with the mythological impersonations must have been inter- 
minably long. In the time of the 
native kings the ancestral images of 
the Egyptian gods and Pharaohs had 
been introduced ;' and in the same 
way the gods of Olympus with the 
Macedonian princes, Alexander the 
Great, Ptolemy Soter, and his son 
Philadelphus, were now represented. 
To add to the delights of the feast 
splendid sham fights were held, where 
the victors, and among them the 
king, received golden crowns as GOIN PE PTOUENT GO7e=s 
prizes. One such feast-day under 
the Ptolemies cost between £300,000 and £400,000; and how enormous must the 
sums have been which they expended on their fleet-—eight hundred splendid Nile- 
boats lay in the inner harbour of the Lake Mareotis alone—on the army, on the 
court, on the Museum and _ the 
Library ! 

No sovereign house of that 
period could compare with the 
Lagidze in wealth, nor have any 
kings ever applied their treasure to 
more profitable purposes than the 
first Ptolemies. 

Ptolemy Soter, first as governor 
under Alexander* and subsequently 
as king, was the founder of the 
splendid edifices on the Bruchium, 
many of which were only finished 
by his son Philadelphus. He ex- 
pended but little on his own palace, 
for he was wont to say that a king should be lavish to others and not to himself. He 
was a frugal and at the same time a wise and powerful sovereign, who sowed the 
seeds of most of the learning, and laid the foundations of most of the institutions 
that afterwards made Alexandria great and famous ; and his disposition to promote 
science and art was inherited even by the most worthless of his descendants. 
He followed Alexander’s example in leaving to the Egyptians their old laws and 


COIN OF ALEXANDER THE GREAT. 


‘A series of statues of deceased kings carried in the procession of the festival of the god Amsi or Khem, in the reign 
of Rameses IIL, of the XXth dynasty, is given by Wilkinson, “ Manners and Customs,” Vol. IIL. pl. Ix. (New Edition.) 
* po. 331. 


14 EGYPT. 


gods; but he held them in subjection by establishing military colonies. He might 
even have succeeded in engrafting Hellenic life and the Greek spirit throughout the 
Nile valley if he had not denied all municipal rights to 
the children of mixed marriages, with a view of keeping 
the blood of the Greek colonists pure. Many as there were 
among the inhabitants of Alexandria who were not Greeks, 
the council was always addressed as “Men of Macedonia.” 
Soter was equally zealous in the cause of commerce ; he 
had the harbours of the city enlarged and improved; he 
brought eight thousand ship-builders from Phoenicia, and a 
great number of cedar trunks from Lebanon to use in 
increasing his fleet. The old Egyptian merchants had not 
known the use of a coinage, but had carried on their dealings 
by weighing out metal, which was commonly wrought into 
the form of rings. Ptolemy Soter’ followed the example set 
by the states of the Greek metropolis, and caused coins of 
gold, silver, and copper to be struck in Alexandria. Many 
of the Ptolemaic heads, particularly those on the more 
precious metals, are hardly surpassed in beauty of work- 
manship, and enable us to form a personal acquaintance, 
so to speak, with the different individuals of the family of the 
Lagide. The mathematician Euclid, the physicians Erasis- 
eactn oepenigees Sus tratus and Herophilus, the Athenian Demetrius Phalereus, 
were among the circle of learned men which Soter gathered 
round him ; Demetrius Phalereus he first took into his council as learned in law, and 
it was from him that the suggestion to collect a library afterwards emanated. He 
wrote a history of the wars of Alexander the Great, which is unfortunately lost to 
us. Among the artists who flourished under him in Alexandria, we need only name 
the painter Apelles and his rivals, and the sculptor Antiphilus. Buildings were 
needed in the new metropolis, pleasure and splendour were in great request in 
the great emporium of the products of three continents; what wonder then 
that Alexandria attracted artists of every description, that architects and pleasure- 
loving Greeks congregated there, that the Hast and West clasped. hands there, the 
sovereion house setting the example of adorning life with all that was most lovely 
and delightful ? 
The hetaira Thais was Soter’s first wife ; his second was the Macedonian Berenice” 
Both these queens taught the Alexandrian ladies how the Greek feeling for 
beauty could be combined with the oriental love of splendour. The most exquisite 
of all the gems that have been handed down to us were engraved for the Ptolemies, 
and it was especially for the ladies of Alexandria that the weavers of Cos 


1 Ptolemy Soter coined gold staters, or didrachms, 55 grains in weight, equal to 25 silver drachms ; and pentadrachms, of 
75 grains, in the same metal, equal to 125 silver drachms; and silver tetradrachms, of 220 grains. It is uncertain if he coined 


97 
lars 


ro 


e copper, which was issued on the old Egyptian standard, but must have been employed for small change. 


? From this name a whole set of w is derived, including Bernstein, the German for amber, and through a series 


nish, Eng.; vernis, Fr. 


(vernice, vernix, vernis) the modern forms— 


ANCIENT ALEXANDRIA. 15 


manufactured a delicate fabric of bombyx or silk,’ a kind of firm but transparent gauze, 
which covered without concealing the fair form of the wearer. 

This is not the plate to enlarge on the wars conducted by Ptolemy Soter. 
Towards the end of his reign, B.c. 284, he associated Philadelphus, his son by Berenice, 
in the government. This prince found Alexandria in an advanced state as to its struc- 
tures, to which only the ornamentation was lacking—and nothing could more perfectly 
accord with his talents and tastes than the fulfilment of this task. A man of much 
smaller powers than his father, he would never have been equal to the effort of 
creating a great city out of nothingness; but the disciple of Straton? and Philetas,’ 
the wealthy and tasteful patron of science, was eminently fitted to finish and 
elaborate that which lay under his hand. He and his father have been happily 
compared to Solomon and his father David. 

Under him Alexandria reached the summit of its glory. No member of his 
family, with the exception of the last Cleopatra, earned a greater celebrity than he ; 
and that not by the splendour of warlike deeds, but by the quiet arts of peace 
for which his reign of three-and-thirty years and an unheard-of influx of wealth 
gave him ample time and means. Under him was made that translation of the 
Bible into Greek which is known by the name of the Septuagint ; but the story which 
tells of Seventy translators who, although they worked apart in different rooms, pro- 
duced renderings which perfectly agreed, must be consigned to the class of legends. 

The greatest and most valuable work of Ptolemy Philadelphus was his anxious 
care for the Museum, which under him attained its most flourishing development. 
In this magnificent structure the most distinguished sages of the time of the Ptolemies 
found a welcome, and such protection from external worries as conduced to their 
advantageous co-operation in study and in teaching. It was situated in the same 
quarter as the king’s palace, and consisted of a “Grove,” @e, a large court with 
fountains and arbours; an extensive open hall protected from the weather by a 
colonnade in which the learned met, disputed, and found room to gather their disciples 
around them; and a large building with a spacious dining-hall. Here the members 
of the institute reclined at their meals—for the Greeks always ate reclining—classed 
according to the schools to which they belonged ; the Aristotelian reclining by the 
Aristotelian, the Platonist by Platonists. Each mess chose its principal (or president), 
and the body of principals constituted a senate whose sittings were presided over by 
a neutral High Priest chosen by the government. 

The structure was spacious, the decoration of its courts and halls was splendid 
and artistic, and the independence of the individual sages appears to have been 
perfect ; they were always at liberty to teach or to pursue their investigations in 
the quiet of seclusion. 

In the time of Philadelphus the Museum was the focus which collected all the 
rays of the spiritual and intellectual life of the period, and the means of culture put 
at the disposal of its members were unequalled ; for Philadelphus displayed so much 


' A kind of silk, according to some authors (Yates, “Textrinum Antiquorum,” 1843, p. 168, where all the classical 


authorities upon the Bombyx and the Coian garments are cited and discussed), A description of their transparent fineness is 


given 
by Seneca, “ De Beneficiis,” vii. c. 9. The transparent garments of Cleopatra are mentioned by Lucan, x., |. 141. 


* A philosopher, who taught physics and material pantheism. * Poet and grammarian, 


16 EGYPT. 


judgment and liberality in extending the collection of books made by his father, and 
had it so admirably arranged and catalogued, that this library—which was in con- 
nection with the Museum of Alexandria, and contained four hundred thousand 
rolls—was justly regarded as the finest of all antiquity. By the time of Czsar, when 
these treasures, which had guided the labours of 
many Alexandrian sages, fell a prey to fire, the 
collection begun by the Ptolemies seems to have 
increased to nine hundred thousand rolls. 

There is no province of science which was not 
cultivated in the Museum of Alexandria, no branch 
of learning which was not promoted there; but the 
most important and permanent results were produced 
in the departments of grammar—philology in the 
modern sense of the word—and in natural sciences. 

It is to the critical labours of the Alexandrians that we owe the preservation 
of the literature of the Greeks, and the decisive influence that this has had on the 
culture of western Europe need hardly be pointed out. As regards natural science 
it is quite certain that the splendid advance it has made in our own time is 
indissolubly linked with the results obtained, and more particularly with the methods 
introduced by the Alexandrian school. The revival of science was in the first instance 
no more than a return to the principles of the Alexandrians. 

The Ptolemies took delight in their intercourse with the sages of the Museum, 
and they strove to gather together within its walls all the most eminent minds of 
the time. Letters have been preserved from the hand of Menander, the great 
Athenian author of comedy, and from his lady-love Glycera. Menander writes to 
her :—“I have received letters from Ptolemy the King of Egypt, in which he invites 
me and Philemon in the most pressing manner, promising us in a princely fashion 
the good things, as they call them, of the earth. . ... Let him consult for himself. 
I shall want no advice. Thou, my Glycera, art my Hellenistic jurisdiction ; thou art 
to me a whole council of Areopagites, hast ever been and shalt continue to be my 
every thing.” 

Glycera answers :—“As soon as you sent me the letters of the king I read 
them. I call Calligenia [Ceres] to witness, in whose temple I am now serving, that 
I rejoiced, Menander, beyond the power of containing myself, nor did my joy escape 
the notice of those who were present. There was my mother, with my sister 
Euphronion, and a female friend whom you are acquainted with...... Seeing 
unusual joy in my countenance and eyes, they enquired of me: ‘What great piece 
of good fortune, my dear Glycera, has befallen you, that you appear so totally 
changed in body and mind, while a certain gleam of joy and pleasure shines through 
your whole frame.” ‘Oh! said I, in a tone and voice loud enough for every one 
who was present to hear me, ‘Ptolemy the King of Egypt has sent for my Menander, 
promising him in a manner half his kingdom!’ and when I spoke this I held out 
and brandished in my hands the letter with the royal seal.” 


COIN OF PTOLEMY V. EPIPHANES. 


* Alciphron’s epistles, translated by Beloe, p. 121. 


——— ee 
PRs. Tyee een Om 


ANCIENT ALEXANDRIA. 17 


If these letters are not genuine, they at any rate show us with what feelings 
the Greeks received an invitation to Alexandria. Menander certainly could not quit 
Athens, but many other poets and philosophers accepted the bidding of the Ptolemies, 
and found in Alexandria a new and congenial home, dear to them even long after 
the glories of the Ptolemaic dynasty were extinct. 

Soter and Philadelphus were succeeded by Euergetes I., the son of the latter 
king; he greatly extended the frontier of Egypt eastward, and at the same time 
found time, taste, and means to maintain Alexandria as the metropolis of art, 
learning, and commerce. 


FATHER NILE, (In the Vatican, Rome.) 


During the minority of Ptolemy V. Epiphanes, and after the defeat at Paneas,! 
the protectorship of this king was placed in the hands of the Roman Senate, 
and from that time Roman influence was increasingly felt in Alexandria, even under 
Euergetes II., surnamed Physcon, z.c. 146, whose strong, though crime-stained, hands 
and far-seeing ability availed to postpone for a short time the inevitable fall of his 
degenerate house. During the last peaceful interval of his stormy and interrupted 
reign, he found means greatly to develop Alexandrian trade; but his next successors 
lost all that they might still have preserved. The Roman general Pompey was appointed 
protector of the famous Cleopatra and her husband, who was also her brother: 


' The battle of Paneas was fought between Scopas, the general of Epiphanes, and Antiochus, B.c. 198, and resulted 
in the defeat of the general of Epiphanes. 


3 


INTO THE PALACE, 


CLEOPATRA CARRIED 


ANCIENT ALEXANDRIA. 19 


and after the battle of Pharsalia he was murdered off the Egyptian coast at the 
instigation of his ward. Cesar himself disembarked a few days later at Alexandria, 
and after defending himself on the Bruchium against a superior force, he, with the 
aid of Mithridates, routed his Egyptian foe. Ptolemy sank with the ship in which 
he was, in the battle with the Romans that was fought on an arm of the Nile 
by the Delta, and from that time, p.c. 47, Egypt, including Alexandria, belonged 
to Rome ; although Cleopatra and her young brother, only eleven years of age—who 
was at first co-regent with her, but from whom she soon freed herself—continued to 
wear the double crown of Upper and Lower Egypt. 

While Cesar was defending himself on the Bruchium, Cleopatra, then seventeen 
years of age, had had herself rolled up in 
a carpet like a bale of goods, and smuggled 


into the palace on the back of a servant. 
Her marvellous gifts of body and mind soon 
achieved the conquest of the heart of the 
great Roman; but, unlike Antony, who not 
long after sacrificed his duty and his fame 
to the intoxicating joys of a life with this 
woman, Czesar never showed himself greater 
as a general than at the defence of the palace 
of Alexandria. In those days of extreme 
peril the famous library of the Museum fell 
a prey to the flames ; Cleopatra subsequently 
endeavoured to repair the mischief, and 
induced Antony to transport the two hundred 
thousand volumes of the library of Pergamus 
to Alexandria. By so doing she carried out 
the traditions of her house, which always 
supported science and those who fostered it. 
Under her the aged physician Dioscorides produced his works, and the Alexandrian 
astronomer Sosigenes, who was no stranger to the Hgyptian mode of computing time, 
assisted Ceesar in the introduction of that new method of calculating the calendar 
which is now universally known as the Julian Era. 

On the occasion of Cresar’s triumph at Rome, a statue of the Nile and a model 
of the Pharos of Alexandria in many coloured lights were exhibited to the people 
of the Tiber; and when, three years later, p.c. 44, the dagger of the assassin 
pierced the heart of the great Dictator, Cleopatra was living with her son and his, 
named Czesarion, in a villa on the banks of the Tiber. 

Days of the greatest splendour and most intoxicating delight were destined 
once more to shine on the Bruchium in Alexandria when Cleopatra, then five and 
twenty, induced her judge and conqueror Antony, after the battle of Philippi, to 
follow her to Alexandria and devote himself to her cause ; attracted by a passion 
which she seems to have returned, and which was at any rate most romantic. The 
dazzling splendour of the boat in which the enchantress of the Nile went to meet 
the Roman conqueror, the irresistible fascination of her beauty and charm, and the 


20 EGYPT. 


admirable talents of the woman who could talk to each officer in his native tongue, 
| have been painted by Plutarch in such glowing colours that Shakespeare, in deserib- 
i ing the first meeting of these famous lovers, has closely followed the historian’s 
| narrative. 
| 


“The barge she sat in, like a burnished throne 


Burnt in the water: the poop was beaten gold ; 
| Purple the sails, and so perfumed that 


<: with them the oars were silver; 


The winds were lovye-si 
Which to the tune of flutes kept stroke and made 
The water, which they beat, to follow faster, 

As amorous of their strokes. For her own person, 
} It beggared all description: she did lie 

| In her pavilion, (cloth of gold, of tissue,) 
O’erpicturing that Venus where we see 

The fancy out-work nature; on each side her 


Stood pretty dimpled boys, like smiling Cupids 

| With divers-colour’d fans, whose wind did seem 
To glow the delicate cheeks which they did cool 
| And what they did, undid. 

| Her gentlewomen, like the Nereides 

| So many mermaids, tended her i’ the eyes 

| 


And made their bends adornings: at the helm 


A seeming mermaid steers; the silken tackle 
Swells with the touches of those flower-soft hands 
That yarely frame the office. From the barge 

A strange invisible perfume hits the sense 

Of the adjacent wharfs. The city cast 

Her people out upon her; and Antony, 
Enthroned in the market-place did sit alone, 
Whistling to the air.” 


Wait CLEOPATRA ON THE CYDNUS, 


The life of debauch led by Antony and Cleopatra has become a byword, and in 
fact the unlimited vaviety of sensual delight indulged in by this pair, the new pleasures 
invented by them, and their immeasurable expenditure remain as unparalleled as 


| 
\ 


s | 


; 


CLEOPATRA’S NEEDLE. 


22 EGYPT. 


their indefatigable powers of enjoyment. At their banquets the guests waded through 
roses, the vessels were of unheard-of value, the food of unrivalled delicacy ; and not 
only were the revels carried on through the night in the palace, but the guests 
wandered in disguise through the streets of the slumbering city. Music and song 
resounded, and costly perfumes floated in the air, in constant accompaniment to the 
games, the feasts, the hunting, and the boating of this famous couple who, with appro- 
priate reference to the gold and silver splendour of their lives, called their children 
Alexander Helios (the Sun) and Cleopatra Selene (the Moon). The treasures at their 
disposal seemed to be inexhaustible ; Cleopatra was the first to dissolve a pearl in 
order to increase the costliness of a draught of wine, and she came to the conclusion, 
as a connoisseur in luxury, that nothing was so extravagant as the most expensive 
incense ; everything else having some certain value or outcome, while the worth of 
four hundred denarii' of spices used but once to anoint the hands was wafted away 
on the air and lost for ever. 

The days of repentance followed when Antony was defeated at the sea-fight 
of Actium, without attempting to avail himself of his powerful infantry, and 
forgetful even of his own often-proved and heroic courage. After this disgraceful 
defeat, he withdrew into a tower on a spit of land washed by the waters of the 
great harbour of Alexandria, which he called his Timoneum, after the misanthropical 
philosopher of Athens, concerning whom the most famous poet of the Alexandrian 
Academy wrote the following epigram :— 


A. Timon, who Timon art no more— 
Light, darkness, which is worst a bore ? 
B. Darkness 


Worse swarms of those I’d leave behind.? 


—for in the grave I find 


But once more Antony, abandoned by his followers, met his Cleopatra for a 
brief spell of wanton luxury. Once more, in his struggle with Octavian, he found 
his old manly spirit, and then the hour of doom fell upon him and his queen. Both 
fell into the hands of the conqueror, but only in death. Antony evaded the hope- 
less future by a stroke of his sword, and Cleopatra by the bite of a poisonous asp. 

When Augustus mounted the throne of the Cwsars, .c. 30, Egypt bowed 
unresistingly to his sceptre, and became a Roman province. All the subsequent 
emperors were acknowledged by the priests, even in the inmost chambers of the 
temples, as Autocrats® (or independent rulers), and enjoyed the divine honours paid 
to the Pharaohs, even in the sanctuaries at the Cataract and in the Oases of the 
desert. Augustus caused the suburb of Necropolis to be founded on the plain to the 
east of Alexandria, where he had defeated Antony; and later emperors still contributed 
to decorate the Egyptian capital with splendid buildings. The Alexandrians erected 
the so-called Sebasteum in honour of Tiberius on that spot, by the great harbour, 
where now stands an obelisk known as Cleopatra’s Needle, to which the city of Trieste 


1 About £12. * Callimachus, Major R. G. MacGregor’s translation. 
*The word autocrator is a Greek equivalent of the Roman Imperator, and appears with Augustus in Egypt, as the 
official language of the country was Greek, not Latin. In the hieroglyphical inscriptions of the Roman period the word 


autocrator, or its equivalent (in hieroglyphics), is used as a prenomen and inclosed by a royal oval or cartouche. 


ANCIENT ALEXANDRIA. 23 


pretends to lay claim.’ Its companion, which for a long period lay on the earth, has been 
erected in London. It escaped the perils of an adventurous voyage, in a singular vessel 
constructed for the purpose, and was landed safely near the Thames. Neither of the 
obelisks has anything whatever to do with Cleopatra, nor is it true that that queen 
built the Sebasteum in honour of Ceesar after the birth of Ceesarion. The obelisk 
was only named after her because her name is one of the few among those of 
antiquity which has remained familiar to the memory of succeeding generations, 
and is therefore associated with all the great works of ancient times. The cele- 
brated obelisk that decorated the Sebasteum was brought from the old city of 
the Sun, Heliopolis. It is 216 metres high (about seventy feet), and the sister 
obelisk, now for ever parted from it, stands on a London quay, the Thames Embank- 
ment, as the obelisk of Luxor® has long stood on the Place de la Concorde in Paris. 
King Thothmes III. erected the obelisk known as Cleopatra’s Needle at the most 
splendid epoch of ancient Egypt, in the sixteenth century before Christ. The hiero- 
glyphics engraved in the granite to perpetuate the glory of his name, were inlaid 
with silver-gilt,’ and its point was capped with the same metal. It was dedicated 
to the Sun-god Ra, and formerly the beams of the day-star were mirrored in the 
polished surface of the granite and gold. These obelisks stood before the door of 
the Sebasteum, around which lay gardens, and its colonnades were decorated with 
paintings and statues. This magnificent edifice was burnt down during a revolt of 
the heathen against the Christians, a.p. 366. How and when it was again destroyed 
after its restoration is uncertain. At the present day a stone-mason has established 
his store and yard on the site of this once splendid structure, and the whistle of 
the locomotive from the neighbouring station of Ramleh disturbs the contemplative 
visitor. The venerable monument in its sordid surroundings arouses no sentimental 
feelings, and it is only when it was seen from the sea that it had some picturesque 
charm or reminded us of the past greatness of the Greek city. 

The famous “Pompey’s Pillar,’ too, carries us back to the Alexandria of the 
Roman emperors. It stands south-west of the city, and marks the spot where once 
the Serapeum must have stood, and where the Necropolis adjoined the Egyptian 
quarter of Rhacotis. 

The Serapeum was by no means merely a temple to the god Serapis, whose 
worship was introduced by the Ptolemies, in order to give to the mixed races they 
governed a deity which Greeks and Egyptians might worship with equal devotion. 
It was also a learned institution, with numerous branches annexed, and it became 
at a later period a centre for the spiritual and mystical requirements of all the 
various shades of creed and opinion that met in Alexandria. In the time of the 


' This obelisk has been conveyed to New York. 
* The obelisk stood on four bronze crabs, which supported it, and on one of these was found a Greek and Latin 
ti 


it was originally erected by Thothmes ITI., at Heliopolis, and erected again by Rames 


inscription, that it had been re- 


sd by the architect Pontius, in the 8th year of Augustus, a.p. 24. The inscriptions show 


s II. at the same place. 


® The expression on the obelisk itself, tasm, or wasm, appears to mean gilded, for this word does not appear in any lists of 
metals, nor does it enter into the computations of metals, or lists recording the weight of different kinds of gold. It is, how- 
eyer, occasionally mentioned on obelisks that they were capped with this material; or, perhaps, merely tipped with it. One 


idea is that the expression meant copper; but the alr mentioned objection is equally adverse to that idea, although 


Abdallatif notices that in his time some obelisks remained capped with that material. 


24 EGYPT. 


i surroundings, carriages approached it by a well-paved way, and pedestrians went 


! Czesars only the Capitol of Rome excelled it in splendour. It towered far above its 
|| 
| 
| 


up to it by a flight of a hundred steps that grew wider towards the top. The 

. fore-court was entered by a circular domed gateway, supported on four pillars, and 

at last the Temple itself came into view with its obelisks, its fountains, its subter- 
, its 

ranean rooms, and cells for penitents; with its library, containing three hundred 


| 
\, | = 
sa : 
i| = 
i i) 8 
HAA i a 
| 
| A 
! POMPEY’S PILLAR. 


SSS 


EGYPTIAN GIRL. 


ANCIENT ALEXANDRIA. 25 


thousand voiumes, its halls and the gigantic pillars which could be seen from afar, 


even at sea. Paintings attracted the visitor, and the glitter of precious metals and 
stones dazzled his sight. A pious thrill filled his soul as he approached the sanct- 


uary where the statue of the god—probably executed by Bryaxis—sat enthroned. 
It consisted of plates of precious metal, skilfully overlaying and concealing a nucleus 
of wood; it wore the Calathus on its head, and at its feet lay a Cerberus, with the 
heads of a lion, a wolf, and a dog, entwined bya snake. Through an opening, 
which was cunningly contrived in the half-dark sanctuary, rays of light fell on the 
lips of the god as though to kiss them. Under Marcus Aurelius fire broke out in 
the Serapeum, but the library and the statue of the god escaped injury. All that 
was destroyed was restored with new splendour, for Alexandria proudly styled 
herself the city of Serapis, and this god, like the Egyptian Isis, found priests and 
votaries throughout almost the whole Roman Empire. 

When, under Aurelian, a.p. 273, the Bruchium was destroyed, and with it all the 
Museum buildings, the Serapeum became the meeting-place of the learned. It was 
not until Christianity rapidly took root in Egypt that the worship of the god was 
endangered; and when Theodosius promulgated his decree against the images 
worshipped by the heathen, and Theophilus, archbishop of Alexandria, devoted himself 
to carrying it out with fanatic zeal, the temple of Serapis was razed to the ground, 
and with it the statue of the god. The history of its destruction is full of dramatic 
interest. Every one believed that if any man ever dared to lift a sacrilegious hand 
against the sacred person of the god, heaven and earth would fall in ruins. But a 
soldier was found bold enough to lay a ladder against the statue, to seize a heavy 
axe, and to mount the steps. The blood curdled in the veins of the spectators, and 
even the Christians who were looking on watched the soldier's deed in trembling, 
and held their breath, awaiting some monstrous issue. The soldier swung his 
axe and hit the image on the cheek, which fell off rattling to the ground. All 


co) 


listened and none dared stir; but no lightning fell, no thunder roared; the sun shone 
brightly ; no quakings shook the earth! The soldier struck another blow, a third and 
a fourth ; the precious metal fell ringing down, and the mutilated body of the god 
was dragged through the streets—those probably who had trembled most with 
terror being those who treated it with the most impudent contempt. Finally it was 
burnt in the amphitheatre. 

Nothing remains of the splendid edifice but a few shafts of columns lying on 
the ground, and Pompey’s Pillar. An Arab cemetery with innumerable graves now 
occupies the site of its former splendour, and the mourners who come with palm- 
branches to the resting-place of their dead, and tell how bitter a loss has fallen on 
them, little guess how fitting an echo their lamentations over the transitory nature of 
all earthly things find on this spot. Pompey’s Pillar, the last witness to the splendour 
of the past, still stands up against the sky, tall and stark, and little injured. It is 
the only work of art in the Greek style that can compare in magnitude with the 
work of Pharaonic times, and it is a masterpiece of elegant proportion. It is con- 
structed of red granite from the first cataract, it stands on a quadrangular plinth, 
and, with this and the capital, is about 99 feet high. The capital, which is 
Corinthian, either is much weather-worn or was never finished; on the top a 


4 


| 
ii ARAB CEMETERY. 
Hl 


ANCIENT ALEXANDRIA. 27 


statue formerly stood. This pillar does not in any way owe its name to the great 
Pompey who was murdered off the Egyptian coast by his ward Ptolemy, but to a 
Roman prefect of the same name who, as is proved by the inscription it bears, 
erected it in honour of the Emperor Diocletian, the “guardian genius of the city,” 
in gratitude for a gift of grain he had sent to the Alexandrians. 

The citizens erected another monument to the same emperor, namely, the 
bronze image of a certain horse, to which, indeed, they owed much gratitude. One 
Achilleus' had set himself up as emperor in opposition to Diocletian ; the Alexandrians 
took up his cause, and Diocletian had to besiege the city for eight months before it 
surrendered. Achilleus was killed, and the emperor ordered that as many of the 
citizens should be massacred as would bring the blood up to his horse’s knees. The 
butchery began, and he went towards the place of execution; suddenly his horse 
stumbled over a body and fell on his knees, that were wetted with blood. The 
emperor’s threat was fulfilled, and the horse deserved the gratitude of the citizens, 
for far worse had befallen them some time previously.” Caracalla, roused to anger by 
some jests and epigrams of the satirists of the great city—which had received him 
joyfully and worthily—fell upon the elders at a banquet, and on the youth 
of the city at the gymnasium, and had them all killed. The massacre and 
plundering lasted for several days; the waters in the harbour gleamed red with the 
blood of the slaughtered citizens, and the number of the killed was so enormous 
that the emperor dared not render any account to the senate; in his report he 
boasted that he had spent these days in pious offices, and had sacrificed the men with 
beasts to the gods. He had a strong wall, with forts at intervals, erected all across 
the city, to reduce the inhabitants to unresisting submission. 

Happier memories were associated with the visit of another and earlier emperor, 
namely, with that of Hadrian, who disputed with the philosophers of the Museum, 
and was thanked by them with much flattery... The poet Pancrates, for instance, 
offered him a rare red lotus-flower, and declared the blossom had grown from the 
blood of a lion that the emperor had slain with his own hand in the Libyan desert. 
At that time posts in the Museum were indeed mere sinecures, but many men of 
conspicuous merit were happy to fill them, besides a number of less worthy persons— 
curiosity-hunters and dealers in trifles; we may instance the grammarian (or, as we 
should say, philologist) Apollonius Dyscolus, and the astronomer Claudius Ptolemzus,’ 
whose system of cosmogony was pre-eminent for more than a thousand years in the 
Mohammedan and Christian worlds. 


Even at a later date philosophers of distinction were not lacking at Alexandria, 
and it was still the soil where Athenzeus® could live and flourish—a man to whom 
no sage saying, no anecdote of antiquity was unknown; and where so keen a judge 
of mankind as Lucian’ found food for his satirical tastes and powers. 


1 An usurper who reigned four months, a.p. 296. 2 apd. 284, 
8 a.p, 216. He was present during the time of the massacre at the Serapeum. 


4 a.p, 130. Coins were struck to record his visit, with figures of the Nile, Egypt, and Alexandria; the most remarkable 
nd Tsis. 


represents Hadrian and his wife Sabina sacrificing to Serapis 


5 Supposed to have lived about the period. His observatory was at Alexandria. 
© Born at Naucratis, he wrote the Deipnosophiste, or banquets of the learned, about a.p. 228, 


Pavan, dy) 


28 HGYPT. 


Indeed, a marvellous vitality seethed in the blood of even the later Alexandrians. 
Under the Egyptian sun all that has any inherent capacity for growth must thrive 
luxuriantly. The quick blood of the Greek throbbed here with a more rapid pulse ; 
but Greek vivacity degenerated to an insatiable craving for civil revolution, the 
spirit of enterprise to rash temerity, energy to a fevered struggle and contention 
for wealth, and the wit of the Greeks to reckless and frivolous mockery, which 
too often met with a sanguinary revenge. At the same time the sources of wealth, 
in the city which the Romans so often laid under contribution, seemed to be so 
inexhaustible that it was asserted on the shores of the Tiber that the Alexandrians 


NIGHT ON THE RED SEA. 


possessed the secret of making gold. And yet they enriched themselves in a very 
natural way; the exports of the produce of Egypt—the granary of the ancient 
world—lay in their lands ; all the paper needed alike in the East and the West was 
prepared from the Papyrus, indigenous to Egypt, and had to pass through 
Alexandria ; all the treasures of the interior of Africa—ivory, ebony, ostrich-feathers, 
and the gaudy fells of beasts of prey—were discharged on the banks of Lake 
Mareotis, and either carried in barques by way of the navigable canal to the harbour 
of Hunostus, or forwarded to the great mart on the quay of the larger harbour. 
Enormous profits also poured into the merchants’ coffers from their dealings with 
Arabia—the land of spices—with the Somali coast, Ceylon, and the ports of Malabar 
and India, whence costly rarities were brought for which the luxurious Romans paid 
insane sums. The most valued were diamonds, and next to them pearls, and a 
pound of silk was exchanged against its weight in gold. The fleets sailed from 


ANCIENT ALEXANDRIA. 29 


Myos-Hormos at the season of the longest nights, down the Red Sea, and returned 
usually by the next December. The wares were disembarked 
at Berenice, conveyed by beasts of burden to Coptos on the 
Nile, and then forwarded by ship down the river to Alexandria. 
Here merchants from all nations awaited their arrival, but 
most found their way to Rome. The business done in the 
inner harbour of Lake Mareotis was more important than 
that of the maritime port, where the exports far exceeded the 
imports in quantity and value. 

The industrial activity of the Alexandrians was as restless 
as it was successful. When Hadrian passed some time among 
them, he wrote a letter to Servianus' which has come down 
to us, and is of great value, first, because it shows that even 
in his time the Christians—whom indeed he did not distinguish 
from the worshippers of Serapis—were a conspicuous body, and 
also for the picture that the emperor cannot forbear sketching 
of the activity of the Alexandrians, whom, however, he describes 
as a frivolous, capricious, refractory, and worthless community, 
running after every new rumour. “Their city [Alexandria ],” 
he says, “is wealthy, splendid, and industrious ; no one lives 
there in idleness. Glass is made there; some work in paper- 
making, others in weaving linen, and all the busy population 
seem to exercise some handiwork. The gouty, the blind, even 
the crippled find something to do. They all have but one God 
[Mammon ?]. Christians, Jews, and all nationalities worship 
him. It is a pity that the manners of the city are so corrupt, 
for by its importance and size it is worthy to be the capital 
of all Egypt.” 

The emperor’s praise was as well founded as his blame. 


OLD EGYPTIAN VASE. 


Gibbon says very justly of the 
Alexandrians that they united 
the vanity and instability of 
the Greeks with the super- 
stition and obstinacy of the 
Egyptians. Perfect peace in 
the city was rare after the 
time of the Ptolemies, and 


quite unknown after the in- 
troduction of Christianity. 
The most trifling cause — a 
temporary lack of beasts or 
of grain, an oversight as to 
some customary greeting, an 


1 Given in Flavius Vopiscus’ Life of 


Saturninus. GEM, WITH PORTRAITS OF PTOLEMY PHILADELPHUS AND ARSINOE, DAUGHTER OF LYSIMACHUS. 


30 EGYPT. 


error as to precedence in the public baths, or some religious dispute, at all times 
sufficed to stir up a tumult among the vast populace, whose vengeance was at once 
furious and implacable. 

It is amazing to note what this hot-blooded, superstitious, and restless race was 
capable of in industrial produce, not to mention the mechanical inventions of such 
men as Ctesibius' and Heron? who devised their automata in the peaceful seclusion of 
the Museum, such as clepsydra (or water-clocks), hydraulic engines, organs, and the 
like, and discovered the power of steam. Alexandrian woven stuffs were famous 
throughout the world,—from the coarsest horse-cloth to the most gorgeous hangings 
covered with artistic embroidery—from white cotton to the most gaily-lined silken robes. 
Their ship-building was the most perfect then known, and the carriages which the 
Alexandrians used in their promenades through the streets were not less famous than 
their fine cabinet-work. The tables which they made of thya’ wood, with feet of 
ivory, were purchased for as much as 1,400,000 sesterces (about £10,500). The 
engraved and incised works in the finer and baser metals were carried to the highest 
pitch of perfection in Alexandria, and of all the gems that have been preserved to 
our day the finest were executed in Alexandria. In goldsmiths’ work and the setting 
of jewels for ornaments, cups and vases, as well as in the fabrication of arms, 
beautiful specimens were produced, as also in glass-blowing, an art which was brought 
from Alexandria into Italy. Even glass mirrors, window-glass, and coloured glass 
Mosaic (millefiori)—a sort of work previously known to the ancient Egyptians—were 
produced here, and the Alexandrians devoted great attention to grace of form in their 
vases of artificial crystal. We shall presently take the opportunity of speaking of the 
arts of masonry in Egypt, and of the manufacture of papyrus, but must now make 
an end of our wanderings through heathen Alexandria, the magnificent burial-place 
of the great and splendidly endowed Conqueror whose name it bears. 


ap. 251. 7 AD. 28 
* The wood of Callitris quadrivalwis, one of the Cupressine. A minute and interesting account of the tree is given in 
“A Journal of a Tour in Morocco,” by Hooker and Ball. App. D, p. 389. 


HEAD OF SERAPIS, AND ZODIAC. 


TRAVELLER named Norden, visiting Alex- 
andria in the middle of the last century, 
compared it to an orphaned child who had 
inherited nothing of its father’s possessions, 
but only his name. The traveller who at 
the present day goes down to the swarming 
quay of Alexandria, where steamships of 
every nationality lie at anchor—who surveys 
the enormous new buildings in the harbour— 
who walks through the splendid quarter of 
the Franks, and in the afternoon follows 
the string of carriages which drive through 
the Rosetta Gate, the old Canopic Gate, out 
into the country, would think this judgment 
too hard, and would be inclined to believe that 


not only the name, but a good share of the wealth of 
the famous father, had been handed down to the 
orphan. And yet Norden was right, for in his time 
the city had only as many thousand inhabitants as it 
could count hundreds of thousands in the flower of its 
prosperity. Its commerce had fallen off by degrees ; 
one of the harbours—the only one in which European 


vessels were permitted to anchor—was so ruinous 
and insecure that, when Volney visited the city,’ one single storm of wind wrecked 


forty-two ships against the harbour 


quays, and every vessel that entered was in 


1 ap. 1782. 


32 EGYPT. 


danger of running aground ; while the other—now called the old port—which Turks 
only might enter, was, with true Oriental indifference, being utterly ruined, ballast 
being constantly thrown overboard, and gradually choking it. 

The population was pauperised and wretched; dearth affected every necessary 
of life; even water, that most indispensable requisite, was wanting when the season 
of the inundation was over, and the Nile ceased to supply the cuttings which con- 
nected it with the city. The houses were low and squalid; nothing was to be seen 
in the market but dates and flat round cakes of bread, and the streets were choked 
by rubbish and ruins. The howl of the jackal and the screech of the owl 
disturbed the night, and on the neglected fortifications hardly four cannon were 
to be found in a proper place and condition. At the beginning of this century 
the great city founded by Alexander was perishing of inanition 
and want; its life and wealth had vanished; but the last 
quarter of the century finds it healthy and thriving, the sick 
man is convalescent. Let us see how it happened that the 
tree lost its first bloom, and how a new spring has caused it 
to blossom again. 

Within the first century after the birth of the Saviour, 
Christianity had extended rapidly throughout Alexandria and 
the Nile valley. It is believed that St. Mark the Evangelist 
himself preached the new doctrine there, and the Egyptians 
were better prepared to receive it than any other nation of 
antiquity. They had been accustomed for ages past to turn 
their thoughts to a future life; to regard this world as “a 
tabernacle,’ and the next world as man’s true home. The 
initiated among the priesthood worshipped the One God, whom 
they declared to the people under many names and forms. 
They represented the course of life under a beautiful myth, 
in which the hero triumphed over death, darkness, and sin. The images of Isis, 
with the child Horus at her breast, are the first representations of a divine 
mother and child, and repentance and _ penitential exercises were familiar to the 
Egyptians." In Alexandria, even, there were cells attached to the temple of Serapis, 
in which world-weary souls secluded themselves from the turmoil of life ;* and a 
Roman satirist ridicules the pious ladies among the votaries of Isis who allowed 
the priests to inflict on them any penance, even bathing in the river in midwinter, 
as a punishment for pleasant sins. This readiness to do penance, which was foreign 
to the pagan Roman spirit, won many disciples to Christianity on the shores of the 
Nile. Among the numerous Hebrew inhabitants of the city, too, it spread rapidly, 
for the cold theism of the Jews had become much modified in Alexandria bv the 
religious and philosophical efforts to which the spiritual leaders of the Hebrew 
community had devoted themselves—men who had all experienced Greek culture, 
and who spoke and wrote the Greek language. The religion of the East and the 


ISIS SUCKLING HORUS. 


1 Figures of the goddess Isis seated, of bronze or porcelain, have been found in great numbe 


They are generally of 
2. 30. 
* They were called en katoché in Greek, and are mentioned in the Greek Papyri of the Serapeum of Memphis. 


the period of the 26th dynasty, about B.c. 650, and continue till the period of the Roman conquest, 5 


) I 


ih 
i A 


lh 


Wh 


Ht 


ee 
” | 


| i il i 


aH 


Ih 
Ht 


COPTIC MAIDEN. 


3b4 EGYPT. 


philosophy of the West here solemnised their union. The new doctrine of re- 
demption was received from Palestine with open arms on the Nile, and in Alex- 
andria—the city of philosophical thought and methodical interpretation—its unfixed 
traditions were cast into a mould and established on a basis which made them hard 
) to refute, and at the same time attractive to the Western mind. 
Christianity was born in Palestine, but it was educated in Alexandria. 
This is not the place to relate the struggles which the Christian community 
in Alexandria were forced to carry on against the heathen authorities that ruled 
| them. Those days of persecution came to be known as the Epoch of Martyrs,’ and 
many of the noblest blood-witnesses of the Catholic Church were dragged to 
| execution in Alexandria. However, when Christianity was made the state religion, 
heathendom also had its martyrs; and by the side of the touching figure of Saint 
Catherine we may well grant a place to the maiden form of the fair philosopher 
| Hypatia,’ whom Cyril the Bishop caused to be slain by the hands of fanatical monks. 
Hi It was as early as the third century after Christ that the Patriarch Thomas 
| ventured to dedicate a church in Alexandria to the Virgin Mary, and in the fourth, 
HM I after the death of Julian the Apostate, who had vainly attempted to restore the 
heathen gods to the place they had lost, all Egypt embraced Christianity. But the 
| Gospel of Peace had no power to control the stormy and irrepressible nature of the 
mixed races of Alexandria, or to cool their hot blood. The unbridled love of rioting 
possessed by the excitable natives of the great city now took another bent, and dis- 
played itself in other scenes. These arose from questions of creed. Just as in former 
times they had been ready to seize the sword in petty and worldly quarrels, so 
now they were prompt to use it when the matters in dispute were shades of 
dogmatic meaning; and there was no lack of such occasions for its use in this’ 
| city of disputants, of critics and hair-splitters, who now began to analyse the nature 
of Christ, just as they had formerly exercised their subtle wits in investigating 
lj philosophical systems, grammatical forms, and historic data. A lamentable spectacle ! 
| and yet grand in its way; and unique as evidencing how deeply the life of that 
H time was penetrated and permeated by religious feeling. 

The most famous of these disputes, and involving the most important con- 
sequences, were those as to whether Christ was of a similar or identical nature 
with God, and whether it was to be received that two natures, or only one— 
i] the divine—existed in Christ. The latter view, defended by Eutyches, was also 
supported by Dioscorus, the patriarch of Alexandria, and his congregation, while 
at the Council of Chalcedon it was rejected and stigmatised as a heresy. The 
Alexandrian emperors who governed Egypt, and who submitted to the decision of 
this council, combated the error of the Monophysites—those, that is to say, who 
acknowledged only one nature in Christ—but the Egyptians clung to their creed 
nevertheless, and poured contempt on the followers of the orthodox doctrine, calling 
them “Melikites,” which we may interpret as “King’s Men.” To this day the 
native Christians of Egypt, the Copts, are adherents of the Monophysite confession. 

The officers and troops of the orthodox emperors persecuted their fellow- 


' Commencing 20th August, a.p, 281. 


2 Massacred a.p. 416; daughter of the mathematician Theon, and teacher of an eclectic system of philosophy. 


MODERN ALEXANDRIA. 35 


subjects of the heretical creed with great cruelty, and these on their part resisted 
a compulsory change of bishop; sanguinary street-fights, in which the soldiers 
commonly remained victors, decimated the citizens of Alexandria, where now a 
new and stormy element was introduced. An enormous number of servants of the 
Church, contemners of the world, monks and anchorites, came streaming in from 
all parts of Egypt, which from the end of the fourth century was richer in monastic 
institutions than any other country of the world. 


A COPT. 


It might appear as if, at that remarkable period, true religious feeling had 
ceased to exist, and all Christendom was animated by merely the spirit of dogma. 
It was not, however, really so; only in the works of historians, who at that time 
had so much to narrate of grand foundations and conyersions, of martyrdoms and 
visions, of fights with word and sword for the faith, no space was found for 
describing the inner life of Christian homes and families, or the lives of those 
hermits and penitents who, by an existence full of physical privations and rich in 
spiritual rapture, silently and sincerely strove for redemption and _ purification. 
Many of these had unostentatiously given all their possessions to the poor, in order 
to withdraw from the world and win Paradise by prayer and mortification, 

Orthodox Byzantium was a more dangerous foe to Christian Alexandria than 


EAST. 


THE 


EE OF 


RE 


ISTIC 


8 
5 
a 
5 


THE 


PALM, 


THE 


MODERN ALEXANDRIA. 37 


heathen Rome had been, for it not only demanded the wealth and blood of her 
sons, but sought, too, to rob her of her noblest and proudest title—the Metropolis 
of Learning. Besides the heathen philosophers, the greatest Christian teachers of the 


my 


| 


i 


: 


| 


| 
: 


COURT OF AN EGYPTIAN HOUSE OF THE TIME OF THE KHALIFS. 


time of the empire had lived in Alexandria—Clemens, Origen, and Athanasius. 
But now even the higher spiritual life and endeavour of the city were extinguished, 
for Alexandria was destined to escape no possible misfortune.’ 

The Byzantine garrisons were too weak to protect the frontiers of Egypt 


1 Alexandria was decimated and burnt by Narses, a.p. 553. 


de ee et 


38 EGYPT. 


against the incursions of the marauding desert tribes, and the governors were too 
avaricious to take due care for the irrigation of the country. The harvests and 
exports of corn fell short, commerce became stagnant, and the industry of the country 
was paralysed. Added to these came pestilence and famine, and furious insur- 
rection of the starving citizens, oppressed as they were on all sides. Only a few 
had been able to preserve the wealth they had inherited from their fathers ; among 
them the converted Jew Urbib, who relieved the sufferings of his starving fellow- 
citizens with princely liberality. 

It was from Byzantium, from the adherents of the opposite confession, the 
Melikites, that the heaviest blows fell upon the city and the country. What 
wonder, then, that when a Mohammedan army invaded the Nile valley, not 
long after the death of the Prophet, those Egyptians who adhered to the Mono- 
physite doctrine should make common cause with the invaders, and finally, obeying 
the counsel of their Bishop Benjamin, go over to the general of the Khalif to put 
an end to the dominion of the hated Greeks.’ 

The Egyptian governor of the city, Makaukas, set the bad example to his 
Monophysite followers, and when the emperor reproached him in a letter, because, 
in spite of the hundred thousand Greeks whom he commanded, he would rather pay 
tribute than fight against the Arabs, Makaukas exclaimed: “By God! these Arabs 
with their handful of men are stronger than we with our multitudes ; one man of 
theirs is equal to a hundred of ours; for they seek death and love it better than 
life.” When he immediately after made peace with the Mohammedan general, he 
promised him a poll-tax of two dinars* for every Egyptian ; but he made it a condition 
that no peace should be made with the Greeks till they were all reduced to slavery 
and their property confiscated, for that was what they deserved. 

But in spite of the secession of the Copts, the Greeks resisted valiantly, and 
fighting went on for a long time round Alexandria, which was strongly fortified with 
many towers that mutually flanked each other; till on the Ist of Moharram, in 
the year 20 of the Hegira,’ the city fell into the hands of the Arabs. 

At that time the inhabitants are said still to have numbered nearly 600,000, 
besides 70,000 Jews who had all taken flight before the city fell. Of those remaining 
behind 40,000 were Israelites and 200,000 Greeks. These large numbers are very 
surprising, and no less so is the estimate given of the amount of property of certain 
particularly rich Egyptians at that time. One Copt, who was convicted of having 
betrayed the weakness of the Moslems to the Greeks, was possessed of 13,000,000, 
and another named Petrus of 12,000,000 dinars.* 

Amroo,’ the Mohammedan general, treated the conquered with much considera- 
tion. The story has been often repeated that he caused the four thousand baths of 
Alexandria to be heated during six months by burning the books in the library, in 
obedience to the orders of the Khalif Omar, who declared that “if they contradicted 
the Koran they were mischievous, and if they agreed with it they were useless ’”— 
but this is an invention of a later period. The great public libraries had been dispersed, 

1 ap. 640. * Two dinars equal 15 frances (about 12 shillings per head). 


® December 10th, a.p. 641. * 13,000,000 dinars about £3,900,000; 12,000,000 dinars about £3,600,000. 
® Also called Amr-ben-el-Aas. 


MODERN ALEXANDRIA. 39 


and the most valuable of the books had certainly been carried to Constantinople a 
long time before Alexandria fell into the hands of the Arabs. 

Before the Emperor Constantine finally relinquished Alexandria and Egypt, he 
sent one more fleet to the Nile. It is said that the Greeks of Egypt appealed to 
him for aid under the following circumstances. Amroo, being asked by the com- 
mandant of a town to what sum the poll-tax was likely to be raised, pointed to the 


“PLACE MOHAMMED ALI,” 


walls of a church, and replied, “If you were to give me a mountain of gold pieces 
reaching from the foundations to the roof I still would not say ‘enough, for you are 
our treasury ; if we want much, we shall take much, if we want little, we will take 
little.” 

They joined battle at Nakyoos. Victory was hardly won by the Arabs, and 
when they had defeated the Greeks, Amroo had breaches made in the walls of 
Alexandria, for he had sworn that he would throw the city open on all sides like 
the house of a courtesan.’ 

All Egypt henceforth belonged to the Arabs; a new culture struck root in 
its soil, and spread and grew luxuriantly. 


1 The city was taken, after a siege of fourteen months, on the 22nd December, a.p. 640. 


40 EGYPT. 


The rapidity with which Islam was in those times able to engraft its vitality 
and its forms on the stock of conquered countries was quite magical. It is true that 
many of the Coptic communities clung to their old faith with true Egyptian tenacity, 
but thousands were converted to the religion of the Prophet. Churches and monas- 
teries were destroyed, and slender crescent-crowned minarets stood up high above the 
towers of the Christian churches. A new and fruitful life soon bloomed in the 
Mohammedan country. Art and science, commerce and home-trade soared up again ; 


THE OLD HARBOUR OF ALEXANDRIA, 


and the grand results of that peculiar culture and strongly marked period have even 
left the stamp of their influence on Europe, where, as we shall see, their effects are 
still felt. Egypt was destined once more to take precedence of all the Oriental 
nations in the highest and noblest walks of life; but the centre of its power and 
influence was no longer Alexandria. 

Cairo sprang up from the camp‘ that had surrounded the tent, Fostaat, of 
Amroo, and Omar’ himself had already passed sentence on the turbulent Greek city, 
which seemed to him ill-fitted to be the residence of a ruler of Egypt; it was in 
Cairo that the vice-gerents of the Khalifs and the Khalifs themselves held their 
court; it was there that the caravans, to whom now the commerce of both the East 
and West was thrown open, established their emporium; and though Alexandria still 
served as a port for communication by sea with the West and North, the lion’s share 


lap, 641. 2 Omar restored the Nilometer and the canal of the two seas, called the canal of the Prince of the Faithful. 


THE BANKS OF THE MAHMOUDEEYEH CANAL, 


42 EGYPT. 
of the profits was snatched from her by the newly founded Arab metropolis, and 
by the rapidly increasing ports of the Mediterranean, Venice and Genoa. After 
the Cape of Good Hope had been doubled, and a new way opened to the Indies, 
and after the discovery of America, the number of ships in the harbours of 
Alexandria constantly diminished, and they gradually fell into decay. The Turkish 
Beys and the overbearing Mamelukes, who, after the incorporation of Egypt with 
the Ottoman Empire, drained it to the utmost, brought it to utter ruin, and it was, 
indeed, a beggared orphan when the French army landed here under Bonaparte, 
who by the splendid battle of the Pyramids’ made himself master of Egypt, and 
kept it till Nelson, the English hero, destroyed the French fleet in the bay of 
Aboukir, a little way to the east of Alexandria.’ 

This is not the place to relate the history of the short period of French dominion 
in the Nile valley, and the unfortunate issue of the enterprise undertaken by 
Bonaparte with so much admirable foresight. One thing only must be specially 
pointed out ; the result of the French invasion was not merely that the whole course 
of the political history of Egypt was diverted into a new channel, but that the 
attention of European savants was directed to the ancient wonderland of the 
Pharaohs, and to those gigantic monuments which had endured for thousands of 
years. By the help of these it has been possible to study one of the most remarkable 
and ancient epochs of the human race in all its aspects, impulses, and results, and 
to resuscitate it, as it were, like a man buried alive. 

It was as a subaltern in the Turkish army sent against the French in 1802 
that the man first trod Egyptian soil who, by his unhesitating energy and states- 
manlike talents, was destined to effect a revolution in the position of affairs throughout 
the Nile valley. Mohammed Ali’s name is one of the most illustrious of this 
century, and he is universally known as the founder of the dynasty to which the 
present Viceroy, Tewfik Pacha, belongs, and as the victorious hero who, but for the 
intervention of the European powers, would have gained possession of the throne 
of Constantinople. But few know all that he did for the internal development of 
Egypt, or understand that the country owes to him that impetus towards innova- 
tion which has proved a blessing in the present, and on which rest all its hopes 
for the future. To him Alexandria owes its renewed bloom, and it is with good 
reason that his equestrian statue now decorates the finest piazza: 
him—of the handsomely built Frank quarter. 

Mohammed Ali understood that the great designs formed in his restless mind 
could only be carried into effect by the help of means borrowed from the civilisation 
of the West. He invited the aid of European engineers and architects, as it was 
necessary that the old harbour, which he now re-opened to the ships of all nations, 
should be deepened, extended, and made secure. With the assistance of the most 
distinguished French scientists he turned his particular attention to the irrigation 
of the country he governed, and he was not slow to perceive that, for a healthy 
development of the resources of Alexandria, the city needed above all things a 
regular supply of water, and a canal to connect it with the Nile. 


named after 


1 21st July, av. 1798. * Ist August the same year. 


MODERN ALEXANDRIA. 43 


As he was the despotic and unrestrained master of all the human labour of 
the country, peasants from every part of Egypt were put under requisition of 
forced labour, and a deep navigable water-way was due, embracing the lake of 
Kdkoo in its wide circuit, and fed by the Rosetta branch of the Nile at Foom el 
Mahmoudeeyeh. Two hundred and fifty thousand fellaheen were employed in 
carrying out this undertaking. We cannot but pity these miserable creatures, of 
whom thousands perished, insufficiently fed or sheltered, and worked beyond their 
strength; but we must admire the work, which perfectly fulfils its object of 
conveying the produce of Egypt once more 
to the harbour of Alexandria, of watering its 
parched soil, and supplying its inhabitants 
with the most indispensable necessary of life. 

If we now walk along the bank of the 
canal, it is difficult to believe that hardly fifty 
years have elapsed since the first sod was 
turned for its formation. Where the closely- 
packed Egyptian boats unload, spreading palm- 
trees grow on the raised banks; and in the 
vicinity of the city, heavily-laden barques and 
small steam-tugs lie at anchor side by side 
with humble boats from the provinces, and 
elegantly-fitted dahabeeyehs for the pleasure 
trips of the wealthy. Proud palaces line the 
banks, and villas in long rows, many of them 
enclosed in gardens where the vegetation of 
every zone thrives and flourishes. 

The wealth restored to the impoverished 
city by the construction of this canal no- 
where strikes us more impressively than WATERING THE ROADS, 
when we pass through the Rosetta Gate 
in the afternoon, and walk towards its banks. On the Arab and Christian holidays 
particularly, Fridays and Sundays, as we walk down the road, dusty in spite of 
the sprinkling of the black watermen, we are met by a crowd of pleasure-seeking 
citizens, on foot, on horseback, or in carriages. The dusky drivers of the pretty 
hired carriages, with their capital horses, on these days and at this hour demand 
double and treble fares, and the sais or out-runner bounds on in front of the 
millionaire’s carriage with bare brown feet, never tiring even when the spirited 
horses behind him make their swiftest pace. The ladies and gentlemen in the 
carriages, and most of those on foot, are in European costume; only the Arab 
tarboush, known to us under the name of “fez”—a red cap with a black silk 
tassel—holds its own against the European hat. Those who wear it do not remove 
it in greeting, but instead of airing their heads, wave their hand at an acquaintance. 
Silks rustle, jewellery glitters, and handsome feathers wave wherever the fair 
Alexandrians show themselves in public; and there are among them not a few 
whose husbands can well afford to order their toilets from Paris, their carriages 


44 EGYPT. 


from Vienna or Milan, and to secure them a box for the Italian opera at the 
Zizinia Theatre. Immense fortunes have been made here, particularly during the 
American war. Foreign commerce at the present time enriches enterprising merchants 
of all nations, and has attracted during the last few years three thousand vessels per 
annum to the harbour of Alexandria. The export of a comparatively new commodity, 


A SAIS, OR RUNNING FOOTMAN. 


cotton, has proved particularly lucrative, and the exchange business of the banks 
of Alexandria is far more considerable than that of the houses of business in the 
capital. The poor orphan has grown rich again, and its wealth flows in from many 
of the same sources whence its forefathers filled their treasuries. In the market- 
place, which in Norden’s time was deserted, everything may now be found that 
can serve to deck the tables of the wealthy, whether Orientals or Kuropeans. The 
fruit and vegetable sellers are for the most part Egyptians, but the purchasers are 
Europeans of all ranks, and among them we meet many a fair and elegant house- 
wife, followed by her black servant, like a dusky shadow. With the single exception 


MODERN ALEXANDRIA. 45 


of Abbas Pacha, who was always inimical to foreigners, Mohammed Ali’s successors 
have followed the example of the great founder of their house, availing themselves of 
every advance in European culture for the advancement of Alexandria also, and 
devoting particular attention to those means of communication which keep up its 
intercourse with Europe and the other parts of Egypt. 

Said Pacha, the predecessor of Ismail, had the Mahmoudeeyeh Canal cleared of 
silt and deepened, and the waters are now kept at their level by enormous forcing- 
pumps. He completed the railway con- 
necting Alexandria with Cairo, and 
began the construction of that net- 
work of iron ways which overspreads 
the Delta with constantly increasing 
meshes, and which now joins the port 
on the Mediterranean with Suez, and 
connects all the most important towns 
of the Delta. 

Said Pacha resided principally in 
Alexandria, for which he had retained 
a preference from his earlier life, when 
he was an admiral of the Egyptian 
fleet. He lived in his castle of Gabari 
at the extreme west of the city, on 
the site of the ancient Necropolis, 
where now races are run in the 
European style. The castle is falling 
into ruins day by day, but it was 
surrounded by gardens, and there the 
prodigal and eccentric prince, who was 
by no means deficient in talent, loved 
to inspect the manceuyres of his troops. ALENANDRIAN LADY WITH HER DLACK ATTENDANT. 

The traces may still be discerned of the 

iron causeway which he had laid to enable him to overlook the march past of his soldiers 
without inconvenience from dust; they, in the polished black boots of civilised 
life, must have suffered fearfully from the metal heated by the sun of those latitudes. 
He had a railroad constructed to connect his summer palace at Maryoot with 
Alexandria, and to convey necessaries to the troops which were encamped there under 
his eye. The twenty-three miles of iron road passed through an utter desert, and 
had no other purpose whatever. In spite of this and many similar follies, the 
whimsical and extravagant Governor was open to great ideas; he had been brought 
up by an admirable instructor, Keenig Bey, who had not left him ignorant of any 
of the nobler and more important features of European thought and culture; and 
history will not forget that it was Said Pacha who encouraged Monsieur de Lesseps’ 
grand scheme of cutting through the Isthmus of Suez to connect the Mediterranean 
and the Red Sea, and who provided the talented and persevering Frenchman with 
means to carry out his idea. He was not so happy as to live to see the completion 


46 GY 


of this undertaking, which has been productive of vast results for the commerce of 
Alexandria. He died in January, 1863, after great suffering, and his mortal remains 
rest in a small mosque at Alexandria. Only a few, faithful to his memory, visit the 
modest mausoleum of the illustrious dead whose next of kin, in consequence of the 
most unfortunate law of succession then in force, had no claim to the viceregal 
dignity. This law is now abrogated. 

Said’s successor, Ismail, was the son of Ibrahim Pacha, the great victor of Nezib, 
and grandson of Mohammed Ali. The title of Khedive was bestowed on Ismail Pacha, 
ruler of the Nile country, by the Sublime Porte in 1867. We shall use this Turkish 
title, which means much the same as the word Viceroy, whenever we have occasion 
to speak of this man, whose prudence, industry, energy, and unprejudiced judgment 
raised the outward dignity and internal prosperity of his country in a wonderful 
degree. We will, in another chapter, more closely investigate the character and in- 
fluence of Ismail Pacha, and show what enormous difficulties he had to grapple 
with in carrying out his grand work of education and reformation. He, nevertheless, 
intended to carry them out, if not to the end, at any rate to a promising stage of 
progress, if his powers had not failed, and he had not been fettered by external 
influences. It must suffice here to give a sketch of what Alexandria alone owes to him. 

Every one knows that it was the Khedive who brought the cutting of the 
Isthmus of Suez to its termination, and attracted the attention of the whole world 
to the success of the enterprise by the splendid ceremonies at its opening; in fact, 
it was an undertaking from which not only a single nation, but every commercial 
country, has derived benefit. For, so soon as the first vessels had navigated the 
anal, new shipping companies were called into existence, and at the present time 
Austrian and Italian, English and French, Russian and Turkish lines of steamships 
are in regular communication with Alexandria. Every year saw an increased number 
of ships entering the ancient harbour of Hunostus, and the Khedive undertook to 
make it in every respect one of the first ports, not of the Mediterranean only, but 
of the whole world. 

It is at El Meks, to the south-west of the city, that the works are situated 
in which an enormous number of blocks of stone are squared, while others are 
hewn in the quarries of the rocky hills that coast the river. The breakwater is 
a work which is exceeded in magnitude only by a few structures remaining from 
the time of the Pharaohs. It lies opposite the little island of Pharos, and extends 
for a distance of above three kilometres (more than a mile and three quarters), 
forming an obtuse angle towards El Meks, and many millions of tons of rough 
and squared stone have been used in constructing it. A second mole, almost a 
kilometre’ long, is connected with the old station, and that and the new quay 
on the western side of the Heptastadium, east of the harbour, give the port 
altogether an extent of open space and a degree of safety that it can scarcely 
have had even under the Ptolemies. 

A great deal has been said in Europe about the enormous sums spent, with 
true Oriental recklessness and lavishness, by the Egyptian Government during the 


‘ Rather more than half a mile English (4 furlongs 212 yards 1 foot 94 inches long, or more than 1,000 yards). 


3 3) 


MODERN ALEXANDRIA. 47 


last decade, but too little has been thought about the millions which have 
been applied to great public enterprises, and which, like an acorn dropped in 
the ground, will bear full interest only to future generations, though already 
Alexandria has profited by them more than any city in Egypt. Protected against 


MOSQUE OF SAID PACHA. 


all storms by efficiently constructed bulwarks, and against every foe by strong 
fortifications, ships of all nations are here invited into a sheltered harbour, in which 
the largest fleets may find room. Here is the terminus of all the railways which 
directly connect the city with Cairo, Suez, and Rosetta. Here converge the 
telegraph-wires, by which it communicates with almost every part of the world, 
even with the interior of Africa. A well-constructed aqueduct supplies the houses of 
the citizens, and an elaborate system of gas-pipes ramifies through even the remotest 


48 


EGYPT. 


: 
parts of the city, providing light during the night. It is only to the narrow 
alleys of the Arab quarter that this truly European illumination has not yet 


WHAT WILL COME OF IT ALL? 


penetrated ; for when it was introduced there it filled the 
sons of the soil with such alarm as for a long time made it 
the ruling theme of conversation. The main thoroughfares are 
paved, and are furnished with side-walks. That love of planting 
trees which the Khedive inherited from his grandfather, 
Mohammed Ali, also proved advantageous to Alexandria, and a 
special office of health takes zealous care of the resuscitated city. 

Several hospitals exist, and owe their foundation to that 
benevolence which characterises not only the Christian, but 
also the Arab religion. Even in the Egyptian infirmaries, 
strict regulations, imported from the West, maintain a discipline 
which multiplies tenfold the value of the gifts of the bene- 
volent. Physicians of every creed exercise their calling in the 
hospitals of Alexandria, and the traveller, as he walks through 


the city, constantly finds the Christian cross adorning a church or chapel in close 
contiguity to the crescent crowning a mosque. Copts and Greeks of both confessions, 


Roman Catholics and Protestants, Anglican 
and Presbyterian congregations, have here 
their places of worship; and the Jews 
perform their devotional services in stately 
synagogues, unhindered by the Moslems, 
whose mosques in Alexandria are, in fact, 
little worthy of notice. 

It is greatly to the credit of the suc- 
cessors of Mohammed Ali that they not only 
do not interfere with the religious observances 
of the colonists of other creeds, but have 
aided them in erecting their places of 
worship with gifts of building ground. 
Mohammed Ali gaye up sites of consider- 
able extent to the Roman Catholics, and 
the little Protestant Church, in which a 
German pastor preaches to a German con- 
gregation, stands on a plot of ground given 
to the Evangelical German colonists by Said 
Pacha. It stands on the shore of the so- 


called New Harbour, which ships can no 


longer enter, and on the soil of the ancient 
Bruchium. Services are also held here in 


PROTESTANT CHURCH AT ALEXANDRIA. 


French for Protestants who are neither Germans nor attached to any English 


denomination. 


- This German church was dedicated in 1866, on the Emperor William’s birthday, 


and the congregation were liberally assisted in establishing it, not only by the 


PROPHET. 


THE 


FOLLOWER OF 


A YOUTHFUL 


MODERN ALEXANDRIA. 49 


King of Prussia; as he then was, but by the Khedive himself. Erbkam, who is 
now dead, and who during his lifetime was well known to every lover of ancient 
Egyptian art, designed the little church in the Romanesque style. M. Liittke, 
author of a work on Modern Egypt, was the first minister, and he could say with 


SARRAF, OR MONEY-CHANGER, 


justifiable pride, at the termination of the work to which he had contributed much 
good counsel—< This neat little edifice, in connection with its situation in the 
broad harbour of Alexandria, which opens out on the broad blue sea, makes a 
pleasing and touching impression, and the Crown Prince of the German Empire (then 
Crown Prince of Prussia), like many other foreign visitors, felt this when he 
visited it in 1869, and gave lively expression to his sentiments.” 

As we have seen, people of every creed have found a home in Alexandria, 
and labour and toil in complete freedom, net only in religious matters, but in 


v/ 


50 EGYPT. 


practical life also—practical life which, unfortunately, absorbs the lion’s share of 
all the powers of colonists and, natives alike. That life for the ideal, that struggle 
for intellectual wealth, that nurture of science and art which ennobled Alexandria 
of yore, have not accompanied the 
resurrection of the great metropolis, 
and yet the circumstances of the new 
city appeal to us in many particulars 
as a reflection of ancient Alexandria. 
Just as the old town remained a Greek 
colony in the midst of Egyptians, so 
the new has received little of that 
impress of the Mohammedan mind which 
is visible throughout the rest of the 
Nile valley. The Alexandria of our day, 
like its predecessor two thousand years 
ago, has developed from an unimportant 
ARABTAN” CEMETERY Egyptian town, by the influx of enter- 

prising Huropeans—chiefly Greeks and 

Italians—while the. native Egyptian element has been thrust into the background. 
Now, as then, the citizens of Alexandria may well be called a turbulent and mixed 
population of South European stamp, and the saying of Hadrian, in writing to 
Servianus, “They all know but one God 
[Mammon],” is only too true of the greater 
part of the traders living here now, who far 
more often strive to attain the goal of their 
lives, a large and rapid fortune, by some 
happy hit in a risky speculation than by 


quiet industry. 

Of course there are not wanting most 
respectable representatives of the merchant 
class, English and French, German and 
Swiss, Hellenes and lLevantines; but the 
man who ventures into the Greek drinking 
shops, and their innumerable gaming hells, 
will meet with the very dregs of society— 
than whom nothing more worthless, dissolute, 
and reckless can be found in any great city. 

The Jewish community plays an im- 
portant part in New, as it did in Old, 
Alexandria, and counts many wealthy men among its members. A great part 
of the exchange business is in the hands of Hebrews, as we may perceive from the 
names of the most important firms, or by a glance at the humble money-changer, 
the Sarraf, who conducts his business squatting behind a little table at the corner 
of a street. 

Any one really desirous of studying Oriental life will not find what he seeks 


WINDOW OF THE HAREM. 


MODERN ALEXANDRIA. 51 


in this centre of commerce ; rather will he pack up at once and turn southwards to 
the beautiful city of the Khalifs; for in Alexandria the Arab is at home only in 
the poorest and humblest quarters, and the cemeteries where his dead lie at rest 
are almost more numerous than the spots where he dwells while living. Also the 
Turks pass for little. Many of them live in the island of Pharos in houses which, 
though humble indeed, are often pleasant enough. They are overlooked by the lordly 
palace of the Khedive, which is situated on the tongue of land known as Ras-et- 
Teen (the Cape of Figs), and was erected by Mohammed Ali and restored by Ismail 
Pacha. But even this building, though the sea washes round it in imitation of the 


i | 


— i 
mo 
AE TIPS 


PALACE OF THE KHEDIVE. 


Seraglio at Constantinople, is devoid of character, and would hardly be suggestive of 
the Hast but for the adjoining harem and its gardens. Here the inquisitive 
European need not hope to catch a glimpse of fine eyes half hidden behind a veil 
and trellis, though he may indeed meet. with one of the eunuchs that are never 
absent from an Hgyptian establishment of any pretension, as guardians of the ladies, 
and on whom, in ancient times, the highest offices constantly devolved in all 
Oriental countries. 

Eunuchs were by no means first employed by the Mohammedans; on the con- 
trary they were introduced from Byzantium, for the Mohammedans under the early 
Khalifs assigned a high social position to women, and Byzantium always returned 
with interest the abuses she had borrowed from the East. It is now long since 
eunuchs have been excluded from offices of state; but, although they all belong to 


52 EGYPT. 


the black races of the upper Nile, and their repulsive and sleepy aspect gives small 
indication of it, they are said to be to the present day conspicuous for their prudence 
and energy, and they generally manage the household they belong to. In Cairo we 
as often meet them as here we rarely see them. 

If in Alexandria we do at last succeed in realising that we are indeed in the 
East, the next instant something carries us back to Europe; and the time is not 
far distant when Western life will have destroyed the last trace of Oriental life in 
this spot. Only two unmistakable tokens survive—one in the vegetable and the 


EUNUCH. 


other in the animal kingdom—the Palm and the Camel; and these will uphold 
the Eastern character of Alexandria when the last minaret of the last mosque shall 
have disappeared. 

Whoever remembers Egypt remembers its palms, those noble trees with slender 
fibrous stems, standing up like pillars, with umbrageous crowns that spread out like 
shading roofs ; fair daughters of the Hast that are the ornament of the fertile land, 
and that break the monotony of the desert ; under whose shade it is so delightful 
to rest, whose crowns are stirred by the lightest breath of wind, and at whose feet, 
when they form a grove, light and shade play in incessant variety. Wherever 
Islamism has penetrated this tree has followed it, the tree of which the Prophet 
himself said, “Honour the palm, for it is your maternal aunt; on the stony soil 


THE JEWEL OF THE HAREM. 


o+ EGYPT. 


of the desert it offers you a fruitful source of sustenance.” The pious revere it 
as a gift bestowed by God on the lands of the faithful, and wantonly to injure 
a palm-tree would be a deadly sin. Throughout the Hast there are no gifts 


PALMS. 


of nature more useful than the palm-tree and the camel, and how incomparable 
the blessings which they secure to the Oriental seem in his eyes is sufficiently 
proved by the common saying, “The palm is the camel and the camel the palm of 
the desert.” 

Every part of this beautiful tree, from the root to the summit, is of value. Its 
trunk is in many parts of the Hast the only building timber; mats and ropes are 


MODERN ALEXANDRIA. 5 


or 


woven of its fibre; of its branches roofs, beds, seats, cages, and baskets are made ; 
and it is well known that it affords an abundance of nutritious food in the heavy 
clusters of fruit that ripen in the autumn under its crown of leaves. 

The precious trees, male and female (for the palm is dicecious), are tended with 
rare, and even the ancient Egyptians distinguished them as the father and mother 
trees, and understood the art of assisting 
nature and of transferring the pollen to the 
female flowers by hand. 

As the Swiss when abroad pines for his 
native mountains, so the Arab longs for the 
palms of the Hast. The first Ommeyyade 
Khalif in Spain could not exist in’ his new 
home without the lordly palm, and had a 
young tree brought from Syria, which he 
planted in the garden of his country-house at 
Ruhzafa, near Cordova. He gave utterance to 
his home-sick longing for the tree of his 
native land in the following expressive verses :— 


ten 


“Oh! Palm, like me a stranger here, 


An exile in the alien west, 


Driven from home and dispossessed 


But, ah! thou’rt mute, nor canst thou shed a tear. 


“ Happy to have no sentient soul ! 
Heart-ache like mine thou canst not know ; 
Could’st thou but feel, thy tears would flow 


In yearning love and grief, without control. 


« Aye, home-sick tears for Eastern groves 
That shade Euphrates ; but the tree oe 


Forgets ; and I, compelled to flee 


By hate, almost forget my former loves.” at ome 


The palm-tree so pathetically sung has been the parent of thousands of descend- 
ants, which at this day wave their broad crowns in the breeze of Southern Spain. 

We, at the present time, find it as difficult to think of Egypt without camels 
as without palms, and yet the “patient ship of the desert” was not naturalised on 
the shores of the Nile until a comparatively late date. It was not used in the time 
of the Pharaohs, though we find it mentioned on the monuments,’ and the conquerors 
of Western Asia often met with it in their expeditions. Even in the other parts of 
North Africa and in the Sahara, from which in our minds the camel is an inseparable 
feature, it was not in general use till after the Christian era. Barth has proved 


‘ As the kamaru or kamalu, as early as the thirteenth century 


It does not appear on the coins till the time 


of Hadrian, a.p. 130, although it is mentioned as introduced by Ptolew 


; Bc. 304. In Assyria the two-humped camel of 
Bactria was known in the time of Shalmaneser, B.c. 850, and the one-humped at the time of Assur-bani-pal or Assur- 


bani-habla, B.c. 627. 


MODERN ALEXANDRIA. 57 


that even the Phcenician merchants of Carthage, whose caravans traversed the desert 
in many directions, made no use of this humped beast of burden. 

They were introduced into the Nile valley in thousands by the Arab hosts, and 
followed them in their advance to the West. The facility with which they become 
naturalised wherever the necessary conditions exist is shown by the history of the 
last few years. After the Crimean war 
Tartars migrated with their camels into 
the Dobrudscha, where that animal was 
previously unknown, and a short time 
since Von Kremer found it completely 
naturalised, and saw Tartar wagons in 
Galatz drawn by camels which had 
crossed the frozen Danube. 

In Egypt the humped beast bears 
all kinds of burdens, draws the plough, 
drives the water-wheel, scours the desert 
with Bedaween or pilgrims, and yields 
milk to its owner, as well as its wool, 
which serves for weaving both coarse 
and fine materials. We shall often meet 
with the camel in the course of our further 
journeying, and shall have much to say 
about it, and need only add here that 
it is constantly employed in all sorts of 
ways in Alexandria. At Ramleh, to the 
east of the city, where the Khedive’s 
summer palace is situated, and whither 
the Alexandrians adjourn in the hottest 
months for the sake of the sea-breezes, 
there are encampments of Bedaween 
who keep herds of camels in order to 
sell their valuable hair to the merchants A SILK EMEROIDERER, 
and weavers of the city. 

Of all the industrial arts of the early days of Alexandria one only still survives, 
that of fine embroidery. In the time of the Khalifs this had reached an admirable 
pitch of perfection. In those days the European princes procured their more costly 
dress-stuffs from the East, and even the coronation mantle of the Roman-German 
emperors, preserved in the treasury of Vienna, was worked by Arab hands ; indeed 
the “Tiraz,” an arabesque representing in its artistic curves the name and titles of 
the illustrious wearer, is conspicuously embroidered upon it. Venice and Genoa 
obtained their silk-stuffs from Alexandria, and all the gold thread required in Europe 
in the days of chivalry—when the nobility loved gorgeously embroidered garments— 
was brought from the Hast, where it was made, as is now known, of finely divided 
threads of the intestines of animals killed for food. The island of Cyprus was the 
emporium for these wares, of which great quantities were used in the silk embroidery 


8 


58 EGYPT. 


done at Alexandria. We do not know whether it was in Alexandria that Said Pacha, 
the predecessor of Ismail Pacha, had his large state tent constructed ; but it was 
made of heavy silk stuff covered with rich embroidery, and was so large that a hundred 
guests could be accommodated in it, its height being more than fifty feet. Em- 
broidery and weaving are at this day the arts best understood in the East, and are 
practised by men as well as by women. One of the prettiest blossoms in the Arab 
anthology is addressed to a girl weaving. The last verses run as follows :— 


«There at her loom her task she plies, 
Through quivering threads the shuttle flies ; 
So thrill and tremble—while he sighs— 


The fibres of the poet’s heart. 


“ J watch her often as she sends 
The weft across the warp, and bends 
To tie or cut the floating ends— 
Fate-like—and sports with every heart. 


“ Or, tangled in the ravelled snare 
Of threads, sometimes I must compare 
The maid to some wild fawn or hare 


Caught by the cunning hunter’s art.” 


The weaving of the East is still in high repute, but it is not what it formerly 
was, and the same is true of the embroidery ; but both arts will continue to flourish 
so long as the Arabs retain their delight in gorgeous garments and fine carpets, and 
their wives love to cover their little feet with richly embroidered slippers, on which, 
among the gold, here and there gleams a pearl or a precious stone. 

We are now on the threshold of the mysterious East, but its secrets will not 
be unlocked to us in half-European Alexandria. Away, then, to the south! through 
the Delta—that verdurous fan,’ as the poet says, “with Cairo sparkling like a costly 
diamond on the handle.” 


AL OTT TTT 


NN MoM 


THROUGH THE DELTA. 


> <2 ____ 


RECTLY the signal is given, with a shrill whistle 
we are off to the south by the railway. The 
houses and villas to our right, the morocco 
cushions on which we sit, the shape of the 
little tickets, the long wires running by the 
way-side, which bring men’s thoughts into closer 
communication than the railway does their cities, 
the look of the locomotives and carriages—how 
European it all is! Aye, and the machines are 
fed with coal, ordinary black coal, and not with 
fragments of mummies, as an American author 

informed his readers not long since. And yet we are 
in the East. Palms are waving in the breeze, crescent- 
crowned minarets stand up against the sky, and the 
dust which pours in only too freely through the open 
window is genuine and unadulterated desert sand. Nor 
does the brown face of the guard under its tarboush belong 
to any European, and on the ticket there are Arabic 
letters and numbers, side by side with the French. The 
sleepers of the rails, too, are peculiar, for they are made 
of iron, the valley of the Nile being too poor in timber to 
supply them of oak. 

To our left we see the sails of the ships that navigate 
the Mahmoudeeyeh Canal; on our right lie the brackish, 
level waters of Lake Mareotis, where formerly thousands 
of vessels found deep and commodious anchorage, and on 
whose shores—in those ancient times with which we 


60 EGYPT. 


haye sought to make the reader familiar—houses and vineyards stood in fair 
array. 
“ And Thasian vines there are, and Mareots white,”? 


sings Virgil. Strabo celebrates the Mareotic wine as keeping to a great age, and 
Athenzeus, who had drunk it at many a feast in Alexandria, praises its pale colour 
and its delightful bouquet, and says it is light and wholesome, and does not affect 
the head. Horace, too, sings of the juice of Mareotic grapes, which, like all the 
better vintages of Egypt, grew on such spots on the shores of the Nile as were 
never invaded by its inundations, or overlaid by the rich alluvium they deposited. 
In tombs of the very earliest date we find pictures exhibiting the processes 
of vine-culture among the ancient Egyptians. An example is here given, but we 


AlAL YY 


z 


MI 


ANCIENT EGYPTIAN REPRESENTATION OF THE VINTAGE, (From a Tomb at Sakkara.) 


shall meet with many. Some of the vintagers are busy gathering the clusters 
from the vines, while others tread out the must. Above them is written, “ Vintage 
of the grapes of the estate.” The name of the noble possessor was Ptah-hotep, and 
he jived about 5,000 years ago, at the time of the building of the Pyramids. Wine 
is no longer produced on the shores of Lake Mareotis, though many ruined 
walls remain on its banks, which the Arabs, with a reminiscence of old traditions, 
call “wine-presses.” In the rest of the Delta excellent grapes are grown, and, 
which is curious, not on vine-stocks, but still on arbour-like espaliers, as in the 
time of the Pharaohs. The wine-forbidding creed of Islam has interfered with the 
manufacture of wine; the cultivation of the grape has died out, and though the 
Egyptian grapes might very likely prove excellent for the purpose, none are ever 
pressed. They are of very good flavour, ripening in June and July, and are sold 
with other fruit in the markets. 

Meanwhile we are being hurried onwards. Once more a bright sheet of 
water gleams to our left. This is the lake of Aboukir, so called after a miserable 
fishing-village on a little promontory to the west of Alexandria; but its name 
deserves, as few others do, to be held famous and sacred. The greatest sea-fight 
of the last century was fought opposite Aboukir, when, on the Ist of August, 1798, 
the British hero Nelson succeeded in destroying the French fleet under the command 
of the brave but hapless Admiral Brueys. 


' Georgic II, 9. Blackmore’s translation. 


THROUGH THE DELTA. 61 


This is not the place to lay before the reader the varying fortunes of the 
extraordinary war which was carried on in Egypt 
against England; but how can we fail to recall, 
in sight of the waters of Aboukir, that battle, in 
which laurels were won alike by the conquerors 
and the conquered, while death gathered so rich 
a harvest, first at this very sea-fight, and sub- 
sequently in 1801, when the British besieged 
Alexandria? A hundred and fifty villages and 
hamlets were then wiped off from the face of 
the earth like an inscription from a tablet, for the 
English cut through the low hills that protected 
the fertile country, at a point not far from 
Aboukir, and let the salt tide through—a terrible 
ally on their side—flooding the defenceless plain. 

Now the lakes are left behind; the level 
ground on each side of the railway grows greener 
and greener as we proceed. Damanhoor is the 
name of the first station, and here the loco- 
motive takes in water. This is the old town of 
Horus, the Greek Apollinopolis parva, and now 
the residence of the governor, or Mudeer, of an 
extensive and fertile province. Grey houses of 
handsome size stand on the slope of the modest 


hill behind the station ; slender minarets point to 
heaven here as everywhere, and the white tomb- 
stones of the Arab cemetery gleam in close 
proximity to the iron road. A widow, sitting 
on the grave of her lost husband, gazes into 
vacancy, not heeding the train as it rushes by. 

It was by a mere chance that no less a 
man than General Bonaparte escaped joining the 
dead in the cemetery of Damanhoor. He narrowly 
evaded the threatened danger of being captured 
by a division of the Egyptian horse, and when 
Desaix remonstrated with him on his imprudence, 
he made the reply which was so strangely justified 
by subsequent events as to seem almost prophetic, 
“Tt is not written above that I should fall into 
the hands of the Mamelukes; of the English— 
perhaps.” 

The foot-prints of a great man leave a signifi- 


cant impression, even in the most inconspicuous spots, 
and we shall often trace those which were left by XEACLOSS. 
Bonaparte and his followers on the land of the Nile. MINARET OF THE MOSQUE OF WERDANEE AT CAIRO. 


IEG aves 


The train now carries us through the highly-cultivated plain of the Delta, 
and we find it hard to believe that the French army found Damanhoor situated in 
the midst of a desert. It is true that the country we are speeding across is uniform, 
but the very features that repeat themselves—all, in fact, that meets the eye from 
Damanhoor as far as Cairo, and on both sides of the railway, bears witness to the 
extraordinary fertility of the black soil, and to the industry of its inhabitants. 

An endless breadth of green fields spreads on every side, interspersed with 
villages that look from afar like tumuli, or ant-hills, shaded by palms, and not 


WIDOW MOURNING. 


unfrequently clustering round the rubbish heaps and ruins of some destroyed city. 
Camels and asses, with their drivers, pass in long files along the dykes that stand 
up high above the plain ; black buffaloes go down to the water to drink, and birds, 
large and small, far more numerous than in Europe, people the air. Here buffaloes 
are grazing, there halfnaked men and women, in long blue garments, are labouring 
in a cotton-field. New pictures multiply under our gaze, but we hurry past them ; 
each as it vanishes is merged in the next. But stay! what is that? Sails fluttering— 
the sheen of water—a broad stream opens on the sight. That is the Nile; not 
the great undivided main stream of the Nile, but one of the two chief branches 
by which at the present day its waters join the sea. 

The train rattles and thunders across an iron causeway. “Kafr et Zayat” 
is painted up on the whitewashed station, and we get out, for the fair at 
Tantah, at which we purpose to assist, does not begin till Friday, and it is well 


THROUGH THE DELTA. 63 


worth while to stay and inspect more closely the great granary of the ancient 
world. It was the Delta that filled those ships whose delayed arrival threatened 
all Rome and Byzantium with starvation, and here, on sites of ancient fame, we 
may more vividly recall those famous times. 

A boat can be hired at once, and wind and stream carry us down the Rosetta 
branch of the Nile, away to the Delta proper, whose soil the father of history’ very 
justly designates as the gift of the river. For a long series of ages man has availed 
himself of this gift, utilising it in various ways according to the requirements of 
each period. There was a time when on this island trickling brooks made their 
way through marshes and barriers formed by the vegetation, tangles of weeds 


A DYKE IN THE DELTA AT THE TIME OF THE INUNDATION. 


and wreaths of flowers. Islets and spits of land stood out of the water, and the 
luxuriant and unchecked vegetation which we see represented in the oldest tombs 
formed hedges, thickets, dykes, and fences, behind which the hippopotamus, the 
crocodile, and many kinds of reptiles and wild beasts lurked unmolested. Presently 
the land was occupied by man: Egyptians came to it from the south— 
Egyptians who, probably, had first crossed from Arabia by the strait of Bab-el 
Mandeb to settle by the Nile; and from the north came colonies of Semitic origin. 
The thickets were cleared, the streams made navigable for the canoe and oar, 
the wild beasts hunted down; and when abundant crops were found to thrive 
on the first reclaimed elevation, parcel after parcel of land was rescued from the 
marsh, the waters being forced to keep to their prescribed channels, and to serve 
the ends of the cultivator. New courses were dug for the stream, which in the 
time of the Pharaohs discharged itself into the sea by seven mouths. Flourishing 


' Herodotus. 


64 EGYPT. 


cities ere long stood on its banks, and two-and-twenty 
Zat' or Nomarchs governed an equal number of circuits, 
and watched over the welfare of the district entrusted 
to them. This division of the Delta existed down to 
the time of the Romans, and we learn from large and 
small coins that, at any rate from the reign of Trajan 
to that of Domitian,? each nome or district was free 
to coin its own money. A very marked individuality, 
as we shall see, distinguished. these districts, and was 
made more patent by the circumstance that each 
prayed to its own circle of gods, and worshipped its 
own sacred animal, of which select specimens were 
kept in the temples. Images of them were borne in 
the processions, and, at a later period, stamped on 
the coins as the arms ‘or badge of the city. The 
money struck at Mendes, the city of the sacred ram, 
shows the image of a he-goat; that of the nome 
Leontopolite, the province of the lion-city, represents 
the king of beasts, the god Horus having chosen that 
form when he vanquished the enemies of his father 
Osiris in the neighbourhood of Tsar, the city of the lion. 

The Rosetta branch of the Nile, which we are 
now navigating, corresponds to the ancient Bolbitine 
mouth of that river. 

The papyrus reed* was diligently cultivated on its 
banks, as on those of every stream in the Delta; on its 
surface floated the lotus, not only as an ornament, 
but also as a plant for nourishment; for its seeds, like 


1 Ebers writes Zat for 7'sat, but the nomarch was called Hat or Ha ( First”). 
? Domitius Domitianus, who usurped the imperial dignity in Egypt, probably 


3 y about 296 .p., but was soon deposed by Diocletian. 
A PAPYRUS THICKET, (From a Tomb at Benwhassan.) 2 a 5 ¥ kg ss ae 
® Although Egypt coined its own currency as late as Domitius Domitianus 
(who is supposed to be the usurper otherwise known under the name of Achilleus), 
copper coins inscribed with the names of the nomes or districts were limited to a very short period, the earliest being 
of the eleventh year of Trajan, a.p. 108, and the latest of the eighth year of Antoninus Pius, a.p. 145. They have been 
described by Zoega, Tochon d’ Annecy, and De Rougé. 
4 The papyrus is represented on the monuments as early as the IVth dynasty, and until the close of hieroglyphic 


writing. Its name papw occurs in an early hieratic text. 


BRONZE COIN OF THE LEONTOPOLITE NOME (ANTONINUS PIUS, A.D. 145), BRONZE COIN OF THE MENDESIAN NOME (ANTONINUS PIUS, A.D, 145), 


THE PILOT OMAR. 


66 HGYPT: 


the pith of the papyrus, were often eaten by the poor. This reed has entirely 
disappeared, not only from the Delta, but from the whole of Egypt, and has 
retreated to the south, where it grows abundantly on both the Blue and White 
Nile. The hippopotamus and crocodile have followed it, though they were still to 
be found in the Delta under the Arab sway; occasionally specimens of the crocodile 
are, however, still killed in Upper Egypt. Even the lotus-flower, once the most 
universally distributed and conspicuous of all the Egyptian water-plants, is become 


TOMB OF A SHEIKH AT THE TIME OF THE KHALIFS, 


comparatively rare ;' in its blossom the infant Horus’ was born, and its graceful 
form was constantly taken as a model by the architects and artists of Pharaonic 
times. However, many specimens of both the white and blue lotus may still be 
found in the stream in the vicinity of Damietta, and Rohrbach saw its poppy-like 
seeds eaten there. 

Under the Byzantine dominion the culture of the Delta retrograded sadly. 
The Khalifs and the governors under them revived it by their care for the 
wise distribution of the waters of the Nile, and many a solitary building, in some 
remote spot rarely trodden by the foot of a European, testifies to the more 


1 Called Sshnin, still found, according to Mariette Pacha, in the canals of Lower Egypt. 


* Horus was born of Isis, but at a later period is seen seated on the lotus. It is said to be a symbol of the 
new birth of the sun, and of the resurrection. 


THROUGH THE DELTA. 67 


flourishing life which blossomed even there when Islam was at the summit of its 
glory. 

After the fall of the Fatimite dynasty and the death of the great Saladin 
(Salah-ed-deen)' the cultivation of the Delta deteriorated more and more, first under 
the sway of the Mameluke sultans, and subse- 
quently, after the incorporation of Egypt with the 
Ottoman Empire by Selim, as the inevitable conse- 
quence of the rapacity and greed of the Turkish 
Pachas and Beys. In process of time the mouths 
of the Nile became choked with alluvial mud, and 
the outlet for the discharge of the flood became 
so small that it was forced to find a new and 
deeper bed. - The eastern or Pelusiac arm found 
a convenient issue through the Sebennytic channel 
and into the sea at Damietta; the western or 
Canopic branch was diverted into an artificial 
channel, the Bolbitine mouth, now known as the 
Rosetta branch, down which, in fact, we are this 
moment travelling. The ancient main branches 
of the river gradually disappeared entirely ; their 
waters were distributed throughout the interior 
of the Delta by new subsidiary channels, and it 
is almost exclusively by these that at the present 
day the Nile discharges its flood into the sea. 
Since the time of the Romans the veins, so to 
speak, that traverse the Delta in all directions haye 
changed beyond all recognition, and that which is 
true of the river-courses is equally applicable to the vegetation which owes its 
existence to the Nile. New and foreign products have displaced not the papyrus 
and lotus only, but in some measure even the grain of the ancient Egyptians ; 
trees of new species overshadow the roads and hamlets, and it may be confidently 
asserted that all the arable land which was lost to culture under the rule of 
the Mamelukes and Turks has been reclaimed under the fostering care of Mohammed 
Ali and his successors, more especially under Ismail Pacha. Bonaparte’s saying 
that under good management the Nile would extend to the desert, and under 
bad management the desert would extend to the Nile has been verified ; and the 
traveller visiting the neighbourhood of Damanhoor in the month of October— 
Damanhoor, where the French troops complained loudly that they were starving— 
will see with double surprise the endless spread of fields of maize as tall as a man, 
where the golden spathes swelled with grain now await the reaper, though they 
were sown only a few weeks since. 

A gentle southerly air fills the lateen-sail of our modest bark ; we squat, Turk- 
fashion, on the deck, and the fields and meadows, the villages and hamlets glide 


1 ap. 1192. 


68 EGYPT. 


past us. There is abundant food for curiosity and not a little for the lover of 
landscape beauty, as here and there a reach of the river brings graceful groups 
of palms and shrubs into view, or we see long files of 
the village women coming down to the river to draw 
water. The bronze-hued men, women, and children are 
busy in every field, busy from the rising of the sun 
till its last level rays glow above the western horizon. 
The whole earth can show us no more fertile plains 
than those that lie around us; but few make greater 
demands on the industry of the husbandman. Only a 
certain portion of the soil, known as the Rayah fields, 
is steeped and enriched in the inundation ; the higher- 
lying grounds—Sharakee—demand artificial watering from 
year’s end to year’s end, and a considerable amount 
of manuring also. We frequently meet with fellaheen 
labouring at the shadoof, or bucket and pole, in Upper 
Egypt; but here the fields are watered by means of 
wheels to which water-jars are attached—the sakeeyeh— 
or by the taboot, a wheel constructed with hollow box-shaped appendages to the 
spokes. Buffaloes or camels turn the water-works, which are heard clanking from 
afar; but nowadays the rural quiet is not unfrequently disturbed by the regular 
snort and rhythmical clatter of a steam-pump on the bank. 


ARABIC DECORATIVE PAINTING. 


VILLAGE IN THE DELTA. 


THROUGH THE DELTA. 69 


The water thus raised serves to irrigate here a cotton plantation—of which the 
shrubs are covered in their season with flowers that much resemble those of the wild 
rose—or there fields of indigo, hemp, or grain. Broad levels, gay with many-coloured 
blossoms, are sown with poppy—‘* the father of sleep” (Aboo’n-noom) as the Arabs 


A WATER-WHEEL, 


eall it—and the beds of pumpkin, melon, and cucumber are resplendent with spherical 
golden fruit and green cylindrical gourds. Most of the soil yields two or even 
three crops in the year, but it requires a proper rotation of crops, and in some cases 
to lie fallow for a time. 

We are now approaching a village which, being built close to the shore, invites 
us to land. The huts of the poorer fellaheen are constructed of Nile mud and roofed 


70 EGYPT. 


with palm stems and leaves daubed over with earth; the richer peasants live in 
houses built of sun-dried bricks, while the magistrate of the village not unfrequently 
has a handsome dwelling of properly burnt bricks. None of the windows open to 
the street; over many of the doors we see some modest decoration—a torus, a fillet 
in ovolo, or a spiral ornament. Here some small, coloured china plates have been 
used as a decoration; there a fancifully designed representation of the king of beasts ; 
there, again, a painted picture of the camel or steam-boat on which the master 
of the house performed his pilgrimage to Mecca across the desert and the Red 


RUINS OF SAIS. 


Sea. The order of art to which all these decorative paintings belong—and we shall 
find them common even in the capital—is certainly that of our. first innocence, or 
of the famous “Livre des Sauvages” by which the Abbé Domenech made himself 
notorious. Heaps of rubbish choked with weeds, among which cowardly yelping 
dogs seek a subsistence, lie in the middle of the village street, where we may 
very likely come upon the rotting carcase of an ass. A minaret towers above 
the houses and hovels, and a few umbrageous sycamores spread their leafy crowns, 
the chief ornament of the village ; slender date-palms sway in the breeze, the long 
racemes of the acacia shed their delicate perfume by the side of thorny Sont-trees ; 
evergreen tamarisks, and the carob with its lone pods of seeds—the St. John’s bread 
or locust-bean—mingle with that child of distant India, the Lebbek-tree (albizzia 
lebbek), which has been naturalised here only within the last twenty or thirty years. 

Notwithstanding the extreme poverty of such villages, we rarely meet with 
begegarly misery, but seldom, on the other hand, with a well-to-do peasantry such as we 


THROUGH THE DELTA. 71 


should have been justified in looking for in this favoured climate. Most of the land 
belongs to the Khedive, to the Pacha, or to the Bey ; the fellah tills it merely as a 
tenant or day-labourer, and the taxes he is forced to pay if he 


owns the soil absorb a disproportionately large share of the = 
profit he derives from it. The patient peasant submits to the t 


oppression which has been his lot ever since the foundation of 
the dominion of the Pharaohs as to an inevitable law of nature: 
it reached its culminating point under the Mamelukes and Beys, 
and it has by no means ceased even under the more judicious 
rule of the present government, which can spare nothing for 
ameliorating the domestic condition of the lower clas: 

We have reached our first destination in the course of our 
journey. We will quit the boat and walk inland; presently we 
come upon a village, and a little to the northward lie some 
mounds of ruins and a small lake. By the water's edge stand 
some storks, and a flock of herons allow us to approach within 
a few yards of them before they turn their graceful necks and 
spread their wings, soaring away towards the Nile like a white 


28. 


NEITH, GODDESS OF SAIS, 


cloud. 

We are now among the ruins of the ancient Sais) the splendid residence of 
Pharaohs and the city of sages, where flourished an academy which was no less 
famous among the Greeks than among the Egyptians 
themselves. The little village, crowned by a mosque, 
which has engrafted itself on the site preserves the 
proud name of Sais in the form of Sa or Sa el Hagayr. 

The writer of these pages attempted many years 
since to realise in his mind’s eye the now vanished city 
of Sais as it was at the time of its splendour, to people 
its temples with priests and sacred animals, its streets 
with a living humanity, its palaces with princes and 
potentates. It is impossible to describe the feelings which 
stirred his soul as he trod the soil of the venerable spot, 
while the fallen edifices stood before his fancy, and the 
illustrious dead rose again before - his dreaming spirit. 
Wandering and searching through the wide extent of ruins 
he could find no trace of those noble buildings—not a hall, 


PALM CAPITAL. 


not a room, not a pillar—nothing but an ancient rampart 
wall, which for colossal dimensions has not its fellow 
even in Egypt. It consists of huge unburnt bricks, and encloses the meagre 
remains of the once magnificent city. The citadel with the ancient palace of the 


' The city of Sais is mentioned under the Vth dynasty, and continues to be so in Egyptian texts till the XXVIth. 
Its most flourishing period was during this dynasty (B.c. 670 to Bo. 927), when Egypt fell into the power of the 
Persians, and was conquered by Cambyses. The capital under the XXVIth dynasty was at Sais, and the tombs of 
that line are said to have been there. Many of its monuments were of basalt. 


* In “An Egyptian Princess.” (Sampson Low & Co.) 


THROUGH THE DELTA. 73 


Pharaohs must have stood on yonder mound; that pool at the side of the northern 
enclosure is the sacred lake on which the history of Isis and Osiris was represented 
at night, on richly decorated vessels, in a splendid and mystical drama or mystery- 
play. The lake undoubtedly lay within the precincts of the temple of Neith, the 
divine mother, the Female Principle in the life of the Cosmos and of man. She 
was Nature, whose mysterious order must remain a secret to the sons of earth. 
Her statue bore the inscription, “I am all in all; the Past, the Present, and 
the Future, and my veil hath no mortal ever raised.” It was this sentence which 


inspired Schiller, the great German poet, with the motive of his “ Veiled Statue of 


Sais.” The youth who dared to raise that curtain never revealed what he had found 
hidden behind it. 
“ Senseless and pale, 
Prostrate before the dais of Isis’ shrine 
Next day they found him; that which there he s 


He never uttered.” 


Here, as in other temples, the image of the divinity or of her sacred animal, 
the cow, was carved out of one block and enshrined in a sanctuary. The enormous 
and finely-worked mass of granite, which must have weighed about 880 tons, was 
brought by order of Amasis from the first cataract at the utmost south of Egypt, 
and dedicated by him to the goddess ; his first name, Se Neth (son of Neith), designated 
him as her son. This gigantic monument formerly graced the sanctuary of the 
goddess, with obelisks and sphinxes, with pillars crowned by capitals of palms, and 
with colossal statues—of which we are told by trustworthy authorities ; but the same 
fate has befallen them all, as well as the palaces, the houses of the citizens and 
princes, the tombs of Osiris and of the Saite kings. The excavations in the soil of the 
dead city carried on by Mariette Pacha, the chief commissioner for antiquities in 
Egypt, have brought to light little that is noteworthy. 

They have also yielded but a small number of those stone relics and images 
which are preserved in all the museums of Europe, and yet we know from 
records on other monuments that the arts of sculpture in Egypt reached a high 
pitch of development under the dynasty which had its origin in Sais. We may be 
specially grateful to the good fortune which gave to the museum of the Vatican one 
monument as a witness of the most fateful period of Saite history, namely, of the 
time that followed the Persian conquest of the city. An inscription on this monu- 
ment relates how Cambyses, after entering the city, at first proved himself gracious 
to the priesthood, and even caused himself to be initiated into the mysteries of 
Neith. It was at a later period that the son of Cyrus first showed himself as the 
frenzied tyrant that is painted in history. Until long after his time the sages of 
the academy of Sais continued to enjoy the high estimation which they had won in 
the earliest ages. The greatest medical work of the Egyptians that has come down 


' Known as the Pastophorus Statue of the Vatican. It has been published in the “ Museo Pio Clementino VII.,” 
Plate 6. A complete translation of the whole inscription is given in the “Records of the Past,” Vol. X. p. 45, by Mr. 
Le Page Renouf. It is the narrative of Utahorresenet, an officer of state and admiral who lived under Cambyses and 


Darius, and differs from that generally received. 


10 


74 EGYPT. 


to us was written by them; they told Solon of “Atlantis,” the engulfed land of 
the far west, and Plato’s account of their discourse makes us admire and wonder at 
their sagacious observations of the starry heavens. 
Herodotus sought instruction from them, and legend 
tells us that Cecrops, the founder of Athens, came 
forth from Sais. All the Hellenes called Neith—in 
Egyptian, Neth—Athene ; and 4@HN4, as has been 
observed, if read from left to right, yields Neth 
(4)NH@(4). This goddess, who was also worshipped 
by the tribes of Libya, was represented with a 
weaver’s shuttle on her head, and the linen stuffs, 
carpets, and other costly tissues of Sais were 
famous throughout the ancient world. 

The external prosperity of Egypt, and the 
number of her cities and population at no time 
reached a greater height than under her Saite 


rulers, who were always friendly to the Greeks.’ 
And now! A chill runs through our veins as 
we look down on the deserted plain and the 
wretched heaps of grey ruins that surround us. 
Sais was still important enough to be mentioned as 
a bishopric in the first centuries after Christ; but 
after that its existence is forgotten. Its memory, 
however, must continue to live in the minds of men. 


FOOA. 


We return to our boat, which carries 
us still farther to the north. It is now 
growing dusk, and our thoughts recur to 
the “lamp-burning,” as it was called, the 
great festival of Neith of Sais, when every 
citizen lighted his lamp, and a splendid 
illumination, which extended throughout 
Egypt, turned the night into day. 

After a voyage of three hours we 
enter the harbour of the pretty and attract- 
ive town of Desook, where we cast anchor. 
Sleep is short and uneasy on the hard 
deck-couch, and the Egyptian sun inevitably 
forces us to open our eyes. Bedaween, who 
have come to the camel-fair, have pitched OUTSIDE THE GATE OF RosErTA. 
their tents on the quay, and with the first 
morning twilight they are up and stirring, praying with their faces turned towards 
the East. 

The sky flushed, and as the fiery globe arose, glorious and mighty, I was irre- 


1 Psammetichus I. owed his elevation to the Greek troops sent to him by Gyges, King of Lydia. They were 
Tonians and Carians. 


DESOOK. 


3RAHEEM AT 


IE 


THE HOLY 


OF 


MOSQUE 


76 EGYPT. 


sistibly reminded for the first time of those sublime verses of the Bible, which so 
often afterwards recurred to my mind as I watched many an Eastern sunrise :— 


oh —_ = “Tn them [the heavens] hath he set a tabernacle for the sun: which cometh forth 
: : as a bridegroom out of his chamber, and rejoiceth as a giant to run his course. 
Tt goeth forth from the uttermost part of the heaven, and runneth about the end 


of it again: and there is nothing hid from the heat thereof.” (Ps. xix. 5, 6, Prayer- 


book Version.) 


The Orientals sometimes seek their beds early, but they 
never lie late. The prayer at sunrise may on no account 
be omitted; besides, it is considered unwholesome to let the 
sun shine on the head of a sleeper, and the cool morning 
hours are the pleasantest of the day. Hence, every Arab 
unfailingly performs his first morning ablutions as soon as 
he can “tell a white thread from a black one.” This is the 
day of the weekly market and camel-fair of Desook, and 
the peasants and Bedaween are seen standing in picturesque 
groups in front of the mosque of the Holy Ibraheem, chaffer- 
ing, bargaining, chatting, or gambling. The noble cupola 
of the Gamah, or mosque, has been lately whitewashed, 


HOUSE IN R 


ETTA WITH PROJECTING 


sTOREYS. for in a short time—only eight days after the Festival 
at Tantah—the “Molid,”’ or birthday festival of the 
patron saint of Desook—who is considered second only to the holy Seyyid el 


Bedawee of Tantah—is to be held, with 
all the accompaniments of the annual fair, 
with solemn prayer and recitations of the 
Koran, with religious dancing and various 
festivities. 

All that here meets the eye is purely 
and genuinely Oriental in character, and 
many a picturesque face and form may be 
seen among the women who bring vege- 
tables and fowls to market, or who come 
to fetch water for household uses; but 
our attention is for the moment diverted 
by our desire to solve this problem: Does 
Desook occupy the site of the ancient 
Naucratis or not? 

What was Naucratis ? 

It was the predecessor and precursor 
of Alexandria—for centuries the only city 
in Egypt in which the Greeks were per- 
mitted to settle and carry on commerce 
unmolested ; it was, in fact, to the Nile 
valley what the Dutch factory of Desima, THE ROSETTA STONE. (In the British Museum.) 


THROUGH THE DELTA. 77 


ages later, was to Japan. And the Hellenes were very capable of taking advantage of 
this privilege. lJonians, Dorians, and Adolians here united in a sort of Hanseatic 
me league, with special representatives and a 
=e common sanctuary, the Hellenion, which 
served as a tie among them; while 
close to it the Samians raised a temple 
of their own to Hera, the Milesians one 
to Apollo, and the Aiginetans one to 
Zeus. This rich colony remained in faith- 
ful connection with the mother-country, 
contributed to public works in Hellas, 
received political fugitives from that 
home as guests, and made life fair for 
them, as for its own children, after 
the Greek model. The women and the 
flower-garlands of Naucratis were unsur- 
passed in beauty, and all Hellas sang 
the praises of Rhodopis, whom Charaxos, 
the brother of the poetess Sappho, pur- 
chased and married, and whose memory 
was long revered in legend and story.’ 
Naucratis must have stood somewhere near where Desook now stands; but 
it is in vain that we seek a trace of 
the ancient days. Not a shard, not a 
stone is to be found to support this 
conjecture. It is certain that Naucratis 
belonged to the nome of Sais, but it 
may have been situated farther to the 
west than Desook—on what spot we 
cannot exactly know, and we are not able 
to support any hypothesis by evidence. 
Away then, still farther north! 
We must hasten onwards if we would 
visit Resheed, or Rosetta, and still reach 
Tantah in time for the opening cere- 
monies of the great festival on Friday. 
A favouring breeze swells our 
sails; we have the pretty little town of 
Fooa on our right. Foom el Mahmou- 
deeyeh lies to the left. There it is that 
huge and well-managed steam-engines 
work the pumps that force the waters 
of the Nile into the canal which connects the river with Alexandria. First one 
and then another village, each crowned with its minaret, comes into view and 


WINDOW OF A HAREM. 


DOOK OF AN ARABIAN HOUSE, 


' The story of her sandal seems to be the origin of the tale of Cinderella, 


THROUGH THE DELTA. 79 


disappears ; the richest cultivation is everywhere apparent. Before nightfall we 
have passed the palm-groves and hill of Aboo Mandoor, and the harbour of 
Resheed comes in sight, crowded with Arab barques. We find a hospitable 
reception in the house of an American, who is now commander-general of the 
fortifications, and who in his own country won a name for himself during the 
Civil War. ‘The well-informed son of this veteran hero is our guide next day 
through the streets and bazaars, the mosques and gardens of the city. 

Many Greek columns and pillars—used in building private houses and mosques, 
or lying on the ground under the open sky—are relics of the ancient Greek 
Bolbitine period, but there are no monuments or 
inscriptions of any earlier date; while, on the other 
hand, many handsome houses, ornamented with pro- 
jecting storeys, and almost European in style, testify 
to the importance of the city in more recent times. 
A large part of the commerce of Alexandria, par- 
ticularly in the products of Egyptian soil, was at 
one time diverted to Resheed, but it was _ forced 
to surrender it again as soon as the Mahmoudeeyeh 
Canal had once more opened the road from <Alex- 
andria to the Nile. Wherever we go we feel that 
the city is all too spacious for its 20,000 inhabitants ; 
it is like a deserted palace, where humble citizens dwell 
in the halls and saloons. The gardens are inviting 
and neat. Resheed in Coptic is called Ti Rashit, 
which may be translated the “city of pleasantness.” If 
we pass through the northern gate, and walk on, we 
come upon some fortifications, and among them Fort 
St. Julien. It was here that a French captain of engineers, named Bouchard, was 
employed in throwing up entrenchments, when his workmen discovered a stone, 
which made his name immortal and gave new fame to that of Rosetta. 

Who has not heard of the “Rosetta Stone,” the tablet or key which has upon 


SELLER OF DATE BREAD. 


it the three famous inscriptions which made it possible for European investigators 
to unlock the lips of the Egyptian Sphinx, closed as they had been for ages—that 
is to say, to decipher the hieroglyphic writings of the ancient Egyptians? By the 
fortune of war the inestimably precious block of basalt fell into the hands of the 
English, who have worthily enshrined it in the British Museum. We must defer 
telling the reader how it was possible, by the aid of the Egyptian inscription with 
its Greek translation incised on this slab, to decipher other hieroglyphic records 
until we stand before other monuments, which are preserved at Boolak, near 
Cairo, and which tested and proved the hypotheses of Egyptologists.’ 
apd. 1799. 


* It is a decree of the priests of Egypt assembled (p.c. 198) at a synod at Memphis in honour of Ptolemy V., to 


whom it accords certain honours in consideration of the services rendered to the priesthood by the monarch. It consists of 


three versions: hieroglyphical, demotic or enchorial—used as a kind of written handwriting at the time, and employing the 
popular language, which differed from the extinct hieroglyphic—and Greek. About one-third of the hieroglyphical writing is 


wanting. Some decipherment was first attempted in 1802. Young, in 1818, deciphered the names of Ptolemy and Berenice 


80 EGYPT. 


This famous tablet has lost a corner; how happy would he be that might 
find it ! 

But we have lingered too long on our voyage northwards.. By dawn next 
day we are once more on board, and sailing back to Desook by the way by which 
we came. There we take the train, and reach our destination in time for the 
opening of the festival. 

Tantah is an Egyptian city of moderate size, and the residence of the Mudeer 
of a considerable province. Opposite the railway station there stands a row of 
handsome houses, half-European in style; the viceregal barrack-like castle is as 
hideous as it is huge, and the white dust of the broad roadways is scorching under 
the mid-day sun. We will take one of the narrow, cool, and shady streets which 
lead to the heart of the city, and which in the true Arab fashion shows only bare 
walls on the side facing the street. Here and there a sort of oriel, or turret, 
closely latticed, projects from the grey wall, or the well-wrought masonry of a 
gate or archway pleases the eye. But all this we shall meet with again in Cairo, 
and infinitely more beautiful. 

We will enter the chief bazaar, the great Sook of the city ; it is difficult to 
make our way through the crowd of men that are constantly streaming through 
it, and still more difficult to fight for and keep a place by the small, closely-packed 
stalls of the merchants; but there is nothing to be procured here that cannot be 
found in far greater choice in the city of the Pyramids.’ 

We must simply allow ourselves to be carried onwards by the dense stream of 
people, and presently we find ourselves standing in front of the tall and well-kept 
new mosque. Its debased type of architecture affords small pleasure to the eye, 
which turns with more satisfaction to the medreseh, or school-house belonging to 
the mosque, which is an elegant structure of a more ancient date. 

Opposite to it glitter the bright panes and gaudy bottles of the apothecary’s 
shop, an indispensable institution in a town which has, too, a large hospital of 
its own. The apothecary himself we find to be a well-informed German, who has 
been a great traveller, and has done worthy service in his own country in natural 
history. From his shop—which for brilliant neatness and cleanliness might serve 
as a pattern for many an one in Europe—we can gaze comfortably at the motley 
files of men as they crowd into the mosque, and next day, Friday morning, may 
look on at the solemn procession which opens the festival. The destination of this 
procession is the tomb of the Mohammedan saint, Seyyid ei Bedawee. 

No resort of pilgrims in all Egypt is more attractive than this. Festivals are 
held there three times a year. In January, and again at the spring and autumn 
equinoxes, thousands of people assemble at Tantah, and at the time of the great 
Molid, or birthday festival of the saint, the pilgrims often number half a million. 

It is not wholly in the interest of religion, it is true, that these masses converge 
on Tantah, but with very secular purpose as well. Supply and demand are active 
at the festival, and Moslems are allowed to trade even on the pilgrimage to Mecca. 


in hieroglyphics, and his discovery of the phonetic principle—namely, that the hieroglyphs were used for sounds—led to 


the discovery of the whole by Champollion in 1822. 


1 Cairo. 


MARKET AT TANTAH. 


ug! 


82 EGYPT, 


Many horses and camels, as well as horned cattle, sheep, and goats are driven 
hither for sale; the trade in all the produce of the soil must be very considerable, 
and booths are erected in the city, where, as in our annual fairs, goods of every 
description are offered to the buyer. Often the handicraftsman may be seen hard at 
work behind his counter, This is to show that all his wares are to be sold at first 
hand, and that the maker himself is responsible for the excellence of his own work- 
manship. The cooks’ shops are closely surrounded, but the humbler customers treat 
themselves only to a cake of date-bread; this consists of dates with the kernels 
removed and then pressed together, and it is even more attractive to the flies than 
to the customers ; the seller has to wage incessant war against them. 

As the sparrow-hawks follow birds of passage so do thieves follow at the heels 
of those who come to the festival, and no one who has a friend to advise him goes 
out on the broad square, where the horse market is held, without having been 
warned against them. 

Here every form of amusement known to the Oriental is offered to the pilgrim. 
But the delights of the Molid are by no means confined to this spot; on the 
contrary, every coffee-house in the city is brilliantly illuminated, and we can hear 
from afar the shrill Arab music, the clatter of castanets, and the shouts of “Ya 
salam” (bravo) of the audience within. All the painted and overdressed votaries of 
Venus, all the singers and dancers of the Nile valley have met together there. At 
Tantah we met and recognised a Ghaziyeh, or dancer, whom we had admired before 
this in the house of the German consular agent at Luxor, in remote Upper Egypt. The 
famous Almehs’ or singers of Cairo, however, keep away from the annual gathering 
at Tantah ; but among those who come to it we see women of rare and peculiar 
beauty. They constitute a distinct race, distinguished from the Egyptians proper 
by many peculiarities, and particularly by the shape of the face, and they have 
among themselves lady-presidents, one of whom we heard called—perhaps in jest 
only—* Makhbooba-Bey.”* We shall meet with them again in Upper Egypt, and 
have an opportunity of studying their costume, their rich jewels, and their treat- 
ment of their art when free from these crowded and noisy surroundings. Wherever 
we turn our eyes during the festival at Tantah we see these women, and with 
them male dancers, dressed as women, besides jugglers and conjurers of every 
degree, who usually ply their art best in the open air, in the midst of a circle of 
spectators squatting on the ground. The naiveté and good-humour of the Oriental 
is very conspicuous under these circumstances. 

It is a thing to see how kindly the elders make way for the children, and 
seat them in the front rows; how the tall make way for the short, and the men 
for the women, that they all may see; what horror is expressed by every face 
when the juggler lifts his dagger, and how reverently the whole circle bow if Jack 
Pudding names Allah, the Most High! Never have we heard heartier laughter 
than from the auditors of the unmentionable jokes of Karagyooz and Ali Kaka ; 


1 The Almehs appear at the earliest Pharaonic times, and particularly flourished under the XVIIIth and XIXth 
dynasties, B.c. 1500—1200. They danced naked with a girdle only round the loims, and appeared at entertainments, 
Some are represented on the paintings of tombs in the British Museum. 


* Literally, “my Lord Mistress.” 


THROUGH THE DELTA. 83 
but, it must be confessed, we were never more sincerely grieved by seeing women 
and children among an audience. 

A little-known poet named Freudenberg has described the scene of turmoil at 
this festival better than we can do in dry prose. The gifted but restless Wilibald 
Winkler, who spent a long time in Egypt, includes him among the “whimsical 
dreamers” of whom he counts himself one, and says he was “a little old gentle- 
man hardly four feet high.” But he was certainly a poet who wrote the verses of 
which the following is a modest translation. The English language, however, does 
not lend itself to any worthy rendering of the brilliant, sportive jingle of the 
German syllables with the happy intermixture of Arabic words :— 


Loud is the sound of ballad-singers shouting He stops to watch the swings rocking and swaying; 


While, with her wanton grace and paces pretty, The youngsters laugh as they are tossed and whirled : 


Like some alluring, sly coquette It must be nice to ride up there 


A dancer with her castagnette In rhythm to that gay Nubian air! 


Displays herself in subtle pantomime ; To rush through space and feel the breezes blow, 
And si 


Of Sa 


rs chant an old Arabian ditty To mount and soar and float above the world! 


ladin and of his time. But—para yok*’—he stays below. 


Seesaws are creaking, all their bells are tinkling, He joins the circle crowded round a wizard 


Gaudily-painted vans and coaches clatter ; Who wakes the dead and conjures up the devil, 


The Berberee! guitars are humming, Who blows a horn—and at the sound 

The Darabookkahs? round us drumming ; His empty jug at once is found 
A thousand people push and shove and hustle, Full—filled by Afreets;® nuts to serpents turn 
A thousand voices buzz and roar and chatter, Within their pockets—puzzled still they revel; 

The fair is at the height of bustle. Abundant bakhsheesh he can earn. 
Lounging at leisure through this giddy rabble— A short way on he finds the Alateeyeh7— 


This rout—this Oriental Paradise 


Aman, with hands behind his back, 


There sound the feeble, fiddling Hemengheh,’ 


The dulcimer and tambourine, 
Rich—passing rich—though gold he lack— Zither and songs of Bedaween ; 


A little man comes quietly to ponder, The weird old airs cradle and soothe his care 


With gentle smiles and kindly thoughtful eyes, With sweet fantastic dreams, half sad, half gay; 


Upon the happy turmoil yonder. A mystic language charms his ear. 


Before a cook’s stall 


sresently he pauses ; There, ’mid the tents where garish lamps are flaring 


Zemith and Baklawah and dainty cakes Dervishes spin in wild delirious dances, 


And Kuslokum and almond tarts 
And Shekerlee* of many sorts, 


Bardoo sherbet* and syrups violet-scented 


Tempt him—alas! his empty purse he shakes; 


He feasts his eyes—and is contented. 


Eestatically drunk as it were. 
Coffee, sherbet, and pipes? out there 


Mingle their scent with musk and ambergris; 


Fumes of Hasheesh inspire voluptuous fancies— 


Oh! for a sou to purchase bliss! 


' A mandoline. 


* A drum chiefly used in harems. 
like a bottle. 


It is of wood, often inlaid with tortoise-shell and mot 
The skin is stretched over the broad side; the neck is open. 


* Favourite sweetmeats among the Orientals, and especially the Egyptians. 


* There are various kinds of sherbet; a favourite variety is a syrupy eaw suerée flavoured with crushed violets. 
aithen 


* Para yok—not a sou. 


7 Dancers and singers 


* A kind of violin with a very small body of pierced cocoa-nut. 


, often wearing women’s apparel 


° The Arab bogey or kobold. 


fish, which is stretched over the cavity of the nut like a drum-skin. 


® Sheesheh. Persian glass. 


These pipes have a glass bowl and a long flexible tube. 


1er-of-pearl, and shaped 


The bridge rests on a piece of the skin of a 


84 EGYPT. 


His humour merry and his mind diverted, Satiate at last, and silent, homewards turning 
He glides about among the scenes that please him ; As from a feast of gods away he went. 
The little man can see and hear. Quoth he :— Have I not had my share ? 
His heart is soon beguiled of care, I poor!there is no better fare 
In age still fresh and young, and will not listen Than mirth with liberty—to those who know it.” 
To petty cares like gnats that buzz and tease him: Who was this wight, contented with content? 
In rosy hues the pictures glisten. A little fond old man—a poet. 


Tt is clear that a pilgrimage to Tantah is not merely an affair of religion ; but 
no doubt there are many among the pilgrims who are full of sincere devotion, and 
have but one aim in view, namely, to pray by the coffin of the great saint Seyyid 
Ahmed el Bedawee. The history of this miracle-worker is highly characteristic, and 
shall be given here; for it is well calculated to show to what sort of men Islam 
attributes the style and title of sanctity. 

He is said to have been born about a.p. 1200 at Fez, whither his family, who 
were of course direct descendants of the Prophet, had fled from Ivak. In his seventh 
year he accompanied them on a pilgrimage to Mecca, and there he spent a stormy 
youth, showing more taste and aptitude for wild pranks than for serious study, so 
that he earned the title of “scatter-brains” among his companions. When he was 
eight-and-twenty his father died, and soon after he experienced an extraordinary 
change. It was under his brother’s roof—for he himself scorned to set up a house 
and family—that the afflatus of divine love, the Walah of the Moslem, came upen 
him, and converted the licentious and reckless youth into a saint. His hasty tongue 
seemed to be spell-bound, he expressed himself only by signs, he mortified his body by 
forty-day fasts, and would keep his eyes, that glowed like live coals, fixed heaven- 
ward all day long. At the same time he heard inward voices, and strange visions 
visited him at night; his fellow-citizens began to venerate him as a man favoured by 
Heaven, and the fame of his sanctity preceded him when, urged by a mystical longing, 
he made a journey on foot, first to Irak and then to Egypt, where he was received 
with distinction by the reigning Sultan Beybars. He settled finally in Tantah, and 
performed unheard-of feats of mortification and asceticism. He would never put on a 
new garment until the old one had rotted upon him ; his fixed contemplation of the 
heavens became more and more prolonged ; and miracles of every kind, even to the 
resuscitation of the dead, were reported of him. He gave mysterious counsel and 
support to his followers in all their need, his contemners were persistently punished 
by suffering and death. He is said to have died at the venerable age of ninety-six ; 
but the solemn festival of his Molid, or birthday, was not instituted until much 
later, and grew more and more popular, attracting a constantly increasing number 
of votaries. The exact description which we possess of his person is particularly 
attractive, because it represents him as a thorough Arab, and as a man whose charac- 
teristic peculiarities could not fail to exercise a powerful influence on others. Nothing 
was to be seen of his head, we are told, but two large, sunken black eyes and a pro- 
minent aquiline nose, with the contiguous portion of the cheeks and the lower portion 
of the forehead—of a light brown hue—and the general outline of a massive coun- 
tenance. All else was concealed by two face-cloths, Zitdm, such as the Bedaween 
wear to the present day. From the period when he began his ascetic exercises he 


=~ 5 ~e . y 2 6 © one en 


THROUGH THE DELTA. 85 


never removed these cloths, and his disciple Abd’el Medjeed, when at his earnest 
entreaty he lifted only the upper wrapper, is said to have been so impressed and 
overcome by that sacred countenance that he shortly afterwards gave up the ghost. 
Many scars, graced his countenance, and on each side of his nose he had a mole, 
which is considered a sign of great beauty by the Orientals. This remarkable head 
crowned a tall and slender form; his arms were long—the unfailing mark of a true 
Arab—and his legs strong. 

As the festival of Tantah is wont to give rise to many frays and commotions, 
the Government at Cairo has frequently decreed that it should cease to be held; 
but no Mufti has ever dared to carry this edict into effect, for religious prejudice 
clings too tenaciously to the saint who was so ready to aid the faithful, and whose 
vengeance fell so heavily on those who attacked his honour. Even at the present 
day he is believed to work abundance of miracles, and to exercise a decisive 
influence even in trivial family affairs—nay, especially in these, for the Arabs 
attribute the function of direct intercession with the Almighty to the Prophet alone, 
and not to their saints, who, on the contrary, are permitted only to draw, as it 
were, on the store of miraculous power bestowed upon him, and to distribute favours 
in greater or less measure to the votaries who visit their tombs. 

How sacred is the mausoleum where, behind a finely-wrought bronze railing, 
his sarcophagus, covered with red velvet, stands on one side and that of his son 
Farag on the other! The most fervent devotion is expressed in the faces of the 
pious devotees who pray here, and they quit the mausoleum filled with hope and 
contentment ; for not only does the great Ahmed hear their prayers, but Kutb also, 
the miraculous being who rules over the Walees, or saints, and who is especially 
present here. Excepting the dome of the Kaaba at Mecca, there are few spots 
where the devotee is more fain to linger than by the mausoleum of the holy Seyyid 
Ahmed el Bedawee at Tantah. 

We may omit any closer inspection of this modern mosque itself. The splendid 
mosques of Cairo, of a better period, will be of much greater interest; but in none 
of those have I ever seen so many or such zealous worshippers as here on one 
occasion, when, for the first and last time in the course of my many visits to the 
Nile valley, the fanaticism of the Moslems turned upon me with such fury that 
nothing but my own deliberate coolness and the intervention of the Sheikh of the 
Mosque saved me from serious injury. 

The festival at Tantah resembles in many respects the feast solemnly held at 
Bubastis, and described by Herodotus ;* and it may perhaps be regarded as its 


Tv 


outcome and successor. 

Before we quit this sacred spot to wend our way across the eastern Delta— 
known to us by name from early infancy as the land of Goshen—we will visit the 
tents outside the city, where thousands of pilgrims are encamped, and where, on the 
shores of the canal that waters Tantah, we may witness many scenes that remind us 
of the encampments of the tribes of Jacob, whose fertile territory we are now about 
to traverse. 


1 Lib. IL ¢. 59, celebrated, according to the tablet of Canopus, on the first of the Egyptian month Payni and four 
following days, in the ninth year of Ptolemy Euergetes I, Bc. 238. 


Wy 


FATIMA, 


HO ever saw the great meeting-place 
of the ten thousand pilgrims outside 
the gate of Tantah without being 
reminded of the camp of the wander- 
ing Israelites? The most beautiful 
illustrations of the Bible narrative 
were before my eyes, tangible and 
in the flesh, as I gazed at the groups 
of figures — bearded men, with 
sharply-cut features and glittering 
black eyes; wearing turbans, but 
clothed otherwise in the simple 
shirt-shaped coat of Eastern nations; barefoot, and 
yet not without dignity and distinction in the 
freedom and breadth of their motions. Here they 
were meditatively resting, there tending their cattle, 
or engaged in vehement discussion; there again 
veiled women were helping their camels to water. 

We are on the borders of the land of Goshen, 
and the Biblical pictures which here offer themselves 
in living actuality to our sight prompt us to visit the 
venerated spot which Pharaoh assigned to his steward 
Joseph as a dwelling-place for his brethren and their 
families and herds. 

In the first instance, we can once more avail 
ourselves of the railway. We change carriages first 
at Benha-l’Asal, and again at Zakazeek. We are now 
on the very soil of Goshen proper, the eastern pro- 
vince of the Delta. As far as it is possible to fix 


its ancient limitations, it exhibits the form of a cornucopia, bounded towards the 
east, at the widest end or opening of the cornucopia, by the water-way that divides 


88 EGYPT. 


Africa from Asia. The fresh-water canal which already existed at the time of the 
sojourn of the Jews in Egypt, and which was reopened by M. de Lesseps, washes 
its southern frontier; the Lake of Menzaleh lies to the north of it, and to the west 
the Tanitic arm of the Nile, which has now dwindled to a narrow water-course. 

Many and great as are the changes that the centuries have wrought in Goshen, 
they have not been able to efface the characteristic peculiarities of the landscape. 
Wherever the Nile-flood reaches 
the fields, even on the shores 
of the fresh-water canal, the fer- 
tilised soil yields a rich harvest 
to the husbandman ; but on the 
higher levels, and towards the east 
generally, spread wide parched 
flats, on which only a variety of 
desert weeds can find sustenance, 
and where numerous nomad tribes 
pitch their tents and pasture their 
cattle. It is towards the north, 
in the vicinity of the lake of 
Menzaleh, that the nature of the land seems to have undergone the most con- 
spicuous change. Where formerly the Semitic herdsman could pasture innumerable 
cattle on the rich marshy land lie pools of bitter, brackish water; and where 
a peaceful community laboured and accumulated wealth in handsome towns a few 
poor fishermen now dry their nets in front of their miserable huts. 

We now invite you, Reader, to accompany us in an excursion to the lakes, 
through the pasture-land and desert of the province of 
Goshen. 

We will start from Zakazeek, the ancient Bubastis. 
There is a great deal worth seeing in the station of 
this flourishing town, which is the central dépot for the 
vast trade in cotton from the eastern province, and the 
chief functionaries of that part of Egypt also reside here. 
The waiting-rooms have the same look of western neat- 
ness as the counting-houses of the European merchants in 
the city itself; but many a traveller has been tempted to 
neglect the excellent breakfast that was served him, 
watching the strange and motley groups of travellers that A VEILED BEAUTY, 
gather on the platform. Particularly there are pilgrims 
to Mecca from every part of the Hast, and they crowd the ticket-office and the 
platform, especially during the weeks preceding the month of pilgrimage, attracting 
the attention of the traveller from the West. Every Mussulman ought to accomplish 
a pilgrimage to the Holy Places at least once in his lifetime, and the fulfilment 
of this injunction is now-a-days very essentially facilitated by railways and steam- 
boats. Moslems from the three quarters of the earth meet here. The most stately- 
looking are the tall Kabyles from Algeria, and the Moors of Tunis in their white 


TENT OF BEDAWEEN ARAB: 


GOSHEN. 89 


burnous; the most comfortable seem to be the Tartars, who carry their samovar, 
or Russian tea-urn, with them, and never cast off their high over-shoes and fur 
caps, even on the parched sand of the desert and under the African sun. Yonder 


iG 
i 


i! 
ie 
: i 


TUNISIAN PILGRIM. 


you may see three wives of a Turk, squatting on the ground in charge of an old 
nurse or duenna; their lord and master jealously paces up and down in front of 
his little harem, and casts an evil glance on you; he is suspicious lest your eyes 
may meet those of his youngest wife, for the light Turkish veil leaves the eyes 
uncovered. A pretty and elegant European lady gazes inquisitively at her less 
independent sisters; and what would they say if they could know that this young 


12 


90 EGYPT. 


and unveiled girl has travelled all the way from the distant land of the Nemsawee 
(Germans) quite unaccompanied, and is going, relying only on herself, as far as 
India, to bring up boys in the knowledge of many sciences? 

There is a perpetual stir and bustle in the station at Zakazeek; but there 
was a time when this place was not a mere resting-place for passers-by, but was 


BLACK GRANITE STATUE OF SEKHET, MUMMY OF A CAT. 


itself the goal of many travellers, and attracted more pilgrims than any city in 
Egypt. 

Out yonder, within a few minutes’ walk of the station, rises a tall and narrow 
heap of ruins on the site of the ancient Bubastis. The populous city has dis- 
appeared from the face of the earth, and the words of the prophet Ezekiel have 
been fulfilled there—her young men were to perish by the sword, and her women 
to be led away into captivity.’ The city must have been destroyed by fire, as we 


1 Ezekiel xxx. 17, Pi-beseth is Bubastis. 


Se 


GOSHEN. 91 


learn from fragments of melted glass and blackened stones, and with it the temple 
which stood in its midst—that famous temple of which Herodotus says that there 
were many larger and more splendid, but not one that he had seen that would 
compare with it in beauty of 
proportion. 

The Arabs call the ruins of 
Bubastis Zed Basta. Here, about 
seven years since, I found the 
fragments of two statues of the 
cat-headed goddess who was wor- 
shipped here, sometimes under 
the name of Bast, sometimes as 
Sekhet.’ She was the goddess of 
love and passion; the daughter 
of the Sun-god, who with her 
fiery teeth warred against all her 
father’s enemies, and who in the 
nether world punished the guilty. 
But she was also Aphrodite, and 
with a sceptre of flowers in her 
hand presided over the joys of 
love and the pleasures of feasting 
and intoxication. She is repre- 
sented sometimes with the head 
of the furious lion, and some- 
times with that of the caressing 
cat, corresponding to her two 
natures. Vast crowds of men 
—Herodotus reckons them at 
700,000—collected to keep her 
festivals. Men and women alike 
found place in the flat boats 
that conveyed them, and _ the 
latter outdid the men in audacity. 
Singing, flute-playing, clatter, and 
the clapping of hands never 
ceased throughout the voyage. 
The stay-at-home folks in the 
towns by which they passed were 
greeted with coarse jests, and in Bubastis itself vast offerings of beasts were sacrificed, 
and more wine was drunk than elsewhere in the whole course of the year. 


THE FATHER OF THE CATS, WITH THE CARAVAN OF PILGRIMS. 


1 Her name is generally Sekhet. She was the wife of Ptah or Vulcan, and as such called Merienptah, “beloved of 
Nefer Tum. Other names she also bore, as Urheq, and Menhi or Menhit. Statues of her were made 


Ptah.” Their son wa 
by Amenophis ITI. about s.c. 1400, of dark granite. Mystically she was male and female. 
® Her cat-headed type is much later, and appears about our era in bronze figures. 


EGYPT. 


The historian to whom we owe the description of this festival tells us that 
dead cats were embalmed and then sent to be buried at Bubastis. No trace 
remains of the tombs of the cats; but, on the other hand, the memory of the 
ancient sanctity of this animal has not altogether died out. It is not very long 
since, in Cairo, a considerable sum was bequeathed by will for the maintenance of 
starving cats. Until within a few decades each caravan of pilgrims to Mecca was 
accompanied by an old woman who carried with her a number of cats, and was 
known as “the mother of the cats;” and to this day a man with cats travels with 
each caravan. This singular custom is pro- 
bably a relic or memorial of the cats which 
used to be brought to Bubastis. 

Tt can hardly be a mere coincidence 
that makes 700,000 the number of the 
Egyptians that had to make the pilgrimage 
to Bubastis, while 70,000 Moslems must 
every year visit Mecca. If any are wanting 
to make up the number of believers Heaven 
supplies the deficiency by sending angels. 

Under the lion-headed form the monu- 
ments sometimes mention this goddess as 
Astarte,, and say that the people of Asia 
were under her special protection. There 
can be no doubt that there were many men 
of Semitic race among the citizens of 
Bubastis. The whole eastern portion of the 
Delta was peopled by them, and there were 
few places in it that, at the time of the 
Pharaohs, had not a Semitic as well as an 
Egyptian name. 

The capital city, from which the pro- 
vince assigned to Joseph’s tribe took its name of Gosen (Goshen), bore the name of 
Pa or Pha-Aos (Phacousa). The Hebrews called it and the province Goshen, and to 
this day there are mounds of ruins near the Arab village of Fakoos, among which 
I myself found the name of Pharaoh the Oppressor. 

Fakoos may now be reached by railway. Formerly I visited it on horseback, 
and rode all about its pasture-land and the desert-strip of the Delta. I found 
hospitable entertainment in the houses of the Egyptian officials, of the Greek cotton- 
merchants, and of the well-to-do village magistrates; and I shall never forget the 
night I spent in the neighbourhood of Fakoos, at the house of a young English- 
man who had erected a steam-engine for working machines to pick and clean cotton 
in the factory of a certain Bey, and who was now employed in working and 
repairing it. My kind host had been for two years the manager of his Turkish 
master’s plantation and factory, and his charming young wife had joined him in 


COTTON PLANT. 


* At Edfoo, lion-headed, wearing a solar disk. 


THROUGH THE DESERT. 


A RIDE 


94 EGYPT. 


Egypt. Both had given up present comfort and pleasure to lay the foundation of 
an independent existence at home in the future. A fixed sum—stated in figures— 
was the goal that they looked forward to, and as soon as the sum should be made 
up both were ready to leave the luxuriant country that lay around them as far as 
the eye could reach—but not before. To attain this end both husband and wife 
submitted to every privation: not even the smallest ormament decorated their 
meagrely-furnished rooms, not a drop of wine had ever 
sparkled in the few glasses they owned; the temptations 
of an expedition to Cairo or to Alexandria were steadily 
resisted, and nothing bound them to the world but an 
English newspaper and a little heap of letters, read 
almost to pieces, and lying on the work-table of the 
gentle creature whom the Arab women of the village 
avoided as an outcast, because she showed her pretty 
face unveiled among the men. “For two years,’ she said, 
“JT have not spoken a word to any EHuropean woman, 
and I cannot understand the Arab women; and _ besides 
they scorn me.” 

I had a few bottles of red wine and much news for 
them of the outer world, and so it fell out that we three 
spent half the night in chat, and that they parted from 
me as from a brother when my tall bay horse was 
brought round, and I mounted for my ride to San—the 
ancient Zoan—the city where Moses performed his 
miracles before Pharaoh. 

The first part of the way led me across a_ well- 
tilled pasture and corn land, intersected by canals, and 
differing but little from the country I had passed through 
} on the way from Rosetta. I found a few peasants’ houses, 

EGYPTIAN WxEAT. (Triticum Sativwn.) with orchards in full bloom and many an European 
tree and shrub interspersed among the -palms, and the 

Egyptian wheat with its heavy ears reminded me of home. At last I came 
to an end of the fields and was on the dry soil of the desert, that showed 
patches here and there of a salt incrustation looking like a film of ice. Ere 
long the desert spread round me on every side, and it was here that for the 
first time I felt the magical charm of its solitude, and, with it, that mysterious 
excitement which takes possession of the traveller's fancy and exhibits its 
results so conspicuously in the vivid imaginativeness of the Arabs them- 
selves, who people the lifeless waste with a legion of marvellous and fantastic 
beings. Here dwells the whole world of spirits; here riot the Djins and the 
Ghouls that rush through the air riding on weird beasts, on locusts, lizards, and 
spiders. And even the devout may believe in them, for the Prophet himself 
respected them, and many confessed Islam; but others are evil spirits and 
oppress men, and the devil is their ruler. The Djins dare even mount up to 
Heaven to spy its secrets, but the angels keep watch, and the falling stars that 


GOSHEN. 95 


the wanderer in the desert sees at night are fiery arrows which fall upon these 
audacious spirits. 

As you wander through the silent waste at the hours of prayer a clear long- 
drawn cry may greet your ear. Your eye can see no living thing, but the voice 
grows more and more distinct. A secret shudder runs through your veins, you 
spring up a slope which conceals the horizon, and now you perceive a lonely herds- 
man, surrounded by his sheep, who shouts out his prayer as loud as ever he can 


HERDSMAN IN THE DESERT. 


to empty space. This is in order that the spirits may hear the solitary shepherd 
and be witness for him at the day of judgment. Is there on earth a more ghostly 
apparition than an Arab traveller mounted high on his camel, wrapped in light- 
coloured garments, and escorted by vultures who follow him on his silent way in 
the twilight along the sandy track? When the moon is up and its beams 
are reflected in the micaceous fragments on the ridges, the ghouls are transformed 
into dancing lights, and the Djins appear in human form, floating above the ground 
or pacing silently along, or riding on black horses with their faces black too, and 
claws like the coulter of a sickle. 

These are the terrors of the desert, which is nevertheless full of an indescribable 
charm which I hope to communicate to the reader in another place. This present 
ride through the desert is too short. 

Nor was it wholly deserted, for I came upon three different encampments of 
Bedaween with a few camels and small herds of lean kine. By sunrise I had reached 


TANIS. 


RUINS OF 


AND PHARAOH. 


JOSEPH 


i) 


| il : i ll i i i i i 1 


GOSHEN. 97 


the strip of fertile land that borders the old Tanitic arm of the Nile. This stream 
in the time of the Pharaohs watered the most important part of Goshen far more 
liberally than it does at present ; it is now called the Mwizz, or the Canal of San-el- 
Hager. On the farther side of this stream stands the fishing hamlet of San. We 
called out, but no one appeared to ferry us over; then a fisherman, who had joined 
company with me from a neighbouring village, offered himself to carry me across 
the shallow river. In an instant he had thrown off his fellah’s shirt and, stooping 
before me, invited me to mount on his broad back. I hesitated a moment with an 
uncanny feeling of astonishment, for it was as if one of the Hykshos sphinxes of San 
—to which I will shortly introduce the reader—had come to life, and invited me to 
mount. Through how many generations have these knotty vertebrae, these thick lips, 
and these sturdy muscular limbs, which are so different from the graceful and 
slender native Egyptian type, been transmitted? And not I alone, but the celebrated 
archeologist, Mariette Pacha, met with hundreds of men of the same stamp when, 
by command of the Khedive, he cleared so many of the monuments of Egypt from 
the sand, and among them those of Tanis, restoring them to the light of day and 
the scientific study of antiquarians. 

I need not relate how the broad-shouldered descendant of the Hykshos carried 
me through the water, how my servant followed him, and the horse-boy, with the 
saddle on his head, leading the horse by the bridle; how I reached the opposite 
shore, half dry, half dripping, and soon after sundown found shelter under the 
hospitable roof of the worthy Ahmed Bakhsheesh. The pottage or soup, the fowl 
stuffed with rice and raisins, and the baked fish which were set before me were as 
much relished by the hungry traveller as the contents of my last bottle of wine were 
by the finely-grown son of the house, who, to gratify his guest, sacrificed some of the 
joys of Paradise, and sinned against the prohibition of the Prophet ever to drink 
wine. I would rather say nothing about that night’s sleep, for I lay on a carpet 
spread on the floor. Only a few feet from me slept my servant and horse-boy, not 
to speak of a number of fisher-lads—and I had forgotten my insect powder! 

I hailed the dawn as a release, took a bath in the icy-cold arm of the Nile, 
and then followed my host’s son to the ruins of Tanis. 

In a few minutes I was standing in their midst. Many of the remains of the 
cities and temples that have come down to us from the period of Egypt’s splendour 
are of greater extent and in better preservation, but no ruins excel these in 
picturesque charm. I wandered from monument to monument, seeking a vantage- 
ground from which to overlook them all, and before beginning to investigate and 
copy the separate inscriptions I ascended a mound of rubbish to the north of the 
ruins, and sat down by the dilapidated tomb of some Sheikh. From this spot, 
whither I often returned, it was possible to overlook the whole extent of the ruins? 
The city must have been a large one, and one of the most splendid residences and 
centres of culture in the kingdom. Only in Thebes are there so many and such large 


‘ The most interesting are of the period of the Hykshos, or Shepherds, of the XVIIth dynasty. Traces of the XIIIth 
dynasty have been found there. Although the capital or seat of government was removed thence under the XXVIth dynasty, it 
was not entirely abandoned, for monuments of the period of the Ptolemies have been found there. It fell under the edict 


of Theodosius, a.p. 381. 


13 


98 EGYPT. 


monuments of hard granite to be found; but of all the magnificent buildings which 
once stood here not even the ground-plan can be recognised. The great sanctuary 
erected by Rameses (Ramses) I]—Pharaoh the Oppressor—has crumbled into dust. 
Granite pillars with palm-leaf capitals, colossi, and no less than twelve broken obelisks 
lie, by the side of less important monuments, in grand confusion on the earth. An 
Arabic legend relates that the Pharaohs were giants, who could move the mightiest 


EXCAVATIONS AT 'TANIS. 


masses of rock with a magic rod; but if it needed giants to erect these monuments, 
it must have required the will and the strength of a God thus to overthrow them. 
It is impossible here to enumerate all the monuments separately ; it must suffice 
to say that among them there are several of the greatest importance and interest. 
Every period of Egyptian history, excepting the very oldest, here finds a represen- 
tative ; and when I, in perfect solitude, looked round on the brick foundations of the 
ruined houses that lay close to me on the slope of the hill, at the overthrown temples 
and palaces just below my feet, and farther off at the fields and pasture-land, 
splendid visions of those by-gone days rose before my inward eye ; the glorious past of 
Tanis—how far removed from the melancholy actuality !—became to me a living presence. 


GOSHEN. 99 


It was at This, in Upper Egypt, the neighbour-city to Abydos, that the power 
of the race of the Pharaohs was developed. Its first offshoots founded Memphis, and 
ere long the culture of the Nile valley had spread from the first cataract to the 
coast of the Mediterranean. Here, at the time of the builders of the Pyramids, a 
stock of Semitic blood, derived from the East, acquired a firm foothold. Some of the 
new-comers pastured their flocks in marshes near the Lake of Menzaleh, while others 
navigated the sea—which the Egyptians hated and dreaded—in swiftly sailing vessels, 
and established trading ports on the 
mouth of the eastern branch of the 
Nile. At the early part of the third 
century before Christ the foreigners 
were beginning to crowd the Egyptian 
inhabitants, and even to overmatch 
them. Their princes—who resided at 
Heracleopolis, in the Sethroitic district, 
close to the eastern boundary and not far 
from Tanis—made themselves masters 
of the throne of the Pharaohs and of 
the Nile valley, until the descendants 
of the deposed Egyptian kings suc- 
ceeded in overpowering: and  exter- 
minating them. By the middle of 
the third millennium before Christ a 
dynasty of native race wielded the 
sceptre at Thebes over the whole of 
united Egypt, including the province 
of the foreigners ; and the Amenemhas 
and Usertesens, whom we shall often 
meet with again, erected proud sanct- 
uaries at Tanis to the Egyptian 
gods, and set up their images, carved 
out of hard stone, in front of their 
throne. They fortified the eastern 
frontier ; but, secure in the sense of their own power, they allowed ingress to 
Semitic immigrants, who approached them submissively and with gifts. The glorious 
XIIth dynasty became extinct in a woman. A weaker race mounted the throne of 
the Pharaohs, and the migration of a Semitic stock on horse and on foot from 
sed southwards on the Egyptians, who, though they attempted to oppose 


HYKSHOS SPHINX. 


Syria pr 
the incursion of these barbarous tribes, were vanquished, and their kings were forced 
to retire to Upper Egypt. Meanwhile, the Asiatics settled in the Eastern Delta, 
added strong fortifications to Pelusium—which was also called Abaris\—and raised 
Tanis to be the capital of their princes; and ere long they mingled with their 


' Called in Egyptian Ha-war, and in Greek Auaris, The Egyptian appellation has been supposed to mean “ the place of 
flight.” Chabas, “ Les Pasteurs en Egypte,” p. 41. 


100 EGYPT. 
fellow Semites, the earlier settlers in the Nile valley. It is an historical law that 
the conquerors of a highly cultivated and civilised country must inevitably adapt 
themselves to its manners and customs, and thus actually by their conquest be 
forced into subjection; and it proved true in this case. We know them by the 
name of MHykshos, that is to say, princes of the Shasu, or Bedaween, and we 
know, from the few monuments 
that remain to us of their work, 
that they assimilated themselves 
to Egyptian life in every par- 
ticular, even in their works of 
art. Like the Pharaohs, they 
had sphinxes made as symboli- 
cal representations of themselves, 
with the bodies of lions and 
heads of men; and the faces 
of these figures were treated as 
portraits of their own features. 
The finest of these Hykshos 
sphinxes had already been trans- 
ported to Cairo when I first 
visited: Tanis, but a few still 
looked up at me out of the 
sand, and they exactly resembled 
the people I had to deal with 
at San and by the Lake of 
Menzaleh. 

The Hykshos remained in 
power more than four hundred 
years. The national hatred of 


the vanquished branded their 
memory, painted them as an ac- 
cursed race of devastators, could 
hardly forgive them for setting 
up their god Ba’al in the place 
of the old gods, and bestowed 
on him the name of Seth,’ or 
Typhon, which was that of the Egyptian divinity who was worshipped first as the 
god of war and of foreign lands, and was subsequently execrated as the impersona- 
tion of all that was gloomy and discordant in nature and in the life of man. Of 
Eyil in the positive sense, as opposed to Good, the Egyptian religion had no know- 
ledge. Their feeling as to evil was that it was but transitory, a passage to future 


RAMSES IL. (From a Statue at Turin.) 


} The exact duration of the Shepherd rule is a difficult point. Two statements are given by Manetho—259 years two 
months, according to one version ; and 511 y 


sording to another, 


* The name of Set, or Seth, is found as early as the VIth dynasty. 


GOSHEN. 101 


salvation ; as dying was merely the process of death, which was in fact the threshold 
of the true and everlasting life. The highest honours were paid to Seth in the cities 
of the Hykshos, and not only kings were called by his name, but also the territory 
known as the Sethroitic district, which lay adjoining the nome, or province, of 
Tanis, and to the east of it. 

During the dominion of the Hykshos in the northern part of the Nile valley, 
the old Egyptian royal house ruled in Upper Egypt. A papyrus informs us that 
a dispute about a spring in the desert gave the Pharaohs an occasion for turning 
against the Asiatic interlopers. A ‘great war of deliverance began, which lasted 
many decades, and ended by the taking of Abaris, Pelusium, after a siege both by 
land and sea.’ We still find traces of the camp of the Hykshos at Tel el Heyr, and 
at Tanis the remains of their kings’ palaces; while in the north-eastern portion of 
the Delta we meet with their living descendants, still bearing the features of their 
ancestry. 

The victorious Egyptians forced the main body of the Hykshos army to retire. 
Part of the vanquished withdrew by land to Asia ; others, taking to the sea, colonised 
the islands of the Carpathian Sea, an ancient name for a part of the Mediterranean 
near Crete; and a third division, who had devoted themselves to peaceful occupa- 
tions, remained behind in the Delta. 

The strength of the Egyptians had gained in temper during the long war against 
the intrusive foreigners. The enterprising spirit of the kings of the XVIIIth dynasty, 
who resided at Thebes, helped them to penetrate Asia as far as the Euphrates, and 
to fill the treasuries of the city of Amon with the spoils of the East. The Hebrews, 
to whom a grateful Pharaoh had abandoned the rich pastures of Goshen, herded 
their flocks unmolested. Every one knows the story of Joseph, the king’s steward, 
and the Biblical narrative of the multiplying and increase of Jacob’s race to a 
nation. Here we are standing on the very scene of the events which preceded 
the Exodus of the Israelites. 

Lames 


-s I. overthrew the last descendants of the conquerors of the Hykshos, 
who had wasted their strength in religious struggles, and usurped their throne. His 
son was Seti I., and his grandson, Rameses II., is the Sesostris of the Greeks and 
the “Pharaoh the Oppressor” of the Israelites; his great-grandson Menephtah is the 
Pharaoh of the Exodus. Many bas-reliefs and portrait-statues make us familiar with 
the physiognomy of most of the members of this family, whose peculiar features 
confirm the idea—which is supported by many other reasons—that they were of Semitic 
origin. The military glory of Sesostris has been immortalised by the narratives 
of classical writers, but all that he and his father achieved as patrons of 
architecture is less well known. We shall have occasion at Thebes to marvel at 
their stupendous creations, and we learn from an inscription in the temple -at 
Karnak that Seti I. had planned a canal to connect the Nile with the Red Sea, and 
at the same time to water the plains of Southern Goshen. The ruins of a city, 
built by Rameses, have been discovered near its ancient bed; and on the same 
spot, Mashoota, we saw, besides a monument of granite, strong walls composed of 


o 


' The war began under Aahmes I., or Amosis. 


GOSHEN. 103 


bricks which were stamped with the name of the Pharaoh of the Exodus. Similar 
bricks are found at Tanis, which the monuments also call the city of Rameses, 
and which is the Raamses of the Bible. Here and at Pithom it is said in the 
Scripture that “the Egyptians made the children of Israel to serve with rigour: 
and they made their lives bitter with hard bondage, in morter, and in brick, and in 
all manner of service in the field” (Exodus i. 13, 14). In Exodus v. 7 we find that 
the taskmasters and their officers were commanded, “Ye shall no more give the 
people straw to make brick, as heretofore: let them go and gather straw for them- 
selves.” 

Can there be any better illustration of this speech than the brick mixed with 
straw brought from Goshen and preserved in the Berlin museum, and of which we 
give a drawing? It bears the name of Rameses, who frequently resided at Tanis, 
started thence on his warlike expeditions, and brought one of his greatest wars 
to a happy termination by signing a treaty there with his chief antagonists, the 
princes of the Kheta. 

He was wont to turn his arms against Semitic nations; what wonder then 
that he severely oppressed the kindred race who were subject to him, and strove 
to burden them with hard labour? Venerable papyrus-rolls contain the accounts of 
the taskmasters of the Hebrews as rendered to the overseers, and show us how 
unremittingly the officers watched the labourers, and endeavoured to promote their 
material comfort. The officials praise the neighbourhood of Tanis and the fertility 
of Goshen in words of rapture. Paintings in the tombs at Thebes show us the 
labourers at their work ; but the people whom we here see drawing water, hewing 
up the earth, kneading the clay, filling it into wooden moulds, and piling the bricks 
in layers while the taskmaster watches them, stick in hand—are not Jews, but 
Asiatics of some other race who had been carried captive into Egypt at an earlier 
date under Thothmes III., and there forced, as the inscription tells us, “to make 
bricks for the new buildings of the provision houses, or granaries, of the city of 
Amon.” By the side of the second picture it is written, “Prisoners, brought by 
his Majesty to labour at the temple of his father Amon.” <A third inscription cele- 
brates the vigilance of the taskmasters, and the gods are entreated to reward 
the king for remembering them with wine and good food. An overseer calls out 
to the people, “I carry the stick, be ye not idle.” 

It is impossible to study these pictures without thinking of the oppression 
of the Jews. Perhaps the very wall on which I sat so many hours was the work of 
their hands. Perhaps it was on the very stream that I crossed yesterday that the 
heart-sick mother of Moses floated the rush basket containing her child; and it is 
expressly testified by the Psalmist (Psalm Ixxviii. 12, 43) that the Pharaoh before whom 
Moses wrought his miracles lived at Tanis. It was hence that the cry went 
out for the flight of the enslaved multitude, and hence that Menephtah set forth 
with his chariots and horses to overtake the fugitives. We are able to present the 
reader with a portrait of the vacillating king, who in his terror gave the promise 
which he retracted as soon as he thought himself secure. Another portrait of the 
same prince, with even a weaker countenance, is preserved in the museum at Boolak. 
All the general human interest in Tanis ends with the Hebrew exodus; but the 


104 EGYPT. 


populous city continued to be of the greatest importance to Egypt, and in the 
eighth century before Christ a new, though not very illustrious, race of kings came 
thence to govern Egypt. 

We will now quit our seat on the sheikh’s 
tomb and wander, pencil in hand, from one mound 
of ruins to another. Most of the inscriptions are 
addressed to the gods Amon, Ptah, or Ra Harmachis. 
Many monuments attract our attention, but for the 

2 most part they lie half buried in the sand, and over- 

BEIGE NAR GEE) SASOUON Oh TTI ie seers are appointed who are forbidden under heavy 
| penalties to allow strangers to clear them. The 
happy accident is too fresh in the memory of the inspector of excavations by which 

: the illustrious Lepsius and his companions discovered a monument of immense im- 


FORCED LABOURERS OF THE SEMITIC RACE STAMPING OUT BRICKS, (Tomb of Rekhmavra at Thebes.) 


portance which he himself had overlooked. This stone has become famous under 
the name of the tablet of Tanis, or the decree of Canopus. We shall find it in 


FORCED LABOURERS OF THE SEMITIC RACE MAKING AND CARRYING BRICKS. (Tomb of Rekhmara at Thebes.) 


the museum of Boolak, where it was deposited. Only cursory mention can in this 
place be made of a great tablet of granite, which still lies among the ruins, and 
which is dated by the years of an era beginning from the epoch of the Hykshos, 


ABA 2 BSA IR Nn 


GOSHEN. 105 


which occurs nowhere else ;* of the colossus of Rameses II. in porphyry, on which 
there are traces of painting in various colours; of the shrine of granulated alabaster- 
like marble; of the female torso with the characteristics of an Amazon, the left 
breast being larger than the right; of the black statues of Sekhet with the lion- 
head, the sombre sitting figures of basalt, and the almost purple ones of red granite. 

On the morning after my second sleepless night at Tanis all was bustle in 
front of my host’s house. Numbers of fishermen had come in in their large boats, 
on which the nets were hung in 
orderly array, and offered the fish 
they had caught in the lake, packed 
in large and small baskets, for sale 
to the highest bidder. This auction, 
which takes place every Tuesday 
and Friday, was in every way a 
singular picture, and I shall never 
forget it. 

Nothing in Egypt is more purely 
African than the finny inhabitants of 
its waters. The Nile produces the 
same fish as the Senegal, and with 
their flat heads, minute eyes, and 
long cirri, or beards, they look as if 
they belong to some earlier epoch of 
creation than the graceful natives 
of our own fresh waters. By far 
the most common is the Shad, called 
Karmoot, and to the same family 
belongs the celebrated Electrical 
Shad, the Ra’ad, marked with black 
spots. Some of the species present an 
almost monstrous appearance, with 
their long thread-like fins on the 
back and belly. One of the drollest is the Fahaka, or Tetrodon, which, when blown 
out, looks like a pumpkin with a tail, twinkling eyes, and a little laughing mouth 
with four shining white teeth. The Kanooma fish, with its long snout bent down- 
wards, is the Oxyrrhynchus of the ancient Egyptians. Perhaps the most interesting 
is the Finny Pike, Polypterus, which is a survivor of the primeval order of the 
Ganoid fishes; I do not remember ever having seen it, yet I believe it was the 
original of a hieroglyphic sign. In the fried or boiled stage of their existence I 
decidedly prefer our Northern fish to the Egyptian varieties, which are for the most 
part flabby and unsavoury. I have tasted many kinds, and can pay the tribute of 
praise to none but that known as the Bayad, of which very large specimens are caught, 
and which has flesh of a brilliant whiteness. 


ee a a 


MENEPHTAH, 


' A translation of this tablet, which mentions an interval of 400 years from the Shepherds to Rameses II, is given in the 
“ Records of the Past,” Vol. IV. p. 33. 
s i 


14 


/~ 


EGYPT. 


The auction was a vehement business, and the dealers were not less calcu- 
lated to attract the attention of an European than their wares. ‘The passionate 
emotions, of which education and custom require us to control the exhibition, are 
here shown without concealment or check, and perhaps with the fullest unreserve 
when a question of “Mine” and “Thine” is to be settled. How the fishermen 
shout in wild confusion ! how their black eyes flash and glare! how they snatch back 


MALAPTERURUS ELECTRICUS—ELECTRICAL SHAD, (Ra’ad.) 


their baskets in a rage! and how often the worthy Ahmed has to scream at them, 
“Wait a minute, ’m coming ;” and to use his palm-rod! At the same time many 
a fine fish finds its way into the basket that stands behind him, for he is clever 
enough to temper his severity with kindliness, and whenever a hand-to-hand fight 
seems inevitable, he contrives to pacify the adversaries with conciliatory words and 
soothing gestures. What a wonderful variety of tones these people have at their 


TETRODON HISPIDUS. (Fahaka.) 


HEAD OF THE PIMELODUS AURATUS. 


command to express every shade of feeling! I am thinking less of the shrieking 
vehemence of their anger than of the melting pathos their voices can assume in a 
caressing mood, or when seeking reconciliation. 

Meanwhile retort answers abuse. “ Where are your eyes, merchant?” shouts 
the fisherman, thinking the buyer’s bid too small. The man, who thinks he is being 
cheated, cries out, “Bind a turban of straw about thine head” (be as great a fool 
as you will), “but never forget thy duty.” Some cutting answer is given: the man 
who is thus reprimanded asserts himself to be as good as his antagonist, and 


P 


& 


WN 


4 


MENZALEH. 


ASSEMBLY OF BIRDS ON THE LAKE OF 


108 EGYPT. 


better too; but the enemy has the nimbler wit and the sharper tongue, and 
retorts, “Every beast that has a hump fancies itself a camel.” 

When the auction was over the fishermen wanted me to buy a pelican and 
two fine herons that they had caught alive. They carried home but little money, 
for only a certain percentage of their earn- 
ings was paid to them; the principal 
profits accrue to the holder of the right 
of fishing in the Lake of Menzaleh, 
which is farmed out for about £60,000. 

It was with a party of fishermen 
from the little fishing town of El Mata- 
reeyeh that I visited this remarkable 
inland sea, which is separated from the 
Mediterranean by only a narrow strip of 
land. It is of about the extent of the 
county of York, and is strewed with 

FISH AUCTION AT SAN. islets. So rich is it in waterfowl of 

every species that Brehm, who is a good 

authority, calculated that they must consume sixty thousand pounds of fish daily. 
The well-known story of Baron Minchhausen, who fired off his gun with his ramrod 
for a charge, and so shot and spitted a whole flock of ducks, here hardly seems 
impossible ; for, particularly at breeding-time, the islands and reedy shallows of this 
lake are peopled with countless masses of feathered guests. The charming illus- 
tration by W. Gentz 
is not in the least 
an exaggerated re- 
presentation of the 
scene. Ducks and 
shell-drakes, storks 
and herons, pelicans, 
the Aboo Monas, 
and the delicately- 
coloured —flamingo— 
whose breeding-places 
are known to only a 
few hunters among 
the natives of Men- 
zaleh—gulls and terns, 
dark and light hued 
eagles and falcons—who in their turn prey on the feathered murderers and avenge the 
fish—are found collected in legions in this paradise of birds. The sportsman who 
wanders from islet to islet can make an enormous bag, particularly when he is skilful 
enough to manage a little boat with his own hand. The water is in most places 
shallow, and overflows only the lowest of the islands during the inundation ; those 


MORMYSUS OXYRRHYNCHUS. (Kanooma,) 


POLYPTERUS—FINNY PIKE. (Bishir.) 


lying above this water-mark are called “mountains,” djebel, by the fishermen. 


GOSHEN. 109 


Vivid pictures, that I can never forget, stamped themselves on my mind as 
I traversed this wonderful lake in the roughly-constructed bark of the Matareeyeh 
fisherman: pictures of primeval nature, a silent but populous landscape, barely 
touched by the hand of man, affording at present much delight to the sportsman, 
but perhaps—indeed, it is to be hoped—before many decades are passed, to be 
restored to tilth and culture. 

There can be no manner of doubt that broad expanses now covered by its 
waters were in former times fields and meadows, tilled by the peasantry, and 


FISHING-BOAT ON THE LAKE OF MENZALEH. 


affording pasture to the herdsman’s cattle. Even at the present day, though it is 
connected with the sea by a narrow passage, Nile mud is deposited at the bottom of 
the lake; and experienced men have declared with conviction that, with the 
mechanical appliances of our day, it would be practicable to reconvert it into 
fertile land, and make it remunerative to those who might embark in the enterprise. 
On some of the islands there are to this day traces of ancient culture, not wholly 
extinct even a few centuries ago. Little remains of the city of Isis, Ta-n-Isis, on the 
island of Tenees, but it still shows some noble ruins; and Arab writers tell us that 
at the time of the Khalifate no finer tissues were woven than those produced here. 
The damask, fine gauze, and costly gold tissue of Tenees, or Tinnys, were famous 
throughout the East, and enriched the inhabitants, whose posterity have fallen indeed 
from their high estate, and now laboriously earn their scanty bread by net and sail. 


EGYPT. 


And yet any one who has been in intercourse with these humble, simple men 
remembers them with kindliness. I can call to mind the crowd of figures that 
pressed round the large brazier, side by side with the stranger, at Matareeyeh ; I 
can see the slight forms of the women who followed a dead body, lamenting: and 
Ido not think that in all Egypt I met with a finer race. Faces more manly 
or more noble than those of the descendants of the Hykshos are nowhere to be seen 
throughout the Khedive’s dominions. Like all Asiatics of Semitic origin, they were 
called “Amu” under the Pharaohs, and then Biamites, 7e., Pi-Amu. Even in the 
eighth and ninth centuries after Christ they gave much trouble to the Khalifs 
Merwan IT. and Mamoon. The name of Malakeeyeen, which they themselves adopted, 
dates fromithe time when they embraced Christianity. When the rest of the 


WATER-WHEEL FOR IRRIGATION IN THE NEIGHBOURHOOD OF DAMIETTA. 


Egyptians adopted the teaching of Eutyches, the determined Biamites remained 
faithful to the orthodox doctrine, and called themselves Melekites, or “imperial.” 
They remained unsubdued by the French, and it is only within a short time—in 
fact only a very few years—that the magistrates have dared to enlist their sons under 
the conscription for military service. The Lake of Menzaleh has had a new and 
perfectly straight eastern boundary set to it by the construction of the Suez Canal. 

We will now turn westward, and in the neighbourhood of Damietta, Damyat, 
and the mouth of the ancient Phatnitic branch of the Nile—now the river of 
Damietta—we come upon a type of landscape which, though it is flat and level 
like the whole of the Delta, nevertheless has peculiarities of its own. The eye of 
the European will, in the first place, be struck by the neatly-planted fields of 
rice, which is here a favourite crop; and a harvest, which well repays the 
cultivator, is reaped in September or October. This cereal, it is true, was not 
unknown to the Egyptians at the time of Alexander's Macedonian successors, but 


GOSHEN. 111 


it was the Arabs who first introduced its culture on a large scale from its 
Indian habitat to the shores of the Nile. 

There is little to be said about Damietta itself ; 
a sand-bank bars the entrance to the harbour, which 
is surrounded by tall but ill-built houses. The Bazaar 
is of unusual length; some fine pillars from ancient 
buildings are found in the mosques, and there are 
splendid gardens outside the gates. The most beauti- 
ful belongs to the German Consul, a wealthy and 
most worthy Levantine named Suroor. Damyat at 
the present day contains from thirty to forty thousand 
inhabitants. It was not famous in antiquity: under 
the Arabs it was esteemed for woven stuffs, and 
workshops where the Christians manufactured the 
finest furniture-stuffs, ornamented with pictures and 
patterns, as well as brocades for dresses, one of 
which was valued at three hundred dinars, or forty 
pounds. It owes its place in history to its long siege 
and final conquest by the Crusaders.' 


Among the farmhouses in the vicinity of v 
Damietta sycamores of great girth and tall in pro- NYMPHAEA LOTUS—LOTUS-FLOWER. 


portion are to be seen, and other fine trees also grow 

near and shade the villages. Peach and other fruit trees flourish in the gardens. 
The clatter of water-wheels, driven by buffaloes, is audible on every side, pouring 
an abundance of water into the irrigation canals and the open runlets which 
convey it through the fields. 
Cattle certainly thrives here, 
and the buffaloes and oxen, the 
butter and cheese of the neigh- 
bourhood of Damietta have no 
equals throughout Egypt. The 
botanist who seeks rare plants 
in the water-channels will here 
find the last representatives of 
a species formerly so abundant 
in the Nile—the lotus-flower, 
both white and blue ; its seeds 
when ground are still eaten by 
the peasants. But the plant, 
which was once the queen of 
all the products of the Delta, 
and which brought enormous wealth to the inhabitants, the Papyrus, has not been 
seen here by any trustworthy traveller. And yet it was here, on the very branch 


NYMPHA NELUMBO—LOTUS-FLOWER, WITH FRUIT, 


' By Jean de Brienne, a.p, 1217 ; it was lost, but retaken by Louis IX. a.p. 1248. 


112 EGYPT. 


of the Nile which bathes this ground to the present day, that the most valuable 
variety of the Cyperus—to which our “paper” owes its name—was grown; nor 
was it for ancient Egypt only, but for every cultivated 
nation on the Mediterranean that this writing material 
was prepared from its pith. Manufactories of papyrus 
“paper” existed in the Delta down to the time of the 
Khalifs, but parchment was already competing with the 
Kgyptian material, which was of such importance as an 
article of commerce that Firmus, a citizen of Alexandria 
who set himself up as emperor in opposition to Aurelian,’ 
could declare that his manufactories of papyrus brought 
him in a revenue large enough to maintain an army. In 
consequence of the introduction of new writing materials 
into Kurope—parchment and rag-paper—the physiognomy 
of the Delta must have undergone a complete trans- 
formation. In the place of those thickets which have 
been described as “a forest without branches, a shrubbery 
without leaves, a harvest in the water, a scene of beauty 
in a bog,” we now see rice, maize, indigo, and cotton 
fields. Every recollection even of the plant which for so 
many hundred years was so carefully tended, and which 
Strabo so graphically describes as “a bare stick with a 
tuft at the top,’ has been lost to the natives of the 
Delta. The European sees it in hot-houses, or may have 
met with it on the shores of the Anapo while travelling 
to Syracuse, in Sicily,’ little thinking, perhaps, that he 
has every day occasion to use words and ideas which 
owe their origin to the Egyptian reed. 

Papyrus and Byblus are different forms of the same 
word: from the first we derive our word “paper,” from the 
second the word “ Bible.” The celebrated writing material 
was prepared by slicing the pith of the stem into thin 
lamine, which were laid side by side and overlapping 
each other, pressed together, and smoothed. The sheets 
thus prepared were stuck together to form a sheet, and 
the first leaf was known as the “protocollon,’ hence the 
word “protocol.” Long sheets of papyrus could of course 

EL eenat SEAN be preserved only in rolls; thus each book was a roll, 

and the part assigned to each actor in German theatrical 

parlance is still called his “rolle,” in French, “réle.” The ancient Egyptians were 
accustomed to write with inks of two colours: the main text being transcribed 
with black ink, while red (rubra) was used for distinguishing the beginnings of 


1 a.p. 274; he coined money and assumed the purple, but was soon defeated and put to death, 
* Thickets of Papyri have been also found at the Lake Merom, in Syria. 


GOSHEN. 113 


sections ;* hence the word “rubric.” Charta, or carta, was the name commonly 


given to this paper by the Romans,’ and it has given us the word “card.” 

We know the various kinds of Egyptian paper, which were sometimes desig- 
nated by the names of their place of manufactory, as Saitica, or Tanitica ; sometimes 
after some person of distinction, as Liviana,? Corneliana ; sometimes according to the 
purpose for which they were intended, as hieratic, writing paper, theatre-ticket paper, 
or bag paper ;° and papyrus rolls of remarkable size, and in admirable preservation, 
have come down to us. This writing material was invented in Egypt at the earliest 
in the time of the Pyramids ;° but it was most lavishly used at the time when 
Alexandria was in its glory. 


RIVER WALL ON THE DAMIETTA ARM OF THE NILE. 


The papyrus grown in the Sebennytic district was particularly famous. On the 
site of the chief town of this nome, or government, where the historian Manetho 
was born, now stands the miserable town of Semennood, on the left bank of the 
Damietta branch, along which we once sailed up stream from Mansoorah. 

Mansoorah the Victorious is, next to Tantah, the most important inland town of 
the Delta, and the chief town of the wealthy province of Dakheleeyeh, where 
numerous Huropeans—principally Greeks, but also English, Germans, and Swiss— 
have settled, and carry on a trade principally in cotton. Mansoorah is a compara- 


? The black was an animal carbon, the red colour an ochre. 

> 
* The word “chartes” is found in Greek, and mentioned in an Athenian inscription of the time of Pericles ; it was not, 
till the time of Alexander the Great. 


however, in much use among the Gre 
* From Livia, wife of Augustus, who died .p. 29. 
4 After Cornelius Gallus, a.p, 26. 
® Taeniotica, a coarse kind sold by weight. 
° The oldest written dated Papyrus is of about the time of the Vth dynasty. 


15 


114 EGYPT. 


tively modern town, for it was built by command of the Sultan Melek el Kamil 
during the Crusades, after the taking of Rosetta by the Christians (about 1220). <A 
fortified bridge, close to the town, at that time connected the two shores of the 
Nile; while at the present day the opposite suburb of Talkha, where the railway- 
station is, can only be reached by taking a boat. However, the construction of an 
iron bridge, with a double line of rails, is about to be begun. 

There is little to tell about the present town of Mansoorah, but stirring 
memories revive in our mind as we seek for the humble spot where one of the most 
powerful kings of the West is said to have lingered a captive. Louis IX. of France 
was conquered before the walls of Mansoorah by the army led by the young 
Sultan el Mo’azzam Tooranshah, and was forced to yield to the infidels with his 
brother, Charles of Anjou, and the flower of French chivalry.’ The Sultan treated 
his captive foe with consideration, but he met his death at the hand of his own 
warriors, while Louis, at the cost of an enormous ransom and the evacuation of 
the town of Damietta, regained his freedom and that of his fellow-captives. 

With a favourable wind we may reach Behbeet el Hagar in two hours from 
Mansoorah, and it is one of the most remarkable of all the ruined cities of Egypt. 
The sight of the well-tilled fields on each side of the stream delights the eye as we 
sail along. Opposite the village of el Weesh I disembarked on an ancient river- 
wall, or quay ; and, as I turned my face landwards, I could almost believe myself 
transported to my own country, for I rarely met with any palm-trees, but my 
road lay through white poplars, lime-trees, and willows; among which, however, grew 
Sont-trees and Lebbek, Tamarisk, and Bernouf shrubs. I walked quickly on, and 
in about half an hour found myself in front of the plainly recognisable traces of 
a wall enclosing a gigantic heap of ruins, the remains of the splendid temple 
of Pa-Hebit—that is to say, “the strong place”—where the great goddess 
was worshipped from whose name the Romans called this town Iseum. The 
streets and squares of the ancient city have completely disappeared; not a vestige 
of the dwellings of early ages can be detected among the huts of the fellaheen 
of the village of Behbeet; but here, as everywhere in Egypt, the abodes of the 
gods were built of more durable materials than those of man, and the granite ruins 
of the temple of Isis at Hebit are strong enough to defy many a century to come. 
There they lie, within the ancient temple precincts, one mighty mass of blocks, por- 
tions of pillars, fragments of architraves, slabs, and flights of steps. JI have never 
seen anything more strange and impressive than this temple, fallen, as it might seem, 
at the command of a magician. Neither the slow injuries of time, nor the feeble 
hand of man could have effected the sudden and utter ruin of this edifice of granite. 
An earthquake felled it at one shock, and the legendary memory of such a 
catastrophe, as well as of the sacred beasts of the cow-headed goddess, survives in 
the minds of the fellaheen, for Isis long commanded the deepest veneration in this 
place, and her image is preserved on many stones. While I was resting by the 
ruins a man of Behbeet told me the following story, which is familiar to every 
inhabitant of the village :—“In the time of Solomon a beautiful temple stood here 


1 ap. 1250. 


GOSHEN. 115 


in which there dwelt a cow sent by God, and which no one dared touch. Once 
upon a time there was a woman who wanted the cow to give milk for her new- 
born child; she went secretly into the temple and attempted to milk the cow, but 
the udders yielded no milk; then the woman cursed the cow, and hardly had she 
uttered the last’ word when the huge building fell in with a fearful crash, and 
buried the blasphemous woman and her child under the ruins. If any one strikes 
the stones in the evening the cow is heard lowing. Many of the folks of the 
village have heard it, and they call our ruins here Hagar gamoos, or ‘the buffalo 
stones.’ ” 

What a splendid spectacle this temple must have presented when the sunshine 
was reflected on the polished grey and brown granite of which it was constructed ! 
Hundreds of the blocks have preserved the pictures and inscriptions which were 
chiselled on their surface with peculiar care, and they tell us that the ruined 
sanctuary of Isis was erected (B.c. 287 to 247) by Ptolemy II, Philadelphus. 
No record remains of the time of its fall, and it will never be possible to 
verify the plan of the foundation, for though so many blocks lie heaped up, literally 
not one stone remains upon the other. It takes four hundred paces to walk round 
the high mound of ruins, and to climb to the top is like climbing a mountain of 
granite. Very possibly the pavement of the temple-court lies preserved under the 
superincumbent soil, for very little corn grows within its precincts near the pool 
which indicates the situation of the sacred tank, which no Egyptian temple was 
ever without. 

Before nightfall I got back to Mansoorah, whence it would be easy to reach 
the recently discovered ruins of Mendes, the city of the sacred ram. But we must 
leave it unvisited, for we are anxious to turn southwards, to the Pyramids and Cairo, 
the very heart of Egyptian life. 


NILE. 


STREAM OF THE 


a 
i= 
<q 
a 


THE 


aw 


MEMPHIS AND THE 
PYRAMIDS. 


RE reaching the city of the Khalifs— 
long ere we arrive at the station of 
Kalyoob—the Pyramids are seen on 
the distant horizon.1 | They are the 
tokens of Cairo, and it is with them 
that the most ancient records are 
connected of that vanished metropolis 
of which Cairo may be regarded as 
the later successor. So, before we enter the town, 
we will turn our steps to Memphis and the venerable 
structures that stand on the soil of its Necropolis. 

Cairo has been constantly called the City of 
the Pyramids, and not without justice; from every 
elevated position the simple outlines of these 
marvellous structures are conspicuous; nevertheless, 
the connection is but a superficial one between the 
gay and lively capital on the eastern bank of the Nile 
and the imperishable masses of stone on the 
opposite shore. Cairo has gazed at the Pyramids 


* The hieroglyphic word “ per-am-us” (edge of the Pyramid) is the supposed origin of the word to which many 
fanciful derivations have been given, The solid content was called “abumir,” the word “ peramus” meaning the four lines of 
the angles of the face or edge. 


118 EGYPT. 


ever since its foundations were dug, but the most ancient of the Pyramids had 
seen the lapse of four thousand years before the first stone of the first house in 
Cairo was laid. 

The capital with its lofty citadel is but an upstart that has thriven rapidly, 
and come into its vast fortune early by the overthrow of a reverend predecessor. 
Memphis fell, and Cairo grew out of its ruins. This is literally the fact, for, in the 
first place, the citizens of the old residence of the Pharaohs moved and settled in 
the city, which immediately it was founded by Amroo, Omar's general,’ increased 
very rapidly; and, in the second place, the ancient palaces of Memphis were pulled 
down, and the beautiful polished ornaments and stone slabs were conveyed across the 
Nile, and used for the foundation-stones of new buildings or the construction of 
strong walls. Monuments of marble and alabaster were broken up and burnt for 
lime. Many of the pillars, too, in the older mosque of Cairo were derived from 
the temples of Memphis. The old city was in short a quarry, with the stones 
ready wrought: and it was not spared; nay, so recklessly worked, that nothing— 
absolutely nothing—remains of the largest and most ancient city in Egypt at 
this day but some mounds of rubbish and a few more or less damaged monumental 
fragments. 

The streets and squares, the palaces and temples, the academies and_fortifi- 
cations where so many hundred thousands of Memphites lived and worked, toiled 
and prayed, struggled and rested, laboured and thought, were joyful in time of 
peace or fought fiercely in time of war—all have vanished from the face of the 
earth. Memphis—the city of the living—is no more; but the Necropolis of 
Memphis—the city of the dead—has been as wonderfully preserved as though it had 
some share in the immortality of the souls of its inhabitants that rest in Osiris. 
Here, if anywhere, is the spot for recalling the striking saying by which the Greeks 
were wont to express the character of the Egyptian temperament: “They regarded 
their house as an inn, and their grave as an eternal home; their life on earth 
as a brief sojourn, and their death as true life!” And their burial-places have, 
in fact, outlived their cities, and their tombs have perpetuated the memory of their 
life to our time. 

There is no more venerable site of human culture than that we propose to 
visit to-day, and no more ancient monuments than those we shall find there. 
Usually those who go to see the Pyramids first visit the Necropolis; we shall 
take our own way, and make acquaintance with the city of the living before we 
tread the city of the dead. We are bound by no considerations of time and 
comfort, so we prefer to entrust ourselves to a Nile-boat rather than take the 
railway which cuts across the province of Memphis, and we disembark at 
Bedrasheyn, a large fellah village. The palm-groves that surround it are among 
the finest in Egypt—and how could they be other than flourishing? for they are 
rooted in a soil where stood for ages the most populous city in the world. It is 
delicious to ride on the dyke road that traverses these groves, for under the palm 
crowns it is never altogether sunny or shady, and the incessant play of light and 


1 ap. 641, 


VILLAGE OF BEDRASHEYN. 


THE 


120 EGYPT. 
shade relieves us from any sense of monotony; and yet, taken separately, the trees 
of this extensive wood are exactly like each other, with their columnar trunks 
and feathered crowns. They all seem formed on one pattern—a beautiful one, it 
is true—and they are far from exhibiting the various individuality of our oaks 
and beeches. 

In the little harbour of the village of Bedrasheyn lie large bundles of the 
ribs of the palm-leaves stripped of their feathery blades, and a strange spectacle 
is offered when the fellaheen climb up the smooth trunks and tie themselves to 
the summit of the tree, while they bend down 
the branches to fertilise the blossoms, or to gather 
the long bunches of dates. 

Behind the palm-groves spread green and well- 
tilled fields ; from the highest mound of ruins on 
the plain we can overlook the whole wide-spreading 
landscape once occupied by the famous city of the 
Pyramids. 

There stand the houses of the Arab village of 
Mitraheeneh and to the south-west of it the villa of 
a wealthy Armenian, while south-east of it are the 
most considerable remains of the city ; those most to the north belonging to a temple, 
while on the south the fallen colossus of Rameses II. may be seen. In a hut 
close by are preserved the fragments of the monuments. discovered by Mariette 
Pacha in the soil of Memphis. 

Looking towards the east nothing is to be seen but palm-trees and fields ; but 
if we turn our eyes towards the west, beyond the cultivated land, and take in the 
whole extent of the horizon, our attention is rivetted by a marvellous panorama. 
Tt is true that the yellow limestone range which closes in the view like a wall 
with its bare and barren cliffs is neither varied in character, nor impressively high, 
nor pleasing in outline ; but, instead of picturesque peaks and far-gleaming glaciers, 
as far as the eye can reach it is overtopped by pyramids. These hills of human 
workmanship stand in groups, and are various as to size and shape. It is as 
though they had grown together with the rock on which they stand, and were 
no less enduring. 

If the citadel of Memphis and the king’s palace stood on the hill from whose 
summit we are now gazing westward, the site was happily chosen. It was Lepsius who 
pointed out that this is the only spot far and wide whence a view could be obtained 
commanding the whole of Memphis, and whence each royal builder could watch the 
progress of his own Pyramid. Even the most northern group, that of Aboo Roash, 
could probably have been seen from here before it was destroyed.| Now, at the 
very northernmost spot on the horizon, rise the greatest of the Pyramids, 
named after the village of Gheezeh, and, farther to the south, the groups of Zaweyet 
el ‘Aryan* and of Abuseer.* To the west, and not so remote, rise the proud steps of 


i ue 


iil 
til 


FAQADE OF A TOMB, 


? The name of the monarch who built this pyramid is not known. * Built by Userenra or Rathures. 
* Built by Cheops, of the [Vth dynasty. * Built by Sahura, of the Vth dynasty, 


He 
ems 
t 


A CITIZEN OF MEMPHIS. 


MEMPHIS AND THE PYRAMIDS. 121 


the Pyramid of Sakkarah' with its sadly injured sisters, and farther south again 
the group of Dahshoor,’ exhibiting the curious peculiarity of a bent pyramid. The 
most southerly pyramids of all, which are invisible from our hill, do not belong 
properly to the N ecropolis of Memphis ; but, even without counting them, here are 
above eighty of these wonderful mausoleums. And what numbers of tombs, with 
more or less richly-decorated fagades, have their openings in the face of the lime- 

: stone cliff, and are covered with sand! The enormous extent of 

(Nz) this, the vastest of all cemeteries—which, if we include the 
Pyramid of Meydoom, covers a stretch of country more than 
forty-five miles long—affords us a standard for estimating on 
one hand the magnitude and on the other the duration of the 
ancient city of Memphis. 

Menes, the first king of Egypt, is said to 
have founded this city. Its name, in Egyp- 
tian—Men-nefer, signifies “the good place.” 
The priests told Herodotus that the Pharaoh, 
in order to make a site of suitable extent 
for his magnificent buildings, was forced to 
divert the stream of the river into a new 
vrax, mm cop or szurms. Channel, which divided the fertile land lying 

between the Libyan and Arabian ranges 
into two equal halves, and the dams constructed by Menes to the south of the city 
were, when Herodotus travelled in Egypt (about 454 before Christ), still carefully 
kept up and annually restored by the Persian Governors. ‘Traces of them may 
still be seen. After fortifying the site, and carefully attending to the necessary 
regulation of the inundation of the Nile, Menes raised a sanctuary to the god 
Ptah, which during the many ages that the city endured continued to be its 
central point, and was added to and enriched by all the Pharaohs, even down to 
the time of the Roman emperors. 

Foremost in rank of all the Egyptian gods, as being the eldest and first of 
them all, stood the primeval and venerable divinity Ptah* of Memphis. He was 
called the creator, from whom the germ and at the same time the laws and 
conditions of all being proceeded. He, “the beginning and the beginner,’ was also the 
chief of the divinities of light, and was called the creator of the egg from which, 
when he had broken it, the sun and moon came forth. “Ptah” means “the 
opener,” and Ptah-Sokar-Osiris’*—who was ruler of the Necropolis of Memphis, and 


BULL APIS. 


1 Age unknown ; supposed tomb of the early Apis bulls. The building perhaps as old as the IInd dynasty. 

* Built by Unas, or Onnos, last king of the Vth dynasty ; anciently called Vefer setu, “ the most beautiful place.” Pyramid 
known as the modern Mastabat-el-Faraoun, 

* Built by Senefou, of the I[Ird dynasty ; the pyramid was called Kha, or “the rising one.” Each pyramid had its special 


name placed in the inscriptions after that of the monarch who built it. 


* Ptah appears as a mere deity wearing a skull-cap, covered with a collar and counterpoise, and holding a dog-headed sceptre, 
the was, sometimes combined with the Tat, or so-called emblem of stability, and standing on a pedestal in the shape of truth or 
a cubit; gods and men were said to come out of his mouth, 

5 A later form of the same god allied with the solar Seker, or Socharis, and with Osiris represented as a naked embryonic | 
dwarf wearing a cap and beetle, scarab, on his head. The numerous figures and representations of him are not older than the 


XXVIth dynasty, or the seventh century B.c. 
16 


— 


122 EGYPT. 


whose name is preserved in that of the village of Sakkarah—bestows on the 
departed sun its power of rising again, and on departed souls a resurrection 
to eternal life on the other side of the grave. Apis was the animal sacred 
to Ptah} and was carefully tended in his temple. He. lay on a soft couch 
behind a curtain of costly material, was fed on a broth of wheat-flour and pearl- 
wheat, with milk and honey-cakes, and a harem of cows was kept for him in an 
adjacent building. Even his mother had reverence paid her, was splendidly tended, 
and had a stall of her own. The number of his servants was very great, and 
greater still that of his votaries, for the power 
of seeing into futurity was ascribed to him. 
It is true he could answer the questions put 
with no more than “yes” and “no.” If he 
accepted the food offered him. by a worshipper, 
the oracle was favourable; if he scorned it, 
things looked badly for the matter he was 
appealed to to decide upon. It betokened 
death to the astronomer Hudoxus of Cnidus 
when the bull licked his garment instead of 
eating out of his hand, and Germanicus died 
soon after the oracle of Apis had pronounced 
itself unfavourable to him. Besides the bull 
Apis a sacred serpent was worshipped here ; 
on the lake or tank, which was never wanting 
in an Kgyptian temple, floated elegant boats 
dedicated to the god, and a sacred grove grew 
on its banks. All the Pharaohs who caused 
their bodies to be interred in Pyramids were 
worshippers of Ptah in this sanctuary, and 


SAORED UREUS SNAKE, its high-priest, the “Sam,” was the first in 
rank of all the priesthood of Egypt. The 


king frequently conferred this dignity on his own sons; it survived the dominion of 
the Hykshos, and at the time of the greatest splendour of the Pharaohs was borne 
by Khamus,? the son and heir of the great Rameses, who, however, died before his 
father. This powerful prince, known to the Greeks as Sesostris, who decorated 
almost every city on the Nile with monuments of his triumphs, bestowed a. special 
favour on this temple, gracing it with colossal statues of himself, which were erected 
before its gate. 

We know the occurrence which gave rise to the dedication of these statues. 
When Sesostris—so the Greek traveller was told—came home from one of his 
warlike expeditions, the faithless viceroy whom he had left behind in the Nile 
valley received him at the frontier town of Pelusium with a costly banquet, and 


1 He was called the “second life” of Ptah. His sepulchre was at the Serapeum of Sakkarah from the time of 
Amenophis IIL. to the Roman Empire, until about B.c. 30. 

* A sacerdotal title supposed to mean “ foreman.” 

8 Appointed Viceroy of Memphis, he was buried amidst the Apis bulls in the Serapeum of Sakkarah. 


MEMPHIS AND THE PYRAMIDS. 123 


then had the wooden palace, which had been erected for the occasion, set on fire, 
after the king and his family had retired to rest, intoxicated from the feast. 
Rameses was miraculously preserved, and in his deep gratitude he decorated the 
temple of Ptah with those colossi, one of which—the solitary monument of any 
size that marks the site of the city, the living city, of Memphis—lies at a thousand 
paces to the south-west of the village of Mitraheeneh, extended on the soil and 
kissing the earth. This stone giant, which is more than seven times the height 
of a man, belongs to the English, and perhaps may some day follow the obelisk 
of Alexandria to the banks of the Thames. 

Although after the expulsion of the Hykshos the residence of the Pharaohs 
was transferred from Memphis to Thebes, the city of Menes was highly prosperous, 
even in later times. Its harbour on the Nile, which is frequently mentioned, was 
an emporium for all the produce of the country, and the commerce of Memphis 
was not restricted to the Nile valley. A special quarter was given up to Phoenician 
merchants and their factories. Here stood the temple of the Aphrodite of the 
foreigners, Astarte-Ashera, with its sacred grove, in which the youth of the city 
gathered together to do honour to the goddess. This part of the city was the 
centre of pleasure, while in the purely Egyptian quarters the citizens lived quietly 
and in strict morality. A great variety of handicrafts were practised here, and 
science was held in high esteem among the priests of the highest class. The 
schools which were attached to the temples of Ptah, of his son Imhotep,’ and of 
other gods were very famous, and many writings, of which their disciples were the 
authors, have come down to us. The Pharaohs who lived at Thebes visited 
Memphis from time to time, and its citadel was at all times regarded as one of 
the most important bulwarks of the kingdom. It was still famous among the 
Greeks as “the White Wall,’ by which name it ~as also known to the Egyptians ; 
and the monuments, as well as the classical writers, speak of many sieges of this 
citadel and of many stormings of the walls of Memphis. Assyrians and Persians 
did not regard Egypt as conquered until this “White Wall” had fallen, and the 
soldiers’ quarter, which lay within it, must have been densely populated. Memphis 
was not only one of the most populous, but one of the most extensive cities of 
antiquity, and even late into the period of its decay it was half a day’s journey to 
walk through it from north to south. 

The first fatal blow to its greatness fell when Philip's son founded Alexandria,’ 
and so created as it were a new heart for Egypt, which at once became the source 
and the recipient of all its vital streams. Then, when the hosts of Islam overran 
the Nile valley, and their leaders, avoiding Alexandria and Memphis, founded Fostat,’ 
adjoining the old Roman castle of Babylon, on the eastern shore of the Nile, and 
fixed their residence there, the new town—which subsequently developed into the 
city of Cairo—absorbed all the privileges and possessions of the ancient city of the 
Pyramids, and in a very few centuries Memphis was no more than a city of ruins, 
though, indeed, of ruins that had no equal. It is not more than seven centuries 


! Called Imouthos or Alsculapius by the Greeks. He does not appear honoured earlier than the tinte of the Ptolemies, 
although a king of the VIth dynasty bore his name. 
* Bc. 331. > AD. 641. 


a 


Il. 


ig] 
a 
<4 
aS 


COLOSSUS OF 


FALLEN 


MEMPHIS AND THE PYRAMIDS. 125 


since the learned and trustworthy Abd-al Lateef, of Bagdad, visited Memphis and 
wrote down what he saw there. “Enormous as are the extent and antiquity of this 
city,” he says, “in spite of the frequent change of governments whose yoke it has 
borne, and the great pains more than one nation has been at to destroy it, to sweep 
its last trace from the face of the earth, to carry away the stones and materials of 
which it was constructed, to mutilate the statues that adorned it; in spite, finally, 
of all that more than four thousand years have done in addition to man, these 
ruins still offer to the eye of the beholder a mass of marvels which bewilder the 
senses, and which the most skilful pen must fail to describe. The more deeply we 
contemplate this city the more our admiration rises, and avery fresh glance at the 
ruins is a fresh source of delight.” 

We cannot here enumerate all the different monuments which Abd-al Lateef 
admired, and they have now long since vanished. By the “lions” which stood facing 
each other he no doubt means sphinxes. The whole soil was covered with ruins, 
and the mass of- broken statues—among which lay the above-mentioned one of 
Rameses II.—was enormous. After Abd-al Lateef the gradually diminishing remains 
of Memphis are rarely mentioned; stone by stone they were transported across the 
Nile, and many a noble work of art was destroyed by the folly of fanaticism. Thus, 
in the middle of the fifteenth century, an Emir caused the destruction of the much- 
admired “green shrine,’ which was formed out of a single enormous block of a stone 
as hard as iron, and ornamented with figures and inscriptions. It was smashed to 
pieces. The golden statue, with eyes of precious stones, which had once been 
enshrined in this marvel of art—dedicated, probably, to the moon-god Chonsu—had 
long before disappeared. Abd-al Lateef describes the thirst for gold of his con- 
temporaries with deep indignation ; he calls it a disease, and relates how the ruins 
of Memphis had been systematically searched through and through in every spot, 
even the most unlikely, by treasure-seekers, to whom everything they could find was 
acceptable. The bronze clamps were torn from the walls, the hinges from the door- 
posts, and the statues bored into to search for treasure within. They crept into the 
clefts in the hills like thieves into a house; crawling on their faces, they slipped 
into every cranny in the hill-side, and many of them lost what they already had in 
these fruitless searches; while others who were penniless misled rich folks to their 
ruin, persuading them to risk their fortune, and at the same time their common- 
sense, in the hope of discovering great treasure. A thousand failures were at once 
forgotten as soon as a rich find was reported; but at last the plundered ruins could 
no longer yield even the smallest reward to the severest labour, till the husbandman 
expelled the treasure-seeker, and compelled the soil of Memphis to produce nobler 
wealth in the form of corn and fruit-trees.’ 

Now, as we turn westwards, and wander among the yellow sandy Pyramids 
and the wide expanse of tombs, we know what sort of city it was that laid her 
dead to their eternal rest in this vastest of graveyards. We will begin our 
excursion from the north, and first visit the largest Pyramids, called, from the 
village in their neighbourhood, the Pyramids of Ghizeh. We can reach them from our 


1 Abd-al Lateef was translated into French by Sylvestre de Sacy, 1810. 


126 EGYPT. 


inn in a comfortable conveyance after a rather long hour's drive. A visit to the 
Pyramids is a favourite Sunday “outing” with the Cairenes, and there is scarcely 
any “excursion” by land which can compare with it for the charm and variety of 
the feelings it gives rise to. 

In the early morning sunshine the carriage, drawn by brisk horses, rattles 
across the iron bridge over the Nile which connects Cairo with the beautiful island 
of Ghezeereh ; this, with its castle and the western channel of the river that bathes 
it, is soon left behind us. The well-kept road runs as straight as a line under the 


AT THE FOOT OF THE PYRAMID OF CHEOPS. 


shade of lebbek-trees; the castle and the viceregal gardens of Ghizeh, enclosed by 
walls, lie to our left; the dewy verdure of the fields, intersected by canals, refreshes 
the eye, and a delicate blue mist veils the western horizon. The air has that 
purity and that aromatic freshness which are peculiar to a winter morning in Egypt. 
Now the misty curtain that floats over the western landscape parts for a moment 
—the Pyramids are before us, with their sharp triangular outline; but the mist 
falls again. Right and left we see ‘now wading buffaloes, now flocks of herons; here 
a solitary pelican within easy shot of our carriage, there half-naked labourers at 
their daily work, and their villages standing remote from the road. There soar 
two large grey eagles; the eye follows their flight, and, glancing upwards, perceives 
that the fog is disappearing by degrees, that the blue sky is growing brighter, till at 
last the sun shoots out his level rays in unshrouded splendour. At this hour, in the 


MEMPHIS AND THE PYRAMIDS. 127 


time of the Pharaohs, the hymns of praise of the priests rang out from the temple- 
: doors hailing the child Horus, the god of light, who had vanquished Seth, his father’s 
foe—darkness and its allies, the fog and mist; the struggle was over, and there was 
a truce during the hours of daylight, but it would begin again in the evening, and 
end in the sun-god being worsted; he, on his side, must sink into the nether world, 
to return victorious on the following morning. “The child is the father of. the 
man :” the child Horus has be- 
come the mighty sun-god Ra. 

It is now bright and hot ; 
before us the Pyramids stand 
unveiled, scarred with the in- 
juries they have suffered in 
the course of ages. The horses 
now moderate their pace, for 
the road begins to mount, and 
a wall shuts it in on either 
hand ; this was constructed as 
a protection against another 
enemy—the ally and minister 
of the same god as rules the 
darkness—against that foe to 
all life, the sand of the desert. 
His dominion extends as far 
as the desert reaches; where 
waters gleam and plains are 
verdurous, Osiris and his chil- 
dren wield the sceptre. Even 
where moisture reaches the 
fringe of the desert herbs and 
trees thrive. When Osiris— 
so runs the myth—embraced 
the wife of Seth, he left his 
wreath of melilot on her couch.’ 

This piece of the road 
is constantly covered with 
sand in spite of the wall. An inn, now abandoned, is left on our right; the road 
takes a sharp curve, and soon the panting horses halt on the rocky plateau where 
the highest of the Pyramids stand. 

We find ourselves in front of the largest of those structures, which were esteemed 
by the ancients as wonders of the world. It is unnecessary to describe them, for the 
stereometrical form which took its name from them is familiar to all; nor is this 
the place for a numerical estimate of their size and bulk. It is only by comparison 


BEDAWEEN AND FELLAH, 


* In the later inscriptions Horus appears in the disk or orb of the sun in the first hour of the day. Horus is the youthful 
or nascent sun ; as such he is Har-pa-chrat, or Harpocrates, a name meaning Horus, the child. 
* Plutarch, “De Iside,” 14. The goddess, wife of Seth or Typhon, was Nephthys, sister of Isis. 


raft 
— aM 


ASCENT OF THE GREAT PYRAMID. 


AND SPHINX. 


PYRAMIDS 


THE 


MEMPHIS AND THE PYRAMIDS. 129 


with other objects more present to our mind’s eye that we can form any idea of 
their size ; thus we will only say that, while St. Peter's at Rome is 131 métres high 
(430 feet), the great Pyramid of Cheops, if its summit were perfect, would measure 
147 metres (or 482 feet), thus being 52 feet the taller; so that, if the Pyramid of 
Cheops were hollow, the great Roman cathedral could stand within it like a clock 
under a glass shade. Neither the great church of St. Stephen at Vienna, nor the 
cathedral at Strasburg is as high as the great pyramid, and no building in England 
approaches it. St. Paul’s, in London, as is well known, would stand within St. 
Peter's, and is just 100 feet lower than the pyramid. Old St. Paul’s, the spire of which 
was destroyed by lightning in 1561, and the building itself in the fire of London in 1666, 
was somewhat taller; the tower, too, of the new cathedral at Cologne, just finished, 
exceeds it in height.' In one respect no other building in the world can in the remotest 
degree compare with the Pyramids, and that is in the mass and weight of the 
materials used in their construction.” If the great mausoleum of Cheops were pulled 
down, a wall could be built all round the frontier of France with the stones. When a 
good pistol is fired from the top of the great pyramid, aiming horizontally, the ball falls 
about half-way down the side. By such comparisons as these, they who cannot have the 
advantage of visiting Egypt may form a vivid conception of the dimensions of these 
enormous structures ; the traveller who stands on the sandy platform face to face 
with them, and gazes up at their summits, needs no such aids to his imagination. 

We get out of the carriage on the northern side of the great pyramid; in the 
sharply-defined triangular shadow squat groups of women selling oranges and various 
cates, donkey-boys are waiting with their grey steeds, and travellers are taking a 
rest after having accomplished the ascent of the pyramid. This labour now lies 
before us, and if we were disposed to shirk it, there would be no lack of attacks 
on our indolent resolve, for from the instant when we stepped out of the carriage 
we have been closely pursued by a ragged crowd of brown and sinewy guides, 
vehemently offering their assistance. They proudly call themselves ‘“ Bedaween,” 
though they have nothing in common with the true “sons of the desert” but 
their faults. Nevertheless, it is not only advisable but necessary to have recourse to 
their help, although the way up can scarcely be missed. 

We begin to mount at a spot where the falling away of the external stone 
casing of the pyramid leaves the step-like interior structure most exposed, and all 
the way to the top we are on a sort of stairs of smooth-hewn stone; but the steps 
are unequal, and sometimes of considerable height—some half as high as a man. 
Two or three stout lads accompany me; one springs up first with his bare feet, 
holds my hands, and drags me after him; another follows, shoves behind, and heaves 
me forward ; a third takes me under the arm, and lifts. Thus I half scramble up and 
half am lugged up, and the nimble guides give the climber no rest if he wishes 
to pause a moment for breath, or to wipe the sweat from his forehead. At the 


' The measurements of the height of the spire of old St. Paul’s from the ground differ. Stowe makes it 520 feet ; Camden, 
534: this discrepancy may arise from the measurement having been made from or to different points. The towers of the cathedral 
of Cologne are 510 feet, and so, higher than the great pyramid. 
* The weight of the three great pyramids has been estimated at 12,659,460 tons; about twenty-three square feet 
thickness of skin and thirty feet of height have been lost in 5,000 years, 
17 


130 EGYPT. 


same time they never cease shouting all the way and clamouring for bakscheesh, 
and are altogether as pertinaciously annoying as if they wished us to forget the 
gratitude we owe them for their assistance.’ 

At last we have reached the goal. ‘The point of the pyramid has long since 
crumbled away, and we find ourselyes on a tolerably spacious platform. When our 
gasping lungs and throbbing pulses have a little subsided, and we have paid and 
got rid of the “ Bedaween,’ who torment us to exchange our money and to buy 
sham antiquities, we look down on the vast space before us, and the longer we 


SECOND AND THIRD PYRAMIDS. 


gaze and let this glorious landscape penetrate our soul the more full of meaning 
and the more unique it seems to us. Fertility and dearth, life and death lie 
nowhere in such close and intimate juxtaposition as here. Out there to the east 
flows the stately Nile, white lateen-sails fluttering across it; and fields and 
meadows, gardens and groves spread along its shores like a carpet of emerald 
verdure. The villages that nestle under the shade of the trees look like birds’ 
nests among green foliage, and at the foot of the mountain of Mokattam—which 
at this hour is bathed in golden light, and presently, when the sun is setting, will 
reflect the rosy and violet glow of evening—rise the thousand mosques of the city 
of the Khalifs dominated by the citadel, and by those slenderest of minarets 


1 Abd-al Lateef describes the difficulty of the ascent in his time, except to persons accustomed to mount by small holes 


eut in the casing. 


MEMPHIS AND THE PYRAMIDS. 131 


which grace the mausoleum of Mohammed Ali and are visible from the re- 
motest distance—an unmistakable feature of Cairo. Gardens and trees encircle the 
city as a garland round some fair head; there is 
nowhere a loyelier picture of prosperity, fertility, 
and life. The silver veins of the canals pervade 
the whole luxuriant scene and look like some 
shining, vital fluid. The sky is unclouded, and 
yet light shadows sweep across the fields; these 
are flocks of birds which here find abundance of 
food and drink. How lavish is the goodness of 
God! How fair and wealthy is the earth ! 

The Bedaween have left us; we are alone 
on the summit. All is still, not a sound reaches 
us from far or near. Turning now to the west 
the eye can see nothing but pyramids and tombs 
and cliffs and sand. Not a blade, not a shrub 
can find nutriment on this sterile soil. Yellow- 
grey and dull brown are the only hues to be 


\ 


seen, in unbroken monotony far and wide. DOOR OF A TOMY AT GHIZEN, 

Only here and there a white object shines 
among the dust; that is the dried skeleton of some dead animal. Silent and 
void, the foe to every thing that has life—the desert stretches before us; and 
where is its end? For days, weeks, months the traveller would never reach it, even 


if he escaped alive from the choking, overwhelming 
sand. Here, indeed, if anywhere, Death is king 
without dispute; here, where the Egyptians saw the 
sun vanish every day, here, behind the mountain 
rampart of the Libyan desert, began a world which, 
compared to the blooming domain of the Hast, was 
like a corpse compared to the eager stirring living 
man. There is no more silent burial-ground on earth 
than this desert ; and so tomb after tomb was arrayed 
here, and, as if to keep more closely the secret of the 
grave, the waste flung its shroud of sand over the 
tombs of the dead. Here loom the terrors of infinitude. 
Here, at the very gate of the other world where 
eternity begins, the work of men’s hands seems to 

SORIBE, (In the Lowwre,) have evaded the common lot of earthly things and 

to have won some share of immortality. 

“Time mocks all things, but the Pyramids mock Time,” says an oft-repeated 
Arab proverb. We turn from the western landscape and look round at the circle 
of these monuments which are close to the Pyramid of Cheops. They all stand 
on the rocky foundation of the sand-drifted desert-plateau. Though, no doubt, some 
deeper motive lay at the root of the choice of this situation, it was partly 
determined by a consideration which a nation of husbandmen, such as the Egyptians 


132 EGYPT. 


were, could never have lost sight of: the bodies must be safe from the Nile 
floods, and at the same time no portion of the fertile land must be subtracted from 
the requirements of the living. This idea is expressed indeed in a Greek inscription 
which Arrian, the disciple of Epictetus, had engraved on the Great Sphinx, and 
which begins thus (Dr. Young’s translation) :— 


“Thy form stupendous here the gods have placed, 


Sparing each spot of harvest-bearing land.” 


In the whole of the Nile valley not one ancient grave has been found which 
could be reached by the inundation of the river. 

Looking south-west we see in the immediate neighbourhood a pyramid which 
in point of size yields little to that of Cheops; the casing layer of smooth stone 
at the top is still well preserved, and its builder was King Chefren—named Khafia 
in the inscriptions—the second successor to Cheops, who would seem also to 
have completed the Great Sphinx, which is somewhat farther to the east. The 
third pyramid, which is considerably smaller, but built with great care and of fine 
materials, served as a mausoleum for Mycerinus (Men-ka-ra), one of the same race 
of kings. The smaller pyramids, lying east of us and close under our feet, and south 
of the structure of Mycerinus, cover the mortal remains of the sons and daughters 
of the same Pharaohs who caused the larger monuments to be erected. Hast again 
of these three pyramids we can detect the ruins of the temple of Isis, where 
sacrifices were offered to the manes of the departed kings. Isis, the maternal, took 
the divine -part of the dead into her bosom and restored it to life as the child 
Horus, who grew up to be Osiris. This departed soul did not, as we say, return to 
God; but, if it were found pure and faithful, became absolutely one with the universal 
soul whence it was derived, and received the same name, Osiris. Thus the honours 
paid to the celestials could be offered to the souls of the Pharaohs that had passed 
through that apotheosis, and as long as Egypt was governed by independent 
sovereigns, there were prophets or priests of the Osirian or deceased Cheops (Khufu), and 
of the other principal pyramid-builders, who conducted the worship in the fallen 
temple of Isis, and who usually belonged to the oldest families of Memphis. 

From this it appears that Herodotus was falsely informed when he tells us 
that Cheops and Chefren were both wicked contemners of the gods, who closed 
the temples and drew down on themselves the hatred of their subjects, so that no 
Egyptian would mention their names for detestation. 

We may now descend, not wholly without difficulties it is true, and we will visit 
the best preserved of the tombs which stand up from the-sand-drifts in regular rows, 
or contemplate the caves in the rock which open in from the face of the limestone 
plateau on which the Pyramids stand; thus we shall get an idea of the times of 
Chefren and his successor which will rescue them completely and for all time from 
the ignominious and odious character given them by Herodotus. While the Pyramids 
themselves bear no inscriptions, the inner chambers of all the tombs of the great of 
that early period are completely covered with pictures and hieroglyphics. The latter 


1 The name of Mycerinus is found to be preceded by that of Osiris; but not those of his two predecessors. 


MEMPHIS AND THE. PYRAMIDS. 133 


refer to the relations in which the deceased stood to the Prince, to his titles and 
dignities, and to his possessions on earth. Only a few—as, for instance, that of the 


SLAUGHTER OF VICTIMS. 


general officer Una'—narrate any warlike achievements. The epoch of the Pyramids 
was a time of peaceful prosperity. The whole life of the citizens of those days is 
set before our eyes by these 
representations. The wall of 
every tomb is a stone page of 
the most ancient of picture- 
books, and marvellously pre- 
served by the sand which 
covered it. And if we ask 
whether, indeed, at so early 
a date the mechanical appli- 
ances of masons and _ sculptors aE; 

were equal to giving worthy 

artistic expression to the manifold types of life, a simple “Yes” is hardly answer 
enough ; for, in fact, the sculptors of the Nile at no time created more perfect 
pictures than at that early period, divided 


from ours by the lapse of five thousand A eras 
years. The figures and features of the kings, eS GF Sor ay 
the nobles, and the officials were reproduced V7 a /\ @ (\ 


with realistic accuracy and absolute fidelity, ‘ 
and any one who has had the opportunity of 
admiring the statue of the scribe found in 
the Necropolis of Memphis, and now in 
Paris, cannot doubt that he has seen a per- == = 
fect portrait of the keen-looking man that IOS Ma ee ea 

it represents. The various compositions which 

cover the walls of the tombs deserve less praise; but the hand must have been 
well skilled that could chisel in limestone, and with indifferent tools, all these 


1 This has been translated more than once; there is an English version in the “ Records of the Past,” Vol. I. p. 3. 


134 EGYPT. 


characteristic forms with so clean an outline and such slight relief—often not more 
than a few lines in depth. 
Nor is it only the art of the Egyptians that we find again in these tombs ; 


BONDMEN FELLING TREES, 


ll their culture and arts of life stand before us complete and fully represented. 
The type of writing is precisely the same as it continued to be at the time of 


© 


FISHING WITH NET. 


the Romans; the scribe’s implements represented thus ih and the papyrus roll 
== are already in use as hieroglyphic symbols. We find from later writings 
that the most important scientific and religious works were written at this period. 


a 
gap 


} 


Hike of IM 
faa | 


CROCODILES AND HIPPOPOTAMUS IN THE NILE. 


MEMPHIS AND THE PYRAMIDS. 135 


The great sempiternal calendar of the starry skies was already understood and used, 
and a highly elaborated theology was expounded to the people by a learned and 
well-organised priesthood. Every stone of the Pyramids was carefully measured, 
and the exactitude with which the four sides of the structures face the four points 
of the compass, proves that the architect—who could hardly have been acquainted 
with the use of the magnetic needle—worked hand in hand with the astronomer. 
The whole land was measured and distributed into districts under officers in charge 
of them. Every division had its governor, and above them all stood Pharaoh, not 
merely as unlimited ruler by the grace of God, but as the representative of the 
immortals, as the son and human incarnation of the sun-god Ra. A magnificent 
court surrounded the king, who was usually spoken of by the title of “The Great 
Gate” (in Egyptian, Per-aa; Hebrew, Pharaoh). Privy councillors, chamberlains, 
lords-treasurers, intendants of war material, of the women’s house, of the 
labourers, of the granaries, of the minstrels, nay, even of the wardrobe and the 
bath, are mentioned. The governors of the districts and other officials near to 
the sovereign’s person took the hereditary rank of Erpa-ha," or “Prince of the 
realm,’ and if they were related to the family of the Pharaoh they had the title 
of Suten-rekh, or “ Royal relative.’’ The daughters of the King were married to 
distinguished or meritorious officials, and we know that some of these attained to 
such an honour, notwithstanding an humble origin. Children of talent and merit, 
even of modest rank, were educated with the King’s children, and we find even 
swimming-masters mentioned in an enumeration of the princes’ tutors. Every 
Egyptian was forced to be satisfied with one lawful wife, and one queen only shared 
the throne during the Pharaoh’s life-time and his tomb after death. A harem is, 
however, mentioned, where numerous women lived who were engaged in various 
offices about the royal pair, and which was inherited by each succeeding king. The 
passion for building which was predominant at this period—one of the strongest 
that ever takes possession of a powerful prince—strikes us everywhere in this 
Necropolis. It took deep root in Egypt, and was inherited by successive dynasties 
of Egyptian kings, and finally by many members of the family of the Ptolemies. 
An acute historian once observed that no more solid external symbol of a powerful 
government could be imagined than buildings of an important and permanent 
character. Moreover, the very act of building—rapidly urged forward by propor- 
tionate forces—is in itself an image or emblem of active rule, and in peaceful times 
is a substitute for it. The Pharaohs who piled up the Pyramids were passionately 
devoted to this illustrious taste, and we cannot be surprised that they should have 
given their architects a prominent position at court, and that among the tombs 
which we are now inspecting many of the finest are those of the master-architects 
under the Pharaohs. 

Many of the graves here do not consist—like those dwellings of the dead 
which we shall meet with on our journey into Upper Egypt—of chambers hewn. out 
in the rock, but of independent mausoleums which the Arabs call Mastaba. They are 


' Erpa Ha or Repa Ha is “hereditary chief.” The governors of nomes were hereditary nobles, like the King himself. 


2 One of the leading titles of the period ; literally, King’s acquaintance. 


136 


built of hewn stones ; their ground-plan is usually quadrangular, and their walls slope 


GROUP OF EASTERN WOMEN. 


inwards towards the top, so that 
the whole structure forms a truncated 
pyramid, rising not very high above 
the ground. Each Mastaba contains 
a principal chamber and a niche or 
cell, commonly walled up, called the 
Serdab, or “hollow space”; in this 
the statue of the deceased is fre- 
quently found. The “well ’—<., 
the shaft by which the body was 
deposited — commonly lay at the 
western end of the building.” The 
remains found in them prove that 
the arts of embalming were not so 
well understood at the early date 
when the Pyramids were built as 
at a later period. The door of the 
Mastaba generally opens to the east, 
while the entrance to the Pyramid 
is on the north side. On the stone 
door-posts, which were frequently 
decorated with the portrait of the 
deceased, a cylindrical hewn _ block 
generally rested, undoubtedly a copy 
of the trunk of a palm-tree such as 
the fellaheen use to this day to 
crown the door-way of their huts. 
Every wall on the inside of these 
peculiarly constructed monuments 
is covered with pictures such as 
we have described of the private 
life of the deceased. It was possible 
only for the rich and noble to have 
such permanent and costly sepulture, 
so that the pictures and the inscrip- 
tions explaining them always exhibit 
the owner as surrounded by manifold 
possessions, and in the midst of life. 
We seldom meet with any allusion 
to death and the other world; the 
mourners who assembled at the 

1 The bodies were lowered by a shaft or well into 


the sepulchral chamber. When so deposited the well was 
filled up with rubble. 


18 


* TWO GREAT PYRAMIDS AT THE TIME OF THE INUNDATION. 


138 EGYPT. 


Mastaba were not supposed to lament there, but to think of their father, brother, 
or master as still living in Osiris; as divine, and to be honoured with sacrifices, but 
not bewailed. The glorified spirit! valued the gifts that were brought to him from 
every village on his hereditary estate; bulls and gazelles were slain before him, 
and lists, engraved in tablets as a binding record, promise him on certain days of 
the year offerings of meat and bread, fowls and vegetables, cakes and milk, wine 
and essences. Prayers were addressed to him, and these children of a primitive 
age always preserved a cheerful memory of the man who, during his life-time, had 
been one of themselves; to whom they were bound by ties of love, friendship, 
eratitude, or servitude, and whose wealth and pleasures they had shared. 

Every noble was a landowner. His wealth consisted not in money, which was 
at that timé unknown, but in fields, meadows, papyrus-plantations on the shores of the 
streams, in serfs who exercised every variety of handicraft in his service, and in 
almost every kind of domestic animal that is known to us at the present day. 
Nay, some species which they had tamed, as antelopes and gazelles, have relapsed 
into the wild state. It is true that neither the horse nor the camel were known to 
them, and sheep seem to have been rare, but they sometimes occur. The possessions 
in herds of a noble of the time of the Pyramids were of very considerable extent. 
In the tomb of Khafra-ankh and his wife Herneka we read that they were owners 
of 835 oxen, 220 hornless cattle, 760 asses, 2,235 antelope-goats, and 740 common goats. 
The most enormous stock of beasts, however, belonged to a noble interred at Sakkarah, 
who possessed in all, including calves, 5,300 head of cattle. Swine also were often 
kept; fowls, and more particularly geese and doves,’ were numbered by thousands. 
Pictures are never wanting in the tombs which represent the tilling of the fields, 
from the first ploughing with the hook-shaped plough to the gathering of the 
harvest. Overseers, stick in hand, everywhere superintended the labourers, who wore 
no garment but an apron; and the lord Urkhu himself is depicted as borne forth 
to inspect his fields on a litter supported between two asses.” A servant walks 
behind him shading him with a fan. We see the vine-dressers in full activity in 
the vineyards, and in the plantations we are shown the felling of the trees. It is 
hot, and the toilers refresh themselves with a draught from a flask; here the 
overseer is accompanied by his greyhound. The timber is required for constructing 
the Nile-boats which are used by the nobles, not only for purposes of business, 
but for taking their pleasure; for the upper classes delighted in catching fish and 
snaring birds, and in every description of sport by water. Besides, the reeds by the 
shore are over-crowded by the feathered tribes, the waters swarm with fish, and the 
hunter rarely sallies forth in vain when a crocodile or a hippopotamus is to be 
slain. And the man who fills an office at court, and whose serfs compose quite 
a little state by themselves, needs such recreation. His vassals perform every kind 
of handicraft—joiner’s work, pottery, glass-blowing, weaving, paper-making, gold- 


* This spirit, called Ga, was supposed to be attached to the statue, There was a hole in the Serdab through which 


the prayers and incense are supposed to have reached the statue usually walled up in it. 


The ring-dove, called Mena, often appears in the tombs; the pigeon, called Karenpe, in Coptic Shrompi, “the bird of 
heaven,” also. 


® The wheel not haying been invented, cars and carriages were consequently not used. 


MEMPHIS AND THE PYRAMIDS. 139 


washing, working in metals, and preparing the papyrus. The art of writing was 
industriously practised ; the overseers were at the same time accountants; whole 
rows of scribes are busy in the writing-rooms. ‘The simple gifts of nature do not 
satisfy the daily requirements of such a people; they bake, boil, and roast, and we 
find an extraordinary variety of cakes, each of which has its distinctive name. The 
ladies, who seem usually to have been of fair complexion—for they are represented 
with yellowish skins, while the men are reddish-coloured—stand on a perfect equality 
with their husbands, and were even then called “mistress of the house.” When sons 
were lacking the daughters took the inheritance, and even the crown could devolve 
on the daughter of a Pharaoh. The children were named first after their mother 
and next after their father, and the inscriptions have in many cases preserved the 
pet name that commemorates the amiability of the wife. Family life is full of 
feeling and dignity, and light-heartedness and innocent delight find constant 
expression. Many of the encouraging words spoken by the overseers to the 
labourers, or by one serf to another, contain some jest, and some of the pictures 
even are intentionally humourous. No epoch of Egyptian history offers a more pleasing 
aspect than this; and though the Pyramids have been called “tokens of the slavery 
of whole races of men,” and many a curse has been pronounced since the days of 
Herodotus on the heartless tyrants who raised them, it seems to us that these 
Jeremiahs have caused themselves unnecessary regret; for it was not an enfeebled 
race of captives who built the Pyramids, groaning under the lash as they toiled, 
but a youthful and vigorous nation who, during long centuries of peaceful inactivity, 
spent their superfluous energy in joyful labour to accomplish an almost superhuman 
task, under the very eyes of princes whom they reverenced as divine. All ulterior 
considerations were overlooked, for it was their delight in the newly found methods 
and means of overcoming mechanical difficulties which incited the first pyramid- 
builders and their successors to attempt the solution of the severest problems. 
Just as nature in the early days of her development produced the Ichthyosaurus, 
as the cyclopean walls of Greece were the precursors of the harmonious forms of 
her temples, as in the lives of individuals the period of wise moderation follows 
one of bolder enterprise—so in Egypt first arose those mightiest of all monuments 
of human labour, the Pyramids. Beyond a doubt, the lower orders must have 
suffered much oppression in the course of their erection, and yet we can hardly be 
mistaken in supposing that the contemporaries of Cheops who helped in completing 
his great work were proud of their co-operation ; for every prince who undertakes 
a work which promises to give evidence to succeeding generations of the strength 
and ability of his age is secure of the approbation and support of his people. The 
nobles of those days did not neglect to record for the information of posterity what 
connection they had had with the building of their sovereign’s Pyramid; nor must 
we forget that that sovereign was a god in the imagination of his subjects. 
After the completion of the monument erected in his honour, the people no doubt 
went home, like the Israelites after the dedication of Solomon’s temple, “blessing 
the king, joyful, and of good courage.” 

There is hardly a traveller who has not fallen into a gloomy vein in describing 
the Pyramids, but without reason, as I have tried to prove, though certainly it 


EGYPT. 


must always be impossible for us moderns to throw 
ourselves into the feelings of those who raised these 
gigantic monuments ; for to us the dignity of antiquity 
is superadded to their hugeness, and the smile dies on 
our lips as we contemplate these great piles, over whose 
heads ages have passed as years and days do with us. 
They belong to a race of giants before whom the 
greatest of us feels small, and before investigating their 
construction, and penetrating to their interior, we cannot 
forbear quoting a sentence from Arthur Schopenhauer : 
“Many objects of contemplation excite our sense of the 
sublime, because the space they occupy, as well as their 
venerable antiquity—and thus their duration in time— 
make us feel diminished to nothingness in their presence ; 
and yet we revel in the delight of gazing at them. Such 
are high mountains, the Pyramids of Egypt, and the 
colossal ruins of antiquity.” 

In 1787, Goethe saw at Rome a drawing of a 
pyramid restored ideally by the French traveller Cassas, 
“from certain records, data, and conjectures.” “This 
drawing,” he says, “is the most stupendous architec- 
tural idea I ever saw in my life, and I believe man can 
go no farther.” 

Our knees are still trembling from our clamber up 
the great Pyramid; we can rest in its shadow, look 
up to its apex, and ask ourselves in what way, and by 
what means it was possible to erect so gigantic a pile. 
In the first place we recall the strange account given 
by Herodotus, that the summit was first completed, and 


THE BUILDING OF THE PYRAMIDS. 


MEMPHIS AND THE PYRAMIDS. 141 


the portion next the soil finished last. This has proved to be as well founded as 
his other assertion, of which the accuracy is forcibly impressed on every beholder, 
that the pyramid of Cheops was built up “in steps.” 

Though the English travellers Perring and Vyse deserve the credit of having 
first measured the Pyramids exactly in all their dimensions, it is to the Germans 
Lepsius’ and Erbkam that the honour is due of having discovered, by painstaking 
investigations and most ingenious calculations, the method on which they were 
constructed. Any one who is acquainted with their great work will perfectly 
understand the account given by Herodotus, and be supplied with the answer to 
all the questions which force themselves on the mind of every thinking man who 
beholds the pyramids. We know now how it came to pass that one king raised 
a monument to himself of such 
gigantic size while another was 
content with a much smaller one; 
why we can point to only one 
uncompleted pyramid; and how it 
was that Cheops was bold enough 
to undertake a work for which the 


average duration of a reign was 
a wholly inadequate time,’ and 
whose completion by a _ successor 
was not to be hoped for, since he, 
in his turn, would have to devote 


himself to building his own tomb. 
As soon as a Pharaoh mounted 
the throne, he began the construction 


PYRAMID OF DASHOOR, 


of his mausoleum, at first of modest dimensions, by building a truncated pyramic 
with steep walls. If death overtook him, his nucleus had the apex added to it at 
once, and the sloping sides of the pyramid were prolonged to reach the ground ; but 
if time and means were not wanting, after this core or nucleus was completed an outer 
casing consisting of a series of steps was put on the truncated pyramid, and this 
process was repeated till at last a stage was reached when the mere addition of a 
layer was a gigantic undertaking. When it was necessary to finish off the pyramid 
the point was first completed, and then the steps were filled in from the apex down- 
wards. The shape of the broken pyramid of Dashoor is highly instructive, for this 
one had its summit duly finished, but the unfilial successor neglected to complete 
the lower portion. Thus the pyramids were actually finished from the top down- 
wards, but no stones that could easily fall out were used in filling in the steps, 


' Lepsius, “ Ueber den Bau der Pyramiden,” 8vo, Cairo, 1843, first pointed out the mode of construction, The ground- 
plan was first laid out, and the place for the sepulchral chamber planned; then the passage for the sarcophagus, descending 
at an angle, had its mouth beyond the ground-plan of the mass of masonry. If the King’s life was very long the masonry 
had to be carried beyond the orifice of the descending shaft or passage, as in the case of the great pyramid, necessitating 


a change of construction.—Gliddon, “ Otia Aegypti 


There is reason to believe, from the Papyrus of Turin, that the life of Cheops extended or was supposed to extend 
to above ninety years, as pointed out by Hincks. 


142 EGYPT. 


but blocks of this form Ao which lay on each other with a broad surface, 
and in the course of time were as intimately joined by the mere pressure 
of their weight as if they had been cemented with the finest mortar. It is evident 
that the encasing of the pyramids with smooth slabs of stone such as still remain 
in those of Chefren and Mycerinus must have been begun at the top. 

We know now that the size of the pyramid grew in proportion to the length of 
the life of its builder, and that it was at any time possible to bring it to completion. 
The filling in of the steps would be left to the filial piety of the heir, though in the 
earliest times it does not even seem to have been regarded as essential, as is shown 
by the pyramid of Meydoom and the step-shaped pyramid of Sakkarah.’ “If in the 


QUARRIES OF TOURAH. 


course of ages the other determining proportions had remained equal, we might at 
this day count the years of each king’s reign by the number of layers on his pyramid, 
like the annual rings in a tree.” 

The neatness of the workmanship of each separate block is beyond all praise. 
Herodotus was able to state that they were derived from the quarries on the opposite 
shore of the Nile, brought across the river in boats, and then conveyed by a cause- 
way, which was itself the result of ten years’ labour, to the spot where the building 
was proceeding. Extensive remains of this raised way are still visible, and even if 
the Pyramids themselves had disappeared the stone quarries in the Mokattam range 
at Tourah and Masarah, to the south of Cairo, would tell us that here in former 
times a people had lived who, above all others, loved to build. The architects of 
the Pharaohs penetrated deep into the heart of the mountains, which consist of a 
fine-grained nummulitic limestone of the older tertiary formation, and thence brought 


* There is some difficulty about determining the number of steps: they may be five or seven. These were brick 
pyramids. 


MEMPHIS AND THE PYRAMIDS. 143 


out the flawless blocks which they required; and it will be easily understood that 
the passages, vaults, and halls they thus hollowed out correspond in size with the 
mass of the pyramids, for the whole of the materials applied to their construction, 
with the exception of the granite slabs that cover them, were hewn from these 


WEIGHING STONES. 


quarries. Tourah was called Toroua in old Egyptian; this sounded like Troja to the 
ears of the Greeks, and they called it so; and as they found the captives taken in 
the Asiatic wars labouring in these quarries, they unhesitatingly invented the story 
that these were the descendants of the people of Ilion, whom Menelaus left behind 
on the shores of the Nile when he visited Egypt with the recovered Helen. 

At the present day a great deal of stone is procured in the neighbourhood of 
the ancient quarries for the buildings of Cairo; and although it is true that the 


oD 


ZZ 


SS 


MEMPHIS AT THE COFFIN OF HER HUSBAND. 


LAMENTATION OF A WIDOW OF 


CHEFREN. 


RUINS OF 


MEMPHIS AND THE PYRAMIDS. 145 


blocks and slabs no longer reach their destination dragged by a troop of men 
harnessed to the sledges, which run upon rollers, but are conveyed by horses or 
steam-engines over an iron tramway, there is still much 
in the scene that reminds us of ancient times, as well as 
in the form of the scales on which the blocks are weighed. 

Among the blocks from Mokattam which are built 
into the pyramids, many occur that are full of countless 
nummulites. 

A hundred thousand men, who were relieved every 
three months, are said to have been employed for twenty, 
or perhaps thirty, years in building the Pyramid of Cheops, 
and the dragoman of Herodotus interpreted to him the 
inscription which stated that for the minor articles of food for the workmen—as 


radishes, onions, and garlic—one thousand six hundred talents (or about £360,000) 


had been expended. “If this was so,” exclaimed the Halicarnassian, “how much 
must not other essential things have cost! 
such as tools of iron,’ and the maintenance 
and clothing of the labourers.” And we 
share the feelings of the Greek, for we see no 
reason to regard the numbers that were read 
to him as in any way exaggerated. However, 
the inscription of which he speaks was certainly 
not on the pyramid itself, which never bore any 
hieroglyphs or pictures, but in one or other of 
the neighbouring tombs. 

But our escort is urging us to investigate 
the interior of the mausoleum of Cheops; the 
passages and chambers of the other pyramids 
cannot as yet be traversed without much 
preparation and some danger; besides, the 
different arrangement of the interior is of 
small interest, excepting to the archzeologist. 
In all there is the same disproportion between 
the vast size of the building and the small 
dimensions of the utilised space that it contains, 


ENTRAN 


p TO THE PYRAMID OF cHEOPS. and yet this disproportion is intelligible and 

seems quite rational when we realise the fact 

that the architect's task was to construct for a corpse a resting-place as impene- 
trable and as secret as possible. 

A visit to the interior of a pyramid is not altogether agreeable, for the farther 

we penetrate the more unpleasant are the heat and the peculiar smell of the bats 

which live there, particularly in the now impenetrable passages and chambers. 


? Herodotus, ii, 9,126, for “the iron with which they were worked.” Fragments of iron and copper have been 


found in the air channels by Perring and Dixon. 


19 


146 HEMET: 


The “cool cellars” of our drinking songs are unknown in Egypt; a subterranean 
chamber preserves the average yearly temperature of the latitude, and this at Cairo 
is about 26° centigrade. 

The entrance to a pyramid is always on 
the north side; in the mausoleum of Cheops it 
is on the level of the thirteenth step. We 
light the candles we have brought with us and 
walk on; straight on and upwards at first, till 
we come to a large block of granite which was 
fixed in the roof, and which closed the passage 
to the resting-place of the coffin. We pass round 
it, for the treasure-seekers who found their in- 
gress arrested by it were unable to destroy it, 
and ruined the side wall in order to get a pas- 
sage. Then we proceed upwards through a low 
close corridor, at the end of which a horizontal 
passage opens into the small ‘“ Queen’s” chamber. 
Here we find a room which, though narrow, is 
more lofty, so that we can stand upright and 
take breath. The light of the torches and 
tapers is reflected from the polished surface of 
the Mokattam limestone. The separate blocks 
fit so accurately that the joints are hardly to 
be detected. The stone panels at the bottom 
of the wall are perfectly preserved, and the case 
is the same with the singularly placed stone 
beams of the roof. The parallel grooves cut in 
the floor and on the walls were to facilitate the 
transport of the sarcophagus. A few steps farther, 
through a horizontal passage—which enlarges in 
the middle into a sort of antechamber closed 
by four stone blocks or doors—-and we find 
ourselves in the “ King’s” chamber, and in front 
of the despoiled granite sarcophagus of Cheops. 
This, the largest and most important chamber 
in the pyramid—its heart, as we may say—does not 
lie exactly in the centre, nor is it distinguished 
by great dimensions or by rich plastic decoration. 
Any good-sized room in our private houses may 
compare with it in size, for it is less than 
nineteen feet high; its length measures thirty-four feet and its breadth seventeen. 
Nine enormous slabs of granite form the roof and rest with their ends on the side 
walls. The enormous mass of masonry that is piled above them must have crushed 


GALLERY IN THE PYRAMID OF CHEOPS. 


1 About 70° Fahrenheit. 


MEMPHIS AND THE PYRAMIDS. 147 


them in if the far-seeing architect had not provided against this by constructing 
over this chamber five others to diminish the pressure. The first of these chambers— 
which are culs-de-sac—was called Davison’s room, after its discoverer, and the 
four others, of which the uppermost exhibits a triangular section, were found 
by Perring and Vyse, and were named by them, with utter want of taste, 
Wellington's, Nelson’s, Lady Arbuthnot’s, and Campbell’s Chambers. The discovery 
of these hidden rooms—chambers of construction, as they are termed by 
architects— was of great importance from the circumstance that the name of 
Cheops occurs in them. The stone-workers had written it on the blocks with 
red paint even before they left the quarry, and the masons had built them into 
the wall in such a way that the inscriptions were turned upside down. This 
discovery certainly brought nothing new to light, but it confirmed what had long 
been known, for we had already learned from the Greeks the name of the king 
who was interred in the Great Pyramid. But so long as no inscription declared 
it in plain words, it was optional—and it had a certain fascination—to bring all 
sorts of profound speculations and mysterious calculations to bear on the wonderful 
erection of Cheops. Thus Jomard, and others after him, attempted with much 
acuteness to bring forward evidence that this structure, with its measurements and 
proportions, its accurate relation to the points of the compass, its opening directly in 
the eye, so to speak, of the Polar star,’ and so forth, had served a scientific end. 
The careful “orientation” of the pyramid bore witness to its astronomical purpose ; 
from its dimensions it was concluded that it was to be regarded as a metrical 
monument, as the indestructible witness to the standard of measurement that had 
prevailed in ancient Egypt, or as an astronomical and chronological memorial.” But 
all these suggestions, in spite of the acumen with which they were argued, have 
failed of acceptance, because, as we have seen, it was quite impossible, when a 
pyramid was planned, to estimate its ultimate size with any accuracy. 

How many ideas: have been thrown out as to. the end and purpose of the 
pyramids! According to the ancient Arab legends, they were erected before Noah’s 
flood in order that the treasures of science of doomed humanity might be preserved 
from destruction. Karly Christian travellers, who did not know the small dimensions 
of their inner chambers, thought that they were the granaries constructed by Joseph; 


some regarded them as observatories and sundials, measuring the length of the day 
by their vast shadows; others as light-towers, beacons shining from afar to guide the 
wanderer in the desert; others, again, supposed that in their gloomy chambers the 
secret and appalling rites of initiation into the mysteries and the solemn dedication 
of priests were accomplished ; nay, a certain Herr Kuhn,’ in 1793, strove in perfect 
earnest to prove that they were not the work of men’s hands, but a natural 
growth. Others, better informed, and cognisant of the true purpose of a pyramid— 
namely, to receive the sarcophagus of a king—endeayoured to find an ethical reason 


' Sir J. Herschel’s observations on the entrance passage in the Great Pyramid, and that the entrance faced the star, 
1,” Vol. IL. p. 107. 

* Culminating in the theory of Professor Piazzi Smyth, that the proportions amount to a revelation, See his work, 
“Our Inheritance in the Great Pyramid.” 


a Draconis, the old Pole-star, are given in Vyse’s “ Jour 


* T. Ch, Kuhn ; his work was published at Lemgo, 


148 HGYPT: 


for the choice of the pyramidal form for a tomb. By it all the fundamental ideas 
of Egyptian religion and philosophy were supposed to be symbolised to the outward 
sense. According to them it was to be regarded as the emblem of the spiritual 
world in its gradations from the broadest basis to the apex, and to be compared to 
the Platonic graduated edifice of ideas which culminated and found its apex in the 
very highest and uttermost cognisable idea. It was the presentment of the four 
elements which, when separated, pervade all matter and re-unite into one. These 
elements—earth, air, fire, and water—were said to be the fundamental constituents 
of the world and of all things. In the primary essence or godhead 
—Osiris—they existed together in perfect equality, and hence unity ; 
at the creation contention, or mutual repulsion—Typhon—rent the 
godhead ; but love, Isis, re-united the four elements—the disjecta 
membra of the godhead—forming out of them, by harmonious and 
judicious combinations and unions, the whole visible universe 
and all the creatures in it. And as in the beginning the world and 
all things in it came into being, so the processes of destruction 
and re-construction are constantly repeated. The combining of the 
four elements by Isis and their dissolution by Typhon, the con- 
vergence and divergence of the four sides of the pyramids, were 
supposed to symbolise the primitive formula of all cosmical life— 


the combining and severing of the four elements. These vague 
but ingenious speculations correspond to the well-attested doctrines 
of the Egyptian priesthood, and a symbolical meaning was attributed 
at least to the apex of the pyramid, for a pointed top belonged ex- 
clusively to the mausoleums of the kings, while the bodies of 
private individuals were deposited in truncated pyramids. This 
rule was without exception, and several paintings have been found 
in which the basal portion of the pyramid is black, and the upper 
part and point are red. We may regard it as quite certain that 
the indestructible buildings of which we are speaking were intended 
to insure the preservation, not only of the bodies of the princes 
which were deposited in them, but of their memory, and that they 
therefore belong to that class of monuments of which a great thinker said—“<TIt is 
evident that they were in fact intended to appeal to the latest posterity, to hold 
communion with them as it were, and so maintain the unity of man’s conscious 
life. Nor is it only in the buildings of the Hindoos, Egyptians, Greeks, and 


WOODEN COFFIN OF MEN-KA-RA. 


Romans, but in those also of a later period, that we can see the yearning to 
speak to distant generations; and therefore it is disgraceful to destroy or disfigure 
them, or to degrade them to base and utilitarian ends.” 

The Pyramids have not been spared by impious hands, and their interior chambers 
—where we still are lingering—had, at any rate at the time of the Romans, been 
opened by avaricious Prefects. Under the Arab dominion the rulers themselves under- 
took this task, by no means a light one; finding nothing but empty sarcophagi and 
bodies, they endeavoured to justify themselves in the eyes of their subjects for the 
sums they had squandered, and spread the false intelligence that they had found 


MEMPHIS AND THE PYRAMIDS. 149 


exactly as much gold as the work of opening the tombs had cost. When the labourers 
under Mamoon (died a.p. 813), the son of Haroun el Rasheed, who is so well known 
to every reader of the “ Arabian Nights,” had penetrated to the heart of the Pyramid 
of Cheops, it is said that they found a treasure, and also a marble tablet on which 
were these words :—‘ Such a King, son of such a King, in such year will open 
this pyramid and spend a certain sum of money in so doing. We here repay 
him for his undertaking; but if he persists in his enterprise, he will sacrifice much 
money and gain nothing.” In fact, searching the Pyramids has enriched no one, 
and though we hear romantic tales of 
things said to have been found there, yet, 


on the whole, ransacking a pyramid has 
been generally regarded as a crime to be 
followed by retribution, or even by death.! 

The daring and indefatigable English, 
who some forty years since explored the 
Pyramids at a great cost, found in them 
neither gold nor silver, but many treasures 
of high scientific value. Their labours 
were best rewarded in the pyramid third 
in size, which is called by the Arabs “the 
coloured or red pyramid,” from its casing 
of granite, and which far exceeds those of 
Cheops and Chefren in the perfection of 
its structure and execution. In it they 


found not only highly remarkable inner 


chambers, and a beautiful sarcophagus of 
brownish basalt or whinstone veined with 


blue, but also the lower part of the wooden 
mummy-shaped chest or coffin in which SEPULCHKAL CHAMMEK OF MEN-KA-RA, 
the king’s body had lain, and on it an 
inscription which proves that Herodotus was well informed when he named King 
Mycerinus—in Egyptian, Men-ka-ra—as the builder of this third pyramid. The 
noble basalt sarcophagus sank off the coast of Spain with the ship which was to 
transport it to England; the inscription on the wooden chest, which is preserved in 
the British Museum, offers no difficulties to the translator. It has been thus rendered 
into English by Dr. 8S. Birch :—*Thou that art become Osiris, ruler of the North 
and South country,” King Men-ka-ra, living for ever, born of Nut the goddess of 
heaven, and begotten of Seb the god of earth—may the wings of thy mother Nut 
spread over thee to shelter thee, in whose name is hidden the secret of heaven. 
May she grant thee to be as a god, striking to earth all who oppose thee. King 
of the North and South. Men-ka-ra living for ever.” 
temains were even found of this king’s skeleton, and of the materials in which 
' Fragments of a stone with a Cufic inscription, probably relating to the attempt to open, have lately been found near 


the pyramid. 


* Or upper and lower hemisphere. 


150 EGYPT. 


his body, embalmed with resins, had been wrapped.’ The winding-sheet consisted of 
wool,? while the bandages of the mummies of a later period were usually made of 
linen. The burial-chamber of Men-ka-ra is finer than any other room found in the 
Pyramids ; it consists entirely of granite, and the ceiling is formed of blocks resting 
against each other in the middle, and hewn into a pointed arch resembling that 
known as early English. Thus the room has the aspect of a vaulted chamber. 

The other rooms, and several passages closed with slabs in this pyramid, show 
that another body besides that of Men- 
ka-ra was interred here at a later period, 
and history and legend agree in saying 
that it was that of a woman. Queen 
Nitocris, of the VIth dynasty, seems to 
have taken possession of this mausoleum, 
which was built long before her time, and 
her fair hair and rosy complexion, which 
were long remembered, led to her being 
confounded with the famous Greek beauty, 
Rhodopis—+e., the rosy-faced—who is said 
to have been the wife of Sappho’s brother, 
and the favourite of the Pharaohs. At the 
time of Herodotus it was already currently 
reported that it was she who lay interred 
in the third pyramid; at a later date the 
memory of the fair Rhodopis took new 
aspects, and she became a sort of Loreley 
in Arab legends. On the western pyramid, 
they tell us, a fair and wanton woman 
sits with brilliant teeth, who drives the 
traveller mad that lets himself be caught 
in her toils. Thomas Moore has repeated 


this legend :— 


“Pair Rhodope, as story tells, 
The bright, unearthly nymph who dwells 
’Mid sunless gold and jewels hid, 


STATUE OF CH . aa . 
The Lady of the Pyramid.”—The Epicurean, chap. vi. 


The Bedaween have other tales of spirits that haunt the Pyramids; one wears 
the form of a boy, and a second that of a man, who stride round these mausoleums 


after sunset, burning incense. No Arab child ventures near them at night, and least 
of all near the Pyramid of Men-ka-ra. And yet all that history and legend tell of 


1 These are now in the British Museum, but the condition of the remains and the anchylosed condition of one knee 
have cast a doubt on the subject, as it has been considered the body could not have been mummied in a symmetrical form and 
placed in the inner wooden coffin found with it. 

2 The wraps of the bodies of the workmen found in the Tourah quarries were also of wool, like those found with the 
body in the third pyramid. 

3 Described by the Arabic author Masoudi, and translated in Vyse’s “Journal,” Vol. II. p, 327. 


MEMPHIS AND THE PYRAMIDS. 151 


this king is in his favour; he is lauded as the friend of the gods, who re-opened 
the temples and led the people back to worship and sacrifice. He is called the most 
just and venerated of all kings, and he must have been a “merry monarch” too, if 
any germ of truth lies at the bottom of the legend which relates that, having been 
told that an oracle had prophesied that he should live but six years and die in the 
seventh, he caused the lamps to be lighted every day at sunset, and drank and 
rejoiced till the morning, and so gaye the oracle the lie, since, by turning night into 
day, he made twelve years of 
the six allotted to him. 

The legends associated with 
Rhodopis are no less pleasing 
and pretty. She, who was the 
Loreley witch of the Arabs, was 
also their Cinderella, for it is 
said that an eagle—or, according 
to another authority, the wind 
—carried away her sandal while 
she was bathing, bore it to 
Memphis, and there dropped it 
into the lap of the king as he 
sat in judgment. He, amazed 
at the elegance of the sandal 
and the strangeness of the in- 
cident, immediately sent forth 
messengers to seek its owner. 
She was found at Naucratis and 
brought to the king, who made 


her his wife and, when she died, 
caused the third pyramid to be 
erected for her.* 

Thus, as flowers grow on 
a grave, so sweet myths have 
sprung up round these solemn 


tombs THE SPHINX CLEARED FROM THE SAND. 


We will now quit this hot, 
dark, and dusty inner chamber, and make our way to the second pyramid, which 
is easily distinguished by the polished casing-stones which to this day cover its 
upper portion and are in good preservation. 

It was erected by Chefren—called by the Egyptians Khafra—the next but one 
in succession to Cheops. Its interior offers nothing remarkable ; but to the south- 
east of it stands a stone building, in which, as it would appear, the faithful assembled 
to honour his manes with pious exercises. It was Mariette Pacha who brought 
this interesting structure to light, after it had been for a thousand years buried in 


? This legend is delightfully told in Vol. III. of William Morris’s “Earthly Paradise.” 


EGYPT. 


sand; and at the same time he obtained certain evidence as to the name of its 
. founder, for in a tank which contained water, but which is now choked with sand, 
he discovered seven statues which all represented King Chefren, the builder of the 
second pyramid. The name of this sovereign may be read on most of them, and the 


m7 
; | 
H 


\N 
\ 


MODERN SPHINN-LIKE FACE. 


finest and best preserved has found a well-deserved place of honour in the museum 
at Boolak. It is wrought in a diorite’ so hard that Mr. Drake—with whom I some 
years since stood admiring it—assured me that he should hesitate to try his chisel 
on such a material; it is nevertheless highly finished in every part, and the realistic 
treatment of the grave and gracious features is worthy of all praise. The beautiful 


1 A hard variety of greenstone, of volcanic origin. 


MEMPHIS AND THE PYRAMIDS. 153 


polish of the diorite need not surprise us when we look round at the building in 
which these statues were found. It consists of blocks of granite and alabaster, and 
the masons who hewed and polished these with the utmost care were skilled in every 
branch which we could regard as belonging to their calling. The arrangement of this 
building is very simple; but it is interesting as the only example of a temple-like 
edifice that has come down to us from those very early days. The rectangle every- 
where predominates, the pillars have not as yet developed into columns, and on the 
walls there are no inscriptions to tell us the purpose to which this building was 
devoted. The two larger chambers form together a T, and the side rooms have 
coffer-shaped niches of granite and alabaster. Many of the huge slabs which 
roofed the nave—if I may be allowed the expression—still remain supported on 
the granite pillars. How was the cultus performed which these chambers hid from 
the eyes of the multitude? May we infer from the statues of the dog-headed 
ape’ found in the sand that the god Thoth, to whom this animal was sacred, was 
honoured here above all others? Were the statues of Chefren hurled into the 
pool by heathen rebels, or were they not overthrown till a Christian edict devoted 
all the images of the gods to destruction? Or is this the temple of the Sphinx 
spoken of in a primeval inscription ? 

Questions like these crowd upon the mind of the visitor; and if he raises his 
eyes towards the north-east, he sees in his immediate neighbourhood the gigantic 
form of the most mysterious of all mysterious images—the great Egyptian Sphinx, the 
watcher of the desert, called by the Arabs Aboo ’l hawl, “the father of terrors.” Its 


huge mass was covered with desert-sand again and again, in ancient times as well as 
in our own days; only the head, decorated with the royal coif, being left gazing 
fixedly eastwards. 

During the present century, it is true, the Sphinx has been compelled to reveal 
its lion-body, and stand confessed to daylight and curiosity; and it has been 
ascertained that it is hewn out of the living rock, and where the stone has not lent 
itself to the form of the lion-body it has been supplemented with masonry. This 
figure, at the present day, measures nearly sixty-four feet from the crown of the 
and what a spectacle it must have 


head to the pavement on which the paws rest 
offered when the servants of the Necropolis kept it free from sand, and it could be 
seen complete, with the stately flight of steps which led up to it! 

Through many successive centuries worshippers innumerable mounted these steps 
to approach the altar, which stood on a finely inlaid pavement between the legs of 
the giant—for the Sphinx was the image of a mighty god. The Greeks heard him 
called Harmachis—in Egyptian, Har-em-khu—and this signified “Horus on the 
horizon,” or “the sun at its rising.” Harmachis is the young light which conquers 
the darkness ; the soul triumphing over death ; fertility expelling dearth ; and he, the 
conqueror of Typhon, vanquished the foe under many forms, among them under that 
of a Sphinx. Harmachis, in the Necropolis, promised resurrection to the dead ; 
Harmachis, who is most active just in the morning hours, and whose face is fully 
illuminated by the rising sun, brings the world to a new day after the gloom of night ; 


1 Or Cynocephalus, living animal sacred to the lunar deities Khonsu or Chons, and Tahuti or Thoth, 


20 


154 EGYPT. 


Harmachis, on the border of the fertile country, conquers the drought and keeps 
back the sand from engulfing the fields. Thus it comes that his image, the Sphinx, 
was called by the Egyptians at first Hu,’ and afterwards Belhit, both signifymg “a 
watcher”; and by the Greeks Agathodacmon, “the good spirit.” 

Each Pharaoh was regarded as a mortal incarnation of the sun-god; and 
therefore the kings were willing to select the form of a Sphinx as expressing allego- 
rically the divine essence in their nature. The attribute of fiery and irresistible 
physical strength was represented by the body of the powerful and irascible lion; the 
highest intellectual power by the human head. The union of the two was happily 
chosen as the symbol of an omniscient and omnipotent object of worship. 

The making of the Sphinx was begun under Cheops. It was finished by order 
of King Chefren, the builder of the second pyramid, and dedicated to Harmachis ; 
this we learn from the large tablet covered with hieroglyphics and fixed in the breast, 


HOUSE OF MARIETTE PACHA AT SAKKARAH. 


which also informs us that this monument must have already needed to be freed 
from the sand under the kings of the XVIIIth dynasty, about B.c. 1500. King 
Thothmes IV., so runs the inscription, in the course of a lion and gazelle hunt in 
the first year of his reign, rested in this vicinity, and came to worship Harmachis— 
i.e, the Sphinx. He slept in the shadow of the giant, and he dreamed that the 
god spoke to him with his own mouth, “as a father speaks to his son,” and required 
of him that he should free his image from the drifts of sand. When he woke he 
took the divine warning to heart. In commemoration of this vision, and of the 
subsequent disinterment of the Sphinx, he caused this tablet to be erected, which 
to this day is but very little injured. 

Other inscriptions, of much later date, record the resistance which it has been 
necessary to make to the encroachments of the sand—sometimes hardly perceptible, 
but sometimes, when the Khamseens blow, rising in hot storm-clouds of dust. Among 


1 The Sphinx was so called on the tablet describing the objects deposited in the pyramid; it was also named dkar, 
and, as a hieroglyph, used for Web—* Lord.” It seems to have been particularly honoured under the XVIIIth dynasty by 
the monarchs of that line, and often appears represented on monuments and scarabwei of the period. Generally it is male, 
but Mutnetem or Netemmut, the mother of the monarch Horus, is represented as a female Sphinx. 


or 
oe 


MEMPHIS AND THE PYRAMIDS. 1 


these inscriptions we find, in Greek, the remarkable verses by the historian Arrian ; 
most of the others only tell of imperial visits to the Sphinx, and of works of 
restoration undertaken with reference to the pavement round the monument and the 
wall intended to ward off the sand. In later times not a hand was put out to 
preserve it from being overwhelmed; nay, in the last century the face of the “ father 
of terrors” was used as a target for shooting at when the Mameluke artillery was 
practising—that face of which Abd-al Lateef writes, that “It bore the stamp of 
benignity and beauty, and was graced by an affable smile.” When this travelled 
Arab was asked what was the most wonderful thing he had seen, he replied, 


PYRAMID OF SAKKARAH. 


“The exquisite proportions of the Sphinx’s head.” At the present day it has acquired 
a hideous negro aspect, chiefly from the loss of the nose. 

Why is it that men are so ready to destroy the works of man? The hand of 
the destroyer has been put forth even against the Pyramids. Some sovereigns have 
thought they could utilise the well-hewn blocks; others have dreamed of sweeping 
them from the face of the earth, in fanatical fury against. the works of the heathen. 
However, the attempt to blow them up with gunpowder,. though contemplated more 
than once, was not carried into effect; but only in consequence of a warning that 
Cairo would be endangered by it. 

The sand, the foe of every work of man erected here, has at the same time 
proved to be their friend, for nothing but what it has covered and protected has 


156 EGYPT. 


come down to us uninjured, and this is the case with that part of the Necropolis of 
Memphis known as Sakkarah. 

Let us turn from Ghizeh southwards; we will keep close to the border of the 
fertile land, leaving the fields of the dead of Zaweyet el‘Aryan and the stately 
group of Pyramids of Abuseer on our left, and then—up by a little pool, round 
which the plovers are fluttering, and where wagtails alight to drink—we will climb 
the bare undulating hill-frontier of the desert. After a short walk on a sandy path, 
past boulders, choked-up tombs, whitened bones, and many a fragment of mummy 
cloths sticking out of the sand, we arrive in sight of the spacious verandah of a 
simple but hospitable-looking house. This is “ Beth Mariette,” 
as the Arabs call it— 
the head-quarters of the 
man who by his acumen, 
zeal, and energy has 
succeeded in wresting 
thousands and thou- 
sands of monuments, 
among them some of 
the highest importance, 
from the sand-drifts of 

et a UC MN CCLON OMS MOLems ake SS apt 
karah. The keepers of 
this hostelry, grey-bearded and friendly Arabs, provide us with couches and filtered 
water, and our breakfast tastes excellent in this shady spot after our ride through 
the desert. 


One of the old guardians willingly guides us to the monuments we designate. 
One strikes the eye at once—the high pyramid of steps; but many others which we 
know by description are not to be discerned even with his help, for the unwearying 
sand that Mariette Pacha strove against has triumphed once more. 

We could see the pyramid of steps from the ruins of Memphis; we will now 
proceed to the south-east and visit it. It consists of six stories, so to speak—the 
bottom one, which is the highest, measuring about thirty-seven feet. If we inspect 
this pyramid more closely, we shall perceive that it differs from its sisters in many 
respects. It is not set to the four points of the compass; its base is not a square, 
though rectangular; it has been surrounded by a wall, and its interior may be said 
to be altogether peculiar. The Prussian General von Minutoli explored and described 
it; of its four entrances one, contrary to all custom, faces southwards.'. Two of 
the chambers are lined with green tiles set in stucco in a sort of mosaic, and 
the ceilings of the rooms are ornamented with stars.” The chambers and passages 


‘ Besides Minutoli’s description (Reise, 1844, p. 405) this pyramid has also been described by Segato (in his Sagyi Pittorici, 


Firenze, 1827), who makes 


ven steps, which would correspond with the number of steps of the Babylonian pyramid ; but in the 
present condition of the pyramid it is difficult to determine how many steps it may originally have had. 

* Porcelain tiles from this pyramid are in the British Museum; some had a kind of ring or pierced place at the back 

» 


to pass something—as a wire or cord—through, to hold them more securely. The details of it are given in Vyse’s ‘“ Journal, 


Vol. IIL. p. 41. Two of the titles, if not for a prenomen of a king, are inserted on the door. 


MEMPHIS AND THE PYRAMIDS. 157 


are completely choked with the remains of vessels in alabaster and marble, with 
fragments of sarcophagi and fallen pieces of the sculptured stones that covered the 
walls and roof. A thickly gilt skull, gilt sandals, and other interesting remains of 
antiquity found here by von Minutoli, with the model of a boat in which they 
were contained, have been carried to the mouth of the Elbe. 

What one element spares another destroys, serving the ends of Time the 
Annihilator. Even this proud structure, on its foundation of eternal rock, is doomed 
to destruction. And yet it is certainly the oldest of all the artificial eminences far 
and near, and it has seen the lapse of more centuries than any other edifice raised 
by the hand of man. 

The Pyramid of Kochome—/e., of the black bull—is said to have been built 
by the sovereigns of the first dynasty, and one part of the Necropolis of Sakkarah 
undoubtedly bore the same name. If Mariette Pacha is right, in the time of the 
early empire, before the dominion of the Hykshos, the most sacred portions of the 
Apis bulls were preserved and interred in the inner chambers of this pyramid. 
This would explain the choice of the name Kochome—in Egyptian, Ka-Kham— 
“the black bull.” This is not the place to enquire minutely into the antiquity of a 
monument; but I may say that, though this pyramid of steps may have been built 
a little later than the mausoleums of Ghizeh, probabilities at any rate are in favour 
of its being considerably. older. At every step we meet with something that we 
an neither recognise nor restore in our imagination. 

The ancients have left us some information about the buildings on these sites. 
The Pyramids stood here, then as now. The Serapeum, as 
we shall presently see, has been discovered; and the name of 
Sakkarah, which is found under the form Sokari in the very 
oldest tombs, has not disappeared under the lapse of ages. But 
where are we to look for the sacred lake across which the 
mummy of the Apis was ferried in a bark? where on the western 
shores spread the broad meadows that were compared to the 
Homeric fields of Asphodel? where stood the sanctuary of the 
sombre Hecate, and the statue of Justice without a head? 
where the gates of Cocytus and Truth? where the numberless ‘tts perme (Ath 


sacer). 


sacred and civic buildings spoken of by the Greek papyri ? 

Here, among these tombs, in ancient times, thousands of living souls sought 
the mercy of God, peace of soul, and, at the same time, earthly advantage. 

We will return to Mariette Pacha’s house, and direct our attention to the most 
important of the indefatigable Frenchman’s discoveries—namely, the Serapeum or 
temple of the god Serapis. The most magnificent of his temples has already been 
described in the chapter on Alexandria. 

Here, at Sakkarah, the bulls Apis were buried from the remotest period ; their 
name in Egyptian was Hapi, and after their death Osar-Hapi—zc., the Osiris Apis.’ 
They were venerated as the incarnation of the soul of Osiris in the nether world, 


1 The name of Osiris prefixed to that of the Apis meant the Osirian or deceased Apis. The name of Osiris is found 
ed private persons before the XLXth 


prefixed to that of Men-ka-ra or Mycerinus on his coffins, but not to those of deceas 
dynasty, about B.c. 1300. 


158 IDE NOEME, 


or, in other words, as the resuscitating principle restoring all that was dead to 
new life. The god who figured the wanderings of the soul until it was absorbed 
into the great universal essence was 
called Sakari. It was in his province 
that the temple of Osiris-Hapi was 
erected, and the Greek god Serapis 
arose from a modified conception of 
the nature of this divinity. 

Thus it happened that close to 
the Egyptian tombs of the Apis and 
his temple there also rose a Greek 
Serapeum. 

When, in the year 1856, a number 
of Sphinxes were discovered in the 
neighbourhood of Mariette Pacha’s 
house, that learned investigator was 
reminded of a passage in Strabo, in 
which that trustworthy geographer 
states that in the Necropolis of Mem- 
phis a Serapeum was erected in so 
sandy a spot that the Sphinxes were 
constantly being covered with sand, 
and the votaries visiting the temple 
were, when the wind was violent, in danger from the sand-storms. 
This keen archeologist was immediately possessed with the desire 
to ascertain whether, where Fernandez had found the Sphinxes, 
the remains of the Serapeum might not be discovered. He began 
to excavate there, and although he had ample supplies of labour 
at his command he needed all his energy to overcome the difficulties 
he encountered. The masses of sand had caked and hardened, and 
the sides of the passages so patiently excavated often fell in and 
choked the opening up again. At last the avenue of Sphinxes 
was found. He followed it up, and it was discovered that it had 
connected the Greek Serapeum with the Egyptian temple. He 
then opened out a Greek sanctuary, now again choked up, besides 
those tombs of the Apis which are among the chief wonders of 
Egypt, and which every visitor to Cairo goes to see. The temple, 
of which they may be said to have been the crypt, is long 
since fallen in, and the traveller who at the present day gazes on 
the vacant desert that spreads on every side cannot picture to 
himself how different it looked under the Ptolemaic kings and ISIS REINA OT ni 
Roman Ceesars. There, under the very shadow of the stately temple, 
dwelt the different orders of the priests, as well as the attendants and keepers of 
the sacred animals. There were schools, and inns for the reception of pilgrims 
who came from the “uttermost parts of the earth,’ a market, and booths where 


TOMB OF THE APIS. 


MEMPHIS AND THE PYRAMIDS. 159 


merchants sold their goods; there were barracks for the troops posted here, and, 
finally, there were little cells attached to the sanctuary, which are worthy of 
mention, since they may be regarded as the precursors of Christian monasticism. 
Greek papyri inform us that here, long before the birth of the Saviour, ascetic 
penitents led a gloomy, cloistered life in the strictest self-imposed seclusion. Of their 
own freewill these hermits denied themselves all intercourse with their fellow-men, 
and every grace and pleasure, even to a smile. Their miserable cells were con- 
structed of mere Nile mud and unburnt bricks, and clung like swallows’ nests to 
the great temple buildings wherever they found room, even on the roof. What 
these recluses needed for their support was brought to them by their relations, and 
given to them through the one small window of their hovels.’ Here they strove 
for purity—z.e., inward puri- 

fication —in the service of mh Tw 
Serapis, and it is but natural a : \ 
that in their over-wrought s a i was 
frame of mind they should He 
have been favoured with mar- \ 


vellous dreams, and tempted \ } 
by hideous apparitions. Who- ii P 
ever dedicated himself to the i 


i mi 


service of Serapis in _ this 
world was received by the | 
god as one of his elect in | 
the next. Already in the |) 
very earliest times the monu Win Ie 4 
ments speak of the “ Fellows,” HIRE ese 
the followers and the minis- ; 

ters of Osiris. There is much 

that is very touching in what 

has been handed down to us 

of the history of the twin- 

sisters Thaues and Taus, who were attached to the Serapeum as priestesses of Isi 
The papyrus which contains their petitions tells us that they had to fetch water in 
cracked jars from the Nile, which is at some little distance, for the three hundred 
and sixty daily libations at the altar of Serapis, and their reward for this labour of 
the Danaids was three cakes of bread a day, with an annual bounty of wheat 
and kiki-oil. But these doles were so irregularly paid that, in order not to die of 
hunger, they were forced to ask help by these petitions. 

On other occasions, however, and even in much later times, nothing was spared 
in this institution. When the Apis died, under Ptolemy I. Soter, not only was 
the whole of the immense sum devoted to his obsequies exhausted, but the priests 
found themselves obliged to borrow of the king fifty talents, or about £11,250. In 


DOOR OF THE MASTABA OF TI. 


1 On the occasion of the visit of one of the Ptolemies, a recluse saw the monarch and presented a petition on behalf 
of his brother. 
2 Vide “The Sisters,” a romance by G. Ebers. 


IL dO VaVisvit 


) 
) 
et 
<2} 
| > 
LEZ LI ) 
SSS } 
| 
) 
yy 
oy 


MEMPHIS AND THE PYRAMIDS. 161 


the time of Diodorus the keepers of the Apis spent for this purpose a hundred 
talents, or about £22,500. 

We will visit the grave of the bull who was interred at such a cost; we have 
seen how carefully he was tended in the Apeum of the temple of Ptah at Memphis. 
There the cow too was worshipped of whom it was reported that she became the 
mother of the Apis by the influence of a moonbeam. When a new Apis was 
discovered a festival was held throughout the land, and the happy owner was 
rewarded with princely gifts. First of all, the priests had to examine him, to see 
that none of the sacred marks—eight-and-twenty in all, according to Ailian—were 
lacking to him. His coat must be black; on his forehead he was to have a triangular 
white mark, on his back the figure of a vulture,’ and on his right flank a white 
crescent ; the hairs of his tail were to be of 
two colours. His tongue, too, was examined, 
for under it there must be an excrescence shaped 
like a scarabeeus. It need hardly be said that a 
variety of ceremonies preceded and attended his 
admission to the temple of Ra. After his death 
he was carefully embalmed, and his mummy 
carried to the tombs before which we are now 
standing. Of their discovery Mariette Pacha 
himself writes as follows :—‘I confess that when, 
on the 12th November, 1871, I first penetrated 
into the sepulchre of the Apis, I was so overcome 
with astonishment that, though it is now five ; ) 
years ago, the feeling is still vivid in my mind. CEASE 
By some inexplicable accident one chamber of 


the Apis tombs, walled up in the thirtieth year of Rameses II, had escaped the 
general plunder of the monuments, and I was so fortunate as to find it untouched. 
Three thousand seven hundred years had had no effect in altering its primitive 
state. The finger mark of the Egyptian who set the last stone in the wall built 
up to cover the door, was still visible in the mortar. Bare feet had left their traces 
on the sand strewn in a corner of this chamber of the dead; nothing had been 
disturbed in this burying-place, where an embalmed ox had been resting for nearly 
fourteen centuries. To many travellers it will seem a terrible thing to live here 
alone for years in the desert; but discoveries such as the chamber of Rameses II. 
leave an impression compared to which all others sink into insignificance, and which 
I can only wish I may experience again and again.” 


Our old guide now opens a door which protects the rock passages and chambers 
from the inroads of the sand. The two oldest galleries of the Apis vaults’ have 
become wholly impenetrable; it is only the most recent and finest which is open 


) These 
housing with < 
* The € 


’ The oldest sepulchres date from the reign of Amenophis IIT., about B.c. 1400; they had mortuary chapels above the 


are supposed to have been represented by the arrangement of the hair; on the bronze figures are represented a 


, a solar-winged disc, or a scarabeeus, and a vulture with expanded wings. 


vations here were four years in progress. 


sepulchral chambers. 


21 


162 EGYPT. 


to the visitor. It contains sixty-four tombs, and was excavated under Psametik L., 
of the XXVIth Saite dynasty, (who died B.c. 618); and it was enlarged even under 
the last of the Ptolemies. 

We have lighted the tapers we are to carry. If a visitor of distinction comes 
to the catacomb it is illuminated by wax tapers set in wooden stands fixed for the 


= LN=S8iiie 


purpose, or sometimes by the 


magnesium light which turns its 
darkness into day. But what 
there is to see is soon told. 


There is an antechamber, a long 
gallery with side rec in which 
lie the coffins, and right and left 
near the entrance there are three 
connected corridors which run into 
the main gallery, forming alto- 
gether a plan like the hook in 
the ground-line of the letter P. 


BRINGING OF THE OVERSEER FOR THE RECKONING. 


All are hewn out of the living rock, and the length altogether may be about 1,070 
feet. When Mariette Pacha opened the antechamber it looked like a museum of 
inscriptions, for above five hundred tablets, rounded at the top, were fastened to 
the walls, the votive offerings of pious pilgrims in memory of their visits to this 
sacred spot. No one, when erecting such a memorial, failed to indicate on the 


SHIP-BUILDING. 


tablet the day, month, and year of the king’s reign, or when the deceased Apis, to 
whom his pilgrimage was addressed, was born, installed, and interred. It may 
easily be imagined what services these little monuments, now for the most part to be 
seen in the Louvre, have rendered in helping to determine the order of succession 
and duration of the reigns of many of the Pharaohs. 

Twenty-four of the stone sarcophagi remain intact; many have been walled 
up with limestone into the recesses of the rock passage in which they stand; they 
are formed of various materials, the finest are of a dark greywacke, others of red 


MEMPHIS AND THE PYRAMIDS. 163 


granite, and the least costly of limestone. The chests of the smaller sarcophagi are 
all of one piece, but the inscriptions have been preserved on only three of them. 
Even the least imaginative must feel, 
in the presence of these sarcophagi, as ee 
if transported into the Campo Santo of aust =S0} | 
a world of giants. I hesitate in such a Gas 
spot to descend to the bathos of mere 
figures; but the reader will best form 
a conception of the size of the coffins 
of these bulls when he is told that on 
an average, after the excavation of the 
interior, they weigh 130,000 lbs. 
Perhaps it is the enormous difference 
between the idea of a coffin that we have SEMA 
in our mind and the coffins we actually 
see before us that has so powerful an effect on the beholder’s mind. Added to 
this, there is the thrill with which we see any object of primeval antiquity, and 


CATTLE TREADING OUT CORN. 


which has commanded the pious reverence of countless generations. It is true that 
these sentiments are inefficient to overawe the avarice of man. Even the tombs 
of the Apis had been thoroughly rifled long before they were buried in sand ; 
Mariette Pacha found the lids of the sarcophagi pushed aside, and on many of 


gle Oat RK et Fe ee le Vis (| 


Me. 


L LA 
eu doe Té! 


id 
= 


Cn 


HORNED CATTLE DRIVEN THROUGH THE WATER. 


w 


i 


im CE 


164 EGYPT. 


them a heap of stones had been flung in token of contempt for the work of the 
heathen. 
In an older portion of the Apis catacombs, which had fallen in, Mariette Pacha 


ENJOYMENTS ON THE WATER. 


found a human body with a golden mask on the face, and with many costly 
ornaments and amulets on the breast. From inscriptions it was known that these 
were the remains of Khamfs, the eldest 
son of Rameses IL, who was high-priest 
at Memphis, and who is often mentioned 
as a particularly pious prince. He seems 
to have been buried among the sacred 
bulls as a special distinction above others.’ 

The number of tombs choked by sand 
at Sakkarah is enormous; but I can 
here make mention only of the two 
finest of them; these are the Mastabas— 
as they are called—of Ti and of Ptah- 
hotep, of which only the first-named is 


| SSS s aS BX £1 Z 
ae eg Ve 


SALTING FISH. 


usually open to the traveller's inspection. Both were erected by noblemen— 
peers of the realm—who served under that royal family, the Vth dynasty, which 


WRESTLING. 


succeeded the builders of the Pyramids of Ghizeh. We go down to the en- 
trance of the mausoleum of Ti by a path cut in the sand, and at the very 


' He died in the lifetime of his father. 


CAMP. 


166 EGYPT. 


threshold, on the pillared supports to the right and left of the entrance, we are 
greeted by the portrait in relief of the dignitary himself, leaning on his rod 


ISA Ze 


A 


=—=-s yew PB 


ACROBATIC EXERCISES AND GAME OF MOORA. 


of office, who, as an inscription informs us, served under three Pharaohs. He 
himself was not of royal blood; but, as holding the office of high-priest, and 


at SEX, SN sig 


——— 


ENJOYMENTS OF HUNTING. 


being, as he boasts, the friend and chamberlain of the Regent, “ruling in the 
heart of his lord” as privy councillor—“lord of the secrets” as superintendant 


CAPTURED ANIMALS OF THE WILDERNESS. 


of all government works and of the whole establishment of the scribes of his 
province—he was the husband of a princess, who is several times represented 
by his side. She was called Nefer-hoteps, meaning “her calm is beautiful,” 


MEMPHIS AND THE PYRAMIDS. 167 


and her daughters, as well as she herself, are everywhere designated as “relations 
of the king;”* moreover, her husband dignifies her with the title, to which 
every Egyptian wife thought she had a claim, of “the mistress of the house,” 
“the beloved of her hus- 

fai j=2— band,” “the palm of pleas- 
CN See antness to her husband.” 
-) The sarcophagus, with the 
coffin, stood in the middle 
of the open hall, which was 
surrounded with twelve pil- 
lars, while the thick walls 
sloped inwards towards 
A MUSICAL ENTERTAINMENT. the top like the sides 

of a pyramid. Here the 

survivors and dependants were wont to assemble to offer sacrifices to the dead; a 
corridor led into the smaller sepulchral chambers, where statues of the deceased 
and his wife were also found. AIl the walls of the Mastaba consist of a fine-grained 
limestone, and are covered with reliefs of extraordinary 
delicacy. The outlines are sharp and clear, and although 


é 270 6 REGO 
the inability of the artist to represent true perspective JSP EW a 
annoys us, the vividness with which all is rendered that LEZ 
is necessary for the realisation of the subject compels 

: ae ; ; A 
our frankest admiration. All that was noble in the LI KEIM Me 
life of a distinguished Egyptian, and all that he PIGEONS, 
required of his survivors after his death for his 
honour and for the welfare of his soul, are more beautifully and vividly set before 
us in the Mastabas of Ti and Ptah-hotep than even in the tombs at Ghizeh. 

I should be only too happy to wander from wall to wall and reproduce 
for the reader one picture after 
A OS another; but in this place I can 
oN. 2 pay ; : 

a SE SE, (POS only allow myself to mention the 
axl J : : 
SSS ‘<a D KK LSD) most remarkable details. 
ZN) 


ee 


XEONE wa ( The life of the great man was 


= 
—_—s 


¥ 


AS <a Gaal divided between his duties at court, 
paved 


IS Se the care of his property, and his 
ee Ee —— Sy : pleasures among his family and in 
Zen oe LAA sport. The inscriptions mention in 
FLOCK OF PIGEONS. the barest words the relations that 

bound him to his royal master, while 

all that relates to his possessions and the joys of his life is set before us 
in pictures. As in Ghizeh, we here learn the extent of the herds of the 
deceased. Not Landseer himself could have sketched the profile of a_ heifer, 
an ass, a goose, or a crane with clearer outline than these modest artists; 


» Suten retch, literally, “royal acquaintance.” 


168 EGYPT. 


the scenes which make us witnesses of the slaughter of the oxen are full of 
life, and little inscriptions everywhere help to complete the meaning of the 
pictorial illustration and to engage the sympathy of the beholder. In these 
we are told the weight of fat yielded by the slaughtered cattle; here we 
see the overseer’s name written over his head, there the encouraging words 
shouted from one to another. Many trades and utensils have their names 
attached, so that these pictures have not a little advanced the study of the 
ancient Egyptian language. Above all, everything which serves as a contribu- 
tion to the history of culture is of transcendent interest. The immense age of 
these pictures is indisputable, and yet it is hard to believe in it when we 
see what fixed forms all the aspects of citizen-life had already taken at the 
time when they were executed, and how, even at that early date, writing was 
in use even for the requirements of ordinary life. Lands and men were the 
most valued possessions of man. Hence we find secretaries reed and scroll in 
hand, and before them stand their lord’s serfs; these were represented by the 
village magistrates, and above their heads we read: “What the heads of the 
villages brought in to the valuation.” The sticks under the arms of the magis- 
trates would seem to indicate that the business was conducted with scant mercy, 
and that even in those times the fellaheen paid their hard-won taxes far from 
willingly. 

The line of hieroglyphics between the officers and the peasants sa) 
rating by the chief intendant. of the estates.” 

In another place the villages belonging to Ti are represented under the form 
of thirty-six female figures offering gifts of all sorts of country produce. The 
inscription above them runs thus:—“Food offering and drink offering from the 
villages on the family estates of the Chamberlain Ti, in Upper and Lower Egypt.” 
3y the side of each woman is the name of the place she represents. Such 
extensive estates, and lying so far apart, made it incumbent on the owner to 
provide good and efficient means of transport. The Nile and the canals were then, 
as now, the natural high-roads of intercourse; hence ship-building was actively 
carried on, and some of the pictures show the tools the carpenter had to use; 
others exhibit the forms of the finished boats, of larger travelling vessels and ships 
of burden. Ropes and sails were used, but instead of a rudder an oar was employed, 
moved by a man. 

At that time, as at the present, the chief income of the wealthy Egyptian 
was derived from fields fertilised by Nile mud, and these pictures enable us to 
look on as eye-witnesses at every operation of the husbandman. 

We will here only give the picture of the ploughman at his labour and the 
cattle treading out the corn. In the first picture we see a pair of oxen yoked 
together by a beam across the forehead. Over them is written, “A strong pulling ”— 


S 


“The 


? 


of oxen; and over the peasant guiding the plough, “Labour at the plough.” <As 
we look at the second picture we are reminded of the passage in the Bible, 
“Thou shalt not muzzle the ox that treadeth out the corn.” This injunction is 
applicable to the foremost beast, above which it is written, “Trot on, beasts, trot 
on,” and the overseer is about to give him a blow with his stick. Other pictures 


MEMPHIS AND THE PYRAMIDS. 169 


show the sowing, and the flocks of goats, the grain flung upon the damp soil, 
the reaping of the ears with small sickles, the binding of the sheaves and the 
carrying of them home on asses. Hyen the “leasing,” the gleaning, is mentioned ; 
and while this recalls the Book of Ruth, there is another picture which reminds 
us vividly enough of Pharaoh’s dream, which Joseph so sagaciously interpreted. 

Seeing the picture of a hippopotamus-hunt in the tomb of Ti, we cannot but 
think of Behemoth, the Nile horse of the Book of Job: “His bones are as strong 
pieces of brass”—it is written—“he is the chief of the ways of God, was he made 
for him to play with? When the mountains bring him forth food and all the beasts 
of the field play; he rests under lotus-plants in the covers of the reed and fens.”? 

In one of the pictures in this Mastaba, which has even preserved its colour in 
many places, we see the noble Ti hunting the hippopotamus. He is shown of 
twice the size of his followers, leaning on ‘his staff in his boat, which is overtopped 
by a papyrus-thicket of unusual height, which is the nesting-place of numberless 
birds. A hippopotamus and a crocodile are fighting, but the hunter’s whole 
attention is fixed on the enormous river-horse which is already entangled in ropes,” 
while the huntsmen, whose efforts Ti is calmly directing, fling lances at it. 
The water swarms with scaly inhabitants, and the number in the nets, as well 
as that of the victims to the delightful sport of “sticking” the fish, is immense. 
On land we see the fish split, dried, and salted. 

Nor was it only by water, but in the desert too, that the love of hunting 
of the nobles of that period showed itself. In the Mastaba of Ptah-hotep we 
find that worthy represented on a large scale, and before him a whole series of 
pictures representing his favourite amusements; gymnastic games, wrestling, and 
even the game of morra, which is still a favourite one—played with the fingers 
—in most countries bordering on the Mediterranean. 

A great variety of beasts are ensnared by him and by his huntsmen. Here 
we see antelopes caught by the lasso, there well-trained greyhounds decorated 
with broad collars rush on the hunted gazelle; the domestic life of beasts of 
prey, even of the panther and jackal, is watched and depicted. A lion surprises 
a heifer; we meet with the hyena, the ichneumon, and the hedgehog ;* nay, in 
the tomb of Ti, even with a stag) Who can enumerate and name the birds 
saught in Ptah-hotep’s net? The hunters, when they come home, bring their lord 
the creatures they have caught alive 


antelopes, gazelles, and lions. These last are 
shut up in strongly barred cages. The dogs, the master’s favourites, follow the 
servant Khnum-hotep, who leads them in a leash; and. there are dogs in the 
house too for his amusement. An ape and a dwarf are kept for sport in the 
more wealthy families. The followers of Ptah-hotep feast before him while he sits 
on his throne supported on lions’ paws, and display their skill in playing the 
harp and flute. The first Egyptologist to whom we owe a reproduction of this 
picture, the careful and meritorious Duemichen! of Strasburg, takes it amiss in the 


* Job xl, 18—21. The English version differs. 

* The hippopotamus was harpooned. 

The hedgehog, Hrinaceus dthiopicus (Ehrenb.). The armadillo is found only in South America. 
‘ Die Resultate, fol. Berlin, 1869. 


22 


170 


EGYPT. 


ancient dignitary that he should have allowed his dogs to remain present at this 
concert, and even surmises that he must have cared more for the society of his 
hunting companions than for the piece of music that is being performed. 

In truth it is difficult to preserve one’s solemnity in this tomb, such a cheerful 


HUTS AND HOUSEHOLD COMPANIONS OF THE FELLAHEEN. 


atmosphere pervades these pictures and 
bas-reliefs. It is as if they expressed 
the wish of the deceased to be joyfully 
remembered by his survivors. 

Here a ship’s captain shouts to the 
slow crew, “ You are like apes.” By the 
side of a flock of goats, which the herds- 
man is tempting with a basket full of 
fodder to follow him across the sowed 
field, we read the words, “This is how 
man loves labour.” There is a regatta 
led by Ti, and one boatman calls out to 
his competitor, “ You are free with your 
hands ”—.e., you are too vehement. Above 
some running asses we see, “Man loves 
the swift and thrashes the lazy, so make 
haste.” By a reaping scene it is written, 
“This is reaping: do it, I say, in due 
season.” The ears are addressed in these 
words, “You are ripe,’ or “ Well, you 
are large ones!” An ox being slaughtered, 
one fellow warns the other, “ Keep steady.” 
“JT am doing it all right,” is the answer. 
In a similar scene a man lifts up the leg 
of the slaughtered beast and touches the 
lips of another with the tip of his finger, 
“Took at this blood,’ he cries. “It is 
pure,’ says his companion. Most charm- 
ing of all are the flocks of pigeons, which 
were trained as carriers at an early period 
in Egypt, and which to this day are kept 
in the poorest hovels of the Fellaheen. 
Among the hunting scenes many are 
broadly farcical. 


Nevertheless death is kept in mind. One painting shows us the funeral 


procession of a deceased noble. 


Wailing women open the procession, and are 


followed by the beasts for sacrifice, and by priests burning incense and sprinkling 
the earth with essences. Near the sarcophagus walks the widow, and behind we 
see the children and superior servants of the deceased; his innumerable train of 
servants, with offerings of all kinds, close the procession. Many inscriptions are 


addressed to the guardian of the nether-world, the guide of the soul in the next 


MEMPHIS AND THE PYRAMIDS. 171 


life, the jackal-headed god Anubis.! Nor did they forget to indicate the kind 
and amount of alms to be offered to the Manes of .the deceased,? and the 
festivals when they were to be laid on the altar in the Mastaba. 

Most of the numerous tombs of this vast Necropolis, even those which the zeal 
of the learned had once disinterred, now lie buried in sand. There is much that 
is interesting and remarkable about many of them, particularly one which was 
erected for a dignitary named Thunerei, in which Mariette Pacha found a long 
list of kings’ names, which has done great service in restoring the chronology of 
Kgyptian history. 

The number of relics found in this spot within the last decade is almost 


MASTABA FAR’UON, 


countless; objects in stone, wood, and bronze, and other materials, besides 
beautifully-worked ornaments in gold set with blood-stone, turquoise, lapis-lazuli, 
and other stones for females, have been brought to light in this portion of the 
Necropolis of Memphis. Some of the most precious of these relics, and of the 
very highest antiquity, were found at Sakkarah, and are to be seen in the 
Museum of Boolak. 

A thorough study of this Necropolis would require many days. The traveller 
who penetrates farther into the desert in order to visit the remarkable building 
known as the Mastaba Far’oon—and which may perhaps be supposed to be the 
slaughter-house where the numberless beasts were killed which were here sacrificed 


‘ At this early period the sepulchral decorations are addressed to Anubis, not Os 
* In registers in the sepulchres containing a minute account of objects of the table, those of the later coffins have, besides 


lists of food, representations of objects of furniture and attire, and the numbers of each object. 


172 EGYPT. 


—will not unfrequently meet a caravan of Bedaween from the Libyan oases who 
are rejoicing in their approach to the Nile after their painful journey across the 
waterless desert, and are resting for the last time before entering Cairo, which 
smiles on them in the distance. 


Wandering here from tomb to tomb we have quite lost count of time. Night 
is spreading silently over the wide fields of the dead; only the revolting howl of 
the hyena breaks the stillness of the desert. The moon has risen and throws its 
filmy veil of silver threads over the Pyramids, the range of desert hills, and the 
green strip of fertile country. 


CAIRO; 


THE ORIGIN OF THE CITY. 


a 


N ONE of the stories of the “Thousand and One 
Nights” a man of Mosul praises Bagdad as the 
“city of peace” and the “mother of the world ;” 
but the eldest of the men whom he addresses 
replies: “He who has not seen the city of Cairo 
has not seen the world. Her soil is gold, her 
women an enchantment, and the Nile a wonder.” In the 
following night Sheherezadeh praises the delights of the city of 
the Pyramids in the following rapturous words :—< What are 
the joys of seeing the beloved compared to the sight of that 
place? He who has seen it confesses that there is no greater 
enjoyment for the eye; and when he thinks of the night when 
the Nile reaches the desired height he returns the goblet full 
of wine to him that offers it, and lets the water return to its 
fountain-head (that is to say, he wants nothing more). And 
when thou seest the island of Roda with its shady trees, 
thou art transported with joyful delight, and when thou 
standest in Cairo by the Nile, when at sunset it is veiled in the tissue of 
sunbeams, thou art revived by a soft breeze that fans the shady shore.” These are 
rapturous phrases indeed, dipped by the,imagination of the enthusiastic poet in 
colours as glowing as those shed by the sun as it vanishes from the Egyptian 
heavens. And yet, he who has ever stood on the height of the citadel of Cairo, 
and gazed across its forest of minarets at the Nile and the Pyramids on the western 


174 EGYPT. 
horizon—who has visited its streets and byways, its bazaars and mosques, its 
open squares and gardens—who has mingled in its gay, motley, thronging stream 
of life, in the stir and bustle of its inhabitants—he will ever remember the days 
of his sojourn in Cairo as a time when it was vouchsafed to him to live in the 


LANE IN THE COPT QUARTER. 


land of fairy-tale and romance—aye, even though nature have denied him the 
heavenly gift of fancy, and though his, soul may never have felt the stir of a 
poet’s dream. 

To wander through Cairo is to meet constant novelty; only to look round is 
a joy, and merely to see is to learn. No man ever left Cairo without profit, or 


CAIRO. 175 


without loss; for though every man takes home with him a thousand different 
impressions and memories that long shine bright in his fancy, he carries in his 
heart a vain longing which ever beckons him with a tempting hand back again to 
the shores of the Nile. “He who has drunk of the waters of that stream,” says the 
Arab proverb, “longs for it for ever ;” and 
again, “Ye shall not linger with impunity 
under the palm.” 

How can we explain the magical 
charm that this marvellous city never fails 
to exercise? Certainly in its most fascina- 
ting spots there is nothing whatever of 
what we understand by a “fine city.” 
The hill against which it leans is bare 
of all vegetation, and it is one of the 
youngest of the great cities of the East. 
One thing it has certainly above and 
beyond any other place that is known 
to me: it is so full of variety that a 
single ride takes us through more different 
elements of culture, productions of art, 
and objects of nature than in any other 
spot; “the three quarters of the earth 
here meet and touch.” 

Ere we are rid of the dust with 
which the desert-wind has covered us 
during our wanderings through the mighty MASHREREEYEH WINDOW. 
remains of the age of the Pharaohs, we 
are standing on the carefully watered footway of a street on both sides of which are 
ranged handsome houses of European architecture. A few steps farther and we turn 
into a shady side-street where we walk between two high stone-walls. Not a window 
with shining panes allows of any friendly intercourse 
between the street and the domestic interior; but 
balconies with close lattices of wood-work project 
before us, behind us, above us, on the right hand 
and on the left, all along the street, concealing every- 
thing that lives and stirs within from the gaze of 
the passer-by or of the opposite neighbours. Through 
the interstices and openings of these lattices—which 

SESE OEE are worked with richly pierced patterns and deli- 

cately turned bars—many an Arab lady's eye peeps, 

nevertheless, down on us below; for the lattice, called the Mashrebeeyeh, admits 
air to the women’s rooms, and allows the fair ones to see without being seen. 
The name of these outworks, which constitute the most lasting characteristic of 
the streets of old Cairo, comes from the Arab word Sharab—i.e., drink—because 
the porous water-vessels called “goallah” are set in them to cool the water they 


CAIRO. 177 


contain ; they are usually exposed to the air in round hollows in the floor of the 
balcony. In these thoroughly Oriental streets, where two riders can scarcely pass 
each other, it is always shady and cool, and the Cairene is wise to prefer them to 
the broad ones of the modern quarter. 

We make our way towards one of the main thoroughfares, riding past the 
high door of a mosque. Pious Moslems come out of it, and politely make way for 
some Franciscan monks, who seem to be holding grave council close to the sanctuary 
of Allah. We now pass into a broader street. There beasts and vehicles crowd each 


y 


Ui 


Wy, 


ae 


DRIVING THROUGH THE TOWN. 


other, the men talking and shouting, while now and then we hear the bray of an 
ass, or the grunt of a camel; but the ear is never assailed by the clatter and uproar 
of an European town, for wheels roll silently over the soft unpaved roadway. We 
have hardly made our way fairly through the bustling crowd when we find ourselves 
on a vacant place with tumble-down houses over which vultures wheel, and where 
starving street-dogs are rummaging for bones among the ruins. Huge dry stones, 
among which even weeds disdain to strike root, lie in mighty heaps on one side; 
while on the other, behind yonder wall, in the well-watered garden of some great 


man, are collected the plants of every zone, revelling in moisture, bursting with sap, 


and growing with astonishing rapidity. At the gate of the park we meet an eunuch 


23 


178 EGYPT. 


mounted on an Arab horse with splendid trappings, and he casts a lowering glance 
at the fair Europeans who are whirled past him, unveiled and laughing, in their 
open Vienna carriages. A runner makes way through the crowd for the swift 
horses till they come to a standstill before a gaudy shop, in whose windows every- 
thing is displayed for sale that is dreamed of for feminine adornment, even in 
European capitals. In front of it a poor Arab offers for sale his wretched stock of 
nondescript wares on a miserable truck. A long string of camels now forces us 
to make way. They are tied together like boats in tow of a steam-tug; each carries 
on his humped back a bale of goods which is being conveyed to the railway, where 


4 LEARNED MAN ABSORBED IN THE KORAN. 


the whistle of the engine mingles with the half grunt, half roar of the patient 
beasts. In the splendid garden of the Hzbekeeyeh square we see the black nurse 
of some Arab child side by side with the French “bonne” and her fair-haired 
charge; the Italian dandy lights his cigarette from that of a Nubian merchant ; 
from the open window of an assembly-room, decorated with gilt mirrors and marble 
tables, ring out the latest European tunes, performed by a chorus of ladies; we 
pause to listen to the familiar strains, and are startled to hear, in the room next 
to the music-hall, the sharp clink of gold coins tossed on to a roulette table by 
the excited players. 

Turn now into this side-street with its many balconies and finely pierced harem- 
lattices. There, in front of a “café,” or tavern, on the ground-floor, sit a group 


CAIRO. 179 


of black and brown folks listening with much complacency to the nasal recitative 
of a street-singer. His more than simple strains have no charm for the 
cultivated ear, and we hastily make our way through the group. There, riding on 
by a shady avenue of Lebbek-trees, we soon find ourselves again between the 
rows of houses of a narrow, gay, and busy street. The broad Nile gleams in the 
distance, and a forest of masts fills up the picture. That is the Harbour of 
Boolak. Side by side with a splendidly fitted steam-ship lies a clumsy Nubian 
barge with ragged lateen-sails, in form just like the boats we see on the 
monuments of Pharaonic times bringing the tribute of the Soudan to Heypt. 
Not far from the port stands a magnificent museum, in which the monuments and 
relics of antiquity are arranged in accordance with the highest requirements of 
the science of the West. 

Of all the Egyptians who daily pass this building scarcely one in a hundred 
can tell his own age, and could hardly say whether “the Pharaoh”—under which 
name he designates the whole pre-Christian history of his country—lived three 
hundred or three thousand years ago. And yet it is among these ignorant men 
that the efforts of learning also find their home. In that vast building at Boolak 
slender Egyptian fingers pull from European steam-presses carefully printed sheets 
covered with learned Arabic texts. But we will turn our back on the “State 
printing-press” and the port, and return to Cairo proper, for in the courts of 
the University-mosque el Azhar—of which we propose to give further details 
presently—we shall find more students than in any “high school” of the West. 
Make yourself acquainted with those sages who live there in placid content, 
satisfied as it were with merely intellectual food, and then ask yourself whether 
you have ever seen a student more deeply immersed in his subject than that 
old Moslem who is striving for a right understanding of a difficult passage in 
the Koran. 

This wonderful city is like a mosaic picture of contrasts. Still, to this day, 
the background of the picture is of Oriental colouring; but one Hastern figure after 
another is displaced by an European one, and those who desire to become familiar 
with Cairo as the metropolis of Oriental life must not delay. 

The reader, we may hope, will follow us now. We are fettered by no 
considerations of time and space. The gates of palaces, the doors of mosques 
and schools, nay the inmost chambers of the houses are not closed to us, and 
we purpose to trace the life of the Cairene—great and small—from the cradle to 
the grave. We will introduce ourselves as spectators of his labours, and as guests 
at his feasts, and whenever a freer admission is granted to a trustworthy friend 
than to ourselves I will depute him to be your guide. 

My business in these pages will be to present Cairo as it is; but in order 
to do so successfully, it will be necessary to describe how it developed. 

Memphis, the ancient capital of Egypt, with which we are already acquainted, 
may be called the mother of Cairo. It lay on the west bank of the Nile, while 
its daughter, the younger city, is spread over the tract between the river and the 
Mokattam range, between the desert-sand and the magnificent garden-land. The 
limestone eminence with the citadel serves as its backbone, as it were, while the 


PUBLIC 


SCHOOL 


IN THE 


HEART 


OF 


CAIRO, 


CAIRO. 181 


Nile, whose swift waters rush past the garden-walls and quays of its western 
suburb, invites it to busy intercourse and traffic with distant shores. 

The rocky hill behind the city is perfectly bare and barren.! Before the Lord 
God—so runs the old legend—reyealed himself to Moses on Mount Sinai, He told 
all the mountains that he purposed speaking to his elect servant on one of them. 
Immediately they all began to strain and stretch themselves that they might 
seem tall and big; Zion alone—the mount on which Jerusalem stands—bowed 
and was humble. Then, to reward its 
humility, the Lord commanded that all the 
other mountains should give the plants 
that grew upon them to grace and deck 
it. The Mokattam parted with all its 
verdure in favour of Zion, and hence its 
name, which recalls an Arabic word mean- 
ing “to part.” 

During the splendour of Memphis 
only small hamlets stood opposite the 
Pyramids on the eastern shore of the 
Nile. One of the most southerly was in 
connection with the stupendous quarries 
which yielded the materials for the great 
buildings of the ancient city of the 
Pharaohs. The Egyptians called it Toroua, 
and as the prisoners of war were em- 
ployed here as stone-hewers, and the name 
Toroua remotely suggested Troja, the story 
soon was current among the Greeks—who 
were so apt at seizing or coining legends 
—that here, near the modern Tourah, the 
captive Trojans had settled who had been 
led hither by Menelaus on his return after 
the fall of Hion, and that he himself was 
said to have rested here with the recovered 


Helen. BLACK AND WHITE JOCKEYS. 


Another place of which we find early 
mention, and which formed the nucleus of the oldest portion of Cairo, was called 
Babylon, and it was said that it owed its origin to the Babylonians brought into 
Egypt by Cambyses.* We shall return to it again, but for the moment must direct 
our attention to a third and larger town which flourished here at a very early period. 
This is the venerable City of the Sun, Heliopolis. It was situate a few miles to 
the north-east of modern Cairo, and it was one of the most famous centres of 
learning of all antiquity. No one would willingly leave unvisited the spot where 


' Called in Egyptian kar-kar, and mentioned as early as the VIth dynasty ; it was the ancient arsenal. 2 BG) 1527. 


182 EGYPT. 


it stood, for there still exist there a tree, a spring, and a stone, which are all three 
. accounted among the chief wonders of Egypt ; moreover, one of the pleasantest things 
in the world is an excursion thither, on horseback or driving, either early in the 
morning or when the approach of evening lengthens the shadows. 

As soon as we have left the houses behind us and have crossed the city canal 
—Khaleeg it is called—we see the large mass of buildings of Abbaseeyeh with 
its barracks, its military school, and its observatory. On our right lies the 
extensive race-course, with its stands built of wood, where the races are run in the 
month of January. English and Arab horses both enter the lists, and during the 
few minutes’ struggle the former usually beat their Bedawee competitors, though 
these are so much the handsomer, and far exceed the northerners in “staying” 


DROMEDARY RACE, 


powers. The dusky jockey can keep his seat in the saddle just as well as the 
English one, and yet the white man—small as he is, in accordance with his 
calling—looks down with proud disdain on the wretched ill-fed lengthiness of the 
black one. In no class of the Cairene population is race-hatred so keen as among 
the drivers, grooms, and riders. The Arab loves the horse, and on his native soil 
will depute the charge of a horse to no foreigner. Hence it has not unfrequently 
occurred that the English jockeys imported by wealthy Egyptians have been 
subject to the murderous attacks of their swarthy rivals. Dromedary-races are 
frequently run, and it is certainly a strange sight when the antediluvian forms, 
as we might almost say, of the “ships of the desert” begin nimbly to move 
their long stiff legs and soft feet, and to throw them up before and behind in 
swift career. They are urged forward with shrill shrieks by their dark riders ; 


CAIRO. 183 


but with all their energy, and the utmost exercise of the beasts’ strength, they 
camot match the swiftness of the horse. No doubt they have the power of 
continuing to run steadily for some miles, when the horse that outstripped them 
in the first hour has long since given in, panting and gasping. The swiftest 
dromedaries are called “Hegeen,” and we shall have occasion in another place to 
speak of the high value set upon them, and of the incredible distances they can 
cover without taking any rest. 

No sooner have we passed the Abbaseeyeh than we are fanned by the pure 
air of the desert, along the border of 
which our way lies. The road is hot 
and dusty, but we soon shall be pro- 
tected by the shade of the Lebbek- 
trees on the right and left, and as 
we approach one of the residences 
of the Khedive Tewfik Pacha our 
eyes are gladdened by the sight of 
well-irrigated fields, luxuriant green 
gardens, and vineyards bearing abun- 
dantly. Ask the labourer when he 
sowed the corn that now with ripe 
ears awaits the harvest—ask the 
peasant by the road-side when the 
noble trees were planted whose broad 
crowns now wave over the road, or 
that beautiful Eucalyptus which 
stands up above the hedge-row— 
and the answers you will receive 
will seem to you hardly credible. 
Trees which in 1869 had only lately 
been planted, and still needed to be 
propped, when I saw them again in 
1873 had begun to spread broad leafy GARDEN ON THE ROAD TO HELIOPOLIS. 
crow! The Lebbek (A liizzia Lebbeh), 
which has now for many years been conspicuously characteristic of Egypt, is said to 
have been brought to the valley of the Nile from Eastern India in the time of 
Mahommed Ali; and the botanist Schweinfurth states that propagation by offsets or 
cuttings, which with most trees can only be practised on young shoots and branches, 


can be effected in the case of the Lebbek with branches as large as a man, or even 
with portions of the trunk. Many of the gardens we have passed on the way are 
more luxuriantly beautiful, and better kept than the one before which we now halt 
and spring from the saddle; but none can compete with it in fame, for in its midst, 
and now enclosed within a railing, stands a sycamore, under which the Virgin Mary 
is said to have rested with the infant Christ during the flight into Egypt. The 
Khedive Ismail, during his visit to Paris in 1867, gallantly presented it to the 
Empress Eugenie. It is no doubt of great age, but we can only regard it as the 


184 EGYPT. 


successor of an older tree which was already dead when Vansleb visited Egypt in 
1672. This trustworthy traveller was told by monks in Cairo that the Virgin’s tree 
had died of old age in 1656, and they showed him its remains, which were preserved 
as a most precious relic. It is true that the gardeners showed a stump as the 
remains of the original tree. 

Not far from the rent, broken, and riven trunk of the present Virgin’s tree, 
which seems to have been planted on precisely the same spot as the old one, and 
on which travellers innumerable have cut their names, a spring of fresh water flows 
from the ground—which in these climes usually yields only a salt and bitter fluid— 


SYCAMORE OF MATAREEYEH, 


and waters the garden by the help of a double water-wheecl. This spring is men- 
tioned in records of the highest antiquity, and when it was said, and believed for 
centuries, that the balsam-shrubs—of which Brocardi compared the leaves to those 
of marjoram—could thrive here and nowhere else, this phenomenon was ascribed 
to certain miraculous effects of this spring, which had got interwoven with the 
legend of the Virgin. The infant Christ, it was said, had been bathed in the spring, 
and from that time it had never ceased to flow with fresh water. In another place we 
are told that the Virgin washed the Saviour’s swaddling clothes in it, and wherever 
a drop fell from them on the soil a balsam-tree sprang up. When their pursuers 
came up with the fugitives, the Virgin hid herself with the Infant in a hollow in 
the tree, and a spider concealed her from their gaze with its web. Much that is 
heathen may, however, be traced in these legends; at any rate, the Egyptian myths 


THE FLIGHT INTO EGYPT. 


186 EGYPT. 


tell us of a god who was saved from his pursuers by hiding in a tree, and also of 
balsam-shrubs that sprang from the moisture with which a celestial being bedewed 
the earth. 

The Arabs call this garden and its environs, including the ruins of Heliopolis, 
which are about half a mile distant, Ayn Shems, which, with reference to the 
spring, is commonly rendered “fount of the sun,’ but seems actually to mean “eye 
of the sun.” 

This name was borne by an idol which had escaped destruction under the ruins 

of Heliopolis, and of whom it was asserted that if any one in possession of any 
office ventured to gaze upon it he was shortly after divested of his dignity. The 
story goes that the Sultan Ahmed-ibn-Tuloon,' having heard this legend, took his 
stand in front of the image and ordered stone-masons to destroy it. Thereupon it is 
said that after an illness of ten months he died; we know, in fact, that he died 
in Syria. This idol, known as the “sun’s eye,” was probably nothing else than 
an Egyptian statue which had stood, long years before, in the vast hall of the 
sanctuary of Heliopolis. 
This famous temple of the sun is the only Egyptian temple of which a Greek 
(the geographer Strabo) has given us an exact description, and we must, therefore, 
especially regret that the words of the prophet Jeremiah have been so completely 
fulfilled: “He shall break also the images of Beth-shemesh [the house of the Sun] 
that 7s in the land of Egypt; and the houses of the gods of the Egyptians shall he 
burn with fire” (Jer. xliii. 13). 

In a few minutes we reach the scanty remains, and are standing before a fine 
obelisk, the oldest of all the monuments of this description, and the only one which 
still lifts its point skywards, though it was raised in the remote period before the 
incursion of the Hykshos. As the obelisk form was sacred to the sun-god, we cannot 
be surprised to learn that the City of the Sun was full of obelisks, of which there 
remained in the time of Abd-al Lateef such a mass of fragments that he calls 
them innumerable. Most of those obelisks, which were transported by the Cesars 
to Rome, Constantinople, and Alexandria (among these Cleopatra’s needles), were 
originally erected here in front of the gate of the temple of the sun, and never 
stood singly, but always in pairs. The one we are now admiring had its twin, 
which was overthrown in the year 1160 of our era—and not in 1260, as Makreezee 
states. Arabs have even seen the copper caps that covered their peaks, and the 
verdigris that stained their reddish-brown sides. The ruins of the overthrown 
obelisk probably lie deep in the soil near its still erect companion, which was 
placed, more than four thousand years since, in front of the gates of the temple 
of the sun by Pharaoh Usertesen I. The inscriptions, which are alike on the 
four sides, exhibit the grand and simple style of that period; they record the name 
of the king to whom the obelisk owed its erection, and tell us that it was set up 
at a feast initiating a period of thirty years. Its base is deep in the ground, for 
since its erection the surrounding soil has risen by successive depositions of Nile 
mud to a thickness of nearly six feet; in the inscriptions that cover it numberless 


1 ‘Who lived from .p. 870 to a.p, 884, 


CAIRO. 187 


wasps have made their nests. In the time of the Khalifs this obelisk and its brother 
were known as “ Pharaoh’s needles.” 

Heliopolis, which was called An by the Egyptians and On by the Hebrews, 
is mentioned at a very early date. The temple of the sun in its midst was as 
old as the worship of the day-star, with which all the religious doctrine and cultus 
of the Nile valley was connected. Ra, under his two chief aspects—Harmachis, the 
morning sun, and Tum, the evening sun—was worshipped here in a combined form, 
Tum-Harmachis ; and associated with him were various female divinities, among 
which Hathor, Iusas, and the oft-named Nebt-hotep held important positions. 
I should not here allude to Osar-Sup or Osiris-Sup'—a god frequently mentioned as 
connected with Heliopolis—if it were not that I 
believe this name to have survived in that of 
Osarsiph,” which was given to Moses by the Greek 
narrators of the Jewish Exodus. 

The temple of the sun was said to have been 
the dwelling of the immortals so early as at the 
time of the wars of the gods. When Typhon and 
Horus had wounded each other their wounds were 
bound up and healed in the “great hall” of 
Heliopolis. A manuscript on leather in the Berlin 
Museum informs us that King Amenemha I. and 
his son Usertesen rebuilt the temple itself; and Z 2 2 
there is no lack of Egyptian and Greek evidence gabe erry lags eee 

2 (From a Ritual.) 

to show that the god who bestowed light on the 

earth also aroused and nourished the enlightened powers of the spirit, and that under 
his protection a college of priests flourished here whose fame outshone the other 
similar foundations at Sais, Memphis, and Thebes. Herodotus celebrates the sages 
of Heliopolis as the most enlightened of all Egypt, and though the Greeks criticised 
their mystical style and method, they admired their astronomical and other learning ; 
and the houses where Pythagoras, Plato, and Eudoxus had lived, while attending 
the great school of the City of the Sun, which even in his time was deserted, were 
still pointed out to foreigners in the city; its lecture-rooms seem to have been 
only with difficulty accessible to strangers. 


Certain names of sages of Heliopolis have come down to us. May not the priest 
Potiphar for one have belonged to them, to whose daughter Asnath the Pharaoh 
married his favourite, Joseph? We could even give many details, if space per- 
mitted, as to the possessions of the priests of the sun—which under Rameses III. 
had become enormous—as to the establishment of the temple, and the sacred 
trees and animals worshipped within its precincts. We will only allude to the pale- 
hued bull Mnevis;* to the lions with a glistening skin which were kept here; and, 


* According to some, Osiris, as represented before his destruction and embalmment, figured often in the Arabian nome at 
Mount Sinai, and also in the Eastern Desert, He was represented as a mummied hawk, and the name Sup or Supti is also 
applied to Sekhet, a form of Bast. 

2 Strabo, xvi. 760. 


® Adored at Heliopolis as the incarnation of the sun-god Ra. 


IOPOLIS. 


EL: 


THE OLD HE 


AT 


SUN 


THE 


OF 


OBELISK 


CAIRO. 189 


above all, to the Pheenix. Everyone knows the myth of the bird of the land of 
paims, which, after being burnt, rises again from its ashes and brings them to 
Heliopolis at intervals of five hundred years, by which symbol the consolatory 
hope found expression that all that dies, fades, or is extinguished in nature shall 
revive to new life, bloom, and glory. The image of the Phoenix, says Horapollo, 
signifies the traveller returning from strange and distant lands after a long 
separation. Venus, as we call it, the brightest and purest planet of the eastern 


THE ISLAND OF RODA, 


heavens, bore the name of the Phoenix; her early setting, giving promise of her 
return in the evening, seemed also to promise to the dying mortal that it should 
be vouchsafed to his departing soul to shine in renewed glory in the dark night of 
death. The Hgyptians called the Phoenix “Bennu,”* and on many inscriptions the 
temple of the sun, or some portion of it, is called the house of Bennu’ All 
Egypt took part—we are told by later authors—in pilgrimages to this temple. 
The most splendid of the Pharaohs added to their names the title of “Prince of 
Heliopolis,” to the exclusion of all other names of might; and proud conquerors, 


* According to the Ritual, or Book of the Dead, the Bennu in Heliopolis was the creator of visible and invisible beings. 


* Also roofed or capped home, or else city of pyramids or obelisks. 


190 EGYPT. 


who at Memphis were content only to sacrifice to the great Ptah, submitted to 
many ceremonies in the sanctuary of the sun-god, and qualified themnselves for 
admission into the mysteries of the temple. 

Amenemha I., the founder of the sanctuary of the sun, entreats, after he has 
begun the great work (which was not finished till the time of his son, Usertesen), 
“May it not perish by the vicissitudes of time, may that which is made endure !” 
This desire of a great king, which has come down to us through the leathern roll now 
preserved at Berlin, has not been fulfilled; for of his magnificent structure, built for 
all eternity, nothing remains but the obelisk we have seen, and a few blocks of stone 
scarcely worth mentioning. The Persian Cambyses is unjustly accused of having 
destroyed the temple and city of the sun, for the city was minutely described in 
detail long after his time, and the temple was still flourishing; nay, many remains 
of the sanctuary, that have now long since vanished, were described even by Arab 
authors. 

Abd-al Lateef calls Heliopolis (Ayn Shems) “a small town with ruined but still 
visible walls, from which it is easy to recognise that they belonged to a temple, 
since hideous and huge idols were found there of hewn stone, thirty ells high, 
and with symmetrically formed limbs.” The gate of the city—probably the pylon 
of the temple mentioned by Strabo—was as yet undestroyed. Almost all the 
figures, pedestals, and ornaments which our informant saw were covered with 
sculptured pictures and hieroglyphic inscriptions. 

If we ask what has become of the enormous quantity of hard, well-hewn 
blocks which were still seen here at a comparatively late period by trustworthy 
witnesses, the answer is that Cairo the Great, growing up in the immediate 
neighbourhood of the temple of the sun, carried them off; and to find them 
again we must search through the foundation-walls of her palaces, her mosques, 
and her dwelling-houses. Heliopolis shared the fate of Memphis; but we have now 
made acquaintance. with the old Phoenix, and will return to the young “bird of 
the sun” that rose from its ashes. 

Back again to Cairo is our way. The asses that carry us are not less inde- 
fatigable than their driver Ahmed, the very type of the Egyptian gamin, of whom I 
shall have more to tell presently. We go over the whole city, crossing at its farthest 
southern limit the canal known as the Khaleeg, which traverses it in a perfectly 
straight line from one end to the other, and is said to have been projected by 
Amroo to connect the Nile with the Red Sea. We stand here at the spot whence 
it starts; this is Old Cairo, the humble mother of a magnificent daughter, the 
Fostat of the Arabs in the first century of Islam.’ At the extreme south of it, 
after a short walk through streets of the most provincial character and appearance, 
we come upon a modest quarter, where considerable remains of walls and a fortifica- 
tion of the time of the Romans have been preserved. This is the Egyptian Babylon, 
the fort which for centuries contained one of the legions which kept Egypt in 
subjection to the Cesars and the Byzantine emperors. This town was bathed 
on the west by the Nile, which divided opposite to it, embracing a large island, 


1 The era of the Hegira commenced the 15th-16th July, a.p, 622. 


s 


192 EGYPT. 


in shape like an oleander-leaf. Roda is the name of this island, and in early times 
it was connected 
with Babylon by a 
bridge. 

The history of 
the foundation of 
Cairo and of the do- 
minion of the Arabs 


in Egypt is imsepa- 
rably connected with 
these sites. 
In the year A.p. 
638 a small band 
of religious fanatics, 
adherents of the 
new religion of Mo- 
hammed, came into 
Egypt from Syria, 
under the  leader- 
ship of Amroo-ibn- 
el-Asee. At Fara- 
mah he, with his 
four thousand men, 
encountered the 
great imperial army 
commanded by the 
Greek governor Mu- 
kaukas, and with 
the help of the 
Copts—that is, of 
those Christians of 
Egyptian extraction that had clung to the 
Monophysite confession—who had joined him, 
he forced it to retreat after a month of 
determined resistance. No less a personage 
than the Bishop Benjamin of Alexandria 
had encouraged the Copts to revolt, for at 
this period the vehement dogmatic hostility 
of the orthodox Greeks made them an 
SS enemy more hated and dreaded by the 
THE TENT OF AMKOO. Monophysites than the Mohammedans were. 
For the orthodox church pillaged their 
cloisters, closed their churches, had for a long time impaired their estates by 
unjust fines, and crippled their freedom by imprisonment; and they looked 
to the Mohammedans merely for rescue, in the first instance, from the heretical 


0. 


CATI 


OLD 


CAIRO. 193 


Greek emperors, priests, and officials, their oppressors and tormentors. After 
several battles the Greeks withdrew into Babylon, where they were besieged by 
Amroo, to whom the Khalif Omar had sent reinforcements. 

The Arab warriors of that day were heroes, and their statesmen were sages to 
be regarded as in no respect behind the noblest figures whose memory has been kept 
green in the history of other nations. What Decius Mus, Curtius, or Arnold von 
Winkelried has acted more nobly than Zoobeyr, who resolved to sacrifice himself in 
order to lead his comrades to victory? He set up a ladder close to a breach in 
the wall and climbed up it sword in hand, but unobserved. Having reached the 
top he shouted to his companions a jubilant “Allah akbar!” in which, at his 
command, they all joined in loud acclaim. The besieged, 
thinking that a strong troop of the enemy had scaled 
the wall, fled—and Babylon was in the hands of the 
Avabs. 

The vanquished garrison withdrew to the island 
of Roda, whence the Governor, Mukaukas, entered into 
negotiations for peace with the conquerors, after de- 
stroying the bridge that connected the island with the 
mainland. Two Copts went as envoys to the Mussul- 
man camp, and Amroo detained them there a few days 
in order that they might become acquainted with the 
sarnest and pious character of his warriors, and report 
it to their comrades. The deeply religious and noble 
lives of these defenders of their faith could not, in fact, 
fail of its effect on the envoys, and after a few contests 
by word and deed a treaty was concluded, by which the 
Copts pledged themselves to pay an annual poll-tax of 
two dinars, excepting only the old men, women, and ,\.}¥ : 
children. The conquerors, on their part, resigned all THE NILOMETER, 
claims on the land or property of the vanquished, and 


granted a free retreat to the Greeks who would not submit to the exaction of 
a tribute. In the course of a former chapter, describing New Alexandria, I have 
already related the honourable testimony borne by Mukaukas to the Arab character 
when the emperor reproached him bitterly with his weakness in yielding, with a 
force of 100,000 men, to an army of 12,000. After the whole Coptic population 
of lower Egypt had submitted-to him without a single blow, Amroo turned upon 
Alexandria—which was still at that time the heart of Greek life in HEgypt—in 
June 640. We know already that it was forced at last to succumb after a 
valiant resistance. Amroo wished to establish his residence in Alexandria, and 
began to construct a palace and to assign quarters to his troops; but the 
Khalif did not approve of these measures, and rightly so; for the unquiet 
mercantile port, used as it was to faction and strife, seemed but ill adapted 
to be the centre of a new and re-awakened vitality. 


Amroo, therefore, retired to Babylon again, in whose neighbourhood his tent 
and camp, Fosta&t, had remained pitched. For when he was about to set out 


25 


OLD ARABIAN HOUSE. 


CAIRO. 195 


for Alexandria, and had commanded that his tent should be removed, he had 
been told that a pair of pigeons had built their nest on the top of it. At this 
information the general desired that his canvas house should be left standing, “For 
God forbid,” said he, “that a Moslem should refuse a shelter to any living being 
—one of God’s creatures—that has put itself under the protection of his hospitality.” 
Thus it occurred that on his return from Alexandria his old tent was still standing. 
He took possession of it again, and proceeded to found a new city which received 
the name of Fostat, or “the tent.” At an early date the Arabic name for Egypt— 
Misr—was transferred to the new capital, to which the present name, Kahira or 
Cairo, was not added till more than three centuries later ; to this day, 
indeed, it is still called Misr or Masr by the inhabitants, and by 
Egyptians in general. The name of Old Cairo was first used when 
Fostat had sunk to being merely a suburb of New Cairo. 

The building of the city progressed rapidly under the guidance 


of four master-builders, and the streets and quarters which were 
assigned to the soldiers, according to their nationalities, were dis- 
tributed among the gardens and pleasaunces which the Arabs found 
ready laid out. There stood the fort of Babylon, whose “iron 
gate” opened on the Nile, and the bridge of boats which joined the 
island of Roda to the mainland: there rose the old Coptic church 
of the Virgin, which, indeed, had been built before the founding of 
Fostat, and in whose crypt to this day a spot is pointed out where, 
as under the tree at Matareeyeh, the Holy Family is said to have 
rested during the flight into Egypt; there—as far as Mokattam— 
lay verdant groves and vineyards, and in their midst stood up the 
“light-fort,”* as it was called, in which the Greek and Roman governors 
were accustomed to reside when visiting this neighbourhood. 

The famous Nilometer, or Mikyas, on the island of Roda was, 
it would seem, not transferred thither from Memphis till after the 
founding of Fosta&t. Makreezee, in 1417, saw the remains of an 


SCALE OF THE NILOMETER. 


older Nilometer, and its successor, after much improvement and restoration, serves 
to this day as the standard of the inundation which everybody watches with 
anxious expectation throughout Hgypt. The Arabs assert that it was not con- 
structed till fifty-six years after the founding of Fostat. 

The visitor wishing to see it and the island can no longer avail himself of the 
bridge of boats, long since destroyed. A light boat will carry him over the narrow 
arm of the river to the large ill-kept garden of the estate of Hassan Pacha— 
in which, however, large vines, orange and lemon trees, roses, jasmines, and a 
variety of ornamental shrubs thrive luxuriantly, enclosing in their verdant bowers 
a fine summer palace in the Turkish style. The Mikyas itself is within a covered 
vault or chamber, the roof being supported on simple wooden pillars; it was 
built to replace the earlier structure which was destroyed at the end of the last 
century. The quadrangular tank, in which stands the octagon pillar, is walled all 


1 The Leukon Teichos, the “ White Wall” or “White Fort”: the ancient Citadel. 


ANAS 


THE SACRIFICE TO THE NILE, 


CAIRO. 197 


round, and communicates with the river by a canal; the pillar is supported by a 
beam at the top, and on it are inscribed the ancient Arabic measurements. 

In the walls of the chamber there are small niches ornamented with simple 
corner pillars, and vaulted with low pointed arches, which were in use here as 
early as the beginning of the eighth century. Among the Kufic inscriptions which 


have been preserved on them, the finest owe their existence to Mamoon, the son of 
Haroun-er-Rascheed, “the friend of science,” who restored the injured Mikyas in 
A.D. 814. The restoration of the Nilometer effected under the Khalif el-Mutawakkil is 
the most celebrated, as it was that which procured it the name of the new Mikyas.! 

In the very earliest times the Pharaohs had understood the necessity of 
measuring exactly the amount or deficiency of the inundations of the Nile, and 
Nilometers are preserved which were erected high up the river in Nubia by kings 
of the old empire ;* by princes, that is to say, who reigned before the invasion of 
the Hykshos. Herodotus tells us that the water must rise sixteen ells* for the 
inundation to be considered a favourable one; if it remained below this mark the 
higher fields failed in obtaining a due supply of water, and a dearth was the result ; 
if it greatly exceeded it, it broke down the dykes, damaged the villages, and had 
not retired into its bed by the time for sowing the seed. Thus the peasant, who 
could expect no rain, and was threatened neither by frosts nor storms, could 
have his prospects of a good or a bad harvest read off by the priests with 
perfect certainty from the scale of the Nilometer; and not by the servants of the 
divinities only, but by the officers of the realm, who calculated the amount of taxes 
to be paid to them in proportion to the rising of the river. 

The standard was protected by the magical power of unapproachable sanctity, 
and the husbandman himself has been strictly interdicted from the earliest times to 
this very day from casting a glance at it during the time when the river is rising ; 
for what sovereign could bear to disclose without reserve the decrees of Providence as 
to the most important of his rights, that of estimating the amount of the taxes to be 
imposed? In the time of the Pharaohs it was the priesthood that declared to the 
king and to the people their estimate of the inundations, and at the present day 
the sheykh, who is sworn to secrecy, is under the control of the police of Cairo, 
and has his own Nilometer, of which the zero point is said to be somewhat below 
that of the ancient standard. The engineers of the French expedition first detected 
the fraud by means of which the government endeavoured every year to secure 
the full amount of taxes. 

When the Nile has reached a height of fifteen old Arabic ells and sixteen 
kirat (the ell, or cubit, is five hundred and forty centimétres, about seventeen feet eight 
inches, and contains twenty-four kirat—the kirat being less than nine inches) it exceeds 
its lowest level by more than eight ells, and has reached the height requisite to 
enable it to irrigate the highest fields, reaching to that which the Arabs call Kefa. 


1 The pre: 
* As, for example, the measurements of the height to which the Nile rose at Samneh in the reign of Amenemha IIL., of 


nt Nilometer ; the old one had been destroyed by an earthquake. 


the XIIth dynasty, and the Nilometer at Elephantine, which has disappeared with the two temples in 1822 ; this last was Greek. 
* The statues of the Nile of the time of the Romans in the first century a.p. represent the sixteen cubits as infants 
playing about the river-god. (See p. 17.) 


198 


EGYPT. 


This happy event is announced to the people who await it in breathless anxiety, and 
the opening of the dykes may be proceeded with. We shall presently describe the 
festival held on this occasion from the remotest times. The extent of the inundation 
has been watched with equal eagerness at every epoch of Egyptian history, and at 


COURT OF THE MOSQUE OF AMROO, 


the present time customs prevail, and we hear views expressed, which can be traced 
by direct descent to the time of the Pharaohs; and yet during the dominion of 
Christianity in Egypt, and later again under sovereigns governing a nation wholly 
converted to Islam, the old worship of the Nile, with all its splendour, its display, 
and its strange ceremonies, was extirpated with the utmost rigour. But some 


CAIRO. 199 


portion of every discarded religion becomes merged in the new one that has 
supplanted it as a fresh form of superstition, and thus we discover, from a Christian 


document dating from the sixth century, that the “rising of the Nile in its time” 
was no longer attributed to Osiris, but to a certain Saint Orion : and, as the priests 
of antiquity taught that a tear from the eye of Isis led to the over-flowing of the 
Nile, we hear the Egyptians of the present day say that “a divine tear” has fallen 
into the stream and caused its flood. 

As soon as the cutting of the dykes takes place, a coarsely moulded figure 
made of Nile mud is—even to this day—flung into the river with much rejoicing 
of the people, by whom it is called “the bride”; and it is considered as a substitute 
for a fair virgin who, it is said, used to be richly dressed as a bride and cast into 
the stream to purchase its favours. When, after the founding of Fostat, the Nile 
did not rise to its proper level, Ibn-Ayas relates that the Copts implored the 
governor Amroo to allow them to offer such a victim to the river. The general 
refused, but when the Nile remained at its low level and famine seemed to threaten 
the land, Amroo made the Khalif Omar acquainted with the state of affairs. His 
messenger came back with a letter and the order to cast it into the Nile. Amroo 
obeyed, and in the very next night the Nile reached the required level of sixteen 
ells; the letter of the Commander of the Faithful contained these words: 
“To the blessed Nile of Egypt. If up till this time thou hast flowed only by thine 
own will, then cease to flow; but if thy stream was obedient to the command of 
the most high God, we beseech that God that he will grant thee thy necessary 
increase.” This pretty legend is hardly credible, because the ancient Hgyptian 
faith forbid human sacrifice as strictly as the Christian religion itself. However, 
in pre-Islamite times some kind of offering was no doubt cast into the stream, 
though not a maiden; and Makreezee tells us, so circumstantially as to exclude all 
doubt, that in the fourteenth century the Christians were wont to throw a reliquary 
with the finger of a saint into the Nile to secure a good inundation. It may be 
well to mention in this place that the mystery as to the cause of the rising of the 
Nile has long since been solved. It owes its origin to the rains which fall at that 
time of the year in the tropics, and to the melting of the snows in the high mountain- 
ranges of the cradle of both the primary streams of the Nile. Its increase, at first 
hardly perceptible, begins early in June: it rises more and more rapidly from the 
15th to the 20th of July, then proceeds more slowly till towards the end of 
September, when for a few weeks it remains at much the same level, or sometimes 
shows a slight decline; in the middle of October it swells once more, reaching its 
highest level—at which it can remain only a few days—and_ then, gradually sinking, 
it returns to its lowest ebb. 

It is to the Nilometer that the island of Roda owes its fame, and there is 
little else that the visitor will find worth seeing beyond plantations, houses, and 
the modest tomb of a sheykh,-unless we mention a venerable Mandoorah-tree with 
spreading branches, called by the Arabs Hakeem-kebeer, “the great physician,” 
to which they make pilgrimages in order to be cured of fevers and other disorders. 
The devotees kneel down at its root, and its boughs are thickly hung with fragments 
of cloths of every description, the votive-offerings of the sick and thank-offerings of 


VNILVA JO AMYL GAYOVS AHL 


CAIRO. 201 


the convalescent. Its sanctity is so highly esteemed that the pilgrims regarded 
Herr Welsch’s wish to sketch it as sacrilege, and it was only by force and cunning 
that he succeeded in completing his portrait of this vegetable physician. 

A legend has been preserved which says that this tree was planted by Fatima, 
the daughter of the Prophet, but I could not trace its origin. Siyootee, who died 
in 1506, does not allude to it. We are, however, better informed as to the period 
when the oldest mosque in all Egypt was built; to this day it preserves the name 
of its founder, Amroo, and we can soon reach it, after leaving Roda, by traversing 
the streets of Fostat with their squalid rubbish heaps. 

The Mosque of Amroo is called with justice the chief mosque of Cairo. The 
conqueror of Hgypt caused it to be erected in the spot where, during the siege 
of Babylon, Koteybah the merchant had pitched his booth. The new sanctuary 
was fifty cubits long and thirty wide. The raised pulpit, where the Koran was 
to be read and which Amroo had set up, had to be removed by order of the 
Khalif, because he thought it unseemly that the listeners, being true believers, 
should stand any lower than the reader. Opposite the chief entrance was situated 
the governor's house, which has long since vanished from the face of the earth; 
and very little has come down to us even of the mosque of Amroo in its original 
form, for only thirty-three years after it was built it was pulled down by the 
Governor Maslamah, newly constructed, and ornamented with a minaret; and two 


centuries later it was magnificently restored after a fire. The traveller who at 


Rn 


the present day, after wandering through the narrow mean streets and clambering 
over heaps of rubbish, comes upon the dusty grey walls of this edifice, can hardly 
believe that enclosed within is one of the most venerable and grandly planned 
works of Arab architecture. When he enters the vast court of the mosque he will at 
first be startled by the immense breadth of space enclosed by the colonnade ; then he 
will be filled with regret and indignation at the deplorable and reckless carelessness 
which has left this noble monument to fall into decay; but finally, when he has 
striven—irrespective of injury and ruin—to conceive justly of this glorious building 
as a whole, he will be full of sincere admiration and will yield to that thrill of 
veneration without which we cannot contemplate anything really great and grand. 
The Mosque of Amroo is called the “crown of mosques,’ and in a certain 
sense it justly deserves the name, not only for its venerable antiquity and. the 
grandeur of its style, but also because in it, and in it alone, more than once in 
times of common peril the representatives of all the creeds and confessions that 
worship the one and only God have met together in common supplication to Him. 
What a scene it must have presented when, in the time of Mohammed Ali, 
Moslems led by their Ulema, Christians of every confess 
and patriarchs, Hebrews following their reciters or Rabbis, trod the broad court of 
this sanctuary and bowed with one accord before the Most High. If this grand 


ion led by their bishops 


devotional procession had had any but a mere earthly aim—the increase of the 
Nile—it would have been a still more gratifying incident to relate. 
A closer inspection of the arrangement of this building seems to be required 


of us; and for this reason, that it may be said to be the finest specimen of a temple 
of worship of the oldest epoch of Arab architecture. The Mosque is not a house 


26 


MINARET OF THE MEMURIAL MOSQUE OF BARKOOK. 


Kaabah. 


EGYPT. 


of prayer; it was originally only an open court 
surrounded with colonnades, of which the pillars 
and columns on the side lying towards Mecca are 
usually more richly ornamented than the rest. The 
minarets —slender towers generally standing near 
the doorway, but not unfrequently over it—are never 
absent. The Muezzin mounts to the top of them 
to call the faithful to prayer. The court of the 
temple of Mecca, which encloses the Kaabah, built 
as it was in the times before the foundation of 
Islam, may be regarded as a type of the simplest 
form of mosque; but the natives of the land of 
Mohammed were so ignorant of the arts of con- 
struction that they usually built their dwellings 
merely of clay and dried palm-branches. At the 
present time the mosque at Mecca still consists of 
a court enclosed by arcades, and in the midst of it 
are the Kaabah and the famous spring Zemzem.’ 
The first minaret was no doubt a palm-tree, which 
the Muezzin climbed up to call the faithful to 
prayer ; and when the religion of the Prophet re- 
quired that places of worship should be erected, 
the faithful seized upon those buildings which they 
found ready to hand in the countries they had 
subjugated. A concession to any better style that 
might have existed, or an adaptation to their own 
needs of the architecture of the more advanced 
foreign nations, seems never to have been thought 
of. The pillars with their slender shafts reminded 
the sons of the desert of their palms, the cupola 
recalled the tent (Kubba), and they adopted both 
at an early date. It is wonderful to observe how 
the Greek spirit modified the primeval Egyptian 
polygonal column, and adopted it as an organic 
architectural element in the structure of the Doric 
temple—from which it never became dissevered— 
while at the same time the fine Greek sense of 
beauty added a certain nobility to the type. It 
was quite otherwise, though again in conformity 
with their religion and character, that it was 
applied by the Arabs, who came sword in hand, 
the conquerors of the nations. They unhesitatingly 
tore the pillars from the temples and palaces they 


‘At this spring, according to Mohammedan legend, Abraham performed his ablutions when he came to worship the 


CATRO. 203 


found standing, however noble and worthy of preservation they might be, to place 
them, unaltered, in their own buildings, regardless alike of the order to which they 
belonged, the thickness or the form of their shafts, and the nature of their materials. 
If they seemed too short, they raised them on a massive base; all they cared for 
was to make them of equal height as supports. The Arabs learned the structure of 
the cupola from the Byzantines, and brought it, as we shall see, to high perfection. 
The successful transformation of the round arch—which had long been known to 
other nations—into the pointed arch first occurs in their buildings. But the rich 
ornamentation of flat surfaces with arabesques is quite peculiar to them. This they 
borrowed from the arts of carpet and tissue weaving, known to them from the 
earliest times, and still we do not find it applied in their earliest buildings, for they 
had not yet learnt to transfer these designs from their looms, festal clothes, and 
tent rugs to the decoration of a stone surface. 

No trace of such ornaments is to be found in the Mosque of Amroo, and it 
was not till later that it became a characteristic and unfailing feature of the 
Arabic style of architecture. We do not even meet with the peculiarly Arabic 
and very frequent stalactite ornament which is such a charming compromise and 
connecting link between the flamboyant and the perpendicular; but we will do 
full justice to its fantastic forms when we meet with it later on. 

On the other hand, in the Mosque of Amroo there is no lack of those details 
of construction and articles of furniture which occur in all mosques, and with 
which we will at once make the reader acquainted. We can, however, more 
advantageously introduce him at another opportunity to the tombs of the founders, 
the schools, the public wells, and other benevolent foundations which are generally 
connected with a mosque. 

The court, in which we have already recognised the most ancient form of 
the Mohammedan plan of worship, and which is never wanting in mosques even 
of later date, is called Sahn-el-Gama. In the midst of it, in the Mosque of Amroo, 
close to a palm and a thorn-tree, is the well Hanefeeyeh, intended for the 
prescribed ablutions; this is often roofed in and richly ornamented. The court of 
the Mosque of Amroo is encircled on all four sides by arcades closed on the outer- 
side by a wall without windows. A peculiar sanctity is attributed to the side 
lying towards Mecca, which in Egypt is to the east, and it encloses the holy of 
holies, known as the Liwan. While the colonnades to the north and south of the 
court have no more than three rows of pillars, and that to the west only one row 
of double pillars—which, indeed, are all overthrown but one pair—there is a perfect 
forest of columns on the eastern side. They are arranged in six long rows all at 
equal distances, and constitute a magnificent arcade, where they throw strange lights 
and shades on the pavement covered with torn mats, and afford a picture never 
to be forgotten, even by the traveller who, like myself, has also stood in the mosque- 
cathedral of Cordova—of all churches the most crowded with pillars. Most of the 
columns in the Mosque of Amroo are of marble, and have capitals of every 


imaginable form known to ancient art. Here the acanthus of the Corinthian order 
meets the eye, there the Ionic volute; and side by side with the Byzantine cubic 
capital we come upon the floral capital of the Ptolemaic period carved by Greek 


204 EGYPT. 


hands. Only the forms of ancient Egyptian art are carefully excluded, as in all 
Arab buildings. If only these pillars could tell us whence they came, how much 
might we learn—down to the very latest trace of the splendid, but vanished, 
temples and churches of Memphis, Heliopolis, and other ancient towns in the 
neighbourhood of Cairo, which were still living cities at the time of the founding 


LIWAN OR SANCTUARY OF THE MOSQUE OF AMROO, 


of Fostaét! Very possibly at this time a column from the temple of Aphrodite 
props one side of an archway, while the other is supported by a pillar which once 
stood by the altar of a church to the Virgin. 

Out there, where a solemn twilight reigns instead of the garish light of day, 
we see the prayer-niche—Mihrab or Kiblah—which is to be found in every mosque. 
It shows the believer in which direction he must turn to seek Mecca. In front of 


this, on feast-days, the Koran is read, and it is often richly ornamented with mosaic 
and stone carving. On its left is the Mimbar, or pulpit—a tall erection of wood, 
led up to by a straight staircase covered with rich carving or inlaid work; over it 


CAIRO. 205 


there is usually a bulbous-shaped cupola supported on a sort of wooden baldachino. 
To the right of the prayer-niche once stood a desk, now destroyed; but in other 


} 


THE MIMBAR OR PULPIT IN THE MOSQUE OF KAYT BEY. 


mosques the Koran is placed upon such a desk during divine worship. Nearer 
to the court, and standing between the same two rows of pillars as the Mimbar, 
there is a wooden platform surrounded by a balustrade, and generally raised on four 


206 EGYPT. 


feet or pillars; it commonly stands away from the wall, but’is sometimes attached 
to a pillar, and from it, on Fridays, the praises of God and the Prophet are pro- 
claimed. This duty is performed by the preacher’s assistants—Imam or Khateeb— 
and consists in repeating the verses of the Koran that are read in the prayer- 
niche in so loud a voice that the most distant member of the congregation may 
hear and understand. 

Among the pillars of the Mosque of Amroo there are three which have a 
greater attraction for the Cairenes than even the grave of Abdallah lying at. the 
north-east corner of the Liwan, or holy of holies, though he was the son of the 
founder of Fostat and of this house of worship, and 
is revered here as a saint. A fine pair of twin- 
pillars in the terribly injured western portico are 
a particularly favourite resort, for it is said of them 
that only true believers can squeeze through between 
the two shafts. The well-fed: rich man naturally 
finds the passage through this “eye of a needle” 
more difficult than the lean and hungry wretch ; but 
“even grief may grow fat,’ and many a pious 
Moslem has gazed with anxiety on his stout dimen- 


sions, and has had to bear the ridicule of his 
leaner neighbour —always maliciously disposed — at 
finding the passage too narrow for his bulk. 

The third pillar in repute stands in the Liwan, 


not far from the prayer-niche, and bears the trace 
more mind- 


of the prophet’s whip, or, as others say: 
ful of the fact that the mosque was not erected 
4 until after the death of Mohammed—the whip of 
THE PILLARS OY ORDEAL. the Khalif Omar. When Amroo began to build 

the great court he entreated either one or the 

other—for the sake of historical probability we will say the Khalif Omar—to send 
him a pillar from Mecca. The Commander of the Faithful thereupon ordered 
one to fly at once to Fostadt. But twice did the pillar defy his orders and 
remain where it was; when at his third command it made no sign of moving, 
its angered lord hit it a blow with his whip, and adjured it in the name of 
God and the Prophet to obey. At once the marble cylinder rose, shot like an 
arrow through the air, and dropped down on the site of the building. The Arabic 
inscription, showing the name of Mohammed in relief in white on the dark ground 


of the pillar, is very singular. On feeling over the letters that form the name 
not the slightest relief or intaglio is perceptible to the touch, and it is difficult to 
understand how they can have got marked upon the stone, in which they seem 
to have grown by some freak of nature. Herr Liittke is of opinion that these 


characters must have been produced by blows on the marble with a blunt instrument, 
which effected a small disintegration wnder the surface. 

At the present time the Mosque of Amroo is but rarely filled with devo- 
tees; but there was a time when its now bare walls were clothed with gorgeous 


CAIRO. 207 


colours and splendid’ gilding, when twelve hundred and ninety copies of the 
Koran lay on an equal number of desks, and when, as darkness fell, no less 
than eighteen thousand lamps were lighted. The number of pillars in this 
mosque is said to have been greater than that of the days in the year, but 
at the present time only two hundred and fifty remain standing ; 


5° 


and what a 
magnificent spectacle must it have been when, within the illuminated enclosure 
as light as day, thousands of the faithful stood arrayed as if in order 
of battle! 

No one is allowed to sit down in the mosque, and there is neither seat nor 
bench to be seen, for the Mohammedan says that prayer is a fight against the 
devil, who seeks to hinder his approach to God and the Prophet. Therefore the 
true believers stand arrayed in ranks like a regiment led forth against the enemy, 
of which the individuals are likened to an army under the command of a general, 
and at their head stands the [mam or prayer-reciter as protagonist—Promachos 
in the spiritual strife. Each believer is supported by a pair of angels sent from 
Heaven; these stand one on the right hand and one on the left of each 
supplicant as soon as he enters the ranks, and remain with him till prayer is 
ended. The front rank or van of the worshippers is called by Moslems by the 
same name as the ranks of a real army; both are termed Saff. The standing 
place of the Imam, the prayer-niche of which mention has been made, in the 
theological vocabulary of the Moslems is called Mihrab, and the word is said to 
be derived from another, Harb—meaning “war.” Prayer, after the prescribed 
ablutions, is begun by reciting the Fatihah, the first verse of the Koran—the 
Paternoster of the Mohammedan—and it ends with a farewell to the guardian 
angels; it ‘must be recited with deep prostrations to the ground, Rik’ah, their 
number varying with the hour of the day. Often, indeed, the soul of the devotee 
remains untouched under the discharge of these strictly prescribed formulas, and 
yet surely nowhere are worshippers to be met with so absorbed in their devotions 
as here. In Cairo, as elsewhere, the most diligent frequenter of the House of 
God easily passes for the most pious of men, and so it is not always the purest 
motives that urge the Moslem to the mosque; but the true believer prays not 
there alone, and more than once it has happened that I have come upon a 
traveller in the desert who, at the hour of prayer, in the conviction that he was 
alone with his God, knelt down on_ his little prayer-carpet, raising his arms in 
the prescribed manner with such devout fervour, such ardent longing and ecstasy, 
as though it had been vouchsafed to him to gaze through the open -portals of 
Heaven itself. 

To the Moslem, as to the Christian and Israelite, his God is everywhere 
present ; nay, his mosques are built without any solemn ceremony of laying the 
foundation-stone ; they have no inherent sanctity, and their site and walls are not 
dedicated by any consecration, for space would be too narrow to contain the 
Almighty, whose throne is Heaven and the earth His footstool. Mesgid—this 
is the original form of our word “mosque”—signifies a place to honour the Lord 
in; but the Arabs usually give their places of worship a different name—Gam’a, 
“the place of assembly”—and the mosque is, in fact, before everything a Gam/’a, or 


208 EGYPT. 


place of assembly for the faithful, who, on the Yaum al gam’a—ie., the day of 
assembly (their Sabbath, kept on our Friday)—gather together in order that they 
may first bind themselves to a great and closely knit unity, and there listen to 
the proclamation from the top of the Mimbar, by the mouth of the preacher or 
Khalif, of the inspiring confession that there is no God but the omnipresent 
Allah, and that Mohammed is His prophet. Then all the assembly sink like 
one man to the earth, in acknowledgment of this declaration, as if stricken 
down by its overpowering grandeur. 

We shall see many more mosques founded in the City of the Khalifs, and 
take occasion to visit them. 

That which is considered the oldest after that of Amroo is the one built by 


ROW OF SUPPLICANTS. 


the governor Ahmed-ibn Tuloon, and named after him. At the time of its erection 
Fostat had been founded less than two hundred and fifty years, and yet the life 
of the Egyptians had undergone a complete transformation in all its details and 
manners, and the scene of it had been altered in every particular. Amroo himself 
had promised to all the Copts who should accept Islam and pay the poll-tax 
perfectly equal rights with their conquerors, and many went over to the faith of 
Mohammed. War, pestilence, revolt, persecution, extortion by the strong from 
the weak, in short every calamity had decimated the inhabitants of the Nile 
valley under the Byzantine rule, and so made room for the Arabs. Many 
tribes settled in Egypt, and soon gaye up their nomad life to establish them- 
selves as husbandmen in the country, and in the cities as merchants and 
artisans, or as students and artists, thus inaugurating a new life—always linked 
with the old it is true, but characterised by peculiarities in all its relations. 


CAIRO. 209 


The decayed language of the Egyptians—the Coptic’'—with its-insubordination to 
grammar, and its numerous words adopted from the Greek, was soon displaced by 
the supple and subtle Arab tongue. It has already been related in our account 
of Alexandria how marvellously rapid was the process of transformation which 
was wrought in Egypt by the Arabs; but while the exterminating powers of 
Islam wreaked themselves in their utmost horror on the Greek city, the Arab 
nature found in Fost&t an appropriate opening for the development of its innate 
creative spirit, and for resuscitating from a heap of ruins a vitality full of vigour, 
variety, and significance, destined to enrich the world with the fairest fruits. 

This is not the place for following the vicissitudes of the history of the 
Khalifs, nor for relating how, after Omar's death and the murder of Othman and 


a a 


MORNING PRAYER OF A BEDAWEEN, 


of Merwan IL, the last of the Omayyades, Egypt, which was ruled by governors, 
became subject to the Abbasides; but it is worthy of mention that scarcely two 
hundred years after the founding of Fost&ét it was behind no city of the East in 
the distinction and brilliancy of its scientific position. Haroun-er-Rasheed’s second 
successor, his learned son Mamoon (who died a.p. 833), visited Egypt and the city 
founded by Amroo, in which, during his reign, astronomy, to which he delighted to 


devote himself, jurisprudence, in connection with theology, natural science, grammar, 
and philosophy, were cultivated and taught in a celebrated school or academy ; as 
were more particularly those sciences whose Arabie names have not been supplanted 


' A name of the later Egyptians derived—written in Greek letters—from the Greek word Aiyuptios—* Egyptian.” There 


were four dialects, the Coptic, the Memphitic spoken at Memphis, the Theban or Sahidic, and the Bashmuric, a later dialect. 


s in the Sahidic are as old as the third century a.p.; the Memphitic do not appear till the tenth century A.D. The 


language ceased to be spoken more than two centuries ago, but is still used in the ritual and services of the church. 


27 


210 EGYPT. 


by others even in our day—Algebra and Chemistry. It was under Mamoon that 
the first terrestrial meridian was measured, and instruments previously unknown were 
used in the observatory erected by him. Also it is to the translations made in his 
time of Greek, Latin, and Hebrew books into the Arabic tongue that we owe the 
preservation of many writings of the ancients which would otherwise have been lost. 

The same prince restored the Nilometer on the island of Roda, and decorated 
it with inscriptions which still exist. Under him Fost&t enjoyed a period of fairest 
bloom; nevertheless, it was under the rule of a viceroy of the later Abbasides—the 
enterprising and talented Ahmed-ibn-Tuloon'—that the town first overstepped the 
limits of what we know now as Old Cairo. The 
father of this remarkable man, a Turk by birth, 
had found admission as a prisoner of war into 
the body-guard of the Khalif, which at that 
time constituted a Preetorian guard that suc- 
ceeded on more than one occasion in breaking a 
sceptre and disposing of a crown. This talented 
man goon won a high position in the monarch’s 
palace. His manly and noble-minded son, who 
had, too, a great taste for science, was appointed 
to the government of Egypt, and he not only 
knew how to maintain this by his wisdom, and 
by the force of arms and gold, but he made a 
victorious incursion into Syria, and founded an 
independent sovereignty for himself and his 
family. He enlarged Fostat, his capital—where 
he had resided at first in the palace built in the 
soldiers’ quarter by his predecessors—by extend- 
ing it in the direction of the present citadel, and 
by building the quarter called el-Khateeyah, where he erected for himself a splendid 
castle, and afterwards the mosque which to this day bears his name ; he meanwhile 
had founded several richly endowed benevolent institutions, where every Triday 
he visited in person the sick and insane, besides causing many other useful buildings 
to be executed, among which the conduits especially deserve mention. The mosque 
is situated south-west of the citadel (which was not built till afterwards) and half- 
way between it and Old Cairo, not far from the spacious riding-course where the 
Arab grandees trained and exercised their splendid horses on the fortified hill 
called Kal’at el-Kebsh—“the fort of the ram.” This was invested by legends with a 
peculiar sanctity ; one of these relates that Abraham led his son to the slaughter 
on it, and that it then took its name in memory of the ram which was substituted 
for sacrifice by the Lord God. Other Cairenes declare that at the end of the flood 
Noah’s Ark was stranded on this hill, and that a ram came out of it first of all the 
beasts; while earlier tales say that Ahmed found the remains of the Ark on 
Mount Ararat in Armenia, and that it was built into the new mosque in the form 


1 ap. 870. 


COL? CE APIDOLEO” ST. 


HORSE. 


ARABIAN 


212 EGYPT. 


of a frieze, on which the whole of the Koran was engraved. Very possibly Ahmed- 
ibn-Tuloon, as the head of a new princely race, assumed—in Oriental fashion—the 
name of “the ram,” 7.¢, the leader of the flock, and 
the name el-Kebsh—* the ram’”—may refer to him. 


who, when he felt death 
near, desired that the Mohammedans should pray for 
him with the Koran, the Jews with the Pentateuch 
and Psalms, and the Christians with the Gospels, all on 
the top of Mokattam—when he had decided on build- 
ing a new mosque, scorned to strip any of the more 
ancient structures in order to decorate his pious work. 


This benevolent prince 


When he could find no right way—so runs the legend 
—of building a magnificent temple out of nothing but 
new inaterials, the Greek architect who had constructed 
the aqueducts under his orders, and who had been 
thrown into prison on a false accusation, let him know 
that he had conceived of the plan of a magnificent 
mosque, for which no pillars should be required other 
than those which would need to be placed on each 
side of the prayer-niche. 

The Greek architect's drawing satisfied the prince’s 
requirements, and thus the beautiful structure rose 


which, in spite of the many injuries .it has suffered, 
has hitherto fulfilled the desire of its owner—that, 
even if fire or water should destroy Fostat, it might 


remain standing. 

This structure differs but little in its ground- 
plan from the Mosque of Amroo, and is generally 
regarded as especially typical of the earliest period of 
Arab architecture. The rectangular court is enclosed 


by side-courts on three sides, and their flat wooden 
roofs are supported on pillars, and not on columns 
as in the Mosque of Amroo, and on heavy pointed 


arches, of which the spring recalls the horse-shoe arch. 


: On the side facing towards Mecca, where the prayer- 
ARCH ORNAMENT rRow THE wosavE or re-rcxoox. Niche is placed, there are five rows, on the others only 
two. At the four angles of each square pillar are 


small columns with Byzantine capitals in gypsum. Coste and, after him, Von 
Kremer consider these peculiar features as the prototype of the cluster-pillars in 
our Gothic cathedrals. We do not even yet meet with arabesque decorations or 
with stalactite ornaments over the doorway in this noble building; but the capitals 
of the columns, the borders and spandrils of the arches are richly ornamented 

* The revenues of Egypt were at this time very great; according to De Guignes (/istoire des Huns) 300,000,000 


pieces of gold. At the death of Tuloon, about £12,000,000 were in his treasury, after ;200,000 had been abstracted four 


years before by his son Abbas. 


CAIRO. 213 


with truly Arabic and most beautiful foliage carving, which, however, still reminds 
us of its Byzantine prototype. The characters of the Kufic type, in which the 
verses from the Koran are inscribed, run off into branches and flowers, which 
might be regarded as of the nature of arabesque; they serve as a rich string- 
course ornament on the walls close under the roof.. Even the latticed windows 
in the upper part of the wall have borders of foliage, and specially worthy of 
notice is the upper portion of the walls, which consist of burnt bricks and are 


THE LIWAN OR SANCTUARY OF THE MOSQUE OF IBN-TULOON. 


covered with a facing of alabaster. This forms a sort of fancifully designed pierced 
battlement, which has unfortunately suffered severe injury. In the sanctuary, on 
sach side of the prayer-niche, stands a Byzantine pillar. The Mimbar is covered 
with very fine work in geometrical inlaying of walnut wood and ivory, but it 
was not erected in the mosque until its restoration under the Bahritic Mamelukes. 
In the midst of the court rises a domed structure, originally intended as the 
tomb of Ibn-Tuloon, but under which the tank for the prescribed ablutions does 
at present stand. 

Strong external walls enclose this splendid building on the west, north, and 
south, to keep out the hubbub of the city, but in the course of time it has 
suffered severely and undergone cruel disfigurement. It is difficult, at the present 


214 EGYPT. 


day, for the visitor to form any idea of the grand effect it must have produced 
at the time of its first completion, for almost all of the arches have been walled 
up, and the arcades subdivided into cells, which afford a refuge to beggars who 
torment the visitor, and to Cairenes past work. Badly whitewashed walls with 
square windows and doors now enclose the court in place of the open pillared 
arcades. Nothing is left to remind us of the former splendour of the building but 
the frieze and its injured cornice, the niches and rosettes between the walled-up 
arches, and the Liwan, or sanctuary, which has been spared and left open. 
Close to the western outer wall of the mosque rises the quite peculiar minaret. 
The tower rests on a massive quadrangular substructure, and rises in three 
stories, each smaller than the last; the lowest is circular in plan, the second and 
third polygonal. The small cupola has lost its summit, but we know that instead 
of a crescent it was crowned with a little ship, in 
which it was the custom to place food for the kites 
that soar round the mosque. 

Quite peculiar, too, to this minaret is the flight 
of steps going round it outside, by which the muezzins 
mount from balcony to balcony. It is said that once 
Tbn-Tuloon, sitting in council, became quite absorbed 

carmais oP convuxs rox te xosave or in thought, wrapping a strip of paper spirally round 
oe ee his finger; when he roused himself to consciousness 

and met the enquiring looks of his officials, he excused himself by explaining 
that the twisted strip of paper was the model of the staircase of the minaret 
he was building. The whole edifice was completed in two years, and it seemed 
to the Cairenes so extravagantly costly that they complained at the enormous 
sum disbursed for it, so that Ibn-Tuloon was forced to declare that he had 
found a treasure, to which he owed the means of erecting his mosque. It was 
said that he had three times come upon enormous buried wealth, and, in fact, 
the sums laid out by him for public purposes were immense; although at the 
same time he reduced the imposts, and on a second occasion mitigated them, 
because in a dream he heard the voice of a friend saying to him, “When a 
prince sacrifices his rights for the best interests of his people, God takes it on 


Himself to make it up to him.” : 
Ahmed-ibn-Tuloon is one of the noblest figures in Oriental history. When 
he died, in May a.p. 884, in spite of the many wars he had engaged in, and his 
indomitable energy in building, which had extended even to fortifying the island 
of Roda, he left behind him an enormous treasure, which, according to our modern 
English computation, is said to have amounted to sixty millions; he was sincerely 
lamented by his innumerable subjects in both Syria and Egypt. The dynasty founded 
by him was to all extents and purposes independent, although the prosperity of 
the Abbasides continued to be prayed for in the mosques of Fostat; and seventeen 
sons and sixteen daughters who survived him—for he had an extensive harem— 
seemed to promise long continuance to the new family of Regents. And yet 
within twenty-two years of the death of its founder it was extinct. The power of 
the Abbaside Khalifs dwindled to nothing at the same time. The last rulers of 


CATRO. 215 


Egypt who acknowledged their supremacy, before the rising of the Fatimites, were 
the Turk Mohammed-el-Ihsheed and, last of all, his black slave Kafoor, who, after 
serving his lord and his two sons, who were minors, with conspicuous fidelity, 
undertook in his own person the government of the Nile valley—which was at that 
time under a visitation of famine, war, and pestilence—till he died, in the year 967 
of our era, greatly lamented by the poets,’ to whom he had been a liberal patron. 
He was succeeded by the grandson of his former lord, Mohammed-el-Ihsheed : this boy 
was only eleven years old, and 

his relatives took advantage of his yap ay 
youthful inexperience to snatch | \y 
from him his rich inheritance. 

At this period of its utmost 
misery Egypt was certain to fall 
like a ripe fruit into the first 
strong hand stretched out to grasp 
it, and this strong hand was not 
long to wait for. 

A few decades before, a bold 
man, Obeyd-Allah — who called 
himself, whether rightly or no, 
a descendant of Alee, the pro- 
phet’s son-in-law, by his daughter 
Fatima—had founded a new Shiite 
dynasty called the Fatimites,? in 
Northern Africa. Under the title 
of a Mehdee—meaning “one who 
is under the special guidance of 
God ”—he founded, on a peninsula PATTERN OF THE MIMBAR IN THE MOSQUE OF IRN-TULOON. 
which juts out into the bay of 
Tunis, the splendid capital of Mahadeeyah, which is now utterly destroyed, and 
after many wars he and his successors brought the greater portion of North Africa, 
Sicily, and Sardinia under their dominion. Obeyd-Ailah’s son Kasoon was even bold 
enough to attack Egypt, and he actually succeeded in reaching Alexandria and in 
conquering the Fayoom; but it was not until fifty-five years later that his great 
grandson Mo’izz, encouraged by Egyptian emirs, ventured to attempt to subjugate 
the whole valley of the Nile. In February a.p. 969,° he sent his general Djawhar 
with a picked army to invade the country lying to the east. A battle was fought 
at Ghizeh, the adherents of the dynasty of Ihsheed were routed, and the victorious 
Djawhar crossed the Nile and encamped to the north of Fost&t on the spot where 
modern Cairo, which he subsequently founded, was destined to rise. 


Ae 


' Also the musicians, who were much enriched by his favours and donations. The musical art was much prized at 
the period. A considerable volume existed with the names of the poets and their works, but all their poems have 
disappeared. 

® Consisted of eleven sovereigns who reigned one hundred and eighty-eight years. 

8 Towards the end of the reign of Kafoor. 


| 
i 


Ai 
i 


i 
i 


{i 


SULTAN, 


THE 


THE CONSORT OF 


; 
| 
| 
} 
| 
{ 
j 


| 
| 
] 
| 
j 


AHMED, 


io 


CAIRO. 217 


A few months after his entry into Fostat, Djawhar gave orders to add to the 
city on the northern side by the building of a new town. This adjoined the quarter 
of el-Khateeyeh founded by Ibn-Tuloon, and was to serve, in the first instance, as 
head-quarters for Djawhar’s soldiers, and as the court ‘residence of the Fatimite 
Khalifs. The first sod was to be turned, by the advice of the astrologers, at the 
moment when the planet Mars—known to the Arabs as el-Kahir, “the victorious” 
—crossed the meridian of Fostat. According to another legend the circuit of the 
new city was marked out and surrounded by a string to which little bells were 


MINARET AND COURT OF THE MOSQUE OF IBN-TULOON, 


attached, so that at a signal to be given by them the labourers might all begin 
together. But before the architect who awaited the word of the astrologers could 
sound the signal, a bird of prey shot down on to the string, the little bells rang 
out all round, the labourers set to work, and, it is said, at the very instant at which 
the planet crossed the meridian of the new town. This in consequence took its 
name from it, Masr-el-Kahira—v.e., the Victorious of Egypt. 

A star of conquest had presided over the founding of the new town, and 
Djawhar lighted up in it a new luminary which guided him to victory in the arena 
of intellectual conflict; for his first act was to found the University and mosque of 
el-Azhar, which to this day may be regarded as the source and centre of all 
scientific life in the Hast. 


28 


CAIRO; 


UNDER THE FATIMITES AND 
EYOOBIDES. 


Oe 


SARIOUS have been the changes that have 
passed over the city since that period of early 
development which we have traced so far. 
We now stand on the threshold of the most 
splendid section of its history, and we feel 
tempted to interrupt the course of events to do honour 
to the University and mosque of el-Azhar, and to record 
their achievements. It must be regarded as having 
been from the time of its foundation by Djawhar, the 
general of the army under Mo’izz, down to the present 
day the source from which all the intellectual and 
religious life of Cairo has for centuries derived its 
nourishment—from whence, indeed, it still derives it 
—and it deserves to be considered as the very heart 
and brain of the City of the Khalifs. But for the 
present we must pass by its lofty gates, and postpone 
visiting it till we can do so without interrupting the course of the historical 
narrative. I will then resign the reader into the care of a guide to whom this 
famous institution is familiar, and who will make him acquainted with its 
organisation and results. Here it need only be said that Djawhar himself built 
and furnished it magnificently, and secured the salaries of the professors and the 


maintenance of students by munificent endowments. 
Soon after the founding of Cairo the Khalif Mo’izz’ transferred the royal 


2 ap. 970. 2 a.p. 972; his treasures and expenditure were enormous. Makreezee, pp. 385-—488. 


CATRO. 219 


residence to the new city in which, only three years after, he was borne to the 
grave of his forefathers, whose bodies had been conveyed to Egypt. The country 
and the capital alike owed great things to his immediate successors. They governed 
their kingdom, which already extended to the western confines of Africa, with 
solicitude and wisdom, opening out new channels for the commerce of Egypt, even 
as far as India and deep into the heart of the African continent. The caravans 
which travelled from Tangier—which bordered on the Moorish dependencies of 
Spain—and traversed the greater portion of Northern Africa wd Kayrawan and 
Tripolis, conveyed merchandise of enormous value, which they poured into the 
Khans of Cairo, fast rising to be the most important capital of the East; and 


ANCIENT EGYPTIAN YASES. 


from thence other files of camels kept up constant intercourse between Syria and 
Hgypt. Aydab and Klysma on the Red Sea were the ports where goods conveyed 
by sea were shipped and unshipped. 

The artistic industry of the Arabs also found ample opportunity for display 
under the Fatimites, who loved to live in richly fitted palaces, and whose ministers 
and richer subjects, imitating their princes, built magnificent dwelling-houses. 

In the fifth soorah of the Koran, wine, gambling, statues, and drawing lots 
are forbidden as an abomination to the faithful; hence neither painting nor sculpture 
could ever rise to a high eminence among the Arabs, or even assert their dignity 
as independent arts; nevertheless, the prohibition of the Prophet was disregarded, 
particularly in Cairo under the Fatimites, and we are told that in their time the 


most splendid tapestries were in use, on which were representations of the sovereigns 
and of celebrated men; and that in the capital itself there were manufactories of 
artistic vessels and materials of every description. A variety of table ornaments 
were produced there, and the elegant figures from Cairo were highly esteemed, 
particularly gazelles and lions, elephants and giraffes. Certain vessels of. glazed 
clay, regarded as unique, bore the forms of human figures, or of animals. Similar 
vessels were not unknown to the ancient Egyptians; but the painters who worked 


HAREM OF A HOUSE IN THE TIME OF THE KHALIFS. 


CAIRO. 221 


in the service of the Fatimites appear to have immeasurably surpassed the artists 
of Pharaonic times, who were neyer able to attain to any freedom of treatment, 
and to whom the laws of perspective remained unknown. For how should an 
artist of Old Memphis or Thebes have so succeeded in painting dancing women 


ABOO BEKR. OTHMAN, 
EGYPTIAN COINS. 


that some should seem to float out from the wall, and others to recede? And 
Makreezee asserts that both were accomplished under the Fatimites by Ibn-Azeez 
and Koseyr during a banquet in Cairo. We are also 
told of portraits of distinguished poets executed at 
the same period, and of a picture representing 
Joseph in the well, which, by its fine effects of 
colour, excited the highest admiration. Even the 
workshops of the sculptors sent out not merely 
fantastic ornaments and designs of animals, but 
human figures, and among them armed knights on 
horseback. 

At an early date the Arabs had exchanged 
their primitive modest garb for the gorgeous clothing 
used by the nations they had subjugated, and more 
particularly by the Persians. At the court of the 
Khalifs at Bagdad an enormous use was made of 
embroidered dresses of the rarest materials. The 
Fatimites sought to vie with the Abbasides in this 
respect, and several establishments were founded in 
Cairo for the production of embroidery on _ silk, 
which was largely used for turbans worked with 
gold, for mantles of honour with the monograms of 
the names of sovereigns (tiraz), and ladies’ robes 
with inscriptions. The robes of honour embroidered 
with the tiraz played so conspicuous a part under 
the successors of Moizz that the “Intendant of the Tiraz” held one of the 
most distinguished posts in the court. Very costly work was also produced 
by the goldsmiths and armourers, and the former worked not for ladies only but 
for men also, for both sexes were fond of decorating themselves with necklaces 
and bracelets. We are told of ladies who so loaded themselves with ornaments 
of gold and precious stones that they could not walk without assistance. The 


HALBERD AND SPEAR FOR LION HUNTING, OF STEEL 
INLAID WITH SILVER. TIME OF THE FATIMITES. 


222 


an) 


BA, ae 
DZ eet 


ARABIC SILK DAMASK OF THE ELE 


NTH CENTURY. FROM A 
GARMENT OF HENRY THE SAINT (A.D. 1002—24) In 
BAMBERG GERMAN MUSEUM, 


EGYPT. 


men expended large sums on the decoration of their arms; and the interior of 
their houses, as well as their persons, were decked with every product of the 


industrial arts of the period. The walls were 
lined with polished stucco in various colours, 
with arabesques or richly embroidered stuffs, or 
even with tiles in pottery with an enamel facing 
of inimitable brilliancy; the floor was of mosaic 
or was covered with thick carpets. A carpet 
made in the reign’ of Mo’izz represented the 
chief cities of the world, and under the pictures 
were explanatory sentences in letters of gold 
and silver. This carpet is said to have cost 
22,000 dinars (about £12,000). The cabinet- 
makers had preserved their early art of inlaying 
furniture, using costly dark wood inlaid with 
lighter ones, or with ivory and mother-of-pearl, 
and at no period were the coverings for pillows 
and cushions more richly designed or more 
beautifully coloured than those of the Egyptian 


damask at that date.’ 


The costly stuffs of Damietta have already 
been spoken of; figures of various animals were 
woven into these. The heavy stuff known as 
Deebak brocade, with its large patterns of flowers, 
is still to be met with in the high-mass robes of 
Catholic priests. The Christian Copts were the 
best weavers both in the Delta and at Syoot 
in Upper Egypt, which produced a particular 
purplish-red furniture stuff. Even quite simple 
vessels of clay and brass showed very elegant 
forms, and were decorated with rich Tawsheer 
work ; nor was less care bestowed on the ewers 
and bowls used for washing the hands at meals, 
on the lanterns for lighting the courts and halls, 
on the plates, saucers, and vases, the boxes, jars, 
and bowls (khordddhee) used for the lavish burn- 
ing of essences—in which the Prophet himself 
had indulged—and for containing sweetmeats, 
preserved fruits, syrup, and sherbets, which the 
Cairenes to this day prepare in great and ex- 


ABIC STUFF. PRE! 


NUREMBERG. DARK-RED 


+ROUND AND GREY FOLIAGE, 
THE OUTLINES CHANGING BLUE AND GOLD. 


cellent variety. The joys of the table even inspired the poets to sing of them, and 
many an old traveller celebrates the praises of the multitude of cooks and roasters 
who set up their stalls and fires at the corners of the streets, or carried them about 


1 aD. 968—977. ? ap. 968—977. 


CAIRO. 228 


on their heads. Old Sebastian Frank! tells us, “There be there [in Cairo] as many 
as fifteen thousand public kitchens, wherein every day, and all day, they cook victuals 
and dainties, both roast and boiled; for the natives cook but little in their 
houses, but many cooks go round about in the city with fire ready prepared on 
a hearth, which they carry on their heads, and they will boil or roast meat 
therewith; and if any man have need they take down the oven from their head 
and give to the hungry ac- 
cording to his desire for a 
reasonable sum of money.” 
At the present day cooks 
are to be seen at many 
street-corners, and wandering 
provision-merchants in great 
numbers. A writer of the 
time of Saladin® declares that 
if he were called upon to 
enumerate and describe the 
various sweetmeats prepared 
in Egypt a separate book 
would require to be written. 
A large pasty, of which the 
preparation is minutely de- 
scribed by this author, proves 
the luxury of living indulged 


in by the princes and grandees 
of his time. First a dough 
is prepared of thirty pounds 
of the finest meal, kneaded 
up with five and a half 
pounds of sesame oil; this 
was to be divided into two 
portions. One, rolled thin, 
was laid in a large copper 
pan with strong handles, pre- WIFE OF THE SHEYKM OP THE COOKS, 

pared for the purpose. On 

this was spread a minced stuffing of meat, and above it thirty lambs, roast and 
stuffed with a fine spiced farcis of pounded pistachio nuts, pepper, ginger, cinnamon, 
mastic, coriander, carraway, and nuts. Over this was poured rose-water flavoured 


with nutmeg. On and between the lambs were packed twenty fowls, an equal 
number of young chickens, and fifty small birds, some stuffed with meat and 
some with eggs, some roasted in grape juice or lemon juice. This mass (may we 


not write “mess”) was garnished with little meat patties and tarts full of sugar- 
work. When it had acquired a dome-shape—and pieces of meat or toasted cheese 


1 “Chronique et Tableau de la Turquie,” 4to, 1550. 2 ap. 1171—1192. 


224 EGYPT. 


might still be added—Attar of rose with essence of nutmeg, or of aloes wood, 
was to be poured over it; it was then covered with the other half of the dough, 
care being taken that it so effectually enclosed the contents that no steam 
should find even the smallest outlet, and the dish was put into the oven. 
When the crust was well baked, and of a delicate ruddy hue, the pasty was 
withdrawn from the oven, wiped with a sponge, and again moistened with rose- 
water and nutmeg. This dish was considered particularly suitable for being taken 
on hunting and country expeditions by the king or great personages, since it 
contained a variety of viands, was easily portable, did not fall to pieces easily, 
looked handsome, tasted well, and was very slow in cooling. 

Though Persia, and at a later day Andalusia, yielded the finest Attar of rose, 
Bassorah the famous palm-flower oil, Armenia the most costly essence of willow, and 
Koofah the finest essence of stock gilly-flower and violet, the lily oil of Egypt was 
especially prized; but the choicest spices and the finest incense were brought from 
the Somali coast in the time of the Khalifs as they had been under the Pharaohs. 
The consumption of essences must have been enormous at the highest tide of 
Egyptian splendour, for the people were actually enjoined to perfume themselves 
on Fridays, corpses were anointed with aromatic essences; sherbets and sweetmeats 
were flavoured with fine vegetable extracts, perfumes filled the air in every well- 
to-do house; and saturated the letters and presents which were constantly being 
exchanged. The ladies bathed in perfumed water, the men used scented oils for 
the hair, and both made use of red, yellow, and green soap. During great festivals 
incense was burnt in all the streets, so that even the poorest might be regaled by 
the mere act of breathing. Nor was there any lack of narcotics. The mode of 
preparing opium, introduced from Syoot in Upper Egypt, was well known, and 
the Sultan Beybars' promulgated several edicts prohibiting the use of Hasheesh, a 
stupefying and intoxicating preparation of Indian hemp. In spite of the Prophet's 
prohibition the juice of the grape continued to be indulged in; alcohol (as its name 
indicates) is an Arab discovery, and beer—the favourite beverage of the ancient 
Egyptians—was also brewed and drunk under the Khalifs. Many a jovial song in 
praise of wine was sung by Arab poets, and in early times many Arabs would by 
no means admit that the Prophet had forbidden its use. In an old MS. copy of 
Tha/alibi* it is said, “The Prophet—may God bless him and accept him—permitted 
wine, and mercifully allows us to strengthen ourselves with it at our meals, and 
to lift the veil of our cares and sorrows.” In another place it is written, “ None 
forbids wine but a churl, and none allows it but a noble soul; the free-handed and 
the generous praise it, the avaricious and niggardly find fault with it. But shun 
drunkenness, it is a disgrace and a sin.” Wine is called “the alchemy of joy, and 
the pleasantest thing the world rejoices in.” In the “Cheerer” it is said, “ the 
world is as one beloved, and wine is the dew of her lip.” 

Ibn-el-Mw'tazz sang :* 


“Care not if time passes slowly or hurries thee onward ; 
Whisper thy woes to the wine cup that bubbles before thee. 


taps L277: * Died about a.p, 1043, in the reign of the Khalif Mostansir-Billah. % ap. 807. 


DEN IN CAIRO. 


GAR 


PRINCELY 


29 


EGYPT. 


Yet, if three times thou hast emptied it pause and consider ; 


Guard thou thy heart lest joy vanish and leave only torment. 


Here is the proved panacea for sadness and sorrow ; 
Hearken thou then to my counsel who knows what will serve thee, 
Care not for time, but bethink thee how often the wretched 


Fain would amend all its evils—alas! but he cannot.” 


Other poets who have sung of wine praise it with gay freedom and without 
restraint. The drinker sings triumphantly as he raises his glass— 


“Drink, or e’er this life be past 
Drain the goblet to the last.” 


A great deal of wine must have been drunk in Egypt, if it is correctly stated 
that the wine-tax in one day amounted to more than a thousand dinars (almost 
£600). The Christian monks seem to have kept the best cellars of the noble 
juice, and the poet Ibn Hamdees’ gives a ravishing picture of a night he spent 
in drinking with some friends in a convent in Sicily, his native home. There 
was fine muscatel there indeed, and a piece of silver purchased “liquid gold.” 

The princes and potentates in their palaces feasted off the precious metals, and 
even off plates of onyx and the other less precious gem stones. Knife and spoon 
handles of jasper and carnelian, and vessels of rock-crystal were not very rare. 
Glass, both clear and coloured, was used in a variety of forms. 

The outside of the house that faced on the street was just as simple as the 
interior was splendid—particularly the “mandaree,” or room for receiving visitors, 
and the harem, or women’s apartments—for suspicion and jealousy, as well as 
fear of the greed of princes and of the envious gaze of the passer-by, prescribed 
concealment of the wealth of the household, especially under the later sovereigns. 

The Arabs excelled all other nations in horticulture, and particular care was 
bestowed on the gardens, which are praised alike by poets and prose writers. 
Among the latter is Aboo Bekr el-Herawee, the traveller who is known to the 
Arabs.as Kiselak,? because he inscribed his name on innumerable monuments; he 
enumerates the following plants, which he had ‘seen all at the same season in 
Egyptian gardens :—Roses of three different colours, two sorts of jasmine, and two 
of lotus, myrtle, jonquils, chrysanthemums, white and scented violets, stock gilly- 
flower, levkoja (snow flake), iris, lemon, palms with ripe and unripe fruit, bananas, 
sycamores, vines with sour and sweet grapes, fig and almond trees, coriander, melons, 
cucumbers, and a variety of other vegetables, among which the famous Egyptian 
asparagus is mentioned in the earliest antiquity. Another writer, speaking of the 
Khalif’s garden, says that it contained—besides many other splendid plants to be 
met with in our gardens—palms of which the trunks were covered with plates 
of gold, which hid pipes out of which water spouted, so that it seemed to shoot 
up from the palm-tree itself. Flowers thickly sown were made, by training and 
clipping, to form figures and inscriptions, and in cool pavilions springs spouted 
out from the wall, and baskets were fastened up in which rare birds built their 


1 ap. 125]. <A Sicilian, died in the Island of Majorca, a.p. 1132. LN WP 


CAIRO. 227 


nests; peacocks and other birds of fine plumage ornamented the terraces. Many 
cultivated plants have made their way, by the intervention of the Arabs, from 
the East to the West, and were improved by them. The fairyland of Oriental 
tales cannot be conceived of without its gardens. In them alone may even the 
blue heavens find permission to gaze down on the unveiled beauties of the 
harem; thus it was in the garden that love tied its forbidden bonds, while 
high walls shut it in from the sight 
of the passer-by. 

Even the mosques—richly as 
they were furnished and decorated 
within—were comparatively plain on 
the exterior. It was only on the 
chief gateway, in the friezes, the 
minarets, and the beautifully orna- 
mented casing of the cupolas that 
the decorative arts of architect and 
sculptor could display themselves ; 
while, so early as at the time of the 
Fatimites, they had understood the 
application of the arabesques and in- 
scriptions, which had long been used 
as patterns for weaving, to the 
walls of the palaces and mosques. 
These delightful surface decorations 
served at once to please the imagina- 
tion and satisfy artistic feeling, and 
to arouse sentiments of devotion and 
a thirst for learning. Little, alas! has 
remained to our day of the buildings 
of that date, but there is no lack of 
descriptions of the splendour which eye Oe erat sane 
gradually developed itself under the 
Fatimite Khalifs, and it may be asserted with perfect confidence that all those 
features—which are peculiar to Arab architecture, and of which we shall be able 
to point out fine examples of a later period—reached their full development 
under this race of sovereigns. This is especially true of the stalactite ornament, 
as it has been called—from a false idea that it was an imitation of those 
fantastical natural formations which occur, in many varieties, in caverns where 
the water percolates through the roof. Kugler describes it as a peculiar kind of 
architectonic structure, of which the striking effect may be attributed to its 
apparent constructive value, and also to its organic (in the ideal sense) and 
fanciful character as a decoration. It occurs as a transition or interposed 
ornament supporting overhanging members of the edifice: for instance, as filling 


up the internal angles where a cupola rises above a quadrangular space; and in 
various other instances it is used in certain places as a substitute for a complete 


EGYPT. 


arch and vault. It is an artificial system of projecting parts in which smail 
brackets alternate with little niches with pointed arches, in such a way that the 
base of each super-imposed bracket is over the centre of the niche below, and 
often so that the upper projections hang over like a fir-cone. The constructive ra- 
tionale of the stalactite is an idea of support and thrust upwards, and Schmoranz, 
one of the most accomplished connoisseurs in Arab art, distinguishes three varieties, 
the Arab, Persian, and Mauresque. ach of these displays certain peculiarities, 
partly resulting from the character of the materials to which they are applied— 
wood, alabaster, terra-cotta, or stone. The uncoloured stalactites intended for mere 
effects of shadow are, of course, 
differently treated to the many- 
coloured painted ones. 

The palace built for his 
sovereign by Djawhar the Vic- 
torious has entirely disappeared ; 
but a poetical description has 
been preserved of another struc- 
ture of that period, the castle 
of the princes al-Mansoor, at 
Bugia in Algiers, which was 
sung of by the afore-mentioned 
poet Ibn Hamdees. The follow- 
ing prose version is from the 
German of Count von Schack :— 


“Century on century have passed 


over Greece and have given birth to no 


palace so splendid as this. O Mighty One, Whe eI 


CONGO HAUGR TAEDA TCONT TORmnniatetee we are made to understand the joys of PERSO-TURKISH STALAGTITE CAPITAL. 
OF THE MOSQUE OF EZBEK. Eden in these halls, with their lofty roofs 


and this cool delicious court-yard. The 


sight of them prompts the believer to deeds of virtue, for gardens as fair as these may be his home above; 
and even the sinner looking round him leaves the path of error, repenting of his former sins, to deserve the 
joys of Heaven. When the slaves open the gates the very hinges murmur a welcome to those who enter. 
The lions before the gate, which bite brazen rings, lift up their voices to say Allah is almighty. They seem 
ready to spring and tear the intruder who enters the court without being bidden. Like woven carpets dusted 
over with fine camphor are the marble pavements of the court. Pearls are inlaid all round, and far and wide 
the earth fills the air with perfume, as if it were pure musk. When the sun sets and darkness reigns, this 


castle might serve instead of it and make the night as clear as day.” 


The poet also praises the fountain of the same palace; it was surrounded 
by lions, from whose mouths the water poured into a basin, and as it rushed 
forth from their jaws it made a noise as loud “as though it were their roar.” 
In the midst of the basin stood a tree of metal with birds in the branches, and 
threads of water that played in the sun poured from their little beaks; moisture 
dropped also from the leaves of the tree. Ibn Hamdees devotes a poem even to 
the gates and to the ceiling of this palace. ©The gates were ornamented with 
the precious metals and with carving, and studded with gold nails. On the ceiling 


CAIRO. 229 


there were pictures of blooming gardens and hunting-scenes. The painter of these 
was highly lauded— 


“Twould seem he dipped his paint-brush in the sun’s refulgent beam 
To give the scene the splendour and the glamour of a dream.” 


The most important structure of the Fatimite period now remaining in Cairo 
is the mosque which was erected by the grandson and second successor of 
Mo’izz.* It is true it is half-ruined, and offers little worthy of remark to the 
visitor; but he who knows the story of the life of its founder, Hakim, must 
admit that this Khalif, who came to the throne when only eleven years old, is 
one of the most remarkable figures in history—one of the most singular and, by 
reason of the strange contradictions combined in his character, one of the most 
incomprehensible. To this day the sect of the Druses living in Syria regard 
him as an incarnation of the Most High—he himself, in his later years, believed 
himself to be God—and they believe that he disappeared only to come again 
and to receive the homage of the whole world. 

The development of Cairo owed but little to 
him, and the different classes of its inhabitants 
met with the most various treatment at his 
hands, according to the mood he was in. The 
Jews and the Christian Copts suffered most, 
and yet at times he would grant them the 
utmost freedom, and even permit such of them 
as had gone over to Islam to return to the 
exercise of their old religion. The lowest classes, 
among whom in his youth he was wont to pray, 
and whom he won over by his ever open hand, 
were devoted to him, while he was dreaded 
by the great. In the harems of the wealthy 
his very name was a word of fear, for no 
woman was allowed to leave her house, nor 


were the purveyors of provisions even permitted 
to cross its threshold. Magnanimity and mean- 
ness, mad severity and gentle kindness, affability 
and haughtiness amounting to the most frightful 
and blasphemous mania, a stern and utterly 
intolerant devotion to the doctrines of the Shiite 
sect and complete subjection to the religion of 
his fathers—all these conflicting elements and 
moods ruled alternately in the storm-tossed soul 
of this strangely compounded man; sometimes he would ride through the streets of 
the city in pomp with a large suite, at others alone, on an ass; for half the week 
he would sit in rooms artificially darkened, where candles and lamps took the 


THE MOSQUE OF EL HAKIM. 


DAD. 996. 


230 EGYPT. 
place of, sunshine; and once, like a second Nero, he had his palace set on fire. 
At last, in one of his nocturnal expeditions on Mokattam, he disappeared, leaving 
no trace. Probably he was murdered; but the Druses, as I have said, to this 
day look for his return to earth. He built three places of worship, but the 
mosque named after him and praised as an admirable work was destroyed by an 
earthquake. A stately structure with a ruined minaret that is but little injured— 
used in his time as an observatory—is now supported by the north-east portion 
of the city wall. It stands between the two most conspicuous gates in Cairo, 
the Bab en-Nasr—or “gate of victory”’—and the Bab el-Footooh, which were built 
in the reign of the second sovereign from Hakim, the magnificent but feeble 
el-Mustansir, by his Wezeer Bedr el-Gamalee. The Bab en-Nasr is an important 
structure of the best period of Arab art, and the solidity and accurate squaring of 
the stones are justly admired by experts. The Bab el-Footooh with its circular 
forts, well constructed and well preserved, deserves equal praise. 

The traveller who, in his walk round this suburb, comes towards these gates 
and the mosque of Hakim will see, on his left, a little cemetery where 
J. L. Bureckhardt—the finest writer of travels of any period—rests among the 
Moslems whose country and customs he studied and described. 

It is highly significant that it is not the Khalif who is commemorated as the 
builder of these two portals, but in both cases his Wezeer; and, in fact, after 
the time of Mustansir,* the Wezeers became more and more the rulers of the 
fate of Cairo, of Egypt, and of the Fatimite race. This dynasty became extinct 
after eight successors of Hakim had filled the throne, its end being as_ pitiful 
as its rise and early career had been splendid. The Egyptian Khalifat met its 
death-blow under the feeble Adeed, not indeed so much from the first Crusaders 
—who, under the later Fatimites, made a violent and victorious descent. 
consequence of the avarice and jealousy of the Wezeers, who made war on one 
another when they ought to have guarded the kingdom. Among them must be 
mentioned Shawer, who, to consolidate his power, applied for help to Noor-ed-deen, 


as in 


Prince of Aleppo” He thus threw open the road into Egypt to the Kurdish 
mercenaries of the Syrian, led by Sheerkooh and his young nephew, the famous 
Salah-ed-deen (Saladin), the son of Eyoob. After many vicissitudes, which culminated 
in the unprincipled Wezeer appealing to the Crusaders themselves for aid, he was 
deprived of both office and life by the Kurds. After the death of his uncle 
Sheerkooh,’ Saladin took his post, and reigned over Egypt, though at first 
only nominally and in the name of Adeed—the last of the Fatimites, who lived 
shut up in his palace with his wives; but even before the death of this prince, 
which took place shortly after, he governed as the independent Sultan, and he 
ventured boldly, and with. impunity, to have prayers said on the pulpits of 
Cairo for the Abbaside Khalif, whose faith he shared, being a Sunnite. From 
him sprang a new dynasty of sovereigns for Egypt, named the House of the 
Eyoobides,’ after Eyoob, the father of Saladin. 


1 a.p. 1036—1094. 2 ap. 1153. ® Atabeg of Syria. 
* First mention of employment of carrier-pigeons at this time. 


® Commander-in-chief of Noor-ed-deen, ° Hight reigns lasting eighty years. 


BAB EN-NASR. 


232 EGYPT: 


Saladin’s grand deeds of prowess, his chivalrous spirit, his generosity and 
good-heartedness have survived far more vividly in our Western legends and poems 
than they have among Orientals. Walter von der Vogelweide' rouses us with 
the appeal “Remember the gentle Sal’adeen,” and to him “gentle”*’ conveyed 
the idea of generous magnanimity, our “true gentleman.” Dante allows him 


BAB EL-FOOTOH. 


to linger alone in a circle, as the noblest of the heathen—“E solo in parte 
vid’ il Saladino.”? Lessing and Walter Scott have both done their best to keep 
Saladin’s personal memory green in the mind of Western nations. It was he 
and his valour that lost Jerusalem to the Crusaders, and nevertheless Christian 


' Cir. 1260. * Milte, or ‘“ Mild.” % « Inferno,” canto iv., 129. 


30 


CITADEL OF CAIRO. 


23 EGYPT. 


chivalry found in him something akin to itself, and was ready to accept the legend 
that he was the son of a Christian woman, and that he allowed himself to be 
dubbed Knight Templar by the captive Hugo of Tiberias, though the Templars 
were the bitterest foes of his cause. His life is not free from mean traits, but 
still he was a hero and a true knight: the only one of his creed at that time 
who could do justice to his enemies, and at the same time a prince—as Lessing 
has painted him—who was never weary of giving, and in whose treasury, after 
he had given away many millions, only about forty-five shillings were found at his 
death. His sister—the Sittah of Lessing’s play—was named Sitt’ esh-Shameh, and 
history says of her that at her brother's death she distributed her own treasure 
in alms, since his coffers were almost empty. 

This is not the proper place for following his warlike career; but what he 
accomplished for Cairo must not remain unmentioned, for it was Saladin who 
founded and erected the citadel which to this day towers imposingly above the 
city. If it had been built with no other object than that of maintaining obedience 
and defending Cairo, the choice of the site could hardly be deemed happy, for it 
is overtopped by other heights lying farther to the south. which again command 
it. But Saladin wished to fix his residence in the new fortress, and Makreezee 
tells us that he selected the height of Mokattam—‘“the pleasure-house of fresh 
air,’ as it was called—for his building, because it w: s observed that meat, which 
would keep only twenty-four hours in the city, remained fresh two days and nights 
up on the hill. After the fall of the Fatimites, and the restoration of the Sunnite 
confession, the greatest dangers threatened Saladin from the Shiite inhabitants. At 
first he had lived in the castle of the Grand Wezeer, ang had given the palace 
of the Khalifs of the race of Mo’izz to his Emirs, andfno spot could be found 
better suited at this time for the coercion of the Cgirénes than that which he 
selected. The eunuch Karakoosh® was entrusted with the construction of the 
fortress, and the outer walls which were to surround the whole city; and this 
extraordinary man, who seems to have been half a fool and half a sage, solved 
the problem set before him by destroying the small pyramids of Ghizeh and the 
third pyramid—that of Mycerinus—and using them as stone quarries. The finely 
squared blocks of the Pharaonic period were carried across the Nile, and the work 
proceeded rapidly, even while the Sultan was absent fighting in Syria, though it was 
not completed till the reign of his nephew and second successor, Malik el Kamil. 

The memory of Karakoosh, the architect, has remained particularly fresh 
among the Egyptians. The buffoon’ who is always conspicuous in every public 
theatrical exhibition’ is called by his name, and he appears, in fact, to have merited 
this fate by many of his acts and dealings. A widow once begged of him to 


a 


1 Nathan der Weise. 2 AD, LTE. 

3 Beha-ed-den, The name Kurakoosh, meaning ‘black bird,” was given to him as a nickname, probably after new im:posts. 

‘About a.p. 1219. 

> D’Herbelot, in his account of Karakoosh, states a work was written by Soiuthi on his actions. 

® Supposed by some to be the origin of Karaguse, Karaguez, or Caragheus, the Chinese Punch or Polichinello, exhibited 
as a kind of ombre chinoise by a figure behind a cloth illumined by a lamp from behind. This cynical performance of the 
Karaguse often embodies political caricatures of the day, and reflects public opinion. Others deny that Karaguse, which means 


“black snout,” is the same as Karakoosh. 


CAIRO. 


eae on her a winding-sheet that she might bury her husband who was just 
dead. 


Sy) eae, 2 a n . . 5 
Karakoosh replied—“ The alms-box is just now empty; come again next year, 


DOOR OF THE ALLEY OF SUKKARIE, 


and then, by God’s help, I will give you the winding-sheet.” The following story, 
which is related of other persons too, with several variations, is more to his credit. 
A great robbery was committed in Cairo. Karakoosh enquired of the man 
who had been robbed whether his street was closed by a gate, as was frequently 


236 EGYPT. 


the case in early times. Having been answered in the affirmative, he ordered that 
the gate and the inhabitants of the street should both be brought to him; then, 
applying his ear to the gate, he said: “This gate tells me that the man who 


ts 


ne 
ih am ft 
a 

Sgt 


DOOR OF THE MAMELUKES IN THE CITADEL OF CAIRO. 


stole the money has a feather in his turban.” The thief involuntarily clutched at 
his turban and was discovered. 

Many other traits of Karakoosh are told which are absolutely barbarous, but 
the confidence put in him by Saladin would seem to prove that he cannot have 
been altogether devoid of fine qualities. 

The Arabs called the new. fortress the “Nile Castle,” and the modern Cairenes 
call it simply ’el-Kal’ah, or “the fort.” A winding road, very well kept, now leads 


CATRO. 237 


up to the citadel; but the old steep path, shut in by walls, is also kept up, and 
debouches at the gate called el-Azab, which is also called the Gate of the Mamelukes, 
because it was close to it that the frightful tragedy was enacted of the massacre 
of these haughty nobles under Mohammed Ali, as will presently be related. 

The palace in which Saladin’s successors lived for centuries was subsequently 
wholly abandoned; a few halls decorated in the Turkish style are re-opened at 
the present day on occasions of great ceremonial receptions. The finest of the 
marble pillars were broken away by Seleem, after his conquest of Cairo, in 
1517, and sent to Stamboul with the most valuable of the other decorative objects 
and furniture. It would have been very difficult to form any idea of the appearance 
of an Arab castle, or of the life within its walls, if the following account of the 
reception of the Crusaders’ envoys at the palace of the Khalifs at Cairo had not 
been handed down to us. We owe it to the historian William of Tyre.’ 

“As this prince’s house,” he says, “has quite strange arrangements, such as 
have never been seen in our time, we will here correctly set forth all that has 
been told to us by faithful reporters, who have been with this 
splendour, his immeasurable wealth, and his many lordly possess 
not unpleasing to know of them more exactly. 

“Hugo of Cesarea and Godfrey, the Knight Templar, arriving at Cairo 
accompanied by the Soudan, went to the palace called in the language of that 
country Kasare (ar-Kasr), preceded by a number of apparitors who marched in 
front with much clatter, armed with swords. They were led through narrow 
passages where there was no. daylight, and at every doorway they met with 
companies of armed Ethiopians, who hastened to salute the Soudan as soon as 
he appeared. Having thus passed the first and second posts, they were shown 
into a larger space where the sun could shine, since it was open to the sky. 
Here there were galleries to walk in, with marble columns pierced and carved 
with gold in relief; the pavements, too, were of various materials, and the whole 


ereat prince, of his 


ons, as it will be 


aspect of these arcades was really worthy of royal majesty. The elegance of the 
materials and workmanship involuntarily attracted the gaze of the passer-by, and 
the eye found it hard to turn from them, nor could it be satisfied with gazing 
on them. There were basins of marble filled with the clearest water ; 
infinite variety and unknown in our part of the world were heard singing, while 


birds of 


their strange forms and colours were equally new and presented an extraordinary 
appearance, at least in the eyes of our countrymen, and they all had different 
food appropriate to their taste, according to their species. From thence they went 
still farther on, under the guidance of the chief of the Eunuchs, and they came 
to buildings as much more beautiful than the former as those had seemed superior 
to those usually seen in other places. Here they found an astonishing variety 
of quadrupeds, such as the fanciful hand of the painter might depict, or poetry 
describe in the licence of fiction, or the imagination of a sleeper invent in his 
dreams—such, in short, as actually exist in the East and South, while the West has 
never seen the like. After passing through many corridors and twisted passages, 


1 He was Bishop of Tyre, a.p. 1100—1187, and wrote “ Belli sacri Historia, libri xxiii.” 


id . 


iy 


: 


r i" 


WITH THE MOSQUE OF HASAN. 


ROOMELEH PLACE 


CAIRO. 239 


where the busiest might well have paused to gaze at all they saw, they reached the 
palace itself, where they found more numerous bodies of armed men and attendants 


Oo 
5 


forming considerable troops, which, by their splendid dress and great numbers, 
attested the incomparable magnificence of the sovereign of this place, just as the 
various objects they had seen proclaimed his wonderful splendour and wealth. 

“As soon as they were within the palace the Sultan did homage, as is the 
custom, to his suzerain; he prostrated himself twice, offering him, as it were, 
a manner of worship which is paid to none other. Finally, after prostrating 
himself a third time, he divested himself 
of the sword that hung round his. neck. 


Then, with surprising swiftness, the cur- 
tains of cloth of gold, embroidered with 
an infinite variety of precious stones, 
were withdrawn. These, which hung in 
the middle of the room, had concealed 
the throne, and the Khalif became visible, 
showing his face to all beholders, seated 
on a gilt throne, dressed in robes more 
magnificent than those of kings, and sur- 
rounded by a small number of eunuchs MALKAPS. 
who were his retainers.” * 

In this instance, too, written words have proved more enduring than stone 
and metal. 

In the Citadel of Cairo, to which we will now return, a good deal remains 
from the period of its founders. But newer features of very various styles and 
of every date—early, late, and brand-new 


are mingled with what is old, and 
greatly predominate. The fort is a fantastical and Babylonian medley of fabulous 
courts and labyrinthine corridors, of barracks and palaces, of abruptly precipitous 
walls and hideous ouwbdiettes. It ought to be contemplated as a whole, and yet 
it is impossible to describe the way in which this whole is composed, or how 
the parts which constitute it, and. which have so little resemblance to each other, 
are connected. Here the tallest minarets of Cairo seem almost to touch the sky, 
there the deepest well in the city has its bottom below the level of the Nile— 
on one hand rises a half-ruined and ancient wall of blocks from the Pyramids, 
on the other the shining alabaster walls and court of a modern mosque—here 
stands a palace with splendid pillars, and there a dilapidated place of worship. 
The old mosque yonder is turned into a granary, and this wing of the palace, 
formerly decorated with fabulous splendour, is now a. barrack. 

After climbing a steep street, in which breath altogether fails us, we find 
ourselves suddenly on a small plateau, fanned by the pure desert air, while the 
eye can gaze unhindered far and near. At our feet we see the busy—or lazy— 
swarms of people on the Roomeleh square, adjoining the old Karameydan, 
which now and henceforth bears the name of the founder of the vice-regal house, 


1 «Histoire des Faits et gestes dans les régions d’Outremer” (Guizot, coll. de Mémoires, Paris, 18: 


zat EGYPT. 
Mohammed Ali. The splendid Mosque of Hasan, which towers above this square 
or place, was built about two hundred years later than the citadel; but, even 
at the earlier date, great and small may have assembled here, taking “part in 
every sort of amusement, and spending the month of Schawwal awaiting the 
starting of the great caravan of Mecca pilgrims. The eye glances across and 
away from this animated spot and the vast places of 
worship that dominate it, and we see before us the huge 
city spreading far and wide to the west and north. There 
are many human forms and fluttering garments to be seen 
on the flat roofs, which also support the openings of the 
ventilators, wooden structures resembling in form those 
that cover the cabin-ladder on board a river steamer. 
These “malkafs” form quite a little town on the top of 
the larger one, but the eye does not linger on them, for 
it is tempted to wander in every direction—and upwards 
especially—by the minarets, which stand up here, there, 


and everywhere in hundreds of tall and slender forms. 
But our upward gaze is soon dazzled by the rays of the 
sun and the sheeny glare of the whitewashed walls; and 
the eye turns away, lower and farther tov yards the west, 
where the broad Nile silently floods its green and fertile 
banks, and the Pyramids rise up on the margin of the 
desert at the foot of the rocky Libyan range. 

What Vesuvius is to Naples the Pyramids are to 
Jairo; they are its peculiar and characteristic token or 
symbol, and if at any moment we forget—surrounded by 
evidences of European culture—that we are parted from 
our Western home by many a mile of sea and land, the 
Pyramids remind us of the fact that we are sojourning 
in the land of the Pharaohs. We glance 
rapidly across the Hill of Mokattam to the east, 
and the Wind-mill Hills to the south, across 
the strip of desert and the heaps of ruins ; 
but we let our gaze linger somewhat longer 
on that strange scene—the Necropolis of Cairo. 
The different cemeteries, in distinct groups of 
tombs, lie far apart in the sandy waste ; and, | romrmow 
besides these, those towns of domed mausoleums, 
among which the two most justly celebrated are those of the Mamelukes, close 
below us to the south, and farther away, north-east of the citadel, the burial-place 
of the Khalifs. 

So long as the sun is still high in the heavens, this great picture lacks half 
of its most bewitching charm. Grey, yellow, brown, dazzling white, with here and 
there a streak of green dimmed by dust or by distance, are the only colours that 
meet the eye; but we will visit the citadel again, and stand by the parapet of the 


CAIRO. 241 


ral 
south-west platform early at sunrise, or in the evening before the sun has disappeared 


behind the Libyan range, when the radiant heavens flood the varied and suggestive 
picture with an infinite wealth of tints. Rosy clouds float like filmy veils round the 
slender minarets, a paler gold is mirrored in the Nile, the fields have a bluish-green 
bloom upon them, the horizon glows in regal purple, and tbe distant hills reflect a 
tender violet. 

It is with ditticulty that we tear ourselves from the scene, but before night falls 
we must turn back to the inner courts of the citadel. Here two neighbouring spots 
have remained unaltered from the time of Saladin. First, an utterly neglected 
mosque, in a half Byzantine style, with its dome fallen in; and, beyond it, a very 
remarkable water-work, called by the Arabs “Joseph’s well,” and said by them to 
have been dug by that son of Jacob who was governor under one of the Pharaohs: 
it received its name, however, from Saladin, whose full name was Salah-ed-Deen 
Yoosuf—Yoosuf signifying Joseph. Abd-al-Lateef,’ the contemporary of the great 
Sultan, who enjoyed the honour of his personal acquaintance, speaks of this well, 
which is accurately described by Makreezee. 

It consists of a shaft 88.30 metres deep (about 289 feet). The water is raised 
in jars by two large wheels turned by the help of oxen, which go up and down on 
a sloping plane hewn out of the rock to about half-way up the shaft. Important as 
this structure was in early times, it has been of little value since the introduction of 
steam-pumps into Cairo. Besides, the water has a saltish flavour, in consequence, 
as Makreezee states, of a mistake made by Karakoosh,* who had the narrow opening 
—through which at first a small quantity of excellent water was procured—much 
enlarged, and so admitted the waters of a salt spring, that mixes with the sweet. 

The great mosque which now graces the citadel, and whose tall and too 
slender minarets are visible from a great distance, must be introduced to the 
reader's knowledge with the other works ‘of Mohammed Ali, who founded it, and 
after whom it is called. 

Saladin, before his death, had concluded a peace with the Crusaders, and his 
successors—for he left seven sons and one daughter—inherited from him Egypt, 
Syria, Arabia, and a part of Mesopotamia. But during his lifetime he had already 
divided these vast poss 


sions among his three eldest sons; the other members 
of the family had towns and provinces over which they ruled. His son Melik 
el-Azeez’ was succeeded by Saladin’s brother, Melik el-Adil,* who governed for 
a short time as guardian of his nephew, who was a minor, and then, having 
deposed the boy, who was only ten years old, governed Egypt on his own account. 
He is known also by the name which he bore before he usurped the throne, Seyf-ed- 
Deen Aboo Bekr, and we find on his coins that he—like all the other members of 
his family—had stamped, not his own name only, but that also of the feeble 
Abbasside Khalifs, whose supremacy he acknowledged. The heraldic double-headed 
eagle is remarkable on one of the coins here figured; it also occurs on ancient 
buildings in Cairo” After Melik el-Adil, evil times fell upon the Mohammedan 


EPASD LOD: * Sobriquet of the Beha-ed-deen, Vizier of Saladin, a.p. 1174—1193. 
3 ap, 1196—1200. * aD. 1200. 
» It appears still earlier, having been found on a small Babylonian hematite cylinder at least Bc. 500. 


31 


EGYPT. 


peoples of western Asia and Syria. But this is not the place to relate how the 
Eyoobide families made war on one another ; how the Crusaders attacked even Egypt ; 
how Damietta fell,» and Melik es-Salih—Saladin’s grand-nephew—routed Louis IX. 
of France at Mansoorah,” and—as the reader already knows—kept him prisoner 
there ; or how the Mongols overthrew the ancient sovereignties of Asia, overran China, 
and rushed on in wild hordes to the very frontiers of Europe. But I must not 
omit to mention ‘that when Melik es-Salih, the last but one of the Eyoobide race 
—the last was murdered soon after he came to the throne*—aspired to form a strong 
body-guard such as the Abbasside Khalifs had had, which should ruthlessly carry out 
all his orders, this project was greatly facilitated by the inroads of the Mongols. 
For many individuals of the overthrown nations, particularly Turks and Kharez- 
mians, must have emigrated into foreign countries and sought service wherever 
they could find it; and there can have been no lack of Turkish prisoners of war 
to be sold into. slavery, and no one better able to purchase them than the 
wealthy sovereign of Egypt. A poet of that period addressed the founder of this 


COINS OF MELIK EL-ADIL (SEYF-ED-DEEN ABOO BEKR, SON OF EYOOB), THE INSCRIPTION CALLS HIM THE “RIGHTEOUS KING.” 


body-guard—this heterogeneous troop of purchased warriors—Melik es-Salih, who in 
other respects was reputed a just and temperate prince, telling him he was 
committing a folly, for that he was inviting “the hawk’s brood to settle in the 
eagle's nest.” And the poet goes on :— 


O glorious Saladin, I see thy son 
Hurry to market to buy foreign slaves ; 
But soon to market they will make him run, 


Sold into slavery himself by slaves. 


The poet’s prophecy was fulfilled. This body-guard, under the humble name of 
“Mamelukes "—7.e., the slaves—became a terror, it is true, to Melik es-Salih’s foes, 
and even to the armies of the Crusaders; but soon grew to be far more terrible 
to him and to his house, whose last scion, his own son, died under their daggers. 

Much clatter of arms is heard throughout this period, and yet the arts of 
peace were by no means neglected, particularly at Cairo. Study, rhetoric, and 
philosophy throve in the universities and schools ; 


singing and poetry under the 
immediate patronage of the princes and grandees—nay, even in the streets and 
in the household circle. The authors of the time of the Eyoobide dynasty are 
distinguished not only for the subjects of which they treated, but for the artistic 
elegance with which they wrote their manuscripts. Behar ed-deen Zoheyr, 


1 ap, 1219, Sap; 1250, 3 ap. 1256. 


CAIRO. 243 


secretary to Melik es-Salih, enjoyed the greatest esteem as a calligrapher, and 
this beautiful penman was at the same time a poet, and a man of quite be- 
witching amiability. His poems, lately edited in a splendid form by E. H. Palmer, 
show us how high a degree of intellectual freedom was allowed to the soaring 
spirits of that age, and under what refined and delightful conditions of life the 
social intercourse of the Cairenes was carried on. The poet celebrates not mighty 
princes only and beautiful women, but garden-feasts, water-parties on the Nile, and 


OLD ARABIC ENAMELLED GLASS CUP. 


jolly drinking-bouts. It was to the city of the Khalifs that Behr ed-deen Zoheyr 
invited one of his many friends in the following pleasant lines -— 


“Tf you come to see me here, my friend, 
Thanks and hearty welcome will await you, 

If you come not—which the Lord forfend— 
You are held excused; I cannot rate you.” 


The same amiable poet, in the following lines, thanks a friend for a letter which has 
given him extreme pleasure :— 


“Your letter came, and I declare, 
My longing it expresses quite. 
Methinks my heart was standing by 
Dictating to you what to write.” 
Palmer’s Translation. 


With what subtle grace does the poet allude playfully to passages from the 
Koran to proclaim himself the prophet of truth and love! He is admirable, too, as 


244 EGYPT. 


a satirist. He retorts on a would-be philosopher, who reproaches him with not 
understanding his arguments, by saying “he is no Solomon, that he should 
understand the language of beasts.” We learn from his contemporary and 
biographer, Ibn Khallikan—the author of “Accounts of the Lives of Remarkable 
Men”—that our poet was born at Mecca, or at any rate near that city, and was on 
such terms of friendship with Melik es-Salih, his liege lord, as did the prince and the 
poet equal honour. It was in Cairo that Ibn-Khallikan met him, and wrote the 
following estimate of his character:—“He has great influence over his sovereign, 


who knows how to value him very highly, and entrusts him with his secrets as he 
does no one else. In spite of this he uses his influence only in the interests 
of justice, and benefits many by his good offices and friendly services.” After 
the death of his sovereign (1249) the poet led a retired life, and rarely left his 
house. Nine years later he died of the plague, which raged fatally in Cairo. He 
was buried in the Karafeh, the necropolis of Cairo—with which we will shortly 
make better acquaintance—close to the mausoleum of the Imam Shati‘ee. 


er 


MAMELUKE EMIR. 


CAIRO; 
UNDER THE MAMELUKE 
SULTANS. 

Saha eee 


SOONER was the race of Hyoob 
extinct than Aybeg, a warrior of that 
troop of Mamelukes which were quar- 
tered on the island of Roda, and who 
called themselves the Bahrites (¢.c., of 
the river—btahr), seized the reins of 
government. He and his successors 
constitute the race of the Bahrite 
Sultans, under whose dominion much 
blood was shed in Egypt, though at 
the same time many great works 
were achieved. 

The beginning of their rule was disgraced by frightful 
massacres. The palace in the citadel was their residence, 
and the very first of them was there assassinated in his 
bath by one of his wives. Another wife of the murdered 
man undertook to avenge him. She killed her guilty rival 
and flung her body into the ditch of the citadel, where it 
lay unburied for days, and every one who was suspected 
of having been an accomplice in the crime shared her 
miserable fate. 


How many such deeds of horror these walls must 
have seen in those terrific times, and how fearful a harvest 
must Death have reaped in that field! His scythe swept over the house of the 


Abbassides also. Mighty kingdoms were overturned by the overwhelming might of 


246 EGYPT. 


the Mongol invaders. A swarm of them under Hoolagoo conquered Bagdad (1258) 
and slew the last Khalif of the true blood of Abbas, with his two sons and all 
his nearest relatives. 

When the Mameluke Beybars mounted the throne of Egypt by means of a 
murder, there were no true Khalifs left, and yet he felt that his sovereignty could 
not be regarded as firmly secured over the numerous Shiite sectarians, as well as the 
friends of the Eyoobides and of the crushed house of Abbas in Egypt and Syria, 
unless he could invest it with some semblance of legitimacy and religious consecra- 
tion. He was much rejoiced, therefore, when he learned that a descendant of the 
Abbassides and of the Prophet, who gave himself out to be a son of the Khalif 
Sahir, had escaped the sword of the Mongols. He called him to Cairo without 
delay, received him there with the utmost pomp, conducted him to the citadel, and 
assigned a palace there as his residence. The chief Kadi was required to acknow- 
ledge his descent, and to do homage to him as Khalif. Beybars himself swore 
allegiance to him, and in return was invested by the new “Commander of the 
Faithful” with the office of Regent of all the lands then subject—or ever to become 
subject—to Islam. To carry out this farce to the end, Beybars received at the hand 
of the new Khalif the insignia which were to distinguish him as the representative 
of the Abbassides, and which consisted of a black turban richly embroidered with 
gold, a violet upper robe, a gold necklace, golden spurs, several sabres and swords of 
honour, two spears, and a shield. The standards of the Abbassides fluttered over his 
head as he mounted his white horse, which had black housings and was decorated 
with trappings of the colours of that house. 

Beybars allowed the fullest liberty to this feudal lord of his own creating ; 
but after the Khalif had fallen at the head of the legion which he himself com- 
manded, in the struggle against the Mongols, Beybars set another “Commander of 
the Faithful” on the throne, who was also said to be descended from Abbas, but he 
kept him a helpless prisoner in the citadel. The same fate pursued his equally 
hapless successors, in whose name a series of Mameluke Sultans governed the country 
till the Ottoman Sultan Seleem I.’ conquered Cairo and Egypt, and forced the last 
of these sham Khalifs to transfer to him his titles, rights, and dignities.* It is from 
this act and right of conquest that the Sultan ruling at Constantinople derives his 
claim to the title of “Commander of the Faithful.” To the present day, it is true, 
the learned Sunnites still refuse to acknowledge his supremacy in spiritual matters, 
and ascribe it exclusively to the Grand Shereef of Mecca. 

The history of Egypt under the Mameluke Sultans is only connected with that 
of Europe by very slight threads, and the pages on which it is written are deeply 
stained with blood; but the ghastly deeds of this race of warriors, who drove the 
Crusaders out of Palestine, were almost always done with the naked sword; while 
the Greeks had at an earlier date called Egypt the “land of. poison,” and even under 
the Ptolemies poison was the favourite tool of the ambitious, and preferred to every 
other means. Nor is there any lack of fine and manly figures among the Mameluke 


1 ap. 1517. 
* Toomin Bey, the last of the Mamelukes, who made an heroic resistance at Ghizeh, fled to the Delta. Scelem 
exposed him on a camel for six days, and hung him in the arcade of a gate of the mosque of Mo’ayyad. 


| 


i \ | l 


KALA‘OON, 


MORISTAN OF 


THE 


DOOR or 


248 EGYPT. 


Sultans, many of whom had entered the Nile valley as slaves; and it must not be 
I forgotten in their favour that most of them promoted the arts and sciences with 
such zeal, that all the noblest works of Arab art which have escaped destruction 
owe their origin to them. The Moristan (as it is called) of Kala’oon, which is the 


ORNAMENTAL GIRDLING OF THE MORISTAN OF KALA’OON. 


most richly endowed foundation, and the Mosque of Hasan, which is the most 
beautiful of the mosques of Cairo, were raised by the Mameluke Sultans of the 
Bahrite dynasty; but most of the numberless mausoleums which are known as the 
“tombs of the Khalifs” were built by Sultans of the family of the Circassian 
Mamelukes, who also caused many other mosques to be erected. From 1250 to 


ORNAMENTAL GIRDLING OF THE MORISTAN OF KALA’00N. 


1517 these princes ruled Egypt from the citadel of Cairo as their capital and 
residence. Kala’oon, who died in 1290, was the second successor of Beybars. 
He could glory in his successes over the Mongols and Crusaders, and the 
historians who wrote under his son’s direction lauded him highly for his virtue 
and love of justice; but the author of the history of the Khalifs cannot forbear 
bringing a charge against him which his dealings seem to have justified—that he 
held no oath or treaty sacred if his interests required him to break them. 


CAIRO. 249 


However, the Egyptians were far less oppressed under him than under his pre- 
decessor Beybars. He earned the honours which a nation is ever ready to pay to 
a victorious prince, and he may even have won many hearts by his extraordinary 
beauty, which brought 1,000 dinars into the pocket of the slave-merchant who 
brought him from Turkestan. Finally, he took care, by splendid endowments, to 
earn the name of benefactor of the 
poor and suffering. 

The Moristan, or hospital, founded 
by him, now stands in the north- 
eastern quarter of the city, hard 
the bazaar- of the coppersmiths—who 
may be seen there at work on the 
deserted site of the vast, but 
neglected and now fast perishing 
structure. Only the tomb of its 
founder is preserved from destruc- 
tion, and still visited by the sick, 
who expect to be cured of head- 
ache by the Sultan’s turban-cloth, 
which is treasured as a relic, or 
who seek to be healed of inter- 
mittent fever by his caftan. 

It is an effective and noble 
structure of the best period, and 
in former times owned an endow- 
ment for fifty readers of the Koran. 
On Thursdays young women generally 
resort to it, and mothers with little 
children. The former pray before the 
splendid shrine for male offspring, 
which are thought so important in 
Arab families, and which ensure to 
the mother an amount of considera- 
tion, which is usually denied her if 
she is childless or only bears daughters. 
Strange things, indeed, are to be seen 


WINDOW IN THE MAUSOLEUM OF KALA’OON. 


by any one who succeeds in watching the devotional exercises of the women 
who come to this sacred spot. He will observe them with astonishment throw 
off all their upper garments, cover their face with both hands, and then leap 
from side to side in front of the niche till they sink exhausted on the ground. 
They often lie on the stone floor for a long time before they recover from this 
collapse and find strength enough to rise. 

Many mothers bring very young children, not yet able to walk, that their 
“tongues may be loosed.” For this extraordinary purpose the poor little 
creatures are conducted to a large polished dark stone near the right-hand 


32, 


INTERIOR OF THE MOSQUE OF KALA’OON. 


CATRO. 2 


Or 
1 


window; a green lemon is squeezed upon it, and the juice is rubbed on to the 
large stone with a smaller one. As soon as the stone, which contains iron in 
some form, begins to tum red from the action of the vegetable acid, the child 
is made to suck it: of course the babies, who like nothing but sweet things, 
refuse, and scream with all their might. This delights the mothers, for the louder 
they scream the more the miracle is believed in, and the more surely will “the 
tongue be loosed.” 

A mysterious influence is also attributed to the pillars of the prayer-niche. 
They are covered at the lower part with a patina, or oxidation, which has not 
a very pleasing effect, asit is due to the lemon-juice deposited by the “ loosened 
tongues” of the children. These extraordinary ceremonies have never before been 
described. When my informant, the architect Herr Schmoranz—one of the best 
connoisseurs in Arab art — succeeded once in watching them, he was 
discovered by an old Eunuch, and very probably his beautiful drawings might 


never haye adorned these pages if he had not previously 
studied every part of the Mausoleum of Kala’oon, and 
so made himself familiar with all its passages and exits. 
Not women and mothers only pray by the Sultan’s 
tomb ; the poor entreat for a better lot, and, in point 
of fact, few institutions have done more to alleviate sorrow 
and misery than that of Kala’oon, which included, besides 
the mausoleum, a school and a hospital of immense 
extent. There was a separate ward for each form of 


disease, and each patient had his own bed; women 
were received in a wing separate from the men; every — xosem or 4 rmany scwoor mw camo. 
sufferer, whether rich or poor, was nursed free- of 
charge. Connected with the hospital proper were laboratories, dispensaries, 
kitchens, baths, and a lecture hall where the. chief physician of the establishment 
gave his clinical lectures on medicine. The store-rooms for food, and the amount 
consumed, were so vast that several stewards were occupied solely in purchasing 
them and in accounting for the sums of money expended in them. The college 
connected with the institution was equally well furnished forth, and possessed a fine 
library ; close by was a school for children, where sixty poor orphans found a 
home, food, and clothing. 

This work. of Kala’oon has outlived the memory of his warlike deeds, and 
causes his name to this day to be blessed, for every Moslem regards charity 


as the greatest virtue. All that is undertaken by the faithful must be done 
solely to the glory of God, and the stronger the power of the faith in his 
breast the greater will the number of his good works be. The loftier Christian 


conception of neighbourly love, as including all humanity, is foreign, no doubt, to 
the Moslem religion, but the sons of Islam are required to show love, pity, 
generosity, tender-heartedness, and patience to eyery fellow-Moslem:; and of the 
five indispensable exercises by which the believer is to give proof of his faith 
the giving of alms was placed second by the Prophet, the first act of faith being 
prayer. We cannot, therefore, be surprised to see a magnificent benevolent 


252 EGYPT. 


foundation like this Moristan of Kala’oon established on the broadest principles of 
pure humanity, and erected in the capital (at that time) of the Mohammedan world 
by a Moslem ruler, or to learn that not Cairo only, but every great city of the 
East can to the present day boast of similar institutions. 

Nevertheless beggars have at no period been wanting in the city of the 
Khalifs, but these poor creatures, many of whom are blind—some led by children, 
many finding their way about with wonderful skill and certainty, though with no 
guide but a stick—seldom give the impression of being abject and cowering victims ; 
on the contrary, they ask for assistance with a certain self-respect, and we, who 
understand the pious texts they call out to the passer-by, perceive that their object 
is on the whole not so much to excite compassion as to 
urge upon the rich man the duty of giving out of his abun- 
dance, and to remind him that he—the needy one—is 
justified in expecting from him who is blessed with a 
superfluity “the wages of his poverty, in the name of 
God.” “TI,” cries the beggar, “am the guest of God and 
the Prophet, oh! God, the free giver!” or some such 
motto, and he who bestows freely is assured that by his 
gift he makes the Most High his debtor. Many beggars 
cry out, “I demand of God the price of bread, and he who 
pays the price giveth to the Lord.” It might put our men 
of fortune to shame to see how large a portion of his 
income a wealthy Cairene, even at the present day, is wont 
to set aside ‘for benevolent purposes. Pious endowments 
(awkaf—plural of wakf) are numerous and various, and 
consist in moneys and invested capital, which are managed 
by proper trustees. Most of them are attached to mosques, 
and intended for the support of schools (medreseh) and 
fountains or wells, which are always kept up in the neigh- 
bourhood of the mosques. These institutions—known as Sebeel—which afford 
relief to the thirsty, are a great boon in a rainless region and in a town where 
the natural water is all saltish surface-water. The benevolent custom of making 
cisterns dates, no doubt, from the time when the Arabs wandered as nomads 
through the desert, but it is equally valuable in the cities. The poor, needing to 
moisten his parched gums and unable to pay the water-carrier, would have to make 
his way to the Nile, which is at some distance from most parts of the city, if he 
could not find a drinking-fountain in almost every street. For several weeks before 
the Nile rises its waters become turbid, unwholesome, and almost undrinkable, though 
at other times they are so delicious that Champollion called them the champagne of 
drinking waters, and the Arabs say that the Prophet would have wished to live for 
ever if he had once tasted. them; it is at that season, therefore, that the public 
fountains are most used. Many of them are enclosed by railings of finely-wrought 
iron, gilt bronze, or wood. A projecting roof shades the drinker, who mounts a few 
steps to the window of the cistern room, where the water is distributed, or to reach 
the metal tube out of which he sucks the refreshing liquid. Poetical inscriptions in 


PUBLIC DRINKING FOUNTAIN. 


CAIRO. 253 


gilt letters record the memory of the founders of the fountains, and their Arabic 
name—* Sebeel,” or “Sebeel Allah’—signifies “the path to God,” since the good deed 
of providing for the hungry and thirsty is the surest road, next to martyrdom, by 
which the faithful may attain to Him. 

Hence even the* water-carriers—who are wont to attract the attention of 
passers-by by clattering their metal drinking cups, and whose queerly-shaped water- 
skins look like the body of a goat with four stumps of legs—call out “The way of 
God, oh thirsty ones!” 

These words, no doubt, were first sung out in the desert; but pious phrases 
such as “ God forgive thy sins, oh distributor of drink!” or “God have mercy on 
thy parents!” are particularly frequent on the lips of the water-seller when in honour 
of some festival he is hired to give the fluid free of charge to all that ask it; and 
each one who receives the bowl of refreshing fluid at his hand, while he thanks him, 
adds a fervent “Ameen” (Amen) to his pious invocation. When his water-skin is 
empty he calls down the blessing of God on the dispenser of the drink, and wishes 
he may come into Paradise. 

The wells in the city are of course of far less consequence than those on the 
track across the desert, and the pious spirit of the Mohammedans has therefore 
associated another foundation with that of the Sebeel or city fountain, which very 
plainly proves how much of true and beautiful humanity is to be found in that much 
contemned Islam which we often accuse of empty formalism. The public wells are 
connected with houses of several storeys in which elementary schools are maintained 
out of the endowment money—usually for orphan boys. Thus, every builder of a 
fountain may be considered as a benefactor to‘ orphans as well, and the more ancient 
of these institutions date from a period when, so far as I know, no institution for 
orphans had ever been thought of in Europe. 

Numerous foundations of this kind were endowed under the Mameluke ‘Sultans, 
and perhaps no sovereign who ever ruled in the Nile valley did more to enlarge 
and beautify Cairo than Kala’oon’s youngest son, en-Nasir. He mounted the 
throne as a boy of nine years old, was deposed once by the ambitious Ameers, and 
on another occasion, after he had done great deeds, he was compelled to resign the 
government ; at last, however, he re-entered the citadel, and took the reins of the 
state into his own hands. For forty-three years, in all, he governed independently, 
and was prudent, but suspicious—industrious and capable, but licentious, and passion- 
ately addicted to many costly amusements. During his second reign he beat the 
Templars, drove the Christians out of Aradus, and achieved the greatest deed of arms of 
his reign by vanquishing the Mongols in the plain of Merg as-Soffar, and annihilating 
their army of more than 100,000 men. The citizens of Cairo prepared a grand festival 
for the return of their triumphant Sultan after this victory. A splendid palace was 
erected to receive him, close to the Bab en-Nasr, with which we are already acquainted, 
and near it large basins were filled with perfect lakes of lemonade, which Mamelukes 
served out to the returning army to drink. Any one who had a house in one of 
the streets through which the procession of victors must pass could let it for a few 
hours for a hundred gold pieces to some of the curious who were attracted to Cairo. 
When, not long after, many buildings in the city were destroyed by an earthquake, 


a Saye pa ge ee 


COURT IN THE MORISTAN OF KALA’OON. 


CAIRO. 255 


and thousands of human beings were buried in the ruins, it was thought that this 
was a visitation sent by God to punish the arrogance and extravagance of the 
triumphant nation, 


FOUNTAIN AND SCHOOL 


Some of them, and particularly the Christians, were ere long visited in another 
way. Some time before, and particularly under Hakim,’ they had suffered much 
oppression and been forced to submit to humiliating edicts. Nasir showed him- 
himself more tolerant, until an envoy from the Sultan of Morocco met a Christian 
riding on horseback, who was haughtily pushing aside all those of lower rank who 


' ap. 996—1000 


256 EGYPT. 


came near him. The Moor, it is said, enraged by this haughtiness in an unbeliever 
represented the matter to the Sultan, and persuaded him to renew the strict edict, 
by which the Christians were compelled to wear blue turbans and the Jews yellow 


STREET IN CAIRO. 


ones, that they might be immediately distinguished from the Moslems. Christian and 
Jewish women were to wear a distinguisking mark on the breast, the men were 
strictly prohibited riding on horseback, and even on asses were allowed only to sit 
sideways. The ringing of bells on feast-days was to be discontinued, and Christians 
were forbidden to employ Moslems, either as slaves or in any hard labour. Their 
appointment to public office, in the magistracy or otherwise, was also prohibited. 


Mince 


j 


A BLIND BEGGAR. 


33 


IKE NEM 

These decrees fomented the hatred of the lower orders of Moslems, who began 
to maltreat the unbelievers and to plunder the churches and synagogues, till the 
threats of Christian princes put an end to these melancholy outbreaks. During his 
third and longest possession of the throne Nasir undertook the beautifying of Cairo, 
with an expenditure that was almost extravagant. He is said to have given 8,000 
dirhem (about £4,500) a day for building purposes, although he had not to pay for 
the forced labour of the lower classes and the slaves of the Ameers, but only to feed 
them while they dug and built for 
him. Syrian architects assisted his 


Egyptian artificers. A new canal, 
constructed by his orders, converted 
wide wastes of desert into garden- 
land, and as he had splendid palaces 
built for himself, his wives, and his 
children, the Ameers too vied with 
each other in erecting and decorat- 
ing castles and suburban residences, 
which soon surrounded the city on 
all sides. More than thirty mosques 
many bath-houses, mausoleums, and 
cloisters are said to have sprung into 
existence at this time, and the 
governors’ of provinces were so 
ready to follow his example that 
the Viceroy of Damascus, for in- 
stance, had many old houses pulled 
down in his capital to build finer 
ones in their place, and to widen 
the streets. 

Nasir was also a great lover 
of horses, and kept a number of 
experts among the Bedaween, whose 
business it was to look out for 
particularly fine ones. He deemed 
no price too high for a really noble steed, and he is said once to have paid 
1,000,000 dirhem (about £560,000) for a single horse of exceptional beauty, and the 
large sums of gold that flowed to Sons of the Desert through his hands gradually 
estranged them from the simple customs and manners of their fathers. He him- 
self would take part in horse-races, and do everything in his power to secure the 
victory for his own horses. 

This chivalrous Sultan—in spite of a lame foot and small stature—was also 
devoted to the chase, and particularly to falconry for birds, a sport that is particu- 
larly successful in Egypt, where birds abound, and which, at that time, was a 
favourite pastime with all the Arab grandees. He would pay any price for a fine 
and well-trained falcon, and his masters of the horse and hunt enjoyed his particular 


AMONG THE OLD HOUSES. 


CAIRO. 259 


favour.” He was, moreover, a good manager of his land; he had the making of new 
canals much at heart, and devoted himself quite passionately to the breeding of 
sheep and of geese. He was a fostering friend to the learned men of his time, and 


ON THE OLD CANAL AT CAIRO, 


raised the historian Abool-Feda—who, it is true, boasted of being descended from 
the elder brother of the great Saladin—to the rank of Sultan of Hamah, giving him 
all the privileges and marks of honour that he himself enjoyed. He forgave the 
son of the sage Kazweenee many misdeeds for his father’s sake. This is not the place 
to enlarge on the weaknesses of a prince who at times devoted himself to the 
highest and gravest aims, and yet frequently gave himself up, body and soul, to the 


60 EGYPT. 
most trifling pursuits. He would always be surrounded by the handsomest male 
and female slaves of all countries, and after a spell of hard labour would commit 
wild excesses at magnificent feasts. 

When, after a painful death,’ his eyes were closed, but few nobles followed his 
corpse to the tomb, and it is said that only one lantern and one wax taper were 
carried before the bier of the splendour-loving Sultan, who had been distinguished by 
many admirable qualities. He was laid in the tomb of his father Kala’oon. 


HORSE RACE. 


After his death, the Ameers disposed of the throne, though they had frequently 
declared that they would remain true to the house of Kala’oon, even if no descendant 
were left of it but one blind daughter. They kept the Khalifs during their life- 
time shut up as their mere tools in the citadel, and compelled them to give a 
certain religious sanction to their proceedings. Nasir, indeed, had made use of the 
Abasside prince of his time, carrying him forth to battle as a sort of standard or 
ensign, to impose upon his enemies. Several grandsons of Kala’oon held the 
sovereignty under the Ameers, but none of these Sultans of a day could maintain 
himself on the throne, which in six years changed its owner six times, till a son of 
Nasir, only eleven years of age, and known as Sultan Hasan, assumed the sove- 
reignty. Of all those “ fainéant ” princes we need only name Scha’aban, an older 


Tap. 1341. 2 ap. 1316, 


CAIRO. 261 


son of Nasir, for we have some particularly splendid specimens of Arab calligraphic 
and ornamental art executed in his reign. Four years after his accession, Hasan . 
was forced with tears to restore to the nobles the authority they had lent him, but 
he was again entrusted with it shortly after. In the twenty-fifth year of his age 
he again aroused the dissatisfaction of the Ameers because he preferred Egyptian 
and Arab officials to the chiefs of the Mamelukes, and while he was flying from his 


HAWKING OF THE HERON. 


enemies he was taken prisoner by the powerful and bold High-Marshal Yelboghas, 
dragged into his house, and there murdered. From the time when he ascended the 
throne till his death was but fourteen years, and this short reign was remarkable 
for one fearful visitation which fell upon Cairo, and for the completion of one 
splendid work, which to this day is regarded—and with justice—as the most magnifi- 
cent ornament of Cairo. Hasan himself retired to Siryakoos while the most fearful 
outbreak of plague that has ever visited Egypt raged from November, 1348, until 
January, 1349, slaying thousands daily. This awful epidemic, called the Black Death, 
seems to have come to Egypt from China by Tartary, Mesopotamia, and Syria, and 
to have been transmitted from Constantinople to Italy, Spain, France, and Germany. 


ral 


rT nae 


Tina 


INTERIOR OF THE MOSQUE OF THE SULTAN HASAN. 
S ‘AN ASAN. 


CAIRO. 263 


Not men alone, but every living thing—nay, even plants—were attacked by the 
poison of this deadly disease. Plague-spots broke out on most of the domestic 
animals, and even on hares; the surface of the Nile was crowded with dead fish, the 
dates on the palms were full of worms, and uneatable. In the short space of two 


sed 


f 
LN 


ORNAMENT OF THE HEAD-PIECE OF A DOOR OF THE MOSQUE OF SCHABAN. 


months 900,000 men are said to have died in FostAt and Cairo, and we are told 
that several estates changed owners seven and even eight times from the sudden 
death of the possessors. 

The reader of Makreezee’s account of the course of this pestilence will be 


Peri aeaeeeeaece Tas 


ae 


FRIEZE IN THE MOSQUE OF THE SULTAN HASAN. 


reminded only too vividly of the terrible visitation which decimated Pharaoh’s 
subjects just before the Exodus of the Jews. 

The same avenging angel, which then slew the first-born of all the land, 
passed again from house to house on the Nile shore; and this incident in Egyptian 
history seems better adapted than any other to illustrate to the reader Alma 


264 IE NGeMe, 


Tadema’s striking picture of an Egyptian mother bewailing her son under the ninth 
plague of Egypt. 

Every class fell victims to this pestilence ; there were no tillers in the fields, 
no servants in the houses, no water-carriers for the thirsty, no artisans to produce 
clothing and necessaries, and it is difficult to comprehend where, within a short time 
of this visitation, Sultan Hasan could find the means and the hands to build that 
sacred edifice which is justly regarded as the most magnificent and perfect production 
of Arab architecture. He is said, it is true, often to have found himself embarrassed, 


REMAINS OF CONSTRUCTIONS OF THE TIME OF THE MAMELUKE SULTANS IN A MODERN FOUNTAIN. 


for the building of this mosque took three whole years, and it cost twenty thousand 
drachms of silver daily." When Hasan was advised to abandon the completion of a 
work which swallowed up such vast sums he was not to be dissuaded, but replied that 
he would give no man the right to say that a sovereign of Egypt had lacked means to 
build a house of God. After it was completed, he is said to have commanded that 
the architect should have his hand cut off, to prevent his ever designing another 
building of equal beauty in any other place. This structure differs in arrangement 
too from all the other ancient mosques that I am acquainted with, and it cannot be 
denied that the master who was entrusted with carrying out the work did not keep 
himself entirely free from European, and more particularly from Italian influence, 


1 About 15,000 francs, or £600. according to Makreezee. 


GHL f0 HLVad ANG 


CAIRO. 265 


though none of those features are absent which we have learned to regard as 
characteristic of a Moslem place of w orship. Thus, even in the mosque of Hasan, 
the Hosh el-Gama forms the nucleus of the edifice ; but it is smaller than in the 
oldest mosques we have seen, and instead of the colonnades w hich, in those, surround 
the main court, we here find a very lofty hall with an arcade of pointed horse-shoe 
arches on each of the four sides of the court. This main court and its four w ings, 
the principal part of the mosque, constitute a Greek cross. It is impossible to tread 
this grand space, where no roof intercepts the light of day, without being deeply 
impressed. All that surrounds us is majestic, solemn, and harmonious ; and, if we 
turn our attention to the details of the ornamental work in the ee and in 
the mausoleum itself, we shall feel our utmost artistic requirements satisfied by the 
infinite play and variety of lines, and the beautiful and 
flowing forms of the recurring designs, and long to know 
the meaning of the words and texts from the Koran that 
are tastefully introduced into the Arabesques—a decora- 
tion full of significance, and in many places conveying 
lessons of warning while «gracing the design. The rich 
ornamentation of the wall-surfaces at first seems arbitrary 
and puzzling, but we soon perceive that the curves are 
not entangled in a mere fantastic maze, but combine in 
regular order with the inspiring texts that appeal to the 
heart and soul of the believer. The Moslem is forbidden to 
use any image to beautify his sanctuary, so he ornaments it 
by the bold and skilful application of lines, and by mottoes 
addressed to the beholder. Every portion of this costly 
structure is neglected and injured, and yet we feel our spirit en Ee ea 
elevated as we lift our eyes to the enormous arches which MOSQUE OF THE SULTAN HASAN. 
enclose the court of the mosque, like four gigantic barbicans, 

and support the walls, crowned with a majestic cornice and ornaments of simple 
lily-form. 

In the midst of the court, which is paved with slabs of coloured marble, there 
is a large fountain, and, near it, a small one. The first is for the ablutions of the 
Egyptians, and has a cupola fancifully shaped like a globe, and coloured blue, crowned 
by a crescent, and surrounded by a broad belt of inscription in gold letters. The 
second and smaller fountain was formerly used by the Turks only. At the south-east 
corner of the court a pointed archway, with a span of more than sixty-seven feet, 
forms the entrance to the vaulted holy of holies. Here none of the accessories are 
wanting which we have already met with in the Leewan of the Mosque of Amzroo. 
The mimbar or pulpit is supported on stone pillars, and Sultan Hasan himself—who 
during the periods of his deposition had devoted himself to theological studies—would 
sometimes mount its steps to address the people, who had to remain in the larger 
space outside the sanctuary. Numerous lamps hang low down, suspended from 
the top of the vault, to light up the sacred chamber for evening prayer. In 
the farthest background of this holy of holies are the prayer-niche, and the entrance 
into the mausoleum of the builder of the mosque, known as the Maksoorah. This 


34 


TEHIVAM- 14 NVHM FHL NI INVHOUEN Ladyv) 


CAIRO. 267 


tomb has a particularly impressive effect ; for the quadrangular room, in the midst of 
which is the sepulchre, is crowned by a cupola which reaches to the height of 180 feet, 
and the transition from its circumference to the quadrangular structure on which it 
rests is effected in a really classical way by the introduction of brackets wrought in 
a honeycomb and _stalactite design. The lower part of the walls of this chamber 
is inlaid with coloured marbles, and the upper part has a frieze with texts from the 
Koran in large letters. But even here nothing is done for its preservation, and yet 
the tomb of Hasan is a fayourite 
resort of the Cairenes, who do not 
know that the body of its founder 
was never recovered, and, therefore, 
cannot be resting there. They love 
to assemble to discuss public news 
of all kinds in this commodious 
space-; but many of them visit the 
tomb of the Sultan to be cured of 
certain complaints. Catarrh and 
similar disorders disappear when 
the tongue is moistened. by the 
reddish fluid which is obtained by 
wetting the porphyry threshold- 
stone with water and then rubbing 
it with a certain miraculous pebble, 
which is carefully preserved. The 
two pillars to the right and left 
of the niche in the farther wall 
are also considered to have healing 
powers. He who licks one of them 
can be cured of jaundice, and women 
who suck the juice of a lemon they 
have rubbed upon them will be 
blessed with offspring. 

Surely the architect who de- 
signed and built the great entrance- 


NICHE FOR PRAYER. 


niche on the northern side of this mosque never dreamed of these small souls sunk in 
the crassest superstition. It is led up to by steps, and rises above them to a height of 
sixty-five feet ; the top of it is an apse, interrupted in its spring and supported on 
stalactite work. The walls are lined with rich arabesques, and a portion of the cornice— 
with its honeycomb design—which runs round the whole of the outer wall of the 
mosque, crowns the facade, in the midst of which we find this entrance-niche—a portal 
worthy of any temple. The transition of the large bulbous cupola into the square base 
is effected by an intermediate polygon. The larger of the two minarets belonging to 
this mosque has no equal in Cairo as regards its height, which is about 280 feet. 
The thickness of the enormously strong walls is worthy of remark, and the building 
produces even from outside an impression of complete and perfect seclusion from the 


SULTAN HASAN. 


THE 


OF 


MOSQUE 


THE 


OF 


PORCH 


CAIRO. 269 


pillars built into its angles. Unfortunately one of the minarets must have had a 
less firm foundation than the rest of the edifice, for it fell in soon after the structure 
was finished, and buried in its fall the fountain-school which Hasan had established 
near his mosque, and in which three hundred orphans were brought up at his 


se aT ae a 


— 


ORNAMENT FROM THE GREAT PORCH OF THE MOSQUE OF THE SULTAN HASAN. 


expense. These unfortunate children were killed at the same time by the enormous 
blocks falling from such a height. 

We have lingered long over the description of this building, because it is, on 
the whole, the finest and most beautiful of all the funeral mosques that have 
cupolas. Many such, it is true, stand in various parts 
of the city—by far the greater number in the east of Cairo, 
where there are large groups of them standing together, 
and known as the tombs of the Khalifs and Mamelukes. 
It is no longer possible to determine what princes are buried 
in these last, which lie to the south of the citadel; but 
well-preserved inscriptions tell us that the so-called “tombs 
of the Khalifs” have no right to that name, since most of 
them were built in the time of the Mameluke princes, who 
succeeded the Bahrite rulers—of whom Hasan (died 1361) 
was one—and who were known as the Burgite or Circassian 
Sultans. Barkook, Farag, Burs-bey, Inal, Kayt-Bey, el- 
Ashraf, and Kansoowah el-Ghooree—whose mausoleums with 
cupolas are celebrated as the finest of the so-called Khalifs’ 
were members of this family of rulers. 

From 1382 to 1517 the fate of Egypt was in the hands 
of these unbridled men, many of whom had first come into 
Egypt as slaves. They had already received the name of Burgites in the time of 
Kala’oon, who gave the tower of the citadel as a residence to the Circassians of his 
body-guard—and the word burg signifies a fort or tower of defence ; he also gave 


tombs 


T FROM THE GREAT PORCH OF 
MOSQUE OF THE SULTAN HASAN. 


them a particular uniform. 
The first of them who succeeded in seizing the sceptre was Barkook, who had 
been sold into Egypt as a slave, and who, when he had overthrown the Bahrite 


270 EGYPT. 


Mamelukes, kept possession of the throne for seventeen years. Self-willed, subtle, 


and brave, at the same time suspicious and cruel, he reckles 
object he had in view ; and y 


y pursued whatever 
t, in spite of the blood he shed and the tortures he 
inflicted, he was to the end of his life a patron of science and art. The great 
historian Ibn Khaldoon lived in his reign, and was his friend ; though he could not 
persuade the Sultan to take energetic steps against the growing power of the 
Osmanlee, whom he, with prophetic insight, looked upon as a more dangerous foe 
than even the Mongols, led at that time by the all-conquering Timoor. Barkook’s 
memory is still kept fresh in Cairo by his beautiful mosque-tomb, where, by the side 


TOMB, WITH MOSQUE, OF BARKOOK. 


of his own mausoleum, and another erected for his harem, he also established a 
fountain with its school, chambers for the students and their teachers, and for the 
officers of the sanctuary. The mausoleum is crowned by two fine cupolas, one over 
the men’s graves and the other over the women’s, and it has two minarets; close to 
it is the monument of Sultan Farag, the son and successor of Barkook. The 
great conqueror Timoor died before Farag, and his death relieved Egypt of the 
most pressing danger that. at that time, threatened her independence. 

It would weary the reader if I were to relate in detail the innumerable bloody 
struggles for the throne, the revolts and deeds of violence of which Cairo was the scene 
under the Circassian Mamelukes. These overbearing and usurping foreigners could 
have no idea of true patriotism or of the sacrifice of their own interests to the common 
good. Hach in his turn plundered the “ provision-land of the earth,” or the “ mother 


of well-being,” as Arab writers delight in calling Egypt. Their rapacity was insatiable, 


CAIRO. 271 


and although it is true that magnificent edifices were built under their auspices, this 
was only because they were filled with the desire to impress on their contemporaries 
and on posterity a due idea of the power and wealth they had at their command. 
One of the most splendid mosques 
in Cairo is that of Farag’s second 
successor, whose name was Sheykh el- 
Mo’ayyad, and who came into Egypt 
as a slave at twelve years old. This 
was erected on the site of what had 
been a prison, into which he had been 
cast by his enemies ; at that time he 
made a vow to convert that dungeon 
into a mosque if ever he attained the 


ORNAMENT FROM THE MOSQUE OF 


BARKOOK, throne. When he became Sultan, he BARKOOK. 
splendidly redeemed his word, for he 
expended the enormous sum of 400,000 dinars (about £225,000) on the edifice called 


ORNAMENT FROM THE MOSQUE OF 


by his name, and containing the mausoleums of himself and his family—although, 
as may be easily seen, and as historians tell us, he had the pillars used in it brought 
away from ancient dwelling-houses, 
palaces, and mosques. This mosque, 
which has been lately restored, is, 
perhaps, the most splendid of all 
those in Cairo ; thirty polishers and 
a hundred workmen were employed 
on it for years; but it no doubt 
displays a certain overloaded style. 
The desire to adapt and subordinate 
the perfect beauty of noble forms of 
detail to the harmonious propor- 
tions of a grand architectonic unity 
had given way to a wish to dazzle 
the beholder by splendour of colour- 


ing, costliness of material, and a 
superabundance of decorative design. 
The court, with its well, is surroun- 
ded, as in other mosques, with 


FOUNTAIN AT THE TOMB AND MOSQUE OF BARKOOK, 


colonnades. Among the pillars 
which support the arches we find 
several of the Corinthian order, which owe their origin to Greek or Roman artists, 
and which were removed, as has been said, from very ancient buildings. The 
sanctuary is particularly splendid, with a coffered ceiling inlaid, painted, and gilt ; 
but the effect is not produced by noble forms, but by material and display ; and 
though in many parts of this mosque the eye is charmed by lovely details, it is 
soon disenchanted again by others which are both inartistic in conception and 
careless in execution. 


CITADEL. 


OF THE 


FOOT 


AT THE 


IS 


CAIRO. 273 


a Sheykh Mo’ayyad had won splendid victories over the Syrian generals' by the 
military genius of his son,’ and many of his contemporaries praise. him as a fine 
orator, poet, and musician ; but the unprejudiced judgment of posterity can only hold 
him in horror as a hypocrite in religion, cruel, and insatiably avaricious. 

Highly-gifted Mohammedan travellers have praised his mosque as a “ collection 


NICHE FOR PRAYER IN THE MOSQUE OF THE SULTAN MO’AYYAD. 


of architectural beauties,” and have declared with rapture that the strength of the 
pillars in it proves that the king who built it was the “prince of the sovereigns of 
his time.” Sculptors, too, assert that, “compared with this, the throne of Belkes 
[the Mohammedan name for the Queen of Sheba] was but a trifle, and the far-famed 
palace of the ancient Persian kings scarcely worth speaking of.’ But only three 
years after the death of Mo’ayyad® it was discovered that one of the minarets—there 


1 ap, 1412—1421. * Ibrahim, who died at an early age. * ap, 1421. 


35 


EGYPT. 


were three—leaned considerably to one side. A council of architects was convened, 
and pronounced their opinion that, as the falling stones were causing many deaths, 
it must shortly be pulled down. The door of the mosque was closed for thirty days, 
and the architect, Mohammed el-Burgee, had to put up with the satirical verses of 
the poets of Cairo for a much longer period. It is true that an excuse for the 
mishap was found, for many people asserted that the damage was done by the 
“envious eye” of people looking on at the unfinished work—that “evil eye” against 


=a 


DETAILS OF THE PRINCIPAL DOOR OF THE MOSQUE OF MO’AYYAD. 


which the Egyptians have protected themselves, by amulets and spells, from the time 
of the Pharaohs to the present day. 

The superstition of the Cairenes is especially attracted to this mosque and to 
the neighbouring Bab el-Zuweyleh. The latter, particularly, is a favourite haunt of 
the Kutb, that miraculous being whose chief resort is the roof of the Kaaba at 
Mecca, and who often shows himself to the true believer, in the humble guise of a 
man. At this particular spot he cures the toothache, and those who are suffering 
from it drive a nail into the door of the gate, or pull out a tooth and crush it in 
the roadway beneath. 

Mo’ayyad was succeeded by his son, who, however, died in three months, leaving 


CAIRO. 275 


his eldest son, a boy of ten, upon the throne ; but his preceptor, Burs Bey; who had 
previously been a slave, soon contested it, and succeeded in taking possession of it. 
The mausoleum of this usurper also stands among the tombs of the Khalifs! He 
died a natural death, after a reign of sixteen years. He carried Janus, King of 
Cyprus, prisoner to Cairo, that island being at the time the head-quarters of the 
pirates who infested the Mediterranean and interfered with its commerce ; he had 
kept the Mongols from invading Egypt, though at the cost, it is true, of a not very 
honourable peace, and had earned the title of Protector of Mecca. He had acquired 
the possession of the harbour of Jedda at the same time as that of the Holy City, 
to which it belonged, and the commerce of these two towns had not long before been 
much increased ; for the ships voyaging from India and Persia, and which had formerly 
brought their freights to Aden, avoided calling at that port in consequence of the 
oppressions exercised by the princes of Yemen after the year 1422; but when the 
navigator Ibraheem, of Calcutta, had met with a good reception at Jedda—at first 
with one ship only, but subsequently with a little fleet of fourteen large and heavily- 
laden merchant-men—trading-ships began to frequent that port in much greater 
numbers than before. By the year 1426 not less than forty merchant-ships from 
India and Persia were anchored in the harbour of Jedda, and had to pay a duty of 
70,000 dinars (about £40,000). And how much more important must the tribute 
money have been which the pilgrims had to pay, who united to their pious purpose 
the usual business in small trade! 

The great fair of Jedda, the scene of rendezvous where representatives of 
every nation acknowledging Islam annually assembled, was at that time second to 
hone in importance. Under the Mameluke princes the Red Sea was the great high- 
road by which the whole of the commerce between India and Europe must pass. 
The “infidel” King of Ceylon sent ambassadors to Sultan Kala’oon to conclude 
with him a treaty of commerce, and in the time of Kala’oon’s grandson envoys 
‘ame even from China to Cairo ; their huge junks had long been the medium of 
commerce across the Indian Ocean. The ancient caravan route from the Red Sea 
to the shores of the Nile was trodden by long files of heavily-laden camels, and at 
the ports of Keft—and subsequently at Koos—the vessels waiting to load and un- 
load were almost innumerable. Thirty-six thousand boats, it is said, navigated the 
Nile, and the Florentine Frescobaldi asserts that in his time (1384) there were more 
vessels in the harbour of Cairo than at Genoa, Venice, or Ancona. Under the 
Mamelukes it fell to Alexandria's share to supply the requirements of Western Europe 
in the matter of Hastern merchandise. tepresentatives of every commercial nation 
and city were to be found there, and it has been said with justice that, at that time, 
the position held by any nation in relation to the general commerce of the world 
might be accurately estimated by its footing in that emporium. The Venetians 
would seem to have outstripped all other dealers, though the Genoese concluded special 
agreements with Sultan Kala’oon, and with his son Khaleel,’ who built the Khan 
el-Khaleel, which became the centre and head-quarters of business in Cairo. The 


Tap, 1422. 
* After paying a large ransom and agreeing to an annual tribute he returned as a vassal to Cyprus. 


* Who ascended the throne a.p. 1292. 


276 EGYPT. 


Black Sea may be said to have been their special domain, and they, assisted by 
the Venetians, carried on the trade of importing Greek and Circassian slaves. The 
Nile valley, which is so poor in forests and mines, had also to be supplied from the 
North with ship-timber and iron ; for without a due supply of these indispensable 


ZZ 
ZEEE 


ABYSSINIAN FEMALE SLAVE. 


materials, Egypt was unable to construct a single ship of all her fleet. This fleet 
had often inflicted the greatest damage on those of western countries ; a large 
portion of the gold and silver coined in Europe flowed into the hands of the infidels 
of the East, the trade in slaves 
both men and women—could not, of course, be countenanced by the Church, and so 
it came to pass that the Pope repeatedly prohibited all trade between the maritime 


among whom there were only too many Christians, 


CAIRO. 277 


nations of Europe and the seaports of Egypt, and threatened the refractory with all 
kinds of temporal and eternal punishment. But the Christian merchants were 
more tempted by the certainty of earthly profit than terrified by the threats 
of the Church, and they exchanged money and merchandise with the unbelievers 
with all the more unconcern that the enormous profit they easily made enabled 
them to spend the more freely in purchasing pardons and dispensations. 

The lion’s share in these enormous transactions flowed into the coffers of the 
Egyptian Sultans, for we learn from a table of prices-current, drawn up by a com- 
panion of Vasco de Gama, that Indian spices were five times as dear in Cairo as in 
Calcutta, and that this was in consequence of the high duty that had to be paid on 
them in Egypt, to supply the Mameluke Sultans with a large proportion of the 
treasure which even the least lavish of them freely spent, as we have seen. Burs- 
bey, and his predecessors and successors were accounted the wealthiest princes in 


the world; and, in truth, the sums disbursed in their reigns for every kind of 


luxury were beyond all measure great. The purchase of new Mamelukes and pages, 
of fine horses and other beasts, cost millions yearly. We have already seen what 
enormous sums were swallowed up by the architectural ambition of these sovereigns ; 
but their greatest outlay was in keeping up their court, of which the splendour 
involved lavish expenses ; their harems were crowded with wives and eunuchs, with 
Circassian, Greek, Abyssinian, and other female slaves—some of whom cost a perfect 
fortune—with singers and dancing women. Even the lower’ servants were clothed in 
silk, and wore gold ornaments. Their wives and favourite slaves must have pearls 
and precious stones, not only for their personal decoration, but for their household 
vessels and small wares, and for the litters in which they were borne to the country- 
houses of their masters with an escort of eunuchs and Mamelukes. 

The East is the land of gifts, and probably not a day passed in which a con- 
siderable value in gold, slaves, horses, jewels, and robes of honour was not dispensed 
to his subjects by the hand of the sovereign. Beyond a doubt, the most fertile 
arable land in the world yielded great returns, and the quickly-emptied coffers 
could be re-filled again and again by exorbitant taxation of the citizens and p easantry, 
by the sale of places, by confiscations and penalties inflicted on all “unbelievers” in 
Mohammed ; but all these sources of wealth would prove insufticient against the 
frightful and extravagant consumption if commerce had not again and again filled 
the treasury to the brim. 

This influx of gold was seriously diminished by Burs-bey, for he prohibited 


all trade in spices to private individuals, assumed the monopoly of all Indian mer- 
chandise, and sold it by his officials for such insanely high sums that the Frank 
dealers would only purchase what was absolutely necessary, and the Venetians sent 
a fleet to Alexandria and threatened to cease all dealings with the countries under 
his rule. This reduced him to less sweeping demands, but he adhered to the 
monopoly in pepper and sugar; and in Egypt itself pepper was not to be purchased 
excepting from his officials; nay, he took away from the merchants the stock they 
had in reserve, and gave them so small a compensation that they suffered severely. 


He laid claim to the right of dealing in many other articles, and the discontent of 


his subjects led to revolts, and to reprisals on the part of the Venetians and of the 


EGYPT. 


Princes of Castile and Aragon, who captured several of the Egyptian vessels. The 
mischief entailed on his country by his insatiable avarice was enormous. His greed 
went so far that—if we may believe his contemporary Makreezee, who stamps_ his 
character with infamy—during his reign Egypt and Syria were depopulated and 
impoverished. 

In the short space of thirty years after the death of this prince eight Circassian 
sultans succeeded each other, and under their rule Constantinople was allowed to fall 
into the hands of the Turks, who gave it the name of Istamboul or Stamboul. 
After the deposition of Timoorboga, the last of these princes, Kayt Bey, a Mameluke 
whom Burs-bey had purchased for fifty dinars, succeeded in possessing himself of the 


COUNTRY RESIDENCE, AND WATER WHEEL, AT CAIRO. 


throne, and governed for twenty-nine years. This parvenu had in his youth 
been distinguished as a brave lance-thrower, and as instructor of the fencers, who 
used then—as they do to this day—to exhibit their prowess at the setting forth of 
a caravan of pilgrims. He proved his mettle several times as sultan, and showed 
himself a skilful statesman, and indefatigably active and adroit in the business of 
government. He was at the same time violent, and his love of money amounted to 
the meanest covetousness. Under him a successful resistance was offered to the 
Turks, under Mohammed and Bayazeed, and the general who distinguished himself 
most in the struggle was Hzbek, after whom the largest and finest square in Cairo 
is called Ezbekeeyeh. This eminent man had also been brought into Cairo as a slave, 
but had been capable of raising himself to high dignities and great possessions. A 
part of what is now the Ezbekeeyeh Square was acquired by him as a place where 
he could break in his camels. At an earlier period it had been the site of hand- 


some houses and blooming gardens, which, when he took possession of it, lay in 


RESIDENCE, 


PRAYS 


THE 


TO 


HER WAY 


ON 


SULTAN 


THE 


OF 


SPOUSE 


280 EGYPT. 


a 


deserted ruins. Ezbek began by restoring the canal, the neglect of which had 
brought this quarter of the city to ruin; he then caused the land to be cleared of 
ruins and rubbish, and fine buildings to be erected on one side of it. Soon after 
other wealthy men followed his example, and at last it became the fashion to have 
a house in the Ezbekeeyeh. The 
beautiful mosque which bears his 
name is a worthy monument of the 
remarkable man in whose honour 
it was built, and its rich and taste- 
ful decoration is highly praised by 
the admirers of Arab art. Even 
the school attached to it is a very 
remarkable structure. The Ez- 
bekeeyeh Square has survived many 
vicissitudes, and now it is known 
throughout the world as the brilliant 
and splendid centre of Frank society 
in Cairo. The visitor at the pre- 
sent day sees a handsome public 
garden in the midst, and passes by 
a well-kept road leading to the 
capital hotels, fine public buildings 
and private houses which surround 
it on every side, and which are full 
of all the luxuries of Huropean 
capitals; and he will find it difficult to realise 
that so late as in the year 1827 the trustworthy 
Prokesch von Osten spoke of it as being for half 
the year under water, and for the other half 
tilled as a field. Most of the buildings on this 
celebrated site were destroyed or dilapidated ; 
those that remained were for the most part of 
Moorish style, and “bore traces of their ancient 
splendour.” At this day it would be difficult to 
find even one stone of the Mameluke period. 
We shall take occasion presently to show the 
FERN TN. 15 SAUD R gd SR reader what Ismail Pacha made of this spot. 

MOSQUE OF EZBEK. Kayt Bey died at the ripe age of eighty- 

five, having been compelled in his last hours to 

abdicate in favour of his son, aged fourteen, and he was buried in the beautiful 
mosque-tomb which, according to custom, he had caused to be erected while he 
still “walked in the land of the living,’ and which, again, is one of the “tombs 
of the Khalifs.” The visitor to this splendid building, on leaving the city passes 


1 He abdicated a.p. 1496. 


36 


iii 
x it 


ty 


INTERIOR OF THE MOSQUE OF EZBEK. 


282 EGYPT. 


by another fine structure known as the Okella (a corruption of Waukkdleh) of Kayt 
Bey, which was also built by that Sultan. 
Such Okellas or Khans existed in great numbers 
in Cairo, as in most of the cities of the East. 
They served, and still serve, as hostelries for the 
merchants, as well for the accommodation and 
safe keeping of their wares, and consist of a 
court surrounded by buildings, of which the lower 
storey forms a vaulted warehouse, while the upper 
rooms are used as living or store rooms. Most 
of these Okellas— Lane says there must be 
above two hundred in Cairo—are named after 
their founders, who built them for the benefit 
of the public, as protectors of commerce and 
benefactors to the merchant class. The entrance 
is through a gateway, which is closed at night, 
and is often finely decorated with ornaments on 
the key-stone. This is the case in the gateway 
of the Okella of Kayt Bey, and it is unfortu- 
nate that it should have been so much injured, 
for he had eminent architects and sculptors at 
his command. This is abundantly proved, in 
the first place, by the mosque-tomb we have 
mentioned, which every one who has seen it 
must remember with admiring wonder, and 
which Coste, one of the most distinguished 
connoisseurs of Arab art in Egypt, declared to 
be the most beautiful building of the kind in 
Cairo. How beautiful is the cupola, covered 
with a net-work of ribbon ornament that covers 
it like a stone lace-work! How elegant are the 
form and decorations of the minaret, how charac- . 
teristic the entrance! Up to this we are led by 
an ante-chamber surrounded by walls crowned 
with little pinnacles, and which seems to have 
been used in the time of the Sultan—as similar 
chambers were in other mosques—for cere- 
monious receptions of distinguished guests, or 
for solemn audiences and judgments. In the 
niche of the doorway there is, on each side, a 
stone seat, over which carpets were spread on 
such occasions, and on which personages of rank 
were seated. In the background stood the 
throne for the Sultan, led up to by steps. 
MINARED OF THE MOSQUE OF KAYT BEY. Those who wished to approach him had to pass 


CAIRO. 


through a double row of Mamelukes in brilliant array 
of arms. 

The architectural arrangement of this mosque re- 
sembles in most respects that of Sultan Hasan’s, but the 
roof of the central court was quite peculiar, with a lantern 
of pierced wood, which admitted the air and the softened 
light of day. The grand proportions of the inner room 
have a particularly harmonious effect, and make this 
place a singularly soothing and pleasant spot, which we 
are ready to visit a second and third time and to indulge 
ourselves in gazing at the noble forms of the arches and 
vaulting, the finish of the 
carving, and the fanciful 
grace of the flat surface 
ornament, which even here 
excludes every kind of high 
or round relief. It is rare 
to find a worshipper kneel- 
ing on the broken marble 
pavement, and if by chance 
a Cairene has found his 
way here it is to worship 
certain blocks of granite 
encased in an ugly cover ; 

GR AACENTS SOF II NORGE AND OME ICE of these the grey one shows 
the impression of both the 

Prophet's feet, and the red 

one the mark of one only. Kayt Bey himself brought 
these with him from Mecca ; he loved to travel and to 
undertake long hunting expeditions, and besides _ his 
pilgrimage to Mecca, he afterwards visited Hebron and 
Jerusalem. We are told that on his return from Arabia 
and Cairo he was received with great pomp. At 
Matareeyeh, the Atabeg Ezbek—the builder of the 
Hzbekeeyeh square—gave him a grand banquet, and when 
he entered his capital he found the streets adorned with 
silken hangings, and richly decorated. Singers, male 
and female, joined the procession, singing songs of 
triumph, and when he reached the citadel he was re- 
ceived there by the very same Ameers who, nine years 
later, forced him, as an old man, to abdicate in favour 


of his son. 

Under both the series of Mameluke Sultans the 
crown of Egypt was either clutched by bold usurpers 
or given by the ambitious nobles to children under age, 


i = 


Ci 
(a 


——— SS 


INTERIOR OF THE MOSQUE AND TOMB OF KAYT BEY 


CATRO. 285 


but descended from a former sovereign. It alw ays devolved on the phantom-Khalifs 
of the Abbaside family to authorise and proclaim the new sovereign. 

Kayt Bey’s son Mohammed was born in his father’s sev enty-second year, and 
his mother was a Circassian slave. In a reign of only three years he made himself 
infamous by his cruelty and his unbridled licentiousness. The few instances of his 
personal courage and of his generous liberality sink into the shade by the side of his 
numberless shameless deeds. Whoever he might meet in his nightly prowls 
through the city was beaten, mutilated, or beheaded. For whole nights he would 
float on the Nile with singers of both sexes ; with his boon companions and_ black 


mn il Ue cee 


Aci IO i it 


THE SULTAN’S FAVOURITE SONGSTRESS. 


slaves he would force his way into private houses, and carry off the fairest women 
from their owners ; and, in order that he might have light enough for his nocturnal 
expeditions, the shopkeepers were obliged to light up their shops with lanterns. 
On one of these excursions he was attacked by a troop of Ameers and Mame- 
lukes, who had conspired against him; they killed him, and left his body lying in 
the street, but it was subsequently interred by his uncle and successor. 

Once more within six years the throne of Egypt changed its owner four times 
a slave of Kayt Bey’s—succeeded 


till at length Khansooweh el G ) 
in occupying it for fifteen years.’ This old man—he was sixty years old when he 


\ ap. 1501—1516; he died of apoplexy, or was killed in the battle of Dabik, north of Aleppo, and his head 


carried as a trophy to the victorious Selim I. 


286 EGYPT. 


took possession of the throne—was descended from a royal house, and many 
noble qualities may be attributed to him; there are, too, in Cairo, many splendid 
monuments of his time. It is true he had to oppress the people with new and 
scarcely endurable taxes in order to maintain his repute as a builder in “the 


PORTAL OF THE MOSQUE EL GHOOREEYEH. 


grand style.” Besides many other sanctuaries, he was the founder of the beautiful 
mosque named after him, in the street El Ghooreeyeh, and of the fountain and 
school opposite to it. He had many new cisterns and caravanserais constructed 
on the pilgrims’ road to Mecca; he built round the citadel of Cairo, and at its 
foot he laid out a beautiful garden, with trees and flowers that he had introduced 
from Syria. 


oe 


CATRO, 287 


His dress and weapons were always most choice and valuable, his horse’s 
harness was as elegant as it was costly, and he always fed off gold plate. 

The sons of Nasir had heaped treasures on Aufak, the most beautiful and 
famous singer of her time. This remarkable woman was the mistress of these three 
Sultans in succession ; and the pearls and jewels with which the royal brothers 
decked her turban are said to have been worth 100,000 dirhem—about £2,800. 
Khansooweh el Ghooree was equally open-handed to singers, male and female, and not 
to singers only, but to musicians and poets also. ‘Tale-tellers were always allowed 
free access to him. What period, indeed, and what country, could be better fitted to 
prompt their imagination to new creations than these, where the fate and history of 
great and small alike changed from day to day with the unexpected rapidity and 
variety of a kaleidoscope? The prince of yesterday, to-day was lying in the dust ; and a 
boy whom men had known as a slave, to-morrow might be a ruling potentate, dis- 
posing of inexhaustible treasures. A lucky speculation in trade, or a service rendered 
to the Sultan, might raise the poor to wealth; or a 
well-to-do citizen might turn to a beggar in a twinkling, 
if this were the pleasure of some great man. The 
marvels of India, of the palaces of Persia, nay, even 
of distant Cathay, were familiar—and not from books 
alone, since every day sailors and travellers, merchants 
and slaves, brought fresh stories of these remote countries 
to the capital of the Mameluke Sultans. 

All that greed or luxury could dream—of 
earthly possessions, of sensual delights, of splendour 
and favour—was within the reach of a happy few in 
almost superabundance, and he who would outyie these Se Gn eee 
actualities, in tale or song, could but borrow from the 
region of romance. And the oppressed and wretched people—crushed, taxed, and 
denuded—were always thirsting for. these marvellous tales, which lifted them 
from their dull and squalid surroundings into the realms of light that were opened to 
their gaze by the story-teller. Why should not good-hap and riches fall in some 
lucky hour into the lap of the poorest of the poor among them, as it had to the 
fortunate boy Aladdin ? Pictures answering to the romantic forms of which these old 
legends spoke were vivid in the fancy of every Cairene, and the lively imagination 
and visionary spirit of the Oriental constantly re-moulded them in new forms, each 
more weird or more splendid than the last. The reign of Khansooweh el Ghooree was 
the very flowering-time of Oriental romance, and there can be no doubt that the 
stories of the “Thousand and one Nights,’ most of which had long been known by 
oral transmission, assumed a concrete form at this time or a very few years earlier. 

The wandering Arab had ere this beguiled his hours of repose with these tales ; 
then they helped the townsman to forget the pinching cares of life, or served to relieve 
the tedium of luxurious monotony in the seclusion of the harem. The narrator was 
allowed to give his imagination the freest play, but the predicaments he originated 
he was expected to get over easily and pleasantly, and the play of his poetic fancy 
had to serve as a framework for deep thoughts, though suggested by pleasing images, 


EASTERN STORY-TELLER. 


DARB-EL-AHMAR. 


CATRO. 289 


lik 3 the , i i i 
e the arabesques that cover the groundwork in the national architecture. The 
pocthy, of the Moslems has, therefore, been very happily compared to their produc- 
tions in the constructive arts. 
Indeed, both the Eastern legend and the arabesque ornament are the unreal 


A YOUNG TOPULAR HERO OF TO-DAY. 


offspring of fancy; and yet both must command our admiration, like everything that 
has reached absolute maturity and perfection within the limits of the beautiful and of 
its own conditions. The Arab faith admits no image, no symbol; mysticism is foreign 
to it, and its bald theism strictly corresponds to the naked walls of the places of 
worship erected in the first century of Islam. Perfectly bare of ornament, they produce 


37 


290 HGYPT. 
the same effect as a rocky landscape destitute of vegetation; but at an early stage 
an attempt was made to animate the stone, to “make it plastic,’ and the effort 
succeeded without infringing the injunctions of the faith, by the introduction of those 
legends in arabesque, those poems in colour with which the walls are covered, and 
of which a gifted traveller has said that they “looked like petrified spray.” They are, 
in fact, a poem of lines, palms, stars, flowers, and suggestive forms, and the beholder’s 


MAUSOLEUM OF KANSOOWEH EL GHOOREE. 


fancy yields irresistibly to their charm. Not so, however, his understanding ; for he cannot 
but miss—in almost every building—that well-considered co-ordination of the structure 
and organic relation of parts which distinguish the loftier spirit of Western architecture, 
as well as the due proportioning of the strength of the supports to the superincumbent 
weight, a satisfactory treatment of the cornice, and, above all, structural solidity.’ 


? According to the architect, M. Jules Bourgoin, author of “Les Arts Arabes” (Paris, 1873), some interesting 
peculiarities in the mosques show the influence of European art, bas-reliefs of portions of the Mosque of Hasan having edifices 


with belfries and towers of pure Gothic style. 


RANK. 


ARAB OF 


AN 


EGYPT. 


The Mosque of Kansooweh el Ghooree is the last we need study as belonging 
to this period of the decadence of Arab-Egyptian Architecture. That it has a certain 
superficial splendour cannot be denied, but the details betray an unmistakable de- 
generacy in style. El Ghooree’s Mausoleum stands among the tombs of the Khalifs— 
a cubical structure with an extravagantly high cupola; however, he cannot have been 
buried here, since he was killed in Syria, in the year 1516, in battle against the 
Osmanlee, and his head was carried to their Sultan Seleem, who, in the following 
year, put an end for ever to the independence of Egypt. 

Even the Indian trade of the Arabs, to which, as we have seen, the sovereigns 
of Egypt had for centuries owed much of their wealth, met its death-blow under 
Kansooweh el Ghooree; for in 1497 Vasco de Gama sailed round the Cape of Good 
Hope. At Melinde, on the east coast of Africa, he met with an Arab pilot, who 
conducted him to the Malabar coast and into seas previously unknown to European 
seamen, though for several centuries Moslems had carried on there a well-regulated 
trade, even with China and Japan, which had borne them golden fruits. El Ghooree 
did not fail to understand the danger which threatened his people’s interests from 
the Portuguese, and, encouraged by the Venetians, he dispatched a fine fleet to the 
Indian Seas under the command of the Kurd Ameer Huseyn. In the first encounter 
with the Kuropeans El Ghooree’s admiral won a victory, though dearly bought ; but 
in the year 1509 the great captain Francisco de Almeida succeeded in avenging the 
death of his son Lourengo, who had been killed in a glorious and heroic struggle 
against the Kgyptians. He annihilated the Egyptian fleet under Huseyn, near Diu, 
and this victory made the Portuguese masters of the Indies, and destroyed for 
ever the Arab trade with Hastern countries. The new rulers of Egypt, the Osmanlee, 
made an attempt, it is true, somewhat later, to repossess themselves of Diu ; but 
this entirely failed, and to this day the Turkish flag has never again waved 
triumphantly in Indian ports. All that was grand and pregnant, all that was 
beautiful and suggestive in Egypt, deteriorated, or was swept away by the Ottoman 
conquest. This fatal catastrophe occurred a few months after the death of Kansooweh 
el Ghooree, who had neglected opposing the Turks while it was yet time. He was 
succeeded by his former slave, Tuman Bey, to whom the Cairenes gave the surname 
of Melik el Ashraf, 7e¢, most honoured king ; and, in the midst of misfortune he 
did credit to the title by his heroic conduct. On the 17th October, 1516, he 
mounted the throne, and by the 20th January of the following year his predecessor's 
conquerors were within a few miles of Cairo. A battle was fought at Heliopolis, 
near the Pilgrim’s Lake (Birket el Hage) ; one division of the Osmanlee force 
seized upon the Hgyptian camp, a second surrounded the Mokattam and fell on 
Tuman Bey’s army in flank. This Sultan had fought like one of the heroes of 
the glorious days of Islam, and he had already succeeded in penetrating with 
two Ameers and a picked troop of Mamelukes to the very heart of the Turkish 
camp, where he had taken possession of the Sultan Seleem’s tent and had slain the 
generals he found there, when news was brought to him that his army was in full 
flight from the field of battle. Even the open and masked trenches in which the 
Egyptians had posted their artillery had fallen into the hands of the Turks, through 
the treason, as it proved, of two Albanian Mamelukes, who had betrayed to a Turkish 


CATRO. 293 


pacha—a countryman of theirs—the Egyptian Sultan’s plan of battle, and had 
pointed out to him the trenches hidden by wattled reeds, and the position of the 
cannon. When the Osmanlee had succeeded in circumventing the Egyptian army 
it was indispensable to turn the field-pieces round; but they were old-fashioned iron 
mortars mounted on transoms, loaded with metal, and without wheels, so that this 
movement could not, in fact, be effected ; while the Turks had light and movable 
cannon at their command. Kurt Bey, one of the bravest of Tuman’s Ameers, was 
therefore in the right when, having been taken prisoner by the victors, he was 
asked by Seleem what had become of his former valour—* That,” he replied, “had 
suffered no detriment, and it was only to their cannon that the Turks owed the 
victory, for with them the weakest woman might vanquish the strongest man ; 
they were a Frankish: device, of which no Moslem ought to make use in fighting 
against men who believed in God and the Prophet.” 

The Egyptian Sultan fled to Tourah while the Turks took possession of Cairo 
and its Citadel. Slaughter and rapine were indulged in with impunity by Seleem’s 
soldiery, drunk with victory, till by a bold surprise and attack Tuman Bey once 
more made himself master of the city. He kept it but a short time ; he was forced 
again to surrender it to the enemy, and then obliged once more to make an 
attempt to save the independence of Egypt by a pitched battle. For a whole day 
he fought at Ghizeh with a contempt of death worthy to be commemorated; next 
day, however, he was deserted by his flying troops, and, being betrayed by Bedaween, 
he was seized and dragged a captive to Seleem. After being kept a prisoner for 
seventeen days, he was hanged at the Gate ez-Zuweyleh to an iron hook which is 
still shown there.’ 

This was the end of the Mameluke rule and the beginning of Turkish supremacy 
in Egypt. 

Muta Wakkil, the last of the pseudo-Khalifs of the Abbaside race, escaped 
with his life when he had solemnly made over all his dignities and rights to the 
Ottoman princes. He is said to have left two sons, but they died unknown and 
ignored. The Abbasides died out slowly and silently like tinder feebly smouldering 
out: the dynasty of the Mameluke Sultans ended like the wild flare of a torch 
that is suddenly extinguished by a stormy gust. 


2 The 13th of February, a.p, 1517. 


CAIRO 


IN ITS DECADENCE; AND ITS 
TOMBS. 


> +e <__—_ 


vince of the Ottoman Empire ; 
governors sent from Constantinople 
resided in the city of Cairo, and a 
Turkish general occupied its citadel. 
Both these officials were to be assisted and 
supported by a state-council composed of 
officers, learned men, and distinguished 
Mamelukes ; and in order to prevent any 
governor of the Nile valley from winning 
the suffrages of the inhabitants, each was 
nominated for one year only—a time so 
short that the occupant of the office was 
forced to devote himself with breathless 
haste to the performance of the only task 
to which any one of them applied himself 


DERVISHES AND OTHER STRANGE DEVOTEES. with any zeal, that, namely, of enriching 
“ himself before the expiration of his tenure. 


Then the recalled ruler returned to Constantinople with the booty he had secured, 
and thither also were conveyed all the revenues which the state officials were 


CAIRO. 295 


unable to divert into their own pockets.* But the most abundant source of wealth 
could not but be dried up by this shameless rapine. Under the Mameluke princes 
commerce had brought gold in abundance into Egypt, and the reckless parvenu 
princes had made haste to return the gold they haa extorted into the hands from 
which they had snatched it ; but under the Turkish rule the wealth they wrung 
from Egypt was altogether lost to the country, and fell into the hands of the 
oppressor and foreigner. Dearth and misery fell upon the wealth-creating Nile, 


BEFORE THE WALLS OF MASR-EL-KAHIRA, 


and the condition of the country was not improved when its government passed 
out of the hands of the Turkish Governors—whose Sultans grew weaker and 
weaker—into those of the twenty-four captains (or beys) of the troops and_ their 
Mamelukes, who ruled arbitrarily in the provinces, and allowed the pacha from 
Constantinople no privilege whatever but that of receiving their annual tribute. 
These new tyrants chose a leader from among themselves—the Sheykh el Beled, 


1 The new Government consisted of (1) The Pacha, who received the orders of the Sultan and promulgated them. (2) 
Six Military Corps, the chiefs of which formed the divan of the Pacha, whom they controlled and watched, and could denounce, 


ry, to Constantinople. (3) Twelve Mameluke Beys, chosen annually, but re-eligible, charged with the twelve 
divisions of Egypt. This form of government resembled the eikosarchy, or Government of Twenty, subsequently reduced to 


twelve, the dodekarchy, under the Assyrians, B.c. 620. 


296 EGYPT. 


or “Lord of the Land”—and, as there were always several beys who laid 
claim to this dignity, endless bloody quarrels arose, of which the scene was usually 
laid in the streets of Cairo. At last, towards the middle of the last century, 
Alee Bey, a man of character and talent, became the Sheykh el Beled, and suc- 
ceeded in acquiring the dominion over Egypt. He diminished the troops of 
Janissaries, increased the number of his Mamelukes, and ventured, when he had 
secured the support of the people, to send the governing pacha back to Con- 
stantinople. He laughed to scorn the sentence of death declared against him by 
the Porte, and, in 1771, caused himself to be proclaimed Sultan of Egypt by the 


THE RUINED MOSQUE OF IBN-TULOON. 


Shereef of Mecca. He would have made himself master of Syria had he not 
been betrayed by the basest treachery into the hands of his enemies, and then 
killed. After his death, the three Beys Ismail, Murad, and Ibraheem fought for 
supremacy ; but, although the Porte favoured the last of these three, the two others 
presently succeeded. in taking possession of the Nile valley and of its capital, and 
subsequently earned a great name by defending Egypt against the French under 
Buonaparte. Cairo owes no added splendour to this period. Her old glory under 
the Khalifs has paled; a home had been found by the Nile for a high and 
characteristic form of culture, but all that was fairest and noblest in it has fallen into 
decline and ruin; and it is on the Turks, and on the misrule of their governors that 
the chief blame must be laid. They dug the graye, so to speak, of its ancient 
splendour, and, as we recall their deeds, we cannot forbear asking—How is it 
that even now, when so much is being done for the improvement of the Khedive’s 


CAIRO. 297 


residence, so much of Cairo lies in ruins ; that even the noblest buildings of the 
time of the Khalifs are hastening to utter destruction ; 
ruins lie piled on ruins, and at her very gates 


while, outside the walls, 
amid the wreck of noble monu- 
ments on one hand, and gay pleasure-houses on the other—the vultures and wild 
dogs gorge themselves on the loathsome carrion of dead beasts ? 

In the first instance, no doubt, we must ascribe this decadence to political 
causes, for before the invasion of Egypt by the French, and ere the Government of 
Mohammed Ali brought about better times for the country, the rulers, as we have 
seen, had been for three centuries incessantly striving to make money out of it, 
and never either to preserve what was old or to create anything new. But this 
will not account for the decay of these monuments in later and better time ; and 
Ignaz Goldziher, the man of all others most competent on all Oriental questions 
at the present day, with whom I have gravely discussed this matter, shows con- 
vineingly in an essay (not yet published, but which he has placed at my disposal) 
that it is the very character of the Egyptian people, their total lack of the 
spirit of historical continuity, which is mainly instrumental in the destruction of 
the noblest secular and religious buildings, seconded by the careless constructive 
architecture of the builders of the time of the Khalifs. 

He endeavours in the first place to clear the Cairenes from the accusation 
of a lack of religious fervour, to which many writers have ascribed their neglect 
of some of their noblest places of worship. 


He was as much surprised as I was 
at the number of ruined mosques which we meet with at every step, and which, 
nevertheless, served for the offices of a religion which is still living and flourishing 


under their walls ; a religion which 
the source, sum, and essence of all 
is capable. Wherever the eye turns, 


constitutes and contains the alpha and omega, 
the spiritual vitality of which Moslem Egypt 
it sees the annihilation of abandoned mosques, 


medresehs, and tombs of saints—buildings famous in the history which records 
their origin and splendour—while their very ruins testify to their former magni- 
ficence and beauty. But all this destruction cannot be laid to the charge of 
religious indifference as attributed to the Moslems of Egypt, for the breast of the 
Mohammedan certainly never swells with greater pride than under the consciousness 
of the abundant well of religious feeling and theological science which flows in 


Cairo ; and in this respect Cairo, the capital and heart of Mohammedanism in 
its decadence, may boldly hold her own against any city of the East, ancient or 
modern. The Cairene is religious; he is a Moslem, and a pious Moslem, 


and thoroughly devoted to Islam ; but Mohammed himself declared, “Islam is 
not a monkish system,’ and the very word Islam to God,” 
and conveys no idea of ascetic mortification. For once that an Egyptian Moslem 
thinks of the “apparatus of terror” of the Koran, or shudders at its grim and 
elaborate delineations of the pains of hell, he triumphs a hundred times in his 
hopes of Paradise with its endless delights. 
nature, which strives in everything to see the brightest side. 


signifies ‘ devotion 


Gloomy views are foreign to his 
His religion allows 
him many worldly pleasures, and he enjoys them with greedy sensuality and 
fickle taste. An old Arab writer, comparing the physical and spiritual characteris- 
tics of the Cairenes, described them with justice 


being as changeable as the 


38 


298 EGYPT. 


weather-cock, and licentious to the utmost degree ; so that it is difficult for a Christian, 
who sees their worldly mode of life, their facility of temper: 


verging on frivolity, 
their views of life, and their 
clinging to the world, to be- 
lieve in the religious feeling 
c oS 
which nevertheless is never lost 
unless by the most reprobate. 


mood—a peculiarity which they 
share with other nations in 
whose veins the blood is much 
mixed—and their inconstancy, 
which they have inherited from 
their nomad ancestry, must be 
considered in the second place 
as contributing to explain the 
carelessness with which the 
Cairenes originally set to work 
in the erection of their ancient 
buildings, and with which they 
abandon them to decay. Works 
of such strength as to be calcu- 
lated to endure to all eternity, 
like those of the Pharaohs, they 
never even thought of. All 
that they built bore the stamp 
of evanescence and change ; 
it would seem as though they 
had never quite forgotten the 
tent of their forefathers—a 


dwelling quickly set up and as 
quickly removed. Very rarely, 
even in the time of the Khalifs, 
was there such care exercised 
in the choice of the materials 
or the construction of the 
buildings as in the works of 
the ancient Egyptians. The 
love of luxury and splendour, 
the airy fancy and frivolous 
vivacity of the Egyptian middle- 
ages have taken tangible form 
in numberless ill-founded edifices covered over with the richest play of lines 
and splendour of colour. “They are marvels in their own way, these Moslem tombs 
and mosques of Cairo,’ wrote a French essayist ; “their plan, as it lies upon 


ARAB FAMILY AMONG THE RUINS. 


Their rapid changes of 


CATRO. 299 


paper, is projected with an astonishing genius for art, and when they stood com- 
pleted they were for a few score of years as bewitching as a painted and rouged 
beauty can be; but at the present time they are no more than squalid ruins— 
heaps of beams, rafters, and lumps of plaster which betray at once the instability 
and superficial character of the builders.” This judgment is too severe, but it 
cannot be denied that the only well-preserved buildings of the Arabs are those of 
which the original foundations were not laid in the service of Islam, or else in 
which the influence of foreign art is to be traced. They were Byzantines who built 
the Hagia Sophia in Constantinople ; the chief mosque in Damascus grew cut of 
the church of St. John ; the pillars in the mosque of Amroo were stolen from 
heathen and Christian temples ; the sanctuary of TIbn-Tuloon was built by a. 
Greek ; and Italian influence is unmistakable in that of Hasan. One of those 
portions of this structure which were truly Arabic fell in, as we have seen, soon 
after it was built, and the melancholy fate of part of the mosque of Mo’ayyad, 
shortly after its erection, has also been told. 

More spirited descriptions of buildings, fresh in all the splendour and charm 
of recent completion, than those given by the Arabic historians and poets are 
nowhere to be found ; but, Strange to say, the Moslem, though enjoined by his 
religion to fix his inward eye on all that is lofty and sublime, has no feeling for 
the monuments of a former age, and includes them all under the one denomination 
of “Kufree,” that is to say “ heathenish.” They arouse in him neither sympathy 
nor admiration ; nay, he is so absolutely indifferent to them that he does not even 
despise them. In the historical literature of the Arabs that refers to Egypt— 
particularly in the classical works of Makreezee and Abd-al Lateef—the Pyramids, 
the Sphinx, and other monuments are mentioned and described; but these authors 
are read only by a few, and any interest in the monuments of Egyptian antiquity 
finds no place among the feelings of the pious Mohammedan populace. It may be 
confidently declared that there are not in all Cairo a thousand Moslems who, in 
the whole course of their lives, ever took a single donkey-ride to Ghizeh to see the 
Pyramids and Sphinx ; and we shall have to speak of great and. beautiful monu- 
ments in Upper Egypt which have been carried away piecemeal and burnt in lime- 
kilns, or built into the foundations of manufactories and palaces.’ An intelligent 
traveller, a Mohammedan of Damascus—one of the “ illuminated ” Theosophists 
of his time — about 170 years ago made a pilgrimage to Mecca through 
Palestine, Egypt, and Arabia, spent some weeks in Cairo, and left not a grave of 
a walee (or saint), inside or outside the city, unvisited and undescribed ; but of 
the Pyramids, and of the impression they left on his really susceptible apprehen- 
sion, we find no word. Even the Mohammedan landowner who makes a voyage 
down the Nile in his dahabeeyeh (Nile-boat) to inspect his estates will rarely or 
never be at the trouble to take a ride into the country to contemplate those 
“pillars of eternity” which are the goal of so many inquiring pilgrims from the 
West ; and if by chance some ruins of antiquity catch his eye, he vouchsafes no 
more than a passing glance at these wondrous objects, and calls the fleeting im- 
antasy.” 


6c 


pression he receives from them a mere 


1 Gliddon ; “ Appeal on Destruction of Monuments,” London, 1841. 


THE KHALIFS. 


OF 


TOMES 


CAIRO. 301 


The Oriental is not conservative: he is utilitarian in the strictest sense of 
the word ; hence antiquity, even when it bears the stamp of grandeur, does not 
appeal to his sympathies unless it is of some obvious utility. The artistic merits 
or historical associations of a monument in no wa : 


justify its existence in his eyes. 
The first condition he requires is that it should be applicable to some purpose; in 
short—and this tells and explains the whole matter—he is devoid of the historic spirit 
which begets all our pleasure in preserving the relics of the past, and which is the 
source of all sound culture in the present. 
Certainly there is no lack of good his- 
torians among the Arabs, and even the 
philosophy of history has been worthily 
treated of in their literature; but the 
faculty and the endeavour which the Euro- 
pean regards as lying at the root of all 
deeper and higher culture —the effort to 
apprehend the present as the child of the 
past, and to discern its features through 


every phase of its development — this en- 
deavour and this spirit are foreign to the 
Oriental, and he therefore feels no pang 
when the monuments of the past are de- 
stroyed and their very memory is recklessly 
erased from the great book of life. He 
loves “stories” indeed; they amuse his 
fancy and excite his interest, which is 
indefatigably receptive of facts — whether 
real or invented is all one to him; but 
“history” as we conceive of it, and culti- 
vate it in order to elevate our minds and 


train our energies, is unknown to the 
Oriental as a means of education. In former times el-Fahree 
was the only historian who insisted on that the young should 
be introduced to the study of history ; he wrote the history 
of the Khalifs, having lived during the period of their 
extinction by the Mongols; and his works, which were 
and are still unknown to the Orientals themselves, have lately been rescued 
from oblivion by the industry of German research." Recently, however, the 
reformers of education in modern Egypt have bestirred themselves to cultivate 
historical literature and to make students acquainted with history. These 
praiseworthy efforts cannot fail of exercising a beneficial effect on the mental and 
general progress of future generations ; but that now living is unfortunately devoid, 
as we have seen, of any such impulse of reverence as would result in the 
preservation of ancient buildings. These children of the present—to whom the 
future is in the hands of God and independent of their volition, and to whom 
1 Translated by W. Ahlwerdt, Gotha, 1860. 


302 EGYPT. 


the past is a thing unknown—do not actually labour to destroy what exists, 
but they feel no call to preserve it, and the decay of those ancient sanctuaries 
causes them no regret. That which has no practical utility. deserves, as it seems 
to them, to perish; and it would appear as though that conservative spirit 
which was natural to the ancient Egyptians, and their passionate adhesion to the 
status quo, had been entirely lost to their posterity by the admixture of foreign 
blood. They prefer to build something new that offers fresh food for the eye, and 
they abandon the decrepit to its fate. Unfortunately, ever since the conquest of 
Egypt by the Turks all that they have built is devoid, not only of solidity, but of 
that fine feeling for art which we everywhere meet with among the most ruinous 
remains of the architecture of the Khalifs. And it is even a subject for rejoicing 
that in these times of decadence the renewal of the old buildings has been neglected, 
since the only attempt that has been made in that direction has turned out most 
lamentably. The mosques of Cairo were usually built of alternate courses of red 
and of yellowish-white stone, 
a favourite method even in 
western architecture and par- 
ticularly in Tuscany. As the 
red colour was somewhat faded, 
on the occasion of the open- 
ing of the Suez Canal all the 
old mosques were painted in 
honour of the Khedive’s guests 


with a colour which is cer- 
tainly anything rather than 
pale. The task of restoring 
the stately old mosques and 
minarets was handed over to 
the house-painter, and his un- 
skilled hand has daubed the 
walls with vulgar ruddle and 
glaring yellow ; and now their jack-pudding pattern of stripes disgraces the noble 
monuments, whose builders took ie utmost care in the application of their colours 
that they should be soft and subdued. The structures of the Turkish period are 
ungraceful in form, overloaded with massive ornament, and painted with tasteless 
gaudiness ; but they will not long vex the cultivated eye, for, above everything, they 
are built, not for permanence, but for the passing hour—which makes what use it 
van of them; and posterity, which was never once thought of by those who built 
them, will revenge itself by forgetting them. 


NS iy K 


FRAGMENTS OF A COLUMN 


The caprice and laxity which are displayed by Orientals in their works of art 
are reflected in their political history. Dynasties and reigning sovereigns change 
with surprising rapidity, and where in the annals of modern Oriental history shall 
we find long lines of kings like those of antiquity or of Europe ? 

Time, which hurls its mighty avalanche down upon all things and buries them 
in its inexorable adv: ahher, “revolving time,” or, as the Arabs also call 


CAIRO. 3803 


it “ +} =e . ” . 
it a We of the nights ”—time destroys all things. This melancholy truth 
18 nowhere truer, nowhere more forcibly felt, than in the East— ; 


“ Know, oh soul, that all that is not Allah must pass away.” 


Thus runs a vers which was declai W 

: ‘ erse whic fi the i 
ME 1 h s declaimed by the heathen Arab Lebeed, and which 
earned the honour of admissi i t , ; the ets which 


HAMIDA, A CAIRENE MAIDEN, 


in his last years he became a convert. The writers of history even, in the artificial 
and laboured prefaces to their works, enlarge not on the Eternal, which is mirrored 
in the fates of nations, but only on the Transitory, which strikes them as they 
contemplate all earthly things. 

The inythological instincts of the people prompt them, as we often have seen, 
to connect miracles and legends with sacred buildings and relics, and these usually 


! Lived in the time of Mohammed. 


304 EGYPT. 


survive as long as the objects of their reverence. If the relics are lost, or the 
buildings fall into decay, the legend vanishes from the memory of the people, 
acquires new meanings, and is at last completely lost, for myths and legends demand 
local circumstance and fostering. Many legends, therefore, have disappeared with 
the ancient building: still not a few have been preserved, but they are for the 
most part so monstrous and unmeaning that the repetition of them can only be 
endurable to those who believe in them. One of the least foolish that I am ac- 
quainted with may find a place here. Lane—who was so well acquainted with 
Cairene life—relates it, and connects it with the Gate of Ez Zuweyleh or el Muta- 
welee, of which I have spoken, and which is believed to work miracles and is regarded 
as a haunt of the mysterious chief of all the Walees or saints. 

A certain pious shopkeeper felt an ardent longing to be enrolled in this 
venerable company, and to that end he went to a man who was universally esteemed 
as holy, to beg him to procure him an interview with the Kutb. After all sorts of 
tests this was promised him, and he was commanded to go to the above-mentioned 
gate and to address himself to the first person he might see coming out of the neigh- 
bouring mosque of el Mo’ayyad. The merchant obeyed, and he was, in fact, met 
by the Kutb in the form of a dignified old man, who granted his prayer and 
ordered him to take the district south-west of the Zuweyleh Gate under his pro- 
tection, with the street called Darb el Ahmar. Immediately the merchant felt that 
he had become a Walee, and perceived that he had insight into things hidden from 
other mortals. When he reached the district entrusted to him he saw a man 
selling cooked beans out of a large pot to the passers-by; the newly-made saint 
took a stone, struck the pot over with it, and submitted without a murmur to a 
severe thrashing for the deed. When the bean-seller’s rage was somewhat moderated 


and he set to work to gather up the shards of his broken pot, he found a 
poisonous snake among the pieces ; then he perceived with repentance that he had 
beaten a Walee who had interfered to prevent his selling food that would have 
poisoned his customers. The next day the poor saint limped round his district with 
swollen limbs, and, without thinking of the blows he had received a few hours 
before, he flung over a large jar of milk which was offered for sale at a stall. Again 
he was severely beaten by the owner, but the passers-by held the milk-seller back, 
remembering what had happened the day before. When they searched among the 
fragments of the milk-jar they found a dead dog at the bottom. On the third day 
the Walee dragged himself again to the Darb el Ahmar, but painfully, for he was 
sorely beaten. Here he met a servant carrying a tray on his head, with delicacies 
and fruit intended for a feast in a country-house. The saint immediately put his 
stick between the man’s feet, so that he fell down and all the contents of the 
saucers were spilt in the street. The servant flew on him in a fury, and gave 
him as severe a taste of the stick as he himself expected to get from his master for 
his clumsiness. Meanwhile the dogs fell upon the cates that lay in the roadway, and 
within a few minutes of the first mouthfuls they lay dead. This proved to the 
bystanders that the food that had been spilt was poisoned, and they earnestly im- 
plored the saint’s forgiveness. The pious man rubbed his severely beaten shoulders, 
said to himself that it was not worth while to see things that were hidden from other 


ll 


| 


\ 


39 


RODA. 


THE ISLAND OF 


TOMB OF A SHEYKH ON 


306 EGYPT. 


mortals, and prayed to God and the Kutb to remove from him the burden of sanctity 
and to restore him to his former ignorance and humble condition. Heaven granted his 
prayer, and, as a shopkeeper, he escaped the beatings he had received as a Walee.' 

It is related of the saint commonly known as “Iron Stone,” who is said to 
have been the Mameluke of Sultan Kayt Bey, that his master sent him to a vener- 
able sheykh to offer him a rich gift in gold. The Walee at first refused the offering, 
but presently accepted it, pressed the coin between his hands, in which it instantly 
turned to blood, and said, “See my son, this is your 
gold.” The Mameluke was staggered; he remained 
with the Walee as his disciple, founded an order of 
Dervishes, and is to this day reverenced as a saint 
at Cairo; more than one legend is connected with 
his tomb. 

Particular powers are ascribed to various relics, 
but they are also attributed to certain buildings, as, 
for instance, to a certain mosque which is still called 
“Gam’a el-benat,” 7¢., the mosque of the daughters. 
This, it is believed, has the gift of assisting girls 
who have remained unmarried to get a husband. 
Every Friday the true believers assemble in this 
mosque, .as in all the others, to pray and hear 
sermons. If a maiden, who, in spite of the efforts 
of her relatives, has not succeeded in being chosen 
as the mistress of any harem, desires to obtain a 
husband, tradition prescribes the following mode of 
procedure: She must go on a Friday to mid-day 
prayer—the most solemn service in the whole week— 
in the Mosque of the Daughters. When the believers 
prostrate themselves for the first time at the cry of 
the Imam, “Allah akbar” (Allah is great), and while their foreheads touch the 
reed mats on the floor of the mosque, she must walk once up and down the 


TOMB OF IBRAHEEM AGA. 


space dividing two: ranks of worshippers; then, beyond a doubt, within a year it 
shall be her lot to know the joys of married life by the side of a good husband. 
Most of the pious legends are associated with the tombs of saints which, like 
the saints themselves, are called Walees. A great many of these may be regarded 
as centres of the religious life of the Cairenes, and yet the older ones are no better 
kept up than the other structures of the time of the Khalifs. Such walee-tombs 
are either found in mosques, which are named after the saints interred in them, 
or they are independent structures roofed with a cupola within whose narrow walls 
the coffin of the saint, covered with a carpet, serves as the shrine before which the 
devotees put up their prayers. These Kubbeh are usually erected on the spot where 
the holy man, whose remains they cover, is supposed to have had his anchorite’s 
cell or Zawiyah (literally, his corner), and such buildings occur at every step 


1 There is a long account of the Auth in Lane’s “Modern Egyptians,” 12mo. (1871), i. 290. 


CAIRO. 307 


throughout the East; for great is the number of men whose tombs have become 
the scene of pious devotions or the centre of a crowd of superstitious and miraculous 
legends. A devout Moslem will never pass by such a memorial without putting up 
an inward prayer and a supplication 
that he may be received into the 
order of the Walees. . What such 
a saint may be, and what idea we 
may form of Mohammedan sanctity, 
has been set before the reader in 
the account of the mawlid or birth- 
day-festival of the holy Ahmed 
Seyyid el-Bedawee of Tantah. 

Often at night, on the way 
home from some distant excursion, 
ere reaching Cairo a monotonous 
chant may be heard, hardly to be 
called a song—a recitative in Arabic, 
broken from time to time by a 
shrill scream, wrung as it were 


from the labouring breast of some 
passionately excited worshipper in 
his pious ecstasy. A reverent feel- 
ing steals over the traveller, and 
his blood runs chill as he catches 
sight of the figures of the Dervishes, 
shrouded in the shades of night, 
who at this late hour are gathered 
round the tomb of a Walee, per- 
forming their strange evolutions and 
their Zikr, or mystical recitations, 
under the open heavens. I propose 
to'take my readers to witness such 
a Zikr when I make them the 
spectators of the festivals of the 
Cairenes; but the visitor to the 
capital can at any time assist at 
these very extraordinary religious 


practices if he visits a Tekkeh or A DIUREE TAO BONG EET Ey EEE GELS 
Dervish monastery at certain hours. 

These buildings commonly occupy the site of the former dwelling-place of a Walee 
who was in some way connected with the order to which the cloister belongs. 

Every Thursday, as it grows dusk, a troop of Dervishes, in their grey sugar- 
loaf hats of sheepskin, proceed, lamp in hand, through the Abdeen street of Cairo, 
and then, to the left, through the squalid lanes of the Greek quarter. They are on 
their way to a tomb-mosque, rarely visited by foreigners, where they pass the whole 


308 


EGYPT. 


night by the grave of the saint in Zikr. Many even of the non-initiated take part 
in the pious exercises of this brotherhood, which is much run after by the people. 
The lower class, nay, even many of the better educated and cultivated Cairenes go 


VAULTED CELLAR IN AN OLD STREET. 


to the tombs of the Walees, in the first instance no doubt on account of the 
miraculous powers ascribed to them, and which are chiefly exercised in healing, for 
which reason they naturally are chiefly attractive to the sick and crippled. Under 
a sycamore near Cairo there stood a Kubbeh which, even in the last century, is said 
to have possessed the miraculous power of curing animals; for if some of the dust 
taken from inside it were laid on the sick or injured limb of any beast a cure 


CAIRO. 309 


was ins effec r : : 
Be ee effected. The tombs of other saints are frequented because their aid 
2 Bone. a us circumstances of outward difficulty, and others again to obtain the 

essing of offspring. At Za’ka, a frontier-town between Egypt and Syria, not far 


MAMELUKE TOMB. 


from el-Areesh, there is the grave of a Bedawee saint and sheykh named Zuweyyid, 
of which the gate is never closed, because it is believed that treasures preserved in 
it can never be stolen by any thief, and that those who seek refuge in it escape 
their pursuers. Nor is it only the tombs of miracle-working saints that enjoy such 
fame and reverence, but also those of such men as have been intimately connected 


CATRO. 311 


with the rise and growth of Islam, particularly those of the Companions of the 
Prophet, 7, those men who had known the Prophet himself. Among these are 
reckoned those warriors who came into Egypt with the great leader Amroo, and 
every tomb which the people persuade themselves has been erected to one of these 
shares the same honours as the resting-places of the Walees. 

It is true that the tomb of the same “Companion” is venerated in four or 

five different places, and yet we never find any attempt made to clear up the con- 
tradictions that arise from this, for the tenacity with which the people cling to 
such traditions is very great. Most of those which survive in Egypt are connected 
with the hapless family of the Khalif Alee. They owe their origin to the family 
of the Fatimites, who, as we have shown, traced their pedigree back to Fatima, the 
wife of Alee and Mohammed’s favourite daughter, and who made the pious city of 
vairo, in which they resided, the centre of a Shiite dominion. Even at the present 
day, when Cairo is justly regarded as the focus of Sunnite learning, these traditions 
are firmly believed. Thus the great festival of Ashoora, which was originally 
Judaic and begins on the tenth day of the first Mohammedan month Moharrem, is 
solemnly observed as a great fast and day of repentance by those Cairenes who 
cherish the memory of Alee, and with mourning ceremonials that are scouted by the 
Sunnites, because it is the anniversary of the fall of the dynasty of Alee and of the 
martyrdom of Hasan and Huseyn, the two sons of Alee. The scene of these per- 
formances, .which in part are perfectly theatrical, is usually the mosque of 
el Hasaneyn, where the head of the martyr Huseyn is said to be buried. This Huseyn 
is a saint highly esteemed by the Cairenes, and, their most unpleasant peculiarity 
being their perpetual habit of swearing, no oath is oftener in their lips than—‘ By 
the life of our master Huseyn” (Wahayat seed-na Huseyn). 

The most abundant food for the tomb-worship of the Cairenes is offered them 
at the Karafeh, the most vast cemetery in all the East; and there, if anywhere, 
we may find the traces of those beliefs of the Egypt of the Pharaohs which have 
survived among the Moslems of the Nile valley. I have already hinted that such 
remains exist, when speaking of the festival of Ahmed-el-Bedawee at Tantah and of the 
rising of the Nile. In Cairo we are particularly reminded of ancient forms of thought 
by the fact—unique among the modern cities of the Hast—that behind the abodes of 
the living there lies spread a city of the dead; a place of rest full of graves and 
mausoleums innumerable. We saw, when considering the Necropolis of Memphis, 
that in the time of the Pharaohs the cities of the dead were placed to the west of 
the towns, and that this situation was intimately connected with their religion and 
mythology; and it may have happened quite accidentally that the Necropolis of 
Mohammedan Cairo extends as a long array of groups of tombs outside the Hastern 
limits of the city and across the ledge of the Mokattam. There, to the right and 
left of the citadel, stand those magnificent cupolaed buildings which, with their 
builders, I have already introduced to the reader, and at the feet of the mausoleums 
of the great lie immeasurable rows of graves with simple head-stones or white- 
washed Kubbeh. A cemetery is called a “karafeh” in the Arabic dialect spoken in 
Egypt; but this name originally belonged only to those particular acres of the dead 
that surround these tombs of the Khalifs and Mamelukes. This Karafeh, for 


EGYPT. 


centuries the burying-place of the Moslem inhabitants of Cairo, is also one of the 
most popular resorts of the pious, whether native or foreign, who visit Cairo in 
order to seek out the graves of the saints and there to put up a fervent prayer. 
The populace of Cairo frequently make a pilgrimage to the Karafeh on a Friday, 
starting before sunrise, and regularly on certain holy days, particularly that of 
el Eed. Men, women, and children are then to be seen crowding the streets that 


i 
[s¢ 
uN, ( 


uel 
: 


} 
ut! 
Fe 


tlt 


SARCOPHAGUS OF IBRAHEEM PACHA, 


lead to the cemetery; and the city of the dead, usually so deserted and silent, is 
filled with gay and active life. Palm-branches are laid on the graves; dates, bread, 
and alms are dispensed to the poor, and the spirits of the favourite saints are 
appealed to in long-winded supplication. Are these devotees Moslems—believers in 
the one and only God—or are they not a people who worship their ancestors? In 
truth we can hardly blame the Wehabites'—those destroyers of the temples in Upper 
Arabia and India—when they turn their fanaticism against the tombs of the Walees, 

' Name of a sect called also the Wahhabees, from Abd-el-Wahhab, their founder. This sect arose in the end of the 
eighteenth century in Arabia, and with iconoclastic zeal endeavoured to destroy the tombs of the Walees. Had the Wahhabees 
succeeded Mohammedanism would have taken a new departure, but they were conquered by Mehemet Ali in 1812 and deprived 
of Mecca and Medina, 


15 


PART OF 


THE HOUSE OF 


THE 


SHEYKH SADAT, 


CATRO. 315 


pulling them down and devastating them because they conduce to obscure the 
grand Monotheistic idea. ; 

In the Karafeh beyond a doubt the all-comprehending Allah has far less 
honour done him than the pious dead interred there. Members of every sect may 
find here the resting-places of the most revered leaders of the ritual they observe. 
Here a mausoleum covers a sarcophagus with the mortal remains of the Imam 
Shafe’ee,’ the founder of the science of the rationale of canonical law and the highly 
revered originator of the ritual named after him, which was the predominant one 
until the Turkish conquest. A perfect garland of beautiful legends has been woven 


round the history and person of this remarkable man by the mythological spirit of 


the Egyptians. Many miracles are related of his Kubbeh, of which the door, as the 
Cairenes believe, never opens but to a true believer and never to the reprobate in 
whose heart there lurks a doubt; and this miraculous peculiarity of the door which 
leads to the sepulchre of the pious sage is said to have unmasked many a hypo- 
crite. <A large part of the Necropolis bears the name of Shafe’ee, and here stands 
the mosque-tomb of the vice-regal family called the Hosh el Basha, which is visited 
principally by foreigners. In this stands the beautiful sarcophagus of the great 
general Ibrahim Pacha, father of the ex-Khedive, and there the Koran is read 
sarly and late. 

Very special miraculous powers are attributed to the tomb of the famous 
Imam Leyth ibn Sa’d,* known as “the father of miracles”; the miraculous powers 
he exercised during his life having remained with him after death. Once upon a 
time—so saith the legend—one of his votaries, being in great straits, came to the 
kubbeh of this saint, and prayed fervently for release from his need. After he had 
squatted a long time, sunk in meditation and grief before the holy spot, he fell 
asleep, and the Imam appeared to him in a dream and said, “ Be easy, pious man ! 
when thou shalt wake, take that thou shalt find in my grave.” The poor man 
opened his eyes, and before him sat a bird, who recited the Koran without hesita- 
tion in all the seven modes. The man took the bird, and showed it in the city, 
where the learned creature excited so much attention that the governor desired to 
possess it, and paid so high a sum for it that the man was able to pay his debts 
and to live free of care for the remainder of his days. But the Governor did not 
long rejoice in his acquisition, for the Imam appeared to him at night in a dream, 
and said, “Know that my soul is shut up in a cage in your house.” Next 
morning, when the governor went to see his feathered and learned captive, it had 
disappeared, for the Imam had assumed the form of a bird to relieve the pious 
devotee in his need. I must also mention the tombs of the Sadat al-Bekreeyeh, 
i.e., those principals of the Egyptian orders of Dervishes who descend in a direct 
line from the Khalif Aboo Bekr. This dignity continues to this day to enjoy the 
highest consideration, and the holder takes a distinguished position at many popular 
and religious festivals. The tombs of the Sadat al’Alaweeyeh, 7¢., of the former 
heads of the orders derived from Alee, are also to be seen in this city of the 
dead. The present holder of this high office, which, however, is rarely exercised, 


1 Died at Fostat a.v, 819. ? Died ap, 791. 


40 


314 EGYPT. 


is a rich landowner of most gracious manners, who is willing to show, to such 
foreigners as have a sufficient introduction, his beautiful and venerable family 


residence 


which is, perhaps, the most characteristic dwelling come down from old 
times in all Cairo—his choice library full of literary treasures, and the most affable 
kindness withal. He has even conducted many a learned European with the 
- utmost amiability to visit the tombs of his predecessors, where there is to be seen 
his extremely interesting pedigree, which goes back, ostensibly, to the time of the 
Moslem invasion of Egypt. 

Yonder tomb, where all pause with such deep devotion and reverence, is that 
of the sheykh Omar ibn el-Fareed,' the poet of the “ Wine-songs,” the great hymns 
: of mystical divine love among the Mohammedans. The poem is throughout alle- 
3 gorical, to be sure, and does not celebrate the material juice of the grape or its 
effects, but the divine atHatus and ecstacy of the Soofee who has drunk of the 
sweet and intoxicating spirit of God’s love, and, abandoning his own identity, has 
become one with his celestial beloved one. By the sepulchre of Sheykh Omar 
verses are often recited from his poems which work up the bystanders to the highest 
pitch of transport, and it is often the scene of those Zikr* so frequently mentioned, 
and to which reference will again be made in a future chapter. 

We have lingered long among ruins and tombs, and have given a due meed 
: of attention to old Cairo. We will now turn to the young and flourishing capital, 

its residents of to-day, and the princely house that has succeeded in arresting the 
country in its drift towards ruin, and—with the help of foreign pilots—in guiding 


oO 
: its course into a safer and better channel. 


2 ' Died a.p. 1235. Ibn Khallikan IT., 338. 


* Religious invocations accompanied by whirling and other gestures. 


Graziani 
Aer MTT 


se as 


ti " 
. rth capisshinlenaedinelit:t 


ETTY RESEARCH INSTITUTE 


OIA NI 


3 3125 01053 374: 


ie 


4 Wat 


oad fhe 


OP eae yay j \ Sa wee 
We RAVE Medte de We I 


AUP eae ans a Lge A ; Sina MNS, 
: al 
= saci 


