Space, Time and Gravitation (Arthur Eddington, 1920)
==========================================================
The first popular exposition of Einstein's relativity in English, by the eclipse expedition leader. Public domain. Internet Archive full text (spacetimegravita00eddirich).

0009-03ZF6  VD  'A313>ld39 
A313>id3a  'VINdOdnVD 


9QQ  'ON 


i^izzmn 

MOT38  03dl/mS  SV  30(1 

'SOrc-3P9  6u|||Do  Aq  peMeuey  eq  Aooi  S)|Oog 
•e|op  enp  em  oj  joud  sAop  v  epouu  eq  ADUU  s86jDLjoea  puo  s|Meuey 

•SAVQ  L  aaidv  asnvosa  39  AVI^I  saooa  nv 

9 

9 

v 

e 

s 

3Sn  3IAIOH 

L  QOId3d  NVO1 

Ndni3d 


SPACE       TIME 

AND 

GRAVITATION 


CAMBRIDGE  UNIVERSITY  PRESS 

C.  F.  CLAY,  MANAGER 
LONDON  :  FETTER  LANE,  E.C.  4 


NEW  YORK  :  THE  MACMILLAN  CO. 

BOMBAY      1 

CALCUTTA  >  MACMILLAN  AND  CO.,  LTD. 

MADRAS      J 

TORONTO    :    THE    MACMILLAN    CO.    OP 

CANADA,  LTD. 
TOKYO  :  MARUZEN-KABUSHIKI-KAISHA 


ALL  RIGHTS  RESERVED 


SPACE      TIME 

AND 

GRAVITATION 

AN  OUTLINE  OF  THE  GENERAL 
RELATIVITY  THEORY 


BY 

A.  S.  EDDINGTON,  M.A.,  M.Sc.,  F.E.8. 

PLUMIAN  PROFESSOR  OF  ASTRONOMY  AND  EXPERIMENTAL 
PHILOSOPHY,  CAMBRIDGE 


CAMBRIDGE 

AT  THE  UNIVERSITY  PRESS 
1920 


Mo. 


Perhaps  to  move 

His  laughter  at  their  quaint  opinions  wide 
Hereafter,  when  they  come  to  model  heaven 
And  calculate  the  stars :  how  they  will  wield 
The  mighty  frame :  how  build,  unbuild,  contrive 

To  save  appearances. 

Paradise  Lost. 


PREFACE 

BY  his  theory  of  relativity  Albert  Einstein  has  provoked  a 
revolution  of  thought  in  physical  science. 

The  achievement  consists  essentially  in  this: — Einstein  has 
succeeded  in  separating  far  more  completely  than  hitherto  the 
share  of  the  observer  and  the  share  of  external  nature  in  the 
things  we  see  happen.  The  perception  of  an  object  by  an  observer 
depends  on  his  own  situation  and  circumstances;  for  example, 
distance  will  make  it  appear  smaller  and  dimmer.  We  make 
allowance  for  this  almost  unconsciously  in  interpreting  what  we 
see.  But  it  now  appears  that  the  allowance  made  for  the  motion 
of  the  observer  has  hitherto  been  too  crude — a  fact  overlooked 
because  in  practice  all  observers  share  nearly  the  same  motion, 
that  of  the  earth.  Physical  space  and  time  are  found  to  be 
closely  bound  up  with  this  motion  of  the  observer;  and  only  an 
amorphous  combination  of  the  two  is  left  inherent  in  the  external 
world.  When  space  and  time  are  relegated  to  their  proper  source 
— the  observer — the  world  of  nature  which  remains  appears 
strangely  unfamiliar;  but  it  is  in  reality  simplified,  and  the 
underlying  unity  of  the  principal  phenomena  is  now  clearly 
revealed.  The  deductions  from  this  new  outlook  have,  with  one 
doubtful  exception,  been  confirmed  when  tested  by  experiment. 

It  is  my  aim  to  give  an  account  of  this  work  without  intro- 
ducing anything  very  technical  in  the  way  of  mathematics, 
physics,  or  philosophy.  The  new  view  of  space  and  time,  so 
opposed  to  our  habits  of  thought,  must  in  any  case  demand 
unusual  mental  exercise.  The  results  appear  strange;  and  the 
incongruity  is  not  without  a  humorous  side.  For  the  first  nine 
chapters  the  task  is  one  of  interpreting  a  clear-cut  theory, 
accepted  in  all  its  essentials  by  a  large  and  growing  school  of 
physicists — although  perhaps  not  everyone  would  accept  the 
author's  views  of  its  meaning.  Chapters  x  and  xi  deal  with 
very  recent  advances,  with  regard  to  which  opinion  is  more 
fluid.  As  for  the  last  chapter,  containing  the  author's  specula- 
tions on  the  meaning  of  nature,  since  it  touches  on  the  rudiments 
of  a  philosophical  system,  it  is  perhaps  too  sanguine  to  hope  that 
it  can  ever  be  other  than  controversial. 


vi  PREFACE 

A  non-mathematical  presentation  has  necessary  limitations; 
and  the  reader  who  wishes  to  learn  how  certain  exact  results 
follow  from  Einstein's,  or  even  Newton's,  law  of  gravitation  is 
bound  to  seek  the  reasons  in  a  mathematical  treatise.  But  this 
limitation  of  range  is  perhaps  less  serious  than  the  limitation  of 
intrinsic  truth.  There  is  a  relativity  of  truth,  as  there  is  a 
relativity  of  space. — 

"For  is  and  IS-NOT  though  with  Rule  and  Line 
And  UP-AND-DOWN  without,  I  could  define." 

Alas !  It  is  not  so  simple.  We  abstract  from  the  phenomena  that 
which  is  peculiar  to  the  position  and  motion  of  the  observer; 
but  can  we  abstract  that  which  is  peculiar  to  the  limited  imagina- 
tion of  the  human  brain?  We  think  we  can,  but  only  in  the 
symbolism  of  mathematics.  As  the  language  of  a  poet  rings  with 
a  truth  that  eludes  the  clumsy  explanations  of  his  commentators, 
so  the  geometry  of  relativity  in  its  perfect  harmony  expresses  a 
truth  of  form  and  type  in  nature,  which  my  bowdlerised  version 
misses. 

But  the  mind  is  not  content  to  leave  scientific  Truth  in  a  dry 
husk  of  mathematical  symbols,  and  demands  that  it  shall  be 
alloyed  with  familiar  images.  The  mathematician,  who  handles 
x  so  lightly,  may  fairly  be  asked  to  state,  not  indeed  the  in- 
scrutable meaning  of  x  in  nature,  but  the  meaning  which  x 
conveys  to  him. 

Although  primarily  designed  for  readers  without  technical 
knowledge  of  the  subject,  it  is  hoped  that  the  book  may  also 
appeal  to  those  who  have  gone  into  the  subject  more  deeply. 
A  few  notes  have  been  added  in  the  Appendix  mainly  to  bridge 
the  gap  between  this  and  more  mathematical  treatises,  and  t® 
indicate  the  points  of  contact  between  the  argument  in  the  text 
and  the  parallel  analytical  investigation. 

It  is  impossible  adequately  to  express  my  debt  to  con- 
temporary literature  and  discussion.  The  writings  of  Einstein, 
Minkowski,  Hilbert,  Lorentz,  Weyl,  Robb,  and  others,  have 
provided  the  groundwork ;  in  the  give  and  take  of  debate  with 
friends  and  correspondents,  the  extensive  ramifications  have 
gradually  appeared.  A  S  E 

1  May,  1920. 


CONTENTS 

ECLIPSE  INSTRUMENTS  AT  SOBRAL    .        Frontispiece 

PROLOGUE  PAGE 

WHAT  is  GEOMETRY?     .....          1 

CHAPTER   I 
THE  FITZGERALD  CONTRACTION  .        ^       .        17 

CHAPTER  II 
RELATIVITY   ..        .        .        .        ,        .  30 

CHAPTER  III 
THE  WORLD  OF  FOUR  DIMENSIONS      ,        .        45 

CHAPTER  IV 
FIELDS  or  FORCE 63 

CHAPTER  V 
KINDS  OF  SPACE     .        .        .        .        *        .77 

CHAPTER  VI 

THE  NEW  LAW  OF  GRAVITATION  AND  THE 

OLD  LAW          .        .         .        .        .        .        93 

CHAPTER  VII 

WEIGHING  LIGHT    .  .        .        .        .      110 

CHAPTER  VIII 

OTHER  TESTS  OF  THE  THEORY     .        .        .       123 

CHAPTER  IX 
MOMENTUM  AND  ENERGY      ....       136 

CHAPTER  X 
TOWARDS  INFINITY        .        .        .        .        .      152 

CHAPTER  XI 
ELECTRICITY  AND  GRAVITATION  .        .      167 

CHAPTER  XII 
ON  THE  NATURE  OF  THINGS         .        .        .,     180 

APPENDIX 

MATHEMATICAL  NOTES        •••.-.       .        .        .      202 

HISTORICAL  NOTE  210 


PROLOGUE 
WHAT   IS   GEOMETRY? 

A  conversation  between — 

An  experimental  PHYSICIST. 
A  pure  MATHEMATICIAN. 

A  RELATIVIST,  who  advocates  the  newer  conceptions  of  time  and 
space  in  physics. 

Rel.  There  is  a  well-known  proposition  of  Euclid  which  states 
that  "Any  two  sides  of  a  triangle  are  together  greater  than  the 
third  side."  Can  either  of  you  tell  me  whether  nowadays  there 
is  good  reason  to  believe  that  this  proposition  is  true? 

Math.  For  my  part,  I  am  quite  unable  to  say  whether  the 
proposition  is  true  or  not.  I  can  deduce  it  by  trustworthy 
reasoning  from  certain  other  propositions  or  axioms,  which  are 
supposed  to  be  still  more  elementary.  If  these  axioms  are  true, 
the  proposition  is  true ;  if  the  axioms  are  not  true,  the  proposition 
is  not  true  universally.  Whether  the  axioms  are  true  or  not 
I  cannot  say,  and  it  is  outside  my  province  to  consider. 

Phys.  But  is  it  not  claimed  that  the  truth  of  these  axioms  is 
self-evident? 

Math.  They  are  by  no  means  self-evident  to  me;  and  I  think 
the  claim  has  been  generally  abandoned. 

Phys.  Yet  since  on  these  axioms  you  have  been  able  to  found 
a  logical  and  self-consistent  system  of  geometry,  is  not  this 
indirect  evidence  that  they  are  true? 

Math.  No.  Euclid's  geometry  is  not  the  only  self-consistent 
system  of  geometry.  By  choosing  a  different  set  of  axioms  I  can, 
for  example,  arrive  at  Lobatchewsky's  geometry,  in  which  many 
of  the  propositions  of  Euclid  are  not  in  general  true.  From  my 
point  of  view  there  is  nothing  to  choose  between  these  different 
geometries. 

Rel.  How  is  it  then  that  Euclid's  geometry  is  so  much  the 
most  important  system? 

Math.  I  am  scarcely  prepared  to  admit  that  it  is  the  most 
important.  But  for  reasons  which  I  do  not  profess  to  understand, 
my  friend  the  Physicist  is  more  interested  in  Euclidean  geometry 

E.S.  I 


2  PROLOGUE 

than  in  any  other,  and  is  continually  setting  us  problems  in  it. 
Consequently  we  have  tended  to  give  an  undue  share  of  attention 
to  the  Euclidean  system.  There  have,  however,  been  great 
geometers  like  Riemann  who  have  done  something  to  restore 
a  proper  perspective. 

Eel.  (to  Physicist).  Why  are  you  specially  interested  in 
Euclidean  geometry?  Do  you  believe  it  to  be  the  true  geometry? 

Phys.    Yes.    Our  experimental  work  proves  it  true. 

Rel.  How,  for  example,  do  you  prove  that  any  two  sides  of 
a  triangle  are  together  greater  than  the  third  side? 

Phys.  I  can,  of  course,  only  prove  it  by  taking  a  very  large 
number  of  typical  cases,  and  I  am  limited  by  the  inevitable 
inaccuracies  of  experiment.  My  proofs  are  not  so  general  or  so 
perfect  as  those  of  the  pure  mathematician.  But  it  is  a  recognised 
principle  in  physical  science  that  it  is  permissible  to  generalise 
from  a  reasonably  wide  range  of  experiment;  and  this  kind  of 
proof  satisfies  me. 

Rel.  It  will  satisfy  me  also.  I  need  only  trouble  you  with 
a  special  case.  Here  is  a  triangle  ABC;  how  will  you  prove  that 
AB  +  BC  is  greater  than  AC? 

Phys.    I  shall  take  a  scale  and  measure  the  three  sides. 

Rel.  But  we  seem  to  be  talking  about  different  things.  I  was 
speaking  of  a  proposition  of  geometry — properties  of  space,  not 
of  matter.  Your  experimental  proof  only  shows  how  a  material 
scale  behaves  when  you  turn  it  into  different  positions. 

Phys.  I  might  arrange  to  make  the  measures  with  an  optical 
device. 

Rel.  That  is  worse  and  worse.  Now  you  are  speaking  of 
properties  of  light. 

Phys.  I  really  cannot  tell  you  anything  about  it,  if  you  will 
not  let  me  make  measurements  of  any  kind.  Measurement  is 
my  only  means  of  finding  out  about  nature.  I  am  not  a  meta- 
physicist. 

Rel.  Let  us  then  agree  that  by  length  and  distance  you  always 
mean  a  quantity  arrived  at  by  measurements  with  material  or 
optical  appliances.  You  have  studied  experimentally  the  laws 
obeyed  by  these  measured  lengths,  and  have  found  the  geometry 
to  which  they  conform.  We  will  call  this  geometry  "Natural 
Geometry";  and  it  evidently  has  much  greater  importance  for 


WHAT  IS  GEOMETRY?  3 

you  than  any  other  of  the  systems  which  the  brain  of  the 
mathematician  has  invented.  But  we  must  remember  that  its 
subject  matter  involves  the  behaviour  of  material  scales — the 
properties  of  matter.  Its  laws  are  just  as  much  laws  of  physics 
as,  for  example,  the  laws  of  electromagnetism. 

Phys.  Do  you  mean  to  compare  space  to  a  kind  of  magnetic 
field?  I  scarcely  understand. 

Rel.  You  say  that  you  cannot  explore  the  world  without 
some  kind  of  apparatus.  If  you  explore  with  a  scale,  you  find 
out  the  natural  geometry ;  if  you  explore  with  a  magnetic  needle, 
you  find  out  the  magnetic  field.  What  we  may  call  the  field  of 
extension,  or  space-field,  is  just  as  much  a  physical  quality  as 
the  magnetic  field.  You  can  think  of  them  both  existing  together 
in  the  aether,  if  you  like.  The  laws  of  both  must  be  determined 
by  experiment.  Of  course,  certain  approximate  laws  of  the  space- 
field  (Euclidean  geometry)  have  been  familiar  to  us  from  child- 
hood; but  we  must  get  rid  of  the  idea  that  there  is  anything 
inevitable  about  these  laws,  and  that  it  would  be  impossible  to 
find  in  other  parts  of  the  universe  space-fields  where  these  laws 
do  not  apply.  As  to  how  far  space  really  resembles  a  magnetic 
field,  I  do  not  wish  to  dogmatise;  my  point  is  that  they  present 
themselves  to  experimental  investigation  in  very  much  the  same 
way. 

Let  us  proceed  to  examine  the  laws  of  natural  geometry. 
I  have  a  tape-measure,  and  here  is  the  triangle.  AB  =  39J  in., 
BC  =  £  in.,  CA  =  39|  in.  Why,  your  proposition  does  not  hold ! 

Phys.  You  know  very  well  what  is  wrong.  You  gave  the 
tape-measure  a  big  stretch  when  you  measured  AB. 

Rel.    Why  shouldn't  I? 

Phys.  Of  course,  a  length  must  be  measured  with  a  rigid 
scale. 

Rel.  That  is  an  important  addition  to  our  definition  of  length. 
But  what  is  a  rigid  scale? 

Phys.    A  scale  which  always  keeps  the  same  length. 

Rel.  But  we  have  just  defined  length  as  the  quantity  arrived 
at  by  measures  with  a  rigid  scale;  so  you  will  want  another  rigid 
scale  to  test  whether  the  first  one  changes  length;  and  a  third 
to  test  the  second ;  and  so  ad  inflnitum.  You  remind  me  of  the 
incident  of  the  clock  and  time-gun  in  Egypt.  The  man  in  charge 

i — 2 


4  PROLOGUE 

of  the  time-gun  fired  it  by  the  clock;  and  the  man  in  charge  of 
the  clock  set  it  right  by  the  time-gun.  No,  you  must  not  define 
length  by  means  of  a  rigid  scale,  and  define  a  rigid  scale  by 
means  of  length. 

Phys.  I  admit  I  am  hazy  about  strict  definitions.  There  is 
not  time  for  everything;  and  there  are  so  many  interesting 
things  to  find  out  in  physics,  which  take  up  my  attention.  Are 
you  so  sure  that  you  are  prepared  with  a  logical  definition  of  all 
the  terms  you  use? 

Rel.  Heaven  forbid !  I  am  not  naturally  inclined  to  be 
rigorous  about  these  things.  Although  I  appreciate  the  value  of 
the  work  of  those  who  are  digging  at  the  foundations  of  science, 
my  own  interests  are  mainly  in  the  upper  structure.  But  some- 
times, if  we  wish  to  add  another  storey,  it  is  necessary  to  deepen 
the  foundations.  I  have  a  definite  object  in  trying  to  arrive  at 
the  exact  meaning  of  length.  A  strange  theory  is  floating  round, 
to  which  you  may  feel  initial  objections;  and  you  probably 
would  not  wish  to  let  your  views  go  by  default.  And  after  all, 
when  you  claim  to  determine  lengths  to  eight  significant  figures, 
you  must  have  a  pretty  definite  standard  of  right  and  wrong 
measurements. 

Phys.  It  is  difficult  to  define  what  we  mean  by  rigid;  but  in 
practice  we  can  tell  if  a  scale  is  likely  to  change  length  appreciably 
in  different  circumstances. 

Rel.  No.  Do  not  bring  in  the  idea  of  change  of  length  in 
describing  the  apparatus  for  defining  length.  Obviously  the 
adopted  standard  of  length  cannot  change  length,  whatever  it 
is  made  of.  If  a  metre  is  defined  as  the  length  of  a  certain  bar, 
that  bar  can  never  be  anything  but  a  metre  long;  and  if  we 
assert  that  this  bar  changes  length,  it  is  clear  that  we  must  have 
changed  our  minds  as  to  the  definition  of  length.  You  recognised 
that  my  tape-measure  was  a  defective  standard — that  it  was 
not  rigid.  That  was  not  because  it  changed  length,  because,  if 
it  was  the  standard  of  length,  it  could  not  change  length.  It 
was  lacking  in  some  other  quality. 

You  know  an  approximately  rigid  scale  when  you  see  one. 
What  you  are  comparing  it  with  is  not  some  non-measurable 
ideal  of  length,  but  some  attainable,  or  at  least  approachable, 
ideal  of  material  constitution.  Ordinary  scales  have  defects — 


WHAT  IS  GEOMETRY?  5 

flexure,  expansion  with  temperature,  etc. — which  can  be  reduced 
by  suitable  precautions;  and  the  limit,  to  which  you  approach 
as  you  reduce  them,  is  your  rigid  scale.  You  can  define  these 
defects  without  appealing  to  any  extraneous  definition  of  length; 
for  example,  if  you  have  two  rods  of  the  same  material  whose 
extremities  are  just  in  contact  with  one  another,  and  when  one 
of  them  is  heated  the  extremities  no  longer  can  be  adjusted  to 
coincide,  then  the  material  has  a  temperature-coefficient  of 
expansion.  Thus  you  can  compare  experimentally  the  tempera- 
ture-coefficients of  different  metals  and  arrange  them  in 
diminishing  sequence.  In  this  sort  of  way  you  can  specify  the 
nature  of  your  ideal  rigid  rod,  before  you  introduce  the  term 
length. 

Phys.    No  doubt  that  is  the  way  it  should  be  defined. 

Eel.  We  must  recognise  then  that  all  our  knowledge  of  space 
rests  on  the  behaviour  of  material  measuring-scales  free  from 
certain  definable  defects  of  constitution. 

Phys.  I  am  not  sure  that  I  agree.  Surely  there  is  a  sense  in 
which  the  statement  AB  =  2CD  is  true  or  false,  even  if  we  had 
no  conception  of  a  material  measuring-rod.  For  instance,  there 
is,  so  to  speak,  twice  as  much  paper  between  A  and  B,  as  between 
C  and  D. 

Rel.  Provided  the  paper  is  uniform.  But  then,  what  does 
uniformity  of  the  paper  mean?  That  the  amount  in  given  length 
is  constant.  We  come  back  at  once  to  the  need  of  defining  length. 

If  you  say  instead  that  the  amount  of  "space"  between 
A  and  B  is  twice  that  between  C  and  Z>,  the  same  thing  applies. 
You  imagine  the  intervals  filled  with  uniform  space;  but  the 
uniformity  simply  means  that  the  same  amount  of  space  corre- 
sponds to  each  inch  of  your  rigid  measuring-rod.  You  have 
arbitrarily  used  your  rod  to  divide  space  into  so-called  equal 
lumps.  It  all  comes  back  to  the  rigid  rod. 

I  think  you  were  right  at  first  when  you  said  that  you  could 
not  find  out  anything  without  measurement;  and  measurement 
involves  some  specified  material  appliance. 

Now  you  admit  that  your  measures  cannot  go  beyond  a 
certain  close  approximation,  and  that  you  have  not  tried  all 
possible  conditions.  Supposing  that  one  corner  of  your  triangle 
was  in  a  very  intense  gravitational  field — far  stronger  than  any 


6  PROLOGUE 

we  have  had  experience  of — I  have  good  ground  for  believing 
that  under  those  conditions  you  might  find  the  sum  of  two  sides 
of  a  triangle,  as  measured  with  a  rigid  rod,  appreciably  less  than 
the  third  side.  In  that  case  would  you  be  prepared  to  give  up 
Euclidean  geometry? 

Phys.  I  think  it  would  be  risky  to  assume  that  the  strong 
force  of  gravitation  made  no  difference  to  the  experiment. 

Rel.    On  my  supposition  it  makes  an  important  difference. 

Phys.  I  mean  that  we  might  have  to  make  corrections  to  the 
measures,  because  the  action  of  the  strong  force  might  possibly 
distort  the  measuring-rod. 

Rel.  In  a  rigid  rod  we  have  eliminated  any  special  response 
to  strain. 

Phys.  But  this  is  rather  different.  The  extension  of  the  rod 
is  determined  by  the  positions  taken  up  by  the  molecules  under 
the  forces  to  which  they  are  subjected;  and  there  might  be  a 
response  to  the  gravitational  force  which  all  kinds  of  matter 
would  share.  This  could  scarcely  be  regarded  as  a  defect;  and 
our  so-called  rigid  rod  would  not  be  free  from  it  any  more  than 
any  other  kind  of  matter. 

Rel.  True;  but  what  do  you  expect  to  obtain  by  correcting 
the  measures?  You  correct  measures,  when  they  are  untrue  to 
standard.  Thus  you  correct  the  readings  of  a  hydrogen-ther- 
mometer to  obtain  the  readings  of  a  perfect  gas-thermometer, 
because  the  hydrogen  molecules  have  finite  size,  and  exert  special 
attractions  on  one  another,  and  you  prefer  to  take  as  standard 
an  ideal  gas  with  infinitely  small  molecules.  But  in  the  present 
case,  what  is  the  standard  you  are  aiming  at  when  you  propose 
to  correct  measures  made  with  the  rigid  rod? 

Phys.  I  see  the  difficulty.  I  have  no  knowledge  of  space 
apart  from  my  measures,  and  I  have  no  better  standard  than 
the  rigid  rod.  So  it  is  difficult  to  see  what  the  corrected  measures 
would  mean.  And  yet  it  would  seem  to  me  more  natural  to 
suppose  that  the  failure  of  the  proposition  was  due  to  the 
measures  going  wrong  rather  than  to  an  alteration  in  the  character 
of  space. 

Rel.  Is  not  that  because  you  are  still  a  bit  of  a  metaphysicist? 
You  keep  some  notion  of  a  space  which  is  superior  to  measure- 
ment, and  are  ready  to  throw  over  the  measures  rather  than  let 


WHAT  IS  GEOMETRY?  7 

this  space  be  distorted.  Even  if  there  were  reason  for  believing 
in  such  a  space,  what  possible  reason  could  there  be  for  assuming 
it  to  be  Euclidean?  Your  sole  reason  for  believing  space  to  be 
Euclidean  is  that  hitherto  your  measures  have  made  it  appear  so; 
if  now  measures  of  certain  parts  of  space  prefer  non-Euclidean 
geometry,  all  reason  for  assuming  Euclidean  space  disappears. 
Mathematically  and  conceptually  Euclidean  and  non-Euclidean 
space  are  on  the  same  footing;  our  preference  for  Euclidean 
space  was  based  on  measures,  and  must  stand  or  fall  by 
measures. 

Phys.  Let  me  put  it  this  way.  I  believe  that  I  am  trying  to 
measure  something  called  length,  which  has  an  absolute  meaning 
in  nature,  and  is  of  importance  in  connection  with  the  laws  of 
nature.  This  length  obeys  Euclidean  geometry.  I  believe  my 
measures  with  a  rigid  rod  determine  it  accurately  when  no 
disturbance  like  gravitation  is  present;  but  in  a  gravitational 
field  it  is  not  unreasonable  to  expect  that  the  uncorrected 
measures  may  not  give  it  exactly. 

Rel.  You  have  three  hypotheses  there: — (1)  there  is  an 
absolute  thing  in  nature  corresponding  to  length,  (2)  the 
geometry  of  these  absolute  lengths  is  Euclidean,  and  (3)  practical 
measures  determine  this  length  accurately  when  there  is  no 
gravitational  force.  I  see  no  necessity  for  these  hypotheses,  and 
propose  to  do  without  them.  Hypotheses  nonflngo.  The  second 
hypothesis  seems  to  me  particularly  objectionable.  You  assume 
that  this  absolute  thing  in  nature  obeys  the  laws  of  Euclidean 
geometry.  Surely  it  is  contrary  to  scientific  principles  to  lay 
down  arbitrary  laws  for  nature  to  obey ;  we  must  find  out  her 
laws  by  experiment.  In  this  case  the  only  experimental  evidence 
is  that  measured  lengths  (which  by  your  own  admission  are  not 
necessarily  the  same  as  this  absolute  thing)  sometimes  obey 
Euclidean  geometry  and  sometimes  do  not.  Again  it  would 
seem  reasonable  to  doubt  your  third  hypothesis  beyond,  say, 
the  sixth  decimal  place;  and  that  would  play  havoc  with  your 
more  delicate  measures.  But  where  I  fundamentally  differ  from 
you  is  the  first  hypothesis.  Is  there  some  absolute  quantity  in 
nature  that  we  try  to  determine  when  we  measure  length? 
When  we  try  to  determine  the  number  of  molecules  in  a  given 
piece  of  matter,  we  have  to  use  indirect  methods,  and  different 


8  PROLOGUE 

methods  may  give  systematically  different  results;  but  no  one 
doubts  that  there  is  a  definite  number  of  molecules,  so  that  there 
is  some  meaning  in  saying  that  certain  methods  are  theoretically 
good  and  others  inaccurate.  Counting  appears  to  be  an  absolute 
operation.  But  it  seems  to  me  that  other  physical  measures  are 
on  a  different  footing.  Any  physical  quantity,  such  as  length, 
mass,  force,  etc.,  which  is  not  a  pure  number,  can  only  be  denned 
as  the  result  arrived  at  by  conducting  a  physical  experiment 
according  to  specified  rules. 

So  I  cannot  conceive  of  any  "length"  in  nature  independent 
of  a  definition  of  the  way  of  measuring  length.  And,  if  there  is, 
we  may  disregard  it  in  physics,  because  it  is  beyond  the  range 
of  experiment.  Of  course,  it  is  always  possible  that  we  may 
come  across  some  quantity,  not  given  directly  by  experiment, 
which  plays  a  fundamental  part  in  theory.  If  so,  it  will  turn  up 
in  due  course  in  our  theoretical  formulae.  But  it  is  no  good 
assuming  such  a  quantity,  and  laying  down  a  priori  laws  for  it 
to  obey,  on  the  off-chance  of  its  proving  useful. 

Phys.  Then  you  will  not  let  me  blame  the  measuring-rod 
when  the  proposition  fails? 

Rel.  By  all  means  put  the  responsibility  on  the  measuring- 
rod.  Natural  geometry  is  the  theory  of  the  behaviour  of  material 
scales.  Any  proposition  in  natural  geometry  is  an  assertion  as 
to  the  behaviour  of  rigid  scales,  which  must  accordingly  take 
the  blame  or  credit.  But  do  not  say  that  the  rigid  scale  is 
wrong,  because  that  implies  a  standard  of  right  which  does  not 
exist. 

Phys.  The  space  which  you  are  speaking  of  must  be  a  sort  of 
abstraction  of  the  extensional  relations  of  matter. 

Rel.  Exactly  so.  And  when  I  ask  you  to  believe  that  space 
can  be  non-Euclidean,  or,  in  popular  phrase,  warped,  I  am  not 
asking  you  for  any  violent  effort  of  the  imagination;  I  only 
mean  that  the  extensional  relations  of  matter  obey  somewhat 
modified  laws.  Whenever  we  investigate  the  properties  of  space 
experimentally,  it  is  these  extensional  relations  that  we  are 
finding.  Therefore  it  seems  logical  to  conclude  that  space  as 
known  to  us  must  be  the  abstraction  of  these  material  relations, 
and  not  something  more  transcendental.  The  reformed  methods 
of  teaching  geometry  in  schools  would  be  utterly  condemned, 


WHAT  IS  GEOMETRY?  9 

and  it  would  be  misleading  to  set  schoolboys  to  verify  propositions 
of  geometry  by  measurement,  if  the  space  they  are  supposed  to 
be  studying  had  not  this  meaning. 

I  suspect  that  you  are  doubtful  whether  this  abstraction  of 
extensional  relations  quite  fulfils  your  general  idea  of  space;  and, 
as  a  necessity  of  thought,  you  require  something  beyond.  I  do 
not  think  I  need  disturb  that  impression,  provided  you  realise 
that  it  is  not  the  properties  of  this  more  transcendental  thing 
we  are  speaking  of  when  we  describe  geometry  as  Euclidean  or 
non-Euclidean. 

Math.  The  view  has  been  widely  held  that  space  is  neither 
physical  nor  metaphysical,  but  conventional.  Here  is  a  passage 
from  Poincare's  Science  and  Hypothesis,  which  describes  this 
alternative  idea  of  space  : 

"  If  Lobatchewsky's  geometry  is  true,  the  parallax  of  a  very 
distant  star  will  be  finite.  If  Riemann's  is  true,  it  will  be  negative. 
These  are  the  results  which  seem  within  the  reach  of  experiment, 
and  it  is  hoped  that  astronomical  observations  may  enable  us 
to  decide  between  the  two  geometries.  But  what  we  call  a 
straight  line  in  astronomy  is  simply  the  path  of  a  ray  of  light. 
If,  therefore,  we  were  to  discover  negative  parallaxes,  or  to 
prove  that  all  parallaxes  are  higher  than  a  certain  limit,  we 
should  have  a  choice  between  two  conclusions:  we  could  give 
up  Euclidean  geometry,  or  modify  the  laws  of  optics,  and 
suppose  that  light  is  not  rigorously  propagated  in  a  straight 
line.  It  is  needless  to  add  that  everyone  would  look  upon  this 
solution  as  the  more  advantageous.  Euclidean  geometry, 
therefore,  has  nothing  to  fear  from  fresh  experiments." 

Eel.  Poincare's  brilliant  exposition  is  a  great  help  in  under- 
standing the  problem  now  confronting  us.  He  brings  out  the 
interdependence  between  geometrical  laws  and  physical  laws, 
which  we  have  to  bear  in  mind  continually.  We  can  add  on  to 
one  set  of  laws  that  which  we  subtract  from  the  other  set. 
I  admit  that  space  is  conventional — for  that  matter,  the  meaning 
of  every  word  in  the  language  is  conventional.  Moreover,  we 
have  actually  arrived  at  the  parting  of  the  ways  imagined  by 
Poincare,  though  the  crucial  experiment  is  not  precisely  the 
one  he  mentions.  But  I  deliberately  adopt  the  alternative, 
which,  he  takes  for  granted,  everyone  would  consider  less 


10  PROLOGUE 

advantageous.  I  call  the  space  thus  chosen  physical  space,  and 
its  geometry  natural  geometry,  thus  admitting  that  other  con- 
ventional meanings  of  space  and  geometry  are  possible.  If  it 
were  only  a  question  of  the  meaning  of  space — a  rather  vague 
term — these  other  possibilities  might  have  some  advantages. 
But  the  meaning  assigned  to  length  and  distance  has  to  go 
along  with  the  meaning  assigned  to  space.  Now  these  are 
quantities  which  the  physicist  has  been  accustomed  to  measure 
with  great  accuracy;  and  they  enter  fundamentally  into  the 
whole  of  our  experimental  knowledge  of  the  world.  We  have  a 
knowledge  of  the  so-called  extent  of  the  stellar  universe,  which, 
whatever  it  may  amount  to  in  terms  of  ultimate  reality,  is  not 
a  mere  description  of  location  in  a  conventional  and  arbitrary 
mathematical  space.  Are  we  to  be  robbed  of  the  terms  in  which 
we  are  accustomed  to  describe  that  knowledge? 

The  law  of  Boyle  states  that  the  pressure  of  a  gas  is  propor- 
tional to  its  density.  It  is  found  by  experiment  that  this  law  is 
only  approximately  true.  A  certain  mathematical  simplicity 
would  be  gained  by  conventionally  redefining  pressure  in  such 
a  way  that  Boyle's  law  would  be  rigorously  obeyed.  But  it 
would  be  high-handed  to  appropriate  the  word  pressure  in  this 
way,  unless  it  had  been  ascertained  that  the  physicist  had  no 
further  use  for  it  in  its  original  meaning. 

Phys.  I  have  one  other  objection.  Apart  from  measures,  we 
have  a  general  perception  of  space,  and  the  space  we  perceive 
is  at  least  approximately  Euclidean. 

Rel.  Our  perceptions  are  crude  measures.  It  is  true  that  our 
perception  of  space  is  very  largely  a  matter  of  optical  measures 
with  the  eyes.  If  in  a  strong  gravitational  field  optical  and 
mechanical  measures  diverged,  we  should  have  to  make  up  our 
minds  which  was  the  preferable  standard,  and  afterwards  abide 
by  it.  So  far  as  we  can  ascertain,  however,  they  agree  in  all 
circumstances,  and  no  such  difficulty  arises.  So,  if  physical 
measures  give  us  a  non-Euclidean  space,  the  space  of  perception 
will  be  non-Euclidean.  If  you  were  transplanted  into  an  ex- 
tremely intense  gravitational  field,  you  would  directly  perceive 
the  non-Euclidean  properties  of  space. 

Phys.    Non-Euclidean  space  seems  contrary  to  reason. 

Math.    It  is  not  contrary  to  reason,  but  contrary  to  common 


WHAT  IS  GEOMETRY?  11 

experience,  which  is  a  very  different  thing,  since  experience  is 
very  limited. 

Phys.  I  cannot  imagine  myself  perceiving  non-Euclidean  space ! 

Math.  Look  at  the  reflection  of  the  room  in  a  polished  door- 
knob, and  imagine  yourself  one  of  the  actors  in  what  you  see 
going  on  there. 

Rel.  I  have  another  point  to  raise.  The  distance  between 
two  points  is  to  be  the  length  measured  with  a  rigid  scale.  Let 
us  mark  the  two  points  by  particles  of  matter,  because  we  must 
somehow  identify  them  by  reference  to  material  objects.  For 
simplicity  we  shall  suppose  that  the  two  particles  have  no 
relative  motion,  so  that  the  distance — whatever  it  is — remains 
constant.  Now  you  will  probably  agree  that  there  is  no  such 
thing  as  absolute  motion;  consequently  there  is  no  standard 
condition  of  the  scale  which  we  can  call  "at  rest."  We  may 
measure  with  the  scale  moving  in  any  way  we  choose,  and  if 
results  for  different  motions  disagree,  there  is  no  criterion  for 
selecting  the  true  one.  Further,  if  the  particles  are  sliding  past 
the  scale,  it  makes  all  the  difference  what  instants  we  choose 
for  making  the  two  readings. 

Phys.  You  can  avoid  that  by  denning  distance  as  the  measure- 
ment made  with  a  scale  which  has  the  same  velocity  as  the  two 
points.  Then  they  will  always  be  in  contact  with  two  particular 
divisions  of  the  scale. 

Rel.  A  very  sound  definition;  but  unfortunately  it  does  not 
agree  with  the  meaning  of  distance  in  general  use.  When  the 
relativist  wishes  to  refer  to  this  length,  he  calls  it  the  proper- 
length;  in  non-relativity  physics  it  does  not  seem  to  have  been 
used  at  all.  You  see  it  is  not  convenient  to  send  your  apparatus 
hurling  through  the  laboratory — after  a  pair  of  a  particles,  for 
example.  And  you  could  scarcely  measure  the  length  of  a  wave 
of  light  by  this  convention*.  So  the  physicist  refers  his  lengths 
to  apparatus  at  rest  on  the  earth ;  and  the  mathematician  starts 
with  the  words  "Choose  unaccelerated  rectangular  axes  0#,  Oy, 
Oz,  ..."  and  assumes  that  the  measuring-scales  are  at  rest 
relatively  to  these  axes.  So  when  the  term  length  is  used  some 
arbitrary  standard  motion  of  the  measuring  apparatus  must 
always  be  implied. 

*  The  proper- length  of  a  light- wave  is  actually  infinite. 


12  PROLOGUE 

Phys.  Then  if  you  have  fixed  your  standard  motion  of  the 
measuring-rod,  there  will  be  no  ambiguity  if  you  take  the 
readings  of  both  particles  at  the  same  moment. 

Rel.  What  is  the  same  moment  at  different  places?  The 
conception  of  simultaneity  in  different  places  is  a  difficult  one. 
Is  there  a  particular  instant  in  the  progress  of  time  on  another 
world,  Arcturus,  which  is  the  same  as  the  present  instant  on  the 
Earth? 

Phys.  I  think  so,  if  there  is  any  connecting  link.  We  can 
observe  an  event,  say  a  change  of  brightness,  on  Arcturus,  and, 
allowing  for  the  time  taken  by  light  to  travel  the  distance, 
determine  the  corresponding  instant  on  the  earth. 

Rel.  But  then  you  must  know  the  speed  of  the  earth  through 
the  aether.  It  may  have  shortened  the  light-time  by  going  some 
way  to  meet  the  light  coming  from  Arcturus. 

Phys.    Is  not  that  a  small  matter? 

Rel.  At  a  very  modest  reckoning  the  motion  of  the  earth  in 
the  interval  might  alter  the  light-time  by  several  days.  Actually, 
however,  any  speed  of  the  earth  through  the  aether  up  to  the 
velocity  of  light  is  admissible,  without  affecting  anything  observ- 
able. At  least,  nothing  has  been  discovered  which  contradicts 
this.  So  the  error  may  be  months  or  years. 

Phys.  What  you  have  shown  is  that  we  have  not  sufficient 
knowledge  to  determine  in  practice  which  are  simultaneous 
events  on  the  Earth  and  Arcturus.  It  does  not  follow  that  there 
is  no  definite  simultaneity. 

Rel.  That  is  true,  but  it  is  at  least  possible  that  the  reason 
why  we  are  unable  to  determine  simultaneity  in  practice  (or, 
what  comes  to  pretty  much  the  same  thing,  our  motion  through 
the  aether)  in  spite  of  many  brilliant  attempts,  is  that  there  is 
no  such  thing  as  absolute  simultaneity  of  distant  events.  It  is 
better  therefore  not  to  base  our  physics  on  this  notion  of  absolute 
simultaneity,  which  may  turn  out  not  to  exist,  and  is  in  any 
case  out  of  reach  at  present. 

But  what  all  this  comes  to  is  that  time  as  well  as  space  is 
implied  in  all  our  measures.  The  fundamental  measurement  is 
not  the  interval  between  two  points  of  space,  but  between  two 
points  of  space  associated  with  instants  of  time. 

Our  natural  geometry  is  incomplete  at  present.    We  must 


WHAT  IS  GEOMETRY?  13 

supplement  it  by  bringing  in  time  as  well  as  space.  We  shall 
need  a  perfect  clock  as  well  as  a  rigid  scale  for  our  measures. 
It  may  be  difficult  to  choose  an  ideal  standard  clock :  but  what- 
ever definition  we  decide  on  must  be  a  physical  definition.  We 
must  not  dodge  it  by  saying  that  a  perfect  clock  is  one  which 
keeps  perfect  time.  Perhaps  the  best  theoretical  clock  would  be 
a  pulse  of  light  travelling  in  vacuum  to  and  fro  between  mirrors 
at  the  ends  of  a  rigid  scale.  The  instants  of  arrival  at  one  end 
would  define  equal  intervals  of  time. 

Phys.  I  think  your  unit  of  time  would  change  according  to 
the  motion  of  your  "clock"  through  the  aether. 

Rel.  Then  you  are  comparing  it  with  some  notion  of  absolute 
time.  I  have  no  notion  of  time  except  as  the  result  of  measure- 
ment with  some  kind  of  clock.  (Our  immediate  perception  of 
the  flight  of  time  is  presumably  associated  with  molecular 
processes  in  the  brain  which  play  the  part  of  a  material  clock.) 
If  you  know  a  better  clock,  let  us  adopt  it;  but,  having  once 
fixed  on  our  ideal  clock  there  can  be  no  appeal  from  its  judg- 
ments. You  must  remember  too  that  if  you  wish  to  measure 
a  second  at  one  place,  you  must  keep  your  clock  fixed  at  what 
you  consider  to  be  one  place;  so  its  motion  is  defined.  The 
necessity  of  defining  the  motion  of  the  clock  emphasises  that 
one  cannot  consider  time  apart  from  space;  there  is  one  geometry 
comprising  both. 

Phys.  Is  it  right  to  call  this  study  geometry.  Geometry  deals 
with  space  alone. 

Math.  I  have  no  objection.  It  is  only  necessary  to  consider 
time  as  a  fourth  dimension.  Your  complete  natural  geometry 
will  be  a  geometry  of  four  dimensions. 

Phys.    Have  we  then  found  the  long-sought  fourth  dimension? 

Math.  It  depends  what  kind  of  a  fourth  dimension  you  were 
seeking.  Probably  not  in  the  sense  you  intend.  For  me  it  only 
means  adding  a  fourth  variable,  t,  to  my  three  space-variables 
x,  y,  z.  It  is  no  concern  of  mine  what  these  variables  really 
represent.  You  give  me  a  few  fundamental  laws  that  they 
satisfy,  and  I  proceed  to  deduce  other  consequences  that  may 
be  of  interest  to  you.  The  four  variables  may  for  all  I  know  be 
the  pressure,  density,  temperature  and  entropy  of  a  gas;  that 
is  of  no  importance  to  me.  But  you  would  not  say  that  a  gas 


14  PROLOGUE 

had  four  dimensions  because  four  mathematical  variables  were 
used  to  describe  it.  Your  use  of  the  term  "dimensions"  is 
probably  more  restricted  than  mine. 

Phys.  I  know  that  it  is  often  a  help  to  represent  pressure 
and  volume  as  height  and  width  on  paper;  and  so  geometry 
may  have  applications  to  the  theory  of  gases.  But  is  it  not  going 
rather  far  to  say  that  geometry  can  deal  directly  with  these 
things  and  is  not  necessarily  concerned  with  lengths  in 
space? 

Math.  No.  Geometry  is  nowadays  largely  analytical,  so  that 
in  form  as  well  as  in  effect,  it  deals  with  variables  of  an  unknown 
nature.  It  is  true  that  I  can  often  see  results  more  easily  by 
taking  my  x  and  y  as  lengths  on  a  sheet  of  paper.  Perhaps  it 
would  be  helpful  in  seeing  other  results  if  I  took  them  as  pressure 
and  density  in  a  steam-engine;  but  a  steam-engine  is  not  so 
handy  as  a  pencil.  It  is  literally  true  that  I  do  not  want  to 
know  the  significance  of  the  variables  x9  y,  z,t  that  I  am  discussing. 
That  is  lucky  for  the  Relativist,  because  although  he  has  defined 
carefully  how  they  are  to  be  measured,  he  has  certainly  not 
conveyed  to  me  any  notion  of  how  I  am  to  picture  them,  if  my 
picture  of  absolute  space  is  an  illusion. 

Phys.  Yours  is  a  strange  sub j  ect .  You  told  us  at  the  beginning 
that  you  are  not  concerned  as  to  whether  your  propositions  are 
true,  and  now  you  tell  us  you  do  not  even  care  to  know  what 
you  are  talking  about. 

Math.  That  is  an  excellent  description  of  Pure  Mathematics, 
which  has  already  been  given  by  an  eminent  mathematician*. 

Rel.  I  think  there  is  a  real  sense  in  which  time  is  a  fourth 
dimension — as  distinct  from  a  fourth  variable.  The  term 
dimension  seems  to  be  associated  with  relations  of  order. 
I  believe  that  the  order  of  events  in  nature  is  one  indissoluble 
four-dimensional  order.  We  may  split  it  arbitrarily  into  space 
and  time,  just  as  we  can  split  the  order  of  space  into  length, 

*  "  Pure  mathematics  consists  entirely  of  such  asseverations  as  that,  if  such 
and  such  a  proposition  is  true  of  anything,  then  such  and  such  a  proposition 
is  true  of  that  thing.  It  is  essential  not  to  discuss  whether  the  first  proposition 
is  really  true,  and  not  to  mention  what  the  anything  is  of  which  it  is  supposed 

to  be  true Thus  mathematics  may  be  denned  as  the  subject  in  which  we 

never  know  what  we  are  talking  about,  nor  whether  what  we  are  saying  is  true." 

BEBTBAND  RTJSSELL. 


WHAT  IS  GEOMETRY?  15 

breadth  and  thickness.  But  space  without  time  is  as  incomplete 
as  a  surface  without  thickness. 

Math.  Do  you  argue  that  the  real  world  behind  the  pheno- 
mena is  four-dimensional? 

Rel.  I  think  that  in  the  real  world  there  must  be  a  set  of 
entities  related  to  one  another  in  a  four-dimensional  order,  and 
that  these  are  the  basis  of  the  perceptual  world  so  far  as  it  is 
yet  explored  by  physics.  But  it  is  possible  to  pick  out  a  four- 
dimensional  set  of  entities  from  a  basal  world  of  five  dimensions, 
or  even  of  three  dimensions.  The  straight  lines  in  three- 
dimensional  space  form  a  four-dimensional  set  of  entities,  i.e. 
they  have  a  fourfold  order.  So  one  cannot  predict  the  ultimate 
number  of  dimensions  in  the  world — if  indeed  the  expression 
dimensions  is  applicable. 

Phys.  What  would  a  philosopher  think  of  these  conceptions? 
Or  is  he  solely  concerned  with  a  metaphysical  space  and  time 
which  is  not  within  reach  of  measurement. 

Rel.  In  so  far  as  he  is  a  psychologist  our  results  must  concern 
him.  Perception  is  a  kind  of  crude  physical  measurement;  and 
perceptual  space  and  time  is  the  same  as  the  measured  space 
and  time,  which  is  the  subject-matter  of  natural  geometry.  In 
other  respects  he  may  not  be  so  immediately  concerned. 
Physicists  and  philosophers  have  long  agreed  that  motion 
through  absolute  space  can  have  no  meaning;  but  in  physics 
the  question  is  whether  motion  through  aether  has  any  meaning. 
I  consider  that  it  has  no  meaning;  but  that  answer,  though  it 
brings  philosophy  and  physics  into  closer  relation,  has  no  bearing 
on  the  philosophic  question  of  absolute  motion.  I  think, 
however,  we  are  entitled  to  expect  a  benevolent  interest  from 
philosophers,  in  that  we  are  giving  to  their  ideas  a  perhaps 
unexpected  practical  application. 

Let  me  now  try  to  sum  up  my  conclusions  from  this  conversa- 
tion. We  have  been  trying  to  give  a  precise  meaning  to  the 
term  space,  so  that  we  may  be  able  to  determine  exactly  the 
properties  of  the  space  we  live  in.  There  is  no  means  of  deter- 
mining the  properties  of  our  space  by  a  priori  reasoning,  because 
there  are  many  possible  kinds  of  space  to  choose  from,  no  one 
of  which  can  be  considered  more  likely  than  any  other.  For 


16  PROLOGUE 

more  than  2000  years  we  have  believed  in  a  Euclidean  space, 
because  certain  experiments  favoured  it ;  but  there  is  now  reason 
to  believe  that  these  same  experiments  when  pushed  to  greater 
accuracy  decide  in  favour  of  a  slightly  different  space  (in  the 
neighbourhood  of  massive  bodies).  The  relativist  sees  no  reason 
to  change  the  rules  of  the  game  because  the  result  does  not 
agree  with  previous  anticipations.  Accordingly  when  he  speaks 
of  space,  he  means  the  space  revealed  by  measurement,  whatever 
its  geometry.  He  points  out  that  this  is  the  space  with  which 
physics  is  concerned ;  and,  moreover,  it  is  the  space  of  everyday 
perception.  If  his  right  to  appropriate  the  term  space  in  this 
way  is  challenged,  he  would  urge  that  this  is  the  sense  in  which 
the  term  has  always  been  used  in  physics  hitherto;  it  is  only 
recently  that  conservative  physicists,  frightened  by  the  revolu- 
tionary consequences  of  modern  experiments,  have  begun  to 
play  with  the  idea  of  a  pre-existing  space  whose  properties 
cannot  be  ascertained  by  experiment — a  metaphysical  space,  to 
which  they  arbitrarily  assign  Euclidean  properties,  although  it 
is  obvious  that  its  geometry  can  never  be  ascertained  by  experi- 
ment. But  the  relativist,  in  defining  space  as  measured  space, 
clearly  recognises  that  all  measurement  involves  the  use  of 
material  apparatus ;  the  resulting  geometry  is  specifically  a  study 
of  the  extensional  relations  of  matter.  He  declines  to  consider 
anything  more  transcendental. 

My  second  point  is  that  since  natural  geometry  is  the  study 
of  extensional  relations  of  natural  objects,  and  since  it  is  found 
that  their  space-order  cannot  be  discussed  without  reference  to 
their  time-order  as  well,  it  has  become  necessary  to  extend  our 
geometry  to  four  dimensions  in  order  to  include  time. 


CHAPTEE  I 
THE  FITZGERALD    CONTRACTION 

In  order  to  reach  the  Truth,  it  is  necessary,  once  in  one's  life,  to  put  every 
thing  in  doubt  —  so  far  as  possible.  DESCARTES. 

WILL  it  take  longer  to  swim  to  a  point  100  yards  up-stream 
and  back,  or  to  a  point  100  yards  across-stream  and  back? 

In  the  first  case  there  is  a  long  toil  up  against  the  current, 
and  then  a  quick  return  helped  by  the  current,  which  is  all  too 
short  to  compensate.  In  the  second  case  the  current  also  hinders, 
because  part  of  the  effort  is  devoted  to  overcoming  the  drift 
down-stream.  But  no  swimmer  will  hesitate  to  say  that  the 
hindrance  is  the  greater  in  the  first  case. 

Let  us  take  a  numerical  example.  Suppose  the  swimmer's 
speed  is  50  yards  a  minute  in  still  water,  and  the  current  is 
30  yards  a  minute.  Thus  the  speed  against  the  current  is  20, 
and  with  the  current  80  yards  a  minute.  The  up  journey  then 
takes  5  minutes  and  the  down  journey  1  J  minutes.  Total  time, 
6  J  minutes. 

Going  across-stream  the  swimmer  must  aim  at  a  point  E  above 
the  point  B  where  he  wishes  to  arrive,  so 
that  OE  represents  his  distance  travelled 
in  still  water,  and  EB  the  amount  he  has  J,        1 

drifted  down.   These  must  be  in  the  ratio  E 

50  to  30,  and  we  then  know  from  the  right- 
angled  triangle  QBE  that  OB  will  corre- 
spond to  40.  Since  OB  is  100  yards,  OE 
is  125  yards,  and  the  time  taken  is  2J 
minutes.  Another  2|  minutes  will  be 
needed  for  the  return  journey.  Total  time, 


5  minutes.  Ito'  L 

In  still  water  the  time  would  have  been  4  minutes. 
The  up-and-down  swim  is  thus  longer  than  the  transverse 

swim  in  the  ratio  6J  :  5  minutes.   Or  we  may  write  the  ratio 

1 


£.  S. 


18  THE  FITZGERALD  CONTRACTION  [CH. 

which  shows  how  the  result  depends  on  the  ratio  of  the  speed 
of  the  current  to  the  speed  of  the  swimmer,  viz.  f  g. . 

A  very  famous  experiment  on  these  lines  was  tried  in  America 
in  the  year  1887.  The  swimmer  was  a  wave  of  light,  which  we 
know  swims  through  the  aether  with  a  speed  of  186,330  miles 
a  second.  The  aether  was  flowing  through  the  laboratory  like 
a  river  past  its  banks.  The  light- wave  was  divided,  by  partial 
reflection  at  a  thinly  silvered  surface,  into  two  parts,  one  of 
which  was  set  to  perform  the  up-and-down  stream  journey  and 
the  other  the  across-stream  journey.  When  the  two  waves 
reached  their  proper  turning-points  they  were  sent  back  to  the 
starting-point  by  mirrors.  To  judge  the  result  of  the  race,  there 
was  an  optical  device  for  studying  interference  fringes ;  because 
the  recomposition  of  the  two  waves  after  the  journey  would 
reveal  if  one  had  been  delayed  more  than  the  other,  so  that,  for 
example,  the  crest  of  one  instead  of  fitting  on  to  the  crest  of 
the  other  coincided  with  its  trough. 

To  the  surprise  of  Michelson  and  Morley,  who  conducted  the 
experiment,  the  result  was  a  dead-heat.  It  is  true  that  the 
direction  of  the  current  of  aether  was  not  known — they  hoped 
to  find  it  out  by  the  experiment.  That,  however,  was  got  over 
by  trying  a  number  of  different  orientations.  Also  it  was 
possible  that  there  might  actually  be  no  current  at  a  particular 
moment.  But  the  earth  has  a  velocity  of  18 J  miles  a  second, 
continually  changing  direction  as  it  goes  round  the  sun ;  so  that 
at  some  time  during  the  year  the  motion  of  a  terrestrial  labora- 
tory through  the  aether  must  be  at  least  18 J  miles  a  second. 
The  experiment  should  have  detected  the  delay  by  a  much 
smaller  current;  in  a  repetition  of  it  by  Morley  and  Miller 
in  1905,  a  current  of  2  miles  a  second  would  have  been 
sufficient. 

If  we  have  two  competitors,  one  of  whom  is  known  to  be 
slower  than  the  other,  and  yet  they  both  arrive  at  the  winning- 
post  at  the  same  time,  it  is  clear  that  they  cannot  have  travelled 
equal  courses.  To  test  this,  the  whole  apparatus  was  rotated 
through  a  right  angle,  so  that  what  had  been  the  up-and-down 
course  became  the  transverse  course,  and  vice  versa.  Our  two 
competitors  interchanged  courses,  but  still  the  result  was  a 
dead-heat. 


i]  THE  FITZGERALD  CONTRACTION  19 

The  surprising  character  of  this  result  can  be  appreciated  by 
contrasting  it  with  a  similar  experiment  on  sound-waves. 
Sound  consists  of  waves  in  air  or  other  material,  as  light  con- 
sists of  waves  in  aether.  It  would  be  possible  to  make  a  precisely 
similar  experiment  on  sound,  with  a  current  of  air  past  the 
apparatus  instead  of  a  current  of  aether.  In  that  case  the  greater 
delay  of  the  wave  along  the  direction  of  the  current  would 
certainly  show  itself  experimentally.  Why  does  light  seem  to 
behave  differently? 

The  straightforward  interpretation  of  this  remarkable  result 
is  that  each  course  undergoes  an  automatic  contraction  when  it 
is  swung  from  the  transverse  to  the  longitudinal  position,  so 
that  whichever  arm  of  the  apparatus  is  placed  up-stream  it 
straightway  becomes  the  shorter.  The  course  is  marked  out  in 
the  rigid  material  apparatus,  and  we  have  to  suppose  that  the 
length  of  any  part  of  the  apparatus  changes  as  it  is  turned  in 
different  directions  with  respect  to  the  aether-current.  It  is 
found  that  the  kind  of  material — metal,  stone  or  wood — makes 
no  difference  to  the  experiment.  The  contraction  must  be  the 
same  for  all  kinds  of  matter;  the  expected  delay  depends  only 
on  the  ratio  of  the  speed  of  the  aether  current  to  the  speed  of 
light,  and  the  contraction  which  compensates  it  must  be  equally 
definite. 

This  explanation  was  proposed  by  FitzGerald,  and  at  first 
sight  it  seems  a  strange  and  arbitrary  hypothesis.  But  it  has 
been  rendered  very  plausible  by  subsequent  theoretical  researches 
of  Larmor  and  Lorentz.  Under  ordinary  circumstances  the  form 
and  size  of  a  solid  body  is  maintained  by  the  forces  of  cohesion 
between  its  particles.  What  is  the  nature  of  cohesion?  We  guess 
that  it  is  made  up  of  electric  forces  between  the  molecules.  But 
the  aether  is  the  medium  in  which  electric  force  has  its  seat; 
hence  it  will  not  be  a  matter  of  indifference  to  these  forces  how 
the  electric  medium  is  flowing  with  respect  to  the  molecules. 
When  the  flow  changes  there  will  be  a  readjustment  of  cohesive 
forces,  and  we  must  expect  the  body  to  take  a  new  shape  and 
size. 

The  theory  of  Larmor  and  Lorentz  enables  us  to  trace  in 
detail  the  readjustment.  Taking  the  accepted  formulae  of 
electromagnetic  theory,  they  showed  that  the  new  form  of 

2 — 2 


20  THE  FITZGERALD  CONTRACTION  [CH. 

equilibrium  would  be  contracted  in  just  such  a  way  and  by 
just  such  an  amount  as  FitzGerald's  explanation  requires*. 

The  contraction  in  most  cases  is  extremely  minute.  We  have 
seen  that  when  the  ratio  of  the  speed  of  the  current  to  that 
of  the  swimmer  is  f,  a  contraction  in  the  ratio  ^/(l  —  (f)2) 
is  needed  to  compensate  for  the  delay.  The  earth's  orbital 
velocity  is  10}00  of  the  velocity  of  light,  so  that  it  will  give  a 
contraction  of  \/(l  -  (y^^)2),  or  1  part  in  200,000,000.  This 
would  mean  that  the  earth's  diameter  in  the  direction  of  its 
motion  is  shortened  by  2 J  inches. 

The  Michelson-Morley  experiment  has  thus  failed  to  detect 
our  motion  through  the  aether,  because  the  effect  looked  for- — 
the  delay  of  one  of  the  light  waves — is  exactly  compensated  by 
an  automatic  contraction  of  the  matter  forming  the  apparatus. 
Other  ingenious  experiments  have  been  tried,  electrical  and 
optical  experiments  of  a  more  technical  nature.  They  likewise 
have  failed,  because  there  is  always  an  automatic  compensation 
somewhere.  We  now  believe  there  is  something  in  the  nature 
of  things  which  inevitably  makes  these  compensations,  so  that 
it  will  never  be  possible  to  determine  our  motion  through  the 
aether.  Whether  we  are  at  rest  in  it,  or  whether  we  are  rushing 
-  through  it  with  a  speed  not  much  less  than  that  of  light,  will 
make  no  difference  to  anything  that  can  possibly  be  observed. 

This  may  seem  a  rash  generalization  from  the  few  experiments 
actually  performed ;  more  particularly,  since  we  can  only  experi- 
ment with  the  small  range  of  velocity  caused  by  the  earth's 
orbital  motion.  With  a  larger  range  residual  differences  might 
be  disclosed.  But  there  is  another  reason  for  believing  that  the 
compensation  is  not  merely  approximate  but  exact.  The  com- 
pensation has  been  traced  theoretically  to  its  source  in  the 
well-known  laws  of  electromagnetic  force ;  and  here  it  is  mathe- 
matically exact.  Thus  the  generalization  is  justified,  at  least  in 
so  far  as  the  observed  phenomena  depend  on  electromagnetic 
causes,  and  in  so  far  as  the  universally  accepted  laws  of  electro- 
magnetism  are  accurate. 

The  generalization  here  laid  down  is  called  the  restricted 
*X      Principle  of  Relativity: — It  is  impossible  by  any  experiment  to 
detect  uniform  motion  relative  to  the  aether. 
*  Appendix,  Note  1. 


i]  THE  FITZGERALD  CONTRACTION  21 

There  are  other  natural  forces  which  have  not  as  yet  been 
recognised  as  coming  within  the  electromagnetic  scheme — 
gravitation,  for  example — and  for  these  other  tests  are  required. 
Indeed  we  were  scarcely  justified  in  stating  above  that  the 
diameter  of  the  earth  would  contract  2j  inches,  because  the 
figure  of  the  earth  is  determined  mainly  by  gravitation,  whereas 
the  Michelson-Morley  experiment  relates  to  bodies  held  together 
by  cohesion.  There  is  fair  evidence  of  a  rather  technical  kind 
that  the  compensation  exists  also  for  phenomena  in  which 
gravitation  is  concerned ;  and  we  shall  assume  that  the  principle 
covers  all  the  forces  of  nature. 

Suppose  for  a  moment  it  were  not  so,  and  that  it  were  possible 
to  determine  a  kind  of  absolute  motion  of  the  earth  by  experi- 
ments or  observations  involving  gravitation.  Would  this  throw 
light  on  our  motion  through  the  aether?  I  think  not.  It  would 
show  that  there  is  some  standard  of  rest  with  respect  to  which 
the  law  of  gravitation  takes  a  symmetrical  and  simple  form; 
presumably  this  standard  corresponds  to  some  gravitational 
medium,  and  the  motion  determined  would  be  motion  with 
respect  to  that  medium.  Similarly  if  the  motion  were  revealed 
by  vital  or  psychical  phenomena,  it  would  be  motion  relative 
to  some  vital  or  psychical  medium.  The  aether,  denned  as  the 
seat  of  electric  forces,  must  be  revealed,  if  at  all,  by  electric 
phenomena. 

It  is  well  to  remember  that  there  is  reasonable  justification 
for  adopting  the  principle  of  relativity  even  if  the  evidence  is 
insufficient  to  prove  it.  In  Newtonian  dynamics  the  phenomena 
are  independent  of  uniform  motion  of  the  system;  no  explanation 
is  asked  for,  because  it  is  difficult  to  see  any  reason  why  there 
should  be  an  effect.  If  in  other  phenomena  the  principle  fails, 
then  we  must  seek  for  an  explanation  of  its  failure — and  no 
doubt  a  plausible  explanation  can  be  devised;  but  so  long  as 
experiment  gives  no  indication  of  a  failure,  it  is  idle  to  anticipate 
such  a  complication.  Clearly  physics  cannot  concern  itself  with 
all  the  possible  complexities  which  may  exist  in  nature,  but  have 
not  hitherto  betrayed  themselves  in  any  experiment. 

The  principle  of  relativity  has  implications  of  a  most  revolu- 
tionary kind.  Let  us  consider  what  is  perhaps  an  exaggerated 
case — or  perhaps  the  actual  case,  for  we  cannot  tell.  Let  the 


22  THE  FITZGERALD  CONTRACTION  [CH. 

reader  suppose  that  he  is  travelling  through  the  aether  at 
161,000  miles  a  second  vertically  upwards;  if  he  likes  to  make 
the  positive  assertion  that  this  is  his  velocity,  no  one  will  be 
able  to  find  any  evidence  to  contradict  him.  For  this  speed  the 
FitzGerald  contraction  is  just  J,  so  that  every  object  contracts 
to  half  its  original  length  when  turned  into  the  vertical  position. 

As  you  lie  in  bed,  you  are,  say,  6  feet  long.  Now  stand  upright; 
you  are  3  feet.  You  are  incredulous?  Well,  let  us  prove  it! 
Take  a  yard-measure;  when  turned  vertically  it  must  undergo 
the  FitzGerald  contraction,  and  become  only  half  a  yard.  If  you 
measure  yourself  with  it,  you  will  find  you  are  just  two — half- 
yards.  "But  I  can  see  that  the  yard-measure  does  not  change 
length  when  I  turn  it."  What  you  perceive  is  an  image  of  the 
rod  on  the  retina  of  your  eye;  you  imagine  that  the  image 
occupies  the  same  space  in  both  positions;  but  your  retina  has 
contracted  in  the  vertical  direction  without  your  knowing  it,  so 
that  your  visual  estimates  of  vertical  length  are  double  what 
they  should  be.  And  so  on  with  every  test  you  can  devise. 
Because  everything  is  altered  in  the  same  way,  nothing  appears 
to  be  altered  at  all. 

It  is  possible  to  devise  electrical  and  optical  tests;  in  that 
case  the  argument  is  more  complicated,  because  we  must  con- 
sider the  effect  of  the  rapid  current  of  aether  on  the  electric 
forces  and  on  waves  of  light.  But  the  final  conclusion  is  always 
the  same;  the  tests  will  reveal  nothing.  Here  is  one  illustration. 
To  avoid  distortion  of  the  retina,  lie  on  your  back  on  the  floor, 
and  watch  in  a  suitably  inclined  mirror  someone  turn  the  rod 
from  the  horizontal  to  the  vertical  position.  You  will,  of  course, 
see  no  change  of  length,  and  it  is  not  possible  to  blame  the 
retina  this  time.  But  is  the  appearance  in  the  mirror  a  faithful 
reproduction  of  what  is  actually  occurring?  In  a  plane  mirror 
at  rest  the  appearance  is  correct ;  the  rays  of  light  come  off  the 
mirror  at  the  same  angle  as  they  fall  on  to  it,  like  billiard  balls 
rebounding  from  an  elastic  cushion.  But  if  the  cushion  is  in 
rapid  motion  the  angle  of  the  billiard-ball  will  be  altered ;  and 
similarly  the  rapid  motion  of  the  mirror  through  the  aether 
alters  the  law  of  reflection.  Precise  calculation  shows  that  the 
moving  mirror  will  distort  the  image,  so  as  to  conceal  exactly 
the  changes  of  length  which  occur. 


i]  THE  FITZGERALD  CONTRACTION  23 

The  mathematician  does  not  need  to  go  through  all  the 
possible  tests  in  detail;  he  knows  that  the  complete  compensa- 
tion is  inherent  in  the  fundamental  laws  of  nature,  and  so  must 
occur  in  every  case.  So  if  any  suggestion  is  made  of  a  device 
for  detecting  these  effects,  he  starts  at  once  to  look  for  the 
fallacy  which  must  surely  be  there.  Our  motion  through  the 
aether  may  be  very  much  less  than  the  value  here  adopted,  and 
the  changes  of  length  may  be  very  small ;  but  the  essential  point 
is  that  they  escape  notice,  not  because  they  are  small  (if  they 
are  small),  but  because  from  their  very  nature  they  are  unde- 
tectable. 

There  is  a  remarkable  reciprocity  about  the  effects  of  motion 
on  length,  which  can  best  be  illustrated  by  another  example. 
Suppose  that  by  development  in  the  powers  of  aviation,  a  man 
flies  past  us  at  the  rate  of  161,000  miles  a  second.  We  shall 
suppose  that  he  is  in  a  comfortable  travelling  conveyance  in 
which  he  can  move  about,  and  act  normally  and  that  his  length 
is  in  the  direction  of  the  flight.  If  we  could  catch  an  instantaneous 
glimpse  as  he  passed,  we  should  see  a  figure  about  three  feet 
high,  but  with  the  breadth  and  girth  of  a  normal  human  being. 
And  the  strange  thing  is  that  he  would  be  sublimely  unconscious 
of  his  own  undignified  appearance.  If  he  looks  in  a  mirror  in 
his  conveyance,  he  sees  his  usual  proportions;  this  is  because  of 
the  contraction  of  his  retina,  or  the  distortion  by  the  moving 
mirror,  as  already  explained.  But  when  he  looks  down  on  us, 
he  sees  a  strange  race  of  men  who  have  apparently  gone  through 
some  flattening-out  process;  one  man  looks  barely  10  inches 
across  the  shoulders,  another  standing  at  right  angles  is  almost 
"  length  and  breadth,  without  thickness."  As  they  turn  about 
they  change  appearance  like  the  figures  seen  in  the  old-fashioned 
convex-mirrors.  If  the  reader  has  watched  a  cricket-match 
through  a  pair  of  prismatic  binoculars,  he  will  have  seen  this 
effect  exactly. 

It  is  the  reciprocity  of  these  appearances — that  each  party 
should  think  the  other  has  contracted — that  is  so  difficult  to 
realise.  Here  is  a  paradox  beyond  even  the  imagination  of 
Dean  Swift.  Gulliver  regarded  the  Lilliputians  as  a  race  of 
dwarfs;  and  the  Lilliputians  regarded  Gulliver  as  a  giant.  That 
is  natural.  If  the  Lilliputians  had  appeared  dwarfs  to  Gulliver, 


24  THE  FITZGERALD  CONTRACTION  [CH. 

and  Gulliver  had  appeared  a  dwarf  to  the  Lilliputians — but  no ! 
that  is  too  absurd  for  fiction,  and  is  an  idea  only  to  be  found  in 
the  sober  pages  of  science. 

This  reciprocity  is  easily  seen  to  be  a  necessary  consequence 
of  the  Principle  of  Relativity.  The  aviator  must  detect  a  Fitz- 
Gerald  contraction  of  objects  moving  rapidly  relatively  to  him, 
just  as  we  detect  the  contraction  of  objects  moving  relatively  to  us, 
and  as  an  observer  at  rest  in  the  aether  detects  the  contraction 
of  objects  moving  relatively  to  the  aether.  Any  other  result 
would  indicate  an  observable  effect  due  to  his  own  motion 
through  the  aether. 

Which  is  right?  Are  we  or  the  aviator?  Or  are  both  the 
victims  of  illusion?  It  is  not  illusion  in  the  ordinary  sense, 
because  the  impressions  of  both  would  be  confirmed  by  every 
physical  test  or  scientific  calculation  suggested.  No  one  knows 
which  is  right.  No  one  will  ever  know,  because  we  can  never 
find  out  which,  if  either,  is  truly  at  rest  in  the  aether. 

It  is  not  only  in  space  but  in  time  that  these  strange  variations 
occur.  If  we  observed  the  aviator  carefully  we  should  infer  that 
he  was  unusually  slow  in  his  movements;  and  events  in  the 
conveyance  moving  with  him  would  be  similarly  retarded — as 
though  time  had  forgotten  to  go  on.  His  cigar  lasts  twice  as 
long  as  one  of  ours.  I  said  "infer"  deliberately;  we  should  see 
a  still  more  extravagant  slowing  down  of  time;  but  that  is  easily 
explained,  because  the  aviator  is  rapidly  increasing  his  distance 
from  us  and  the  light-impressions  take  longer  and  longer  to 
reach  us.  The  more  moderate  retardation  referred  to  remains 
after  we  have  allowed  for  the  time  of  transmission  of  light. 

But  here  again  reciprocity  comes  in,  because  in  the  aviator's 
opinion  it  is  we  who  are  travelling  at  161,000  miles  a  second 
past  him;  and  when  he  has  made  all  allowances,  he  finds  that 
it  is  we  who  are  sluggish.  Our  cigar  lasts  twice  as  long  as  his. 

Let  us  examine  more  closely  how  the  two  views  are  to  be 
reconciled.  Suppose  we  both  light  similar  cigars  at  the  instant 
he  passes  us.  At  the  end  of  30  minutes  our  cigar  is  finished. 
This  signal,  borne  on  the  waves  of  light,  hurries  out  at  the  rate 
of  186,000  miles  a  second  to  overtake  the  aviator  travelling  at 
161,000  miles  a  second,  who  has  had  30  minutes  start.  It  will 
take  nearly  194  minutes  to  overtake  him,  giving  a  total  time  of 


I] 


THE  FITZGERALD  CONTRACTION 


25 


224  minutes  after  lighting  the  cigar.  His  watch  like  everything 
else  about  him  (including  his  cigar)  is  going  at  half-speed;  so 
it  records  only  112  minutes  elapsed  when  our  signal  arrives. 
The  aviator  knows,  of  course,  that  this  is  not  the  true  time  when 
our  cigar  was  finished,  and  that  he  must  correct  for  the  time  of 
transmission  of  the  light-signal.  He  sets  himself  this  problem — 
that  man  has  travelled  away  from  me  at  161,000  miles  a  second 
for  an  unknown  time  x  minutes ;  he  has  then  sent  a  signal  which 
travels  the  same  distance  back  at  186,000  miles  a  second;  the 
total  time  is  112  minutes;  problem,  find  x.  Answer,  x  —  60 
minutes.  He  therefore  judges  that  our  cigar  lasted  60  minutes, 
or  twice  as  long  as  his  own.  His  cigar  lasted  30  minutes  by  his 
watch  (because  the  same  retardation  affects  both  watch  and 
cigar);  and  that  was  in  our  opinion  twice  as  long  as  ours,  because 
his  watch  was  going  at  half-speed.  . 

Here  is  the  full  time-table. 


Stationary 
watch 


0  min. 
30    „ 
60    „ 

112     „ 
120     „ 

224     , 


Stationary  Observer 

Lights  cigar 
Finishes  cigar 

Inferred  time  aviator's 
cigar  finished 

Receives  signal  aviator's 
cigar  finished 


Aviator 

Lights  cigar 

Finishes  cigar 


Aviator's 
watch 

0  min. 
15     „ 

30    „ 

56    , 


Inferred  time  stationary       60     „ 

cigar  finished 
Receives  signal  stationary  112     „ 

cigar  finished 


This  is  analysed  from  our  point  of  view,  not  the  aviator's; 
because  it  makes  out  that  he  was  wrong  in  his  inference  and  we 
were  right.  But  no  one  can  tell  which  was  really  right. 

The  argument  will  repay  a  careful  examination,  and  it  will 
be  recognised  that  the  chief  cause  of  the  paradox  is  that  we 
assume  that  we  are  at  rest  in  the  aether,  whereas  the  aviator 
assumes  that  he  is  at  rest.  Consequently  whereas  in  our  opinion 
the  light-signal  is  overtaking  him  at  merely  the  difference 
between  186,000  and  161,000  miles  a  second,  he  considers  that 
it  is  coming  to  him  through  the  relatively  stationary  aether  at 
the  normal  speed  of  light.  It  must  be  remembered  that  each 
observer  is  furnished  with  complete  experimental  evidence  in 
support  of  his  own  assumption.  If  we  suggest  to  the  aviator 


26  THE  FITZGERALD  CONTRACTION  [CH. 

that  owing  to  his  high  velocity  the  relative  speed  of  the  wave 
overtaking  him  can  only  be  25,000  miles  a  second,  he  will  reply 
"  I  have  determined  the  velocity  of  the  wave  relatively  to  me 
by  timing  it  as  it  passes  two  points  in  my  conveyance;  and  it 
turns  out  to  be  186,000  miles  a  second.  So  I  know  my  correction 
for  light-time  is  right*."  His  clocks  and  scales  are  all  behaving 
in  an  extraordinary  way  from  our  point  of  view,  so  it  is  not 
surprising  that  he  should  arrive  at  a  measure  of  the  velocity  of 
the  overtaking  wave  which  differs  from  ours;  but  there  is  no 
way  of  convincing  him  that  our  reckoning  is  preferable. 

Although  not  a  very  practical  problem,  it  is  of  interest  to 
inquire  what  happens  when  the  aviator's  speed  is  still  further 
increased  and  approximates  to  the  velocity  of  light.  Lengths 
in  the  direction  of  flight  become  smaller  and  smaller,  until  for 
the  speed  of  light  they  shrink  to  zero.  The  aviator  and  the 
objects  accompanying  him  shrink  to  two  dimensions.  We  are 
saved  the  difficulty  of  imagining  how  the  processes  of  life  can 
go  on  in  two  dimensions,  because  nothing  goes  on.  Time  is 
arrested  altogether.  This  is  the  description  according  to  the 
terrestrial  observer.  The  aviator  himself  detects  nothing  un- 
usual; he  does  not  perceive  that  he  has  stopped  moving.  He  is 
merely  waiting  for  the  next  instant  to  come  before  making  the 
next  movement;  and  the  mere  fact  that  time  is  arrested  means 
that  he  does  not  perceive  that  the  next  instant  is  a  long  time 
coming. 

It  is  a  favourite  device  for  bringing  home  the  vast  distances 
of  the  stars  to  imagine  a  voyage  through  space  with  the  velocity 
of  light.  The  youthful  adventurer  steps  on  to  his  magic  carpet 
loaded  with  provisions  for  a  century.  He  reaches  his  journey's 
end,  say  Arcturus,  a  decrepit  centenarian.  This  is  wrong.  It  is 
quite  true  that  the  journey  would  last  something  like  a  hundred 
years  by  terrestrial  chronology ;  but  the  adventurer  would  arrive 
at  his  destination  no  more  aged  than  when  he  started,  and  he 
would  not  have  had  time  to  think  of  eating.  So  long  as  he  travels 
with  the  speed  of  light  he  has  immortality  and  eternal  youth. 

*  We  need  not  stop  to  prove  this  directly.  If  the  aviator  could  detect  any- 
thing in  his  measurements  inconsistent  with  the  hypothesis  that  he  was  at  rest 
in  the  aether  (e.g.  a  difference  of  velocity  of  overtaking  waves  of  light  and 
waves  meeting  him)  it  would  contradict  the  restricted  principle  of  relativity. 


i]  THE  FITZGERALD  CONTRACTION  27 

If  in  some  way  his  motion  were  reversed  so  that  he  returned  to 
the  earth  again,  he  would  find  that  centuries  had  elapsed  here, 
whilst  he  himself  did  not  feel  a  day  older — for  him  the  voyage 
had  lasted  only  an  instant*. 

Our  reason  for  discussing  at  length  the  effects  of  these 
improbably  high  velocities  is  simply  in  order  that  we  may  speak 
of  the  results  in  terms  of  common  experience;  otherwise  it 
would  be  necessary  to  use  the  terms  of  refined  technical  measure- 
ment. The  relativist  is  sometimes  suspected  of  an  inordinate 
fondness  for  paradox;  but  that  is  rather  a  misunderstanding  of 
his  argument.  The  paradoxes  exist  when  the  new  experimental 
discoveries  are  woven  into  the  scheme  of  physics  hitherto 
current,  and  the  relativist  is  ready  enough  to  point  this  out. 
But  the  conclusion  he  draws  is  that  a  revised  scheme  of  physics 
is  needed  in  which  the  new  experimental  results  will  find  a  natural 
place  without  paradox. 

To  sum  up — on  any  planet  moving  with  a  great  velocity 
through  the  aether,  extraordinary  changes  of  length  of  objects 
are  continually  occurring  as  they  move  about,  and  there  is  a 
slowing  down  of  all  natural  processes  as  though  time  were 
retarded.  These  things  cannot  be  perceived  by  anyone  on  the 
planet;  but  similar  effects  would  be  detected  by  any  observer 
having  a  great  velocity  relative  to  the  planet  (who  makes  all 
allowances  for  the  effect  of  the  motion  on  the  observations,  but 
takes  if  for  granted  that  he  himself  is  at  rest  in  the  aethert). 
There  is  complete  reciprocity  so  that  each  of  two  observers  in 
relative  motion  will  find  the  same  strange  phenomena  occurring 

*  Since  the  earth  is  moving  relatively  to  our  adventurer  with  the  velocity 
of  light,  we  might  be  tempted  to  argue  that  from  this  point  of  view  the  terrestrial 
observer  would  have  perpetual  youth  whilst  the  voyager  grew  older.  Evidently, 
if  they  met  again,  they  could  disprove  one  or  other  of  the  two  arguments.  But 
in  order  to  meet  again  the  velocity  of  one  of  them  must  be  reversed  by  super- 
natural means  or  by  an  intense  gravitational  force  so  that  the  conditions  are 
not  symmetrical  and  reciprocity  does  not  apply.  The  argument  given  in  the 
text  appears  to  be  the  correct  one. 

t  The  last  clause  is  perhaps  unnecessary.  The  correction  applied  for  light 
transmission  will  naturally  be  based  on  the  observer's  own  experimental  deter- 
mination of  the  velocity  of  light.  According  to  experiment  the  velocity  of  light 
relatively  to  him  is  apparently  the  same  in  all  directions,  and  he  will  apply 
the  corrections  accordingly.  This  is  equivalent  to  assuming  that  he  is  at  rest 
in  the  aether;  but  he  need  not,  and  probably  would  not,  make  the  assumption 
explicitly. 


28  THE  FITZGERALD  CONTRACTION  [CH. 

to  the  other;  and  there  is  nothing  to  help  us  to  decide  which  is 
right. 

I  think  that  no  one  can  contemplate  these  results  without 
feeling  that  the  whole  strangeness  must  arise  from  something 
perverse  and  inappropriate  in  our  ordinary  point  of  view. 
Changes  go  on  on  a  planet,  all  nicely  balanced  by  adjustments 
of  natural  forces,  in  such  a  way  that  no  one  on  the  planet  can 
possibly  detect  what  is  taking  place.  Can  we  seriously  imagine 
that  there  is  anything  in  the  reality  behind  the  phenomena, 
which  reflects  these  changes?  Is  it  not  more  probable  that  we 
ourselves  introduce  the  complexity,  because  our  method  of 
description  is  not  well-adapted  to  give  a  simple  and  natural 
statement  of  what  is  really  occurring? 

The  search  for  a  more  appropriate  apparatus  of  description 
leads  us  to  the  standpoint  of  relativity  described  in  the  next 
chapter.  I  draw  a  distinction  between  the  principle  and  the 
standpoint  of  relativity.  The  principle  of  relativity  is  a  state- 
ment of  experimental  fact,  which  may  be  right  or  wrong;  the 
first  part  of  it — the  restricted  principle — has  already  been 
enunciated.  Its  consequences  can  be  deduced  by  mathematical 
reasoning,  as  in  the  case  of  any  other  scientific  generalization. 
It  postulates  no  particular  mechanism  of  nature,  and  no  particular 
view  as  to  the  meaning  of  time  and  space,  though  it  may  suggest 
theories  on  the  subject.  The  only  question  is  whether  it  is 
experimentally  true  or  not. 

The  standpoint  of  relativity  is  of  a  different  character.  It 
asserts  first  that  certain  unproved  hypotheses  as  to  time  and 
space  have  insensibly  crept  into  current  physical  theories,  and 
that  these  are  the  source  of  the  difficulties  described  above. 
Now  the  most  dangerous  hypotheses  are  those  which  are  tacit 
and  unconscious.  So  the  standpoint  of  relativity  proposes 
tentatively  to  do  without  these  hypotheses  (not  making  any 
others  in  their  place);  and  it  discovers  that  they  are  quite 
unnecessary  and  are  not  supported  by  any  known  fact.  This  in 
itself  appears  to  be  sufficient  justification  for  the  standpoint. 
Even  if  at  some  future  time  facts  should  be  discovered  which 
confirm  the  rejected  hypotheses,  the  relativist  is  not  wrong  in 
reserving  them  until  they  are  required. 

It  is  not  our  policy  to  take  shelter  in  impregnable  positions; 


i]  THE  FITZGERALD  CONTRACTION  29 

and  we  shall  not  hesitate  to  draw  reasonable  conclusions  as  well 
as  absolutely  proved  conclusions  from  the  knowledge  available. 
But  to  those  who  think  that  the  relativity  theory  is  a  passing 
phase  of  scientific  thought,  which  may  be  reversed  in  the  light 
of  future  experimental  discoveries,  we  would  point  out  that, 
though  like  other  theories  it  may  be  developed  and  corrected, 
there  is  a  certain  minimum  statement  possible  which  represents 
irreversible  progress.  Certain  hypotheses  enter  into  all  physical 
descriptions  and  theories  hitherto  current,  dating  back  in  some 
cases  for  2000  years,  in  other  cases  for  200  years.  It  can  now 
be  proved  that  these  hypotheses  have  nothing  to  do  with  any 
phenomena  yet  observed,  and  do  not  afford  explanations  of  any 
known  fact.  This  is  surely  a  discovery  of  the  greatest  importance 
— quite  apart  from  any  question  as  to  whether  the  hypotheses 
are  actually  wrong. 

I  am  not  satisfied  with  the  view  so  often  expressed  that  the 
sole  aim  of  scientific  theory  is  "economy  of  thought."  I  cannot 
reject  the  hope  that  theory  is  by  slow  stages  leading  us  nearer 
to  the  truth  of  things.  But  unless  science  is  to  degenerate  into 
idle  guessing,  the  test  of  value  of  any  theory  must  be  whether 
it  expresses  with  as  little  redundancy  as  possible  the  facts 
which  it  is  intended  to  cover.  Accidental  truth  of  a  conclusion 
is  no  compensation  for  erroneous  deduction. 

The  relativity  standpoint  is  then  a  discarding  of  certain 
hypotheses,  which  are  uncalled  for  by  any  known  facts,  and 
stand  in  the  way  of  an  understanding  of  the  simplicity  of  nature. 


CHAPTER   II 
RELATIVITY 

The  views  of  time  and  space,  which  I  have  to  set  forth,  have  their  foundation 
in  experimental  physics.  Therein  is  their  strength.  Their  tendency  is  revolu- 
tionary. From  henceforth  space  in  itself  and  time  in  itself  sink  to  mere  shadows, 
and  only  a  kind  of  union  of  the  two  preserves  an  independent  existence. 

H.  MINKOWSKI  (1908). 

THERE  are  two  parties  to  every  observation — the  observed  and 
the  observer. 

What  we  see  depends  not  only  on  the  object  looked  at,  but 
on  our  own  circumstances — position,  motion,  or  more  personal 
idiosyncracies.  Sometimes  by  instinctive  habit,  sometimes  by 
design,  we  attempt  to  eliminate  our  own  share  in  the  observa- 
tion, and  so  form  a  general  picture  of  the  world  outside  us, 
which  shall  be  common  to  all  observers.  A  small  speck  on  the 
horizon  of  the  sea  is  interpreted  as  a  giant  steamer.  From  the 
window  of  our  railway  carriage  we  see  a  cow  glide  past  at  fifty 
miles  an  hour,  and  remark  that  the  creature  is  enjoying  a  rest. 
We  see  the  starry  heavens  revolve  round  the  earth,  but  decide 
that  it  is  really  the  earth  that  is  revolving,  and  so  picture  the 
state  of  the  universe  in  a  way  which  would  be  acceptable  to  an 
astronomer  on  any  other  planet. 

The  first  step  in  throwing  our  knowledge  into  a  common 
stock  must  be  the  elimination  of  the  various  individual  stand- 
points and  the  reduction  to  some  specified  standard  observer. 
The  picture  of  the  world  so  obtained  is  none  the  less  relative. 
We  have  not  eliminated  the  observer's  share;  we  have  only 
fixed  it  definitely. 

To  obtain  a  conception  of  the  world  from  the  point  of  view 
of  no  one  in  particular  is  a  much  more  difficult  task.  The 
position  of  the  observer  can  be  eliminated ;  we  are  able  to  grasp 
the  conception  of  a  chair  as  an  object  in  nature — looked  at  all 
round,  and  not  from  any  particular  angle  or  distance.  We  can 
think  of  it  without  mentally  assigning  ourselves  some  position 
with  respect  to  it.  This  is  a  remarkable  faculty,  which  has 
evidently  been  greatly  assisted  by  the  perception  of  solid  relief 


CH.  n]  RELATIVITY  31 

with  our  two  eyes.  But  the  motion  of  the  observer  is  not 
eliminated  so  simply.  We  had  thought  that  it  was  accomplished; 
but  the  discovery  in  the  last  chapter  that  observers  with 
different  motions  use  different  space-  and  time-reckoning  shows 
that  the  matter  is  more  complicated  than  was  supposed.  It  may 
well  require  a  complete  change  in  our  apparatus  of  description, 
because  all  the  familiar  terms  of  physics  refer  primarily  to  the 
relations  of  the  world  to  an  observer  in  some  specified  circum- 
stances. 

Whether  we  are  able  to  go  still  further  and  obtain  a  knowledge 
of  the  world,  which  not  merely  does  not  particularise  the 
observer,  but  does  not  postulate  an  observer  at  all;  whether  if 
such  knowledge  could  be  obtained,  it  would  convey  any  in- 
telligible meaning;  and  whether  it  could  be  of  any  conceivable 
interest  to  anybody  if  it  could  be  understood — these  questions 
need  not  detain  us  now.  The  answers  are  not  necessarily 
negative,  but  they  lie  outside  the  normal  scope  of  physics. 

The  circumstances  of  an  observer  which  affect  his  observations 
are  his  position,  motion  and  gauge  of  magnitude.  More  personal 
idiosyncracies  disappear  if,  instead  of  relying  on  his  crude 
senses,  he  employs  scientific  measuring  apparatus.  But  scientific 
apparatus  has  position,  motion  and  size,  so  that  these  are  still 
involved  in  the  results  of  any  observation.  There  is  no  essential 
distinction  between  scientific  measures  and  the  measures  of  the 
senses.  In  either  case  our  acquaintance  with  the  external  world 
comes  to  us  through  material  channels;  the  observer's  body  can 
be  regarded  as  part  of  his  laboratory  equipment,  and,  so  far  as 
we  know,  it  obeys  the  same  laws.  We  therefore  group  together 
perceptions  and  scientific  measures,  and  in  speaking  of  "a 
particular  observer"  we  include  all  his  measuring  appliances. 

Position,  motion,  magnitude-scale — these  factors  have  a  pro- 
found influence  on  the  aspect  of  the  world  to  us.  Can  we  form 
a  picture  of  the  world  which  shall  be  a  synthesis  of  what  is  seen 
by  observers  in  all  sorts  of  positions,  having  all  sorts  of  velocities, 
and  all  sorts  of  sizes.  As  already  stated  we  have  accomplished 
the  synthesis  of  positions.  We  have  two  eyes,  which  have 
dinned  into  our  minds  from  babyhood  that  the  world  has  to  be 
looked  at  from  more  than  one  position.  Our  brains  have  so  far 
responded  as  to  give  us  the  idea  of  solid  relief,  which  enables  us 


32  RELATIVITY  [CH. 

to  appreciate  the  three-dimensional  world  in  a  vivid  way  that 
would  be  scarcely  possible  if  we  were  only  acquainted  with 
strictly  two-dimensional  pictures.  We  not  merely  deduce  the 
three-dimensional  world;  we  see  it.  But  we  have  no  such  aid 
in  synthesising  different  motions.  Perhaps  if  we  had  been 
endowed  with  two  eyes  moving  with  different  velocities  our 
brains  would  have  developed  the  necessary  faculty;  we  should 
have  perceived  a  kind  of  relief  in  a  fourth  dimension  so  as  to 
combine  into  one  picture  the  aspect  of  things  seen  with  different 
motions.  Finally,  if  we  had  had  two  eyes  of  different  sizes,  we 
might  have  evolved  a  faculty  for  combining  the  points  of  view 
of  the  mammoth  and  the  microbe. 

It  will  be  seen  that  we  are  not  fully  equipped  by  our  senses 
for  forming  an  impersonal  picture  of  the  world.  And  it  is 
because  the  deficiency  is  manifest  that  we  do  not  hesitate  to 
advocate  a  conception  of  the  world  which  transcends  the  images 
familiar  to  the  senses.  Such  a  world  can  perhaps  be  grasped, 
but  not  pictured  by  the  brain.  It  would  be  unreasonable  to 
limit  our  thought  of  nature  to  what  can  be  comprised  in  sense- 
pictures.  As  Lodge  has  said,  our  senses  were  developed  by  the 
struggle  for  existence,  not  for  the  purpose  of  philosophising  on 
the  world. 

Let  us  compare  two  well-known  books,  which  might  be 
described  as  elementary  treatises  on  relativity,  Alice  in  Wonder- 
land  and  Gulliver's  Travels.  Alice  was  continually  changing  size, 
sometimes  growing,  sometimes  on  the  point  of  vanishing  alto- 
gether. Gulliver  remained  the  same  size,  but  on  one  occasion 
he  encountered  a  race  of  men  of  minute  size  with  everything  in 
proportion,  and  on  another  voyage  a  land  where  everything  was 
gigantic.  It  does  not  require  much  reflection  to  see  that  both 
authors  are  describing  the  same  phenomenon — a  relative  change 
of  scale  of  observer  and  observed.  Lewis  Carroll  took  what  is 
probably  the  ordinary  scientific  view,  that  the  observer  had 
changed,  rather  than  that  a  simultaneous  change  had  occurred 
to  all  her  surroundings.  But  it  would  never  have  appeared  like 
that  to  Alice;  she  could  not  have  "stepped  outside  and  looked 
at  herself,"  picturing  herself  as  a  giant  filling  the  room.  She 
would  have  said  that  the  room  had  unaccountably  shrunk. 
Dean  Swift  took  the  truer  view  of  the  human  mind  when  he 


n]  RELATIVITY  33 

made  Gulliver  attribute  his  own  changes  to  the  things  around 
him ;  it  never  occurred  to  Gulliver  that  his  own  size  had  altered ; 
and,  if  he  had  thought  of  the  explanation,  he  could  scarcely 
have  accustomed  himself  to  that  way  of  thinking.  But  both 
points  of  view  are  legitimate.  The  size  of  a  thing  can  only  be 
imagined  as  relative  to  something  else;  and  there  is  no  means  of 
assigning  the  change  to  one  end  of  the  relation  rather  than  the 
other. 

We  have  seen  in  the  theory  of  the  Michelson-Morley  experi- 
ment that,  according  to  current  physical  views,  our  standard  of 
size — the  rigid  measuring-rod — must  change  according  to  the 
circumstances  of  its  motion;  and  the  aviator's  adventures 
illustrated  a  similar  change  in  the  standard  of  duration  of  time. 
Certain  rather  puzzling  irregularities  have  been  discovered  in 
the  apparent  motions  of  the  Sun,  Mercury,  Venus  and  the  Moon ; 
but  there  is  a  strong  family  resemblance  between  these,  which 
leads  us  to  believe  that  the  real  phenomenon  is  a  failure  of  the 
time-keeping  of  our  standard  clock,  the  Earth.  Instances  could 
be  multiplied  where  a  change  of  the  observer  or  his  standards 
produces  or  conceals  changes  in  the  world  around  him. 

The  object  of  the  relativity  theory,  however,  is  not  to  attempt 
the  hopeless  task  of  apportioning  responsibility  between  the 
observer  and  the  external  world,  but  to  emphasise  that  in  our 
ordinary  description  and  in  our  scientific  description  of  natural 
phenomena  the  two  factors  are  indissolubly  united.  All  the 
familiar  terms  of  physics — length,  duration  of  time,  motion, 
force,  mass,  energy,  and  so  on — refer  primarily  to  this  relative 
knowledge  of  the  world;  and  it  remains  to  be  seen  whether  any 
of  them  can  be  retained  in  a  description  of  the  world  which  is 
not  relative  to  a  particular  observer. 

Our  first  task  is  a  description  of  the  world  independent  of 
the  motion  of  the  observer.  The  question  of  the  elimination  of 
his  gauge  of  magnitude  belongs  to  a  later  development  of  the 
theory  discussed  in  Chapter  xi.  Let  us  draw  a  square  ABCD  on 
a  sheet  of  paper,  making  the  sides  equal,  to  the  best  of  our 
knowledge.  We  have  seen  that  an  aviator  flying  at  161,000 
miles  a  second  in  the  direction  AB,  would  judge  that  the  sides 
AB,  DC  had  contracted  to  half  their  length,  so  that  for  him 
the  figure  would  be  an  oblong.  If  it  were  turned  through  a  right 
E.  s.  * 


34  RELATIVITY  [CH. 

angle  AB  and  DC  would  expand  and  the  other  two  sides  con- 
tract— in  his  judgment.  For  us,  the  lengths  of  AB  and  AC  are 
equal;  for  him,  one  length  is  twice  the  other.  Clearly  length 
cannot  be  a  property  inherent  in  our  drawing;  it  needs  the 
specification  of  some  observer. 

We  have  seen  further  that  duration  of  time  also  requires  that 
an  observer  should  be  specified.  The  stationary  observer  and 
the  aviator  disagreed  as  to  whose  cigar  lasted  the  longer  time. 

Thus  length  and  duration  are  not  things  inherent  in  the 
external  world;  they  are  relations  of  things  in  the  external 
world  to  some  specified  observer.  If  we  grasp  this  all  the  mystery 
disappears  from  the  phenomena  described  in  Chapter  i.  When 
the  rod  in  the  Michelson-Morley  experiment  is  turned  through 
a  right  angle  it  contracts ;  that  naturally  gives  the  impression 
that  something  has  happened  to  the  rod  itself.  Nothing  whatever 
has  happened  to  the  rod — the  object  in  the  external  world. 
Its  length  has  altered,  but  length  is  not  an  intrinsic  property  of 
the  rod,  since  it  is  quite  indeterminate  until  some  observer  is 
specified.  Turning  the  rod  through  a  right  angle  has  altered  the 
relation  to  the  observer  (implied  in  the  discussion  of  the  experi- 
ment); but  the  rod  itself,  or  the  relation  of  a  molecule  at  one 
end  to  a  molecule  at  the  other,  is  unchanged.  Measurement  of 
length  and  duration  is  a  comparison  with  partitions  of  space 
and  time  drawn  by  the  observer  concerned,  with  the  help  of 
apparatus  which  shares  his  motion.  Nature  is  not  concerned 
with  these  partitions;  it  has,  as  we  shall  see  later,  a  geometry 
of  its  own  which  is  of  a  different  type. 

Current  physics  has  hitherto  assumed  that  all  observers  are 
not  to  be  regarded  as  on  the  same  footing,  and  that  there  is 
some  absolute  observer  whose  judgments  of  length  and  duration 
are  to  be  treated  with  respect,  because  nature  pays  attention  to 
his  space-time  partitions.  He  is  supposed  to  be  at  rest  in  the 
aether,  and  the  aether  materialises  his  space-partitions  so  that 
they  have  a  real  significance  in  the  external  world.  This  is 
sheer  hypothesis,  and  we  shall  find  it  is  unsupported  by  any 
facts.  Evidently  our  proper  course  is  to  pursue  our  investiga- 
tions, and  call  in  this  hypothetical  observer  only  if  we  find  there 
is  something  which  he  can  help  to  explain. 

We  have  been  leading  up  from  the  older  physics  to  the  new 


n]  RELATIVITY  35 

outlook  of  relativity,  and  the  reader  may  feel  some  doubt  as  to 
whether  the  strange  phenomena  of  contraction  and  time- 
retardation,  that  were  described  in  the  last  chapter,  are  to  be 
taken  seriously,  or  are  part  of  a  reductio  ad  absurdum  argument. 
The  answer  is  that  we  believe  that  the  phenomena  do  occur  as 
described ;  only  the  description  (like  that  of  all  observed  pheno- 
mena) concerns  the  relations  of  the  external  world  to  some 
observer,  and  not  the  external  world  itself.  The  startling 
character  of  the  phenomena  arises  from  the  natural  but  fallacious 
inference  that  they  involve  intrinsic  changes  in  the  objects 
themselves. 

We  have  been  considering  chiefly  the  observer's  end  of  the 
observation;  we  must  now  turn  to  the  other  end — the  thing 
observed.  Although  length  and  duration  have  no  exact  counter- 
parts in  the  external  world,  it  is  clear  that  there  is  a  certain 
ordering  of  things  and  events  outside  us  which  we  must  now 
find  more  appropriate  terms  to  describe.  The  order  of  events  is 
a  four-fold  order;  we  can  arrange  them  as  right-and-left,  back- 
wards-and-forwards,  up-and-down,  sooner-and-later.  An  indi- 
vidual may  at  first  consider  these  as  four  independent  orders, 
but  he  will  soon  attempt  to  combine  some  of  them.  It  is 
recognised  at  once  that  there  is  no  essential  distinction  between 
right-and-left  and  backwards-and-forwards.  The  observer  has 
merely  to  turn  through  a  right  angle  and  the  two  are  inter- 
changed. If  he  turns  through  a  smaller  angle,  he  has  first  to 
combine  them,  and  then  to  redivide  them  in  a  different  way. 
Clearly  it  would  be  a  nuisance  to  continually  combine  and  re- 
divide;  so  we  get  accustomed  to  the  thought  of  leaving  them 
combined  in  a  two-fold  or  two-dimensional  order.  The  amalga- 
mation of  up-and-down  is  less  simple.  There  are  obvious  reasons 
for  considering  this  dimension  of  the  world  as  fundamentally 
distinct  from  the  other  two.  Yet  it  would  have  been  a  great 
stumbling-block  to  science  if  the  mind  had  refused  to  combine 
space  into  a  three-dimensional  whole.  The  combination  has  not 
concealed  the  real  distinction  of  horizontal  and  vertical,  but  has 
enabled  us  to  understand  more  clearly  its  nature — for  what 
phenomena  it  is  relevant,  and  for  what  irrelevant.  We  can 
understand  how  an  observer  in  another  country  redivides  the 
combination  into  a  different  vertical  and  horizontal.  We  must 

3—2 


36  RELATIVITY  [CH. 

now  go  further  and  amalgamate  the  fourth  order,  sooner-and- 
later.  This  is  still  harder  for  the  mind.  It  does  not  imply  that 
there  is  no  distinction  between  space  and  time;  but  it  gives  a 
fresh  unbiassed  start  by  which  to  determine  what  the  nature  of 
the  distinction  is. 

The  idea  of  putting  together  space  and  time,  so  that  time  is 
regarded  as  a  fourth  dimension,  is  not  new.  But  until  recently 
it  was  regarded  as  merely  a  picturesque  way  of  looking  at  things 
without  any  deep  significance.  We  can  put  together  time  and 
temperature  in  a  thermometer  chart,  or  pressure  and  volume 
on  an  indicator-diagram.  It  is  quite  non-committal.  But  our 
theory  is  going  to  lead  much  further  than  that.  We  can  lay 
two  dimensional  surfaces — sheets  of  paper — on  one  another  till 
we  build  up  a  three-dimensional  block;  but  there  is  a  difference 
between  a  block  which  is  a  pile  of  sheets  and  a  solid  block  of 
paper.  The  solid  block  is  the  true  analogy  for  the  four-dimen- 
sional combination  of  space- time ;  it  does  not  separate  naturally 
into  a  particular  set  of  three-dimensional  spaces  piled  in  time- 
order.  It  can  be  redivided  into  such  a  pile ;  but  it  can  be  redivided 
in  any  direction  we  please. 

Just  as  the  observer  by  changing  his  orientation  makes  a  new 
division  of  the  two-dimensional  plane  into  right-and-left,  back- 
wards-and-forwards — just  as  the  observer  by  changing  his 
longitude  makes  a  new  division  of  three-dimensional  space  into 
vertical  and  horizontal — so  the  observer  by  changing  his  motion 
makes  a  new  division  of  the  four-dimensional  order  into  time 
and  space. 

This  will  be  justified  in  detail  later;  it  indicates  that  observers 
with  different  motions  will  have  different  time  and  space- 
reckoning— a  conclusion  we  have  already  reached  from  another 
point  of  view. 

Although  different  observers  separate  the  four  orders  differ- 
ently, they  all  agree  that  the  order  of  events  is  four-fold;  and 
it  appears  that  this  undivided  four-fold  order  is  the  same  for 
all  observers.  We  therefore  believe  that  it  is  inherent  in  the 
external  world;  it  is  in  fact  the  synthesis,  which  we  have  been 
seeking,  of  the  appearances  seen  by  observers  having  all  sorts  of 
positions  and  all  sorts  of  (uniform)  motions.  It  is  therefore  to 
be  regarded  as  a  conception  of  the  real  world  not  relative  to  any 
particularly  circumstanced  observer. 


ii]  RELATIVITY  37 

The  term  "  real  world  "  is  used  in  the  ordinary  sense  of  physics, 
without  any  intention  of  prejudging  philosophical  questions  as 
to  reality.  It  has  the  same  degree  of  reality  as  was  formerly 
attributed  to  the  three-dimensional  world  of  scientific  theory  or 
everyday  conception,  which  by  the  advance  of  knowledge  it 
replaces.  As  I  have  already  indicated,  it  is  merely  the  accident 
that  we  are  not  furnished  with  a  pair  of  eyes  in  rapid  relative 
motion,  which  has  allowed  our  brains  to  neglect  to  develop  a 
faculty  for  visualising  this  four-dimensional  world  as  directly 
as  we  visualise  its  three-dimensional  section. 

It  is  now  easy  to  see  that  length  and  duration  must  be  the 
components  of  a  single  entity  in  the  four-dimensional  world  of 
space-time.  Just  as  we  resolve  a  structure  into  plan  and  eleva- 
tion, so  we  resolve  extension  in  the  four-dimensional  world  into 
length  and  duration.  The  structure  has  a  size  and  shape 
independent  of  our  choice  of  vertical.  Similarly  with  things  in 
space-time.  Whereas  length  and  duration  are  relative,  the 
single  "  extension  "  of  which  they  are  components  has  an  absolute 
significance  in  nature,  independent  of  the  particular  decomposi- 
tion into  space  and  time  separately  adopted  by  the  observer. 
\  Consider  two  events;  for  example,  the  stroke  of  one  o'clock 
and  the  stroke  of  two  o'clock  by  Big  Ben.  These  occupy  two 
points  in  space-time,  and  there  is  a  definite  separation  between 
them.  An  observer  at  Westminster  considers  that  they  occur  at 
the  same  place,  and  that  they  are  separated  by  an  hour  in  time; 
thus  he  resolves  their  four-dimensional  separation  into  zero 
distance  in  space  and  one  hour  distance  in  time.  An  observer 
on  the  sun  considers  that  they  do  not  occur  at  the  same  place; 
they  are  separated  by  about  70,000  miles,  that  being  the  distance 
travelled  by  the  earth  in  its  orbital  motion  with  respect  to  the 
sun.  It  is  clear  that  he  is  not  resolving  in  quite  the  same  direc- 
tions as  the  terrestrial  observer,  since  he  finds  the  space-com- 
ponent to  be  70,000  miles  instead  of  zero.  But  if  he  alters  one 
component  he  must  necessarily  alter  the  other;  so  he  will  make 
the  time-component  differ  slightly  from  an  hour.  By  analogy 
with  resolution  into  components  in  three-dimensions,  we  should 
expect  him  to  make  it  less  than  an  hour — having,  as  it  were, 
borrowed  from  time  to  make  space ;  but  as  a  matter  of  fact  he 
makes  it  longer.  This  is  because  space-time  has  a  different 


38  RELATIVITY  [CH. 

geometry,  which  will  be  described  later.  Our  present  point  is 
that  there  is  but  one  separation  of  two  events  in  four  dimensions, 
which  can  be  resolved  in  any  number  of  ways  into  the  com- 
ponents length  and  duration. 

We  see  further  how  motion  must  be  purely  relative.  Take 
two  events  A  and  B  in  the  history  of  one  particle.  We  can  choose 
any  direction  as  the  time-direction;  let  us  choose  it  along  AB. 
Then  A  and  B  are  separated  only  in  time  and  not  in  space,  so 
the  particle  is  at  rest.  If  we  choose  a  slightly  inclined  time- 
direction,  the  separation  AB  will  have  a  component  in  space; 
the  two  events  then  do  not  occur  at  the  same  place,  that  is  to 
say,  the  particle  has  moved.  The  negation  of  absolute  motion 
is  thus  associated  with  the  possibility  of  choosing  the  time- 
direction  in  any  way  we  please.  What  determines  the  separation 
of  space  and  time  for  any  particular  observer  can  now  be  seen. 
Let  the  observer  place  himself  so  that  he  is,  to  the  best  of  his 
knowledge,  at  rest.  If  he  is  a  normal  human  being,  he  will 
seat  himself  in  an  arm-chair;  if  he  is  an  astronomer,  he  will 
place  himself  on  the  sun  or  at  the  centre  of  the  stellar  universe. 
Then  all  the  events  happening  directly  to  him  will  in  his  opinion 
occur  at  the  same  place.  Their  separation  will  have  no  space- 
component,  and  they  will  accordingly  be  ranged  solely  in  the 
time-direction.  This  chain  of  events,  marking  his  track  through 
the  four-dimensional  world,  will  be  his  time-direction.  Each 
observer  bases  his  separation  of  space  and  time  on  his  own  track 
through  the  world. 

Since  any  separation  of  space  and  time  is  admissible,  it  is 
possible  for  the  astronomer  to  base  his  space  and  time  on  the 
track  of  a  solar  observer  instead  of  that  of  a  terrestrial  observer; 
but  it  must  be  remembered  that  in  practice  the  space  and  time 
of  the  solar  observer  have  to  be  inferred  indirectly  from  those 
of  the  terrestrial  observer;  and,  if  the  corrections  are  made 
according  to  the  crude  methods  hitherto  employed,  they  may 
be  inferred  wrongly  (if  extreme  accuracy  is  needed). 

The  most  formidable  objection  to  this  relativist  view  of  the 
world  is  the  aether  difficulty.  We  have  seen  that  uniform  motion 
through  the  aether  cannot  be  detected  by  experiment,  and 
therefore  it  is  entirely  in  accordance  with  experiment  that  such 
motion  should  have  no  counterpart  in  the  four-dimensional 


n]  RELATIVITY  39 

world.  Nevertheless,  it  would  almost  seem  that  such  motion 
must  logically  exist,  if  the  aether  exists;  and,  even  at  the 
expense  of  formal  simplicity,  it  ought  to  be  exhibited  in  any 
theory  which  pretends  to  give  a  complete  account  of  what  is 
going  on  in  nature.  If  a  substantial  aether  analogous  to  a 
material  ocean  exists,  it  must  rigidify,  as  it  were,  a  definite 
space;  and  whether  the  observer  or  whether  nature  pays  any 
attention  to  that  space  or  not,  a  fundamental  separation  of 
space  and  time  must  be  there.  Some  would  cut  the  knot  by 
denying  the  aether  altogether.  We  do  not  consider  that  desirable, 
or,  so  far  as  we  can  see,  possible ;  but  we  do  deny  that  the  aether 
need  have  such  properties  as  to  separate  space  and  time  in  the 
way  supposed.  It  seems  an  abuse  of  language  to  speak  of  a 
division  existing,  when  nothing  has  ever  been  found  to  pay  any 
attention  to  the  division. 

Mathematicians  of  the  nineteenth  century  devoted  much  time 
to  theories  of  elastic  solid  and  other  material  aethers.  Waves  of 
light  were  supposed  to  be  actual  oscillations  of  this  substance ; 
it  was  thought  to  have  the  familiar  properties  of  rigidity  and 
density;  it  was  sometimes  even  assigned  a  place  in  the  table  of 
the  elements.  The  real  death-blow  to  this  materialistic  concep- 
tion of  the  aether  was  given  when  attempts  were  made  to  explain 
matter  as  some  state  in  the  aether.  For  if  matter  is  vortex- 
motion  or  beknottedness  in  aether,  the  aether  cannot  be  matter 
— some  state  in  itself.  If  any  property  of  matter  comes  to  be 
regarded  as  a  thing  to  be  explained  by  a  theory  of  its  structure, 
clearly  that  property  need  not  be  attributed  to  the  aether. 
If  physics  evolves  a  theory  of  matter  which  explains  some 
property,  it  stultifies  itself  when  it  postulates  that  the  same 
property  exists  unexplained  in  the  primitive  basis  of  matter. 

Moreover  the  aether  has  ceased  to  take  any  very  active  part 
in  physical  theory  and  has,  as  it  were,  gone  into  reserve.  A 
modern  writer  on  electromagnetic  theory  will  generally  start 
with  the  postulate  of  an  aether  pervading  all  space ;  he  will  then 
explain  that  at  any  point  in  it  there  is  an  electromagnetic  vector 
whose  intensity  can  be  measured;  henceforth  his  sole  dealings 
are  with  this  vector,  and  probably  nothing  more  will  be  heard 
of  the  aether  itself.  In  a  vague  way  it  is  supposed  that  this 
vector  represents  some  condition  of  the  aether,  and  we  need  not 


40  RELATIVITY  [CH. 

dispute  that  without  some  such  background  the  vector  would 
scarcely  be  intelligible — but  the  aether  is  now  only  a  background 
and  not  an  active  participant  in  the  theory. 

There  is  accordingly  no  reason  to  transfer  to  this  vague  back- 
ground of  aether  the  properties  of  a  material  ocean.  Its  properties 
must  be  determined  by  experiment,  not  by  analogy.  In  particular 
there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  it  can  partition  out  space  in 
a  definite  way,  as  a  material  ocean  would  do.  We  have  seen  in 
the  Prologue  that  natural  geometry  depends  on  laws  of  matter ; 
therefore  it  need  not  apply  to  the  aether.  Permanent  identity 
of  particles  is  a  property  of  matter,  which  Lord  Kelvin  sought 
to  explain  in  his  vortex-ring  hypothesis.  This  abandoned 
hypothesis  at  least  teaches  us  that  permanence  should  not  be 
regarded  as  axiomatic,  but  may  be  the  result  of  elaborate  con- 
stitution. There  need  not  be  anything  corresponding  to 
permanent  identity  in  the  constituent  portions  of  the  aether; 
we  cannot  lay  our  finger  at  one  spot  and  say  ''this  piece  of 
aether  was  a  few  seconds  ago  over  there."  Without  any  con- 
tinuity of  identity  of  the  aether  motion  through  the  aether 
becomes  meaningless;  and  it  seems  likely  that  this  is  the  true 
reason  why  no  experiment  ever  reveals  it. 

This  modern  theory  of  the  relativity  of  all  uniform  motion  is 
essentially  a  return  to  the  original  Newtonian  view,  temporarily 
disturbed  by  the  introduction  of  aether  problems ;  for  in  Newton's 
dynamics  uniform  motion  of  the  whole  system  has  not — and  no 
one  would  expect  it  to  have — any  effect.  But  there  are  consider- 
able difficulties  in  the  limitation  to  uniform  motion.  Newton 
himself  seems  to  have  appreciated  the  difficulty;  but  the  experi- 
mental evidence  appeared  to  him  to  be  against  any  extension 
of  the  principle.  Accordingly  Newton's  laws  of  mechanics  are 
not  of  the  general  type  in  which  it  is  unnecessary  to  particularise 
the  observer;  they  hold  only  for  observers  with  a  special  kind 
of  motion  which  is  described  as  "unaccelerated."  The  only 
definition  of  this  epithet  that  can  be  given  is  that  an  "un- 
accelerated" observer  is  one  for  whom  Newton's  laws  of  motion 
Ihold.  On  this  theory,  the  phenomena  are  not  indifferent  to  an 
^acceleration  or  non-uniform  motion  of  the  whole  system.  Yet 
an  absolute  non-uniform  motion  through  space  is  just  as  im- 
possible to  imagine  as  an  absolute  uniform  motion.  The  partial 


n]  RELATIVITY  41 

relativity  of  phenomena  makes  the  difficulty  all  the  greater. 
If  we  deny  a  fundamental  medium  with  continuous  identity  of 
its  parts,  motion  uniform  or  non-uniform  should  have  no 
significance;  if  we  admit  such  a  medium,  motion  uniform  or 
non-uniform  should  be  detectable;  but  it  is  much  more  difficult 
to  devise  a  plan  of  the  world  according  to  which  uniform  motion 
has  no  significance  and  non-uniform  motion  is  significant. 

It  is  through  experiment  that  we  have  been  led  back  to  the 
principle  of  relativity  for  uniform  motion.  In  seeking  some  kind 
of  extension  of  this  principle  to  accelerated  motion,  we  are  led 
by  the  feeling  that,  having  got  so  far,  it  is  difficult  and  arbitrary 
to  stop  at  this  point.  We  now  try  to  conceive  a  system  of  nature 
for  which  all  kinds  of  motion  of  the  observer  are  indifferent. 
It  will  be  a  completion  of  our  synthesis  of  what  is  perceived  by 
observers  having  all  kinds  of  motions  with  respect  to  one 
another,  removing  the  restriction  to  uniform  motion.  The 
experimental  tests  must  follow  after  the  consequences  of  this 
generalisation  have  been  deduced. 

The  task  of  formulating  such  a  theory  long  appeared  impossible. 
It  was  pointed  out  by  Newton  that,  whereas  there  is  no  criterion 
for  detecting  whether  a  body  is  at  rest  or  in  uniform  motion,  it 
is  easy  to  detect  whether  it  is  in  rotation.  For  example  the 
bulge  of  the  earth's  equator  is  a  sign  that  the  earth  is  rotating, 
since  a  plastic  body  at  rest  would  be  spherical. 

This  problem  of  rotation  affords  a  hint  as  to  the  cause  of  the 
incomplete  relativity  of  Newtonian  mechanics.  The  laws  of 
motion  are  formulated  with  respect  to  an  unaccelerated  observer, 
and  do  not  apply  to  a  frame  of  reference  rotating  with  the  earth. 
Yet  mathematicians  frequently  do  use  a  rotating  frame.  Some 
modification  of  the  laws  is  then  necessary ;  and  the  modification 
is  made  'by  introducing  a  centrifugal  force — not  regarded  as  a 
real  force  like  gravitation,  but  as  a  mathematical  fiction  em- 
ployed to  correct  for  the  improper  choice  of  a  frame  of  reference. 
The  bulge  of  the  earth's  equator  may  be  attributed  indifferently  1 
to  the  earth's  rotation  or  to  the  outward  pull  of  the  centrifugal  I 
force  introduced  when  the  earth  is  regarded  as  non-rotating. 

Now  it  is  generally  assumed  that  the  centrifugal  force  is 
something  sui  generis,  which  could  always  be  distinguished 
experimentally  from  any  other  natural  phenomenon.  If  then 


42  RELATIVITY  [CH. 

on  choosing  a  frame  of  reference  we  find  that  a  centrifugal  force 
is  detected,  we  can  at  once  infer  that  the  frame  of  reference  is 
a  "wrong"  one;  rotating  and  non-rotating  frames  can  be  dis- 
tinguished by  experiment,  and  rotation  is  thus  strictly  absolute. 
But  this  assumes  that  the  observed  effects  of  centrifugal  force 
cannot  be  produced  in  any  other  way  than  by  rotation  of  the 
observer's  frame  of  reference.  If  once  it  is  admitted  that  centri- 
fugal force  may  not  be  completely  distinguishable  by  experiment 
from  another  kind  of  force — gravitation — perceived  even  by 
Newton's  unaccelerated  observer,  the  argument  ceases  to  apply. 
We  can  never  determine  exactly  how  much  of  the  observed  field 
of  force  is  centrifugal  force  and  how  much  is  gravitation;  and 
we  cannot  find  experimentally  any  definite  standard  that  is  to 
be  considered  absolutely  non-rotating. 

The  question  then,  whether  there  exists  a  distinction  between 
"right"  frames  of  reference  and  "wrong"  frames,  turns  on 
whether  the*use  of  a  "wrong"  frame  produces  effects  experi- 
mentally distinguishable  from  any  natural  effects  which  can  be 
perceived  when  a  "right"  frame  is  used.  If  there  is  no  such 
difference,  all  frames  may  be  regarded  as  on  the  same  footing 
and  equally  right.  In  that  case  we  can  have  a  complete  relativity 
of  natural  phenomena.  Since  the  effect  of  departing  from 
Newton's  standard  frame  is  the  introduction  of  a  field  of  force, 
this  generalised  relativity  theory  must  be  largely  occupied  with 
the  nature  of  fields  of  force. 

The  precise  meaning  of  the  statement  that  all  frames  of 
reference  are  on  the  same  footing  is  rather  difficult  to  grasp. 
We  believe  that  there  are  absolute  things  in  the  world — not  only 
matter,  but  certain  characteristics  in  empty  space  or  aether. 
In  the  atmosphere  a  frame  of  reference  which  moves  with  the 
air  is  differentiated  from  other  frames  moving  in  a  different 
manner;  this  is  because,  besides  discharging  the  normal  functions 
of  a  frame  of  reference,  the  air-frame  embodies  certain  of  the 
absolute  properties  of  the  matter  existing  in  the  region. 
Similarly,  if  in  empty  space  we  choose  a  frame  of  reference 
which  more  or  less  follows  the  lines  of  the  absolute  structure  in 
the  region,  the  frame  will  usurp  some  of  the  absolute  qualities 
of  that  structure.  What  we  mean  by  the  equivalence  of  all 
frames  is  that  they  are  not  differentiated  by  any  qualities 


n]  RELATIVITY  43 

formerly  supposed  to  be  intrinsic  in  the  frames  themselves — 
rest,  rectangularity,  acceleration — independent  of  the  absolute 
structure  of  the  world  that  is  referred  to  them.  Accordingly  the 
objection  to  attributing  absolute  properties  to  Newton's  frame 
of  reference  is  not  that  it  is  impossible  for  a  frame  of  reference 
to  acquire  absolute  properties,  but  that  the  Newtonian  frame 
has  been  laid  down  on  the  basis  of  relative  knowledge  without 
any  attempt  to  follow  the  lines  of  absolute  structure. 

Force,  as  known  to  us  observationally,  is  like  the  other 
quantities  of  physics,  a  relation.  The  force,  measured  with  a 
spring-balance,  for  example,  depends  on  the  acceleration  of  the 
observer  holding  the  balance;  and  the  term  may,  like  length 
and  duration,  have  no  exact  counterpart  in  a  description  of 
nature  independent  of  the  observer.  Newton's  view  assumes 
that  there  is  such  a  counterpart,  an  active  cause  in  nature 
which  is  identical  with  the  force  perceived  by  his  standard 
unaccelerated  observer.  Although  any  other  observer  perceives 
this  force  with  additions  of  his  own,  it  is  implied  that  the 
original  force  in  nature  and  the  observer's  additions  can  in  some 
way  be  separated  without  ambiguity.  There  is  no  experimental 
foundation  for  this  separation,  and  the  relativity  view  is  that 
a  field  of  force  can,  like  length  and  duration,  be  nothing  but 
a  link  between  nature  and  the  observer.  There  is,  of  course, 
something  at  the  far  end  of  the  link,  just  as  we  found  an 
extension  in  four  dimensions  at  the  far  end  of  the  relations 
denoted  by  length  and  duration.  We  shall  have  to  study  the 
nature  of  this  unknown  whose  relation  to  us  appears  as  force. 
Meanwhile  we  shall  realise  that  the  alteration  of  perception  of 
force  by  non-uniform  motion  of  the  observer,  as  well  as  the 
alteration  of  the  perception  of  length  by  his  uniform  motion,  is 
what  might  be  expected  from  the  nature  of  these  quantities  as 
relations  solely. 

We  proceed  now  to  a  more  detailed  study  of  the  four-dimen- 
sional world,  of  the  things  which  occur  in  it,  and  of  the  laws  by 
which  they  are  regulated.  It  is  necessary  to  dive  into  this 
absolute  world  to  seek  the  truth  about  nature;  but  the  physicist's 
object  is  always  to  obtain  knowledge  which  can  be  applied  to 
the  relative  and  familiar  aspect  of  the  world.  The  absolute 
world  is  of  so  different  a  nature,  that  the  relative  world,  with 


44  RELATIVITY  [CH.  n 

which  we  are  acquainted,  seems  almost  like  a  dream.  But  if 
indeed  we  are  dreaming,  our  concern  is  with  the  baseless  fabric 
of  our  vision.  We  do  not  suggest  that  physicists  ought  to 
translate  their  results  into  terms  of  four-dimensional  space  for 
the  empty  satisfaction  of  working  in  the  realm  of  reality.  It  is 
rather  the  opposite.  They  explore  the  new  field  and  bring  back 
their  spoils — a  few  simple  generalisations — to  apply  them  to  the 
practical  world  of  three-dimensions.  Some  guiding  light  will  be 
given  to  the  attempts  to  build  a  scheme  of  things  entire.  For 
the  rest,  physics  will  continue  undisturbedly  to  explore  the 
relative  world,  and  to  employ  the  terms  applicable  to  relative 
knowledge,  but  with  a  fuller  appreciation  of  its  relativity. 


CHAPTER   III 
THE  WORLD  OF  FOUR  DIMENSIONS 

Here  is  a  portrait  of  a  man  at  eight  years  old,  another  at  fifteen,  another  at 
seventeen,  another  at  twenty-three,  and  so  on.  All  these  are  evidently  sections, 
as  it  were,  Three -Dimensional  representations  of  his  Four-Dimensional  being, 
which  is  a  fixed  and  unalterable  thing.  H.  G.  WELLS,  The  Time  Machine. 

THE  distinction  between  horizontal  and  vertical  is  not  an 
illusion;  and  the  man  who  thinks  it  can  be  disregarded  is  likely 
to  come  to  an  untimely  end.  Yet  we  cannot  arrive  at  a  com- 
prehensive view  of  nature  unless  we  combine  horizontal  and 
vertical  dimensions  into  a  three-dimensional  space.  By  doing 
this  we  obtain  a  better  idea  of  what  the  distinction  of  horizontal 
and  vertical  really  is  in  those  cases  where  it  is  relevant,  e.g.  the 
phenomena  of  motion  of  a  projectilec  We  recognise  also  that 
vertical  is  not  a  universally  differentiated  direction  in  space,  as 
the  flat-earth  philosophers  might  have  imagined. 

Similarly  by  combining  the  time-ordering  and  space-ordering 
of  the  events  of  nature  into  a  single  order  of  four  dimensions, 
we  shall  not  only  obtain  greater  simplicity  for  the  phenomena 
in  which  the  separation  of  time  and  space  is  irrelevant,  but  we 
shall  understand  better  the  nature  of  the  differentiation  when  it 
is  relevant. 

^  A  point  in  this  space-time,  that  is  to  say  a  given  instant  at 
a  given  place,  is  called  an  "event."  An  event  in  its  customary 
meaning  would  be  the  physical  happening  which  occurs  at  and 
identifies  a  particular  place  and  time.  However,  we  shall  use 
the  word  in  both  senses,  because  it  is  scarcely  possible  to  think 
of  a  point  in  space-time  without  imagining  some  identifying 
occurrence. 

In  the  ordinary  geometry  of  two  or  three  dimensions,  the 
distance  between  two  points  is  something  which  can  be  measured, 
usually  with  a  rigid  scale;  it  is  supposed  to  be  the  same  for  all 
observers,  and  there  is  no  need  to  specify  horizontal  and  vertical 
directions  or  a  particular  system  of  coordinates.  In  four- 
dimensional  space^time  there  is  likewise  a  certain  extension  or 


46          THE  WORLD  OF  FOUR  DIMENSIONS        [CH. 

generalised  distance  between  two  events,  of  which  the  distance 
in  space  and  the  separation  in  time  are  particular  components. 
This  extension  in  space  and  time  combined  is  called  the 
"interval"  between  the  two  events;  it  is  the  same  for  all 
observers,  however  they  resolve  it  into  space  and  time  separately. 
We  may  think  of  the  interval  as  something  intrinsic  in  external 
nature  —  an  absolute  relation  of  the  two  events,  which  postulates 
no  particular  observer.  Its  practical  measurement  is  suggested 
by  analogy  with  the  distance  of  two  points  in  space. 

In  two  dimensions  on  a  plane,  two  points  Plt  P2  (Fig.  2)  can 

be  specified  by  their  rectangular 
coordinates  (x1}  t/j)  and  (x2,  y2), 
when  arbitrary  axes  have  been  se- 
lected. In  the  figure,  OX  t  =  #j  , 
,  etc.  We  have 


XiXf  + 

(X2  -  X 


Xi  x2       x    So  that  if  s  is  the  distance  between 

FIG.  2.  P1  and  P2 

s2  =  (x2  -  xtf  +  (y2  -  ytf. 
The  extension  to  three  dimensions  is,  as  we  should  expect, 

*2  =  (x2  -  xj*  +  (y2  -  t/J2  +  (z2  -  zj*. 

Introducing  the  times  of  the  events  tlt  t2,  we  should  naturally 
expect  that  the  interval  in  the  four-dimensional  world  would 
be  given  by 

*2  =  (x2  -  ^)2  +  (y2  -  ytf  +  (««  -  %)2  +  (*,  -  <i)2. 
An  important  point  arises  here.  It  was,  of  course,  assumed 
that  the  same  scale  was  used  for  measuring  x  and  y  and  z.  But 
how  are  we  to  use  the  same  scale  for  measuring  tt  We  cannot 
use  a  scale  at  all;  some  kind  of  clock  is  needed.  The  most 
natural  connection  between  the  measure  of  time  and  length  is 
given  by  the  fact  that  light  travels  300,000  kilometres  in  1 
second.  For  the  four-dimensional  world  we  shall  accordingly 
regard  1  second  as  the  equivalent  of  300,000  kilometres,  and 
measure  lengths  and  times  in  seconds  or  kilometres  indiscrimi- 
nately ;  in  other  words  we  make  the  velocity  of  light  the  unit  of 


m]         THE  WORLD  OF  FOUR  DIMENSIONS  47 

velocity.  It  is  not  essential  to  do  this,  but  it  greatly  simplifies 
the  discussion. 

Secondly,  the  formulae  here  given  for  s2  are  the  characteristic 
formulae  of  Euclidean  geometry.  So  far  as  three-dimensional 
space  is  concerned  the  applicability  of  Euclidean  geometry  is 
very  closely  confirmed  by  experiment.  But  space-time  is  not 
Euclidean;  it  does,  however,  conform  (at  least  approximately) 
to  a  very  simple  modification  of  Euclidean  geometry  indicated 
by  the  corrected  formula 

s*  =  («,  -  *,)«  +  (yt  -  y^  +  («,  -  *i)2  -  (*•  -  <!)*• 

There  is  only  a  sign  altered;  but  that  minus  sign  is  the  secret 
of  the  differences  of  the  manifestations  of  time  and  space  in 
nature. 

This  change  of  sign  is  often  found  puzzling  at  the  start.  We 
could  not  define  s  by  the  expression  originally  proposed  (with 
the  positive  sign),  because  the  expression  does  not  define  any- 
thing objective.  Using  the  space  and  time  of  one  observer,  one 
value  is  obtained;  for  another  observer,  another  value  is 
obtained.  But  if  s  is  defined  by  the  'expression  now  given,  it  is 
found  that  the  same  result  is  obtained  by  all  observers*.  The 
quantity  s  is  thus  something  which  concerns  solely  the  two 
events  chosen ;  we  give  it  a  name — the  interval  between  the  two 
events.  In  ordinary  space  the  distance  between  two  points  is 
the  corresponding  property,  which  concerns  only  the  two  points 
and  not  the  extraneous  coordinate  system  of  location  which  is 
used.  Hence  interval,  as  here  defined,  is  the  analogue  of  dis- 
tance ;  and  the  analogy  is  strengthened  by  the  evident  resemblance 
of  the  formula  for  s  in  both  cases.  Moreover,  when  the  difference 
of  time  vanishes,  the  interval  reduces  to  the  distance.  But  the 
discrepancy  of  sign  introduces  certain  important  differences. 
These  differences  are  summed  up  in  the  statement  that  the 
geometry  of  space  is  Euclidean,  but  the  geometry  of  space-time 
is  semi-Euclidean  or  "  hyperbolic."  The  association  of  a  geometry 
with  any  continuum  always  implies  the  existence  of  some 
uniquely  measurable  quantity  like  interval  or  distance;  in 
ordinary  space,  geometry  without  the  idea  of  distance  would  be 
meaningless. 

*  Appendix,  Note  2. 


48          THE  WORLD  OF  FOUR  DIMENSIONS        [CH. 

For  the  moment  the  difficulty  of  thinking  in  terms  of  an 
unfamiliar  geometry  may  be  evaded  by  a  dodge.  Instead  of 
real  time  t,  consider  imaginary  time  r;  that  is  to  say,  let 


t=  r       -  1. 

Then  (*2  -  tj*  =  -  (r2  -  Tl)2, 

so  that 

s2  =  (x2  -  xtf  +  (2/2  -  2/i)2  +  (*2  -  *i)a  +  (T,  -  TX)2. 
Everything  is  now  symmetrical  and  there  is  no  distinction 
between  r  and  the  other  variables.  The  continuum  formed  of 
space  and  imaginary  time  is  completely  isotropic  for  all  measure- 
ments; no  direction  can  be  picked  out  in  it  as  fundamentally 
distinct  from  any  other. 

The  observer's  separation  of  this  continuum  into  space  and 
time  consists  in  slicing  it  in  some  direction,  viz.  that  perpen- 
dicular to  the  path  along  which  he  is  himself  travelling.  The 
section  gives  three-dimensional  space  at  some  moment,  and  the 
perpendicular  dimension  is  (imaginary)  time.  Clearly  the  slice 
may  be  taken  in  any  direction;  there  is  no  question  of  a  true 
separation  and  a  fictitious  separation.  There  is  no  conspiracy 
of  the  forces  of  nature  to  conceal  our  absolute  motion — because, 
looked  at  from  this  broader  point  of  view,  there  is  nothing  to 
conceal.  The  observer  is  at  liberty  to  orient  his  rectangular  axes 
of  x9  y,  z  and  T  arbitrarily,  just  as  in  three-dimensions  he  can 
orient  his  axes  of  x,  y,  z  arbitrarily. 

It  can  be  shown  that  the  different  space  and  time  used  by 
the  aviator  in  Chapter  I  correspond  to  an  orientation  of  the 
time-axis  along  his  own  course  in  the  four-dimensional  world, 
whereas  the  ordinary  time  and  space  are  given  when  the  time- 
axis  is  oriented  along  the  course  of  a  terrestrial  observer.  The 
FitzGerald  contraction  and  the  change  of  time-measurement 
are  given  exactly  by  the  usual  formulae  for  rotation  of  rect- 
angular axes*. 

It  is  not  very  profitable  to  speculate  on  the  implication  of  the 
mysterious  factor  V  —  1,  which  seems  to  have  the  property  of 
turning  time  into  space.  It  can  scarcely  be  regarded  as  more 
than  an  analytical  device.  To  follow  out  the  theory  of  the  four- 

*  Appendix,  Note  3. 


m]         THE  WORLD  OF  FOUR  DIMENSIONS          49 

dimensional  world  in  more  detail,  it  is  necessary  to  return  to 
real  time,  and  face  the  difficulties  of  a  strange  geometry. 

Consider  a  particular  observer,  S,  and  represent  time  according 
to  his  reckoning  by  distance  up  the  page  parallel  to  OT.  One 
dimension  of  his  space  will  be  represented  by  horizontal  distance 
parallel  to  OX;  another  will  stand  out  at  right  angles  from  the 
page;  and  the  reader  must  imagine  the  third  as  best  he  can. 
Fortunately  it  will  be  sufficient  for  us  to  consider  only  the  one 
dimension  of  space  OX  and  deal  with  the  phenomena  of  "line- 


FIG.  3. 

land,"  i.e.  we  limit  ourselves  to  motion  to  and  fro  in  one  straight 
line  in  space. 

The  two  lines  U'OU,  V'OV,  at  45°  to  the  axes,  represent  the 
tracks  of  points  which  progress  1  unit  horizontally  (in  space) 
for  1  unit  vertically  (in  time) ;  thus  they  represent  points  moving 
with  unit  velocity.  We  have  chosen  the  velocity  of  light  as  unit 
velocity;  hence  U'OU,  V'OV  will  be  the  tracks  of  pulses  of  light 
in  opposite  directions  along  the  straight  line. 

Any  event  P  within  the  sector  UOV  is  indubitably  after  the 
event  O,  whatever  system  of  time-reckoning  is  adopted.  For  it 
would  be  possible  for  a  material  particle  to  travel  from  O  to  P9 
the  necessary  velocity  being  less  than  that  of  light;  and  no 


50          THE  WORLD  OF  FOUR  DIMENSIONS        [CH. 

rational  observer  would  venture  to  state  that  the  particle  had 
completed  its  journey  before  it  had  begun  it.  It  would,  in  fact, 
be  possible  for  an  observer  travelling  along  NP  to  receive  a 
light-signal  or  wireless  telegram  announcing  the  event  0,  just 
as  he  reached  N,  since  ON  is  the  track  of  such  a  message ;  and 
then  after  the  time  NP  he  would  have  direct  experience  of  the 
event  P.  To  have  actual  evidence  of  the  occurrence  of  one 
event  before  experiencing  the  second  is  a  clear  proof  of  their 
absolute  order  in  nature,  which  should  convince  not  merely 
the  observer  concerned  but  any  other  observer  with  whom  he 
can  communicate. 

Similarly  events  in  the  sector  U'OV  are  indubitably  before 
the  event  0. 

With  regard  to  an  event  P'  in  the  sector  UOV  or  YOU'  we 
v/  cannot  assert  that  it  is  absolutely  before  or  after  O.  According 
to  the  time-reckoning  of  our  chosen  observer  S,  P'  is  after  0, 
because  it  lies  above  the  line  OX;  but  there  is  nothing  absolute 
about  this.  The  track  OP'  corresponds  to  a  velocity  greater 
than  that  of  light,  so  that  we  know  of  no  particle  or  physical 
impulse  which  could  follow  the  track.  An  observer  experiencing 
the  event  P'  could  not  get  news  of  the  event  0  by  any  known 
means  until  after  P'  had  happened.  The  order  of  the  two  events 
can  therefore  only  be  inferred  by  estimating  the  delay  of  the 
message  and  this  estimate  will  depend  on  the  observer's  mode 
of  reckoning  space  and  time. 

Space-time  is  thus  divided  into  three  zones  with  respect  to 
the  event  O.  U'OV  belongs  to  the  indubitable  past.  UOV  is 
the  indubitable  future.  UOV  and  YOU'  are  (absolutely)  neither 
past  nor  future,  but  simply  "elsewhere."  It  may  be  remarked 
that,  as  we  have  no  means  of  identifying  points  in  space  as  "the 
same  point,"  and  as  the  events  O  and  P  might  quite  well  happen 
to  the  same  particle  of  matter,  the  events  are  not  necessarily  to 
be  regarded  as  in  different  places,  though  the  observer  S  will 
judge  them  so;  but  the  events  O  and  P'  cannot  happen  to  the 
same  particle,  and  no  observer  could  regard  them  as  happening 
at  the  same  place.  The  main  interest  of  this  analysis  is  that  it 
shows  that  the  arbitrariness  of  time-direction  is  not  inconsistent 
with  the  existence  of  regions  of  absolute  past  and  future. 

Although  there  is  an  absolute  past  and  future,  there  is  between 


m]         THE  WORLD  OF  FOUR  DIMENSIONS  51 

them  an  extended  neutral  zone;  and  simultaneity  of  events  at 
different  places  has  no  absolute  meaning.  For  our  selected 
observer  all  events  along  OX  are  simultaneous  with  one  another; 
for  another  observer  the  line  of  events  simultaneous  with  0 
would  lie  in  a  different  direction.  The  denial  of  absolute 
simultaneity  is  a  natural  complement  to  the  denial  of  absolute 
motion.  The  latter  asserts  that  we  cannot  find  out  what  is  the 
same  place  at  two  different  times;  the  former  that  we  cannot 
find  out  what  is  the  same  time  at  two  different  places.  It  is 
curious  that  the  philosophical  denial  of  absolute  motion  is 
readily  accepted,  whilst  the  denial  of  absolute  simultaneity 
appears  to  many  people  revolutionary. 

The  division  into  past  and  future  (a  feature  of  time-order 
which  has  no  analogy  in  space-order)  is  closely  associated  with 
our  ideas  of  causation  and  free-will.  In  a  perfectly  determinate 
scheme  the  past  and  future  may  be  regarded  as  lying  mapped 
out — as  much  available  to  present  exploration  as  the  distant 
parts  of  space.  Events  do  not  happen;  they  are  just  there,  and 
we  come  across  them.  "  The  formality  of  taking  place"  is  merely 
the  indication  that  the  observer  has  on  his  voyage  of  exploration 
passed  into  the  absolute  future  of  the  event  in  question ;  and  it 
has  no  important  significance.  We  can  be  aware  of  an  eclipse 
in  the  year  1999,  very  much  as  we  are  aware  of  an  unseen 
companion  to  Algol.  Our  knowledge  of  things  where  we  are  not, 
and  of  things  when  we  are  not,  is  essentially  the  same — an 
inference  (sometimes  a  mistaken  inference)  from  brain  impres- 
sions, including  memory,  here  and  now. 

So,  if  events  are  determinate,  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  a 
person  from  being  aware  of  an  event  before  it  happens ;  and  an 
event  may  cause  other  events  previous  to  it.  Thus  the  eclipse 
of  the  Sun  in  May  1919  caused  observers  to  embark  in  March. 
It  may  be  said  that  it  was  not  the  eclipse,  but  the  calculations 
of  the  eclipse,  which  caused  the  embarkation;  but  I  do  not 
think  any  such  distinction  is  possible,  having  regard  to  the 
indirect  character  of  our  acquaintance  with  all  events  except 
those  at  the  precise  point  of  space  where  we  stand.  A  detached 
observer  contemplating  our  world  would  see  some  events 
apparently  causing  events  in  their  future,  others  apparently 
causing  events  in  their  past — the  truth  being  that  all  are  linked 


52          THE  WORLD  OF  FOUR  DIMENSIONS       [CH. 

by  determinate  laws,  the  so-called  causal  events  being  merely 
conspicuous  foci  from  which  the  links  radiate. 

The  recognition  of  an  absolute  past  and  future  seems  to 
depend  on  the  possibility  of  events  which  are  not  governed  by 
a  determinate  scheme.  If,  say,  the  event  O  is  an  ultimatum, 
and  the  person  describing  the  path  NP  is  a  ruler  of  the  country 
affected,  then  it  may  be  manifest  to  all  observers  that  it  is  his 
knowledge  of  the  actual  occurrence  of  the  event  O  which  has 
caused  him  to  create  the  event  P.  P  must  then  be  in  the  absolute 


FIG.  4. 

future  of  0,  and,  as  we  have  seen,  must  lie  in  the  sector  UOV. 
But  the  inference  is  only  permissible,  if  the  event  P  could  be 
determined  by  the  event  0,  and  was  not  predetermined  by 
causes  anterior  to  both — if  it  was  possible  for  it  to  happen  or 
not,  consistently  with  the  laws  of  nature.  Since  physics  does 
not  attempt  to  cover  indeterminate  events  of  this  kind,  the 
distinction  of  absolute  past  and  future  is  not  directly  important 
for  physics ;  but  it  is  of  interest  to  show  that  the  theory  of  four- 
dimensional  space-time  provides  an  absolute  past  and  future,  in 
accordance  with  common  requirements,  although  this  can 
usually  be  ignored  in  applications  to  physics. 


m]         THE  WORLD  OF  FOUR  DIMENSIONS  53 

Consider  now  all  the  events  which  are  at  an  interval  of  one 
unit  from  0,  according  to  the  definition  of  the  interval  s 

s2  =  -  (*a  -  xtf  -  (y2  -  ytf  -  (*a  -  *!)2  +  (t2  -  *x)2...(l). 
We  have  changed  the  sign  of  s2,  because  usually  (though  not 
always)  the  original  s2  would  have  come  out  negative.  In 
Euclidean  space  points  distant  a  unit  interval  lie  on  a  circle: 
but,  owing  to  the  change  in  geometry  due  to  the  altered  sign 
of  (t2  —  Zi)2,  they  now  lie  on  a  rectangular  hyperbola  with  two 
branches  KLM,  K'L'M'.  Since  the  interval  is  an  absolute 
quantity,  all  observers  will  agree  that  these  points  are  at  unit 
interval  from  O. 

Now  make  the  following  construction: — draw  a  straight  line 
OFTj ,  to  meet  the  hyperbola  in  F;  draw  the  tangent  FG  at  F, 
meeting  the  light-line  U'OU  in  G;  complete  the  parallelogram 
OFGH;  produce  OH  to  X^  We  now  assert  that  an  observer 
Sl  who  chooses  OT±  for  his  time-direction  will  regard  OX±  as 
his  space  direction  and  will  consider  OF  and  OH  to  be  the  units 
of  time  and  space. 

The  two  observers  make  their  partitions  of  space  and  time 
in  different  ways,  as  illustrated  in  Figs.  5  and  6,  where  in  each 
case  the  partitions  are  at  unit  distance  (in  space  and  time) 
according  to  the  observers'  own  reckoning.  The  same"  diagram 
of  events  in  the  world  will  serve  for  both  observers ;  S1  merely 
removes  *S"s  partitions  and  overlays  his  own,  locating  the  events 
in  his  space  and  time  accordingly.  It  will  be  seen  at  once  that 
the  lines  of  unit  velocity — progress  of  one  unit  of  space  for  one 
unit  of  time — agree,  so  that  the  velocity  of  a  pulse  of  light  is 
unity  for  both  observers.  It  can  be  shown  from  the  properties 
of  the  hyperbola  that  the  locus  of  points  at  any  interval  s  from 
O,  given  by  equation  (1),  viz. 

*2  =  (t  -  tQ)*  -(x-  x.)\ 

is  the  same  locus  (a  hyperbola)  for  both  systems  of  reckoning 
a?  and  t.  The  two  observers  will  always  agree  on  the  measures 
of  intervals,  though  they  will  disagree  about  lengths,  durations, 
and  the  velocities  of  everything  except  light.  This  rather  com- 
plex transformation  is  mathematically  equivalent  to  the  simple 
rotation  of  the  axes  required  when  imaginary  time  is  used. 
It  must  not  be  supposed  that  there  is  any  natural  distinction 


54          THE  WORLD  OF  FOUR  DIMENSIONS        [CH. 

corresponding  to  the  difference  between  the  square-partitions 
of  observer  S  and  the  diamond-shaped  partitions  of  observer  Sl . 
We  might  say  that  Sl  transplants  the  space-time  world  un- 
changed from  Fig.  5  to  Fig.  6,  and  then  distorts  it  until  the 
diamonds  shown  become  squares ;  or  we  might  equally  well  start 
with  this  distorted  space-time,  partitioned  by  S±  into  squares, 
and  then  S's  partitions  would  be  represented  by  diamonds. 
It  cannot  be  said  that  either  observer's  space-time  is  distorted 
absolutely,  but  one  is  distorted  relatively  to  the  other.  It  is  the 
relation  of  order  which  is  intrinsic  in  nature,  and  is  the  same 
both  for  the  squares  and  diamonds ;  shape  is  put  into  nature  by 
the  observer  when  he  has  chosen  his  partitions. 


Xi 


o 


X    O 


FIG.  5. 


FIG.  6. 


We  can  now  deduce  the  FitzGerald  contraction.  Consider 
a  rod  of  unit  length  at  rest  relatively  to  the  observer  S.  The 
two  extremities  are  at  rest  in  his  space,  and  consequently  remain 
on  the  same  space-partitions ;  hence  their  tracks  in  four  dimen- 
sions PP',  QQ'  (Fig.  7)  are  entirely  in  the  time-direction.  The 
real  rod  in  nature  is  the  four-dimensional  object  shown  in  section 
as  P'PQQ'.  Overlay  the  same  figure  with  S^s  space  and  time 
partitions,  shown  by  the  dotted  lines.  Taking  a  section  at  any 
one  "time,"  the  instantaneous  rod  is  PjQx,  viz.  the  section  of 
P'PQQ'  by  S^s  time-line.  Although  on  paper  P1Q1  is  actually 
longer  than  PQ,  it  is  seen  that  it  is  a  little  shorter  than  one  of 
•S^s  space-partitions;  and  accordingly  Sj_  judges  that  it  is  less 


Ill] 


THE  WORLD  OF  FOUR  DIMENSIONS 


55 


than  one  unit  long — it  has  contracted  on  account  of  its  motion 
relative  to  him. 

Similarly  RR'  -  SS'  is  a  rod  of  unit  length  at  rest  relatively 
to  Si .    Overlaying  S's  partitions  we  see  that  it  occupies  -R^  at 


Q' 


1 

.-,' 

/«,»•* 

/ 

^ 

'  f 

/ 

**" 

1 

I 

1 

^  + 

j 

„*•*"*! 

rQi 

^' 

p,     / 

/ 

/ 

/ 

rj 

n 

a  particular  instant  for  S;  and  this  is  less  than  one  of  S's 
partitions.  Thus  S  judges  it  to  have  contracted  on  account  of 
its  motion  relative  to  him. 

In  the  same  way  we  can  illustrate  the  problem  of  the  duration 
of  the  cigar;  each  observer 
believed  the  other's  cigar  to 
last  the  longer  time.  Taking 
LM  (Fig.  8)  to  represent  the  *•* 
duration  of  $'s  cigar  (two 
units),  we  see  that  in  S^s 
reckoning  it  reaches  over  a 
little  more  than  two  time- 
partitions.  Moreover  it  has  not 
kept  to  one  space-partition, 
i.e.  it  has  moved.  Similarly  L'N'  is  the  duration  of  S^s  cigar 
(two  time-units  for  him) ;  and  it  lasts  a  little  beyond  two  unit- 
partitions  in  >S"s  time-reckoning.  (Note,  in  comparing  the  two 
diagrams,  L',  M',  N'  are  the  same  points  as  L,  M,  N.) 

If  in  Fig.  4  we  had  taken  the  line  OT^  very  near  to  OU,  our 


FIG.  8. 


56          THE  WORLD  OF  FOUR  DIMENSIONS        [CH. 

diamonds  would  have  been  very  elongated,  and  the  unit- 
divisions  OF,  OH  very  large.  This  kind  of  partition  would  be 
made  by  an  observer  whose  course  through  the  world  is  OTl} 
and  who  is  accordingly  travelling  with  a  velocity  approaching 
that  of  light  relative  to  S.  In  the  limit,  when  the  velocity 
reaches  that  of  light,  both  space-unit  and  time-unit  become 
infinite,  so  that  in  the  natural  units  for  an  observer  travelling 
with  the  speed  of  light,  all  the  events  in  the  finite  experience  of 
S  take  place  "in  no  time"  and  the  size  of  every  object  is  zero. 
This  applies,  however,  only  to  the  two  dimensions  x  and  t;  the 
space-partitions  parallel  to  the  plane  of  the  paper  are  not 
affected  by  this  motion  along  x.  Consequently  for  an  observer 
travelling  with  the  speed  of  light  all  ordinary  objects  become 
two-dimensional,  preserving  their  lateral  dimensions,  but  in- 
finitely thin  longitudinally.  The  fact  that  events  take  place  "in 
no  time"  is  usually  explained  by  saying  that  the  inertia  of  any 
particle  moving  with  the  velocity  of  light  becomes  infinite  so 
that  all  molecular  processes  in  the  observer  must  stop;  many 
things  may  happen  in  $'s  world  in  a  twinkling  of  an  eye — of 
Si's  eye. 

However  successful  the  theory  of  a  four-dimensional  world 
may  be,  it  is  difficult  to  ignore  a  voice  inside  us  which  whispers 
"At  the  back  of  your  mind,  you  know  that  a  fourth  dimension 
is  all  nonsense."  I  fancy  that  that  voice  must  often  have  had  a 
busy  time  in  the  past  history  of  physics.  What  nonsense  to 
say  that  this  solid  table  on  which  I  am  writing  is  a  collection 
of  electrons  moving  with  prodigious  speeds  in  empty  spaces, 
which  relatively  to  electronic  dimensions  are  as  wide  as  the 
spaces  between  the  planets  in  the  solar  system !  What  nonsense 
to  say  that  the  thin  air  is  trying  to  crush  my  body  with  a  load 
of  14  Ibs.  to  the  square  inch!  What  nonsense  that  the  star- 
cluster,  which  I  see  through  the  telescope  obviously  there  now, 
is  a  glimpse  into  a  past  age  50,000  years  ago!  Let  us  not  be 
beguiled  by  this  voice.  It  is  discredited. 

But  the  statement  that  time  is  a  fourth  dimension  may 
suggest  unnecessary  difficulties  which  a  more  precise  definition 
avoids.  It  is  in  the  external  world  that  the  four  dimensions  are 
united — not  in  the  relations  of  the  external  world  to  the 
individual  which  constitute  his  direct  acquaintance  with  space 


m]         THE  WORLD  OF  FOUR  DIMENSIONS  57 

and  time.  Just  in  that  process  of  relation  to  an  individual,  the 
order  falls  apart  into  the  distinct  manifestations  of  space  and  time. 
An  individual  is  a  four-dimensional  object  of  greatly  elongated 
form;  in  ordinary  language  we  say  that  he  has  considerable  exten- 
sion in  time  and  insignificant  extension  in  space.  Practically  he 
is  represented  by  a  line — his  track  through  the  world.  When  the 
world  is  related  to  such  an  individual,  his  own  asymmetry  is 
introduced  into  the  relation;  and  that  order  of  events  which  is 
parallel  with  his  track,  that  is  to  say  with  himself,  appears  in 
his  experience  to  be  differentiated  from  all  other  orders  of  events. 
Probably  the  best  known  exposition  of  the  fourth  dimension 
is  that  given  in  E.  Abbott's  popular  book  Flatland.  It  may  be  of 
interest  to  see  how  far  the  four-dimensional  world  of  space-time 
conforms  with  his  anticipations.  He  lays  stress  on  three  points. 

(1)  As  a  four-dimensional  body  moves,  its  section  by  the 
three-dimensional  world  may  vary;  thus  a  rigid  body  can  alter 
size  and  shape. 

(2)  It  should  be  possible  for  a  body  to  enter  a  completely 
closed  room,  by  travelling  into  it  in  the  direction  of  the  fourth 
dimension,  just  as  we  can  bring  our  pencil  down  on  to  any  point 
within  a  square  without  crossing  its  sides. 

(3)  It  should  be  possible  to  see  the  inside  of  a  solid,  just  as 
we  can  see  the  inside  of  a  square  by  viewing  it  from  a  point 
outside  its  plane. 

The  first  phenomenon  is  manifested  by  the  FitzGerald  con- 
traction. 

If  quantity  of  matter  is  to  be  identified  with  its  mass,  the 
second  phenomenon  does  not  happen.  It  could  easily  be  con- 
ceived of  as  happening,  but  it  is  provided  against  by  a  special 
law  of  nature — the  conservation  of  mass.  It  could  happen, 
but  it  does  not  happen. 

The  third  phenomenon  does  not  happen  for  two  reasons. 
A  natural  body  extends  in  time  as  well  as  in  space,  and  is 
therefore  four-dimensional;  but  for  the  analogy  to  hold,  the 
object  must  have  one  dimension  less  than  the  world,  like  the 
square  seen  from  the  third  dimension.  If  the  solid  suddenly 
went  out  of  existence  so  as  to  present  a  plane  section  towards 
time,  we  should  still  fail  to  see  the  interior  of  it ;  because  light- 
tracks  in  four-dimensions  are  restricted  to  certain  lines  like 


58          THE  WORLD  OF  FOUR  DIMENSIONS        [CH. 

UOV,  U'OV  in  Fig.  3,  whereas  in  three-dimensions  light  can 
traverse  any  straight  line.  This  could  be  remedied  by  interposing 
some  kind  of  dispersive  medium,  so  that  light  of  some  wave- 
length could  be  found  travelling  with  every  velocity  and  following 
every  track  in  space-time ;  then,  looking  at  a  solid  which  suddenly 
went  out  of  existence,  we  should  receive  at  the  same  moment 
light-impressions  from  every  particle  in  its  interior  (supposing 
them  self-luminous).  We  actually  should  see  the  inside  of  it. 

How  our  poor  eyes  are  to  disentangle  this  overwhelming 
experience  is  quite  another  question. 

The  interval  is  a  quantity  so  fundamental  for  us  that  we  may 
consider  its  measurement  in  some  detail.  Suppose  we  have  a 
scale  AB  divided  into  kilometres,  say,  and  at  each  division  is 
placed  a  clock  also  registering  kilometres.  (It  will  be  remembered 
that  time  can  be  measured  in  seconds  or  kilometres  indifferently.) 


1 

'                     2 

1                    3l 

4 

J 

FIG.  9. 

When  the  clocks  are  correctly  set  and  viewed  from  A  the  sum 
of  the  readings  of  any  clock  and  the  division  beside  it  is  the 
same  for  all,  since  the  scale-reading  gives  the  correction  for  the 
time  taken  by  light,  travelling  with  unit  velocity,  to  reach  A. 
This  is  shown  in  Fig.  9  where  the  clock-readings  are  given  as 
though  they  were  being  viewed  from  A. 

Now  lay  the  scale  in  line  with  the  two  events ;  note  the  clock 
and  scale-readings  tltxlt  of  the  first  event,  and  the  corresponding 
readings  t2,  x2,  of  the  second  event.  Then  by  the  formula 
already  given 

*•  =  (*.  ~  *l)2  -  (*2  -  *l)2' 

But  suppose  we  took  a  different  standard  of  rest,  and  set  the 
scale  moving  uniformly  in  the  direction  AB.  Then  the  divisions 
would  have  advanced  to  meet  the  second  event,  and  (x2  —  #1) 
would  be  smaller.  This  is  compensated,  because  t2  —  ^  also 
becomes  altered.  A  is  now  advancing  to  meet  the  light  coming 
from  any  of  the  clocks  along  the  rod;  the  light  arrives  too 


in]         THE  WORLD  OF  FOUR  DIMENSIONS  59 

quickly,  and  in  the  initial  adjustment  described  above  the  clock 
must  be  set  back  a  little.  The  clock-reading  of  the  event  is  thus 
smaller.  There  are  other  small  corrections  arising  from  the 
FitzGerald  contraction,  etc. ;  and  the  net  result  is  that,  it  does 
not  matter  what  uniform  motion  is  given  to  the  scale,  the  final 
result  for  s  is  always  the  same. 

In  elementary  mechanics  we  are  taught  that  velocities  can  be 
compounded  by  adding.  If  l?'s  velocity  relative  to  A  (as  observed 
by  either  of  them)  is  100  km.  per  sec.,  and  C's  velocity  relative 
to  B  is  100  km.  per  sec.  in  the  same  direction,  then  C's  velocity 
relative  to  A  should  be  200  km.  per  sec.  This  is  not  quite 
accurate;  the  true  answer  is  199-999978  km.  per  sec.  The  dis- 
crepancy is  not  difficult  to  explain.  The  two  velocities  and  their 
resultant  are  not  all  reckoned  with  respect  to  the  same  partitions 
of  space  and  time.  When  B  measures  C's  velocity  relative  to 
him  he  uses  his  own  space  and  time,  and  it  must  be  corrected 
to  reduce  to  A's  space  and  time  units,  before  it  can  be  added 
on  to  a  velocity  measured  by  A. 

If  we  continue  the  chain,  introducing  D  whose  velocity 
relative  to  C,  and  measured  by  C,  is  100  km.  per  sec.,  and  so  on 
ad  infinitum,  we  never  obtain  an  infinite  velocity  with  respect 
to  A,  but  gradually  approach  the  limiting  velocity  of  300,000 
km.  per  sec.,  the  speed  of  light.  This  speed  has  the  remarkable 
property  of  being  absolute,  whereas  every  other  speed  is  relative. 
If  a  speed  of  100  km.  per  sec.  or  of  100,000  km.  per  sec.  is 
mentioned,  we  have  to  ask — speed  relative  to  what?  But  if 
a  speed  of  300,000  km.  per  sec.  is  mentioned,  there  is  no  need 
to  ask  the  question;  the  answer  is — relative  to  any  and  every 
piece  of  matter.  A  ft  particle  shot  off  from  radium  can  move  at 
more  than  200,000  km.  per  sec. ;  but  the  speed  of  light  relative 
to  an  observer  travelling  with  it  is  still  300,000  km.  per  sec.  It 
reminds  us  of  the  mathematicians'  transfinite  number  Aleph; 
you  can  subtract  any  number  you  like  from  it,  and  it  still 
remains  the  same. 

The  velocity  of  light  plays  a  conspicuous  part  in  the  relativity 
theory,  and  it  is  of  importance  to  understand  what  is  the 
property  associated  with  it  which  makes  it  fundamental.  The 
fact  that  the  velocity  of  light  is  the  same  for  all  observers  is  a 
consequence  rather  than  a  cause  of  its  pre-eminent  character. 


60          THE  WORLD  OF  FOUR  DIMENSIONS        [CH. 

Our  first  introduction  of  it,  for  the  purpose  of  coordinating 
units  of  length  and  time,  was  merely  conventional  with  a  view 
to  simplifying  the  algebraic  expressions.  Subsequently,  con- 
siderable use  has  been  made  of  the  fact  that  nothing  is  known 
in  physics  which  travels  with  greater  speed,  so  that  in  practice 
our  determinations  of  simultaneity  depend  on  signals  trans- 
mitted with  this  speed.  If  some  new  kind  of  ray  with  a  higher 
speed  were  discovered,  it  would  perhaps  tend  to  displace  light- 
signals  and  light- velocity  in  this  part  of  the  work,  time-reckoning 
being  modified  to  correspond;  on  the  other  hand,  this  would 
lead  to  greater  complexity  in  the  formulae,  because  the  Fitz- 
Gerald  contraction  which  affects  space-measurement  depends 
on  light- velocity.  But  the  chief  importance  of  the  velocity  of 
light  is  that  no  material  body  can  exceed  this  velocity.  This 
gives  a  general  physical  distinction  between  paths  which  are  time- 
like  and  space-like,  respectively — those  which  can  be  traversed 
by  matter,  and  those  which  cannot.  The  material  structure  of 
the  four-dimensional  world  is  fibrous,  with  the  threads  all  running 
along  time-like  tracks;  it  is  a  tangled  warp  without  a  woof. 
Hence,  even  if  the  discovery  of  a  new  ray  led  us  to  modify  the 
reckoning  of  time  and  space,  it  would  still  be  necessary  in  the 
study  of  material  systems  to  preserve  the  present  absolute 
distinction  of  time-like  and  space-like  intervals,  under  a  new 
name  if  necessary. 

It  may  be  asked  whether  it  is  possible  for  anything  to  have 
a  speed  greater  than  the  velocity  of  light.  Certainly  matter 
cannot  attain  a  greater  speed;  but  there  might  be  other  things 
in  nature  which  could.  "Mr  Speaker,"  said  Sir  Boyle  Roche, 
"  not  being  a  bird,  I  could  not  be  in  two  places  at  the  same  time." 
Any  entity  with  a  speed  greater  than  light  would  have  the 
peculiarity  of  Sir  Boyle  Roche's  bird.  It  can  scarcely  be  said  to 
be  a  self-contradictory  property  to  be  in  two  places  at  the  same 
time  any  more  than  for  an  object  to  be  at  two  times  in  the  same 
place.  The  perplexities  of  the  quantum  theory  of  energy  some- 
times seem  to  suggest  that  the  possibility  ought  not  to  be 
overlooked ;  but,  on  the  whole,  the  evidence  seems  to  be  against 
the  existence  of  anything  moving  with  a  speed  beyond  that  of 
light. 

The  standpoint  of  relativity  and  the  principle  of  relativity 


in]  THE  WORLD  OF  FOUR  DIMENSIONS  61 

are  quite  independent  of  any  views  as  to  the  constitution  of 
matter  or  light.  Hitherto  our  only  reference  to  electrical  theory 
has  been  in  connection  with  Larmor  and  Lorentz's  explanation 
of  the  FitzGerald  contraction;  but  now  from  the  discussion  of 
the  four-dimensional  world,  we  have  found  a  more  general 
explanation  of  the  change  of  length.  The  case  for  the  electrical 
theory  of  matter  is  actually  weakened,  because  many  experi-    I 
mental  effects  formerly  thought  to  depend  on  the  peculiar    J 
properties  of  electrical  forces  are  now  found  to  be  perfectly    j 
general  consequences  of  the  relativity  of  observational  know-   j 
ledge. 

Whilst  the  evidence  for  the  electrical  theory  of  matter  is  not 
so  conclusive,  as  at  one  time  appeared,  the  theory  may  be 
accepted  without  serious  misgivings.  To  postulate  two  entities, 
matter  and  electric  charges,  when  one  will  suffice  is  an  arbitrary 
hypothesis,  unjustifiable  in  our  present  state  of  knowledge.  The 
great  contribution  of  the  electrical  theory  to  this  subject  is  a 
precise  explanation  of  the  property  of  inertia.  It  was  shown 
theoretically  by  J.  J.  Thomson  that  if  a  charged  conductor  is 
to  be  moved  or  stopped,  additional  effort  will  be  necessary 
simply  on  account  of  the  charge.  The  conductor  has  to  carry 
its  electric  field  with  it,  and  force  is  needed  to  set  the  field 
moving.  This  property  is  called  inertia,  and  it  is  measured  by 
mass.  If,  keeping  the  charge  constant,  the  size  of  the  conductor 
is  diminished,  this  inertia  increases.  Since  the  smallest  separable 
particles  of  matter  are  found  by  experiment  to  be  very  minute 
and  to  carry  charges,  the  suggestion  arises  that  these  charges 
may  be  responsible  for  the  whole  of  the  inertia  detected  in 
matter.  The  explanation  is  sufficient;  and  there  seems  no  reason 
to  doubt  that  all  inertia  is  of  this  electrical  kind. 

When  the  calculations  are  extended  to  charges  moving  with 
high  velocities,  it  is  found  that  the  electrical  inertia  is  not 
strictly  constant  but  depends  on  the  speed;  in  all  cases  the 
variation  is  summed  up  in  the  statement  that  the  inertia  is 
simply  proportional  to  the  total  energy  of  the  electromagnetic 
field.  We  can  say  if  we  like  that  the  mass  of  a  charged  particle 
at  rest  belongs  to  its  electrostatic  energy;  when  the  charge  is 
set  in  motion,  kinetic  energy  is  added,  and  this  kinetic  energy 
also  has  mass.  Hence  it  appears  that  mass  (inertia)  and  energy 


62  THE  WORLD  OF  FOUR  DIMENSIONS     [CH.III 

are  essentially  the  same  thing,  or,  at  the  most,  two  aspects  of 
the  same  thing.  It  must  be  remembered  that  on  this  view  the 
greater  part  of  the  mass  of  matter  is  due  to  concealed  energy, 
which  is  not  as  yet  releasable. 

The  question  whether  electrical  energy  not  bound  to  electric 
charges  has  mass,  is  answered  in  the  affirmative  in  the  case  of 
light.  Light  has  mass.  Presumably  also  gravitational  energy 
has  mass;  or,  if  not,  mass  will  be  created  when,  as  often  happens, 
gravitational  energy  is  converted  into  kinetic  energy.  The  mass 
of  the  whole  (negative)  gravitational  energy  of  the  earth  is  of 
the  order  minus  a  billion  tons. 

The  theoretical  increase  of  the  mass  of  an  electron  with  speed 
has  been  confirmed  experimentally,  the  agreement  with  calcula- 
tion being  perfect  if  the  electron  undergoes  the  FitzGerald 
contraction  by  its  motion.  This  has  been  held  to  indicate  that 
the  electron  cannot  have  any  inertia  other  than  that  due  to  the 
electromagnetic  field  carried  with  it.  But  the  conclusion  (though 
probable  enough)  is  not  a  fair  inference;  because  these  results, 
obtained  by  special  calculation  for  electrical  inertia,  are  found 
to  be  predicted  by  the  theory  of  relativity  for  any  kind  of 
inertia.  This  will  be  shown  in  Chapter  ix.  The  factor  giving 
the  increase  of  mass  with  speed  is  the  same  as  that  which  affects 
length  and  time.  Thus  if  a  rod  moves  at  such  a  speed  that  its 
length  is  halved,  its  mass  will  be  doubled.  Its  density  will  be 
increased  four-fold,  since  it  is  both  heavier  and  less  in  volume. 

We  have  thought  it  necessary  to  include  this  brief  summary 
of  the  electrical  theory  of  matter  and  mass,  because,  although 
it  is  not  required  by  the  relativity  theory,  it  is  so  universally 
accepted  in  physics  that  we  can  scarcely  ignore  it.  Later  on  we 
shall  reach  in  a  more  general  way  the  identification  of  mass  with 
energy  and  the  variation  of  mass  with  speed;  but,  since  the 
experimental  measurement  of  inertia  involves  the  study  of  a 
body  in  non-uniform  motion,  it  is  not  possible  to  enter  on  a 
satisfactory  discussion  of  mass  until  the  more  general  theory  of 
relativity  for  non-uniform  motion  has  been  developed. 


CHAPTER   IV 
FIELDS   OF  FORCE 

For  whenever  bodies  fall  through  water  and  thin  air,  they  must  quicken  their 
descents  in  proportion  to  their  weights,  because  the  body  of  water  and  subtle 
nature  of  air  cannot  retard  everything  in  equal  degree,  but  more  readily  give 
way  overpowered  by  the  heavier;  on  the  other  hand  empty  void  cannot  offer 
resistance  to  anything  in  any  direction  at  any  time,  but  must,  as  its  nature 
craves,  continually  give  way;  and  for  this  reason  all  things  must  be  moved  and 
borne  along  with  equal  velocities  though  of  unequal  weights  through  the 
unresisting  void.  LUCRETIUS,  De  Natura  Rerum, 

THE  primary  conception  offeree  is  associated  with  the  muscular 
sensation  felt  when  we  make  an  effort  to  cause  or  prevent  the 
motion  of  matter.  Similar  effects  on  the  motion  of  matter  can 
be  caused  by  non-living  agency,  and  these  also  are  regarded  as 
due  to  forces.  As  is  well  known,  the  scientific  measure  of  a  force 
is  the  momentum  that  it  communicates  to  a  body  in  given  time. 
There  is  nothing  very  abstract  about  a  force  transmitted  by 
material  contact ;  modern  physics  shows  that  the  momentum  is 
communicated  by  a  process  of  molecular  bombardment.  We  can 
visualise  the  mechanism,  and  see  the  molecules  carrying  the 
motion  in  small  parcels  across  the  boundary  into  the  body  that 
is  being  acted  on.  Force  is  no  mysterious  agency;  it  is  merely 
a  convenient  summary  of  this  flow  of  motion,  which  we  can 
trace  continuously  if  we  take  the  trouble.  It  is  true  that  the 
difficulties  are  only  set  back  a  stage,  and  the  exact  mode  by 
which  the  momentum  is  redistributed  during  a  molecular 
collision  is  not  yet  understood;  but,  so  far  as  it  goes,  this  analysis 
gives  a  clear  idea  of  the  transmission  of  motion  by  ordinary 
forces. 

But  even  in  elementary  mechanics  an  important  natural  force 
appears,  which  does  not  seem  to  operate  in  this  manner.  Gravita- 
tion is  not  resolvable  into  a  succession  of  molecular  blows. 
A  massive  body,  such  as  the  earth,  seems  to  be  surrounded  by 
a  field  of  latent  force,  ready,  if  another  body  enters  the  field,  to 
become  active,  and  transmit  motion.  One  usually  thinks  of  this 
influence  as  existing  in  the  space  round  the  earth  even  when 


64  FIELDS  OF  FORCE  [CH. 

there  is  no  test-body  to  be  affected,  and  in  a  rather  vague  way 
it  is  suspected  to  be  some  state  of  strain  or  other  condition  of 
an  unperceived  medium. 

Although  gravitation  has  been  recognised  for  thousands  of 
years,  and  its  laws  were  formulated  with  sufficient  accuracy  for 
almost  all  purposes  more  than  200  years  ago,  it  cannot  be  said 
that  much  progress  has  been  made  in  explaining  the  nature  or 
mechanism  of  this  influence.  It  is  said  that  more  than  200 
theories  of  gravitation  have  been  put  forward;  but  the  most 
plausible  of  these  have  all  had  the  defect  that  they  lead  nowhere 
and  admit  of  no  experimental  test.  Many  of  them  would  nowa- 
days be  dismissed  as  too  materialistic  for  our  taste — filling  space 
with  the  hum  of  machinery — a  procedure  curiously  popular  in 
the  nineteenth  century.  Few  would  survive  the  recent  discovery 
that  gravitation  acts  not  only  on  the  molecules  of  matter,  but 
on  the  undulations  of  light. 

The  nature  of  gravitation  has  seemed  very  mysterious,  yet  it 
is  a  remarkable  fact  that  in  a  limited  region  it  is  possible  to 
create  an  artificial  field  of  force  which  imitates  a  natural 
gravitational  field  so  exactly  that,  so  far  as  experiments  have 
yet  gone,  no  one  can  tell  the  difference.  Those  who  seek  for  an 
explanation  of  gravitation  naturally  aim  to  find  a  model  which 
will  reproduce  its  effects;  but  no  one  before  Einstein  seems  to 
have  thought  of  finding  the  clue  in  these  artificial  fields,  familiar 
as  they  are. 

When  a  lift  starts  to  move  upwards  the  occupants  feel  a 
characteristic  sensation,  which  is  actually  identical  with  a 
sensation  of  increased  weight.  The  feeling  disappears  as  soon 
as  the  motion  becomes  uniform;  it  is  associated  only  with  the 
change  of  motion  of  the  lift,  that  is  to  say,  the  acceleration. 
Increased  weight  is  not  only  a  matter  of  sensation ;  it  is  shown 
by  any  physical  experiments  that  can  be  performed.  The  usual 
laboratory  determination  of  the  value  of  gravity  by  Atwood's 
machine  would,  if  carried  out  inside  the  accelerated  lift,  give 
a  higher  value.  A  spring-balance  would  record  higher  weights. 
Projectiles  would  follow  the  usual  laws  of  motion  but  with  a 
higher  value  of  gravity.  In  fact,  the  upward  acceleration  of 
the  lift  is  in  its  mechanical  effects  exactly  similar  to  an  additional 
gravitational  field  superimposed  on  that  normally  present. 


iv]  FIELDS  OF  FORCE  65 

Perhaps  the  equivalence  is  most  easily  seen  when  we  produce 
in  this  manner  an  artificial  field  which  just  neutralises  the  earth's 
field  of  gravitation.  Jules  Verne's  book  Round  the  Moon  tells 
the  story  of  three  men  in  a  projectile  shot  from  a  cannon  into 
space.  The  author  enlarges  on  their  amusing  experiences  when 
their  weight  vanished  altogether  at  the  neutral  point,  where  the 
attraction  of  the  earth  and  moon  balance  one  another.  As  a 
matter  of  fact  they  would  not  have  had  any  feeling  of  weight 
at  any  time  during  their  journey  after  they  left  the  earth's 
atmosphere.  The  projectile  was  responding  freely  to  the  pull  of 
gravity,  and  so  were  its  occupants.  When  an  occupant  let  go 
of  a  plate,  the  plate  could  not  "fall"  any  more  than  it  was 
doing  already,  and  so  it  must  remain  poised. 

It  will  be  seen  that  the  sensation  of  weight  is  not  felt  when 
we  are  free  to  respond  to  the  force  of  gravitation;  it  is  only 
felt  when  something  interferes  to  prevent  our  falling.  It  is 
primarily  the  floor  or  the  chair  which  causes  the  sensation  of 
weight  by  checking  the  fall.  It  seems  literally  true  to  say  that 
we  never  feel  the  force  of  the  earth's  gravitation ;  what  we  do 
feel  is  the  bombardment  of  the  soles  of  our  boots  by  the  molecules 
of  the  ground,  and  the  consequent  impulses  spreading  upwards 
through  the  body.  This  point  is  of  some  importance,  since  the 
idea  of  the  force  of  gravitation  as  something  which  can  be  felt, 
predisposes  us  to  a  materialistic  view  of  its  nature. 

Another  example  of  an  artificial  field  of  force  is  the  centrifugal 
force  of  the  earth's  rotation.  In  most  books  of  Physical  Con- 
stants will  be  found  a  table  of  the  values  of  "g,"  the  acceleration 
due  to  gravity,  at  different  latitudes.  But  the  numbers  given 
do  not  relate  to  gravity  alone;  they  are  the  resultant  of  gravity 
and  the  centrifugal  force  of  the  earth's  rotation.  These  are  so 
much  alike  in  their  effects  that  for  practical  purposes  physicists 
have  not  thought  it  worth  while  to  distinguish  them. 

Similar  artificial  fields  are  produced  when  an  aeroplane 
changes  its  course  or  speed;  and  one  of  the  difficulties  of  naviga- 
tion is  the  impossibility  of  discriminating  between  these  and  the 
true  gravitation  of  the  earth  with  which  they  combine.  One 
usually  finds  that  the  practical  aviator  requires  little  persuasion 
of  the  relativity  of  force. 

To  find  a  unifying  idea  as  to  the  origin  of  these  artificial 
B,S,  5 


66  FIELDS  OF  FORCE  [CH. 

fields  of  force,  we  must  return  to  the  four-dimensional  world  of 
space-time.  The  observer  is  progressing  along  a  certain  track 
in  this  world.  Now  his  course  need  not  necessarily  be  straight. 
It  must  be  remembered  that  straight  in  the  four-dimensional 
world  means  something  more  than  straight  in  space;  it  implies 
also  uniform  velocity,  since  the  velocity  determines  the  inclina- 
tion of  the  track  to  the  time-axis. 

The  observer  in  the  accelerated  lift  travels  upwards  in  a 
straight  line,  say  1  foot  in  the  first  second,  4  feet  in  two  seconds, 
9  feet  in  three  seconds,  and  so  on.  If  we  plot  these  points  as 
x  and  t  on  a  diagram  we  obtain  a  curved  track.  Presently  the 
speed  of  the  lift  becomes  uniform  and  the  track  in  the  diagram 
becomes  straight.  So  long  as  the  track  is  curved  (accelerated 
motion)  a  field  of  force  is  perceived;  it  disappears  when  the 
track  becomes  straight  (uniform  motion). 

Again  the  observer  on  the  earth  is  carried  round  in  a  circle 
once  a  day  by  the  earth's  rotation ;  allowing  for  steady  progress 
through  time,  the  track  in  four  dimensions  is  a  spiral.  For  an 
observer  at  the  north  pole  the  track  is  straight,  and  there  the 
centrifugal  force  is  zero. 

Clearly  the  artificial  field  of  force  is  associated  with  curvature 
of  track,  and  we  can  lay  down  the  following  rule : — 
i  Whenever  the  observer's  track  through  the  four-dimensional 

world  is  curved  he  perceives  an  artificial  field  of  force. 

The  field  of  force  is  not  only  perceived  by  the  observer  in  his 
sensations,  but  reveals  itself  in  his  physical  measures.  It  should 
be  understood,  however,  that  the  curvature  of  track  must  not 
have  been  otherwise  allowed  for.  Naturally  if  the  observer  in 
the  lift  recognises  that  his  measures  are  affected  by  his  own 
acceleration  and  applies  the  appropriate  corrections,  the  artificial 
force  will  be  removed  by  the  process.  It  only  exists  if  he  is 
unaware  of,  or  does  not  choose  to  consider,  his  acceleration. 

The  centrifugal  force  is  often  called  "  unreal."  From  the  point 
of  view  of  an  observer  who  does  not  rotate  with  the  earth,  there 
is  no  centrifugal  force;  it  only  arises  for  the  terrestrial  observer 
who  is  too  lazy  to  make  other  allowance  for  the  effects  of  the 
earth's  rotation.  It  is  commonly  thought  that  this  "unreality" 
quite  differentiates  it  from  a  "real"  force  like  gravity;  but  if 
we  try  to  find  the  grounds  of  this  distinction  they  evade  us. 


iv]  FIELDS  OF  FORCE  67 

The  centrifugal  force  is  made  to  disappear  if  we  choose  a  suitable 
standard  observer  not  rotating  with  the  earth;  the  gravitational 
force  was  made  to  disappear  when  we  chose  as  standard  observer 
an  occupant  of  Jules  Verne's  falling  projectile.  If  the  possibility 
of  annulling  a  field  of  force  by  choosing  a  suitable  standard 
observer  is  a  test  of  unreality,  then  gravitation  is  equally  unreal 
with  centrifugal  force. 

It  may  be  urged  that  we  have  not  stated  the  case  quite 
fairly.  When  we  choose  the  non-rotating  observer  the  centrifugal 
force  disappears  completely  and  everywhere.  When  we  choose 
the  occupant  of  the  falling  projectile,  gravitation  disappears  in 
his  immediate  neighbourhood;  but  he  would  notice  that, 
although  unsupported  objects  round  him  experienced  no  accelera- 
tion relative  to  him,  objects  on  the  other  side  of  the  earth  would 
fall  towards  him.  So  far  from  getting  rid  of  the  field  of  force, 
he  has  merely  removed  it  from  his  own  surroundings,  and  piled 
it  up  elsewhere.  Thus  gravitation  is  removable  locally,  but 
centrifugal  force  can  be  removed  everywhere.  The  fallacy  of 
this  argument  is  that  it  speaks  as  though  gravitation  and 
centrifugal  force  were  distinguishable  experimentally.  It  pre- 
supposes the  distinction  that  we  are  challenging.  Looking  simply 
at  the  resultant  of  gravitation  and  centrifugal  force,  which  is  all 
that  can  be  observed,  neither  observer  can  get  rid  of  the  resultant 
force  at  all  parts  of  space.  Each  has  to  be  content  with  leaving 
a  residuum.  The  non-rotating  observer  claims  that  he  has  got 
rid  of  all  the  unreal  part,  leaving  a  remainder  (the  usual  gravita- 
tional field)  which  he  regards  as  really  existing.  We  see  no 
justification  for  this  claim,  which  might  equally  well  be  made 
by  Jules  Verne's  observer. 

It  is  not  denied  that  the  separation  of  centrifugal  and  gravita- 
tional force  generally  adopted  has  many  advantages  for 
mathematical  calculation.  If  it  were  not  so,  it  could  not  have 
endured  so  long.  But  it  is  a  mathematical  separation  only, 
without  physical  basis ;  and  it  often  happens  that  the  separation 
of  a  mathematical  expression  into  two  terms  of  distinct  nature, 
though  useful  for  elementary  work,  becomes  vitiated  for  more 
accurate  work  by  the  occurrence  of  minute  cross-terms  which 
have  to  be  taken  into  account. 

Newtonian  mechanics  proceeds  on  the  supposition  that  there 

5—2 


68  FIELDS  OF  FORCE  [CH. 

is  some  super-observer.  If  he  feels  a  field  of  force,  then  that 
force  really  exists.  Lesser  beings,  such  as  the  occupants  of  the 
falling  projectile,  have  other  ideas,  but  they  are  the  victims  of 
illusion.  It  is  to  this  super-observer  that  the  mathematician 
appeals  when  he  starts  a  dynamical  investigation  with  the  words 
"Take  unaccelerated  rectangular  axes,  Ox,  Oy,  Oz  ...."  Un- 
accelerated  rectangular  axes  are  the  measuring-appliances  of  the 
super-observer. 

It  is  quite  possible  that  there  might  be  a  super-observer, 
whose  views  have  a  natural  right  to  be  regarded  as  the  truest, 
or  at  least  the  simplest.  A  society  of  learned  fishes  would  pro- 
bably agree  that  phenomena  were  best  described  from  the  point 
of  view  of  a  fish  at  rest  in  the  ocean.  But  relativity  mechanics 
finds  that  there  is  no  evidence  that  the  circumstances  of  any 
observer  can  be  such  as  to  make  his  views  pre-eminent.  All  are 
on  an  equality.  Consider  an  observer  A  in  a  projectile  falling 
freely  to  the  earth,  and  an  observer  B  in  space  out  of  range  of 
any  gravitational  attraction.  Neither  A  nor  B  feel  any  field  of 
force  in  their  neighbourhood.  Yet  in  Newtonian  mechanics  an 
artificial  distinction  is  drawn  between  their  circumstances;  B  is 
in  no  field  of  force  at  all,  but  A  is  really  in  a  field  of  force,  only 
its  effects  are  neutralised  by  his  acceleration.  But  what  is  this 
acceleration  of  ^4?  Primarily  it  is  an  acceleration  relative  to  the 
earth;  but  then  that  can  equally  well  be  described  as  an  accelera- 
tion of  the  earth  relative  to  A,  and  it  is  not  fair  to  regard  it  as 
something  located  with  A.  Its  importance  in  Newtonian 
philosophy  is  that  it  is  an  acceleration  relative  to  what  we  have 
called  the  super-observer.  This  potentate  has  drawn  planes  and 
lines  partitioning  space,  as  space  appears  to  him.  I  fear  that 
the  time  has  come  for  his  abdication. 

Suppose  the  whole  system  of  the  stars  were  falling  freely 
under  the  uniform  gravitation  of  some  vast  external  mass,  like 
a  drop  of  rain  falling  to  the  ground.  Would  this  make  any 
difference  to  phenomena?  None  at  all.  There  would  be  a 
gravitational  field;  but  the  consequent  acceleration  of  the 
observer  and  his  landmarks  would  produce  a  field  of  force 
annulling  it.  Who  then  shall  say  what  is  absolute  acceleration? 

We  shall  accordingly  give  up  the  attempt  to  separate  artificial 
fields  of  force  and  natural  gravitational  fields;  and  call  the  whole 


iv]  FIELDS  OF  FORCE  69 

measured  field  of  force  the  gravitational  field,  generalising  the 
expression.  This  field  is  not  absolute,  but  always  requires  that 
some  observer  should  be  specified. 

It  may  avoid  some  mystification  if  we  state  at  once  that  there 
are  certain  intricacies  in  the  gravitational  influence  radiating 
from  heavy  matter  which  are  distinctive.  A  theory  which  did 
not  admit  this  would  run  counter  to  common  sense.  What  our 
argument  has  shown  is  that  the  characteristic  symptom  in  a 
region  in  the  neighbourhood  of  matter  is  not  the  field  of  force; 
it  must  be  something  more  intricate.  In  due  course  we  shall 
have  to  explain  the  nature  of  this  more  complex  effect  of  matter 
on  the  condition  of  the  world. 

Our  previous  rule,  that  the  observer  perceives  an  artificial 
field  of  force  when  he  deviates  from  a  straight  track,  must  now 
be  superseded.  We  need  rather  a  rule  determining  when  he 
perceives  a  field  of  force  of  any  kind.  Indeed  the  original  rule 
has  become  meaningless,  because  a  straight  track  is  no  longer 
an  absolute  conception.  Uniform  motion  in  a  straight  line  is 
not  the  same  for  an  observer  rotating  with  the  earth  as  for  a 
non-rotating  observer  who  takes  into  account  the  sinuosity  of 
the  rotation.  We  have  decided  that  these  two  observers  are  on 
the  same  footing  and  their  judgments  merit  the  same  respect. 
A  straight-line  in  space-time  is  accordingly  not  an  absolute 
conception,  but  is  only  defined  relative  to  some  observer. 

Now  we  have  seen  that  so  long  as  the  observer  and  his 
measuring-appliances  are  unconstrained  (falling  freely)  the  field 
of  force  immediately  round  him  vanishes.  It  is  only  when  he  is 
deflected  from  his  proper  track  that  he  finds  himself  in  the 
midst  of  a  field  of  force.  Leaving  on  one  side  the  question  of 
the  motion  of  electrically  charged  bodies,  which  must  be  reserved 
for  more  profound  treatment,  the  observer  can  only  leave  his 
proper  track  if  he  is  being  disturbed  by  material  impacts,  e.g. 
the  molecules  of  the  ground  bombarding  the  soles  of  his  boots. 
We  may  say  then  that  a  body  does  not  leave  its  natural  track 
without  visible  cause ;  and  any  field  of  force  round  an  observer 
is  the  result  of  his  leaving  his  natural  track  by  such  cause. 
There  is  nothing  mysterious  about  this  field  of  force;  it  is  merely 
the  reflection  in  the  phenomena  of  the  observer's  disturbance; 
just  as  the  flight  of  the  houses  and  hedgerows  past  our  railway- 
carriage  is  the  reflection  of  our  motion  with  the  train. 


70  FIELDS  OF  FORCE  [CH. 

Our  attention  is  thus  directed  to  the  natural  tracks  of  un- 
constrained bodies,  which  appear  to  be  marked  out  in  some 
absolute  way  in  the  four-dimensional  world.  There  is  no 
question  of  an  observer  here;  the  body  takes  the  same  course 
in  the  world  whoever  is  watching  it.  Different  observers  will 
describe  the  track  as  straight,  parabolical,  or  sinuous,  but  it  is 
the  same  absolute  locus. 

Now  we  cannot  pretend  to  predict  without  reference  to 
experiment  the  laws  determining  the  nature  of  these  tracks; 
but  we  can  examine  whether  our  knowledge  of  the  four-dimen- 
sional world  is  already  sufficient  to  specify  definite  tracks  of  this 
kind,  or  whether  it  will  be  necessary  to  introduce  new  hypothetical 
factors.  It  will  be  found  that  it  is  already  sufficient.  So  far  we 
have  had  to  deal  with  only  one  quantity  which  is  independent 
of  the  observer  and  has  therefore  an  absolute  significance  in  the 
world,  namely  the  interval  between  two  events  in  space  and  time. 
Let  us  choose  two  fairly  distant  events  Px  and  P2.  These  can 
be  joined  by  a  variety  of  tracks,  and  the  interval-length  from 
P!  to  P2  along  any  track  can  be  measured.  In  order  to  make 
sure  that  the  interval-length  is  actually  being  measured  along 
the  selected  track,  the  method  is  to  take  a  large  number  of 
intermediate  points  on  the  track,  measure  the  interval  corre- 
sponding to  each  subdivision,  and  take  the  sum.  It  is  virtually 
the  same  process  as  measuring  the  length  of  a  twisty  road  on 
a  map  with  a  piece  of  cotton.  The  interval-length  along  a 
particular  track  is  thus  something  which  can  be  measured 
absolutely,  since  all  observers  agree  as  to  the  measurement  of 
the  interval  for  each  subdivision.  It  follows  that  all  observers 
will  agree  as  to  which  track  (if  any)  is  the  shortest  track  between 
the  two  points,  judged  in  terms  of  interval-length. 

This  gives  a  means  of  defining  certain  tracks  in  space-time  as 
having  an  absolute  significance,  and  we  proceed  tentatively  to 
identify  them  with  the  natural  tracks  taken  by  freely  moving 
particles. 

In  one  respect  we  have  been  caught  napping.  Dr  A.  A.  Robb 
has  pointed  out  the  curious  fact  that  it  is  not  the  shortest  track, 
but  the  longest  track,  which  is  unique*.  There  are  any  number 

*  It  is  here  assumed  that  P2  is  in  the  future  of  Px  so  that  it  is  possible  for 
a  particle  to  travel  from  P±  to  P2.  If  Px  and  P2  are  situated  like  O  and  P'  in 
Fig.  3,  the  interval-length  is  imaginary,  and  the  shortest  track  is  unique. 


iv]  FIELDS  OF  FORCE  71 

of  tracks  from  P1  to  P2  of  zero  interval-length ;  there  is  just  one 
which  has  maximum  length.  This  is  because  of  the  peculiar 
geometry  which  the  minus  sign  of  (t2  —  t-^)2  introduces.  For 
instance,  it  will  be  seen  from  equation  (1),  p.  53,  that  when 

(»,  -  »,)«  +  (y,  -  ytf  +  to  -  %)2  =  (*,  -  y2, 

that  is  to  say  when  the  resultant  distance  travelled  in  space  is 
equal  to  the  distance  travelled  in  time,  then  s  is  zero.  This 
happens  when  the  velocity  is  unity — the  velocity  of  light.  To 
get  from  Px  to  P2  by  a  path  of  no  interval-length,  we  must 
simply  keep  on  travelling  with  the  velocity  of  light,  cruising 
round  if  necessary,  until  the  moment  comes  to  turn  up  at  P2 . 
On  the  other  hand  there  is  evidently  an  upper  limit  to  the  interval- 
length  of  the  track,  because  each  portion  of  s  is  always  less  than 
the  corresponding  portion  of  (t2  —  ^),  and  s  can  never  exceed 

*a-*i- 

There  is  a  physical  interpretation  of  interval-length  along  the 

path  of  a  particle  which  helps  to  give  a  more  tangible  idea  of 
its  meaning.  It  is  the  time  as  perceived  by  an  observer,  or 
measured  by  a  clock,  carried  on  the  particle.  This  is  called  the 
proper-time ;  and,  of  course,  it  will  not  in  general  agree  with  the 
time-reckoning  of  the  independent  onlooker  who  is  supposed  to 
be  watching  the  whole  proceedings.  To  prove  this,  we  notice 
from  equation  (1)  that  if  x2  =  xlf  y2  =  ylt  and  zz  =  zlt  then 
s  =  t2  —  /! .  The  condition  #2  =  x± ,  etc.  means  that  the  particle 
must  remain  stationary  relative  to  the  observer  who  is  measuring 
x,  y,  2,  t.  To  secure  this  we  mount  our  observer  on  the  particle 
and  then  the  interval-length  s  will  be  t2  —  tlt  which  is  the  time 
elapsed  according  to  his  clock. 

We  can  use  proper-time  as  generally  equivalent  to  interval- 
length;  but  it  must  be  admitted  that  the  term  is  not  very 
logical  unless  the  track  in  question  is  a  natural  track.  For  any 
other  track,  the  drawback  to  denning  the  interval-length  as  the 
time  measured  by  a  clock  which  follows  the  track,  is  that  no 
clock  could  follow  the  track  without  violating  the  laws  of  nature. 
We  may  force  it  into  the  track  by  continually  hitting  it;  but 
that  treatment  may  not  be  good  for  its  time-keeping  qualities. 
The  original  definition  by  equation  (1)  is  the  more  general 
definition. 


72  FIELDS  OF  FORCE  [CH. 

We  are  now  able  to  state  formally  our  proposed  law  of  motion — 
Every  particle  moves  so  as  to  take  the  track  of  greatest  interval- 
length  between  two  events,  except  in  so  far  as  it  is  disturbed  by 
impacts  of  other  particles  or  electrical  forces. 

This  cannot  be  construed  into  a  truism  like  Newton's  first 
law  of  motion.  The  reservation  is  not  an  undefined  agency  like 
force,  whose  meaning  can  be  extended  to  cover  any  breakdown 
of  the  law.  We  reserve  only  direct  material  impacts  and  electro- 
magnetic causes,  the  latter  being  outside  our  present  field  of 
discussion. 

Consider,  for  example,  two  events  in  space-time,  viz.  the 
position  of  the  earth  at  the  present  moment,  and  its  position  a 
hundred  years  ago.  Call  these  events  P2  and  Px .  In  the  interim 
the  earth  (being  undisturbed  by  impacts)  has  moved  so  as  to 
take  the  longest  track  from  Pj  to  P2 — or,  if  we  prefer,  so  as  to 
take  the  longest  possible  proper-time  over  the  journey.  In  the 
weird  geometry  of  the  part  of  space-time  through  which  it 
passes  (a  geometry  which  is  no  doubt  associated  in  some  way 
with  our  perception  of  the  existence  of  a  massive  body,  the  sun) 
this  longest  track  is  a  spiral — a  circle  in  space,  drawn  out  into 
a  spiral  by  continuous  displacement  in  time.  Any  other  course 
would  have  had  shorter  interval-length. 

In  this  way  the  study  of  fields  of  force  is  reduced  to  a  study 
of  geometry.  To  a  certain  extent  this  is  a  retrograde  step ;  we 
adopt  Kepler's  description  of  the  sun's  gravitational  field  instead 
of  Newton's.  The  field  of  force  is  completely  described  if  the 
tracks  through  space  and  time  of  particles  projected  in  every 
possible  way  are  prescribed.  But  we  go  back  in  order  to  go 
forward  in  a  new  direction.  To  express  this  unmanageable  mass 
of  detail  in  a  unified  way,  a  world-geometry  is  found  in  which 
the  tracks  of  greatest  length  are  the  actual  tracks  of  the  particles. 
It  only  remains  to  express  the  laws  of  this  geometry  in  a  concise 
form.  The  change  from  a  mechanical  to  a  geometrical  theory  of 
fields  of  force  is  not  so  fundamental  a  change  as  might  be 
supposed.  If  we  are  now  reducing  mechanics  to  a  branch  of 
natural  geometry,  we  have  to  remember  that  natural  geometry 
is  equally  a  branch  of  mechanics,  since  it  is  concerned  with  the 
behaviour  of  material  measuring-appliances. 

Reference  has  been  made  to  weird  geometry.    There  is  no 


iv]  FIELDS  OF  FORCE  73 

help  for  it,  if  the  longest  track  can  be  a  spiral  like  that  known 
to  be  described  by  the  earth.  Non-Euclidean  geometry  is 
necessary.  In  Euclidean  geometry  the  shortest  track  is  always 
a  straight  line ;  and  the  slight  modification  of  Euclidean  geometry 
described  in  Chapter  in  is  found  to  give  a  straight  line  as  the 
longest  track.  The  status  of  non-Euclidean  geometry  has  already 
been  thrashed  out  in  the  Prologue;  and  there  seems  to  be  no 
reason  whatever  for  preferring  Euclid's  geometry  unless  observa- 
tions decide  in  its  favour.  Equation  (1),  p.  53,  is  the  expression 
of  the  Euclidean  (or  semi-Euclidean)  geometry  we  have  hitherto 
adopted ;  we  shall  have  to  modify  it,  if  we  adopt  non-Euclidean 
geometry. 

But  the  point  arises  that  the  geometry  arrived  at  in  Chapter  in 
was  not  arbitrary.  It  was  the  synthesis  of  measures  made  with 
clocks  and  scales,  by  observers  with  all  kinds  of  uniform  motion 
relative  to  one  another;  we  cannot  modify  it  arbitrarily  to  fit 
the  behaviour  of  moving  particles  like  the  earth.  Now,  if  the 
worst  came  to  the  worst,  and  we  could  not  reconcile  a  geometry 
based  on  measures  with  clocks  and  scales  and  a  geometry  based 
on  the  natural  tracks  of  moving  particles — if  we  had  to  select 
one  or  the  other  and  keep  to  it — I  think  we  ought  to  prefer  to 
use  the  geometry  based  on  the  tracks  of  moving  particles.  The 
free  motion  of  a  particle  is  an  example  of  the  simplest  possible 
kind  of  phenomenon;  it  is  unanalysable;  whereas,  what  the 
readings  of  any  kind  of  clock  record,  what  the  extension  of  a 
material  rod  denotes,  may  evidently  be  complicated  phenomena 
involving  the  secrets  of  molecular  constitution.  Each  geometry 
would  be  right  in  its  own  sphere;  but  the  geometry  of  moving 
particles  would  be  the  more  fundamental  study.  But  it  turns 
out  that  there  is  probably  no  need  to  make  the  choice;  clocks, 
scales,  moving  particles,  light-pulses,  give  the  same  geometry. 
This  might  perhaps  be  expected  since  a  clock  must  comprise 
moving  particles  of  some  kind. 

A  formula,  such  as  equation  (1),  based  on  experiment  can 
only  be  verified  to  a  certain  degree  of  approximation.  Within 
certain  limits  it  will  be  possible  to  introduce  modifications.  Now 
it  turns  out  that  the  free  motion  of  a  particle  is  a  much  more 
sensitive  way  of  exploring  space-time,  than  any  practicable 
measures  with  scales  and  clocks.  If  then  we  employ  our  accurate 


74  FIELDS  OF  FORCE  [CH. 

knowledge  of  the  motion  of  particles  to  correct  the  formula,  we 
shall  find  that  the  changes  introduced  are  so  small  that  they  are 
inappreciable  in  any  practical  measures  with  scales  and  clocks. 
There  is  only  one  case  where  a  possible  detection  of  the  modifica- 
tion is  indicated ;  this  refers  to  the  behaviour  of  a  clock  on  the 
surface  of  the  sun,  but  the  experiment  is  one  of  great  difficulty 
and  no  conclusive  answer  has  been  given.  We  conclude  then 
that  the  geometry  of  space  and  time  based  on  the  motions  of 
particles  is  accordant  with  the  geometry  based  on  the  cruder 
observations  with  clocks  and  scales;  but  if  subsequent  experi- 
ment should  reveal  a  discrepancy,  we  shall  adhere  to  the  moving 
particle  on  account  of  its  greater  simplicity. 

The  proposed  modification  can  be  regarded  from  another 
point  of  view.  Equation  (1)  is  the  synthesis  of  the  experiences 
of  all  observers  in  uniform  motion.  But  uniform  motion  means 
that  their  four-dimensional  tracks  are  straight  lines.  We  must 
suppose  that  the  observers  were  moving  in  their  natural  tracks  ; 
for,  if  not,  they  experienced  fields  of  force,  and  presumably 
allowed  for  these  in  their  calculations,  so  that  reduction  was 
made  to  the  natural  tracks.  If  then  equation  (1)  shows  that 
the  natural  tracks  are  straight  lines,  we  are  merely  getting  out 
of  the  equation  that  which  we  originally  put  into  it. 

The  formula  needs  generalising  in  another  way.  Suppose  there 
is  a  region  of  space-time  where,  for  some  observer,  the  natural 
tracks  are  all  straight  lines  and  equation  (1)  holds  rigorously. 
For  another  (accelerated)  observer  the  tracks  will  be  curved, 
and  the  equation  will  not  hold.  At  the  best  it  is  of  a  form  which 
can  only  hold  good  for  specially  selected  observers. 

Although  it  has  become  necessary  to  throw  our  formula  into 
the  melting-pot,  that  does  not  create  any  difficulty  in  measuring 
the  interval.  Without  going  into  technical  details,  it  may  be 
pointed  out  that  the  innovations  arise  solely  from  the  intro- 
duction of  gravitational  fields  of  force  into  our  scheme.  When 
there  is  no  force,  the  tracks  of  all  particles  are  straight  lines  as 
our  previous  geometry  requires.  In  any  small  region  we  can 
choose  an  observer  (falling  freely)  for  whom  the  force  vanishes, 
and  accordingly  the  original  formula  holds  good.  Thus  it  is  only 
necessary  to  modify  our  rule  for  determining  the  interval  by 
two  provisos  (1)  that  the  interval  measured  must  be  small, 


iv]  FIELDS  OF  FORCE  75 

(2)  that  the  scales  and  clocks  used  for  measuring  it  must  be 
falling  freely.  The  second  proviso  is  natural,  because,  if  we  do 
not  leave  our  apparatus  to  fall  freely,  we  must  allow  for  the 
strain  that  it  undergoes.  The  first  is  not  a  serious  disadvantage, 
because  a  larger  interval  can  be  split  up  into  a  number  of  small 
intervals  and  the  parts  measured  separately.  In  mathematical 
problems  the  same  device  is  met  with  under  the  name  of  integra- 
tion. To  emphasise  that  the  formula  is  strictly  true  only  for 
infinitesimal  intervals,  it  is  written  with  a  new  notation 

dsz  =  -  dx*  -  dy*  -  dz*  +  dt*     (2) 

where  dx  stands  for  the  small  difference  x2  —  x1,  etc. 

The  condition  that  the  measuring  appliances  must  not  be 
subjected  to  a  field  of  force  is  illustrated  by  Ehrenfest's  para- 
dox. Consider  a  wheel  revolving  rapidly.  Each  portion  of  the 
circumference  is  moving  in  the  direction  of  its  length,  and 
might  be  expected  to  undergo  the  FitzGerald  contraction  due 
to  its  velocity ;  each  portion  of  a  radius  is  moving  transversely 
and  would  therefore  have  no  longitudinal  contraction.  It  looks 
as  though  the  rim  of  the  wheel  should  contract  and  the  spokes 
remain  the  same  length,  when  the  wheel  is  set  revolving.  The 
conclusion  is  absurd,  for  a  revolving  wheel  has  no  tendency  to 
buckle — which  would  be  the  only  way  of  reconciling  these 
conditions.  The  point  which  the  argument  has  overlooked  is 
that  the  results  here  appealed  to  apply  to  unconstrained  bodies, 
which  have  no  acceleration  relative  to  the  natural  tracks  in 
space.  Each  portion  of  the  rim  of  the  wheel  has  a  radial  accelera- 
tion, and  this  affects  its  extensional  properties.  When  accelera- 
tions as  well  as  velocities  occur  a  more  far-reaching  theory  is 
needed  to  determine  the  changes  of  length. 

To  sum  up — the  interval  between  two  (near)  events  is  some- 
thing quantitative  which  has  an  absolute  significance  in  nature. 
The  track  between  two  (distant)  events  which  has  the  longest 
interval-length  must  therefore  have  an  absolute  significance. 
Such  tracks  are  called  geodesies.  Geodesies  can  be  traced  practi- 
cally, because  they  are  the  tracks  of  particles  undisturbed  by 
material  impacts.  By  the  practical  tracing  of  these  geodesies 
we  have  the  best  means  of  studying  the  character  of  the  natural 
geometry  of  the  world.  An  auxiliary  method  is  by  scales  and 


76  FIELDS  OF  FORCE  [CH.  iv 

clocks,  which,  it  is  believed,  when  unconstrained,  measure  a 
small  interval  according  to  formula  (2). 

The  identity  of  the  two  methods  of  exploring  the  geometry 
of  the  world  is  connected  with  a  principle  which  must  now  be 
enunciated  definitely.  We  have  said  that  no  experiments  have 
been  able  to  detect  a  difference  between  a  gravitational  field 
and  an  artificial  field  of  force  such- as  the  centrifugal  force.  This 
is  not  quite  the  same  thing  as  saying  that  it  has  been  proved 
that  there  is  no  difference.  It  is  well  to  be  explicit  when  a 
positive  generalisation  is  made  from  negative  experimental 
evidence.  The  generalisation  which  it  is  proposed  to  adopt  is 
known  as  the  Principle  of  Equivalence. 

A  gravitational  field  of  force  is  precisely  equivalent  to  an  artificial 
field  of  force,  so  that  in  any  small  region  it  is  impossible  by  any 
conceivable  experiment  to  distinguish  between  them. 

In  other  words,  force  is  purely  relative. 


CHAPTER  V 
KINDS   OF   SPACE 

The  danger  of  asserting  dogmatically  that  an  axiom  based  on  the  experience 
of  a  limited  region  holds  universally  will  now  be  to  some  extent  apparent  to 
the  reader.  It  may  lead  us  to  entirely  overlook,  or  when  suggested  at  once 
reject,  a  possible  explanation  of  phenomena.  The  hypothesis  that  space  is  not 
homaloidal  [flat],  and  again  that  its  geometrical  character  may  change  with 
the  time,  may  or  may  not  be  destined  to  play  a  great  part  in  the  physics  of  the 
future;  yet  we  cannot  refuse  to  consider  them  as  possible  explanations  of 
physical  phenomena,  because  they  may  be  opposed  to  the  popular  dogmatic 
belief  in  the  universality  of  certain  geometrical  axioms — a  belief  which  has 
risen  from  centuries  of  indiscriminating  worship  of  the  genius  of  Euclid. 

W.  K.  CLIFFORD  (and  K.  PEARSON),  Common  Sense  of  the  Exact  Sciences. 

ON  any  surface  it  requires  two  independent  numbers  or  "co- 
ordinates" to  specify  the  position  of  a  point.  For  this  reason 
a  surface,  whether  flat  or  curved,  is  called  a  two-dimensional 
space.  Points  in  three-dimensional  space  require  three,  and  in 
four-dimensional  space-time  four  numbers  or  coordinates. 

To  locate  a  point  on  a  surface  by  two  numbers,  we  divide  the 
surface  into  meshes  by  any  two  systems  of  lines  which  cross  one 
another.  Attaching  consecutive  numbers  to  the  lines,  or  better 
to  the  channels  between  them,  one  number  from  each  system 
will  identify  a  particular  mesh ;  and  if  the  subdivision  is  sufficiently 
fine  any  point  can  be  specified  in  this  way  with  all  the  accuracy 
needed.  This  method  is  used,  for  example,  in  the  Post  Office 
Directory  of  London  for  giving  the  location  of  streets  on  the 
map.  The  point  (4,  2)  will  be  a  point  in  the  mesh  where  channel 
No.  4  of  the  first  system  crosses  channel  No.  2  of  the  second. 
If  this  indication  is  not  sufficiently  accurate,  we  must  divide 
channel  No.  4  into  ten  parts  numbered  4-0,  4-1,  etc.  The  sub- 
division must  be  continued  until  the  meshes  are  so  small  that 
all  points  in  one  mesh  can  be  considered  identical  within  the 
limits  of  experimental  detection. 

The  diagrams,  Figs.  10,  11,  12,  illustrate  three  of  the  many 
kinds  of  mesh-systems  commonly  used  on  a  flat  surface. 

If  we  speak  of  the  properties  of  the  triangle  formed  by  the 
points  (1,  2),  (3,  0),  (4,  4),  we  shall  be  at  once  asked,  What  mesh- 


78 


KINDS  OF  SPACE 


[CH. 


system  are  you  using?  No  one  can  form  a  picture  of  the  triangle 
until  that  information  has  been  given.  But  if  we  speak  of  the 
properties  of  a  triangle  whose  sides  are  of  lengths  2,  3,  4  inches, 
anyone  with  a  graduated  scale  can  draw  the  triangle,  and  follow 
our  discussion  of  its  properties.  The  distance  between  two  points 
can  be  stated  without  referring  to  any  mesh-system.  For  this 
reason,  if  we  use  a  mesh-system,  it  is  important  to  find  formulae 
connecting  the  absolute  distance  with  the  particular  system  that 
is  being  used. 

In  the  more  complicated  kinds  of  mesh-systems  it  makes  a 
great  simplification  if  we  content  ourselves  with  the  formulae  for 
very  short  distances.  The  mathematician  then  finds  no  difficulty 
in  extending  the  results  to  long  distances  by  the  process  called 
integration.  We  write  ds  for  the  distance  between  two  points 


1  1  /  1  1  1 


FIG.  10. 


FIG.  11. 


FIG.  12. 


close  together,  x±  and  x2  for  the  two  numbers  specifying  the 
location  of  one  of  them,  dxl  and  dx2  for  the  small  differences  of 
these  numbers  in  passing  from  the  first  point  to  the  second. 
But  in  using  one  of  the  particular  mesh-systems  illustrated  in 
the  diagrams,  we  usually  replace  xlt  x2  by  particular  symbols 
sanctioned  by  custom,  viz.  (xlt  x2)  becomes  (x,  y),  (r,  6),  (£,  77) 
for  Figs.  10,  11,  12,  respectively. 

The  formulae,  found  by  geometry,  are: 

For  rectangular  coordinates  (x,  y),  Fig.  10, 
ds2  =  dx2  +  dy\ 

For  polar  coordinates  (r,  0),  Fig.  11, 
ds*  =  dr*  +  rW8. 

For  oblique  coordinates  (f  ,  77),  Fig.  12, 


where  K  is  the  cosine  of  the  angle  between  the  lines  of  partition. 


v]  KINDS  OF  SPACE  79 

As  an  example  of  a  mesh-system  on  a  curved  surface,  we  may 
take  the  lines  of  latitude  and  longitude  on  a  sphere. 

For  latitude  and  longitude  (/?,  A) 

ds2  =  d^  +  cos2  $d\2. 

These  expressions  form  a  test,  and  in  fact  the  only  possible 
test,  of  the  kind  of  coordinates  we  are  using.  It  may  perhaps 
seem  inconceivable  that  an  observer  should  for  an  instant  be  in 
doubt  whether  he  was  using  the  mesh-system  of  Fig.  10  or 
Fig.  11.  He  sees  at  a  glance  that  Fig.  11  is  not  what  he  would 
call  a  rectangular  mesh-system.  But  in  that  glance,  he  makes 
measures  with  his  eye,  that  is  to  say  he  determines  ds  for  pairs 
of  points,  and  he  notices  how  these  values  are  related  to  the 
number  of  intervening  channels.  In  fact  he  is  testing  which 
formula  for  ds  will  fit.  For  centuries  man  was  in  doubt  whether 
the  earth  was  flat  or  round — whether  he  was  using  plane  rect- 
angular coordinates  or  some  kind  of  spherical  coordinates.  In 
some  cases  an  observer  adopts  his  mesh-system  blindly  and  long 
afterwards  discovers  by  accurate  measures  that  ds  does  not  fit 
the  formula  he  assumed — that  his  mesh-system  is  not  exactly  of 
the  nature  he  supposed  it  was.  In  other  cases  he  deliberately 
sets  himself  to  plan  out  a  mesh-system  of  a  particular  variety, 
say  rectangular  coordinates ;  he  constructs  right  angles  and  rules 
parallel  lines;  but  these  constructions  are  all  measurements  of 
the  way  the  ^-channels  and  ^-channels  ought  to  go,  and  the 
rules  of  construction  reduce  to  a  formula  connecting  his  measures 
ds  with  x  and  y. 

The  use  of  special  symbols  for  the  coordinates,  varying 
according  to  the  kind  of  mesh-system  used,  thus  anticipates  a 
knowledge  which  is  really  derived  from  the  form  of  the  formulae. 
In  order  not  to  give  away  the  secret  prematurely,  it  will  be 
better  to  use  the  symbols  xl ,  x2  in  all  cases.  The  four  kinds  of 
coordinates  already  considered  then  give  respectively  the  re- 
lations, 

ds2  =  dxj2  +  dcc22  (rectangular), 

ds*  =  dx^  +  xfdxf  (polar), 

ds2  =  dx^  —  ZKdXidx^  +  dx22  (oblique), 

ds2  =  dxj2  +  cos2  x^dx^  (latitude  and  longitude). 

If  we  have  any  mesh-system  and  want  to  know  its  nature,  we 


80  KINDS  OF  SPACE  [CH. 

must  make  a  number  of  measures  of  the  length  ds  between 
adjacent  points  (xlt  x2)  and  (x±  -f  dxlf  x2  +  dx2)  and  test  which 
formula  fits.  If,  for  example,  we  then  find  that  ds2  is  always 
equal  to  dx-f  +  x^dx£,  we  know  that  our  mesh-system  is  like 
that  in  Fig.  11,  xl  and  x2  being  the  numbers  usually  denoted  by 
the  polar  coordinates  r,  6.  The  statement  that  polar  coordinates 
are  being  used  is  unnecessary,  because  it  adds  nothing  to  our 
knowledge  which  is  not  already  contained  in  the  formula.  It  is 
merely  a  matter  of  giving  a  name ;  but,  of  course,  the  name  calls 
to  our  minds  a  number  of  familiar  properties  which  otherwise 
might  not  occur  to  us. 

For  instance,  it  is  characteristic  of  the  polar  coordinate  system 
that  there  is  only  one  point  for  which  xt  (or  r)  is  equal  to  0, 
whereas  in  the  other  systems  x±  =  0  gives  a  line  of  points.  This 
is  at  once  apparent  from  the  formula;  for  if  we  have  two  points 
for  which  xl  =  0  and  x±  +  dxl  =  0,  respectively,  then 

dxj2  +  x^dxf  =  0. 

The  distance  ds  between  the  two  points  vanishes,  and  accordingly 
they  must  be  the  same  point. 

The  examples  given  can  all  be  summed  up  in  one  general 
expression 

ds*  =  gndxj2  +  2gl2dz1dx2  +  g22dx22, 

where  gu ,  gl2 ,  g22  may  be  constants  or  functions  of  x±  and  cc2 . 
For  instance,  in  the  fourth  example  their  values  are  1,  0,  cos2  x^. 
It  is  found  that  all  possible  mesh-systems  lead  to  values  of  ds2 
which  can  be  included  in  an  expression  of  this  general  form;  so 
that  mesh-systems  are  distinguished  by  three  functions  of 
position  gllt  £12,  £22  which  can  be  determined  by  making  physical 
measurements.  These  three  quantities  are  sometimes  called 
potentials. 

We  now  come  to  a  point  of  far-reaching  importance.  The 
formula  for  ds2  teaches  us  not  only  the  character  of  the  mesh- 
system,  but  the  nature  of  our  two-dimensional  space,  which  is 
independent  of  any  mesh-system.  If  ds2  satisfies  any  one  of  the 
first  three  formulae,  then  the  space  is  like  a  flat  surface;  if  it 
satisfies  the  last  formula,  then  the  space  is  a  surface  curved  like 
a  sphere.  Try  how  you  will,  you  cannot  draw  a  mesh-system  on 
.a  flat  (Euclidean)  surface  which  agrees  with  the  fourth  formula. 


v]  KINDS  OF  SPACE  81 

If  a  being  limited  to  a  two-dimensional  world  finds  that  his 
measures  agree  with  the  first  formula,  he  can  make  them  agree 
with  the  second  or  third  formulae  by  drawing  the  meshes 
differently.  But  to  obtain  the  fourth  formula  he  must  be  trans- 
lated to  a  different  world  altogether. 

We  thus  see  that  there  are  different  kinds  of  two-dimensional 
space,  betrayed  by  different  metrical  properties.  They  are 
naturally  visualised  as  different  surfaces  in  Euclidean  space  of 
three  dimensions.  This  picture  is  helpful  in  some  ways,  but 
perhaps  misleading  in  others.  The  metrical  relations  on  a  plane 
sheet  of  paper  are  not  altered  when  the  paper  is  rolled  into  a 
cylinder — the  measures  being,  of  course,  confined  to  the  two- 
dimensional  world  represented  by  the  paper,  and  not  allowed  to 
take  a  short  cut  through  space.  The  formulae  apply  equally 
well  to  a  plane  surface  or  a  cylindrical  surface;  and  in  so  far  as 
our  picture  draws  a  distinction  between  a  plane  and  a  cylinder, 
it  is  misleading.  But  they  do  not  apply  to  a  sphere,  because 
a  plane  sheet  of  paper  cannot  be  wrapped  round  a  sphere. 
A  genuinely  two-dimensional  being  could  not  be  cognisant  of 
the  difference  between  a  cylinder*  and  a  plane;  but  a  sphere 
would  appear  as  a  different  kind  of  space,  and  he  would  recognise 
the  difference  by  measurement. 

Of  course  there  are  many  kinds  of  mesh-systems,  and  many 
kinds  of  two-dimensional  spaces,  besides  those  illustrated  in  the 
four  examples.  Clearly  it  is  not  going  to  be  a  simple  matter  to 
discriminate  the  different  kinds  of  spaces  by  the  values  of  the 
g's.  There  is  no  characteristic,  visible  to  cursory  inspection, 
which  suggests  why  the  first  three  formulae  should  all  belong  to 
the  same  kind  of  space,  and  the  fourth  to  a  different  one. 
Mathematical  investigation  has  discovered  what  is  the  common 
link  between  the  first  three  formulae.  The  gn ,  g12 ,  g22  satisfy  in 
all  three  cases  a  certain  differential  equationf;  and  whenever 
this  differential  equation  is  satisfied,  the  same  kind  of  space 
occurs. 

No  doubt  it  seems  a  very  clumsy  way  of  approaching  these 
intrinsic  differences  of  kinds  of  space — to  introduce  potentials 

*  One  should  perhaps  rather  say  a  roll,  to  avoid  any  question  of  joining  the 
two  edges. 

t  Appendix,  Note  4. 
E.S.  6 


82  KINDS  OF  SPACE  [CH. 

which  specifically  refer  to  a  particular  mesh-system,  although 
the  mesh-system  can  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  matter.  It  is 
worrying  not  to  be  able  to  express  the  differences  of  space  in  a 
purer  form  without  mixing  them  up  with  irrelevant  differences 
of  potential.  But  we  have  neither  the  vocabulary  nor  the 
imagination  for  a  description  of  absolute  properties  as  such. 
All  physical  knowledge  is  relative  to  space  and  time  partitions; 
and  to  gain  an  understanding  of  the  absolute  it  is  necessary  to 
approach  it  through  the  relative.  The  absolute  may  be  denned 
as  a  relative  which  is  always  the  same  no  matter  what  it  is 
relative  to  *.  Although  we  think  of  it  as  self-existing,  we  cannot 
give  it  a  place  in  our  knowledge  without  setting  up  some  dummy 
to  relate  it  to.  And  similarly  the  absolute  differences  of  space 
always  appear  as  related  to  some  mesh-system,  although  the 
mesh-system  is  only  a  dummy  and  has  nothing  to  do  with  the 
problem. 

The  results  for  two  dimensions  can  be  generalised,  and  applied 
to  four-dimensional  space-time.  Distance  must  be  replaced  by 
interval,  which  it  will  be  remembered,  is  an  absolute  quantity, 
and  therefore  independent  of  the  mesh-system  used.  Partitioning 
space-time  by  any  system  of  meshes,  a  mesh  being  given  by  the 
crossing  of  four  channels,  we  must  specify  a  point  in  space-time 
by  four  coordinate  numbers,  aslf  x2,  #3,  #4-  By  analogy  the 
general  formula  will  be 

+  £22  d*22  +  £33<^32  +  &4  ^42  +  2gltda}ldsct 


#4   ...........................  (3). 

The  only  difference  is  that  there  are  now  ten  g's,  or  potentials, 
instead  of  three,  to  summarise  the  metrical  properties  of  the 
mesh-system.  It  is  convenient  in  specifying  special  values  of 
the  potentials  to  arrange  them  in  the  standard  form 

£11    812    Sis    £i4 

£22    £23    £24 

£33    £34 


*  Cf.  p.  31,  where  a  distinction  was  drawn  between  knowledge  which  does 
not  particularise  the  observer  and  knowledge  which  does  not  postulate  an 
observer  at  all. 


v]  KINDS  OF  SPACE  83 

The  space-time  already  discussed  at  length  in  Chapter  ni 
corresponded  to  the  formula  (2),  p.  75, 

ds*=  -  dx*-  dy2  -  dz*  +  dp. 

Here  (#,  y,  z,  t)  are  the  conventional  symbols  for  (x1>  #2,  xz,  #4) 
when  this  special  mesh-system  is  used,  viz.  rectangular  coordi- 
nates and  time.  Comparing  with  (3)  the  potentials  have  the 
special  values 

-  1       0       0       0 

-  1       00 

-  1       0 

+  1 

These  are  called  the  "Galilean  values."  If  the  potentials  have 
these  values  everywhere,  space-time  may  be  called  "flat," 
because  the  geometry  is  that  of  a  plane  surface  drawn  in 
Euclidean  space  of  five  dimensions.  Recollecting  what  we  found 
for  two  dimensions,  we  shall  realise  that  a  quite  different  set 
of  values  of  the  potentials  may  also  belong  to  flat  space-time, 
because  the  meshes  may  be  drawn  in  different  ways.  We  must 
clearly  understand  that 

(1)  The  only  way  of  discovering  what  kind  of  space-time  is 
being  dealt  with  is  from  the  values  of  the  potentials,  which  are 
determined  practically  by  measurements  of  intervals, 

(2)  Different  values  of  the  potentials  do  not  necessarily 
indicate  different  kinds  of  space-time, 

(3)  There    is    some    complicated    mathematical    property 
common  to  all  values  of  the  potentials  which  belong  to  the 
same  space-time,  which  is  not  shared  by  those  which  belong  to 
a  different  kind  of  space-time.    This  property  is  expressed  by 
a  set  of  differential  equations. 

It  can  now  be  deduced  that  the  space-time  in  which  we  live 
is  not  quite  flat.  If  it  were,  a  mesh-system  could  be  drawn  for 
which  the  g's  have  the  Galilean  values,  and  the  geometry  with 
respect  to  these  partitions  of  space  and  time  would  be  that 
discussed  in  Chapter  in.  For  that  geometry  the  geodesies,  giving 
the  natural  tracks  of  particles,  are  straight  lines. 

Thus  in  flat  space-time  the  law  of  motion  is  that  (with 
suitably  chosen  coordinates)  every  particle  moves  uniformly  in 
a  straight  line  except  when  it  is  disturbed  by  the  impacts  of 

6—2 


84  KINDS  OF  SPACE  [CH. 

other  particles.  Clearly  this  is  not  true  of  our  world ;  for  example, 
the  planets  do  not  move  in  straight  lines  although  they  do  not 
suffer  any  impacts.  It  is  true  that  if  we  confine  attention  to  a 
small  region  like  the  interior  of  Jules  Verne's  projectile,  all  the 
tracks  become  straight  lines  for  an  appropriate  observer,  or, 
as  we  generally  say,  he  detects  no  field  of  force.  It  needs  a 
large  region  to  bring  out  the  differences  of  geometry.  That  is 
not  surprising,  because  we  cannot  expect  to  tell  whether  a 
surface  is  flat  or  curved  unless  we  consider  a  reasonably  large 
portion  of  it. 

According  to  Newtonian  ideas,  at  a  great  distance  from  all 
matter  beyond  the  reach  of  any  gravitation,  particles  would  all 
move  uniformly  in  straight  lines.  Thus  at  a  great  distance  from 
all  matter  space-time  tends  to  become  perfectly  flat.  This  can 
only  be  checked  by  experiment  to  a  certain  degree  of  accuracy, 
and  there  is  some  doubt  as  to  whether  it  is  rigorously  true.  We 
shall  leave  this  afterthought  to  Chapter  x,  meanwhile  assuming 
with  Newton  that  space-time  far  enough  away  from  everything 
is  flat,  although  near  matter  it  is  curved.  It  is  this  puckering 
near  matter  which  accounts  for  its  gravitational  effects. 

Just  as  we  picture  different  kinds  of  two-dimensional  space 
as  differently  curved  surfaces  in  our  ordinary  space  of  three- 
dimensions,  so  we  are  now  picturing  different  kinds  of  four- 
dimensional  space-time  as  differently  curved  surfaces  in  a 
Euclidean  space  of  five  dimensions.  This  is  a  picture  only  *. 
The  fifth  dimension  is  neither  space  nor  time  nor  anything  that 
can  be  perceived ;  so  far  as  we  know,  it  is  nonsense.  I  should  not 
describe  it  as  a  mathematical  fiction,  because  it  is  of  no  great 
advantage  in  a  mathematical  treatment.  It  is  even  liable  to 
mislead  because  it  draws  distinctions,  like  the  distinction  be- 
tween a  plane  and  a  roll,  which  have  no  meaning.  It  is,  like 
the  notion  of  a  field  of  force  acting  in  space  and  time,  merely 
introduced  to  bolster  up  Euclidean  geometry,  when  Euclidean 
geometry  has  been  found  inappropriate.  The  real  difference 
between  the  various  kinds  of  space-time  is  that  they  have 

*  A  fifth  dimension  suffices  for  illustrating  the  property  here  considered; 
but  for  an  exact  representation  of  the  geometry  of  the  world,  Euclidean  space 
of  ten  dimensions  is  required.  We  may  well  ask  whether  there  is  merit  in 
Euclidean  geometry  sufficient  to  justify  going  to  such  extremes. 


v]  KINDS  OF  SPACE  85 

different  kinds  of  geometry,  involving  different  properties  of  the 
g's.  It  is  no  explanation  to  say  that  this  is  because  the  surfaces 
are  differently  curved  in  a  real  Euclidean  space  of  five  dimensions. 
We  should  naturally  ask  for  an  explanation  why  the  space  of 
five  dimensions  is  Euclidean ;  and  presumably  the  answer  would 
be,  because  it  is  a  plane  in  a  real  Euclidean  space  of  six  dimen- 
sions, and  so  on  ad  infinitwn. 

The  value  of  the  picture  to  us  is  that  it  enables  us  to  describe 
important  properties  with  common  terms  like  "pucker"  and 
"curvature"  instead  of  technical  terms  like  "differential 
invariant."  We  have,  however,  to  be  on  our  guard,  because 
analogies  based  on  three-dimensional  space  do  not  always  apply 
immediately  to  many-dimensional  space.  The  writer  has  keen 
recollections  of  a  period  of  much  perplexity,  when  he  had  not 
realised  that  a  four-dimensional  space  with  "no  curvature"  is 
not  the  same  as  a  "flat"  space!  Three-dimensional  geometry 
does  not  prepare  us  for  these  surprises. 

Picturing  the  space-time  in  the  gravitational  field  round  the 
earth  as  a  pucker,  we  notice  that  we  cannot  locate  the  pucker 
at  a  point;  it  is  "somewhere  round"  the  point.  At  any  special 
point  the  pucker  can  be  pressed  out  flat,  and  the  irregularity 
runs  off  somewhere  else.  That  is  what  the  inhabitants  of  Jules 
Verne's  projectile  did;  they  flattened  out  the  pucker  inside  the 
projectile  so  that  they  could  not  detect  any  field  of  force  there; 
but  this  only  made  things  worse  somewhere  else,  and  they 
would  find  an  increased  field  of  force  (relative  to  them)  on  the 
other  side  of  the  earth. 

What  determines  the  existence  of  the  pucker  is  not  the  values 
of  the  g's  at  any  point,  or,  what  comes  to  the  same  thing,  the 
field  of  force  there.  It  is  the  way  these  values  link  on  to  those 
at  other  points — the  gradient  of  the  g's,  and  more  particularly 
the  gradient  of  the  gradient.  Or,  as  has  already  been  said,  the 
kind  of  space-time  is  fixed  by  differential  equations. 

Thus,  although  a  gravitational  field  of  force  is  not  an  absolute 
thing,  and  can  be  imitated  or  annulled  at  any  point  by  an 
acceleration  of  the  observer  or  a  change  of  his  mesh-system, 
nevertheless  the  presence  of  a  heavy  particle  does  modify  the 
world  around  it  in  an  absolute  way  which  cannot  be  imitated 
artificially.  Gravitational  force  is  relative;  but  there  is  this 


86  KINDS  OF  SPACE  [CH. 

more  complex  character  of  gravitational  influence  which  is 
absolute. 

The  question  must  now  be  put,  Can  every  possible  kind  of 
space-time  occur  in  an  empty  region  in  nature?  Suppose  we 
give  the  ten  potentials  perfectly  arbitrary  values  at  every  point  ; 
that  will  specify  the  geometry  of  some  mathematically  possible 
space-time.  But  could  that  kind  of  space-time  actually  occur — 
by  any  arrangement  of  the  matter  round  the  region? 

The  answer  is  that  only  certain  kinds  of  space-time  can  occur 
in  an  empty  region  in  nature.  The  law  which  determines  what 
kinds  can  occur  is  the  law  of  gravitation. 

It  is  indeed  clear  that,  since  we  have  reduced  the  theory  of 
fields  of  force  to  a  theory  of  the  geometry  of  the  world,  if  there 
is  any  law  governing  fields  of  force  (including  the  gravitational 
field),  that  law  must  be  of  the  nature  of  a  restriction  on  the 
possible  geometries  of  the  world. 

The  choice  of  g's  in  any  special  problem  is  thus  arrived  at  by 
a  three-fold  sorting  out:  (1)  many  sets  of  values  can  be  dismissed 
because  they  can  never  occur  in  nature,  (2)  others,  while  possible, 
do  not  relate  to  the  kind  of  space-time  present  in  the  problem 
considered,  (3)  of  those  which  remain,  one  set  of  values  relates 
to  the  particular  mesh-system  that  has  been  chosen.  We  have 
now  to  find  the  law  governing  the  first  discrimination.  What  is 
the  criterion  that  decides  what  values  of  the  g's  give  a  kind  of 
space-time  possible  in  nature? 

In  solving  this  problem  Einstein  had  only  two  clues  to  guide 
him. 

(1)  Since  it  is  a  question  of  whether  the  kind  of  space-time  is 
possible,  the  criterion  must  refer  to  those  properties  of  the  g's 
which  distinguish  different  kinds  of  space-time,  not  to  those 
which  distinguish  different  kinds  of  mesh-system  in  the  same 
space-time.  The  formulae  must  therefore  not  be  altered  in  any 
way,  if  we  change  the  mesh-system. 

(2)  We  know  that  flat  space-time  can  occur  in  nature  (at 
great  distances  from  all  gravitating  matter).  Hence  the  criterion 
must  be  satisfied  by  any  values  of  the  g's  belonging  to  flat 
space-time. 

It  is  remarkable  that  these  slender  clues  are  sufficient  to 
indicate  almost  uniquely  a  particular  law.  Afterwards  the 


v]  KINDS  OF  SPACE  87 

further  test  must  be  applied — whether  the  law  is  confirmed  by 
observation. 

The  irrelevance  of  the  mesh-system  to  the  laws  of  nature  is 
sometimes  expressed  in  a  slightly  different  way.  There  is  one 
type  of  observation  which,  we  can  scarcely  doubt,  must  be 
independent  of  any  possible  circumstances  of  the  observer, 
namely  a  complete  coincidence  in  space  and  time.  The  track  of 
a  particle  through  four-dimensional  space-time  is  called  its 
world-line.  Now,  the  world-lines  of  two  particles  either  intersect 
or  they  do  not  intersect;  the  standpoint  of  the  observer  is  not 
involved.  In  so  far  as  our  knowledge  of  nature  is  a  knowledge 
of  intersections  of  world-lines,  it  is  absolute  knowledge  inde- 
pendent of  the  observer.  If  we  examine  the  nature  of  our 
observations,  distinguishing  what  is  actually  seen  from  what  is 
merely  inferred,  we  find  that,  at  least  in  all  exact  measurements, 
our  knowledge  is  primarily  built  up  of  intersections  of  world- 
lines  of  two  or  more  entities,  that  is  to  say  their  coincidences. 
For  example,  an  electrician  states  that  he  has  observed  a  current 
of  5  milliamperes.  This  is  his  inference:  his  actual  observation 
was  a  coincidence  of  the  image  of  a  wire  in  his  galvanometer 
with  a  division  of  a  scale.  A  meteorologist  finds  that  the  tem- 
perature of  the  air  is  75°;  his  observation  was  the  coincidence  of 
the  top  of  the  mercury-thread  with  division  75  on  the  scale  of 
his  thermometer.  It  would  be  extremely  clumsy  to  describe  the 
results  of  the  simplest  physical  experiment  entirely  in  terms  of 
coincidence.  The  absolute  observation  is,  whether  or  not  the 
coincidence  exists,  not  when  or  where  or  under  what  circum- 
stances the  coincidence  exists ;  unless  we  are  to  resort  to  relative 
knowledge,  the  place,  time  and  other  circumstances  must  in 
their  turn  be  described  by  reference  to  other  coincidences.  But 
it  seems  clear  that  if  we  could  draw  all  the  world-lines  so  as  to 
show  all  the  intersections  in  their  proper  order,  but  otherwise 
arbitrary,  this  would  contain  a  complete  history  of  the  world, 
and  nothing  within  reach  of  observation  would  be  omitted. 

Let  us  draw  such  a  picture,  and  imagine  it  embedded  in  a 
jelly.  If  we  deform  the  jelly  in  any  way,  the  intersections  will 
still  occur  in  the  same  order  along  each  world-line  and  no 
additional  intersections  will  be  created.  The  deformed  jelly  will 
represent  a  history  of  the  world,  just  as  accurate  as  the  one 


88  KINDS  OF  SPACE  [CH. 

originally  drawn;  there  can  be  no  criterion  for  distinguishing 
which  is  the  best  representation. 

Suppose  now  we  introduce  space  and  time-partitions,  which 
we  might  do  by  drawing  rectangular  meshes  in  both  jellies. 
We  have  now  two  ways  of  locating  the  world-lines  and  events 
in  space  and  time,  both  on  the  same  absolute  footing.  But 
clearly  it  makes  no  difference  in  the  result  of  the  location  whether 
we  first  deform  the  jelly  and  then  introduce  regular  meshes,  or 
whether  we  introduce  irregular  meshes  in  the  undeformed  jelly. 
And  so  all  mesh-systems  are  on  the  same  footing. 

This  account  of  our  observational  knowledge  of  nature  shows 
that  there  is  no  shape  inherent  in  the  absolute  world,  so  that 
when  we  insert  a  mesh-system,  it  has  no  shape  initially,  and  a 
rectangular  mesh-system  is  intrinsically  no  different  from  any 
other  mesh-system. 

Returning  to  our  two  clues,  condition  (1)  makes  an  extra- 
ordinarily clean  sweep  of  laws  that  might  be  suggested  ;  among 
them  Newton's  law  is  swept  away.  The  mode  of  rejection  can 
be  seen  by  an  example;  it  will  be  sufficient  to  consider  two 
dimensions.  If  in  one  mesh-system  (#,  y) 

ds2  =  gu&v*  +  2glzdxdy  +  fe^2, 
and  in  another  system  (x'9  y') 

ds*  =  £n  W*  +  2g12'  dx'dy'  +  g^dy'\ 

the  same  law  must  be  satisfied  if  the  unaccented  letters  are 
throughout  replaced  by  accented  letters.  Suppose  the  law 
£11  =  £22  is  suggested.  Change  the  mesh-system  by  spacing  the 
2/-lines  twice  as  far  apart,  that  is  to  say  take  y'  =  \y>  with 


2g12dxdy 

4g12dx'dy' 

so  that  gur  =  gu,        g22  =  4g22. 

And  if  gu  is  equal  to  £22»  £11'  cannot  be  equal  to  £22'. 

After  a  few  trials  the  reader  will  begin  to  be  surprised  that 
any  possible  law  could  survive  the  test.  It  seems  so  easy  to 
defeat  any  formula  that  is  set  up  by  a  simple  change  of  mesh- 
system.  Certainly  it  is  unlikely  that  anyone  would  hit  on  such 
a  law  by  trial.  But  there  are  such  laws,  composed  of  exceedingly 
complicated  mathematical  expressions.  The  theory  of  these  is 


v]  KINDS  OF  SPACE  89 

called  the  "theory  of  tensors,"  and  had  already  been  worked 
out  by  the  pure  mathematicians  Riemann,  Christoffel,  Ricci, 
Levi-Civita  who,  it  may  be  presumed,  never  dreamt  of  a  physical 
application  for  it. 

One  law  of  this  kind  is  the  condition  for  flat  space-time, 
which  is  generally  written  in  the  simple,  but  not  very  illuminating, 
form 


The  quantity  on  the  left  is  called  the  Riemann-Christoffel 
tensor,  and  it  is  written  out  in  a  less  abbreviated  form  in  the 
Appendix*.  It  must  be  explained  that  the  letters  /i,,  v,  a,  p 
indicate  gaps,  which  are  to  be  filled  up  by  any  of  the  numbers 
1,  2,  3,  4,  chosen  at  pleasure.  (When  the  expression  is  written 
out  at  length,  the  gaps  are  in  the  suffixes  of  the  #'s  and  g's.) 
Filling  the  gaps  in  different  ways,  a  large  number  of  expressions, 
Blul,  I?i23>  B\32,  etc.,  are  obtained.  The  equation  (4)  states  that 
all  of  these  are  zero.  There  are  44,  or  256,  of  these  expressions 
altogether,  but  many  of  them  are  repetitions.  Only  20  of  the 
equations  are  really  necessary;  the  others  merely  say  the  same 
thing  over  again. 

It  is  clear  that  the  law  (4)  is  not  the  law  of  gravitation  for 
which  we  are  seeking,  because  it  is  much  too  drastic.  If  it  were 
a  law  of  nature,  then  only  flat  space-time  could  exist  in  nature, 
and  there  would  be  no  such  thing  as  gravitation.  It  is  not  the 
general  condition,  but  a  special  case  —  when  all  attracting 
matter  is  infinitely  remote. 

But  in  finding  a  general  condition,  it  may  be  a  great  help  to 
know  a  special  case.  Would  it  do  to  select  a  certain  number  of 
the  20  equations  to  be  satisfied  generally,  leaving  the  rest  to 
be  satisfied  only  in  the  special  case?  Unfortunately  the  equations 
hang  together;  and,  unless  we  take  them  all,  it  is  found  that 
the  condition  is  not  independent  of  the  mesh-system.  But  there 
happens  to  be  one  way  of  building  up  out  of  the  20  conditions 
a  less  stringent  set  of  conditions  independent  of  the  mesh- 
system.  Let 

**11  =  #111  +  #112  +  #113  +  #114> 

and,  generally 

GW  =  flj,x  +  Bf^  +  BJ^  +  BJ_4, 

*  Note  5. 


90  KINDS  OF  SPACE  [CH. 

then  the  conditions 

fl^-O    (5), 

will  satisfy  our  requirements  for  a  general  law  of  nature. 

This  law  is  independent  of  the  mesh-system,  though  this  can 
only  be  proved  by  elaborate  mathematical  analysis.  Evidently, 
when  all  the  B's  vanish,  equation  (5)  is  satisfied;  so,  when  flat 
space-time  occurs,  this  law  of  nature  is  not  violated.  Further 
it  is  not  so  stringent  as  the  condition  for  flatness,  and  admits 
of  the  occurrence  of  a  limited  variety  of  non-Euclidean  geome- 
tries. Rejecting  duplicates,  it  comprises  10  equations;  but  four 
of  these  can  be  derived  from  the  other  six,  so  that  it  gives 
six  conditions,  which  happens  to  be  the  number  required  for  a 
law  of  gravitation*. 

The  suggestion  is  thus  reached  that 

<v  =  o 

may  be  the  general  law  of  gravitation.  Whether  it  is  so  or  not 
can  only  be  settled  by  experiment.  In  particular,  it  must  in 
ordinary  cases  reduce  to  something  so  near  the  Newtonian  law, 
that  the  remarkable  confirmation  of  the  latter  by  observation 
is  accounted  for.  Further  it  is  necessary  to  examine  whether 
there  are  any  exceptional  cases  in  which  the  difference  between 
it  and  Newton's  law  can  be  tested.  We  shall  see  that  these 
tests  are  satisfied. 

What  would  have  been  the  position  if  this  suggested  law  had 
failed?  We  might  continue  the  search  for  other  laws  satisfying 
the  two  conditions  laid  down;  but  these  would  certainly  be  far 
more  complicated  mathematically.  I  believe  too  that  they  would 
not  help  much,  because  practically  they  would  be  indistinguish- 
able from  the  simpler  law  here  suggested — though  this  has  not 
been  demonstrated  rigorously.  The  other  alternative  is  that 
there  is  something  causing  force  in  nature  not  comprised  in  the 

*  Isolate  a  region  of  empty  space- time;  and  suppose  that  everywhere  outside 
the  region  the  potentials  are  known.  It  should  then  be  possible  by  the  law  of 
gravitation  to  determine  the  nature  of  space-time  in  the  region.  Ten  differential 
equations  together  with  the  boundary-values  would  suffice  to  determine  the 
ten  potentials  throughout  the  region;  but  that  would  determine  not  only  the 
kind  of  space-time  but  the  mesh-system,  whereas  the  partitions  of  the  mesh- 
system  can  be  continued  across  the  region  in  any  arbitrary  way.  The  four 
sets  of  partitions  give  a  four-fold  arbitrariness;  and  to  admit  of  this,  the  number 
of  equations  required  is  reduced  to  six. 


v]  KINDS  OF  SPACE  91 

geometrical  scheme  hitherto  considered,  so  that  force  is  not 
purely  relative,  and  Newton's  super-observer  exists. 

Perhaps  the  best  survey  of  the  meaning  of  our  theory  can  be 
obtained  from  the  standpoint  of  a  ten-dimensional  Euclidean 
continuum,  in  which  space-time  is  conceived  as  a  particular 
four-dimensional  surface.  It  has  to  be  remarked  that  in  ten 
dimensions  there  are  gradations  intermediate  between  a  flat 
surface  and  a  fully  curved  surface,  which  we  shall  speak  of  as 
curved  in  the  "first  degree"  or  "second  degree*."  The  dis- 
tinction is  something  like  that  of  curves  in  ordinary  space, 
which  may  be  curved  like  a  circle,  or  twisted  like  a  helix ;  but  the 
analogy  is  not  very  close.  The  full  " curvature"  of  a  surface  is  a 
single  quantity  called  G,  built  up  out  of  the  various  terms  GMI/  in 
somewhat  the  same  way  as  these  are  built  up  out  of  BP^V<T. 
The  following  conclusions  can  be  stated. 

If  B£vv=  0  (20  conditions) 

space-time  is  flat.  This  is  the  state  of  the  world  at  an  infinite 
distance  from  all  matter  and  all  forms  of  energy. 

If  G^  =  0  (6  conditions) 

space-time  is  curved  in  the  first  degree.  This  is  the  state  of  the 
world  in  an  empty  region — not  containing  matter,  light  or 
electromagnetic  fields,  but  in  the  neighbourhood  of  these  forms 
of  energy. 

If  G  =  0  (1  condition) 

space-time  is  curved  in  the  second  degree.  This  is  the  state  of 
the  world  in  a  region  not  containing  matter  or  electrons  (bound 
energy),  but  containing  light  or  electromagnetic  fields  (free 
energy). 

If  G  is  not  zero 

space-time  is  fully  curved.  This  is  the  state  of  the  world  in  a 
region  containing  continuous  matter. 

According  to  current  physical  theory  continuous  matter  does 
not  exist,  so  that  strictly  speaking  the  last  case  never  arises. 
Matter  is  built  of  electrons  or  other  nuclei.  The  regions  lying 
between  the  electrons  are  not  fully  curved,  whilst  the  regions 
inside  the  electrons  must  be  cut  out  of  space-time  altogether. 
We  cannot  imagine  ourselves  exploring  the  inside  of  an  electron 

*  This  is  not  a  recognised  nomenclature. 


92  KINDS  OF  SPACE  [CH.V 

with  moving  particles,  light-waves,  or  material  clocks  and 
measuring-rods;  hence,  without  further  definition,  any  geometry 
of  the  interior,  or  any  statement  about  space  and  time  in  the 
interior,  is  meaningless.  But  in  common  life,  and  frequently  in 
physics,  we  are  not  concerned  with  this  microscopic  structure  of 
matter.  We  need  to  know,  not  the  actual  values  of  the  g's  at 
a  point,  but  their  average  values  through  a  region,  small  from 
the  ordinary  standpoint  but  large  compared  with  the  molecular 
structure  of  matter.  In  this  macroscopic  treatment  molecular 
matter  is  replaced  by  continuous  matter,  and  uncurved  space- 
time  studded  with  holes  is  replaced  by  an  equivalent  fully 
curved  space-time  without  holes. 

It  is  natural  that  our  senses  should  have  developed  faculties 
for  perceiving  some  of  these  intrinsic  distinctions  of  the  possible 
states  of  the  world  around  us.  I  prefer  to  think  of  matter  and 
energy,  not  as  agents  causing  the  degrees  of  curvature  of  the 
world,  but  as  parts  of  our  perceptions  of  the  existence  of  the 
curvature. 

It  will  be  seen  that  the  law  of  gravitation  can  be  summed  up 
in  the  statement  that  in  an  empty  region  space-time  can  be 
curved  only  in  the  first  degree. 


CHAPTER  VI 

THE  NEW  LAW  OF  GRAVITATION  AND 
THE  OLD  LAW 

I  don't  know  what  I  may  seem  to  the  world,  but,  as  to  myself,  I  seem  to  have 
been  only  as  a  boy  playing  on  the  sea-shore,  and  diverting  myself  in  now  and 
then  finding  a  smoother  pebble  or  a  prettier  shell  than  ordinary,  whilst  the 
great  ocean  of  truth  lay  all  undiscovered  before  me.  SIR  ISAAC  NEWTON. 

WAS  there  any  reason  to  feel  dissatisfied  with  Newton's  law  of 
gravitation? 

Observationally  it  had  been  subjected  to  the  most  stringent 
tests,  and  had  come  to  be  regarded  as  the  perfect  model  of  an 
exact  law  of  nature.  The  cases,  where  a  possible  failure  could 
be  alleged,  were  almost  insignificant.  There  are  certain  unex- 
plained irregularities  in  the  moon's  motion;  but  astronomers 
generally  looked — and  must  still  look — in  other  directions  for 
the  cause  of  these  discrepancies.  One  failure  only  had  led  to 
a  serious  questioning  of  the  law;  this  was  the  discordance  of 
motion  of  the  perihelion  of  Mercury.  How  small  was  this  dis- 
crepancy may  be  judged  from  the  fact  that,  to  meet  it,  it  was 
proposed  to  amend  square  of  the  distance  to  the  2-00000016 
power  of  the  distance.  Further  it  seemed  possible,  though 
unlikely,  that  the  matter  causing  the  zodiacal  light  might  be  of 
sufficient  mass  to  be  responsible  for  this  effect. 

The  most  serious  objection  against  the  Newtonian  law  as  an 
exact  law  was  that  it  had  become  ambiguous.  The  law  refers 
to  the  product  of  the  masses  of  the  two  bodies ;  but  the  mass 
depends  on  the  velocity — a  fact  unknown  in  Newton's  day. 
Are  we  to  take  the  variable  mass,  or  the  mass  reduced  to  rest? 
Perhaps  a  learned  judge,  interpreting  Newton's  statement  like 
a  last  will  and  testament,  could  give  a  decision;  but  that  is 
scarcely  the  way  to  settle  an  important  point  in  scientific 
theory. 

Further  distance,  also  referred  to  in  the  law,  is  something 
relative  to  an  observer.  Are  we  to  take  the  observer  travelling 
with  the  sun  or  with  the  other  body  concerned,  or  at  rest  in  the 
aether  or  in  some  gravitational  medium? 


94  THE  NEW  LAW  OF  GRAVITATION          fen. 

Finally  is  the  force  of  gravitation  propagated  instantaneously, 
or  with  the  velocity*  of  light,  or  some  other  velocity?  Until 
comparatively  recently  it  was  thought  that  conclusive  proof 
had  been  given  that  the  speed  of  gravitation  must  be  far  higher 
than  that  of  light.  The  argument  was  something  like  this.  If 
the  Sun  attracts  Jupiter  towards  its  present  position  S,  and 
Jupiter  attracts  the  Sun  towards  its  present  position  J,  the  two 
forces  are  in  the  same  line  and  balance.  But  if  the  Sun  attracts 
Jupiter  towards  its  previous  position  Sr,  and  Jupiter  attracts 
the  Sun  towards  its  previous  position  J',  when  the  force  of 
attraction  started  out  to  cross  the  gulf,  then  the  two  forces 


PIG.  13. 

give  a  couple.  This  couple  will  tend  to  increase  the  angular 
momentum  of  the  system,  and,  acting  cumulatively,  will  soon 
cause  an  appreciable  change  of  period,  disagreeing  with  observa- 
tion if  the  speed  is  at  all  comparable  with  that  of  light.  The 
argument  is  fallacious,  because  the  effect  of  propagation  will  not 
necessarily  be  that  S  is  attracted  in  the  direction  towards  J'. 
Indeed  it  is  found  that  if  S  and  J  are  two  electric  charges,  S  will 
be  attracted  very  approximately  towards  J  (not  J')  in  spite  of 
the  electric  influence  being  propagated  with  the  velocity  of 
light*.  In  the  theory  given  in  this  book,  gravitation  is  propa- 
gated with  the  speed  of  light,  and  there  is  no  discordance  with 
observation. 

It  is  often  urged  that  Newton's  law  of  gravitation  is  much 
*  Appendix,  Note  6. 


vi]  AND  THE  OLD  LAW  95 

simpler  than  Einstein's  new  law.  That  depends  on  the  point  of 
view;  and  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  four-dimensional  world 
Newton's  law  is  far  more  complicated.  Moreover,  it  will  be  seen 
that  if  the  ambiguities  are  to  be  cleared  up,  the  statement  of 
Newton's  law  must  be  greatly  expanded. 

Some  attempts  have  been  made  to  expand  Newton's  law  on 
the  basis  of  the  restricted  principle  of  relativity  (p.  20)  alone. 
This  was  insufficient  to  determine  a  definite  amendment.  Using 
the  principle  of  equivalence,  or  relativity  of  force,  we  have 
arrived  at  a  definite  law  proposed  in  the  last  chapter.  Probably 
the  question  has  arisen  in  the  reader's  mind,  why  should  it  be 
called  the  law  of  gravitation?  It  may  be  plausible  as  a  law  of 
nature;  but  what  has  the  degree  of  curvature  of  space-time  to 
do  with  attractive  forces,  whether  real  or  apparent? 

A  race  of  flat-fish  once  lived  in  an  ocean  in  which  there  were 
only  two  dimensions.  It  was  noticed  that  in  general  fishes  swam 
in  straight  lines,  unless  there  was  something  obviously  interfering 
with  their  free  courses.  This  seemed  a  very  natural  behaviour. 
But  there  was  a  certain  region  where  all  the  fish  seemed  to  be 
bewitched;  some  passed  through  the  region  but  changed  the 
direction  of  their  swim,  others  swam  round  and  round  inde- 
finitely. One  fish  invented  a  theory  of  vortices,  and  said  that 
there  were  whirlpools  in  that  region  which  carried  everything 
round  in  curves.  By-and-by  a  far  better  theory  was  proposed; 
it  was  said  that  the  fishes  were  all  attracted  towards  a  particu- 
larly large  fish — a  sun-fish — which  was  lying  asleep  in  the  middle 
of  the  region ;  and  that  was  what  caused  the  deviation  of  their 
paths.  The  theory  might  not  have  sounded  particularly  plausible 
at  first;  but  it  was  confirmed  with  marvellous  exactitude  by  all 
kinds  of  experimental  tests.  All  fish  were  found  to  possess  this 
attractive  power  in  proportion  to  their  sizes ;  the  law  of  attraction 
was  extremely  simple,  and  yet  it  was  found  to  explain  all  the 
motions  with  an  accuracy  never  approached  before  in  any 
scientific  investigations.  Some  fish  grumbled  that  they  did  not 
see  how  there  could  be  such  an  influence  at  a  distance;  but  it 
was  generally  agreed  that  the  influence  was  communicated 
through  the  ocean  and  might  be  better  understood  when  more 
was  known  about  the  nature  of  water.  Accordingly,  nearly 
every  fish  who  wanted  to  explain  the  attraction  started  by 


96  THE  NEW  LAW  OF  GRAVITATION          [CH. 

proposing  some  kind  of  mechanism  for  transmitting  it  through 
the  water. 

But  there  was  one  fish  who  thought  of  quite  another  plan. 
He  was  impressed  by  the  fact  that  whether  the  fish  were  big 
or  little  they  always  took  the  same  course,  although  it  would 
naturally  take  a  bigger  force  to  deflect  the  bigger  fish.  He  there- 
fore concentrated  attention  on  the  courses  rather  than  on  the 
forces.  And  then  he  arrived  at  a  striking  explanation  of  the 
whole  thing.  There  was  a  mound  in  the  world  round  about 
where  the  sun-fish  lay.  Flat-fish  could  not  appreciate  it  directly 
because  they  were  two-dimensional;  but  whenever  a  fish  went 
swimming  over  the  slopes  of  the  mound,  although  he  did  his 
best  to  swim  straight  on,  he  got  turned  round  a  bit.  (If  a  traveller 
goes  over  the  left  slope  of  a  mountain,  he  must  consciously 
keep  bearing  away  to  the  left  if  he  wishes  to  keep  to  his  original 
direction  relative  to  the  points  of  the  compass.)  This  was  the 
secret  of  the  mysterious  attraction,  or  bending  of  the  paths, 
which  was  experienced  in  the  region. 

The  parable  is  not  perfect,  because  it  refers  to  a  hummock  in 
space  alone,  whereas  we  have  to  deal  with  hummocks  in  space- 
time.  But  it  illustrates  how  a  curvature  of  the  world  we  live 
in  may  give  an  illusion  of  attractive  force,  and  indeed  c%n  only 
be  discovered  through  some  such  effect.  How  this  works  out  in 
detail  must  now  be  considered. 

In  the  form  G^v  =  0,  Einstein's  law  expresses  conditions  to  be 
satisfied  in  a  gravitational  field  produced  by  any  arbitrary 
distribution  of  attracting  matter.  An  analogous  form  of  Newton's 
law  was  given  by  Laplace  in  his  celebrated  expression  V2F  =  0. 
A  more  illuminating  form  of  the  law  is  obtained  if,  instead  of 
putting  the  question  what  kinds  of  space-time  can  exist  under 
the  most  general  conditions  in  an  empty  region,  we  ask  what 
kind  of  space-time  exists  in  the  region  round  a  single  attracting 
particle?  We  separate  out  the  effect  of  a  single  particle,  just  as 
Newton  did.  We  can  further  simplify  matters  by  introducing 
some  definite  mesh-system,  which,  of  course,  must  be  of  a  type 
which  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  kind  of  space-time  found. 

We  need  only  consider  space  of  two  dimensions — sufficient 
for  the  so-called  plane  orbit  of  a  planet — time  being  added  as 
the  third  dimension.  The  remaining  dimension  of  space  can 


vi]  AND  THE  OLD  LAW  97 

always  be  added,  if  desired,  by  conditions  of  symmetry.    The 
result  of  long  algebraic  calculations  *  is  that,  round  a  particle 

ds2=-  -  dr2  -  r2d62  + -ydt2 ....(6) 

2m 
where  y  =  1 —  . 

The  quantity  m  is  the  gravitational  mass  of  the  particle — 
but  we  are  not  supposed  to  know  that  at  present,  r  and  6  are 
polar  coordinates,  the  mesh-system  being  as  in  Fig.  11 ;  or  rather 
they  are  the  nearest  thing  to  polar  coordinates  that  can  be 
found  in  space  which  is  not  truly  flat. 

The  fact  is  that  this  expression  for  ds2  is  found  in  the  first 
place  simply  as  a  particular  solution  of  Einstein's  equations  of 
the  gravitational  field;  it  is  a  variety  of  hummock  (apparently 
the  simplest  variety)  which  is  not  curved  beyond  the  first  degree. 
There  could  be  such  a  state  of  the  world  under  suitable  circum- 
stances. To  find  out  what  those  circumstances  are.  we  have  to 
trace  some  of  the  consequences,  find  out  how  any  particle 
moves  when  ds2  is  of  this  form,  and  then  examine  whether  we 
know  of  any  case  in  which  these  consequences  are  found 
observationally.  It  is  only  after  having  ascertained  that  this 
form  of  ds2  does  correspond  to  the  leading  observed  effects 
attributable  to  a  particle  of  mass  m  at  the  origin  that  we  have 
the  right  to  identify  this  particular  solution  with  the  one  we 
hoped  to  find. 

It  will  be  a  sufficient  illustration  of  this  procedure,  if  we 
indicate  how  the  position  of  the  matter  causing  this  particular 
solution  is  located.  Wherever  the  formula  (6)  holds  good  there 
can  be  no  matter,  because  the  law  which  applies  to  empty  space 
is  satisfied.  But  if  we  try  to  approach  the  origin  (r  =  0),  a 
curious  thing  happens.  Suppose  we  take  a  measuring-rod,  and, 
laying  it  radially,  start  marking  off  equal  lengths  with  it  along 
a  radius,  gradually  approaching  the  origin.  Keeping  the  time 
t  constant,  and  dO  being  zero  for  radial  measurements,  the 
formula  (6)  reduces  to 

ds2  =  -  -  dr2 

y 

or  dr2  =  —  yds2. 

*  Appendix,  Note  7. 
E.  s.  i 


98  THE  NEW  LAW  OF  GRAVITATION          [CH. 

We  start  with  r  large.  By-and-by  we  approach  the  point 
where  r  =  2m.  But  here,  from  its  definition,  y  is  equal  to  0. 
So  that,  however  large  the  measured  interval  ds  may  be,  dr  =  0. 
We  can  go  on  shifting  the  measuring-rod  through  its  own  length 
time  after  time,  but  dr  is  zero;  that  is  to  say,  we  do  not  reduce 
r.  There  is  a  magic  circle  which  no  measurement  can  bring  us 
inside.  It  is  not  unnatural  that  we  should  picture  something 
obstructing  our  closer  approach,  and  say  that  a  particle  of 
matter  is  filling  up  the  interior. 

The  fact  is  that  so  long  as  we  keep  to  space-time  curved  only 
in  the  first  degree,  we  can  never  round  off  the  summit  of  the 
hummock.  It  must  end  in  an  infinite  chimney.  In  place  of  the 
chimney,  however,  we  round  it  off  with  a  small  region  of  greater 
curvature.  This  region  cannot  be  empty  because  the  law  applying 
to  empty  space  does  not  hold.  We  describe  it  therefore  as  con- 
taining matter— a  procedure  which  practically  amounts  to  a 
definition  of  matter.  Those  familiar  with  hydrodynamics  may 
be  reminded  of  the  problem  of  the  irrotational  rotation  of  a 
fluid;  the  conditions  cannot  be  satisfied  at  the  origin,  and  it  is 
necessary  to  cut  out  a  region  which  is  filled  by  a  vortex- 
filament. 

A  word  must  also  be  said  as  to  the  coordinates  r  and  t  used 
in  (6).  They  correspond  to  our  ordinary  notion  of  radial  distance 
and  time — as  well  as  any  variables  in  a  non-Euclidean  world 
can  correspond  to  words  which,  as  ordinarily  used,  presuppose 
a  Euclidean  world.  We  shall  thus  call  r  and  t,  distance  and  time. 
But  to  give  names  to  coordinates  does  not  give  more  information 
— and  in  this  case  gives  considerably  less  information — than  is 
already  contained  in  the  formula  for  ds2.  If  any  question  arises 
as  to  the  exact  significance  of  r  and  t  it  must  always  be  settled 
by  reference  to  equation  (6). 

The  want  of  flatness  in  the  gravitational  field  is  indicated  by 
the  deviation  of  the  coefficient  y  from  unity.  If  the  mass  m  =  0, 
y  =  1,  and  space- time  is  perfectly  flat.  Even  in  the  most  intense 
gravitational  fields  known,  the  deviation  is  extremely  small. 
For  the  sun,  the  quantity  m,  called  the  gravitational  mass,  is 
only  1-47  kilometres*,  for  the  earth  it  is  5  millimetres.  In  any 
practical  problem  the  ratio  2m/r  must  be  exceedingly  small. 

*  Appendix,  Note  8. 


vi]  AND  THE  OLD  LAW  99 

Yet  it  is  on  the  small  corresponding  difference  in  y  that  the 
whole  of  the  phenomena  of  gravitation  depend. 

The  coefficient  y  appears  twice  in  the  formula,  and  so  modifies 
the  flatness  of  space-time  in  two  ways.  But  as  a  rule  these  two 
ways  are  by  no  means  equally  important.  Its  appearance  as  a 
coefficient  of  dt2  produces  much  the  most  striking  effects. 
Suppose  that  it  is  wished  to  measure  the  interval  between  two 
events  in  the  history  of  a  planet.  If  the  events  are,  say  1  second 
apart  in  time,  dt  =  1  second  =  300,000  kilometres.  Thus 
dt2  =  90,000,000,000  sq.  km.  Now  no  planet  moves  more  than 
50  kilometres  in  a  second,  so  that  the  change  dr  associated  with 
the  lapse  of  1  second  in  the  history  of  the  planet  will  not  be 
more  than  50  km.  Thus  dr2  is  not  more  than  2500  sq.  km. 
Evidently  the  small  term  2m/r  has  a  much  greater  chance  of 
making  an  impression  where  it  is  multiplied  by  dt2  than  where 
it  is  multiplied  by  dr2. 

Accordingly  as  a  first  approximation,  we  ignore  the  coefficient 
of  dr2,  and  consider  only  the  meaning  of 

ds2  =  -dr2-  r2d02  +  (1  -  2m/r)  dt2  (7). 

We  shall  now  show  that  particles  situated  in  this  kind  of  space- 
time  will  appear  to  be  under  the  influence  of  an  attractive  force 
directed  towards  the  origin. 

Let  us  consider  the  problem  of  mapping  a  small  portion  of  this 
kind  of  world  on  a  plane. 

It  is  first  necessary  to  define  carefully  the  distinction  which  is 
here  drawn  between  a  "picture"  and  a  "map."  If  we  are  given 
the  latitudes  and  longitudes  of  a  number  of  places  on  the  earth, 
we  can  make  a  picture  by  taking  latitude  and  longitude  as 
vertical  and  horizontal  distances,  so  that  the  lines  of  latitude 
and  longitude  form  a  mesh-system  of  squares ;  but  that  does  not 
give  a  true  map.  In  an  ordinary  map  of  Europe  the  lines  of 
longitude  run  obliquely  and  the  lines  of  latitude  are  curved. 
Why  is  this?  Because  the  map  aims  at  showing  as  accurately 
as  possible  all  distances  in  their  true  proportions  *.  Distance  is 
the  important  thing  which  it  is  desired  to  represent  correctly. 
In  four  dimensions  interval  is  the  analogue  of  distance,  and  a 
map  of  the  four-dimensional  world  will  aim  at  showing  all  the 

*  This  is  usually  the  object,  though  maps  are  sometimes  made  for  a  different 
purpose,  e.g.  Mercator's  Chart. 

7—2 


100 


THE  NEW  LAW  OF  GRAVITATION 


[CH. 


intervals  in  their  correct  proportions.  Our  natural  picture  of 
space-time  takes  r  and  t  as  horizontal  and  vertical  distances, 
e.g.  when  we  plot  the  graph  of  the  motion  of  a  particle ;  but  in 
a  true  map,  representing  the  intervals  in  their  proper  proportions, 
the  r  and  t  lines  run  obliquely  or  in  curves  across  the  map. 

The  instructions  for  drawing  latitude  and  longitude  lines  (/3,  A) 
on  a  map,  are  summed  up  in  the  formula  for  ds,  p.  79, 


FIG.  14. 

and  similarly  the  instructions  for  drawing  the  r  and  t  lines  are 
given  by  the  formula  (7). 

The  map  is  shown  in  Fig.  14.  It  is  not  difficult  to  see  why  the 
Z-lines  converge  to  the  left  of  the  diagram.  The  factor  1  —  2m/r 
decreases  towards  the  left  where  r  is  small;  and  consequently 
any  change  of  t  corresponds  to  a  shorter  interval,  and  must  be 
represented  in  the  map  by  a  shorter  distance  on  the  left.  It  is 
less  easy  to  see  why  the  r-lines  take  the  courses  shown;  by 
analogy  with  latitude  and  longitude  we,  might  expect  them  to 
be  curved  the  other  way.  But  we  discussed  in  Chapter  in  how 


AND  THE  OLD  LAW 


101 


the  slope  of  the  time-direction  is  connected  with  the  slope  of 
the  space-direction;  and  it  will  be  seen  that  the  map  gives 
approximately  diamond-shaped  partitions  of  the  kind  repre- 
sented in  Fig.  6*. 

Like  all  maps  of  curved  surfaces,  the  diagram  is  only  accurate 
in  the  limit  when  the  area  covered  is  very  small. 

It  is  important  to  understand  clearly  the  meaning  of  this  map. 
When  we  speak  in  the  ordinary  way  of  distance  from  the  sun 
and  the  time  at  a  point  in  the  solar  system,  we  mean  the  two 
variables  r  and  t.  These  are  not  the  result  of  any  precise  measures 
with  scales  and  clocks  made  at  a  point,  but  are  mathematical 
variables  most  appropriate  for  describing  the  whole  solar  system. 


FIG.  15. 

They  represent  a  compromise,  because  it  is  necessary  to  deal 
with  a  region  too  large  for  accurate  representation  on  a  plane 
map.  We  should  naturally  picture  them  as  rectangular  co- 
ordinates partitioning  space-time  into  square  meshes,  as  in 
Fig.  15;  but  such  a  picture  is  not  a  true  map,  because  it  does 
not  represent  in  their  true  proportions  the  intervals  between  the 
various  points  in  the  picture.  It  is  not  possible  to  draw  any 
map  of  the  whole  curved  region  without  distortion ;  but  a  small 
enough  portion  can  be  represented  without  distortion  if  the 
partitions  of  equal  r  and  t  are  drawn  as  in  Fig.  14.  To  get  back 

*  The  substitution  x=r  +  $tzm/r2,  y  =  t(l-m/r),  gives  fo*=  -dxz  +  dy*,  if 
squares  of  m  are  negligible.  The  map  is  drawn  with  x  and  y  as  rectangular 
coordinates. 


102  THE  NEW  LAW  OF  GRAVITATION          [CH. 

from  the  true  map  to  the  customary  picture  of  r  and  t  as  per- 
pendicular space  and  time,  we  must  strain  Fig.  14  until  all  the 
meshes  become  squares  as  in  Fig.  15. 

Now  in  the  map  the  geometry  is  Euclidean  and  the  tracks  of 
all  material  particles  will  be  straight  lines.  Take  such  a  straight 
track  PQ,  which  will  necessarily  be  nearly  vertical,  unless  the 
velocity  is  very  large.  Strain  the  figure  so  as  to  obtain  the 
customary  representation  of  r  and  t  (in  Fig.  15),  and  the  track 
PQ  will  become  curved — curved  towards  the  left,  where  the  sun 
lies.  In  each  successive  vertical  interval  (time),  a  successively 
greater  progress  is  made  to  the  left  horizontally  (space).  Thus 
the  velocity  towards  the  sun  increases.  We  say  that  the  particle 
is  attracted  to  the  sun. 

The  mathematical  reader  should  find  no  difficulty  in  proving 
from  the  diagram  that  for  a  particle  with  small  velocity  the 
acceleration  towards  the  sun  is  approximately  m/r2,  agreeing 
with  the  Newtonian  law. 

Tracks  for  very  high  speeds  may  be  affected  rather  differently. 
The  track  corresponding  to  a  wave  of  light  is  represented  by 
a  straight  line  at  45°  to  the  horizontal  in  Fig.  14.  It  would 
require  very  careful  drawing  to  trace  what  happens  to  it  when 
the  strain  is  made  transforming  to  Fig.  15;  but  actually,  whilst 
becoming  more  nearly  vertical,  it  receives  a  curvature  in  the 
opposite  direction.  The  effect  of  the  gravitation  of  the  sun  on 
a  light-wave,  or  very  fast  particle,  proceeding  radially  is  actually 
a  repulsion ! 

The  track  of  a  transverse  light-wave,  coming  out  from  the 
plane  of  the  paper,  will  be  affected  like  that  of  a  particle  of 
zero  velocity  in  distorting  from  Fig.  14  to  Fig.  15.  Hence  the 
sun's  influence  on  a  transverse  light- wave  is  always  an  attraction. 
The  acceleration  is  simply  m/r2  as  for  a  particle  at  rest. 

The  result  that  the  expression  found  for  the  geometry  of  the 
gravitational  field  of  a  particle  leads  to  Newton's  law  of  attrac- 
tion is  of  great  importance.  It  shows  that  the  law,  G^v  =  0, 
proposed  on  theoretical  grounds,  agrees  with  observation  at 
least  approximately.  It  is  no  drawback  that  the  Newtonian 
law  applies  only  when  the  speed  is  small;  all  planetary  speeds 
are  small  compared  with  the  velocity  of  light,  and  the  considera- 
tions mentioned  at  the  beginning  of  this  chapter  suggest  that 


vi]  AND  THE  OLD  LAW  103 

some  modification  may  be  needed  for  speeds  comparable  with 
that  of  light. 

Another  important  point  to  notice  is  that  the  attraction  of 
gravitation  is  simply  a  geometrical  deformation  of  the  straight 
tracks.  It  makes  no  difference  what  body  or  influence  is  pursuing 
the  track,  the  deformation  is  a  general  discrepancy  between  the 
"mental  picture"  and  the  "true  map"  of  the  portion  of  space- 
time  considered.  Hence  light  is  subject  to  the  same  disturbance 
of  path  as  matter.  This  is  involved  in  the  Principle  of  Equi- 
valence; otherwise  we  could  distinguish  between  the  acceleration 
of  a  lift  and  a  true  increase  of  gravitation  by  optical  experi- 
ments ;  in  that  case  the  observer  for  whom  light-rays  appear  to 
take  straight  tracks  might  be  described  as  absolutely  unacceler- 
ated  and  there  could  be  no  relativity  theory.  Physicists  in 
general  have  been  prepared  to  admit  the  likelihood  of  an 
influence  of  gravitation  on  light  similar  to  that  exerted  on 
matter;  and  the  problem  whether  or  not  light  has  "weight" 
has  often  been  considered. 

The  appearance  of  y  as  the  coefficient  of  dt2  is  responsible  for 
the  main  features  of  Newtonian  gravitation  ;  the  appearance  of 
]/y  as  the  coefficient  of  dr*  is  responsible  for  the  principal 
deviations  of  the  new  law  from  the  old.  This  classification  seems 
to  be  correct;  but  the  Newtonian  law  is  ambiguous  and  it  is 
difficult  to  say  exactly  what  are  to  be  regarded  as  discrepancies 
from  it.  Leaving  aside  now  the  time-term  as  sufficiently  dis- 
cussed, we  consider  the  space-  terms  alone* 


y 

The  expression  shows  that  space  considered  alone  is  non- 
Euclidean  in  the  neighbourhood  of  an  attracting  particle.  This 
is  something  entirely  outside  the  scope  of  the  old  law  of  gravita- 
tion. Time  can  only  be  explored  by  something  moving,  whether 
a  free  particle  or  the  parts  of  a  clock,  so  that  the  non-Euclidean 
character  of  space-time  can  be  covered  up  by  introducing  a  field 
of  force,  suitably  modifying  the  motion,  as  a  convenient  fiction. 
But  space  can  be  explored  by  static  methods  ;  and  theoretically 

*  We  change  the  sign  of  ds2,  so  that  ds,  when  real,  means  measured  space 
instead  of  measured  time. 


104  THE  NEW  LAW  OF  GRAVITATION          [CH. 

its  non-Euclidean  character  could  be  ascertained  by  sufficiently 
precise  measures  with  rigid  scales. 

If  we  lay  our  measuring  scale  transversely  and  proceed  to 
measure  the  circumference  of  a  circle  of  nominal  radius  r,  we 
see  from  the  formula  that  the  measured  length  ds  is  equal  to 
rd9,  so  that,  when  we  have  gone  right  round  the  circle,  6  has 
increased  by  2n  and  the  measured  circumference  is  27rr.  But 
when  we  lay  the  scale  radially  the  measured  length  ds  is  equal 
to  dr/Vy,  which  is  always  greater  than  dr.  Thus,  in  measuring 
a  diameter,  we  obtain  a  result  greater  than  2r,  each  portion  being 
greater  than  the  corresponding  change  of  r. 

Thus  if  we  draw  a  circle,  placing  a  massive  particle  near  the 
centre  so  as  to  produce  a  gravitational  field,  and  measure  with 
a  rigid  scale  the  circumference  and  the  diameter,  the  ratio  of 
the  measured  circumference  to  the  measured  diameter  will  not  be 
the  famous  number  TT  =  3-141592653589793238462643383279... 
but  a  little  smaller.  Or  if  we  inscribe  a  regular  hexagon  in  this 
circle  its  sides  will  not  be  exactly  equal  to  the  radius  of  the 
circle.  Placing  the  particle  near,  instead  of  at,  the  centre, 
avoids  measuring  the  diameter  through  the  particle,  and  so 
makes  the  experiment  a  practical  one.  But  though  practical, 
it  is  not  practicable  to  determine  the  non-Euclidean  character 
of  space  in  this  way.  Sufficient  refinement  of  measures  is  not 
attainable.  If  the  mass  of  a  ton  were  placed  inside  a  circle  of 
5  yards  radius,  the  defect  in  the  value  of  TT  would  only  appear 
in  the  twenty-fourth  or  twenty-fifth  place  of  decimals. 

It  is  of  value  to  put  the  result  in  this  way,  because  it  shows 
that  the  relativist  is  not  talking  metaphysics  when  he  says  that 
space  in  the  gravitational  field  is  non-Euclidean.  His  statement 
has  a  plain  physical  meaning,  which  we  may  some  day  learn  how 
to  test  experimentally.  Meanwhile  we  can  test  it  by  indirect 
methods. 

Suppose  that  a  plane  field  is  uniformly  studded  with  hurdles. 
The  distance  between  any  two  points  will  be  proportional  to 
the  number  of  hurdles  that  must  be  passed  over  in  getting  from 
one  point  to  the  other  by  the  straight  route — in  fact  the  minimum 
number  of  hurdles.  We  can  use  counts  of  hurdles  as  the  equi- 
valent of  distance,  and  map  the  field  by  these  counts.  The  map 
can  be  drawn  on  a  plane  sheet  of  paper  without  any  inconsis- 


vi]  AND  THE  OLD  LAW  105 

tency,  since  the  field  is  plane.  Let  us  now  dismiss  from  our 
minds  all  idea  of  distances  in  the  field  or  straight  lines  in  the 
field,  and  assume  that  distances  on  the  map  merely  represent 
the  minimum  number  of  hurdles  between  two  points;  straight 
lines  on  the  map  will  represent  the  corresponding  routes.  This 
has  the  advantage  that  if  an  earthquake  occurs,  deforming  the 
field,  the  map  will  still  be  correct.  The  path  of  fewest  hurdles 
will  still  cross  the  same  hurdles  as  before  the  earthquake;  it 
will  be  twisted  out  of  the  straight  line  in  the  field ;  but  we  should 
gain  nothing  by  taking  a  straighter  course,  since  that  would 
lead  through  a  region  where  the  hurdles  are  more  crowded. 
We  do  not  alter  the  number  of  hurdles  in  any  path  by  deforming 
it. 

This  can  be  illustrated  by  Figs.  14  and  15.  Fig.  14  represents 
the  original  undistorted  field  with  the  hurdles  uniformly  placed. 
The  straight  line  PQ  represents  the  path  of  fewest  hurdles  from 
P  to  Q,  and  its  length  is  proportional  to  the  number  of  hurdles. 
Fig.  15  represents  the  distorted  field,  with  PQ  distorted  into 
a  curve ;  but  PQ  is  still  the  path  of  fewest  hurdles  from  P  to  Q, 
and  the  number  of  hurdles  in  the  path  is  the  same  as  before. 
If  therefore  we  map  according  to  hurdle-counts  we  arrive  at 
Fig.  14  again,  just  as  though  no  deformation  had  taken  place. 

To  make  any  difference  in  the  hurdle-counts,  the  hurdles 
must  be  taken  up  and  replanted.  Starting  from  a  given  point 
as  centre,  let  us  arrange  them  so  that  they  gradually  thin  out 
towards  the  boundaries  of  the  field.  Now  choose  a  circle  with 
this  point  as  centre; — but  first,  what  is  a  circle?  It  has  to  be 
defined  in  terms  of  hurdle-counts;  and  clearly  it  must  be  a 
curve  such  that  the  minimum  number  of  hurdles  between  any 
point  on  it  and  the  centre  is  a  constant  (the  radius).  With  this 
definition  we  can  defy  earthquakes.  The  number  of  hurdles  in 
the  circumference  of  such  a  circle  will  not  bear  the  same  pro- 
portion to  the  number  in  the  radius  as  in  the  field  of  uniform 
hurdles;  owing  to  the  crowding  near  the  centre,  the  ratio  will 
be  less.  Thus  we  have  a  suitable  analogy  for  a  circle  whose 
circumference  is  less  than  TT  times  its  diameter. 

This  analogy  enables  us  to  picture  the  condition  of  space 
round  a  heavy  particle,  where  the  ratio  of  the  circumference  of 
a  circle  to  the  diameter  is  less  than  77.  Hurdle-counts  will  no 


106  THE  NEW  LAW  OF  GRAVITATION          [CH. 

longer  be  accurately  mappable  on  a  plane  sheet  of  paper, 
because  they  do  not  conform  to  Euclidean  geometry. 

Now  suppose  a  heavy  particle  wishes  to  cross  this  field, 
passing  near  but  not  through  the  centre.  In  Euclidean  space, 
with  the  hurdles  uniformly  distributed,  it  travels  in  a  straight 
line,  i.e.  it  goes  between  any  two  points  by  a  path  giving  the 
fewest  hurdle  jumps.  We  may  assume  that  in  the  non-Euclidean 
field  with  rearranged  hurdles,  the  particle  still  goes  by  the  path 
of  least  effort.  In  fact,  in  any  small  portion  we  cannot  distinguish 
between  the  rearrangement  and  a  distortion ;  so  we  may  imagine 
that  the  particle  takes  each  portion  as  it  comes  according  to  the 
rule,  and  is  not  troubled  by  the  rearrangement  which  is  only 
visible  to  a  general  survey  of  the  whole  field  *. 

Now  clearly  it  will  pay  not  to  go  straight  through  the  dense 
portion,  but  to  keep  a  little  to  the  outside  where  the  hurdles 
are  sparser — not  too  much,  or  the  path  will  be  unduly  lengthened. 
The  particle's  track  will  thus  be  a  little  concave  to  the  centre, 
and  an  onlooker  will  say  that  it  has  been  attracted  to  the  centre. 
It  is  rather  curious  that  we  should  call  it  attraction,  when  the 
track  has  rather  been  avoiding  the  central  region;  but  it  is  clear 
that  the  direction  of  motion  has  been  bent  round  in  the  way 
attributable  to  an  attractive  force. 

This  bending  of  the  path  is  additional  to  that  due  to  the 
Newtonian  force  of  gravitation  which  depends  on  the  second 
appearance  of  y  in  the  formula.  As  already  explained  it  is  in 
general  a  far  smaller  effect  and  will  appear  only  as  a  minute 
correction  to  Newton's  law.  The  only  case  where  the  two  rise 
to  equal  importance  is  when  the  track  is  that  of  a  light- wave, 
or  of  a  particle  moving  with  a  speed  approaching  that  of  light ; 
for  then  dr2  rises  to  the  same  order  of  magnitude  as  dt2. 

To  sum  up,  a  ray  of  light  passing  near  a  heavy  particle  will 
be  bent,  firstly,  owing  to  the  non-Euclidean  character  of  the 
combination  of  time  with  space.  This  bending  is  equivalent  to 
that  due  to  Newtonian  gravitation,  and  may  be  calculated  in 
the  ordinary  way  on  the  assumption  that  light  has  weight  like 
a  material  body.  Secondly,  it  will  be  bent  owing  to  the  non- 

*  There  must  be  some  absolute  track,  and  if  absolute  significance  can  only 
be  associated  with  hurdle-counts  and  not  with  distances  in  the  field,  the  path 
of  fewest  hurdles  is  the  only  track  capable  of  absolute  definition.  , 


vi]  AND  THE  OLD  LAW  107 

Euclidean  character  of  space  alone,  and  this  curvature  is 
additional  to  that  predicted  by  Newton's  law.  If  then  we  can 
observe  the  amount  of  curvature  of  a  ray  of  light,  we  can  make 
a  crucial  test  of  whether  Einstein's  or  Newton's  theory  is 
obeyed. 

This  separation  of  the  attraction  into  two  parts  is  useful  in 
a  comparison  of  the  new  theory  with  the  old;  but  from  the 
point  of  view  of  relativity  it  is  artificial.  Our  view  is  that  light 
is  bent  just  in  the  same  way  as  the  track  of  a  material  particle 
moving  with  the  same  velocity  would  be  bent.  Both  causes  of 
bending  may  be  ascribed  either  to  weight  or  to  non-Euclidean 
space-time,  according  to  the  nomenclature  preferred.  The  only 
difference  between  the  predictions  of  the  old  and  new  theories 
is  that  in  one  case  the  weight  is  calculated  according  to  Newton's 
law  of  gravitation,  in  the  other  case  according  to  Einstein's. 

There  is  an  alternative  way  of  viewing  this  effect  on  light 
according  to  Einstein's  theory,  which,  for  many  reasons  is  to 
be  preferred.  This  depends  on  the  fact  that  the  velocity  of 
light  in  the  gravitational  field  is  not  a  constant  (unity)  but 
becomes  smaller  as  we  approach  the  sun.  This  does  not  mean 
that  an  observer  determining  the  velocity  of  light  experimentally 
at  a  spot  near  the  sun  would  detect  the  decrease;  if  he  performed 
Fizeau's  experiment,  his  result  in  kilometres  per  second  would 
be  exactly  the  same  as  that  of  a  terrestrial  observer.  It  is  the 
coordinate  velocity  that  is  here  referred  to,  described  in  terms 
of  the  quantities  r,  6,  t,  introduced  by  the  observer  who  is 
contemplating  the  whole  solar  system  at  the  same  time. 

It  will  be  remembered  that  in  discussing  the  approximate 
geometry  of  space-time  in  Fig.  3,  we  found  that  certain  events 
like  P  were  in  the  absolute  past  or  future  of  O,  and  others  like 
P'  were  neither  before  nor  after  0,  but  elsewhere.  Analytically 
the  distinction  is  that  for  the  interval  OP,  ds2  is  positive;  for 
OP',  ds2  is  negative.  In  the  first  case  the  interval  is  real  or 
"time-like";  in  the  second  it  is  imaginary  or  "space-like."  The 
two  regions  are  separated  by  lines  (or  strictly,  cones)  in  crossing 
which  ds2  changes  from  positive  to  negative;  and  along  the  lines 
themselves  ds  is  zero.  It  is  clear  that  these  lines  must  have 
important  absolute  significance  in  the  geometry  of  the  world. 
Physically  their  most  important  property  is  that  pulses  of  light 


108  THE  NEW  LAW  OF  GRAVITATION          [CH. 

travel  along  these  tracks,  and  the  motion  of  a  light-pulse  is 
always  given  by  the  equation  ds  =  0. 

Using  the  expression   for  ds2  in   a  gravitational   field,   we 
accordingly  have  for  light 

0  =  -  -  dr*  -  r2d6*  +  ydt2. 

y 

For  radial  motion,  dd  =  0,  and  therefore 

dr* 


For  transverse  motion,  dr  =  0,  and  therefore 


Thus  the  coordinate  velocity  of  light  travelling  radially  is  y, 
and  of  light  travelling  transversely  is  \/y,  in  the  coordinates 
chosen. 

The  coordinate  velocity  must  depend  on  the  coordinates 
chosen;  and  it  is  more  convenient  to  use  a  slightly  different 
system  in  which  the  velocity  of  light  is  the  same  in  all  directions  *, 
viz.  y  or  1  —  2m/r.  This  diminishes  as  we  approach  the  sun  — 
an  illustration  of  our  previous  remark  that  a  pulse  of  light 
proceeding  radially  is  repelled  by  the  sun. 

The  wave-motion  in  a  ray  of  light  can  be  compared  to  a 
succession  of  long  straight  waves  rolling  onward  in  the  sea.  If 
the  motion  of  the  waves  is  slower  at  one  end  than  the  other,  the 
whole  wave-front  must  gradually  slew  round,  and  the  direction 
in  which  it  is  rolling  must  change.  In  the  sea  this  happens  when 
one  end  of  the  wave  reaches  shallow  water  before  the  other, 
because  the  speed  in  shallow  water  is  slower.  It  is  well  known 
that  this  causes  waves  proceeding  diagonally  across  a  bay  to 
slew  round  and  come  in  parallel  to  the  shore;  the  advanced  end 

*  This  is  obtained  by  writing  r  +  m  instead  of  r,  or  diminishing  the  nominal 
distance  of  the  sun  by  If  kilometres.  This  change  of  coordinates  simplifies 
the  problem,  but  can,  of  course,  make  no  difference  to  anything  observable. 
After  we  have  traced  the  course  of  the  light  ray  in  the  coordinates  chosen,  we 
have  to  connect  the  results  with  experimental  measures,  using  the  corresponding 
formula  for  ds2.  This  final  connection  of  mathematical  and  experimental  results 
is,  however,  comparatively  simple,  because  it  relates  to  measuring  operations 
performed  in  a  terrestrial  observatory  where  the  difference  of  y  from  unity  is 
negligible. 


vi]  AND  THE  OLD  LAW  109 

is  delayed  in  the  shallow  water  and  waits  for  the  other.  In  the 
same  way  when  the  light  waves  pass  near  the  sun,  the  end  nearest 
the  sun  has  the  smaller  velocity  and  the  wave-front  slews  round ; 
thus  the  course  of  the  waves  is  bent. 

Light  moves  more  slowly  in  a  material  medium  than  in 
vacuum,  the  velocity  being  inversely  proportional  to  the  re- 
fractive index  of  the  medium.  The  phenomenon  of  refraction 
is  in  fact  caused  by  a  slewing  of  the  wave-front  in  passing  into 
a  region  of  smaller  velocity.  We  can  thus  imitate  the  gravita- 
tional effect  on  light  precisely,  if  we  imagine  the  space  round 
the  sun  filled  with  a  refracting  medium  which  gives  the 
appropriate  velocity  of  light.  To  give  the  velocity  1  —  2m/r,  the 
refractive  index  must  be  1/(1  —  2m/r),  or,  very  approximately, 
1  4-  2m/r.  At  the  surface  of  the  sun,  r  =  697,000  km.,  m  =  1-47 
km.,  hence  the  necessary  refractive  index  is  1-00000424.  At  a 
height  above  the  sun  equal  to  the  radius  it  is  1-00000212. 

Any  problem  on  the  paths  of  rays  near  the  sun  can  now  be 
solved  by  the  methods  of  geometrical  optics  applied  to  the 
equivalent  refracting  medium.  It  is  not  difficult  to  show  that 
the  total  deflection  of  a  ray  of  light  passing  at  a  distance  r  from 
the  centre  of  the  sun  is  (in  circular  measure) 

4m 


whereas   the  deflection   of  the   same  ray   calculated   on  the 
Newtonian  theory  would  be 

2m 
r 

For  a  ray  grazing  the  surface  of  the  sun  the  numerical  value 
of  this  deflection  is 

l"-75     (Einstein's  theory), 
0"-87     (Newtonian  theory). 


CHAPTER  VII 
WEIGHING  LIGHT 

Query  1.  Do  not  Bodies  act  upon  Light  at  a  distance,  and  by  their  action 
bend  its  Rays,  and  is  not  this  action  (caeteris  paribus)  strongest  at  the  least 
distance?  NEWTON,  Opticks. 

WE  come  now  to  the  experimental  test  of  the  influence  of 
gravitation  on  light  discussed  theoretically  in  the  last  chapter. 
It  is  not  the  general  purpose  of  this  book  to  enter  into  details 
of  experiments;  and  if  we  followed  this  plan  consistently,  we 
should,  as  hitherto,  summarise  the  results  of  the  observations 
in  a  few  lines.  But  it  is  this  particular  test  which  has  turned 
public  attention  towards  the  relativity  theory,  and  there  appears 
to  be  widespread  desire  for  information.  We  shall  therefore  tell 
the  story  of  the  eclipse  expeditions  in  some  detail.  It  will  make 
a  break  in  the  long  theoretical  arguments,  and  will  illustrate 
the  important  applications  of  this  theory  to  practical  obser- 
vations. 

It  must  be  understood  that  there  were  two  questions  to 
answer:  firstly,  whether  light  has  weight  (as  suggested  by 
Newton),  or  is  indifferent  to  gravitation;  secondly,  if  it  has 
weight,  is  the  amount  of  the  deflection  in  accordance  with 
Einstein's  or  Newton's  laws? 

It  was  already  known  that  light  possesses  mass  or  inertia  like 
other  forms  of  electromagnetic  energy.  This  is  manifested  in 
the  phenomena  of  radiation-pressure.  Some  force  is  required  to 
stop  a  beam  of  light  by  holding  an  obstacle  in  its  path;  a  search- 
light experiences  a  minute  force  of  recoil  just  as  if  it  were  a 
machine-gun  firing  material  projectiles.  The  force,  which  is 
predicted  by  orthodox  electromagnetic  theory,  is  exceedingly 
minute;  but  delicate  experiments  have  detected  it.  Probably 
this  inertia  of  radiation  is  of  great  cosmical  importance,  playing 
a  great  part  in  the  equilibrium  of  the  more  diffuse  stars.  Indeed 
it  is  probably  the  agent  which  has  carved  the  material  of  the 
universe  into  stars  of  roughly  uniform  mass.  Possibly  the  tails 
of  comets  are  a  witness  to  the  power  of  the  momentum  of  sun- 


CH.  vn]  WEIGHING  LIGHT  111 

light,  which  drives  outwards  the  smaller  or  the  more  absorptive 
particles. 

It  is  legitimate  to  speak  of  a  pound  of  light  as  we  speak  of 
a  pound  of  any  other  substance.  The  mass  of  ordinary  quantities 
of  light  is  however  extremely  small,  and  I  have  calculated  that 
at  the  low  charge  of  3d.  a  unit,  an  Electric  Light  Company 
would  have  to  sell  light  at  the  rate  of  £140,000,000  a  pound. 
All  the  sunlight  falling  on  the  earth  amounts  to  160  tons  daily. 

It  is  perhaps  not  easy  to  realise  how  a  wave-motion  can  have 
inertia,  and  it  is  still  more  difficult  to  understand  what  is  meant 
by  its  having  weight.  Perhaps  this  will  be  better  understood  if 
we  put  the  problem  in  a  concrete  form.  Imagine  a  hollow  body, 
with  radiant  heat  or  light- waves  traversing  the  hollow;  the 
mass  of  the  body  will  be  the  sum  of  the  masses  of  the  material 
and  of  the  radiant  energy  in  the  hollow;  a  greater  force  will  be 
required  to  shift  it  because  of  the  light-waves  contained  in  it. 
Now  let  us  weigh  it  with  scales  or  a  spring-balance.  Will  it  also 
weigh  heavier  on  account  of  the  radiation  contained,  or  will  the 
weight  be  that  of  the  solid  material  alone?  If  the  former,  then 
clearly  from  this  aspect  light  has  weight;  and  it  is  not  difficult 
to  deduce  the  effect  of  this  weight  on  a  freely  moving  light-beam 
not  enclosed  within  a  hollow. 

The  effect  of  weight  is  that  the  radiation  in  the  hollow  body 
acquires  each  second  a  downward  momentum  proportional  to 
its  mass.  This  in  the  long  run  is  transmitted  to  the  material 
enclosing  it.  For  a  free  light-wave  in  space,  the  added  momen- 
tum combines  with  the  original  momentum,  and  the  total 
momentum  determines  the  direction  of  the  ray,  which  is 
accordingly  bent.  Newton's  theory  suggests  no  means  for 
bringing  about  the  bending,  but  contents  itself  with  predicting 
it  on  general  principles.  Einstein's  theory  provides  a  means, 
viz.  the  variation  of  velocity  of  the  waves. 

Hitherto  mass  and  weight  have  always  been  found  associated 
in  strict  proportionality.  One  very  important  test  had  already 
shown  that  this  proportionality  is  not  confined  to  material 
energy.  The  substance  uranium  contains  a  great  deal  of  radio- 
active energy,  presumably  of  an  electromagnetic  nature,  which 
it  slowly  liberates.  The  mass  of  this  energy  must  be  an  appreciable 
fraction  of  the  whole  mass  of  the  substance.  But  it  was  shown 


112  WEIGHING  LIGHT  [CH. 

by  experiments  with  the  Eotvos  torsion-balance  that  the  ratio 
of  weight  to  mass  for  uranium  is  the  same  as  for  all  other 
substances;  so  the  energy  of  radio-activity  has  weight.  Still 
even  this  experiment  deals  only  with  bound  electromagnetic 
energy,  and  we  are  not  justified  in  deducing  the  properties  of 
the  free  energy  of  light. 

It  is  easy  to  see  that  a  terrestrial  experiment  has  at  present 
no  chance  of  success.  If  the  mass  and  weight  of  light  are  in  the 
same  proportion  as  for  matter,  the  ray  of  light  will  be  bent 
just  like  the  trajectory  of  a  material  particle.  On  the  earth  a 
rifle  bullet,  like  everything  else,  drops  16  feet  in  the  first  second, 
64  feet  in  two  seconds,  and  so  on,  below  its  original  line  of  flight ; 
the  rifle  must  thus  be  aimed  above  the  target.  Light  would  also 
drop  16  feet  in  the  first  second* ;  but,  since  it  has  travelled  1 86,000 
miles  along  its  course  in  that  time,  the  bend  is  inappreciable. 


FIG.  16. 

In  fact  any  terrestrial  course  is  described  so  quickly  that 
gravitation  has  scarcely  had  time  to  accomplish  anything. 

The  experiment  is  therefore  transferred  to  the  neighbourhood 
of  the  sun.  There  we  get  a  pull  of  gravitation  27  times  more 
intense  than  on  the  earth;  and — what  is  more  important — the 
greater  size  of  the  sun  permits  a  much  longer  trajectory  through- 
out which  the  gravitation  is  reasonably  powerful.  The  deflection 
in  this  case  may  amount  to  something  of  the  order  of  a  second 
of  arc,  which  for  the  astronomer  is  a  fairly  large  quantity. 

In  Fig.  16  the  line  EFQP  shows  the  track  of  a  ray  of  light 
from  a  distant  star  P  which  reaches  the  earth  E.  The  main 
part  of  the  bending  of  the  ray  occurs  as  it  passes  the  sun  S; 
and  the  initial  course  PQ  and  the  final  course  FE  are  practically 
straight.  Since  the  light  rays  enter  the  observer's  eye  or  telescope 
in  the  direction  FE,  this  will  be  the  direction  in  which  the  star 
appears.  But  its  true  direction  from  the  earth  is  QP,  the  initial 

*  Or  32  feet  according  to  Einstein's  law.  The  fall  increases  with  the  speed  of 
the  motion. 


vn]  WEIGHING  LIGHT  113 

course.    So  the  star  appears  displaced  outwards  from  its  true 
position  by  an  angle  equal  to  the  total  deflection  of  the  light. 

It  must  be  noticed  that  this  is  only  true  because  a  star  is  so 
remote  that  its  true  direction  with  respect  to  the  earth  E  is 
indistinguishable  from  its  direction  with  respect  to  the  point 
Q.  For  a  source  of  light  within  the  solar  system,  the  apparent 
displacement  of  the  source  is  by  no  means  equal  to  the  deflection 
of  the  light-ray.  It  is  perhaps  curious  that  the  attraction  of 
light  by  the  sun  should  produce  an  apparent  displacement  of 
the  star  away  from  the  sun;  but  the  necessity  for  this  is 
clear. 

The  bending  affects  stars  seen  near  the  sun,  and  accordingly 
the  only  chance  of  making  the  observation  is  during  a  total 
eclipse  when  the  moon  cuts  off  the  dazzling  light.  Even  then 
there  is  a  great  deal  of  light  from  the  sun's  corona  which  stretches 
far  above  the  disc.  It  is  thus  necessary  to  have  rather  bright 
stars  near  the  sun,  which  will  not  be  lost  in  the  glare  of  the 
corona.  Further  the  displacements  of  these  stars  can  only  be 
measured  relatively  to  other  stars,  preferably  more  distant  from 
the  sun  and  less  displaced;  we  need  therefore  a  reasonable 
number  of  outer  bright  stars  to  serve  as  reference  points. 

In  a  superstitious  age  a  natural  philosopher  wishing  to  perform 
an  important  experiment  would  consult  an  astrologer  to  ascertain 
an  auspicious  moment  for  the  trial.  With  better  reason,  an 
astronomer  to-day  consulting  the  stars  would  announce  that  the 
most  favourable  day  of  the  year  for  weighing  light  is  May  29. 
The  reason  is  that  the  sun  in  its  annual  journey  round  the 
ecliptic  goes  through  fields  of  stars  of  varying  richness,  but  on 
May  29  it  is  in  the  midst  of  a  quite  exceptional  patch  of  bright 
stars — part  of  the  Hyades — by  far  the  best  star-field  encountered. 
Now  if  this  problem  had  been  put  forward  at  some  other  period 
of  history,  it  might  have  been  necessary  to  wait  some  thousands 
of  years  for  a  total  eclipse  of  the  sun  to  happen  on  the  lucky 
date.  But  by  strange  good  fortune  an  eclipse  did  happen  on 
May  29,  1919.  Owing  to  the  curious  sequence  of  eclipses  a 
similar  opportunity  will  recur  in  1938;  we  are  in  the  midst  of 
the  most  favourable  cycle.  It  is  not  suggested  that  it  is  im- 
possible to  make  the  test  at  other  eclipses;  but  the  work  will 
necessarily  be  more  difficult. 

B.S.  8 


114  WEIGHING  LIGHT  [CH. 

Attention  was  called  to  this  remarkable  opportunity  by  the 
Astronomer  Royal  in  March,  1917;  and  preparations  were  begun 
by  a  Committee  of  the  Royal  Society  and  Royal  Astronomical 
Society  for  making  the  observations.  Two  expeditions  were  sent 
to  different  places  on  the  line  of  totality  to  minimise  the  risk 
of  failure  by  bad  weather.  Dr  A.  C.  D.  Crommelin  and  Mr  C. 
Davidson  went  to  Sobral  in  North  Brazil;  Mr  E.  T.  Cottingham 
and  the  writer  went  to  the  Isle  of  Principe  in  the  Gulf  of  Guinea, 
West  Africa.  The  instrumental  equipment  for  both  expeditions 
was  prepared  at  Greenwich  Observatory  under  the  care  of  the 
Astronomer  Royal;  and  here  Mr  Davidson  made  the  arrange- 
ments which  were  the  main  factor  in  the  success  of  both 
parties. 

The  circumstances  of  the  two  expeditions  were  somewhat 
different  and  it  is  scarcely  possible  to  treat  them  together.  We 
shall  at  first  follow  the  fortunes  of  the  Principe  observers.  They 
had  a  telescope  of  focal  length  11  feet  4  inches.  On  their 
photographs  1  second  of  arc  (which  was  about  the  largest  dis- 
placement to  be  measured)  corresponds  to  about  y^.  inch — 
by  no  means  an  inappreciable  quantity.  The  aperture  of  the 
object-glass  was  13  inches,  but  as  used  it  was  stopped  down  to 
8  inches  to  give  sharper  images.  It  is  necessary,  even  when  the 
exposure  is  only  a  few  seconds,  to  allow  for  the  diurnal  motion 
of  the  stars  across  the  sky,  making  the  telescope  move  so  as  to 
follow  them.  But  since  it  is  difficult  to  mount  a  long  and  heavy 
telescope  in  the  necessary  manner  in  a  temporary  installation 
in  a  remote  part  of  the  globe,  the  usual  practice  at  eclipses  is 
to  keep  the  telescope  rigid  and  reflect  the  stars  into  it  by  a 
coelostat — a  plane  mirror  kept  revolving  at  the  right  rate  by 
clock-work.  This  arrangement  was  adopted  by  both  expeditions. 

The  observers  had  rather  more  than  a  month  on  the  island 
to  make  their  preparations.  On  the  day  of  the  eclipse  the 
weather  was  unfavourable.  When  totality  began  the  dark  disc 
of  the  moon  surrounded  by  the  corona  was  visible  through  cloud, 
much  as  the  moon  often  appears  through  cloud  on  a  night  when 
no  stars  can  be  seen.  There  was  nothing  for  it  but  to  carry  out 
the  arranged  programme  and  hope  for  the  best.  One  observer 
was  kept  occupied  changing  the  plates  in  rapid  succession,  whilst 
the  other  gave  the  exposures  of  the  required  length  with  a  screen 


vii]  WEIGHING  LIGHT  115 

held  in  front  of  the  object-glass  to  avoid  shaking  the  telescope  in 
any  way. 

For  in  and  out,  above,  about,  below 
'Tis  nothing  but  a  Magic  Sfadow-show 
Played  in  a  Box  whose  candle  is  the  Sun 
Round  which  we  Phantom  Figures  come  and  go. 

Our  shadow-box  takes  up  all  our  attention.  There  is  a  marvellous 
spectacle  above,  and,  as  the  photographs  afterwards  revealed, 
a  wonderful  prominence-flame  is  poised  a  hundred  thousand 
miles  above  the  surface  of  the  sun.  We  have  no  time  to  snatch 
a  glance  at  it.  We  are  conscious  only  of  the  weird  half-light  of 
the  landscape  and  the  hush  of  nature,  broken  by  the  calls  of  the 
observers,  and  beat  of  the  metronome  ticking  out  the  302 
seconds  of  totality. 

Sixteen  photographs  were  obtained,  with  exposures  ranging 
from  2  to  20  seconds.  The  earlier  photographs  showed  no  stars, 
though  they  portrayed  the  remarkable  prominence;  but  appar- 
ently the  cloud  lightened  somewhat  towards  the  end  of  totality, 
and  a  few  images  appeared  on  the  later  plates.  In  many  cases 
one  or  other  of  the  most  essential  stars  was  missing  through 
cloud,  and  no  use  could  be  made  of  them;  but  one  plate  was 
found  showing  fairly  good  images  of  five  stars,  which  were 
suitable  for  a  determination.  This  was  measured  on  the  spot 
a  few  days  after  the  eclipse  in  a  micrometric  measuring-machine. 
The  problem  was  to  determine  how  the  apparent  positions  of 
the  stars,  affected  by  the  sun's  gravitational  field,  compared 
with  the  normal  positions  on  a  photograph  taken  when  the  sun 
was  out  of  the  way.  Normal  photographs  for  comparison  had 
been  taken  with  the  same  telescope  in  England  in  January. 
The  eclipse  photograph  and  a  comparison  photograph  were 
placed  film  to  film  in  the  measuring-machine  so  that  corre- 
sponding images  fell  close  together*,  and  the  small  distances 
were  measured  in  two  rectangular  directions.  From  these  the 
relative  displacements  of  the  stars  could  be  ascertained.  In 
comparing  two  plates,  various  allowances  have  to  be  made  for 
refraction,  aberration,  plate- orientation,  etc.;  but  since  these 
occur  equally  in  determinations  of  stellar  parallax,  for  which 

*  This  was  possible  because  at  Principe  the  field  of  stars  was  reflected  in 
the  coelostat  mirror,  whereas  in  England  it  was  photographed  direct. 

8—2 


116  WEIGHING  LIGHT  [CH. 

much  greater  accuracy  is  required,  the  necessary  procedure  is 
well-known  to  astronomers. 

The  results  from  this  plate  gave  a  definite  displacement,  in 
good  accordance  with  Einstein's  theory  and  disagreeing  with 
the  Newtonian  prediction.  Although  the  material  was  very 
meagre  compared  with  what  had  been  hoped  for,  the  writer 
(who  it  must  be  admitted  was  not  altogether  unbiassed)  believed 
it  convincing. 

It  was  not  until  after  the  return  to  England  that  any  further 
confirmation  was  forthcoming.  Four  plates  were  brought  home 
undeveloped,  as  they  were  of  a  brand  which  would  not  stand 
development  in  the  hot  climate.  One  of  these  was  found  to 
show  sufficient  stars;  and  on  measurement  it  also  showed  the 
deflection  predicted  by  Einstein,  confirming  the  other  plate. 

The  bugbear  of  possible  systematic  error  affects  all  investiga- 
tions of  this  kind.  How  do  you  know  that  there  is  not  something 
in  your  apparatus  responsible  for  this  apparent  deflection? 
Your  object-glass  has  been  shaken  up  by  travelling;  you  have 
introduced  a  mirror  into  your  optical  system;  perhaps  the  50° 
rise  of  temperature  between  the  climate  at  the  equator  and 
England  in  winter  has  done  some  kind  of  mischief.  To  meet 
this  criticism,  a  different  field  of  stars  was  photographed  at 
night  in  Principe  and  also  in  England  at  the  same  altitude  as 
the  eclipse  field.  If  the  deflection  were  really  instrumental,  stars 
on  these  plates  should  show  relative  displacements  of  a  similar 
kind  to  those  on  the  eclipse  plates.  But  on  measuring  these 
check-plates  no  appreciable  displacements  were  found.  That 
seems  to  be  satisfactory  evidence  that  the  displacement  observed 
during  the  eclipse  is  really  due  to  the  sun  being  in  the  region, 
and  is  not  due  to  differences  in  instrumental  conditions  between 
England  and  Principe.  Indeed  the  only  possible  loophole  is  a 
difference  between  the  night  conditions  at  Principe  when  the 
check-plates  were  taken,  and  the  day,  or  rather  eclipse,  con- 
ditions when  the  eclipse  photographs  were  taken.  That  seems 
impossible  since  the  temperature  at  Principe  did  not  vary  more 
than  1°  between  day  and  night. 

The  problem  appeared  to  be  settled  almost  beyond  doubt; 
and  it  was  with  some  confidence  that  we  awaited  the  return  of 
the  other  expedition  from  Brazil.  The  Brazil  party  had  had 


vii]  WEIGHING  LIGHT  117 

fine  weather  and  had  gained  far  more  extensive  material  on 
their  plates.  They  had  remained  two  months  after  the  eclipse 
to  photograph  the  same  region  before  dawn,  when  clear  of  the 
sun,  in  order  that  they  might  have  comparison  photographs 
taken  under  exactly  the  same  circumstances.  One  set  of 
photographs  was  secured  with  a  telescope  similar  to  that  used 
at  Principe.  In  addition  they  used  a  longer  telescope  of  4  inches 
aperture  and  19  feet  focal  length*.  The  photographs  obtained 
with  the  former  were  disappointing.  Although  the  full  number 
of  stars  expected  (about  12)  were  shown,  and  numerous  plates 
had  been  obtained,  the  definition  of  the  images  had  been  spoiled 
by  some  cause,  probably  distortion  of  the  coelostat-mirror  by 
the  heat  of  the  sunshine  falling  on  it.  The  observers  were 
pessimistic  as  to  the  value  of  these  photographs ;  but  they  were 
the  first  to  be  measured  on  return  to  England,  and  the  results 
came  as  a  great  surprise  after  the  indications  of  the  Principe 
plates.  The  measures  pointed  with  all  too  good  agreement  to 
the  "half-deflection,"  that  is  to  say,  the  Newtonian  value  which 
is  one-half  the  amount  required  by  Einstein's  theory.  It  seemed 
difficult  to  pit  the  meagre  material  of  Principe  against  the  wealth 
of  data  secured  from  the  clear  sky  of  Sobral.  It  is  true  the 
Sobral  images  were  condemned,  but  whether  so  far  as  to 
invalidate  their  testimony  on  this  point  was  not  at  first  clear; 
besides  the  Principe  images  were  not  particularly  well-defined, 
and  were  much  enfeebled  by  cloud.  Certain  compensating 
advantages  of  the  latter  were  better  appreciated  later.  Their 
strong  point  was  the  satisfactory  check  against  systematic  error 
afforded  by  the  photographs  of  the  check-field;  there  were 
no  check-plates  taken  at  Sobral,  and,  since  it  was  obvious 
that  the  discordance  of  the  two  results  depended  on  syste- 
matic error  and  not  on  the  wealth  of  material,  this  distinctly 
favoured  the  Principe  results.  Further,  at  Principe  there  could 
be  no  evil  effects  from  the  sun's  rays  on  the  mirror,  for  the 
sun  had  withdrawn  all  too  shyly  behind  the  veil  of  cloud. 
A  further  advantage  was  provided  by  the  check-plates  at 
Principe,  which  gave  an  independent  determination  of  the 

*  See  Frontispiece.  The  two  telescopes  are  shown  and  the  backs  of  the  two 
coelostat-mirrors  which  reflect  the  sky  into  them.  The  clock  driving  the  larger 
mirror  is  seen  on  the  pedestal  on  the  left. 


118  WEIGHING  LIGHT  [CH. 

difference  of  scale  of  the  telescope  as  used  in  England  and  at 
the  eclipse;  for  the  Sobral  plates  this  scale-difference  was 
eliminated  by  the  method  of  reduction,  with  the  consequence 
that  the  results  depended  on  the  measurement  of  a  much  smaller 
relative  displacement. 

There  remained  a  set  of  seven  plates  taken  at  Sobral  with  the 
4-inch  lens ;  their  measurement  had  been  delayed  by  the  necessity 
of  modifying  a  micrometer  to  hold  them,  since  they  were  of 
unusual  size.  From  the  first  no  one  entertained  any  doubt  that 
the  final  decision  must  rest  with  them,  since  the  images  were 
almost  ideal,  and  they  were  on  a  larger  scale  than  the  other 
photographs.  The  use  of  this  instrument  must  have  presented 
considerable  difficulties — the  unwieldy  length  of  the  telescope, 
the  slower  speed  of  the  lens  necessitating  longer  exposures  and 
more  accurate  driving  of  the  clock-work,  the  larger  scale  rendering 
the  focus  more  sensitive  to  disturbances — but  the  observers 
achieved  success,  and  the  perfection  of  the  negatives  surpassed 
anything  that  could  have  been  hoped  for. 

These  plates  were  now  measured  and  they  gave  a  final  verdict 
definitely  confirming  Einstein'*  value  of  the  deflection,  in  agree- 
ment with  the  results  obtained  at  Principe. 

It  will  be  remembered  that  Einstein's  theory  predicts  a 
deflection  of  l"-74  at  the  edge  of  the  sun*,  the  amount  falling 
off  inversely  as  the  distance  from  the  sun's  centre.  The  simple 
Newtonian  deflection  is  half  this,   0"-87.    The  final  results 
(reduced  to  the  edge  of  the  sun)  obtained  at  Sobral  and  Principe 
with  their  "probable  accidental  errors"  were 
Sobral       l"-98±  0"-12, 
Principe   1"-61  ±  0"-30. 

It  is  usual  to  allow  a  margin  of  safety  of  about  twice  the  probable 
error  on  either  side  of  the  mean.  The  evidence  of  the  Principe 
plates  is  thus  just  about  sufficient  to  rule  out  the  possibility  of 
the  "half-deflection,"  and  the  Sobral  plates  exclude  it  with 
practical  certainty.  The  value  of  the  material  found  at  Principe 
cannot  be  put  higher  than  about  one-sixth  of  that  at  Sobral; 
but  it  certainly  makes  it  less  easy  to  bring  criticism  against  this 
confirmation  of  Einstein's  theory  seeing  that  it  was  obtained 

*  The  predicted  deflection  of  light  from  infinity  to  infinity  is  just  over  I" '745, 
from  infinity  to  the  earth  it  is  just  under. 


VIl] 


WEIGHING  LIGHT 


119 


independently  with  two  different  instruments  at  different  places 
and  with  different  kinds  of  checks. 

The  best  check  on  the  results  obtained  with  the  4-inch  lens 
at  Sobral  is  the  striking  internal  accordance  of  the  measures  for 
different  stars.  The  theoretical  deflection  should  vary  inversely 
as  the  distance  from  the  sun's  centre;  hence,  if  we  plot  the  mean 
radial  displacement  found  for  each  star  separately  against  the 
inverse  distance,  the  points  should  lie  on  a  straight  line.  This 

Displacement 


i"-oo 

•09- 
•08- 
•07 
•06 
•05 
•04 
•03 
•02- 
•01- 


/ 


/ 


Distance 


I   I    I     I        I 
90'         60'   50' 

FIG.  17. 


40' 


I 
30' 


I 
25X 


is  shown  in  Fig.  17  where  the  broken  line  shows  the  theoretical 
prediction  of  Einstein,  the  deviations  being  within  the  accidental 
errors  of  the  determinations.  A  line  of  half  the  slope  representing 
the  half-deflection  would  clearly  be  inadmissible. 

Moreover,  values  of  the  deflection  were  deduced  from  the 
measures  in  right  ascension  and  declination  independently. 
These  were  in  close  agreement. 


120 


WEIGHING  LIGHT 


[CH. 


A  diagram  showing  the  relative  positions  of  the  stars  is  given 
in  Fig.  18. 

The  square  shows  the  limits  of  the  plates  used  at  Principe, 
and  the  oblique  rectangle  the  limits  with  the  4-inch  lens  at 
Sobral.  The  centre  of  the  sun  moved  from  S  to  P  in  the  2J 

N 


•12 


— w 


Y 


FIG.  18. 

hours  interval  between  totality  at  the  two  stations;  the  sun  is 
here  represented  for  a  time  about  midway  between.  The  stars 
measured  on  the  Principe  plates  were  Nos.  3,  4, 5, 6, 10, 11 ;  those 
at  Sobral  were  11,  10,  6,  5,  4,  2,  3  (in  the  order  of  the  dots 
from  left  to  right  in  Fig.  17).  None  of  these  were  fainter  than 
6m-0,  the  brightest  K1  Tauri  (No.  4)  being  4m-5. 
It  has  been  objected  that  although  the  observations  establish 


vii]  WEIGHING  LIGHT  121 

a  deflection  of  light  in  passing  the  sun  equal  to  that  predicted 
by  Einstein,  it  is  not  immediately  obvious  that  this  deflection 
must  necessarily  be  attributed  to  the  sun's  gravitational  field. 
It  is  suggested  that  it  may  not  be  an  essential  effect  of  the  sun 
as  a  massive  body,  but  an  accidental  effect  owing  to  the  circum- 
stance that  the  sun  is  surrounded  by  a  corona  which  acts  as 
a  refracting  atmosphere.  It  would  be  a  strange  coincidence  if 
this  atmosphere  imitated  the  theoretical  law  in  the  exact 
quantitative  way  shown  in  Fig.  17;  and  the  suggestion  appears 
to  us  far-fetched.  However  the  objection  can  be  met  in  a  more 
direct  way.  We  have  already  shown  that  the  gravitational 
effect  on  light  is  equivalent  to  that  produced  by  a  refracting 
medium  round  the  sun  and  have  calculated  the  necessary 
refractive  index.  At  a  height  of  400,000  miles  above  the  surface 
the  refractive  index  required  is  1-0000021.  This  corresponds  to 
air  at  -^  atmosphere,  hydrogen  at  ^  atmosphere,  helium  at 
•fa  atmospheric  pressure.  It  seems  obvious  that  there  can  be  no 
material  of  this  order  of  density  at  such  a  distance  from  the  sun. 
The  pressure  on  the  sun's  surface  of  the  columns  of  material 
involved  would  be  of  the  order  10,000  atmospheres;  and  we 
know  from  spectroscopic  evidence  that  there  is  no  pressure  of 
this  order.  If  it  is  urged  that  the  mass  could  perhaps  be  sup- 
ported by  electrical  forces,  the  argument  from  absorption  is 
even  more  cogent.  The  light  from  the  stars  photographed  during 
the  eclipse  has  passed  through  a  depth  of  at  least  a  million  miles 
of  material  of  this  order  of  density — or  say  the  equivalent  of 
10,000  miles  of  air  at  atmospheric  density.  We  know  to  our 
cost  what  absorption  the  earth's  5  miles  of  homogeneous 
atmosphere  can  effect.  And  yet  at  the  eclipse  the  stars  appeared 
on  the  photographs  with  their  normal  brightness.  If  the  irre- 
pressible critic  insists  that  the  material  round  the  sun  may  be 
composed  of  some  new  element  with  properties  unlike  any 
material  known  to  us,  we  may  reply  that  the  mechanism  of 
refraction  and  of  absorption  is  the  same,  and  there  is  a  limit  to 
the  possibility  of  refraction  without  appreciable  absorption. 
Finally  it  would  be  necessary  to  arrange  that  the  density  of  the 
material  falls  off  inversely  as  the  distance  from  the  sun's  centre 
in  order  to  give  the  required  variation  of  refractive  index. 
Several  comets  have  been  known  to  approach  the  sun  within 


122  WEIGHING  LIGHT  [CH.VII 

the  limits  of  distance  here  considered.  If  they  had  to  pass 
through  an  atmosphere  of  the  density  required  to  account  for 
the  displacement,  they  would  have  suffered  enormous  resistance. 
Dr  Crommelin  has  shown  that  a  study  of  these  comets  sets  an 
upper  limit  to  the  density  of  the  corona,  which  makes  the 
refractive  effect  quite  negligible. 

Those  who  regard  Einstein's  law  of  gravitation  as  a  natural 
deduction  from  a  theory  based  on  the  minimum  of  hypotheses 
will  be  satisfied  to  find  that  his  remarkable  prediction  is  quanti- 
tatively confirmed  by  observation,  and  that  no  unforeseen  cause 
has  appeared  to  invalidate  the  test. 


CHAPTER  VIII 
OTHER  TESTS   OF  THE  THEORY 

The  words  of  Mercury  are  harsh  after  the  songs  of  Apollo. 

Love's  Labour's  Lost. 

WE  have  seen  that  the  swift-moving  light-waves  possess  great 
advantages  as  a  means  of  exploring  the  non-Euclidean  property 
of  space.  But  there  is  an  old  fable  about  the  hare  and  the 
tortoise.  The  slow-moving  planets  have  qualities  which  must 
not  be  overlooked.  The  light-wave  traverses  the  region  in  a  few 
minutes  and  makes  its  report;  the  planet  plods  on  and  on  for 
centuries  going  over  the  same  ground  again  and  again.  Eack 
time  it  goes  round  it  reveals  a  little  about  the  space,  and  the 
knowledge  slowly  accumulates. 

According  to  Newton's  law  a  planet  moves  round  the  sun  in 
an  ellipse,  and  if  there  are  no  other  planets  disturbing  it,  the 
ellipse  remains  the  same  for  ever.  According  to  Einstein's  law 
the  path  is  very  nearly  an  ellipse,  but  it  does  not  quite  close  up ; 
and  in  the  next  revolution  the  path  has  advanced  slightly  in  the 
same  direction  as  that  in  which  the  planet  was  moving.  The 
orbit  is  thus  an  ellipse  which  very  slowly  revolves  *. 

The  exact  prediction  of  Einstein's  law  is  that  in  one  revolution 
of  the  planet  the  orbit  will  advance  through  a  fraction  of  a 
revolution  equal  to  3u2/C2,  where  v  is  the  speed  of  the  planet 
and  C  the  speed  of  light.  The  earth  has  1/10,000  of  the  speed  of 
light;  thus  in  one  revolution  (one  year)  the  point  where  the 
earth  is  at  greatest  distance  from  the  sun  will  move  on 
3/100,000,000  of  a  revolution,  or  0"-038.  We  could  not  detect 
this  difference  in  a  year,  but  we  can  let  it  add  up  for  a  century 
at  least.  It  would  then  be  observable  but  for  one  thing — the 
earth's  orbit  is  very  blunt,  very  nearly  circular,  and  so  we 
cannot  tell  accurately  enough  which  way  it  is  pointing  and  how 
its  sharpest  apses  move.  We  can  choose  a  planet  with  higher 
speed  so  that  the  effect  is  increased,  not  only  because  v2  is 
increased,  but  because  the  revolutions  take  less  time;  but,  what 
*  Appendix,  Note  9. 


124  OTHER  TESTS  OF  THE  THEORY  [CH. 

is  perhaps  more  important,  we  need  a  planet  with  a  sharp 
elliptical  orbit,  so  that  it  is  easy  to  observe  how  its  apses  move 
round.  Both  these  conditions  are  fulfilled  in  the  case  of  Mercury. 
It  is  the  fastest  of  the  planets,  and  the  predicted  advance  of  the 
orbit  amounts  to  43"  per  century;  further  the  eccentricity  of 
its  orbit  is  far  greater  than  that  of  any  of  the  other  seven 
planets. 

Now  an  unexplained  advance  of  the  orbit  of  Mercury  had 
long  been  known.  It  had  occupied  the  attention  of  Le  Verrier, 
who,  having  successfully  predicted  the  planet  Neptune  from  the 
disturbances  of  Uranus,  thought  that  the  anomalous  motion  of 
Mercury  might  be  due  to  an  interior  planet,  which  was  called 
Vulcan  in  anticipation.  But,  though  thoroughly  sought  for, 
Vulcan  has  never  turned  up.  Shortly  before  Einstein  arrived 
at  his  law  of  gravitation,  the  accepted  figures  were  as  follows. 
The  actual  observed  advance  of  the  orbit  was  574"  per  century; 
the  calculated  perturbations  produced  by  all  the  known  planets 
amounted  to  532"  per  century.  The  excess  of  42"  per  century 
remained  to  be  explained.  Although  the  amount  could  scarcely 
be  relied  on  to  a  second  of  arc,  it  was  at  least  thirty  times  as 
great  as  the  probable  accidental  error. 

The  big  discrepancy  from  the  Newtonian  gravitational  theory 
is  thus  in  agreement  with  Einstein's  prediction  of  an  advance 
of  43"  per  century. 

The  derivation  of  this  prediction  from  Einstein's  law  can  only 
be  followed  by  mathematical  analysis;  but  it  may  be  remarked 
that  any  slight  deviation  from  the  inverse  square  law  is  likely 
to  cause  an  advance  or  recession  of  the  apse  of  the  orbit.  That 
a  particle,  if  it  does  not  move  in  a  circle,  should  oscillate  between 
two  extreme  distances  is  natural  enough;  it  could  scarcely  do 
anything  else  unless  it  had  sufficient  speed  to  break  away 
altogether.  But  the  interval  between  the  two  extremes  will  not 
in  general  be  half  a  revolution.  It  is  only  under  the  exact 
adjustment  of  the  inverse  square  law  that  this  happens,  so  that 
the  orbit  closes  up  and  the  next  revolution  starts  at  the  same 
point.  I  do  not  think  that  any  "simple  explanation"  of  this 
property  of  the  inverse-square  law  has  been  given ;  and  it  seems 
fair  to  remind  those,  who  complain  of  the  difficulty  of  under- 
standing Einstein's  prediction  of  the  advance  of  the  perihelion, 


vm]  OTHER  TESTS  OF  THE  THEORY  125 

that  the  real  trouble  is  that  they  have  not  yet  succeeded  in 
making  clear  to  the  uninitiated  this  recondite  result  of  the 
Newtonian  theory.  The  slight  modifications  introduced  by 
Einstein's  law  of  gravitation  upset  this  fine  adjustment,  so  that 
the  oscillation  between  the  extremes  occupies  slightly  more  than 
a  revolution.  A  simple  example  of  this  effect  of  a  small  deviation 
from  the  inverse-square  law  was  actually  given  by  Newton. 

It  had  already  been  recognised  that  the  change  of  mass  with 
velocity  may  cause  an  advance  of  perihelion;  but  owing  to  the 
ambiguity  of  Newton's  law  of  gravitation  the  discussion  was 
unsatisfactory.  It  was,  however,  clear  that  the  effect  was  too 
small  to  account  for  the  motion  of  perihelion  of  Mercury,  the 
prediction  being  Ju2/C2,  or  at  most  vz/C2.  Einstein's  theory  is 
the  only  one  which  gives  the  full  amount  3v2/C2. 

It  was  suggested  by  Lodge  that,  this  variation  of  mass  with 
velocity  might  account  for  the  whole  motion  of  the  orbit  of 
Mercury,  if  account  were  taken  of  the  sun's  unknown  absolute 
motion  through  the  aether,  combining  sometimes  additively  and 
sometimes  negatively  with  the  orbital  motion.  In  a  discussion 
between  him  and  the  writer,  it  appeared  that,  if  the  absolute 
motion  were  sufficient  to  produce  this  effect  on  Mercury,  it 
must  give  observable  effects  for  Venus  and  the  Earth;  and  these 
do  not  exist.  Indeed  from  the  close  accordance  of  Venus  and 
the  Earth  with  observation,  it  is  possible  to  conclude  that,  either 
the  sun's  motion  through  the  aether  is  improbably  small,  or 
gravitation  must  conform  to  relativity,  in  the  sense  of  the 
restricted  principle  (p.  20),  and  conceal  the  effects  of  the 
increase  of  mass  with  speed  so  far  as  an  additive  uniform  motion 
is  concerned. 

Unfortunately  it  is  not  possible  to  obtain  any  further  test  of 
Einstein's  law  of  gravitation  from  the  remaining  planets.  We 
have  to  pass  over  Venus  and  the  Earth,  whose  orbits  are  too 
nearly  circular  to  show  the  advance  of  the  apses  observationally. 
Coming  next  to  Mars  with  a  moderately  eccentric  orbit,  the 
speed  is  very  much  smaller,  and  the  predicted  advance  is  only 
l"-3  per  century.  Now  the  accepted  figures  show  an  observed 
advance  (additional  to  that  produced  by  known  causes)  of  5" 
per  century,  so  that  Einstein's  correction  improves  the  accord- 
ance of  observation  with  theory;  but,  since  the  result  for  Mars 


126  OTHER  TESTS  OF  THE  THEORY  [CH. 

is  in  any  case  scarcely  trustworthy  to  5"  owing  to  the  inevitable 
errors  of  observation,  the  improvement  is  not  very  important. 
The  main  conclusion  is  that  Einstein's  theory  brings  Mercury 
into  line,  without  upsetting  the  existing  good  accordance  of  all 
the  other  planets. 

We  have  tested  Einstein's  law  of  gravitation  for  fast  move- 
ment (light)  and  for  moderately  slow  movement  (Mercury). 
For  very  slow  movement  it  agrees  with  Newton's  law,  and  the 
general  accordance  of  the  latter  with  observation  can  be  trans- 
ferred to  Einstein's  law.  These  tests  appear  to  be  sufficient  to 
establish  the  law  firmly.  We  can  express  it  in  this  way. 

Every  particle  or  light-pulse  moves  so  that  the  quantity  s 
measured  along  its  track  between  two  points  has  the  maximum 
possible  value,  where 

ds2  =  -  (1  -  2m/r)~1  dr2  -  r2dd2  +  (I  -  2m/r)  dt2. 
And  the  accuracy  of  the  experimental  test  is  sufficient  to  verify 
the  coefficients  as  far  as  terms  of  order  m/r  in  the  coefficient  of 
dr2,  and  as  far  as  terms  of  order  mz/r2  in  the  coefficient  of  dt2  *. 

In  this  form  the  law  appears  to  be  firmly  based  on  experiment, 
and  the  revision  or  even  the  complete  abandonment  of  the 
general  ideas  of  Einstein's  theory  would  scarcely  affect  it. 

These  experimental  proofs,  that  space  in  the  gravitational 
field  of  the  sun  is  non-Euclidean  or  curved,  have  appeared 
puzzling  to  those  unfamiliar  with  the  theory.  It  is  pointed  out 
that  the  experiments  show  that  physical  objects  or  loci  are 
"warped"  in  the  sun's  field;  but  it  is  suggested  that  there  is 
nothing  to  show  that  the  space  in  which  they  exist  is  warped. 
The  answer  is  that  it  does  not  seem  possible  to  draw  any  dis- 
tinction between  the  warping  of  physical  space  and  the  warping 
of  physical  objects  which  define  space.  If  our  purpose  were 
merely  to  call  attention  to  these  phenomena  of  the  gravitational 
field  as  curiosities,  it  would,  no  doubt,  be  preferable  to  avoid 
using  words  which  are  liable  to  be  misconstrued.  But  if  we  wish 
to  arrive  at  an  understanding  of  the  conditions  of  the  gravita- 
tional field,  we  cannot  throw  over  the  vocabulary  appropriate 
for  that  purpose,  merely  because  there  may  be  some  who  insist 
on  investing  the  words  with  a  metaphysical  meaning  which  is 
clearly  inappropriate  to  the  discussion. 
*  Appendix,  Note  10. 


vm]  OTHER  TESTS  OF  THE  THEORY  127 

We  come  now  to  another  kind  of  test.  In  the  statement  of 
the  law  of  gravitation  just  given,  a  quantity  s  is  mentioned; 
and,  so  far  as  that  statement  goes,  s  is  merely  an  intermediary 
quantity  defined  mathematically.  But  in  our  theory  we  have 
been  identifying  s  with  interval-length,  measured  with  an 
apparatus  of  scales  and  clocks ;  and  it  is  very  desirable  to  test 
whether  this  identification  can  be  confirmed — whether  the 
geometry  of  scales  and  clocks  is  the  same  as  the  geometry  of 
moving  particles  and  light-pulses. 

The  question  has  been  mooted  whether  we  may  not  divide 
the  present  theory  into  two  parts.  Can  we  not  accept  the  law 
of  gravitation  in  the  form  suggested  above  as  a  self-contained 
result  proved  by  observation,  leaving  the  further  possibility 
that  s  is  to  be  identified  with  interval-length  open  to  debate? 
The  motive  is  partly  a  desire  to  consolidate  our  gains,  freeing 
them  from  the  least  taint  of  speculation ;  but  perhaps  also  it  is 
inspired  by  the  wish  to  leave  an  opening  by  which  clock-scale 
geometry,  i.e.  the  space  and  time  of  ordinary  perception,  may 
remain  Euclidean.  Disregarding  the  connection  of  s  with 
interval-length,  there  is  no  object  in  attributing  any  significance 
of  length  to  it;  it  can  be  regarded  as  a  dynamical  quantity  like 
Action,  and  the  new  law  of  gravitation  can  be  expressed  after 
the  traditional  manner  without  dragging  in  strange  theories  of 
space  and  time.  Thus  interpreted,  the  law  perhaps  loses  its 
theoretical  inevitability;  but  it  remains  strongly  grounded  on 
observation.  Unfortunately  for  this  proposal,  it  is  impossible 
to  make  a  clean  division  of  the  theory  at  the  point  suggested. 
Without  some  geometrical  interpretation  of  s  our  conclusions  as 
to  the  courses  of  planets  and  light- waves  cannot  be  connected 
with  the  astronomical  measurements  which  verify  them.  The 
track  of  a  light- wave  in  terms  of  the  coordinates  r,  6,  t  cannot 
be  tested  directly;  the  coordinates  afford  only  a  temporary 
resting-place ;  and  the  measurement  of  the  displacement  of  the 
star-image  on  the  photographic  plate  involves  a  reconversion 
from  the  coordinates  to  s,  which  here  appears  in  its  significance 
as  the  interval  in  clock-scale  geometry. 

Thus  even  from  the  experimental  standpoint,  a  rough  corre- 
spondence of  the  quantity  s  occurring  in  the  law  of  gravitation 
with  the  clock-scale  interval  is  an  essential  feature.  We  have 


128  OTHER  TESTS  OF  THE  THEORY  [CH. 

now  to  examine  whether  experimental  evidence  can  be  found 
as  to  the  exactness  of  this  correspondence. 

It  seems  reasonable  to  suppose  that  a  vibrating  atom  is  an 
ideal  type  of  clock.  The  beginning  and  end  of  a  single  vibration 
constitute  two  events,  and  the  interval  ds  between  two  events 
is  an  absolute  quantity  independent  of  any  mesh-system.  This 
interval  must  be  determined  by  the  nature  of  the  atom;  and 
hence  atoms  which  are  absolutely  similar  will  measure  by  their 
vibrations  equal  values  of  the  absolute  interval  ds.  Let  us 
adopt  the  usual  mesh-system  (r,  6,  t)  for  the  solar  system,  so 
that 

ds2=  -  y-1  dr2  -  r*dd2  +  ycfe2. 

Consider  an  atom  momentarily  at  rest  at  some  point  in  the  solar 
system;  we  say  momentarily,  because  it  must  undergo  the 
acceleration  of  the  gravitational  field  where  it  is.  If  ds  corre- 
sponds to  one  vibration,  then,  since  the  atom  has  not  moved, 
the  corresponding  dr  and  d6  will  be  zero,  and  we  have 

ds2  =  ydt2. 

The  time  of  vibration  dt  is  thus  l/\/y  times  the  interval  of 
vibration  ds. 

Accordingly,  if  we  have  two  similar  atoms  at  rest  at  different 
points  in  the  system,  the  interval  of  vibration  will  be  the  same 
for  both  ;  but  the  time  of  vibration  will  be  proportional  to  the 
inverse  square-root  of  y,  which  differs  for  the  two  atoms.  Since 

2m 


77? 

1  H  --  ,  very  approximately. 

Take  an  atom  on  the  surface  of  the  sun,  and  a  similar  atom 
in  a  terrestrial  laboratory.  For  the  first,  1  +  m/r  =  1-00000212, 
and  for  the  second  1  +  m/r  is  practically  1.  The  time  of  vibration 
of  the  solar  atom  is  thus  longer  in  the  ratio  1*00000212,  and  it 
might  be  possible  to  test  this  by  spectroscopic  examination. 

There  is  one  important  point  to  consider.  The  spectroscopic 
examination  must  take  place  in  the  terrestrial  laboratory;  and 
we  have  to  test  the  period  of  the  solar  atom  by  the  period  of 
the  waves  emanating  from  it  when  they  reach  the  earth.  Will 
they  carry  the  period  to  us  unchanged?  Clearly  they  must. 


vm]  OTHER  TESTS  OF  THE  THEORY  129 

The  first  and  second  pulse  have  to  travel  the  same  distance  (r), 
and  they  travel  with  the  same  velocity  (dr/dt);  for  the  velocity 
of  light  in  the  mesh-system  used  is  1  -  2m/r,  and  though  this 
velocity  depends  on  r,  it  does  not  depend  on  t.  Hence  the  differ- 
ence dt  at  one  end  of  the  waves  is  the  same  as  that  at  the  other 
end. 

Thus  in  the  laboratory  the  light  from  a  solar  source  should 
be  of  greater  period  and  greater  wave-length  (i.e.  redder)  than 
that  from  a  corresponding  terrestrial  source.  Taking  blue  light 
of  wave-length  4000  A,  the  solar  lines  should  be  displaced 
4000  x  -00000212,  or  0-008  A  towards  the  red  end  of  the 
spectrum. 

The  properties  of  a  gravitational  field  of  force  are  similar  to 
those  of  a  centrifugal  field  of  force;  and  it  may  be  of  interest 
to  see  how  a  corresponding  shift  of  the  spectral  lines  occurs  for 
an  atom  in  a  field  of  centrifugal  force.  Suppose  that,  as  we  rotate 
with  the  earth,  we  observe  a  very  remote  atom  momentarily  at 
rest  relative  to  our  rotating  axes.  The  case  is  just  similar  to 
that  of  the  solar  atom;  both  are  at  rest  relative  to  the  respective 
mesh-systems ;  the  solar  atom  is  in  a  field  of  gravitational  force, 
and  the  other  is  in  a  field  of  centrifugal  force.  The  direction  of 
the  force  is  in  both  cases  the  same — from  the  earth  towards  the 
atom  observed.  Hence  the  atom  in  the  centrifugal  field  ought 
also  to  vibrate  more  slowly,  and  show  a  displacement  to  the  red 
in  its  spectral  lines.  It  does,  if  the  theory  hitherto  given  is 
right.  We  can  abolish  the  centrifugal  force  by  choosing  non- 
rotating  axes.  But  the  distant  atom  was  at  rest  relative  to  the 
rotating  axes,  that  is  to  say,  it  was  whizzing  round  with  them. 
Thus  from  the  ordinary  standpoint  the  atom  has  a  large  velocity 
relative  to  the  observer,  and,  in  accordance  with  Chapter  i,  its 
vibrations  slow  down  just  as  the  aviator's  watch  did.  The  shift 
of  spectral  lines  due  to  a  field  of  centrifugal  force  is  only  another 
aspect  of  a  phenomenon  already  discussed. 

The  expected  shift  of  the  spectral  lines  on  the  sun,  compared 
with  the  corresponding  terrestrial  lines,  has  been  looked  for; 
but  it  has  not  been  found. 

In  estimating  the  importance  of  this  observational  result  in 
regard  to  the  relativity  theory,  we  must  distinguish  between 
a  failure  of  the  test  and  a  definite  conclusion  that  the  lines  are 
E.S.  o 


130  OTHER  TESTS  OF  THE  THEORY  [CH. 

undisplaced.  The  chief  investigators  St  John,  Schwarzschild, 
Evershed,  and  Grebe  and  Bachem,  seem  to  be  agreed  that  the 
observed  displacement  is  at  any  rate  less  than  that  predicted 
by  the  theory.  The  theory  can  therefore  in  no  case  claim  support 
from  the  present  evidence.  But  something  more  must  be 
established,  if  the  observations  are  to  be  regarded  as  in  the 
slightest  degree  adverse  to  the  theory.  If  for  instance  the  mean 
deflection  is  found  to  be  -004  instead  of  -008  Angstrom  units, 
the  only  possible  conclusion  is  that  there  are  certain  causes  of 
displacement  of  the  lines,  acting  in  the  solar  atmosphere  and  not 
yet  identified.  No  one  could  be  much  surprised  if  this  were  the 
case;  and  it  would,  of  course,  render  the  test  nugatory.  The 
case  is  not  much  altered  if  the  observed  displacement  is  -002 
units,  provided  the  latter  quantity  is  above  the  accidental  error 
of  measurement;  if  we  have  to  postulate  some  unexplained  dis- 
turbance, it  may  just  as  well  produce  a  displacement  —  -006  as 
+  -002.  For  this  reason  Evershed's  evidence  is  by  no  means 
adverse  to  the  theory,  since  he  finds  unexplained  displacements 
in  any  case.  One  set  of  lines  measured  by  St  John  gave  a  mean 
displacement  of  -0036  units;  and  this  also  shows  that  the  test 
has  failed.  The  only  evidence  adverse  to  the  theory,  and  not 
merely  neutral,  is  a  series  of  measures  by  St  John  on  17  cyanogen 
lines,  which  he  regarded  as  most  dependable.  These  gave  a  mean 
shift  of  exactly  -000.  If  this  stood  alone  we  should  certainly  be 
disposed  to  infer  that  the  test  had  gone  against  Einstein's 
theory,  and  that  nothing  had  intervened  to  cast  doubt  on  the 
validity  of  the  test.  The  writer  is  unqualified  to  criticise  these 
mutually  contradictory  spectroscopic  conclusions;  but  he  has 
formed  the  impression  that  the  last-mentioned  result  obtained 
by  St  John  has  the  greatest  weight  of  any  investigations  up  to 
the  present*. 

It  seems  that  judgment  must  be  reserved;  but  it  may  be  well 
to  examine  how  the  present  theory  would  stand  if  the  verdict 
of  this  third  crucial  experiment  finally  went  against  it. 

It  has  become  apparent  that  there  is  something  illogical  in 

*  A  further  paper  by  Grebe  and  Bachem  (Zeitechrift  fur  Pkysik,  1920,  p,  51), 
received  whilst  this  is  passing  through  the  press,  makes  out  a  case  strongly 
favourable  for  the  Einstein  displacement,  and  reconciles  the  discordant  results 
found  by  most  of  the  investigators.  But  it  may  still  be  the  best  counsel  to 
"wait  and  see,"  and  I  have  made  no  alteration  in.  the  discussion  here  given. 


vm]  OTHER  TESTS  OF  THE  THEORY  131 

the  sequence  we  have  followed  in  developing  the  theory,  owing 
to  the  necessity  of  proceeding  from  the  common  ideas  of  space 
and  time  to  the  more  fundamental  properties  of  the  absolute 
world.  We  started  with  a  definition  of  the  interval  by  measure- 
ments made  with  clocks  and  scales,  and  afterwards  connected 
it  with  the  tracks  of  moving  particles.  Clearly  this  is  an  inversion 
of  the  logical  order.  The  simplest  kind  of  clock  is  an  elaborate 
mechanism,  and  a  material  scale  is  a  very  complex  piece  of 
apparatus.  The  best  course  then  is  to  discover  ds  by  exploration 
of  space  and  time  with  a  moving  particle  or  light-pulse,  rather 
than  by  measures  with  scales  and  clocks.  On  this  basis  by 
astronomical  observation  alone  the  formula  for  ds  in  the  gravita- 
tional field  of  the  sun  has  already  been  established.  To  proceed 
from  this  to  determine  exactly  what  is  measured  by  a  scale  and 
a  clock,  it  would  at  first  seem  necessary  to  have  a  detailed  theory 
of  the  mechanisms  involved  in  a  scale  and  clock.  But  there  is 
a  short-cut  which  seems  legitimate.  This  short-cut  is  in  fact 
the  Principle  of  Equivalence.  Whatever  the  mechanism  of  the 
clock,  whether  it  is  a  good  clock  or  a  bad  clock,  the  intervals  it 
is  beating  must  be  something  absolute;  the  clock  cannot  know 
what  mesh-system  the  observer  is  using,  and  therefore  its 
absolute  rate  cannot  be  altered  by  position  er  motion  which  is 
relative  merely  to  a  mesh-system.  Thus  wherever  it  is  placed, 
and  however  it  moves,  provided  it  is  not  constrained  by  impacts 
or  electrical  forces,  it  must  always  beat  equal  intervals  as  we 
have  previously  assumed.  Thus  a  clock  may  fairly  be  used  to 
measure  intervals,  even  when  the  interval  is  defined  in  the  new 
manner;  any  other  result  seems  to  postulate  that  it  pays  heed 
to  some  particular  mesh-system*. 

Three  modes  of  escape  from  this  conclusion  seem  to  be  left 
open.  A  clock  cannot  pay  any  heed  to  the  mesh-system  used; 
but  it  may  be  affected  by  the  kind  of  space-time  around  itf. 
The  terrestrial  atom  is  in  a  field  of  gravitation  so  weak  that  the 
space-time  may  be  considered  practically  flat;  but  the  space- 

*  Of  course,  there  is  always  the  possibility  that  this  might  be  the  case, 
though  it  seems  unlikely.  The  essential  point  of  the  relativity  theory  is  that 
(contrary  to  the  common  opinion)  no  experiments  yet  made  have  revealed  any 
mesh-system  of  an  absolute  character,  not  that  experiments  never  will  reveal 
such  a  system. . 

f  Appendix,  Note  11. 

9—2 


132  OTHER  TESTS  OF  THE  THEORY  [CH. 

time  round  the  solar  atom  is  not  flat.  It  may  happen  that  the 
two  atoms  actually  detect  this  absolute  difference  in  the  world 
around  them  and  do  not  vibrate  with  the  same  interval  ds — 
contrary  to  our  assumption  above.  Then  the  prediction  of  the 
shift  of  the  lines  in  the  solar  spectrum  is  invalidated.  Now  it  is 
very  doubtful  if  an  atom  can  detect  the  curving  of  the  region  it 
occupies,  because  curvature  is  only  apparent  when  an  extended 
region  is  considered;  still  an  atom  has  some  extension,  and  it  is 
not  impossible  that  its  equations  of  motion  involve  the  quantities 
B^va.  which  distinguish  gravitational  from  flat  space-time.  An 
apparently  insuperable  objection  to  this  explanation  is  that  the 
effect  of  curvature  on  the  period  would  almost  certainly  be 
represented  by  terms  of  the  form  m2/r2,  whereas  to  account  for 
a  negative  result  for  the  shift  of  the  spectral  lines  terms  of  much 
greater  order  of  magnitude  m\r  are  needed. 

The  second  possibility  depends  on  the  question  whether  it  is 
possible  for  an  atom  at  rest  on  the  sun  to  be  precisely  similar  to 
one  on  the  earth.  If  an  atom  fell  from  the  earth  to  the  sun  it 
would  acquire  a  velocity  of  610  km.  per  sec.,  and  could  only  be 
brought  to  rest  by  a  systematic  hammering  by  other  atoms. 
May  not  this  have  made  a  permanent  alteration  in  its  time- 
keeping properties?  It  is  true  that  every  atom  is  continually 
undergoing  collisions,  but  it  is  just  possible  that  the  average 
solar  atom  has  a  different  period  from  the  average  terrestrial 
atom  owing  to  this  systematic  difference  in  its  history. 

What  are  the  two  events  which  mark  the  beginning  and  end 
of  an  atomic  vibration?  This  question  suggests  a  third  possi- 
bility. If  they  are  two  absolute  events,  like  the  explosions  of 
two  detonators,  then  the  interval  between  them  will  be  a  definite 
quantity,  and  our  argument  applies.  But  if,  for  example,  an 
atomic  vibration  is  determined  by  the  revolution  of  an  electron 
around  a  nucleus,  it  is  not  marked  by  any  definite  events.  A 
revolution  means  a  return  to  the  same  position  as  before;  but 
we  cannot  define  what  is  the  same  position  as  before  without 
reference  to  some  mesh-system.  Hence  it  is  not  clear  that  there 
is  any  absolute  interval  corresponding  to  the  vibration  of  an 
atom;  an  absolute  interval  only  exists  between  two  events 
absolutely  defined. 

It  is  unlikely  that  any  of  these  three  possibilities  can  negative 


vm]  OTHER  TESTS  OF  THE  THEORY  133 

the  expected  shift  of  the  spectral  lines.  The  uncertainties  intro- 
duced by  them  are,  so  far  as  we  can  judge,  of  a  much  smaller 
order  of  magnitude.  But  it  will  be  realised  that  this  third  test 
of  Einstein's  theory  involves  rather  more  complicated  considera- 
tions than  the  two  simple  tests  with  light- waves  and  the  moving 
planet.  I  think  that  a  shift  of  the  Fraunhofer  lines  is  a  highly 
probable  prediction  from  the  theory  and  I  anticipate  that 
experiment  will  ultimately  confirm  the  prediction ;  but  it  is  not 
entirely  free  from  guess-work.  These  theoretical  uncertainties 
are  apart  altogether  from  the  great  practical  difficulties  of  the 
test,  including  the  exact  allowance  for  the  unfamiliar  circum- 
stances of  an  absorbing  atom  in  the  sun's  atmosphere. 

Outside  the  three  leading  tests,  there  appears  to  be  little 
chance  of  checking  the  theory  unless  our  present  methods  of 
measurement  are  greatly  improved.  It  is  not  practicable  to 
measure  the  deflection  of  light  by  any  body  other  than  the  sun. 
The  apparent  displacement  of  a  star  just  grazing  the  limb  of 
Jupiter  should  be  0"-017.  A  hundredth  of  a  second  of  arc  is 
just  about  within  reach  of  the  most  refined  measurements  with 
the  largest  telescopes.  If  the  observation  could  be  conducted 
under  the  same  conditions  as  the  best  parallax  measurements, 
the  displacement  could  be  detected  but  not  measured  with  any 
accuracy.  The  glare  from  the  light  of  the  planet  ruins  any  chance 
of  success. 

Most  astronomers,  who  look  into  the  subject,  are  entrapped 
sooner  or  later  by  a  fallacy  in  connection  with  double  stars. 
It  is  thought  that  when  one  component  passes  behind  the  other 
it  will  appear  displaced  from  its  true  position,  like  a  star  passing 
behind  the  sun;  if  the  size  of  the  occulting  star  is  comparable 
with  that  of  the  sun,  the  displacement  should  be  of  the  same 
order,  l"-7.  This  would  cause  a  very  conspicuous  irregularity  in 
the  apparent  orbit  of  a  double  star.  But  reference  to  p.  113 
shows  that  an  essential  point  in  the  argument  was  the  enormous 
ratio  of  the  distance  QP  of  the  star  from  the  sun  to  the  distance 
EF  of  the  sun  from  the  earth.  It  is  only  in  these  conditions  that 
the  apparent  displacement  of  the  object  is  equal  to  the  deflection 
undergone  by  its  light.  It  is  easy  to  see  that  where  this  ratio  is 
reversed,  as  in  the  case  of  the  double  star,  the  apparent  displace- 
ment is  an  extremely  small  fraction  of  the  deflection  of  the  light. 
It  would  be  quite  imperceptible  to  observation. 


134  OTHER  TESTS  OF  THE  THEORY  [CH. 

If  two  independent  stars  are  seen  in  the  same  line  of  vision 
within  about  I",  one  being  a  great  distance  behind  the  other, 
the  conditions  seem  at  first  more  favourable.  I  do  not  know  if 
any  such  pairs  exist.  It  would  seem  that  we  ought  to  see  the 
more  distant  star  not  only  by  the  direct  ray,  which  would  be 
practically  undisturbed,  but  also  by  a  ray  passing  round  the 
other  side  of  the  nearer  star  and  bent  by  it  to  the  necessary 
extent.  The  second  image  would,  of  course,  be  indistinguishable 
from  that  of  the  nearer  star;  but  it  would  give  it  additional 
brightness,  which  would  disappear  in  time  when  the  two  stars 
receded.  But  consider  a  pencil  of  light  coming  past  the  nearer 
star;  the  inner  edge  will  be  bent  more  than  the  outer  edge,  so 
that  the  divergence  is  increased.  The  increase  is  very  small; 
but  then  the  whole  divergence  of  a  pencil  from  a  source  some 
hundred  billion  miles  away  is  very  minute.  It  is  easily  calculated 
that  the  increased  divergence  would  so  weaken  the  light  as  to 
make  it  impossible  to  detect  it  when  it  reached  us  *. 

If  two  unconnected  stars  approached  the  line  of  sight  still 
more  closely,  so  that  one  almost  occulted  the  other,  observable 
effects  might  be  perceived.  When  the  proximity  was  such  that 
the  direct  ray  from  the  more  distant  star  passed  within  about 
100  million  kilometres  of  the  nearer  star,  it  would  begin  to  fade 
appreciably.  The  course  of  the  ray  would  not  yet  be  appreciably 
deflected,  but  the  divergence  of  the  pencil  would  be  rapidly 
increased,  and  less  light  from  the  star  would  enter  our  telescopes. 
The  test  is  scarcely  likely  to  be  an  important  one,  since  a 
sufficiently  close  approach  is  not  likely  to  occur;  and  in  any 
case  it  would  be  difficult  to  feel  confident  that  the  fading  was 
not  due  to  a  nebulous  atmosphere  around  the  nearer  star. 

The  theory  gives  small  corrections  to  the  motion  of  the  moon 
which  have  been  investigated  by  de  Sitter.  Both  the  axis  of 
the  orbit  and  its  line  of  intersection  with  the  ecliptic  should 
advance  about  2"  per  century  more  than  the  Newtonian  theory 
indicates.  Neither  observation  nor  Newtonian  theory  are  as  yet 
pushed  to  sufficient  accuracy  to  test  this;  but  a  comparatively 
small  increase  in  accuracy  would  make  a  comparison  possible. 

Since  certain  stars  are  perhaps  ten  times  more  massive  than 
the  sun,  without  the  radius  being  unduly  increased,  they  should 
show  a  greater  shift  of  the  spectral  lines  and  might  be  more 

*  Appendix,  Note  12. 


viii]  OTHER  TESTS  OF  THE  THEORY  135 

favourable  for  the  third  crucial  test.  Unfortunately  the  pre- 
dicted shift  is  indistinguishable  from  that  caused  by  a  velocity 
of  the  star  in  the  line-of-sight  on  Doppler's  principle.  Thus  the 
expected  shift  on  the  sun  is  equivalent  to  that  caused  by  a  re- 
ceding velocity  of  0-634  kilometres  per  second.  In  the  case  of  the 
sun  we  know  by  other  evidence  exactly  what  the  line-of-sight 
velocity  should  be;  but  we  have  not  this  knowledge  for  other 
stars.  The  only  indication  that  could  be  obtained  would  be  the 
detection  of  an  average  motion  of  recession  of  the  more  massive 
stars.  It  seems  rather  unlikely  that  there  should  be  a  real 
preponderance  of  receding  motions  among  stars  taken  indis- 
criminately from  all  parts  of  the  sky;  and  the  apparent  effect 
might  then  be  attributed  to  the  Einstein  shift.  Actually  the 
most  massive  stars  (those  of  spectral  type  B)  have  been  found 
to  show  an  average  velocity  of  recession  of  about  4-5  km.  per 
sec.,  which  would  be  explained  if  the  values  of  m/r  for  these 
stars  are  about  seven  times  greater  than  the  value  for  the  sun — 
a  quite  reasonable  hypothesis.  This  phenomenon  was  well- 
known  to  astrophysicists  some  years  before  Einstein's  theory 
was  published.  But  there  are  so  many  possible  interpretations 
that  no  stress  should  be  placed  on  this  evidence.  Moreover  the 
very  diffuse  "giant"  stars  of  type  M  have  also  a  considerable 
systematic  velocity  of  recession,  and  for  these  mjr  must  be  much 
less  than  for  the  sun. 


CHAPTER   IX 
MOMENTUM  AND   ENERGY 

For  spirits  and  men  by  different  standards  mete 

The  less  and  greater  in  the  flow  of  time. 

By  sun  and  moon,  primeval  ordinances — 

By  stars  which  rise  and  set  harmoniously — 

By  the  recurring  seasons,  and  the  swing 

This  way  and  that  of  the  suspended  rod 

Precise  and  punctual,  men  divide  the  hours, 

Equal,  continuous,  for  their  common  use. 

Not  so  with  us  in  the  immaterial  world; 

But  intervals  in  their  succession 

Are  measured  by  the  living  thought  alone 

And  grow  or  wane  with  its  intensity. 

And  time  is  not  a  common  property; 

But  what  is  long  is  short,  and  swift  is  slow 

And  near  is  distant,  as  received  and  grasped 

By  this  mind  and  by  that.  NEWMAN,  Dream  of  Oerontius. 

ONE  of  the  most  important  consequences  of  the  relativity  theory 
is  the  unification  of  inertia  and  gravitation. 

The  beginner  in  mechanics  does  not  accept  Newton's  first  law 
of  motion  without  a  feeling  of  hesitation.  He  readily  agrees  that 
a  body  at  rest  will  remain  at  rest  unless  something  causes  it  to 
move ;  but  he  is  not  satisfied  that  a  body  in  motion  will  remain 
in  uniform  motion  so  long  as  it  is  not  interfered  with.  It  is 
quite  natural  to  think  that  motion  is  an  impulse  which  will 
exhaust  itself,  and  that  the  body  will  finally  come  to  a  stop. 
The  teacher  easily  disposes  of  the  arguments  urged  in  support 
of  this  view,  pointing  out  the  friction  which  has  to  be  overcome 
when  a  train  or  a  bicycle  is  kept  moving  uniformly.  He  shows 
that  if  the  friction  is  diminished,  as  when  a  stone  is  projected 
across  ice,  the  motion  lasts  for  a  longer  time,  so  that  if  all  inter- 
ference by  friction  were  removed  uniform  motion  might  con- 
tinue indefinitely.  But  he  glosses  over  the  point  that  if  there 
were  no  interference  with  the  motion — if  the  ice  were  abolished 
altogether — the  motion  would  be  by  no  means  uniform,  but  like 
that  of  a  falling  body.  The  teacher  probably  insists  that  the 
continuance  of  uniform  motion  does  not  require  anything  that 


CH.IX]  MOMENTUM  AND  ENERGY  137 

can  properly  be  called  a  cause.  The  property  is  given  a  name 
inertia;  but  it  is  thought  of  as  an  innate  tendency  in  contrast 
to  force  which  is  an  active  cause.  So  long  as  forces  are  confined 
to  the  thrusts  and  tensions  of  elementary  mechanics,  where  there 
is  supposed  to  be  direct  contact  of  material,  there  is  good  ground 
for  this  distinction;  we  can  visualise  the  active  hammering  of 
the  molecules  on  the  body,  causing  it  to  change  its  motion.  But 
when  force  is  extended  to  include  the  gravitational  field  the 
distinction  is  not  so  clear. 

For  our  part  we  deny  the  distinction  in  this  last  case.  Gravita- 
tional force  is  not  an  active  agent  working  against  the  passive 
tendency  of  inertia.  Gravitation  and  inertia  are  one.  The 
uniform  straight  track  is  only  relative  to  some  mesh-system, 
which  is  assigned  by  arbitrary  convention.  We  cannot  imagine 
that  a  body  looks  round  to  see  who  is  observing  it  and  then  feels 
an  innate  tendency  to  move  in  that  observer's  straight  line — 
probably  at  the  same  time  feeling  an  active  force  compelling 
it  to  move  some  other  way.  If  there  is  anything  that  can  be 
called  an  innate  tendency  it  is  the  tendency  to  follow  what  we 
have  called  the  natural  track — the  longest  track  between  two 
points.  We  might  restate  the  first  law  of  motion  in  the  form 
"Every  body  tends  to  move  in  the  track  in  which  it  actually 
does  move,  except  in  so  far  as  it  is  compelled  by  material  impacts 
to  follow  some  other  track  than  that  in  which  it  would  otherwise 
move."  Probably  no  one  will  dispute  this  profound  statement ! 

Whether  the  natural  track  is  straight  or  curved,  whether  the 
motion  is  uniform  or  changing,  a  cause  is  in  any  case  required. 
This  cause  is  in  all  cases  the  combined  inertia-gravitation.  To 
have  given  it  a  name  does  not  excuse  us  from  attempting  an 
explanation  of  it  in  due  time.  Meanwhile  this  identification  of 
inertia  and  gravitation  as  arbitrary  components  of  one  property 
explains  why  weight  is  always  proportional  to  inertia.  This 
experimental  fact  verified  to  a  very  high  degree  of  accuracy 
would  otherwise  have  to  be  regarded  as  a  remarkable  law  of 
nature. 

We  have  learnt  that  the  natural  track  is  the  longest  track 
between  two  points;  and  since  this  is  the  only  definable  track 
having  an  absolute  significance  in  nature,  we  seem  to  have  a 
sufficient  explanation  of  why  an  undisturbed  particle  must 


138  MOMENTUM  AND  ENERGY  [CH. 

follow  it.  That  is  satisfactory,  so  far  as  it  goes,  but  still  we  should 
naturally  wish  for  a  clearer  picture  of  the  cause — inertia- 
gravitation — which  propels  it  in  this  track. 

It  has  been  seen  that  the  gravitational  field  round  a  body 
involves  a  kind  of  curvature  of  space-time,  and  accordingly 
round  each  particle  there  is  a  minute  pucker.  Now  at  each 
successive  instant  a  particle  is  displaced  continuously  in  time  if 
not  in  space;  and  so  in  our  four-dimensional  representation 
which  gives  a  bird's-eye-view  of  all  time,  the  pucker  has  the 
form  of  a  long  groove  along  the  track  of  the  particle.  Now  such 
a  groove  or  pleat  in  a  continuum  cannot  take  an  arbitrary 
course — as  every  dress-maker  knows.  Einstein's  law  of  gravita- 
tion gives  the  rule  according  to  which  the  curvatures  at  any 
point  of  space-time  link  on  to  those  at  surrounding  points ;  so 
that  when  a  groove  is  started  in  any  direction  the  rest  of  its 
course  can  be  forecasted.  We  have  hitherto  thought  of  the  law 
of  gravitation  as  showing  how  the  pucker  spreads  out  in  space, 
cf.  Newton's  statement  that  the  corresponding  force  weakens  as 
the  inverse  square  of  the  distance.  But  the  law  of  Einstein 
equally  shows  how  the  gravitational  field  spreads  out  in  time, 
since  there  is  no  absolute  distinction  of  time  and  space.  It  can 
be  deduced  mathematically  from  Einstein's  law  that  a  pucker 
of  the  form  corresponding  to  a  particle  necessarily  runs  along 
the  track  of  greatest  interval-length  between  two  points. 

The  track  of  a  particle  of  matter  is  thus  determined  by  the 
interaction  of  the  minute  gravitational  field,  which  surrounds 
and,  so  far  as  we  know,  constitutes  it,  with  the  general  space- 
time  of  the  region.  The  various  forms  which  it  can  take,  find 
their  explanation  in  the  new  law  of  gravitation.  The  straight 
tracks  of  the  stars  and  the  curved  tracks  of  the  planets  are 
placed  on  the  same  level,  and  receive  the  same  kind  of  explana- 
tion. The  one  universal  law,  that  the  space-time  continuum 
can  be  curved  only  in  the  first  degree,  is  sufficient  to  prescribe 
the  forms  of  all  possible  grooves  crossing  it. 

The  application  of  Einstein's  law  to  trace  the  gravitational 
field  not  only  through  space  but  through  time  leads  to  a  great 
unification  of  mechanics.  If  we  have  given  for  a  start  a  narrow 
slice  of  space-time  representing  the  state  of  the  universe  for  a  few 
seconds,  with  all  the  little  puckers  belonging  to  particles  of  matter 


ix]  MOMENTUM  AND  ENERGY  139 

properly  described,  then  step  by  step  all  space-time  can  be  linked 
on  and  the  positions  of  the  puckers  shown  at  all  subsequent 
times  (electrical  forces  being  excluded).  Nothing  is  needed  for 
this  except  the  law  of  gravitation — that  the  curvature  is  only 
of  the  first  degree — and  there  can  thus  be  nothing  in  the  pre- 
dictions of  mechanics  which  is  not  comprised  in  the  law  of 
gravitation.  The  conservation  of  mass,  of  energy,  and  of 
momentum  must  all  be  contained  implicitly  in  Einstein's  law. 

It  may  seem  strange  that  Einstein's  law  of  gravitation  should 
take  over  responsibility  for  the  whole  of  mechanics;  because  in 
many  mechanical  problems  gravitation  in  the  ordinary  sense 
can  be  neglected.  But  inertia  and  gravitation  are  unified;  the 
law  is  also  the  law  of  inertia,  and  inertia  or  mass  appears  in  all 
mechanical  problems.  When,  as  in  many  problems,  we  say  that 
gravitation  is  negligible,  we  mean  only  that  the  interaction  of 
the  minute  puckers  with  one  another  can  be  neglected;  we  do 
not  mean  that  the  interaction  of  the  pucker  of  a  particle  with 
the  general  character  of  the  space-time  in  which  it  lies  can  be 
neglected,  because  this  constitutes  the  inertia  of  the  particle. 

The  conservation  of  energy  and  the  conservation  of  momentum 
in  three  independent  directions,  constitute  together  four  laws 
or  equations  which  are  fundamental  in  all  branches  of  mechanics. 
Although  they  apply  when  gravitation  in  the  ordinary  sense  is 
not  acting,  they  must  be  deducible  like  everything  else  in 
mechanics  from  the  law  of  gravitation.  It  is  a  great  triumph  for 
Einstein's  theory  that  his  law  gives  correctly  these  experimental 
principles,  which  have  generally  been  regarded  as  unconnected 
with  gravitation.  We  cannot  enter  into  the  mathematical 
deduction  of  these  equations;  but  we  shall  examine  generally 
how  they  are  arrived  at. 

It  has  already  been  explained  that  although  the  values  of 
G^  are  strictly  zero  everywhere  in  space-time,  yet  if  we  take 
average  values  through  a  small  region  containing  a  large  number 
of  particles  of  matter  their  average  or  "macroscopic"  values 
will  not  be  zero*.  Expressions  for  these  macroscopic  values  can 
be  found  in  terms  of  the  number,  masses  and  motions  of  the 
particles.  Since  we  have  averaged  the  G^,  we  should  also 

*  It  is  the  gr's  which  are  first  averaged,  then  the  O^v  are  calculated  by  the 
formulae  in  Note  5. 


140  MOMENTUM  AND  ENERGY  [CH. 

average  the  particles;  that  is  to  say,  we  replace  them  by  a 
distribution  of  continuous  matter  having  equivalent  properties. 
We  thus  obtain  macroscopic  equations  of  the  form 

GUV  =   ^M«" 

where  on  the  one  side  we  have  the  somewhat  abstruse  quantities 
describing  the  kind  of  space-time,  and  on  the  other  side  we  have 
well-known  physical  quantities  describing  the  density,  momen- 
tum, energy  and  internal  stresses  of  the  matter  present.  These 
macroscopic  equations  are  obtained  solely  from  the  law  of 
gravitation  by  the  process  of  averaging. 

By  an  exactly  similar  process  we  pass  from  Laplace's  equation 
V2(j>  =  0  to  Poisson's  equation  for  continuous  matter  V2(/>  =  —  47775, 
in  the  Newtonian  theory  of  gravitation. 

When  continuous  matter  is  admitted,  any  kind  of  space-time 
becomes  possible.  The  law  of  gravitation  instead  of  denying  the 
possibility  of  certain  kinds,  states  what  values  of  K^,  i.e.  what 
distribution  and  motion  of  continuous  matter  in  the  region,  are 
a  necessary  accompaniment.  This  is  no  contradiction  with  the 
original  statement  of  the  law,  since  that  referred  to  the  case  in 
which  continuous  matter  is  denied  or  excluded.  Any  set  of 
values  of  the  potentials  is  now  possible;  we  have  only  to  calculate 
by  the  formulae  the  corresponding  values  of  G^,  and  we  at 
once  obtain  ten  equations  giving  the  K^v  which  define  the 
conditions  of  the  matter  necessary  to  produce  these  potentials. 
But  suppose  the  necessary  distribution  of  matter  through  space 
and  time  is  an  impossible  one,  violating  the  laws  of  mechanics ! 
No,  there  is  only  one  law  of  mechanics,  the  law  of  gravitation; 
we  have  specified  the  distribution  of  matter  so  as  to  satisfy 
G^v  =  K^vt  and  there  can  be  no  other  condition  for  it  to  fulfil. 
The  distribution  must  be  mechanically  possible ;  it  might,  how- 
ever, be  unrealisable  in  practice,  involving  inordinately  high  or 
even  negative  density  of  matter. 

In  connection  with  the  law  for  empty  space,  G^v  =  0,  it  was 
noticed  that  whereas  this  apparently  forms  a  set  often  equations, 
only  six  of  them  can  be  independent.  This  was  because  ten 
equations  would  suffice  to  determine  the  ten  potentials  precisely, 
and  so  fix  not  only  the  kind  of  space-time  but  the  mesh-system. 
It  is  clear  that  we  must  preserve  the  right  to  draw  the  mesh- 
system  as  we  please;  it  is  fixed  by  arbitrary  choice  not  by  a  law 


ix]  MOMENTUM  AND  ENERGY  141 

of  nature.  To  allow  for  the  four-fold  arbitrariness  of  choice, 
there  must  be  four  relations  always  satisfied  by  the  G^,  so  that 
when  six  of  the  equations  are  given  the  remaining  four  become 
tautological. 

These  relations  must  be  identities  implied  in  the  mathematical 
definition  of  G^;  that  is  to  say,  when  the  G^  have  been  written 
out  in  full  according  to  their  definition,  and  the  operations 
indicated  by  the  identities  carried  out,  all  the  terms  will  cancel, 
leaving  only  0  =  0.  The  essential  point  is  that  the  four  relations 
follow  from  the  mode  of  formation  of  the  G^  from  their  simpler 
constituents  (g^  and  their  differential  coefficients)  and  apply 
universally.  These  four  identical  relations  have  actually  been 
discovered  *. 

When  in  continuous  matter  G^v  =  K^v  clearly  the  same  four 
relations  must  exist  between  the  K^,  not  now  as  identities, 
but  as  consequences  of  the  law  of  gravitation,  viz.  the  equality 
of  G^  and  K^. 

Thus  the  four  dimensions  of  the  world  bring  about  a  four-fold 
arbitrariness  of  choice  of  mesh-system ;  this  in  turn  necessitates 
four  identical  relations  between  the  G^;  and  finally,  in  conse- 
quence of  the  law  of  gravitation,  these  identities  reveal  four  new 
facts  or  laws  relating  to  the  density,  energy,  momentum  or  stress 
of  matter,  summarised  in  the  expressions  K^v . 

These  four  laws  turn  out  to  be  the  laws  of  conservation  of 
momentum  and  energy. 

The  argument  is  so  general  that  we  can  even  assert  that 
corresponding  to  any  absolute  property  of  a  volume  of  a  world 
of  four  dimensions  (in  this  case,  curvature),  there  must  be  four 
relative  properties  which  are  conserved.  This  might  be  made  the 
starting-point  of  a  general  inquiry  into  the  necessary  qualities 
of  a  permanent  perceptual  world,  i.e.  a  world  whose  substance 
is  conserved. 

There  is  another  law  of  physics  which  was  formerly  regarded 
as  fundamental — the  conservation  of  mass.  Modern  progress 
has  somewhat  altered  our  position  with  regard  to  it;  not  that 
its  validity  is  denied,  but  it  has  been  reinterpreted,  and  has 
finally  become  merged  in  the  conservation  of  energy.  It  will  be 
desirable  to  consider  this  in  detail. 

*  Appendix,  Note  13. 


142  MOMENTUM  AND  ENERGY  [CH. 

It  was  formerly  supposed  that  the  mass  of  a  particle  was  a 
number  attached  to  the  particle,  expressing  an  intrinsic  property, 
which  remained  unaltered  in  all  its  vicissitudes.  If  m  is  this 
number,  and  u  the  velocity  of  the  particle,  the  momentum  is  mu; 
and  it  is  through  this  relation,  coupled  with  the  law  of  conserva- 
tion of  momentum  that  the  mass  m  was  denned.  Let  us  take 
for  example  two  particles  of  masses  m1  =  2  and  m2  =  3,  moving 
in  the  same  straight  line.  In  the  space-time  diagram  for  an 
observer  S  the  velocity  of  the  first  particle  will  be  represented 
by  a  direction  OA  (Fig.  19).  The  first  particle  moves  through 


FIG.  19. 

a  space  MA  in  unit  time,  so  that  MA  is  equal  to  its  velocity 
referred  to  the  observer  S.  Prolonging  the  line  OA  to  meet  the 
second  time-partition,  NB  is  equal  to  the  velocity  multiplied 
by  the  mass  2;  thus  the  horizontal  distance  NB  represents  the 
momentum.  Similarly,  starting  from  B  and  drawing  BC  in  the 
direction  of  the  velocity  of  m2,  prolonged  through  three 
time-partitions,  the  horizontal  progress  from  B  represents  the 
momentum  of  the  second  particle.  The  length  PC  then  repre- 
sents the  total  momentum  of  the  system  of  two  particles. 

Suppose  that  some  change  of  their  velocities  occurs,  not 
involving  any  transference  of  momentum  from  outside,  e.g.  a 
collision.  Since  the  total  momentum  PC  is  unaltered,  a  similar 


ix]  MOMENTUM  AND  ENERGY  143 

construction  made  with  the  new  velocities  must  again  bring  us 
to  C;  that  is  to  say,  the  new  velocities  are  represented  by  the 
directions  OB',  B'C,  where  B'  is  some  other  point  on  the  line  NB. 
Now  examine  how  this  will  appear  to  some  other  observer  S1 
in  uniform  motion  relative  to  S.  His  transformation  of  space 
and  time  has  been  described  in  Chapter  in  and  is  represented  in 
Fig.  20,  which  shows  how  his  time-partitions  run  as  compared 
with  those  of  S.  The  same  actual  motion  is,  of  course,  repre- 
sented by  parallel  directions  in  the  two  diagrams;  but  the 


FIG.  20. 

interpretation  as  a  velocity  MA  is  different  in  the  two  cases. 
Carrying  the  velocity  of  m1  through  two  time-partitions,  and  of 
ra2  through  three  time-partitions,  as  before,  we  find  that  the  total 
momentum  for  the  observer  S1  is  represented  by  PC  (Fig.  20); 
but  making  a  similar  construction  with  the  velocities  after 
collision,  we  arrive  at  a  different  point  C'.  Thus  whilst  momen- 
tum is  conserved  for  the  observer  S,  it  has  altered  from  PC  to 
PC'  for  the  observer  St. 

The  discrepancy  arises  because  in  the  construction  the  lines 
are  prolonged  to  meet  partitions  which  are  different  for  the  two 


144  MOMENTUM  AND  ENERGY  [CH. 

observers.  The  rule  for  determining  momentum  ought  to  be 
such  that  both  observers  make  the  same  construction,  inde- 
pendent of  their  partitions,  so  that  both  arrive  by  the  two  routes 
at  the  same  point  C.  Then  it  will  not  matter  if,  through  their 
different  measures  of  time,  one  observer  measures  momentum 
by  horizontal  progress  and  the  other  by  oblique  progress;  both 
will  agree  that  the  momentum  has  not  been  altered  by  the 
collision.  To  describe  such  a  construction,  we  must  use  the 
interval  which  is  alike  for  both  observers;  make  the  interval- 
length  of  OB  equal  to  2  units,  and  that  of  BC  equal  to  3  units, 
disregarding  the  mesh-system  altogether.  Then  both  observers 
will  make  the  same  diagram  and  arrive  at  the  same  point  C 
(different  from  C  or  C'  in  the  previous  diagrams).  Then  if 
momentum  is  conserved  for  one  observer,  it  will  be  conserved 
for  the  other. 

This  involves  a  modified  definition  of  momentum.  Momentum 
must  now  be  the  mass  multiplied  by  the  change  of  position  §x 
per  lapse  of  interval  Ss,  instead  of  per  lapse  of  time  Sz.  Thus 

$x 

momentum  =  m^- 
Ss 

instead  of  momentum  =  m  ~-  , 

ot 

and  the  mass  m  still  preserves  its  character  as  an  invariant 
number  associated  with  the  particle. 

Whether  the  momentum  as  now  defined  is  actually  conserved 
or  not,  is  a  matter  for  experiment,  or  for  theoretical  deduction 
from  the  law  of  gravitation.  The  point  is  that  with  the  original 
definition  general  conservation  is  impossible,  because  if  it  held 
good  for  one  observer  it  could  not  hold  for  another.  The  new 
definition  makes  general  conservation  possible.  Actually  this 
form  of  the  momentum  is  the  one  deduced  from  the  law  of 
gravitation  through  the  identities  already  described.  With 
regard  to  experimental  confirmation  it  is  sufficient  at  present 
to  state  that  in  all  ordinary  cases  the  interval  and  the  time  are 
so  nearly  equal  that  such  experimental  foundation  as  existed 
for  the  law  of  conservation  of  the  old  momentum  is  just  as 
applicable  to  the  new  momentum. 

Thus  in  the  theory  of  relativity  momentum  appears  as  an 


ix]  MOMENTUM  AND  ENERGY  145 

invariant  mass  multiplied  by  a  modified  velocity  8x/8s.  The 
physicist,  however,  prefers  for  practical  purposes  to  keep  to  the 
old  definition  of  momentum  as  mass  multiplied  by  the  velocity 
Sx/St.  We  have 

8x         8t   8a? 

m  TT  =  m  s-  .  ~T  , 
bs         8s   8t 

accordingly  the  momentum  is  separated  into  two  factors,  the 
velocity  Sx/8t,  and  a  mass  M  =  mSt/8s,  which  is  no  longer  an 
invariant  for  the  particle  but  depends  on  its  motion  relative  to 
the  observer's  space  and  time.  In  accordance  with  the  usual 
practice  of  physicists  the  mass  (unless  otherwise  qualified)  is 
taken  to  mean  the  quantity  M. 

Using  unaccelerated  rectangular  axes,  we  have  by  definition 
of  s 

8s2  =  W  -  Sa?2  -  Sz/2  -  Ss2, 
so  that 


=  I-u2, 

where  u  is  the  resultant  velocity  of  the  particle  (the  velocity  of 
light  being  unity).  Hence 

-M 

Thus  the  mass  increases  as  the  velocity  increases,  the  factor 
being  the  same  as  that  which  determines  the  FitzGerald  con- 
traction. 

The  increase  of  mass  with  velocity  is  a  property  which  chal- 
lenges experimental  test.  For  success  it  is  necessary  to  be  able 
to  experiment  with  high  velocities  and  to  apply  a  known  force 
large  enough  to  produce  appreciable  deflection  in  the  fast- 
moving  particle.  These  conditions  are  conveniently  fulfilled  by 
the  small  negatively  charged  particles  emitted  by  radioactive 
substances,  known  as  /?  particles,  or  the  similar  particles  which 
constitute  cathode  rays.  They  attain  speeds  up  to  0-8  of  the 
velocity  of  light,  for  which  the  increase  of  mass  is  in  the  ratio 
1-66;  and  the  negative  charge  enables  a  large  electric  or  magnetic 
force  to  be  applied.  Modern  experiments  fully  confirm  the 
theoretical  increase  of  mass,  and  show  that  the  factor  1/V(1  —  w2) 
E.  s.  10 


146  MOMENTUM  AND  ENERGY  [CH. 

is  at  least  approximately  correct.  The  experiment  was  originally 
performed  by  Kaufmann;  but  much  greater  accuracy  has  been 
obtained  by  recent  modified  methods. 

Unless  the  velocity  is  very  great  the  mass  M  may  be  written 

m/V(l  -  u2)  =  m  +  %mu2. 

Thus  it  consists  of  two  parts,  the  mass  when  at  rest,  together 
with  the  second  term  which  is  simply  the  energy  of  the  motion. 
If  we  can  say  that  the  term  m  represents  a  kind  of  potential 
energy  concealed  in  the  matter,  mass  can  be  identified  with 
energy.  The  increase  of  mass  with  velocity  simply  means  that 
the  energy  of  motion  has  been  added  on.  We  are  emboldened 
to  do  this  because  in  the  case  of  an  electrical  charge  the  electrical 
mass  is  simply  the  energy  of  the  static  field.  Similarly  the  mass 
of  light  is  simply  the  electromagnetic  energy  of  the  light. 

In  our  ordinary  units  the  velocity  of  light  is  not  unity,  and 
a  rather  artificial  distinction  between  mass  and  energy  is  intro- 
duced. They  are  measured  by  different  units,  and  energy  E  has 
a  mass  E/C2  where  C  is  the  velocity  of  light  in  the  units  used. 
But  it  seems  very  probable  that  mass  and  energy  are  two  ways 
of  measuring  what  is  essentially  the  same  thing,  in  the  same 
sense  that  the  parallax  and  distance  of  a  star  are  two  ways  of 
expressing  the  same  property  of  location.  If  it  is  objected  that 
they  ought  not  to  be  confused  inasmuch  as  they  are  distinct 
properties,  it  must  be  pointed  out  that  they  are  not  sense- 
properties,  but  mathematical  terms  expressing  the  dividend 
and  product  of  more  immediately  apprehensible  properties,  viz. 
momentum  and  velocity.  They  are  essentially  mathematical 
compositions,  and  are  at  the  disposal  of  the  mathematician. 

This  proof  of  the  variation  of  mass  with  velocity  is  much  more 
general  than  that  based  on  the  electrical  theory  of  inertia.  It 
applies  immediately  to  matter  in  bulk.  The  masses  m1  and  m2 
need  not  be  particles;  they  can  be  bodies  of  any  size  or  com- 
position. On  the  electrical  theory  alone,  there  is  no  means  of 
deducing  the  variation  of  mass  of  a  planet  from  that  of  an 
electron. 

It  has  to  be  remarked  that,  although  the  inertial  mass  of  a 
particle  only  comes  under  physical  measurement  in  connection 
with  a  change  of  its  motion,  it  is  just  when  the  motion  is  changing 
that  the  conception  of  its  mass  is  least  definite;  because  it  is  at 


ix]  MOMENTUM  AND  ENERGY  147 

that  time  that  the  kinetic  energy,  which  forms  part  of  the  mass, 
is  being  passed  on  to  another  particle  or  radiated  into  the 
surrounding  field;  and  it  is  scarcely  possible  to  define  the 
moment  at  which  this  energy  ceases  to  be  associated  with  the 
particle  and  must  be  reckoned  as  broken  loose.  The  amount  of 
energy  or  mass  in  a  given  region  is  always  a  definite  quantity; 
but  the  amount  attributable  to  a  particle  is  only  definite  when 
the  motion  is  uniform.  In  rigorous  work  it  is  generally  necessary 
to  consider  the  mass  not  of  a  particle  but  of  a  region. 

The  motion  of  matter  from  one  place  to  another  causes  an 
alteration  of  the  gravitational  field  in  the  surrounding  space. 
If  the  motion  is  uniform,  the  field  is  simply  convected;  but  if 
the  motion  is  accelerated,  something  of  the  nature  of  a  gravita- 
tional wave  is  propagated  outwards.  The  velocity  of  propagation 
is  the  velocity  of  light.  The  exact  laws  are  not  very  simple 
because  we  have  seen  that  the  gravitational  field  modifies  the 
velocity  of  light;  and  so  the  disturbance  itself  modifies  the 
velocity  with  which  it  is  propagated.  In  the  same  way  the 
exact  laws  of  propagation  of  sound  are  highly  complicated, 
because  the  disturbance  of  the  air  by  sound  modifies  the  speed 
with  which  it  is  propagated.  But  the  approximate  laws  of 
propagation  of  gravitation  are  quite  simple  and  are  the  same  as 
those  of  electromagnetic  disturbances. 

After  mass  and  energy  there  is  one  physical  quantity  which 
plays  a  very  fundamental  part  in  modern  physics,  known  as 
Action.  Action  here  is  a  very  technical  term,  and  is  not  to  be 
confused  with  Newton's  "  Action  and  Reaction."  In  the  relativity 
theory  in  particular  this  seems  in  many  respects  to  be  the  most 
fundamental  thing  of  all.  The  reason  is  not  difficult  to  see.  If 
we  wish  to  speak  of  the  continuous  matter  present  at  any  par- 
ticular point  of  space  and  time,  we  must  use  the  term  density. 
Density  multiplied  by  volume  in  space  gives  us  mass  or,  what 
appears  to  be  the  same  thing,  energy.  But  from  our  space-time 
point  of  view,  a  far  more  important  thing  is  density  multiplied 
by  a  four-dimensional  volume  of  space  and  time;  this  is  action. 
The  multiplication  by  three  dimensions  gives  mass  or  energy; 
and  the  fourth  multiplication  gives  mass  or  energy  multiplied 
by  time.  Action  is  thus  mass  multiplied  by  time,  or  energy 
multiplied  by  time,  and  is  more  fundamental  than  either. 

10 — 2 


148  MOMENTUM  AND  ENERGY  [CH. 

Action  is  the  curvature  of  the  world.  It  is  scarcely  possible 
to  visualise  this  statement,  because  our  notion  of  curvature  is 
derived  from  surfaces  of  two  dimensions  in  a  three-dimensional 
space,  and  this  gives  too  limited  an  idea  of  the  possibilities  of  a 
four-dimensional  surface  in  space  of  five  or  more  dimensions. 
In  two  dimensions  there  is  just  one  total  curvature,  and  if  that 
vanishes  the  surface  is  flat  or  at  least  can  be  unrolled  into  a 
plane.  In  four  dimensions  there  are  many  coefficients  of 
curvature;  but  there  is  one  curvature  par  excellence,  which  is, 
of  course,  an  invariant  independent  of  our  mesh-system.  It  is 
the  quantity  we  have  denoted  by  G.  It  does  not  follow  that  if 
the  curvature  vanishes  space-time  is  flat;  we  have  seen  in  fact 
that  in  a  natural  gravitational  field  space-time  is  not  flat 
although  there  may  be  no  mass  or  energy  and  therefore  no  action 
or  curvature. 

Wherever  there  is  matter*  there  is  action  and  therefore 
curvature ;  and  it  is  interesting  to  notice  that  in  ordinary  matter 
the  curvature  of  the  space-time  world  is  by  no  means  insignificant. 
For  example,  in  water  of  ordinary  density  the  curvature  is  the 
same  as  that  of  space  in  the  form  of  a  sphere  of  radius  570,000,000 
kilometres.  The  result  is  even  more  surprising  if  expressed  in 
time  units;  the  radius  is  about  half-an-hour. 

It  is  difficult  to  picture  quite  what  this  means;  but  at  least 
we  can  predict  that  a  globe  of  water  of  570,000,000  km.  radius 
would  have  extraordinary  properties.  Presumably  there  must 
be  an  upper  limit  to  the  possible  size  of  a  globe  of  water.  So 
far  as  I  can  make  out  a  homogeneous  mass  of  water  of  about 
this  size  (and  no  larger)  could  exist.  It  would  have  no  centre, 
and  no  boundary,  every  point  of  it  being  in  the  same  position 
with  respect  to  the  whole  mass  as  every  other  point  of  it — like 
points  on  the  surface  of  a  sphere  with  respect  to  the  surface. 
Any  ray  of  light  after  travelling  for  an  hour  or  two  would  come 
back  to  the  starting  point.  Nothing  could  enter  or  leave  the 
mass,  because  there  is  no  boundary  to  enter  or  leave  by;  in 
fact,  it  is  coextensive  with  space.  There  could  not  be  any  other 
world  anywhere  else,  because  there  isn't  an  "anywhere  else." 

The  mass  of  this  volume  of  water  is  not  so  great  as  the  most 

*  It  is  rather  curious  that  there  is  no  action  in  space  containing  only  light. 
Light  has  mass  (M)  of  the  ordinary  kind;  but  the  invariant  mass  (m)  vanishes. 


ix]  MOMENTUM  AND  ENERGY  149 

moderate  estimates  of  the  mass  of  the  stellar  system.  Some 
physicists  have  predicted  a  distant  future  when  all  energy  will 
be  degraded,  and  the  stellar  universe  will  gradually  fall  together 
into  one  mass.  Perhaps  then  these  strange  conditions  will  be 
realised ! 

The  law  of  gravitation,  the  laws  of  mechanics,  and  the  laws 
of  the  electromagnetic  field  have  all  been  summed  up  in  a  single 
Principle  of  Least  Action.  For  the  most  part  this  unification 
was  accomplished  before  the  advent  of  the  relativity  theory, 
and  it  is  only  the  addition  of  gravitation  to  the  scheme  which  is 
novel.  We  can  see  now  that  if  action  is  something  absolute, 
a  configuration  giving  minimum  action  is  capable  of  absolute 
definition;  and  accordingly  we  should  expect  that  the  laws  of 
the  world  would  be  expressible  in  some  such  form.  The  argu- 
ment is  similar  to  that  by  which  we  first  identified  the  natural 
tracks  of  particles  with  the  tracks  of  greatest  interval-length. 
The  fact  that  some  such  form  of  law  is  inevitable,  rather  dis- 
courages us  from  seeking  in  it  any  clue  to  the  structural  details 
of  our  world. 

Action  is  one  of  the  two  terms  in  pre-relativity  physics  which 
survive  unmodified  in  a  description  of  the  absolute  world.  The 
only  other  survival  is  entropy.  The  coming  theory  of  relativity 
had  cast  its  shadow  before;  and  physics  was  already  converging 
to  two  great  generalisations,  the  principle  of  least  action  and 
the  second  law  of  thermodynamics  or  principle  of  maximum 
entropy. 

We  are  about  to  pass  on  to  recent  and  more  shadowy  develop- 
ments of  this  subject;  and  this  is  an  appropriate  place  to  glance 
back  on  the  chief  results  that  have  emerged.  The  following 
summary  will  recall  some  of  the  salient  points. 

1.  The  order  of  events  in  the  external  world  is  a  four- 
dimensional  order. 

2.  The  observer  either  intuitively  or  deliberately  constructs 
a  system  of  meshes  (space  and  time  partitions)  and  locates  the 
events  with  respect  to  these. 

3.  Although  it  seems  to  be  theoretically  possible  to  describe 
phenomena  without  reference  to  any  mesh-system  (by  a  catalogue 
of  coincidences),  such  a  description  would  be  cumbersome.    In 


150  MOMENTUM  AND  ENERGY  [CH. 

practice,  physics  describes  the  relations  of  the  events  to  our 
mesh-system;  and  all  the  terms  of  elementary  physics  and  of 
daily  life  refer  to  this  relative  aspect  of  the  world. 

4.  Quantities  like  length,  duration,  mass,  force,  etc.  have  no 
absolute  significance;  their  values  will  depend  on  the  mesh- 
system  to  which  they  are  referred.   When  this  fact  is  realised, 
the  results  of  modern  experiments  relating  to  changes  of  length 
of  rigid  bodies  are  no  longer  paradoxical. 

5.  There  is   no   fundamental   mesh-system.     In   particular 
problems,  and  more  particularly  in  restricted  regions,  it  may 
be  possible  to  choose  a  mesh-system  which  follows  more  or  less 
closely  the  lines  of  absolute  structure  in  the  world,  and  so 
simplify  the  phenomena  which  are  related  to  it.  But  the  world- 
structure  is  not  of  a  kind  which  can  be  traced  in  an  exact  way 
by  mesh-systems,  and  in  any  large  region  the  mesh-system 
drawn  must  be  considered  arbitrary.   In  any  case  the  systems 
used  in  current  physics  are  arbitrary. 

6.  The  study  of  the  absolute  structure  of  the  world  is  based 
on  the  "interval"  between  two  events  close  together,  which  is 
an  absolute  attribute  of  the  events  independent  of  any  mesh- 
system.    A   world-geometry   is   constructed   by  adopting  the 
interval  as  the  analogue  of  distance  in  ordinary  geometry. 

7.  This    world-geometry    has    a    property    unlike    that    of 
Euclidean  geometry  in  that  the  interval  between  two '  real 
events  may  be  real  or  imaginary.   The  necessity  for  a  physical 
distinction,  corresponding  to  the  mathematical  distinction  be- 
tween real  and  imaginary  intervals,  introduces  us  to  the  separa- 
tion of  the  four-dimensional  order  into  time  and  space.  But  this 
separation  is  not  unique,  and  the  separation  commonly  adopted 
depends  on  the  observer's  track  through  the  four-dimensional 
world. 

8.  The  geodesic,  or  track  of  maximum  or  minimum  interval- 
length  between  two  distant  events,  has  an  absolute  significance. 
And  since  no  other  kind  of  track  can  be  defined  absolutely,  it 
is  concluded  that  the  tracks  of  freely  moving  particles  are 
geodesies. 

9.  In  Euclidean  geometry  the  geodesies  are  straight  lines.  It 
is  evidently  impossible  to  choose  space  and  time-reckoning  so 
that  all  free  particles  in  the  solar  system  move  in  straight  lines. 


ix]  MOMENTUM  AND  ENERGY  151 

Hence  the  geometry  must  be  non-Euclidean  in  a  field  of  gravita- 
tion. 

10.  Since  the  tracks  of  particles  in  a  gravitational  field  are 
evidently  governed  by  some  law,  the  possible  geometries  must 
be  limited  to  certain  types. 

11.  The  limitation  concerns  the  absolute  structure  of  the 
world,  and  must  be  independent  of  the  choice  of  mesh-system. 
This    narrows    down   the    possible    discriminating   characters. 
Practically  the  only  reasonable  suggestion  is  that  the  world 
must  (in  empty  space)  be  "curved  no  higher  than  the  first 
degree " ;  and  this  is  taken  as  the  law  of  gravitation. 

1 2.  The  simplest  type  of  hummock  with  this  limited  curvature 
has  been  investigated.   It  has  a  kind  of  infinite  chimney  at  the 
summit,  which  we  must  suppose  cut  out  and  filled  up  with  a 
region  where  this  law  is  not  obeyed,  i.e.  with  a  particle  of  matter. 

13.  The  tracks  of  the  geodesies  on  the  hummock  are  such  as 
to  give  a  very  close  accordance  with  the  tracks  computed  by 
Newton's  law  of  gravitation.    The  slight  differences  from  the 
Newtonian  law  have  been  experimentally  verified  by  the  motion 
of  Mercury  and  the  deflection  of  light. 

14.  The  hummock  might  more  properly  be  described  as  a 
ridge  extending  linearly.    Since  the  interval-length  along  it  is 
real  or  time-like,  the  ridge  can  be  taken  as  a  time-direction. 
Matter  has  thus  a  continued  existence  in  time.    Further,  in 
order  to  conform  with  the  law,  a  small  ridge  must  always  follow 
a  geodesic  in  the  general  field  of  space-time,  confirming  the  con- 
clusion arrived  at  under  (8). 

15.  The  laws  of  conservation  of  energy  and  momentum  in 
mechanics  can  be  deduced  from  this  law  of  world-curvature. 

16.  Certain  phenomena  such  as  the  FitzGerald  contraction 
and  the  variation  of  mass  with  velocity,  which  were  formerly 
thought  to  depend  on  the  behaviour  of  electrical  forces  con- 
cerned, are  now  seen  to  be  general  consequences  of  the  relativity 
of  knowledge.  That  is  to  say,  length  and  mass  being  the  relations 
of  some  absolute  thing  to  the  observer's  mesh-system,  we  can 
foretell  how  these  relations  will  be  altered  when  referred  to 
another  mesh-system. 


CHAPTER  X 
TOWARDS   INFINITY 

The  geometer  of  to-day  knows  nothing  about  the  nature  of  actually  existing 
space  at  an  infinite  distance;  he  knows  nothing  about  the  properties  of  this 
present  space  in  a  past  or  a  future  eternity.  He  knows,  indeed,  that  the  laws 
assumed  by  Euclid  are  true  with  an  accuracy  that  no  direct  experiment  can 
approach,  not  only  in  this  place  where  we  are,  but  in  places  at  a  distance  from 
us  that  no  astronomer  has  conceived;  but  he  knows  this  as  of  Here  and  Now; 
beyond  his  range  is  a  There  and  Then  of  which  he  knows  nothing  at  present, 
but  may  ultimately  come  to  know  more.  W.  K.  CLIFFOBD  (1873). 

THE  great  stumbling-block  for  a  philosophy  which  denies 
absolute  space  is  the  experimental  detection  of  absolute  rotation. 
The  belief  that  the  earth  rotates  on  its  axis  was  suggested  by 
the  diurnal  motions  of  the  heavenly  bodies ;  this  observation  is 
essentially  one  of  relative  rotation,  and,  if  the  matter  rested 
there,  no  difficulty  would  be  felt.  But  we  can  detect  the  same 
rotation,  or  a  rotation  very  closely  equal  to  it,  by  methods 
which  do  not  seem  to  bring  the  heavenly  bodies  into  considera- 
tion; and  such  a  rotation  is  apparently  absolute.  The  planet 
Jupiter  is  covered  with  cloud,  so  that  an  inhabitant  would 
probably  be  unaware  of  the  existence  of  bodies  outside ;  yet  he 
could  quite  well  measure  the  rotation  of  Jupiter.  By  the  gyro- 
compass he  would  fix  two  points  on  the  planet — the  north  and 
south  poles.  Then  by  Foucault's  experiment  on  the  change  of 
the 'plane  of  motion  of  a  freely  suspended  pendulum,  he  would 
determine  an  angular  velocity  about  the  poles.  Thus  there  is 
certainly  a  definite  physical  constant,  an  angular  velocity  about 
an  axis,  which  has  a  fundamental  importance  for  the  inhabitants 
of  Jupiter;  the  only  question  is  whether  we  are  right  in  giving 
it  the  name  absolute  rotation. 

Contrast  this  with  absolute  translation.  Here  it  is  not  a 
question  of  giving  the  right  name  to  a  physical  constant;  the 
inhabitants  of  Jupiter  would  find  no  constant  to  name.  We  see 
at  once  that  a  relativity  theory  of  translation  is  on  a  different 
footing  from  a  relativity  theory  of  rotation.  The  duty  of  the 


CH.  x]  TOWARDS  INFINITY  153 

former  is  to  explain  facts;  the  duty  of  the  latter  is  to  explaii 
away  facts. 

Our  present  theory  seems  to  make  a  start  at  tackling  this 
problem,  but  gives  it  up.  It  permits  the  observer,  if  he  wishes, 
to  consider  the  earth  as  non-rotating,  but  surrounded  by  a  field 
of  centrifugal  force;  all  the  other  bodies  in  the  universe  are  then 
revolving  round  the  earth  in  orbits  mainly  controlled  by  this 
field  of  centrifugal  force.  Astronomy  on  this  basis  is  a  little 
cumbersome;  but  all  the  phenomena  are  explained  perfectly. 
The  centrifugal  force  is  part  of  the  gravitational  field,  and  obeys 
Einstein's  law  of  gravitation,  so  that  the  laws  of  nature  are 
completely  satisfied  by  this  representation.  One  awkward 
question  remains,  What  causes  the  centrifugal  force?  Certainly 
not  the  earth  which  is  here  represented  as  non-rotating.  As  we 
go  further  into  space  to  look  for  a  cause,  the  centrifugal  force 
becomes  greater  and  greater,  so  that  the  more  we  defer  the  debt 
the  heavier  the  payment  demanded  in  the  end.  Our  present 
theory  is  like  the  debtor  who  does  not  mind  how  big  an  obligation 
accumulates  satisfied  that  he  can  always  put  off  the  payment. 
It  chases  the  cause  away  to  infinity,  content  that  the  laws  of 
nature — the  relations  between  contiguous  parts  of  the  world — 
are  satisfied  all  the  way. 

One  suggested  loophole  must  be  explored.  Our  new  law  of 
gravitation  admits  that  a  rapid  motion  of  the  attracting  body 
will  affect  the  field  of  force.  If  the  earth  is  non-rotating,  the 
stars  must  be  going  round  it  with  terrific  speed.  May  they  not 
in  virtue  of  their  high  velocities  produce  gravitationally  a 
sensible  field  of  force  on  the  earth,  which  we  recognise  as  the 
centrifugal  field?  This  would  be  a  genuine  elimination  of 
absolute  rotation,  attributing  all  effects  indifferently  to  the 
rotation  of  the  earth  the  stars  being  at  rest,  or  to  the  revolution 
of  the  stars  the  earth  being  at  rest;  nothing  matters  except  the 
relative  rotation.  I  doubt  whether  anyone  will  persuade  himself 
that  the  stars  have  anything  to  do  with  the  phenomenon.  We 
do  not  believe  that  if  the  heavenly  bodies  were  all  annihilated 
it  would  upset  the  gyrocompass.  In  any  case,  precise  calculation 
shows  that  the  centrifugal  force  could  not  be  produced  by  the 
motion  of  the  stars,  so  far  as  they  are  known. 

We  are  therefore  forced  to  give  up  the  idea  that  the  signs  of 


154  TOWARDS  INFINITY  [CH. 

the  earth's  rotation — the  protuberance  of  its  equator,  the 
phenomena  of  the  gyrocompass,  etc. — are  due  to  a  rotation 
relative  to  any  matter  we  can  recognise.  The  philosopher  who 
persists  that  a  rotation  which  is  not  relative  to  matter  is  un- 
thinkable, will  no  doubt  reply  that  the  rotation  must  then  be 
relative  to  some  matter  which  we  have  not  yet  recognised.  We 
have  hitherto  been  greatly  indebted  to  the  suggestions  of 
philosophy  in  evolving  this  theory,  because  the  suggestions 
related  to  the  things  we  know  about ;  and,  as  it  turned  out,  they 
were  confirmed  by  experiment.  But  as  physicists  we  cannot 
take  the  same  interest  in  the  new  demand ;  we  do  not  necessarily 
challenge  it,  but  it  is  outside  our  concern.  Physics  demands  of 
its  scheme  of  nature  something  else  besides  truth,  namely  a 
certain  quality  that  we  may  call  convergence.  The  law  of 
conservation  of  energy  is  only  strictly  true  when  the  whole 
universe  is  taken  into  account;  but  its  value  in  physics  lies  in 
the  fact  that  it  is  approximately  true  for  a  very  limited  system. 
Physics  is  an  exact  science  because  the  chief  essentials  of  a 
problem  are  limited  to  a  few  conditions;  and  it  draws  near  to 
the  truth  with  ever-increasing  approximation  as  it  widens  its 
purview.  The  approximations  of  physics  form  a  convergent 
series.  History,  on  the  other  hand,  is  very  often  like  a  divergent 
series;  no  approximation  to  its  course  is  reached  until  the  last 
term  of  the  infinite  series  has  been  included  in  the  data  of 
prediction.  Physics,  if  it  wishes  to  retain  its  advantage,  must 
take  its  own  course,  formulating  those  laws  which  are  approxi- 
mately true  for  the  limited  data  of  sense,  and  extending  them 
into  the  unknown.  The  relativity  of  rotation  is  not  approxi- 
mately true  for  the  data  of  sense,  although  it  may  possibly  be 
true  when  the  unknown  as  well  as  the  known  are  included. 

The  same  considerations  that  apply  to  rotation  apply  to 
acceleration,  although  the  difficulty  is  less  striking.  We  can  if 
we  like  attribute  to  the  sun  some  arbitrary  acceleration,  balancing 
it  by  introducing  a  uniform  gravitational  field.  Owing  to  this 
field  the  rest  of  the  stars  will  move  with  the  same  acceleration 
and  no  phenomena  will  be  altered.  But  then  it  seems  necessary 
to  find  a  cause  for  this  field.  It  is  not  produced  by  the  gravitation 
of  the  stars.  Our  only  course  is  to  pursue  the  cause  further  and 
further  towards  infinity;  the  further  we  put  it  away,  the  greater 


x]  TOWARDS  INFINITY  155 

the  mass  of  attracting  matter  needed  to  produce  it.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  earth's  absolute  acceleration  does  not  intrude 
on  our  attention  in  the  way  that  its  absolute  rotation  does*. 

We  are  vaguely  conscious  of  a  difficulty  in  these  results ;  but 
if  we  examine  it  closely,  the  difficulty  does  not  seem  to  be  a 
very  serious  one.  The  theory  of  relativity,  as  we  have  understood 
it,  asserts  that  our  partitions  of  space  and  time  are  introduced 
by  the  observer  and  are  irrelevant  to  the  laws  of  nature;  and 
therefore  the  current  quantities  of  physics,  length,  duration, 
mass,  force,  etc.,  which  are  relative  to  these  partitions,  are  not 
things  having  an  absolute  significance  in  nature.  But  we  have 
never  denied  that  there  are  features  of  the  world  having  an 
absolute  significance ;  in  fact,  we  have  spent  much  time  in  finding 
such  features.  The  geodesies  or  natural  tracks  have  been  shown 
to  have  an  absolute  significance;  and  it  is  possible  in  a  limited 
region  of  the  world  to  choose  space  and  time  partitions  such 
that  all  geodesies  become  approximately  straight  lines.  We  may 
call  this  a  "natural"  frame  for  that  region,  although  it  is  not 
as  a  rule  the  space  and  time  adopted  in  practice ;  it  is  for  example 
the  space  and  time  of  the  observers  in  the  falling  projectile,  not 
of  Newton's  super-observer.  It  is  capable  of  absolute  definition, 
except  that  it  is  ambiguous  in  regard  to  uniform  motion.  Now 
the  rotation  of  the  earth  determined  by  Foucault's  pendulum 
experiment  is  the  rotation  referred  to  this  natural  frame.  But 
we  must  have  misunderstood  our  own  theory  of  relativity 
altogether,  if  we  think  there  is  anything  inadmissible  in  an 
absolute  rotation  of  such  a  kind. 

Material  particles  and  geodesies  are  both  features  of  the 
absolute  structure  of  the  world;  and  a  rotation  relative  to 
geodesic  structure  does  not  seem  to  be  on  any  different  footing 
from  a  velocity  relative  to  matter.  There  is,  however,  the 
striking  feature  that  rotation  seems  to  be  relative  not  merely 
to  the  local  geodesic  structure  but  to  a  generally  accepted 
universal  frame;  whereas  it  is  necessary  to  specify  precisely 

*  To  determine  even  roughly  the  earth's  absolute  acceleration  we  should 
need  a  fairly  full  knowledge  of  the  disturbing  effects  of  all  the  matter  in  the 
universe.  A  similar  knowledge  would  be  required  to  determine  the  absolute 
rotation  accurately;  but  all  the  matter  likely  to  exist  would  have  so  small  an 
effect,  that  we  can  at  once  assume  that  the  absolute  rotation  is  very  nearly 
the  same  as  the  experimentally  determined  rotation. 


156  TOWARDS  INFINITY  [CH. 

what  matter  a  velocity  is  measured  with  respect  to.  This  is 
largely  a  question  of  how  much  accuracy  is  needed  in  specifying 
velocities  and  rotations,  respectively.  If  in  stating  the  speed  of 
a  f$  particle  we  do  not  mind  an  error  of  10,000  kilometres  a 
second,  we  need  not  specify  precisely  what  star  or  planet  its 
velocity  is  referred  to.  The  moon's  (local)  angular  velocity  is 
sometimes  given  to  fourteen  significant  figures;  I  doubt  if 
any  universal  frame  is  well-defined  enough  for  this  accuracy. 
There  is  no  doubt  much  greater  continuity  in  the  geodesic 
structure  in  different  parts  of  the  world  than  in  the  material 
structure;  but  the  difference  is  in  degree  rather  than  in 
principle. 

It  is  probable  that  here  we  part  company  from  many  of  the 
continental  relativists,  who  give  prominent  place  to  a  principle 
known  as  the  law  of  causality — that  only  those  things  are  to  be 
regarded  as  being  in  causal  connection  which  are  capable  of 
being  actually  observed.  This  seems  to  be  interpreted  as  placing 
matter  on  a  plane  above  geodesic  structure  in  regard  to  the 
formulation  of  physical  laws,  though  it  is  not  easy  to  see  in 
what  sense  a  distribution  of  matter  can  be  regarded  as  more 
observable  than  the  field  of  influence  in  surrounding  space 
which  makes  us  aware  of  its  existence.  The  principle  itself  is 
debateable;  that  which  is  observable  to  us  is  determined  by 
the  accident  of  our  own  structure,  and  the  law  of  causality 
seems  to  impose  our  own  limitations  on  the  free  interplay  of 
entities  in  the  world  outside  us.  In  this  book  the  tradition  of 
Faraday  and  Maxwell  still  rules  our  outlook;  and  for  us  matter 
and  electricity  are  but  incidental  points  of  complexity,  the 
activity  of  nature  being  primarily  in  the  so-called  empty  spaces 
between. 

The  vague  universal  frame  to  which  rotation  is  referred  is 
called  the  inertial  frame.  It  is  definite  in  the  flat  space-time  far 
away  from  all  matter.  In  the  undulating  country  corresponding 
to  the  stellar  universe  it  is  not  a  precise  conception;  it  is  rather 
a  rude  outline,  arbitrary  within  reasonable  limits,  but  with  the 
general  course  indicated.  The  reason  for  the  term  inertial  frame 
is  of  interest.  We  can  quite  freely  use  a  mesh-system  deviating 
widely  from  the  inertial  frame  (e.g.  rotating  axes);  but  we  have 
seen  that  there  is  a  postponed  debt  to  pay  in  the  shape  of  an 


x]  TOWARDS  INFINITY  157 

apparently  uncaused  field  of  force.  But  is  there  no  debt  to  pay, 
even  when  the  inertial  frame  is  used?  In  that  case  there  is  no 
gravitational  or  centrifugal  force  at  infinity;  but  there  is  still 
inertia,  which  is  of  the  same  nature.  The  distinction  between 
force  as  requiring  a  cause  and  inertia  as  requiring  no  cause 
cannot  be  sustained.  We  shall  not  become  any  more  solvent  by 
commuting  our  debt  into  pure  inertia.  The  debt  is  inevitable 
whatever  mesh-system  is  used;  we  are  only  allowed  to  choose 
the  form  it  shall  take. 

The  debt  after  all  is  a  very  harmless  one.  At  infinity  we  have 
the  absolute  geodesies  in  space-time,  and  we  have  our  own 
arbitrarily  drawn  mesh-system.  The  relation  of  the  geodesies 
to  the  mesh-system  decides  whether  our  axes  shall  be  termed 
rotating  or  non-rotating;  and  ideally  it  is  this  relation  that  is 
determined  when  a  so-called  absolute  rotation  is  measured. 
No  one  could  reasonably  expect  that  there  would  be  no  deter- 
minable  relation.  On  the  other  hand  uniform  translation  does 
not  affect  the  relation  of  the  geodesies  to  the  mesh-system — if 
they  were  straight  lines  originally,  they  remain  straight  lines — 
thus  uniform  translation  cannot  be  measured  except  relative  to 
matter. 

We  have  been  supposing  that  the  conditions  found  in  the 
remotest  parts  of  space  accessible  to  observation  can  be  extra- 
polated to  infinity;  and  that  there  are  still  definite  natural 
tracks  in  space-time  far  beyond  the  influence  of  matter.  Feelings 
of  objection  to  this  view  arise  in  certain  minds.  It  is  urged  that 
as  matter  influences  the  course  of  geodesies  it  may  well  be 
responsible  for  them  altogether;  so  that  a  region  outside  the 
field  of  action  of  matter  could  have  no  geodesies,  and  conse- 
quently no  intervals.  All  the  potentials  would  then  necessarily 
be  zero.  Various  modified  forms  of  this  objection  arise;  but  the 
main  feeling  seems  to  be  that  it  is  unsatisfactory  to  have  certain 
conditions  prevailing  in  the  world,  which  can  be  traced  away  to 
infinity  and  so  have,  as  it  were,  their  source  at  infinity;  and 
there  is  a  desire  to  find  some  explanation  of  the  inertial  frame 
as  built  up  through  conditions  at  a  finite  distance. 

Now  if  all  intervals  vanished  space-time  would  shrink  to  a 
point.  Then  there  would  be  no  space,  no  time,  no  inertia,  no 
anything.  Thus  a  cause  which  creates  intervals  and  geodesies 


158  TOWARDS  INFINITY  [CH. 

must,  so  to  speak,  extend  the  world.  We  can  imagine  the  world 
stretched  out  like  a  plane  sheet;  but  then  the  stretching  cause — 
the  cause  of  the  intervals — is  relegated  beyond  the  bounds  of 
space  and  time,  i.e.  to  infinity.  This  is  the  view  objected  to, 
though  the  writer  does  not  consider  that  the  objection  has 
much  force.  An  alternative  way  is  to  inflate  the  world  from 
inside,  as  a  balloon  is  blown  out.  In  this  case  the  stretching 
force  is  not  relegated  to  infinity,  and  ruled  outside  the  scope  of 
experiment;  it  is  acting  at  every  point  of  space  and  time,  curving 
the  world  to  a  sphere.  We  thus  get  the  idea  that  space-time 
may  have  an  essential  curvature  on  a  great  scale  independent 
of  the  small  hummocks  due  to  recognised  matter. 

It  is  not  necessary  to  speculate  whether  the  curvature  is 
produced  (as  in  the  balloon)  by  some  pressure  applied  from  a 
fifth  dimension.  For  us  it  will  appear  as  an  innate  tendency  of 
four-dimensional  space-time  to  curve.  It  may  be  asked,  what 
have  we  gained  by  substituting  a  natural  curvature  of  space- 
time  for  a  natural  stretched  condition  corresponding  to  the 
inertial  frame?  As  an  explanation,  nothing.  But  there  is  this 
difference,  that  the  theory  of  the  inertial  frame  can  now  be 
included  in  the  differential  law  of  gravitation  instead  of  re- 
maining outside  and  additional  to  the  law. 

It  will  be  remembered  that  one  clue  by  which  we  previously 
reached  the  law  of  gravitation  was  that  flat  space-time  must  be 
compatible  with  it.  But  if  space-time  is  to  have  a  small  natural 
curvature  independent  of  matter  this  condition  is  now  altered. 
It  is  not  difficult  to  find  the  necessary  alteration  of  the  law*. 
It  will  contain  an  additional,  and  at  present  unknown,  constant, 
which  determines  the  size  of  the  world. 

Spherical  space  is  not  very  easy  to  imagine.  We  have  to 
think  of  the  properties  of  the  surface  of  a  sphere — the  two- 
dimensional  case — and  try  to  conceive  something  similar  applied 
to  three-dimensional  space.  Stationing  ourselves  at  a  point  let 
us  draw  a  series  of  spheres  of  successively  greater  radii.  The 
surface  of  a  sphere  of  radius  r  should  be  proportional  to  r2;  but 
in  spherical  space  the  areas  of  the  more  distant  spheres  begin 
to  fall  below  the  proper  proportion.  There  is  not  so  much  room 
out  there  as  we  expected  to  find.  Ultimately  we  reach  a  sphere 

*  Appendix,  Note  14. 


x]  TOWARDS  INFINITY  159 

of  biggest  possible  area,  and  beyond  it  the  areas  begin  to  de- 
crease *.  The  last  sphere  of  all  shrinks  to  a  point — our  antipodes. 
Is  there  nothing  beyond  this?  Is  there  a  kind  of  boundary 
there?  There  is  nothing  beyond  and  yet  there  is  no  boundary. 
On  the  earth's  surface  there  is  nothing  beyond  our  own  antipodes 
but  there  is  no  boundary  there. 

The  difficulty  is  that  we  try  to  realise  this  spherical  world  by 
imagining  how  it  would  appear  to  us  and  to  our  measurements. 
There  has  been  nothing  in  our  experience  to  compare  it  with, 
and  it  seems  fantastic.  But  if  we  could  get  rid  of  the  personal 
point  of  view,  and  regard  the  sphericity  of  the  world  as  a  state- 
ment of  the  type  of  order  of  events  outside  us,  we  should  think 
that  it  was  a  simple  and  natural  order  which  is  as  likely  as  any 
other  to  occur  in  the  world. 

In  such  a  world  there  is  no  difficulty  about  accumulated  debt 
at  the  boundary.  There  is  no  boundary.  The  centrifugal  force 
increases  until  we  reach  the  sphere  of  greatest  area,  and  then, 
still  obeying  the  law  of  gravitation,  diminishes  to  zero  at  the 
antipodes.  The  debt  has  paid  itself  automatically. 

We  must  not  exaggerate  what  has  been  accomplished  by  this 
modification  of  the  theory.  A  new  constant  has  been  introduced 
into  the  law  of  gravitation  which  gives  the  world  a  definite 
extension.  Previously  there  was  nothing  to  fix  the  scale  of  the 
world ;  it  was  simply  given  a  priori  that  it  was  infinite.  Granted 
extension,  so  that  the  intervals  are  not  invariably  zero,  we  can 
determine  geodesies  everywhere,  and  hence  mark  out  the  inertial 
frame. 

Spherical  space-time,  that  is  to  say  a  four-dimensional  con- 
tinuum of  space  and  imaginary  time  forming  the  surface  of  a 
sphere  in  five  dimensions,  has  been  investigated  by  Prof,  de 
Sitter.  If  real  time  is  used  the  world  is  spherical  in  its  space 
dimensions,  but  open  towards  plus  and  minus  infinity  in  its 
time  dimension,  like  an  hyperboloid.  This  happily  relieves  us 
of  the  necessity  of  supposing  that  as  we  progress  in  time  we 
shall  ultimately  come  back  to  the  instant  we  started  from! 
History  never  repeats  itself.  But  in  the  space  dimensions  we 
should,  if  we  went  on,  ultimately  come  back  to  the  starting 
point.  This  would  have  interesting  physical  results,  and  we 

*  The  area  is,  of  course,  to  be  determined  by  measurement  of  some  kind. 


160  TOWARDS  INFINITY  [CH. 

shall  see  presently  that  Einstein  has  a  theory  of  the  world  in 
which  the  return  can  actually  happen ;  but  in  de  Sitter's  theory 
it  is  rather  an  abstraction,  because,  as  he  says,  "all  the  para- 
doxical phenomena  can  only  happen  after  the  end  or  before  the 
beginning  of  eternity." 

The  reason  is  this.  Owing  to  curvature  in  the  time  dimension, 
as  we  examine  the  condition  of  things  further  and  further  from 
our  starting  point,  our  time  begins  to  run  faster  and  faster,  or 
to  put  it  another  way  natural  phenomena  and  natural  clocks 
slow  down.  The  condition  becomes  like  that  described  in 
Mr  H.  G.  Wells's  story  "The  new  accelerator." 

When  we  reach  half-way  to  the  antipodal  point,  time  stands 
still.  Like  the  Mad  Hatter's  tea  party,  it  is  always  6  o'clock; 
and  nothing  whatever  can  happen  however  long  we  wait.  There 
is  no  possibility  of  getting  any  further,  because  everything 
including  light  has  come  to  rest  here.  All  that  lies  beyond  is 
for  ever  cut  off  from  us  by  this  barrier  of  time;  and  light  can 
never  complete  its  voyage  round  the  world. 

That  is  what  happens  when  the  world  is  viewed  from  one 
station ;  but  if  attracted  by  such  a  delightful  prospect,  we  pro- 
ceeded to  visit  this  scene  of  repose,  we  should  be  disappointed. 
We  should  find  nature  there  as  active  as  ever.  We  thought  time 
was  standing  still,  but  it  was  really  proceeding  there  at  the 
usual  rate,  as  if  in  a  fifth  dimension  of  which  we  had  no 
cognisance.  Casting  an  eye  back  on  our  old  home  we  should  see 
that  time  apparently  had  stopped  still  there.  Time  in  the  two 
places  is  proceeding  in  directions  at  right  angles,  so  that  the 
progress  of  time  at  one  point  has  no  relation  to  the  perception 
of  time  at  the  other  point.  The  reader  will  easily  see  that  a  being 
confined  to  the  surface  of  a  sphere  and  not  cognisant  of  a  third 
dimension,  will,  so  to  speak,  lose  one  of  his  dimensions  altogether 
when  he  watches  things  occurring  at  a  point  90°  away.  He 
regains  it  if  he  visits  the  spot  and  so  adapts  himself  to  the  two 
dimensions  which  prevail  there. 

It  might  seem  that  this  kind  of  fantastic  world-building  can 
have  little  to  do  with  practical  problems.  But  that  is  not  quite 
certain.  May  we  not  be  able  actually  to  observe  the  slowing 
down  of  natural  phenomena  at  great  distances  from  us?  The 
most  remote  objects  known  are  the  spiral  nebulae,  whose 


x]  TOWARDS  INFINITY  161 

distances  may  perhaps  be  of  the  order  a  million  light  years. 
If  natural  phenomena  are  slowed  down  there,  the  vibrations  of 
an  atom  are  slower,  and  its  characteristic  spectral  lines  will 
appear  displaced  to  the  red.  We  should  generally  interpret  this 
as  a  Doppler  effect,  implying  that  the  nebula  is  receding.  The 
motions  in  the  line-of-sight  of  a  number  of  nebulae  have  been 
determined,  chiefly  by  Prof.  Slipher.  The  data  are  not  so  ample 
as  we  should  like;  but  there  is  no  doubt  that  large  receding 
motions  greatly  preponderate.  This  may  be  a  genuine  pheno- 
menon in  the  evolution  of  the  material  universe ;  but  it  is  also 
possible  that  the  interpretation  of  spectral  displacement  as  a 
receding  velocity  is  erroneous ;  and  the  effect  is  really  the  slowing 
of  atomic  vibrations  predicted  by  de  Sitter's  theory. 

Prof.  Einstein  himself  prefers  a  different  theory  of  curved 
space-time.  His  world  is  cylindrical — curved  in  the  three  space 
dimensions  and  straight  in  the  time  dimension.  Since  time  is  no 
longer  curved,  the  slowing  of  phenomena  at  great  distances 
from  the  observer  disappears,  and  with  it  the  slight  experimental 
support  given  to  the  theory  by  the  observations  of  spiral  nebulae. 
There  is  no  longer  a  barrier  of  eternal  rest,  and  a  ray  of  light  is 
able  to  go  round  the  world. 

In  various  ways  crude  estimates  of  the  size  of  the  world  both 
on  de  Sitter's  and  Einstein's  hypotheses  have  been  made;  and 
in  both  cases  the  radius  is  thought  to  be  of  the  order  1013  times 
the  distance  of  the  earth  from  the  sun.  A  ray  of  light  from  the 
sun  would  thus  take  about  1000  million  years  to  go  round  the 
world;  and  after  the  journey  the  rays  would  converge  again  at 
the  starting  point,  and  then  diverge  for  the  next  circuit.  The 
convergent  would  have  all  the  characteristics  of  a  real  sun  so 
far  as  light  and  heat  are  concerned,  only  there  would  be  no 
substantial  body  present.  Thus  corresponding  to  the  sun  we 
might  see  a  series  of  ghosts  occupying  the  positions  where  the 
sun  was  1000,  2000,  3000,  etc.,  million  years  ago,  if  (as  seems 
probable)  the  sun  has  been  luminous  for  so  long. 

It  is  rather  a  pleasing  speculation  that  records  of  the  previous 
states  of  the  sidereal  universe  may  be  automatically  reforming 
themselves  on  the  original  sites.  Perhaps  one  or  more  of  the 
many  spiral  nebulae  are  really  phantoms  of  our  own  stellar 
system.  Or  it  may  be  that  only  a  proportion  of  the  stars  are 
E.S.  ix 


162  TOWARDS  INFINITY  [CH. 

substantial  bodies;  the  remainder  are  optical  ghosts  revisiting 
their  old  haunts.  It  is,  however,  unlikely  that  the  light  rays 
after  their  long  journey  would  converge  with  the  accuracy  which 
this  theory  would  require.  The  minute  deflections  by  the  various 
gravitational  fields  encountered  on  the  way  would  turn  them 
aside,  and  the  focus  would  be  blurred.  Moreover  there  is  a 
likelihood  that  the  light  would  gradually  be  absorbed  or 
scattered  by  matter  diffused  in  space,  which  is  encountered  on 
the  long  journey. 

It  is  sometimes  suggested  that  the  return  of  the  light-wave 
to  its  starting  point  can  most  easily  be  regarded  as  due  to  the 
force  of  gravitation,  there  being  sufficient  mass  distributed 
through  the  universe  to  control  its  path  in  a  closed  orbit.  We 
should  have  no  objection  in  principle  to  this  way  of  looking  at 
it ;  but  we  doubt  whether  it  is  correct  in  fact.  It  is  quite  possible 
for  light  to  return  to  its  starting  point  in  a  world  without 
gravitation.  We  can  roll  flat  space-time  into  a  cylinder  and  join 
the  edges ;  its  geometry  will  still  be  Euclidean  and  there  will  be 
no  gravitation ;  but  a  ray  of  light  can  go  right  round  the  cylinder 
and  return  to  the  starting  point  in  space.  Similarly  in  Einstein's 
more  complex  type  of  cylinder  (three  dimensions  curved  and 
one  dimension  linear),  it  seems  likely  that  the  return  of  the 
light  is  due  as  much  to  the  connectivity  of  his  space,  as  to 
the  non-Euclidean  properties  which  express  the  gravitational 
field. 

For  Einstein's  cylindrical  world  it  is  necessary  to  postulate 
the  existence  of  vast  quantities  of  matter  (not  needed  on  de 
Sitter's  theory)  far  in  excess  of  what  has  been  revealed  by  our 
telescopes.  This  additional  material  may  either  be  in  the  form 
of  distant  stars  and  galaxies  beyond  our  limits  of  vision,  or  it 
may  be  uniformly  spread  through  space  and  escape  notice  by 
its  low  density.  There  is  a  definite  relation  between  the  average 
density  of  matter  and  the  radius  of  the  world;  the  greater  the 
radius  the  smaller  must  be  the  average  density. 

Two  objections  to  this  theory  may  be  urged.  In  the  first 
place,  absolute  space  and  time  are  restored  for  phenomena  on 
a  cosmical  scale.  The  ghost  of  a  star  appears  at  the  spot  where 
the  star  was  a  certain  number  of  million  years  ago;  and  from 
the  ghost  to  the  present  position  of  the  star  is  a  definite  distance 


x]  TOWARDS   INFINITY  163 

—the  absolute  motion  of  the  star  in  the  meantime*.  The  world 
taken  as  a  whole  has  one  direction  in  which  it  is  not  curved; 
that  direction  gives  a  kind  of  absolute  time  distinct  from  space. 
Relativity  is  reduced  to  a  local  phenomenon ;  and  although  this 
is  quite  sufficient  for  the  theory  hitherto  described,  we  are 
inclined  to  look  on  the  limitation  rather  grudgingly.  But  we 
have  already  urged  that  the  relativity  theory  is  not  concerned 
to  deny  the  possibility  of  an  absolute  time,  but  to  deny  that  it 
is  concerned  in  any  experimental  knowledge  yet  found;  and  it 
need  not  perturb  us  if  the  conception  of  absolute  time  turns  up 
in  a  new  form  in  a  theory  of  phenomena  on  a  cosmical  scale, 
as  to  which  no  experimental  knowledge  is  yet  available.  Just 
as  each  limited  observer  has  his  own  particular  separation  of 
space  and  time,  so  a  being  coextensive  with  the  world  might 
well  have  a  special  separation  of  space  and  time  natural  to  him. 
It  is  the  time  for  this  being  that  is  here  dignified  by  the  title 
"absolute." 

Secondly,  the  revised  law  of  gravitation  involves  a  new 
constant  which  depends  on  the  total  amount  of  matter  in  the 
world;  or  conversely  the  total  amount  of  matter  in  the  world 
is  determined  by  the  law  of  gravitation.  This  seems  very  hard 
to  accept — at  any  rate  without  some  plausible  explanation  of 
how  the  adjustment  is  brought  about.  We  can  see  that,  the 
constant  in  the  law  of  gravitation  being  fixed,  there  may  be 
some  upper  limit  to  the  amount  of  matter  possible;  as  more 
and  more  matter  is  added  in  the  distant  parts,  space  curves 
round  and  ultimately  closes ;  the  process  of  adding  more  matter 
must  stop,  because  there  is  no  more  space,  and  we  can  only 
return  to  the  region  already  dealt  with.  But  there  seems  nothing 
to  prevent  a  defect  of  matter,  leaving  space  unclosed.  Some 
mechanism  seems  to  be  needed,  whereby  either  gravitation 
creates  matter,  or  all  the  matter  in  the  universe  conspires  to 
define  a  law  of  gravitation. 

Although  this  appears  to  the  writer  rather  bewildering,  it  is 
welcomed  by  those  philosophers  who  follow  the  lead  of  Mach. 
For  it  leads  to  the  result  that  the  extension  of  space  and  time 

*  The  ghost  is  not  formed  where  the  star  is  now.  If  two  stars  were  near 
together  when  the  light  left  them  their  ghosts  must  be  near  together,  although 
the  stars  may  now  be  widely  separated. 

II — 2 


164  TOWARDS  INFINITY  [CH. 

depends  on  the  amount  of  matter  in  the  world — partly  by  its 
direct  effect  on  the  curvature  and  partly  by  its  influence  on  the 
constant  of  the  law  of  gravitation.  The  more  matter  there  is, 
the  more  space  is  created  to  contain  it,  and  if  there  were  no 
matter  the  world  would  shrink  to  a  point. 

In  the  philosophy  of  Mach  a  world  without  matter  is  unthink- 
able. Matter  in  Mach's  philosophy  is  not  merely  required  as 
a  test  body  to  display  properties  of  something  already  there, 
which  have  no  physical  meaning  except  in  relation  to  matter; 
it  is  an  essential  factor  in  causing  those  properties  which  it  is 
able  to  display.  Inertia,  for  example,  would  not  appear  by  the 
insertion  of  one  test  body  in  the  world ;  in  some  way  the  presence 
of  other  matter  is  a  necessary  condition.  It  will  be  seen  how 
welcome  to  such  a  philosophy  is  the  theory  that  space  and  the 
inertial  frame  come  into  being  with  matter,  and  grow  as  it  grows. 
Since  the  laws  of  inertia  are  part  of  the  law  of  gravitation, 
Mach's  philosophy  was  summed  up — perhaps  unconsciously — 
in  the  profound  saying  "  If  there  were  no  matter  in  the  universe, 
the  law  of  gravitation  would  fall  to  the  ground." 

No  doubt  a  world  without  matter,  in  which  nothing  could 
ever  happen,  would  be  very  uninteresting;  and  some  might  deny 
its  claim  to  be  regarded  as  a  world  at  all.  But  a  world  uniformly 
filled  with  matter  would  be  equally  dull  and  unprofitable;  so 
there  seems  to  be  little  object  in  denying  the  possibility  of  the 
former  and  leaving  the  latter  possible. 

The  position  can  be  summed  up  as  follows: — in  a  space 
without  absolute  features,  an  absolute  rotation  would  be  as 
meaningless  as  an  absolute  translation;  accordingly,  the  exist- 
ence of  an  experimentally  determined  quantity  generally 
identified  with  absolute  rotation  requires  explanation.  It  was 
remarked  on  p.  41  that  it  would  be  difficult  to  devise  a  plan 
of  the  world  according  to  which  uniform  motion  has  no  significance 
but  non-uniform  motion  is  significant;  but  such  a  world  has 
been  arrived  at — a  plenum,  of  which  the  absolute  features  are 
intervals  and  geodesies.  In  a  limited  region  this  plenum  gives 
a  natural  frame  with  respect  to  which  an  acceleration  or  rotation 
(but  not  a  velocity)  capable  of  absolute  definition  can  be 
measured.  In  the  case  of  rotation  the  local  distortions  of  the 
frame  are  of  comparatively  little  account;  and  this  explains 


x]  TOWARDS  INFINITY  165 

why  in  practice  rotation  appears  to  have  reference  to  some  world- 
wide inertial  frame. 

Thus  absolute  rotation  does  not  indicate  any  logical  flaw  in 
the  theory  hitherto  developed;  and  there  is  no  need  to  accept 
any  modification  of  our  views.  Possibly  there  may  be  a  still 
wider  relativity  theory,  in  which  our  supposed  plenum  is  to  be 
regarded  as  itself  an  abstraction  of  the  relations  of  the  matter 
distributed  throughout  the  world,  and  not  existent  apart  from 
such  matter.  This  seems  to  exalt  matter  rather  unnecessarily. 
It  may  be  true ;  but  we  feel  no  necessity  for  it,  unless  experiment 
points  that  way.  It  is  with  some  such  underlying  idea  that 
Einstein's  cylindrical  space-time  was  suggested,  since  this 
cannot  exist  without  matter  to  keep  it  stretched.  Now  we  freely 
admit  that  our  assumption  of  perfect  flatness  in  the  remote 
parts  of  space  was  arbitrary,  and  there  is  no  justification  for 
insisting  on  it.  A  small  curvature  is  possible  both  conceptually 
and  experimentally.  The  arguments  on  both  sides  have  hitherto 
been  little  more  than  prejudices,  which  would  be  dissipated  by 
any  experimental  or  theoretical  lead  in  one  direction.  Weyl's 
theory  of  the  electromagnetic  field,  discussed  in  the  next 
chapter,  assigns  a  definite  function  to  the  curvature  of  space; 
and  this  considerably  alters  the  aspect  of  the  question.  We  are 
scarcely  sufficiently  advanced  to  offer  a  final  opinion;  but  the 
conception  of  cylindrical  space-time  seems  to  be  favoured  by 
this  new  development  of  the  theory. 

Some  may  be  inclined  to  challenge  the  right  of  the  Einstein 
theory,  at  least  as  interpreted  in  this  book,  to  be  called  a 
relativity  theory.  Perhaps  it  has  not  all  the  characteristics 
which  have  at  one  time  or  another  been  associated  with  that 
name;  but  the  reader,  who  has  followed  us  so  far,  will  see  how 
our  search  for  an  absolute  world  has  been  guided  by  a  recognition 
of  the  relativity  of  the  measurements  of  physics.  It  may  be 
urged  that  our  geodesies  ought  not  to  be  regarded  as  fundamental ; 
a  geodesic  has  no  meaning  in  itself;  what  we  are  really  concerned 
with  is  the  relation  of  a  particle  following  a  geodesic  to  all  the 
other  matter  of  the  world  and  the  geodesic  cannot  be  thought  of 
apart  from  such  other  matter.  We  would  reply,  "  Your  particle 
of  matter  is  not  fundamental ;  it  has  no  meaning  in  itself;  what 
you  are  really  concerned  with  is  its  '  field ' — the  relation  of  the 


166  TOWARDS  INFINITY  [CH.  x 

geodesies  about  it  to  the  other  geodesies  in  the  world — and 
matter  cannot  be  thought  of  apart  from  its  field."  It  is  all 
a  tangle  of  relations;  physical  theory  starts  with  the  simplest 
constituents,  philosophical  theory  with  the  most  familiar  con- 
stituents. They  may  reach  the  same  goal;  but  their  methods 
are  often  incompatible. 


CHAPTER  XI 
ELECTRICITY  AND   GRAVITATION 

Thou  shalt  not  have  in  thy  bag  divers  weights,  a  great  and  a  small. 
Thou  shalt  not  have  in  thine  house  divers  measures,  a  great  and  a  small. 
But  thou  shalt  have  a  perfect  and  just  weight,  a  perfect  and  just  measure  shalt 
thou  have.  Book  of  Deuteronomy. 

THE  relativity  theory  deduces  from  geometrical  principles  the 
existence  of  gravitation  and  the  laws  of  mechanics  of  matter. 
Mechanics  is  derived  from  geometry,  not  by  adding  arbitrary 
hypotheses,  but  by  removing  unnecessary  assumptions,  so  that 
a  geometer  like  Riemann  might  almost  have  foreseen  the  more 
important  features  of  the  actual  world.  But  nature  has  in 
reserve  one  great  surprise — electricity. 

Electrical  phenomena  are  not  in  any  way  a  misfit  in  the 
relativity  theory,  and  historically  it  is  through  them  that  it  has 
been  developed.  Yet  we  cannot  rest  satisfied  until  a  deeper 
unity  between  the  gravitational  and  electrical  properties  of  the 
world  is  apparent.  The  electron,  which  seems  to  be  the  smallest 
particle  of  matter,  is  a  singularity  in  the  gravitational  field  and 
also  a  singularity  in  the  electrical  field.  How  can  these  two  facts 
be  connected?  The  gravitational  field  is  the  expression  of  some 
state  of  the  world,  which  also  manifests  itself  in  the  natural 
geometry  determined  with  measuring  appliances;  the  electric 
field  must  also  express  some  state  of  the  world,  but  we  have  not 
as  yet  connected  it  with  natural  geometry.  May  there  not  still 
be  unnecessary  assumptions  to  be  removed,  so  that  a  yet  more 
comprehensive  geometry  can  be  found,  in  which  gravitational 
and  electrical  fields  both  have  their  place? 

There  is  an  arbitrary  assumption  in  our  geometry  up  to  this 
point,  which  it  is  desirable  now  to  point  out.  We  have  based 
everything  on  the  "interval,"  which,  it  has  been  said,  is  some- 
thing which  all  observers,  whatever  their  motion  or  whatever 
their  mesh-system,  can  measure  absolutely,  agreeing  on  the 
result.  This  assumes  that  they  are  provided  with  identical 
standards  of  measurement — scales  and  clocks.  But  if  A  is  in 


168  ELECTRICITY  AND  GRAVITATION  [CH. 

motion  relative  to  B  and  wishes  to  hand  his  standards  to  B  to 
check  his  measures,  he  must  stop  their  motion;  this  means  in 
practice  that  he  must  bombard  his  standards  with  material 
molecules  until  they  come  to  rest.  Is  it  fair  to  assume  that  no 
alteration  of  the  standard  is  caused  by  this  process?  Or  if  A 
measures  time  by  the  vibrations  of  a  hydrogen  atom,  and  space 
by  the  wave-length  of  the  vibration,  still  it  is  necessary  to  stop 
the  atom  by  a  collision  in  which  electrical  forces  are  involved. 

The  standard  of  length  in  physics  is  the  length  in  the  year 
1799  of  a  bar  deposited  at  Paris.  Obviously  no  interval  is  ever 
compared  directly  with  that  length  ;  there  must  be  a  continuous 
chain  of  intermediate  steps  extending  like  a  geodetic  triangula- 
tion  through  space  and  time,  first  along  the  past  history  of  the 
scale  actually  used,  then  through  intermediate  standards,  and 
finally  along  the  history  of  the  Paris  metre  itself.  It  may  be 
that  these  intermediate  steps  are  of  no  importance  —  that  the 
same  result  is  reached  by  whatever  route  we  approach  the 
standard;  but  clearly  we  ought  not  to  make  that  assumption 
without  due  consideration.  We  ought  to  construct  our  geometry 
in  such  a  way  as  to  show  that  there  are  intermediate  steps,  and 
that  the  comparison  of  the  interval  with  the  ultimate  standard 
is  not  a  kind  of  action  at  a  distance. 

To  compare  intervals  in  different  directions  at  a  point  in 
space  and  time  does  not  require  this  comparison  with  a  distant 
standard.  The  physicist's  method  of  describing  phenomena 
near  a  point  P  is  to  lay  down  for  comparison  (1)  a  mesh-system, 
(2)  a  unit  of  length  (some  kind  of  material  standard),  which  can 
also  be  used  for  measuring  time,  the  velocity  of  light  being  unity. 
With  this  system  of  reference  he  can  measure  in  terms  of  his 
unit  small  intervals  PP'  running  in  any  direction  from  P, 
summarising  the  results  in  the  fundamental  formula 

+  g22dcc2*  +  ...  +  2g12dxldx2  +  .... 


If  now  he  wishes  to  measure  intervals  near  a  distant  point  Q,  he 
must  lay  down  a  mesh-system  and  a  unit  of  measure  there.  He 
naturally  tries  to  simplify  matters  by  using  what  he  would  call 
the  same  unit  of  measure  at  P  and  Q,  either  by  transporting  a 
material  rod  or  some  equivalent  device.  If  it  is  immaterial  by 
what  route  the  unit  is  carried  from  P  to  Q,  and  replicas  of  the 


xi]  ELECTRICITY  AND  GRAVITATION  169 

unit  carried  by  different  routes  all  agree  on  arrival  at  Q,  this 
method  is  at  any  rate  explicit.  The  question  whether  the  unit 
at  Q  defined  in  this  way  is  really  the  same  as  that  at  P  is  mere 
metaphysics.  But  if  the  units  carried  by  different  routes  dis- 
agree, there  is  no  unambiguous  means  of  identifying  a  unit  at 
Q  with  the  unit  at  P.  Suppose  P  is  an  event  at  Cambridge  on 
March  1,  and  Q  at  London  on  May  1 ;  we  are  contemplating  the 
possibility  that  there  will  be  a  difference  in  the  results  of  measures 
made  with  our  standard  in  London  on  May  1,  according  as  the 
standard  is  taken  up  to  London  on  March  1  and  remains  there, 
or  is  left  at  Cambridge  and  taken  up  on  May  1.  This  seems  at 
first  very  improbable;  but  our  reasons  for  allowing  for  this 
possibility  will  appear  presently.  If  there  is  this  ambiguity  the 
only  possible  course  is  to  lay  down  (1)  a  mesh-system  filling  all 
the  space  and  time  considered,  (2)  a  definite  unit  of  interval,  or 
gauge,  at  every  point  of  space  and  time.  The  geometry  of  the 
world  referred  to  such  a  system  will  be  more  complicated  than 
that  of  Riemann  hitherto  used;  and  we  shall  see  that  it  is 
necessary  to  specify  not  only  the  10  g's,  but  four  other  functions 
of  position,  which  will  be  found  to  have  an  important  physical 
meaning. 

The  observer  will  naturally  simplify  things  by  making  the 
units  of  gauge  at  different  points  as  nearly  as  possible  equal, 
judged  by  ordinary  comparisons.  But  the  fact  remains  that, 
when  the  comparison  depends  on  the  route  taken,  exact  equality 
is  not  definable;  and  we  have  therefore  to  admit  that  the  exact 
standards  are  laid  down  at  every  point  independently. 

It  is  the  same  problem  over  again  as  occurs  in  regard  to 
mesh-systems.  We  lay  down  particular  rectangular  axes  near 
a  point  P;  presently  we  make  some  observations  near  a  distant 
point  Q.  To  what  coordinates  shall  the  latter  be  referred?  The 
natural  answer  is  that  we  must  use  the  same  coordinates  as  we 
were  using  at  P.  But,  except  in  the  particular  case  of  flat  space, 
there  is  no  means  of  defining  exactly  what  coordinates  at  Q  are 
the  same  as  those  at  P.  In  many  cases  the  ambiguity  may  be 
too  trifling  to  trouble  us;  but  in  exact  work  the  only  course  is 
to  lay  down  a  definite  mesh-system  extending  throughout  space, 
the  precise  route  of  the  partitions  being  necessarily  arbitrary. 
We  now  find  that  we  have  to  add  to  this  by  placing  in  each 


170  ELECTRICITY  AND   GRAVITATION  [CH. 

mesh  a  gauge  whose  precise  length  must  be  arbitrary.  Having 
done  this  the  next  step  is  to  make  measurements  of  intervals 
(using  our  gauges).  This  connects  the  absolute  properties  of  the 
world  with  our  arbitrarily  drawn  mesh-system  and  gauge- 
system.  And  so  by  measurement  we  determine  the  g's  and  the 
new  additional  quantities,  which  determine  the  geometry  of  our 
chosen  system  of  reference,  and  at  the  same  time  contain  within 
themselves  the  absolute  geometry  of  the  world — the  kind  of 
space-time  which  exists  in  the  field  of  our  experiments. 

Having  laid  down  a  unit-gauge  at  every  point,  we  can  speak 
quite  definitely  of  the  change  in  interval-length  of  a  measuring- 
rod  moved  from  point  to  point,  meaning,  of  course,  the  change 
compared  with  the  unit-gauges.  Let  us  take  a  rod  of  interval- 
length  I  at  P,  and  move  it  successively  through  the  displacements 
dxlf  dx2,  dx3,  dx^  and  let  the  result  be  to  increase  its  length 
in  terms  of  the  gauges  by  the  amount  \l.  The  change  depends 
as  much  on  the  difference  of  the  gauges  at  the  two  points  as 
on  the  behaviour  of  the  rod;  but  there  is  no  possibility  of 
separating  the  two  factors.  It  is  clear  that  A  will  not  depend 
on  I,  because  the  change  of  length  must  be  proportional  to 
the  original  length — unless  indeed  our  whole  idea  of  measure- 
ment by  comparison  with  a  gauge  is  wrong*.  Further  it  will 
not  depend  on  the  direction  of  the  rod  either  in  its  initial  or 
final  positions  because  the  interval-length  is  independent  of 
direction.  (Of  course,  the  space-length  would  change,  but  that 
is  already  taken  care  of  by  the  g's.)  A  can  thus  only  depend  on 
the  displacements  dxlt  dx%,  dx9,  dx±,  and  we  may  write  it 

A  =  K^dxi  +  Acaefoa  +  K3dxs  +  /c4d#4, 

so  long  as  the  displacements  are  small.  The  coefficients  Klt  KZ, 
KZ,  /c4  apply  to  the  neighbourhood  of  P,  and  will  in  general  be 
different  in  different  parts  of  space. 

This  indeed  assumes  that  the  result  is  independent  of  the 
order  of  the  displacements  dxlf  dx2,  dx3,  dxt — that  is  to  say 
that  the  ambiguity  of  the  comparison  by  different  routes  dis- 
appears in  the  limit  when  the  whole  route  is  sufficiently  small. 
It  is  parallel  with  our  previous  implicit  assumption  that  although 
the  length  of  the  track  from  a  point  P  to  a  distant  point  Q 

*  We  refuse  to  contemplate  the  idea  that  when  the  metre  rod  changes  its 
length  to  two  metres,  each  centimetre  of  it  changes  to  three  centimetres. 


xi]  ELECTRICITY  AND  GRAVITATION  171 

depends  on  the  route,  and  no  definite  meaning  can  be  attached 
to  the  interval  between  them  without  specifying  a  route,  yet  in 
the  limit  there  is  a  definite  small  interval  between  P  and  Q  when 
they  are  sufficiently  close  together. 

To  understand  the  meaning  of  these  new  coefficients  K  let  us 
briefly  recapitulate  what  we  understand  by  the  g's.  Primarily 
they  are  quantities  derived  from  experimental  measurements  of 
intervals,  and  describe  the  geometry  of  the  space  and  time 
partitions  which  the  observer  has  chosen.  As  consequential 
properties  they  describe  the  field  of  force,  gravitational,  centri- 
fugal, etc.,  with  which  he  perceives  himself  surrounded.  They 
relate  to  the  particular  mesh-system  of  the  observer;  and  by 
altering  his  mesh-system,  he  can  alter  their  values,  though  not 
entirely  at  will.  From  their  values  can  be  deduced  intrinsic 
properties  of  the  world — the  kind  of  space-time  in  which  the 
phenomena  occur.  Further  they  satisfy  a  definite  condition — 
the  law  of  gravitation — so  that  not  all  mathematically  possible 
space-times  and  not  all  arbitrary  values  of  the  g's  are  such  as 
can  occur  in  nature. 

All  this  applies  equally  to  the  /c's,  if  we  substitute  gauge- 
system  for  mesh-system,  and  some  at  present  unknown  force 
for  gravitation.  They  can  theoretically  be  determined  by 
interval-measurement;  but  they  will  be  more  conspicuously 
manifested  to  the  observer  through  their  consequential  property 
of  describing  some  kind  of  field  of  force  surrounding  him.  The 
K'S  refer  to  the  arbitrary  gauge-system  of  the  observer;  but  he 
cannot  by  altering  his  gauge-system  alter  their  values  entirely 
at  will.  Intrinsic  properties  of  the  world  are  contained  in  their 
values,  unaffected  by  any  change  of  gauge-system.  Further  we 
may  expect  that  they  will  have  to  satisfy  some  law  corresponding 
to  the  law  of  gravitation,  so  that  not  all  arbitrary  values  of  the 
K'S  are  such  as  can  occur  in  nature. 

It  is  evident  that  the  /c's  must  refer  to  some  type  of  pheno- 
menon which  has  not  hitherto  appeared  in  our  discussion;  and 
the  obvious  suggestion  is  that  they  refer  to  the  electromagnetic 
field.  This  hypothesis  is  strengthened  when  we  recall  that  the 
electromagnetic  field  is,  in  fact,  specified  at  every  point  by  the 
values  of  four  quantities,  viz.  the  three  components  of  electro- 
magnetic vector  potential,  and  the  scalar  potential  of  electro- 


172  ELECTRICITY  AND  GRAVITATION          [CH. 

statics.  Surely  it  is  more  than  a  coincidence  that  the  physicist 
needs  just  four  more  quantities  to  specify  the  state  of  the  world 
at  a  point  in  space,  and  four  more  quantities  are  provided  by 
removing  a  rather  illogical  restriction  on  our  system  of  geometry 
of  natural  measures. 

[The  general  reader  will  perhaps  pardon  a  few  words  addressed 
especially  to  the  mathematical  physicist.  Taking  the  ordinary 
unaccelerated  rectangular  coordinates  a?,  y,  z,  t,  let  us  write 
F9  G,  H,  —  O  for  fclf  *2,  /c3,  *4,  then 

*  =  A  =  Fdx  +  Gdy  +  Hdz  -  <S>dt. 

From  which,  by  integration, 

log  I  +  const.  =  l(Fdx  +  Gdy  +  Hdz  -  <5>dt). 
The  length  /  will  be  independent  of  the  route  taken  if 

Fdx  +  Gdy  +  Hdz  -  ®dt 
is  a  perfect  differential.  The  condition  for  this  is 

as_aG_o      <^_^_0       a^_^_0 

dy      dz  dz      dx  dx      dy 

3<D     dF  3O     dG  aO     dH 

~a^~^=0>    T%^S  T    ~^~^  = 

If  F,  G,  H,  O  are  the  potentials  of  electromagnetic  theory,  these 
are  precisely  the  expressions  for  the  three  components  of 
magnetic  force  and  the  three  components  of  electric  force,  given 
in  the  text-books.  Thus  the  condition  that  distant  intervals  can 
be  compared  directly  without  specifying  a  particular  route  of 
comparison  is  that  the  electric  and  magnetic  forces  are  zero  in 
the  intervening  space  and  time. 

It  may  be  noted  that,  even  when  the  coordinate  system  has 
been  denned,  the  electromagnetic  potentials  are  not  unique  in 
value;  but  arbitrary  additions  can  be  made  provided  these 
additions  form  a  perfect  differential.  It  is  just  this  flexibility 
which  in  our  geometrical  theory  appears  in  the  form  of  the 
arbitrary  choice  of  gauge-system.  The  electromagnetic  forces 
on  the  other  hand  are  independent  of  the  gauge-system,  which 
is  eliminated  by  "curling."] 

It  thus  appears  that  the  four  new  quantities  appearing  in  our 
extended  geometry  may  actually  be  the  four  potentials  of 


xi]  ELECTRICITY  AND  GRAVITATION  173 

electromagnetic  theory;  and  further,  when  there  is  no  electro- 
magnetic field  our  previous  geometry  is  valid.  But  in  the  more 
general  case  we  have  to  adopt  the  more  general  geometry  in 
which  there  appear  fourteen  coefficients,  ten  describing  the 
gravitational  and  four  the  electrical  conditions  of  the  world. 

We  ought  now  to  seek  the  law  of  the  electromagnetic  field 
on  the  same  lines  as  we  sought  for  the  law  of  gravitation,  laying 
down  the  condition  that  it  must  be  independent  of  mesh-system 
and  gauge-system  since  it  seeks  to  limit  the  possible  kinds  of 
world  which  can  exist  in  nature.  Happily  this  presents  no 
difficulty,  because  the  law  expressed  by  Maxwell's  equations, 
and  universally  adopted,  fulfils  the  conditions.  There  is  no 
need  to  modify  it  fundamentally  as  we  modified  the  law  of 
gravitation.  We  do,  however,  generalise  it  so  that  it  applies 
when  a  gravitational  field  is  present  at  the  same  time — not 
merely,  as  given  by  Maxwell,  for  flat  space-time.  The  deflection 
of  electromagnetic  waves  (light)  by  a  gravitational  field  is  duly 
contained  in  this  generalised  law. 

Strictly  speaking  the  laws  of  gravitation  and  of  the  electro- 
magnetic field  are  not  two  laws  but  one  law,  as  the  geometry 
of  the  g's  and  the  ic's  is  one  geometry.  Although  it  is  often 
convenient  to  separate  them,  they  are  really  parts  of  the  general 
condition  limiting  the  possible  kinds  of  metric  that  can  occur  in 
empty  space. 

It  will  be  remembered  that  the  four-fold  arbitrariness  of  our 
mesh-system  involved  four  identities,  which  were  found  to 
express  the  conservation  of  energy  and  momentum.  In  the  new 
geometry  there  is  a  fifth  arbitrariness,  namely  that  of  the  selected 
gauge-system,  This  must  also  give  rise  to  an  identity;  and  it  is 
found  that  the  new  identity  expresses  the  law  of  conservation  of 
electric  charge. 

A  grasp  of  the  new  geometry  may  perhaps  be  assisted  by  a 
further  comparison.  Suppose  an  observer  has  laid  down  a  line 
of  a  certain  length  and  in  a  certain  direction  at  a  point  P,  and 
he  wishes  to  lay  down  an  exactly  similar  line  at  a  distant  point 
Q.  If  he  is  in  flat  space  there  will  be  no  difficulty;  he  will  have 
to  proceed  by  steps,  a  kind  of  triangulation,  but  the  route  chosen 
is  of  no  importance.  We  know  definitely  that  there  is  just  one 
direction  at  Q  parallel  to  the  original  direction  at  P;  and  it  is 


174  ELECTRICITY  AND  GRAVITATION          [CH. 

in  ordinary  geometry  supposed  that  the  length  is  equally 
determinate.  But  if  space  is  not  flat  the  case  is  different. 
Imagine  a  two-dimensional  observer  confined  to  the  curved 
surface  of  the  earth  trying  to  perform  this  task.  As  he  does  not 
appreciate  the  third  dimension  he  will  not  immediately  perceive 
the  impossibility;  but  he  will  find  that  the  direction  which  he  has 
transferred  to  Q  differs  according  to  the  route  chosen.  Or  if  he 
went  round  a  complete  circuit  he  would  find  on  arriving  back 
at  P  that  the  direction  he  had  so  carefully  tried  to  preserve  on 
the  journey  did  not  agree  with  that  originally  drawn*.  We 
describe  this  by  saying  that  in  curved  space,  direction  is  not 
integrable;  and  it  is  this  non-integrability  of  direction  which 
characterises  the  gravitational  field.  In  the  case  considered  the 
length  would  be  preserved  throughout  the  circuit;  but  it  is 
possible  to  conceive  a  more  general  kind  of  space  in  which  the 
length  which  it  was  attempted  to  preserve  throughout  the 
circuit,  as  well  as  the  direction,  disagreed  on  return  to  the  starting 
point  with  that  originally  drawn.  In  that  case  length  is  not 
integrable;  and  the  non-integrability  of  length  characterises  the 
electromagnetic  field.  Length  associated  with  direction  is  called 
a  vector;  and  the  combined  gravitational  and  electric  field 
describe  that  influence  of  the  world  on  our  measurements  by 
which  a  vector  carried  by  physical  measurement  round  a  closed 
circuit  changes  insensibly  into  a  different  vector. 

The  welding  together  of  electricity  and  gravitation  into  one 
geometry  is  the  work  of  Prof.  H.  Weyl,  first  published  in  1918  f. 
It  appears  to  the  writer  to  carry  conviction,  although  up  to  the 
present  no  experimental  test  has  been  proposed.  It  need  scarcely 
be  said  that  the  inconsistency  of  length  for  an  ordinary  circuit 
would  be  extremely  minute  {,  and  the  ordinary  manifestations 
of  the  electromagnetic  field  are  the  consequential  results  of 

*  It  might  be  thought  that  if  the  observer  preserved  mentally  the  original 
direction  in  three-dimensional  space,  and  obtained  the  direction  at  any  point 
in  his  two-dimensional  space  by  projecting  it,  there  would  be  no  ambiguity. 
But  the  three-dimensional  space  in  which  a  curved  two-dimensional  space  is 
conceived  to  exist  is  quite  arbitrary.  A  two-dimensional  observer  cannot 
ascertain  by  any  observation  whether  he  is  on  a  plane  or  a  cylinder,  a  sphere 
or  any  other  convex  surface  of  the  same  total  curvature. 

t  Appendix,  Note  15. 

j  I  do  not  think  that  any  numerical  estimate  has  been  made. 


xi]  ELECTRICITY  AND  GRAVITATION  175 

changes  which  would  be  imperceptible  to  direct  measurement. 
It  will  be  remembered  that  the  gravitational  field  is  likewise 
perceived  by  the  consequential  effects,  and  not  by  direct  interval- 
measurement. 

But  the  theory  does  appear  to  require  that,  for  example,  the 
time  of  vibration  of  an  atom  is  not  quite  independent  of  its 
previous  history.  It  may  be  assumed  that  the  previous  histories 
of  terrestrial  atoms  are  so  much  alike  that  there  are  no  significant 
differences  in  their  periods.  The  possibility  that  the  systematic 
difference  of  history  oT  solar  and  terrestrial  atoms  may  have  an 
effect  on  the  expected  shift  of  the  spectral  lines  on  the  sun  has 
already  been  alluded  to.  It  seems  doubtful,  however,  whether 
the  effect  could  attain  the  necessary  magnitude. 

It  may  seem  difficult  to  identify  these  abstract  geometrical 
qualities  of  the  world  with  the  physical  forces  of  electricity  and 
magnetism.  How,  for  instance,  can  the  change  in  the  length  of 
a  rod  taken  round  a  circuit  in  space  and  time  be  responsible  for 
the  sensations  of  an  electric  shock?  The  geometrical  potentials 
(K)  obey  the  recognised  laws  of  electromagnetic  potentials,  and 
each  entity  in  the  physical  theory — charge,  electric  force, 
magnetic  element,  light,  etc. — has  its  exact  analogue  in  the 
geometrical  theory;  but  is  this  formal  correspondence  a  sufficient 
ground  for  identification?  The  doubt  which  arises  in  our  minds 
is  due  to  a  failure  to  recognise  the  formalism  of  all  physical 
knowledge.  The  suggestion  "  This  is  not  the  thing  I  am  speaking 
of,  though  it  behaves  exactly  like  it  in  all  respects"  carries  no 
physical  meaning.  Anything  which  behaves  exactly  like 
electricity  must  manifest  itself  to  us  as  electricity.  Distinction 
of  form  is  the  only  distinction  that  physics  can  recognise;  and 
distinction  of  individuality,  if  it  has  any  meaning  at  all,  has  no 
bearing  on  physical  manifestations. 

We  can  only  explore  the  world  with  apparatus,  which  is  itself 
part  of  the  world.  Our  idealised  apparatus  is  reduced  to  a  few 
simple  types — a  neutral  particle,  a  charged  particle,  a  rigid 
scale,  etc.  The  absolute  constituents  of  the  world  are  related  in 
various  ways,  which  we  have  studied,  to  the  indications  of  these 
test-bodies.  The  main  features  of  the  absolute  world  are  so 
simple  that  there  is  a  redundancy  of  apparatus  at  our  disposal ; 
and  probably  all  that  there  is  to  be  known  could  theoretically 


176  ELECTRICITY  AND  GRAVITATION          [CH. 

be  found  out  by  exploration  with  an  uncharged  particle.  Actually 
we  prefer  to  look  at  the  world  as  revealed  by  exploration  with 
scales  and  clocks — the  former  for  measuring  so-called  imaginary 
intervals,  and  the  latter  for  real  intervals ;  this  gives  us  a  unified 
geometrical  conception  of  the  world.  Presumably,  we  could  obtain 
a  unified  mechanical  conception  by  taking  the  moving  uncharged 
particle  as  standard  indicator;  or  a  unified  electrical  conception 
by  taking  the  charged  particle.  For  particular  purposes  one 
test-body  is  generally  better  adapted  than  others.  The  gravita- 
tional field  is  more  sensitively  explored  with  a  moving  particle 
than  a  scale.  Although  the  electrical  field  can  theoretically  be 
explored  by  the  change  of  length  of  a  scale  taken  round  a  circuit, 
a  far  more  sensitive  way  is  to  use  a  little  bit  of  the  scale — an 
electron.  And  in  general  for  practical  efficiency,  we  do  not  use 
any  simple  type  of  apparatus,  but  a  complicated  construction 
built  up  with  a  view  to  a  particular  experiment.  The  reason  for 
emphasising  the  theoretical  interchangeability  of  test-bodies  is 
that  it  brings  out  the  unity  and  simplicity  of  the  world ;  and  for 
that  reason  there  is  an  importance  in  characterising  the  electro- 
magnetic condition  of  the  world  by  reference  to  the  indications 
of  a  scale  and  clock,  however  inappropriate  they  may  be  as 
practical  test-bodies. 

Weyl's  theory  opens  up  interesting  avenues  for  development. 
The  details  of  the  further  steps  involve  difficult  mathematics; 
but  a  general  outline  is  possible.  As  on  Einstein's  more  limited 
theory  there  is  at  any  point  an  important  property  of  the  world 
called  the  curvature ;  but  on  the  new  theory  it  is  not  an  absolute 
quantity  in  the  strictest  sense  of  the  word.  It  is  independent  of 
the  observer's  mesh-system,  but  it  depends  on  his  gauge.  It  is 
obvious  that  the  number  expressing  the  radius  of  curvature  of 
the  world  at  a  point  must  depend  on  the  unit  of  length;  so  we 
cannot  say  that  the  curvatures  at  two  points  are  absolutely 
equal,  because  they  depend  on  the  gauges  assigned  at  the  two 
points.  Conversely  the  radius  of  curvature  of  the  world  provides 
a  natural  and  absolute  gauge  at  every  point;  and  it  will  pre- 
sumably introduce  the  greatest  possible  symmetry  into  our  laws 
if  the  observer  chooses  this,  or  some  definite  fraction  of  it,  as 
his  gauge.  He,  so  to  speak,  forces  the  world  to  be  spherical  by 
adopting  at  every  point  a  unit  of  length  which  will  make  it  so. 


xi]  ELECTRICITY  AND  GRAVITATION  177 

Actual  rods  as  they  are  moved  about  change  their  lengths  com- 
pared with  this  absolute  unit  according  to  the  route  taken,  and 
the  differences  correspond  to  the  electromagnetic  field.  Einstein's 
curved  space  appears  in  a  perfectly  natural  manner  in  this 
theory;  no  part  of  space- time  is  flat,  even  in  the  absence  of 
ordinary  matter,  for  that  would  mean  infinite  radius  of  curva- 
ture, and  there  would  be  no  natural  gauge  to  determine,  for 
example,  the  dimensions  of  an  electron — the  electron  could  not 
know  how  large  it  ought  to  be,  unless  it  had  something  to 
measure  itself  against. 

The  connection  between  the  form  of  the  law  of  gravitation 
and  the  total  amount  of  matter  in  the  world  now  appears  less 
mysterious.  The  curvature  of  space  indirectly  provides  the 
gauge  which  we  use  for  measuring  the  amount  of  matter  in  the 
world. 

Since  the  curvature  is  not  independent  of  the  gauge,  Weyl 
does  not  identify  it  with  the  most  fundamental  quantity  in 
nature.  There  is,  however,  a  slightly  more  complicated  invariant 
which  is  a  pure  number,  and  this  is  taken  to  be  Action*.  We 
can  thus  mark  out  a  definite  volume  of  space  and  time,  and 
say  that  the  action  within  it  is  5,  without  troubling  to  define 
coordinates  or  the  unit  of  measure !  It  might  be  expected  that 
the  action  represented  by  the  number  1  would  have  specially 
interesting  properties;  it  might,  for  instance,  be  an  atom  of 
action  and  indivisible.  Experiment  has  isolated  what  are  be- 
lieved to  be  units  of  action,  which  at  least  in  many  phenomena 
behave  as  indivisible  atoms  called  quanta;  but  the  theory,  as 
at  present  developed,  does  not  permit  us  to  represent  the 
quantum  of  action  by  the  number  1.  The  quantum  is  a  very 
minute  fraction  of  the  absolute  unit. 

When  we  come  across  a  pure  number  having  some  absolute 
significance  in  the  world  it  is  natural  to  speculate  on  its  possible 
interpretation.  It  might  represent  a  number  of  discrete  entities  ; 
but  in  that  case  it  must  necessarily  be  an  integer,  and  it  seems 
clear  that  action  can  have  fractional  values.  An  angle  is  com- 
monly represented  as  a  pure  number,  but  it  has  not  really  this 
character;  an  angle  can  only  be  measured  in  terms  of  a  unit  of 
angle,  just  as  a  length  is  measured  in  terms  of  a  unit  of  length. 

*  Appendix,  Note  16. 
E.  s.  12 


178  ELECTRICITY  AND  GRAVITATION  [CH. 

I  can  only  think  of  one  interpretation  of  a  fractional  number 
which  can  have  an  absolute  significance,  though  doubtless  there 
are  others.  The  number  may  represent  the  probability  of  some- 
thing, or  some  function  of  a  probability.  The  precise  function 
is  easily  found.  We  combine  probabilities  by  multiplying,  but 
we  combine  the  actions  in  two  regions  by  adding;  hence  the 
logarithm  of  a  probability  is  indicated.  Further,  since  the 
logarithm  of  a  probability  is  necessarily  negative,  we  may 
identify  action  provisionally  with  minus  the  logarithm  of 
the  statistical  probability  of  the  state  of  the  world  which 
exists. 

The  suggestion  is  particularly  attractive  because  the  Principle 
of  Least  Action  now  becomes  the  Principle  of  Greatest  Proba- 
bility. The  law  of  nature  is  that  the  actual  state  of  the  world  is 
that  which  is  statistically  most  probable. 

Weyl's  theory  also  shows  that  the  mass  of  a  portion  of  matter 
is  necessarily  positive ;  on  the  original  theory  no  adequate  reason 
is  given  why  negative  matter  should  not  exist.  It  is  further 
claimed  that  the  theory  shows  to  some  extent  why  the  world 
is  four-dimensional.  To  the  mathematician  it  seems  so  easy  to 
generalise  geometry  to  n  dimensions,  that  we  naturally  expect 
a  world  of  four  dimensions  to  have  an  analogue  in  five  dimensions. 
Apparently  this  is  not  the  case,  and  there  are  some  essential 
properties,  without  which  it  could  scarcely  be  a  world,  which 
exist  only  for  four  dimensions.  Perhaps  this  may  be  compared 
with  the  well-known  difficulty  of  generalising  the  idea  of  a  knot; 
a  knot  can  exist  in  space  of  any  odd  number  of  dimensions,  but 
not  in  space  of  an  even  number. 

Finally  the  theory  suggests  a  mode  of  attacking  the  problem 
of  how  the  electric  charge  of  an  electron  is  held  together;  at 
least  it  gives  an  explanation  of  why  the  gravitational  force  is  so 
extremely  weak  compared  with  the  electric  force.  It  will  be 
remembered  that  associated  with  the  mass  of  the  sun  is  a  certain 
length,  called  the  gravitational  mass,  which  is  equal  to  1-5  kilo- 
metres. In  the  same  way  the  gravitational  mass  or  radius  of  an 
electron  is  7-10~56  cms.  Its  electrical  properties  are  similarly 
associated  with  a  length  2-1 0"33 cms.,  which  is  called  the  electrical 
radius.  The  latter  is  generally  supposed  to  correspond  to  the 
electron's  actual  dimensions.  The  theory  suggests  that  the  ratio 


xi]  ELECTRICITY  AND  GRAVITATION  179 

of  the  gravitational  to  the  electrical  radius,  3-1042,  ought  to  be 
of  the  same  order  as  the  ratio  of  the  latter  to  the  radius  of 
curvature  of  the  world.  This  would  require  the  radius  of  space 
to  be  of  the  order  6-1029  cms.,  or  2-1011  parsecs.,  which  though 
somewhat  larger  than  the  provisional  estimates  made  by  de 
Sitter,  is  within  the  realm  of  possibility. 


12—2 


CHAPTER  XII 
ON  THE  NATURE  OF   THINGS 

Hippolyta.  This  is  the  silliest  stuff  that  ever  I  heard. 
Theseus.       The  best  in  this  kind  are  but  shadows;  and  the  worst  are 
no  worse,  if  imagination  amend  them. 

A  Midsummer -Night's  Dream. 

THE  constructive  results  of  the  theory  of  relativity  are  based 
on  two  principles  which  have  been  enunciated — the  restricted 
principle  of  relativity,  and  the  principle  of  equivalence.  These 
may  be  summed  up  in  the  statement  that  uniform  motion  and 
fields  of  force  are  purely  relative.  In  their  more  formal  enuncia- 
tions they  are  experimental  generalisations,  which  can  be 
admitted  or  denied;  if  admitted,  all  the  observational  results 
obtained  by  us  can  be  deduced  mathematically  without  any 
reference  to  the  views  of  space,  time,  or  force,  described  in  this 
book.  In  many  respects  this  is  the  most  attractive  aspect  of 
Einstein's  work;  it  deduces  a  great  number  of  remarkable 
phenomena  solely  from  two  general  principles,  aided  by  a 
mathematical  calculus  of  great  power;  and  it  leaves  aside  as 
irrelevant  all  questions  of  mechanism .  But  this  mode  of  develop- 
ment of  the  theory  cannot  be  described  in  a  non-technical  book. 

To  avoid  mathematical  analysis  we  have  had  to  resort  to 
geometrical  illustrations,  which  run  parallel  with  the  mathe- 
matical development  and  enable  its  processes  to  be  understood 
to  some  extent.  The  question  arises,  are  these  merely  illustrations 
of  the  mathematical  argument,  or  illustrations  of  the  actual 
processes  of  nature.  No  doubt  the  safest  course  is  to  avoid  the 
thorny  questions  raised  by  the  latter  suggestion,  and  to  say 
that  it  is  quite  sufficient  that  the  illustrations  should  correctly 
replace  the  mathematical  argument.  But  I  think  that  this 
would  give  a  misleading  view  of  what  the  theory  of  relativity 
has  accomplished  in  science. 

The  physicist,  so  long  as  he  thinks  as  a  physicist,  has  a  definite 
belief  in  a  real  world  outside  him.  For  instance,  he  believes  that 
atoms  and  molecules  really  exist;  they  are  not  mere  inventions 


CH.XII]         ON  THE  NATURE  OF  THINGS  181 

that  enable  him  to  grasp  certain  laws  of  chemical  combination. 
That  suggestion  might  have  sufficed  in  the  early  days  of  the 
atomic  theory ;  but  now  the  existence  of  atoms  as  entities  in  the 
real  world  of  physics  is  fully  demonstrated.  This  confident 
assertion  is  not  inconsistent  with  philosophic  doubts  as  to  the 
meaning  of  ultimate  reality. 

When  therefore  we  are  asked  whether  the  four-dimensional 
world  may  not  be  regarded  merely  as  an  illustration  of  mathe- 
matical processes,  we  must  bear  in  mind  that  our  questioner  has 
probably  an  ulterior  motive.  He  has  already  a  belief  in  a  real 
world  of  three  Euclidean  dimensions,  and  he  hopes  to  be  allowed 
to  continue  in  this  belief  undisturbed.  In  that  case  our  answer 
must  be  definite;  the  real  three-dimensional  world  is  obsolete, 
and  must  be  replaced  by  the  four-dimensional  space-time  with 
non-Euclidean  properties.  In  this  book  we  have  sometimes 
employed  illustrations  which  certainly  do  not  correspond  to  any 
physical  reality — imaginary  time,  and  an  unperceived  fifth 
dimension.  But  the  four-dimensional  world  is  no  mere  illustra- 
tion; it  is  the  real  world  of  physics,  arrived  at  in  the  recognised 
way  by  which  physics  has  always  (rightly  or  wrongly)  sought  for 
reality. 

I  hold  a  certain  object  before  me,  and  see  an  outline  of  the 
figure  of  Britannia;  another  observer  on  the  other  side  sees  a 
picture  of  a  monarch ;  a  third  observer  sees  only  a  thin  rectangle. 
Am  I  to  say  that  the  figure  of  Britannia  is  the  real  object;  and 
that  the  crude  impressions  of  the  other  observers  must  be 
corrected  to  make  allowance  for  their  positions?  All  the  appear- 
ances can  be  accounted  for  if  we  are  all  looking  at  a  three- 
dimensional  object — a  penny — and  no  reasonable  person  can 
doubt  that  the  penny  is  the  corresponding  physical  reality. 
Similarly,  an  observer  on  the  earth  sees  and  measures  an  oblong 
block;  an  observer  on  another  star  contemplating  the  same 
object  finds  it  to  be  a  cube.  Shall  we  say  that  the  oblong  block 
is  the  real  thing,  and  that  the  other  observer  must  correct  his 
measures  to  make  allowance  for  his  motion?  All  the  appearances 
are  accounted  for  if  the  real  object  is  four-dimensional,  and  the 
observers  are  merely  measuring  different  three-dimensional 
appearances  or  sections;  and  it  seems  impossible  to  doubt  that 
this  is  the  true  explanation.  He  who  doubts  the  reality  of  the 


182  ON  THE  NATURE  OF  THINGS  [CH. 

four-dimensional  world  (for  logical,  as  distinct  from  experi- 
mental, reasons)  can  only  be  compared  to  a  man  who  doubts  the 
reality  of  the  penny,  and  prefers  to  regard  one  of  its  innumerable 
appearances  as  the  real  object. 

Physical  reality  is  the  synthesis  of  all  possible  physical  aspects 
of  nature.  An  illustration  may  be  taken  from  the  phenomena  of 
radiant-energy,  or  light.  In  a  very  large  number  of  phenomena 
the  light  coming  from  an  atom  appears  to  be  a  series  of  spreading 
waves,  extending  so  as  to  be  capable  of  filling  the  largest 
telescope  yet  made.  In  many  other  phenomena  the  light  coming 
from  an  atom  appears  to  remain  a  minute  bundle  of  energy,  all 
of  which  can  enter  and  blow  up  a  single  atom.  There  may  be 
some  illusion  in  these  experimental  deductions;  but  if  not,  it 
must  be  admitted  that  the  physical  reality  corresponding  to 
light  must  be  some  synthesis  comprehending  both  these  appear- 
ances. How  to  make  this  synthesis  has  hitherto  baffled  con- 
ception. But  the  lesson  is  that  a  vast  number  of  appearances 
may  be  combined  into  one  consistent  whole — perhaps  all 
appearances  that  are  directly  perceived  by  terrestrial  observers 
— and  yet  the  result  may  still  be  only  an  appearance.  Reality 
is  only  obtained  when  all  conceivable  points  of  view  have  been 
combined. 

That  is  why  it  has  been  necessary  to  give  up  the  reality  of 
the  everyday  world  of  three  dimensions.  Until  recently  it  com- 
prised all  the  possible  appearances  that  had  been  considered. 
But  now  it  has  been  discovered  that  there  are  new  points  of 
view  with  new  appearances ;  and  the  reality  must  contain  them 
all.  It  is  by  bringing  in  all  these  new  points  of  view  that  we 
have  been  able  to  learn  the  nature  of  the  real  world  of 
physics. 

Let  us  briefly  recapitulate  the  steps  of  our  synthesis.  We 
found  one  step  already  accomplished.  The  immediate  perception 
of  the  world  with  one  eye  is  a  two-dimensional  appearance.  But 
we  have  two  eyes,  and  these  combine  the  appearances  of  the 
world  as  seen  from  two  positions ;  in  some  mysterious  way  the 
brain  makes  the  synthesis  by  suggesting  solid  relief,  and  we 
obtain  the  familiar  appearance  of  a  three-dimensional  world. 
This  suffices  for  all  possible  positions  of  the  observer  within  the 
parts  of  space  hitherto  explored.  The  next  step  was  to  combine 


xn]  ON  THE  NATURE  OF  THINGS  183 

the  appearances  for  all  possible  states  of  uniform  motion  of  the 
observer.  The  result  was  to  add  another  dimension  to  the  world, 
making  it  four-dimensional.  Next  the  synthesis  was  extended 
to  include  all  possible  variable  motions  of  the  observer.  The 
process  of  adding  dimensions  stopped,  but  the  world  became 
non-Euclidean;  a  new  geometry  called  Riemannian  geometry 
was  adopted.  Finally  the  points  of  view  of  observers  varying 
in  size  in  any  way  were  added;  and  the  result  was  to  replace 
the  Riemannian  geometry  by  a  still  more  general  geometry 
described  in  the  last  chapter. 

The  search  for  physical  reality  is  not  necessarily  utilitarian, 
but  it  has  been  by  no  means  profitless.  As  the  geometry  became 
more  complex,  the  physics  became  simpler;  until  finally  it 
almost  appears  that  the  physics  has  been  absorbed  into  the 
geometry.  We  did  not  consciously  set  out  to  construct  a 
geometrical  theory  of  the  world;  we  were  seeking  physical 
reality  by  approved  methods,  and  this  is  what  has  happened. 

Is  the  point  now  reached  the  ultimate  goal?  Have  the  points 
of  view  of  all  conceivable  observers  now  been  absorbed?  We  do 
not  assert  that  they  have.  But  it  seems  as  though  a  definite 
task  has  been  rounded  off,  and  a  natural  halting-place  reached. 
So  far  as  we  know,  the  different  possible  impersonal  points  of 
view  have  been  exhausted — those  for  which  the  observer  can  be 
regarded  as  a  mechanical  automaton,  and  can  be  replaced  by 
scientific  measuring-appliances.  A  variety  of  more  personal 
points  of  view  may  indeed  be  needed  for  an  ultimate  reality; 
but  they  can  scarcely  be  incorporated  in  a  real  world  of  physics. 
There  is  thus  justification  for  stopping  at  this  point  but  not  for 
stopping  earlier. 

It  may  be  asked  whether  it  is  necessary  to  take  into  account 
all  conceivable  observers,  many  of  whom,  we  suspect,  have  no 
existence.  Is  not  the  real  world  that  which  comprehends  the 
appearances  to  all  real  observers?  Whether  or  not  it  is  a  tenable 
hypothesis  that  that  which  no  one  observes  does  not  exist, 
science  uncompromisingly  rejects  it.  If  we  deny  the  rights  of 
extra-terrestrial  observers,  we  must  take  the  side  of  the  Inquisi- 
tion against  Galileo.  And  if  extra-terrestrial  observers  are 
admitted,  the  other  observers,  whose  results  are  here  combined, 
cannot  be  excluded. 


184  ON  THE  NATURE  OF  THINGS  [CH. 

Our  inquiry  into  the  nature  of  things  is  subject  to  certain 
limitations  which  it  is  important  to  realise.  The  best  comparison 
I  can  offer  is  with  a  future  antiquarian  investigation,  which  may 
be  dated  about  the  year  5000  A.D.  An  interesting  find  has  been 
made  relating  to  a  vanished  civilisation  which  flourished  about 
the  twentieth  century,  namely  a  volume  containing  a  large 
number  of  games  of  chess,  written  out  in  the  obscure  symbolism 
usually  adopted  for  that  purpose.  The  antiquarians,  to  whom 
the  game  was  hitherto  unknown,  manage  to  discover  certain 
uniformities;  and  by  long  research  they  at  last  succeed  in 
establishing  beyond  doubt  the  nature  of  the  moves  and  rules  of 
the  game.  But  it  is  obvious  that  no  amount  of  study  of  the 
volume  will  reveal  the  true  nature  either  of  the  participants  in 
the  game — the  chessmen — or  the  field  of  the  game — the  chess- 
board. With  regard  to  the  former,  all  that  is  possible  is  to  give 
arbitrary  names  distinguishing  the  chessmen  according  to  their 
properties;  but  with  regard  to  the  chess-board  something  more 
can  be  stated.  The  material  of  the  board  is  unknown,  so  too 
are  the  shapes  of  the  meshes — whether  squares  or  diamonds; 
but  it  is  ascertainable  that  the  different  points  of  the  field  are 
connected  with  one  another  by  relations  of  two-dimensional 
order,  and  a  large  number  of  hypothetical  types  of  chess-board 
satisfying  these  relations  of  order  can  be  constructed.  In 
spite  of  these  gaps  in  their  knowledge,  our  antiquarians  may 
fairly  claim  that  they  thoroughly  understand  the  game  of 
chess. 

The  application  of  this  analogy  is  as  follows.  The  recorded 
games  are  our  physical  experiments.  The  rules  of  the  game, 
ascertained  by  study  of  them,  are  the  laws  of  physics.  The 
hypothetical  chess-board  of  64  squares  is  the  space  and  time  of 
some  particular  observer  or  player;  whilst  the  more  general 
relations  of  two-fold  order,  are  the  absolute  relations  of  order 
in  space-time  which  we  have  been  studying.  The  chessmen  are 
the  entities  of  physics — electrons,  particles,  or  point-events;  and 
the  range  of  movement  may  perhaps  be  compared  to  the  fields 
of  relation  radiating  from  them — electric  and  gravitational 
fields,  or  intervals.  By  no  amount  of  study  of  the  experiments 
can  the  absolute  nature  or  appearance  of  these  participants  be 
deduced;  nor  is  this  knowledge  relevant,  for  without  it  we  may 


xii]  ON  THE  NATURE  OF  THINGS  185 

yet  learn  "the  game"  in  all  its  intricacy.  Our  knowledge  of  the 
nature  of  things  must  be  like  the  antiquarians'  knowledge  of 
the  nature  of  chessmen,  viz.  their  nature  as  pawns  and  pieces 
in  the  game,  not  as  carved  shapes  of  wood.  In  the  latter  aspect 
they  may  have  relations  and  significance  transcending  anything 
dreamt  of  in  physics. 

It  is  believed  that  the  familiar  things  of  experience  are  very 
complex;  and  the  scientific  method  is  to  analyse  them  into 
simpler  elements.  Theories  and  laws  of  behaviour  of  these 
simpler  constituents  are  studied;  and  from  these  it  becomes 
possible  to  predict  and  explain  phenomena.  It  seems  a  natural 
procedure  to  explain  the  complex  in  terms  of  the  simple,  but 
it  carries  with  it  the  necessity  of  explaining  the  familiar  in  terms 
of  the  unfamiliar. 

There  are  thus  two  reasons  why  the  ultimate  constituents  of 
the  real  world  must  be  of  an  unfamiliar  nature.  Firstly,  all 
familiar  objects  are  of  a  much  too  complex  character.  Secondly, 
familiar  objects  belong  not  to  the  real  world  of  physics,  but  to 
a  much  earlier  stage  in  the  synthesis  of  appearances.  The 
ultimate  elements  in  a  theory  of  the  world  must  be  of  a  nature 
impossible  to  define  in  terms  recognisable  to  the  mind. 

The  fact  that  he  has  to  deal  with  entities  of  unknown  nature 
presents  no  difficulty  to  the  mathematician.  As  the  mathe- 
matician in  the  Prologue  explained,  he  is  never  so  happy  as 
when  he  does  not  know  what  he  is  talking  about.  But  we  our- 
selves cannot  take  any  interest  in  the  chain  of  reasoning  he  is 
producing,  unless  we  can  give  it  some  meaning — a  meaning, 
which  we  find  by  experiment,  it  will  bear.  We  have  to  be  in 
a  position  to  make  a  sort  of  running  comment  on  his  work. 
At  first  his  symbols  bring  no  picture  of  anything  before  our 
eyes,  and  we  watch  in  silence.  Presently  we  can  say  "Now  he 
is  talking  about  a  particle  of  matter  "..."Now  he  is  talking 
about  another  particle  "..."Now  he  is  saying  where  they  will 
be  at  a  certain  time  of  day  "..."Now  he  says  that  they  will  be 
in  the  same  spot  at  a  certain  time."  We  watch  to  see. — "Yes. 
The  two  particles  have  collided.  For  once  he  is  speaking  about 
something  familiar,  and  speaking  the  truth,  although,  of  course, 
he  does  not  know  it."  Evidently  his  chain  of  symbols  can  be 
interpreted  as  describing  what  occurs  in  the  world;  we  need  not, 


186  ON  THE  NATURE  OF  THINGS  [CH. 

and  do  not,  form  any  idea  of  the  meaning  of  each  individual 
symbol ;  it  is  only  certain  elaborate  combinations  of  them  that 
we  recognise. 

Thus,  although  the  elementary  concepts  of  the  theory  are  of 
undefined  nature,  at  some  later  stage  we  must  link  the  derivative 
concepts  to  the  familiar  objects  of  experience. 

We  shall  now  collect  the  results  arrived  at  in  the  previous 
chapters  by  successive  steps,  and  set  the  theory  out  in  more 
logical  order.  The  extension  in  Chapter  xi  will  not  be  considered 
here,  partly  because  it  would  increase  the  difficulty  of  grasping 
the  main  ideas,  partly  because  it  is  less  certainly  established. 

In  the  relativity  theory  of  nature  the  most  elementary  concept 
is  the  point-event.  In  ordinary  language  a  point-event  is  an 
instant  of  time  at  a  point  of  space ;  but  this  is  only  one  aspect 
of  the  point-event,  and  it  must  not  be  taken  as  a  definition. 
Time  and  space — the  familiar  terms — are  derived  concepts  to 
be  introduced  much  later  in  our  theory.  The  first  simple  con- 
cepts are  necessarily  undefinable,  and  their  nature  is  beyond 
human  understanding.  The  aggregate  of  all  the  point-events  is 
called  the  world.  It  is  postulated  that  the  world  is  four-dimen- 
sional, which  means  that  a  particular  point-event  has  to  be 
specified  by  the  values  of  four  variables  or  coordinates,  though 
there  is  entire  freedom  as  to  the  way  in  which  these  four  identi- 
fying numbers  are  to  be  assigned. 

The  meaning  of  the  statement  that  the  world  is  four-dimen- 
sional is  not  so  clear  as  it  appears  at  first.  An  aggregate  of  a 
large  number  of  things  has  in  itself  no  particular  number  of 
dimensions.  Consider,  for  example,  the  words  on  this  page.  To 
a  casual  glance  they  form  a  two-dimensional  distribution;  but 
they  were  written  in  the  hope  that  the  reader  would  regard 
them  as  a  one-dimensional  distribution.  In  order  to  define  the 
number  of  dimensions  we  have  to  postulate  some  ordering 
relation;  and  the  result  depends  entirely  on  what  this  ordering 
relation  is — whether  the  words  are  ordered  according  to  sense 
or  to  position  on  the  page.  Thus  the  statement  that  the  world 
is  four-dimensional  contains  an  implicit  reference  to  some  ordering 
relation.  This  relation  appears  to  be  the  interval,  though  I  am 
not  sure  whether  that  alone  suffices  without  some  relation 
corresponding  to  proximity.  It  must  be  remembered  that  if  the 


xn]  ON  THE  NATURE  OF  THINGS  187 

interval  s  between  two  events  is  small,  the  events  are  not 
necessarily  near  together  in  the  ordinary  sense. 

Between  any  two  neighbouring  point-events  there  exists  a 
certain  relation  known  as  the  interval  between  them.  The 
relation  is  a  quantitative  one  which  can  be  measured  on  a 
definite  scale  of  numerical  values*.  But  the  term  "interval" 
is  not  to  be  taken  as  a  guide  to  the  real  nature  of  the  relation, 
which  is  altogether  beyond  our  conception.  Its  geometrical 
properties,  which  we  have  dwelt  on  so  often  in  the  previous 
chapters,  can  only  represent  one  aspect  of  the  relation.  It  may 
have  other  aspects  associated  with  features  of  the  world  outside 
the  scope  of  physics.  But  in  physics  we  are  concerned  not  with 
the  nature  of  the  relation  but  with  the  number  assigned  to 
express  its  intensity;  and  this  suggests  a  graphical  representa- 
tion, leading  to  a  geometrical  theory  of  the  world  of  physics. 

What  we  have  here  called  the  world  might  perhaps  have  been 
legitimately  called  the  aether;  at  least  it  is  the  universal  sub- 
stratum of  things  which  the  relativity  theory  gives  us  in  place 
of  the  aether. 

We  have  seen  that  the  number  expressing  the  intensity  of 
the  interval-relation  can  be  measured  practically  with  scales  and 
clocks.  Now,  I  think  it  is  improbable  that  our  coarse  measures 
can  really  get  hold  of  the  individual  intervals  of  point-events; 
our  measures  are  not  sufficiently  microscopic  for  that.  The 
interval  which  has  appeared  in  our  analysis  must  be  a  macro- 
scopic value ;  and  the  potentials  and  kinds  of  space  deduced  from 
it  are  averaged  properties  of  regions,  perhaps  small  in  comparison 
even  with  the  electron,  but  containing  vast  numbers  of  the 
primitive  intervals.  We  shall  therefore  pass  at  once  to  the 
consideration  of  the  macroscopic  interval;  but  we  shall  not 
forestall  later  results  by  assuming  that  it  is  measurable  with 
a  scale  and  clock.  That  property  must  be  introduced  in  its 
logical  order. 

Consider  a  small  portion  of  the  world.  It  consists  of  a  large 
(possibly  infinite)  number  of  point-events  between  every  two  of 
which  an  interval  exists.  If  we  are  given  the  intervals  between 

*  There  is  also  a  qualitative  distinction  into  two  kinds,  ultimately  identified 
as  time-like  and  space-like,  which  for  mathematical  treatment  are  distinguished 
by  real  and  imaginary  numbers. 


188  ON  THE  NATURE  OF  THINGS  [CH. 

a  point  A  and  a  sufficient  number  of  other  points,  and  also 
between  B  and  the  same  points,  can  we  calculate  what  will  be 
the  interval  between  A  and  .B?  In  ordinary  geometry  this 
would  be  possible;  but,  since  in  the  present  case  we  know  nothing 
of  the  relation  signified  by  the  word  interval,  it  is  impossible  to 
predict  any  law  a  priori.  But  we  have  found  in  our  previous 
work  that  there  is  such  a  rule,  expressed  by  the  formula 


This  means  that,  having  assigned  our  identification  numbers 
(xlt  x2>  xa>  ^4)  to  the  point-events,  we  have  only  to  measure 
ten  different  intervals  to  enable  us  to  determine  the  ten  coeffi- 
cients, gllt  etc.,  which  in  a  small  region  may  be  considered  to  be 
constants  ;  then  all  other  intervals  in  this  region  can  be  predicted 
from  the  formula.  For  any  other  region  we  must  make  fresh 
measures,  and  determine  the  coefficients  for  a  new  formula. 

I  think  it  is  unlikely  that  the  individual  interval-relations  of 
point-events  follow  any  such  definite  rule.  A  microscopic 
examination  would  probably  show  them  as  quite  arbitrary,  the 
relations  of  so-called  intermediate  points  being  not  necessarily 
intermediate.  Perhaps  even  the  primitive  interval  is  not 
quantitative,  but  simply  1  for  certain  pairs  of  point-events  and 
0  for  others.  The  formula  given  is  just  an  average  summary 
which  suffices  for  our  coarse  methods  of  investigation,  and  holds 
true  only  statistically.  Just  as  statistical  averages  of  one  com- 
munity may  differ  from  those  of  another,  so  may  this  statistical 
formula  for  one  region  of  the  world  differ  from  that  of  another. 
This  is  the  starting  point  of  the  infinite  variety  of  nature. 

Perhaps  an  example  may  make  this  clearer.  Compare  the 
point-events  to  persons,  and  the  intervals  to  the  degree  of 
acquaintance  between  them.  There  is  no  means  of  forecasting 
the  degree  of  acquaintance  between  A  and  B  from  a  knowledge 
of  the  familiarity  of  both  with  C,  Z>,  E,  etc.  But  a  statistician 
may  compute  in  any  community  a  kind  of  average  rule.  In 
most  cases  if  A  and  B  both  know  C,  it  slightly  increases  the 
probability  of  their  knowing  one  another.  A  community  in 
which  this  correlation  was  very  high  would  be  described  as 
cliquish.  There  may  be  differences  among  communities  in  this 
respect,  corresponding  to  their  degree  of  cliquishness  ;  and  so 


xn]  ON  THE  NATURE  OF  THINGS  189 

the  statistical  laws  may  be  the  means  of  expressing  intrinsic 
differences  in  communities. 

Now  comes  the  difficulty  which  is  by  this  time  familiar  to  us. 
The  ten  g's  are  concerned,  not  only  with  intrinsic  properties  of 
the  world,  but  with  our  arbitrary  system  of  identification- 
numbers  for  the  point-events;  or,  as  we  have  previously  ex- 
pressed it,  they  describe  not  only  the  kind  of  space-time,  but 
the  nature  of  the  arbitrary  mesh-system  that  is  used.  Mathe- 
matics shows  the  way  of  steering  through  this  difficulty  by  fixing 
attention  on  expressions  called  tensors,  of  which  B£vtr  and  G^v 
are  examples. 

A  tensor  does  not  express  explicitly  the  measure  of  an  intrinsic 
quality  of  the  world,  for  some  kind  of  mesh-system  is  essential 
to  the  idea  of  measurement  of  a  property,  except  in  certain  very 
special  cases  where  the  property  is  expressed  by  a  single  number 
termed  an  invariant,  e.g.  the  interval,  or  the  total  curvature. 
But  to  state  that  a  tensor  vanishes,  or  that  it  is  equal  to  another 
tensor  in  the  same  region,  is  a  statement  of  intrinsic  property, 
quite  independent  of  the  mesh-system  chosen.  Thus  by  keeping 
entirely  to  tensors,  we  contrive  that  there  shall  be  behind  our 
formulae  an  undercurrent  of  information  having  reference  to  the 
intrinsic  state  of  the  world. 

In  this  way  we  have  found  two  absolute  formulae,  which 
appear  to  be  fully  confirmed  by  observation,  namely 

in  empty  space,  G^  =  0, 

in  space  containing  matter,      G^  =  K^v , 

where  K^v  contains  only  physical  quantities  which  are  perfectly 
familiar  to  us,  viz.  the  density  and  state  of  motion  of  the  matter 
in  the  region. 

I  think  the  usual  view  of  these  equations  would  be  that  the 
first  expresses  some  law  existing  in  the  world,  so  that  the  point- 
events  by  natural  necessity  tend  to  arrange  their  relations  in 
conformity  with  this  equation.  But  when  matter  intrudes  it 
causes  a  disturbance  or  strain  of  the  natural  linkages;  and  a 
rearrangement  takes  place  to  the  extent  indicated  by  the  second 
equation. 

But  let  us  examine  more  closely  what  the  equation  G^v  =  0 
tells  us.  We  have  been  giving  the  mathematician  a  free  hand 


190  ON  THE  NATURE  OF  THINGS  [CH. 

with  his  indefinable  intervals  and  point-events.  He  has  arrived 
at  the  quantity  G^;  but  as  yet  this  means  to  us — absolutely 
nothing.  The  pure  mathematician  left  to  himself  never  "  deviates 
into  sense."  His  work  can  never  relate  to  the  familiar  things 
around  us,  unless  we  boldly  lay  hold  of  some  of  his  symbols  and 
give  them  an  intelligible  meaning — tentatively  at  first,  and  then 
definitely  as  we  find  that  they  satisfy  all  experimental  know- 
ledge. We  have  decided  that  in  empty  space  G^  vanishes.  Here 
is  our  opportunity.  In  default  of  any  other  suggestion  as  to 
what  the  vanishing  of  G^v  might  mean,  let  us  say  that  the 
vanishing  of  G^v  means  emptiness;  so  that  G^,  if  it  does  not 
vanish,  is  a  condition  of  the  world  which  distinguishes  space 
said  to  be  occupied  from  space  said  to  be  empty.  Hitherto  G^ 
was  merely  a  formal  outline  to  be  filled  with  some  undefined 
contents ;  we  are  as  far  as  ever  from  being  able  to  explain  what 
those  contents  are;  but  we  have  now  given  a  recognisable 
meaning  to  the  completed  picture,  so  that  we  shall  know  it 
when  we  come  across  it  in  the  familiar  world  of  experience. 

The  two  equations  are  accordingly  merely  definitions — 
definitions  of  the  way  in  which  certain  states  of  the  world 
(described  in  terms  of  the  indefinables)  impress  themselves  on 
our  perceptions.  When  we  perceive  that  a  certain  region  of  the 
world  is  empty,  that  is  merely  the  mode  in  which  our  senses 
recognise  that  it  is  curved  no  higher  than  the  first  degree. 
When  we  perceive  that  a  region  contains  matter  we  are  recognising 
the  intrinsic  curvature  of  the  world;  and  when  we  believe  we 
are  measuring  the  mass  and  momentum  of  the  matter  (relative 
to  some  axes  of  reference)  we  are  measuring  certain  components 
of  world-curvature  (referred  to  those  axes).  The  statistical 
averages  of  something  unknown,  which  have  been  used  to 
describe  the  state  of  the  world,  vary  from  point  to  point;  and 
it  is  out  of  these  that  the  mind  has  constructed  the  familiar 
notions  of  matter  and  emptiness. 

The  law  of  gravitation  is  not  a  law  in  the  sense  that  it  restricts 
the  possible  behaviour  of  the  substratum  of  the  world;  it  is 
merely  the  definition  of  a  vacuum.  We  need  not  regard  matter 
as  a  foreign  entity  causing  a  disturbance  in  the  gravitational 
field;  the  disturbance  is  matter.  In  the  same  way  we  do  not 
regard  light  as  an  intruder  in  the  electromagnetic  field,  causing 


xn]  ON  THE  NATURE  OF  THINGS  191 

the  electromagnetic  force  to  oscillate  along  its  path;  the  oscilla- 
tions constitute  the  light.  Nor  is  heat  a  fluid  causing  agitation 
of  the  molecules  of  a  body ;  the  agitation  is  heat. 

This  view,  that  matter  is  a  symptom  and  not  a  cause,  seems 
so  natural  that  it  is  surprising  that  it  should  be  obscured  in  the 
usual  presentation  of  the  theory.  The  reason  is  that  the  con- 
nection of  mathematical  analysis  with  the  things  of  experience 
is  usually  made,  not  by  determining  what  matter  is,  but  by 
what  certain  combinations  of  matter  do.  Hence  the  interval  is 
at  once  identified  with  something  familiar  to  experience,  namely 
the  thing  that  a  scale  and  a  clock  measure.  However  advan- 
tageous that  may  be  for  the  sake  of  bringing  the  theory  into 
touch  with  experiment  at  the  outset,  we  can  scarcely  hope  to 
build  up  a  theory  of  the  nature  of  things  if  we  take  a  scale  and 
clock  as  the  simplest  unanalysable  concepts.  The  result  of  this 
logical  inversion  is  that  by  the  time  the  equation  G^v  =  K^v  is 
encountered,  both  sides  of  the  equation  are  well-defined 
quantities.  Their  necessary  identity  is  overlooked,  and  the 
equation  is  regarded  as  a  new  law  of  nature.  This  is  the  fault 
of  introducing  the  scale  and  clock  prematurely.  For  our  part 
we  prefer  first  to  define  what  matter  is  in  terms  of  the  elementary 
concepts  of  the  theory;  then  we  can  introduce  any  kind  of 
scientific  apparatus;  and  finally  determine  what  property  of  the 
world  that  apparatus  will  measure. 

Matter  defined  in  this  way  obeys  all  the  laws  of  mechanics, 
including  conservation  of  energy  and  momentum.  Proceeding 
with  a  similar  development  of  Weyl's  more  general  theory  of 
the  combined  gravitational  and  electrical  fields,  we  should  find 
that  it  has  the  familiar  electrical  and  optical  properties.  It  is 
purely  gratuitous  to  suppose  that  there  is  anything  else  present, 
controlling  but  not  to  be  identified  with  the  relations  of  the 
fourteen  potentials  (g's  and  fc's). 

There  is  only  one  further  requirement  that  can  be  demanded 
from  matter.  Our  brains  are  constituted  of  matter,  and  they 
feel  and  think — or  at  least  feeling  and  thinking  are  closely 
associated  with  motions  or  changes  of  the  matter  of  the  brain. 
It  would  be  difficult  to  say  that  any  hypothesis  as  to  the  nature 
of  matter  makes  this  process  less  or  more  easily  understood; 
and  a  brain  constituted  out  of  differential  coefficients  of  g's  can 


192  ON  THE  NATURE  OF  THINGS  [CH. 

scarcely  be  said  to  be  less  adapted  to  the  purposes  of  thought 
than  one  made,  say,  out  of  tiny  billiard  balls !  But  I  think  we 
may  even  go  a  little  beyond  this  negative  justification.  The 
primary  interval  relation  is  of  an  undefined  nature,  and  the 
g's  contain  this  undefinable  element.  The  expression  G^  is 
therefore  of  defined  form,  but  of  undefined  content.  By  its  form 
alone  it  is  fitted  to  account  for  all  the  physical  properties  of 
matter;  and  physical  investigation  can  never  penetrate  beneath 
the  form.  The  matter  of  the  brain  in  its  physical  aspects  is 
merely  the  form;  but  the  reality  of  the  brain  includes  the 
content.  We  cannot  expect  the  form  to  explain  the  activities  of 
the  content,  any  more  than  we  can  expect  the  number  4  to 
explain  the  activities  of  the  Big  Four  at  Versailles. 

Some  of  these  views  of  matter  were  anticipated  with  marvellous 
foresight  by  W.  K.  Clifford  forty  years  ago.  Whilst  other  English 
physicists  were  distracted  by  vortex-atoms  and  other  will-o'- 
the-wisps,  Clifford  was  convinced  that  matter  and  the  motion 
of  matter  were  aspects  of  space-curvature  and  nothing  more. 
And  he  was  no  less  convinced  that  these  geometrical  notions 
were  only  partial  aspects  of  the  relations  of  what  he  calls 
"elements  of  feeling." — "The  reality  corresponding  to  our  per- 
ception of  the  motion  of  matter  is  an  element  of  the  complex 
thing  we  call  feeling.  W7hat  we  might  perceive  as  a  plexus  of 
nerve-disturbances  is  really  in  itself  a  feeling;  and  the  succession 
of  feelings  which  constitutes  a  man's  consciousness  is  the  reality 
which  produces  in  our  minds  the  perception  of  the  motions  of 
his  brain.  These  elements  of  feeling  have  relations  of  nextness 
or  contiguity  in  space,  which  are  exemplified  by  the  sight- 
perceptions  of  contiguous  points ;  and  relations  of  succession  in 
time  which  are  exemplified  by  all  perceptions.  Out  of  these  two 
relations  the  future  theorist  has  to  build  up  the  world  as  best 
he  may.  Two  things  may  perhaps  help  him.  There  are  many 
lines  of  mathematical  thought  which  indicate  that  distance  or 
quantity  may  come  to  be  expressed  in  terms  of  position  in  the 
wide  sense  of  the  analysis  situs.  And  the  theory  of  space- 
curvature  hints  at  a  possibility  of  describing  matter  and  motion 
in  terms  of  extension  only."  (Fortnightly  Review,  1875.) 

The  equation  G^v  =  K^v  is  a  kind  of  dictionary  explaining 
what  the  different  components  of  world-curvature  mean  in 


xn]  ON  THE  NATURE  OF  THINGS  193 

terms  ordinarily  used  in  mechanics.  If  we  write  it  in  the  slightly 
modified,  but  equivalent,  form 


we  have  the  following  scheme  of  interpretation 


I*  >  4  =  Pll  +  PU>    Pu  +  P™,    PlS 

T23,     T24  Pn  +  pv2,    Pw  +  pvw,    -  pv, 

T33,     TM  pw  +  pw*,    -pw, 


Here  we  are  using  the  partitions  of  space  and  time  adopted  in 
ordinary  mechanics;  p  is  the  density  of  the  matter,  u,  v,  w  its 
component  velocities,  and  pllf  pl2,  ...  p33,  the  components  of 
the  internal  stresses  which  are  believed  to  be  analysable  into 
molecular  movements. 

Now  the  question  arises,  is  it  legitimate  to  make  identifications 
on  such  a  wholesale  scale?  Having  identified  T44  as  density, 
can  we  go  on  to  identify  another  quantity  T34  as  density 
multiplied  by  velocity?  It  is  as  though  we  identified  one  "  thing  " 
as  air,  and  a  quite  different  "thing"  as  wind.  Yes,  it  is  legiti- 
mate, because  we  have  not  hitherto  explained  what  is  to  be  the 
counterpart  of  velocity  in  our  scheme  of  the  world  ;  and  this  is 
the  way  we  choose  to  introduce  it.  All  identifications  are  at 
this  stage  provisional,  being  subject  to  subsequent  test  by 
observation. 

A  definition  of  the  velocity  of  matter  in  some  such  terms  as 
'''wind  divided  by  air,"  does  not  correspond  to  the  way  in 
which  motion  primarily  manifests  itself  in  our  experience. 
Motion  is  generally  recognised  by  the  disappearance  of  a  particle 
at  one  point  of  space  and  the  appearance  of  an  apparently 
identical  particle  at  a  neighbouring  point.  This  manifestation 
of  motion  can  be  deduced  mathematically  from  the  identifying 
definition  here  adopted.  Remembering  that  in  physical  theory 
it  is  necessary  to  proceed  from  the  simple  to  the  complex, 
which  is  often  opposed  to  the  instinctive  desire  to  proceed  from 
the  familiar  to  the  unfamiliar,  this  inversion  of  the  order  in 
which  the  manifestations  of  motion  appear  need  occasion  no 
surprise.  Permanent  identity  of  particles  of  matter  (without 
which  the  ordinary  notion  of  velocity  fails)  is  a  very  familiar 
idea,  but  it  appears  to  be  a  very  complex  feature  of  the  world. 
E.S.  13 


194  ON  THE  NATURE  OF  THINGS  [CH. 

A  simple  instance  may  be  given  where  the  familiar  kinematical 
conception  of  motion  is  insufficient.  Suppose  a  perfectly  homo- 
geneous continuous  ring  is  rotating  like  a  wheel,  what  meaning 
can  we  attach  to  its  motion?  The  kinematical  conception  of 
motion  implies  change — disappearance  at  one  point  and  reap- 
pearance at  another  point — but  no  change  is  detectable.  The 
state  at  any  one  moment  is  the  same  as  at  a  previous  moment, 
and  the  matter  occupying  one  position  now  is  indistinguishable 
from  the  matter  in  the  same  position  a  moment  ago.  At  the 
most  it  can  only  differ  in  a  mysterious  non-physical  quality — 
that  of  identity ;  but  if,  as  most  physicists  are  willing  to  believe, 
matter  is  some  state  in  the  aether,  what  can  we  mean  by  saying 
that  two  states  are  exactly  alike,  but  are  not  identical?  Is  the 
hotness  of  the  room  equal  to,  but  not  identical  with,  its  hotness 
yesterday?  Considered  kinematically,  the  rotation  of  the  ring 
appears  to  have  no  meaning;  yet  the  revolving  ring  differs 
mechanically  from  a  stationary  ring.  For  example,  it  has 
gyros tatic  properties.  The  fact  that  in  nature  a  ring  has  atomic 
and  not  continuous  structure  is  scarcely  relevant.  A  conception 
of  motion  which  affords  a  distinction  between  a  rotating  and 
non-rotating  continuous  ring  must  be  possible;  otherwise  this 
would  amount  to  an  a  priori  proof  that  matter  is  atomic. 
According  to  the  conception  now  proposed,  velocity  of  matter 
is  as  much  a  static  quality  as  density.  Generally  velocity  is 
accompanied  by  changes  in  the  physical  state  of  the  world, 
which  afford  the  usual  means  of  recognising  its  existence;  but 
the  foregoing  illustration  shows  that  these  symptoms  do  not 
always  occur. 

This  definition  of  velocity  enables  us  to  understand  why 
velocity  except  in  reference  to  matter  is  meaningless,  whereas 
acceleration  and  rotation  have  a  meaning.  The  philosophical 
argument,  that  velocity  through  space  is  meaningless,  ceases  to 
apply  as  soon  as  we  admit  any  kind  of  structure  or  aether  in 
empty  regions;  consequently  the  problem  is  by  no  means  so 
simple  as  is  often  supposed.  But  our  definition  of  velocity  is 
dynamical,  not  kinematical.  Velocity  is  the  ratio  of  certain 
components  of  T^vt  and  only  exists  when  T44  is  not  zero.  Thus 
matter  (or  electromagnetic  energy)  is  the  only  thing  that  can 
have  a  velocity  relative  to  the  frame  of  reference.  The  velocity 


xii]  ON  THE  NATURE  OF  THINGS  195 

of  the  world-structure  or  aether,  where  the  T^v  vanish,  is  always 
of  the  indeterminate  form  0^-0.  On  the  other  hand  acceleration 
and  rotation  are  defined  by  means  of  the  g^v  and  exist  wherever 
these  exist  * ;  so  that  the  acceleration  and  rotation  of  the  world- 
structure  or  aether  relative  to  the  frame  of  reference  are  deter- 
minate. Notice  that  acceleration  is  not  defined  as  change  of 
velocity;  it  is  an  independent  entity,  much  simpler  and  more 
universal  than  velocity.  It  is  from  a  comparison  of  these  two 
entities  that  we  ultimately  obtain  the  definition  of  time. 

This  finally  resolves  the  difficulty  encountered  in  Chapter  x 
— the  apparent  difference  in  the  Principle  of  Relativity  as 
applied  to  uniform  and  non-uniform  motion.  Fundamentally 
velocity  and  acceleration  are  both  static  qualities  of  a  region 
of  the  world  (referred  to  some  mesh-system).  Acceleration  is  a 
comparatively  simple  quality  present  wherever  there  is  geodesic 
structure,  that  is  to  say  everywhere.  Velocity  is  a  highly  com- 
plex quality  existing  only  where  the  structure  is  itself  more 
than  ordinarily  complicated,  viz.  in  matter.  Both  these  qualities 
commonly  give  physical  manifestations,  to  which  the  terms 
acceleration  and  velocity  are  more  particularly  applied;  but  it 
is  by  examining  their  more  fundamental  meaning  that  we  can 
understand  the  universality  of  the  one  and  the  localisation  of 
the  other. 

It  has  been  shown  that  there  are  four  identical  relations 
between  the  ten  qualities  of  a  piece  of  matter  here  identified, 
which  depend  solely  on  the  way  the  G^  were  by  definition 
constructed  out  of  simpler  elements.  These  four  relations  state 
that,  provided  the  mesh-system  is  drawn  in  one  of  a  certain  number 
of  ways,  mass  (or  energy)  and  momentum  will  be  conserved. 
The  conservation  of  mass  is  of  great  importance;  matter  will 
be  permanent,  and  for  every  particle  disappearing  at  any  point 
a  corresponding  mass  will  appear  at  a  neighbouring  point;  the 
change  consists  in  the  displacement  of  matter,  not  its  creation 
or  destruction.  This  gives  matter  the  right  to  be  regarded,  not 
as  a  mere  assemblage  of  symbols,  but  as  the  substance  of  a 

*  Even  in  Newtonian  mechanics  we  speak  of  the  "field  of  acceleration,"  and 
think  of  it  as  existing  even  when  there  is  no  test  body  to  display  the  accelera- 
tion. In  the  present  theory  this  field  of  acceleration  is  described  by  the  g^v. 
There  is  no  such  thing  as  a  "field  of  velocity"  in  empty  space;  but  there  is  in 
a  material  ocean. 

13—2 


196  ON  THE  NATURE  OF  THINGS  [CH. 

permanent  world.  But  the  permanent  world  so  found  demands 
the  partitioning  of  space-time  in  one  of  a  certain  number  of 
ways,  viz.  those  discussed  in  Chapter  in* ;  from  these  a  particular 
space  and  time  are  selected,  because  the  observer  wishes  to 
consider  himself,  or  some  arbitrary  body,  at  rest.  This  gives 
the  space  and  time  used  for  ordinary  descriptions  of  experience. 
In  this  way  we  are  able  to  introduce  perceptual  space  and  time 
into  the  four-dimensional  world,  as  derived  concepts  depending 
on  our  desire  that  the  new-found  matter  should  be  permanent. 

I  think  it  is  now  possible  to  discern  something  of  the  reason 
why  the  world  must  of  necessity  be  as  we  have  described  it. 
When  the  eye  surveys  the  tossing  waters  of  the  ocean,  the 
eddying  particles  of  water  leave  little  impression;  it  is  the  waves 
that  strike  the  attention,  because  they  have  a  certain  degree 
of  permanence.  The  motion  particularly  noticed  is  the  motion  of 
the  wave-form,  which  is  not  a  motion  of  the  water  at  all.  So 
the  mind  surveying  the  world  of  point-events  looks  for  the 
permanent  things.  The  simpler  relations,  the  intervals  and 
potentials,  are  transient,  and  are  not  the  stuff  out  of  which 
mind  can  build  a  habitation  for  itself.  But  the  thing  that  has 
been  identified  with  matter  is  permanent,  and  because  of  its 
permanence  it  must  be  for  mind  the  substance  of  the  world. 
Practically  no  other  choice  was  possible. 

It  must  be  recognised  that  the  conservation  of  mass  is  not 
exactly  equivalent  to  the  permanence  of  matter.  If  a  loaf  of 
bread  suddenly  transforms  into  a  cabbage,  our  surprise  is  not 
diminished  by  the  fact  that  there  may  have  been  no  change  of 
weight.  It  is  not  very  easy  to  define  this  extra  element  of 
permanence  required,  because  we  accept  as  quite  natural 
apparently  similar  transformations — an  egg  into  an  omelette, 
or  radium  into  lead.  But  at  least  it  seems  clear  that  some  degree 
of  permanence  of  one  quality,  mass,  would  be  the  primary 
property  looked  for  in  matter,  and  this  gives  sufficient  reason 
for  the  particular  choice. 

We  see  now  that  the  choice  of  a  permanent  substance  for  the 

*  When  the  kind  of  space-time  is  such  that  a  strict  partition  of  this  kind  is 
impossible,  strict  conservation  does  not  exist;  but  we  retain  the  principle  as 
formally  satisfied  by  attributing  energy  and  momentum  to  the  gravitational 
field. 


xn]  ON  THE  NATURE  OF  THINGS  197 

world  of  perception  necessarily  carries  with  it  the  law  of  gravita- 
tion, all  the  laws  of  mechanics,  and  the  introduction  of  the 
ordinary  space  and  time  of  experience.  Our  whole  theory  has 
really  been  a  discussion  of  the  most  general  way  in  which 
permanent  substance  can  be  built  up  out  of  relations ;  and  it  is 
the  mind  which,  by  insisting  on  regarding  only  the  things  that 
are  permanent,  has  actually  imposed  these  laws  on  an  indifferent 
world.  Nature  has  had  very  little  to  do  with  the  matter;  she 
had  to  provide  a  basis — point-events;  but  practically  anything 
would  do  for  that  purpose  if  the  relations  were  of  a  reasonable 
degree  of  complexity.  The  relativity  theory  of  physics  reduces 
everything  to  relations;  that  is  to  say,  it  is  structure,  not 
material,  which  counts.  The  structure  cannot  be  built  up  with- 
out material ;  but  the  nature  of  the  material  is  of  no  importance. 
We  may  quote  a  passage  from  Bertrand  Russell's  Introduction 
to  Mathematical  Philosophy. 

"There  has  been  a  great  deal  of  speculation  in  traditional 
philosophy  which  might  have  been  avoided  if  the  importance 
of  structure,  and  the  difficulty  of  getting  behind  it,  had  been 
realised.  For  example  it  is  often  said  that  space  and  time  are 
subjective,  but  they  have  objective  counterparts;  or  that 
phenomena  are  subjective,  but  are  caused  by  things  in  them- 
selves, which  must  have  differences  inter  se  corresponding  with 
the  differences  in  the  phenomena  to  which  they  give  rise.  Where 
such  hypotheses  are  made,  it  is  generally  supposed  that  we  can 
know  very  little  about  the  objective  counterparts.  In  actual 
fact,  however,  if  the  hypotheses  as  stated  were  correct,  the 
objective  counterparts  would  form  a  world  having  the  same 
structure  as  the  phenomenal  world.... In  short,  every  proposition 
having  a  communicable  significance  must  be  true  of  both  worlds 
or  of  neither:  the  only  difference  must  lie  in  just  that  essence 
of  individuality  which  always  eludes  words  and  baffles  descrip- 
tion, but  which  for  that  very  reason  is  irrelevant  to  science." 

This  is  how  our  theory  now  stands. — We  have  a  world  of 
point-events  with  their  primary  interval-relations.  Out  of  these 
an  unlimited  number  of  more  complicated  relations  and  qualities 
can  be  built  up  mathematically,  describing  various  features  of 
the  state  of  the  world.  These  exist  in  nature  in  the  same  sense 
as  an  unlimited  number  of  walks  exist  on  an  open  moor.  But 


198  ON  THE  NATURE  OF  THINGS  [CH. 

the  existence  is,  as  it  were,  latent  unless  someone  gives  a  signifi- 
cance to  the  walk  by  following  it;  and  in  the  same  way  the 
existence  of  any  one  of  these  qualities  of  the  world  only  acquires 
significance  above  its  fellows,  if  a  mind  singles  it  out  for 
recognition.  Mind  filters  out  matter  from  the  meaningless 
jumble  of  qualities,  as  the  prism  filters  out  the  colours  of  the 
rainbow  from  the  chaotic  pulsations  of  white  light.  Mind  exalts 
the  permanent  and  ignores  the  transitory;  and  it  appears  from 
the  mathematical  study  of  relations  that  the  only  way  in  which 
mind  can  achieve  her  object  is  by  picking  out  one  particular 
quality  as  the  permanent  substance  of  the  perceptual  world, 
partitioning  a  perceptual  time  and  space  for  it  to  be  permanent 
in,  and,  as  a  necessary  consequence  of  this  Hobson's  choice,  the 
laws  of  gravitation  and  mechanics  and  geometry  have  to  be 
obeyed.  Is  it  too  much  to  say  that  mind's  search  for  permanence 
has  created  the  world  of  physics?  So  that  the  world  we 
perceive  around  us  could  scarcely  have  been  other  than  it  is*? 

The  last  sentence  possibly  goes  too  far,  but  it  illustrates  the 
direction  in  which  these  views  are  tending.  With  Weyl's  more 
general  theory  of  interval-relations,  the  laws  of  electrodynamics 
appear  in  like  manner  to  depend  merely  on  the  identification 
of  another  permanent  thing — electric  charge.  In  this  case  the 
identification  is  due,  not  to  the  rudimentary  instinct  of  the 
savage  or  the  animal,  but  the  more  developed  reasoning-power 
of  the  scientist.  But  the  conclusion  is  that  the  whole  of  those 
laws  of  nature  which  have  been  woven  into  a  unified  scheme — 
mechanics,  gravitation,  electrodynamics  and  optics — have  their 
origin,  not  in  any  special  mechanism  of  nature,  but  in  the 
workings  of  the  mind. 

"Give  me  matter  and  motion,"  said  Descartes,  "and  I  will 
construct  the  universe."  The  mind  reverses  this.  "Give  me  a 
world — a  world  in  which  there  are  relations — and  I  will  construct 
matter  and  motion." 

Are  there  then  no  genuine  laws  in  the  external  world?  Laws 
inherent  in  the  substratum  of  events,  which  break  through  into 

*  This  summary  is  intended  to  indicate  the  direction  in  which  the  views 
suggested  by  the  relativity  theory  appear  to  me  to  be  tending,  rather  than  to 
be  a  precise  statement  of  what  has  been  established.  I  am  aware  that  there 
are  at  present  many  gaps  in  the  argument.  Indeed  the  whole  of  this  part  of 
the  discussion  should  be  regarded  as  suggestive  rather  than  dogmatic. 


xn]  ON  THE  NATURE  OF  THINGS  199 

the  phenomena  otherwise  regulated  by  the  despotism  of  the 
mind?  We  cannot  foretell  what  the  final  answer  will  be;  but, 
at  present,  we  have  to  admit  that  there  are  laws  which  appear 
to  have  their  seat  in  external  nature.  The  most  important  of 
these,  if  not  the  only  law,  is  a  law  of  atomicity.  Why  does  that 
quality  of  the  world  which  distinguishes  matter  from  emptiness 
exist  only  in  certain  lumps  called  atoms  or  electrons,  all  of 
comparable  mass?  Whence  arises  this  discontinuity?  At 
present,  there  seems  no  ground  for  believing  that  discontinuity 
is  a  law  due  to  the  mind;  indeed  the  mind  seems  rather  to  take 
pains  to  smooth  the  discontinuities  of  nature  into  continuous 
perception.  We  can  only  suppose  that  there  is  something  in 
the  nature  of  things  that  causes  this  aggregation  into  atoms. 
Probably  our  analysis  into  point-events  is  not  final;  and  if  it 
could  be  pushed  further  to  reach  something  still  more  funda- 
mental, then  atomicity  and  the  remaining  laws  of  physics  would 
be  seen  as  identities.  This  indeed  is  the  only  kind  of  explanation 
that  a  physicist  could  accept  as  ultimate.  But  this  more  ultimate 
analysis  stands  on  a  different  plane  from  that  by  which  the 
point-events  were  reached.  The  world  may  be  so  constituted 
that  the  laws  of  atomicity  must  necessarily  hold;  but,  so  far  as 
the  mind  is  concerned,  there  seems  no  reason  why  it  should 
have  been  constituted  in  that  way.  We  can  conceive  a  world 
constituted  otherwise.  But  our  argument  hitherto  has  been 
that,  however  the  world  is  constituted,  the  necessary  combina- 
tions of  things  can  be  found  which  obey  the  laws  of  mechanics, 
gravitation  and  electrodynamics,  and  these  combinations  are 
ready  to  play  the  part  of  the  world  of  perception  for  any  mind 
that  is  tuned  to  appreciate  them;  and  further,  any  world  of 
perception  of  a  different  character  would  be  rejected  by  the 
mind  as  unsubstantial. 

If  atomicity  depends  on  laws  inherent  in  nature,  it  seems  at 
first  difficult  to  understand  why  it  should  relate  to  matter 
especially;  since  matter  is  not  of  any  great  account  in  the 
analytical  scheme,  and  owes  its  importance  to  irrelevant  con- 
siderations introduced  by  the  mind.  It  has  appeared,  however, 
that  atomicity  is  by  no  means  confined  to  matter  and  electricity ; 
the  quantum,  which  plays  so  great  a  part  in  recent  physics,  is 
apparently  an  atom  of  action.  So  nature  cannot  be  accused  of 


200  ON  THE  NATURE  OF  THINGS  [CH. 

connivance  with  mind  in  singling  out  matter  for  special  distinc- 
tion. Action  is  generally  regarded  as  the  most  fundamental 
thing  in  the  real  world  of  physics,  although  the  mind  passes  it 
over  because  of  its  lack  of  permanence ;  and  it  is  vaguely  believed 
that  the  atomicity  of  action  is  the  general  law,  and  the  appear- 
ance of  electrons  is  in  some  way  dependent  on  this.  But  the 
precise  formulation  of  the  theory  of  quanta  of  action  has  hitherto 
baffled  physicists. 

There  is  a  striking  contrast  between  the  triumph  of  the 
scientific  mind  in  formulating  the  great  general  scheme  of 
natural  laws,  nowadays  summed  up  in  the  principle  of  least 
action,  and  its  present  defeat  by  the  newly  discovered  but  equally 
general  phenomena  depending  on  the  laws  of  atomicity  of 
quanta.  It  is  too  early  to  cry  failure  in  the  latter  case;  but 
possibly  the  contrast  is  significant.  It  is  one  thing  for  the  human 
mind  to  extract  from  the  phenomena  of  nature  the  laws  which 
it  has  itself  put  into  them;  it  may  be  a  far  harder  thing  to 
extract  laws  over  which  it  has  had  no  control.  It  is  even  possible 
that  laws  which  have  not  their  origin  in  the  mind  may  be 
irrational,  and  we  can  never  succeed  in  formulating  them.  This 
is,  however,  only  a  remote  possibility;  probably  if  they  were 
really  irrational  it  would  not  have  been  possible  to  make  the 
limited  progress  that  has  been  achieved.  But  if  the  laws  of 
quanta  do  indeed  differentiate  the  actual  world  from  other 
worlds  possible  to  the  mind,  we  may  expect  the  task  of  formu- 
lating them  to  be  far  harder  than  anything  yet  accomplished 
by  physics. 

The  theory  of  relativity  has  passed  in  review  the  whole  subject- 
matter  of  physics.  It  has  unified  the  great  laws,  which  by  the 
precision  of  their  formulation  and  the  exactness  of  their  applica- 
tion have  won  the  proud  place  in  human  knowledge  which 
physical  science  holds  to-day.  And  yet,  in  regard  to  the  nature 
of  things,  this  knowledge  is  only  an  empty  shell — a  form  of 
symbols.  It  is  knowledge  of  structural  form,  and  not  knowledge 
of  content.  All  through  the  physical  world  runs  that  unknown 
content,  which  must  surely  be  the  stuff  of  our  consciousness. 
Here  is  a  hint  of  aspects  deep  within  the  world  of  physics,  and 
yet  unattainable  by  the  methods  of  physics.  And,  moreover, 
we  have  found  that  where  science  has  progressed  the  farthest, 


xn]  ON  THE  NATURE  OF  THINGS  201 

the  mind  has  but  regained  from  nature  that  which  the  mind  has 
put  into  nature. 

We  have  found  a  strange  foot-print  on  the  shores  of  the 
unknown.  We  have  devised  profound  theories,  one  after 
another,  to  account  for  its  origin.  At  last,  we  have  succeeded 
in  reconstructing  the  creature  that  made  the  foot-print.  And 
Lo !  it  is  our  own. 

5  " 


APPENDIX 
MATHEMATICAL  NOTES 

THE  references  marked  "Report"  are  to  the  writer's  "Report 
on  the  Relativity  Theory  of  Gravitation"  for  the  Physical 
Society  of  London  (Fleet way  Press),  where  fuller  mathematical 
details  are  given. 

Probably  the  most  complete  treatise  on  the  mathematical 
theory  of  the  subject  is  H.  Weyl's  Raum,  Zeit,  Materie  (Julius 
Springer,  Berlin). 

Note  1  (p.  20). 

It  is  not  possible  to  predict  the  contraction  rigorously  from 
the  universally  accepted  electromagnetic  equations,  because 
these  do  not  cover  the  whole  ground.  There  must  be  other  forces 
or  conditions  which  govern  the  form  and  size  of  an  electron; 
under  electromagnetic  forces  alone  it  would  expand  indefinitely. 
The  old  electrodynamics  is  entirely  vague  as  to  these  forces. 

The  theory  of  Larmor  and  Lorentz  shows  that  if  any  system 
at  rest  in  the  aether  is  in  equilibrium,  a  similar  system  in 
uniform  motion  through  the  aether,  but  with  all  lengths  in  the 
direction  of  motion  diminished  in  FitzGerald's  ratio,  will  also 
be  in  equilibrium  so  far  as  the  differential  equations  of  the 
electromagnetic  field  are  concerned.  There  is  thus  a  general 
theoretical  agreement  with  the  observed  contraction,  provided 
the  boundary  conditions  at  the  surface  of  an  electron  behave  in 
the  same  way.  The  latter  suggestion  is  confirmed  by  experiments 
on  isolated  electrons  in  rapid  motion  (Kaufmann's  experiment). 
It  turns  out  that  this  requires  an  electron  to  suffer  the  same 
kind  of  contraction  as  a  material  rod;  and  thus,  although  the 
theory  throws  light  on  the  adjustments  involved  in  material 
contraction,  it  can  scarcely  be  said  to  give  an  explanation  of  the 
occurrence  of  contraction  generally. 


MATHEMATICAL  NOTES  203 

Note  2  (p.  47). 

Suppose  a  particle  moves  from  (sclf  */i,  #1,  t^)  to  (x.2>  yz,  zz,  tz), 
its  velocity  u  is  given  by 


Hence  from  the  formula  for 


_ 

(We  omit  a  V  —  1,  as  the  sign  of  s2  is  changed  later  in  the 
chapter.) 

If  we  take  t-L  and  t2  to  be  the  start  and  finish  of  the  aviator's 
cigar  (Chapter  i),  then  as  judged  by  a  terrestrial  observer, 

t2  —  t±  =  60  minutes,   \/(l  —  u2)  =  FitzGerald  contraction  =  J. 

As  judged  by  the  aviator, 

*2  -  *i  =  30  minutes,    */(!  -  u2)  =  1. 

Thus  for  both  observers  5  =  30  minutes,  verifying  that  it  is 
an  absolute  quantity  independent  of  the  observer. 

Note  3  (p.  48). 

The  formulae  of  transformation  to  axes  with   a   different 
orientation  are 

x  =  x'  cos  6  —  T'  sin  6,     y  =  yf,     z  =  z',     r  —  x'  sin  6  +  r'  cos  6, 
where  9  is  the  angle  turned  through  in  the  plane  XT. 

Let  u  =  i  tan  6,  so  that  cos  6  =  (1  -  u2)  ~  *  =  /?,  say.    The 
formulae  become 

x  =  P(x'-Mr'),     y  =  y',     z  =  zf,     r  =  0  (r'+  iux'), 
or,  reverting  to  real  time  by  setting  ir  =  t, 


which  gives  the  relation  between  the  estimates  of  space  and 
time  by  two  different  observers. 

The  factor  ft  gives  in  the  first  equation  the  FitzGerald  con- 
traction, and  in  the  fourth  equation  the  retardation  of  time. 
The  terms  ut'  and  ux'  correspond  to  the  changed  conventions 
as  to  rest  and  simultaneity. 

A  point  at  rest,  x  =  const.,  for  the  first  observer  corresponds 
to  a  point  moving  with  velocity  u9  x'—  ut'=  const.,  for  the  second 
observer.  Hence  their  relative  velocity  is  u. 


204  APPENDIX 

Note  4  (p.  81). 
The  condition  for  flat  space  in  two  dimensions  is 

3 


git 


,        3 


Note  5  (p.  89). 

Let  g  be  the  determinant  of  four  rows  and  columns  formed 
with  the  elements  g^v  . 

Let  g™  be  the  minor  of  g^v  ,  divided  by  g. 
Let  the  "3-index  symbol"  {/>tv,  A}  denote 


summed  for  values  of  a  from  1  to  4.   There  will  be  40  different 
3-index  symbols. 

Then  the  Riemann-Christoffel  tensor  is 

o  o 

B^Va-  =  (P**  €)  {€"»  P)  ~  {/*"»  €)  (€C7'  P)  +  g^-  &°>P}  ~  ^  {^'P}' 

the  terms  containing  e  being  summed  for  values  of  e  from  1  to  4. 
The   "contracted"   Riemann-Christoffel  tensor  G^v  can  be 
reduced  to 

a} 


-I — - —   log?  \/  —  0  —  { uuv.  a\  ~ —  loer  V'  —  £. 

ox  ox  ox 

where  in  accordance  with  a  general  convention  in  this  subject, 
each  term  containing  a  suffix  twice  over  (a  and  /?)  must  be 
summed  for  the  values  1,  2,  3,  4  of  that  suffix. 

The  curvature  G  =  g^G^,  summed  in  accordance  with  the 
foregoing  convention. 

Note  6  (p.  94). 
The  electric  potential  due  to  a  charge  e  is 

t=[r(l-vrIC)Y 


MATHEMATICAL  NOTES  205 

where  vr  is  the  velocity  of  the  charge  in  the  direction  of  r,  C  the 
velocity  of  light,  and  the  square  bracket  signifies  antedated 
values.  To  the  first  order  of  vr/C,  the  denominator  is  equal  to 
the  present  distance  r,  so  the  expression  reduces  to  e/r  in  spite 
of  the  time  of  propagation.  The  foregoing  formula  for  the 
potential  was  found  by  Lienard  and  Wiechert. 

Note  7  (p.  97). 

It  is  found  that  the  following  scheme  of  potentials  rigorously 
satisfies  the  equations  G^v=  0,  according  to  the  values  of  G^v 
in  Note  5,  _  ^  Q  Q  Q 

-  a^2  0  0 

-  a^2  sin2  a?22       0 

y 

where  y  =  1  —  K/xlt  and  K  is  any  constant  (see  Report,  §  28). 
Hence  these  potentials  describe  a  kind  of  space-time  which  can 
occur  in  nature  referred  to  a  possible  mesh-system.  If  K  =  0, 
the  potentials  reduce  to  those  for  flat  space-time  referred  to 
polar  coordinates;  and,  since  in  the  applications  required  K  will 
always  be  extremely  small,  our  coordinates  can  scarcely  be 
distinguished  from  polar  coordinates.  We  can  therefore  use  the 
familiar  symbols  r,  6,  (f>,  t,  instead  of  xlt  cc2,  x3,  a?4.  It  must, 
however,  be  remembered  that  the  identification  with  polar 
coordinates  is  only  approximate;  and,  for  example,  an  equally 
good  approximation  is  obtained  if  we  write  x±  =  r  +  JAC,  a  sub- 
stitution often  used  instead  of  x±  —  r  since  it  has  the  advantage 
of  making  the  coordinate- velocity  of  light  more  symmetrical. 

We  next  work  out  analytically  all  the  mechanical  and  optical 
properties  of  this  kind  of  space-time,  and  find  that  they  agree 
observationally  with  those  existing  round  a  particle  at  rest  at 
the  origin  with  gravitational  mass  \K.  The  conclusion  is  that 
the  gravitational  field  here  described  is  produced  by  a  particle 
of  mass  \K — or,  if  preferred,  a  particle  of  matter  at  rest  is 
produced  by  the  kind  of  space-time  here  described. 

Note  8  (p.  98). 

Setting  the  gravitational  constant  equal  to  unity,  we  have  for 
a  circular  orbit  mirz  _  V2ir^ 

so  that  m  =  i?V. 


206  APPENDIX 

The  earth's  speed,  r>,  is  approximately  30  km.  per  sec.,  or 
TTT^TTTF  ^  terms  of  the  velocity  of  light.  The  radius  of  its  orbit, 
r,  is  about  1-5  .  108  km.  Hence,  m,  the  gravitational  mass  of  the 
sun  is  approximately  1-5  km. 

The  radius  of  the  sun  is  697,000  kms.,  so  that  the  quantity 
2m/r  occurring  in  the  formulae  is,  for  the  sun's  surface,  -00000424 
or  0"-87. 

Note  9  (p.  123). 

See  Report,  §§  29,  30.  The  general  equations  of  a  geodesic  are 


From  the  formula  for  the  line-element 

ds*=  -  y-'dr2  -  rW2  +  ydP    ............  (1), 

we  calculate  the  three-index  symbols  and  it  is  found  that  two 
of  the  equations  of  the  geodesic  take  the  rather  simple  form 

M      %    <bM_ 

j    n   "T"  •     j        j       -    ", 

as*     r    as  as 

d2*      d(logy)    dr<tt_n 
5^+       dr      'dsds~    ' 

which  can  be  integrated  giving 


*   e 

ds      y 

where  h  and  c  are  constants  of  integration. 

Eliminating  dt  and  d#  from  (1),  (2)  and  (3),  we  have 


or  writing  u  —  1/r, 

fdu\2  c2  -  1      2mu 


Differentiating  with  respect  to  & 
d?u  m 


MATHEMATICAL  NOTES  207 

which  gives  the  equation  of  the  orbit  in  the  usual  form  in  particle 
dynamics.  It  differs  from  the  equation  of  the  Newtonian  orbit 
by  the  small  term  3mu2,  which  is  easily  shown  to  give  the  motion 
of  perihelion. 

The  track  of  a  ray  of  light  is  also  obtained  from  this  formula, 
since  by  the  principle  of  equivalence  it  agrees  with  that  of  a 
material  particle  moving  with  the  speed  of  light.  This  case  is 
given  by  ds  =  0,  and  therefore  h  =  oo  .  The  differentia]  equation 
for  the  path  of  a  light-ray  is  thus 

d?u 
JM  +  u 

An  approximate  solution  is 


neglecting    the    very   small   quantity   m?/R2.     Converting  to 
Cartesian  coordinates,  this  becomes 


m 

M\i    -    ~=T 


The  asymptotes  of  the  light-track  are  found  by  taking  y 
very  large  compared  with  x,  giving 


so  that  the  angle  between  them  is  4<m/R. 

Note  10  (p.  126). 
Writing  the  line  element  in  the  form 

+  b™  +  cr^+  ...W 

the  approximate  Newtonian  attraction  fixes  b  equal  to  —  2; 
then  the  observed  deflection  of  light  fixes  a  equal  to  +  2  ;  and 
with  these  values  the  observed  motion  of  Mercury  fixes  c  equal 
to  0. 

To  insert  an  arbitrary  coefficient  of  r2d02  would  merely  vary 
the  coordinate  system.  We  cannot  arrive  at  any  intrinsically 
different  kind  of  space-time  in  that  way.  Hence,  within  the 
limits  of  accuracy  mentioned,  the  expression  found  by  Einstein 
is  completely  determinable  by  observation. 


208  APPENDIX 

It  may  be  mentioned  that  the  line-element 

ds*  =  -  dr*  -  rW  +  (1  -  2m/r)  dt*, 

gives  one-half  the  observed  deflection  of  light,  and  one-third 
the  motion  of  perihelion  of  Mercury.  As  both  these  can  be 
obtained  on  older  theories,  taking  account  of  the  variation  of 
mass  with  velocity,  the  coefficient  y-1  of  dr*  is  the  essentially 
novel  point  in  Einstein's  theory. 

Note  1  1  (p.  131). 

It  is  often  supposed  that  by  the  Principle  of  Equivalence  any 
invariant  property  which  holds  outside  a  gravitational  field  also 
holds  in  a  gravitational  field;  but  there  is  necessarily  some 
limitation  on  this  equivalence.  Consider  for  instance  the  two 
invariant  equations 

dsz=  1, 


where  k  is  some  constant  having  the  dimensions  of  a  length. 
Since  Z?JW  vanishes  outside  a  gravitational  field,  if  one  of  these 
equations  is  true  the  other  will  be.  But  they  cannot  both  hold 
in  a  gravitational  field,  since  there  B^B^"  does  not  vanish, 
and  is  in  fact  equal  to  24ra2/r6.  (I  believe  that  the  numerical 
factor  24  is  correct;  but  there  are  65,536  terms  in  the  expression, 
and  the  terms  which  do  not  vanish  have  to  be  picked  out. 

This  ambiguity  of  the  Principle  of  Equivalence  is  referred  to 
in  Report,  §§  14,  27;  and  an  enunciation  is  given  which  makes 
it  definite.  The  enunciation  however  is  merely  an  explicit  state- 
ment, and  not  a  defence,  of  the  assumptions  commonly  made  in 
applying  the  principle. 

So  far  as  general  reasoning  goes  there  seems  no  ground  for 
choosing  ds2  rather  than  ds2  (1  +  24&4ra2/r6),  or  any  similar  ex- 
pression, as  the  constant  character  in  the  vibration  of  an  atom. 

Note  12  (p.  134). 

Let  two  rays  diverging  from  a  point  at  a  distance  R  pass  at 
distances  r  and  r  +  dr  from  a  star  of  mass  m.  The  deflection 
being  4ra/r,  their  divergence  will  be  increased  by  4>mdr/r2.  This 
increase  will  be  equal  to  the  original  divergence  dr/R  if 
r  =  V4<mR.  Take  for  instance  4m  =  10  km.,  R  =  1015  km.,  then 
r  =  108  km.  So  that  the  divergence  of  the  light  will  be  doubled, 


MATHEMATICAL  NOTES  209 

when  the  actual  deflection  of  the  ray  is  only  10"7,  or  0"-02. 
In  the  case  of  a  star  seen  behind  the  sun  the  added  divergence 
has  no  time  to  take  effect;  but  when  the  light  has  to  travel  a 
stellar  distance  after  the  divergence  is  produced,  it  becomes 
weakened  by  it.  Generally  in  stellar  phenomena  the  weakening 
of  the  light  should  be  more  prominent  than  the  actual  deflection. 

Note  13  (p.  141). 
The  relations  are  (Report,  §  39) 

^-iJI     (A*  =  1.2,  8,  4),  V       ' 

where  G"^  is  the  (contracted)  covariant  derivative  of  G£,  or 


I  doubt  whether  anyone  has  performed  the  laborious  task  of 
verifying  these  identities  by  straightforward  algebra. 

Note  14  (p.  158). 
The  modified  law  for  spherical  space-time  is  in  empty  space 

G>  =  A£M,. 

In  cylindrical  space-  time,  matter  is  essential.  The  law  in  space 
occupied  by  matter  is 


the  term  2A  being  the  only  modification.  Spherical  space-time 
of  radius  R  is  given  by  A  =  3/R2;  cylindrical  space-time  by 
A  =  l/R2  provided  matter  of  average  density  p  =  l/47rR2  is 
present.  (See  Report,  §§  50,  51.)  The  total  mass  of  matter  in 
the  cylindrical  world  is  JrrR.  This  must  be  enormous,  seeing 
that  the  sun's  mass  is  only  Ij  kilometres. 

Note  15  (p.  174). 

WeyPs  theory  is  given  in  Berlin.  Sitzungsberichte,  30  May,  1918  ; 
Annalen  der  Physik,  Bd.  59  (1919),  p.  101. 

Note  16  (p.  177). 

The  argument  is  rather  more  complicated  than  appears  in 
the  text,  where  the  distinction  between  action-density  and 
action  in  a  region,  curvature  and  total  curvature  in  a  region, 
has  not  been  elaborated.  Taking  a  definitely  marked  out  region 
in  space  and  time,  its  measured  volume  will  be  increased  16-fold 
E.  s.  14 


210  APPENDIX 

by  halving  the  gauge.  Therefore  for  action-density  we  must 
take  an  expression  which  will  be  diminished  16-fold  by  halving 
the  gauge.  Now  G  is  proportional  to  l/R2,  where  R  is  the  radius 
of  curvature,  and  so  is  diminished  4-fold.  The  invariant  B^V<TB*V" 
has  the  same  gauge-dimensions  as  Gz;  and  hence  when  integrated 
through  a  volume  gives  a  pure  number  independent  of  the  gauge. 
In  WeyPs  theory  this  is  only  the  gravitational  part  of  the  com- 
plete invariant 


which  reduces  to 


The  second  term  gives  actually  the  well-known  expression  for 
the  action-density  of  the  electromagnetic  field,  and  this  evidently 
strengthens  the  identification  of  this  invariant  with  action- 
density. 

Einstein's  theory,  on  the  other  hand,  creates  a  difficulty  here, 
because  although  there  may  be  action  in  an  electromagnetic 
field  without  electrons,  the  curvature  is  zero. 

HISTORICAL  NOTE 

Before  the  Michelson-Morley  experiment  the  question  had 
been  widely  discussed  whether  the  aether  in  and  near  the  earth 
was  carried  along  by  the  earth  in  its  motion,  or  whether  it 
slipped  through  the  interstices  between  the  atoms.  Astronomical 
aberration  pointed  decidedly  to  a  stagnant  aether;  but  the 
experiments  of  Arago  and  Fizeau  on  the  effect  of  motion  of 
transparent  media  on  the  velocity  of  light  in  those  media, 
suggested  a  partial  convection  of  the  aether  in  such  cases.  These 
experiments  were  first-order  experiments,  i.e  they  depended  on 
the.  ratio  of  the  velocity  of  the  transparent  body  to  the  velocity 
of  light.  The  Michelson-Morley  experiment  is  the  first  example 
of  an  experiment  delicate  enough  to  detect  second-order  effects, 
depending  on  the  square  of  the  above  ratio;  the  result,  that  no 
current  of  aether  past  terrestrial  objects  could  be  detected, 
appeared  favourable  to  the  view  that  the  aether  must  be  con- 
vected  by  the  earth.  The  difficulty  of  reconciling  this  with 
astronomical  aberration  was  recognised. 


HISTORICAL  NOTE  211 

An  attempt  was  made  by  Stokes  to  reconcile  mathematically 
a  convection  of  aether  by  the  earth  with  the  accurately  verified 
facts  of  astronomical  aberration;  but  his  theory  cannot  be 
regarded  as  tenable.  Lodge  investigated  experimentally  the 
question  whether  smaller  bodies  carried  the  aether  with  them 
in  their  motion,  and  showed  that  the  aether  between  two 
whirling  steel  discs  was  undisturbed. 

The  controversy,  stagnant  versus  convected  aether,  had  now 
reached  an  intensely  interesting  stage.  In  1895,  Lorentz  dis- 
cussed the  problem  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  electrical 
theory  of  light  and  matter.  By  his  famous  transformation  of 
the  electromagnetic  equations,  he  cleared  up  the  difficulties 
associated  with  the  first-order  effects,  showing  that  they  could 
all  be  reconciled  with  a  stagnant  aether.  In  1900,  Larmor  carried 
the  theory  as  far  as  second-order  effects,  and  obtained  an  exact 
theoretical  foundation  for  FitzGerald's  hypothesis  of  contrac- 
tion, which  had  been  suggested  in  1892  as  an  explanation  of  the 
Michelson-Morley  experiment.  The  theory  of  a  stagnant  aether 
was  thus  reconciled  with  all  observational  results;  and  hence- 
forward it  held  the  field. 

Further  second-order  experiments  were  performed  by  Rayleigh 
and  Brace  on  double  refraction  (1902,  1904),  Trouton  and  Noble 
on  a  torsional  effect  on  a  charged  condenser  (1903),  and  Trouton 
and  Rankine  on  electric  conductivity  (1908).  All  showed  that 
the  earth's  motion  has  no  effect  on  the  phenomena.  On  the 
theoretical  side,  Lorentz  (1902)  showed  that  the  indifference  of 
the  equations  of  the  electromagnetic  field  to  any  velocity  of  the 
axes  of  reference,  which  he  had  previously  established  to  the 
first  order,  and  Larmor  to  the  second  order,  was  exact  to  all 
orders.  He  was  not,  however,  able  to  establish  with  the  same 
exactness  a  corresponding  transformation  for  bodies  containing 
electrons. 

Both  Larmor  and  Lorentz  had  introduced  a  "local  time"  for 
the  moving  system.  It  was  clear  that  for  many  phenomena  this 
local  time  would  replace  the  "real"  time;  but  it  was  not 
suggested  that  the  observer  in  the  moving  system  would  be 
deceived  into  thinking  that  it  was  the  real  time.  Einstein,  in 
1905  founded  the  modern  principle  of  relativity  by  postulating 
that  this  local  time  was  the  time  for  the  moving  observer;  no 


212  APPENDIX 

real  or  absolute  time  existed,  but  only  the  local  times,  different 
for  different  observers.  He  showed  that  absolute  simultaneity 
and  absolute  location  in  space  are  inextricably  bound  together, 
and  the  denial  of  the  latter  carries  with  it  the  denial  of  the 
former.  By  realising  that  an  observer  in  the  moving  system 
would  measure  all  velocities  in  terms  of  the  local  space  and  time 
of  that  system,  Einstein  removed  the  last  discrepancies  from 
Lorentz's  transformation. 

The  relation  between  the  space  and  time  coordinates  in  two 
systems  in  relative  motion  was  now  obtained  immediately  from 
the  principles  of  space  and  time-measurement.  It  must  hold 
for  all  phenomena  provided  they  do  not  postulate  a  medium 
which  can  serve  as  a  standard  for  absolute  location  and  simul- 
taneity. The  previous  deduction  of  these  formulae  by  lengthy 
transformation  of  the  electromagnetic  equations  now  appears 
as  a  particular  case;  it  shows  that  electromagnetic  phenomena 
have  no  reference  to  a  medium  with  such  properties. 

The  combination  of  the  local  spaces  and  times  of  Einstein 
into  an  absolute  space-time  of  four  dimensions  is  the  work  of 
Minkowski  (1908).  Chapter  in  is  largely  based  on  his  researches. 
Much  progress  was  made  in  the  four-dimensional  vector- 
analysis  of  the  world;  but  the  whole  problem  was  greatly 
simplified  when  Einstein  and  Grossmann  introduced  for  this 
purpose  the  more  powerful  mathematical  calculus  of  Riemann, 
Ricci,  and  Levi-Civita. 

In  1911,  Einstein  put  forward  the  Principle  of  Equivalence, 
thus  turning  the  subject  towards  gravitation  for  the  first  time. 
By  postulating  that  not  only  mechanical  but  optical  and 
electrical  phenomena  in  a  field  of  gravitation  and  in  a  field 
produced  by  acceleration  of  the  observer  were  equivalent,  he 
deduced  the  displacement  of  the  spectral  lines  on  the  sun  and 
the  displacement  of  a  star  during  a  total  eclipse.  In  the  latter 
case,  however,  he  predicted  only  the  half-deflection,  since  he 
was  still  working  with  Newton's  law  of  gravitation.  Freundlich 
at  once  examined  plates  obtained  at  previous  eclipses,  but  failed 
to  find  sufficient  data;  he  also  prepared  to  observe  the  eclipse 
of  1914  in  Russia  with  this  object,  but  was  stopped  by  the  out- 
break of  war.  Another  attempt  was  made  by  the  Lick  Observa- 
tory at  the  not  very  favourable  eclipse  of  1918.  Only  preliminary 


HISTORICAL  NOTE  213 

results  have  been  published ;  according  to  the  information  given, 
the  probable  accidental  error  of  the  mean  result  (reduced  to  the 
sun's  limb)  was  about  l"-6,  so  that  no  conclusion  was  permissible. 
The  principle  of  equivalence  opened  up  the  possibility  of  a 
general  theory  of  relativity  not  confined  to  uniform  motion,  for 
it  pointed  a  way  out  of  the  objections  which  had  been  urged 
against  such  an  extension  from  the  time  of  Newton.  At  first 
the  opening  seemed  a  very  narrow  one,  merely  indicating  that 
the  objections  could  not  be  considered  final  until  the  possibilities 
of  complications  by  gravitation  had  been  more  fully  exhausted. 
By  1913,  Einstein  had  surmounted  the  main  difficulties.  His 
theory  in  a  complete  form  was  published  in  1915;  but  it  was  not 
generally  accessible  in  England  until  a  year  or  two  later.  As 
this  theory  forms  the  main  subject-matter  of  the  book,  we  may 
leave  our  historical  survey  at  this  point. 


14—3 


INDEX 


Absolute,    approached    through    the 

relative,  82 

Absolute  acceleration,  68,  154,  194 
Absolute  past  and  future,  50 
Absolute  rotation,  152,  164,  194 
Absolute  simultaneity,  12,  51 
Absolute  time,  in  cylindrical  world, 

163 

Acceleration,  a  simpler  quality  than 
velocity,  195;  modifies  FitzGerald 
contraction,  75 
Action,    147;   atomicity  of,    199;   on 

Weyl's  theory,  177 
Action,  Principle  of  Least,  149,  178 
Addition  of  velocities,  59 
Aether,  a  plenum  with  geodesic  struc- 
ture,    164;    identified    with    the 
"world,"  187;  non-material  nature 
of,  39;  stagnant,  210 
Artificial  fields  of  force,  64 
Atom,  vibrating  on  sun,  128 
Atomicity,  law  of,  199;  of  Action,  177 
Aviator,  space  and  time-reckoning  of, 
23 

Bending  of  light,  effect  on  star's 
position,  112;  observational  results, 
118;  theory  of,  107,207 

Beta  particles,  59,  145 

Brain,  constitution  of,  191 

Brazil,  eclipse  expedition  to,  117 

Causality,  law  of,  156 

Causation  and  free  will,  51 

Centrifugal  Force,  compared  with 
gravitation,  41,  65;  debt  at  infinity, 
157;  not  caused  by  stars,  153; 
vibrating  atom  in  field  of,  129 

Chess,  analogy  of,  184 

Christoffel,  89 

Circle  in  non-Euclidean  space,  104 

Clifford,  77,  152,  192 

Cliquishness,  188 


Clock,  affected  by  velocity,  58;  on  sun, 
74,  128;  perfect,  13;  recording 
proper- time,  71 

Clock-scale,  58 

Clock-scale  geometry,  not  fundamental, 
73, 131,  191 

Coincidences,  87 

Comets,  motion  through  coronal  me- 
dium, 121;  radiation-pressure  in,  110 

Conservation  of  electric  charge,  173; 
of  energy  and  momentum,  139;  of 
mass,  141,  196 

Content  contrasted  with  structural 
form,  192,  200 

Continuous  matter,  91,  140 

Contraction,  FitzGerald,  19,  54 

Convergence  of  physical  approximations, 
154 

Coordinates,  77 

Coordinate  velocity,  107 

Corona,  refraction  by,  121 

Cottingham,  114 

Crommelin,  114,  122 

Curvature,  degrees  of,  91;  identified 
with  action,  148;  merely  illustra- 
tive, 84;  of  a  globe  of  water,  148; 
of  space  and  time,  158;  on  Weyl's 
theory,  176;  perception  of,  190 

Cylinder  and  plane,  indistinguishable 
in  two  dimensions,  81 

Cylindrical  world,  Einstein's,  161, 177 

Davidson,  114 

Deflection  of  light,   effect  on  star's 

position,  112;  observational  results, 

118;  theory  of,  107,207 
Density,  effect  of  motion  on,  62 
Displacement  of  spectral  lines,  129;  in 

nebulae,  161 ;  in  stars,  135 
Displacement  of  star-images,  112,  115 
Double  stars  and  Einstein  effect,  133 
Duration,   not   inherent   in   external 

world,  34 


216 


INDEX 


Eclipse,  observations  during,  113 
Ehrenfest's  paradox,  75 
Electrical  theory  of  inertia,  61 
Electricity  and  gravitation,  167 
Electromagnetic  potentials  and  forces, 

172 

Electron,  dimensions  of,  177 ;  geometry 
inside,  91;  gravitational  mass  of, 
178;  inertia  of,   61;  Kaufmann's 
experiment  on,  62, 146;  singularity 
in  field,  167 
"Elsewhere,"  50 
Emptiness,  perception  of,  190 
Energy,  conservation  of,  139;  identi 
fied  with  mass,  146;  inertia  of,  61, 
146;  weight  of  radio-active,  112 
Entropy,  149 

Eotvos  torsion- balance,  112 
Equivalence,  Principle  of,  76,  131,  212 
Euclidean  geometry,  1,  47,  73 
Euclidean  space  of  five  dimensions,  84 
Event,  definition  of,  45,  186 
Evershed,  130 
Extension  in  four  dimensions,  37,  46 

Feeling,  elements  of,  192 

Fields  of  force,  artificial,  64;  due  to 
disturbance  of  observer,  69;  elec- 
tromagnetic, 171 ;  relativity  of,  67 

Field  of  velocity,  195 

FitzGerald  contraction,  19;  conse- 
quences of,  22;  modified  by 
acceleration,  75;  relativity  ex- 
planation of.  54 

Flat  space  in  two  dimensions,  80 

Flat  space-time,  83;  at  infinity,  84; 
conditions  for,  89 

Flatfish,  analogy  of,  96 

Flatland,  57 

Force,  compared  with  inertia,  137; 
electromagnetic,  172;  elementary 
conception  of,  63;  fields  of,  64; 
relativity  of,  43,  67,  76 

Form  contrasted  with  content,  192, 200 

Formalism  of  knowledge,  175 

Foucault's  pendulum,  152 

Four-dimensional  order,  35,  56,  186 

Four- dimensional  space -time,  geo- 
metry of,  45,  82;  reality  of,  181 

Fourth  dimension,  13 


Frame,  inertial,  156 

Frames    of    reference,    "right"    and 

"wrong,"  42 
Freewill,  51 
Freundlich,  212 
Future,  absolute,  50 

Galilean  potentials,  83 

Gauge,  effect  on  observations,  31; 
provided  by  radius  of  space,  177 

Gauge-system,   169 

Geodesic,  absolute  significance  of,  70, 
150;  definition  of,  75;  motion  of 
particles  in,  138,  151;  in  regions  at 
infinity,  157 

Geodesic  structure,  absolute  character 
of,  155, 164;  acceleration  of,  195 

Geometrical  conception  of  the  world, 
176,  183 

Geometry,  Euclidean,  1;  hyperbolic, 
47;  Lobatchewskian,  1,  9;  natural, 
2;  non-Euclidean,  or  Riemannian, 
6,  73, 84, 90;  non-Riemannian,  169 ; 
semi-Euclidean,  47 

Ghosts  of  stars,  161 

Globe  of  water,  limit  to  size  of,  148 

Gravitation,  Einstein's  law  of,  differ- 
ential formula,  90;  integrated  for- 
mula for  a  particle,  97 ;  macroscopic 
equations,  140,  193 

Gravitation,  Newton's  law  of,  ambig- 
uity of,  93;  approximation  to 
Einstein's  law,  103;  deflection  of 
light,  109,  111 

Gravitation,  propagation  with  velocity 
of  light,  94,  147;  relativity  for 
uniform  motion,  21,  125 

Gravitational  field  of  Sun,  97;  de- 
flection of  light,  107,  118,  207;  dis- 
placement of  spectral  lines,  129; 
motion  of  perihelion,  122,  206; 
Newtonian  attraction,  102;  result 
of  observational  verification,  126 

Grebe  and  Bachem,  130 

Greenwich,  Royal  Observatory.  114 

Gyro-compass,  152 

Hummock  in  space-time,  97 
Hurdles,  analogy  of  counts  of,  104 
Hyperbolic  geometry,  47 


INDEX 


217 


Identities  connecting  G^v,  141 

Identity  permanent,  40,  193 

Imaginary  intervals,  150,  187 

Imaginary  time,  48,  181 

Inertia,  compared  with  force,  137; 
electrical  theory  of,  61 ;  in  regions 
at  infinity,  157;  infinite,  56; 
Mach's  views,  164;  of  light,  110; 
relativity  theory  of,  139 

Inertia-gravitation,  137 

Inertial  frame,  156 

Infinity,  conditions  at,  157 

Integrability  of  length  and  direction, 
174 

Interval,  46,  150,  187;  general  ex- 
pression for,  82;  practical  measure- 
ment of,  58,  75 

Interval-length,  geometrical  signifi- 
cance essential,  127 ;  identified  with 
proper  time,  71;  tracks  of  maximum, 
70, 150 ;  zero  for  velocity  of  light,  71 

Invariant  mass,  145;  of  light,  148 

Jupiter,  deflection  of  light  by,  133 

Kaufmann's  experiment,  62, 146 
Kinds  of  space,  81 

Laplace's  equation,  96,  140 

Larmor,  19,  211 

Length,  definition  of,  2;  effect  of 
motion  on,  19;  relativity  of,  34 

Le  Verrier,  124 

Levi-Civita,  89 

Lift,  accelerated,  64 

Light,  bending  of,  107,  112,  118,  207; 
coordinate  velocity  of,  107;  mass 
of,  62,  110,  148;  voyage  round  the 
world,  161;  weight  of,  111 

Light,  velocity  of,  an  absolute  velocity, 
59;  importance  of,  60;  system 
moving  with,  26,  56 

Lobatchewsky,  1,  9 

Lodge,  32,  125,  211 

Longest  tracks,  70 

Lorentz,  19,  211 

Mach's  philosophy,  163 
Macroscopic  equations,  92,   139;  in- 
terval, 187 


Map  of  sun's  gravitational  field,  99 

Mass,  conservation  of,  141,  195; 
electrical  theory  of,  61;  gravita- 
tional, 98;  identified  with  energy, 
146;  invariant,  145;  of  light,  62, 
110,  148;  variation  with  velocity, 
145 

Mathematics,  Russell's  description  of, 
14 

Matter,  continuous,  91 ;  definition  of  a 
particle,  98;  extensional  relations 
of,  8;  gravitational  equations  in, 
141;  perception  of,  190;  physical 
and  psychological  aspects,  192 

Mercury,  perihelion  of,  123,  125 

Mesh-systems,  77;  irrelevance  to  laws 
of  nature,  87 

Michelson-Morley  experiment,  18 

Minkowski,  30,  212 

Mirror,  distortion  by  moving,  22 

Momentum,  conservation  of,  141;  re- 
definition of,  144;  of  light,  111 

Moon,  motion  of,  93, 134 

Motion,  insufficiency  of  kinematical 
conception,  194;  Newton's  first 
law,  136 

Natural  frame,  155 

Natural  gauge,  176 

Natural  geometry,  2 

Natural  tracks,  70 

Nebulae,  atomic  vibrations  in,  161 

Newton,  absolute  rotation,  41;  bend- 
ing of  light,  110;  law  of  gravitation, 
93;  law  of  motion,  136;  relativity 
for  uniform  motion,  40;  super- 
observer,  68 

Non-Euclidean  geometry,  6, 73,  84,  90 

Non-Riemannian  geometry,  169 

Observer,  an  unsymmetrical  object,  57 
Observer  and  observed,  30 
Orbits  under  Einstein's  law,  123 
Order  and  dimensions,  14,  186 
Ordering  of  events  in  external  world, 
35,  54,  184 

Past,  absolute,  50 

Perceptions,  as  crude  measures,  10;  15, 
31 


218 


INDEX 


Perihelia  of  planets,  motions  of,  123 
Permanence  of  matter,  196 
Permanent  identity.  40,  193 
Permanent  perceptual  world,  141,  198 
Poincare,  9 
Point-event,  45,  186 
Potentials,  80;  Galilean  values,  83 
Potentials,  electromagnetic,  172 
Principe,  eclipse  expedition  to,  114 
Principle  of  Equivalence,  76,  131,  212 
Principle  of  Least  Action,  149,  178 
Principle  of  Relativity  (restricted),  20 
Probability,  a  pure  number,  178 
Projectile,  Jules  Verne's,  65 
Propagation  of  Gravitation,  94,  147 
Proper-length,  11 
Proper- time,  71 
Pucker  in  space-time,  85 

Quanta,  60,  177,  182,  200 

Radiation-pressure,  110 
Real  world  of  physics,  37,  181 
Receding  velocities  of  B-  type  stars, 

135;  of  spiral  nebulae,  161 
Reflection  by  moving  mirror,  22 
Refracting     medium    equivalent    to 

gravitational  field,  109 
Refraction  of  light  in  corona,  121 
Relativity  of  force,  43,  76;  of  length 
and  duration,  34;  of  motion,  38;  of 
rotation,  152,  155;  of  size,  33 
Relativity,  Newtonian,  40;  restricted 

Principle  of,  20 ;  standpoint  of,  28 
Repulsion  of  light  proceeding  radially, 

102,  108 

Retardation  of  time,  24,  55;  in  centri- 
fugal field,  129;  in  spherical  world, 
160 

Ricci,  89 

Riemann,  2,  89,  167 
Riemann-Christoffel  tensor,  89 
Riemannian,  or  non-Euclidean,  geo- 
metry, 6,  73,  84,  90 
Rigid  scale,  definition  of,  3 
Rotation,  absolute,  152,  164,  194 
Rotation  of  a  continuous  ring.  194 
Russell,  14,  197 

St  John,  130 


Semi-Euclidean  geometry,  47 

Simultaneity,  12,  51 

de  Sitter,  134,  159,  179 

Sobral,  eclipse  expedition  to.  117 

Space,  conventional,  9;  kinds  of,  81; 

meaning  of,  3,  8,  15;  relativity  of, 

34 

Space-like  intervals,  60,  187 
Space -time,  45 ;  due  to  Minkowski,  212 ; 

partitions  of,  54; 
Spherical  space-time,  159 
Standard  metre,  comparison  with,  168 
Stresses  in  continuous  matter,  193 
Structure  opposed  to  content,  197,  200 
Structure,  geodesic,  absolute  character 

of,  155,  164;  acceleration  of,  195; 

behaviour  at  infinity,  157 
Super-observer,  Newton's,  68 
Synthesis  of  appearances,  31,  182 

Tensors,  89,  189 

Thomson,  J.  J.,  61 

Time,  absolute,  163;  depends  on 
observer's  track,  38,  57;  for  moving 
observer,  24;  imaginary,  48;  mea- 
surement of,  13;  past  and  future, 
51;  "standing  still,"  26,  160 

Time-like  intervals,  60,  187 

Tracks,  natural,  70 

Vacuum,  defined  by  law  of  gravita- 
tion, 190 

Vector,  non-integrable  on  Weyl's 
theory,  174 

Velocity,  addition-law,  59;  definition 
of,  193;  static  character,  194 

Velocity  of  gravitation,  94,  147 

Velocity  of  light,  importance  of,  60; 
in  gravitational  field,  108;  system 
moving  with,  26,  56 

Warping  of  space,  8,  126 

Wave-front,  slewing  of,  108 

Weight,  of  light,  107,  111;  of  radio- 
active energy,  111;  proportional  to 
inertia,  137;  vanishes  inside  free 
projectile,  65 

Weyl,  174 

World,  186,  187 

World-line,  87 


RETURN     CIRCULATION  DEPARTMENT 

202  Main  Librar 


LOAN  PERIOD 
HOME  USE 


^^^SSil^U^o^Oe. 

KP  rpcharaed  by  brmg.ng  DOO^  ^  ^  ^ 


Renewc 


DUTASJTAMPEDBfcLOW 


3  1981 


AU6  1 7  1994 

' '    I    UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA, 

C^A-    ^SJ,,^       BERKELEY,  CA  94720 

'     POHAA  IMLJ.  UUO,  OVJrn,    i 


/  r-HA 


YC  60614 


