Manual of The Mother Church
Mary Baker Eddy (1903)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): The 89th edition of Mary Baker Eddy's Manual of The Mother Church (Boston: First Church of Christ, Scientist); the edition text was fixed in Eddy's lifetime (pre-1910). Public domain.

========================================================================

Eighty-ninth Edition


Manual of
The Mother Church
The First Church


of Christ, Scientist


in Boston, Massachusetts
by
MARY BAKER EDDY


Discoverer and Founder of Christian Science
and Author of Science and Health
with Key to the Scriptures


Published by
THE FIRST CHURCH OF CHRIST, SCIENTIST
in Boston, Massachusetts, U.S.A.


The facsimile of the signature of
Mary Baker Eddy and the design of
the Cross and Crown seal are trademarks
of The Christian Science Board of Directors,
registered in the United States
and other countries.


Copyright, 1895
By Christian Science Board of Directors
Copyright renewed, 1923


Copyright, 1895, 1896, 1897, 1898, 1899, 1901
By James A. Neal and Thomas W. Hatten


Copyright renewed, 1923, 1925, 1926, 1927, 1929


Copyright, 1903, 1904, 1906, 1908
By Mary Baker G. Eddy


Copyright renewed, 1931, 1932, 1934, 1936
All rights reserved


PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA


EXTRACT FROM A LETTER IN “MISCEL-
LANEOUS WRITINGS” By Mary Baker Eddy


HE Rules and By-Laws in the Manual

of The First Church of Christ, Scientist,

Boston, originated not in solemn con-

clave as in ancient Sanhedrim. They
were not arbitrary opinions nor dictatorial demands,
such as one person might impose on another. They
were impelled by a power not one’s own, were
written at different dates, and as the occasion re-
quired. They sprang from necessity, the logic of
events, — from the immediate demand for them as
a help that must be supplied to maintain the dignity
and defense of our Cause; hence their simple,
scientific basis, and detail so requisite to demon-
strate genuine Christian Science, and which will do
for the race what absolute doctrines destined for
future generations might not accomplish.


Ves *


—
Lote a
= eg mae i)
aay Uy enw tie
7 wit ali
. iy
“Et na
N nni— prcie aa
Fg of ders deghadl a
ata eo rs ovisteb, fue eS
>


Ai { mick bre ai aul nities: D
steed lw etterih OO: ee conae Ste ;
@ ~

wand - ’ ry wv arr sil} a


{Ent sesh siping ot


"An


TABLE OF CONTENTS


NEG TS ee, oe so, in) sy. saad Oe epee ;


Cuurcu By-Laws


CHURCH OFFICERS
Names, ELEecTION, AND Duties. Arr. I


NAMES ees. AOL Oa een en, SUNS SVERAY | BaP
Preciletites Sones sas. MR a ee. oe
Glerkcands | TeaSTer eo, eo Siedl oask oe av
REE Po Oh ee er meee cr a eee sees
Directorsinc-  fayin A. oc Sat tees?
GhurchiBusiness= >. — 27ss fae ay Seereaeeele
Publishing Buildings. 2.00"
Trusteeships and Syndicates ........
Duties'of Church Officersiiue i low.) de kes


Reapers oF Tue Moruer Cuurcu. Arr. II


Bilecorg ee hal oes e igge  he ae  ae
LST atel eee Os eee oe ene re Sen
Removals te Ale ea: dws ate soils <eciye ate lwtice
First Reader’s Residence ..........


6 CHURCH MANUAL


Duties or Reapers or THE Morner Cuurcu AND
oF ITs Brancuw Cuurcues. Art. III
Moral /Obhgations.;, 2. . 2. 9). eee 31


Hirst: Readers) ties maser 31
Stutable Selections: meant ann 31
Order of Reading 4, b. Jet Re tee ee a2


Naming Book and Author. . ..... . ewe se,


Readers in Branch Churches .......... oo
Enforcement of By-Laws-.< .- +. .-.-. . 0 S89 32
A Reader not a Leader’... . . ae eee 33
CHURCH MEMBERSHIP
QUALIFICATIONS FOR MemBersuip. Art. IV
Believe in Christian Science. . % 4 ....... 34
Free from Other Denominations. . .. . . Ee Ee at
Children when Twelve Years Old ........ 35
APPLICATIONS FOR MemBersuip. Arr. V
Students. of the Collese™ . . . 1 2 =Ges see 35
Other Students. 3. 5..:. 40 ley Se, eee 35
Students Pupils:.0 "7 a aa 36
Exceptional Cases ...? 7.4 2) a, 36
Addressed. to Clerk; «i. .) <5 os xetees Se 36
Endorsing Applications ..... .. ........ 37
Notice of Rejection. . «estes «eee 37
RECOMMENDATION AND ExEction. Arr. VI
Pupils of-Normal Students@) 4 (a. So eau 37
Members of The Mother Church ... .. .. . 37
Election ae/.. .2apet.) ane oo ae 38


Prospationary Mempersuire. Arr. VIT
Members who once Withdrew.. . . 2...) 38
Members once Dismissed
Ineligible for Probation


TABLE OF CONTENTS


DISCIPLINE
GUIDANCE OF Mempers. Arr. VIII


A Rule foreM ottves and-Acts, «:cqi\ itr w aes
Tovbe Readin Church... 52. teipwurcant let
Christ Jesus the: Ensample.. . . .... .>.
Dove tay ehwee sever Re pet gee, kor a hee
Prayecimecnrcn ee
AllertnessstorDuty 3 == ks ee
AG sO Das MOD Set ee ae tee


No Malpractice
Formulas Forbidden
No Adulterating Christian Science
No Incorrect Literature


Ghuoxious Books e..5 o.c4'.' 7, / Coe
BerC anita ata obo aris ona
Gury PP OMOGICAIS wees ate ie les ees oe o
Church Organizations Ample ........
Joming Another Society |. < pasehtT crete as
Forbidden Membership ..........
Officious, Members... A)-t.-— 2 el
decalal tes eapedi ee te ee et Be PE
Dlecal Aloptioie otek i ool est, se eae
sesot latitials <GeeSs- "Ph oe ee ka oe
Practitioners and Patients. .........
Duty to patents: 28 es be Se oe ys
AReniaienmlke gia Yale ben eo een. Geen
Charity GG ee nse) ee ot a RE
Uncharitable Publications .........
The GoldaniRule. & 4s Lente ot fictee
Numbering the People. - 2 «6 6 se eee
Our; Churchiliditicessy Were es) Stee


8 CHURCH MANUAL


No“Monopoly.” 2 1. 2° SS ee 49
Christianvscience NUESC alee ence anne 49


MarriaGE AND Decrease. Art. IX


A Legal Ceremony: ..... 20S.) 6 DG Sie. 49
Sudden Decease*......:-cigasee tal eet rl = 49
DesatTinc IN Pustic. Art. X :
No Unauthorized Debating ........... 50
Compuiaints. Art. XI
Departure froni*Tenets'. >... eee ee 50
Wiolationiof By-laws) 5 5) ete 50
Violation of Christian Fellowship ........ 51
Prelimmary Requirement. casein eee ene 51
Auithorityeeetas-s een lca nec a ec wee ee Dn
Members in Mother Church Only ........ 52
Working Against the Cause. . . .<.. .... 52
No Unchristian:GConductie =)... 5 maeen ) . ose e 53
Not totbearn(ifypnotismr’: =". 2s ~ ne ees 53
Publications:Unjust. .. . 22" 7 ee, (eee 53
The Mother Church of Christ, Scientist, Tenets . . 54
Special: Offenses ss. «. 5, <) aeeletek sdaeweees 54
Members of Branch Churches... ....... 54
Teacuers. Art. XII
Probation <2 °° pice sik setae an be ea ee 55
Misteachins) ic 5 ete te kd tee ee eee 55
MEETINGS
REGULAR AND SpeciAL Meetincs. Art. XIII
‘Annual’ Meetings 2 0 )¢k pene | SE ee 56
Meetings of Board of Directors ......... 56


Calledonly:by=theiClerk £.2../: eu hee 57


TABLE OF CONTENTS 9


CHURCH SERVICES


Tue CuristTIAN ScriENCE Pastor. Art. XIV
Ordination; |= tysded bh artiert by SST nee, x 58


READING In Pusuic. Art. XV
AnnouncmezAuthorssNames | cory csc eee = 58


WELCOMING STRANGERS. ArT. XVI


aherbeader'shwWeleome-../ 0 aes ce 59

The Local Members’ Welcome ......... 59
Services UninTERRUPTED. ArT. XVII

Continued Throughout the Year ........ 60

BasterObservancesame: <2 A ata) 4 eee ae 60

Laying .a Corner Stone->- 5 FI SUke tO, 60

Overflow. Meetings. 8 t.20, Tk PAA 61
Communion. Art. XVIII

iNowMore Gommunion, | 2 . eu: ewe) oe 2 61

Communion of Branch Churches ........ 61


Music iN THE Cuurcu. Art. XIX


SOIISEOROMOTPAUIst are > Gavucd erc:h “cee ieee che 61
Sunpay Scuoot. Art. XX

The Sunday scn0dlen. « Amun iNy es oS... 62

Teaching the-Children 2 462 2 = = =~ sMGE. 4 62

Subject for Lessons. . 6 ws ee 62


READING ROOMS. Arr. XXI
Scala HSincHe rate: Bard Thao. 7. SIG aRNAees s. 63


Wibrarians @ ale eae RL do cemtlip rts. 63
Literature in Reading Rooms .......... 64


Z


10 CHURCH MANUAL


RELATION AND DUTIES OF MEMBERS TO
PASTOR EMERITUS. Arr. XXII


The Title of Mother Changed. ........
A-Member. not.a.Leader. . .222°7 25...
Obedience:Required —) oo 3n a & Ge scee oe es


Understanding Communications


Reading and Attesting Letters
Unauthorized Reports
Private Communications
Unauthorized Legal Action
Duty to God


elie cane ae ant ae es we


THE MOTHER CHURCH AND BRANCH
CHURCHES. Arr. XXIII


Local Self-government .......... 6%
Titles 3) 2%... 2 5. gee Bo. dared tt tke tee
Motber Church, Uniques,  .ganee.) acs Se


Tenets Copyrighted
Manual
Organizing Churches
Requirements for Organizing Branch Churches
Privilege of Members
No Close Communion


Interpreting Communications... .....0..


Opportunity for Serving the Leader . .... .
Locdtione esheets ee of oe nee a a
Agreement Required. .......... ray Be
Incomplete Term of Service. .........
Students with Mrs, Eddy\; .). 0) . See
Mrs: Eddy's Room. .. .. accnGeeu) sroit ae
Pastor Emeritus to be Consulted . .. 2...


TABLE OF CONTENTS


INorInterferences. ae se eee ea Scye
Teachers’ and Practitioners’ Offices .......
Feecogmtions 4 ng cer caine AI MRA


GUARDIANSHIP OF CHURCH FUNDS. Arr.
XXIV
Church Edifice a Testimonial ..........
imancial citation me eee een ae
Reportor Directors 22... se oer es pe
Einancepcommittees = +5 ack, Ae eee
GodeRequrement “<cs 2 Sk oa aes
Provision ior thesMuture 4 4 ss.) eo) ee ne
Delbtiandsntveewta.! 3 nore kik See
Hereenciese 32 a5 ss fous as be ee ee
@ommitteconsbusinesss) 002 eee


THE CHRISTIAN SCIENCE PUBLISHING
SOCIETY. Arr. XXV


PS OATCOL) I TUSECES. | Bicce cheb Bidbig! i had beau os
DisposalcOf, MOnGse oie Sacer arise cue ieen
Vacancies im Trusteeship . . 2 6 2 ws ee se
Mavorm aud Wianaeer . 8. ne tS ee ep
Suitable Fmployees 3. eee ee 4 ee ye
ee PCTIOCIGAIGH MS Ree aa rueee ke fo See gh ae Oh ct yee
im ulevom@onductheestes Goo. fo 4 St hae oes
IBookettorbe:bubusnede mt) tee cl yn eee
RemovaltotiG@ardsise.0s = 2 4.5 2 8 a


TEACHING CHRISTIAN SCIENCE
Treacuers. Art. XXVI


Votive til cucuiionie is os ox alariiGeialf..
Caren eupis a gets ds bs. x Wee cakes.
Defense against Malpractice .......-..-.


of


12 CHURCH MANUAL


Number of Pupils \. ..... .. -. 7. eee oe 84
Pupil’s -Pattion® 00) Sane uies ee eee Diy 204
Associations =i) So 6) .eve- ches ho fe 84
AgSimelepHieldtofalvaborainames sain 84
Caring for Pupils of Strayed Members ..... . 85
Teachers must have Certificates... ...... 85


Pupits. Ant. XXVII


Authorizedstomlicacht- es aaeiee fe ere 86
Withoutebeacherssyets msc) te. ee eee 86
Basisitorlieachinoeaeme ss tery a) eee eee 86
Church, Membership’... s.. 0. she ee 87
Class Teaching: 25 Se a ae ee ee ee ee 87


BOARD OF EDUCATION
OrGaAnizaTION. Art. XXVIII


OMCETSits 30%, x CM ou et ee ae ee 88
Hlectionin 3 0 ered a ks Gee oe oe 88
President’ not ‘to be Consulted’ ©. 7. 2). 88
Presidency of Collégé* * > as St ee 89


APPLICANTS AND GRADUATES. ART. XXIX


Normal Teachers livas, gas geen ee oe, 89
Qualifications=S. kee, Aas Ree Pere pe 0 89
» Coertificates.oc vuesene coe ribet edt a 90


AcTION oF THE Boarp. Art. XXX


DesslOns ee aa” ok ie, cae eee ee 90
Special Instructioa? 4° (6 C2Ql TL, Sy. 90
Signatures © ajastim,: TVR Sek eee 91
Remuneration and Free Scholarship .. . 2. . . 91
Surplus Funds .02.. 4 42. . SA oe 91


TABLE OF CONTENTS 13


Healing Better than Teaching. ......... 92
Not Members of The Mother Church ... . . . 92


BOARD OF LECTURESHIP


ORGANIZATION AND Duties. Art. XXXI


PeleCHOMMe eee cce oy A ee, Pe one ote A 93
Duty of [ertirers syria ko eo 93
No Disruption of Branch Churches ...... . 93
ICCC D RONG ae natin ee ec a a eee 94
Citedit Lecturer’ jadi’ iste Ser 94


Cauuts For Lecrures. Art. XXXII


Brom the. Directors: 26... Pea, A oP 95
From Branch’Churches 2 9. ah sn 95
Drole Societies) (45e Jap 7s Gd oa a ee 95
anital-Lectuxves! 0G 2... +-. 5,4, +. <0.-, Se 95
No Lectures by Readers ............ 95
No Wednesday Evening Lectures ....... ., 96
Bectine lh eeae se sens ek ae I lh PRL 96
SASS ae ana yo ae 2 aay ene eee 96
Tiree puUmal CASES octane ee ee cae 96


COMMITTEE ON PUBLICATION. Arr. XXXIII


favthesMotherCharch 30 enirsie ae Gu Srehan: 97
DGtiesae Oe ae ee eae en eae wee
fneBrancus@hurchesm- a ame meen en oa ae 98
ADOC ee ee es Sk ee ae)
RemovalstrompOicewy ane sae ye a 100
CASE-Ob NCCES Gk gs oe he ae se 100


CHURCH-BUILDING. Arr. XXXIV


Building Committee, on. kin tes ee te 102
Desenationot Deeds) ie oy Saget es apa, 8 102
The Mother Church Building .......... 103


14 CHURCH MANUAL


CHURCH MANUAL. Arr. XXXV


For The Mother Church Only. ...... =~ . 104

Seventy-third Edition the Authority... .. . . 104

‘Amendment of By-Laws #2 J) o>: 2 So Ws
APPENDIX


SprciaAL INSTRUCTIONS REGARDING APPLICATIONS FOR
CruncH MEMBERSHIP 7... = & cee core


Present ORDER OF SERVICES IN THE MotHEeR CHURCH
AND) DRANCH] CHURCHES) 2+). ) saree see eae el20


PRESENT ORDER OF COMMUNION SERVICES IN BRANCH
CHURCHES ~3S5~.. . 6 6 Ss Ss eee eee


OrpDER oF EXERCISES FOR THE SUNDAY SCHOOL OF THE
Moruer CuurcH AND BrancH CuurcHES ... . 127


DEED: ORMURUST cc chen SS. es


Derrep Conveyinc LaNnp For CuurcH Purposes. . . . 136


TENETS


of The Mother Church
The First Church of Christ, Scientist


To be signed by those uniting with The First 1
Church of Christ, Scientist, in Boston, Mass.
1. As adherents of Truth, we take the inspired 3
Word of the Bible as our sufficient guide to eternal
| Life.

2. We acknowledge and adore one supreme and 6
infinite God. We acknowledge His Son, one Christ;
the Holy Ghost or divine Comforter; and man in
-God’s image and likeness. 9


_ 3. We acknowledge God’s forgiveness of sin in

| the destruction of sin and the spiritual understanding
that casts out evil as unreal. But the belief in sin is 12
punished so long as the belief lasts.


4. We acknowledge Jesus’ atonement as the evi-
dence of divine, efficacious Love, unfolding man’s 15
unity with God through Christ Jesus the Way-shower;
From Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures by Mary Baker


Eddy. © 1971 The Christian Science Board of Directors. Copyright
under Special Act of Congress, All rights reserved in all editions.


: [15]


16 TENETS OF THE MOTHER CHURCH


1 and we acknowledge that man is saved through Christ,
through Truth, Life, and Love as demonstrated by the

3 Galilean Prophet in healing the sick and overcoming
sin and death.


5. We acknowledge that the crucifixion of Jesus

6 and his resurrection served to uplift faith to under-

stand eternal Life, even the allness of Soul, Spirit, and
the nothingness of matter.


9 6. And we solemnly promise to watch, and pray
for that Mind to be in us which was also in Christ
Jesus; to do unto others as we would have them do

12 unto us; and to be merciful, just, and pure.


Mary Baker Eppy


HISTORICAL SKETCH


N THE spring of 1879, a little band of earnest

seekers after Truth went into deliberations over
forming a church without creeds, to be called the
_“CxHurcu oF Curist, Scientist.” They were mem-
bers of evangelical churches, and students of Mrs.
Mary Baker Eddy in Christian Science, and were
known as “Christian Scientists.”
At a meeting of the Christian Scientist Association,
April 12, 1879, on motion of Mrs. Eddy, it was
-yoted, — To organize a church designed to com-
| yaemorate the word and works of our Master, which
should reinstate primitive Christianity and its lost
| element of healing.
Mrs. Eddy was appointed on the committee to


corner stone whereof is, that Christian Science, as
taught and demonstrated by our Master, casts out


error, heals the sick, and restores the lost Israel:
2 [17]


| draft the Tenets of The Mother Church — the chief 15


18


18 HISTORICAL SKETCH


1 for ‘‘the stone which the builders rejected, the same
is become the head of the corner.”’

3 The charter for the Church was obtained June,
1879,* and the same month the members, twenty-six
in number, extended a call to Mary Baker Eddy

6 to become their pastor. She accepted the call,
and was ordained a. p. 1881. Although walking
through deep waters, the little Church went steadily

9 on, increasing in numbers, and at every epoch
saying,

“Hitherto hath the Lord helped us.” .

12 On the twenty-third day of September, 1892, at
the request of Rev. Mary Baker Eddy, twelve
of her students and Church members met and re-

15 organized, under her jurisdiction, the Christian
Science Church and named it, THe First CHurcH
OF CHRIST, SCIENTIST.

ig At this meeting twenty others of Mrs. Eddy’s
students and members of her former Church were
elected members of this Church, — those with others


21 that have since been elected were known as “First |


Members.”” The Church Tenets, Rules, and By-


Laws, as prepared by Mrs. Eddy, were adopted. A _
24 By-Law adopted March 17, 1903, changed the —


title of ‘First Members”’ to ‘Executive Members.”


(On July 8, 1908, the By-Laws pertaining to ‘“Ex-
27 ecutive Members”’ were repealed.)


HISTORICAL SKETCH 19


Tue First CHuRCH OF CurRIST, SCIENTIST, IN Bos-
ton, Mass., is designed to be built on the Rock,
Christ; even the understanding and demonstration
of divine Truth, Life, and Love, healing and saving
the world from sin and death; thus to reflect in some
degree the Church Universal and Triumphant.


:


* Steps were taken to promote the Church ‘of Christ, Scientist, in
April, May and June; formal organization was accomplished and
the charter obtained in August, 1879.


\ rt
| t f [ a
“
SAG | nf I
ce ae tie oats
Me CTP Th
4 | 9%
orient
5 - pi vine
®| ih. PY; j
Ler) dis? we it


‘
det Ade


La Ler
jy Ue ) ee a
ER oe ie :
(iTS ae eee


fv}


eo


-_
ss
-
c.
Fs


iL +


iy fear Poel


+ area


4 va. ; of


ill da” thay ae] ry@


»
a
Paya” lari 1k


a


CHURCH OFFICERS


Rev. MARY BAKER EDDY
Pastor Emeritus


ow


Christian Science Board of Directors
Mrs. LENORE D. HANKS
DAVID E. SLEEPER
DeWITT JOHN
OTTO BERTSCHI
CHARLES LOUIS REILLY


ows


Mrs. NAOMI PRICE
President


CLEM W. COLLINS
First Reader


Conducts services and reads from the Christian Science textbook,


“SCIENCE AND HEALTH WITH KEY TO THE
SCRIPTURES”
By Mary Baker Eddy


Miss JANE O. ROBBINS
Second Reader
Reads from the SCRIPTURES


Miss CORINNE LaBARRE
Clerk
Christian Science Center, Boston, Mass.
MARC E. ENGELER


Treasurer
Christian Science Center, Boston, Mass.


June, 1976 — June, 1977


21


CHURCH BY-LAWS


CHURCH BY-LAWS


CHURCH OFFICERS


ARTICLE I


NAMES, ELECTION, AND DUTIES


Names. Section1. The Church officers shall
consist of the Pastor Emeritus, a Board of Direc-
tors, a President, a Clerk, a Treasurer, and two
Readers.

President. Srcr. 2. The President shall be
elected, subject to the approval of the Pastor
_ Emeritus, by the Board of Directors ! on Mon-
| day preceding the annual meeting of the
' Church. The President shall hold office for one
_ year, and the same person is eligible for elec-
tion but once in three years.


Clerk and Treasurer. Sect. 3. The term of 15


office for the Clerk and the Treasurer of this


1 See under ‘Deed of Trust” for incorporation of the “Chris-
tian Science Board of Directors.”


[25]


26 CHURCH BY-LAWS Art. I


1 Church (also for the editors and the manager
of The Christian Science Publishing Society,
3 and the manager of the general Committee on
Publication in Boston) is one year each, dating
from the time of election to office. Incumbents

6 who have served one year or more, may be re-
elected, or new officers elected, at the annual
meeting held for this purpose, by a unanimous

9 vote of the Christian Science Board of Direc-
tors and the consent of the Pastor Emeritus
given in her own handwriting.

12 Readers. Secr. 4. Every third year Read-
ers shall be elected in The Mother Church by
the Board of Directors, which shall inform the

15 Pastor Emeritus of the names of its candidates
before they are elected; and if she objects, said
candidates shall not be chosen. The Directors

is shall fix the salaries of the Readers.

Directors. Sect. 5. The Christian Science
Board of Directors shall consist of five members.

21 They shail fill a vacancy occurring on that Board
after the candidate is approved by the Pastor
Emeritus. A majority vote or the request of

24 Mrs. Eddy shall dismiss a member. Members
shall neither report the discussions of this Board,
nor those with Mrs. Eddy.


NS


CHURCH OFFICERS Ua


Church Business. Sercr. 6. The business 1
of The Mother Church shall be transacted by
its Christian Science Board of Directors. The 3
manager of the general Committee on Publi-
cation in the United States shall order no spe-
cial action to be taken by said Committee that 6
is not named in the Manual of this Church
without consulting with the full Board of Di-
rectors of The Mother Church and receiving 9
the written consent of said Board.

Publishing Buildings. Srcr. 7. It shall be
the duty of the Christian Science Board of Di- 12
rectors to provide a suitable building for the
publication of The Christian Science Journal,
Christian Science Sentinel, Der Herold der 15
Christian Science, and all other Christian Sci-
ence literature published by The Christian Science
Publishing Society. It shall also be the duty 18
of the Christian Science Board of Directors to
provide suitable rooms, conveniently and pleas-
antly located in the same building, for the pub- 21
lication and sale of the books of which Mary
Baker Eddy is, or may be, the author, and of
other literature connected therewith. 24

Trusteeships and Syndicates. SkEcT. 8.
Boards of Trustees and Syndicates may be


28 CHURCH BY-LAWS


1 formed by The Mother Church, subject to the
approval of the Pastor Emeritus.

3 Duties of Church Officers. Sect. 9. Law
constitutes government, and disobedience to the
laws of The Mother Church must ultimate in

6 annulling its Tenets and By-Laws. Without a
proper system of government and form of ac-
tion, nations, individuals, and religion are un-

9 protected; hence the necessity of this By-Law
and the warning of Holy Writ: ‘‘That servant,
which knew his lord’s will, and prepared not

2 himself, neither did according to his will, shall
be beaten with many stripes.”

It is the duty of the Christian Science Board of

15 Directors to watch and make sure that the off-
cers of this Church perform the functions of
their several offices promptly and well. If an

is Officer fails to fulfil all the obligations of his
office, the Board of Directors shall immediately
call a meeting and notify this officer either to

21 resign his place or to perform his office faith-
fully; then failing to do either, said officer shall
be dismissed from this Church, and his dismis-

24 sal shall be written on the Church records.

It is the duty of any member of this Church,
and especially of one who has been or who is


CHURCH OFFICERS 29


the First Reader of a church, to inform the 1
Board of Directors. of the failure of the Com-
mittee on Publication or of any other officer in 3
this Church to perform his official duties. A
Director shall not make known the name of the
complainant. 6

If the Christian Science Board of Directors fails
to fulfil the requirements of this By-Law, and a
member of this Church or the Pastor Emeritus 9
shall complain thereof to the Clerk and the com-
plaint be found valid, the Directors shall resign
their office or perform their functions faithfully. 12
Failing to do thus, the Pastor Emeritus shall ap-
point five suitable members of this Church to fill
the vacancy. The salary of the members of the 15
- Board of Directors shall be at present two thou-
sand five hundred dollars each annually.


ArticLe II 18


READERS OF THE MOTHER CHURCH


_ Election. Section 1. The Readers for The
Mother Church shall be a man and a woman, 21
one to read the Bre, and one to read ScrENCE
-anp Heatran with Key To, THE SCRIPTURES.


30 CHURCH BY-LAWS


1 Eligibility. Srcr. 2. The Directors shall
select intelligible Readers who are exemplary
3 Christians and good English scholars. They
must be members of The Mother Church.
Removal. Srcr. 3. If a Reader in The
6 Mother Church be found at any time inadequate
or unworthy, he or she shall be removed from
office by a majority vote of the Board of Di-
9 rectors and the consent of the Pastor Emeritus,
and the vacancy supplied.
First Reader’s Residence. Srcr. 4. Unless
12 Mrs. Eddy requests otherwise, the First Reader
of The Mother Church shall eccupy, during his
term of Readership, the house of the Pastor
15 Emeritus, No. 385 Commonwealth Avenue, Bos-
ton. The Board of Directors shall pay from
the Church funds the taxes and rent on this
18 property; the Board shall attend to the insur-
ance before it expires, suitably furnish the
house, and keep the property in good repair, so
21 long as Mrs. Eddy does not occupy the house


herself and the occupants are satisfactory to
her.


CHURCH OFFICERS 31


ARTICLE III 1


DUTIES OF READERS OF THE MOTHER
CHURCH AND OF ITS BRANCH CHURCHES 3


Moral Obligations. Section 1. The Readers
of The Mother Church and of all its branch
_ churches must devote a suitable portion of their 6
| time to preparation for the reading of the Sunday
lesson, —a lesson on which the prosperity of
Christian Science largely depends. They must 9
keep themselves unspotted from the world, —
uncontaminated with evil, — that the mental at-
mosphere they exhale shall promote health and 12
holiness, even that spiritual animus so universally
needed.
First Readers’ Duties. Sect. 2. It shall be 1s
‘the duty of the First Readers to conduct the
| principal part of the Sunday services, and the
Wednesday evening meetings. 18
_ Suitable Selections. Scr. 3. The First
Readers shall read, as a part of the Wednesday
evening services, selections from the SCRIPTURES, 21
and from SciENCE AND HEALTH WITH KEY TO
THE SCRIPTURES.


32 CHURCH BY-LAWS Art. I


1 Order of Reading. Sect. 4. The First Read-
ers in the Christian Science churches shall read
3 the correlative texts in SCIENCE AND HEALTH
witH KEY TO THE SCRIPTURES; and the Second
Readers shall read the BrsLeE texts. The readings
6 from the Scriprures shall precede the readings
from SCIENCE AND HrattH. The Readers shall
not read from copies or manuscripts, but from
9 the books.
Naming Book and Author. Sect.5. The
Readers of SctENCE AND HEALTH witH KEy To
12 THE SCRIPTURES, before commencing to read
from this book, shall distinctly announce the full
title of the book and give the author’s name.
15 Such announcement shall be made but once
during the lesson.
Readers in Branch Churches. Sxcr. 6.
is These Readers shall be members of The Mother
Church. They shall read understandingly and
be well educated. They shall make no remarks
21 explanatory of the Lesson-SERMoN at any time,
but they shall read all notices and remarks that
may be printed in the Curistran SCIENCE QuaR-
24 TERLY. This By-Law applies to Readers in all
the branch churches.
Enforcement of By-Laws. Sect. 7. It shall


CHURCH OFFICERS 33


be the duty of every member of The Mother
Church, who is a First Reader in a Church of
Christ, Scientist, to enforce the discipline and
by-laws of the church in which he is Reader.

A Reader nota Leader. Sect. 8. The Church


Reader shall not be a Leader, but he shall main-


tain the Tenets, Rules, and discipline of the
Church. A Reader shall not be a President of
a church.


-


i)


for)


34 CHURCH BY-LAWS


1 CHURCH MEMBERSHIP


ARTICLE IV


3 QUALIFICATIONS FOR MEMBERSHIP


Believe in Christian Science. Srcrion 1.
To become a member of The Mother Church,
6 The First Church of Christ, Scientist, in Bos-
ton, Mass., the applicant must be a believer in
the doctrines of Christian Science, according to
9 the platform and teaching contained in the Chris-
tian Science textbook, Screnck anp HEALTH
with Key To tHE Scriptures, by Rev. Mary
12 Baker Eddy. The Braue, together with SctENCcE
AND HEaAttH and other works by Mrs. Eddy,
shall be his only textbooks for self-instruction
is in Christian Science, and for teaching and prac-
tising metaphysical healing.
Free from Other Denominations. Scr. 9.
18 This Church will receive a member of another
Church of Christ; Scientist, but not a church
member from a different denomination until that
21 membership is dissolved.


CHURCH MEMBERSHIP 35


Children when Twelve Years Old. Secr. 3. 1
Children who have arrived at the age of twelve
years, who are approved, and whose applications 3
are countersigned by one of Mrs. Eddy’s loyal stu-
dents, by a Director, or by a student of the Board
of Education, may be admitted to membership 6
with The Mother Church.


ARTICLE V
APPLICATIONS FOR MEMBERSHIP 9


Students of the College. Secrion 1. Appli-
cations for membership with The Mother Church


- from students of the Massachusetts Metaphysical 12


College who studied with Rev. Mary Baker Eddy,
shall be signed by the Christian Science Board
of Directors as evidence of the loyalty of the 1s
applicants.

Other Students. Scr. 2. Applicants for
membership who have not studied Christian Sci- 1s
ence with Rev. Mary Baker Eddy, can unite
with this Church only by approval from students
of Mrs. Eddy, loyal to the teachings of the text- 21
book, ScreNcE AND HEALTH wiTtH Key TO THE


36 CHURCH BY-LAWS


1 SCRIPTURES, or from members of The Mother
Church, as provided in Article VI, Sect. 2, of
3 these By-Laws.
Students’ Pupils. Secr. 3. Applications for
membership with The Mother Church, coming
6 from pupils of loyal students who have taken
the Primary or Normal Course at the Massa-
chusetts Metaphysical College or in the Board
9 of Education, or from pupils of those who have
passed an examination by the Board of Educa-
tion, shall have the approval and signature of
12 their teachers, except in such cases as are pro-
vided for in Sect. 4 of this Article.
Exceptional Cases. Srcr. 4. Loyal Chris-
15 tian Scientists whose teachers are deceased, ab-
sent, or disloyal, — or those whose teachers, for
insufficient cause, refuse to endorse their appli-
is cations for membership with The Mother Church,
— can apply to the Clerk of this Church, and
present to him a recommendation signed by three
21 members thereof in good standing, after which,
the unanimous vote of the Board of Directors
may admit said applicant to membership.
24 Addressed to Clerk. Scr. 5. All applica-


tions for membership must be addressed to the
Clerk of the Church.


CHURCH MEMBERSHIP sy


Endorsing Applications. Srcr. 6. A mem- 1
ber of The Mother Church shall not endorse nor
countersign an application for membership there- 3
with until after the blank has been properly filled
out by an applicant. A member who violates
this By-Law shall be disciplined. 6

Notice of Rejection. Srcr. 7. If an applica-
tion for membership with The First Church of
Christ, Scientist, in Boston, Mass., is rejected, the
Clerk of the Church shall send to the applicant a
notice of such rejection; but neither the Clerk
nor the Church shall be obliged to report the 12
cause for rejection.


ArTICLE VI
RECOMMENDATION AND ELECTION 15


Pupils of Normal Students. SECTION I.
One Normal student cannot recommend the pupil
of another Normal student, so long as both are 18
loyal to their Leader and to the Christian Science
textbook, except as provided for in Article V,
Sect. 4. 21

Members of The Mother Church. SkcT. 2.
Only members of The Mother Church are quali-


38 CHURCH BY-LAWS


1 fied to approve for membership individuals who
are known to them to be Christians, and faith-
3 ful, loyal students of the textbook, SctENCE AND
HEALTH witH Key To THE Scriptures. If the
approver is not a loyal student of Mrs. Eddy, a

6 Director of this Church, or a student of the Board
of Education who holds a degree, the application
must be countersigned by one of these.

9 Election. Scr. 3. Applicants for member-
ship in this Church, whose applications are
correctly prepared, may be elected by majority

12 vote of the Christian Science Board of Direc-
tors at the semi-annual meetings held for this
purpose.


15 ARTICLE VII


PROBATIONARY MEMBERSHIP


Members who once Withdrew. Sxcrion 1.

is Individuals who have heretofore been members
of this Church, or were members of the Church
of Christ, Scientist, organized in 1879 by Mary
21 Baker Eddy, but who have voluntarily with-
drawn, may be received into this Church on one
year’s probation, provided they are willing and


CHURCH MEMBERSHIP 39


anxious to live according to its requirements and
make application for membership according to
its By-Laws. If, at the expiration of said one
year, they are found worthy, they shall be re-
ceived into full membership, but if not found
worthy their applications shall be void.
Members once Dismissed. Sect. 2. A full
member or a probationary member, who has
been excommunicated once, and who afterward,
when sufficient time has elapsed thoroughly to
test his sincerity, gives due evidence of having
genuinely repented and of being radically re-


- formed, shall be eligible to probationary mem-
bership upon a unanimous vote of the Christian


Science Board of Directors.


Ineligible for Probation. Srcr. 3. If a


member has been twice notified of his excom-


|


- munication, he shall not again be received into
_ this Church.


12


15


18


40 CHURCH BY-LAWS


1 DISCIPLINE


ArticLe VIII


3 GUIDANCE OF MEMBERS


A Rule for Motives and Acts. SEcTION 1.

Neither animosity nor mere personal attachment

6 should impel the motives or acts of the members

of The Mother Church. In Science, divine Love

alone governs man; and a Christian Scientist

9 reflects the sweet amenities of Love, in rebuk-

ing sin, in true brotherliness, charitableness, and

forgiveness. The members of this Church should

12 daily watch and pray to be delivered from

all evil, from prophesying, judging, condemn-

ing, counseling, influencing or being influenced
15 erroneously.

To be Read in Church. Srcr. 2. The

above Church Rule shall be read in The Mother

1s Church and in the branch churches by the First

Reader on the first Sunday of each month.


On Communion day the Church Tenets are to
21 be read.


DISCIPLINE Al


Christ Jesus the Ensample. Srctr. 3. He
who dated the Christian era is the Ensample in
Christian Science. Careless comparison or irrev-
erent reference to Christ Jesus is abnormal in a
Christian Scientist, and is prohibited. When it is
necessary to show the great gulf between Chris-
tian Science and theosophy, hypnotism, or spirit-
ualism, do it, but without hard words. The wise
man saith, ‘A soft answer turneth away wrath.”
However despitefully used and misrepresented
by the churches or the press, in return employ
no violent invective, and do good unto your
enemies when the opportunity occurs. A de-
parture from this rule disqualifies a member for
office in the Church or on the Board of Lec-
tureship, and renders this member liable to dis-
cipline and, possibly, dismissal from The Mother
Church.

Daily Prayer. Srcr. 4. It shall be the duty
of every member of this Church to pray each


18


day: “‘Thy kingdom come;” let the reign of 21


divine Truth, Life, and Love be established in
me, and rule out of me all sin; and may Thy
Word enrich the affections of all mankind, and
govern them!


24


42 CHURCH BY-LAWS Art. VIII


1 Prayer in Church. Sect. 5. The prayers in
Christian Science churches shall be offered for
3 the congregations collectively and exclusively.
Alertness to Duty. Scr. 6. It shall be the
duty of every member of this Church to defend
6 himself daily against aggressive mental sugges-
tion, and not be made to forget nor to neglect
his duty to God, to his Leader, and to mankind.
9 By his works he shall be judged, — and justified
or condemned.
One Christ. Sect. 7. In accordance with
12 the Christian Science textbooks, — the BIBLE,
and ScrIENCE AND HEALTH with KEY TO THE
ScRIPTURES, — and in accord with all of Mrs.
is Eddy’s teachings, members of this Church shall
neither entertain a belief nor signify a belief in
more than one Christ, even that Christ whereof
is the Scripture beareth testimony.
No Malpractice. Srcr. 8. Members will not
intentionally or knowingly mentally malpractise,
21 Inasmuch as Christian Science can only be prac-~
tised according to the Golden Rule: “ All things
whatsoever ye would that men should do to you,
24 do ye even so to them.” (Matt. 7:12.)
A member of The Mother Church who men-
tally malpractises upon or treats our Leader or


DISCIPLINE 43


her staff without her or their consent shall be dis-
ciplined, and a second offense as aforesaid shall
cause the name of said member to be dropped
forever from The Mother Church.

Formulas Forbidden. Sect. 9. No member
shall use written formulas, nor permit his patients
or pupils to use them, as auxiliaries to teach-
ing Christian Science or for healing the sick.
Whatever is requisite for either is contained in
the books of the Discoverer and Founder of
Christian Science. Sometimes shemay strengthen
the faith by a written text as no one else can.

No Adulterating Christian Science. Sxct. 10.
A member of this Church shall not publish
profuse quotations from Mary Baker Eddy’s
copyrighted works without her permission, and
shall not plagiarize her writings. This By-Law
| not only calls more serious attention to the com-
_-mandment of the Decalogue, but tends to pre-
_ vent Christian Science from being adulterated.
_ No Incorrect Literature. Secr. 11. A mem-
_ ber of this Church shall neither buy, sell, nor cir-
culate Christian Science literature which is not
correct in its statement of the divine Principle
: and rules and the demonstration of Christian
Science. Also the spirit in which the writer


:
:


44 CHURCH BY-LAWS Art. VIII


1 has written his literature shall be definitely con-
sidered. His writings must show strict adher-
3 ence to the Golden Rule, or his literature shall
not be adjudged Christian Science. A departure
from the spirit or letter of this By-Law involves

6 schisms in our Church and the possible loss, for
a time, of Christian Science.

Obnoxious Books. Sect. 12. A member of

9 this Church shall not patronize a publishing
house or bookstore that has for sale obnoxious
books.

12 Per Capita Tax. Srcr. 13. Every member
of The Mother Church shall pay annually a per
capita tax of not less than one dollar, which shall

15 be forwarded each year to the Church Treasurer.

Church Periodicals. Srcr. 14. It shall be the
privilege and duty of every member, who can
is afford it, to subscribe for the periodicals which
are the organs of this Church; and it shall be
the duty of the Directors to see that these period-

21 icals are ably edited and kept abreast of the
times.

Church Organizations Ample. Srcr. 15.

24 Members of this Church shall not unite with
organizations which impede their progress in
Christian Science. God requires our whole heart,


DISCIPLINE 45


aud He supplies within the wide channels of The
Mother Church dutiful and sufficient occupation
for all its members.

Joining Another Society. Secr. 16. It shall
be the duty of the members of The Mother
Church and of its branches to promote peace on
earth and good will toward men; but members
of The Mother Church shall not hereafter be-
come members of other societies except those
specified in The Mother Church Manual, and
they shall strive to promote the welfare of all
mankind by demonstrating the rules of divine
Love.

Forbidden Membership. Sect. 17. A mem-
ber of The First Church of Christ, Scientist, in
Boston, Mass., shall not be a member of any
church whose Readers are not Christian Scientists
and members of The Mother Church.

Officious Members. Sect. 18. A member of
The Mother Church is not entitled to hold office
or read in branch churches of this denomination
except by invitation.

Legal Titles. Scr. 19. Students of Chris-
tian Science must drop the titles of Reverend and
Doctor, except those who have received these
titles under the laws of the State.


_


5


18


24


46 CHURCH BY-LAWS Art. VIII


1 Illegal Adoption. Srcr. 20. No person shall
be a member of this Church who claims a spirit-
3 ually adopted child or a spiritually adopted hus-
band or wife. There must be legal adoption and
legal marriage, which can be verified according
6 to the laws of our land.

Use of Initials ““C.S.”” Sect. 21. A member
of The Mother Church shall not place the initials
9 “C.S.” after his name on circulars, cards, or
leaflets, which advertise his business or profes-
sion, except as a Christian Science practitioner.
12 Practitioners and Patients. Srcr. 22. Mem-
bers of this Church shall hold in sacred confi-
dence all private communications made to them
15 by their patients; also such information as may
come to them by reason of their relation of prac-
titioner to patient. A failure to do this shall sub-

is ject the offender to Church discipline.
A member of The Mother Church shall not,
under pardonable circumstances, sue his patient
21 for recovery of payment for said member’s
practice, on penalty of discipline and liability
to have his name removed from membership.
24 Also he shall reasonably reduce his price in
chronic cases of recovery, and in cases where
he has not effected a cure. A Christian Scientist


DISCIPLINE AT
is a humanitarian; he is benevolent, forgiving, 1
long-suffering, and re to overcome evil with
good. 3
Duty to Patients. Sect. 23. If a member of


_ this Church has a patient whom he does not heal,


and whose case he cannot fully diagnose, he 6


_ may consult with an M. D. on the anatomy in-


volved. And it shall be the privilege of a Chris-
tian Scientist to confer with an M. D. on Ontol- 9


ogy, or the Science of being.


Testimonials. Sect. 24. “Glorify God in


your body, and in your spirit, which are God’s”’ 12


(St. Paul). Testimony in regard to the healing
of the sick is highly important. More than a mere
rehearsal of blessings, it scales the pinnacle of 15


_ praise and illustrates the demonstration of Christ,
“who healeth all thy diseases’ (Psalm 103:3).
This testimony, however, shall not include a de- 18
scription of symptoms or of suffering, though the
| generic name of the disease may be indicated.
'This By-Law applies to testimonials which appear 21
in the periodicals and to those which are given


at the Wednesday evening meeting.
Charity to All. Sect. 25. While members 24


BE this Church do not believe in the doctrines


of theosophy, hypnotism, or spiritualism, they


A8 CHURCH BY-LAWS


1 cherish no enmity toward those who do believe
in such doctrines, and will not harm them. But

3 whenever God calls a member to bear testimony
to Truth and to defend the Cause of Christ, he
shall do it with love and without fear.

6 Uncharitable Publications. Srcr. 26. A
member of this Church shall not publish, nor
cause to be published, an article that is unchari-

9 table or impertinent towards religion, medicine,
the courts, or the laws of our land.

The Golden Rule. Sect. 27. A member of

12 The Mother Church shall not haunt Mrs. Eddy’s
drive when she goes out, continually stroll by
her house, or make a summer resort near her

is for such a purpose. |

Numbering the People. Srcr. 28. Christian
Scientists shall not report for publication the
is number of the members of The Mother Church,
nor that of the branch churches. According to
the Scripture they shall turn away from person-
21 ality and numbering the people.
Our Church Edifices. Srcr. 29. The period-
icals of our denomination do not publish de-
24 scriptions of our church edifices, but they may


quote from other periodicals or give incidental
narratives.


DISCIPLINE 49


No Monopoly. Scr. 30. A Scientist shall
not endeavor to monopolize the healing work in
any church or locality, to the exclusion of others,
but all who understand the teachings of Christian
Science are privileged to enter into this holy work,
and “‘by their fruits ye shall know them.”

Christian Science Nurse. Sect. 31. A mem-


ber of The Mother Church who represents him-
| self or herself as a Christian Science nurse shall


- be one who has a demonstrable knowledge of


Christian Science practice, who thoroughly under-


_ stands the practical wisdom necessary in a sick


room, and who can take proper care of the sick.

The cards of such persons may be inserted in
The Christian Science Journal under rules estab-
lished by the publishers.


ArtiIcLe IX


MARRIAGE AND DECEASE
A Legal Ceremony. Section 1. If a Chris-


tian Scientist is to be married, the ceremony
shall be performed by a clergyman who is legally 21
- authorized.


Sudden Decease. Srcr. 2. If a member of
The Mother Church shall decease suddenly, with-


out previous injury or illness, and the cause
4 ,


re


18


24


50 CHURCH BY-LAWS


1 thereof be unknown, an autopsy shall be made
by qualified experts. When it is possible the

3 body of a female shall be prepared for burial by
one of her own sex.


ARTICLE X


6 DEBATING IN PUBLIC


No Unauthorized Debating. Section 1. A

member of this Church shall not debate on Chris-

9 tian Science in public debating assemblies, with-
out the consent of the Board of Directors.


ARTICLE XI


12 COMPLAINTS


Departure from Tenets. Srction 1. If a
member of this Church shall depart from the
15 Tenets and be found having the name without
the life of a Christian Scientist, and another
member in good standing shall from Christian
18 motives make this evident, a meeting of the Board
of Directors shall be called, and the offender’s
case shall be tried and said member exonerated,
21 put on probation, or excommunicated.
Violation of By-Laws. Srcr. 2. A member
who is found violating any of the By-Laws


DISCIPLINE 51


or Rules herein set forth, shall be admonished
in consonance with the Scriptural demand in
Matthew 18:15-17; and if he neglect to accept
such admonition, he shall be placed on probation,
or if he repeat the offense, his name shall be
dropped from the roll of Church membership.

Violation of Christian Fellowship. Srcr. 3.
Any member who shall unjustly aggrieve or
vilify the Pastor Emeritus or another member,
or who does not live in Christian fellowship with
members who are in good and regular standing
with this Church, shall either withdraw from the
Church or be excommunicated.

Preliminary Requirement. Srcr. 4. No
Church discipline shall ensue until the require-
ments according to the Scriptures, in Matthew
18:15-17, have been strictly obeyed, unless a
By-Law governing the case provides for imme-
diate action.

Authority. Srcr. 5. The Christian Science
Board of Directors has power to discipline, place
on probation, remove from membership, or to
excommunicate members of The Mother Church.
Only the members of this Board shall be pres-
ent at meetings for the examination of com-
plaints against Church members; and they alone


to


4,


5 CHURCH BY-LAWS Art. XI


1 shall vote on cases involving The Mother Church
discipline.

3 Members in Mother Church Only. Secr. 6.
A complaint against a member of The Mother
Church, if said member belongs to no branch

6 church and if this complaint is not for mental
malpractice, shall be laid before this Board, and
within ten days thereafter, the Clerk of the

9 Church shall address a letter of inquiry to the
member complained of as to the validity of
the charge. If a member is found guilty of that

12 whereof he is accused and his previous character
has been good, his confession of his error and
evidence of his compliance with our Church

15 Rules shall be deemed sufficient by the Board
for forgiveness for once, and the Clerk of the
Church shall immediately so inform him. But

is a second offense shall dismiss a member from
the Church.

Working Against the Cause. Srcr. Fo lf ca

21 member of this Church shall, mentally or other-
wise, persist in working against the interests of
another member, or the interests of our Pastor

24 Emeritus and the accomplishment of what she
understands is advantageous to this Church and
to the Cause of Christian Science, or shall influ-


DISCIPLINE 53


ence others thus to act, upon her complaint or 1
the complaint of a member for her or for himself,
it shall be the duty of the Board of Directors 3
immediately to call a meeting, and drop forever
the name of the member guilty of this offense
from the roll of Church membership. 6

No Unchristian Conduct. Secr. 8 If a
member of this Church were to treat the author
of our textbook disrespectfully and cruelly, upon 9
her complaint that member should be excommu-
nicated. If a member, without her having re-
quested the information, shall trouble her on 12
subjects unnecessarily and without her consent,
it shall be considered an offense.

Not to Learn Hypnotism. Sect. 9. Mem- 1s
bers of this Church shall not learn hypnotism
on penalty of being excommunicated from this
Church. No member shall enter a complaint of 1s
mental malpractice for a sinister purpose. If
the author of Science AND Heattu shall bear
witness to the offense of mental malpractice, it 21
shall be considered a sufficient evidence thereof.

Publications Unjust. Srcr. 10. If a mem-
ber of The Mother Church publishes, or causes 24
to be published, an article that is false or unjust,
hence injurious, to Christian Science or to its


54 CHURCH BY-LAWS


1 Leader, and if, upon complaint by another mem-
ber, the Board of Directors finds that the offense
3 has been committed, the offender shall be sus-
pended for not less than three years from his
or her office in this Church and from Church
6 membership. |
The Mother Church of Christ, Scientist,
Tenets. Sect. 11. If amember of The Mother
9 Church of Christ, Scientist, or a member of a
branch of this Church break the rules of its
Tenets as to unjust and unmerciful conduct —
12 on complaint of Mrs. Eddy our Pastor Emeritus
—and this complaint being found valid, his or
her name shall be erased from The Mother
15 Church and the branch church’s list of mem-
bership and the offender shall not be received
into The Mother Church or a branch church
is for twelve years.
Special Offense. Srcr. 12. If a member of
this Church, either by word or work, represents
21 falsely to or of the Leader and Pastor Emeritus,
said member shall immediately be disciplined, and
a second similar offense shall remove his or her
o4 Name from membership in The Mother Church.
Members of Branch Churches. Scr. 13. A
member of both The Mother Church and a branch


DISCIPLINE 55
Church of Christ, Scientist, or a Reader, shall not 1
report nor send notices to The Mother Church,
or to the Pastor Emeritus, of errors of the mem- 3


| bers of their local church; but they shall strive
to overcome these errors. Each church shall
separately and independently discipline its own 6


members, — if this sad necessity occurs.


ARTICLE XII


TEACHERS 9


Probation. Section 1. For sufficient rea-


‘sons it may be decided that a teacher has so
strayed as not to be fit for the work of a Reader 12


in church or a teacher of Christian Science.


Although repentant and forgiven by the Church
and retaining his membership, this weak member 15
shall not be counted loyal till after three years
‘of exemplary character. Then the Board of

| Directors may decide if his loyalty has been 18
proved by uniform maintenance of the life of
a consistent, consecrated Christian Scientist.


Misteaching. Sect. 2. If a member of this 21


Church is found trying to practise or to teach
Christian Science contrary to the statement


thereof in its textbook, SctENCE AND HEALTH 24


56 CHURCH BY-LAWS


1 WITH Key TO THE SCRIPTURES, it shall be the
duty of the Board of Directors to admonish
3 that member according to Article XI, Sect. 4.
Then, if said member persists in this offense,
his or her name shall be dropped from the roll
6 of this Church.


MEETINGS


ARTICLE XIII


9 REGULAR AND SPECIAL MEETINGS


Annual Meetings. Section 1. The regular
meetings of The Mother Church shall be held
12 annually, on Monday following the first Sunday
in June. No other than its officers are required
to be present. These assemblies shall be for
15 listening to the reports of Treasurer, Clerk, and
Committees, and general reports from the Field.
Meetings of Board of Directors. Srcr. 9.

is The annual meeting of the Christian Science
Board of Directors, for electing officers and
other business, shall be held on Monday preced-

z1 ing the annual meeting of the Church. Regular
meetings for electing candidates to membership


MEETINGS Sit


| with The Mother Church, and for the transac-


tion of such other business as may properly come
before these meetings, shall be held on the Fri-


_ day preceding the first Sunday in June, and on


the first Friday in November of each year. Spe-


_ cial meetings may be held at any time upon the
_ call of the Clerk.


Called only by the Clerk. Srcr. 3. ° Before


| calling a meeting of the members of this Church
(excepting its regular sessions) it shall be the


duty of the Clerk to inform the Board of Di-
rectors and the Pastor Emeritus of his intention,


| and to state definitely the purpose for which the
- members are to convene. The Clerk must have
the consent of this Board and the Pastor Emer-
_ itus, before he can call said meeting.


15


58 CHURCH BY-LAWS


1 CHURCH SERVICES


ARTICLE XIV


3 THE CHRISTIAN SCIENCE PASTOR


Ordination. Section 1. I, Mary Baker
Eddy, ordain the BrpLe, and ScIENCE AND
6 HEALTH wiTH Key To THE ScripTURES, Pastor
over The Mother Church, — The First Church
of Christ, Scientist, in Boston, Mass., — and
9 they will continue to preach for this Church
and the world.
The Lesson-Sermon. Sect. 2. The subject
12 of the Lesson-Sermon in the morning service of
The Mother Church, and of the branch Churches
of Christ, Scientist, shall be repeated at the other
15 Services on Sunday. The correlative Biblical
texts in the Lesson-Sermon shall extend from
Genesis to Revelation.


18 ARTICLE XV


READING IN PUBLIC


Announcing Author’s Name. Srction Ik
21 To pour into the ears of listeners the sacred


CHURCH SERVICES 59


revelations of Christian Science indiscriminately, 1
or without characterizing their origin and thus
distinguishing them from the writings of authors 3
who think at random on this subject, is to
lose some weight in the scale of right think-
ing. Therefore it is the duty of every member 6
of this Church, when publicly reading or quot-
ing from the books or poems of our Pastor
Emeritus, first to announce the name of the 9
author. Members shall also instruct their pupils
to adopt the aforenamed method for the benefit
of our Cause. 12


ArTICLE XVI


WELCOMING STRANGERS


The Leader’s Welcome. Section 1. Mrs. 15
Eddy welcomes to her seats in the church,
persons of all sects and denominations who
| come to listen to the Sunday sermon and are 1s
not otherwise provided with seats.

The Local Members’ Welcome. Sect. 2. It
- shall be the duty and privilege of the local mem- 21
bers of The Mother Church to give their seats, if
necessary, to strangers who may come to attend
the morning services. } 24


60 CHURCH BY-LAWS


1 ArticLeE XVII


SERVICES UNINTERRUPTED


3 Continued Throughout the Year. SrcrTIon 1.
The services of The Mother Church shall be
continued twelve months each year. One meet-

6 ing on Sunday during the months of July and
August is sufficient. A Christian Scientist is
not fatigued by prayer, by reading the Scriptures

9 or the Christian Science textbook. Amusement
or idleness is weariness. Truth and Love rest
the weary and heavy laden.

12 Easter Observances. Sxcr. 2. In the United
States there shall be no special observances,
festivities, nor gifts at the Easter season by

15 members of The Mother Church. Gratitude
and love should abide in every heart each day
of all the years. Those sacred words of our

1s beloved Master, ‘“‘ Let the dead bury their dead,”
and “Follow thou me,” appeal to daily Christian
endeavors for the living whereby to exemplify

21 Our risen Lord.

Laying a Corner Stone. Srcr. 3. No large
gathering of people nor display shall be allowed

24 When laying the Corner Stone of a Church of
Christ, Scientist. Let the ceremony be devout.


CHURCH SERVICES 61


No special trowel should be used. (See ScIENCE 1
AND HEALTH, page 140.)

Overflow Meetings. Srcr. 4. A Church of 3
Christ, Scientist, shall not hold two or more
Sunday services at the same hour.


ArtTICcCLE XVIII 6


COMMUNION


Wo more Communion. SeEcTION 1. The
Mother Church of Christ, Scientist, shall observe 9


no more Communion seasons.


Communion of Branch Churches. Srcr. 2.
The Communion shall be observed in the branch 12
churches on the second Sunday in January and
July of each year, and at this service the Tenets
of The Mother Church are to be read. 15


ARTICLE XIX


MUSIC IN THE CHURCH


Soloist and Organist. Section 1. The music 1s


| in The Mother Church shall not be operatic, but


of an appropriate religious character and of a


recognized standard of musical excellence; it 21


shall be played in a dignified and suitable man-
ner. Music from the organ alone should con-
tinue about eight or nine minutes for the 2


62 CHURCH BY-LAWS


1 voluntary and six or seven minutes for the post-
lude, the offertory conforming to the time re-

3 quired to take the collection. The solo singer
shall not neglect to sing any special hymn selected
by the Board of Directors.


6 ARTICLE XX
SUNDAY SCHOOL


The Sunday School. Section 1. Pupils may
9 be received in the Sunday School classes of any
Church of Christ, Scientist, up to the age of
twenty years, and by transfer from another
12 Church of Christ, Scientist, up to that age, but
no pupil shall remain in the Sunday School of
any Church of Christ, Scientist, after reaching
15 the age of twenty. None except the officers,
teachers, and pupils should attend the Sunday
School exercises.
is Teaching the Children. SECT. 92. The
Sabbath School children shall be taught the
Scriptures, and they shall be instructed ac-
21 cording to their understanding or ability to grasp
the simpler meanings of the divine Principle that
they are taught. -
24 Subject for Lessons. Sxcr. 3. The first
lessons of the children should be the Ten Com-


|


READING ROOMS 63


mandments (Exodus 20: 3-17), the Lord’s
Prayer (Matt. 6: 9-13), and its Spiritual In-


_ terpretation by Mary Baker Eddy, Sermon on
the Mount (Matt. 5: 3-12). The next les-


sons consist of such questions and answers as


are adapted to a juvenile class, and may be
_ found in the Christian Science Quarterly Lessons,
read in Church services. The instruction given
_ by the children’s teachers must not deviate from


the absolute Christian Science contained in their
textbook.


READING ROOMS


ARTICLE X XI
Establishment. Section 1. Each church of


the Christian Science denomination shall have
a Reading Room, though two or more churches
' may unite in having Reading Rooms, provided
these rooms are well located.


Librarian. Sect. 2. The individuals who


take charge of the Reading Rooms of The


Mother Church shall be elected by the Christian


- Science Board of Directors, subject to the ap-
| proval of Mary Baker Eddy. He or she shall


have no bad habits, shall have had experience in


12


15


18


24


64. CHURCH BY-LAWS


1 the Field, shall be well educated, and a devout
Christian Scientist.’

3 Literature in Reading Rooms. Sect. 3. The
literature sold or exhibited in the Reading Rooms
of Christian Science Churches shall consist only

6 of Science and Health with Key to the Scrip-
tures, by Mary Baker Eddy, and other writings
by this author; also the literature published or

9 sold by The Christian Science Publishing Society.


RELATION AND DUTIES OF MEM-
BERS TO PASTOR EMERITUS


12 ARTICLE XXII
The Title of Mother Changed. Srcrion 1.
In the year eighteen hundred and ninety-five,
15 loyal Christian Scientists had given to the author
of their textbook, the Founder of Christian Sci-
ence, the individual, endearing term of Mother.
1s At first Mrs. Eddy objected to being called thus,
but afterward consented on the ground that this
appellative in the Church meant nothing more
21 than a tender term such as sister or brother. In
the year nineteen hundred and three and after,
owing to the public misunderstanding of this
4 name, it is the duty of Christian Scientists to
1 See also Article XXYV, Sect. 7.


RELATION OF MEMBERS TO PASTOR EMERITUS 65
drop the word mother and to substitute Leader,


already used in our periodicals.
A Member not a Leader. Szcr. 2. A


Hsciberach whieuhietnchixehweteGhrists Sei-


|. entist, in Boston, Mass., shall not be called


_ Leader by members of this Church, when this
term is used in connection with Christian
| Science.


Obedience Required. Srcr. 3. It shall be


_ the duty of the officers of this Church, of the
_ editors of the Christian Science Journal, Sen-


tinel, and Der Herold, of the members of the
Committees on Publication, of the Trustees of
The Christian Science Publishing Society, and
of the Board of Education promptly to comply


with any written order, signed by Mary Baker
_ Eddy, which applies to their official functions.
| Disobedience to this By-Law shall be sufficient
| cause for the removal of the offending member
| from office.


The vacancy shall be supplied by a majority


vote of the Christian Science Board of Direc-
tors, and the candidate shall be subject to the


approval of Mary Baker Eddy.
Understanding Communications. Sercr. 4.


If the Clerk of this Church shall receive a com-
5 ,


12


—


5


_


8


24


66 CHURCH BY-LAWS Art. XXII


1 munication from the Pastor Emeritus which he
does not fully understand, he shall inform her

3 of this fact before presenting it to the Church
and obtain a clear understanding of the matter,
— then act in accordance therewith.

6 Interpreting Communications. Scr. 5. If
at a meeting of this Church a doubt or dis-
agreement shall arise among the members as to

9 the signification of the communications of the
Pastor Emeritus to them, before action is taken
it shall be the duty of the Clerk to report to her

12 the vexed question and to await her explanation
thereof.

Reading and Attesting Letters. Scr. 6.

15 When a letter or a message from the Pastor
Emeritus is brought before a meeting of this
Church, or she is referred to as authority for

is business, it shall be the duty of the Church to
inquire if all of the letter has been read, and to
require all of it to be read; also to have any

21 authority supposed to come from her satisfac-
torily attested.

Unauthorized Reports. Srcr. 7. Members

24 of this Church shall not report on authority an
order from Mrs. Eddy that she has not sent,
either to the Boards or to the executive bodies


RELATION OF MEMBERS TO PASTOR EMERITUS 67


of this Church. The Pastor Emeritus is not to
be consulted on cases of discipline, on the cases
of candidates for admission to this Church, or
on the cases of those on trial for dismissal from
the Church.

Private Communications. Srcr. 8. A strictly
private communication from the Pastor Emeritus
to a member of her Church shall not be made
public without her written consent.

Unauthorized Legal Action. Srcr. g. A
member of this Church shall not employ an at-
torney, nor take legal action on a case not pro-
vided for in its By-Laws — if said case relates
to the person or to the property of Mary Baker
Eddy — without having personally conferred
with her on said subject.

Duty to God. Scr. ro. Members of this
Church who turn their attention from the divine
Principle of being to personality, sending gifts,
congratulatory despatches or letters to the Pastor
Emerituson Thanksgiving, Christmas, New Year,
or Easter, break a rule of this Church and are
amenable therefor.

Opportunity for Serving the Leader. SECT.
11. At the written request of the Pastor Emeri-
tus, Mrs. Eddy, the Board of Directors shall


68 CHURCH BY-LAWS Art. XXII


1 immediately notify a person who has been a
member of this Church at least three years to
3 go in ten days to her, and it shall be the duty
of the member thus notified to remain with Mrs.
Eddy three years consecutively. A member who
6 leaves her in less time without the Directors’
consent or who declines to obey this call to
duty, upon Mrs. Eddy’s complaint thereof shall
9 be excommunicated from The Mother Church.
Members thus serving the Leader shall be paid
semi-annually at the rate of one thousand dol-
2 lars yearly in addition to rent and board. Those
members whom she teaches the course in Divin-
ity, and who remain with her three consecutive
15 years, receive the degree of the Massachusetts
Metaphysical College.
Location. Srecr. 12. Rev. Mary Baker Eddy
is calls to her home or allows to visit or to locate
therein only those individuals whom she engages
through the Christian Science Board of Direc-
a1 tors of The Mother Church. This By-Law takes
effect on Dec. 15, 1908.
Agreement Required. Srcr. 13. When the


‘4 Christian Science Board of Directors calls a stu-


dent in accordance with Article XXII, Sect. r1,
of our Church Manual to the home of their


RELATION OF MEMBERS TO PASTOR EMERITUS 69


_ Leader, Mrs. Eddy, said student shall come under
a signed agreement to remain with Mrs. Eddy
_ if she so desires, during the time specified in the
| Church Manual.

_ Incomplete Term of Service. NECTLGf-pl fica
- student who has been called to serve our Leader
in accordance with Article XXII, Sect. 11, of
_ the Church Manual leaves her before the expira-
tion of the time therein mentioned such student
shall pay to Mrs. Eddy whatsoever she may
charge for what she has taught him or her dur-
ing the time of such service.

Help. Srcr. 15. If the author of the Chris-
tian Science textbook call on this Board for
household help or a handmaid, the Board shall
immediately appoint a proper member of this
Church therefor, and the appointee shall go im-
_ mediately in obedience to the call. “ He that lov-
eth father or mother more than me is not worthy
of me.” (Matt. 10:37.)
| Students with Mrs. Eddy. Srcr. 16. Stu-
dents employed by Mrs. Eddy at her home shall
~ not take care of their churches or attend to other
affairs outside of her house.

Mrs. Eddy’s Room. Sect. 17. The room in
The Mother Church formerly knownas“ Mother's
Room” shall hereafter be closed to visitors.


_


5


_


8


21


24


27


70 CHURCH BY-LAWS


1 Pastor Emeritus to be Consulted. Strct 18.
The Mother Church shall not make a church By-
3 Law, nor enter into a business transaction witha
Christian Scientist in the employ of Rev. Mary
Baker Eddy, without first consulting her on said
6 subject and adhering strictly to her advice thereon.


THE MOTHER CHURCH AND
BRANCH CHURCHES


9 ARTICLE XXIII


Local Self-government. SrcTion 1. The
Mother Church of Christ, Scientist, shall assume
12 no general official control of other churches, and
it shall be controlled by none other.
Each Church of Christ, Scientist, shall have its
15 own form of government. No conference of
churches shall be held, unless it be when our
churches, located in the same State, convene to
is confer on a statute of said State, or to confer
harmoniously on individual unity and action of
the churches in said State.
21 Titles. «Sect. 2. “The First Church. of
Christ, Scientist,” is the legal title of The Mother


THE MOTHER CHURCH AND BRANCH CHURCHES 71


Church. Branch churches of The Mother Church
may take the title of First Church of Christ,
Scientist; Second Church of Christ, Scientist;


and so on, where more than one church is es-


| tablished in the same place; but the article


“The” must not be used before titles of branch
churches, nor written on applications for mem-


_ bership in naming such churches.


Mother Church Unique. Sect. 3. In its


- relation to other Christian Science churches, in


its By-Laws and self-government, The Mother


| Church stands alone; it occupies a position that
no other church can fill. Then for a branch
- church to assume such position would be disas-


trous to Christian Science. Therefore, no Church


of Christ, Scientist, shall be considered loyal


that has branch churches or adopts The Mother
Church’s form of government, except in such cases


 asare specially allowed and named in this Manual.


Tenets Copyrighted. Sect. 4. Branch


| churches shall not write the Tenets of The


Mother Church in their church books, except


they give the name of their author and her
permission to publish them as Tenets of The


Mother Church, copyrighted in SCIENCE AND


| Hearts witu Key To THE SCRIPTURES,


24


Yo


(ee CHURCH BY-LAWS Art. XXIII


1 Manual. Sect. 5. Branch churches shall
not adopt, print, nor publish the Manual of The
3 Mother Church. See Article XXXV, Sect. 1.

Organizing Churches. Srcr. 6. A member

of this Church who obeys its By-Laws and is a

6 loyal exemplary Christian Scientist working in

the Field, is eligible to form a church in con-

formity with Sect. 7 of this Article, and to

9 have church services conducted by reading the

SCRIPTURES and the Christian Science textbook.

This church shall be acknowledged publicly as a

12 Church of Christ, Scientist.. Upon proper appli-

cation, made in accordance with the rules of The

Christian Science Publishing Society, the serv-

15 ices of such a church may be advertised in The

Christian Science Journal. The branch churches

shall be individual, and not more than two small

is churches shall consolidate under one church gov-

ernment. If the Pastor Emeritus, Mrs. Eddy,

should relinquish her place as the head or Leader

21 of The Mother Church of Christ, Scientist, each

branch church shall continue its present form of

government in consonance with The Mother
24 Church Manual.

Requirements - for Organizing Branch

Churches. Srcr. 7. A branch church of The

27 First Church of Christ, Scientist, Boston, Mass.,


THE MOTHER CHURCH AND BRANCH CHURCHES 73


shall not be organized with less than sixteen loyal
Christian Scientists, four of whom are members
of The Mother Church. This membership shall
include at least one active practitioner whose card
is published in the list of practitioners in The
Christian Science Journal.

Privilege of Members. Srcr. 8. Members
in good standing with The Mother Church, who
are members of the faculty, instructors, or stu-
dents in any university or college, can form and
conduct a Christian Science organization at such
university or college, provided its rules so permit.


_ Also members in good standing with The Mother
Church, who are graduates of said university
or college, may become members of the organ-


ization by application to, and by the unanimous
vote of, the active members present, if the rules


of the university or college so permit. When
called for, a member of the Board of Lecture-
ship may lecture for said university or college
| organization.


No Close Communion. DHOT.) 1G: The


Mother Church and the branch churches shall
not confine their membership to the pupils of 24
one teacher.


No Interference. Sect. 10. A member of The


12


i


5


18


21


- Mother Church may be a member of one branch 27


Vi


74, CHURCH BY-LAWS


1 Church of Christ, Scientist, or of one Christian
Science society holding public services, but he

3 shal! not be a member of both a branch church
and a society; neither shall he exercise super-
vision or control over any other church. In

6 Christian Science each branch church shall be
distinctly democratic in its government, and no
individual, and no other church shall interfere

9 with its affairs.

Teachers’ and Practitioners’ Offices. SrctT. 11.
Teachers and practitioners of Christian Science

12 shall not have their offices or rooms in the branch
churches, in the Reading Rooms, nor in rooms
connected therewith.

15 Recognition. Srcr. 12. In order to be eli-
gible to a card in The Christian Science Journal,
churches and societies are required to acknowl-

is edge as such all other Christian Science churches
and societies advertised in said Journal, and to
maintain toward them an attitude of Christian

21 fellowship.


|


GUARDIANSHIP OF CHURCH FUNDS 75


GUARDIANSHIP OF CHURCH FUNDS


ARTICLE XXIV
Church Edifice a Testimonial. SECTION I.
Whereas, on March 20, 1895, the Christian Sci-
ence Board of Directors, in behalf of The
First Church of Christ, Scientist, Boston, Mass.,


_ presented to Rev. Mary Baker Eddy their


church edifice as a Testimonial of this Church’s


love and gratitude, and she, with grateful ac-


knowledgments thereof, declined to receive this


 munificent gift, she now understands the finan-


cial situation between the Christian Science


- Board of Directors and said Church to be as


follows: —
Financial Situation. Srct. 2. The Christian


- Science Board of Directors owns the church edi-
- fices, with the land whereon they stand, legally;
| and the Church members own the aforesaid
- premises and buildings, beneficially. After the
first church was built, the balance of the build-
ing funds, which remained in the hands of the


Directors, belonged to the Church, and not solely
to the Directors. The balance of the church


oo


1


i.)


1~)
pe


‘A


76 CHURCH BY-LAWS Art. XXIV


1 building funds, which can be spared after the
debts are paid, should remain on safe deposit,

3 to be hereafter used for the benefit of this
Church, as the right occasion may call for it.
The following indicates the proper metas e

6 of the Church funds: —

Report of Directors. Srcr. 3. It shall be
the duty of the Christian Science Board of Di-

9 rectors to have the books of the Church Treas-
urer audited semi-annually, and to report at the
annual Church meeting the amount of funds

12 Which the Church has on hand, the amount of
its indebtedness and of its expenditures for the
last year.

15 Finance Committee. Sect. 4. There shall
be a Committee on Finance, which shall consist of
three members of this Church in good standing.

is Its members shall be appointed annually by the
Christian Science Board of Directors and with
the consent of the Pastor Emeritus. They shall

21 hold quarterly meetings and keep themselves
thoroughly informed as to the real estate owned
by this Church and the amount of funds received

24 by the Treasurer-of The Mother Church, who is
individually responsible for said funds. They
shall have the books of the Christian Science


GUARDIANSHIP OF CHURCH FUNDS 77


Board of Directors and the books of the Church
Treasurer audited annually by an honest, com-
petent accountant. ‘The books are to be audited
on May first.

Prior to paying bills against the Church, the
Treasurer of this Church shall submit them all
to said committee for examination. This com-
mittee shall decide thereupon by a unanimous
vote, and its endorsement of the bills shall render
them payable.

If it be found that the Church funds have not


been properly managed, it shall be the duty of
the Board of Directors and the Treasurer to be
individually responsible for the performance of
their several offices satisfactorily, and for the


proper distribution of the funds of which they


are the custodians.
God’s Requirement. Sect. 5. God requires


wisdom, economy, and brotherly love to char-


acterize all the proceedings of the members of
The Mother Church, The First Church of Christ,


‘Scientist.


Provision for the Future. Sect. 6. In case


of any possible future deviation from duty, the
‘Committee on Finance shall visit the Board of


Directors, and, in a Christian spirit and manner,


12


15


i


8


21


24


78 CHURCH BY-LAWS


1 demand that each member thereof comply with
the By-Laws of the Church. If any Director

3 fails to heed this admonition, he may be dis-
missed from office and the vacancy supplied by
the Board.

6 Debtand Duty. Sect. 7. The Mother Church
shall not be made legally responsible for the debts
of individuals except such debts as are specified

9 in its By-Laws. Donations from this Church
shall not be made without the written consent
of the Pastor Emeritus. Also important move-

12 ments of the manager of the Committee on Pub-
lication shall be sanctioned by the Board of
Directors and be subject to the approval of Mary

15 Baker Eddy. (See Article I, Sect. 6.)

Emergencies. Srecr. 8. The Treasurer, per-
sonally, or through the Clerk of the Church,
is may pay from the funds of the Church bills of
immediate necessity not exceeding $200 for any
one transaction, and he may keep on deposit the
21 sum of $500 with the Clerk, as a petty cash
fund, to be used by him for the payment of
such bills. Such payments shall be reported, on
24 the first of the following month, to the Board
of Directors and the Committee on Finance, for
their approval.


THE CHRISTIAN SCIENCE PUBLISHING SOCIETY 79


Committee on Business. Srct.g. The Chris-
tian Science Board of Directors shall elect
annually a Committee on Business, which shall
consist of not less than three loyal members
of The Mother Church, who shall transact
promptly and efficiently such business as Mrs.
Eddy, the Directors, or the Committee on Pub-
lication shall commit to it. While the mem-
bers of this Committee are engaged in the
transaction of the business assigned to them
they shall be paid from the Church funds.
Before being eligible for office the names of the
persons nominated for said office shall be pre-
sented to Mrs. Eddy for her written approval.


THE CHRISTIAN SCIENCE
PUBLISHING SOCIETY


ARTICLE X XV


Board of Trustees. Section 1. The Board


of Trustees, constituted by a Deed of Trust


given by Rev. Mary Baker Eddy, the Pastor
Emeritus of this Church, on January twenty-
fifth, 1898, shall hold and manage the property
therein conveyed, and conduct the business of


21


80 CHURCH BY-LAWS Art. XXV


1 “The Christian Science Publishing Society” on
a strictly Christian basis, for the promotion of

3 the interests of Christian Science.

Disposal of Funds. Sect. 2. The net profits
of the business shall be paid over semi-annually

6 to the Treasurer of The Mother Church. He
shall hold this money subject to the order of
the Christian Science Board of Directors, which

9is authorized to order its disposition only in
accordance with the By-Laws contained in this
Manual.

12 Vacancies in Trusteeship. Srctr. 3. The
Christian Science Board of Directors shall have
the power to declare vacancies in said trusteeship,

15 for such reasons as to the Board may seem ex-
pedient.

Whenever a vacancy shall occur, the Pastor

is Emeritus reserves the right to fill the same by
appointment; but if she does not elect to exer-
cise this right, the remaining trustees shall fill

21 the vacancy, subject to her approval.

Editors and Manager. Srcr. 4. The term
of office for the editors and the manager of The

2 Christian Science Publishing Society is one year
each, dating from the time of election to the
office. Incumbents who have served one year or


THE CHRISTIAN SCIENCE PUBLISHING SOCIETY 81


more can be re-elected, or new officers elected,
by a unanimous vote of the Christian Science
Board of Directors, and the consent of the Pastor
Emeritus given in her own handwriting.
Suitable Employees. Srcr. 5. A person
who is not accepted by the Pastor Emeritus and
the Christian Science Board of Directors as
suitable, shall in no manner be connected with
publishing her books, nor with editing or pub-
lishing The Christian Science Journal, Christian
Science Sentinel, Der Herold der Christian Sct-
ence, nor with The Christian Science Publishing


- Society.


Periodicals. Srecr. 6. Periodicals which
shall at any time be published by The Christian


- Science Publishing Society, shall be copyrighted


and conducted according to the provisions in the


- Deed of Trust relating to The Christian Science
_ Journal.


Rule of Conduct. Scr. 7. No objectionable


) pictures shall be exhibited in the rooms where the
Christian Science textbook is published or sold.


No idle gossip, no slander, no mischief-making,
no evil speaking shall be allowed.
Books to be Published. Srcr. 8. Only the
Publishing Society of The Mother Church selects,
6


_


2


A


82 CHURCH BY-LAWS


1 approves, and publishes the books and litera-
ture it sends forth. If Mary Baker Eddy disap-
3 proves of certain books or literature, the Society
will not publish them. The Committees on Publi-
cation are in no manner connected with these
6 functions. A book or an article of which Mrs.
Eddy is the author shall not be published nor
republished by this Society without her knowl-
9 edge or written consent.
Removal of Cards. Sect. 9. No cards shall
be removed from our periodicals without the re-
12 quest of the advertiser, except by a majority vote
of the Christian Science Board of Directors at
a meeting held for this purpose or for the exam-
15 ination of complaints.
Members of this Church who practise other
professions or pursue other vocations, shall not
is advertise as healers, excepting those members
who are officially engaged in the work of Chris-
tian Science, and they must devote ample time
21 for faithful practice.


TEACHING CHRISTIAN SCIENCE 83


TEACHING CHRISTIAN
SCIENCE


ARTICLE X XVI
TEACHERS


Motive in Teaching. Srcrion 1. Teaching
Christian Science shall not be a question of
money, but of morals and religion, healing and
uplifting the race.

Care of Pupils. Sect. 2. Christian Scientists
who are teachers shall carefully select for pupils
such only as have good past records and promis-
ing proclivities toward Christian Science. A
teacher shall not assume personal control of, or
attempt to dominate his pupils, but he shall hold
himself morally obligated to promote their prog-
ress in the understanding of divine Principle, not
only during the class term but after it, and to
watch well that they prove sound in sentiment
and practical in Christian Science. He shall per-
sistently and patiently counsel his pupils in con-
formity with the unerring laws of God, and shall
enjoin them habitually to study the Scriptures
and ScreENcE AND HeaLTH witH Kry TO THE
ScrIpTURES as a help thereto.


21


| 84 CHURCH BY-LAWS Art. XXVI


1 Defense against Malpractice. SEcT. 3.
Teachers shall instruct their pupils how to de-
3 fend themselves against mental malpractice,
never to return evil for evil, but to know the
truth that makes free, and thus to be a law, not
6 unto others, but to themselves.
Number of Pupils. Srcr. 4. The teachers of
Christian Science shall teach but one class yearly,
9 which class shall consist of not more than thirty
pupils. After 1907, the Board of Education shall
have one class triennially, a Normal class not
12 exceeding thirty pupils.
Pupil’s Tuition. Srcr. 5. A student’s price
for teaching Christian Science shall not exceed
15 $100.00 per pupil.
Associations. Sect. 6. The associations of the
pupils of loyal teachers shall convene annually.
is The pupils shall be guided by the Bree, and
SCIENCE AND Heatru, not by their teachers’
personal views. Teachers shall not call their
21 pupils together, or assemble a selected number of
them, for more frequent meetings.
A Single Field of Labor. Srcr. 7. A loyal
24 teacher of Christian Science shall not teach an-
other loyal teacher’s pupil, except it be in the
Board of Education. Outside of this Board each


TEACHING CHRISTIAN SCIENCE 85


student occupies only his own field of labor. 1
Pupils may visit each other’s churches, and by
invitation attend each other’s associations. 3

Caring for Pupils of Strayed Members.
Sect. 8. A loyal teacher of Christian Science
may teach and receive into his association the 6
pupils of another member of this Church who
has so strayed as justly to be deemed, under the
provisions of Article XII, Sect. 1, not ready to 9
lead his pupils.

Teachers must have Certificates. SEcT. 9.
A member of this Church shall not teach pupils 12
Christian Science unless he has a certificate to
show that he has been taught by Mrs. Eddy or
has taken a Normal Course at the Massachu- 15
setts Metaphysical College or in the Board of
Education.

Such members who have not been continu- 18
ously active and loyal Christian Scientists since
receiving instruction as above, shall not teach
Christian Science without the approval of The 21
Christian Science Board of Directors.


86 CHURCH BY-LAWS


1 ArticLE XXVIT


PUPILS


3 Authorized to Teach. Srcrion 1. After a
student’s pupil has been duly authorized to be
a teacher of Christian Science, or has been under

6 the personal instruction of Mrs. Eddy, he is no
longer under the jurisdiction of his former
teacher.

9 Without Teachers. Srcr. 2. Those be-
loved brethren whose teacher has left them,
can elect an experienced Christian Scientist,

iz who is not in charge of an association of
students and who is ready for this high call-
ing, to conduct the meetings of their asso-

15 Ciation.

Basis for Teaching. Srcr. 3. The teachers

of the Normal class shall teach from the chapter

1s “ Recapitulation”’ in Scrence AND HEALTH WITH
KEY To THE Scriptures, and from the Chris-
tian Science Platform, beginning on page 330 of

21 the revised editions since 1902, and they shall
teach nothing contrary thereto. The teachers
of the Primary class shall instruct their pupils

24 from the said chapter on “ Recapitulation”’ only.


TEACHING CHRISTIAN SCIENCE 87


Church Membership. Sect. 4. Neither the
Pastor Emeritus nor a member of this Church
shall teach Roman Catholics Christian Science,
except it be with the written consent of the
authority of their Church. Choice of patients is
left to the wisdom of the practitioner, and Mrs.
Eddy is not to be consulted on this subject.

Class Teaching. Srcr. 5. Members of The
Mother Church who are authorized by its By-
Laws to teach Christian Science, shall not solicit,
or cause or permit others to solicit, pupils for their
classes. No member of this Church shall advise


against class instruction.


Teachers of Christian Science must have the
“necessary moral and spiritual qualifications to
elucidate the Principle and rule of Christian Sci-


| ence, through the higher meaning of the Scrip-


tures. “The less the teacher personally controls
other minds, and the more he trusts them to the


| divine Truth and Love, the better it will be for


both teacher and student.” (Retrospection and
“Introspection, page 84.)


—_


w


_


8


21


88 CHURCH BY-LAWS


1 BOARD OF EDUCATION


ARTICLE XXVIII
3 ORGANIZATION


Officers. Section 1. There shall bea Board
of Education, under the auspices of Mary Baker
6 Eddy, President of the Massachusetts Metaphysi-
cal College, consisting of three members, a presi-
dent, vice-president, and teacher of Christian
9 Science. Obstetrics will not be taught.
Election. Srcr. 2. The vice-president shall
be elected annually by the Christian Science
12 Board of Directors. Beginning with 1907, the
teacher shall be elected every third year by said
Board, and the candidate shall be subject to the
15 approval of the Pastor Emeritus.
President not to be Consulted. Srcr.3. The
President is not to be consulted by students
18 on the question of applying for admission to this
Board nor on their course or conduct. The stu-
dents can confer with their teachers on subjects
21 essential to their progress.


\\


BOARD OF EDUCATION 89


| Presidency of College. Srcr. 4. Should the 1

President resign over her own signature or va-

_ cate her office of President of the Massachusetts 3

_ Metaphysical College, a meeting of the Christian

| Science Board of Directors shall immediately be

called, and the vice-president of the Board of 6
Education being found worthy, on receiving her

approval shall be elected to fill the vacancy.


ARTICLE X XIX 9


APPLICANTS AND GRADUATES


Normal Teachers. Section 1. Loyal stu-
dents who have been taught in a Primary class 12
by Mrs. Eddy and have practised Christian Sci-
ence healing acceptably three years, and who pre-
sent such credentials as are required to verify 15
this fact, are eligible to receive the degree of
1.8. D.

Qualifications. Secr. 2. Loyal Christian 1s
Scientists’ pupils who so desire may apply to the
Board of Education for instruction; and if they
| have practised Christian Science healing success- 21
fully three years and will furnish evidence of
their eligibility therefor, they are eligible to enter


90 CHURCH BY-LAWS


1 the Normal class. All members of this class must
be thorough English scholars.

3 Certificates. Srcr.3. Students are examined —
and given certificates by this Board if found —
qualified to receive them.


6 ARTICLE XXX


ACTION OF THE BOARD


Sessions. SECTION 1. The term of the
9 Massachusetts Metaphysical College will open
with the Board of Education on the first
Wednesday of December. The sessions will
12 continue not over one week. None but the
teacher and members of the College class shal!
be present at the sessions, and no Primary
15 Classes shall be taught under the auspices of
this Board.
Special Instruction. Srcr. 2. Not less than
is two thorough lessons by a well qualified teacher
shall be given to each Normal class on the
subject of mental practice and malpractice. One
a1 Student in the class shall prepare a paper on
said subject that shall be read to the class,
thoroughly discussed, and understood ; this paper


BOARD OF EDUCATION 91


shall be given to the teacher, and he shall not 1
allow it or a copy: of it to hue but shall


| destroy this paper. 3


Signatures. Sect. 3. The signature of the


teacher and of the President of the College


shall be on all certificates issued. 6
Remuneration and Free Scholarship. Strcr. 4.


Tuition of class instruction in the Board of
_ Education shall be $100.00. The bearer of a 9
card of free scholarship from the President,
| Rev. Mary Baker Eddy, shall be entitled to


a free course in this department on presenta- 12


tion of the card to the teacher. Only the


President gives free admission to classes.
Surplus Funds. Srct. 5. Any surplus funds 15


left in the hands of the Board of Education
shall be paid over annually to the Treasurer of
The Mother Church. 18


Primary Students. Scr. 6. Students of


Christian Science, duly instructed therein and
with good moral records, not having the certifi- 21


eate of C.S.D. may enter the Normal class in


_the Board of Education, which will be held once


in three years beginning A.D. 1907; provided 24


their diplomas are for three consecutive years


under Mrs. Eddy’s daily conversation on Chris-


pe


92 CHURCH BY-LAWS


1 tian Science, or from the Massachusetts Meta-
physical College Board of Education.

3 Healing Better than Teaching. Srcr. 7.
Healing the sick and the sinner with Truth dem-
onstrates what we affirm of Christian Science,

6 and nothing can substitute this demonstration.
I recommend that each member of this Church
shall strive to demonstrate by his or her practice,

9 that Christian Science heals the sick quickly and
wholly, thus proving this Science to be all that
we claim for it.

12 If both husband and wife are found duly quali-
fied to teach Christian Science, either one, not
both, should teach yearly one class.

15 Not Members of The Mother Church. Sect. 8.
No person shall receive instructions in Chris-
tian Science in any class in the Massachusetts

is Metaphysical College, nor receive the degree of
C.S.B. or C.S8.D., who is not a member of The
First Church of .Christ, Scientist, in Boston,

21 Mass.

Only those persons who are members of this
Church and possessed of the qualifications named
24 in Sect. 9 of Article XXVI of these By-Laws


shall be deemed loyal teachers of Christian
Science.


BOARD OF LECTURESHIP 93


BOARD OF LECTURESHIP


ARTICLE XX XI


ORGANIZATION AND DUTIES
Election. Srecrion 1. This Church shall


| maintain a Board of Lectureship, the members of
| which shall be elected annually on Monday pre-


ceding the Annual Meeting, subject to the ap-


|
]


proval of the Pastor Emeritus. The lecture year
shall begin July 1 of each year.

Duty of Lecturers. Srcr. 2. It is the duty
of the Board of Lectureship to include in each
lecture a true and just reply to public topics


condemning Christian Science, and to bear testi-
| mony to the facts pertaining to the life of the
Pastor Emeritus. Each member shall mail to

the Clerk of this Church copies of his lectures
_ before delivering them.


No Disruption of Branch Churches. Sect. 3.
The Board of Lectureship is not allowed in any-
wise to meddle with nor to disrupt the organiza-


1


94. CHURCH BY-LAWS


1 tion of branch churches. The lecturer can invite
churches within the city whither he is called to

3 unite in their attendance on his lecture, and so —
make for their churches a less lecture fee; but
the churches shall decide their action.

6 Receptions. Sect. 4. Asa rule there should
be no receptions nor festivities after a lecture on
Christian Science, but there may occur excep-

9 tions. If there be an individual who goes to hear
and deride truth, he should go away contemplat-
ing truth; and he who goes to seek truth should

12 have the opportunity to depart in quiet thought
on that subject.

Circuit Lecturer. Sect. 5. Upon the written

15 request of Mrs. Eddy, The Mother Church shall
appoint a Circuit Lecturer. His term of office, if
approved, shall not be less than three years. He

is shall lecture in the United States, in Canada, in
Great Britain and Ireland.


A member shall neither resign nor transfer
21 this sacred office.


BOARD OF LECTURESHIP 95


ARTICLE XXXII 1


CALLS FOR LECTURES


From the Directors. Section 1. When the 3
need is apparent, the Christian Science Board of
Directors of The Mother Church may call on
any member of this Board of Lectureship to 6
lecture at such places and at such times as the
- cause of Christian Science demands.

From Branch Churches. Sect. 2. The 9

_ branch Churches of Christ, Scientist, may apply

through their clerks to a member of this Board

of Lectureship for a speaker, and one shall be 12

assigned them by the Board.

From Societies. Srcr. 3. If called for, a

- member of the Board may lecture for a Society. 15

| Annual Lectures. SEcT. 4. The Mother

| Church and the branch churches shall call on

the Board of Lectureship annually for one or 1s
more lectures.

No Lectures by Readers. Sect. 5. No lec-

| ture shall be given by a Reader during his term 21

of Readership. The duties alone of a Reader are

ample.


96 CHURCH BY-LAWS


1 No Wednesday Evening Lectures. Sncr. 6.
The Board of Lectureship shall not appoint a

3 lecture for Wednesday evening.

Lecture Fee. Srcr. 7. The lecture fee shall
be left to the discretion of the lecturer.

6 Expenses. Srcr. 8. The lecturer’s traveling
expenses and the cost of hall shall be paid by
the church that employs him.

9 Exceptional Cases. Sect. 9. If a lecturer
receive a call to lecture in a place where he sees
there is special need, and the local church is un-

12 able to meet the expense, he is at liberty to supply
that need and trust to contributions for his fee.


COMMITTEE ON PUBLICATION 97


COMMITTEE ON PUBLICATION 1


ARTICLE XX XIII


In The Mother Church. Section 1. There 3
shall be appointed by The Mother Church a Com-
mittee on Publication, which shall consist of one
loyal Christian Scientist who lives in Boston, and 6
he shall be manager of the Committees on Pub-
lication throughout the United States, Canada,
Great Britain and Ireland. He shall be elected 9

~ annually by a unanimous vote of the Christian

_ Science Board of Directors and the consent of

_ the Pastor Emeritus given in her own handwrit- 12
_ ing, and shall receive an annual salary, paid quar-

| terly, of not less than four thousand dollars.

_ Duties. Secr. 2. It shall be the duty of the 15
~ Committee on Publication to correct in a Chris-

_ tian manner impositions on the public in regard

- to Christian Science, injustices done Mrs. Eddy 18
or members of this Church by the daily press,
by periodicals or circulated literature of any sort.


mn


98 CHURCH BY-LAWS Art. XXXII


1 This Committee on Publication shall be respon-
sible for correcting or having corrected a false
3 newspaper article which has not been replied to
by other Scientists, or which has been forwarded
to this Committee for the purpose of having him
6 reply to it. If the correction by the Committee
on Publication is not promptly published by the
periodical in which it is desirable that this cor-
9 rection shall appear, this Committee shall im-
mediately apply for aid to the Committee on
Business. Furthermore, the Committee on Pub-
12 lication shall read the last proof sheet of such
an article and see that it is published according
to copy; he shall circulate in large quantities
15 the papers containing such an article, sending a
copy to the Clerk of the Church. It shall also
be the duty of the Committee on Publication to
is have published each year in a leading Boston
newspaper the letter sent to the Pastor Emeritus
by the Church members in annual meeting as-
21 sembled. The State Committees on Publication
act under the direction of this Committee on
Publication.
24 In Branch Churches. Srcr. 3. The Readers
of the three largest branch churches in each State
of the United States and in Canada shall annually


COMMITTEE ON PUBLICATION 99


- and alternately appoint a Committee on Publi- 1
_ cation to serve in their localities. For the pur-
poses of this By-Law, the State of California shall 3
be considered as though it were two States, the
dividing line being the 36" parallel of latitude.
Each county of Great Britain and Ireland, except 6
as hereinafter specified, through the Readers of
its three largest branch churches, shall annually
and alternately appoint a Committee on Publica- 9
tion to serve in its locality. Each church is not
necessarily confined to its own members in select-
ing this Committee, but if preferred, can appoint 12
a Committee on Publication who is in good fel-
lowship with another Church of Christ, Scientist.
This By-Law applies to all States except Mas- 15
sachusetts, in which the Committee on Publica-
tion is elected only by the Christian Science Board
of Directors. The Committee for the counties 1s
in which London, England, is situated shall be
appointed by the Christian Science Board of
Directors, and he shall, in addition to his other 21
duties, act as District Manager of the Committees
on Publication for Great Britain and Ireland.
Appointment. SrEcrT. 4. The Committees on 24
Publication shall consist of men generally. Each
State Committee shall be appointed by the First
and Second Readers of the church employing 27


100 ; CHURCH BY-LAWS Art. XXXII


1 said Committee. If prior to the meeting of the
church for the election of officers, Mrs. Eddy

3 shall send to the First Reader of the church the
name of a candidate for its Committee on Publi-
cation, the Readers shall appoint said candidate.

6 Or if she shall send a special request to any
Committee on Publication, the request shall be
carried out according to her directions.

9 Removal from Office. Sect. 5. If the Com-
mittee on Publication neglects to fulfil the obli-
gations of his office according to these By-Laws,

12 and this becomes apparent to the Christian Sci-
ence Board of Directors, it shall be the duty of
the Directors immediately to act upon this im-

15 portant matter in accordance with said By-Laws.

The Christian Science Board of Directors may
notify any Church of Christ, Scientist, to remove

18 its Committee on Publication and to appoint an-
other Committee to fill the vacancy; and it shall
be the duty of that church to comply with this

21 request. In such cases it shall be the privilege
of this Board to name the Committee if it so
desires, and any Committee so named by the

24 Board shall be elected by the branch church.

Case of Necessity. Srcr. 6. If a suitable
man is not obtainable for Committee on Publica-

27 tion, a suitable woman shall be elected. If at


COMMITTEE ON PUBLICATION 101


any time the Christian Science Board of Direc-
tors shall determine that the manager of the
general Committee on Publication needs an as-
sistant, the Board shall, with the approval of the
Pastor Emeritus, appoint an assistant manager,
who shall receive an adequate salary from The
Mother Church.


102 CHURCH BY-LAWS


1 CHURCH-BUILDING


ARTICLE XXXIV


3 Building Committee. Srcrion 1. There
shall be a Building Committee consisting of
not less than three members, and this committee

6 shall not be dissolved until the new church
edifice is completed. This committee shall elect,
dismiss, or supply a vacancy of its members by

9 a majority vote.

Designation of Deeds. Srcr. 2. All deeds
of further purchases of land for The First

12 Church of Christ, Scientist, in Boston, Mass.,
shall have named in them all the trusts mentioned
in the deeds given by Albert Metcalf and E.

15 Noyes Whitcomb in March, 1903; but this rule
shall not apply to land purchased for any purpose
other than the erection of a church edifice. Also

is there shall be incorporated in all such deeds
the phrase, ‘‘Mary Baker Eddy’s Church, The


CHURCH-BUILDING 103


Mother Church or The First Church of Christ,
Scientist, in Boston, Mass.”

The Mother Church Building. Srct. 3. The
edifice erected in 1894 for The First Church of
Christ, Scientist, in Boston, Mass., shall neither
be demolished, nor removed from the site where
it was built, without the written consent of the
Pastor Emeritus, Mary Baker Eddy.


104. CHURCH BY-LAWS


1 CHURCH MANUAL


ARTICLE XXXV


3 For The Mother Church Only. Sercrion 1.
The Church Manual of The First Church of
Christ, Scientist, in Boston, Mass., written by

6 Mary Baker Eddy and copyrighted, is adapted
to The Mother Church only. It stands alone,
uniquely adapted to form the budding thought

9and hedge it about with divine Love. This
Manual shall not be revised without the written
consent of its author.

12 Seventy-third Edition the Authority. Srcr. 2.
The Board of Directors, the Committee on Bible
Lessons, and the Board of Trustees shall each

15 keep a copy of the Seventy-third Edition and of
subsequent editions of the Church Manual; and
if a discrepancy appears in any revised edition,

is these editions shall be cited as authority.


CHURCH MANUAL 105


Amendment of By-Laws. Srcr. 3. No new 1
Tenet or By-Law. shall be adopted, nor any
Tenet or By-Law amended or annulled, with- 3
out the written consent of Mary Baker Eddy, the
author of our textbook, ScIENCE AND HEALTH.


a
ae


— nq

ony Loneee CO Aes
st loin ot tede omit pea

2 lic totus ve behewouw wel ee
a hal Z orilLigot He tay asl
a


APPENDIX


APPENDIX


Special Instructions
Regarding Applications for Church Membership


1. Loyal members of The Mother Church are
eligible to approve candidates to unite with this
Church.

9. No persons are eligible to countersign ap-
plications except loyal students of Mrs. Eddy,


Directors, and students of the Board of Educa- °


tion who have been given a degree, and are mem-
bers of The Mother Church.


3. Those who approve applicants should have
applications returned to them after being filled
out by the applicants, as required by Article
V, Sect. 6, and should compare them with
the forms here given, and see that names are
legibly written, before sending them to the
Clerk of the Church. If not correct, the appli-


cant will be notified, and new applications will
[109]


—


2


15


18


a


110 APPENDIX |
1 be required, as none will be returned that are
not correctly made out. This requirement is to
3 prevent applications being duplicated and the
confusion that might result therefrom. It is
important that these seemingly strict conditions
6 be exactly complied with, as the names of the
members of The Mother Church will be recorded
in the history of the Church and become a part
9 thereof.


4. All names, whether of applicants, ap-
provers, or countersigners, must be plainly
12 written, and one, at least, of the given names of
each, written in full. Initials only of first names
will not be received. Women must sign “‘Miss”’
16 or “ Mrs.”’ before their names as the case may be.
All names must be written the same in all
places where they are required.


INSTRUCTIONS FOR APPLICANTS lll


TO APPLICANTS


1. In filling out the application blank, one
of the Christian names must be written in full.
Initials alone will not be received.


2. If the applicant is a married woman she
must sign her own Christian name, not her hus-
band’s, and prefix her signature with ‘Mrs;”
unmarried women must sign “ Miss.”


3. There are two regular forms of applica-
tion. 1. For those who have studied Christian
Science with an authorized teacher; 2. For those
who have not studied Christian Science with a
teacher.

Applicants will find the chief points of these
instructions illustrated in Form 1 and Form 2,
on pages 114 and 118.


4. Those whose teachers are deceased, absent,
or disloyal, or those whose teachers refuse, with-
out sufficient cause, to sign applications (see
Art. V, Sect. 4), will be furnished special forms
on application to the Clerk.


21


4q


112 APPENDIX


1 5. When branch churches are designated by
number, as First Church, Second Church, etc.,

3 the number must be written First, Second, as
shown on page 118. The article “the” either
capitalized (The), or small (the), must not be

6 used before titles of branch churches. See Ar-
ticle X XIII, Sect. 2.


6. If the applicant is not a member of a

9 branch church, he should fill out his applica-

tion in this respect according to the form on
page 114. |


APPLICATION FORMS


114 APPENDIX


APPLICATION
I


PROPERLY SIGNED AND ENDORSED, ACCORD-
ING TO ARTICLE V, SECT. 2


FORM 1.

The First Church of Christ, Scientist, in Boston,
Mass., is designed to be built on the rock of Christ —
Truth and Life—and to reflect the Church Trium-
phant.

One who is not a member of any church, excepting
a branch church of Christ, Scientist, who loves Christian


who has taken a degree at the Massachu-
ho has passed an examination by the


E Science, and reads understandingly the Bible, and Scr-

& ENCE AND HEALTH WITH KEY TO THE SCRIPTURES,

2 by Reverend Mary Baker Eddy, and other works by

= this author, and who is Christianly qualified and can
ES enter into full fellowship with the Tenets and Rules of
Ss The First Church of Christ, Scientist, in eras Mass.,
. a is eligible to membership.


To The First Church of Christ, Scientist, in Boston,
Mass.


Board o


George W. Ledbetter, Clerk.


I hereby make application for membership, and sub-
scribe to the Tenets and the By-Laws of the Church.
My teacher in Christian Science is


Wie factions nciesvinn, f QPES BD. BrOW, CoS Dee eee cate


I am not a member of any church.


have been taught by a loyal student


setts Metaphysical College,


Tf you


INSTRUCTIONS FOR APPLICATION I15


APPLICATION
I — (Continued)


PROPERLY SIGNED AND ENDORSED, ACCORD-
ING TO ARTICLE V, SECT. 2


FORM 1, — (Continued.)


I was formerly a member of the
iad .ct tte denomination,
but have definitely severed my connection therewith.


VGC Mrs. Jennie W L4Cld, (CaS 0 preseason:
Street and Number......... TiS POLES CLS Tp gee


AON Lp ore exerts UY LPAI FEL GO Taste suecensonstarsessestvoncneesshes


I cordially approve the applicant.


DO NOT DETACH,


Name..... Mrs. Jennie W. Field, C.S +, ++----+
| To THE APPLICANT:


Please fill out the
following for the use


of the Treasurer of
the Church :


Street and Number....18 Forest St.,.-----------


Uff


116 APPENDIX


APPLICATION
I


PROPERLY SIGNED AND ENDORSED, ACCORD-
ING TO ARTICLE V, SECT. 2


FORM 1.
’ The First Church of Christ, Scientist, in Boston,
Mass., is designed to be built on the rock of Christ —
Truth and Life—and to reflect the Church Trium-
phant.

One who is not a member of any church, excepting
a branch church of Christ, Scientist, who loves Christian
Science, and reads understandingly the Bible, and Scr-
ENCE AND HEALTH WITH KEY TO THE SCRIPTURES,
by Reverend Mary Baker Eddy, and other works by
this author, and who is Christianly qualified and can
enter into full fellowship with the Tenets and Rules of
The First Church of Christ, Scientist, in Boston, Mass.,
is eligible to membership.


To The First Church of Christ, Scientist, in Boston,
Mass.
George W. Ledbetter, Clerk.


ollege, or by one who has passed an examination by the


Board of Education, fill this blank.


5


setts Metaphysical C


I hereby make application for membership, and sub-
scribe to the Tenets and the By-Laws of the Church.
My teacher in Christian Science is


u have been taught by a loyal student who has taken a degree at the Massachu-


ad Se nn nn ~


If yo


INSTRUCTIONS FOR APPLICATION I1I17


APPLICATION
I — (Continued)


PROPERLY SIGNED AND ENDORSED, ACCORD-
ING TO ARTICLE V, SECT. 2


FORM 1, — (Continued.)


I was formerly a member of the
denomination,


but have definitely severed my connection therewith.


DN GY Coons veooeee Mrs. Jennie W, Field, CuSvoconcsni0
Street and Number SSA OULOSS, 1S iy i Scr =


JOR AND, TOOT iran nnecaaennonnseeeecnanonserse


I cordially approve this applicant.


DO NOT DETACH.


Name..... Mrs. Jennie W. Field, C.S.,+------s
To THE APPLICANT:


Please fillout the
following for the use
of the Treasurer of
the Church :


Street and Number ....18 Forest St.,-.---------~


118 APPENDIX


APPLICATION
II


SIGNED, ENDORSED, AND COUNTERSIGNED,
ACCORDING TO ARTICLE VI, SECT. 2


FORM 2.


One who is not a member of any church, excepting
a branch church of Christ, Scientist, who loves Christian
Science, and reads understandingly the Bible, and Sc1-
ENCE AND HEALTH WITH Key TO THE SCRIPTURES,
by Reverend Mary Baker Eddy, and other works by
this author, and who is Christianly qualified and can
enter into full fellowship with the Tenets and Rules of
The First Church of Christ, Scientist, in Boston, Mass.,
is eligible to membership.


fill this blank.


To The First Church of Christ, Scientist, in Boston,
Mass.


by one who has passed an examination by the


George W. Ledbetter, Clerk.


of Education,


ae


I hereby make application for membership, and sub-
scribe to the Tenets and the By-Laws of the Church.
I have not studied Christian Science with a teacher,
and am not a member of any church excepting Second
Church of Christ, Scientist, at Vew York, WV. Y.

I was formerly a member of the


ollege


ht by a loyal student who has taken a degree at the Massachu-
Boar


denomination,
but have definitely severed my connection therewith.


Tf you have not been taug
setts Metaphysical C


INSTRUCTIONS FOR APPLICATION 119


APPLICATION
II — (Continued)


SIGNED, ENDORSED, AND COUNTERSIGNED,
ACCORDING TO ARTICLE VI, SECT. 2


FORM 2, — (Continued.)


203 LE UMETSON Bley, .in.ccn
New York...


DO NOT DETACH.


Na me....--- Miss Emma L. French
To THE APPLICANT:
Please fill out the S7veet and Number..... 293 Emerson St


following for the use


of the Treasurer of
the Church:


Town or City


N
\


4


120 APPENDIX


Present Order of Services in The Mother
Church and Branch Churches


Republished from the Sentinel


SUNDAY SERVICES


1. Hymn.


2. Reading a Scriptural Selection.
2


3. Silent Prayer, followed by the audible
repetition of the Lord’s Prayer with its spirit-
ual interpretation.

4. Hymn.


5. Announcing necessary notices.

6. Solo.

7. Reading the Explanatory Note on first leaf
of Quarterly.

8. Announcing the subject of the Lesson-
Sermon, and reading the Golden Text.

9. Reading the Scriptural Selection, entitled
“Responsive Reading,” alternately by the First
Reader and the congregation.


10. Reading the Lesson-Sermon. (After the
Second Reader reads the Bisie references of


ORDER OF SERVICES 121


the first Section of the Lesson, the First Reader
makes the following announcement: “As an-
nounced in the explanatory note, I shall now
read correlative passages from the Christian
Science textbook, ScleNcE AND HEALTH WITH
Key To THE ScrIPTURES, by Mary Baker Eddy.”’)


11. Collection.
12. Hymn.
13. Reading the Scientific Statement of


Being, and the correlative SCRIPTURE accord-
ing to I John 3:1-3.


14. Pronouncing Benediction.


The services should be preceded and followed
by organ or piano music of an appropriate char-
acter in all cases where this is possible.

On the first Sunday of each month Article VIII,
Sect. 1, A Rule for Motives and Acts, is to be


read.


ASA
iy


122 APPENDIX


WEDNESDAY MEETINGS


1. Hymn.


2. Reading from the Brsue, and correlative
passages from ScIENCE AND HEALTH wiTH KEy
TO THE SCRIPTURES.


3. Silent Prayer, followed by the audible repe-
tition of the Lord’s Prayer, its spiritual interpre-
tation being omitted.


4. Hymn.
o. Announcing necessary notices.


6. Experiences, testimonies, and remarks on
Christian Science.


7. Closing Hymn.


The services should be preceded and followed
by organ or piano music of an appropriate char-
acter in all cases where this is possible.


ORDER OF SERVICES 123


Thanksgiving Day


Order of Service for The Mother Church and
Branch Churches


1. Hymn.


2. Reading the Thanksgiving Proclamation
of the President of the United States, or the
Governor of the state, or both.


3. Reading a Scriptural Selection.


h. Silent Prayer, followed by the audible
repetition of the Lord’s Prayer with its spirit-
ual interpretation.

5. Hymn.

6. Reading the Explanatory Note on the
first leaf of the Quarterly.

7. Announcing the subject of the Lesson-
Sermon, and reading the Golden Text.

8. Responsive Reading by the First Reader
and the congregation.


124 APPENDIX

g. Reading the Lesson-Sermon prepared by
the Bible Lesson Committee.

10. Solo.

11. Testimonies by Christian Scientists,
appropriate for the occasion.

12. Hymn.

13. Reading the Scientific Statement of


Being, and the correlative SCRIPTURE according
to I John 3:1-3.


14. Pronouncing Benediction.


No collection is to be taken at this service.


The services should be preceded and followed
by organ or piano music of an appropriate char-
acter in all cases where this is possible.


|
q


{
q
|


j


.
)
|


ORDER OF SERVICES 125


Present Order of Communion Services
in Branch Churches


1. Hymn.

2. Reading a Scriptural Selection.

3. Silent Prayer, followed by the audible
repetition of the Lord’s Prayer with its spiritual
interpretation.

4. Hymn.

5. Announcing necessary notices.

6. Reading Tenets of The Mother Church.

7. Collection and Solo.

8. Reading the Explanatory Note on first leaf
of Quarterly.

g. Announcing the subject of the Lesson-
Sermon, and reading the Golden Text.

to. Reading the Scriptural Selection entitled
‘Responsive Reading” alternately by the First
Reader and the congregation.

11. Reading the Lesson-Sermon. (After the


Second Reader reads the Bree references of the
first Section of the Lesson, the First Reader


126 APPENDIX


makes the following announcement: “As an-
nounced in the explanatory note, I shall now read
correlative passages from the Christian Science
textbook, ScreENCE AND HEALTH wiTtH Key TO
THE SCRIPTURES, by Mary Baker Eddy.’’)


12. The First Reader briefly invites the con-


)


gregation to kneel in silent Communion. This is —


concluded by the audible repetition of the Lord’s
Prayer (spiritual interpretation omitted).


13. Singing the Doxology:


‘Be Thou, O God, exalted high;
And as Thy glory fills the sky,
So let it be on earth displayed,
Till Thou art here and now obeyed.”


1h. Reading the Scientific Statement of
Being and the correlative ScrRIPTURE accord-
ing to I John 3:1-3.


15. Pronouncing Benediction.
The Church Tenets shall be read at this service.


The services should be preceded and followed
by organ or piano music of an appropriate char-
acter in all cases where this is possible.


ORDER OF EXERCISES 127


Order of Exercises for the Sunday
School of The Mother Church
and Branch Churches?


1. Call to order by the Superintendent.
2. Hymn.


3. Subject of the lesson announced; Golden
Text repeated by the children; Responsive
Reading.

4. Silent prayer, followed by the audible
repetition of the Lord’s Prayer in unison.


: 5. Instruction in classes, in accordance with
Sections 2 and 3 of Article XX of the Manual
_ of The Mother Church.


6. Entire school reassembles.

:

i 7... tlymn.

: 8. Scientific Statement of Being read by the
Superintendent.


g. School dismissed.


a |
1 If a collection is taken, it should be taken in the classes before
_ they reassemble.

)


128 APPENDIX


Deed of Trust


The following is a Copy of the Deed of Trust
Conveying Land for Church Edifice


Know ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS,


That I Mary Baker G. Eddy of Concord in
the County of Merrimack and State of New
Hampshire in consideration of one dollar to
me paid by Ira O. Knapp of Boston, Mas-
sachusetts, William B. Johnson of Boston,
Massachusetts, Joseph S. Eastaman of Chel-
sea, Massachusetts, and Stephen A. Chase of
Fall River, Massachusetts, the receipt whereof
is hereby acknowledged, and, also in consider-
ation of the trusts and uses hereinafter men-
tioned and established, do hereby give, bargain,
sell, and convey to the said Ira O. Knapp, Wil-
liam B. Johnson, Joseph 8. Eastaman, and
Stephen A. Chase as trustees as hereinafter
provided and to their legitimate successors in


DEED OF TRUST 129


office forever, a certain parcel of land situate
on Falmouth street in said Boston, bounded and
described as follows: Beginning at the junction
of Falmouth street, and a forty-foot street now
called Caledonia street; thence running South-
west on said Falmouth street one hundred and
sixteen and eighty-eight hundredths feet; thence
Northwest at a right angle to a point where a
line drawn at right angles to said forty-foot
street at a point thereon one hundred and six-
teen and fifty-five hundredths feet Northwest
from the point of beginning meets the said
boundary at right angles to Falmouth street,
sixty-six and seventy-eight hundredths feet;
thence at an obtuse angle on said line at right
angles to said forty-foot street sixty-seven and
thirty-five hundredths feet to said forty-foot
street; thence Southeasterly on said forty-foot
street one hundred and sixteen and fifty-five
hundredths feet to the point of beginning;
containing seven thousand eight hundred and
twenty-eight square feet more or less, and sub-
ject to the agreements and restrictions men-
tioned in a deed recorded in Suffolk Registry
of Deeds Lib. 1719, Fol. 83 so far as the same
are now legally operative.
9


130 APPENDIX


This deed of conveyance is made upon the
following express trusts and conditions which
the said grantees by accepting this deed agree
and covenant for themselves and their succes-
sors in office to fully perform and fulfil.


1. Said grantees shall be known as the “ Chris-
tian Science Board of Directors,’ and shall con-
stitute a perpetual body or corporation under and
in accordance with section one, Chapter 39 of the
Public Statutes of Massachusetts.1 Whenever a
vacancy occurs in said Board the remaining mem-
bers shall within thirty days fill the same by elec-
tion; but no one shall be eligible to that office
who is not in the opinion of the remaining mem-
bers of the Board a firm and consistent believer
in the doctrines of Christian Science as taught in
a book entitled “ ScrencE AND HEeatru,” by Mary
Baker G. Eddy beginning with the seventy-first


edition thereof.


The deacons, church wardens, or other similar officers of churches
or religious societies, and the trustees of the Methodist Episcopal
churches, appointed according to the discipline and usages thereof,
shall, if citizens of this commonwealth, be deemed bodies corporate
for the purpose of taking and holding in succession all grants and
donations, whether of real or personal estate, made either to them
and their successors, or to their respective churches, or to the poor of
their churches.

Editor’s note: In May 1971, this statute (renumbered section one of
Chapter 68) was amended by substituting “residents” for “citizens.”


DEED OF TRUST Bal


2. Said Board shall within five years from the
date hereof build or cause to be built upon said
lot of land a suitable and convenient church edi-
fice, the cost of which shall not be less than fifty
thousand dollars.


3. When said church building is completed
said Board shall elect a pastor, reader or speaker
to fill the pulpit who shall be a genuine Christian
Scientist; they shall maintain public worship in
accordance with the doctrines of Christian Sci-
ence in said church, and for this purpose they
are fully empowered to make any and all neces-
sary rules and regulations.


4. Said Board of Directors shall not suffer
or allow any building to be erected upon said
lot except a church building or edifice, nor shall
they allow said church building or any part
thereof to be used for any other purpose than
for the ordinary and usual uses of a church.


5. Said Board of Directors shall not allow or
permit in said church building any preaching or
other religious services which shall not be con-
sonant and in strict harmony with the doctrines
and practice of Christian Science as taught and
explained by Mary Baker G. Eddy in the seventy-


132 APPENDIX


first edition of her book entitled “ScrENCE AND
Hearn,” which is soon to be issued, and in any
subsequent edition thereof.


6. The congregation which shall worship in
said church shall be styled “The First Church
of Christ, Scientist.”


7. Said Directors shall not sell or mortgage
the land hereby conveyed; but they shall see
that all taxes and legal assessments on said
property are promptly paid.

8. Said church building shall not be removed
from said lot except for the purpose of rebuild-
ing thereon a more expensive or a more conven-
ient structure in which said doctrines of Christian
Science only shall be preached and practised. If
said church building is removed for either of
the purposes above set forth, any and all tablets
and inscriptions which are or shall be upon said
church building at the time of removal shall be
removed therefrom and placed upon the walls
of the new edifice. If said building is burned,


the Directors shall forthwith proceed to rebuild
the church.


g. Said Directors shall maintain regular
preaching, reading or speaking in said church


DEED OF TRUST 133


on each Sabbath, and an omission to have and
maintain such preaching, reading or speaking
for one year in succession shall be deemed a
breach of this condition.


10. Whenever said Directors shall determine
that it is inexpedient to maintain preaching,
reading or speaking in said church in accord-
ance with the terms of this deed, they are
authorized and required to reconvey forthwith
said lot of land with the building thereon to
Mary Baker G. Eddy, her heirs and assigns
forever by a proper deed of conveyance.


11. The omission or neglect on the part of
said Directors to strictly comply with any of
the conditions herein contained shall constitute
a breach thereof, and the title hereby conveyed
shall revert to the grantor Mary Baker G. Eddy,
her heirs and assigns forever, upon her entry
upon said land and taking possession thereof
for such breach.

To Have and to Hold the above granted
premises with all the privileges and appurte-
nances thereon belonging to said grantees and
their successors in office to the uses and trusts
above described forever. ©


134 APPENDIX


And the said grantor for herself and her heirs,
executors and administrators covenants with the
said grantees and their successors in office that
she is lawfully seized in fee simple of the afore-
said premises, that they are free from all incum-
brances not herein mentioned or referred to, that
she has good right to sell and convey the same
to the said grantees and their successors in office
as aforesaid, and that she will and her heirs,
executors, and administrators shall, warrant and
defend the same to the said grantees and their
successors in office forever against the lawful
claims and demands of all persons.

In witness whereof I the said Mary Baker G.
Eddy have hereto set my hand and seal this 1st
day of September, 1892.

MARY BAKER G. EDDY.
Signed, sealed, and delivered in presence of


Laura E. SARGENT.
R. E. WALKER.
September 1st, 1892.


StaTE oF New HampsuHire, Fr
MERRIMACK. ‘

Then personally appeared the above named

Mary Baker G. Eddy and acknowledged the


[


DEED OF TRUST 135


foregoing instrument to be her free act and


deed,


Before me
R. E. WALKER.
Notary Public.
September 2, 1892.
SurroLtk Recistry oF Deeps, Lib. 2081, Fol. 257.


N


136 APPENDIX


Deed Conveying Land jor
Church Purposes


METCALF to KNAPP ef al. Trs.
Libro 2886, Fol. 521.


Know atu Men,


That I, Albert Metcalf, the grantor in a cer-
tain deed given to Ira O. Knapp and others
dated October 23, 1896, and recorded with Suf-
folk Deeds, Book 2591, page 398, do hereby de-
clare that the land conveyed by said deed was
conveyed to the grantees therein, as they are the
Christian Science Board of Directors, upon the
trusts, but not subject to the conditions men-
tioned in the deed creating said Board given by
Mary Baker G. Eddy to Ira O. Knapp and
others, dated September 1st, 1892, and recorded
with Suffolk Deeds, Book 208r, page 257. In
addition to the trusts contained in said deed of
September 1, 1892, from Mary Baker G. Eddy,


DEED CONVEYING LAND FOR CHURCH PURPOSES 137


this property is conveyed on the further trusts
that no new Tenet or By-Law shall be adopted,
nor any Tenet or By-Law amended or annulled
by the grantees unless the written consent of said
Mary Baker G. Eddy, the author of the textbook
“SCIENCE AND HEALTH WITH Key TO THE SCRIP-
TURES,” be given therefor, or unless at the writ-
ten request of Mrs. Eddy the Executive Members
of The First Church of Christ, Scientist, (for-
merly called the “First Members,”) by a two-
thirds vote of all their number, decide so to do.
And that the same inscription which is on the
outside of the present church edifice shall be
placed on any new church erected on said lot.
And in consideration of one dollar to me paid
by said Ira O. Knapp, William B. Johnson,
Joseph Armstrong and Stephen A. Chase, the
receipt whereof is hereby acknowledged, I do
hereby confirm the deed as above mentioned, and
do grant and release unto them, their heirs, suc-
cessors and assigns in trust as aforesaid, the
premises therein described.

In Witness Whereof I have hereunto set my
hand and seal this nineteenth day of March, a. p.
nineteen hundred and three.

Apert Mercatr. [Seal]


138 APPENDIX


ComMONWEALTH OF MassAcHUSETTS \ .. Marcu aoth, 1903.
SUFFOLK


Then said Albert Metcalf acknowledged the
foregoing instrument to be his free act and
deed.


Before me
Matcotm McLoup.
Justice of the Peace.


Marcu 20, 1903, at twelve o'clock and sixteen minutes P. M.
Received, Entered and Examined.


Attest: Tos. F. 'TeEmpie, Reg.


A true copy from the REcorps oF DrgEns for the County
oF SUFFOLK, Lib. 2886, Fol. 5a1.


Attest: Cuas. W. Kimpatu, Asst. Reg.
