The Great Pyramid Passages and Chambers, Vol. 1
John Edgar; Morton Edgar, 1910
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): The complete first volume of the Edgars' 1910-1913 pyramid survey — the pyramid canon's most detailed measured record after Petrie. Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/Edgar-1910). This 1910 publication is in the public domain in the United States.

========================================================================

0TOL0655198


GREAT PYRAMID
PASSAGES


PP'J


THE

GREAT PYRAMID PASSAGES

AND CHAMBERS


IN WHICH IS SHOWN HOW

THE GREAT PYRAMID OF GIZEH
SYMBOLICALLY AND BY MEASUREMENT

CORROBORATES THE

PHILOSOPHY AND PROPHETIC TIMES AND SEASONS

OF

THE DIVINE PLAN OF THE AGES

AS CONTAINED IN THE HOLY SCRIPTURES
TOGETHER WITH

TWENTY-TWO LETTERS FROM EGYPT AND PALESTINE


BY

JOHN EDGAR

M.A., B.Sc., M.B., C.M., F.R.F.P.S.G.

AND

MORTON EDGAR


VOLUME I

(ALL RIGHTS RESERVED)


LONDON: ELLIOT STOCK
62, PATERNOSTER ROW, E. C.


NOTE.


In the short interval during which this volume was
in the press, Dr. John Edgar has passed beyond the vail.
Although his departure causes a vacancy in our lives, we
rejoice in the confidence that our beloved brother now
realizes the blessedness of those who “die in the Lord.”
We sorrow not as others who have no hope.


Printed by BONE & HULLEY, 35 Dundas Street, Glasgow.


PREFACE


AS the purpose and scope of this work, and the circumstances which led to its
J % preparation and publication, are commented upon elsewhere, we do not
require to further allude to them here.

In the present volume, which deals mostly with the symbolical features of the
Great Pyramid’s teachings, the measurements stated are, generally, only approxi¬
mate ; these will be detailed more accurately in the second volume, which will
enter into the Great Pyramid’s corroborations of the lime features of the Plan
of the Ages.

As later investigators, we are indebted to past writers on the pyramids for
much valuable data, especially to the three great pioneers, Col. Howard Vyse and
Professors C. Piazzi Smyth and Flinders Petrie, all of whom we frequently quote,
and from whose works a number of our line-drawings of the Great Pyramid are
copied with modifications, bringing them more into accordance with present day
knowledge. In this connection, we gratefully acknowledge the services of
Mr. J. A. Hannah, C.E., of Glasgow, who prepared many of these finely executed
diagrams. The illustrations of Jerusalem, etc., in our letters from the Holy Land,
are small reproductions of the beautiful drawings in Picturesque Palestine, edited
by Colonel Wilson. The photo-engravings are the work of Messrs. Andre &
Sleigh, London.

We desire to express our warm appreciation of the many acts of kindness
accorded us by numerous friends,—among whom we wish specially to mention our
dear old friend, the late Mr. Wm. Ford of Bristol,—which have greatly encouraged
us in our work.

Lastly, our prayer is that our labours may be blessed by the Lord, without
whom no work shall prosper. May this book be used to stimulate its readers to
still greater activity and zeal in His harvest-field.

September, 1910.


1


CONTENTS


I The Origin, Purpose, and General Description of the Great Pyramid,

II The Divine Plan of the Ages, -

III The Chart of the Ages,

IV The Great Pyramid in Type and Antitype,

V The Passage and Chamber System of the Great Pyramid,

VI The Symbolism of the Passages and Chambers of the Great Pyramid,

VII The Symbolism of the Passages and Chambers of the Great Pyramid

more Fully Considered:

(A) The King’s and Queen’s Chambers,

(B) The Descending Passage and Subterranean Chamber,

(C) The First Ascending Passage, -

(D) The Horizontal Passage to the Queen’s Chamber,

(E) The Grand Gallery and the Ante-Chamber to the King’s Chamber,

(F) The Grand Gallery,


PAGE.

11

23

29

37

45

61


66

71

77

81

83

93


LETTERS FROM EGYPT AND PALESTINE.


letter. page.

Introductory Note, ------- 98

I Bristol Hotel, Cairo, ------- 99

II Arab Village, near Great Pyramid of Gizeh, - - - - 103

HI Arab Village, near Great Pyramid of Gizeh, - - - - 115

IV Tent at the Great Pyramid of Gizeh, ----- 121

V Train en route for Cairo, - - - - - -132

VI Tents at the Great Pyramid of Gizeh, - - - - 135

VII Tents at the Great Pyramid of Gizeh, - - - - 139

VIII Tents at the Great Pyramid of Gizeh, .... 147

IX Tents at the Great Pyramid of Gizeh, - - - - 161

X Tents at the Great Pyramid of Gizeh, ... - 167

XI Train en route for Port Said, - - - - - 183

XII Hotel Fast, Jerusalem, - - - - - - 187

XIII Hotel Fast, Jerusalem, ------ 194

XIV Hotel Du Parc, Jaffa, ------ 202

XV Hotel Fast, Jerusalem, ------ 212

XVI Tents at the Great Pyramid of Gizeh, - - - - 217

XVII Train en route for Cairo, ------ 222

XVIII Tents at the Great Pyramid of Gizeh, ... - 231

XIX Tents at the Great Pyramid of Gizeh, ... - 235

XX Mariette’s House, Sakkara, ------ 253

XXI Tents at the Great Pyramid of Gizeh, . _ - - 271

XXII Train en route for Port Said, ----- 287


LIST OF PLATES


AL MAMOUN’S FORCED PASSAGE.

PLATES.

LXIV Cavity on west side of Granite Plug, -

LXV Same as above, showing lower end of First Ascending Passage,

Also Plates V, XXIX, LXIV, LXV, LXIX, LXX.


Par. ref.

328

328


ANTE-CHAMBER.

CXVIII Space between north wall and Granite Leaf,
CXIX South side of Granite Leaf, -
CXX Upper portion of west side, -

CXXI South wall, -

Also Plates XV, XX.


475

476
479
492


CASING-STONES OF GREAT PYRAMID.

VII Discovery of casing-stones by Col. Howard Vyse, -

VIII Fragment of casing-stone adhering by cement to other stones,

XXIII Whole row of nineteen, looking west, -

XXIV Two largest at east end, looking west, -

XXV Butt-joint between pavement and platform,

XXVI Whole row of nineteen, looking east, -

XXVII Front and top view, showing fissure in rock,

XXIX Front view, with Hadji Ali Gabri pointing out A1 Mamoun’s forced

passage, -

XXX Front view, showing angle-stones above Entrance,

XLIII Whole row of nineteen, top view, looking west,

XT .T V Two largest at east end, looking east, -

XLV Workmen removing debris from front of casing-stones,

XLVI Front view of largest at east end, -

XLVII Front view, with Mr. Covington and another man standing,

CII Front view, with Hadji Ali Gabri standing near largest at east end,

Also Plates XL, XLI, CXXXV, CXXXVI.


85

86
223
226

227
226

228

229

229

260

273

273

273

276

426


COMPLETE PYRAMIDS.

PLATES. Par. ref.

XXXIV North front of Second Pyramid, - 248

XXXVIII North front of Third Pyramid, .... - 252

LXXVI North front of Great Pyramid, with tents, - - - - 335

LXXVII North-west angle of Great Pyramid, showing gap between it and tents, 335
LXXIX North-west angle of Great Pyramid, from south of tents, - - 340

LXXXII North-west angle of Great Pyramid, from tent door, - - 348

CXIII Portion of north front of Great Pyramid, near view, - - 473

CXXVII First Pyramid south of Gizeh group, showing huts on top, - 510

CXXX Abusir ruined Pyramid, - - - - - - 512

CXXXI Sakkara ruined Pyramid, ------ 512

CXXXII Sakkara Step Pyramid, - - - - - 512

CXXXVII Dashur Pyramids, from the Sakkara Pyramids, ... 517

CXL Great Pyramid from the south-west, with trees in foreground, - 522

CXLI Pyramids of Gizeh, from the east, with Arab village in foreground, 524

CXLII Pyramids of Gizeh, from south of the Third Pyramid, - - 525

CXLIV Great Pyramid, from the sand-hills above Mena House Hotel, - 527

CLIV Great Pyramid, with summit obscured by mist, ... 574

Also Plates II, XXXII, LXXVIII, CXXVIII, CXXXIX, CXLIII.


DESCENDING PASSAGE.

XI Sectional drawing, showing junction of First Ascending Passage, - 96

XXXI Entrance, showing angle-stones above, - 229

XLVIII Opposite lower end of Well, John descending, - - - 284

LI Hard-caked mud in lower east corner, - 292

LII Lower east corner, with hard-caked mud removed, - - 293

LXXX Sectional drawing of north end, looking west, - 337

CLXII Opposite lower end of Well, Judah ascending, ... 587

Also Plates X, XLIX, LXVI, LXVII, LXVIII,


FIRST ASCENDING PASSAGE.

CX Drawing, showing the system of masonry, - - - - 462

Also Plates XI, LXIV, LXV.


GRAND GALLERY.

XII Drawing of north end, plan and vertical section, looking west, - 102

XIII Sectional drawing of north end, looking south, - 102

XVIII Sectional drawing of north end, showing Queen’s Chamber

floor-line produced, - - - - - -126

CXVI Step at upper or south end, ----- 474

CXVII Doorway of small passage leading to Ante-Chamber, - - 474

CXLIX East Ramp at north wall, ------ 535

CLIII North wall, ------- 575

CLV North wall, from a drawing by Muirhead Bone, - 576


Grand Gallery (Continued). Par re/ .

plates. „ ... 580

CLVI Near view of cut-off of floor, - " ,

CLVII Entrance of Horizontal Passage to Queen s Chamber from Grand ^

Gallery, ' . . 580

CLVIII Looking south, from near north wall, - "

Also Plates XX, CXLV, CXLVI, CXLVII, CXLVIII.


granite plug.


331

LXVI Lower butt-end, from the Descending Passage, - - *

LXVII Lower butt-end, from the Descending Passage, - - .332

T XVIII Lower butt-end, John measuring, - ’

LXIX Exposed west side of upper end, from A1 Mamoun s cavity, - ^

LXX Upper butt-end, from First Ascending Passage,

^ FF Also Plates XI, LXIV, LXV.


GROTTO.

541

CL Drawing, plan and vertical section, looking nort i, - - ‘ ^

CLI Looking north, showing entrance doorway from Well-shaft,

HORIZONTAL PASSAGE TO QUEEN’S CHAMBER.

585

CLIX Step in floo^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ CLvm , C LX.

KING’S CHAMBER.


XV Sectional drawing, looking west, showing Chambers of Construction, 107

XVI Sectional drawing, looking north, showing Chambers of Construction, 1^

XX Sectional drawing, looking west, with figures, - ^

CXXII North-west corner, showing Coffer, - - ^7

CXXIII Mouth of south air-channel, ' 498

CXXIV Doorway of entrance passage, - 49 g

CXXV The Coffer,

MAPS.

10

X Perspective map of Lower Egypt, - - ^

II Gizeh Pyramid plateau, ■

HI Lower Egypt, showing sector-shaped land, - ' '

IV Of the world, showing land-central position of the Great Pyrami ^

LXXXV Jerusalem, - - ' ' " _ .384

XC Lower Egypt, and lower Palestine,


MISCELLANEOUS


PLATES. Par - ref.

VI Chart of the Ages, ------- 46

XXI S.S. Martaban, en route for Egypt, - - - - 216

XXII An Eastern threshing-floor, ..... 219

XXXIII Erecting tent in front of Great Pyramid, .... 245

XXXVI Human skulls in temple of Second Pyramid, - - - 249

XLII Donkey-boy arriving with water at sunrise, ... 256

LXXVIII Avenue and tramway-track to Pyramids of Gizeh, - - 336

LXXXI Rubbish-mound at west base of Great Pyramid, - - - 340

LXXXIII On the balcony of the Du Parc Hotel, Jaffa, - - - 354

LXXXIV A Jaffa porter, ------- 356

XCVI1I Mouth of tomb-shaft in Tombs of the Kings, ... 408

CIII Rock-hewn tombs to the west of the Great Pyramid, - - 441

CXV Kitchen-tent, with cook working in front, - - - - 473

CXXVI Donkey-riding at the Sakkara Pyramids, ... - 505

CXXXVIII Trial Passages, vertical section and plan, ... - 520

CLXIV S.S. Martaban, en route for home, .... 600


PALESTINE.


LXXXVI Church of the Holy Sepulchre, ..... 362

LXXXV II St. Stephen’s Gate, ------- 372

LXXXVIII Church of the Nativity, ------ 379

LXXXIX Cave underneath the Church of the Nativity, - - - 380

XCI Jews' wailing-place, ....... 394

XCII Lower end of the Valley of Jehoshaphat, ... - 397

XCIII Village of Siloam, ------- 398

XCIV Valley of Jehoshaphat, from Temple Area, showing three large tombs, 404
XCV Zechariah’s Tomb, ------- 400

XCVI Threshing-floors on the summit of the Mount of Olives, - - 405

XCVII Tombs of the Kings, ------ 406

XCIX Jerusalem, from the balcony of Fast’s hotel, ... 413

C Model of Solomon’s Temple, - - - - 418

Cl Model of Herod’s Temple, ------ 418

CIV Model of the Mosque of Omar, ----- 447

CV Mosque of Omar, from the south, ----- 447

CVI Under the dome of the Mosque of Omar, ... - 449

CVII Cave underneath the Mosque of Omar, ... - 448

CVIII Jerusalem, from the Mount of Olives, - - - - 452

CIX Jerusalem, from Mount Scopus, ----- 454


PANORAMIC VIEWS.


plates.

LXXV

CXI

CXIV

CXXVIII


Delta of the Nile, with tents in foreground,

Eastward, from “ Tents at the Great Pyramid of Gizeh,” -
North-westward, from “ Tents at the Great Pyramid of Gizeh,”

Gizeh Pyramids from the south,

Also Plates CXXVI, CXXXVII.


Par. ref.

335

471

472
511


LXXI

LXXII

LXXIII

LXXIV

CXII

CXXIX


XIV

XIX

CLX

CLXI

CLXIII


CXXXV

CXXXVI


PORTRAITS AND GROUPS.


Judah, the Pyramid attendant,
Sayd, the waiter,

Ferrali, the cook,

Abraheem Faid, the Reis,


Group at dining-tent door, -
Abdul Salam Faid, the tent-contractor,
Also Plates XXVII, XLII, LXXXIII, CII,


CXXII, CXXIV, CXXV.


QUEEN’S CHAMBER.

Sectional drawing, looking west,

Sectional drawing, looking east,

Doorway of entrance passage,

East wall, showing Niche, -

Mouth of north air-channel,

Also Plate XVIII.


SAKKARA PYRAMIDS.

Casing-stones on the west side of one of the Sakkara Pyramids,
Casing-stones and temple on the east side of do. do.,
Also Plates CXXXI, CXXXII, CXXXIV.


335

335

335

335

471

506


102

142

586

588

593


515

516


SECOND PYRAMID OF GIZEH.


XXXV Temple foundations on the east side,
XXXVII Mouth of the upper Entrance,

Also Plates II, VIII, XXVIII, XXXIV, LXXVIII, CXXVIII,


CXXXIII, CXLI,


CXLII, CXLIII.


248

250


SECTIONAL DRAWINGS OF COMPLETE PYRAMIDS.


V

IX

XVII

XXVIII

XXXIX

CXXXIII

CXXXIV


p lan of the Great Pyramid,

Vertical section of the Great Pyramid, looking west,

Vertical section of the Great Pyramid, looking north,

Vertical section of the Second Pyramid, looking west,

Vertical section of the Third Pyramid, looking west,

Vertical sections of all the Pyramids of Gizeh,

Vertical sections of all the Pyramids of Egypt, other than those
of Gizeh,


25

89

116

228

252

514


514


SMALL HORIZONTAL PASSAGE TO SUBTERRANEAN CHAMBER.


PLATES. Par. ref.

XLIX Entrance at lower end of Descending Passage, - - - 290

L Entrance at lower end of Descending Passage, on west side, - 291

LVIII Recess on west side, looking south, .... 303

LIX Recess on west side, looking north, .... 303

Also Plates X, LV, LVII.


SPHINX.

XXXII Near view, with the Great Pyramid in the background, - - 232

CXXXIX Viewed from hill to the south of the Great Pyramid, - - 521

CXLIII Near view, with the Second Pyramid in the background, - - 524

Also Plate CXLI.


SUBTERRANEAN CHAMBER.


X Drawing, vertical sections and plan, 92

LIII Looking west, showing large rock-mounds, - - - 299

LIV North-west corner, showing recess, .... 300

LV North wall, showing entrance doorway, .... 301

LVI Opening of vertical shaft, looking south, .... 301

LVII Doorway of entrance passage, ..... 302

LX Doorway of little south passage, ..... 306

LXI East wall, -------- 308


XL

THIRD PYRAMID OF GIZEH.

Entrance, and granite casing-stones,


255

XLI

Temple platform, and granite casing-stones,

-

-

255


Also Plates II, XXXVIII, XXXIX, LXXVIII, CXXVIII, CXXXIII, CXLI, CXLII.

WELL.


LXII Mouth of lower end, Judah ascending shaft, ... 316

LXIII Mouth of lower end, Stanley ascending shaft, ... 316

CXLV Drawing of mouth of upper end, looking north-west, - - 531

CXLVI Mouth of upper end, looking north-west, - 531

CXLVII Drawing of mouth of upper end, looking west, ... 531

CXLVIII Mouth of upper end, looking west, .... - 531

CLII Mouth of lower end, showing granite stone in Descending Passage, 556

Also Plates X, XII, XIII, XVIII, XLVIII, CL, CLI, CLXII.


CHAPTER I.

The Origin, Purpose, and General Description
of the Great Pyramid.


O F the seven ancient wonders of the world, the Great Pyramid of Gizeh in the
land of Egypt, because it is the oldest building in the world and because of
its immense size, has been universally recognized as standing pre-eminent,
it has also proved itself the most enduring, for it is the only one of the seven which
remains. For forty-one centuries it has kept silent watch over the Delta of the Nile, at
the southern apex of which it stands ; and each succeeding generation has asked itself
the question : For what purpose was it built, and who was the architect ? Many have
been the theories put forward in the past to answer this question, but all of them so
inconclusive that, although the true answer has within recent years been brought to
light by a few patient investigators, the lines of the Italian poet Petrocchi well expresses
the attitude of men’s minds in general toward this great monument—

“ I ask’d of Time : ‘To whom arose this high
Majestic pile, here mouldering in decay?’

He answer’d not, but swifter sped his way,

With ceaseless pinions winnowing the sky.

To Fame I turn’d : ‘Speak thou, whose sons defy
The waste of years, and deathless works essay ! ’

She heaved a sigh, as one to grief a prey,

And silent, downward cast her tearful eye.

Onward I pass’d, but sad and thoughtful grown,

When, stern in aspect, o’er the ruin’d shrine
I saw Oblivion stalk from stone to stone.

‘ Dread power! ’ I cried, ‘ tell me whose vast design—’

He check’d my further speech, in sullen tone !

‘ Whose once it was, I care not; now 'tis mine ! ’ ”

2 Among the theories which have been advocated, it has been claimed that the
Great Pyramid was a temple to the Sun and Moon, a building on which to burn sacred
fire, a granary for Joseph, a place of refuge from a second deluge, a place of refuge
when the heavens should fall, an astronomical observatory, etc., but the theory which
has found most favour is that which claims that it is a gigantic mausoleum. Concern¬
ing all the pyramids of Egypt, and particularly the Great Pyramid, the Rev. Andrew
Thomson, D.D., wrote in his well-known work, In the Holy Land, —“ And who built
those titanic structures, and what was the design of their builders ? These are questions
that have been repeated since the Father of history, more than two thousand years ago,

11


looked up on those same time-defying piles, and thought them old . . . . The old and
popular supposition which regards them as royal tombs or monuments continues by far
the most probable, especially when it is considered that human remains have actually
been found in some of the smaller pyramids .... On this supposition, with the name
of the monarch that erected them to his own glory buried in impenetrable oblivion,
what a monument are they at once of human power, folly, and crime!

3 “Yet these mountain structures which were almost contemporaneous in their
erection with the beg innin g of human history, and may very possibly be standing at its
close, suggest more than one conclusion. They prove at how early a period human rule
assumed the form of gigantic despotisms. We learn from Herodotus that twenty
thousand men, relieved every three months, were employed for twenty years in erecting
the one Pyramid of Cheops [the Great Pyramid of Gizeh]. The energies of a whole
nation were bent for so long a period, and its resources drained, to gratify the mad
ambition of one of the earliest of the Pharoahs. And they also place it beyond doubt
that Egypt must have been one of the first peopled countries, as well as one of. the
earliest cradles of the arts. There must have been something more than mere brute
strength—a considerable knowledge of some of the great mechanical laws, as well as
of the rules of masonry—to be able to raise those huge blocks to their appointed place,
and to rear those Pyramids. And when we find among Egypt's earliest tomb-paintings
and imperishable frescoes, pictures of the shoemaker’s knife, of the weaver’s hand-
shuttle, and of the whitesmith’s blowpipe as it is used in our own days, we cannot admit
that there is a shade of extravagance in those lines of the old bard,—

1 The fertile plains of Egypt flourished then,

Productive cradle of the first of men.’ ”

4 However true it may be that some, possibly all, of the smaller pyramids were
built as tombs, we hope to give abundant proof that the Great Pyramid of Gizeh, at all
events, was not intended as a tomb, but that, while constructed by man, it is like
the Bible of Divine origin, elected for the purpose of teaching the important truth
of God’s infini te wisdom and foreknowledge. The first to propose and prove this view
was John Taylor of London in a book published in 1859 A.D. and entitled The Great
Pyramid: why was it built ? and who built it? What convinced him was mainly the
many important scientific truths which he found to be embodied in this wonderful
structure, but he was assisted greatly in coming to this conclusion by reasoning on. the
basis of information derived from the writings of Herodotus and Manetho. The former
recorded that the Egyptians detested the memory of the kings who caused their
forefathers to build the Great and Second Pyramids, partly because of this, and
partly because they made them close their temples, and that for this reason they
were not willing to mention their names, but called the two pyramids after Philition, a
shepherd who at that time fed his cattle about the place. Manetho, himself an Egyptian,
wrote: “There came up from the East, in a strange manner, men of an ignoble race,
who had the confidence to invade our country, and easily- subdue it without a battle.
All this invading nation was styled Hyksos, that is, Shepherd Kings.” He then related
how afterwards they departed for Judea and built a city there, named Jerusalem. This
was long before the Exodus under Moses.


12


cultivated


X

lii

N


<0

Q

<

cc

>■

CL


X

O

X

$

*

o

o

0 :

u.

O


r


b

a.

>

o

u

a:

UJ

£

o


CJ -• u.

I O
Ll.

O


Q

UJ

CL

a.

o

$

<

_i

u.

u

X

h


O £


•“ z ■

° ^
u. p °

° 3 X
< o

2 K
“ >-
f 5

~3

g *

£ UJ
£ 2
o (£
r

<0


MERIDIAN SECTION THROUGH THE GREAT PYRAMID

AND ITS HILL CLook/ng West)


5 John Taylor, remembering the idolatrous and immoral practices of the Egyptians,
reasoned that these invaders whom they detested, were probably of purer worship
and character ; and he thought that the evidences pointed to their being members of
God’s chosen race in the direct line of, but preceding, Abraham,—possibly under Shem
himself or Melchizedec, though he inclined to the belief that the master builders were
the thirteen sons of Joktan, son of Eber, the great-grandson of Shem. If so, this would
easily account for the Egyptians’ hatred of their rulers, because, not only were the
Egyptians as a subject people forced to build the Pyramid and to close their own
temples, but they must have seen the bulls, which they worshipped, sacrificed by
these “ men of an ignoble race.” From that day every shepherd was “ an abomination
unto the Egyptians”—Compare Gen. 46: 32-34 ; Exod. 8: 25, 26 ; Gen. 43: 32. Whether
or not this surmise be correct, evidence will be given in the following pages that
John Taylor was right when he declared that the Great Pyramid was of Divine origin.

6 Concerning the Shepherd Kings, the following extract from John Taylor’s work
is full of suggestive interest:—“ They came into the country as strangers; they were not
of the same race nor of the same religion with the Mizraim [Egyptians], who preceded
them in its occupation; they did not invade it as conquerors, though, as Manetho tells
us, ‘ they easily subdued it by their power without a battle.' They must, therefore,
have come either in such large numbers as to make opposition hopeless, or they must
have been received as benefactors by the common people whom they employed ; and it
was only after their departure that their memory was calumniated by the stories told of
their oppression. They were evidently animated by a strong desire to perform a certain
task, and when they had accomplished it they left the country of their own accord, con¬
fiding to the care of the original inhabitants those wonderful works by which they had
enriched and ennobled the land. They never returned to claim any interest in the fruits of
their labours, but occupied some other country, in which they erected no such monuments
as these. They were so far like conquerors, or tyrants as they were called, that they were,
for the time being, the ruling power of the country. They employed the common people
in realizing their magnificent conceptions, for which they must have given them the most
minute directions ; and this evident superiority of intellect may have caused the ignorant
to envy and misrepresent them. But that they improved the condition of the people
among whom they took up their abode during not less than 100 years, must be admitted
by all who know how greatly an inferior race is benefited by the invasion of a superior.”

7 Before his death, John Taylor requested Professor C. Piazzi Smyth, at that time
Astronomer Royal for Scotland, to go to Egypt and make a thorough scientific examina¬
tion of the Great Pyramid. This Professor Smyth did during the winter 1864-5. In
his Life and Work at the Great Pyramid, he has left on record minute measurements
of every important part of the structure, except, on the exterior, the few remaining
casing-stones, and, in the interior, the Subterranean Chamber or Pit, and the lower
three-fourths of the Descending Passage. Large accumulations of rubbish prevented
him from exploring these portions. With the exception of minute fractional differences
in certain parts, these measurements have since been confirmed by other scientific
investigators, prominent among whom is Professor Flinders Petrie, in spite of the fact
that he ridicules the various scientific and religious theories warmly advocated by
Professor Smyth.

B


13


8 Consequent upon the work of Professor Smyth, many able minds have been
awakened to search into the various problems presented by the Great Pyramid Some
of these investigators have claimed not only that it embodies great scientific truths but
aiso that it sets forth symbolically and by measurement the Divine plan of salvatio ,
i” is Mesil Among the supporters of this view was Professor Smyttr

himself ■ but the chief one has been C, T. Russell, Pastor of Brooklyn Tabernacle, N Y
Previous to his study of the Great Pyramid, he had discovered many wonderful truth
in the Scriptures regarding the plan of salvation, truths which revealed the harmonious
co-operation of Divine wisdom, justice, love and power, and therefore exalted h
conception of the character and purposes of the creator and sustamer of the universe
With his mind clarified by the knowledge thus gained, he was enabled to discover
^Uc and prophetic features in the Great Pyramid, which had necessarily been

hl< 9 dC Tlr^int-Juthor^oT Great Pyramid Passages, having discovered in the years
1904 1905, various beautiful confirmations of the prophetic features of the Divine plan
as explained by C. T. Russell in the second and third volumes of his Scripture Stadtes
set themselves in April of the year 1906 seriously to investigate the various ciaimsmad
by him in his article on the Great Pyramid at the end of the third volume, and, than
to the knowledge which they had previously gained, they were not long m coming to
the conclusion Lt these c Jms were well founded. Accordingly, seeking the Lord
continued guidance, they at once decided to investigate the subject further and were
rewarded 1 day by day first one, and then the other, discovered fresh beauties m
the symbolic and prophltic teaching of this marvellous structure. In the course of
five or six weeks most of the Pyramid features described m the first and secon
volumes of Great Pyramid Passages were discovered. For various reasons p
I^on has been delayed until now. Chief among these is the fact that in the summ r
of 1909 the joint authors made a personal visit to the Great Pyramid m order to
investigate it at first hand, especially for the purpose of taking photograph^measu^g
the Descending Passage and Subterranean Chamber, and examining
in the First Ascending Passage, first described by Waynman Dixon, ■ •

the end of this volume will be found several letters from Egypt and Palestine, most of
them originally written by one of the authors, but since revised, re-arranged and en-

’“SST'wiHi. introduction, our attention might now be directed to several items*
General interest connected with the Great Pyramid. There are m all about thirty-eigh
pyramids in Egypt, all of them situated on the western side of the Nile on the border o
the Ubyan poSfon of the great Sahara Desert (Plate I), and all of them squ^ W,
with four triangular sloping sides meeting at the top in a point over the centre of the base^
But of these, only about seven of the largest are of importance; the remainder are much
smaller and are of such inferior material and workmanship, that they collapsed o g
JoInto rounded ruins, with the result that they are now no longer recognizable as

pyramids.

, i■ *• u of C T Russell’s interpretation of the Scriptural prophecies were

Nov. 15th 1904,and dune 15th 1905. It is proposed

to describe them all in the first portion of Vol. II. of Great Pyramid Passages.

14


Plate III.


as well as ot pyramid students is 7 becilisc of its superior site,

Gr .a, Pyramid, or o£ workmanship which it displays,

but chiefly because of the ertraoram y a of nine , known as the

12 Location of the Great ,ram, . ^ , w ten miles to the west of the

nine pyramids of Gizeh, erected o ^ ^ most [ 10 ,-th.„. „f the group, and is

modern city of Cairo. The Grea y plateau—Plate II. A short distance

situated near the cliff which forms e e g P smaller, appears from

directly south-west from it is the if ’ it J re large r than the Great

some view-points, because i s oun Third Pyramid, which is much smaller

Pyramid. Still further to the south-west is the Third Pp ^ ^ to ^ south of

than the other two. The remaining six are m Pyramid. These are com-

the Third Pyramid, and the other to the east £ Great Pyramid lies

paratively very small and are in rums. ^ e directe d towards the rising sun.

the Sphinx, carved out of the roc an ^ to the fact that the Great Pyramid

13 Professor C. Piazzi Smyth fi directed to the four cardinal points

is exactly oriented, that is to say, 1S °^ S1 the vertica i p l an e of the Pyramid

of the compass ; and he po-ted out further that ^ ^ ^ ^ Delta region ;

passages is produced nor ^ ar ' diagolals of the building similarly produced,

while the north-east and the north-wes ^ manner "-Plate III. In 1868,

enclose the Delta “ in a symme nca an c ta t e s Coast Survey, was struck with

Mr. Mitchell, chief hydrographer to the Uni the northern c lst of the Delta.

the regularity of the general con ^* C ™ he tried var i ous lengths and directions of
Taking a good map and a pair of comp , evenly swept by his arc ;

radius*till “he had got all the prominent *^1 the Great Pyra-

and then looking to see where is sou er " d n Q w Lower Egypt being as

mid.” Commenting upon this, Professor Smyth wrdes Now OT ^ ^

already described, of a sector, ^ t \t one ’extreme corner thereof,

centre, not like a circle in ie i , , th t the building which stands at, or

Whereupon Mr. Mitchell £ and Jsame time both at the

just raised above, such a secton - Governing middle. That is to say,

border thereof, and yet at its quasi, or pra y S undefiled in its

just as was to — ^ p “"by Isaiah (ch. rik); for

religious bearing, tho ugh in‘“‘^ne WoS to be both ' an altar to the Lord in the
was it not fore-ordained by border thereof,’—an apparent mechanical

nddstofa.el..d ofEgyp.,«d . p^^^«a diaoi; ^ JP^

impossibility, yet realized m .. ... „ ossesse d by the site of the Great

« « -“*> ‘“S^te^C^ntoreUsmfaceinbothits

Pyramid, mention maybe . „ eri dian and latitude; while its nether

meridian and its latitude than J tfae other side of the globe, ranges its

meridian, the longitude continuous d ist a nce near Behring’s frozen straits

whole length through water ««***“ piazzi Smyth claimed that the meridian of the
—Plate IV. For this reason, Professor C. Piazzi amym e

i t H “nillar ” in Isa 19: 19 is Matsebhah, and signifies anything set up
1 The Hebrew word translated pillar

or erected to commemorate something remarkable.


16


Plate IV.


imv\iiWr


Great Pyr.m.d a b I< Pyramid. Owing to the difficulty of making enact

15 '*• *?'!“'Of almost all the casing stones, and especially

measurements on accou rf robbish ro „ n d the base of the Great

because of the presence oi u g . „ KQri1ll+ „ acC uracv the magnitude

Pyramid, it has hitherto been^mp^ ^ ° pSmyth calculated the vertical height of
of this mountain of stone. „ a S c r- et . f^ e vertical depth of the

the ancient apex above the mean soc e oo > base-side breadth

Subterranean Chamber below ** ^ 12 b- Xgonal between the

Flinders Petrie makes the various measurements

slightly less. of t dimensions , these figures do not

convey^^^dequate 1 idea^f the familiar^ of^e^^e is

comPa^ it °"ob the level between the four corner

m ore than thir een “ \ ess than two-thirds of a mile, although at present, owing to
sockets is on y y ^ bases of the f our sides, one requires to walk for nearly

the large ru lS “ circuit . The vertical height is approximately a hundred feet

a T If St Paul s Cathedral, London, and only 70 feet less than the monument

more than that of St. P C th^ ^ ^ than the statue on the summit of the

religious teaching of the threat r-yram , J Pvramid. For a full

™«" P . “ et,^ to Pcofes Jc, Piazrt Smyth’, works, of which 0„r ■»

,hc «»< Pyramid » chidh w tel discovert, was that

18 Sl > U r"i ,\Tht'of te Great Pyramid was to twice the breadth of its square
the auceut verttou^ he.ght <*£££ ^Ur^ce. , hat is , 5813 toffies is to twice

b “' as ' he t “ s ,0 3 14159. This ratio of the diameter of a circle to its orcum-

t „ii f nlir sides of the Pyramid s square base. Professor . y

measurement of all fom: si J (ical «**«> rf the old problem of squarmg the

commeulmg on th^cla ^ ^ practlc ally done, truly and propsirly, .1 the Grea

^ thousands of years before those Medieval£ys dour «

Sowld et«“„*.e.y with this partiffilar proportion of heigh, to breadth of

18


base.” It is to John Taylor that the credit of this discovery is due.

19 The Great Pyramid unit of measure. As a result of painstaking investigation,
Professor C. Piazzi Smyth ascertained that the unit of measure employed by the builders
of the Great Pyramid, was a cubit which was exactly equal to 25-025 British inches,
and was divided into five parts, and each of these into five smaller parts, named by
Professor Smyth, Pyramid inches. Thus there are 25 Pyramid inches in a Pyramid
cubit, and one Pyramid inch equals 1-001 British inch, or 999 Pyramid inches equal
1000 British inches. Sir Isaac Newton, in his Dissertation on Cubits, claimed that
the sacred cubit of the Israelites approximately equalled 25 British inches, while the
Egyptian cubit measured 20'68, and the Greek and Roman cubit 18-24, British inches.

20 The relation of the Pyramid inch and cubit to the earth’s axis of rotation.
The earth’s axis of rotation, or distance through the earth from the North Pole to the
South Pole, is approximately 7900 miles, or 500,500,000 inches by British measure.
As 1 Pyramid inch equals 1-001 British inch, and the Pyramid cubit contains 25 Pyra¬
mid inches, it follows that the earth’s axis of rotation measures five hundred million
Pyramid inches, or twenty million Pyramid cubits, and the semi-axis of rotation, the
distance from either Pole to the centre of the earth, measures two hundred and fifty
million Pyramid inches, or ten million Pyramid cubits. Accordingly, Professor Smyth
argued that the unit of measure employed in the design of the Great Pyramid was
deduced from the earth’s semi-axis of rotation. The French metre was deduced from
the measurement of the earth’s curved surface from the North Pole to the Equator. It
was supposed to be the ten millionth part of this measurement, though, owing to an
error in the calculation, it is not really so. Professor Smyth contended that the French
method of basing their unit of measure on the curved line from Pole to Equator, is not
so scientifically true as that employed by the builders of the Great Pyramid, which was
based upon the straight line of half the earth’s polar axis,

21 The measurement of the day and year in the Great Pyramid. Having seen
that the Pyramid unit of measure, the cubit, was deduced from the earth’s axis of
rotation, it is not surprising to find it employed to symbolize a day, the period of the
earth’s revolution round its axis; nor to find the breadth of the Pyramid between the
corner sockets employed to symbolize a solar year, the exact period of the earth’s revolu¬
tion round the sun. Both the day and the year are thus recorded in the Great Pyramid,
for, on calculating the length of the four sides of the Pyramid’s square base, Professor
Smyth found that they each measured 365-242 Pyramid cubits, or as many cubits
exactly as there are days in a solar year to the fraction. Thus, the four sides measure
as many cubits as there are days in four years including the leap year. Another method
of representing the fact that the Great Pyramid records the exact length of the solar
year is to consider its top-stone as the sun ; and then measure round the square base by
lengths of four cubits (100 Pyramid inches). The total length of the base thus ascer¬
tained is 365-242 ; it thus represents the annual revolution of the earth round the sun
at the rate of exactly four cubits per day.

22 The mean distance of the earth from the sun. William Petrie, the father of
Professor Flinders Petrie, reflecting on the fact just stated, connected it with John
Taylor’s discovery that the vertical height of the Great Pyramid was the length of the
radius of a circle, the circumference of which equalled the total measurement of the


19


square base. He came to the conclusion that as the top-stone of the Pyramid, from this
point of view, symbolizes the sun, its vertical height should indicate m some way the
mean distance It the sun from the earth. The problem was to find the scale Jins he
ascertained to be ten multiplied by itself nine times (or to use the mathematical sign ),
as shown by the Great Pyramid itself ; for, if a measurement be made from one of the
corner sockets to the central vertical axis of the structure and for every ten hnem-units
horizontally inwards, nine linear units be measured vertically upwards, when je t^l
horizontal and vertical measurements are completed, the original apex of the Great
Pyramid will be reached. That is, the horizontal length from one of the corner sockets
to the centre bears the same proportion to the vertical height of the Pyram£, as ten does
to nine (6456-61 Pyramid inches : 5813 01 Pyramid inches :: 10 : 9). Having found
the scale it was a simple calculation to find how many miles are represented in the
vertical height of the Pyramid. Reducing the 581301 Pyramid mches
height of the Pyramid) to British inches, multiplying this by 10» (i.e., 1,000,000 000),
Ld turning the resulting number into British miles, he brought out the quantity of
91 837 484 rf these miles or as near the mean distance of the sun from the earth as
modern astronomers can determine.

23 That the top-stone represents the sun is interesting, seeing (as wi e P^ ov

it sy,»boLs Christ, who is called by the prophet Malachi the Son of R.gM-
eousness, who will arise with healing in his wings-Mal. 4: 2 It wll be pointed
further on that the King’s Chamber represents Christ’s heavenly inheritance which he
has obtained in order to shed forth the blessings of light and life. It is ' Jjes mg^
therefore, to learn that twice the length of the King’s Chamber in Pyramid inches,-taken
in conjunction with the angle of the passages which leads up to it, also
period of the earth’s revolution round the sun; for if twice the length of the King s
Chamber (412132 x 2) be marked off on the floor of the ascending passages and a rig -
angled triangle be formed by drawing a perpendicular and base-line from t e U PP“
loir extremities respectively of this portion of the floor, the f

found to measure exactly the number of days in the solar year, or 365 242 T
inches Another method by which the King's Chamber shows its connection with
solar year, is explained by Professor SmythTake the length of the Kmg s Chamber
412-132 (Pyramid inches) to express the diameter of a circle. Compu , y
methods of modern science, the area of that circle ; throw that area into a square shape,
and find the length of a side of such square. The answer will be 365 2 2,

24 The Precession of the Equinoxes. Having noted these facts, and teaming
them that the architect’s knowledge of astronomical matters was abreast of that of
modern science, the next astronomical problem to which Professor Smyth applied 1
self was the determination as to whether the Great Pyramid might aiso record by its
construction the duration of the precession of the equinoxes, the longes regu a y
curring period known to astronomers. The return of spring each year J "

with joy ; hence arose the desire to forecast its coming by astronomical data. Long ago
7t was found that it was always heralded by the equinox, when the sun crosses the
celestial equator, and day and night are therefore equal all the wor d over He^to
mark the equinoctial point among the fixed stars, and to note the place of some brilliant
star, whose appearance in the early morning dawn would announce the sun s approach

20


to the equator, was early accomplished with all possible accuracy. This star once
selected, it was believed that it should remain for ever in its place. . . . But a time
arrives at last when the bright star, which for more than five hundred years had, with
its morning ray, announced the season of flowers, is lost. . . . Each year the interval
from the first appearance of the star in the early dawn, up to the equality of day and
night, had grown less and less, and now the equinox came, but the star remained
invisible, and did not emerge from the sun’s beams until the equinox had passed. Long
and deeply were these facts pondered and weighed. At length the truth dawned, and
the discovery broke upon the unwilling mind that the sun’s path among the fixed stars
was actually changing, and that his point of crossing the equator was slowly moving
backwards towards the west, and leaving the stars behind. . . . The retrograde motion
of the equinoctial points, caused the sun to reach those points earlier than it would
have done had they remained fixed, and hence arose the precession of the equinoxes.
... Its rate of motion has been determined, and its vast period of nearly twenty-six
thousand years has been fixed. Once revealed, the slow movement of the equinox
makes it a fitting hour-hand on the dial of the heavens, with which to measure the
revolutions of ages. As the sun’s path has been divided into twelve constellations, each
filling the twelfth part of the entire circuit of the heavens, for the equinox to pass the
twelfth part of the dial, or from one constellation to the next, will require a period of more
than two thousand years. Since the astronomer [Hipparchus] first noted the position
of this hour-hand on the dial of the stars, but one of its mighty hours of two thousand
years has rolled away. In case any record could be found, any chiselled block of
granite, exhibiting the place of the equinox among the stars, at its date, no matter if ten
thousand years had elapsed, we can reach back with certainty, and fix the epoch of the
record. No such monument has ever been found.”

25 These words were written in the year 1853 by Professor O. M. Mitchell in his
Discoveries of Modern Astronomy. Only a dozen years later, Professor C. Piazzi
Smyth demonstrated that such a monument did exist, namely, the Great Pyramid of
Gizeh; and not only so, but that it recorded in its measurements the exact duration of
the precession of the equinoxes, a period of 25,827 years. To quote his words :—This
peculiar celestial cycle, the grand chronological dial, in fact, of the great Pyramid,—
so much is its architecture found to base upon it,—is further defined at that Pyramid,
but at no other throughout all Egypt, by, amongst other intentional features, the
length of the two diagonals of the base (the mean socket floor level), when their
sum is reckoned up in inches, at the rate of a Pyramid inch to a year. For they
amount to 25,827 nearly. Further still, this feature is memorialized again at the
King’s Chamber level of the Great Pyramid ; for that chamber’s floor being by
measure 1702 inches above the socket base of the whole building, Professor H. L. Smith
has shown that the circuit of the Pyramid iat that level equals 25,827 Pyramid inches
[Plate V], And if the whole vertical height of the Great Pyramid, 5813 inches, typifies
the sun-distance [Par. 22], the partial vertical height from the King’s Chamber level
upwards, 4110, indicates the radius of the precessional circle of the equinoxes, in years.”

26 These are but a few of the many scientific features embodied in the Great
Pyramid of Gizeh, and were there no others, they would be amply sufficient to show
the superior wisdom of its great architect.


21


Plate V


CHAPTER II.


The Divine Plan of the Ages.


AS the object of Great Pyramid Passages is to show how clearly the Great

/ \ Pyramid of Gizeh in the land of Egypt, that “ Miracle in Stone,” as Dr. Seiss
A. Jk. has named it, sets forth the plan of salvation presented in God’s Holy Word,
it will be necessary, in order to a proper appreciation of the subject, that the reader
should acquaint himself with at least the outlines of that plan; but the more complete
his knowledge of the plan, the more his appreciation of the Great Pyramid will in¬
crease, and sooner or later he will find himself fully convinced that, the Architect of
this marvellous structure could have been none other than God himself, and that it is
indeed the Lord’s “Stone Witness” in the land of Egypt. Then the wonder which
may have been evoked in him by its immense proportions, the marvellous skill dis¬
played in its construction, its great antiquity and quality of endurance, and the many
scientific features which it embodies, will give place to a new wonder inspired by
reverence for the infinite wisdom of God, when he reflects how the great Architect, by
a few simple Passages and Chambers, could portray in it the whole of his plan of sal¬
vation, not merely the symbolical features of that plan nor the various dispensations
into which it is divided, but even also all the important time-features marked off in the
outworking of it.

28 Many have ignorantly misjudged the wisdom of God, and thought that he has
had no definite, pre-arranged plan, but that he has been relying on the puny efforts of
a few well-intentioned men to accomplish the great task of bringing the world into
harmony with him and his law of righteousness. Accordingly, the message of the
Gospel has been carried hither and thither from individual to individual, and from
nation to nation, with the result that now, at the end of this age, nearly nineteen cen¬
turies after the death and resurrection of Christ, it has been preached for a witness to
every nation. In spite, however, of the strenuous efforts put forth, and the untold
wealth spent in the propagation of the Gospel message, and even though at least some
portions of the Scriptures have been printed in every language, it is recognized that the
number of converts to Christianity has been small indeed compared to the vast majority
who have died in heathen darkness. It has been estimated that there are “ 856,000,000
people in Pagan lands; a generation passes away in 33 years; divide this by 365, we
get the death rate per day 71,066” (Extract from a Missionary Magazine). This
means that every day more than 71,000 men, women and children are dying without

23


having heard that only name under heaven given among men whereby we must be
saved and the Apostle adds, “ neither is there salvation in any other —Acts 4 12.
What does this mean ? If the usual misconception were true, that God was altogether
relying upon the missionary and other well-meaning efforts put forth by good men to
save the heathen by bringing the name of Jesus to them before they die, it would mean
that God, however benevolent his intentions may have been, has failed, and that Sata ,
who has blinded the minds of them that believe not, has been the victor. While God
has gained his thousands, the great deceiver has now under his power his thousands of

th 29 Calvin, strong in his belief in the power of God, and perceiving in the Scriptures
that Jesus himself said, “ Strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, which leadeth unto
life and few there be that find it,” seized upon this as the explanation of the apparent
weakness of God’s plan. He revived the teaching of St. Augustine that God s pre-
determinate purpose was to save only the few, and to condemn to an eternity of tormen
all the remainder, the vast majority. Surely a terrible blasphemy this of the character
of God the Holy One of Israel, whose name is Love! Not that Calvin intended to
misrepresent God, for it must be remembered that the general teaching of his time was
that all power, both present and future, was in the hands of the clergy. In his honest
endeavour to get away from the one extreme, he followed the usual course of going o

the other extreme. ,

30 But though we must discard Calvin’s teachmg, which, while vindicating t

power of God, ignores his justice, wisdom and love, we cannot discard the saying o
Jesus, that the way to life is narrow and few there be that find it. How is it possi e
to reconcile this saying with the four attributes of God just enumerated ? Very simply,
when we disregard the creeds and go directly to the Bible. “ God is his own in er-
preter, and he will make it plain.” The Key to the answer is found in God s promise
to Abraham: In thee and in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed

31 To understand this, let us follow briefly the course of God s dealings with men ,
and though at first it may have been difficult to comprehend wherein the Divine plan
for man’s salvation availed anything, or to understand how God’s attribute of love is
displayed in it, the careful and thoughtful student will presently perceive a beauty and
harmony throughout the whole of the Divine purposes, which will appeal to both heart
and head as nothing else could do. He will see that God is not working in any hap¬
hazard fashion, nor relying on the feeble power and resources of man. God declares
in his own Word that all things are known unto him from the beginning, and that his
Word, the revelation of his purposes, shall not return unto him void, but shall accom¬
plish that which he pleases, and shall prosper in the thing whereto he sent it-Acts lb:
18 ■ Isa. 55: 11. The teaching of the Scriptures, properly understood, is more reason¬
able and more honouring to God than any theory founded on man’s reasoning apart
from Holy Writ. The Lord himself declares this truth through the prophet Isaiah:
“For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, saith the
Lord. For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your

ways, and. my thoughts than your thoughts.

32 When God created Adam and placed him in the Garden of Eden, he imposed on

24


him the restriction that he should not eat of the tree of knowledge of good and evil.
The penalty of disobedience to the Divine will was to be death. Accordingly, when
Adam disobeyed God, the curse of death was passed upon him. Through the law of
heredity, which declares: “ The fathers have eaten a sour grape [of sin], and the
children’s teeth are set on edge,” all Adam’s posterity have been “ born in sin and
shapen in iniquity,” and therefore share in that death-sentence. It was a dying life that
the dying Adam gave to the race, for “ by one man sin entered into the world, and
death by [as a result of] sin; and so death passed upon all men ”—Rom. 5 : 12.

33 God, however, did not leave Adam without a ray of hope. While pronouncing
the curse upon the serpent, he intimated that the “ seed of the woman ” would “ bruise
the serpent’s head,"—that some day and somehow a Saviour, a seed of the woman,
would arise and destroy the tempter and reverse the death sentence upon mankind.
But many centuries rolled by, and no progress was made in the salvation of the human
race. Abel, Enoch and Noah were commended for their faith, but of the vast majority
it is recorded “ every imagination of the thoughts of their heart was only evil continu¬
ally.” So corrupt became the people, that the Lord was forced by his love and wisdom
no less than by his justice to destroy them all—men, women and children—in the
Deluge, and repeople the earth afresh through Noah, who was “ perfect in his genera¬
tion ” and a “preacher of righteousness.” So ended the First Dispensation, a period
of 1656 years.

34 During the Patriarchal Age which followed, the period of 659 years during
which God bestowed special blessings upon Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, the same con¬
dition of affairs prevailed. In spite of the terrible punishment which the Lord had
inflicted upon their forefathers, the people once more relapsed into gross wickedness, so
much so, that there were not even ten righteous men in Sodom. Lot, the one righteous
man in it, was rescued before it and the other cities of the plain were destroyed by
God. In this stage of the Second Dispensation, two thousand years after the promise
that the seed of the woman should bruise the Serpent’s head, God made his oath-bound
covenant with Abraham, that it would be in his seed that all the families of the earth
would be blessed Gen. 12 : 1—3; 22: 16-18. The record shows that Abraham be¬
lieved God, and that his faith was accounted to him for righteousness—Gen. 15 : 5, 6 .

35 After a long period of waiting, Isaac, the seed of promise, was born ;> and God
renewed the covenant with him. It must have seemed as if the promise was then
about to be fulfilled; but Isaac died, and the blessing of all the families of the earth
was still far from being accomplished. When Isaac was old, the covenant was renewed
with his son, Jacob, or Israel as he was afterwards named. Later, Israel with his
household was brought in the providence of God into Egypt, where a few years after¬
wards he died. When on his death-bed, he called his sons together and foretold the
destiny of each of the twelve tribes which would spring from them. As it was God’s
intention to cause these twelve tribes of Israel to grow rapidly into a nation, and then
set them apart to carry out his purposes, their propagation proceeded miraculously,
insomuch that the Egyptians became afraid and adopted drastic measures to diminish
their numbers ; but they could not succeed against the Lord—See Exod. 1 . 7-22.

36 At the appointed time, during the height of their oppression by the Egyptians,
when their number had increased from 70 to 600,000 who were able to go to war, God

25


«■— - — ,ro ” sr t ir

they were not yet prepared to V* rf ^ forty years . Then,

*«<—*», «», ^ w
m o« S U.=»bylo^a»dCMs«Mg^ow^or^^^«Oj^ a co Ul e r

f D TSf Though many great leaders, such

anl St' arose and .reed .he .sraeh.es .rom ^

S.S £K2££S — — Ocd's own heart," and then .oUowed .he g.orious
graham, -

SLT-S “ r r »<. T » r £^1£=£=SS

issued a decree perm.ttmg those Israelites who u _ 23 . From that

^ 9 ° f B^“G^h” d p~“rough the prophet DaoM .ha. " from 0- g™g

Prince shall be seven weeks, and threescore and two weeks, that rs t y

t 4«s vears “ And he shall confirm the covenant with many

of years = 48J years. Ana k / 490 years) of continued

the 70th week. Thus God promised a period of 70 weeks (490 y , con .

favour to .he Isradi.es, to end in 36 A.D.-See Dan, 9. M » .^Luhe

sequence of this that, when the Messiah di come, a ™ d e neral who would deliver

o . ic g u t they looked for a mighty king, statesman a g i _a

them from their Roman bondage, and make them the ^OTemos^ na^on o ,

method of blessing very different from ^jTUZTrs^ hi
much disappointed with the meek and lowly Jesu u Y the ir sight

nor his message, and so they despised and rejected him. Yet te d ^ ^ . „ The

26


they themselves had received, they were, like their Master, misjudged, persecuted, and
put to death. Evidently the long years of falling had warped and twisted men’s minds
to so great an extent, that they were quite unable to comprehend the loving ministra¬
tions of God’s true children. Had the same effort been made during the time when
Abraham interceded for Sodom (See Gen. 18: 17-33), mankind’s reclamation, according
to Jesus’ own words (Matt. 11: 23, 24), would have been comparatively easier. Truly,
“ God moves in a mysterious way, His wonders to perform.”

40 But, thank God, the mystery is now being revealed, for the time is at hand when
all Jesus’ followers who have manifested the same loving disposition to bless, shall have
the desire of their hearts realized ; and Christ shall “ see of the travail of his soul, and
shall be satisfied.” “ Do ye not know that the saints shall judge the world ?”—1 Cor.
6:2; Isa. 53: 11. It is evident that God designed mankind to learn to the full the
bitter lesson of the downward course of sin.

41 Owing to their rejection of the Messiah, the favour of God was removed from the
Israelites and given to the Gentiles ; and as a nation they were destroyed by the
Romans in the year 70 A.D. They had boasted that as the natural seed of Abraham,
the promise belonged to them ; but they did not understand the full significance of this
promise. Paul explains that though a man be under the Mosaic Law, this does not
constitute him a child of Abraham, for “ as many as are of the works of the law are
under the curse” of death; but, just as Abraham believed God, and his faith was
accounted to him for righteousness, so “they which are of faith, the same are the
children of Abraham Gal. 3 : 10, 7. It was for this reason, that they might become
true children of Abraham by faith, that Christ redeemed Jewish believers from the
curse of the Law. The promise is certain of accomplishment; the Law was merely
added because of transgressions till the seed should come. Who, then, is the seed ?
The Apostle’s inspired statement is that Christ is the seed—” Now to Abraham and his
seed were the promises made. He saith not, And to seeds, as of many; but as of one,
And to thy seed, which is Christ ”—-Gal. 3 : 16. Isaac, the child of promise, is now seen
to be merely a type of the true seed. Just as Abraham sacrificed his son, his only son
and received him from the dead “in a figure” (Heb. 11 : 19), so Jehovah sacrificed his
Son, his only Son, Jesus Christ, and received him from the dead, not in a figure, but
in reality.


42 The Scriptural declaration is clear that Christ is the seed ; but why do we not now
see the accomplishment of the work which was to be fulfilled in and through the seed ?
All the families of the earth are still far from being blessed. Over 71,000 are dying
every day without having even heard of Christ, and during the six thousand years since
God gave his word in the Garden of Eden, and the four thousand years since he con¬
firmed his solemn promise to Abraham by an oath,—“ because he could sware by no
greater, he sware by himself” (Heb. 6: 13 ; Gen. 22: 16-18),—thousands of millions of
the human race have died without having received the promised blessing. Yet God is
faithful. What can be the explanation ?


— -•— ^ vuaca ui uie uiiiu cxiapier oi uraianans.

here the Apostle declares that as many as have been baptized (immersed—not into
water, but) into Christ, have put on Christ. There is neither Jew nor Greek, bond nor
ree, male nor female in this anointed company (the word “ Christ ” means “anointed ”),


27


•• for ve are all one in Christ Jesas. And if ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham’s
,‘Z and heir, according to the promise "-Gal, 3: 29. The Apostle here reveals a
further step in God's glorious plan. Mfe now see that although there .s
that one is composed of many members, as we read m 1 Cor. 12 . 12. As the ]

bodv is one and hath many members, and all the members of that one body [thong]
being many are [nevertheless] one body: so a/so is Christ." Thus the purpose of the
Gospel Age is not to bless all the families of the earth, but to select the seed o
Abraham the antitypical Isaac, the Christ, head and body. Only a few have found
fhe strait gate and narrow way to life which enables them to be members of this
anointed company, and of these many are called, but few chosen. The oppor xmiy

■ u members of the true seed of Abraham was accepted by only a remnant of the
of the pear 36 A.D., the end of the 70 weeks of favour.

At that date it was estended to the Gentiles, and the privilege has since been open to
tw^nfGentile alike; bu, very few lews have crossed the gulf of ptei«£e and
unbelief which lie, between the outcast people and this pos.hon of favour with God.

44 Like their Head, the members of the body have been despised and re ected, o
thfworld knoweth them not, even as it knew him not. But soon the full number
will have made their calling and election sure, and will be glorified with the Lord Jesus,
^hen the world will recognize them as the seed of Abraham, heirs of God and joint
heirs with Jesus Christ, and the blessing of all the families of the earth will begin, for e
whole creation has been groaning in pain, waiting te the “^^ti^the sons of God
—Rom 8:19-22. Under the beneficent rule of the Christ, Head and y,

a -ohinp- shall flee away ” Every individual in every nation will have full oppor-
Ltifv t«g perfection the dominion over the world, and the —

with God, lost for them by Adam, and purchased for them by ““

to seek and to save that which was lost, man’s first estate—Isa. 35 ; Luke 19. .

45 It should now be clear to the reader that God has a definite, pre-arranged plan
and that it is certain of accomplishment; and as he studies the various detada of that
ptan as revealed in the Bible, and confirmed in the Great Py»m-
come to a fuller appreciation of the justice, wisdom and power of the Great Creator
who could devise and carry out such glorious purposes, and his heart will respon

the love which prompted them.


28


Plate VI.


CHAPTER III,

The Chart of the Ages.


M OST of the important features of this plan are indicated in the accompanying
chart (Plate VI), in which the figure of a pyramid is fittingly chosen as a
symbol of perfection ; while the thought of imperfection is represented by
a pyramid with its headstone removed. 1

47 The horizontal line at the top of the chart represents the stream of time from the
creation of Adam onward ; while the Dispensations and Ages are marked off by vertical
lines supplemented by large and small segments of circles above. The other horizontal
lines represent the various planes of relationship of man to God during these Dispen¬
sations and Ages.

For a complete study of the subject the reader is earnestly requested to procure the Scripture
tudies, by C. T. Russell, the first volume of which, entitled The Divine Plan of the. Ages, gives a com¬
plete description of this chart.


C


29


4


48 The small pyramid at the beginning

ashevasowtedon^theFfa^^^P^^ continued obedient to his Creator,

He would have remained m this eond „ H7rum rfepravrty or imperfecUon

but through disobedience he fel P / aU his posterity

represented by the lowest horizontal line on the ch F indicated

have been born, for by the law of hereddy ,itef ^ ^ the First

by the two large but imperfect pyrami s s o before the Flood (2 Pet. 2 : 5),

Dispensation, representing the 1 world of g Y nt evi i world”-Gal.

and the other in the Second DispenserU Jto £«» ^ ^

1: 4. The small imperfect pyramid on theperiod of their favour
of human perfection, represents the ewis na tbe yea rly atonement for

vith God, lifted —W no. Z*y j-*- in

their sins by the sacrifices of bulls a g b Jl s and of goats should take away

God', sigh., ^ is why the fjgnre i, no. a perfect pyramid, and

sms”—Lev. 16.34 , neb. _ Tbe whole Jewish economy was

why it is placed below the plane o u “ a ”J? tter ^ tQ comCi and could not justify

instituted to serve as J ^ckmiedly nor actually, for “by the works of the law

those who were under it, neither recko J 1t G al. 2 : 16.

shall no flesh be ^ 7 The Apostle answers,

49 It may be asked, W J J them W ere committed the oracles of God.

“ Much every way . chiefly, bee „ under the ia W .” It was in

To them, God sent his prophets an vna. J twelve disciples, commanded them,

harmony with this that Jesus, w en sen m Samaritans enter

saying, ” Go not into the way of the Genh es^and^ ,?_ Matt . 10 : 5 , 6. ” He

ye not; but go rather to the lost s eep received him not ’’-John 1:11. They

[Jesus] came unto his own [peopH ^ ^ ^ ufe .._ Acts 3 : 14, 15.

“ denied the Holy One and the the favour Q f God, and Jesus after

In consequence, they were cast ° ^ and to ld his disciples to go to all

hi S reSUr Z C T. is" 1 9 The first Gentile convert was Cornelius-Acts 10. The Scri^
nations—Matt. 28 . 19. 1 Jews are st M beloved for their fathers sake, and

tures assure us, however, tha favour and be the first to benefit under

that they will in due time be res ore Apostle says: “ Blindness in part is

the New Covenant in the Millennia ge. P come J [the fuU num ber selected

happened ^ Wshall be savei [from their blindness],

to become the Bride of Offl ]. reconcilin g of the world, what shall the receiving

for if the casting away of them be thereconc g

of them be, but life from the dead. ° " ’ ’ an exalted position in the

50 But though all the obedient of them -U £££ t D f Christ, that they
Millennial Kingdom they^wiU find m conse^q tQ ^ earthly pbase of the King-

SSr~r;.s :=

40


have had the faith of Abraham have been reckoned righteous or just, although actually
there is “none righteous, no, not one”—Rom. 4: 8-13 ; 3: 10.

52 In the eleventh chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews a list is given of the
“Ancient Worthies,” few in number, whose faith has been accounted unto them for
righteousness. In the Ages prior to the ransom-sacrifice of Christ, they proved their
faith toward God in the midst of severe trials. When the hour comes, in which all that
are in the graves shall hear the voice of the Son of Man, and shall come forth (John 5 :
28, 29), these saints will get their reward by rising actually perfect; but their perfection
will be on the human plane on which Adam stood before his fall. This was intimated
by Jesus when he said, “Verily I say unto you, Among them that are born of women
there hath not risen a greater than John the Baptist [not even Abraham, Moses, David,
or any of the holy prophets]: notwithstanding he that is least in the kingdom of heaven
is greater than he’’—Matt. 11: 11. All, even the least, who will share the Kingdom
with Christ will be raised to the plane of the Divine nature, but none who lived and
died previous to the death and resurrection of Christ can attain to this exalted position.
The reason is that it was necessary for Christ to be the “fore-runner” ; and only his
“followers” can possibly gain entrance to the Holy Sanctuary—See Heb. 6 : 19, 20 ;
9: 24 ; 11: 39, 40 ; Acts 2: 34. In the forty-fifth Psalm, verse 16, we are told that these
fathers of Christ according to the flesh, will become his children and will be' made by
him princes in all the earth. Christ, as the Last Adam, will raise all men from the
grave, and will give everlasting life to the obedient, thus becoming their “ Everlasting
Father.” The faithful followers of Christ, the overcomers of this Age, will be associ¬
ated with him as his Bride—Rev. 3: 21 ; 19: 7-9 ; 2 Cor. 11: 2.

53 The third little pyramid on the plane of human perfection represents Jesus
Christ, who left the glory that he had with the Father before the world was, and be¬
came flesh in order that “by the grace of God he might taste death for. every man”
—Heb. 2:9. “ He suffered the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God, being
put to death in the flesh and quickened in the spirit”—1 Pet. 3: 18, R.V. Thus he
laid down his perfect human life for ever as a substitute or ransom-price for the First
Adam. This, as God had foreknown, none of the fallen race could do—Psa. 49 : 7. It
is because the death penalty passed upon the First Adam has been paid by the Last
Adam, that the First Adam and all who have come under condemnation through his
offence, will be liberated from the great prison-house of death. The law of perfect
justice which demands a tooth for a tooth, and an eye for an eye, has been met by the
payment of a perfect human life for a perfect human life:—Deut. 19 : 21. “ There is one
mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for
all, to be testified [to all ] IN DUE TIME”—\ Tim. 2: 4-6.

54 When Jesus Christ was immersed in the Jordan by John the Baptist, he symbol¬
ized the sacrifice of his human nature unto death, and when he came out of the water
and was anointed with the Holy Spirit and with power (Acts 10: 37, 38), he was then
begotten to a new nature on the spirit plane. Thenceforward till his death he is repre¬
sented by the small pyramid on the plane of spirit-begetting, the line situated in the
Gospel Age immediately above the plane of human perfection. At his death, having
given his flesh for the life of the world (John 6 : 51), he laid aside for ever his human
nature, and on the third day was raised from the dead as a spirit being —1 Pet. 3 : 18,

31


r V. During the forty days which followed he is represented by the small PY^micl
on the plane of spirit-birth, the perfect spirit plane, the second line above the plane

^"RlaU^on his^Sm to' the Father, he was invested with glory and honour
(represented by the pyramid on the highest plane, the plane of the Dmne Glory , there
"head-stone” of the "Great Pyramid” which the Lord Jehovah wall setup

in the Millennial Age, the “Dispensation of the fulness of times Eph. . ^ „

stone which the builders refused is become the head stone of the corner -TPs^US£2.

56 All creation will have the opportunity of becoming “ stones m this great
tvpical Pyramid ; but the most honoured position next the Lord Jesus is held out to t
followers^of Christ in this Gospel Age, now near its close. These must first be justi le
by faith as Abraham was; as it is written: “He [Abraham] staggered not at the
promise of God through unbelief, but was strong in faith, giving glory to God , and
being fully persuaded that what he had promised, he was able also to perform, an
therffore ft was imputed to him for righteousness. Now it was not written for his sa e
alone that it was imputed to him, but for us also, to whom it shall be imputed if we be¬
lieve on him that raLd up Jesus our Lord from the dead ; who was delivered or ou
offences, and was raised again for our justification —Rom. 4: 20-25. Just
Abraham's faith and loyalty were submitted to tests and became stronger with each, so
is it with all who remain faithful in this Age ; and just as God accepted Abraham t
fellowship with him, calling him friend (Jas. 2: 23), so he accepts al of th J s
have the faith of Abraham to the same terms of fellowship. The final test of Ab
faith and loyalty came when God said to him : “ Take now thy son thine only son
Isaac, whom thou lovest, and get thee into the land of Moriah ; and offer him there fo
a burnt-offering upon one of the mountains which I will tell thee of Gen. 2 . .

Abraham’s faith in God was not shaken. He offered up Isaac on the altar, “ accoun ing
that God was able to raise him up, even from the dead, from whence also he received
him in a figure Heb. 11: 19. In like manner, the present members of the household
of faith receive their final test as regards justification, when they come to unders an
Christ’s new commandment that they should love one another as he loved them that is,
that they should lay down their lives for one another John 13: 34 , 1 o n , .

57 Abraham’s faith could not and will not be fully rewarded until the sacrifice of
the Antitypical Isaac (Christ, head and body, the Seed of Abraham) is cora P let ®' °
till the Church is glorified, will he be raised to the perfect human plane, with the righ
to eternal life—Heb. 11: 39, 40. During the Gospel Age, however, from the time t a
Jesus Christ “ was delivered for our offences and raised again for our justification, and
ascended to heaven and “ appeared in the presence of God for us,’’ whenever a justi le
person presents his body a living sacrifice, at that very moment God imputes full
earthly life-rights to him, and then receives him in Christ as a holy and acceptable
sacrifice. At the same moment also, he bestows upon him the Holy Spirit of adoption
as an earnest or pledge of his future spiritual inheritance—Eph. 1:13, 14. Henceforth,
he is on the plane of spiritual begetting. It is of such that the Apostle says, “ Ye are
not in the flesh, but in the spirit, if so be that the spirit of God dwell in you, and
again, “ There is therefore now no condemnation to them who are in Christ Jesus, w o
walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit”—Rom. 8 : 9, 1.

32


58 Thus we see that three steps are necessary, first justification, second consecra¬
tion, and the third glorification. The first two are taken by faith ; the third is by the
power of God, and will be consummated when those who are faithful to their vow of
consecration unto death, are given the inheritance with Christ as actual spirit beings of
the Divine nature—1 Cor. 15: 53; 2 Pet. 1: 4. These three steps are shown on the
Chart (Plate VI) as three planes, and are referred to in Rom. 5: 1, 2— (1) “Being
justified by faith we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom
also we have ( 2 ) access by faith into this grace [of sanctification ] wherein we stand,
and rejoice in hope of (3) the glory of God" (the plane of Divine Glory),

59 The Church nominal is represented on the chart by the imperfect pyramid in the
centre of the Gospel Age. It is composed of four classes. Two of these are situated
above the plane of spirit-begetting. They are such as have presented their justified
human bodies as living sacrifices, and have been begotten of the spirit. The top portion
represents the wise virgins who carry out their vows of consecration willingly and
faithfully unto death. In the resurrection, they will be raised as spirit beings on the
highest plane beside the Lord himself to become his Bride. They will sit with him on
his throne and will reign with him a thousand years—Rev. 3 : 21 ; 20 : 6 . The other
portion represents another class, the foolish virgins, who, not proving so faithful, will
be required to come through great tribulation, and will be forced to complete their
sacrifice. Such as are rightly exercised by this discipline, will be “ saved so as by fire,”
and will be raised, like the Bride class, as spirit beings, but on a lower plane. They are
the virgins, the Bride’s companions, who will follow her. Having washed their robes,
and made them white in the blood of the Lamb, they will stand before the throne of
God, and serve him day and night in his temple, and the Lamb will lead them unto
fountains of water of life, and God will wipe away all tears from their eyes, “ With
gladness and rejoicing shall they be brought; they shall enter into the King's palace ”
—Rev, 7 : 9-17 ; Psa. 45: 14, 15.

60 A third class are the justified believers who are not sanctified, and are not,
therefore, spirit-begotten. If they do not take the step of consecration, their reasonable
service, they will find that they have received the grace of God in vain (2 Cor. 6:1;
Luke 9: 24), and will require to take their portion along with the world in the Millen¬
nial Age. They are represented by the portion of the imperfect pyramid which is
situated on the plane of human perfection or justification, and below the plane of spirit-
begetting.

61 The fourth class, represented by that part which is below the human perfection
plane, do not properly belong to the Church. They have no faith in Christ as their
Saviour, and are therefore not even justified, but really belong to the world of the
ungodly. They have become attached to the Church from purely worldly interests, or
from fear. These are the “ tares ” which the enemy sowed, and which have been per¬
mitted, in accordance with the Lord’s command, to grow side by side with the “ true
wheat” until the time of the “ harvest” at the end of the Age, when the separation is
due to take place—Matt. 13 :18-30, 34-43.

62 This “ harvest ” period with its accompanying time of trouble, is represented in
the chart by the shading at the end of the Second Dispensation, where the large imper¬
fect pyramid is seen to be broken, representing the separation of the four classes which


33


have formed the Nominal Church. The worldly and justified classes fall back into the
world to which they belong ; while of the two classes begotten to the spirit nature, one
class will come through the trouble which the Lord will find it necessary to bring upon
them in order that their “robes” of righteousness which they allowed to become
spotted by contact with the world, may be “washed in the blood of the Lamb Rev.

7 - 9-17. But the faithful class will be counted worthy to escape all those things
that shall come to pass—Luke 21: 36. The latter form the special class for the selec¬
tion of which the Lord has set apart the whole Gospel Age—Acts 15: 14. They are
the “seed of Abraham,” the “chosen generation,” the “royal priesthood,” the “ holy
nation ”'the “ peculiar people,” whom the Lord has elected in order that they may show
forth his glory in the Ages to come—1 Pet. 2: 9. They will be sharers with the Lord
in his, the first, resurrection, and of such it is written: “ Blessed and holy is he that
hath part in the first resurrection : . . . they shall be priests of God and of Christ, and
«A.a 11 reign with him a thousand years Rev. 20 : 6 .

63 When the full number of this faithful class has been selected and gathered to the
Lord in the “first resurrection" to become his Bride, and when the present kingdoms
have been completely destroyed in the great time of trouble, then the Lord Jesus Christ
and his Bride will commence that wonderful Millennial reign which is referred to as
“Times of Restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy

prophets since the world began”—Acts 3: 21.

64 It is during the Millennial Age that the Lord of heaven and earth will set up his
great Antitypical Pyramid ; when he will “ gather together in one all things in Christ,
both which are in heaven and which are on earth ”—Eph. 1: 10. In that “ day of the
Lord,” or “ day of judgment,” which, as the Apostle Peter is careful to point out, is a
“ day " of a thousand years (2 Pet. 3: 7-10), Satan will be bound, and all the millions of
earth’s inhabitants who have died during the past six thousand years because of Adam’s
transgression, will be called forth from the tomb—John 5: 28, 29, R.V. As Christ’s
“purchased possession” (Eph. 1: 14; Micah 4: 8 ), they will be redeemed from the
prison-house of death and will be given an accurate knowledge of the Lord and his
great scheme of salvation, in order that they may progress along the “ highway of holi¬
ness” which will be set up in that day; for “the redeemed of the Lord shall return
and come to Zion with songs and everlasting joy upon their heads: they shall obtain
joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away.” “ He will swallow up death
in victory ; and the Lord God will wipe away tears from off all faces; . . . and it shall
be said in that day, Lo, this is our God; we have waited for him, and he will save
us: this is the Lord ; we have waited for him, we will be glad and rejoice in his salva¬
tion ”—Isa. 35: 8-10; 25:8, 9.

65 No wonder Paul said: “I have hope toward God . . . that there shall be a
resurrection of the dead, both of the just and unjust ’’—Acts 24: 15. He knew that
Jesus had come to “seek and to save that which was lost,” and that “he is the propitia¬
tion for our [the Church’s] sins: and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole

■world" _Luke 19: 10; 1 John 2: 2. He knew that although only the few would find

life by the “ narrow way ” of this Gospel Age, the many would yet have their oppor¬
tunity ; and he had hope for them, because “when the judgments of the Lord are in the
earth, the inhabitants of the world will learn righteousness”—Rom. 5:18, 19; Isa. 26: 9.


34


66 In that Millennial day, because of the greatness of the Lord’s power in favour of
the righteous and against the wicked, some of the Lord’s enemies finding that it will
pay them better to be at least outwardly righteous, will “yield feigned obedience” to
him—Psa. 72: 7; 66 : 3, margin. But most of the people will be willing in the day of
his power (Psa. 110: 3) ; they will soon recognize that the Lord’s judgments are for
their benefit; and ultimately all nations which God has made will come and worship
before him, and will glorify his name—Psa. 86 : 9. The majority will eventually love
him and his righteous laws ; and “the Lord preserveth all them that love him”—Psa.
145 : 20.

67 On the other hand, should any persist in evil-doing in spite of the Lord's good¬
ness to them, they will be destroyed from among the people. But all, even the most
incorrigible, will get at least a hundred years’ trial. In Isa. 65 : 20, we read: “ There
shall no more come thence an infant of few days, nor an old man that shall not have
the full length of his days ; as a lad shall one die a hundred years old ; and as a sinner
shall be accursed he who dieth at a hundred years old”—Leeser’s translation. All
those who obey the Lord, whether with feigned love or unfeigned love, will live right
on to the end of the thousand years ; and then, as we are told in Rev. 20 : 7, 8 , “ when
the thousand years are expired, Satan shall be loosed out of his prison, and shall go out
to deceive the nations.” This will be the final test which will make manifest those who
are in heart-harmony with the righteous Judge. Those who have yielded only feigned
obedience will no doubt see some means by which they will hope to gain more by sub¬
mitting to Satan’s suggestions than by loyalty to the Lord, and thus their sympathy
with sin will be manifested ; the fact that they are not in heart-harmony with the Lord
will be demonstrated to all. Such will be cut off in the second death as unworthy of a
place in the Lord’s glorious Kingdom: “ for the upright shall dwell in the land, and the
perfect shall remain in it; but the wicked shall be cut off from the earth, and the trans¬
gressors shall be rooted out of it Prov. 2 : 21, 22. Satan and all the other evil angels
will likewise be destroyed—Heb. 2: 14 ; Rev. 21: 8.

68 There was a “ Harvest ” period at the end of the Jewish Age when the “ wheat"
was gathered to the Lord, and the “chaff” was burned in the great “fire of trouble”
which, by the year 70 A.D., culminated in the destruction of the nation of Israel—Luke
3 : 16, 17 ; John 4: 38; 1: 11-13,—-Wilson’s Emphatic Diaglott. At the present time,
at the end of this Gospel Age, we have entered into a similar Harvest period when the
“wheat” and “tares,” which were allowed to grow together until the time of the Har¬
vest, are being separated,—the “ wheat ” to be gathered into the Lord’s garner, and the
“ tares ” to be bound in bundles and burned in the great fire of trouble which will, by
the year 1914-1915 A.D., culminate in the destruction of Christendom—Matt. 13: 24-30,
34-43. Similarly, at the end of the Millennial Age there will be a Harvest period,
probably of the same duration as the others, namely, 40 years. This will be the “ little
season” during which Satan will be let loose, and be permitted to seduce those of a
wayward (goat-like) character. Those, however, who are docile and faithful (sheep¬
like in character) will know the true Shepherd’s voice and will not listen to the voice of
a stranger.

69 In Matt. 25 : 31-46, which describes the judgment of the Millennial Age, and
especially the Harvest of that Age, we are told : “ When the Son of Man shall come in


35


his glory [the Second Advent], and all the holy angels with him, then shall he sit upon
the throne of his glory: and before him shall be gathered all nations: and he shall
separate them one from another, as a shepherd divideth his sheep from the goats.”
The “goat” class will go into everlasting fire prepared for the devil and his angels (the
“ second death,” see Rev. 21: 8); while the “ sheep ” class will inherit the kingdom pre¬
pared for them “ from the foundation of the world.”

70 The “ wheat ” class of the Jewish Harvest and of the Gospel Age, having been
begotten of the Lord to the spirit nature (John 1: 11-13 ; 3:7, 8), and being “ Sons of
God ” in a special sense, will have eternal life in heaven with God the Father and the
Lord Jesus Christ; but this privilege has been restricted to the faithful of this Gospel
Age. The “ sheep ” class of the Millennial Age will not be called to lay down their
lives, and will not, therefore, be begotten to the spirit nature (2 Cor. 6: 1, 2), but will
regain all that was lost by Adam in the beginning. Paradise will be restored and all
human beings, perfect as Adam was before the Fall, and “ crowned with glory and
honour” (Psa. 8: 4-9), will have communion with God and the holy angels. They will
have dominion, also, “ over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over
the cattle, and over all the earth.” Then will follow the “Ages to come” when the
prayer which the Lord taught his disciples to offer will be fully answered, and the will
of our Heavenly Father will be done on earth as it is done in heaven. These Ages will
be “the days of heaven upon the earth” spoken of by Moses (Deut. 11 : 21), for “the
heavens are the Lord’s: but the earth hath he given to the children of men ”—Psa. 115 [
16. “ And I heard a great voice out of heaven saying, Behold, the tabernacle of God

is with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and God him¬
self shall be with them, and be their God. And God shall wipe away all tears from
their eyes: and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall
there be any more pain : for the former things are passed away. And he that sat upon
the throne said, Behold, I make all things new. And he said unto me, Write : for these
words are true and faithful" —Rev. 21: 3-5,


36


CHAPTER IV.


The Great Pyramid in Type and Antitype.


T HE faithful followers of Christ, for whose selection God has set apart the
Gospel Dispensation, are likened to “living stones” and are urged by the
Apostle to come unto Christ, the “ Chief corner-stone,” and be shaped, pol¬
ished, and built in line with him—1 Pet. 2: 1-8. “ Thus saith the Lord God, Behold I

lay in Zion for a foundation a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner stone, a sure
foundation”—Isa. 28: 16.

72 To believers, the “ Head corner-stone,” Jesus Christ, is precious, because they
recognize his peculiar fitness for the exalted and central position assigned to him.
Studying the plan of the Great Master Architect they see only one place in the Pyramid
for this “ Stone,” namely, at the apex, a position of pre-eminence which no other stone
in the building could possibly occupy—Col. 1: 16-19. They see also, that without this
“ Head corner-stone,” the whole plan of God would be incomplete. It may on first
thought appear strange that the prophet Isaiah and the Apostle Peter should state that
the “ Head-stone ” is also the “ Foundation-stone ” in the Great Antitypical Pyramid ;
but when we consider that its foundation is “ laid in heaven,” and that the attraction
which draws us to Christ is upward, or heavenward, not downward or earthward as in
an earthly building, the apparent contradiction vanishes.

73 A little reflection will also render manifest that the topmost stone of such an
edifice as the pyramid must itself be a pyramid, and therefore complete in itself; but
the rest of the structure, apart from this top-stone, however polished and adapted to
each other the individual stones may be, would be incomplete, imperfect. Place the
top-stone in position, however, and at once the whole structure leaves nothing to be
desired. The four sloping sides would then meet in a point at the top-stone, which
would, therefore, be the “ chief corner-stone,” the “ head-stone of the corner -Eph. 2:
20; Psa. 118: 22.

74 As with Solomon’s Temple, so with the Great Pyramid of Gizeh, the stones were
cut and prepared at the quarries before they were brought and placed in position. This
fact is carefully explained by Professor Flinders Petrie in his admirable work, The
Pyramids and Temples of Gizeh. Treating on the method of work employed in
building the Great Pyramid, he writes:—“ From several indications it seems that the
masons planned the casing, and some at least of the core masonry also, course by course
on the ground. For on all the casing, and on the core on which the casing fitted, there

37


are lines drawn on the horizontal surfaces, showing where each stone was to be placed
on those below it. If the stones were merely trimmed to fit each other as the building
went on, there would be no need to have so carefully marked the place of each block in
this particular way ; and it shows that they were probably planned and fitted together on
the ground below. Another indication of very careful and elaborate planning on the
ground is in the topmost space over the King’s Chamber ; there the roofing-beams were
numbered, and marked for the north and south sides ; and though it may be thought
that it could be of no consequence in what order they were placed, yet all their details
were evidently schemed before they were delivered to the builders’ hands.”

75 A beautiful illustration is this of the living stones in God’s great Antitypical
Pyramid, Jesus Christ and his Church, selected and prepared in the quarry of this
world, before being placed together to form the glorious symbolical building of the
Millennial Age ! One can imagine that the Egyptian builders (who, according to the account
of Herodotus, were forced into the work by their mighty invaders, the Hyksos kings),
when they were engaged under the architect’s supervision in shaping the chief corner¬
stone, would fin d it strangely out of harmony with all their traditional ideas; for the
Great Pyramid was the first of its kind. It may be that in their ignorance they despised
and rejected it; and such an awkwardly-shaped stone with its five sides, five corners,
and sixteen angles, must doubtless have been ‘‘a stone of stumbling” to builders whose
heads did not understand, and whose hearts did not appreciate, the great work upon
which they were engaged.

76 But though we may not be certain how the Egyptian builders treated the typical
chief corner-stone, we have the definite declaration of the Word of God that the
builders of the Antitypical building, those who were permitted by God, the Great
Architect, to chisel and polish Jesus Christ by the trials and sufferings to which they
subjected him, did not comprehend him. Because of their traditional beliefs and the
hardness of their hearts, he had no form nor comeliness in their eyes, and as it seemed to
them that there was no beauty in him that they should desire him, they despised
and rejected him—Isa. 53: 2, 3.

77 The Scriptures assure us that the work on which these men were engaged
through the Lord’s providences, was done by them largely in ignorance, for “ had they
known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of Glory”—Acts 3: 17 ; 1 Cor. 2: 8.
Nevertheless, a measure of responsibility rested upon them. It was because of the
wrong attitude of their hearts that they found Christ “ a stone of stumbling and a rock
of offence” (1 Pet. 2: 7, 8), and, therefore, this stone which they rejected and over
which they stumbled, in due time fell upon them and crushed them. This was con¬
firmed by Jesus in the words of the prophets: 11 What is this then that is written,
The stone which the builders rejected, the same is become the head of the corner?
Whosoever shall fall upon that stone shall be broken ; but on whomsoever it shall fall,
it will grind him to powder ”—Luke 20 : 17, 18. The inspired writer then adds in verse
19, “ The chief priests and the scribes the same hour sought to lay hands on him ; . . .
for they perceived that he had spoken this parable against them.”

78 In the ninth chapter of his letter to the Romans (verses 31-33), the Apostle Paul
points out why Christ was to the Jews a stumbling-stone and rock of offence. It was
because they were seeking to follow after the law of righteousness not by faith, but as it

38


were by the works of the law. Therefore they stumbled at that stumbling-stone, and
later the vengeance of the Lord was executed upon them, and, as a nation, they were
broken in pieces like a potter’s vessel.

79 In the present time, history is repeating itself. Once more those who consider
themselves the people of God, appropriating to themselves the name of Christendom
(Christ’s Kingdom), are rejecting the Lord that bought them. Thus is fulfilled the word
of the Lord through the prophet Isaiah (8: 14): “He [Christ] shall be for a sanctuary
[to the true Church]; but for a stone of stumbling and for a rock of offence to both the
houses of Israel" (Fleshly and Spiritual). Both sets of builders, while permitted by
the Lord to chisel and polish the living stones of the Antitypical Pyramid, have not
known Christ (head and body), and have rejected him. Both have been guilty of
unbelief and hardness of heart, and the judgment of the Lord on Nominal Fleshly Israel
will be repeated on Nominal Spiritual Israel. Christendom (so called) will be broken ;
as foretold by the Psalmist, “ Thou shalt break them [the nations] with a rod of iron ;
thou shalt dash them in pieces like a potter's vessel”—Psa. 2: 9,

80 In due time all the living stones of the Antitypical Pyramid will be made perfect
through sufferings, and then the whole building will be “fitly framed together” as a
holy temple in the Lord. Jesus Christ himself will be the chief corner stone, and as
such will occupy the exalted place of honour in the centre, and the twelve Apostles of
the Lamb will be the foundation stones, next to the Lord in position—Eph. 2: 20-22 ;
Rev. 21: 14.

81 Whatever the feelings of the Egyptian builders may have been during the
period of quarrying and preparing the stones for the Great Pyramid of Gizeh, they
must have marvelled and rejoiced when the top-stone was placed in position ; for this,
the crowning work of the edifice, must have appealed to them more than would the
finishing touches in any other known form of building, demonstrating to them that their
labours were now completed, and that a measure of rest could be enjoyed by all. So
with Jehovah’s Great Antitypical Pyramid, when “he shall bring forth the head-stone
thereof,” he will shout “ Grace, grace unto it,” and the whole creation in heaven and
earth will marvel and give glory to God, and will honour the Son even as they honour
the Father—Zech. 4: 7 ; John 5: 23. Amid great rejoicing, every creature which is in
heaven, and on the earth, and under the earth, and such as are in the sea, and all that
are in them, will say : Blessing, and honour, and glory, and power, be unto him that
sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever—Rev. 5: 13.

82 The identity of the Great Pyramid of Gizeh to the exclusion of all the other
pyramids, as the one referred to in the Holy Scriptures, is shown by an allusion to one
of its characteristic distinctions, namely, its socket foundations. This allusion is found
in Job 38: 4-7, where the language, although evidently intended as a description of the
creation of the earth, will fully answer only to that of the erection of the Great Pyramid,
the type of the New Creation. The Scripture reads thus: “ Where wast thou when I
laid the foundations of the earth ? Declare if thou hast understanding. Who hath laid
the measures thereof, if thou knowest ? Or who hath stretched the line upon it ?
Whereupon are the sockets thereof made to sink ? Or who laid the corner-stone thereof :
when the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy?”
(Marginal reading). The Great Pyramid of Gizeh is the only one which possesses

39


REMNANT ofthe ORIGINAL CASING-STONE SURFACE
of the GREAT PYRAMID.

NEAR THE MIDDLE OF ITS NORTHERN FOOT. AS DISCOVERED BY THE EXCAVATIONS
OF COLONEL HOWARD VYSE IN I8S7.


socket-foundations. Commenting upon this fact, Dr. Seiss declares: “ Nor is it only to
the pyramidal form in general that the allusion is, but to a particular pyramid. By
that strange reference to the sunken feet or planting of the foundations in ‘ sockets,’ we
are conducted directly to the Great Pyramid of Gizeh. Two socketed 1 encastrements,’
‘ socles,’ shoes, or incised sinkings into the rock were found under two of its base
corners by the French savants in 1799, which were again uncovered and described by
Colonel Howard Vyse, in 1837. And as God here speaks of such a fastening down of
the foundations in general, Professor C. Piazzi Smyth was persuaded that there were
corresponding 1 sockets ’ at the other two base corners, and when search was made for
them in 1865, they were found by Messrs. Aiton and Inglis, assisted by Professor
Smyth. Here then are the whole four 1 sockets ’ or fastened foundations. Nothing
of the sort exists at any other known pyramid. They are among the distinctive marks
of the Great Pyramid of Gizeh. They are the enduring tracks of its feet cut into the
living rock, by which almighty God himself identifies it for us as the original image
from which his own description of the creation is drawn ”—See Plate V.

83 During this Gospel Age there has been erected a counterfeit Antitypical Pyra¬
mid, the workmanship of Satan. Claiming to rule by Divine right, it has dominated the
whole world for many centuries ; but it is not the Kingdom for which the Lord taught
his disciples to pray: “ Thy Kingdom come.” Soon its sins will have reached unto
heaven, and God will remember its iniquities ; and its plagues will come in one day,
death and mourning and famine ; and it will be utterly destroyed with fire ; for strong
is the Lord God who judgeth it—Rev. 18: 5, 8. This will be in the great time of
trouble which will end this Gospel Age. In the Chart of the Ages given in the preced¬
ing chapter (Plate VI), the great time of trouble is represented by the shaded part at the
end of the Gospel Age. The large imperfect pyramid here shown falling in ruins,
represents the destruction of “ Babylon the Great,” the counterfeit Antitypical Pyramid
which has never been completed. In the 51st chapter of Jeremiah, the Lord intimates
that for it there will be neither “headstone,” nor “foundation-stones.” “Behold I am
against thee, O destroying mountain [kingdom], saith the Lord, which destroyeth the
earth: and I will stretch out mine hand upon thee, and roll thee down from the rocks,
and will make thee a burnt mountain: and they shall not take from thee a stone for a
corner, nor a stone for foundations ; but everlasting ruins shalt thou be, saith the Lord”
—Jer. 51: 25, 26,—Leeser’s translation. This vivid description of the Lord’s judgment
doubtless applied to the literal Babylon of the prophet's day, but as indicated by the
many citations in the book of Revelation, it is to have its Antitypical fulfilment in the
destruction of “ Babylon the Great ”—Rev. 17:5; 18.

84 The Great Pyramid of Gizeh, according to Greek, Roman, and early Arabian
writers, was formerly covered by a beautiful smooth white-stone casing, which gave to
the structure almost mathematical truth and perfection. This casing remained in posi¬
tion until about the year 1000 A.D., when, profiting by the effects of a severe earthquake
recorded to have happened in 908 A.D., the Caliphs of Egypt began to strip off the
polished bevelled blocks. The Great Pyramid now presents a dilapidated appearance,
and surrounding it on all four sides are great mounds of rubbish fifty fee^ high, the
fragments of many of the once beautiful casing-stones.

85 In his explorations in 1837, Colonel Howard Vyse, employed hundreds of

41


workers to dig down through the hills of rubbish at the north side, and having exposed
three of the original casing-stones in situ, adhering closely by their original cement to
the platform base of the building, demonstrated what was once the outside of the Great

Pyramid_Plate VII. These casing-stones consisted of white, dense limestone, almost

like marble, and exhibited matchless workmanship practically as true as modern work
by optical instrument-makers. The joints are no thicker than silver-paper, yet they
include between the polished surfaces an extraordinarily fine film of white cement.

86 Professor Flinders Petrie in his work, The Pyramids and Temples of Gizeh,
gives a description of the joints of these casing-stones. He writes : “ The mean thick¬
ness of the joints there is one-fiftieth part of an inch ; and the mean variation of t e
cutting of the stone from a straight line, and from a true square, is but one-hundredth
part of an inch in a length of 75 inches up the face, an amount of accuracy equal to
most modern optician’s straight-edges of such a length. These joints, with an area of
some 35 square feet each,-were not only worked as finely as this, but were cemente
throughout. Though the stones were brought as close as one-five-hundredth part of an
inch, or, in fact, into contact, and the mean opening of the joint was but one-fiftieth part
of an inch, yet the builders managed to fill the joint with cement, despite the great area
of it, and the weight of the stone to be moved—some sixteen tons. To merely place
such stones in exact contact at the sides would be careful work, but to do so with
cement in the joints seems almost impossible.” Colonel Howard Vyse, in drawing
attention to this wonderful cement, writes: “Such is the tenacity of the cement with
which they (the casing-stones) are held together, that a fragment of one that has been
destroyed remained firmly fixed in its original alignment, notwithstanding the lapse ot

time, and the violence to which it had been exposed’’—Plate VIII.

87 Thus does the Great Master Architect illustrate the close union of all the
«i living-stones ” with the Headstone and with each other. The invisible cement which
binds them so tenaciously together is Love. But before they are ready to be compactly
fitted together and the building completed, they must first undergo much knocking,
shaping and polishing to conform them to the harmonious lines of the top-stone, for the
least want of conformity in any of these “ stones” would prevent their close adherence
to their fellow-members. Like their “chief corner-stone,” they must be perfected

through sufferings

“Until by means of strokes and blows,

The shapeless mass appears
Symmetric, polished, beautiful,

To stand th’ eternal years."


Resume of Scriptural Texts.


Psa. 118. 22 The stone which the builders re¬

fused is become the head stone of the
corner.

23 This is the Lord’s doing it is mar¬
vellous in our eyes.


Isa. 28. 16 Therefore thus saith the Lord God,

Behold I lay in Zion for a foundation a
stone, a tried stone, a precious corner
stone, a sure foundation: he that be-
lieveth shall not make haste.


EXAMPLE of t„f CASING -STONES, or a PYRAMID, SUPER-POSED on the
RECTANGULAR “A60N«* COURSES; FROM A PHOTOGRAPH BY PIAZZI SMYTH OF THE SUMMIT OF THE PYR


REMNANT or the ORIGINAL CASING-STONl SURFACE of the GREAT PYRAMID

J NEAR THE MIDDLE OF ITS NORTHERN FOOT. AS DISCOVERED BY THE EXCAVATIONS OF COL, HOWARD VYSE IN 1837


42


Rom. 9. 33 As it is written, Behold, I lay in

Sion a stumblingstone and rock of of¬
fence : and whosoever believeth on him
shall not be ashamed.

Isa. 8. 13 Sanctify the Lord of hosts himself ;

and let him be your fear, and let him be
your dread.

14 And he shall be for a sanctuary;
but for a stone of stumbling and for a
rock of offence to both the houses of
Israel, for a gin and for a snare to the
inhabitants of Jerusalem.

15 And many among them shall stum¬
ble, and fall, and be broken, and be
snared, and be taken.

Matt. 21. 42 Jesus saith unto them, Did ye never

read in the scriptures, The stone which
the builders rejected, the same is become
the head of the corner ; this is the Lord’s
doing, and it is marvellous in our eyes ?

43 Therefore say I unto you, The
kingdom of God shall be taken from
you, and given to a nation bringing
forth the fruits thereof.

44 And whosoever shall fall on this
stone shall be broken: but on whomso¬
ever it shall fall, it will grind him to
powder.

Mark 12. 10 "And have ye not read this scrip¬

ture ; The stone which the builders re¬
jected is become the head of the corner :

11 This was the Lord’s doing, and it
is marvellous in our eyes ?

12 And they sought to lay hold on
him, but feared the people; for they
knew that he had spoken the parable
against them: and they left him, and
went their way.

Luke 20. 17 And he beheld them, and said,

What is this then that is written, The
stone which the builders rejected, the
same is become the head of the corner ?

18 Whosoever shall fall upon that
stone shall be broken ; but on whomso¬
ever it shall fall, it will grind him to
powder.

Acts 4. 10 Be it known unto you all, and to all

the people of Israel, that by the name
of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom ye
crucified, whom God raised from the
dead, even by him doth this man stand
here before you whole.

11 This is the stone which was set at
nought of you builders, which is become
the head of the corner.


12 Neither is there salvation in any
other: for there is none other name
under heaven given among men where¬
by we must be saved.

Eph. 2. 20 And are built upon the foundation

of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ
himself being the chief corner stone ;

21 In whom all the building, fitly
framed together, groweth unto an holy
temple in the Lord :

22 In whom ye also are builded to¬
gether for an habitation of God through
the Spirit.

1 Pet. 2. 3 If so be ye have tasted that the Lord

is gracious.

4 To whom coming, as unto a living
stone, disallowed indeed of men, but
chosen of God, and precious.

5 Ye also, as living stones, are built
up a spiritual house, an holy priesthood,
to offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable
to God by Jesus Christ.

6 Wherefore also it is contained in
the scripture, Behold, I lay in Sion a
chief corner stone, elect, precious : and
he that believeth on him shall not be
confounded.

7 Unto you therefore which believe
he is precious : but unto them which be
disobedient, the stone which the builders
disallowed, the same is made the head
of the corner.

8 And a stone of stumbling, and a
rock of offence, even to them which
stumble at the word, being disobedient:
whereunto also they were appointed.

Job 38. 4 Where wast thou when I laid the

foundations of the earth ? declare, if
thou hast understanding.

5 Who hath laid the measures thereof,
if thou knowest ? or who hath stretched
the line upon it ?

6 Whereupon are the sockets thereof
made to sink ? or who laid the corner
stone thereof,

7 When the morning stars sang to¬
gether, and all the sons of God shouted
for joy?

Zech. 4. 7 Who art thou, O great mountain ?

before Zerubbabel thou shalt become a
plain : and he shall bring forth the
head-stone thereof with shoutings, cry¬
ing, Grace, grace unto it!


44


Plate IX.


AS"


CHAMBERS OFj
CONSTRUCTION]


KING'S

CHAMBER


QUEEN'S*

CHAMBER


\f HORIZONTAL PASSAGE


Passage System


OF GIZEH

IN the Land or Egypt x


June ^ July,


1909. fl.D


WELL

SHAFT


3 c e

e ^O/ A


■,W\


GROTTO


V


N>v ^ \ N '^x v > s j^S^^ ^PO/NT or. INTERSECTION * | \

W$SAl

Ifpl^^


^S^xV^\\^^ xx n\X\^ x xn^

y 'N^<X^'\^\XCxXV\\\sX^\\\-^\XX x Xv


'\v-y nv.ww vaa^'?. w\\'\ ■, ,■,' M'V X ir"T^y. 7 -\^ > -'»xxvx-xv;<x\\ : x I(1 ,

sXS\^X^^\X\\^N>xs>X x x\^N> x '^^^v-X\X\\xX^XxNV^:>-x^;^X>.\y;X x \.\ x ^.;^'VsNy\.\\: f


360 480 600 .

30 40 50 60 70


ao 90 too


Angle of Passages = 26 ° 18 10


<XX'XXsV\xW\ V\XVv\NW\\\\\S\S'vN -\\\\\'^'. A ■'.x.XX\

XXXxXX

-_—-^- 3 ” ■■ , ,■ P-a| °°

£0 ° 2S0 FT -

, „ n\X>XX\N x ^X.X x X

8 10 . XXXXXX


CHAPTER V.


The Passage and Chamber System
of the Great Pyramid.


I N the third volume of his Scripture Studies, page 330, C. T. Russell writes: “But
while the outward testimony of this great structure is thus complete and in
accord with God’s written revelation, its inner construction is even more
wonderful. While its outward form illustrates the completed results of God’s Plan
of Redemption, the inner construction marks and illustrates every prominent feature
of that plan as it has developed from age to age, down to its glorious and complete
consummation.” It is the purpose of the present work to demonstrate the truth of this
statement.

89 In order to an intelligent and appreciative understanding of the symbolism of
the Great Pyramid Passage and Chamber system, it will be necessary for the reader first
to acquaint himself with its architecture. The names here given to the various passages
and chambers are those commonly accepted by Pyramid students. They are mentioned
in the order in which they appeared to us during our visit to the Great Pyramid in the
months of June and July of the year 1909, and will be- easily followed and understood
by the reader if reference be made to Plate IX.

90 There is only one Entrance into the interior. High up on the north side of the
building, and twenty-four feet to the east of the middle line, a small doorway leads into
the Entrance or Descending Passage, which, like all the other passages in the Pyramid,
runs directly from north to south. So low is its roof (scarcely four feet), that we
required to stoop considerably, and the difficulty of progression was increased by the
slipperiness and steep downward inclination of the passage. For the first seventy-eight
feet, the centre of the floor is hewn and worn into a series of irregular shallow and deep
trenches. These to some extent increased the difficulty of progression. The only
advantage they possessed was that, in certain places, we found them sufficiently deep to
enable us to stand upright.

91 A few feet further down, we noticed a rectangular, dark granite block which
occupies a depression in the roof. This is the lower butt-end of a series of three large
granite stones, named collectively the Granite Plug, because they completely block the
lower end of the First Ascending Passage. At this place the floor of the Descending
Passage is composed of such hard limestone, that the traffic and vandalism of centuries
have made very little impression on it. The surface is so smooth that to walk on it is
impossible, unless one is wearing rubber shoes, or has bare or stockinged feet, and even

45


p


t


then the support afforded by the side walls may not be disdained. Visitors who are
wearing boots and have no one to assist them, have generally to sit on their heels at
this part, and slide down a few feet till their further descent is arrested by a block of
limestone. This block lies on the floor end-on against a large fractured granite stone,
which is tightly wedged in the passage. Across the top of this granite stone, between it
and the roof, a small iron grill-door has been adjusted. (Neither the two stones nor the
grill-door form any part of the original design.) So confined is the space between the
upper surface of the block of granite and the roof, that, whenever we required to
descend to the lower parts of the Pyramid during the progress of our work, we were
compelled first to sit on the granite stone with our feet thrust through the narrow
opening, and then, taking firm hold of the thin iron lintel of the grill-door, lower our¬
selves cautiously through the opening till our feet rested on the inclined floor of the
passage below the block. This grill-door is generally locked, but M. Maspero, Director-
General of Antiquities in Egypt, kindly permitted it to remain unlocked during the
course of our investigations at the Pyramid.

92 This lower portion of the Descending Passage is a direct continuation of the
part above, and is similar to it, except that it is nearly three times the length, and instead
of being built with masonry, it bores though the solid rock on which the Pyramid is
erected. It ends in a Small Horizontal Passage which, in its turn, leads past a small
Ante-Chamber or Recess on its west side, to a large unfinished Pit, or Subterranean
Chamber, hewn in the solid rock a hundred feet vertically below the base-line of the
Pyramid—Plate X.

93 In the floor of the Pit appears the opening of a large square shaft, which
descends vertically to a considerable depth ; and directly opposite on the south wall,
is the square doorway of a small passage, which, on investigation, we found to run
horizontally southwards for a length of over 50 feet to a blind end. In passing round
the large open shaft to get to this small south passage, we had always carefully to avoid
walking too near its edge, because of the loose crumbling debris which covers the floor
of the Pit.

94 In the Descending Passage at a distance of seven or eight yards up from the
foot, there is an opening in the west wall, so that when we retraced our steps, it
appeared in the wall on our left-hand side. This is the entrance into a small passage,
six feet in length, which leads to the lower end of an almost vertical shaft, only a little
over two feet square in bore, named the Well. A reference to Plate IX will show that
this shaft communicates with the upper passages.

95 Immediately above or north of the granite stone on which the grill-door is fixed,
there is an irregular opening in the west wall of the Descending Passage. When we
stepped through this opening, we found ourselves in a large cavernous space hollowed
out in the Pyramid masonry. This large cavity and the opening into it from the
Descending Passage, were forced fully a thousand years ago by Caliph A1 Mamoun,
son of Harun A1 Raschid of Arabian Nights’ fame. After entering the cavity, when we
turned round and looked up, we saw by the light of our candles that the west side of
the upper two-thirds of the Granite Plug, already mentioned, had been exposed by the
large excavation.

96 The small space between the lower end of the Granite Plug, and the roof-line


47


PLATE XI.


of the Descending Passage, was originally closed by a smooth limestone block similar to
the other stones which form the roof of the Descending Passage, and in line with them
—Plate XI. So effectually did this limestone block conceal the entrance of the First
Ascending Passage, that none of the classic nations knew anything about the upper
passages and chambers. Later, the little of what was once known by ancient Egypt,
Greece and Rome, was lost, for even the site of entrance to the Great Pyramid became
forgotten. Consequently, when Caliph A1 Mamoun, with the mistaken idea that the
Great Pyramid contained treasures of gold and precious stones, desired to enter it and
explore its wonders, there was only an indistinct rumour to guide him towards trying
the northern rather than any other side of the monument. He selected a spot in the
middle line on the seventh course of masonry, and, therefore, several feet below and to
the right of the true Entrance. Here he caused his workmen to force a passage horizon¬
tally into the great solid mass of the Pyramid.

97 It is reported that after weeks of fruitless quarrying, the Caliph’s despairing
workmen were disposed to abandon their task, when one day they heard a noise as if
something had fallen in an interior space a few feet from where they were. They
immediately set to work eastwards in the direction of the sound, and soon burst into the
Descending Passage, thus forming the irregular opening already described. There they
found that the noise had been caused by the falling of the large angular stone, which for
ages had formed part of the roof of the Descending Passage, and had sealed up the
entrance to the upper passages and chambers. In this way, this most important secret
was revealed for the first time since the erection of the building ; and had it not been
for the shaking of the masonry which caused the roof-stone to become dislodged and
fall, the upper passages might even yet have remained unknown.

98 But the workmen, though they had discovered the First Ascending Passage,
found that access into it was prevented by the Granite Plug, which is so tightly wedged
that it is impossible to remove it entire, and so hard that it would have been extremely
difficult to break it. Accordingly, they chose the easier plan of breaking up and
removing the limestone blocks to the right or west of the Granite Plug, and so forced
their way upwards into the passage above. This discovery of the upper passages was
made in the year 820 A.D.; and as the Great Pyramid was built about the year 2170 B.C.,
their existence must have been unknown for practically three thousand years! The
due time had arrived, however, when the Lord permitted these upper passages and
chambers to be discovered, in order that their secrets might be revealed in the latter
days of this Dispensation, and that, by means of the Great Pyramid as well as from the
Bible, men might learn that the Lord is God, “ declaring the end from the beginning,
and from ancient times the things that are not yet done, saying, My counsel shall stand,
and I will do all my pleasure”—Isa. 46:10.

99 It was many years after A1 Mamoun's attack on the inside of the Great Pyramid
that there began, with the object of building the new Mussulman cities and mosques,
that spoiling of its outside which resulted in the removal of the top-stone, and of nearly
all the smooth, white casing-stones that formerly covered or encased the building.
Prior to this act of vandalism, the shining white Pyramid must have presented a
glorious sight. Professor Flinders Petrie points out that the stones at the summit of the
Pyramid continued to be thrown down from time to time till so recently as the beginning

49


VERTICAL SECTION (Looking West) at the SUMMIT of the WELL
SHOWrS END SECTION OF SMALL HORIZONTAL PASSAGE Leao.no to the WELL


‘ , , pif SllKin PI AN of the NORTHERN END of the GRAND GALLERY and the WELL 1
ISHOWN?™ 5M*a HORIZONTAL PASSAGE LEADING FROM THE GRAHO GALLERY WESTWARD TO THE WELL


r


r 1


of last century. This is evident from the names and dates which innumerable visitors
have carved on the stones that form the present flat summit, the size of which is about
twenty-three and a half feet square, forming, therefore, a platform with an area of over
550 square feet.

100 To resume: having passed through the forced hole in the west wall of the
Descending Passage into the cavernous hollow, and having examined the exposed west
side of the upper two-thirds of the Granite Plug, with above it the opening into the
First Ascending Passage, we looked about us and saw in the upper portion of the west
wall of the hollow, the inner extremity of the long channel which A1 Mamoun’s work¬
men had forced through the core masonry from the north face of the Pyramid—Plate
V. Then, taking advantage of a ledge and a series of notches on the high south-east
wall of the hollow, we climbed to the upper end of the Granite Plug and gained access
to the First Ascending Passage, which runs in the same vertical plane and at the same
angle to the horizon as the Descending Passage.

101 To proceed up this passage, we required to stoop uncomfortably low, for, like
the Descending Passage, its roof is scarcely four feet above its floor. When, however,
we reached the southern upper extremity of the passage, we emerged into a large place
where, to our joy, we found a level floor, and abundance of room to stand erect and so
relieve our aching backs. We were now at the lower end of the noblest passage in the
Great Pyramid, which has been well named the Grand Gallery. This Gallery ascends
in the same vertical plane, and at the same angle, as the First Ascending Passage, of
which, therefore, it forms a continuation. The reason why the floor is level is because
another passage, called the Horizontal Passage, also has its beginning at the upper
extremity of the First Ascending Passage.

102 Every time we reached the Grand Gallery, we were glad of a little rest and
a quiet look round—Plate XII.

(1) Behind us was the low steep passage up which we had just laboriously
clambered.

(2) When facing south, we perceived at our feet, on the west or right-hand side, a
very small passage branching off in a horizontal direction. The roof of this small
passage is on a level with the floor of the Horizontal Passage at this place. When
investigating this small passage we found it necessary, after stepping down into it, to
crawl along its floor on hands and knees, but we required to exercise extreme caution,
for at a very short distance to the west, it terminates in a deep vertical shaft, 28 inches
square in bore. This is the upper end of the Well, the lower opening of which, as
already mentioned, appears on the west wall near the foot of the Descending Passage
—Plate XIII.

(3) Straight in front of us we saw the low entrance to the Horizontal Passage,
which extends southwards in the same vertical plane as the Descending and First
Ascending Passages, but, as indicated by its name, in a horizontal direction. In height
and width, it corresponds to the Descending and First Ascending Passages, and leads to
a large square room with a high gabled roof, known as the Queen’s Chamber, on the
east wall of which is a peculiar shallow Niche. On the occasions of our visits to the
Queen’s Chamber, we required to keep a careful watch as we proceeded along the low
Horizontal Passage; otherwise we would have been in danger of a severe fall, for after

52


Plate XIV.


vertical SECTION.OF QUEEN'S CHAMBER (Looking West),

'NC THE STEP IN THE HORIZONTAL PASSACE LEADING THERETO.


traversing six-sevenths of the distance we came to a place where the floor suddenly
drops to a lower level—-Plate XIV.

(4) Above the low entrance of the Horizontal Passage, sixteen and a half feet in
front of us, we beheld the commencement of the Grand Gallery floor. Strictly speak¬
ing, however, the commencement is at the north end-wall. At this place the floor of the
First Ascending Passage appears to project about two feet into the Grand Gallery ; but
this little inclined portion, though continuous with the floor of the First Ascending
Passage, is really the commencement of the Grand Gallery floor. Between this portion
and the portion further south above the Horizontal Passage, there is a large gap—for
the purpose of affording entrance along the Horizontal Passage to the Queen’s Chamber.
Some think that originally there was no break in the continuity of the Grand Gallery
floor, and that thus the entrance into the Queen’s Chamber was concealed, but it is
more probable that the gap was constructed in order to give the appearance of having
been forced. There are certain features which seem to indicate this.

103 The Grand Gallery is narrow, being only seven feet in width ; but with the aid
of a good light its lofty vaulted roof, twenty-eight feet in vertical height, is seen sloping
upwards into deep obscurity, a most impressive sight! Even more impressive is this
wonderful passage when it is illuminated with magnesium wire burnt behind the
spectator as he is standing at the north end. On several occasions we got our Arab
attendant to burn magnesium away up at the south end of the Gallery, and then every
part of it became visiblethe two side-walls approaching each other from their base
upwards by seven overlappings till at the roof they are only three and a half feet apart;
the narrow roof itself with its thirty-six overlappings sloping steeply upwards; and
about 160 feet away at a level of 70 feet above us as we stood at the lower or north end
of the Grand Gallery, the high tapering south wall with, in the centre of its base, the
dark square opening of still another low passage. This low passage, which is only
three and a half feet square in bore, leads horizontally southwards to a small peculiarly
marked apartment called the Ante-Chamber , from the south wall of which a similar
low passage leads to a large rectangular hall known as the King’s Chamber.

104 When we looked along the floor of the Grand Gallery, we saw that the walking-
space is narrowed to three and a half feet by a pair of low square stone benches or
Ramps, extending the whole length of the Gallery at the base of the two side walls.
The floor of the Grand Gallery is, therefore, of the same width as the Descending and
First Ascending Passages, the Horizontal Passage, and the two small horizontal passages
which communicate with the Ante-Chamber and King s Chamber from the south or
upper end of the Grand Gallery.

105 As the apparent commencement of the floor of the Grand Gallery is over seven
feet above the floor of the Horizontal Passage, it would be extremely difficult to ascend
the Grand Gallery were it not that the East Ramp extends right down to the north wall,
and is sufficiently broad to permit one to walk upwards along it till the sloping floor of
the Gallery is reached. The East Ramp is always the one chosen by visitors desiring
to ascend the Gallery, because, although the West Ramp also extends right down to the
north wall of the Gallery, the Well-mouth breaks its continuity. Along the top of the
East Ramp, footholds have been cut, which we found of great assistance, and without
which it would be practically impossible to ascend this narrow slippery ledge.

54


106 At the head of the Grand Gallery (the south end), there is a great Step, thirty-
six inches in height, which, though broken to a considerable extent in the middle, we
found difficult to surmount, not only on account of its height, but also because of the
sloping floor on which our feet rested ; but we found that the Ramps, which terminate
against the front of the Step, proved of assistance, for by carefully placing a foot on top
of one of them, we gained sufficient purchase to enable us to spring to the upper surface
of the Step. This upper surface is a level platform, measuring seven feet from side to
side, and five feet from front to back. We always had a feeling of rest when we
reached the top of the Step, after our laborious and somewhat dangerous climb up the
long steep Gallery. Most visitors to the interior of the Pyramid, when they reach the
lower end of the Grand Gallery, hesitate to proceed further. The absence of the floor
at this part, the long inclined walls and the high receding roof disappearing into the
deep gloom above, gives them a feeling of awe and makes them afraid to go on. It is
only on the repeated assurances of their voluble Arab guides that some of them are
induced to make the attempt. Indeed, many of the visitors do not penetrate even to the
lower north end of the Grand Gallery, the high south-east wall in A1 Mamoun’s cavity,
and the steep and very slippery floor of the First Ascending Passage, deter them from
proceeding further than the junction of the First Ascending Passage ; and very many
more will not even venture inside the Pyramid at all, the low narrow Entrance, and
above all the smooth glossy white floor which slopes away so suddenly from them,
proves too much for their nerves. Those, therefore, who reach the top of the Step at
the head of the Grand Gallery, and pass through the low horizontal passages to the
King’s Chamber, are comparatively a very small and select company indeed!

107 Our inspection of the lofty tapering wall which forms the south terminus of the
Grand Gallery, showed us that, like the two side-walls, it has seven overlappings, each
of which projects about three inches. The topmost overlap near the roof, therefore,
projects about twenty-one inches beyond the base of the wall. The north end-wall at
the foot of the Gallery has only six overlappings. As the two passages, the first from
the Grand Gallery into the Ante-Chamber, and the second from the Ante-Chamber into
the King’s Chamber, are each only three and a half feet high, we found it necessary to
stoop considerably when going through them. Special care required to be exercised on
emerging from the first low passage into the Ante-Chamber ; for at a short distance (21
inches) from the north wall of the chamber, two thick plates of granite, one above the
other, forming together what is called the Granite Leaf, are fixed between the side
walls in such a way, that the bottom of the lower one is on the same level as the roof
of the low passage into the Ante-Chamber—Plate XV.

108 The King’s Chamber, constructed entirely of immense beautifully squared and
levelled blocks of dark polished granite, is the chief apartment in the Great Pyramid,
the one “ to which, and for which, and toward which, the whole Great Pyramid was
originally built.” The Granite Coffer is near the west side of the chamber, and is the
only movable article of furniture in the building. Though named the Sarcophagus by
those who hold to the tombic theory of the Great Pyramid, it exhibits none of the
hieroglyphics nor other markings which are usually found on the sarcophagi in Egypt,
nor is there any record of a mummy ever having been discovered in it. The King’s
Chamber is situated on the 50th course of the Pyramid masonry at a height of about 150

55


Plate XV.


VERTICAL SECTION (LOOKING WEST) OF KING'S CHAMBER; ANTE-CHAMBER AND

Howard Vyse's "chambers of construction" showing "quarry marks"

SINGLE SHADE LINES INDICATE LIMESTONE CROSSED LINES INDICATE CRANITE


feet from the ground, and its size is, approximately, 34 feet from east to west, 17 feet
from north to south, and 19 feet in height. The four walls are built of exactly one
hundred stones varying in size, and the ceiling is formed of nine enormous granite beams,
stretching from north to south, and extending five feet beyond each side wall. These
granite beams are of greater depth than breadth, joist fashion, and constitute the largest
stones in the whole Pyramid. One of them has a breadth of five feet, a depth of about
seven feet, and a length of twenty-seven feet, and weighs about eighty tons. (How did
the builders manage to get it into its position ?)

109 Above the King’s Chamber there are five shallow spaces called Chambers
of Construction, into the lowest of which, known as “Davison’s Chamber” after its
discoverer, access is gained by a small passage entering from the top south-east corner
of the Grand Gallery. This small passage is rough, but is apparently original. It is
about 24 feet in length, and only 32 inches in height by 28 inches in width. We did not
get an opportunity to explore these upper chambers; and a visit to them is attended
with danger. We were informed that there is only one guide (who lives at the Sakkara
Pyramids, about seven miles further up the Nile) who will venture to ascend to the
mouth of the small passage, in order to hold a rope for the venturesome visitor who
desires to extend his investigations to these upper regions. This guide mounts the
giddy height by means of notches cut in the walls at the south-east angle of the Grand
Gallery. When we remember the limited area of the upper surface of the Step, the
vast sloping depth of the Grand Gallery below, and the great height of the roof where
the mouth of the small passage is situated, we can well understand that this guide will
require, as the French say, to “take his courage in both hands.” Our Arab attendant
essayed to ascend for us, but after climbing a third of the height, said he was afraid and
came down again.

110 It was on the 8th of July in the year 1765 A.D., that Davison, accompanied by a
few friends (who did not, however, go with him all the way), discovered and examined
the lowermost Chamber of Construction. He ascended to the mouth of the small
passage by a ladder: and had great difficulty in making his way along the confined
passage because of the large amount of dirt and bat’s manure with which it was choked.
He perceived that the floor of the chamber was composed of the reverse of the granite
beams which form the ceiling of the King’s Chamber, and that the entire widths of their
upper surfaces were exposed, thus making this low space about four feet longer than the
chamber below, although the width from north to south is the same.

111 This comprised all that was known of the parts above the King’s Chamber until
1837, when, on the 14th of February of that year, Col. Howard Vyse instructed his
workmen to commence an excavation from the inner end of the small passage in a verti¬
cal direction, in order to penetrate above the roof-beams of Davison’s Chamber. He
states that his reason for pursuing this operation, was his belief that a sepulchral apart¬
ment lay above Davison’s Chamber, the latter being, as he thought, merely an entresol
or low division between the two main apartments below and above. The work of
excavating proved laborious and most dangerous, because of its being overhead work,
and carried on in so confined a space. It was not until after six weeks of constant
boring and blasting, that the workmen managed to make a small hole into the cavity
above.


57


Plate XVI.


112 On receiving this information, the Colonel, in great expectation, examined the
chamber by the aid of a lighted candle on the end of a rod pushed through the small
opening; but, he wrote :■—I had the mortification of finding that it was a chamber of
construction, like that below it.” He still entertained a hope, however, of discovering a
sepulchral apartment somewhere above the King’s Chamber, and his men continued to
-work upwards, breaking into each Chamber of Construction in succession, until, after
three and a half months’ labour, when they had forced a vertical shaft up to a total
height of forty feet above the small passage, the fifth cavity was entered. This, owing
to its inclined pointed roof, Col. Howard Vyse believed to be the highest and final
chamber. According to his measurements, the apex of the gabled roof of this chamber
is seventy feet above the floor of the King’s Chamber—Plate XVI.

113 On the surrounding masonry of all these Chambers of Construction, excepting
the lowest, Col. Howard Vyse discovered many red-painted marks and hieroglyphs.
He had careful copies of these taken and sent to the British Museum, where they were
examined and pronounced to be merely quarry-marks and instructions for the masons,
painted on at the quarries at the Mokattam hills on the opposite (east) side of the Nile.
These are the marks referred to by Professor Flinders Petrie Par. 74.

114 From the foregoing, it will be gathered that the “ Chambers of Construction
are not chambers in the usually accepted sense of that word, but merely hollows or
vacancies consequent upon the peculiar construction of the masonry above the King s
Chamber, and hence the name “ Chambers of Construction.” The series of five layers
of great granite beams which are built one above the other at short distances apart, and
the additional pairs of great inclined limestone blocks which form the gabled roof of the
topmost hollow (with also, probably, other inclined blocks resting upon these again),
were evidently intended by the ancient builders to form together a support for the
enormous weight of the superincumbent mass of masonry (the ancient top-stone lay more
than 300 feet above the King’s Chamber), which would be solid enough to preserve for
thousands of years the chaste simplicity of the noble chamber which they protect.

115 Nor were the precautions against destruction too great, for even with it all there
is a slight settlement or inclination of the whole of the King’s Chamber towards the
south-west corner, caused by an earthquake, most probably that reported to have
occurred in the year 908 A.D.— Par. 84. The shock of this earthquake must have been
very severe, for every one of the beams which form the immediate roof of the King s
Chamber, great and strong though they be, are broken across near the south wall, so
that as Professor Flinders Petrie has said, the whole of the immensely heavy granite
ceiling is upheld solely by sticking and thrusting ! Moreover, in every one of the spaces
above, the massive roof-beams are either cracked across, or are torn more or less out of
the wall principally on the south side! Nevertheless, the wonderful and unique method
of construction devised four thousand years ago by the ancient architect, has so well
succeeded in preserving the symmetry and squareness of the great chamber, that none
of the effects of the mighty convulsion of nature are apparent to the eyes of the observer
standing in it. These effects reveal themselves only upon close scrutiny, with careful
measuring and levelling.

116 All the chambers in the Great Pyramid run longer from east to west, than from
north to south, and the entrance doorway of each opens on the extreme east of the

58


VERTICAL SECTION OF KINGS CHAMBER AND
Howard Vyse's chambers of construction showing "quarry marks"

^S/NCL E SHADE LINES INDIC ATE LIMESTONE CROSSED LINES INDICATE GRANITE


north wall, the Grotto , even, being no exception to this uniform rule. (We give a full
description of the Grotto in our letters from Egypt.) As all the passages run in the
same vertical plane, a sectional drawing of the Pyramid from east to west would show
the various cham bers situated vertically one above the other.—See Plate XVII, which
shows the Chamber System of the Great Pyramid, looking north.

117 In none of the passages and chambers of the Great Pyramid have we found any
of the sculpture-work and carved hieroglyphics which are so common in many of the
smaller pyramids, and in all of the temples, obelisks, sphinxes, etc., erected throughout
Egypt. There are, indeed, the few red marks in the Chambers of Construction; but
these have been pronounced on good authority to be quarry-marks, and are found on
the walls of spaces which are strictly speaking not chambers, and were originally built
up with solid masonry. In all the other chambers and passages, on the contrary,
intended to be visited, the masonry was finished off plain, and polished (though now
much serrated and injured by the effects of time and vandalism); and in them neither
quarry-marks nor hieroglyphics of any kind have ever been discovered, though many
investigators have sought long and diligently for them. It is not by hieroglyphics nor
by sculpture-work, but by symbol, measure, and angle, that the Great Pyramid of Gizeh
in the land of Egypt yields its secrets, and testifies to the Divine plan of the Ages.


60


PLATE XVII.


Chamber System


CHAPTER VI.


The Symbolism of the Passages and Chambers
of the Great Pyramid,


I F the north wall of the Grand Gallery be assumed to indicate the date of the birth of
Jesus Christ, and a space of 33% inches, measured from this point up the inclined
floor, be taken to symbolize the years of his earthly life, the terminal point of this
measurement will be found to occupy a position “over against the mouth of the Well,”—
not opposite the centre of that opening, but sufficiently near to it to have suggested the
thought to the mind of a young Scotsman, Robert Menzies by name, that the Well
symbolizes Hades, the death-state, into which, in the words of the prophet, our Lord
Jesus poured out his soul”—Isa. 53: 12. And because the surroundings of this Well
present the appearance of its mouth having been, in time past, covered by stone-work,
and later violently uncovered (as if burst open from beneath by an explosion), the
additional thought of Christ’s resurrection was suggested.

119 As a sequence to these thoughts, it was naturally suggested that the First
Ascending Passage which leads up to the point thus assumed to indicate the date of
Christ’s birth, would, therefore, symbolize that Law Dispensation which preceded and
led up to the Advent of the Messiah; and, also, that the Descending Passage from which
the First Ascending Passage branches, would symbolize the world on its downward
course to the “ Pit ” of destruction. On the other hand, the lofty Grand Gallery, con¬
tinuing in the same upward direction as that of the First Ascending Passage, would
appropriately symbolize that Dispensation of Grace, during which the “Glad Tidings”
of the Advent of a Saviour for the world, was to be witnessed to all nations.

120 These thoughts, which were suggested by Robert Menzies as a possible inter¬
pretation of the symbolism of the Great Pyramid’s passages and chambers, have since
been proved to be reasonable, and have led the way to the discovery of many beautiful,
and otherwise undiscoverable, corroborations of the various features of the plan of
salvation as contained in the Holy Scriptures. It is important to realize that it was the
recognition of the symbolism of the Well, which formed the key to the interpretation of
the design of the passage system. This is only what we should expect, for it is the due
recognition of the death and resurrection of Christ, symbolized by the Well, which forms
the key to the proper understanding of the teaching of the Bible. With these leading
thoughts in mind, the symbolism of the various passages and chambers will first be
stated somewhat-briefly, so that a comprehensive view may be taken of them, and then
they will be considered in fuller detail.

E


61


121 In 2 Tim. 1: 10 it is stated that Jesus, by his death and resurrection, abolished
death and brought life and immortality to light through the Gospel. Life on the plane
of human perfection, as it will be at the end of Christ’s Millennial reign on earth, is
indicated by the Queen’s Chamber. Immortality is indicated on a higher level by the
King’s Chamber, into which entrance is gained only by means of the Grand Gallery and
Ante-Chamber. The Grand Gallery represents the pathway of justification by faith
which leads to the high or heavenly calling to joint-heirship with Christ; and the Ante-
Chamber represents the “ School of Christ,” the school of consecration unto death, in
which those who accept the calling and are accepted by the Lord, are made meet for
the heavenly inheritance symbolized by the King s Chamber. The Grand Gallery,
Ante-Chamber, and King’s Chamber have the same significance as the Court, Holy, and
Most Holy of the Tabernacle—See Tabernacle Shadows by C. T. Russell, pp. 19-21.

122 The Descending Passage symbolizes the downward course of “this present evil
world” (Gal. 1: 4) to destruction, represented by the Pit, or Subterranean Chamber.
It is important to notice that it is not the people, but “ this present evil world the
present evil institutions—which will be destroyed in Gehenna. These evil institutions
will, thank God, never be re-awakened. The Pit thus symbolizes Gehenna, the con¬
dition of death from which there will be no awakening, just as the Well symbolizes
Hades, the condition of death from which there will be an awakening.

123 From the Descending Passage, representing the plane of Adamic condemnation,
to the upper planes of life and immortality represented by the Queen’s Chamber and
the King’s Chamber respectively, two ways are shown in the Great Pyramid, namely,
the First Ascending Passage, and the Well. A glance at Plate IX, which represents the
passage system of the Great Pyramid, will show that of these two ways, the First
Ascending Passage, representing the Law Covenant, appears to be much easier to ascend
tlian the other. That is how the Israelites regarded the Law Covenant. When Moses
laid before them the words which the Lord commanded him, ‘ 1 All the people answered
together and said, ‘All that the Lord hath spoken we will do’ ”—Exod. 19: 8. They
thought they could keep the Law and thus gain life, for God had said: “Ye shall there¬
fore keep my statutes and my judgments: which if a man do, he shall live in them : I
am the Lord”—Lev. 18: 5. They did not recognize that it was impossible for fallen
flesh to obey the Divine Law. What was it that blocked this way to life ? It was the
perfect Law of God. Just as the Granite Plug completely blocks the entrance of the
First Ascending Passage of the Great Pyramid, so the Divine Law blocked the way of
life which the Law Covenant offered to the Jew. Thus the Granite Plug symbolizes
the Divine Law. As the Apostle put it, “ The commandment, which was ordained to
life, I found to be unto death”—Rom, 7: 10. Through the Atonement Sacrifices,
however, which the Lord instituted, the Israelites were typically justified (not really
justified, because “it is not possible that the blood of bulls and of goats should take
away sins”—Heb. 10: 4), and were accordingly'reckoned by God as typically obeying
the Law and progressing along the Law Dispensation. 2( The First Ascending Passage,
therefore, symbolizes both the Law Covenant and the Law Dispensation.

124 As the First Ascending Passage is blocked, and the passage forced by A1
Mamoun is no part of the original design of the Great Pyramid, it follows that there is
only one way open from the Descending Passage, symbolical of Adamic condemnation,

62


to the upper passages which symbolize life and immortality, namely, by the Well. But
this way is vertical for a great part of its course, and is only 28 inches square in bore.
It is not a passage at all in the proper sense of the term. As already intimated, it
symbolizes Christ’s ransom-sacrifice. Thus the teaching of the Great Pyramid cor¬
roborates that of the Word of God, which intimates that the way to life and immortality
was first opened up through the death and resurrection of Christ, and that salvation is
by faith. “ By grace are ye saved, through faith ; and that not of yourselves ; it is the
gift of God : not of works, lest any man should boast ”-Eph. 2: 8, 9. None can ascend
from the plane of condemnation and death, to the plane of reckoned justification except
by faith. Justification by faith is not the result of works.

125 Only two men have been capable of keeping the perfect Law of God, because
none but these two began life in this world on the plane of human perfection. The first
one, Adam, wilfully broke God’s Law (1 Tim. 2: 14) and sold the whole human race

Un f e I f n and death ' The ° ther ’ ° n the contrar y> the man Christ Jesus, kept the Law
and did not require to die; but delighting in the will of God, he voluntarily gave up his
life as a sacrifice, the just for the unjust (1 Pet. 3: 18) ; and then, as it was not possible
that he, the innocent one, should be holden of death (Acts 2: 24), God burst the bonds
and raised his beloved Son from hades, the death-state. Through the risen Christ as
the Last Adam, the First Adam with all of his family will eventually also be raised from
t e death-state—1 Tim. 2: 4-6. Thus “the first shall be last, and the last first.”

126 Jesus, then, was not born on the plane of condemnation and death represented
by the Descending Passage, but on the plane of human perfection. He was “ holy,
harmless, undefiled, and separate from sinners ”—Heb. 7: 26. But he was born under
the Law—Gal. 4: 4. This would require that the Great Pyramid should indicate the
date of his birth somewhere in the First Ascending Passage. How could it be at
one and the same time in the First Ascending Passage, and on the plane of human
perfection ? The answer is given in an ingenious and yet simple fashion. The Queen’s
Chamber symbolizes human perfection as it will be at the end of the “Times of
Restitution ” spoken of by the Apostle Peter, and by all the holy prophets since the
world began—Acts 3: 21. Its floor, therefore, should represent the plane of human
perfection. If the line of the floor be produced northwards till it touches the floor of
t e First Ascending Passage, the point of contact will necessarily be on the plane of
human perfection. This point will, therefore, fulfil the required conditions—Plate XVIII.

It indicates the date of the birth of Jesus, because (1) it is in the First Ascending
Passage, symbolizing the fact that Jesus was born under the Law ; and (2) it is on the
plane of the Queen’s Chamber floor, symbolizing the fact that Jesus was born on the
plane of human perfection. It will be noticed that the level of the Queen’s Chamber
floor is not below the summit of the Well, because, properly speaking, the summit of
the Well is the upper extremity of the vertical shaft, to which access is gained by the
short horizontal passage leading out from the lower or north end of the Grand Gallery
and this, the true summit, is slightly below the level of the Queen’s Chamber floor.

lu ? , That thlS P ° mt ° n the floor of the First Ascending Passage indicates the date
ot the birth of Jesus, is confirmed by the following interesting fact. It has been shown
that the First Ascending Passage and the Grand Gallery, symbolize respectively the
aw Dispensation and the Gospel Dispensation. It follows that the point on the floor


63


Plate XVIII.


which'is in line with the north walTof the Grand Gallery, and which marks, therefore,
the end of the First Ascending Passage and the commencement of the Grand (Ellery,
indicates the date of the death and resurrection of Christ which closed the Law
Dispensation, and ushered in the Gospel Dispensation—Col. 2: 14. This line of
demarcation, as indicating the date of the death and resurrection of Christ, is confirmed
by several distinct time-measurements (in all of which a Pyramid inch corresponds to
a year—Par. 25), the consideration of which is reserved for Volume II of Great Pyramid
Passages. Now, if we measure along the floor of the First Ascending Passage from
the point already determined as indicating the date of the birth of Jesus, to this line of
demarcation which indicates the date of his death, the distance between the two is found
to be 33% inches, the exact length which corresponds to the duration of Jesus’ life on
earth at the rate of an inch to a year. 1

128 The fact that two or more parts of the Great Pyramid may symbolize the same
feature of the Plan of Salvation (as, for instance, the Well, and the line of demarcation
between the First Ascending Passage and the Grand Gallery, both of which symbolize
the death and resurrection of Christ), and the fact that one portion of the Great Pyramid
may symbolize two or more features of the Plan of Salvation (as, for instance, the First
Ascending Passage which symbolizes both the Law Covenant and the Law Dispensation),
should occasion no surprise ; for the same principle is observed in the Bible, where, for
example, the followers of Christ are represented by various symbols—sheep, stones,
guests at a wedding, branches in a vine, a bride, etc. In no other way would it be
possible to represent so many features by the few simple passages and chambers con¬
tained in the Great Pyramid.

129 Dr. Seiss, arguing for the same reasonable interpretation of the symbolism of
the Great Pyramid, writes: “Does not the same alphabet spell all our words, and by its
various combinations serve to record all our knowledge ? And when, by reading certain
features of the Great Pyramid m one way, we get one circle of truths, and by reading the™
in other ways, based on Pyramid presentations, we get quite other circles of truths, or trace
in one part coincidences with readings in a different kind in another part, where is the
illogicalness of it or the confounding of things any more than in the cases just named ?”

130 While bearing this in mind, it will at the same time be noticed that nowhere are
the presentations strained or out of harmony with the general symbolization of the
various passages and chambers, but that, on the contrary, they tend to establish more
firmly those symbolical applications; and new beauties, which otherwise would be
lost, are brought to light, corroborating the testimony of the Scriptures.

1 ^is Life and Work at the Great Pyramid, Vol. II, Professor C. Piazzi Smyth states that the
floor of the Horizontal Passage is from 20% to 21 inches above the Queen’s Chamber floor, and 6 inches
above the line of demarcation between the First Ascending Passage and the Grand Gallery This line
of demarcation is, accordingly, from 14% to 15 (say 14-85) inches above the level of the Queen’s Chamber
floor, which is on the same level as the point on the floor of the First Ascending Passage that marks the
date of Jesus’ birth.

This vertical measurement of 14 85 inches is the perpendicular of a right-angled triangle the
hypotenuse of which is the length of that portion of the floor of the First Ascending Passage lying
between the two points which indicate the dates of the birth and death of Jesus. The angle of inclina*
tion of the floor (the hypotenuse) is 26° 18' 10", and the sine of this angle is 4431146 (See any table of
logarithms). If this be divided by the length of the perpendicular, 14-85 inches, the hypotenuse is found
to measure 33 5 inches.

65


I


CHAPTER VII.

The Symbolism of the passages and Chambers of the Great Pyramid

MORE FULLY CONSIDERED.

(A) The King’s and Queen’s Chambers.

W ITH a view to the proper understanding of this subject, let us first consider
what are meant by “Mortality” and “Immortality.” “Mortality” signifies
a state or condition of liability to death; a condition in which death is
a possibility, not in which death is a certainty. “ Immortality ” signifies a state or
condition not liable to death; not merely a condition of freedom from death, but a con¬
dition in which death is an impossibility.

132 Adam was mortal, that is, in a condition in which death was a possibility. He
had life in full and perfect measure, yet not inherent life. His was a life sustained by
“ every tree of the garden ” save the one tree forbidden; and so long as he continued in
obedience to and in harmony with his Maker, his life was secure,—sustaining elements
were not denied. Thus seen, Adam had life, and death was entirely avoidable ; yet he
was in such a condition that death was possible, he was mortal.

133 Immortality is ascribed only to the Divine nature. Originally it was possessed
by Jehovah alone; subsequently it was given to our Lord Jesus in his highly exalted
condition ; finally it will be imparted to the Church, the body of Christ, when glorified
with him —1 Tim. 6: 16 ; John 5 : 26; 2 Pet. 1: 4 ; 1 Cor. 15: 53, 54 (Scripture Studies,
Vol. I, pp. 185-6).

134 In the Chart of the Ages (Plate VI) three important planes are represented: (1)
the lowest, the plane of human depravity, condemnation and death; (2) above this, the
plane of human perfection; and (3) the highest plane, the plane of the Divine nature,
immortality. These three conditions are symbolized in the Great Pyramid by the same
method of superimposed planes: (1) the Descending Passage represents the plane of
Adamic condemnation to death ; (2) the Horizontal Passage and Queen’s Chamber (more
particularly the level of the Queen’s Chamber floor) represents the plane of human per¬
fection, the condition in which everlasting life is a possibility, but not a certainty; and
(3) the King’s Chamber, the plane of the Divine nature, immortality, the condition in
which death is an impossibility.

135 In his work, Tabernacle Shadows, C. T. Russell points out that gold in the
tabernacle symbolizes things Divine; and copper, things human. In the third volume
of Scripture Studies, he points out that the granite and limestone of the Great Pyramid
teach the same lessons; for instance, the Granite Plug in the First Ascending Passage
symbolizes the Divine Law. An examination of Plate IX will show that the only other

66


positions in the Great Pyramid where granite (represented in the Plate by crossed line
shading) is used for constructive purposes are the Ante-Chamber, the King’s Chamber,
and the five spaces above the King’s Chamber named by Col. Howard Vyse the
“ Chambers of Construction ’’—Pars. 110-115. This would indicate that these chambers
symbolize spiritual and Divine things or beings, and that all other parts of the interior
of the Great Pyramid, with the exception of the Granite Plug, symbolize human things
or beings.

136 Immortality, or the Divine nature, the highest of all spirit natures, is symbolized
by the King’s Chamber, which is built entirely of granite. The Queen’s Chamber, on
the other hand, being built entirely of limestone, symbolizes the human nature; but
inasmuch as it is seven-sided (including the floor and double-inclined roof) it symbolizes
that perfection of human nature which will be obtained by all the obedient among men
at the end of the Times of Restitution, when the will of God will be done on earth
as it is done in heaven.

137 Another clue to the interpretation that the plane of the Queen’s Chamber signi¬
fies the plane of human perfection, the condition in which everlasting life is a possibility,
is that the level of its floor is above the summit of the Well. We have seen that the
Well symbolizes not only in a particular sense the death and resurrection of Christ, but
also in a general sense Hades, the state of death from which there will be an awaken¬
ing. Accordingly, the level of the Queen’s Chamber indicates that plane of being which
is superior to death conditions. This is the plane of the perfect human nature, which
enables individuals to obey the perfect Law of God, and, by continuing to obey, to live
for ever as human beings. The fact that this plane is only just at the summit of the
Well, would indicate that in this condition there is, nevertheless, always th e possibility
of death, which, however, would ensue only in the event of disobedience ; whereas the
plane of the King’s Chamber which is high above the level of the summit of the Well,
indicates the plane of being (immortality) in which death is an impossibility,

138 Again, an important proof that the level of the Queen’s Chamber represents
eternal life on the human plane, is that access to it is gained either by the First Ascend¬
ing Passage, or by the Well, both of which symbolize means of access to earthly
life-rights.

(1) The First Ascending Passage symbolizes the Law Covenant, which did not offer
spiritual life and blessings nor a heavenly inheritance, but eternal life on the human
plane with earthly blessings (Gal. 3 : 12 ; Lev, 18 ; 5 ; Deut. 11 : 1—; 28 : 1—); but
just as the First Ascending Passage is completely blocked by the Granite Plug, so the
Law Covenant as a way to life was blocked by the Divine Law, The Commandment
which was ordained to life was found to be unto death, because none could obey it—
Rom. 7; 10. Thus throughout the long period of the Law Dispensation, it was fully
evidenced that in spite of all the advantages of knowledge and opportunity which were
given under the Law Covenant, none of the fallen race could, by his own works, pass
from the plane of Adamic condemnation to the plane of eternal life. Much less could
any of the Gentiles without the Law satisfy the requirements of justice. Thus the
wisdom and righteousness of God, as well as his love, were manifested in the great
scheme of salvation through Christ Jesus, which he had planned before the foundation
of the world. As all were guilty before God, it was necessary that the Son of God

67


should be born as a perfect human being under the Law, and, after proving his right to
eternal life on the human plane, surrender this right for ever for the benefit of the
human race. It is in harmony with this that, as already shown (Par. 127), the date of
the birth of the “ man Christ Jesus,” as a perfect human being born under the Law and
able to keep it, is indicated in the Great Pyramid at the upper end of the First Ascend¬
ing Passage, and on the same level as the floor of the Queen’s Chamber. What Christ
gained by keeping the Law was earthly life-rights, and it was these which he surren¬
dered for the world’s sake. “ The man Christ Jesus gave himself a ransom for all ” ;
“My flesh I will give for the life of the world”—1 Tim. 2: 5, 6; John 6: 51. As a
reward, and in order that he might be enabled to bless all the families of the earth by
giving them the earthly life-rights which he had surrendered, God raised him from the
dead and exalted him to the Divine nature and the heavenly inheritance, symbolized in

the Great Pyramid by the King’s Chamber.

(2) Thus we see that access to the plane of human perfection is impossible for any
of the fallen race by their own works through the Law Covenant, and that the only
way to life is through the ransom-sacrifice of Christ. This is symbolized in the Great
Pyramid by the fact that the First Ascending Passage is completely blocked by the
Granite Plug, and that the only means of access from the Descending Passage to the
level of the Queen’s Chamber is by the Well, which, from this point of view, symbolizes
the ransom-sacrifice of Christ. During the Millennium, the Israelites, and through them
the other nations, will return to their former estate and receive the testimony that the
man Christ Jesus, the Mediator between God and men, gave himself a ransom for all—
1 Tim. 2: 4-6. Thus the ransom is the perfect human life of Jesus sacrificed for all;
and the final outcome of the ransom will be the restitution to the whole human race of
all that was lost by Adam. But only the obedient will receive eternal life, for “ every
soul which will not hear [obey] that prophet, shall be destroyed from among the people”

_Acts 3: 19-23. During the Gospel Age those who have ears to hear and who have

living faith in the ransom-sacrifice of Christ, are justified by faith, that is to say, they
have the earthly life-rights, surrendered by Jesus, imputed to them in advance of the
world; but the sole purpose of this justification by faith is that they may sacrifice these
earthly life-rights as Jesus did,

139 Access to the King’s Chamber is possible only by the Grand Gallery and the
Ante-Chamber. This corroborates the teaching of the Scriptures that access to the
heavenly inheritance on the Divine plane is limited to this Gospel Age, and is possible
only through justification and sanctification. The Grand Gallery symbolizes the faith-
justification of this Age, the condition of those who, through faith in the ransom-
sacrifice of Christ, have passed from the plane of condemnation, and have had imputed
to them the earthly life-rights surrendered by Jesus on their behalf, and through them
on behalf of the world. The Ante-Chamber symbolizes the sanctification of the Gospel
Age, the condition of those who, having been justified to human life-rights, have
responded to the loving invitation of God, and have by faith made a covenant with him
to follow in Jesus’ footsteps of sacrifice unto death. These are reckoned by God as no
longer in the flesh but in the Spirit, and are prepared through sufferings for the heavenly
inheritance, which will be the everlasting possession of Christ and all those of his fol¬
lowers who have been faithful unto death.


140 There is a very great difference between the Kingdom promised to the followers
of Christ, and the kingdom prepared from the foundation of the world for the obedient
of the rest of mankind (1 Cor. 15:50; Matt. 25: 34) ; for just as “the heavens are higher
than the earth” (Isa. 55: 9), so the King’s Chamber, which symbolizes the heavenly
inheritance and is situated upon the 50th course of the Pyramid masonry, is high above
the level of the Queen’s Chamber which is situated on the 25th course, and symbolizes
the earthly inheritance.

141 There is still another method by which the builders of the Great Pyramid, under
Divine direction, symbolized the essential difference between immortality and mortality.
C. T. Russell draws attention to this in the third volume of Scripture Studies (pp. 370,
373), and better could not be done than to quote what is there said: “ As the King’s
Chamber by its ventilating tubes indicates that it symbolizes a permanent residence, an
everlasting condition, so the Queen’s Chamber symbolizes the fact that the condition of
human perfection, when reached, may be made an everlasting state; for it also has
similar ventilating tubes or air passages provided. In one case we may say it symbolizes
a permanent condition, and in the other that it may be made a permanent or everlasting
condition, because this is the fact as indicated both by the Scriptures and by the testimony
of the stone Witness. The Scriptures say of those who attain the condition represented
by the King’s Chamber, that they partake of the Divine nature, and are immortal, or
proof against death—that they cannot die thereafter. And they show that those others
who reach the full restitution, though they will not possess that quality termed immor¬
tality, which is essentially an element of the Divine nature only, will be supplied with
life everlasting under provisions already arranged by the great Architect of the plan of
salvation. If they abide in harmony with God and in obedience to his will, they will
live for ever.

142 “ The Great Pyramid declares these same truths ; for while the King’s Chamber
had open ventilators [Plate XV], the ventilators in the Queen’s Chamber were originally
peculiarly covered. The air-tubes were complete from the outside of the Great Pyra¬
mid to within half an inch [this should read five inches] of the surface of the inner
walls of the Queen’s Chamber, the stones on either side of the Queen’s Chamber, except
the said half-inch [five inches] in thickness, having been chiselled out, showing design
on the part of the Great Pyramid’s Architect, just as every other feature shows it.
Mr. Waynman Dixon made this discovery while examining the walls of the Queen’s
Chamber. He noticed that the wall at a certain spot sounded hollow, and, breaking
through the surface, he found one ventilating tube; and then by the same process he
found its mate in the opposite wall [Plate XIX]. Thus the Pyramid, in harmony with
the Scriptures, declares that ample provision has been made, whereby the perfect
human condition, represented by the Queen’s Chamber, may be an everlasting condition
to each one who conforms to its regulations and laws.”

143 Thus does the Queen’s Chamber with its ventilating air-channels now open to
the winds of heaven, suggest the thought of the “breath of life” being breathed into
man’s nostrils, and man becoming a “living soul”—Gen. 2: 7. “Come from the four
winds, O breath, and breathe upon these slain that they may live. . . . and the breath
came into them, and they lived, and stood up upon their feet, an exceeding great army”
—Ezek. 37: 9, 10.


68


69


Plate XIX.


Resume of Proofs.


I. The KING'S CHAMBER symbolizes immortality, the possession of the
Divine nature, in which death is an impossibility, by the following
features:—


1 It is composed entirely oi granite, which in the

Great Pyramid symbolizes things Divine.

2 It is situated high above the summit of the

■Well, which symbolizes Hades.

3 Access to it is gained only by the Grand Gal¬

lery and the Ante-Chamber, just as the
heavenly inheritance is attained only by
way of faith-justification (Grand Gallery)
and faith - consecration (Ante-Chamber)
during the Gospel Age.


4 Just as “the heavens are high above the earth,”

so the King’s Chamber symbolical of the
Church’s heavenly inheritance, is high
above the Queen’s Chamber symbolical of
the world’s post-millennial earthly inheri¬
tance.

5 It is provided with open ventilating channels,

thus teaching that the King’s Chamber
symbolizes a permanent residence or
condition.


II. The QUEEN’S CHAMBER symbolizes the perfect human nature in which
everlasting life is a possibility, but death not an impossibility, by the
following features :—


1 It is composed of limestone, which in the

interior of the Great Pyramid symbolizes
things human.

2 It is situated just above the level of the sum¬

mit of the Well, symbolical of Hades, and
therefore symbolizes that plane of being,
human perfection, which is superior to
death conditions, but in which, neverthe¬
less, there is always the possibility of
death—in the event of disobedience.

3 It is situated on the same plane as the point

which indicates the birth of the “ man
Christ Jesus ” at the upper end of the
First Ascending Passage—Par. 127.

4 Access to the plane of the Queen’s Chamber is

gained either (a) by the First Ascending
Passage, symbolical of the Law Covenant
which offered to the obedient perfect
human life on the earth (this passage


is completely blocked by the Granite
Plug, symbolical of the Divine Law), or
(b) by the Well, symbolical of the ran¬
som-sacrifice of Christ, the outcome of
which will be restitution to all that was
lost by Adam, given actually to the world
by the end of the Millennial Age, imputed
to the household of faith in the Gospel Age.

5 It is provided with ventilating channels which
were originally covered, and were useless
as conductors of air until someone would
seek, find, and remove the barrier, thus
symbolizing that ample provision has been
made whereby the perfect human condi¬
tion, represented in the seven-sided
Queen’s Chamber, may in due time be an
everlasting condition to all who conform to
God’s regulations and laws.


(B) The Descending Passage and Subterranean Chamber.


THOUGH the Descending Passage of the Great Pyramid is nearly three hundred and
forty feet in length, it measures but three and a half feet from side to side* and rather
less than four feet transversely from floor to roof. Its Entrance is situated in the north
side of the Pyramid at a spot about 49 feet vertically above the ground. From this
point the passage descends southwards at a steep angle.

145 Only one-fourth of the total length of the Descending Passage runs through the
Pyramid proper. The remaining three-fourths, progressing southwards at the same

71


steep angle, is forced through the solid rock upon which the Pyramid stands, and ends
in the Small Horizontal Passage which continues in the same southerly direction, and
leads first to a small Recess, and then to a large Subterranean Chamber carved out in
the heart of the rock about one hundred feet vertically below the centre of the base-line
of the’Pyramid. Though the roof and four walls of this Subterranean Chamber have
been made fairly even, the floor, on the contrary, has been left in an extremely broken
and unfinished condition, by reason of which the name of “Bottomless Pit” has been
applied by some to this chamber. It is a fitting termination to the long low passage
which leads downwards to it.

146 Because of its downward slope and very small bore, the whole Descending
Passage suggests the thought of the world of mankind bowed under the curse, hasten¬
ing towards destruction. Since the transverse height is scarcely four feet, the man who
travels down this passage requires to stoop very low ; and the steep downward inclina¬
tion of the roof compels him to bow his head and shoulders even lower than if the
passage were horizontal. So cramped is the posture, that before he has gone far
his back and head begin to ache, and he longs for an opportunity to stand upright;
but there is no relief, and as he continues his downward course he finds it more and
more laborious and painful. At first, the light streaming in from the Entrance aids him
in choosing his footing, but the further he proceeds the gloomier becomes the way,
until at length he requires to grope along in almost complete darkness, unless he
possess a lamp or torch. When he has reached the lower extremity of the passage,
should he look back, he will see the light at the Entrance now reduced to a mere point
owing to the distance, and serving him only as a reminder of the freedom and light he
once enjoyed. But after he passes the bend of the passage at the horizontal portion
(Plate IX), even this small link with the past becomes lost. As the roof here is even
lower than that of the Descending Passage, at this part of the journey he will be forced
to his knees, and if he should continue unprovided with a lamp, he will require to creep
on in complete darkness, till he stumbles into the “ Pit.” A few feet before the end
of the way, the passage is a little roomier (Plate X), and this may cause him to imagine
that he will obtain more freedom if he perseveres; but the hope is a delusive one,
for the passage becomes as narrow as it was before, and remains so till the Pit is
reached.

147 Is not this a graphic illustration of the condition of the world, bowed under the
yoke of the Adamic condemnation to death, groping and stumbling in the darkness, and
finding no permanent peace and happiness in spite of all its plans and speculations.
This downward course had its first beginning at the fall when God, in passing the sen¬
tence of death upon Adam, the head of the race of mankind, said to him : “ Cursed is
the ground for thy sake; in sorrow shalt thou eat of it all the days of thy life; thorns
also and thistles shall it bring forth to thee; and thou shalt eat the herb of the field.
In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread, till thou return unto the ground ; for out
of it wast thou taken; for dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return”—Rom. 8: 22 ;
Gen. 3: 17-19.

148 Though, as we have seen, God has been silently choosing a special people to
himself and has been carrying out his beneficent purposes in them, “ the whole world
[still] lieth in the wicked one”—1 John 5: 19, R.V. The only hindrances placed by

72


God in the way of the downward course of mankind have been (1) the indirect restrain¬
ing influence of the truth manifested in the lives and sayings of his people (Matt. 5:
13, 14), and (2) the direct prevention of anything which would interfere in any way
with the outworking of the Divine plan of salvation. Had men been given complete
liberty, their evil desires and lack of judgment would long ago have precipitated mat¬
ters, but God restrained them, as we read in Psa. 76: 10—“Surely the wrath of man
shall praise thee: the remainder of wrath shalt thou restrain.”

149 During the long period of 6040 years from the fall to the overthrow of “this
present evil world ” and the setting up of Christ’s Kingdom, men have tried in every
conceivable way to obtain a form of government and mode of life which would ensure
lasting health and happiness, peace and contentment, but to no purpose. The reason
of the failure is to be found in man’s moral, mental and physical imperfection, due in
part to his own fault, but chiefly to heredity and environment. God knew beforehand
that men could not rule themselves, but he knew also that it was best for them to learn
by bitter experience that there is no other way of salvation from sin and its train of evil
consequences—pain, disease, misery and death,—than that which he himself has pro¬
vided in his Son Christ Jesus. In harmony with this, the Apostle Peter said to the
rulers and elders of Israel: “ This is the stone which was set at nought of you builders,
which is become the head of the corner. Neither is there salvation in any other; for
there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved”
—Acts 4: 11, 12.

150 In the beginning Adam had God’s law written on his mind and heart, that is to
say, he was perfect and at peace with God, and thus he enjoyed sweet communion with
the Lord from day to day. But after the fall how changed were all the conditions!
His descendants lost the desire to obey the law of God, and with this they lost also to
an increasing extent the ability to discern good and evil. God permitted this condition
to continue, with the result that the race became more and more degraded, and its con¬
sequent alienation from God grew daily wider. “ When they knew God, they glorified
him not as God, neither were thankful; but became vain in their imaginations, and their
foolish heart was darkened. Professing themselves to be wise, they became fools, and
changed the glory of the uncorruptible God into an image made like to corruptible man,
and to birds, and fourfooted beasts, and creeping things. Wherefore God also gave
them up to uncleanness through the lusts of their hearts . . . and even as they did not
like to retain God in their knowledge, God gave them over to a reprobate mind [mar¬
gin—a mind void of judgment], to do those things which are not convenient ”—Rom.
1: 18-32.

151 For the first sixteen and a half centuries of this long period of 6040 years, the
angels were permitted the attempt to save men, in order to demonstrate their inability
to do so, and at the same time to test their loyalty to God. Far from saving men, some
of these angels became contaminated with the general evil, and so degraded did the
human race become that God brought that First Dispensation to an end by means of
the Deluge, and “ the angels which kept not their first estate, but left their own habi¬
tation, he hath reserved in everlasting chains under darkness unto the judgment of the
great day ” (Jude 6), that is to say, he has ever since prevented them from communion
with the holy angels and from materialising and mingling with men.


73


152 With the termination of the First Dispensation a second beginning was made;
but again the course has been downward toward destruction. It is this Second Dispen¬
sation, called by the Apostle Paul “this present evil world” (Gal. 1: 4,—see the Chart
of the Ages, Plate VI), which is especially symbolized by the Descending Passage.
During the first eight and a half centuries of this Second Dispensation God still refrained
from giving a written Law, but the result was the same, namely, increased misery due
to deep degradation, and the gradual obliteration of God’s image from heart and min d.

153 Then for a period of 1685 years God, having specially chosen and prepared a
people for himself, separated them from the nations around so as to protect them from
their corrupt influences, and gave them his Law, engraved on tables of stone; but
though he watched over them with the jealous care of a wise and loving Father for his
children, punishing them for wrong-doing and blessing them for well-doing, and though
he sent them prophet after prophet to warn and exhort them, it was all of no avail.
Why was this ? Was God disappointed ? Did he expect the nation of Israel to keep
his Law? By no means. God knew that “by the deeds of the law shall no flesh be
justified.” He was merely permitting men to learn for themselves the lesson that “both
Jews and Gentiles ... are all under sin; as it is written, There is none righteous, no,
not one ; . . . that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may become guilty
before God ; ... for all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God.” The Lord’s
purpose in this was that his righteousness, which is by the faith of Jesus Christ, might
be manifested, being witnessed by the Law and the Prophets—Rom. 3: 9-26.

154 During their existence as a nation, from the exodus from Egypt, God led the
Israelites through various experiences. After their period of 40 years in the wilderness,
and six years in taking possession of the promised land, they had judges for a period of
450 years, then kings for 513 years, and lastly they were a subject nation to various
Gentile powers for the remaining period of 676 years, after which they ceased to exist as a
nation, although as a people they preserve their identity to this day. Thus even a
specially prepared people with all the help that God could give them, short of taking
away the freedom of will, were unable to keep the perfect Law of God; and by this
means the Lord demonstrated that, so long as evil was permitted to reign unchecked,
the race must continue on the downward course to destruction.

155 In 606 B.C., with God’s permission, Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, destroyed
Jerusalem, and the Times of the Gentiles referred to by Jesus, began—Luke 21 : 24.
In Scripture Studies, Vol. II. Chap. 4, C. T. Russell proves conclusively that the Times
of the Gentiles, the period during which the Israelites, first as a nation, then as a people,
have been subject to the various Gentile governments which have held sway over the
world, is an era of 2520 years, beginning in 606 B.C., and terminating in 1914 A.D.

156 There was a two-fold purpose in this arrangement. First, God thus permitted
the Gentiles to take control and try the experiment of ruling, “that thus the world might
also learn the futility of its own efforts at self-government while in its present sinful
condition. As he had given the dominion forfeited by Adam to the angels, to demon¬
strate their inability to rule and bless the world, so he now delivered that dominion
over to the Gentiles, to let them try their various methods, unaided by him. These
various experiments God permits as so many valuable and necessary lessons, filling
the intervening time until the Lord’s anointed, whose right it is, shall come and take


the dominion and accomplish all his gracious purposes”— Scripture Studies, Vol. II,
page 75. As foreshadowed by God in the great image, seen by Nebuchadnezzar in his
dream and explained by Daniel (Dan. 2: 31-45), various forms of government under
Babylonia, Medo-Persia, Greece and Rome, have been attempted, but just as the various
parts of the image deteriorated from above downwards, first gold, then silver, then
brass and lastly iron, so the empires named likewise degenerated both mentally and
morally. In the present time of the divisions of the Roman Empire, represented in the
great image by the ten toes, though the downward course has been stayed to some
extent through the influence of the Reformation, the progress is still toward destruction.
Men are using their increased knowledge and their many wonderful discoveries and
inventions for their own selfish ends, and, as a result, unrest and discontent are so much
on the increase that all thinking people recognize breakers ahead, and are predicting a
general wreckage of present institutions.

157 The second purpose was to teach Israel, the chosen people, a much needed
lesson. For seventy years they were imprisoned in Babylon and their land was left
desolate, and never since then have they had a king to reign over them. When the
seventy years were accomplished and all the former wicked generation had died out,
only such of their descendants were permitted to return and build the temple and walls
of Jerusalem as loved God and had respect to his promises. This was a period of great
reformation in Natural Israel, and, dating from Nehemiah’s commission in 454 B.C. to
build the walls of Jerusalem, the nation was promised seventy weeks (7 times 70 = 490
years) of continued favour—Dan. 9: 24-27. But, though they never again relapsed into
gross forms of idolatry, their moral condition, when the Messiah came at the beginning
of the seventieth week, showed that there had been a marked decline. They loved
darkness rather than light, and crucified the Holy One. Thirty-seven years later, in
the year 70 A.D., God visited his vengeance on his people; and once more destroyed
their city and left their land desolate. Since then there has been no nation of Israel,
nor will there be till the Gentile Times are fulfilled, and “ he comes whose right it is ”
to take the Kingdom—Ezek. 21: 25-27.

158 At the end of the seventy weeks, in the year 36 A.D., God first visited the
Gentiles to take out of them a people for his name (Acts 15: 14), and during the course
of this Gospel Age, all, chiefly Gentiles, who have been justified by faith in Jesus as the
Lamb of God that taketh away the sin of the world, and who have denied themselves,
and taken up their cross to follow in the Master’s footsteps of sacrifice unto death, have
had Christ written on their mind and heart by the Holy Spirit—2 Cor. 3:3. But not
all who have professed the name of Christ have been truly his disciples. As the Church
grew in numbers and influence, the idea took shape that if only she were properly
organized under a head, she would be able to do that which others had failed to do,—to
rule and bless the world. God in his wisdom and in pursuance of his great plan of the
Ages, permitted the attempt to be made. The great apostate system, called in the
Scriptures “ Babylon the Great,” came into existence, and its head, the Pope, became
“ King of kings, and Lord of lords.” What was the result ? Far from being saved, the
world was plunged into such a depth of ignorance, superstition and moral degradation,
that the epoch when the “Church” was at the height of her power has been universally
denominated “ The Dark Ages.”


159 Then God sent reformers to the Church, just as he had formerly sent prophets
to the Jews. The Great Reformation followed, and the Lord granted to Spiritual Israel,
just as he had granted in similar circumstances and at a parallel date to Natural Israel,
a period of seventy weeks (490 years) of continued favour. In consequence of this and
of the general spread of education due to the invention of the art of printing, the down¬
ward course has been for the first time stayed, just as in the Great Pyramid the
traveller on reaching the foot of the Descending Passage, passes into the Small Hori¬
zontal Passage. But the knowledge which has been acquired is not the true light. In
reality, just as the Small Horizontal Passage is darker than the Descending Passage, so,
since the end of the Reformation period, the world has been in grosser darkness than
before respecting God and his glorious purposes in Christ Jesus. This is clearly shown
by the use to which the increased knowledge and the numerous inventions have been
put. They have been used simply for selfish purposes, and instead of the good govern¬
ment with universal peace and happiness, which was at first anticipated, they have
resulted in such friction and heat between “ the classes and the masses ” that but a
spark is needed to enkindle a general conflagration which will destroy “ this present evil
world.” The Scriptures and prophetic parallels show that this destruction is due to
take place during 1915 A.D., the year after the end of the lease of power to the Gentiles.
But, thank God, it will not mean the end of the physical world, for the “ earth abideth
for ever it will be merely the termination of the Second Dispensation, the destruction
of all the present evil institutions, in order to the setting up of the Third Dispensation,
the first thousand years of which have been set apart as Christ’s Kingdom—Plate VI.
The conflagration also will not be a literal fire, but will be what the prophet Zephaniah
calls “ the fire of God’s jealousy,” his consuming wrath against evil. “ Therefore wait
ye upon me, saith the Lord, until the day that I rise up to the prey ; for my determina¬
tion is to gather the nations, that I may assemble the kingdoms, to pour upon them mine
indignation, even all my fierce anger ; for all the earth shall be devoured with the fire
of my jealousy. For then will I turn to the people a pure language [message], that they
may all call upon the name of the Lord, to serve him with one consent Zeph. 3: 8, 9.


Resume of Proofs.

I. The DESCENDING PASSAGE symbolizes the course of “ this present evil
world” (the Second Dispensation, and therefore the plane of the Adamic
condemnation to death—Plate VI), by the following features:—


1 Its inclination downwards.

2 Its termination at the Pit, which symbolizes

Gehenna, the condition of death from
which there will be no awakening.

3 Its low roof necessitating the bowing of head

and shoulders, so symbolizing the world
groaning under the yoke of the Adamic
curse.

4 Its increasing darkness, representing the in¬

creasing ignorance of the world regarding
the character and purposes of God.

5 Its slippery floor and absence of supports,


representing the fact that the people have
no real hope, and are without God—Eph.
2 : 11 , 12 .

6 1 The measurement of its length agreeing with

the Scriptural chronology regarding the
duration of the Second Dispensation.

7 1 The position of the lower end of the Well

tallying with the date of the beginning of
the Reformation period.

8 1 The junction with the Small Horizontal Pas¬

sage to the Pit, representing the date of
the end of the Reformation period.


II. The SMALL HORIZONTAL PASSAGE symbolizes the period between the
close of the Reformation and the year 1915, the end of the Second
Dispensation, by the following features:—


1 Its position in relation to the Descending Pas¬

sage at the one end, and the Pit at the
other.

2 1 Its measurement.

3 Its horizontal direction, indicating that, owing

to the Reformation, the downward course
has been stayed; but the progress is still
toward the Pit, destruction.

4 Its darkness, greater than in the Descending

Passage, symbolizing the fact that, since
the period of the Reformation, the world
has been in even grosser darkness than


before respecting God and his glorious
purposes in Christ Jesus.

5 Its low roof, lower even than that of the Des¬

cending Passage, indicating that the people,
since the Reformation period, have again
permitted themselves to be bound.

6 1 The Recess by its position, shape, and size

symbolizes the greater freedom which was
the outcome of the American Declaration
of Independence, and the French Revolu¬
tion—Plate X.


III. The PIT symbolizes Gehenna, the condition of death from which there will
be no awakening, by the following features :—


1 Its position at the termination of the Descend¬

ing and Small Horizontal Passages, and
the fact that the little passage which ex¬
tends horizontally southwards from it, ter¬
minates in a blind end.

2 Its location in the rock a hundred feet verti¬

cally below the base-line of the Pyramid.

3 The fact that though its roof and walls have


been fairly well finished, its floor is ex¬
tremely broken and unfinished.

4 1 The combined length of the Pit and little
south Blind Passage symbolizing the period
during which the disobedient will enter
into the Second Death (Gehenna), namely,
from 1915 A.D., to the end of the Millennial
reign of Chi-ist.


1 These various time-features will be explained in Volume II of Great Pyramid Passages.


(C) The First Ascending Passage.

The First Ascending Passage represents the Law Covenant, or, from another point of
view, the Law Dispensation. On examining the floor of the Descending Passage, which
represents the downward course of “this present evil world,” it will be found that
the portion which faces the entrance to the First Ascending Passage is composed of
extremely hard limestone (Plate XI), whereas above and below this it is softer, and
consequently much worn by the traffic of centuries. Doubtless the hardness of the
floor at this part was intended for the purpose of exact measurements, but it also seems
to indicate the fact that at the time when the Israelites were called out of Egypt to be
the people of God, their standing with the Lord was firm and sure.

161 Owing to the extra headroom consequent upon the First Ascending Passage
branching upwards from the Descending Passage in the same vertical plane, it is not
necessary to stoop at this point,; the traveller is here able to stand upright, and so ease
his aching back. He will thus be able to appreciate the joy which the Israelites must

77


76


F


have experienced when freed from their bondage in Egypt, and he will be enabled to
sympathize with them, when, on being given the Law, they cried joyfully: “ All that
the Lord hath spoken we will do ”—Exod. 19 : 1-8.

162 But should he now endeavour to climb the First Ascending Passage, he will
finH something completely blocking the way, the Granite Plug, which, as before
explained, represents the Law of God. In this ingenious manner the Great Pyramid
teaches that the way to life by the Law Covenant was impassable, and that what blocked
it was the Divine Law, because “ by the deeds of the law shall no flesh be justified,”
for “in man, that is in his flesh, dwelleth no good thing”—Rom. 3: 20 ; 7:18. Thus
the Law Covenant, the way which was ordained unto life, was found to be unto death
—Rom. 7: 10.

163 Nevertheless, although the Israelites could not keep the perfect Law of God,
the Bible informs us that God permitted them to continue their endeavours to do so.
The Great Pyramid teaches the same lesson, for in spite of the fact that at its beginning
the First Ascending Passage is blocked completely by the Granite Plug, beyond this it
is open ; and by its symbolical features, including its length, it represents the condition
of Israel under the Law. Through the atonement sacrifices the Lord year by year
forgave the Israelites their sins, and as a nation they were typically justified, typically
reckoned as having passed from the plane of condemnation represented in the Great
Pyramid by the Descending Passage, to the plane of justification represented by the
level of the Queen’s Chamber. That this justification was only typical is clear from
the statement of the Apostle that the Law made nothing perfect, but was only a shadow
of good things to come, for “it is not possible that the blood of bulls and of goats should
take away sins”—Heb. 10: 1, 4. Those individuals, however, who, like their father
Abraham, rejoiced to see Christ’s day with the eye of faith, and remained until death
true to the Lord in the midst of severe trials, had their faith accounted unto them for
righteousness. They had fellowship with God, and will be awakened to perfect human
life through the instrumentality of the glorified Church, the faithful followers of Christ,
for whom God has provided some better thing, immortality on the Divine plane—
Heb. 11: 39, 40.

164 The mode of access by which it is now possible to reach the part beyond the
Granite Plug (which is still in position) is the hole forced through the soft limestone to
the right (west) of the Plug by Caliph A1 Mamoun. Doubtless the Lord thus delayed
the discovery of the upper passages and chambers in order that they might be kept
intact until the due time for their thorough examination. Once the traveller enters the
First Ascending Passage he finds himself on a higher level than the Descending Pas¬
sage, though still below the level of the Queen’s Chamber, which represents the plane
of human perfection. Thus the Pyramid teaches the same lesson as the Chart of the
Ages (Plate VI); for if reference be made to the latter, it will be seen that the imperfect
pyramid, which represents the nation of Israel, is lifted measurably above the plane of
human depravity (the world under Adamic condemnation), but below the plane of
human perfection,

165 Just as it is in the Descending Passage, the roof of the First Ascending Passage
is rather less than four feet transversely above the floor. Accordingly, the traveller is
pbliged once more to bpw his head and shoulders ; not so low, however, as when going

78


down the Descending Passage, because now he can take advantage of the greater ver¬
tical height (4 feet 5 inches). The Pyramid thus teaches that the Jew was less degraded
than the Gentile.

166 The way also is so dark, steep and slippery, that he readily stumbles and falls,
more especially as there is nothing to hold on to when he slips. So slippery is this
passage, that we found that our measuring rods and other articles, when laid on the
floor, glided rapidly to the bottom. Does not this wonderfully represent the condition
of the Israelites during the Law Dispensation ? Though raised above the condition of
the Gentile nations, they were still imperfect, still below the plane of human perfection.
Those who were sincere delighted in the Law of God after the inward man, but they
saw another law in their members warring against the law of their mind, and bringing
them into captivity to the law of sin which was in their members—Rom. 7: 22, 23.
Bowed under the yoke of the Law, they were weary and heavy-laden with the ordin¬
ances which were against them, and, as the true Light which lighteth every man that
cometh into the world had not yet appeared, their lamp, the Word of God, shone as
yet but dimly. As a result, they stumbled readily, and since they were under Law and
not under Grace, they had nothing to hold on to when their feet slipped. No wonder
the noble Apostle Paul, when he reflected on his former abject condition under the
Law, cried despondently: “ O wretched man that I am! Who shall deliver me from
this death-doomed body ? ” But at the time when he uttered these words he had already
found the answer, and so he exclaimed triumphantly: “ I thank God, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.”

167 As the terminal 33% inches of this passage represents the years of the earthly
life of the “ man Christ Jesus,” who nailed the Law to his cross, and thus by his
death brought the Law Dispensation to a close (Par. 127), so the faithful Israelites, who
were looking and longing for the coming of the Messiah, the great Deliverer, must
have rejoiced when they reached the last few years of that Law Dispensation and the
Messiah came. Burdened by the Law, they must have been comforted when they
heard the gracious words of the Master: “ Come unto me, all ye that labour and are
heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for
I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For my yoke
is easy, and my burden is light"—Matt. 11: 28-30. Those who accepted this loving
invitation found to their joy that from that Pentecostal day, fifty days after the resur¬
rection of Christ, when the Holy Spirit fell upon them, they were no longer under the
Law symbolized by the First Ascending Passage, but were members of the high or
heavenly calling, symbolized by the Grand Gallery. The Law Dispensation had come
to an end, and the Gospel Dispensation had commenced. The Apostle declares: “ That
no man is justified by the law in the sight of God it is evident: for ‘The just shall live by
faith.’ And the law is not of faith: but 1 The man that doeth them shall live in them.’
Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us : for it is
written, ‘ Cursed is every one that hangeth on a tree ’ ”; and again, “ Blotting out the
handwriting of ordinances that was against us, which was contrary to us, he took it out
of the way, nailing it to his cross”—Gal. 3: 11-13 ; Col. 2: 14.

168 These “Israelites indeed” were now able to stand fast (upright) in the liberty
wherewith Christ had made them free. This, the teaching of the Scriptures, is also

79


*


the teaching of the Great Pyramid, for the vertical height of the Grand Gallery is
seven times the transverse height of the First Ascending Passage, twenty-eight feet as
against four feet. There is no longer any need to stoop.

169 Before passing up the Grand Gallery the traveller must recognize the Well at
his feet. As has already been explained, the Well represents “Hades,” the “death-
state,” and the appearance of an explosion at its mouth represents the resurrection of
Christ who thus opened up the new and living way to life and immortality. In this
manner the Great Pyramid symbolizes that, before the Israelites could be accepted as
partakers of the heavenly calling, it was necessary for them to recognize the love and
righteousness of God in giving his only begotten Son as a sacrifice on their behalf, and
to recognize also the loving obedience of the Son in drinking the cup which the Father
had given him. It symbolizes further that it was necessary for them to believe that
God had by his mighty power raised Jesus from the dead and set him at his own right
hand on high.

170 Comparatively few, however, took advantage of the grand opportunity thus pre¬
sented to them. As a Nation they rejected the offer and were, in consequence, cast off ;
and as a Nation, they passed a few years later (70 A.D.) into Hades, the death-state.
The few who repented, however, and were baptized for the remission of sins, were
justified through faith and had peace with God, and becoming partakers of the high or
heavenly calling, and being thus privileged to suffer and die with Christ, they were
given the “ exceeding great and precious promises” whereby they might become par¬
takers of the Divine nature.


Resume of Proofs.

The FIRST ASCENDING PASSAGE symbolizes the Law Covenant and the Law
Dispensation by the following features :—


1 The fact that it branches upwards from the

Descending Passage which represents the
plane of Adamic Condemnation, so sym¬
bolizing the separation of the Jewish nation
from Egypt, the world.

2 The hardness of the Descending Passage floor

at the entrance of the First Ascending Pas¬
sage, symbolizing the fact that the standing
of the Israelites with God at the exodus
from Egypt, was firm and sure.

3 The greater head-room at the junction of the

two passages enabling the traveller to stand
upright, symbolizing the liberty of the
Israelites from Egyptian bondage, which
in turn symbolized the future liberty of the
world from the Adamic curse.

4 The position of the First Ascending Passage

between the Descending Passage represen¬


ting the plane of condemnation, and the
level of the Queen's Chamber representing
the plane of human perfection, symbolizing
the typical justification of Israel, during the
Law Dispensation.

5 Its termination at the level of the Queen’s

Chamber, the plane of human perfection,
symbolizing the fact that the Law Covenant
promised eternal life on the human plane.

6 The fact that the Grand Gallery is a continua¬

tion of it but is essentially different from
it, just as the Gospel Dispensation is in
point of time a continuation of the Law
Dispensation but is essentially different
from it. Those Jews who lived at the end
of the Law Dispensation and accepted the
Messiah, passed into all the privileges of
the Gospel Dispensation. The nation in


general, rejecting the Messiah, were rejected
by the Lord, and in the year 70 A.D. passed
into Hades, from which they will be awak¬
ened in due time.

7 The Granite Plug blocking all passage at its

entrance, symbolizing the Divine Law
blocking the way of the Law Covenant
of life.

8 Its low roof necessitating the bowing of head

and shoulders, so symbolizing the children
of Israel bent and groaning under the yoke
of the Law Covenant, during the period of
the Law Dispensation.

9 The fact that one who is walking up this pas¬

sage does not require to stoop so low as
when walking down the Descending Pas¬
sage because of the resulting difference in


posture, symbolizing the fact that the
Israelites were less degraded than the
Gentiles.

10 Its darkness representing the ignorance of the

Israelites regarding the character and pur¬
poses of God, except as these were revealed
by the Law and the prophecies, which
then shone but dimly.

11 Its slippery floor and its absence of supports,

representing the fact that the Israelites
were under Law and not under Grace.
Their atonement-sacrifices were only typi¬
cal of the better sacrifices to follow.

12 The various measurements of its lengths are

exactly equal to corresponding periods in
the Jewish Dispensation—See Volume II
of Great Pyramid Passages.


(D) The Horizontal Passage to the Queen’s Chamber.

The Horizontal Passage to the Queen’s Chamber is divided into two parts, the first
portion six-sevenths of the total length with a low roof scarcely four feet above the floor,
and the terminal portion, one-seventh of the total length, roomier owing to the floor at
this part being lower by twenty-one inches. C. T. Russell suggests that the full length
of the Horizontal Passage from the north wall of the Grand Gallery to the north wall of
the Queen’s Chamber' was intended to represent the total period of seven thousand
years from the fall of man to the end of the “ Times of Restitution.” From its proximity
to the Queen’s Chamber and the fact that there is more head-room at this portion, and
also that it is the terminal one-seventh of the entire length of the passage, the roomier
portion at the end seems to have been intended to represent the “ Millennium, the last
of the seven thousand-year periods from the date of the fall. The first and longer
portion, which is six-sevenths of the total length of the passage, would seem to repre¬
sent the first six thousand years of the world’s history—Plate XVIII.

172 This first portion, as already stated, is only about four feet from floor to ceiling.
It well represents the world groaning under the yoke of sin and death, stumbling in the
darkness, and going,—they know not where. We have seen that the Descending
Passage represents much the same thing, but there is a difference between the symbolism
of the two passages. The Descending Passage, by its downward inclination and its ter¬
mination at the Pit, is symbolical of the downward course of “ this present evil world
(not the people, but the institutions) toward the destruction which is due to take place
by the year 1915 A.D. The Horizontal Passage, on the contrary, by its horizontal course,
its position at the level of the summit of the Well, and its termination at the seven-sided
Queen’s Chamber, symbolizes the course of the world toward Human Perfection. It
shows that there is a hope beyond the great “ Time of Trouble,” not for the institutions
but for the people; for “ the creature [the world in general] was made subject to vanity
[frailty], not willingly, but by reason of him who hath subjected the same in hope
Rom. 8 : 20.


80


81


1


173 It is because of the Ransom-Sacrifice of Christ, the Son of God, that the world's
salvation will be attained ; and as the Lamb was slain from the foundation of the world,
that is, as God s purpose in Christ was planned from the beginning, it is appropriate
that the Well, which symbolizes the death and resurrection of Christ, should be at the
commencement of the Horizontal Passage, just as it is appropriate that the Queen’s
Chamber should be at its termination. God, seeing the end from the beginning, foretold
that through Christ the whole creation, now groaning and travailing in pain, would be
delivered from the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the children of God
—Rev. 13 : 8; Rom. 8 : 21, 22.

174 The “ Great Time of Trouble” at the close of the six thousand years and the
beginning of the seventh thousand-year period, is represented in the Horizontal Passage
by the sudden drop of twenty-one inches in the floor at the point six-sevenths of the
total length of the passage. A traveller, groping and stumbling along the dark Horizon¬
tal Passage with head and shoulders bent and aching, if he were ignorant of this drop
ahead of him, would meet with a very disagreeable experience when he came to it. He
would be bruised, and would feel crestfallen, humbled. But after a little, when he
would rise to his feet, he would find to his joy that there is now no longer any necessity
to stoop. The end-portion of the passage is approximately five feet eight inches in
height, that is to say, it is the height of an average man —Plate XIV.

175 This pictures well the present condition of the world. Bowed down by the
yoke of sin and death, the nations are groping in the dark, quite unaware of the fact that
a time of humiliation awaits them a few years hence. They will be taken by surprise,
and will fall, and all their earthly hopes and aspirations will be wrecked. Then the
Psalmist’s prophecy will be fulfilled: “ Come, behold the works of the Lord, what
desolations he hath made in the earth; he breaketh the bow, and cutteth the spear in
sunder; he burneth the chariot in the fire. Be still, and know that I am God: I will
be exalted among the heathen [nations], I will be exalted in the earth Psa. 46 : 8-10.
When the people are raised again, they will find to their joy that they will no longer be
compelled to walk with bowed heads. The burden of Adamic condemnation will have
fallen from their shoulders, for “ in those days it will no more be said, The fathers have
eaten a sour grape [of sin] and the children’s teeth are set on edge, but every 'one [who
dies] shall die for his own iniquity; every one that eateth the sour grape his teeth shall
be set on edge”—Jer. 31 : 29, 30. From this point onward, all the humble, obedient
ones will progress with comfort toward the Queen’s Chamber, the post-millennial
condition of eternal bliss.

176 Nevertheless, should any one during the Millennium think too highly of himself
he will strike his head against the hard roof; for Christ’s rule will be an iron one, and
none will be allowed to think more highly of himself than he ought to think. On the
other hand, if any one should think too lowly of himself, he will be encouraged to a
more sober appreciation of his abilities, because that will be the time when “ whosoever
exalteth himself shall be abased; and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted,”
for “God resisteth the proud, but giveth grace unto the humble”—Luke 14 : 11 ■
Jas. 4 : 6.


82


}


r


I


Resume of Proofs.

The HORIZONTAL PASSAGE represents the course of the world during its
seven thousand years of training, by the following features :—


1 Its termination at the Queen’s Chamber, sym¬

bolizing the post-millennial condition of
human perfection.

2 The position of the Well at its commencement,

symbolizing the fact that in God’s purposes
the Lamb was “ slain from the foundation
of the world”—Rev. 13 : 8.

3 Its horizontal direction on or about the plane

of the Queen’s Chamber, symbolizing the
fact that “ the creature [the world in gen¬
eral] was made subject to vanity [frailty],
not willingly, but by reason of him who
hath subjected the same in hope" —Rom.
8 : 20 .

4 The fact that it is divided into two distinct

portions, the first six-sevenths of the whole
length symbolizing the first six thousand
years, the terminal portion one-seventh of
the whole length symbolizing the seventh
thousand-year period, the Millennium.

5 The low roof of the first six-sevenths of the

length, symbolizing the world during the
first six thousand years groaning under


the yoke of sin and death, and stumbling
in the darkness.

6 The sudden fall in the floor (21 inches) at the

end of the first portion of the passage, sym¬
bolizing the “ sudden destruction ” which
will come upon “this present evil world”
“ as travail upon a woman with child ”—
1 Thess. 5 : 3.

7 The ability of the traveller to rise and walk

erect in the terminal portion of the pas¬
sage after the sudden drop, symbolizing
that the yoke of the Adamic condemnation
will fall from the world’s shoulders after
the great time of trouble.

8 The fact that the height of the terminal length

just admits a man of average stature to
walk erect, whereas a little man has plenty
of headroom, and a tall man, unless he
bows his head submissively, will strike it
against the hard roof, symbolizing the iron
rule of Christ : “ Whosoever exalteth him¬
self shall be abased ; and he that humbleth
himself shall be exalted”—Luke 14 : 11.


(E) The Grand Gallery and the Ante-Chamber
to the King’s Chamber.


FROM the point of view now to be considered, the Grand Gallery, the Ante-Chamber,
and the King’s Chamber correspond respectively with the Court, the Holy, and the
Most Holy of the Tabernacle in the wilderness—See Tabernacle Shadows, by C. T.
Russell. And when these three compartments in the Great Pyramid are compared with
the Chart of the Ages (Plate VI), they are found to correspond respectively with the
plane of justification, the plane of spirit-begetting, and the plane of spirit-birth, or
Divine Glory.

178 As already mentioned (Pars. 139, 140), these three compartments and three
planes symbolize the three successive steps or conditions of those drawn of the Lord:—
(1) The Grand Gallery represents the condition of the justified by faith, those who are
reckoned by God as perfect human beings because of their faith, and are called with
the high or heavenly calling to sacrifice (Rom. 12 : 1), that they may become joint-heirs
with Christ in his glory. (2) The Ante-Chamber represents the condition of those who,
having accepted this gracious invitation to present their justified human nature in

83


XX.


sacrifice, are “ begotten again ” to a new nature, receiving the “ holy spirit of promise ”
as an earnest of their future spiritual inheritance, the “ spirit of adoption ” whereby
they now cry “Abba, Father Eph. 1 : 13, 14 ; Rom. 8 : 15 ; Gal. 4:6; Heb. 12 : 9.
These are the spirit-begotten, and are now in the “School of Christ ” where they receive
trials and testings necessary to develop them as “new creatures in Christ Jesus.” In
this School, grace and peace are multiplied unto them through the knowledge of God,
and of Jesus their Lord—2 Pet. 1 : 2. (3) The King’s Chamber represents the condition
of the spirit-born, those who have completed their sacrifice in death, and have in the
resurrection received spirit bodies of the Divine nature in keeping with their new minds
—2 Cor. 5:1. Thus the King’s Chamber symbolizes heaven itself, the throne of the
Lord—Plate XX.

179 Those Jews and Gentiles who are justified by faith, are at peace with God
through the Lord Jesus Christ, the purpose being that they may be called to joint-
heirship with Christ. In the Great Pyramid they are represented as standing in the
Grand Gallery, which by its position above the summit of the Well, symbolizes the
condition of faith-justification. At this stage, as they have not yet been begotten of the
spirit, they are still natural men. This is indicated in the Great Pyramid by the fact
that the Grand Gallery is composed entirely of limestone.

180 Just as the First Ascending Passage leads up to the Grand Gallery, so this

smybolizes the fact that the privilege of faith-justification was first offered to those who
were under the Law Covenant; for, as the Apostle Paul says, the Law was their
“schoolmaster to bring them unto Christ, that they might be justified by faith "—
Gal. 3 : 24. For this purpose, that the Jews might be justified by faith, Christ came
“to his own” ; and to as many as received him as the Father’s appointed way to life,
“ to them gave he the privilege to become the sons of God ”—John 1: 11, 12. “ Christ

is the end of the law for righteousness to every one [under the law] that believeth”—
Rom. 10 : 4. Because of their faith they were no longer compelled to remain under the
bondage of the Law schoolmaster (Gal. 3 : 25, 26), even as those who pass from the low
confined First Ascending Passage into the greater liberty of the Grand Gallery, are no
longer obliged to walk bowed down, but can straighten their backs and raise their heads
in full assurance of faith in the great height of the roof.

181 But those who received Christ by faith were few in number ; the vast majority
because of unbelief never realized that Christ had taken the Law out of the way, nailing
it to his cross (Col. 2 : 14); and of them it was written : “Let their eyes be darkened, that
they may not see, and bow down their back alway ”—Rom. 11 : 10. As they rejected
the glorious liberty of Grace so well symbolized by the Grand Gallery, they were
allowed to remain in their bowed condition under the Law symbolized by the First
Ascending Passage. But, praise the Lord, this does not mean their everlasting undoing,
for “ God hath concluded them all in unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all ’ ’
(Rom. 11 : 32); and the ransom-sacrifice of Christ symbolized by the Well, over which
they stumbled, opened the way by which, when God shall “ take away their sins,” they
may ultimately progress to the Queen’s Chamber condition of human perfection.

182 As merely a “remnant” of the Jewish nation received Jesus as the Messiah, and
the rest “judged themselves unworthy of everlasting life,” God turned to the other
nations, the Gentiles, to “ take out of them a people for his name ”—Acts 13 : 46;

I

85


15 : 14. But the Gentiles were not born under the Law symbolized by the First
Ascending Passage, but were born away down on the plane of Adamic condemnation to
death symbolized by the Descending Passage, and, therefore, far away from the Grand
Gallery privileges of the high calling to sonship. Nevertheless, although Jesus came
to his own people, the Jewish nation, being born under the Law, that he might redeem
them that were under the Law that they might receive the adoption of sons (Gal. 4 :
4, 5), his ransom-sacrifice was all-sufficient to reach right down to those who were
“ aliens from the commonwealth of Israel,” even as the Well, the Great Pyramid's
symbol of the ransom-sacrifice, descends all the way down to the lower parts of the
Descending Passage—Plate IX. Thus, those “ who sometimes were far off ” from
Israel’s covenants of promise, and enemies of God through wicked works, were “ made
nigh by the blood of Christ” (Eph. 2 : 12, 13); and during this Gospel Age they have
passed, symbolically, from the Descending Passage up to the Grand Gallery by means
of the Well, that is, they have passed through faith in the ransom-sacrifice of Christ
from the plane of condemnation to the plane of justification, in order that they may
have the glorious privilege, also by faith, of partaking in the high or heavenly calling of
God in Christ Jesus, which the unbelieving Jews lost. It is not through any works of
theirs that they have been justified and have peace with God, but the way having been
opened by the death of Christ, they have accepted by faith this gracious provision
which God has made for them, by which they may escape the condemnation which is
upon the world—John 3 : 18.

183 But as with the Jewish nation, so also with the other nations, only the few, a
“ little flock ” in all, have exercised saving faith. On their downward course the other
nations have passed the Well, the ransom-sacrifice of Christ, without seeing it; or if
they did, they have had no faith in it as a way to life. To the majority of the Jews it
was a cause of stumbling, just as the upper mouth of the Well may be a cause
of stumbling to one who emerges from the First Ascending Passage; and to the
majority of the Gentiles, it appears to be foolishness, just as the lower end of the Well
appears to be merely a side-track from the lower part of the Descending Passage—
1 Cor. 1 : 23.—Plate X. They little know the drawing power of God, which he exerts
on behalf of those who have faith in this way to life and immortality—John 6 : 44.

184 It is appropriate that the upper end of the Well should be so centrally situated,
namely, at the junction of the First Ascending Passage, the Horizontal Passage, and the
Grand Gallery, because it symbolizes the ransom-sacrifice of Christ which is the centre
or hub of the great plan of salvation—Plate XVIII. Just as the Well is situated at the
end of the First Ascending Passage and at the commencement of the Grand Gallery, so
it was the death of Christ which closed the Law Dispensation and commenced the
Gospel Dispensation; and just as the Well is also at the beginning of the Horizontal
Passage leading to the Queen’s Chamber, so the ransom-sacrifice of Christ was the
beginning of the great scheme devised by God for the ultimate salvation of the world.

185 The great height of the roof, the steep slippery floor, and the help afforded dur¬
ing the ascent by the Ramps,—the stone benches which run the whole length of the
Grand Gallery at the base of the side-walls,—symbolize well the upward progress of
those who have faith sufficient to advance along the pathway of the just. Through
their faith in the ransom-sacrifice of Christ, they are now at peace with God, and are

86


?


able to walk erect. But their path is not an easy one. Owing to the weakness of the
flesh, they find it difficult and fatiguing to advance. Their rate of progress depends on
the degree of their faith and zeal, because it is not by their own strength but by the
strength of the Lord that they are enabled to conquer the difficulties of the way, and
this strength they can have only as a result of faith. Again and again they find them¬
selves prone to slip, but the grace of God, symbolized by the Ramps, enables them to
make upward progress in righteousness in spite of the many difficulties, and the more
progress they make, the nearer they come to God, just as the Grand Gallery leads one
upward and nearer to the King’s Chamber, symbolical of the Holy of Holies, heaven
itself.

186 Of those visitors to the Great Pyramid who reach the Grand Gallery, the few
who make the laborious ascent as far as the great Step at the top, and so come to a
position where they can see the low entrance to the Ante-Chamber, find that their labour
is not at an end. If they desire to make further progress they will require to surmount
the Step, and then after a short pause on its level upper surface, during which they can
look back along the way they have trod and then down at the low entrance to the Ante-
Chamber, they will require to decide whether they will return, or else bow down sub¬
missively and creep through the low passage, only three and a half feet high, into
the Ante-Chamber—Plate XX. The surmounting of the Step is specially difficult
owing to its height of 36 inches, and to the fact that the feet are resting on the inclined
and slippery floor of the Gallery; but by placing one foot on the Ramp, and then
putting forth a vigorous effort, the difficulty can be overcome.

187 In this we have a picture of the condition of those who have advanced through
faith to the end of this portion of their journey. Perseverance in following the path of
faith-justification by the help of the grace of God has led them to the point where they
can see the further step of consecration or sanctification, just as perseverance in climbing
the Grand Gallery by the help of the Ramp leads the traveller to the point where he
can see the low entrance into the Ante-Chamber. They have now to decide whether or
not they will proceed further. The Step symbolizes the natural dislike of the human
mind to entertain earnestly and sincerely the thought of self-denial and self-sacrifice, for
“ no man ever yet hated his own flesh Eph. 5 : 29. With the help of the grace of
God, however, some are enabled by an effort to surmount this diffic ulty When they
do so, they find that more than half the battle of decision has been won. They are now,
for a shorter or longer period, on the halting-place symbolized by the level upper surface
of the Step, and can examine more closely the narrow way which lies open before them
into the condition of sanctification, and thence to joint-heirship with Christ.

188 If they will look back and consider the wonderful love of God in sending his
Son into the world to die for them while they were yet sinners, they will reason that if,
when they were enemies, they were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much
more, being reconciled, they will be saved by his life; and not only so, but they will
also rejoice in God through the Lord Jesus Christ—Rom. 5 : 8-11. Further, if they
consider how much they have already been enabled to accomplish along the pathway
of faith-justification, not in their own strength, but in the strength of the Lord, they will
not hesitate long in coming to a decision. Doubts evidence lack of faith, and tend to
obscure the judgment. The sooner we get rid of them, the more pleasing we shall be

87


to the Lord, for “ without faith it is impossible to please him,” and “he that wavereth
is like a wave of the sea, driven with the wind and tossed ; for let not that man think
that he will receive anything of the Lord”—Heb. 11 : 6; Jas. 1 : 6, 7. Sooner or
later, if they do not decide for the Lord, they will lose this grace of God which they
have received (2 Cor. 6:1), and find themselves again in the Descending Passage con¬
dition of the world sharing in its condemnation; for just as the sole purpose of the
Grand Gallery is to lead to the Ante-Chamber and King’s Chamber, so the sole purpose
of faith-justification in the Gospel Age is to lead us to the sanctified condition and joint-
heirship with Christ symbolized by these two compartments of the Great Pyramid. As
Jesus said: “If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross
daily, and follow me. For whosoever will save his life shall lose it, but whosoever
will lose his life for my sake the same shall save it ”■—Luke 9 : 23, 24. All those who
fail to make use of their justification will share with the rest of the world in its oppor¬
tunity for restitution, which though glorious, will be much inferior to the reward of the
Church, the Body of Christ.

189 How important it is to realize that it is only the meek whom the Lord will

guide in judgment and will teach his way (Psa. 25 : 9), and who will, therefore, see that
it is their reasonable service to bow down and enter the Ante-Chamber condition of
sanctification. These will realize, furthermore, that it is not only their reasonable service
to present their bodies a living sacrifice, but that a wonderful privilege is being offered
to them to share first in the sufferings, and afterwards in the glory, of the Lord; for
without sacrifice unto death, none need hope to attain the heavenly inheritance with
Christ—Rev. 2: 10 ; 2 Tim. 2 : 11, 12. When they see this their faith in God and their
appreciation of his love for them will lead them to reciprocate, and they will deny them¬
selves, and bowing down to his will, will “ make a covenant with him by sacrifice ”•—
Psa. 50 : 5. “ Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his

Son to be the propitiation for our sins. Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also to
love one another.” “ Because he [Jesus] laid down his life for us, we ought to lay
down our lives for the brethren”—1 John 4 : 10, 11 ; 3 : 16, R.V.

190 After the visitor to the Great Pyramid enters the Ante-Chamber and stands
erect, he finds himself at first in a little compartment measuring 21 inches from front to
back, by 42 inches from side to side—Plate XX. His further progress is barred by the
“ Granite Leaf,” fifteen inches thick, which has its under surface in line with the roof of
the entrance passage. The traveller will, therefore, require again to bow very low in
order to pass under this block of granite before he can get the full freedom of the
Ante-Chamber.

191 The stooping necessary to pass through the entrance passage, which is con¬
structed entirely of limestone, represents the voluntary death of the human or earthly
will, self-renunciation. But this alone is not sufficient. Some on giving up their own
will accept the will of the Pope, for instance. To these the Pope’s will becomes infal¬
lible, and they consent to believe and do whatever he commands. This is not true
consecration to God. Those who accept the high calling of God in Christ Jesus must
not only deny themselves, but they must also bow to the will of the Lord. As granite
in the Great Pyramid represents things Divine, so the Granite Leaf represents the
Divine Will, to which those who would enter the School of Christ must bow submis-

88


sively. Before they do this, although they are standing under a granite roof (Plate XX)
representing Divine protection, they are, nevertheless, still standing on limestone. This
symbolizes the fact that they are still regarded by God as human beings, not yet
begotten to the spirit nature. But as soon as they come to the decision to bow down
to the will of God symbolized by the Granite Leaf, thus evidencing their willingness to
“ lose their lives ” for Christ’s sake, Christ imputes to them a sufficiency of his merit to
render their sacrifice holy and acceptable to God. Their justification then becomes
complete; and their sacrifice being now a living one, because entirely free from the
Adamic condemnation, it is at once accepted by the Lord. As the Apostle stated,
“ there is, therefore, now no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, who walk
not after the flesh, but after the spirit ”—Rom. 8:1.

192 It is important to notice that when Paul besought the Romans to present their
bodies a living sacrifice, and pointed out to them that it was their reasonable service to do
so (Rom. 12: 1), he did not address those who were enemies of God through evil works,
but those who had turned to have faith in God, and were, therefore, his “brethren”
of the household of faith. Until a man is justified, he cannot present his body a living
sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God. Not having been freed from condemnation his
death would not be sacrificial nor holy, but would be forfeited at the hands of justice ;
nor would his body be his own to present. The death of such avails nothing, for “ God
hath no pleasure in the death of the wicked ” ; but the sacrificial death of those declared
“blessed and holy” because of their faith in Jesus avails much, for “ precious in the
sight of the Lord is the death of his saints”—Ezek. 33 : 11 ; Psa. 116 : 15.

193 The visitor to the Ante-Chamber who bows down under the Granite Leaf,
steps for the first time on to granite (Plate XX); symbolizing that those who submit
themselves to the will of God, have now risen from the plane of human justification to
the plane of spirit-begetting. Henceforth God reckons them dead as human beings (Col.
3 : 3),—not dead in Adam, but dead in Christ,—and alive as spirit beings. They are
“ accepted in the Beloved ” as members of his body. They are immersed into Christ,
because they are immersed into his death (Eph. 1:6; Rom. 6:3); and becoming par¬
takers of his sufferings and death they will ultimately, if found faithful, become
partakers of his glorious resurrection, the first or chief resurrection—Phil. 3 : 10, 11 ;
Rev. 20 : 6. The first stone of this granite floor is a quarter of an inch higher than the
limestone; and if a vertical line be drawn downward from its first or north edge, it
will be found to pass beyond (south of) the Queen’s Chamber which symbolizes the
perfect human condition.

194 Once an entrance has been gained into the Ante-Chamber proper, it is found
that the level of its floor falls immediately to the level of the limestone step outside,
showing that although those who are spirit-begotten have now the spiritual mind, the
mind of Christ (1 Cor. 2 : 16), they have as yet undergone no change of nature as
regards their bodies. They have received the holy spirit of promise as an earnest or
pledge of their future spiritual inheritance (Eph. 1 : 13, 14), the Divine nature, but their
bodies are still human. Nevertheless, as they are standing on granite, this shows that
they are reckoned by God as partakers of the Divine nature, because they have pres¬
ented their bodies a living sacrifice, and are striving to fulfil their vow of consecration.
Above them is the granite roof, signifying that they are, even more than before, under

89


I


Divine protection. “ He that dwelleth in the secret place of the Most High, shall abide
under the shadow of the Almighty ”—Psa. 91 : 1.

195 Before they can enter the “ Sanctuary ” or King’s Chamber, which is a figure or
type of heaven itself (Heb. 9 : 24), they must bow down once more and pass through
another low entrance-passage—Plate XX. The stooping necessary to do this symbolizes
death, for those who will become joint-heirs with Jesus Christ must rise from the plane
of spirit-begetting to the plane of spirit-birth, that is, they must be changed to the
spiritual condition in the actual as distinguished from the reckoned sense before they
can enter the heavenly glory, for “flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God"
—1 Cor. 15 : 50. That the plane of spirit-birth is higher than the plane of spirit-beget¬
ting is indicated in the Great Pyramid by the fact that the granite floor of the King’s
Chamber is on a higher level than the upper surface of the first granite stone in the
floor of the Ante-Chamber.

196 The emergence from the low entrance-passage into the King’s Chamber sym¬
bolizes the resurrection of those who have been faithful followers of Christ. This is
the first or chief resurrection concerning which John the Revelator states: “Blessed
and holy is he that hath part in the first resurrection: on such the second death hath
no power, but they shall be priests of God and of Christ, and shall reign with him a
thousand years”—Rev. 20 : 6. Paul, speaking of the same class, said: “The dead in
Christ shall rise first" (1 Thess. 4 : 16), and again, “ It is a faithful saying: For if we be
dead with him, we shall also live with him. If we suffer, we shall also reign with
him”—2 Tim. 2 : 11, 12.

197 This gracious offer of joint-heirship with Jesus is free to those who have ears
to hear the glad tidings before the time when the door of opportunity will close, and all
who accept and are faithful unto death will receive the crown of life, and will find that
the sufferings of the present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory which
shall be revealed in them, for they will be raised in the likeness of Christ’s glorious
spiritual body and will reign with him—Rev. 2 : 10; Rom. 8:18; Phil. 3 : 21;
1 John 3 : 2.

198 It is thus evident that the Grand Gallery symbolizes the plane of faith-justifi¬
cation ; the first granite stone in the Ante-Chamber the plane of spirit-begetting; and
the granite floor of the King’s Chamber (or Sanctuary) the plane of spirit-birth, the
Divine nature.


Resume of Proofs.

I. The WELL symbolizes the ransom-sacrifice of Christ by the following
features:—


1 Its resemblance to an Eastern shaft-tomb,

symbolizing the death of Christ.

2 The appearance as if an explosion had taken

place at its mouth, symbolizing the resur¬
rection of Christ.

3 The situation of its upper end at the level of

of the Queen's Chamber floor, symbolizing


the fact that Jesus was a perfect man when
he “poured out his soul unto death," and
“ gave himself a ransom for all ”—Isa. 53 :
12 ; 1 Tim. 2 : 4-6.

4 The situation of its upper end at the termina¬
tion of the First Ascending Passage, sym¬
bolizing the fact that Christ by his death


I


}


<


i


and resurrection brought the Law Dispen¬
sation to a close.

5 The situation of its upper end at the com¬

mencement of the Horizontal Passage to
the Queen’s Chamber, symbolizing the fact
that God had foreordained the ransom-
sacrifice of Christ “ from the foundation of
the world”—Rev. 13 : 8.

6 The situation of its upper end at the com¬

mencement of the Grand Gallery, sym¬
bolizing (a) the fact that Christ, by his
death and resurrection, began the Gospel
Dispensation ; and (b) the fact that both
Jew and Gentile require to have faith in
the death and resurrection of Jesus, and to
accept him as the Christ (Messiah), before
they can enter the High or Heavenly Call¬
ing symbolized by the Grand Gallery.

7 Its position at the junction of the First Ascend¬

ing Passage, the Horizontal Passage, and
the Grand Gallery, symbolizing that the
ransom-sacrifice of Christ is the centre or
hub of the plan of salvation—Plate XVIII.

8 The fact that the opening into it at the upper

end may be a cause of stumbling to one
who emerges from the First Ascending


Passage, symbolizing that faith in the ran¬
som-sacrifice of Christ as a way to life,
was a cause of stumbling to the Jew—
1 Cor. 1 : 23 ; Rom. 9 : 31-33.

9 The fact that it communicates below with

the Descending Passage symbolical of the
Adamic condemnation to death, symboliz¬
ing that any who are suffering under the
Adamic condemnation may pass by faith
in the ransom-sacrifice of Christ Jesus from
the plane of condemnation to the plane of
justification or reckoned human perfec¬
tion.

10 The fact that it is the only open way to the

Queen’s and King’s Chambers, signifying
that the only way to life and immortality
symbolized by these two compartments is
by the ransom-sacrifice of Christ.

11 The fact that the small passage from the

Descending Passage to the lower extremity
of the Well-shaft appears as a small side¬
track (Plate X), symbolizing that faith in
the ransom-sacrifice of Christ as a way to
life appears to be foolishness to the Gen¬
tiles—1 Cor. 1 : 23.


II. The GRAND GALLERY symbolizes the condition of the Justified of the
Gospel Age by the following features:—


1 Its construction of limestone throughout, which

in the interior of the Great Pyramid sym¬
bolizes the human nature.

2 The fact that those who enter it from the First

Ascending Passage must pass the upper
end of the Well, and all others who enter
it from the Descending Passage can do so
only through the Well, symbolizing that
justification of both Jew and Gentile, with
a view to the High Calling, can only be
by faith in the death and resurrection of
Christ.

3 Its situation above the summit of the Well,

and below the plane of the King’s Cham¬
ber, symbolizing that those who are justi¬
fied in the Gospel Age are reckoned as
perfect human beings, not immortal beings.

4 Its termination in the Ante-Chamber, sym¬

bolizing that the sole purpose of faith-
justification in the Gospel Age is to enable
justified human beings to enter the School
of Christ by consecration.

5 Its great height enabling the traveller to


walk easily erect, symbolizing that the
burden of sin has fallen from the shoulders
of the Justified.

6 The difficulties of its upward slope and its

slippery floor, symbolizing the troubles of
the Justified which are permitted by God
to test and develop their faith.

7 The Ramps as an aid to the ascent, symboliz¬

ing the grace of God which enables the
Justified to make upward progress.

8 The upward progress toward the King's

Chamber, symbolizing that those who per¬
severe approach nearer the presence of
God.

9 The great Step at the upper end of the Grand

Gallery, symbolizing the great test to
which the path of faith-justification must
ultimately conduct all the Justified who
make upward progress. As it is only
when one reaches the Step that a proper
view is obtained of the low entrance into
the Ante-Chamber, so it is only after con¬
siderable progress has been made along


90


I


n


the pathway of faith-justification that one is
able to clearly see consecration or sanctifi¬
cation. And as one can surmount the Step
by taking advantage of the aid afforded
by the Ramp, after which he has a short
breathing-space during which he can more
minutely examine the low doorway before


entering, so, by the assistance of the grace
of God, the Justified can overcome the
natural (human) dislike of entertaining the
thought of self-denial and voluntary sacri¬
fice ; after which follows a period of rest
for the purpose of counting the cost.


III. The ANTE-CHAMBER symbolizes the “Holy" of the Tabernacle, the School
of Christ, the condition of the Sanctified during their development as spirit-
begotten sons of God, by the following features:—


1 The very low entrance-passage (42 inches), 8
symbolizing, like the first vail of the
Tabernacle, the death of the human will.


2 The small twenty-one inch space in front of

the Granite Leaf, symbolizing the condi¬
tion of one who has denied .himself, but
has not yet submitted himself to the will
of God.

3 The fact that at this stage he is still standing

on limestone on the same level as the upper
surface of the Step, with limestone walls
behind and on either side of him, symbol¬
izing the fact that, though he has denied
himself, he is not yet spirit-begotten, but
is still a justified human being.

4 The fact that the roof over his head is com¬

posed of granite, signifying that at this
stage, though he has not yet bowed down
to the will of God, he has advanced to the
point of doing so, and is, therefore, under
special Divine protection.

5 The necessity of bowing very low under the

Granite Leaf before entrance is gained into
the Ante-Chamber proper, symbolizing full
submission to the Divine Will, before en¬
trance is gained into the consecrated or
sanctified condition.

6 The necessity of placing the feet upon granite

before one can pass from under the Gran¬
ite Leaf into the Ante-Chamber proper,
symbolizing the fact that, when a justified
human being fully submits to the Divine
Will and passes into the sanctified con¬
dition, he is of necessity begotten of the
spirit.

7 The fact that the first granite stone of the floor

is beyond (south of) the Queen’s Chamber,
signifying that those who are sanctified in
this Gospel Age, are no longer human, but
spiritual—" Ye are not in the flesh but in
the spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God
dwell in you ”—Rom. 8 ; 9.


The fact that the first granite stone of the floor
is raised above the level of the limestone
floor which lies to the north of it, symbol¬
izing that the plane of spirit-begetting is
higher than the plane of human perfection
or justification. See the Chart of the Ages
—Plate VI.

The fact that the remainder of the floor of the
Ante-Chamber, beyond the first granite
stone, falls immediately to the level of the
limestone Step outside, signifying that the
Sanctified during the Gospel Age have
undergone no change of nature as regards
their bodies, but only as regards their
minds or wills.

10 The fact that the floor of this inner section

of the Ante-Chamber is composed entirely
of granite, signifying that the Sanctified
are nevertheless reckoned by God as no
longer fleshly, but spiritual, provided that
henceforth they “ walk not after the flesh,
but after the Spirit.”

11 The peculiar markings on the granite walls,

signifying that the Sanctified are now in
the “ School of Christ.”

12 The granite roof, signifying that they are still,

and now much more than before, under
Divine protection, dwelling in the secret
place of the Most High, under the shadow
of the Almighty—Psa. 91 : 1.

13 The low entrance into the King’s Chamber,

representing the Sanctified laying aside the
human nature in death, in order that they
may enter the heavenly inheritance as a
new creation of the Divine nature, for
“ flesh and blood cannot inherit the King¬
dom of God.” “ This mortal must put on
immortality "—1 Cor. 15 : 50, 54. They
must be faithful unto death, conformable
unto Christ’s death, before they can get
the crown of life, immortality—Rev. 2 : 10;
Phil. 3 : 10, 11..


IV. The KING’S CHAMBER symbolizes the “Most Holy" of the Tabernacle, the
heavenly inheritance, the condition of the Sanctified after they are “born
from the dead” as spirit beings of the Divine nature, by the following
features


1 Its construction, entirely of granite, symbol¬

izing the Divine nature.

2 Its low entrance from the Ante-Chamber,

signifying that it is gained only by con¬
secration unto death.

3 The fact that its floor is still higher than the

level of the first granite stone in the Ante-
Chamber, symbolizing that the plane of
the Divine Glory is high above the plane


of spirit-begetting. See the Chart of the
Ages—Plate VI.

4 The fact that it is the ultimate goal of the

Grand Gallery and Ante-Chamber, signi¬
fying that it is the end of the way.

5 The other proofs given at the end of Section

(A), showing that it symbolizes immor¬
tality.


(F) The Grand Gallery.

In the last section we saw that the Grand Gallery, in its relation to the Ante-Chamber
as the School of Christ, symbolizes the condition of the justified who are called or
invited to present their bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God—Rom. 12 :1.
Those who do so are urged to forget those things which are behind, and reaching
forth unto those things that are before, press toward the mark for the prize of the High
Calling of God in Christ Jesus—Phil. 3 : 13, 14. In the present section, the Grand
Gallery will be considered as symbolizing the High or Heavenly Calling in itself-
Heb. 3 : 1. The two modes of access, the one for the Jew, the other for the Gentile, to
the privilege of the High Calling, have already been considered—Pars. 179-182.

200 This High Calling began, so far as Jesus was concerned, at his birth, because he
was born into this world for the purpose of accepting the call to sacrifice when the due
time should come, which was at his baptism; but it was not until his death and
resurrection that the “ new and living way” was opened up to the world of mankind,
first to the Jews and afterwards to the Gentiles. Good men, like John the Baptist (than
whom there was no greater), who died prior to the time when Jesus Christ rose from
the dead and appeared in the presence of God for us, his followers (Heb. 9 : 24), bar)
no part in this High Calling to be joint-sacrificers and ultimately joint-heirs with the
Master Matt. 11 : 11. The first of the Jews to accept this call and to receive the Holy
Spirit in token of their acceptance by God, were the 120 disciples when they were
assembled in the upper room at Pentecost, the exact date foreshadowed by the Law-
Lev. 23 : 4-17 ; Acts 1 : 13, 14 ; 2 : 1-18. The first Gentile to accept, and be accepted,
was Cornelius—Acts 10.

201 The lofty height of the Grand Gallery very well represents the perfect liberty
and high aspirations of the followers of Christ. Those who go up this way do not
require to walk with their heads bowed as they did when coming up the First Ascending
Passage, representative of the Jews bowed down and condemned by the exacting
requirements of the Law, or when going down the Descending Passage, representative
of the remainder of the human race bowed down under the Adamic condemnation to
death. Those who are privileged to go up the Grand Gallery, can do so with their

93


92


G


heads erect: for “ Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to every one that
believeth,” and “ there is therefore now no condemnation to them which are in Christ
Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit ”—Rom. 8:1.

202 The Jews who struggled up the First Ascending Passage, and the world who
labour down the Descending Passage are weary and faint because of their galling yoke
and heavy burden; “ But they that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength;
they shall mount up with wings as eagles ; they shall run, and not be weary ; and they
shall walk, and not faint”—Isa. 40 : 31. The reason is that they have hearkened to
the Lord’s words : “ Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will
give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in
heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls ; for my yoke is easy, and my burden is
light”—Matt. 11 : 28-30.

203 Nevertheless, although this way is lofty, it is a narrow way, for “ narrow is the
way which leadeth unto life ”—Matt, 7 :14. It is rather less than seven feet wide above
the Ramps, and the walking part between the Ramps is even less than this. It is only
three and a half feet wide— Just room for two to walk abreast, “My Lord and I.”
However anxious the Lord’s brethren may be for some dear one to share this pathway
with them, while they may assist him to see his privilege, none of them can lead him up.
They must urge him to take Jesus' hand; and all who respond will find Jesus able to
save to the uttermost. They will hear Jehovah’s tender words: “ Fear thou not, for I
am with thee: be not dismayed, for I am thy God: I will strengthen thee; yea, I will
help thee; yea, I will uphold thee with the right hand of my righteousness”—
Isa. 41 : 10.

204 The way is dark; “but unto the upright there ariseth light in the darkness.”
Those who walk this way have a “ lamp,” the Word of God, by the light of which they
are enabled to see the pathway, and this lamp is shining more and more brightly—
Psa. 112 : 4 ; 119 : 105 ; Prov. 4 : 18. The way is also slippery; but the wayfarers
have the Lord as their yoke-fellow; if they should slip, he will help them. Moreover,
they have the Ramps beside them all the way, representing the grace of God, his “great
and precious promises ” to support them when they are weary, to cling to when they
slip. “ When I said, ‘ My foot slippeth,’ thy mercy, O Lord, held me up ”—Psa. 93 : 18.
Should anyone wilfully begin to retrace his steps, he will find that the way of the back¬
slider is hard, just as in the Great Pyramid the descent of the Grand Gallery is even
harder than the ascent. Persistence in this downward course must eventuate in the
Second Death—Heb. 6 : 4-6; 10 : 29; 2 Pet. 2 : 20-22.

205 The Step at the head of the Grand Gallery represents the last great trial to be
overcome in each individual Christian’s course ; but just as visitors to the Pyramid can
surmount this Step and gain entrance to the King’s Chamber by taking advantage of
the help afforded them by their guide and by the Ramps, so all who are true Christians
will prove overcomers if their strength is not in themselves, but in the Lord, and if they
rely on the grace of God, “ the exceeding great and precious promises: that by these
they might be partakers of the Bivine nature ”—2 Pet. 1 : 4.

206 When we examine the two side-walls of the Grand Gallery, we see that they
are each composed of eight courses of masonry above the Ramps, and that each course
projects about three inches beyond the one below it—Plate XIII. There are thus seven

94


bverlappmgs, and the width of the passage becomes gradually less between each pair of
opposite courses till the roof is reached ; here the width is identical with the floor-space
between the Ramps. Is there any symbolic significance in these seven overlappings ?
Wordsworth E. Jones, of London, in a lecture which he delivered on the Great Pyramid,
suggested that they might represent the various stages in the upward growth in Christian
character as detailed in 2 Pet. 1 : 5-7: “ And besides this, giving all diligence, add to
your faith virtue; and to virtue knowledge; and to knowledge temperance ; and to
temperance patience; and to patience godliness ; and to godliness brotherly kindness ;
and to brotherly kindness love.”

207 From this point of view, the floor of the Grand Gallery may be taken as
representing the foundation of our faith. The Apostle assures us that “ other foundation
can no man lay than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ 1 Cor. 3 : 11. Jesus himself
s^d : “ I am the way”—John 14 : 6. It is on him that the “exceeding great and precious
promises ” are based, just as it is on the floor of the Grand Gallery that the Ramps are
based. The lowest course of each side wall, representing the faith of the Christian, rests
on the floor through the medium of the Ramp, and similarly, the faith of the Christian
rests on the foundation of Jesus Christ through the medium of the Lord’s great and
precious promises.

208 But the Christian may have all faith so that he could move mountains, and yet, if
he did not add to it the various graces of the spirit, the greatest and highest of which is love,
his faith would profit him nothing. We must superadd to our faith the various over¬
lappings of 1, virtue, fortitude, the courage of our convictions ; 2, knowledge ; 3, tem¬
perance, self-control; 4, patience; 5, godliness,—reverence for God with desire to do his
commands, duty love; 6, brotherly kindness,—love for all who are brethren in Christ
Jesus ; 7, love in its all-comprehensive sense,—love for God, for the brethren, for man¬
kind in general, for enemies. These are all built upon, and are additions to each other
in the order named, and all are necessary, if we would be joint-heirs with our Lord and
Saviour Jesus Christ. “If these things be in you, and abound, they make you that ye shall
neither be barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. But he
that lacketh these things is blind and cannot see afar off, and hath forgotten that he was
purged from his old sins. Wherefore the rather, brethren, give diligence to make your
calling and election sure; for if ye do these things, ye shall never fall; for so an
entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly into the everlasting Kingdom of our
Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ”—2 Pet. 1 : 5-11.

209 The fact that the space between the side walls is narrower and narrower at each
overlapping, till the roof is reached where the width is the same as that between the
Ramps, would seem to indicate that the various additions to the upward growth in grace
enumerated by the Apostle Peter, present more and more difficulty to the individual
Christian who is faithful to his covenant of sacrifice. The way becomes narrower and
narrower, till at length it becomes as narrow as the way the Master trod. This will be
reached only when we develop love in its all-comprehensive sense, in addition to and
inclusive of the other graces of the spirit. It is only those who cultivate this love, the
sum of all the graces, who will be raised to joint-heirship with Christ, inasmuch as these
alone will have proved their fitness to be associated with Christ in judging and blessing
the world in righteousness—1 Cor. 13 : 1-13 ; 6 : 2 ; Rev. 3 : 21; Psa. 96 : 9-13.

95


> i

Resume of Proofs.

I. The GRAND GALLERY symbolizes the Gospel Age as regards both faith-
justification and sanctification, by the following features:—


1 Just as the upper extremity of the First
Ascending Passage is also the starting-
point of the Grand Gallery, so the death
of Christ, which closed the Law Dispen¬
sation (Col. 2 : 14), formed the starting-
point of the Gospel Dispensation. Thus
the Grand Gallery forms a continuation of
the First Ascending Passage in the same
way that the Gospel Dispensation is a con¬
tinuation of the Law Dispensation, more
especially as in both cases the one leads to
an appreciation of the other, for the Law


was a schoolmaster to bring the Jews to
Christ—Gal. 3 : 24.

2 Its length coincides with the duration of the
Gospel Age from the death of Christ in
April 33 A.D., till Autumn of the year 1914
A.D., when the lease of power to the Gen¬
tile nations, the “Times of the Gentiles,"
will terminate, and Christ will take to
himself his mighty power and begin his
reign of righteousness. (This time-feature
will be shown in Volume II of Great
Pyramid Passages.)


II. The GRAND GALLERY symbolizes the condition of the Sanctified of the
Gospel Age, by the following features :—


1 The upper end of the Well, signifying the

death and resurrection of Christ, is situ¬
ated at its commencement, so teaching that
it is only through Christ that we can be¬
come sanctified. Justification must pre¬
cede sanctification.

2 Its vertical height is seven times the trans¬

verse height of both the First Ascending
Passage and the Descending Passage, and
suggests the perfect liberty and high aspir¬
ations of the true Christian. The Lord
“ brought me forth also into a large place ;
he delivered me, because he delighted in
me. The Lord rewarded me according to
my righteousness "—Psa. 18 : 19, 20.

3 The space between the Ramps is only three

and a half feet wide, just room for two to
walk abreast,—My Lord and I. It reminds
us also of Jesus’ words : “ Narrow is the
way which leadeth unto life.”

4 Its upward inclination and its termination at

the granite chambers, suggest the thought
that the way is difficult but leads upward
to holiness and immortality, the Divine
nafture. Before inheriting the heavenly
Kingdom, however, the Christian must,
like his Master, humble himself unto death,
just as in the Great Pyramid, the traveller


before entering the King’s chamber must
bow down very low and creep through
the small entrance-passages.

5 Though its inclination is the same as that of

the First Ascending Passage, the ascent is
easier because of the support afforded by
the Ramps on either side. This represents
the fact that when the follower of Christ
makes a slip, or when he should feel faint
of heart, he can at once lay hold of the
“ exceeding great and precious promises "
of God, by the aid of which he may
become a partaker of the Divine nature.

6 Its seven overlappings suggest the upward

growth of Christian character as detailed
in the second Epistle of Peter—1 : 5-7.

7 The Step at its upper end close to the

low and narrow passage into the King's
Chamber, represents (a) the last great
trial to be encountered by the individual
Christian prior to humbling himself unto
death, the narrow gateway to the heavenly
inheritance; and also, (b) as we shall see
in Volume II of Great Pyramid Passages,
the last great trial upon the true Church,
which is the body of Christ (Eph. 1 : 22,
23), prior to the death and resurrection of
the “feet ” members.


I

I


I


%


LETTERS

FROM

EGYPT AND PALESTINE

(MAY to JULY, 1909).


Revised, Enlarged, and


Re-written.


INTRODUCTORY NOTE.


A LTHOUGH primarily addressed to our three dear sisters, Annie, Minna and Eva (who are also,

/ % we rejoice to say, our sisters in the Lord), these letters in their present revised form are
/ % addressed to our brethren in the Lord generally.

211 As hinted at in Chapter I, it was in Spring of the year 1906 that we began a
systematic study of the symbolical and time features of the Great Pyramid of Gizeh in Egypt, using as
our text-book the third volume of Scripture Studies by C. T. Russell. Although this volume had
previously been read by us, a closer application during the preceding two years to the Scriptural
philosophy of God's glorious plan of the Ages, and to the prophetic times and seasons as presented in the
first two volumes of the series of Scripture Studies, had now prepared us to understand and appreciate
to a greater degree C. T. Russell’s exposition of the corroborative testimony given by the Great Pyramid.

212 Being convinced that further careful and reverential investigation, based upon the knowledge
thus gained, would reveal yet other important features still stored up in the dark recesses of this
wonderful structure, we procured Professor C. Piazzi Smyth’s three large volumes entitled Life and
Work at the Great Pyramid, and his Our Inheritance in the Great Pyramid. With the additional data
thus gathered we were enabled by the Lord’s grace to discover many more beautiful faith-inspiring
corroborations. In a series of lectures delivered in Great Britian and America during the summer of
1906, these further corroborations were made known generally ; and at that time a small edition of a
brochure containing a brief synopsis of the various findings was published.

213 This edition was soon exhausted, and as interest in the subject was sustained we decided to
write out our findings in fuller detail, including a number of others since discovered. Subsequently, we
were so fortunate as to procure, among other books on the Pyramid, the rare work of Col. Howard Vyse,
Operations at the Pyramids of Gizeh, in three large volumes, and also, the equally rare volume of
Professor Flinders Petrie, Pyramids and Temples of Gizeh (the identical volume presented by Professor
Petrie to Professor C. Piazzi Smyth, and containing Professor Smyth's marginal notes). These works
enabled us to become well acquainted with the interior construction of the Pyramid, excepting the lower
rock-cut parts (the Descending Passage, the Small Horizontal Passage leading to the Subterranean
Chamber, the Subterranean Chamber, the Well-shaft, and the Grotto), of which parts none of these books
pretends to be accurate, nor describes so fully as our present study requires.

214 It was therefore thought that a personal visit to the Great Pyramid was necessary, in order to
arrive at proper conclusions in our time-calculations, and to ascertain the true teachings of certain parts
of the Pyramid. Accordingly, after careful consideration of ways and means, and after communicating
with various friends who were in favourable positions to furnish useful information, among whom were
Professor Alex. Ferguson of Cairo, and Charles W. Cotton of London, we made our arrangements, and
booked our passage by the P. Henderson line of steamers. In order to make necessary preliminary
arrangements, and complete certain parts of the work, preparatory to the more important work of
measuring, one of the joint-authors (Morton Edgar) left for Egypt on the 13th of May, 1909, a fortnight
before the other (Professor John Edgar, who was accompanied by his younger son, Stanley). A
fortnight after the latter’s departure, his wife and elder son Jack came out to join us. All five of us
returned together, arriving home at the end of July.

215 The letters cover only the period between our several arrivals in Egypt, and our departure for
home. We were most hospitably entertained by the Burns family during our short stay in Liverpool
while waiting for the departure of our several boats ; and on our return to Glasgow, five hundred of our
brethren in the Lord congregated in a large hall to extend to us a warm welcome home.


PLATE XXI.


LETTER I.


Hotel Bristol, Cairo,
Thursday, 27th May, 1909.

Dear Brethren, —Yesterday morning I arrived safely at Port Said after a ralm and
uneventful voyage. Some time was spent in getting moored, and during the manceuvres
small craft of various descriptions drew around. Most of them belonged to vendors of
wares, who crowded eagerly on board whenever the port doctor had passed the ship.
I had heard great stories about
these vendors, and wondered
what kind of reception we
should have, but they were
quiet, and not very persistent.

One of the boats was Cook’s ;
as soon as their man came
aboard, I told him I wanted
his services to take my bag¬
gage ashore and see it through
the customs. As I have a large
supply of special photographic
films with me, besides other
things on which duty might be
charged, I was afraid the cus¬
tom house officials would de¬
mand a large sum of money ; Qn board ihc s s

“Martaban,” en route for Egypt.

but I explained that I was

merely a tourist, and would be using all the materials I had brought with me. They
let me off easily, charging duty on only half the value of the films.

217 On leaving the customs, I went direct to the Sailors’ Rest, recommended to me
by Brother Cotton of London, and had a pleasant talk with the manager, Mr. Locke,
about the Divine Plan of the Ages. I gave him a handful of tracts for distribution
among the sailors, and a copy of the brochure Where are the Dead ? After
accepting a kind offer of a cup of tea, I went off to the station. The train left at 1 p.m.,
and arrived in Cairo about 5 o’clock.

218 The journey to Cairo was very interesting and instructive. For the first two
hours the train travelled through the sandy desert alongside the Suez Canal, but at
Ismailia the track left the canal and traversed cultivated land. Every now and again
we passed villages built of dried mud. Such of the houses as were in ruins seemed tp

99


Plate XXII.


crumble away very easily. We passed a brickfield quite close to the railway, and I
noticed that the bricks were sun-dried. Here and there were men and boys irrigating
the fields by raising water from the canals through tubes apparently about six or seven
feet long, by about eighteen inches in diameter, I understand that inside these tubes
there is a worm arrangement, the rotation of which causes the water to rise in the tube
and flow into ditches at the sides of the fields. I also saw water-wheels used for the
same purpose, but worked by oxen or camels.

219 It was not long before the scenery around caused me to realize that I was indeed
in a foreign land. A blazing sun shone down from an almost cloudless sky. Palm
trees, tall and short, stood in little clusters. Heavily-laden camels attended by dusky
natives walked along in single file with great swinging steps, and with their heads poised
on their long arched necks. Donkeys, with and without riders, were everywhere.
The harvest is in full swing at present. In those fields in which the wheat had been
reaped, a portion of ground with a hard surface had been prepared as a threshing-floor,
and yokes of oxen were being driven round and round dragging a threshing machine,

a sledge-like contriv¬


ance on which the dri¬
ver was seated. From
time to time the straw
was drawn to the out¬
side of the circle, and
the grain was heaped
up in the centre. Here
and there I saw the
harvesters throwing
the grain into the air
so that the wind might
blow the chaff away.
The whole scene re¬
minded me vividly of
what ITiave so often
read in the Bible and
in travellers’ books.

|(. 220 In the evening

I called on Professor^Alex. Ferguson, John's friend. He and his wife are very kind.
He told me that on receipt of John’s letter he had arranged with M. Maspero, the
Director-general of Antiquities in Egypt, to grant us a permit to work at the Great
Pyramid of Gizeh, and that consequently I should have no difficulty in this respect.
This morning Professor Ferguson accompanied me to the Museum, and introduced me
to M. Maspero. I found him very pleasant, and he kindly answered some questions I
put to him in connection with our work at the Pyramid, and gave me some useful advice
as to how to proceed. He also gave orders that I should be given a letter in Arabic to
hand to the “ Reis ” (chief or overseer) of the excavation works in Egypt, informing him
that I want workers to clear out the Descending Passage of the Great Pyramid.
Professor Ferguson thinks that I am sure to have difficulties sooner or later with the


An Eastern threshing-floor.


JQO


Arabs, and he has kindly volunteered to accompany me to the Pyramid to-morrow
morning to give me a start. I suppose I shall require to take things as they come. My
trust is in the Lord, and I know that all things work together for good to those who
love him. I shall probably employ three or four men, with three or four boys under
each to carry out the rubbish. It sounds quite simple, and I hope it will work out all
right. I have full permission to take photographs in the interior or on the outside of
the Pyramid. The season is now about closed, and it is not likely that many visitors
will come into the interior to interrupt the work.

Friday morning, 28th May. I have not now much more to add to this letter. I
gViall soon be starting off on my first visit to the Pyramids, after which, no doubt, I
shall have plenty to tell you. I might mention, however, that during my voyage on the
“ Martaban,” I gave the officers and passengers a “ Chart Talk.” The chief steward
hung up the Chart of the Ages for me in the dining saloon—Plate VI. I had a “full
house,” and was a little nervous, but I managed to tell them something of God’s great
Plan of the Ages as we understand it; and afterwards I gave all of them copies of the
brochure Where are the Dead? which I know to have been in the Lord’s hands a
means of blessing to many, leading to a still further inquiry into the precious truths as
set forth in the Scripture Studies.

With much love to all, Your loving brother,


Morton Edgar.


101


Plate XXIII.


LETTER II.


Arab Village, near the Pyramids of Gizeh.

Friday, 4th June, 1909.

DEAR Brethren, —At present I am sitting in a house in the Arab village close to the
Great Pyramid—Plate II.

222 I have now been in Egypt for a week, and have been very busy. Soon after
my arrival I learned that Professor C. Piazzi Smyth’s Arab assistant, Ali Gabri, or, as
Professor Smyth misspelt his name, Alee Dobree, died four years ago (December, 1904.
Professor Smyth died on 21st February, 1900). I found, however, that his son, Hadji
Ali Gabri, was following in his father’s steps, so I engaged his services, and have found
him very helpful to me in my photographic work.

223 Mr. L. Dow Covington, an American, has been working at the Great Pyramid
for the past eight years, off and on. When I came here a week ago, he was just com¬
pleting some excavating work at the foot of the north side of the Great Pyramid, and
you can appreciate my pleasant surprise when I beheld not only the three historical
casing-stones discovered many years ago by Col. Howard Vyse, and now again brought
to the light of day, but sixteen others, all of them in one continuous row—Plate XXIII.
These stones demonstrate the fact that the Great Pyramid was formerly covered or
cased with beautiful smooth casing-stones, a fact which formerly some had been inclined
to doubt.

224 It was in May of the year 1837 that Col. Howard Vyse sunk a shaft down
through the fifty feet of rubbish immediately in front of the Entrance, and discovered
the three casing-stones at the eastern extremity of the row—Plate VII. He was greatly
impressed with their size, and considered that the workmanship displayed in them was
unrivalled. When they were first uncovered, they were perfect; but during the short
time they remained exposed while he was at the Pyramids, they were, to his regret,
much defaced by vandalism. He therefore felt it his duty to protect them by covering
them again with a large quantity of rubbish; but he wrote: “ I am sorry to add, that
my precautions were unsuccessful, and that the blocks have been again uncovered and
much injured.” (See Plate V.)

225 Happily, however, the Colonel’s informant was wrong; for Professor Flinders
Petrie wrote that in the year 1881, just when he required them for the purpose of
measuring, etc., the three stones were again uncovered by a contractor who was. using
the rubbish for mending the road to the Pyramids, and he found them in the condition
in which they were when covered in 1837. From then till now, these three stones have
remained exposed. Mr. Covington informs me that he uncovered the fourth one in the
year 1902, and that the whole four stones were illustrated by Professor Breasted of

103


Plate XXIV.


near view (looking west) of the largest of the three historical CASING-STONES discovered by
Col. Howard Vyse at the north base of the Great Pyramid of Gizeh.


PLATE XXV.

Chicago University in his New History of Egypt, 1904. But now, in the latter end of
May of this year, exactly 72 years after Col. Howard Vyse’s celebrated discovery, 15
more of these stones have been excavated, besides a fair area of the pavement and
levelled rock in front. I think I am indeed fortunate to have come just in time to see
these, and to be the first to have had the privilege of photographing them as they now
appearthis was with Mr. Covington’s permission, which was gladly granted.

226 The first three or four of these stones are immediately under the Entrance of
the Pyramid, and are still in excellent preservation, though I notice that the small
portion referred to by Colonel Howard Vyse as adherings with such tenacity (Par. 86),
has disappeared—Compare Plate VIII, with one of my photographs which shows a very
near view of the largest stone, Plate XXIV. The others to the west of these show more
or less signs of surface wear, especially the last five to the extreme west which are
much broken—Plate XXVI. When I stand at the east end of the line of the casing-
stones, and look squarely along the upper and front surfaces of the long row extending
about 86 feet in front of me, I cannot help being impressed with the wonderful level
and almost glossy appearance which both surfaces present, and cannot but marvel at
the wonderful skill which the ancient builders of the Pyramid possessed. The upper
surface is as level and even as a billiard table. Even the core masonry immediately
behind the casing-stones preserves the same wonderful level. Professor Petrie, by
means of his special apparatus, found that in a length of forty feet to the east of the
three casing-stones then uncovered, the upper surface of the first course of core masonry
differed from a dead level by only one-fiftieth part of an inch!

227 The casing-
stones rest on a plat¬
form between sixteen
and seventeen inches
in thickness, which, in
its turn, rests on the
levelled natural rock.

This platform projects
sixteen inches beyond
the comparatively
sharp bottom edge of
the bevelled casing-
stones. A peculiar
feature of the plat¬
form is that its front
edge is not quite at
right-angles with its
upper surface, but is
bevelled after the
manner of the casing-
stones, though only to ^ fractured butt-joint between the pavement (on the left), and

the extent of two or ihe bevelled front edge of the platform (on the right) in front of the
three degrees. This casing-stones of the Great Pyramid of Gizeh.

105


Plate XXVI.


is well seen in Plate XXVI. Continuous with the platform to the distance of over thirty
feet northward (outward) from the line of the casing-stones, are the fragmentary remains
of a pavement, the level upper surface of which is flush with that of the platform, and
still preserves here and there a smooth appearance. The flat stones of which it is com¬
posed approximate to the same thickness as the stones of the platform ; but as the
natural rock on which they lie is not exactly level, they are not all of a uniform thick¬
ness. They vary also in length and breadth. The abutment joints between the
bevelled front edge of the platform and the stones of the pavement, are very close, as
will be seen in one of my photographs of a fractured pavement stone adjoining the
platform—Plate XXV,

228 In one of the photographs, which shows a front and partly top view of the
best preserved of the casing-stones, with Mr. Covington standing at the east end looking
along the upper surface of the row, a large open fissure in the rock can be seen in the
foreground—Plate XXVII. According to the account of Col. Howard Vyse, this fissure
had originally been filled in with rubble stone-work, and covered over with large inset
stones, one of which may be seen in the photograph, partly fallen in. Over these inset
stones which were flush with the levelled rock, the beautifully fitted pavement had
been laid. It had been Col. Howard Vyse’s intention to have blasted the rock to a
considerable depth at this part in hope that he might discover a subterranean com¬
munication with a secret tomb-chamber under the Pyramid, supposed to have been
alluded to by the Greek historian, Herodotus. He chose this part because it is in line
with the Entrance Passage of the Pyramid, but the discovery of the fissure saved him
considerable trouble and expense. He caused it to be cleared to a depth of 47 feet,
and to a length of 74 feet from east to west, but without discovering a passage. He was
therefore satisfied that there was no subterranean passage in connection with the Great
Pyramid, save that of the Well-known Descending Passage leading down to the Pit, a
hundred feet below the base of the Pyramid—Plate IX. In the Second Pyramid, how¬
ever, he did discover a second and lower communication, the entrance of which was
hidden under that Pyramid’s pavement about 40 feet out from the base—Plate XXVlII.
This lower subterranean passage, which is in direct line with the upper Entrance Pas¬
sage, besides being hidden at its entrance by the pavement, was also completely blocked
up in its length by large well-fitted and cemented stones. Col. Howard Vyse had most
of these removed.

229 In a second view of the casing-stones of the Great Pyramid, taken with my
camera erected a little more to the east, Hadji Ali Gabri is seen sitting some distance up
the side of the Pyramid, pointing to the entrance of A1 Mamoun’s forced passage, which
is situated in the seventh course of the Pyramid’s horizontal core masonry—Plate XXIX.
In the upper part of the section shown in this photograph, part of the great angular
limestone blocks above the mouth of the Entrance Passage, may be seen. The relative
positions of the casing-stones, A1 Mamoun’s forced passage, and the Entrance to the
Pyramid can better be judged, however, by a third view which I took with the camera
erected at a greater distance from the base of the Pyramid—Plate XXX. But the square
mouth of the Entrance, which lies some distance in from the face of -the Pyramid,
cannot be seen from the ground below ; also the angular blocks above the Entrance ap¬
pear much lower down than they are in reality—Compare Plate XXXI.

107


The best preserved of the CASING-STONES of the Great Pyramid of Gizeh; showing also the LARGE FISSURE

in the rock, discovered by Col. Howard Vyse in 1837 A.D.


Vertical Section of the SECOND PYRAMID OF GIZEH (from North to South, looking M4-.57)!showinc the Two Entrance Passages
The UPPER discovered by BELZONI 78/8 AD. ; and the LOWER by Col■ HOWARD VYSE, 1837 H.D.


Plate XXVil.


Plate XXIX.


The entrance of AL MAMOUN’S PASSAGE, forced into the Great Pyramid
of Gizeh in the year 820 A.D.


Plate XXX.


The MIDDLE of the NORTH BASE of the GREAT PYRAMID of Gizeh
showing the angle-stones above the Entrance, the casing-stones,
and the entrance of Al Mamoun’s forced passage.


mm


The ENTRANCE of the Great Pyramid of Gizeh.


Plate XXXII.

230 This third photograph (Plate XXX) shows the ruinous and dilapidated condition
to which this great monument has been reduced by the ruthless hands of the spoiler.
According to historical evidence, beautiful smooth limestone blocks, similar to those at
the north base, encased the entire Pyramid up till 820 A.D., when Caliph A1 Mamoun,
in his greed to gain possession of supposed hidden treasure, forced his way into the
Pyramid’s interior. This was the beginning of the destructive work ; and in the years
that followed, the Pyramid’s casing was torn off piecemeal for building purposes—See
Pars. 95-99.

231 The existence of the forced passage, which extends inward in a horizontal
direction till it meets the junction of the Descending and Ascending Passages, proves that
the position of the mouth of the regular Entrance Passage, though evidently well-known
in earlier times, was unknown to A1 Mamoun. Professor Petrie claims that, originally,
the Entrance mouth must have been closed by a stone door, swinging horizontally on
side pivots, and having its outer surface flush with the general angle of the casing. He
instances the Entrance Passage of the South Pyramid of Dashur, which bears evidence
of having been closed in this manner. A door such as this would possess no external
marks by which its situation could be identified ; and knowledge of its existence having
been lost, A1 Mamoun was compelled to force an entrance for himself. That the Great
Pyramid was closed by a pivoted stone door, is borne out by the writings of the ancient
geographer Strabo (1st century B.C.). Referring to the Pyramids of Gizeh, he wrote:
“ The Greater [Pyramid], a little way up one side, has a stone that may be taken out,
which being raised up, there is a sloping passage to the foundations ”—Plate IX.

232 About eight o’clock to-night I went round in company with Hadji Ali Gabri,
and had a look at the Sphinx by moonlight. You have so often seen photographs of
this half-man half-animal, that I do not need to describe it to you. In many of these
photographs, the Great Pyramid is shown in the background in such a manner that
one who has not visited the


locality might get the impres¬
sion that the Sphinx is almost
as large as the Great Pyramid
—Plate XXXII. This is far
from being the case. Never¬
theless, though very small
when compared with the Pyr¬
amid, it is in itself so huge,
weird, and uncanny, that one
cannot be surprised that so
many have wondered why it
was made, and have spoken
of the riddle of the Sphinx.
No wonder so many have ex¬
claimed “ Ah ! If only these
lips could speak, what could
they not tell us of an age long


The Sphinx, and the Great Pyramid of Gizeh.


gone-by! ” But these lips have no riddle to divulge, for the simple reason that the


113


Sp hinx is but a d um b idol. On the contrary, the Great Pyramid which to many minds
it seems to eclipse, can speak, and in no uncertain voice! It has no lips, indeed, but to
those who have the “ hearing ears ” is speaks with a marvellous certainty by means of
its symbolical passages and chambers, not only of the distant past, but of the present
and even also of the far reaching future! The Great Pyramid has, in these latter days,
revealed many things, and possibly it has yet more secrets stored up in its dark pas¬
sages and chambers. They are like the “ dark sayings ” of our Lord; which only those
who have the “ Key ” can understand and appreciate. I thank my heavenly Father
daily that he has opened the eyes of my understanding to see this Key, the Divine plan
of the Ages.

233 The majority of visitors here walk right past the Great Pyramid, and go round
to admire the Sphinx. As usual, the “Idol” receives the most attention and worship.
They are no doubt impressed by the immense size of the Great Pyramid; but every¬
thing there bespeaks toil and labour, and comparatively few ascend to its summit;
fewer still venture within.

With love in the Lord, Your loving brother,

Morton Edgar.


,

"•


LETTER III.


Arab Village, near the Pyramids of Gizeh.

Saturday, 5th June, 1909.

DEAR Brethren, —I went into Cairo to-day to obtain permission to erect tents in front
of the north face of the Great Pyramid. The fact of my not having a place near the
Pyramid where I can keep my measuring-rods, cameras, etc., has proved a great draw¬
back. This is the chief reason why I have decided to have tents erected as close to it as
possible; for although the house in the Arab village in which I lodge at night is not
situated at a great distance from the Pyramid, it is nevertheless not so convenient as
might be—Plate II. For the past week and a half, Mr. Covington has very kindly let
me have the use of his tent to store some of my apparatus, and to change my clothes,
make tea for. myself, etc.; but I feel I can hardly continue to use his tent all the time,
nor keep all my implements there. This kindness of Mr. Covington has been of
great help to me. I was accompanied by the Reis, Abraheem Faid, who has charge
of all the excavating works from Cairo, up the Nile to Fayoum which lies about
70 or 80 miles distant. Through his kind assistance I received the permission
without much difficulty. To-morrow my tent will be erected, and afterwards John’s,
and the others as they are required. The Reis and his son Judah, who assists, his.
father in his work of overseer, are very attentive and obliging; and indeed, all the
Arabs here are very nice to me, and I am thankful to say that I have not so far had
any of the trouble which Professor Ferguson and Mr. Covington thought I might have.

235 To-day I had nineteen men down with me in the Subterranean Chamber or Pit
—Plate IX. I had them working at the west end of that chamber, clearing out some of
the stones and sand which at that end reached nearly to the ceiling. We shall be down
there again to-morrow to complete this part of the work. For the past week I have
had men clearing out the stones and sand from the Descending Passage. About six or
seven years ago, Mr. Covington cleared about thirty feet of the lower end of this
passage, and also the lower end of the Well-shaft. But when he and I crept down the
Descending Passage on my first visit to the interior of the Great Pyramid, we found
that not only was nearly half the height of the passage blocked with sand and stones
throughout the greater part of its length, but the lower third of the part which Mr.
Covington had previously cleared was again filled with rubbish. Mr. Covington thinks
that this was probably due to a great rain-storm which occurred about two months ago.

236 Mr. Covington and the Reis almost frightened me into doing nothing in the way
of excavating. I should require, if I wished to do it properly, they said, to lay rails
along the floor of the Descending Passage, and run the rubbish up to the Entrance in
small waggons, and then it would be necessary for a large number of men, arranged in

115


114


a line from the Entrance down to the edge of the plateau on which the Pyramid is built,
to pass the rubbish along and deposit it clear of the Pyramid itself. The cost might be
from thirty to fifty pounds ($150 to $250), and might even be more. I felt downcast, as
I knew we could not afford to pay so much. However, as it was important that
accurate measurements should be made, not only of the Descending Passage, but also of
the Small Horizontal Passage leading to the Subterranean Chamber, I decided to get at
least this latter passage cleared out. Accordingly, I instructed Judah, who has been
my right-hand man for the past week, to engage and superintend three men to do this
limited portion.

237 They finished the work in a day, with three hours still to spare ; and so by way
of a trial, just to see what could be done in a humble way with the three men, I directed
Judah to ascertain how much of the rubbish in the Descending Passage could be carried
out in baskets in these three hours. They commenced at the top a few feet below- the
point where the First Ascending Passage leaves the Descending Passage—Plate IX. At
this place there is a large granite block which was discovered by Professor Flinders
Petrie in 1881, and is mentioned in his book. A few years ago Mr. Covington closed
the eighteen-inch space between this granite block and the roof with an iron grill-door.
From here downward, according to Professor Petrie, the Descending Passage measures,
approximately, 235 feet.

238 One of the men filled basket after basket with the rubbish, and the other two
carried these up the passage to the Entrance, and then down to the great rubbish
mound in front of the Pyramid where they emptied them, taking care to keep clear of
Mr. Covington’s newly excavated casing-stones. It was wonderful how much they did
in those three hours. I felt encouraged, and asked Judah’s advice about carrying on
the work next day. He recommended me to engage nine men, and to leave it to him,
and he would see that the work was done. Judah was as good as his word. The men
did so well that I was determined to continue the same method till the passage was
cleared throughout its entire length. The number of men was increased each day, as
more ground had to be traversed in carrying out the rubbish, till during the last two
days I have had eighteen men in addition to Judah working there.

239 This particular part of the work is now complete, and it has not cost more
than five pounds! Mr. Covington is astonished, and expresses it as his opinion that the
men have worked well for me in order to spite him, for they do not seem to like him
overmuch, although he is very good to them in many ways. Judah impressed upon me
several times during the work, that I was to trust him and he would see that the work
was well done. He said: “Me and my father are going to deal straight with you.
Trust Judah. We have received two letters from M. Maspero, saying that we are to
take care of you, and we would be afraid not to please you. We want you to be
pleased.” He is constantly asking me if I am pleased, and I always answer that I am
satisfied, as indeed I am, for everything has gone on much better than I had been led to
expect.

240 I have not employed boys, having been advised by Mr. Covington to employ
men only, for although their wages are higher, they can do the work much more
quickly and satisfactorily. They begin work at half-past six in the morning, and
continue till noon, and then, after an interval of two hours, they resume work till six in

U6


the evening. Thus they work for nine and a half hours per day, for which they are
paid the sum of six piastres, or one shilling and three pence (30 cents). This is a good
wage according to the scale in Egypt. I understand that a common wage for unskilled
labour such as this is four to five piastres per day. To Judah I give ten piastres, or
two shillings and a penny (fifty cents), though he only asked for seven. Seventy-two
years ago Col. Howard Vyse paid his men only one piastre per day, and the overseers
only two!

241 In very early times, the Descending Passage appears to have been sufficiently
rlppr to allow of venturesome travellers making occasional visits to the Subterranean
Chamber; but in 1763 A.D., ‘Davison, when describing the Descending Passage,
wrote: “At the end of one hundred and thirty-one feet [from the junction of the First
Ascending Passage] I found it so filled up with earth, that there was no possibility of
proceeding.” It remained in this condition until the year . 1817, when, by the .efforts of
M, Caviglia, access to the Subterranean Chamber was restored; and at the same time
the whole-length of the Well-shaft was cleared. M. Caviglia was afterward for a short
time.in the employment of Col. Howard Vyse.

242. Evidently, however, M. Caviglia did not completely clear out the Descending
Passage, for, twenty years afterward (in 1837), Col. Howard Vyse, in his description of
the state in which he found the Great Pyramid previous to commencing his extensive
operations on it and the other Pyramids, of Gizeh, wrote that, though.open, it was
“much encumbered with stones and rubbish.” This no doubt explains why he
measured .this passage along the roof line, and not along the floor. When Professor
C. Piazzi Smyth visited the Pyramid in 1865, the passage below its juncture with the
First Ascendin g Passage,, appears to have again become so blocked with sand and large
stones, that he did not visit the lower parts of the Pyramid at all. The description and
measurements of these parts given in his published works were derived from Col.
Howard Vyse’s book.

243 In 1881, Professor Flinders Petrie caused the obstructing rubbish to be removed
sufficiently for him to descend. It was during these operations that he discovered the
large granite stone which lies on the floor opposite the entrance to the First Ascending
Passage. He did not disturb it. The parts which he found most blocked were the
upper portion at and below the granite block, and the lowermost thirty feet of the slope
to which part the rains had washed down large quantities of rubbish. He did not have
this material carried out, but instructed his men to distribute it throughout the passage.
Thus we see that the floor of this Descending Passage has never been so thoroughly
cleared, at least in modern times, as it now is. That the debris which my men carried
out is part of the very ancient rubbish, is proved by the fact that they found embedded
in it several small fragments of green idols.

244 When my brother, the doctor, joins me, we shall measure the Descending
Passage very carefully. This will be the first accurate measurement of this long pas¬
sage, and to obtain this constitutes one of the chief purposes of our visit to the Great
Pyramid. As the Great Pyramid is God’s Stone Witness in Egypt, in which he has
outlined by its passages and chambers his glorious plan of salvation, and as the

‘It was Davison who discovered the lowest of the five hollows or “Chambers of Construction
above the King’s Chamber. Col. Howard Vyse discovered the other four—Pars. 110-112.

117


Plate XXXIII.

Descending Passage represents the course of “this present evil world” (Gal. 1 : 4), it is
of importance that it should be carefully examined and measured. Although I have
not attempted to do much measuring, believing it will be better to wait till John arrives,
I have taken a large number of flashlight photographs inside the Pyramid, getting Hadji
Ali Gabri to assist me, and to pose in some of them.


Sunday, 6th June, 11 p.m. I am now sitting in my newly erected tent, about a
hundred feet from the north side of the Great Pyramid. It is situated right on the edge
of the Pyramid plateau, overlooking the large Mena House Hotel, and the tramway car
terminus. From the two doors of my tent, I can see right across the flat Delta of
lower Egypt, and eight miles to the east the domes and minarets of Cairo. Behind the
city, and therefore on the other side of the broad, sluggish Nile, the long range of the
white Mokattam Hills stretches away southward. It is commonly understood that the
limestone blocks, from which the
beautiful casing-stones of the
Great Pyramid are formed,
were quarried from these hills.

246 My large trunk (kindly
lent to me by Brother Stewart
of Glasgow) was brought from
Cairo on the back of a camel.

My tent promises to be fairly
comfortable, and the air on the
Gizeh cliff is a great deal
sweeter and cooler than that in

Cairo, where I lodged during Erecting tent in front of the north side of the

the first week in the Bristol Great Pyramid of Gizeh.

Hotel. In addition, living here

should be cheaper that in Cairo, and I shall now be nearer the scene of my labours,
so that both time and expense will be saved. I have not been much troubled by
mosquitoes, as the breeze which is constantly blowing here seems to drive them away.
Every day there are plenty of clouds in the sky, sometimes obscuring the sun, but there
has been no rain since my arrival. I hear that there is no wet season in Egypt, and
that rain falls seldom, though a couple of months ago, I understand, it came down
in torrents.

247 At present it is a beautiful moonlight night, and I have only lately returned
from a stroll to the Great Pyramid. I went down the Descending Passage as far as its
junction with the First Ascending Passage, and then, turning and looking up toward
the Entrance, saw the North Star with no other star near it. I sat on a limestone block
which lies on the floor of the Descending Passage under the Granite Plug, a few feet
above Petrie’s granite block. I had no light with me, and was alone in the darkness. I
had not been seated long, when I was rather startled to hear a deep organ-like sound,
growing louder and louder, and afterward a small bell-like sound. I wondered what
it was and listened intently. The explanation soon came. It was nothing more than a
number of bats flying past me; I could feel the wind from their wings. The beating of

118


PLATE XXXIV.

their wings in the narrow passages of the Pyramid caused the air to vibrate, producing
the organ-like sound; and the bell-like sound was only their little alarmed chirps as
they flew swiftly along,

I am looking forward to the arrival of John and Stanley next Wednesday—9th June.
My love to all, Your loving brother in the Lord.

Morton Edgar.


1 ‘


The north side of the SECOND PYRAMID of Gizeh; showing the remnant
of the ancient smooth casing at the summit.


r


PLATE XXXV.


north-east angle of the Pyramid.


PLATE XXXVI.


LETTER IV.


Tent at the Great Pyramid oj Gizeh.
Tuesday, 8th June, 1909.


DEAR Brethren, —At six o’clock this morning I started off with Judah to ascend the
Second Pyramid, for the purpose of taking some photographs from the summit.
As will be seen from a photograph which I took of the north face, this pyramid
is covered with a smooth casing of limestone, and is very steep—Plate XXXIV.
According to Col. Howard Vyse, the two lowest courses of casing immediately above
the base are of granite, though Professor Flinders Petrie reports having only
observed one during his investigations in 1881. After climbing to the lower edge of the
upper casing-stones, I thought it too dangerous to proceed higher, and from this point I
took a photograph giving a bird’s-eye view of the recently excavated foundations of the
temple, which is situated close to the base of this pyramid on its east side—Plate XXXV.

249 Yesterday morning I had a quiet walk alone among the ruins of this temple,
and also among the ruins of the temple of the Third Pyramid, and I wondered at the
immense size of many of the limestone blocks with which, for the most part, they have
been built. Some of them are beautifully white, and cleanly cut to very sharp arris
edges. While strolling through the temple of the Second Pyramid, I was somewhat
startled to see about fifty human skulls arranged in two or three rows on a ledge.
I have learned since that these skulls were discovered during the excavations of the


temple.

250 The Second Pyramid has
two Entrance Passages, both on
the north side of the building and
meeting each other below the base
of the pyramid—Plate XXVIII.
One of them is somewhat similar
in position and inclination to the
Entrance Passage of the Great
Pyramid, but its walls are com¬
posed of granite instead of lime¬
stone, and the wide joints and
other details of construction are
not to be compared with the fine
workmanship which the Great
Pyramid displays. As already
mentioned, the -mouth of the


Human skulls unearthed during the excavations of the
Temple of the Second-Pyramid of .Gizeh.


121


Plate XXXVII.

lower Entrance Passage was discovered in 1837 by Col. Howard Vyse, concealed under
the level pavement some distance out from the north base of the pyramid; but it is now
hidden once more under a large mound of rubbish. I photographed the irregular outer
end of the upper Entrance. It is evidently in the same condition as it was in 1818,

when Belzoni found it by digging
down through the great heap of
sand and stones, which had ac¬
cumulated upon it at the time
when the greater part of the
pyramid’s casing was removed,
thus concealing it for centuries.
Belzoni’s name and the date of
his discovery may still be seen,
carved on the face of the outer
granite roof-stone, and are vis¬
ible in the photograph — Plate
XXXVII.

251 When the casing of the
Second Pyramid was intact, the
mouth of its upper entrance must
have been concealed in some way,
probably by a pivoted stone door
like that which is supposed to
have closed the Entrance to the
Great Pyramid, for it also has a
long excavated entrance similar to
A1 Mamoun's forced passage. It
would appear that all the Gizeh
Pyramids were forcibly entered
at about the same period.

The Entrance of the Second Pyramid of Gizeh. 252 A photograph which I

secured of the north-west comer
of the Second Pyramid shows the great amount of rock-cutting which was necessary
before the builders could gain a level surface for its erection—Plate XXXVIII. On the
right or west side of this photograph the north side of the Third Pyramid can be seen ;
it shows the large chasm made by the Mamelukes in an unsuccessful attempt to discover
the Entrance. Col. Howard Vyse was greatly interested in the Third Pyramid, and
spent a great deal of time and money forcing passages into its solid masonry, before he
finally discovered the Entrance hidden under the rubbish in the middle of the north side,
a short distance above the base—Plate XXXIX. The previous operations of the
Mamelukes had misled him; for he concluded that before cutting so large a chasm in
their search for the Entrance, they would first have thoroughly examined every part of
the pyramid s northern face, which in their time must have been comparatively clear of
rubbish. Col. Howard Vyse wrote: “As there were no accounts, ancient or modern,
respecting, the entrance of this, pyramid, or of its having ever been opened, notwithstand-

122


Plate XXXVIII.

ing the attempts that from time to time had been made, it was an object of the greatest
curiosity, and I fully expected to discover the interior chambers and passages, by
carrying on the gallery [or forced horizontal passage] to the centre, and by afterwards
sinking a large shaft to the foundation ”—See Plate XXXIX. This operation proves at
least that there are no built chambers in the solid masonry of this pyramid.


The north side of the THIRD PYRAMID of Gizeh ; showing the large chasm excavated by the
Mamelukes in their search for the Entrance of the Pyramid; also the north-west corner of the Second
Pyramid ; with part of the artificial cliff to the west, formed by the ancient
builders in their rock-levelling operations.


123


Plate xxxix


Plate XLl


The east base of the THIRD PYRAMID of Gizeh; showing partly dressed granite casing-stones
still in situ ; also a portion of the granite pavement of the Pyramid’s temple.


granite-lined chamber, was conveyed by him to Alexandria, where it was shipped for
England to be deposited in the British Museum ; but the boat evidently foundered, for
it was never heard of again. There is a still lower chamber than the granite-lined one,
entrance to which is gained by a flight of six steps. These are by far the earliest
known steps in any building. This lowest chamber contains six niches, which were
quite evidently cut in the rock for the purpose of containing coffins.

254 The Third Pyramid is considerably smaller than its two giant neighbours.
According to the ancient historian Diodorus, it was originally cased with “black stone”
from the base up to the 15th course; but Professor Flinders Petrie found traces of
granite as high as the 16th course, which means that the granite covered just one-quarter
of the pyramid’s height. Above this level the casing was of limestone. Thus, in respect
to its casing, the Third Pyramid was in some respects similar to the Second. The
Pyramid of Abu Roash, which lies away to the north-west, five miles distant from the
Pyramids of Gizeh (Plate III), is supposed to have been entirely cased with granite; but
it is now almost completely destroyed. The Arabs in its neighbourhood have for many
years treated it as a quarry; Professor Flinders Petrie was informed that its stones
were being carried off at the rate of three hundred camel-loads per day! Professor
C. Piazzi Smyth was of the opinion that this Pyramid of Abu Roash never was com¬
pletely finished.

255 I photographed the square Entrance of the Third Pyramid, together with two
or three courses of the granite casing-stones which are still in situ alongside. Except
at their joint edges, where narrow strips of the surface have been chiselled even and
smooth, the outer faces of these stones have not been dressed down, but have been left
very rough and projecting—Plate XL. Another photograph of this pyramid at the
part immediately connected with its temple on the east side, shows a large area of
the granite casing-stones dressed down to one flat surface, but, adjoining these dressed
stones, a few are to be seen still rough, and others only partially dressed—Plate XLI.
In this photograph a portion of the granite pavement of the temple may alsp be seen.
Although many of these stones are large, none approaches in size to the casing-stones
of the Great Pyramid; nor do they present so beautiful an appearance. All round the
Second and Third Pyramids great numbers of granite casing-stones lie partly buried
in the large mounds of debris.

... Jifr;

Wednesday, 9th June. Last night, on Judah’s recommendation, - . I» transferred my
hire to another tent contractor, Abdul Salam Faid. He is an experienced man, providing
tents for the government workers, doctors of Cairo, and the principal excavators in
Egypt. At present he has a tent erected close to the north-west corner of the Great
Pyramid, where a lady doctor from Cairo lodges at night. He is a personal friend
of Professor Alex. Ferguson. My present tent is a vast improvement on the other, and
the price is only slightly greater. It measures about 13 feet in diameter, is 6 feet high
round the sides, and 12 feet high in the centre. Its double roof completely shuts out
the sun’s rays, a very desirable thing in Egypt.; the bed is provided with a mosquito net,
and the ground is covered with a carpet. John and Stanley’s tent is now also erected ;
it is of the same size as mine, and will have two beds. There is a chest of drawers
in each of the tents, so that my drawing, measuring, and photographic apparatus is

127


T


Plate XLII.


now always at hand. This saves time, for formerly when I wished for anything I
had frequently to make a prolonged search through the contents of my boxes. A third
tent of the same size is to be used as a dining-room, and a smaller tent alongside as a
kitchen or cooking-tent. When Grace and Jack arrive, still another bed-room tent will

be erected. We have a
cook to ourselves, and
also a waiter; and Abdul
Salam and his brother
Hassan will frequently
also be in attendance. At
sunrise a donkey - boy
fetches water from the
well at Mena House Hotel.
I am certainly glad I listen¬
ed to Judah’s advice. For
the first time since my
arrival in Egypt, I feel
thoroughly settled. Seek¬
ing for proper accommoda¬
tion has taken up a great
deal of my time, although,
of course, I have not ne¬
glected my work at the
Pyramid. Had I gone to
Mr. Faid at the beginning,
I should have been saved considerable trouble; but I am thankful that things have
now turned out so well, and that John and Stanley will have comfortable quarters to
lodge in when they arrive.

257 At present I have two men working inside the Great Pyramid. They are cutting
additional footholds in the floor of the First Ascending Passage, which is very slippery.
Were it not for the footholds, it would be impossible to ascend this passage, except, per¬
haps, with unshod feet. Mr. Covington says that I am the only one who, with the
exception of himself, has done any work at the Great Pyramid during the last nine years.

258 The weather during the first week was much hotter than it is at present. The
natural water-here, though fairly pure, is not safe to drink for those unaccustomed to
it, unless it has been boiled. Standing on an iron tripod in my tent, I have a large
earthenware jar which, being porous, allows the water to soak through to the surface
where it evaporates. This causes the boiled water which has been poured into the jar
to cool quickly and to remain cool. It is large enough to contain two syphons of soda-
water, which it keeps almost as cool as if they had been laid on ice. I am informed
that the weather in Egypt during the month of June and even also the greater part of
July, is cooler and more pleasant than during the month of May, although June is sup¬
posed to begin the “ off-season.” Most things are also considerably cheaper. I could
not have secured so good an outfit of tents for the price I am paying, if our visit had
been during the season.


Donkey-boy arriving with water at sunrise.


(


Thursday, 10 June, 11 a.m. At present the temperature in the shade is 103° F.
It feels fairly warm, but as the atmosphere is dry, it is not so unbearable as such a
temperature would be in Scotland. I am waiting for a tramway car to take me into
Cairo, as John and Stanley will likely arrive there about one o’clock. Their boat is late,
and this will be the third day in succession that I shall have journeyed to Cairo to
enquire about their arrival.

260 This morning at seven o’clock, Mr. Covington and I measured the casing-stones
at the north front of the Great Pyramid. Captain Norton, a friend of Mr. Covington, is
making a sketch of these stones, and our measurements may be of service to him. We
found that while they are of a uniform height, they vary greatly in both width from
east to west, and in depth inward toward the core masonry at the back. The first
stone to the east of the long row of casing-stones is by far the largest. It measures
about 4 feet 11 inches high, and is 6 feet 9 inches wide from east to west. In depth it
measures 8 feet 3 inches along the base line to the core masonry. This is only the
apparent depth, however, for it extends inward for still another two feet beyond the
core block to the east of it, and thus the actual base measurement from front to back is
10 feet 3 inches. The cubical contents of the block is about 200 cubic feet; and its
weight is approximately 19 tons. This weight is three tons more than Professor Flinders
Petrie estimated (see Par. 86); he evidently was not aware that the stone extends beyond
the core block to the east of it, the debris, now cleared away by Mr. Covington, having
no doubt concealed the upper joint-lines. This extra depth can be seen very well in a
photograph which I took with my camera erected on top of the first course of the core
masonry, some distance to the east of the casing-stones—Plate XLIII. It will be noticed
in this photograph that the fourth casing-stone also extends back a good distance (See
also Plate XXVII); its base depth is even more than that of the first stone, being 11 feet
4 inches ; but its width is only 5 feet as against 6 feet 9 inches for the first stone. The
other stones vary in width from 3 feet 4% inches to 5 feet 3 inches, a fair average width
being 4 feet 6 inches.

6 p.m. I have been to Cairo and met John and Stanley. They look well. On
reaching Cairo they felt it very warm, but now that they are here beside the Pyramids
they feel cooler. We are about to enter the Great Pyramid for a couple of hours’
inspection. By to-morrow we hope to get steadily to work and secure all the particulars
we can. We trust that it will be to God’s glory, and to our mutual edification and the
strengthening of our faith. We shall not, of course, make any measurements to-night,
as it will take us all the two hours to go through the passages and chambers.

Friday, 11th June. This letter will soon be finished, as a man is waiting to take this
and others to Cairo. John was much impressed with the magnitude of the Great
Pyramid. Last night we spent two and half hours inside. John thinks that Grace will
not be able to ascend and descend the passages; they are so steep and slippery. How¬
ever, many ladies make the attempt, and with proper assistance I think Grace should
manage all right.

263 To-day we intend to go down to the Pit (we did not have time last night), and
begin our measurements there. Afterwards the work will progress systematically.


128


129


Plate XLIII.


Judah will be our assistant during our work here. He will manage all our business,
looking after our workers at the Pyramid, etc. His proper name is Abdul Maujud Faid,
but he is generally known as Judah. He has worked for many years in the Cairo
Museum.

264 We send our love to you all, and desire to thank you for so lovingly remember¬
ing us at the Throne of Grace. We specially thank the dear brethren of the Glasgow
Church for their message of love signed by so many. I felt very strongly on the first
night when I removed into my new tent, that the Lord was certainly with us and
answering your prayers on our behalf. We would it were possible to write and
thank you all individually. It is wonderful how everything is working in our
favour. Professor Ferguson of Cairo has been of great service to us, procuring us the
good graces of M. Maspero, with the result that we are being specially well cared for.
We are feeling well to-day. We had breakfast early and are impatient to begin our
work, so as not to lose any precious time. Just now, at 9-30 a.m., the temperature is
82° F. in the shade, and there is a nice cool breeze.

Much love to all, Your loving brother in the Lord,

Morton Edgar.


LETTER V.


Train en route for Cairo.

Thursday, 10th June, 1909.

Dear Brethren, —The train in which Stanley and I are travelling is just leaving the
station of Zag-a-Zig—See Plate III. It is now about 11 a.m. We left Port Said at 8-5,
and expect to be in Cairo about quarter past one in the afternoon, when I hope Morton
and his man will be at the station to meet us. It is very hot and dusty. A hot wind is
blowing in at the windows as from an oven; but everything is very interesting. All
along the route we see camels and donkeys, and flocks of lean sheep and still leaner
goats. In many of the fields oxen and camels and donkeys are walking round and
round great heaps of grain, treading the corn. In others the reaping and threshing have
been completed, and men are busy ploughing with the aid of yokes of oxen. The yoke
is a thick heavy log about ten feet long, and the plough is a very primitive affair,
merely a piece of sharp iron attached to the branch of a tree. (This is a case of the
ploughman overtaking the reaper.) The men are dressed in all sorts of ways, some of
them in full oriental costume, turbans on their heads, and long flowing white gowns
reaching to their slippered feet; others in European dress ; and still others with Turkish
fez, European jacket and boots, and oriental gown. The women are for the most part
dressed in black, with a mantle on their head and a long veil covering the lower part of
their face. Some of them have pointed slippers, others high-heeled Parisian boots.

266 We had a calm voyage. The ship rolled a good deal till it reached the south
of Portugal, but after that there was neither rolling nor pitching, so that it was difficult
to believe one was in a ship. The Mediterranean was like a mill-pond all the way.
There were only three other passengers, two ladies and a young gentleman, all bound
for Rangoon. The doctor of the ship was one of my students a year ago, and was very
agreeable. We had a pleasant time on board. I had about a dozen of the brochures
Where are the Dead? and gave them all away except one. I had also three copies of
the first volume of Scripture Studies, and gave one to one of the officers, and the
others to the two ladies.

267 The ship’s officers asked me to give them a lecture, so I gave a chart talk on
the “ Divine Plan of the Ages ” (Plate VI), which was followed the same evening and
next day with a number of questions and a talk on the Great Pyramid. The captain,
surgeon, and other officers and the engineers were present in addition to the passengers.
They were all much interested. Brother Cotton of London was with us during the
voyage, and I enjoyed his company greatly. We read the Bible together every day,
mostly Genesis, Isaiah and Ezekiel, and talked about the time-prophecies. Stanley made
friends with everyone, and both he and I were greatly interested in the porpoises and
flying-fish.


268 When we were sailing past Malta, the scene of Paul’s shipwreck, we read the
account in the 27th and 28th chapters of the Acts of the Apostles, and were greatly
struck with the power of the Apostle’s personality. In a small ship crowded with “two
hundred threescore and sixteen souls,” this man of God, though a prisoner, impressed
everyone, even the centurion himself, with his force of character and his clear-sighted¬
ness. In the midst of the terrible storm he alone was calm, and his confidence and
cheerfulness inspired the others. One thing that struck us particularly was the little
incident of helping to gather the firewood. That the noble Paul should sloop to such
a lowly service was a striking proof of his humility, and though he must have been cold
and wet owing to his swim ashore and the rain which was pouring down at the time,
and though he must have been almost prostrate from weakness and fatigue owing to the
exposure and the long want of food and sleep, yet all this did not overcome his desire to
labour with his hands for the sake of others. What a noble and loving character he
was. The whole story, as we now read it together, appealed to us as it had never
done before.

269 Our boat reached Port Said at the inconvenient hour of 2 a.m.—But here we are
at another station,—Benha. (Plate III.) It is a large station. Such shouting and yelling!
A gentleman in blue and a lady in black are squatting on the platform opposite my
window. There passes another lady in black with a,.veil covering half of her face, and
a gold or brass cylinder down the middle of her forehead. On her feet she wears a
pair of high-heeled boots which look rather incongruous. Now we are leaving Benha.
Most of the houses, so far as I can see, are square and built of dried mud, with what
looks like a manure heap on the flat roof.

270 To resume : Mr. Hall, Brother Cotton’s friend, came on board at Port Said, saw
us through the customs, and took us to a hotel where we tried to sleep from 3-30 to
6-30 a.m. At 7 a.m. we had breakfast and then drove in a carriage and pair to the
station. Mr. Hall saw to everything. Two letters from Morton were handed to me.
I learn from them that he is staying in a tent at the Pyramid. Stanley and I feel quite
a thrill of pleasure at the thought of camping out. Brother Cotton and Mr. Hall sail
for Jaffa to-day. Mr. Hall believes he can arrange for me to lecture at Jerusalem when
we go there later on, and thinks that I should have a good audience.

271 We are now drawing near Cairo. There go some people with their sunshades
up, riding on donkeys ; and there we see two camels lying down. They do look strange
with their long necks and the haughty way they hold up their heads. Such beautiful
trees over there, with a wealth of bright red blossom more profuse than the foliage!

We are now in Cairo. Morton and his man Judah have met us, and we are about to
set off on our journey to our tents at the Pyramids.

Love to all of like precious faith, Your loving brother,

John Edgar.


133


Plate XLIV.


PLATE XLV.


LETTER VI.


Tents at the Great Pyramid of Gizeh .

Friday, 11th June, 1909.

Dear BRETHREN, —Stanley and I arrived safely yesterday, and, after tea, paid our
first visit to the Great Pyramid, which is five minutes’ walk from the tents. We have
four tents, one as a kitchen, one as a dining-room, and two as bed-rooms. We have
also a cook, waiter, and Pyramid assistant. The cook and another man sleep outside of
our tent doors at night as guards.

273 Nineteen of the casing-stones are exposed side by side on a large stretch
of pavement at the

north side of the
Great Pyramid, and
the north-west cor¬
ner socket, which
used to contain one
of the four founda¬
tion socket-stones,
is also laid bare—

See Plate V. The
casing - stones are
simply wonderful.

Morton says that
when he arrived
here, Mr. Covington
was just completing
his work of exca¬
vating them ; and
he managed to se¬
cure a photograph
showing Mr. Cov¬
ington’s black work¬
men removing the

last few large encumbering stones—Plate XLV. In two other photographs which
Morton took with the camera erected very close to the largest of the casing-stones,
these debris stones may be seen lying in front—Plates XLIV and XLVI.

274 Although of tremendous size, these casing-stones are yet fitted so closely
together, that the fine blade of a pocket-knife cannot be inserted between them. Here

135


Mr. L. Dow Covington’s black workmen removing the last few
obstructing debris stones from the front of the newly excavated
casing-stones at the north base of the Great Pyramid of Gizeh.


J


r


and there the original sharp arris edges of these beautiful white stones are somewhat
chipped and rounded off along the joint-lines, .thus giving a superficial appearance of
wideness to some of the joints; but the joint-lines in general are too close to be
distinguishable in a photograph. In order, therefore, that the shape and comparative
dimensions of the stones forming the casing, as well as of those of the platform on which
they rest, might appear in the photographs, Mr. Covington outlined the various joints
and also the outside arris lines, with charcoal.

275 It is difficult to comprehend how the ancient builders were able to make such
fine cement as that which holds these casing-stones together, and yet though so fine, it is
of such tenacity that all the stones are united as one. A beautiful picture this of our
union by the strong cement of love one to another and to the Lord, the “ Chief Corner¬
stone ” ; for, as you are aware, the whole Pyramid was formerly covered with these
originally beautifully polished casing-stones, though now they have all been removed
with the exception of the nineteen below the Entrance, and a few others still in situ
here and there at the base of the other three sides of the Pyramid. These other casing-
stones, which Professor Flinders Petrie discovered by sinking small well-like shafts
down through the large mounds of debris, have again been covered over with rubbish,
and are said not to be in such a good state of preservation as those immediately below
the Entrance.

276 Among other photographs, Morton secured a very good one showing Mr.
Covington standing at the east end of the long row of casing-stones, and high up in
front of the Entrance another man standing on the fourteenth course of masonry—
Plate XLVII. This photograph, Owing to Mr. Covington and the other man standing So
far apart one above the other, is good for conveying some idea of the true perspective,
for it is very difficult to realize the relative distances of the various parts, and the
dimensions of the masonry courses, without some such aid. But however good photo¬
graphs may be, they can never fully convey to the mind the proper sense of proportion,
and the true beauty, which an actual visit to the place must do. You would require to
be here to see how beautifully-finished and close-fitting the casing-stones are, fully to
realize how well they picture the individuality and yet oneness of the members of
Christ’s body. They remind me of Jesus’ prayer to the Father: “that they may be
one, even as we are one.”

277 No description, however careful, can do justice to the Great Pyramid,.
Although well prepared, and perhaps because so, I felt struck with awe, particularly
when I saw the wonderful expanse of the Grand Gallery lit up with magnesium wire.
My heart is brimming over with gratitude to our dear heavenly Father for the love and
wisdom which prompted him in providing this marvellous Stone Witness in Egypt.

Morton has had the Descending Passage and much of the Pit cleared out, and to-day
we intend to investigate them. Asking your prayers for the Lord’s blessing on our¬
selves and our work here, and fully realizing that it is the meek whom our heavenly
Father guides in judgment,

I am, Your loving brother,

John Edgar.

P.S.—We are remembering you all in prayer.


137


Plate XLVII,


'• L. Dow Covington standing near his newly excavated CASING-STONES at the north base of the Great Pyramid of Gizeh.


LETTER VII.


Tents at the Great Pyramid of Gizeh.

Wednesday, 16th June, 1909.

DEAR Brethren,— We have been very busy for the past few days, measuring the
Descending Passage and taking flashlight photographs inside the Great Pyramid. We
have secured several good pictures of interesting parts. We take these with great
care, paying particular attention to the exact position of the camera, and the exact extent
of view included in the picture. Owing to the low roof and narrow breadth of the
passages (4 feet by 3% feet), and above all, owing to the uneasy slope and smoothness
of the floors, it is exceedingly difficult to take these photographs, and we require a long
time for each. The steepness of the floors is much greater than it appears to be in
drawings. Nothing laid on them will remain stationary for a moment. Rods, bags,
candles, pencils, etc., if we happen to release our hold on them, begin a rapid descent,
and at times we ourselves slip down, if we omit to make use of the footholds.

279 John, Stanley, and our Arab attendant Judah, generally pose in one or other of
the photographs, for the purpose chiefly of showing correct proportions. Sometimes
we erect measuring-rods near the parts taken, and occasionally also stretch lines along
the angles of the floor and walls, etc. After dinner, which is generally about 7-45 to
8 p.m., I go into my tent, and with an extra supply of water for washing purposes,
develop the films exposed during the day. We had some failures at first, but are now
becoming more successful.

280 When asking M. Maspero for permission to take photographs in the interior
of the Great Pyramid, he had expressed doubts as to my being able to develop the
negatives. He said that his excavators found that the high temperature of the water
softened the gelatine emulsion on the photographic plates to such a degree, that it was
extremely difficult to get good results. I am glad to say, however, that I have had no
trouble whatever in this respect. This is partly due to the fact that the emulsion on
my films was specially prepared to withstand high temperature, and partly because I
do all my developing some time after sun-down, when the temperature of the atmos¬
phere has generally fallen to 70° F. An additional advantage is that I can dispense
with the usual dark-room, as the yellow light from the moon and stars has little
deleterious effect, and can easily be shut out from the tent.

281 The stars here are very brilliant and beautiful. While busy with my nightly
photographic work, I sometimes steal out of my tent and look up to admire their
wonderful grandeur. "The Milky-way is very clearly defined, and from the view-point
of our tents, seems to dip down behind the huge black outline of the Great Pyramid,
causing, with the added brilliancy of certain large stars, a perfect halo of light round its

139


Plate xlviii,


The DESCENDING PASSAGE of the Great Pyramid of Gizeh,
as viewed from the lower end of the Well-shaft;
showing the cramped posture necessary to be assumed by one walking
down this passage.


lofty summit. So wonderfully does this halo shine out, that a few nights ago I walked
round to John’s tent, and called on him to come out and admire it with me.

282 Now that we have cleared the Descending Passage below the granite stone on
which the iron grill-door has been fixed (Plate IX), we find that the floor at this part is
not slippery like the floor of the upper portion of the Descending Passage, or of the
Ascending Passages. Immediately below the granite stone there is a short length
smoother than the rest. At this part we notice rough-hewn oblong footholds cut out in
the floor similar to those in the other passages. The whole length of the Descending
Passage from the granite stone downward, i.e., about three-fourths of the total length, is
cut through the solid rock on which the Pyramid is built—Plate II.

283 I have already mentioned that, some years ago, Mr. Covington, with the sanction
of M. Maspero, placed a padlocked iron gate or grill-door, on top of this granite stone.
His object was not to keep visitors from exploring the lower parts of the Great Pyra¬
mid, but rather to prevent the Arab “ guides ” from blocking up the passage with sand
and stones. These guides do not like much work, and if this passage were not closed
as it is, thus keeping visitors from requesting to be taken down all the way to the
Subterranean Chamber (a fatiguing, journey), they would see to it that such requests
were prevented in this other way. Permission to have the grill-door unlocked can be
obtained by applying either to M. Maspero at the Cairo Museum, or to Mr. Covington,
who is always willing to show the interested through the great stone edifice.

284 After Mr. Covington cleared the lower end of the passage, it was possible for
visitors who were interested enough to take the trouble, to creep down to the Pit. As
I mentioned in a previous letter, the first time that I descended, the space between the
roof and the surface of the rubbish along most parts of the Descending Passage per¬
mitted one to creep through with difficulty; but now that we have both it and the
Small Horizontal Passage leading to the Pit thoroughly cleared throughout their entire
length, it is much easier to go up and down. Not, however, that the journey can be
done with comfort; for the four-feet height of the roof, together with the downward
slope of the passage, obliges one to stoop very low; while in the Small Horizontal Pas¬
sage leading to the Pit, it is still necessary to creep, because here the height of the roof
is only about two feet nine inches. The awkward stooping posture which it is necessary
for one to assume when proceeding down the uneasy slope of the Descending Passage,
is well illustrated in a photograph which was taken with the camera erected at the
bottom of the Well-shaft, and pointing out eastward through the little passage, in the
direction of the Descending Passage—See Plate X. It shows John walking down the
steep floor, with his head just touching the low roof—Plate XLVIII. John says he was
glad when the exposure was completed, as he felt very much like the “ poor groaning
creation ” while posing for the picture.

285 Yesterday (Tuesday, 15th June), we instructed Judah to employ his brother and
two other men to dig out and wipe away the dust from the west corner of the floor of
the Descending Passage along its entire length, in order that our steel tape might
rest evenly on the floor close up to the west wall, and so enable us to take exact
measurements. I have already mentioned the fact that Professor C. Piazzi Smyth did
not descend lower than to the junction of the First Ascending Passage, and did not,
therefore, measure the portion of the Descending Passage below this. In 1837, twenty-


K


141


-


eight years before Professor Smyth’s investigations, Colonel Howard Vyse measured it
roughly in feet, apparently along the roof line; but his account is somewhat difficult to
follow. In 1881, Professor Flinders Petrie also measured it, as carefully as he could,
as the floor was then much encumbered with sand and stones.

286 So far as we are aware, these are the only two investigators who have attempted
to measure the lower reach of the Descending Passage. The latter confesses in his
work, Pyramids and Temples of Gizeh, that he could not be sure of his measurements
of this part of the passage, nor did he think it necessary to be more particular. He
writes: “ The measures from the steel tape onwards, by rods, down to the end of the
built passage, where it rests on the rock, are not of the same accuracy as the others;
the broken parts of the passage sides [at A1 Mamoun’s forced hole], and the awkward¬
ness of measuring over the large block of granite [on which the iron grill-door has since
been fixed], without any flat surface even to hold the rods against, prevented my taking
more care over a point where accuracy is probably not of importance. For the total
length of the entrance passage, down to the subterranean rock-cut part, only a rough
measurement by the 140-inch poles was made, owing to the encumbered condition of it.
The poles were laid on the rubbish over the floor, and where any great difference of
position was required, the ends were plumbed one over the other, and the result is
probably only true within two or three inches.”

287 Although the large granite block on which the grill-door is fixed, takes up nearly
the full width of the passage, it did not interfere with our work. We did not require to
measure over it as Professor Flinders Petrie did, for we found that its lower surface
does not rest immediately on the floor of the passage, but is raised up by several inches of
debris. By means of a crowbar our workmen tunnelled out the debris under the block
along the west corner, so that we had a few inches clear space through which we pushed
our steel measuring-tape. We also instructed our men to shift the position of the large
limestone block which then lay diagonally across the passage floor a little distance
above the granite block. This stone lay wedged in from wall to wall, and was, we
understand, placed in position by Professor Smyth for the purpose of holding his
angular-measuring apparatus. We had it levered from its place, and turned round
end-on with the passage—See Plate IX. In this way we obtained a clear surface along
the floor at the base of the west wall of the Descending Passage throughout its entire
extent, and so have been able, for the first time known in history, to take an accurate
continuous floor-measurement of the passage from end to end. In order to ensure
accuracy, we have verified our results by measuring twice in a downward, and once in
an upward, direction. We have also measured the length of this passage twice along
the roof-line on the west side.

288 After getting Judah's brother to clear the other side of the Descending Passage
floor, along the base of the east wall, including the portion under the east side of the
granite block, we carefully measured the floor-length of the passage twice from top to
bottom down this side also. We have therefore measured the length of this Descending
Passage seven times in all.

289 During our measuring operations at the lower end of the Descending Passage,
we made an interesting discovery at its junction with the Small Horizontal Passage
which leads to the Subterranean Chamber. The Descending Passage terminates in a


Plate XLIX.


The LOWER SQUARE END of the Descending Passage of the Great Pyramid of
Gizeh; showing the entrance of the Small Horizontal Passage
leading to the Subterranean Chamber,


142


Plate L.


The Entrance of the SMALL HORIZONTAL PASSAGE leading to the
Subterranean Chamber of the Great Pyramid of Gizeh, show¬
ing its junction with the lower square end of the
Descending Passage on the west side.


flat end, cut square at the corners, and at right-angles to the incline of the passage.
The small passage to the Pit commences horizontally from the centre of this flat end,
but as it is much smaller in bore than the Descending Passage, some of the flat end of
the latter remains, forming a margin several inches wide round the entrance of the
Small Horizontal Passage—See Plate X.

290 We took a photograph showing the square flat end of the Descending Passage ;
and, in order to make apparent the very small bore of the Small Horizontal Passage
leading southward from it to the Subterranean Chamber, John sat in its entrance, his
back resting against the west wall—Plate XLIX. The horizontal pencil-line which
appears on the east wall of the Descending Passage, was drawn to show the continuation
of the roof-level of the Small Horizontal Passage.

291 Professor Flinders Petrie describes this flat terminus of the Descending Passage
in his work, Pyramids and Temples of Gizeh, but mentions that the flat margin occurs
only along the top and on each side. The reason why he failed to notice that it also
runs along the floor, is doubtless because he did not clear the passage thoroughly. The
higher level of the floor of the Small Horizontal Passage above the terminus of the floor
of the Descending Passage, is distinctly apparent in another photograph which we
secured of the junction of these two passages on the west side—Plate L. It will be
noticed that the levelled cord stretched along the angle of the floor and the west wall of
the Small Horizontal Passage, crosses at a point several inches above the lower end of
the vertical rod, which is erected in the bottom corner of the Descending Passage floor.
The horizontal pencil-line which is drawn in continuation of the roof-level of the Small
Horizontal Passage, is 1% inches above the upper end of the vertical three-foot rod. It
will be noticed in the two photographs described, that the flat margins are chipped and
rounded off at the middle of their course. The corner angles are sufficiently well pre¬
served, however, to permit accurate measurements of both the Descending Passage and
the Small Horizontal Passage to be taken.

292 The floor corner of the east wall seemed to be an exception; not that the
margin was broken, but it appeared as if the rock at this part had not been cut away,
but had been left in a rough condition. It seemed to us strange that the ancient workmen
should have left this one corner unfinished, especially as the other three are well cut
and squared. We therefore examined it more closely. On being struck, it gave a sound
similar to that of the surrounding rock; but from certain indications we came to the
conclusion that the corner had been finished like the others, but that a stone had been
cemented in, possibly, we thought, with the idea of preserving the flat end from injury.
We photographed this “inset stone” (Plate LI), and then proceeded to remove part of
it with a chisel, so as to enable us to take an accurate measurement of the full length of
the Descending Passage along the base of the east wall.

293 We had not cut much away before we perceived that what had at first appeared
to be stone, was in reality hard natural concrete. Evidently the small stones and lime¬
stone dust, which had been lying in this corner for so long a time, had become moistened
and caked by the rain, and had afterwards dried into a natural concrete, almost as hard
as the rock itself. We removed the whole of it, and then photographed the corner thus
cleared out—-Plate LII. While removing it, we were astonished to find a living worm
completely embedded in it. It was nearly three inches long, flat in section, hard, and of

145


Plates LI & LII.

an ivory colour. We are puzzled to know how it could remain alive in such a place.
We told Judah to pull it out of its hole, and very gingerly he caught it between his
finger and thumb and suddenly jerked it out in John’s direction. “Ugh!” exclaimed
John in horror, “ Don’t throw it at me! "

The next time I write, I shall give you an account of our work in the Pit.

We all send our love, Your loving brother,

Morton Edgar.


The bottom east corner at the lower end of the Descending
Passage of the Great Pyramid of Gizeh, showing
the hard natural concrete filling the corner.


Same as Plate LI, but with the hard
natural concrete removed
from the corner.


146


LETTER VIII.


Tents at the Great Pyramid of Gizeh.

Saturday, 19th June, 1909.

DEAR Brethren, —For the past few days we have been measuring and photographing
in the Subterranean Chamber, and also in the two small horizontal passages which open
into it from the north and south—Plate X. This Subterranean Chamber is by far the
largest in the Pyramid, being, approximately, 27 feet from north to south, by 46 feet
from east to west. Its area, therefore, is a little more than double that of the King’s
Chamber, which measures 17 feet by 34 feet. Although the roof and walls of this
large Subterranean Chamber are by no means smooth, and in some places are quite
uneven, they are for the most part square and level; but the floor is extremely rugged
and unfinished, and is much encumbered with loose stones and sand.

295 We should prefer to get our men to remove every vestige of this rubbish, in
order that we might examine and photograph the original contour of the rough floor,
but the expense stands in the way. We have had a little clearing done, however, for a
few feet in front of the doorway of the little south passage; and also at the west wall,
which was almost entirely hidden by a bank of the rubbish seven or eight feet deep.
This obscuring bank (which is referred to by Professor Flinders Petrie) having been
cleared away, the west wall is now entirely exposed to view (Plate X); and we find
that for a width of 13 feet in the middle of this end of the chamber, the floor is fairly
well levelled, and is about five and a half feet below the roof, leaving almost sufficient
height for an average person to stand upright.

296 The larger stones removed by our workmen are stacked elsewhere in the cham¬
ber, but the sand and smaller stones have been thrown into the deep shaft in the middle
of the floor at the east end. We have had no hesitation in doing this, as the bottom 36
feet or so of this shaft is no part of the original design of the Pyramid, but is a compar¬
atively modern excavation by Mr. Perring, as is shown by a reference to Col. Howard
Vyse’s work, Pyramids of Gizeh. The upper end of this shaft, however, is evidently
part of the Pyramid’s original. design, and we therefore refrained from filling up this
part. The ancient builders cut a large square shaft for a depth of seven feet below the
level of the highest projection of the uneven floor of this eastern part of the chamber, and
from the bottom of this another but smaller square shaft, for a further depth of three
and a half feet. The larger shaft is approximately six feet six inches square, and its
sides he nearly diagonally to the sides of the chamber. The smaller shaft, which is about
four feet six inches square, proceeds downward from the north corner of the larger one,
the north-east and north-west sides of both being continuous. From the bottom of this
smaller ancient shaft, Mr. Perring sunk his irregularly rounded excavation—Plate X.

147


Plate Liu.


1


297 Col. Howard Vyse had instructed Mr. Perring to sink this excavation to a depth
of 50 feet, in order to test the truth of a theory which claimed, on the supposed authority
of Herodotus, that a still lower and secret Subterranean Chamber existed, in which
Cheops, the accredited builder of the Great Pyramid, was said to have been interred.
But after Mr. Perring’s workmen had reached a_depth of 36 feet without discovering
anything, work on the shaft was abandoned owing to the want of a free circulation
of air.

298 About a thousand feet to the south-east of the Great Pyramid, there is a large
and very deep sepulchral pit, generally named “Campbells Tomb, which was ex¬
cavated by Col. Howard Vyse—Plate II. Professor C. Piazzi Smyth proves that this
tomb more nearly answers Herodotus’ description of Cheops burial place, and Professor
Flinders Petrie concurs with him in this opinion.

299 The Subterranean Chamber of the Great Pyramid is roughly halved into two
parts—an eastern and western. In the eastern half, the floor is excavated much lower
than in the western. It is approximately in the centre of this eastern portion that the
large deep shaft is situated. At the north-east corner of the chamber the floor is 12
feet, and at the south-east corner 14 feet, below the roof; but at the middle of the east
wall, opposite the shaft, it is 17 feet below the roof. In the western half, which begins
about 21 feet from the east wall, the rocky floor rises in high receding mounds, which
reach to within about 10 inches of the roof. In our photograph which was taken with
the camera erected near the east wall and pointing directly west (Plate LIII), it will be
noticed that these mounds lie north and south, and are divided by a narrow trench,
two and half feet wide, which inclines up the middle of the chamber, rather to the north of
the centre, and terminates with a width of two feet at the west wall. John is sitting at the
entrance to this trench on the north side, while Judah reclines on top of the north mound.

300 At the north end of the west wall at the roof, we disclosed in our clearing
operations a small and roughly squared recess—Plate X. In appearance it is as if a
small westward passage had been contemplated, but had been abandoned shortly after
work on it had commenced, as it is only from six to eighteen inches deep, the inner end
being very irregular. Adjoining the wall to the north of this recess, there is a peculiar
upright ridge of rock reaching from the floor to within 13 inches of the roof. It runs
parallel with and about three feet from the north wall of the chamber ; the long narrow
space between the two in not unlike a horse-stall. After getting Stanley to creep into
this space and look out over the ridge in the direction of the recess, we photographed
the corner—Plate LIV.

301 Before John’s arrival, I had taken two photographs in the Pit. One of these
shows the doorway of the north entrance passage, with Hadji Ali Gabri sitting at
the base of the north wall—Plate LV. The north edge of the large shaft in the floor
can be seen in the immediate foreground ; and high up to the right at the top of the east
wall, the rough projecting knob of rock referred to by Professor Flinders Petrie may be
seen. The other photograph was taken with the camera erected a few feet from the
north wall, and pointing toward the south—Plate LVI. The entire opening of the
large shaft is visible; and standing at its east edge is Hadji Ali Gabri, pointing to the
doorway of the little south passage.

302 We have now carefully measured the Small Horizontal Passage leading to the

149


Plate LV.


The rock-cut SUBTERRANEAN CHAMBER of the Great Pyramid of Gizeh,
looking north; showing part of the east wall to the right
with its undressed knob of rock high up near the ceiling;
also the square doorway _ of the Small Horizontal Passage by which
entrance is gained to the Chamber;
and, in the foreground, the north edge of the deep vertical shaft.


Plate LIV.

Subterranean Chamber. The walls and roof of this passage are fairly even and straight
(their surfaces being roughly dressed), but the floor is rather worn toward its junction
with the Descending Passage. The south end of the floor juts irregularly two to five
inches into the Subterranean Chamber. In measuring the length of this passage, we


The north-west corner of the rock-cut Subterranean Chamber in the Great Pyramid of Gizeh;
showing the small recess in the west wall; also Stanley looking over the thin
ridge of rock which bounds the south side of the narrow stall-like
cutting in the north corner of the chamber.


had a little difficulty in determining its south terminal, as the north wall of the Subter¬
ranean Chamber through which the passage opens is somewhat uneven. The photo¬
graph which we secured of the doorway into the chamber (Plate LVII) shows John
standing, indicating with his finger the point on the east wall at the roof termination of
the passage, which we finally fixed upon as being the correct terminal for the whole
passage, and to and from which we have made our various measurements. The short
rod erected against the east wall is plumbed vertically in line with this point; and the
other rod lying horizontally on the floor, has its front edge square and at right-angles
with that of the vertical rod. The vertical rod is 12, and the horizontal rod is 24, inches
in length. The irregular south end of the floor already referred to as projecting into
the Pit, is shown to advantage in this photograph. Previous to taking the picture, we
had all the loose stones and sand cleared away from the floor of the Pit in the
immediately vicinity of the doorway, so that the original rough character of the floor
might be seen.

303 We measured the small Recess which is hewn out in the roof and west wall of
the Small Horizontal Passage leading to the Subterranean Chamber. Its roof, as shown

150


The rock-cut SUBTERRANEAN CHAMBER of the Great Pyramid of Gizeh, looking
south; showing the square doorway of the little south blind passage;
also the large opening of the deep vertical shaft, which
descends from near the centre of the floor
of the eastern portion of the
chamber.


The north-east corner of the rock-cut SUBTERRANEAN CHAMBER of the
Great Pyramid of Gizeh, showing the square doorway of the
Small Horizontal Passage by which entrance
is gained to the chamber.


Plate lviii.

by our two photographs of this Recess, is very uneven, the variations being as much as
9 or 1° inches. A fissure in the rock, about two inches wide, runs diagonally through
the Recess from north-west to south-east. The photograph of the south end of the
Recess shows Judah standing in the dark Pit beyond—Plate LVIII. The horizontal


The Recess cut in the rock to the west of the Small Horizontal Passage
of e Great Pyramid of Gizeh, looking south; showing Judah
standing m the Subterranean Chamber beyond.


Six-foot rod is tightly fixed square across between the east and west walls. The other
rod erected vertically close to the west side of the south doorway of the Recess, is three
teet m length. The second photograph shows the north side of the Recess (Plate LIX) ■
and through at the north end of the passage, Judah’s legs may be seen as he ascends the
steep sloping floor of the Descending Passage. These photographs show a large granite

154


PLATE LIX


The RECESS cat in the rock to the west of the Small Horizontal Passage
of the Great Pyramid of Gizeh, looking north; showing Judah
walking up the Descending Passage beyond.


Plate LX.


The south-east corner of the rock-cut SUBTERRANEAN CHAMBER
of the Great Pyramid of Gizeh ; showing part of the unfinised symbolical floor ; and
the low doorway of the little passage
which leads horizontally southward for over fifty feet to a blind end.


block, lying near the north-west corner of the Recess. Later on I may refer to
this stone.

304 This little subterranean ante-chamber is a very peculiar feature in the Great
Pyramid’s internal system. One would think that the ancient builders had at first
intended to hollow out the large Subterranean Chamber at this point, but afterwards
had changed their original purpose, and pushed on the Small Horizontal Passage a few
feet further south, before finally excavating that large apartment. I remarked to John
that the Recess looked like a miniature Pit, except that in its case the roof and not the
floor had been left in an unfinished condition. John replied that that was right, for we
believe that the Pit symbolizes the “Great Time of Trouble” foretold by the prophet
Daniel, and also by our Lord, and that the Recess represents the French Revolution;
and was not the French Revolution a foreshadowing or miniature of the Great Time of
Trouble in which this “ present evil world ” will end ? (Dan. 12 : 1 ; Matt. 24 : 21.)

305 The little horizontal passage, which leads southward from the Subterranean
Chamber, measures only 29 inches in height and width. We had therefore to creep on
hands and knees when going to the further end. It is a blind passage, over 53 feet in
length—Plate IX. At one time, while engaged in measuring this passage, four of us
were lying near each other at the inner end for about half-an-hour, each with a candle
burning. We were astonished to notice that our breathing was quite easy, and that the
candles burned brightly, in spite of the fact that the Descending Passage away to the
north forms the sole inlet and outlet for air. The floor of this little passage is covered
throughout with a dark earthy material like mould, two to three inches deep. At
a distance of 36 feet from the doorway the passage curves slightly to the west, but
6 feet further on it curves back to its original southerly direction. The bend is so
slight, however, that John says that when he and Stanley were kneeling in the Pit,
holding one end of the steel measuring-tape at the outside of the doorway, he had a full
view of Judah and me with our lighted candles at the blind terminus. When, however,
he looked along the west wall of the passage, he could see us only partially. There is
a small fissure in the rock where this bend occurs. The blind end is fairly well squared,
but uneven, the variations between the prominences and depressions being about
four inches.

306 After directing our workmen to clear away the mound of debris which covered
the floor in front, and to the west of the doorway of the little southward passage (See
the previously mentioned photograph of this part—Plate LVI), so that the original rough,
uneven floor might appear, we photographed this south-east corner of the Pit, showing
the full height of the wall and part of the ceiling-—Plate LX. For the purpose of giving
a correct idea of the extreme smallness of the bore of this south passage, John stood
leaning against the south wall to the west of its doorway.

307 The doorways of the two passages which open into the Subterranean Chamber
are in direct line with each other, the east walls of both being continuous with the east
wall of the chamber; but the roof of the south passage is fully three and a half feet
lower than the roof of the north passage—Plate X. The roof of the north passage is
a little over seven feet below the ceiling of the Subterranean Chamber. It is interesting
to notice that the length of the north passage from its roof junction with the Descending
Passage, measures approximately the same as the length of the east wall of the Pit;


t


157


Plate LXI


•while the two combined approximate to the total length of the south blind passage.

308 Another photograph which we secured in the Subterranean Chamber, shows
the entire extent of the east wall, and also a large section of the ceiling—Plate LXI.
The unevenness of the ceiling is apparent, but the roughness is somewhat exaggerated
in the photograph owing to the strong shadows cast by the brilliant flashlight. Low
down to the left, Stanley can be seen in the act of emerging from the north entrance
passage into the Pit, while to the right side and on a lower level, John is shown standing
in front of the doorway of the south passage. Only a small section of the south wall is
visible. Near the centre, and close up to the east wall, Judah is standing with his feet
resting on the lowest part of the floor of the chamber, near the edge of the large deep
shaft. He holds upright in his hand a six-foot rod, the lower end of which rests on the
floor at his feet.

309 Every time we enter confined places like the little south passage, there is a great
rushing sound made by the numerous bats, as they fly about excitedly, and then, one
by one, dash past us. At night-time when we are going out of the Pyramid after our
day's work, they pass us in great numbers. We can see them also hanging from the
walls and roofs of the passages. Generally they fly past without touching us, although
they sometimes rush up to within a yard of our faces, and then suddenly make a dash
to one side. A day or two ago one of them struck Judah on the cheek. It evidently
failed to notice his dark face. It fluttered down beside me, but before I could get a
good look at it it was off again.

I hope to give you a further account of our work in another letter.

We all send you our love in the Lord, Your loving brother,

Morton Edgar.


159


.. J


The lower end of the WELL-SHAFT of the Great Pyramid of Gizeh ; showing the little passage
which leads westward to the Shaft, as it appears when viewed from the opposite
east wall of the Descending Passage.


LETTER IX.


Tents at the Great Pyramid of Gizeh
Monday, 21st June, 1909.

DEAR Brethren,— Most of our operations in the Great Pyramid so far have been in
the Descending Passage and Pit. We commence work as a rule at 8-30 to 9-30 a.m.,
using the earlier and cooler hours of the morning for sitting in our tents to read, write,
converse, etc. About 12-30 or 1 p.m. we return to our tents for lunch, and after fully
an hour’s rest, we enter the Pyramid once more and continue work till dinner-time,
usually about 7-45 to 8 p.m. At 4-30, our Arab waiter, Sayd, comes to us in the Pyra¬
mid, bringing with him a basket containing a kettle of boiled water, a tea-pot, cups,
etc., and a few biscuits. He soon makes for us a welcome pot of tea. It saves time to
have this refreshment brought to us, and we partake of it wherever we may then
happen to be working, even down in the Pit itself. Two days ago we had our afternoon
tea in the small Recess in the west side of the Small Horizontal Passage leading to the
Pit. As many as five of us were sitting there at the time, and two or even three more
could have accompanied us with some crowding. We had three candles burning while
the feast was in progress, and yet it was not very warm.

311 On another occasion we sipped our tea while sitting in the irregular opening of
a large natural rock-fissure in the Descending Passage—See Plate IX. This fissure is
a “half-way” resting place, a “ Rest-and-be-thankful,” as it were. It involves walls,
ceiling and floor. Originally, stones were cemented into it flush with the general incline
of the passage ; but, though the inset stones in the floor are still in position, most of those
in the walls and ceiling have dropped out sufficiently to permit us to stand upright in
this part of the passage, and so ease our aching backs and heads. It is a real relief
sometimes to stand here for a little before proceeding further upward or downward.
There are similar inset stones let into what appears to be another larger fissure in the
passage higher up—See Plate IX. The stones at that part are well dressed and still
in position.

312 We have taken a number of photographs and careful measurements of the
lower end of the Well, where it enters at the west wall of the Descending Passage—See
Plate X. The opening in the wall is rather broken and rough round the edges, although
the sides are, in a general way, vertical and square with the top. Professor Flinders
Petrie believes that the opening was at one time concealed by a stone, which would
explain why this small, mysterious communication with the Pyramid’s upper system
was quite unknown, previous to Caliph A1 Mamoun's accidental discovery of the lower
end of the First Ascending Passage in 820 A.D.

313 You will remember that the lower end of the First Ascending Passage was, for


161


TE LXHL


The lower end of ihe WELL-SHAFT of the Great Pyramid of Gizeh;
showing the opening of the little passage which leads westward
from the Descending Passage to the Shaft .


nearly 3000 years, concealed by a limestone block fitted in flush with the roof
of the Descending Passage—Plate XI. Owing to the vibrations and shocks caused by
A1 Mamoun’s workmen, as they forced they way through the core masonry a short
distance to the west of the Descending Passage, this limestone block was dislodged
from the position which it had so long held, and fell to the floor of the Descending
Passage. It was the noise of the falling stone which revealed the presence of the
Descending Passage to the workmen j and when they had bored their way into this
passage, the gap in its roof revealed the Granite Plug blocking the lower end of the
hitherto unknown First Ascending Passage. Professor Flinders Petrie’s opinion is, that
the upper passages having thus for the first time been discovered, A1 Mamoun’s work¬
men made their way down the Well-shaft from its upper end in the Grand Gallery, and
forced the conc ealin g block of stone from its position at the lower end. If this were so,
both these communications with the upper passages would be discovered about the
same time.

314 The little westward passage which leads to the (almost) vertical shaft of the
Well, does not he at right-angles with the Descending Passage, but inclines slightly to
the north—Plate X. It is about six feet in length to the east side of the shaft, and its
floor gradually dips down toward its western extremity by about two feet in the whole
length of the passage—Plate XVII. The roof and south wall of this little passage are
very uneven, but the north wall is fairly straight, and roughly level.

315 How much the roughness and brokenness of the mouth of the lower end of the
Well may be due to dilapidation and rough handling since the time it was cut by the
ancient builders, it is difficult to say. If the opening was originally covered by a stone
as Professor Petrie believes, and as is quite probable, those who removed it may have
knocked away the edges of the mouth in their endeavours to dislodge it from its setting.

316 In one of the photographs of the lower end of the Well, Judah is seen com¬
mencing the ascent of the narrow shaft—Plate LXII. The six-foot rod which he grasps
in his right hand, is held parallel with the general incline of this lower reach of the
shaft. The camera was erected against the east wall of the Descending Passage,
directly opposite the opening of the little westward passage. Another photograph
shows Stanley ascending the shaft (Plate LXIII), but this time the camera was erected
at a point against the east wall lower down the Descending Passage. A line was held
stretched across to show the angle of the inclined floor and west wall of the Descending
Passage; and another was stretched horizontally across the mouth of the opening.
This horizontal line was first tested by a spirit level.

317 When we remember that the Descending Passage was hewn in the rock more than
four thousand years ago, it is wonderful how the angles on each side of the roof and
floor have preserved their beautiful squareness. This squareness is most noticeable in
the upper and lower reaches, because for some distance along the middle portion the
surface of the walls has become broken to some extent by exfoliation. The whole
length of the passage from the outside of the building to its junction with the Small
Horizontal Passage leading to the Pit, is as straight as an arrow, and preserves a uniform
height and width throughout. Professor Petrie, in his work Pyramids and Temples of
Gizeh, remarks on the straightness of the upper built part of the Descending Passage.
He says that this part deviates from absolute straightness by only one-fiftieth of an

163


inch. The walls, roof and floor where the passage descends through the rock, give
evidence of having been much smoother than they are at present.

318 It is wonderful how much light enters this passage right to the lower end. Not¬
withstanding the fact that quite two-thirds of its height is cut off by the granite block on
which the iron grill-door is fixed, one evening at twenty minutes to six, when we were
sitting at the junction of the Descending Passage with the Small Horizontal Passage, we
found it possible to read the time. As Petrie’s granite block intercept the rays of light
along the floor and axis of the passage, we found it necessary to hold the watch close
to the roof, against the flat square end of the passage. When we did so, we discerned
the time without much difficulty. If the granite block were removed, it is probable that
the light, which is very strong in Egypt, would penetrate to the lower end of the passage
sufficiently to enable one to read a clearly-printed newspaper.

319 Now that the Descending Passage and the Well-shaft are quite clear of debris,
there is a strong air-current through the various passages, doubtless partly due to the
fact that during the summer there is an almost constant north wind blowing down the
Entrance Passage, but also largely due to the great difference between the temperature
of the interior of the Pyramid and that of the outer air. The conditions are now there¬
fore quite different from what obtained in 1881 when Professor Flinders Petrie was
working in the Descending Passage. He states that he could not remain in it many
hours at a time, because of the lack of fresh air.

320 The wind blows down the Entrance Passage till it reaches the hole which was
made by Caliph A1 Mamoun a thousand years ago, and by which access is gained from
the Descending Passage to the First Ascending Passage. The air-current passes through
this hole round to the upper end of the Granite Plug and up along the First Ascending
Passage to the Grand Gallery, at the lower end of which it divides. One portion travels
up the Grand Gallery, through the Ante-Chamber into the King’s Chamber, and thence
to the atmosphere by means of the south air-channel of that chamber—Plate XV. The
other portion of the current blows down the Well-shaft and emerges into the lower end
of the Descending Passage, up which it passes till it again reaches the forced hole in the
west wall of the Entrance Passage. It enters this once more, crossing the fresh in-going
current, and passes out along A1 Mamoun’s forced passage, so reaching the open air
again. There is generally quite a strong breeze blowing outward through this forced
passage. The above order must be reversed in some respects when the wind outside
blows from the south.

321 As a result of this constant current of air throughout the Pyramid, the passages
are always fresh and cool, and working in them is, for that reason at least, preferable
to working under the blazing sun outside. In the heat of the day, after lunch, we are
always glad to return to the cool recesses of the Pyramid.

322 On my first Sunday at the pyramids, I experienced one of the terrible
Khamseens which blow during the month of May. These are storms of hot wind
laden with sand from the Sahara. The temperature in the shade (in Mr. Covington’s
tent) was then 111° F. It was hotter still in the plain between Cairo and the pyramids,
so that I nearly fainted when travelling in the tramway car. I revived when I reached
the Great Pyramid. I could have slept in the Grand Gallery (which I had then visited
for the first time) where the temperature was only 76° F.,—35° less than in the tent, and


164


I


I don’t know how much less than in the plain below ! That day, in the King’s Chamber,
with the hot wind blowing from the south down the south air-channel in a steady strong
current, the temperature was 82° F. The long narrow channel of cool masonry through
which the heated air must pass (about 200 feet), lowers the temperature by fully
forty degrees.

323 We find that the temperature inside the Pyramid varies with that outside
according to the time of day. For instance, at the lower end of the Well-shaft where
it enters the Descending Passage, our thermometer registered 76° F. between the hours
of 11 a.m. and 1 p.m,,—the hottest part of the day. Between the hours of 3-30 to 5 p.m.
the temperature inside was lowered to 72°, the temperature outside in the shade being
91° But at 7-30 p.m., the temperature at the lower end of the Well-shaft was as low as
69° F. In the Subterranean Chamber, however, the temperature remains fairly
constantly at 76° F.

324 We have now finished work in the lower parts of the Great Pyramid, and in
future will direct our attention to the upper parts. Judah says he is glad, as he does
not like the Pit. The poor chap generally goes off to sleep while John and I are busy
with intricate measurements, but he is very obliging and helpful when wanted, and we
believe he has made our position here as investigators much easier than might have been
the case. As he and his father, as I said before, are in governmental employment as
overseers of a large section of the excavating works of Egypt, his presence with us has
had the effect of keeping off the other Arabs. We have not been troubled by them in
the slightest, we are glad to say.

325 I have only once heard the word “Bakshish" since I came here about a month
ago, and that by one of the men who erected my tent under the first contractor.
Another time, when I was engaged photographing the casing-stones of the Great
Pyramid, two of the Arab “ guides ” came edging nearer and nearer, and presently one
of them asked if I wanted help—if he should not, for instance, pose near the casing-
stones. As that day was only my second at the Pyramid (Saturday, 29th May), I felt
rather timorous ; and as Judah and others had warned me that if I commenced to engage
these men, they would come round me “ like flies,” I raised my hand and waved them
off. They evidently knew I am here on special work, for they immediately turned and
went away; and never since then have we been waylaid by any of the Arabs wanting
to “ guide ” us.

With love in the Lord, Your loving brother,

Morton Edgar.

P.S.—John has not been well to-day.


1


165


Plate LXIV.


AL MAMOUN’S CAVITY; showing the upper portion of the exposed west side of the
GRANITE PLUG which blocks the entrance of the First Ascending Passage
in the Great Pyramid of Gizeh.


LETTER X.


Tents at the Great Pyramid of Gizeh.

Tuesday, 22nd June, 1909.

Dear Brethren, —Yesterday John remained in bed all day. He had an attack of
sickness, -which, while it lasted, caused us a good deal of anxiety. We do not know
how the sickness was brought on. However, I am thankful to say that he is now
a great deal better, and has been able to rise this morning, although he is not sure that
he will venture inside the Great Pyramid to-day. I did not do anything in the Pyramid
yesterday in the way of measuring or photographing, but remained near John’s tent
most of the time. In the morning I sent off Sayd and Stanley to Cairo with a message
for Professor Ferguson, to ask if he could come out here. He came in the afternoon,
and said that John had by that time passed the worst of anything that was likely to
happen. We are thankful that it was only a slight attack. Professor Ferguson was
very kind in coming out to us, as he is just on the point of departing for Scotland on
leave. He will probably be off to-day. He says that he scarcely requires any incubators
in his bacteriological work, because the temperature of the air in Egypt is favourable to
the growth and rapid multiplication of micro-organisms. Such organic liquids as milk,
even after sterilisation, are not safe if exposed for a few hours.

327 I saw one good job done in the Great Pyramid yesterday, namely, the securing,
by cement, of a long iron pin at the head of the Well-shaft—See Plates IX and XVII.
This pin is for the purpose of suspending a 33-foot rope-ladder, the property of Mr.
Covington, down the first vertical part of the Well-shaft. Of course, as the shaft is very
long, other ropes will be required at other vertical parts lower down. We shall be
unable to say more about this, however, until we have made our first descent. We
understand that the lower parts can be descended with comparative safety by means of
the foot-holds cut in the sides of the shaft. We hope to have the privilege of photo¬
graphing the “ Grotto,” to give you some idea of its appearance.

328 Another good job completed yesterday, was the cutting of notches for the feet
and hands in the part by which one climbs alongside the Granite Plug up to the First
Ascending Passage. When we desire to ascend this passage, we leave the Descending
Passage by the hole forced on its right or west side by Caliph A1 Mamoun, about ninety
feet down from the Entrance. This hole is in line with the front of the granite stone
which lies on the floor of the Descending Passage. The limestone block, which now
rests against the upper end of the granite stone (Plate IX), forms a convenient step by
which to gain entrance, for the lower edge of the hole is about two feet up from the
floor of the Descending Passage. From here the forced hole tends upward and west¬
ward into a large cavernous space about twelve feet in height. Communicating with

167


Plate LXV.


this space at the upper portion of its north-westward side is the inner or southern
extremity of the long passage which A1 Mamoun caused to be excavated from the north
face of the Pyramid—Plate V. In order to reach the upper end of the Granite Plug,
and so ascend the First Ascending Passage, we require to scale the south-east wall of
this cavernous space. During my first week here, I secured two photographs showing
Hadji Ali Gabri climbing this wall—Plates LXIV and LXV. In both of these he is seen
standing with one foot on a ledge which is situated about three feet above the loose,
sandy floor of the space, and the other in a notch. By taking advantage of this ledge
and of the notches, we made the ascent at that time without undue difficulty. But now
that we have had fresh notches cut, and the old ones deepened, the ascent and descent
are much easier. One of the photographs (Plate LXV) presents a near view of the
ledge, and also shows the lower end of the First Ascending Passage to better advantage
than the other.

329 This is the second time we have had men cutting footholds in the Great
Pyramid. When they had finished work in the cavernous space, we directed them to
climb up to the First Ascending Passage and enlarge and roughen more of the notches
on the floor, and to cut some fresh ones ; for we found this passage still too slippery in
certain places to be traversed with safety. They also deepened the footholds on the
upper surface of the lower end of the East Ramp in the Grand Gallery. When one
wants to ascend the Grand Gallery, it is necessary to walk along the top of this Ramp
for the first twenty feet to the place where the floor of the Gallery begins. The East
Ramp extends the whole length of the Gallery from the north wall to the Step at the
upper or southern extremity, whereas the first four feet of the West Ramp is partly
broken and partly missing, the open mouth of the Well being situated at this point—
Plate XII. I hope later to describe the appearances at the mouth of the Well.

(From John.) I am feeling a good deal better to-day, and intend to work in the
Pyramid after all. On Thursday first, 24th June, we intend, all three of us, to meet
Grace and Jack at Port Said, and on the same evening take the boat for Jaffa. We shall
probably remain in Palestine till the following Saturday week, when we expect to
return to the Pyramid, and stay till our boat is due to leave Port Said for home
(probably 17th July). Our tent-contractor will not remove our tents from the ground
while we are away, but will allow the kitchen-tent to remain standing, and take down
the others and stow them, along with our larger boxes, inside.— John.

11-30 p.m. I have just completed developing some more photographs taken inside
the Great Pyramid. Three of these are of the Descending Passage where it joins the
First Ascending Passage, showing the lower end of the Granite Plug as it appears in the
roof, and below this the continuation of the Descending Passage, with Petrie’s granite
stone and its grill-door blocking the way. To the right of the grill-door, and above it,
can be seen the forced hole which opens into A1 Mamoun's cavernous hollow. One of
these photographs (Plate LXVI) was taken before our men cleared the debris from the
front of the granite stone, to enable us to take our continuous floor-measurement of the
passage. Judah is sitting on this debris, which was level with the top of the granite
stone, and concealed the limestone block which lay across the passage a few feet in front

169


AL MAMOUN’S CAVITY; showing a portion of~ the smooth inclined floor of the
FIRST ASCENDING PASSAGE of the Great Pyramid of Gizeh ;
also the method by which access to the First Ascending Passage is gained by climbing
from the Descending Passage round the Granite Plug to the west.


Plate LXVI,


The IRON GRILL DOOR which closes the lower reach
of *he DESCENDING PASSAGE of the Great Pyramid of Giseh,
showing Judah sitting on the debris which concealed Petrie’s granite block
also the lower butt-end of the Granite Plug which blocks
the entrance of the First Ascending Passage.


PLATE LX VII.

of it. The second photograph (Plate LX VII) shows this part as it appears now clear of
debris. Only the upper end of the limestone block is visible, as it has been shifted
from its former position, and now rests end-on against Petrie’s granite block—Plate IX.
332 In the third photograph (Plate LXVIII), John is shown standing beneath the


Granite Plug, holding the upper end of
a cord, which is stretched from the bot¬
tom edge of the Plug across the west wall
of the Descending Passage, to show the
line of the floor of the First Ascending
Passage. The point where this line
touches the floor of the Descending Pas¬
sage is called the “point of intersection”
—See Plate XI. The rod which lies
across the passage holding the lower end
of this cord, is three feet in length. John
is also holding a “T” square against the
bottom angle of the Granite Plug, from
which a plumb-bob is hanging to the
floor of the Descending Passage, thus
marking the point on the floor which is
vertically underneath the lower edge of
the Granite Plug. We found this mark
useful for certain measurements at this
part. The roof of the Descending Pas¬
sage above and below the lower end of
the Granite Plug, is much broken away.
The line of the roof of the Descending
Passage can be seen progressing from
above downward at the line where John’s
right hand touches the west wall of the
passage. It was in the triangular-shaped
space which lies in front of the lower end
of the Granite Plug, that the limestone
roof-block was fitted which for thirty
centuries hid the entrance of the First
Ascending Passage, and thus kept secret


the existence of the upper passages and
chambers. (In examining these photo¬
graphs of the interior of the Pyramid,
which, owing to the confined spaces, are
necessarily taken at very close quarters,


Same as Plate LXVI, but with the debris
removed, thus revealing Petrie r s granite block
on which the iron grill-door is fixed,
also Smyth 9 s limestone block which lies
end-on against the granite block.


allowance must be made for a certain amount of distortion and exaggerated perspective.)


333 Besides these photographs of the lower end of the Granite Plug, I developed


a number which had been taken at the upper end- One shows John stooping in the


First Ascending Passage, and leaning with his right-hand on the fractured upper end of


171


....


The lower butt-end of the GrRANIfE PLUG which blocks the entrance oj the
FIRST ASCENDING PASSAGE of the Great Pyramid of Gizeh •
showing the space in the roof of the Descending Passage which was formerly
occupied by an inset limestone block, which covered -
the Granite Plug and hid the entrance of the First Ascending Passage,
and thus for three thousand years kept secret the existence of
the upper passages and chambers of the Pyramid.


The upper south end, and portion of the i vest side, of the GRANITE PLUG which completely blocks the lower end of the First Ascending
Passage in the Great Pyramid of Gizeh; showing two of the series of three great stones, hidden
in the masonry for three thousand years, and exposed by Caliph Al Mamoun in the course of his excavations in the year 820 A.D.


Plate LXVIII.


The lower butt-end of the GRANITE PLUG which blocks the entrance oj the
FIRST ASCENDING PASSAGE of the Great Pyramid of Gizeh ’
showing the space in the roof of the Descending Passage which was formerly
occupied by an inset limestone block, which covered
the Granite Plug and hid the entrance of the First Ascending Passage,
and thus for three thousand years kept secret the existence of
the upper passages and chambers of the Pyramid.


Plate LXIX.


The upper south end , and portion of the west side, of the GRANITE PLUG which completely blocks the lower end of the First, Ascending
Passage in the Great Pyramid of Gizeh ; showing two of the series of three great stones, hidden
in the masonry for three thousand years, and exposed by Caliph Al Mamoun in the course of his excavations in the year 820 A.D.


Judah.


L*}j


■2 o, O
O ^ ^
Q on
«o

0 s £ k

2 s

2 'Qfl

5 c ^
^ o £


u ■“ <
Sf <u .&

s < ~
03 ***» «

§ ^ o

ft, 3 J.
*>2;°
I '■8 3

c g S

« 42 e

O C/J k

<o is

cl

•& p c $>

• b ^ ^

^ 1 o'
<u c

5 3 >§


^ s! ^

Si ,

S£


Our Pyramid attendant.


Sayd:

Our waiter.


the Plug—Plate LXIX. He holds
a candle in his left hand, and is
looking downward along the west
side of the Granite Plug where it
has been exposed by A1 Mamoun's
excavation. His head is nearly in
contact with the roof of the First
Ascending Passage. Two of the
three great granite blocks which
together form the Plug, can be
distinctly seen in this photograph,
the third being, with the exception
of a little part of its upper end,
hidden in the surrounding mason¬
ry. Some previous investigator
has chipped away sufficient of
the uppermost granite stone, to
expose a portion of the smooth
flat upper end of the second.

334 Another photograph
(Plate LXX) was taken with the
camera erected in the First As¬
cending Passage, looking down
on the upper end of the Granite
Plug, and showing Judah stand¬
ing in A1 Mamoun’s forced pass¬
age to the west. Immediately
behind Judah, the long low forced
passage progresses northward to
the outside of the Pyramid—
See Plate V.

Wednesday, 23rd June. After
breakfast this morning we photo¬
graphed Judah, Sayd, Feralli the
cook, and the Reis (Judah’s
father), We also secured several
pictures round our tents, showing
them from various viewpoints.
One of these (Plate LXXV) shows
a panoramic view of the flat
Delta, with the Mokattam Hills
in the dim distance, and our four
tents in the foreground. Another
shows the Great Pyramid in the


Plates LXXI-LXXIV.


Ferrali.
Our cook.


Abraheem Faidi,
The Reis.


The distant MOKATTAM HILLS, as viewed from the west side of the Great Pyramid of Gizeh, with the intervening
flat cultivated plain which lies to the south and west of Cairo; showing our tents in the foreground.


Plate LXXVI.

background, and John, Stanley and myself at the doors of our tents—Plate LXXVI.
Judah “pressed the button.” In this latter photograph the tents look as if they were
almost touching the Pyramid; but this is owing to the clearness of the air. There is
actually a distance of several hundred yards between our tents and the Pyramid, as
another view taken from the west makes more evident—Plate LXXVII.


Tents at the Great Pyramid of Gizeh


336 The diminishing effect which the clearness of the air has on distance, is very
noticeable when one is approaching the pyramids by the electric tramway from Cairo.
After crossing the Nile by the fine bridge recently erected opposite Old Cairo, and
reaching the village of Gizeh on the West bank, the tramcar runs for about four miles in
a straight line over the flat plain to Mena House Hotel, quite close to the pyramids.
The pyramids are plainly visible throughout the whole of this four-mile stretch; but
after about a third of the distance has been traversed, they appear so near, that the
newcomer feels convinced that each stopping place he sees ahead must surely be the


4


Plate LXXVII.


i


o

0,


2

§

o

•5

Co


OS


£

Oh

S.

a

%

<s


2

B


O

e

B

£


I


J


Plate LXXVIII.

terminus. After two or three disillusionments, however, he sinks back on his seat, and
waits patiently till the terminus is reached. The tramcars travel very fast along this
line, the rails of which are laid on an embankment of their own adjoining the public
roadway (Plate LXXVIII) which runs for the entire distance between two rows of
beautiful acacia trees. Each tram-
car is provided with a continuous-
sounding horn, worked by the
driver’s foot. While travelling at
night, especially when one is a little
overcome by the heat, the sound
from these horns is very dreary.

337 As most of our time to-day
was spent in taking the photographs
described, and in packing for our
visit to Palestine, we had little left
for work in the Great Pyramid. It
was not until about 6 p.m. that John
and I entered it. We measured the
upper part of the Descending or
Entrance Passage, from the “scored
lines” on the walls of the passage,
up to the end of the “ basement-
sheet ” of the floor outside. The
basement-sheet is very wide,
measuring 33 feet from east to
west, and is about two and a half
feet in thickness. Professor C.

Piazzi Smyth was of the opinion
that the present outside end of this
basement-sheet is also its original north beginning, although the line of the surface of the
Pyramid’s casing lay several feet to the north of it—Plate LXXX. Down the centre of
this long broad sheet of stone, and at a distance of three and half feet apart, the walls of
the passage are laid with great care; and placed on top of these are immense roof-
stones, eight and half feet thick, and over twelve feet wide from east to west.

338 Without doubt, the Entrance Passage was constructed to endure ; and the work¬
manship displayed in it has always been the subject of great admiration by all investiga¬
tors, both ancient and modern. Professor Greaves, on beholding the beautiful masonry
of this passage in 1638, thirty-eight centuries after the completion of the building, ex¬
claimed with almost Tennysonian feeling: “ The structure of it hath been the labour of
an exquisite hand, as appears by the smoothness and evenness of the work, and by the
close knitting of the joints” ; and Professor C. Piazzi Smyth writes: “No one with an
ability to appreciate good work, can look, unmoved with admiration, at the extra¬
ordinarily truthful straight lines, and close fitting of the wall joints near and about the
present Entrance” ; while Professor Flinders Petrie also adds his testimony in the
following eulogism: “ The pavement, lower casing, and Entrance Passage are exquisitely

179


The avenue and tramway-car line between Cairo and the
Pyramids of Gizeh.


Plate LXXIX.


The north-west angle of the GREAT PYRAMID of Gizeh; showing the pathway along the
top of the rubbish mound at the north base of the Pyramid,
by which access is gained to the Entrance.


read our measurements properly, and our candles would not remain lit because of the
wind which is always blowing at the pyramids. Darkness comes on very suddenly in
Egypt; there is little or no twilight. In Scotland at this time of the year, it remains
light even up to 11 o’clock, but here it is dark at eight, and when the moon is not
shining, very dark at nine o’clock. Sometimes, when coming out of the Pyramid after
our day’s work, it is so dark that it is with considerable difficulty that we tread our
way along the narrow footpath, which leads down from the Entrance along the top of
what now remains of the once large rubbish mound.

340 I may here mention that the ancient rubbish mounds which lie at the bases of
all four sides of the Great Pyramid, have been much reduced in size of late years. The
builders of Mena House Hotel, and others, removed great quantities of the rubbish to
make concrete, etc. A narrow strip of the original top of each mound still remains,
however, running along against the side of the Pyramid, and forming, therefore, an
indication of their original shape and height (between 40 and 50 feet). The one on the

181


PLATE LXXX.

wrought; in fact, the means employed for placing and cementing the blocks of soft
limestone, weighing a dozen or twenty tons each, with such hair-like joints, are almost
inconceivable at present; and the accuracy of the levelling is marvellous.”

339 Before we could complete our work, it became so dark that we could not see to


FRONT ELEVATION (Look mo South) of the ANGLE STONES
AND PRESENTLY DILAPIDATED MASONRY OVER THE ONE AND ©OLE

ORIGINAL ENTRANCE PASSAGE INTO THE GREAT PYRAMID
from a PHOTOGRAPH by PlAZZl SMYTH

VERTICAL LONGITUDINAL SECTION (Lookinq West)

OF THE UPPER NORTH END OR BEGINNING

OF THE ENTRANCE PASSAGE INTO THE GREAT PYRAMID


PLATE LXXXI.

north side forms a ready means of ascending to the Entrance—See Plate LXXIX. On
a former occasion I photographed the base of the west side (Plate LXXXI) where the
original contour of the great mound is clearly defined, while the large square blocks of
the Pyramid’s masonry underneath are exposed to view. Professors Smyth, Petrie,

and others give reasons for be¬
lieving that these mounds are
principally composed of the frag¬
mentary remains of the original
casing of the Pyramid. We have
not yet had an opportunity to ex¬
amine them closely.

341 We sent off Judah for
our electric-light apparatus which
Brother Matheson of Glasgow
fitted up for us. By its aid we
could see very clearly. This is
the first time that we have used
the electric light at the Pyramid.

The recently reduced rubbish mound at the west base ^ have employed it for Several
of the Great Pyramid of Gizeh. nights, however, inside a dark¬

room lamp in my tent, when
developing our photographs. One important reason why we have not used it in the
Pyramid is, that it would be difficult to get the accumulators recharged, as this would
necessitate constant journeyings to Cairo. We find that, after all, candles are more
to be preferred while working inside the Pyramid than any other light, because they
are easier for us to hold when we are lying on the passage floors measuring, etc. We
have only once employed the two acetylene lamps which we brought with us; they
become too hot to be easily handled.

In the afternoon we received a telegram from Grace, saying that she and Jack h a d
arrived in Port Said. We were somewhat surprised, as we had not expected them till
to-morrow. We got their telegram too late, however, to permit us to meet them to-day.
Stanley, nevertheless, was so eager to see his mother and Jack, that he went off by
himself on quarter of an hour’s notice!

We are looking forward to our journey to Palestine, and trust that it may be
interesting and instructive.

Your loving brother as ever,

Morton Edgar.


182


LETTER XI.


Train en route for Port Said.

Thursday, 24th June, 1909.

DEAR Brethren, —This morning, at 6 a.m., John and I climbed to the outer end of the
air-channel which leads from high up the north face of the Great Pyramid, down into
the King’s Chamber away in the heart of the building. Before Col. Howard Vyse dis¬
covered the use of the two air-channels connected with the King’s Chamber, and cleared
them both of debris, their inner ends on the north and south walls of the chamber
(Plate XV) had given rise to many curious conjectures. Many of the older investigators
believed that they led to other hitherto undiscovered apartments in the Pyramid. It
was a common practice formerly to fire a revolver into them in order to hear the
reverberating thunder-like echo. The Queen’s Chamber also was discovered in 1872
A.D. to possess a pair of ventilating channels—Plate XIX. In this respect, the Great
Pyramid stands unique, as not one of the many other pyramids in Egypt have air-
channels to their chambers.

343 Owing to the amount of crumbling debris lying on the masonry courses on the
exterior of the Pyramid, wind and rain tend very readily to carry sand into these air-
channels, and stop them up ; it is believed also that the Arabs throw stones into them.
Although both the north and south channels of the King’s Chamber were thoroughly
cleared out by Col. Howard Vyse at great trouble and expense (it took several men six
weeks’ constant labour to clear the north one), they were again blocked when Professor
Smyth visited the Pyramid, and still remained in that condition at the time of Professor
Petrie’s investigations. Neither of these workers attempted to clear them again ; but
a few years ago Mr Covington was successful in clearing the south channel; though he
has not yet succeeded in completely clearing the other. There is always a more or less
strong current of air blowing through the south channel, up or down according as the
wind blows from the north or south. It is sometimes strong enough to blow out
the light of a candle when it is held inside the channel’s inner mouth.

344 The outer end of the north channel has been widened inward for about 37 feet
of its course—Plate IX. The channel itself measures only about 9 inches square, but
this excavated portion is large enough (about 3 feet by 2 feet 9 inches) to allow a man
to walk down in a stooping posture. The floor and west wall of the channel are still
preserved, the excavators, whoever they were, having cut away the roof and east wall.

345 At the inner end of the north air-channel, similar excavating or “tunnelling” is
to be seen. The excavator at this place was M. Caviglia, who, in 1817 and 1837, caused
this work to be done in the hope of finding the apartment to which he supposed this
channel to lead. He did not begin his work from the King’s Chamber itself, doubtless

183


PLATE LXXXII.


The north-west angle of the GREAT PYRAMID of Gizeh; as viewed from our tents.


because the hat'd granite of that chamber deterred him, but he broke in at the west side
of the Ante-Chamber, to the north of the “ Granite Leaf,” where there was soft lime¬
stone, and continped westward and then southward until he intercepted the channel.
He then followed the course of the channel upward for about 30 feet, cutting away the
stones which formed the floor, but preserving the walls and roof. It is therefore now
possible to observe the peculiar way in which the ancient builders constructed this air-
channel. Its course does not, as one might have at first supposed, rise directly upward
in a straight inclined line from the north wall of the King’s Chamber. On the contrary,
after running horizontally northward for a short length, it takes a number of short
sharp bends, each succeeding bend tending upward and toward the north-west, before
it finally bends northward to proceed directly to the outside of the Pyramid at a steep
angle.

346 It is difficult to understand what purpose the builders had in view in causing
this channel to take so many short turns, but it seems evident that the initial westward
tendency is for the purpose of avoiding the masonry of the Grand Gallery—Plate V.
Why, however, did the builders not place the inner mouth of the channel further to the
west of the north wall of the King’s Chamber, and thus avoid the necessity of the bends,
and the extra work and expense which the making of them must have incurred ? That
it was for some wise purpose we do not doubt, for, as Mr Covington says (and we
believe we have good cause to agree with him), there is a reason, either scientific or
symbolic, for everything in this great and noble structure. It remains for someone to
search out the reason. It is interesting to notice that, although the King’s and Queen’s
Chambers differ greatly in shape and size, the mouths of the air-channels in the upper
chamber are situated in the same vertical plane as those of the lower chamber—See
Plate XVII.

347 When we reached the outer end of the air-channel, Sayd, who accompanied us,
stooped down and crept into the channel until he reached the end of the excavated
portion. He soon returned with two large owls in his hands, and told us that there
were “little sons” inside, meaning that there was a nest of young ones there. We told
l;im to let the owls return to their nest.

348 Twelve days ago (on the 12th June), while sitting in the early morning at the
door of our dining-tent facing the north-west corner of the Great Pyramid (Plate
LXXXII), we had counted by the aid of our Zeiss prism-glasses (of eight magnifications)
the number of courses of masonry from the basement of the Pyramid up to the outer
extremity of this north air-channel of the King’s Chamber. We had observed that it
was situated in the 101st course, and its floor, therefore, begins on the 100th course—
See Plate IX. This enabled us, when climbing up the north-west corner of the Pyramid,
to strike off at the proper level in a horizontal direction toward the centre of the north
front, and thus gain the channel opening. It is quite impracticable to climb the Pyramid
directly up any of its four sides, as they are too steep, and the loose crumbling debris
which lies very thickly at the angles of all the courses makes climbing there doubly
dangerous.

349 Looking down from where we were standing at the mouth of the channel, the
north face of the Pyramid seemed almost precipitous ; and the uncovered casing-stones
about 330 feet below us, looked very small. Our horizontal journey inward from the

185


north-west angle was difficult in places. John manged to travel cautiously along it
without help, but I was glad of Sayd’s assisting hand here and there ; for although Mr
Covington, on the occasion of his attempt to clear this north channel, had removed a
large quantity of the loose debris along this horizontal course, still sufficient lay there,
especially near the channel opening, to make walking somewhat dangerous. Were one
to lose his footing, nothing would check a downward rush right to the bottom. So
dangerous did it look, that not even our Arab assistant, strong and nimble as he had
shown himself to be, would venture to descend eleven courses lower, to investigate for
us an opening which our previous inspection through our glasses had shown to be
situated there. This opening lies some little distance to the east of the mouth of the
King’s Chamber’s air-channel, and is situated in the 90th course. We thought it might
prove to be the opening of the north air-channel of the Queen’s Chamber, for the outer
ends of that chamber’s two air-channels have not yet been located. Professor Flinders
Petrie in his work Pyramids and Temples of Gizeh, mentions having observed with
his telescope a similar opening on the south side of the Pyramid, but situated in the
85th course. His idea was that this might be the outer end of the Queen's Chamber's
south air-channel; but he says that he was prevented from examining it closely.

350 Travelling into Cairo this morning we were Accompanied by Mr Covington, who
is in the midst of preparations for a journey westward across the great Sahara Desert,
to a place called “ Copper City.” He has been so busy that he has been unable to spare
time to aid us in our work. He says he will have ten camels in his caravan. He was
pleased to know that we were off on a visit to Jerusalem. Our train started from Cairo
at 11 a.m., and we are now nearing Port Said. It is warm, but not unbearably so.
We are looking forward to meeting Grace, Jack and Stanley. We sail to-night for Jaffa.
I shall post this letter before leaving Port Said.

With much love, Your loving brother,

Morton Edgar.

(From John). We have arrived at Port Said, and are now on board the Jaffa steamer.
We should reach Jaffa to-morrow morning. Grace and Jack had a magnificent voyage,
and are feeling and looking well. I shall pass this letter to Grace.— John.

We are in a Russian boat, about to sail for Palestine. The weather is glorious. We
have had no rain since leaving Liverpool. When we landed yesterday at Port Said,
everything looked so white, and the glare of the sun was so strong that I had to wear
coloured glasses. It is peculiar to see the ladies here with their faces covered with long
black veils which reach to the ground, and with a little brass tube in the middle of their
foreheads. They do look odd.— Grace.


186


Plate LXXXIII.


LETTER XII.


Hotel Fast, Jerusalem.

Saturday, 26th June, 1909.

Dear Brethren, —You will see by the above address that we are in the Holy City
at last. Before writing about Jerusalem, however, I shall give you a brief account of
our experiences after our arrival in Port Said on our way here. When John and I
arrived there last Thursday, we were met at the railway terminus by Grace and the
two boys. Grace
and Jack had had a
good and pleasant
voyage, and were
looking well.

352 We were
under the impres¬
sion at first that we
had abundance of
time at our disposal,
but on enquiry at
a shipping - office,

John found that we
would require to
hasten. We at once
hurried to the hotel
where Grace and
the boys had lodged ° n the balcon y °f the Du Parc Hotel, Jaffa.

the preceding night, secured their luggage, and rowed out to the Jaffa steamer, which
weighed anchor at 5-30 p.m. Next morning at six o’clock we found ourselves at Jaffa,
and lying off our vessel was a fleet of large rowing-boats, whose crews were waiting
permission to come on board. As soon as this was granted, they made a simultaneous
rush for the steamer. Those who were farthest away came stepping from boat to boat
until the one nearest our vessel was packed, and the entire crowd (about 60 or so)
pushed and struggled on to the stairway. Almost before one could say “ Jack
Robinson, all these boats were emptied ! We were astonished that no one had been
pushed into the sea.

353 When we landed at Jaffa,,we had to pass through the customs. My box was
the only one opened, and the examination of it was merely formal. Our passports also
were not examined. The new Turkish Constitution, which has now been in force for a
year, has made a difference in many respects.-


187


354 From the customs, our road led through several very narrow and dirty streets.
We made some acquaintance with Eastern life immediately, and were not enamoured
of it, although we were greatly interested. After walking for several hundred
yards we entered two carriages which were waiting for us, and were taken to the
Du Parc Hotel. This hotel is to be taken <»ver by the Orient Commerce Co., of which
Brother Cotton is the London manager and a director. It is very comfortable, and has
attached to it a beautiful and extensive garden and a museum of valuable antiquities.
We were informed that Brother Cotton had had to depart the previous evening for
Gaza, where he has some pressing business, but that he might meet us later in Jerusalem.
He left a letter putting us in charge of a courteous young Syrian, Mr Anis Jamal, who,
he said, would show us round during our stay in Palestine.

355 After breakfast, Mr Jamal took us to see the town, and, as you can well under¬
stand, we were greatly interested by what we saw. With a few exceptions the streets
of J affa are very narrow and dirty, and the central ones are thronged with all sorts
of people; but this being the "off-season,” we seemed to be the only European
strangers. About the oddest of the odd people we saw during our walk, were
some women dressed in black, with their faces entirely covered with tightly-drawn
muslin print veils. The print, mostly faded and of a large ugly pattern, gives the un¬
fortunate women a ghastly appearance. I tried to take a snapshot of them, but they
turned and hastened off. Camels and donkeys are as numerous here as horses are at
home, and they do make a noise. This morning (our first in Jerusalem), we were
all awakened about three o’clock by a camel groaning and grunting below our bed-room
windows. I think it was being loaded, and they have generally good cause to groan
when this is done, for their burden is often unmercifully heavy.

356 While speaking of burdens, I may mention that we were much astonished at
the immense loads which the Jaffa porters carry. During our walk, one of them passed
us with a huge box on his back, held in place by means of a rope passed round his
forehead. I wanted to turn back and take a photograph of him, but was told that we
should have plenty of opportunities to take such records; and, sure enough, I did
manage to secure a photograph of one of these porters, on the veranda of the hotel
Plate LXXXIV. The manager of the hotel told us that some of them can carry a
piano, a load heavy enough for a camel!

357 In the afternoon, we drove to some places of interest, among others to a small
flat-roofed building which is claimed to be “ the house of one, Simon a tanner,” where
the Apostle Peter saw the vision of the sheet let down from heaven. This house is in
the hands of the Mohammedans, and is in consequence very dirty. We ascended by an
outside stair to the battlemented flat roof, and noticed that it is not far from the sea.
There did not appear to be any official care-taker, but a number of little girls with red-
stained finger-nails showed us found.

358 We have never anywhere seen so many blind people as here. This may be
due in part to the bright sunlight reflected from the white dust which covers every¬
thing ; one can hardly look at it. Doubtless, however, the chief cause of the blindness
is the infection carried by flies. Our hearts were heavy at the sight of a poor blind
beggar who came up to our carriage- yesterday, when we were leaving the Jaffa hotel
for the railway depot, en route for Jerusalem, He came-up with-outstretched hand, his

188


Plate LXXXIV.

sightless eyes staring right ahead. We had several times observed him :

some others, on the roadside outside the town. One of the hotel men cried c

Imshi” (“Go away, Go away”), smiting his outstretched hand several times

he would not go, he caught his stick from him and struck him with it.

wretch shrank back, and began to

cry. What pent-up feelings were .jg,

in his breast! We gave the man

something; but how powerless

we felt to give him real aid ! We

could not but wish that the Great SMI?

Physician had been there, and we JmU&XvW -

rejoiced that the Times of Resti- m.

tution are at hand. V. 7 — __

at 2 p.m., and although the dis-
tance by rail is only 53 miles, our
train took four hours to climb the

2,600 feet to Jerusalem. From ‘ '"Wf ' Hi * ^ I* I /

the train we observed oxen, camels in . mm v r .
and donkeys treading the corn.

Truly, the East changes not; but A Jaffa Porter.

we are in the Dawn of the Mil¬
lennium, and should expect progress now. Already modern sewing ai
machines are in use in Jaffa and Jerusalem. The object of our dear Broth
visit is to float the Orient Commerce Co., with the view, among other


Plate LXXXV


/> -■*<&/ —' . j«\.\ - i; H: ceo/!c£s _N\<>

^ r£- -J@


| If I rcoxw,, Ill nljlf/! (,.

WMm0Mk


7 /Mils m

i /-v. < ^


r ~ = oJ^fL


, T


' nX\\ I


- ..: ■. r_ n\iw - ^\


1 0/»ve £:_——1
n f/ouS€— -’ I -


-Damascu&jbate*


fj®J

I #? 1

/• Church or .
/Shhe Tom b or '


v\V 1 1)!; ■' iJf///f''J&cSsi i

iktMm


f imz* ^5p

-@|l&lp t

:~ccii>'l rJd! -^s


■ cr.— 3 X


■ —~ "" -/1 AbsalomS . [ ^
-—~ 7 gji pill ar *~


mm


3 , y, >


.N^-SS^'iSiSr’

I '«$#tfl/ \V// ^ /' / ^ t i TmniMT iii mi T T T 1 M ,4o, ° rai ^V-'^sv'


0 //'-r


■nriiT# ^,- -


'■■ ■■ //' / .
f.'Z<vjr


-—r Cr;

. -: : -5>/ zfA'cfJ:.

milim>

i*.


/ \ Fu/fioM<i


the entrance and exit of heavy traffic more readily than the old narrow “ L ” shaped
gateway. Mr. Fast, the hotel proprietor, says that the gate itself has not been closed
day or night for the last 30 years.

362 After passing the gate, we made our way to the Church along several narrow
streets—Plate LXXXVI. Mr Jamal escorted us round, explaining each item. The
Greek and Roman Catholics possess the largest portions of the ground and buildings,
while others of the great sects of Christendom possess smaller portions. There is
constant strife between the various sects, and at times the quarrels go beyond words,
and result is bloodshed. Thus the Christian religion is made a stench in the nostrils of
the heathen. Though at enemity with each other, the Christian (?) sects all unite in
hatred of the Jews, who are not allowed to enter even the court; and yet the side
furthest away from the Church is a public thoroughfare, entered by one doorway and
quitted by another directly opposite. We had an ocular demonstration of this restriction
soon after we arrived. Three Jewesses entered the court by one of the doorways and
began to walk across to the other, they had not advanced many steps when they were
observed, and immediately there was an outcry. One man rushed excitedly from the
Church, and vehemently ordered them out. After hesitating a moment in surprise, they
complied, and turning, went out by the same door again. Several men ran out after
them—to beat them, Mr Jamal said! How completely the tables are turned, and inside
their own holy city, too !

363 On entering the Church, Mr. Jamal kindly pointed out the traditional sites
of the scourging, crucifixion, embalming and burial of Jesus. It is impossible to say
with certainty whether this or a site near the Damascus Gate is the real Calvary,
but the position of the latter at the side of a public highway outside the first city
wall, and the likeness of the rounded knoll to a skull, would seem to favour it rather
than the traditional site—Plate LXXXV.

364 Many of the narrow streets of ancient Jerusalem are like arcades, being covered
over with buildings, leaving an opening here and there for the entrance of air and light.
They are lined with shops, and thronged with people. We understand that there is
now a population of about 100,000 in Jerusalem, of whom about three-fourths are
Jews. Everybody here speaks Arabic, evidently. We hear it on all sides, and its
guttural sounds are now becoming familiar to us.

Monday, 28th June, 5 p.m. All yesterday, Stanley was unwell; and I am sorry to
add that John has also become sick. Yesterday, we got Dr. Wheeler of the London
Jewish Mission Hospital to come and see Stanley, and by that time John had gone to
bed, and all to-day he has been very ill. The doctor called in to see them this morning,
and we are waiting for him to come again shortly.

366 To-day is the anniversary of my birthday. We remember that up till before
his death, our dear father often expressed a great longing to visit Jerusalem and Egypt;
but he was never able to do so. Neither John nor I ever thought, when we heard him
speak of it, that this would be our privilege, nor did I dream that I should celebrate a
birthday in Jerusalem! Without doubt, those who come into the knowledge of the
Truth fulfil their share of Daniel’s prophecy: “Many shall run to and fro.’’ Unfortu¬
nately, however, the anniversary has proved rather a sad one, owing to the sickness

191


^ - -rW M

w*/i~

.■ h., , f : j - -

feM^I'V '*& - tontf'- 'Wr****"

B^jBMMiw^^^-j.^ r mm’ Big

jfesT»w-»Vsv;-- .'

KS&aSSb

K*V (/ *'' " 7:Wr>*. '


■ / -;ji> r ' U-’M.'sftJW
.i^-W»f: i‘1 ,.V'.'>VWia_*fl


-'J >•:■.■'l:i


S&'tWr i*Nrf

* ■ ■


of my dear brother and nephew, and the anxiety it is causing us,


6-30 p.m. The English doctor has only lately been here. He says that John and
Stanley are progressing favourably, and he believes that they will soon both be on their
feet again. I have been waiting until I heard the doctor’s report before posting this, so
that I might let you know what he thinks of their condition ; but I must now bring my
letter to a close, as the post goes off in a few minutes, and there is not another until
Friday.

Much love in the Lord to all, in which the others join,

Your loving brother,

Morton Edgar.


St. Stephen's Gate, Jerusalem.


LETTER XIII.


Hotel Fast, Jerusalem.

Wednesday, 30th June, 1909.

DEAR Brethren, —The past few days have been rather dull, owing to the illness of
John and Stanley. John is now well enough to sit up in his room, and we hope he may
manage to go for a drive to-morrow to the Mount of Olives or elsewhere. Stanley is
still in bed, and is very weak. The poor little chap has had a bad attack. You may be
sure that we are all very careful as regards our diet. We boil the milk and water, and
we are avoiding the fruit.

369 The mosquitoes in Jerusalem are very troublesome. The authorities have taken
no measures against them. In Port Said and Cairo, on the other hand, the numbers are
kept down by a periodical addition of petroleum to the swamps, drains, and other moist
breeding places of these pests. At the pyramids, although we had a few bites, there
are scarcely any mosquitoes, doubtless because there is no water sufficiently near
(except at the time of the Nile inundation), but principally we believe because of the
prevailing wind.

370 This morning, John was well enough to attend to Stanley, and enable Grace to
accompany Jack and me to Bethlehem. We hope, however, to go there again, as John
has a great desire to see the birth-place of the meek and lowly Jesus. In the early
evening Mr. Jamal called and took Jack and me for a walk through the centre of
Jerusalem. Among other places we visited the law courts. Off the court-yard in a
large cell with an open-work wooden gate, about thirty prisoners were seated, men who
had been taken in charge because they refused to pay more than their due share of
taxes. The New Constitution had arranged that the taxes should be one-tenth the
income, and this the men were willing to pay, and even a quarter more if need be. But
the tax-gatherers demanded four-tenths, and as the men, or rather the 15 or 20 villages
which they represented, refused, they were taken in charge to be tried.

371 Mr. Jamal spoke to them, and exhorted them with a parable. He <; aid there
was once a man who asked each of his sons, seven in number, to give him a stick.
Binding the seven sticks together, he handed the bundle to each of the lads in turn,
with the request that he should break it. They all failed. He then took off the binding
string, and handing a single stick to his youngest son, asked him to break it. He did
so with ease. All the other sticks were handed to this youngest son in turn, and were
broken by him. Mr. Jamal explained his parable. If the men were united and of one
mind in their resistance, the tax-gatherers would be unable to break them ; but if they
separated, they would easily be broken. They said he was right. This is the way
they do in the East! The Jamals are a well known family in Jerusalem, Anis’ father
and grandfather both belonging to this city.

194


372 Proceeding on our way through the city eastward, we were soon outside St.
Stephen’s Gate (Plate LXXXVII), and saw in front of us on the other side of the Valley
of Jehoshaphat, the lofty Mount of Olives, with the Garden of Gethsemane at its base.
To the right of us was Mount Moriah, the scene of the sacrifice of Isaac, and later the
site of Solomon’s Temple, the glory of Jerusalem. All this place must now present a
very different aspect from that which it had in our Lord’s day. At that time Herod’s
Temple must have presented a magnificent sight, when viewed from the Mount of
Olives. The Mosque of Omar now occupies the same locality.

373 "We walked from St. Stephen’s Gate down to the road which runs along the dried-
up bed of the brook Kedron in the Valley of Jehoshaphat. After standing at the
junction of the roads for awhile, admiring the beautiful scene, we returned to our hotel
by way of the road which runs round the city walls to the north—Plate LXXXV. On
our road we passed two parties of Americans, who live in a group of buildings to the
north of the city, called the American Colony. They are the followers of a man who,
I understand, claims to be Elijah.

Thursday, 1st July. Ever since Stanley took ill, we have had a nurse from the
London Jewish Mission Hospital in attendance during the night, and for the first two
days another during the day also. Canon Carnegie Brown is very kindly supplying us
with fresh milk for Stanley’s use.

375 This morning at ten o’clock, John, Grace, Jack and I drove for an hour and a
half, partly round the road which Jack and I traversed yesterday. This is John’s first
outing since our walk to the Holy Sepulchre on Sunday morning.

Friday, 2nd July, 4 p.m. This morning, John, Jack and I drove to Bethlehem. We
started at 8 a.m., when it was cool. John enjoyed the drive very much, after his short
but severe illness. Mr. Anis Jamal accompanied us, and explained everything far better
than any official “ dragoman ” could have done. We required to use smoked glasses, as
the glare of the sun on the white road and on our own white clothes, is very trying to
the eyes. We do not like using dark glasses, for they spoil the view Latterly we tried
placing them further down to cut off the white light from below, and looked over the
top, and we found that this answered splendidly.

377 Mr. Jamal says that the women of Bethlehem have the reputation of being
the most beautiful in Palestine. The inhabitants of this town are said to be descen¬
dants of the Crusaders. On our road we passed an ancient well, where we saw
three women washing clothes. Their washing was spread on a flat stone, and the
women were busy beating it with a club, now and again stopping to turn the garment
and sprinkle it with water. On another occasion we saw stones used instead of clubs.

378 We passed Rachel’s tomb, a small ruined mosque situated on the roadside. We
are told that, at a certain time every year, letters from all parts of the world are written
to Rachel, telling her about the ailments of the writers, and begging her to make them
whole. These letters are thrown into the tomb through the window-openings, and
during the night they disappear. Rachel is supposed to have read them. In reality,
the care-taker sees to it that they are destroyed. If one should remain, it is believed,
nevertheless, that Rachel has read it, but has left it for some purpose. Tourists some-


195


Plate LXXXV1II.


Plate LXXXIX.

times manage to secure some of these letters, but this is prevented as much as possible.

379 As Bethlehem is only three-quarters of an hour’s drive from Jerusalem, we were
soon passing through the narrow, picturesque main street on our way to the Church of
the Nativity, so called because it is built over the traditional scene of the birth of


The cave under the Church of the Nativity; showing the "Manger" to the left.


Jesus Plate LXXXVIII. Some soldiers, with their new rifles, of which, Mr. Jamal said,
they are very proud, were guarding the church. Passing through a low entrance, the
ancient iron door of which was made very thick by the early Christians for the purpose
of excluding their enemies, we found ourselves inside the church. We walked through
the building and viewed the old pictures, some of which, with the undoubted object of
intimidating the ignorant with the “doctrines of devils,” show victims writhing in the
lurid flames of “Eternal Torment.”

380 In two of the small caves underneath the Church, all of which are dimly lit with
hanging lamps of silver, we were informed that Eusebius and Jerome lay buried. In a
third cave (Plate LXXXIX), connected with the first two by low passages, Jesus is sup¬
posed to have been born ; whether this be so or not, it is difficult to say. However, as
John says, Bethlehem is the place where Jesus was born, and also David, who typified


197


Plate XC.


Jesus, and now every time we read of these events we shall have fresher interest in them.

381 This visit to the birth-place of the world’s Saviour was one of peculiar interest
to us, for it had been revealed to us by studies prosecuted about a year ago, that
Bethlehem has a direct connection with the Great Pyramid of Gizeh in Egypt. 1 The
importance and force of this connection may be more apparent if, first, I should present
some Scriptural evidence having a bearing on the subject. In the second chapter of
Matthew, we are told how at the time of the birth of the child Jesus, there came “ wise
men from the east ” enquiring where he was that was born King of the Jews ; and how
King Herod, fearing a possible rival, was troubled and asked the chief priests and
scribes “ where Christ should be born.” He was answered: “ In Bethlehem of Judea:
for thus it is written by the prophet, 1 And thou, Bethlehem, in the land of Juda, art
not least among the princes of Juda: for out of thee shall come a Governor, that shall
rule my people Israel.’ ”

382 The narrative, continuing, tells how the wise men went to Bethlehem, and being
led by a star, found the child with Mary his mother, and fell down and worshipped
him. After their departure, the angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph in a dream,
saying, “ Arise, and take the young child and his mother and flee into Egypt.” Joseph,
therefore, “ took the young child and his mother by night, and departed into Egypt,
and was there until the death of Herod: that it might be fulfilled which was spoken
of the Lord by the prophet, saying, ‘ Out of Egypt have I called my son.’ ”

383 We recognize, and it is generally acknowledged, that in Scriptural usage Canaan
symbolizes heaven, and Egypt the present evil world—Par. 160. Accordingly, when
Jesus was sent from Bethlehem into Egypt, this typified the heavenly Father sending
his beloved Son from the glory of heaven into this world of sin and sorrow to be “ per¬
fected through sufferings,” and so become qualified to be installed as the “Head-stone”
of the Great Antitypical Pyramid, of which the stone Pyramid in Egypt is a type—Acts
4 : 10-12. Again, when God, in fulfilment of the prophecy of Hosea 11: 1, called his
Son out of Egypt, an illustration was given of the risen and perfected Christ being lifted
up from this sinful world to heavenly glory, and there highly exalted—Phil. 2 : 9-11.

384 With the Scriptural connection between Bethlehem and Egypt established, it is
interesting to find that the Great Pyramid in Egypt indicates its direct connection with
Bethlehem by means of one of its dominant angles, 26° 18' 10", which both the
Descending and Ascending Passages form with the horizon—Plate IX. For if we use
the parallel of latitude on which the Great Pyramid stands as a base line, and draw a
straight line between Bethlehem and the Great Pyramid (Plate XC), the angle which is
formed at the Pyramid by these two lines will be found to be 26° 18' 10". 2

1 Dr. Seiss suggested Jerusalem, but, as will be seen, our calculations properly indicate Bethlehem. I

2 According to the careful observations made by Professor C. Piazzi Smyth during his investigations
at the Great Pyramid in 1865, the geographical position of the Great Pyramid is expressed as in latitude
29° 58' 51" north of the Equator, and longitude 31° 09' 00" east of Greenwich—Plate II. A straight line
drawn north-eastward from the Pyramid at an angle of 26° 18' 10" to the above latitude, will, therefore,
according to Mercator’s projection, pass through Bethlehem, 233 miles distant, at latitude 31° 42' 04" north,
and longitude 35° 12' 12" east, or through the south-east boundary of that town, in which part the Church
of the Nativity is situated.

We are indebted to Captain John Mackeague, Ex.M., for kindly acceding to our request to verify the
above result; and also to Captain William Orr Warden, Ex.M., for further proving the calculations.

199


r


385 Thus, in the Great Pyramid, Jesus’ sojourn from Bethlehem down into Egypt,
is represented by the downward course of the Descending Passage which symbolizes
“ this present evil world ” ; while his subsequent journey from Egypt back into Canaan
is represented by the upward course of the Ascending Passages to the King’s Chamber
which symbolizes heaven. “ He that descended, is the same also that ascended up far
above all heavens, that he might fulfil [complete] all things ”—Eph. 4 : 9, 10.

386 The Antitypical “ casing-stones,” the members of Christ’s “ Body,” chosen out
of the world, and, therefore, not of it, have also, like their “ Head,” been sent into this
sinful world to be perfected—John 15 : 19; 17: 15-18. While in the “lowest parts,”
they have been protected from evil, for “ the eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous ”
(Psa. 34: 15); and, quite unknown to the world, the Lord has secretly been shaping,
polishing, and making them ready for their positions in the Great Antitypical Pyramid,
taking care to form on each the proper “angle” in continuation with that of their
“ Head-stone,” Jesus Christ—Eph. 2: 20 22. The prophet Isaiah (51: 1), in prophetic
vision, contemplating the former lowly condition of the members of Christ’s body, and
their now highly exalted positions as “ casing-stones ” in God’s Great Spiritual Pyr amid ,
exclaims:

“ Hearken to me, ye that pursue righteousness,
that seek the Lord :

Look unto the rock whence ye were hewn,

and to the hole of the Pit whence ye were dug up ! ”

387 When these jewel-like stones received their final polish, they were stored one
by one out of sight in the memory of the Great Master Architect (their names are written
in heaven) until the time of the setting up of the “Temple.” When brought forth in due
time, they noiselessly fell into and perfectly fitted their allotted places, for they are God’s
workmanship, and his work is perfect. Before the foundation of the world, the Great
“Architect” had predestined in his “Plan” that these “stones” should be conformed to
the image of his dear Son, and had chosen them in him—Mai. 3 : 16, 17 ; 1 Kings 6:7;
1 Pet. 2:5; Eph. 2:10; Deut. 32 : 4; Eph. 1:4; Rom. 8 : 29.

388 David, prophetically, in the name of Jesus, exclaims: “I will praise thee; for I
am fearfully and wonderfully made: marvellous are thy works; and that my soul
knoweth right well. My body was not hid from thee, when I was made in secret, and
curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the earth. Thine eyes did see my substance,
yet being unperfect; and in thy book all my members were written, which in continua¬
tion were fashioned, when as yet there was none of them”—Psa. 139 :14-16, margin.

389 If the Tabernacle in the wilderness, and the Temple of Solomon were set up
under the direction of, and according to the patterns provided by the Almighty (See

Concerning this matter, Captain Mackeague wrote : “ When I saw the figures shaping themselves so as to
bring out the result sought, I was more than astonished, and could hardly finish the problem for joy that
the Lord had at last revealed the true significance of this angle, as an addition to all he has so kindly
shown us since we have come into the truth."

These results were communicated to C. T. Russell, author of Scripture Studies. The following
appreciation was received in reply: “You application of the angle of the passages in the Great Pyramid,
is a new thought, and as it points out so exactly the city of Bethlehem, we regard it with favour, and
are inclined to accept it as a proper application and further verification of the testimony of the Pyramid.
—Yours in the love and service of our Redeemer and King,—C. T. Russell.”

200


Exod. 26: 30; Heb. 8:5; and 1 Chron. 28: 11, 19), what shall now be said as to the
authorship of the Great Pyramid in Egypt ? Surely, if the name of its wonderful
architect be asked, it may truly be answered : “ The Great, the Mighty God, Jehovah of
hosts is his name, Great in counsel, and mighty in work . . . which hast set signs
and wonders in the land of Egypt even unto this day”- —Jer. 32 : 18-20.

This letter must be posted to-night, and John would like to add a little to it. I will
therefore pass it over to him.

With much love to all, Your loving brother,

Morton Edgar.

(From John). I am feeling much better this morning, though not quite myself yet.
Jerusalem would be a grand city to live in, if it were properly governed. The tender
associations of the past, and the glorious hopes of the future, make it the most interest¬
ing city in the world. Its present inhabitants are hoping for great things from the New
Constitution of Turkey, and indeed have now more liberty than formerly, though some
of them are inclined to use their greater liberty as a license to do what they like ; but
the everlasting Kingdom soon to be established with Jerusalem as its capital, will far
exceed their most sanguine desires. We are all hoping that dear little Stanley will soon
be well. With love to all of you from us all, Your loving brother,— John.


201


LETTER XIV.


Hotel Du Parc, Jaffa.

Monday, 12 noon, 5th July, 1909.

DEAR Brethren, —Jack and I are now in Jaffa, waiting till it is time to go on board
our ship (of the Khedival line), bound for Port Said. We are travelling direct to the
pyramids. One night will be spent on board ship; and on our arrival at Port Said we
shall wire to Abdul Salam Faid to have our tents ready for us. We left John and Grace
with Stanley in Jerusalem; but if Stanley is sufficiently well by Saturday they will
follow us to the pyramids then. In the meantime they think it safer not to hurry him
too much, as he is still very weak.

392 On Saturday night last (3rd July), Brother Cotton arrived in Jerusalem. He
and Mr. David Hall have had a fairly successful business tour in Gaza; they secured
sufficient interest to enable them to supply a motor traction-engine with all the
necessary accessories for ploughing, threshing, etc.

393 We left John arranging with Brother Cotton and Mr, Anis Jamal for a public
meeting to be held in Jerusalem. We have been somewhat disappointed at not being
able to do much witnessing for the Truth there, John’s and Stanley’s illness preventing
us from carrying out our plans. Now, however, that John requires to remain there for
nearly a week longer, Jerusalem will get the lecture on “ Where are the Dead ? ” after
all! John will no doubt give you a full account of their experiences.

394 On Friday evening we visited the Jews’ wailing-place (Plate XCI), and this time
Grace was able to accompany us, as the hospital nurse had kindly agreed to take charge
of Stanley for a few hours. The wailing-place is situated outside to the south of the
ancient wall which bounds the Temple Area on the west—Plate LXXXV. The attend¬
ant provided us with seats, and we looked on for half an hour. We were greatly inter¬
ested in observing those Jews from all countries in the world, many of them dressed in
brightly coloured gowns and coats, praying, rocking to and fro continually, and reading
the Psalms and Lamentations aloud in a wailing tone. At times a leader would recite a
petition to the Lord, and others around would join in the responses. Many of them
had tears in their eyes, and all of them kissed the Temple stones. We could not but be
impressed with the feeling that something lay behind all this continual praying, tears
and supplication. Even if we were not blessed with a knowledge of the “ Plan of the
Ages,” and were not fully persuaded that God will again turn his favour to them, we
should have been forced to reflect on the problem of the Jew, and to wonder if God has
still some purpose in view with regard to this wonderful people.

395 Before returning to our hotel, we walked down part of the ancient Tyropceon

202


Plate XCI.

valley, which runs between Mount Zion and Mount Moriah—Plate LXXXV. Though
now nearly filled with rubbish, and largely built upon, it can still be recognized as a
valley. Formerly it was spanned by a couple of bridges. We saw the remains of the
spring of an arch of the south bridge, jutting out slightly from the wall of the Temple
Area. It is called Robinson’s
Arch after the well-known
archaeologist who, as a result
of his excavations, discovered
it under many feet of rubbish.

Mount Zion is much higher
than Mount Moriah on which
the ancient Temple stood. We
walked on down the valley
toward the gate which opens
into the Valley at Hinnom.

This gate is called the “ Dung
Gate,” and was, and still is,
used by the inhabitants of
Jerusalem as an exit for the
refuse of the city. It is the
smallest gate of any, and we
saw plenty evidences of its
use.

396 On Saturday forenoon,

John, Jack, Mr. Jamal and I
rode round Jerusalem on don¬
keys. It is the custom here
for all, high and low, to ride
on donkeys. We started from
the hotel and rode past Jaffa
gate down the desolate valley
of Hinnom, first southward
skirting the west side of Mount
Zion, and then eastward till
we reached the southern end
of the Valley of Jehoshaphat
—Plate LXXXV. The road
descends steeply all the way, The Jews ’ Wading Place.

and is so rough that vehicular

traffic is impossible. At the bend of the valley, and in it, there is a new Jewish colony
of about two dozen houses, poor, and closely built together. We could not help
remarking how peculiar it is that Jews should erect their homes in the Valley of
Hinnom, Gehenna ! They can have but little faith in its symbolical significance, “ utter
destruction,” or they would surely not build there !


203


Plate XCII.

397 At the south extremity of the Tyropceon Valley, where it joins the Valley
of Hinnom, we passed the pool of Siloam, now a desolate scene with its broken pillars.
Further on we descended on the junction of the Valleys of Hinnom and Jehoshaphat,
and looking round we admired the walled city towering above us on the summits of its


The lower end of the Valley of Jehoshaphat, looking north.


lofty hills—Plate XCII. To the left was the deep and desolate valley which we had
descended, bounded on its north side by Mount Zion and Mount Moriah, and on the
south side by the Hill of Evil Counsel and Aceldama—Plate LXXXV.

398 We were told that the Hill of Evil Counsel received its name from the tradition
that Caiaphas had a villa on its summit, and that it was there he plotted against the Son
of Man. Aceldama, or the field of blood, is said to be the potter’s field in which Judas
hanged himself. The hillside below is the place where King Manasseh and others

204


Plate XCIII.

observed the dreadful rites of the worship of Moloch, causing their children to pass
through the fire, and drowning the screams of the little ones with cymbal and chant.
To the right we saw the deep Valley of Jehoshaphat extending along the east side of
the city, and becoming gradually shallower as it proceeds northward. Quite near us,
on the eastern side of this valley, we observed
the quaint little village of Siloam, built on the
steep side of the hill and looking almost as if
about to fall into the valley below—Plate XCIII.

This hill is known as the Mount of Offence,
because it is the traditional site of the palaces
built by Solomon for his many idolatrous wives.

399 After a short rest we rode up along

the bottom of the Valley of Jehoshaphat, passing
the Virgin’s fountain on the way. When we
came to that part which lies between the Temple
Area on the west and the Mount of Olives on
the east, we found the valley covered with grave¬
stones, belonging to both Jews and Moham¬
medans. Both these people have a superstition
that the resurrection and judgment will take
place in this valley, and that if they are not
buried here, their bodies will require to travel to
it underground. Of these tombs there are three
which, from their great size and from the fact
that they are hewn out of the natural rock (with Thelvillage of Siloam.

the exception of the top of the one to the north),

are specially prominent. These are the tombs of Absalom, the Apostle James, and
Zechariah—, Plate LXXXV. The first-named lies to the north of the others, and is
supposed to have been made by Absalom to commemorate his name. If so, his object
has been attained, though not after the manner which he intended, because to this day
the Jewish children cast stones at it to show their indignation at his unfilial conduct.
Next in order is St. James' Tomb, an extensive two-chambered cave, with a large open
window divided by two vertical columns, looking direct across the valley toward the
Temple Area.

400 But the tomb which is of particular interest to us, is that of Zechariah, the cap¬
stone of which is a complete pyramid!-—Plate XCV. When we remember that this
prophet uttered the words, “ He shall bring forth the headstone thereof, with shoutings,
Grace, grace unto it!” it is significant that the monument which has been erected to
his memory should have a pyramid as its head-stone. Such a tomb-stone is surely
unique!

401 When we think of it, how appropriate it is that here, in the midst of so many
evidences of death, we should find a pyramid, the symbol of him who is the resur¬
rection and the life! How like, too, this is to that other, but greater witness to the
resurrection power of our Lord, the Great Pyramid in Egypt, also standing in the midst
of the death which is so evident on every side of it except to the north!—Plate II.

205


o


T


THE VALLEY OF JEHOSHAPHAT, from the walls of the Temple Area; showing Absalom's tomb on the left.
ZECHARIAH’S TOMB on the right, and St. James’ tomb in the centre; also a section of
the innumerable grave-stones which cover a large area of the vallev.


Plate XCV.

Shall we say there is no connection between these two pyramids and Zechariah’s
reference to a head-stone? We must always remember that there is only the one
witness to the Lord in Egypt, the Great Pyramid of Gizeh, for all the other pyramids
are subsequent erections, and more or less copies of the Great one. This fact is well


proven by Professor Petrie. After detailing a series of well
considered arguments, he states that there can
be no reasonable doubt that
nothing but “a bare sand-

blown rise of hill attracted - •

the attention of Khufu ^ A

[whom he understands to JPj!-

have been the builder] for JL'“ > fji & _jp |ff|


Zechariah’s tomb, from the south;


showing also the window-like openings of St. James’ tomb.


the site of his great monument” ; and that the part of the hill on which it stands “is
certainly the finest site for miles on either side of it.” This opinion is the one held also
by Professor Smyth and many other competent authorities.

402 But not only was the Great Pyramid of Gizeh the first pyramid to be erected,
but the pyramid structure proper is entirely peculiar to the Land of Egypt. Professor
C. Piazzi Smyth, in his work Antiquity of Intellectual man, proves conclusively
that the so-called pyramids of Mexico, Assyria, Babylonia, etc., do not answer to the
requirements of the strictly geometrical definition of a pyramid, namely: “a solid,

207


PLATE XCVI


PLATE XCVII.

whose base is a regular rectilinear plane figure, and whose sides are plane triangles,
having all their vertices meeting together in a point above the base, called the vertex of
the pyramid.” These other “pyramids” were erected in steps or terraces, and had
temples built on their tops.

403 In the same connection, Professor Flinders Petrie also writes: “ Such a form of
architecture [as a pyramid] is only known in Middle Egypt, and there only during the
period from the 4th to the 12th Dynasty (before 2000 B.C.) —having square bases and
angles of about 50°. In other countries various modifications of the tumulus, barrow,
or burial-heap have arisen which have come near to this type; but these when formed
of earth are usually circular, or, if square, have a flat top, and when built of stone are
always in steps or terraces.”

404 On a former occasion, when visiting the site of the Temple, we mounted the
walls of the Temple Area and took a photograph of this part of the Valley of Jehosha-
phat, showing the three prominent tombs just mentioned, as well as a few of the
numerous graves which cluster most thickly at the base of the Prophet’s tomb—-
Plate XCIV.

405 On Sunday, 4th July, John, Jack and I, in company with Brother Cotton and
Mr. Jamal, all went a drive along the road to Bethany. We spent so much time visiting
places of interest, that we did not manage to go all the way to Bethany. We drove to
the summit of the Mount of Olives, and ascended the high tower of the Church of the
Ascension. From this eminence we had a magnificent view of the Holy City. Directly
below us were a large number of “ threshing-floors,” of which we succeeded in securing
a photograph showing the harvesters busily engaged “ treading ” the corn—Plate XCVI.

406 We also visited [the
Tombs of the Kings, situated
some distance to the north of
the city—Plate LXXXV. After
descending a broad flight of
rock-hewn steps, we turned
to the left, and through an
archway entered a large open
quadrangle, about 30 feet or
more deep, also cut out in the
rock. On the left wall we
noticed a large opening like
the stage and proscenium of
a theatre—Plate XCVII. It
would measure about 12 or 15
feet deep to the back wall.

On the left side of this stage at
the back, there is a depression
in the floor leading down to a low vertical doorway, which is open. Propped up
beside it is a large stone like a mill-stone, which, if freed, would roll down and
effectually close the entrance. It reminded us of the description of our Lord’s tomb.

209


The Tombs of the Kings,


Plate XCVIII.


£-< a

^ I

S 5

35 QJ

co <

§ °
O £>
^ 'C
o <3


“o' 5
tc 4i

b •§

- k

<3

I


407 We crept through this small doorway, and stood upright in a fairly large
chamber hollowed out in the solid rock at the side of the stage. From it we noticed, by
the light of our candles, that a number of small passages led to other rooms, and having
entered, we found that out of these again yet other passages led to still smaller rooms
which contained the niches for the dead. All the larger apartments have a stone bench
running round the bases of their four walls. These reminded us of the Ramps in the
Grand Gallery of the Great Pyramid of Gizeh. In one of the rooms this resemblance is
most remarkable, for at its north-west corner a portion of the Ramp is broken away,
disclosing an open shaft leading downward to a small subterranean chamber, on three
sides of which are the usual niches for the repose of the dead. It put us at once in
mind of the north-west corner of the Grand Gallery with its broken Ramp and its Well-
shaft. We have always understood that the “Well” in the Great Pyramid of Gizeh
represents Hades, the tomb or death-state; but now we have a practical demonstration
of this common mode of burial in the East, so different from the western practice.
Thus our belief in the symbolism of the “ Well in the Pyramid has been strengthened.

408 We have instructed a photographer in Jerusalem, who has done work in con¬
nection with the "Palestine Exploration Fund,” to take a photograph of this interesting
spot, our own photographic flashlight apparatus having been left behind at the pyra-
niids Plate XCVIII. It is a pity that the Plate does not show a greater portion of the
stone bench on the left.

409 Thus, during our flying visit to Jerusalem, we have observed two interesting
things connected with our work at the Great Pyramid of Gizeh, namely: Zechariah’s
tomb with its symbolical cap-stone; and this broken Ramp revealing the shaft-tomb,
symbolical of the death-state.


Tuesday, 6th July, 8 a.m. Jack and I are now in the train at Port Said, waiting for
our departure to Cairo. We expect to arrive there at one o’clock. We had a fairly
good passage over from Jaffa, except that we might have been more comfortable ; our
cabin was at the stern, and the noise of the screw was disagreeable. Our train has now
moved off, and there is a pleasantly cool breeze blowing into the carriage. In the East
the morning is always the best time to travel.

3 p.m. We have now arrived in Cairo. The train journey was very tiring, and per¬
sonally I felt quite worn out when we reached our destination. Jack, I am glad to say,
is feeling well. We were escorted down the whole length of the station platform by a
squad of hotel porters, each wanting us to go to his particular hotel. They would not
take a refusal. It was not until we met our man, Judah, that they were induced to call off.

412 I asked Judah how he was getting on, and he replied that he was “ very sorry,”
and informed me that his little boy has something wrong with his eyes. Judah appears
distressed about it, showing that he, at least, appreciates good eyesight. Jack is writing
to his father and mother in Jerusalem, telling them that we have arrived safely. We are
now going to the post-office, where we expect to find a number of letters awaiting us. I
will post this here, for it is difficult to get letters sent from the pyramids. The branch
office there is closed during the summer season.

With much love to all, Your loving brother in a far off and very warm land,

P.S.—Jack sends his love. MORTON EDGAR


211


LETTER XV.


Hotel Fast, Jerusalem.

Monday, 5th July, 1909.

Dear Brethren, —“Our forces are now divided into two companies. Morton and Jack
left at eight o’clock this morning for Jaffa, en route for the Great Pyramid, which (D.V.)
they will reach to-morrow. We should all have gone together, but Stanley is not yet
well enough. He has now been in bed for nine days, but this afternoon I lifted him on
to a rocking-chair. He feels fairly well, except that he is still rather weak. His tem¬
perature now fluctuates between 99° and 100° F. We hope that he will have recovered
sufficiently in a day or two to let him see Jerusalem, perhaps to take him a drive to
Bethlehem or Bethany or both. There is now no boat from Jaffa to Port Said till
Saturday, so that, however well he may be, we cannot leave here till then.

414 As a result of our waiting on, we have been able to arrange for the lecture,
“ Where are the Dead ? ” in this hotel. Last week I was too ill to give it, but I am now
feeling very well. Brother Cotton joined us on Saturday evening, and last night he and
Mr. Jamal accompanied me to the Rev. Mr. Sykes of the Church Missionary Society.
Brother Cotton showed him the draft of our programme and asked him if we could hire
his Mission Hall. A long talk followed. He admitted that the problem of the heathen
and of all others who die out of Christ was one which he could not answer, and stated
that he would be very glad to hear what I had .to say regarding it; but he did not think
he would be acting rightly to let us have the use of his hall for such a lecture.

415 This morning, after we had seen Morton and Jack away, Grace and Brother
Cotton called at Hughes’ Hotel, while I waited with Stanley. Hughes’ Hotel has a larger
and more suitable room for a public lecture than Fast’s. The manageress, an Aberdeen
lady, is consecrated to the Lord, and Brother Cotton, Morton and I had a nice talk with
her yesterday. She seems to be favourably impressed with the Truth; but she told
Brother Cotton this morning that she did not feel at liberty to let the room, because
Mr. Hughes, who is abroad at present, objected not long ago to her letting it for a concert.
She proposed that they should see Mr. Thomson who has a Mission Hall, and is superin¬
tendent of the Church Missionary Alliance of the American Free Church. Accordingly,
they called on Mr. Thomson ; but he emphatically refused. He said he had read the
brochure, Where are the Dead? which had been loaned to him by the manageress of
Hughes’ Hotel, and he did not at all agree with it, though he thought it a clever produc¬
tion. Brother Cotton was not surprised at this reception, for this Mr. Thomson was one
of those to whom he sent the Divine Plan of the Ages shortly after coming to a know-
of the Truth, and he remembered having received a strongly-worded letter from him,
opposing the Truth. However, Mr. Thomson said he would come to hear the lecture.


Plate XCIX.

416 Having failed in obtaining any of these three halls, Brother Cotton arranged
with Mr. Fast for this hotel; and handbills will be printed to-morrow morning (the proof
has just come to hand this evening—Monday) advertising a meeting on Thursday at
8-30 p.m. These will be inserted in envelopes and sent to everyone in Jerusalem who


Jerusalem in ihe direction of Jaffa Gate and Mount Zion, as viewed from the
balcony of Fast’s Hotel .


understands English. Already several have been told of the lecture and have expressed
their desire to be present.

417 Among these is Mrs. Schoenecke, the daughter of the late Dr. Schick, who spent
all of his spare moments gathering from books, oral traditions and personal investigations
at the site of the Temple, information concerning the various Temples and Mosques
which have been successively erected on Mount Moriah. The original irregularly
rounded summit of Mount Moriah has been made into a flat plain enclosed by walls,
generally known as the Temple Area. At the south-east corner, erected on arches, is
an extensive pavement, underneath which King Solomon placed his “ forty thousand
stalls of horses” (1 Kings 4:26), and also enormous cisterns to hold supplies of water
estimated at ten million gallons. This water was brought to the cisterns by conduits
from Solomon’s pools, which are situated about ten miles south-south-west of Jerusalem.


212


213


Plates C & Cl.


Dr. Schick’s model of Solomon’s Temple, looking north-west.


Dr. Schick’s model of Herod’s Temple, looking north-west.


418 Dr. Schick made large models of these Temples. Brother Cotton, Morton, Jack
and I visited Mrs. Schoenecke yesterday, and spent about a couple of hours examining
the models. After Mrs. Schoenecke had explained the structure of the tabernacle, I
questioned her as to what it signified, but she did not know. I therefore described
briefly the explanation of it given by C. T. Russell in Tabernacle Shadows, and she
said that it was very reasonable. We procured several excellent photographs of the
models (Plates C & Cl), which are constructed of wood, and consist of many pieces,
made to a scale of 1 : 200. When assembled they form two quadrangles, each measur¬
ing about nine feet long, five and a half feet wide, and (without the stand) twenty inches
high. The photographs of Solomon’s and Herod’s Temples (Plates C & Cl) were taken
with the camera erected at the south-east corner, looking toward the north-west.

419 At present Grace and Brother Cotton are on a visit with Mr. Jamal to the
American Colony to the north of the City—Plate LXXX V. As 4th July was a Sunday,
the Americans are celebrating Independence Day to-day. They call themselves the
“ Overcomers,” I understand, and believe in the near return of the Lord.

420 I asked Mr. Jamal if any of the Jews would attend the lecture, but he said they
would not dare to do so. If their Rabbis knew of their going to a Christian meeting,
they would ostracise them at once, and this would mean the loss of all means of sup¬
port, for they are dependent on the bounty of individuals or societies in Europe and
America.

421 Wednesday, 7th July. Yesterday morning, Stanley was somewhat better, and
as Brother Cotton was driving to the railway terminus Stanley and I accompanied him.
I spent the afternoon writing letters, and in the evening, Grace and I had a walk
round the outside of the west and south walls of Jerusalem, that is to say, round Mount
Zion. It is now known that the ancient city wall extended further south than the pre¬
sent one. At one place, on the south side of Mount Zion, we saw a portion of the old
wall which has been laid bare by excavation—Plate LXXXV. In a line with this, also
outside the present city wall, at the south-west angle, where the valley of Hinnom makes
its sharp bend, a Church Missionary Society School, founded in 1853, includes in its
walls portions of old buildings, steps, etc. The tomb of David is at this part, not far
from the school.

422 George Adam Smith and many others believe that the traditional Mount Zion,
which is higher than Mount Moriah on which the Temple stood, is not the Scriptural
one, but that the true Mount Zion is directly south of the Temple Area on a lower level
than Mount Moriah, and situated between the Tyropoeon Valley on the west, and the
Valley of Jehoshaphat on the east. Dr. Schick and others have stated their belief that
Solomon’s palace was erected here. In 2 Sam. 24 :18, we read of going up to the
Temple from the City of David,—a term frequently used in the Scriptures as synony¬
mous with Zion—2 Sam. 5 :7 ; 1 Kings 8:1. This seems to be the chief argument in
favour of the view.

423 On our return, Grace and I thought we might walk through a part of the city.
Accordingly, we entered by Zion Gate, but instead of turning to the left in order to pass
through the clean Armenian quarter, which consists mostly of synagogues and cloisters,
we turned by mistake to the right, and walked into the Jews’ quarter with its narrow,

215


crowded filthy streets—Plate LXXXV. When a donkey comes along, laden or unladen,
or a porter with his burden, we must squeeze into the side to let them pass. There is
only room for four people to walk abreast; but this would be possible only if the streets
were deserted, for many of the merchants squat on each side with their wares, and as
there is a constant stream of people, it is impossible as a rule for even two to walk
abreast. The smell is dreadful all the way, and clouds of flies hang over the foodstuffs,
especially the sweets, and also over the vegetable refuse which litters the street. I can
assure you, we were glad when we finally emerged into David Street, and then out by
the Jaffa Gate. The streets outside the city walls are broad like European roadways.

424 This morning I called on Canon Brown, head of the London Jews’ Society, for a
bottle of milk for Stanley. He keeps a cow, and has been very good to us, supplying us
with fresh milk every day. Then I visited the English Hospital for Jews, and saw Dr.
Wheeler perform a few minor operations, and had a look round the Hospital with him.
This evening we intend to drive to the Tombs of the Kings and elsewhere, and Grace is
now making tea for us before we start. We expect (D.V.) to leave Jerusalem on the
10th (Saturday), and hope to spend a week at the Great Pyramid before returning
home.

With much love in the Lord, in which Grace joins, Your loving brother,

John Edgar.


216


LETTER XVI.


Tents at the Great Pyramid of Gieeh.

Wednesday, 7th July, 1909.

DEAR Brethren,— Jack and I are now in our tents at the Great Pyramid. We arrived
last night at 7 o’clock, and found them erected much as I had left them nearly a fort¬
night ago. Abdul Salam Faid was glad to welcome me back, and to be introduced to
Jack, but was disappointed at not seeing Stanley. He appears to have taken a great
fancy for him, and is sorry to learn of his illness. We told him that we hoped that
Stanley would be well enough by the end of the week to return to the Pyramid. Mr.
Faid raised his hand and exclaimed : “We will pray to the Great God that he will get
well and be able to come.’’

426 I took Jack over to see Mr. Covington, who has not yet started on his westward
journey; but not finding him in his tent, we walked over to the casing-stones which I
showed to Jack. Being about nine o’clock, and the moon not having risen, it was quite
dark. We had therefore to take a candle which was protected from the breeze by a
glass globe, and by this feeble light Jack saw those wonderful casing-stones, gleaming
out whitely from the surrounding gloom, the solitary survivors of the thousands which
at one time encased this “ Miracle in Stone ”—Plate CII.

427 I am very glad indeed to get back to the Pyramid, and Jack says he too is glad
to be here, for although we enjoyed our visit to Jerusalem, we did not feel quite safe
there but were always afraid we might become ill. As precautionary measures against
malaria we took quinine morning and evening while in Palestine, but at the Pyramid
we do not think this necessary.

428 Just now (12 noon) the temperature in the shade (in my tent, which has a double
roof, quite shutting out the sun’s rays) is 91 °F. Though it is warm, it is not unbearable,
as a fresh wind is blowing from the north. There were some light clouds in the sky
this morning at nine o’clock. When John was here, few clouds were visible, although
during the fortnight before he arrived I saw a number of dark clouds every day. Some
of these were dense enough to obscure for several minutes at a time, even the strong
Egyptian sunlight; so much so, that on several occasions while photographing the casing-
stones of the Great Pyramid, I had to wait until a cloud passed away in order to get
the desired light and shade. I have seen no rain, however, all the time I have been here.

429 Jack and I have been in the Great Pyramid to-day, measuring the masonry of
the east wall of the First Ascending Passage. We found it difficult work, and very
tiring. In some places it is almost impossible to locate the joints between the stones, and
these joints run in different directions. The system of masonry of this passage is very
peculiar, quite unlike any of the other passages. We shall endeavour to make a draw-

217


Plate CII.


Col. Howard Pyse’s historical CASING-STONES in the middle of the north base of the
Great Pyramid of Gizeh; alongside pf which stands Hadji Ali Gabri, whose father,
when a boy, was in the employment of Col. Howard Vyse during
his extensive operations at the Pyramids in 1837 A.D


ing of it. The masonry of the Horizontal Passage to the Queen’s Chamber is very
different from that of the First Ascending Passage. The stones there are very regular
in size and shape; but as we have not yet measured that passage, I cannot say more
about it at present.

430 Before we could properly measure the First Ascending Passage, we required to
get Judah to brush down the floor from top to bottom, for it was covered with stone
chippings and dust as a result of our men’s work there, when cutting footholds. The
fine dust which arose during Judah’s brushing was carried by the air-current up the
passage to where we were measuring, and was very unpleasant; but poor Judah
experienced the worst of it. His left eye became quite inflamed, so that he had to put
on a bandage.

431 We had our five o’clock tea, served by our faithful waiter Sayd, about half-way
up the passage. The floor at that particular part is very broken and uneven, and this
enabled us to rest both ourselves and the kettle and tea-pot, etc,, without fear of sliding
down to the Granite Plug at the lower end. Judah had by this time finished his brush¬
ing, and enjoyed a cup along with us. The last place at which we had “ tea ” when
John was here, was at the bottom of the Well-shaft, where it enters the Descending
Passage. John was sitting right in at the very bottom of the shaft, with a cool current
of air coming down upon his head.

432 I am now about to start on the drawing which is intended to show at a glance
the peculiar masonry of the walls of the First Ascending Passage. It is not an easy
task to record every measurement exactly according to scale.

Thursday night, 8th July. Jack and I have spent most of the day in the First
Ascending Passage, measuring the west wall. This morning we called on Mr. Coving¬
ton, who returned to his tent last night. He was pleased to see me again, and gave us
some newspapers containing certain articles referring to his work of excavating the
casing-stones of the Great Pyramid. Two of these papers made reference, also, to our
own work at the Pyramid.

Friday, 9th July. We are going into the Great Pyramid presently, to measure the
roof and floor of the First Ascending Passage. We hope that to-day will see the end of
our operations in this part of the Pyramid, but are afraid it will not; it is so troublesome
to measure. Judah’s eye is not so bad to-day, although it is still a little inflamed.

435 A great number of strangers, mostly natives of the country, are about this
morning. Most visitors pass by the Great Pyramid, and even of those who evince
interest in it, few venture inside. In fact, all day yesterday, and the day before as well,
we had the interior to ourselves.

1-40 p.m. We were in the Great Pyramid from 10 a.m. till 1 p.m., measuring the
floor and roof of the First Ascending Passage. We were interrupted two or three times
by some of those visitors whom we saw this morning. However, they did not take long
to pass us, and we were not interfered with in any way. A number of them were
Egyptian women, most of whom were accompanied by their guides only. I asked Sayd
about this, as I always thought that the women of this country,, and of the East gener¬
ally, were kept very secluded. Sayd replied that no Arab women would be allowed to

219


enter the Pyramid alone. She would require to be accompanied by her husband, and
would have to make her visit at night. It would be a shame for her to visit it in any
other way.

Evening. In the afternoon we returned to the Great Pyramid and resumed our work.
We finished the particular part we were at by six o'clock. This gave us an hour and a
half to spare before dinner. In that time we climbed to the top of the Pyramid, my first
ascent. We ascended by the south-west angle, the one nearest the Second Pyramid,
and were not assisted, but Judah and Sayd accompanied us. We had a magnificent
view from the summit. When looking down the sides they appeared very steep. We
could have spent a long time viewing the Arab village, and the numerous tombs, etc.,
below us. The sun was setting, and we were specially interested to see the immensely
long shadows cast by the Great and Second Pyramids, away over the sandy but partly
cultivated plain to the east. To the south and west, we saw nothing but sand. It was
impressive to think that we were situated right at the edge of the great Sahara Desert
(called at this part the Libyan Desert) the area of which is greater than the whole of the
United States of America. What a wonderful thing it will be when the prophecy of
Isaiah is fulfilled—“ The desert shall rejoice and blossom as the rose”!

438 Shortly after we reached the summit, Judah began to say his prayers. He evi¬
dently considered it a fine opportunity, on that high place. He faced the east and began
to bow. and to kneel down and touch the ground with his forehead, etc. We could hot
hear him say anything, however. In their way, the Mohammedans are very religious ;
and we cannot help admiring them, even though we know that their prayer is little more
than a form. They let nothing stand in the way of their religious ceremonies. Every
Friday (the Mohammedan’s Sabbath) at 11-30 a.m., Judah must go off to the village to
attend prayers, and we have to get on as well as we may by ourselves. Although the
Arabs have the reputation of being untruthful, we are glad to say that we have nothing
to complain of in those who are immediately in attendance upon us. We have found
them honest and obliging. Mr. Covington, however, is greatly incensed against the
Arabs. They have robbed his tent several times, and he has been unable to get any
redress. He has often said to me: “ Oh! you don’t know these Arabs! ”

439 We descended the Pyramid by its north-east angle, the easiest of the four to
climb, and the one up and down which visitors are generally taken, and walked direct
to the Arab village which is situated quite close to the east side of the Pyramid, not on
the plateau, however, but down below, where we had some business to transact—Plate
II. We found the man we wanted sitting on the sand a little distance from his house,
drinking coffee with a few of his Arab friends.

440 After joining in a cup, and discussing the relative merits of Arabian, Turkish,
and French coffee (we preferred the Arabian), we strolled off together in the direction
of the rock-cut tombs, two Of which Professor Smyth had made his home during the
time of his investigations at the Great Pyramid in 1865. Those were the days before
the advent of the tramway car. It had taken Professor Smyth a whole day and part of
another to do the journey from Cairo to the pyramids; but Haw, the distance can be
traversed in less than an hour! In 1865, the Arab village was not built so close to the.
tombs as it is now. The place would therefore be very much.cleaner than it is at

220


Plate CHI.

present. Wooden doors have been fitted into the openings of the particular tombs used
by Professor Smyth, but as they were locked we were unable to view the inside.

441 As it was dark, I was unable to photograph these tombs, but on a former
occasion I secured a picture of the doorlike entrances of some rock-hewn tombs situated


Rock-hewn tombs to the west of the Great Pyramid of Gizeh; showing their

door-like entrances.


not far from the west base of the Great Pyramid—Plate CIII. We have not had time to
visit many of the tombs, and I am therefore unable to say much about them ; but in one
of those shown in the photograph, we noticed a deep well-like shaft descending perpen¬
dicularly to a considerable depth from the floor of the squarely-cut chamber, and much
resembling the Well-shaft in the Great Pyramid. I understand that these tomb-shafts
are very numerous, and that they have several tiers of passages and chambers branch¬
ing out from them in different directions.

442 I require to close this letter rather abruptly, as Jack is now going to Cairo and
will post it. We received a telegram from Port Said at 9-30 .this morning (it is now
Sunday), saying that John, Grace and Stanley are on their way here. Evidently Stanley
has recovered sufficiently to come on. A large tent about 18 feet in diameter is being
erected for them—quite a village of tents now. But I must close.

Love to all, Your loving brother,

Morton Elgar.

P.S.—Jack sends his love. He greatly enjoys being here.


Plate CIV.


LETTER XVII.


Train en route for Cairo.

Sunday, 11th July, 1909.

DEAR Brethren, —Yesterday at 5 p.m. we bade good-bye to the Holy Land, and about
an hour later it faded away in the distance. Grace, Stanley and I were there 16 days
in all. We landed at Jaffa on Friday, 25th June, at 7 a.m., and we left yesterday, 10th
July (Saturday) at 5 p.m. Barring our sickness and the mosquitoes, we had a very


Dr. Schick’s Model of the Mosque of Omar, and the Temple Area; looking north-west.

pleasant time. The air at Jerusalem is fresh, except in the narrow, dirty streets.

444 The population* of Jerusalem is about 100,000, and the proportion of Jews is said
to be about three-fourths. All are agreed that it is within only the last few years that so
many Jews have settled in the Holy~Land, and now that the Turkish Constitution has
been granted, and a new Sultan enthroned, they expect, because of the increased liberty
which is already apparent, that the influx of Jews will continue to increase. As there is
no longer room within the city proper for such a large growth of the population, many
Colonies of Jews, as also most of the Europeans, the Missionaries, Consuls and others,

222


The Mosque of Omar from the south.

the City-wall, chiefly to the north and west—Plate LXXXV,

445 When I left off my last letter to you, we were about to leave the hotel (Hotel
Fast, Jerusalem) for a drive. It was Wednesday afternoon, 7th inst. We drove first to
the Tombs of the Kings. In one of the chambers a stone bench or ramp which runs
round the walls is broken away at the north-west corner, revealing a passage or shaft
leading down to a chamber on a lower level (the lowest hell or Sheol—Deut. 32:22;
Psa. 86 :13). It looks so like the broken Well-mouth in the Great Pyramid, that Morton
wanted a flashlight photograph of it. A professional photographer accompanied us, and
the picture which he securedjhas turned out very well—Plate XCVIII.

223


Plate CV.

have settled outside. Colonel Conder states that in 1872, when he first visited Jerusa¬
lem, the population was only one-third of what it is now, and there were at that time
only a few villas outside the gates, while the suburbs to north and west had not grown
up, and there were no modern buildings on Olivet. Now fully half the city is outside


Plate CVI.


THE MOSQUE OF OMAR.

C


PLATE CVII.

446 We next drove to the Garden Tomb, which is believed by Col. Conder and others
to be the real tomb of Jesus, It is outside the wall to the north of the city, near the base
of a cliff which is shaped like a skull, and hence might aptly receive the name Golgotha
or Calvarium, the place of a skull (not skulls). After leaving the Garden Tomb we drove


along outside the north wall of the city eastward till we reached the Valley of the-Kedron
(the Valley of Jehoshaphat), and then down southward by the very steep and rough road
into the valley to the Garden of Gethsemane, which is situated at the base of the Mount
of Olives, opposite the Mosque of Omar. The Garden is kept by a Roman Catholic priest.
Several olive trees in it are of an extreme age. One of them, which is claimed to be the
place of our Lord’s agony, is evidently very, very old.

447 Next day, Thursday 8th, after the heat of the day, we walked into the city and
visited the Mosque of Omar. Plate CIV is a photograph of Dr. Schick’s model of this
mosque, and the Temple Area. It gives a good idea of the present appearance of the
place. As this was my second visit I was able to explain the various points of interest
to Grace and Stanley. The Mosque of Omar has a dull appearance when viewed from
a distance, but close at hand it looks very well—Plate CV. The lower half is composes
of marble, and the upper half of blue porcelain. Inside, the lofty dome and stained

225


The Cave under the Dome of the Rock, in the Mosque of Omar.


JERUSALEM, from the Mount of Olives.


glass windows are beautiful, and there is an abundance of lovely mosaic work and gilt
tracing. We required to put on slippers before we were allowed to enter the mosque.
The portion of the floor directly under the great dome is the bare rock of Mount Moriah.
It is fenced off. from the remaining floor-space round it. Many claim that this is the exact
place where the brazen altar of the Temple stood. There is an opening in it through
which the blood of the animals sacrificed is supposed to have drained. We were in¬
formed that no Jew will venture within the Temple Area lest he should happen to tread
on the site of the Holy of Holies.

448 In the rock under the dome is a cave, to which access is gained by a number

of steps_Plate CVII. When we were in it we were told to stamp on the ground and

notice by the hollowness of the sound that there is a second cave underneath. The
Moslems have many ridiculous traditions. A certain hollow in the roof is claimed to
have been worn by the pressure of Mohammed's head as day by day he stood in this
cave and prayed. It was from here that the Moslems believe that the Prophet ascended
to heaven on his miraculous steed, El-Burak. They say that he pierced the roof of the
cave (the hole already mentioned being pointed out as proof of this), and that the rock
would have followed him had it not been for the intervention of the Archangel. Many
Mohammedans believe that the rock now hangs in the air!

449 At the south-west corner of the mosque stands a tall square case of open iron¬
work, in which is kept, under lock and key, a large bottle—Plate CVI. This bottle is
supposed to contain three hairs from the Prophet’s beard. In the day of judgment,
Mohammed will sit astride a short horizontal column which juts from the east wall
bounding the Temple Area, and the Lord Isa (Jesus) will sit on the other side of the
Valley of Jehoshaphat, and between them will be stretched these hairs across the wide
valley. Everybody will be compelled to walk across on the hairs. Unbelievers, i.e.,
all who are not Mohammedans, will fall and be consigned to eternal torment, but
guardian angels will guide the faithful safely across and usher them into Paradise.

450 After inspecting the Mosque of Omar, we walked to the south part of the
Temple Area where we visited the Mosque of Al-Aksa—Plate LXXXV. This was
formerly a Christian Church built by the Emperor Justinian, who is mentioned in
Scripture Studies, Vol. Ill, page 70. In this mosque we noticed several windows, the
iron bars of which are covered with small tufts of rag. It was explained that these
rags were tied there by devout women, under the belief that they would acquire a
special healing virtue. When one of their relatives turns ill, they remove a piece of rag
from the window-bars, and stir some of the sick person’s drink with it!

451 In the evening, I lectured on " Where are the Dead?” There were about
eighty people present, and all seemed much impressed. The only opposition we had
was from the American Missionary,, the Rev. Mr. Thomson. However,, he did not
interrupt the meeting, but reserved his remarks till the end, when he said that if he had
me on a platform, he would “ squash my arguments in half-an-hour.” Brother Cotton
acted as chairman, and at the close of the meeting asked if any would like another
address next evening. A good number held up their hands. Some said it was the best
lecture they had ever heard, and I was glad to have had the privilege of telling them a
little of our heavenly Father’s glorious plan of the Ages.

452 On Friday, 9th, we drove to the Mount of Olives and to Bethany. From the


227


Plate CIX.


summit of the Mount of Olives we had a magnificent view of Jerusalem (Plate CVIII),
and were able to appreciate to some small degree the deep emotion of Jesus when he
wept over the city and pronounced these words: “O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which
killest the prophets, and stonest them that are sent unto thee: how often would I have
gathered thy children together, as a hen doth gather her brood under her wings, and ye
would not! Behold, your house is felt unto you desolate: and verily I say unto you,
Ye shall not see me, until the time come when ye shall say, 1 Blessed is he that cometh
in the name of the Lord’”—Luke 13 : 34, 35 ; 19 : 41. We thank the Lord for the
knowledge that the time is near at hand, when Jerusalem shall no longer be “ trodden
down of the Gentiles”—Luke 21 : 24,—Par. 155.

453 When we reached the village of Bethany, we were shown the tomb of Lazarus,
and the ruins of the house of Simon the leper, and those also of the church which had
been built on the traditional site of the house of Mary and Martha. Although these
sites are only traditional, it was pleasant to remember that we were near the ancient
home of those whom Jesus so dearly loved, and the scene of his greatest miracle.
The tender recollection not only recalled the past, but brought vividly before our minds
the glad time in the near future when all that are in their graves shall hear the voice of
him who said “I am the resurrection and the life,” and shall come forth; and when
the nations will say “ Lo, this is our God: we have waited for him, and he will save us:
this is the Lord ; we have waited for him, we will be glad and rejoice in his salvation "
—Isa. 25 : 9.

454 On our drive to and from Bethany, we had lovely views of Jerusalem from
Mount Scopus, a hill which lies to the north of the Mount of Olives—Plate CIX. It is
said that Titus, in the year 70 A.D., had his first view of Jerusalem from Mount Scopus,
and that when he saw the magnificent walled city, rising high above the Valley of
Jehoshaphat, he was so impressed that he exclaimed; “Her beauty might avail to move the
majesty of Rome to mercy! ” It is a pity that the railway does not approach Jerusalem
from the east, the view is so grand, whereas it is somewhat disappointing when seen
from the present railway station to the west—LXXXV. Our hearts were full as we
gazed upon this wonderful city, the oldest in the world, and thought of its history and
its many associations.

455 In the evening we had our second meeting—a Chart talk on the Divine Plan of
the Ages Plate VI. Some of those present evinced considerable interest, and we were
sorry we had not a larger stock of first volumes of Scripture Studies, as we could have
disposed of a large number.

456 On Saturday, 10th, we journeyed by the morning train from Jerusalem to Jaffa,
and were accompanied by Mr. David Hall. The Mountains of Judaea, along the valleys
of which the railway-line winds in and out, are for the most part very bleak, and are
littered with numberless limestone boulders. There is very little covering of soil on
them. Mr. Hall explained to us that in the rainy season the earth gets washed down.
Near the first station after Jerusalem, we saw several of the hills reclaimed in an
ingenious, yet simple manner. Doubtless all the other mountain sides will soon be
reclaimed after a similar fashion. The limestone blocks have been collected and built
up to form a series of low dry dykes or walls, and the bare ground above each has been


covered with a layer of earth. In this way a series of terraces have been formed one
above the other along the sides of the hills. As no plaster has been used in the con¬
struction of the walls, rain trickles freely through them, but the spaces between the
stones are too fine to allow the passage of much earth.

457 The soil around Jerusalem is very rich,, and is of a beautiful golden-brown

colour. It is interesting to note the contrast between it and the soil of Lower Egypt,
which, though also extremely fertile, is of a deep black hue. This corresponds well
with the Scriptural symbolism of the two countries. Egypt typifies “this present evil
world,” whereas Canaan, “the glorious land” (Dan. 11 16), typifies the heavenly

inheritance. Crops in both Egypt and Palestine grow with scarcely any effort, and
where care is taken the results are wonderful. In the valley of the Jordan, a mon¬
astery possesses a vine which yields six tons of grapes. At one place tomatoes are
grown which weigh three pounds each. Canaan must indeed have been a land “ flow¬
ing with milk and honey.”

458 Our sail across to Port Said was not agreeable ; the cabins were stifling. It is
warm now in the train, but it does not feel so hot as on the day when Stanley and I
first arrived in Egypt. The harvest has now all been gathered, and everywhere we see
the grain, mostly in bags ready for exportation, though in some places it is still lying in
large heaps. In most of the fields we see yokes of oxen drawing the primitive ploughs
which merely scratch the soil.

We are now nearing Cairo, and I must now close. We are all three feeling well, and
hope to find Morton and Jack the same.

Your loving brother,

John Edgar.


230


Plate CX.


Diagram of the


First Ascending


Passage


ROOF


WEST


WALL


ft ft


R 0 /O F


•

■_ * i-t

■Ji _u_sr* \

. ______ L_ _ \


■ i _ ...


' -

F

L 0

0

R


b

t-


o

. a


1

M 1

jr sn

• /

/ 1

/


at


W E\ S T


W h A \ L L\


EAST O a w A L L

, , • r /

R 0 0 F


1 l


F L ,0 0 R


UPPER END

\of *—;

\ GRANITE PLUG


j W 7A '/ L Ly

R 0 / 0 F i ; /


South


North


Opened out on the Plane of the Floor

BETWEEN THE UPPER END OF THE CrAN/TE PLUG AND THE GRAND GALLERY
SHOWING THE PECULIAR BUT SYMMETRICAL SYSTEM OF ITS MASONRY,
ALSO THE POSITIONS OF THE VARIOUS "C/RDLES" WITH THEIR "Po/NTERS."


LETTER XVIII.


Tents at the Great Pyramid of Gizeh.

Tuesday, 13th July, 1909.

DEAR Brethren, —We were glad on Sunday to welcome to our village of tents, John,
Grace and Stanley on their arrival from Jerusalem, and also to see that Stanley was
quite himself again.

460 Since his return, John and I have been working in the First Ascending Passage,
verifying the measurements taken by Jack and me. You will remember how we had
found measuring in this passage very trying. The joints on the walls seemed so hope¬
lessly confused that we had been inclined many times to give up in despair. However,
we felt that we must continue, as otherwise the time already spent would be wasted.
Our labour has been rewarded, for what at first was confusion to us, is now seen to be
wonderful symmetry. There is design in the whole passage. This we discovered when
we had carefully drawn to scale an elevation of each of the walls—Plate CX.

461 In Our Inheritance in the Great Pyramid, 5th edition, page 295, Professor
C. Piazzi Smyth inserted the following as a footnote : “ In the year 1872, Mr. Waynman
Dixon applied himself long and steadily to mapping down everything measurable touch-
ing the reputed disorder of the joint-lines in the First Ascending Passage of the Great
Pyramid, or that one leading up to the lower north end of the Grand Gallery; and
presently perceived a most admirable order pervading the apparent disorder, tending
also to hyper-excellent masonic construction. For the chief discovery was, that at
stated intervals the smaller blocks forming elsewhere separately portions of the walls,
floor, and ceiling of the passage, were replaced by great transverse plates of stone, with
the whole of the passage’s hollow rectangular bore cut clean through themwherefore,
at these places, the said plates formed walls, floor, and ceiling, all in one piece.”

462 These plates of stone have been called Girdles. Before leaving home we had
recognized the importance of the three upper ones as marking important dates in the
Law Dispensation. 1 We therefore examined them with care, and found that while all
of the Girdles are differentiated from the other stones in this passage by their remark¬
able structure, the upper three are distinguished by symmetrical joints in the stones
above and below them. An examination of these joints, as shown in the diagram
(Plate CX), will demonstrate the exact symmetry of their angles one with another.
Additionally, let into the walls immediately below the three upper Girdles, there are
peculiar inset stones, which look like pointers, as if to call the Pyramid students’ special
attention to these Girdles. And as if still further to accentuate their importance, the inset
“ pointer ” stones are let into specially large wall stones, as a reference to the diagram
will show.

1 In spite of long application we were unable to discover chronological significance in the lower Girdles.

231


463 For the purpose of reference we have numbered these Girdles, beginning from
the upper or south end of the passage, and counting downward—See Plate IX. We
find that the distance from the upper extremity of the passage to the first Girdle, is
almost twice the distance between the first and second ; while the distance between the
first and second Girdles is nearly the same as that between the second and third.

464 Almost exactly in the centre of the double space between the upper end of the
passage and the first Girdle, the joints in the floor and both walls are nearly continuous
with each other, forming, therefore, what we might term a Girdle Joint. Let into the
east wall immediately below this Girdle Joint, and as if to call attention to it, are two
small inset stones, somewhat similar to the pointers immediately below the three
important Girdles. The upper part of the passage from the top or south end down to
the third Girdle is, therefore, divided into four parts of nearly equal length.

465 It is interesting to notice that the inset pointer-stones alternate, first on the
east wall below the Girdle Joint, then on the west wall below the first Girdle, then on
the east wall below the second Girdle, and finally on the west wall below the third
Girdle.

466 These three upper Girdles are vertical, and square across from east to west,
and are each composed of two stones, an upper and a lower, the upper forming the roof
and part of both walls, and the lower the floor and the remainder of the walls, The
joints on the walls of the passage between the upper and lower portions of each Girdle
are horizontal, but are not opposite each other. In the first and third Girdles which,
we have seen, are indicated by pointers on the west wall, the joint on the west is lower
than its companion on the east wall; while in the second Girdle, which is indicated by
a pointer on the east wall, the east joint is lower than the west. It would therefore
appear that the two stones which form each Girdle are not set horizontally one upon
the other from east to west, but at an angle.

467 Those Girdles which lie lower down the passage than the three just described,
are all in contact with one another. Though, like the first three, they are vertical, they
do not lie square across the passage; their joint-lines on the floor and roof incline
upward diagonally from the east wall to the west wall. Some of these lower Girdles
are formed out of a single stone. As will be seen in the drawing (Plate CX), the fourth
Girdle is very irregular in shape, its south face being cut to form no less than six
distinct joint-lines with the stones above it.

468 The whole of the passage from the fourth Girdle down to the upper end of the
Granite Plug is much dilapidated, extensive exfoliation having taken place on walls,
roof and floor. Accurate measuring at this part is therefore almost impossible. How¬
ever, we tried our best to get the exact positions of all the joints by stretching lines
tightly along the four angles formed by the walls with the roof and floor, and taking
off-sets to these lines from the various joints. From peculiar indications in the roof
at this dilapidated part, it would seem that the stones which form the Girdles here
were originally built in solid, end to end, after which the bore of the passage was cut
through them. Above the fourth Girdle, however, there can be no doubt that the
passage was constructed in the usual way, i.e., that the floor was first laid, the walls
erected at the proper distance apart on the floor, and the roof-stones then placed on top
of the wall-stones. Nevertheless, it is quite probable that the stones forming the three

232


upper Girdles were built in entire, and the bore of the passage cut through them in situ.
The two roof-stones immediately above and below each of the three upper Girdles, are
in themselves partial girdles, thus further calling attention to the importance of these
three prominent Girdles.

469 And yet, to the casual visitor to the Pyramid, and even to the observer who
keeps his eyes about him, none of this wonderful symmetry in the masonry of the First
Ascending Passage is clearly visible. The joints between the stones are in most
instances so close, that it is difficult to locate their exact positions, more especially as
they appear to run in all directions. The first impression one gets from an endeavour
to understand the system of masonry in this passage, is that it is without order. Here
is the impression which Professor C. Piazzi Smyth had formed of it: “ The walls show
sometimes vertical, and sometimes perpendicular-to-passage joints, and these are now
and then confusedly interfered with by parts of horizontal courses of masonry.
Altogether, there is smaller and less perfect masonry employed in the First Ascending
Passage than in the Entrance Passage ; giving the practical impression of the former
being a mere necessary means of communicating between the Entrance Passage and the
Grand Gallery, and having little or no symbolic importance in itself.” We have reason
to believe, however, that Professor Smyth latterly came to see the important symbolical
significance of this Passage, namely, that it represents the Law Dispensation, the Age
during which God had special dealings with the Jewish nation by virtue of their Law
Covenant, even as the Grand Gallery symbolizes that Dispensation which follows the
Jewish Age, namely, the Gospel Age, in which we are now living—Plate VI.

470 A quotation from the Rev. John Forbes’ Scripture Parallelism, which Profes¬
sor Smyth inserts on the fly-leaf of his 2nd Vol. of Life and Work, is specially appli¬
cable to the masonry of the First Ascending Passage, though not quoted by Professor
Smyth with this intention, but rather as applicable to the whole Pyramid: “ In God's
work of creation, amidst the rich profusion and diversity which seem at first to defy all
attempts at arrangement and classification, an unexpected beauty of order and regularity
are discoverable on closer examination, and all things, from the lowest to the highest,
are found to be in order and number and weight.”

With much love from us all, Your loving brother,

Morton Edgar.


233


Plate CXII.


LETTER XIX.


Tents at the Great Pyramid of Gizeh.

Wednesday, 14th July, 1909.

DEAR Brethren, —All day we have been busy taking photographs, first of the tents
and surroundings, and then inside the Great Pyramid by flashlight. Of the former,
two were taken with the camera pointing out of my bedroom tent doors, one of which
opens to the east, and the other to the north-west. In the eastward view (Plate CXI),
the north - east corner of the Great
Pyramid appears on the right ; and
well in front, on the edge of the pyra¬
mid plateau, is Mr. Covington’s square
tent. The low flat-roofed building be¬
yond this is the Viceroy’s residence
during the season. Down in the sandy
plain below, a few of the houses of the
Arab village are discernible.

472 In the north-west view (Plate
CXIV), a part of Mena House Hotel
can be seen on the right-hand corner,
while on the sand-hills above are a
few small buildings connected with the
hotel. The tents beside these out¬
houses belong to people whose busi¬
nesses are in Cairo, and who come out
here to lodge for the night and enjoy
the cool, fresh night-air of the desert.

Only those who, like ourselves, have
work at the pyramids or tombs, are
permitted to erect tents on the pyra¬
mid plateau.

473 After taking these and a few

other photographs, we journeyed over
to the sand-hills above the hotel, and ^ group of ourselves with our Arab attendants,
secured several views of the Great at the Great Pyramid of Gizeh.

Pyramid from these heights. One of

them (Plate CXIII) was taken with a long-focus lens, and shows only part of the huge
bulk of the Pyramid, and our tents in front,

235


The cook at his kitchen-tent.


View north-westward from " Tents at the Great Pyramid of Gizeh."


Plates CXIV & CXV.


PLATE CXVI,


The STEP at the head of the Grand Gallery of the Great Pyramid of Gizeh;
showing the Ramps terminating against its north front; and the low
passage leading horizontally southward to the Ante-Chamber.


Plate CXVII.

474 Later in the day we resumed our work in the interior of the Great Pyramid.
Placing the camera in front of the Step at the head of the Grand Gallery, we took a
picture of it in order to show how dilapidated it now is after the wear of fully a thous¬
and years’ traffic (Plate CXVI); for since the year 820 A.D., when Caliph A1 Mamoun
forced his way into
these upper pass¬
ages, they have
ever been free of
access to all. This
photograph also
shows the low pass¬
age which leads
from the Grand
Gallery to the Ante-
Chamber, and be¬
yond this the sec¬
ond low passage
leading out of the
Ante - Chamber to
the King’s Cham¬
ber. The lower
edge of the Granite
Leaf in the Ante-
Chamber is also
distinguishable. In
front of the Gran¬
ite Leaf to the right

or west side, Stanley can be seen sitting in the excavation made by Caviglia in his
search for the northern air-channel of the King’s Chamber, which we described in
a former letter Par. 345. Originally the west wall, like the east wall, was con¬
tinuous and unbroken from its commencement at the south wall of the Grand Gallery
to its termination at the King’s Chamber. The continuity of the east wall is shown in
another photograph which we took with the camera erected on top of the Step to the
wes f Plate CXVII. This photograph shows the square but somewhat dilapidated
doorway of the small passage as it appears in the south wall of the Grand Gallery, and
to the left, part of the east wall of the Grand Gallery.

475 We secured photographs of several parts of interest in the Ante-Chamber.
One shows John standing in the twenty-one inch space between the north wall of the
chamber behind him, and the Granite Leaf in front—Plate CXVIII. He is leaning
against the east wall, which at this part is, like the north wall, composed of limestone.
The floor is of special interest. You will no doubt recall how Professor C. Piazzi Smyth
and others point out that, while the floor of the King’s Chamber is composed entirely
of granite, that of the Ante-Chamber consists mostly of granite, but partially of lime¬
stone Plate XV. The latter portion is a continuation of the limestone blocks which
form the Step in the Grand Gallery and the floor of the short passage leading into the

239


The low passage leading horizontally southward from the Grand
Gallery to the Ante-Chamber and King’s Chamber.


*


T


Plate CXVIII,


Plate CXIX.


The twenty-one inch space between the north (left) wall and
the Granite Leaf, in the Ante-Chamber of the Great
Pyramid of Gizeh; showing the first Granite
floor-stone to the right


The south side of the GRANITE LEAF in the ANTE-CHAMBER of the Great
Pyramid of Gizeh; showing the fragmentary remains of two of the
pilasters on the east wall; also the first granite floor-stone
raised slightly above the general floor-level.


1


Ante-Chamber. This limestone portion ends a few inches to the north of the Granite
Leaf. John is seen standing on it, his toes touching the first granite floor-stone which
is raised a quarter of an inch above the other stones of the Ante-Chamber floor.
Before he can rest his feet firmly on solid granite, he will require first to bow
down and pass between the granite walls under the Granite Leaf into the Ante-
Chamber proper—Plate XX.

476 Another photograph (Plate CXIX) shows John in the act of passing under the
Granite Leaf. By actual trial, we found it impossible to raise our heads on the inner or
south side of the Granite Leaf, without first lifting our feet from the limestone floor, and
placing them on granite. With the exception of two small limestone blocks in the upper
corners of the south and east walls, this, the main portion of the Ante-Chamber, is
formed entirely of granite.

477 As there is only a width of about three and a half feet between the east and
west walls of the Ante-Chamber, we could not have taken the photograph of the small
space to the north of the Granite Leaf, had it not been for Caviglia’s excavation in the
west wall. By taking advantage of this excavation, we were enabled to set back the
camera far enough to secure a view of sufficiently wide angle toshow John at nearly
full length.

478 We find it necessary to use our special wide-angle lens, which has a focus of
only 3 l /g inches, in nearly all our photographs of the interior of the Great Pyramid; in
such confined spaces as that mentioned above, it is of great advantage. For views
outside we have another lens with a focus of 6-3 inches, which can also be converted
into a focus of 11% inches by an arrangement lately devised by lens-makers. Both of
these lenses were made by Carl Zeiss of Jena, and are in our opinion the best possible
for careful work. In addition to these, we have a “ Tele-photograph” lens (also made
by Carl Zeiss) capable of giving up to five magnifications; but so far we have not had
many opportunities to make use of it.

479 A third photograph (Plate CXX) taken inside the Ante-Chamber, with the
camera placed on the flat upper surface of the east wainscot, shows the upper portion
of the west side of the Granite Leaf where it fits into its groove in the granite wainscot
of the west wall. Above this, on the right side of the photograph, are seen the upper
and middle of the three limestone blocks which form the north wall of the Ante-Chamber,
Of the two blocks shown above the west wainscot, the one to the north is limestone,
and the other is granite. The extreme blackness of the granite roof is due to the smoke
from the torches and candles of the countless visitors who have passed below on their
way to and from the King’s Chamber.

480 More of the Granite Leaf would have been shown in the above photograph had
it not been for an unfortunate little incident. According to our usual method we had
set light to the touch-paper inserted in the powder, and had retired to a safe distance
till the flash should be over. After waiting for a longer interval than usual without
hearing the explosion, we concluded that the touch-paper had become extinguished, as
had happened on certain other occasions. I therefore edged over in the direction of the
camera along the top of the east wainscot, so as to cover the lens before adjusting a
fresh piece of touch-paper. When quite close to the camera, but before I had time to
cover the lens, the powder suddenly ignited. The result is that part of the field

242


Plate CXX.

of view is intercepted by my knees ; there is sufficient in the photograph, however,
to give a general idea of the appearance of the upper portion of the Ante-Chamber.

481 The two wainscots form a very peculiar feature of this little chamber. Their
distance apart is the same as the width of the walls of the low passages, i.e., about three


The upper end of the < Granite Leaf in the Ante-Chamber of the Great
Pyramid of Gizeh; showing one of the three semi-cylindrical
grooves in the top of the west wainscot.

and a half feet. They are each approximately a foot thick, the width, therefore, of the
Ante-Chamber is about two feet more in its upper than in its lower part. The whole
height of the chamber from floor to roof measures twelve and a half feet, and the length
from north to south walls is about nine feet eight inches. The east wainscot reaches
upward to within 46 inches of the roof, but the west wainscot is 8% inches higher.
This difference in height is well shown in the photograph by the fact that my position,


1


243


as I sit on the upper surface of the east wainscot, is seen to be distinctly on a lower
level than the top of the west wainscot.

4 482 Each wainscot is characterized by four broad vertical grooves, 3 % inches deep ;
those on the east side are of the same dimensions as, and exactly opposite to, those on
the west side of the chamber. The grooves into which the Granite Leaf is fixed, are 17
inches wide, and stop short at the bottom of the Leaf; but the other grooves are cut
the full height of the wainscots, and are 21 % inches broad. The vertical ridges or
pilasters which divide the three broad grooves on each wall, measure about 5 inches wide;
while the width of those which retain the Granite Leaf on the south is 3% inches. The
upper surface of the west wainscot is differentiated from that of the east by three deep
semi-cylindrical horizontal grooves, which correspond in position with the three broad
vertical grooves—See Plate XX. One of these horizontal grooves, and the upper end of
the corresponding vertical groove, are shown in the photograph of the upper part of the
chamber—Plate CXX. In this photograph, and especially in that which shows John
stooping under the Granite Leaf (Plate CXIX), it will be observed that the dividing
pilasters have been largely broken away, though sufficient remains to indicate their
original dimensions. In the lower right-hand corner of the latter photograph the base
of one of these pilasters is easily noticeable.

483 Some writers have suggested that the three opposite pairs of broad vertical
grooves originally contained sliding portcullises of granite, which at one time cut off all
entrance to the King’s Chamber. This suggestion was supported by Col. Howard Vyse,
who was quite of the opinion that the King’s Chamber once contained the body of a
dead king. He based this view on the resemblance of the Coffer to a sarcophagus,
and on the fact that the other pyramids in Egypt, all carefully examined by Mr. Perring
(his active partner in the work), as well as by himself, had given unmistakable evidences
of having been erected as monumental sepulchres. His idea was, that during the life¬
time of the king, the now missing portcullises were suspended above the floor of the
Ante-Chamber on a level with the top of the low passages, just as the Granite Leaf is
now suspended ; but that after the death and interment of the king, they were one by
one lowered gradually by chiselling away the supporting granite immediately below
them on the side walls, until, sinking down by their own weight, they finally rested on
the floor and closed the entrance of the King’s Chamber. This, he believed, explains
why these grooves run down the whole height of the wainscots. For some reason,
which he fails to explain, the ancient workmen had not lowered the fourth portcullis
(i.e., the Granite Leaf), and it was still to be seen suspended in its original position.

484 Except for a few mechanical difficulties, this theory seems reasonable; and
those who have little interest in the matter might be inclined to accept it without further
question. When, however, we begin to investigate the subject more closely, and with
due “ respect for the intelligence of the Pyramid architect ” (to quote Professor Smyth),
we find that there are distinctive peculiarities about the “ Granite Leaf ” (first so named
by Professor Greaves in 1638 A.D.), which make it certain that it, at all events, had
not been intended by the architect to serve as a portcullis.

485 As a portcullis, the Granite Leaf would be unaccountably small when compared
with its companions, for its grooves are four and a half inches less in width than theirs ;
and as it is formed of two stones placed horizontally one upon the other (See Plate

244


CXIX), it could have been lifted out of its position or broken up with comparative ease.

486 If the Granite Leaf had originally been intended to act as a portcullis and had
been lowered to the floor in the manner claimed for the missing three, it would have
been quite useless as a protection against intruders; for its uneven upper surface would
only have been six inches higher than the top of the doorway, and the space of 21
inches between it and the north wall, would have permitted workmen to enter the
chamber in order to break and remove the other portcullises—Plate CXVIII.

487 The grooves which contain the Granite Leaf stop short at the level of the top of
the passages, but the others, as is shown in Plate CXIX, sink a few inches below the
level of the floor. This is a sure proof that the latter grooves were not chiselled out
after the completion of the building, but that, on the contrary, the granite wainscots
were previously cut and finished in this fashion, and then built in position at the sides
of the chamber, before the granite floor-stones were laid down between them. (In the
King’s Chamber the same method of construction was adopted, for the four granite
walls of that chamber dip down five inches in an unbroken line below the level of the
floor—Plate XV.) An additional proof is that the lower portions of the grooves do not
present the rough appearance which must have resulted had they been cut in the
manner suggested by Col. Howard Vyse.

488 A close examination of the Granite Leaf makes it quite certain that the architect
did not design it as a fourth portcullis, not only because it never has been, nor could
have been effectually so used, but also because it is firmly cemented into its present
position (and, probably, also mortised into its place, although this is not so easy to
determine).

489 We believe that the Granite Leaf was intended for a very different purpose ;
and I should like to draw your attention to a peculiar feature in connection with it.
The Granite Leaf appears to be an inch narrower than its corresponding grooves in the
wainscots ; it is 16 inches thick, while the grooves are 17 inches wide. Close examina¬
tion shows, however, that this difference is made up by narrow one-inch projections or
rebates on the north face of the Leaf, which make it fit tightly into its grooves. With
the exception of these rebates (which are an evidence of special design), the whole of
the north face of the Leaf has been dressed or planed down one inch, in order that one
little part near the centre might appear in relief. This little part is generally known as
the Boss. It is in external shape like a horse-shoe, and is 5 inches wide by 5 inches
high on its outer face, which is level with the side rebates. It is situated on the upper
of the two blocks which form the Leaf, its lower edge being 5 inches up from the
horizontal joint between the blocks, and its centre nearly midway between the east
and west walls of the chamber, but one inch nearer the west. The horizontal joint
between those blocks can be seen in the photograph of the south side of the Leaf—
Plate CXIX.

490 The extra labour which was necessary to reduce so carefully and uniformly the
whole north surface of both the blocks, with the exception of the Boss and the projecting
side rebates, to the extent of one inch, shows that this little Boss is an intended feature
in the Great Pyramid ; and Professor C. Piazzi Smyth saw much significance in it. He
claimed that both in its size and in its position it forms a key to the length of the Pyra¬
mid unit of measure, called by him the “ Pyramid Inch,” and also to the length of the


245


r


PLATE CXXI.


“ Pyramid Cubit ” of 5 times 5 Pyramid Inches; both of which measures he proves to
be abundantly evident everywhere throughout the Pyramid—Par. 19.

491 As for ourselves, we believe that everything in this peculiar little chamber has
a symbolical significance, and that the Granite Leaf is a most important feature. You

will remember how
beautifully, in the 3rd
Volume of Scripture
Studies, C. T. Russell
points out a number
of these symbolisms,
which the photographs
we have taken are in¬
tended partially to illus¬
trate—See Chapter VII,
Section (E).

492 One other pho¬
tograph was taken in
the Ante - Chamber —
Plate CXXI. This shows
on the right side a por¬
tion of the west wall
with its broad shallow
grooves and its broken
pilasters, and on the
left the low passage,
only three and a half
feet in height and eight
feet four inches in length,
leading to the King’s
Chamber. The narrow
rebates on each side of
the doorway are clearly
apparent, as also the
four vertical and paral¬
lel grooves, measuring
3% inches in width by
2% inches in depth,
reaching from the ceil¬
ing of theAnte-Chamber
down to the fractured
doortop. The five spaces marked off by these four vertical grooves and the two side
walls, stand out distinctly, and are of equal width, namely, six inches. The white line
across the floor at the further end of the low passage, is the dividing line between the
granite floor of the entrance passage, and the granite floor of the King’s Chamber
beyond. The prominence of this line is due to the fact that the floor of the King’s


The south wall of the Ante-Chamber; showing the four deep
grooves which divide the wall into five equal spaces;
also the low passage which leads southward
to the King’s Chamber.


246


Plate CXXII.

Chamber is three-quarters of an inch higher than that of the Ante-Chamber and the
entrance passage.


493 In the King’s Chamber also, we have taken several photographs; but it is so
large, and the surrounding granite (for the chamber is entirely built of granite) is so


"Afternoon tea” in the King’s Chamber; showing part of the dark granite walls
of the chamber; also the Coffer.


dark, that we find it difficult to obtain a satisfactory general view of the whole chamber.
We remember how Professor Smyth found photographing in this chamber so trouble¬
some that he almost despaired of securing a record of any part of it. He made several
attempts, burning large quantities of magnesium wire each time, but without success.
Finally, he made a torch of 50 short lengths of magnesium wire bound loosely together,
and by this managed to create a flash brilliant enough to enable him to secure a
photograph of the Coffer.

494 W e understand that a number of visitors to the Pyramid attempt unsuccessfully
to take interior photographs by burning lengths of magnesium wire. The light produced
by this wire, although very white, is not intense enough for photographic purposes ; and
if large quantities of it are burned in order to get a longer exposure, the dense smoke
generated soon obscures the object, because in these small passages and chambers the
smoke has no chance to escape quickly,
t


247


I


I


Plate CXXIII.

495 The method which we have found satisfactory is to use magnesium in powder
form, with some preparation added in order to make it explode when ignited. The
specially prepared powder which we use is named the “ Agfa ” flashlight, and we find
that a small quantity is sufficient to enable us to photograph even a large place, such as

the Subterranean Chamber. We
form a little heap of the powder
(varying in size according to the
photograph to be taken) in the
centre of the lid of a metal box.
Into this we insert one end of a
strip of touch-paper; and then, all
other things being ready, we set
light to the paper and retire, shut¬
ting our eyes, and holding our hands
to our ears. The glare of the flash
is so intense that we have found it
necessary to keep our eyes closed
whenever possible; and the noise,
increased ten times by the resound¬
ing echoes throughout the passages,
is rather disconcerting. (We wonder
what the bats think of it all!) As
the flash is instantaneous, the photo¬
graph is secured before the inevitable
smoke (which is not dense in this
powder) has had time to settle. At
first we inclined to put the lid hold¬
ing the powder too near the front of
the camera, with the result that a
number of the negatives were spoiled
by the light fanning out in front of
the lens. We had, of course, to re¬
take these photographs.

496 It is impossible to make use of the focussing-screen of the camera in the ordinary
way in these dark recesses of the Great Pyramid, but the correct focus is easy to obtain
by means of adjustable scales, which indicate the proper distance of the lens from the
sensitive film, relative to the distance that the camera is erected from the part to be
photographed. As the aperture of the wide-angle lens is very small (only f/22 to f/32),
most objects in the field of view, whether close to the camera or at a distance, are
sharply defined.

497 We photographed the mouth of the south air-channel of the King’s Chamber as
it appears on the south wall—Plate CXXIII, The surface of the wall immediately above
and to the east side of the mouth is much broken away, and the opening is therefore
much larger than it was originally. This air-channel runs horizontally southward for a
few feet, then takes a bend upward, and after a second short length still another upward

248


PLATE CXXIV.

bend, from which point it progresses in a straight line, and at a constant angle, to the
south face of the Pyramid. The floor of the horizontal portion is level, but the roof is
arched, both in its breadth from east to west, and in its length from north to south,—a
most peculiar feature, and evidently, from every appearance, the original design of the


The entrance doorway of the King’s Chamber; showing the mouth of the north

air-channel to the left.


builders. The side walls, where they join the floor, though straight in their length, do
not rise at right-angles, but incline outward and upward for about two feet, after which
they curve inward in the shape of a dome as already indicated. The result is, that
although the floor of the channel is only a few inches wide, there is sufficient space
between the walls higher up, and enough height between the floor and the arched roof,
to allow one to creep in on hands and knees. I crept in (holding a lighted candle in

249


The mouth of the air-channel in the south wall of
the King’s Chamber.


Plate CXXV.

front of me, which several times was nearly blown-out by the strong current of air
which is constantly passing through), and examined the second short, but inclined
length of the channel. This portion is also of a peculiar shape. Instead of being
oblong in section like the air-channel on the opposite wall of the chamber, or the two

channels leading
from the Queen’s
Chamber, it is oval,
and is lined with
smooth plaster. I
understand, from
what Mr. Covington
told us, that the
channel beyond the
second bend takes
on the usual oblong
section. It is puzz¬
ling to know why
the builders should
have made two such
peculiar departures.

498 We photo¬
graphed the door¬
way of the small
passage by which
we had entered the
King’s Chamber—
Plate CXXIV. To

show how small it is, Grace stood near it on the west side. The opening of the north
air-channel can be seen on the left-hand side; it will be noticed that its upper edge
is in line with the top edge of the doorway. We secured a picture of the Coffer, with
six of us sitting in it to give an idea of its size—Plate CXXV. On the right-hand side of
this latter photograph, it will be noticed that a portion of the floor of the chamber is
missing. Some of the floor-stones were raised from this, the north-west, corner of the
chamber by early looters, who then excavated a large hollow in the soft limestone below
the hard granite floor, in the hope of discovering hidden treasure somewhere under the
Coffer. This excavation enables one to see that the granite walls of the chamber rest
on limestone exactly five inches below the upper surface of the floor.

499 On the walls behind the Coffer, and also above the doorway, a great many
disfiguring names are visible. Names are scrawled everywhere in the Pyramid.
Generally they are carved in the stone; but in the King’s Chamber the granite is too
hard to make this easily possible, and consequently most of the names are painted on
its walls.

500 The Coffer has been much chipped and otherwise roughly handled, and yet it is
wonderful how well preserved it is after so many centuries of ill usage. On striking it
with the hand, it gives out a clear bell-like sound. This is due to the fact that it is

250


hollowed out of one large block of granite, which, as Professor Flinders Petrie points
out, shows evidence of having been sawn into its square shape. The method by which
this granite block was hollowed out was, according to Professor Petrie, by means of
large jewelled tubular drills.

501 Evidences of the extensive use of saws and drills on all kinds of stone, some of
which are harder even than granite, are everywhere apparent in Egypt. How the
ancient Egyptians were able to use them has puzzled the minds of Egyptologists for
many years. Their knowledge of mechanics teaches them that immense power must
have been employed ; yet they fail to find any trace of an adequate appliance by which
this power could have been generated. 1 Professor Petrie says: “The great pressure
needed to force the drills and saws so rapidly through the hard stones is very
surprising; probably a load of at least a ton or two was placed on the four-inch drills
cutting in granite [he elsewhere speaks of drills of no less t h an eighteen inches in
diameter!] . . . These rapid spiral grooves [to be clearly seen on the inside of drilled
holes] cannot be ascribed to anything but the descent of the drill into the granite under
enormous pressure.” After describing the method by which the builders of the Second
Pyramid introduced and placed in position the large granite portcullis which closes that
pyramid’s lower Entrance Passage (See Plate XXVIII), Professor Petrie adds the
following comment: “ The skill required to turn over and lift such a block, in such a
confined space, is far more striking than the moving of much larger masses in the open
air, where any number of men could work on them. By measuring the bulk, it appears

1 It is significant to note, in this connection, that a piece of wrought iron was found in the Great
Pyramid by one of Col. Howard Vyse’s assistants, Mr. J. R. Hill, during the operations carried on at
Gizeh in 1837. Mr. Hill found it embedded in the cement of an inner joint, while removing some of
the masonry preparatory to clearing the southern air-channel of the King’s Chamber. This piece of iron
is probably the oldest specimen in existence ; and Col. Howard Vyse was fully cognizant of the import¬
ance of the find. He forwarded it to the British Museum with the following certificates :

“ This is to certify, that the piece of iron found by me near the [outside] mouth of the air-
passage, in the southern side of the Great Pyramid at Gizeh, on Friday, May 26th, was taken out by
me from an inner joint, after having removed by blasting the two outer tiers of the stones of the
present surface of the Pyramid ; and that no joint or opening of any sort was connected with the
above-mentioned joint, by which the iron could have been placed in it after the original building of
the Pyramid. I also showed the exact spot to Mr. Perring, on Saturday, June 24th._J. R. Hill.

To the above certificate of Mr. Hill, I can add, that since I saw the spot at the commencement
of the blasting, there have been two tiers of stones removed, and that, if the piece of iron was
found in the joint, pointed out to me by Mr. Hill, and which was covered by a larger stone partly

remaining, it is impossible it could have been placed there since the building of the Pyramid._

J. S. Perring, C.E.

“ We hereby certify, that we examined the place whence the iron in question was taken by Mr.
Hill, and we are of opinion, that the iron must have been left in the joint during the building of the
Pyramid, and that it could not have been inserted afterwards.—Ed. S. Andrews,—James Mash, C.E."

Because of its very rarity, some have been inclined to doubt the authenticity of this piece of iron ;
but Professor Flinders Petrie rightly defends it—“The vouchers for it are very precise; and it has J
cast of a nummulite on the rust of it, proving it to have been buried for ages beside a block of n umm u-
iitic limestone [which forms a large part of the core masonry of the Pyramid], and therefore to be
certainly ancient. No reasonable doubt can therefore exist about its being really a genuine piece used

by the Pyramid masons.” The Scriptures make mention of artificers in iron, before the Deluge_

Gen. 4 : 22. S

251


Plate CXXVI.


that this portcullis was nearly two tons in weight, and would require 40 to 60 men to
lift it; the space, however, would not allow of more than a tenth of that number work¬
ing at it; and this proves that some very efficient method was used for wedding such
masses, quite apart from mere abundance of manual force.”

502 We suggest that it is probably their almost universal belief in the theory of
Evolution, which makes the learned Egyptologists wonder at the undoubted evidences
of mechanical knowledge and skill possessed by ancient nations. But to those who, like
ourselves, have faith in the Scriptural account of the fall of man from original perfection
(Par. 147), the many examples of the skill of 4000 years ago are only confirmatory of
our belief. The present great accession of scientific knowledge on all subjects which is
held as proof of the theory of Evolution, is to us rather an evidence that we are now in
the beginning of the times of restitution, concerning which the Scriptures speak so much
(Acts 3 : 21), the times when all things will be restored to original perfection.

503 Although we do not say that the ancients knew all that modern research has
brought to light, yet many things which they knew were lost in the subsequent degen¬
eration of the race, and have not yet been restored to us of this day. The Great
Pyramid itself is convincing proof, for instance, of the lost art of building accurately
with great masses of stone. The opinion is frequently expressed and generally agreed
to by those who can speak with authority, that no modern builder could undertake to
build the Great Pyramid as it was constructed over 4000 years ago. They would not
know how to make such fine joints between the large blocks of stone, nor how to fill
them with cement.

504 Speaking about the joints and the use of cement by the Egyptians, Professor
Flinders Petrie says: “ The use of cement by the Egyptians is remarkable; and their
skill in cementing joints is hard to understand. How, in the casing of the Great
Pyramid, they could fill with cement a vertical joint about 5 feet by 7 feet in area, and
only averaging one-fiftieth part of an inch thick is a mystery [See Par. 86]; more
especially as the joint could not be thinned by rubbing, owing to its being a vertical
joint, and the block weighing about 16 tons. Yet this was the usual work over 13 acres
of surface, with tens of thousands of casing-stones, none less than a ton in weight.” It
is confirmatory to find so noted an Egyptologist and Evolutionist adding the weight of
his testimony not only to the opinion that the Great Pyramid was at one time entirely
encased with beautifully smooth and exquisitely jointed limestone, but also to the fact
that in its excellency of workmanship, it far surpasses all the pyramids and temples
throughout Egypt. As the Great Pyramid is the oldest of the Egyptian monuments,
this is against the evolution hypothesis, and in favour of the Scriptural teaching
of the fall.

Your loving brother in the Lord,

Morton Edgar.


LETTER XX.


Marie tie's House, Sakkara.
Thursday, 15th July, 1909.

Dear Brethren,— Just now, Jack, Stanley and I are sitting in what used to be the
desert home of Mariette, the great Egyptian excavator, and founder of Cairo Museum.
The house is situated near the Sakkara Pyramids, about three hours’ donkey-ride from
the Pyramids of Gizeh.


Donkey-riding at the Sakkara Pyramids.


506 We started out on donkeys at 6-30 this morning, accompanied by our tent
contractor, Abdul Salam Faid. The donkey I am riding belongs to Mr. Faid, and is
called “Telephone.” While on the road we noticed quite a number of “scarabs,” the

253


252


R


PLATES CXXVII & CXXVIII,


The first mined pyramid to the south of the Gizeh group.


A distant view of the Pyramids of Gizeh, from the south.


PLATE CXXIX.

ancient Egyptian sacred beetle, walking on the sand, and flying past us in front of our
donkeys’ heads. It was especially interesting to see them alighting on their backs on
the sand, and then scrambling to their feet. We have been round all the pyramids
which we passed on our journey, and have also visited some of the large underground
tombs. We have taken a good many photo¬
graphs. It is now about 1 o’clock, and it
is our intention to wait here for an hour
or two till it is sufficiently cool to enable us
to return over the long stretch of burning
desert sand.

507 In one of the tombs which we vis¬

ited, named the Apis Tombs, there are long
underground passages cut it different direc¬
tions, and containing twenty-four sacred
bulls in stone sarcophagi. So immense are
these sarcophagi that some of them are said
to weigh over 60 tons, and yet they have
each been carved out of one huge block of
granite. Although the lids of these great
stone chests are very large, and must weigh
several tons each, they have all been prized
enough to one side to enable a man to creep
in and remove the contents. M. Mariette,
the discoverer of this large underground
tomb, was fortunate enough to find one of
these sarcophagi unopened. It contained
the embalmed remains of a bull as it was
when buried there centuries ago. Ahdul Salam Faid ’ and his donkey " Tete P hone "

508 While we were admiring the wonderful skill, and thinking of the great labour
which must have been bestowed upon this intricate tomb and its immense coffins, I
could not help reflecting that if the purpose of all this skill and labour was the burial of
a couple of dozen bulls, then indeed the words of the Apostle here received their
confirmation—“Professing themselves to be wise, they became fools”—See Par. 150.
Surely, the men who made those tombs were fools indeed, however clever they may
have been at building with great masses of stone!

509 When we came to the first pyramid which lies south of the Gizeh group, we
dismounted and had a look at the foundations of its temple uncovered about two years
ago. Our attention was directed to a large number of shallow circular baths cut out
of solid alabaster. We understand that the excavator had desired to remove these, but
was prevented by the authorities of the Cairo Museum. Round the rim of each of
them we counted 23 small cylindrical depressions, about three-quarters of an inch deep,
conjectured to have been used for holding candles during some of the idolatrous
services. In one place there are nine baths in a row; and the bather is supposed to
have stepped from one to another, the water in them being graduated in temperature.

510 The pyramid to which this temple is attached is in a very ruinous condition.

255


Plates CXXX & CXXXI


An example of the ruined Pyramids of Abusir.


An example of the ruined Pyramids of Sakkara.


Plate CXXXII.

Little of it remains, but a part of the lower course of casing-stones is still in position—
Plate CXXVII. We were interested to see some small stone huts erected on top of this
ruined pyramid. A few of the people, who had formerly taken part in the work of
excavating, live in these huts, and their duty is evidently that of care-takers of the


The Step Pyramid of Sakkara.


excavated pyramid and temple. On request they kindly supplied us with a refreshing
drink of water, and were duly awarded with bakshish.

511 Before continuing our journey southward, we took advantage of the slight
eminence on which this pyramid is built to look back northward in the direction of the
Pyramids of Gizeh, and secure a photographic record of the scene. We had traversed
a considerable distance, and away over the flat plain the Great Pyramid and its
companions looked very small and dim—Plate CXXVIII.

512 All the Pyramids of Abusir and Sakkara are very ruinous. It will be seen by
our photographs of some of them, that they are little more than large mounds of rubbish

Plates CXXX & CXXXI. The “Step” Pyramid of Sakkara is almost the only one
which presents anything like a definite form—Plate CXXXII. This structure, which is
not truly a pyramid, possesses four entrance passages, and has a complicated system of
small passages leading in all directions. These are mostly cut in the rock below the
pyramid’s base-line.

513 We visited the interior of one of the Pyramids of Sakkara. It has only one
simple entrance passage leading to a few subterranean chambers cut in the rock not far
below the base of the pyramid. The walls of the chambers are covered with decorative
scroll-work and hieroglyphics, and one of them contains a sarcophagus.

514 A noteworthy distinction between the Great Pyramid of Gizeh, and all the other
pyramids throughout Egypt, is the fact that in it alone are passages and chambers

257


are


PLATE CXXXV.

the body of the building. In the other pyramids, these


constructed high up in
either cut in the rock more or less after the example of the Descending Passage and Pit
of the Great Pyramid, or else are situated low down near the base-line, partly in the
rock, and partly in the masonry. This important distinction is strikingly apparent, when
one has before him
which


passages and cham¬
bers, together with
the history of the

accidental discovery The casing-stones of one of the Sakkara Pyramids.

of those in the Great

Pyramid by A1 Mamoun in 820 A.D. (Pars. 96-98), is strong evidence that the builders
of the other pyramids were ignorant of their great model’s upper system.

515 In the Sakkara Pyramid, whose interior we visited, some of the lower casing-
stones, which are still to be seen in their original position, are very large. We took a
photograph of those on the west side, getting the Arab care-taker to stand close to them
for the purpose of showing their size—Plate CXXXV. Although these stones are large
on the outside, they do not seem so substantial and solid as the recently uncovered
casing-stones of the Great Pyramid of Gizeh.

516 There can be no doubt that the temple in connection with this pyramid was
built simultaneously with it; for this is clearly shown by a few remaining casing-stones
on the east side. The stones are “ L ” shaped, containing the angle of junction between
the sloping side of the pyramid, and the perpendicular wall of the temple jutting out at
right angles. The photograph which we secured of this right-angled junction will give
some idea of its appearance—Plate CXXXVI.

517 We should like to have gone on to the Pyramids of Dashur, but Mr. Faid said
it would take too long to do the journey. We had, therefore, to content ourselves with
photographing them as they appeared to us in the dim distance—Plate CXXXVII.


7


PLATES CXXXVI & CXXXVII.


The east base of one of the Sakkara Pyramids; showing the
peculiar L-shaped casing-stones.


A distant view of the Pyramids of Dashur, from the Pyramids of Sakkara.


Plate CXXXVIII.


Plan


1 RAMP

1___i_i_!_


WELL


RAMP


are aware that those who claim that the Great Pyramid also had a temple have a certain
amount of justification for their belief, for fragmentary remains of a black-stone (basalt)
pavement can be seen on the east side—Plates II & XVII. But owing to the large
amount of debris which still lies at the east base, it is not certain that this pavement
extended right in to the side of the Pyramid itself; and in any case its fragments are
quite unlike the undoubted temple remains of the Second and Third Pyramids of Gizeh,
or of the other pyramids further up the Nile. Again, there is no room on this side of
the Great Pyramid for a temple of any size. The three small pyramids which are
ranged along the east side of the Great Pyramid, are built too close to allow a temple
even so small as that to the east of the Third Pyramid, to be erected here. But even if
it could be proved that a small temple had been erected near the Great Pyramid, it
would not follow that it had formed any part of the Pyramid as originally designed and
completed by the ancient builders. Just as we know that the Great Pyramid of Gizeh,
unlike the other pyramids of Egypt, was not built as a tomb, not only because there is
no record of a body ever having been found in it, but also because of its symbolism, so
we may be sure that it was not built in connection with an edifice for idolatrous worship
such as was practised by the ancient Egyptians.

261


Plate CXXXIX.


Plate CXL.

(At the tents.) We arrived at our tents about 6 p.m., having completed the journey
from Sakkara in quick time ; our donkeys galloped most of the way.

519 During our absence, John and Grace, accompanied by Judah, visited the Sphinx,
the Granite Temple near the Sphinx, and the Trial Passages which are cut in the rock
about a hundred yards east of the Great Pyramid—Plate II. According to Professors
Smyth and Petrie, the Granite
Temple near the Sphinx has a
direct connection with the tem¬
ple of the Second Pyramid,
both, apparently, being united
by a long straight causeway.

520 John found the Trial
Passages almost entirely filled
with rubbish. They are, how¬
ever, fully described by the
principal writers on the pyra¬
mids—Plate CXXXVIII. Evi¬
dently these Trial Passages
were intended to serve as models
to the ancient workers at the
Great Pyramid, just as modern
shipbuilders and others work to
carefully prepared patterns ; for,
with the single exception of the
position of the Well-shaft, these
inclined passages are an exact
model of the Great Pyramid’s
passage - system, shortened in
length, but of full size in width
and height. The resemblance is
striking, even to the beginning
of the Horizontal Passage to the
Queen’s Chamber, the Ramps at
the sides of the Grand Gallery,
and the contraction at the lower end of the Ascending Passage to hold the Granite Plug
(excepting that in the Trial Passages, this contraction occurs additionally in the height, as
well as in the width of the Ascending Passage). Although the vertical shaft is in a differ¬
ent position in the Trial Passages, it is evidently intended as a model of the Well-shaft in
the Great Pyramid, the bore of each being the same. The total lengths of the Descend¬
ing and Ascending Passages are 66 feet and 50 feet respectively.

521 On our journey back to our tents, I photographed the isolated group of trees
which stand near the “ well of sweet water ” referred to by Col. Howard Vyse (Plate
CXL), showing the Great Pyramid in the background—Compare Plate II. The Arabs
have now turned the place into a burying-ground. I also took the opportunity to
ascend the hill which lies about half a mile to the south (and slightly to the east) of the

263


Isolated trees near the “ Well of sweet water ” referred
to by Col. Howard Vyse.


Great Pyramid—Plate II. From this hill a commanding view is obtained of the pyra¬
mids, and of the intervening strip of desert covered with tombs and with great mounds
of sand, some of which were formed by excavators of the tombs. My object was to
gain a correct impression as to the relative sizes of the Great Pyramid and the Sphinx,
when viewed from a distance. Although the sun was setting behind the pyramids, and a
peculiar dark haze was filling the little valley below me, I was fortunate enough to
secure a photograph of the scene, showing the Sphinx to the extreme right, and the
Great Pyramid to the left, with the three small ruined pyramids on its right (east) side—
Plate CXXXIX.

522 The entrance of the extensive and laborious excavation made by Col. Howard
Vyse on the south side of the Great Pyramid, can be seen very well in this photograph.
It looks like the mouth of another Entrance Passage. It was in pursuance of a theory
that the Great Pyramid contained a second system of passages and chambers entered
from the south, that Col. Howard Vyse caused his workers to search for a southern
Entrance, in the same relative position westward of the centre line of the Pyramid, as
the present northern Entrance lies eastward of the centre—Plate V. The work of
excavating was continued for well over three months, but without finding any indication
of a passage, either by an inclination in the courses of the stones, or by any other
circumstance. The deduction drawn by Col. Howard Vyse as a result of this work is
instructive—“ After much labour, the excavation at the southern front of the Great
Pyramid had been carried to the level of the supposed Entrance, but without the
slightest appearance of a passage. The difficulties encountered in this operation proved
how much expense and labour would be necessary to take down one of these great
edifices. The stones must be carefully lowered from the top, or they would be broken,
and unfit for any useful purpose ; and unless extensive causeways were formed, the
surrounding ground would soon be encumbered to that degree as to impede all further
operations. So wonderfully have these monuments been constructed for duration."

523 The failure to discover additional passages in the Great Pyramid, or to find pas¬
sages and chambers constructed high up in the masonry of any of the other pyramids,
caused an impression of wonder in the mind of Col. Howard Vyse. He wrote : “ I tiaH
not at that time any idea that the stupendous masses of the pyramids were composed of
solid masonry, and that (with the exception of the King’s and Queen’s Chambers and
adjoining passages, and Chambers of Construction afterwards discovered in this Pyra¬
mid), the apartments were invariably excavations in the solid rock. Indeed, after
having ascertained the fact almost beyond the possibility of doubt, it was difficult to
believe it, or to comprehend an adequate motive for the construction of these magnifi¬
cent buildings merely as sepulchral monuments over a tomb, unless it was the all-power¬
ful influence of superstitious feelings.”

524 This photograph (Plate CXXXIX) shows at once how immeasurably larger the
Great Pyramid is than the Sphinx; and we have noticed that the greater the distance from
which we view these monuments, the greater becomes the contrast. In another view of
the pyramids and Sphinx, taken from east of the Arab village (Plate CXLI), the Sphinx
appears most insignificant. By this method of comparison, one can get some impression
of the truly immense size of the Great Pyramid; for the Sphinx, when viewed at close
quarters, is itself huge, as may be appreciated by the photograph of it which we show

265


Plate CXLII.


Plate CXLIII.


here—Plate CXLIII. Notice the man standing on its head, and the other clinging to its
great thick neck!

525 When one gazes upon the Pyramids of Gizeh for the first time, unless previously
well imformed, he is apt to be a little disappointed, for they appear smaller and less
attractive than possibly he had anticipated. This, however, is partly owing to their
unique shape, and part¬
ly owing to the lack of
a building near them
with which a proper
comparison can be
made. St. Paul’s Cathe¬
dral would appear in¬
significant beside the
Great Pyramid, both in
height and in breadth;
the pinnacle of its dome
is a hundred feet lower
than the apex of the
Pyramid. Even St.

Peter’s of Rome, im¬
mense though it is, is
small when compared
with the Great Pyra¬
mid. Nor is it possible
to accurately judge of
the relative proportions
of the various pyramids „ ,

' . The Sphinx, with part of the Second Pyramid

by simply looking at in the backgroun±

them, for from what¬
ever view-point they are surveyed, the inevitable diminishing effect of the perspective
always gives a false impression, so that if the whole group be viewed from south of the
Third Pyramid as in Plate CXLII, the Great Pyramid, although immeasurably larger
than the Third Pyramid, shows no pre-eminence in size.

526 In his first volume of Pyramids of Gizeh, Col. Howard Vyse very well
remarks upon the comparative indifference of visitors to the grandeur of the pyramids ;
and to the growing appreciation of those who are privileged to work in or near them for
any length of time. He writes: “ Owing to the oblateness of their forms, the want of
proper objects of comparison, the proportionate smallness of the stones with which they
are built, and many other adventitious circumstances, the exaggerated and undefined
expectations of travellers are often disappointed in the hasty survey generally taken of
these monuments ; and they are consequently considered rude and misshapen masses of
coarse masonry, without symmetry or beauty, and alone worthy of notice from their
extraordinary size. A more deliberate examination, however, never fails to alter and
correct those opinions ; and it was universally acknowledged, by those who remained
any length of time at the pyramids, that the more carefully and frequently they are


267


Plate CXLIV.


*


inspected—the more extraordinary their grandeur appeared, and also the striking effects
which, under the varying influence of the atmosphere, they continually presented. Pre¬
eminent in dimensions and antiquity over all other buildings in the world, they are alike
admirable for the excellence of their masonry, the skill and science displayed in their
construction, and the imposing majesty of their simple forms.”

527 “ They require repeated examination to enable any one to comprehend their
awful and extraordinary proportions,” the Colonel remarks in another place; and this
we have found to be the case. Points of comparison have gradually attracted our
attention which have helped to educate our eyes to appreciate properly the remarkable
magnitude of the Great Pyramid. Several of these can be seen in our photographs.
One of the most prominent is the size of the large mounds of rubbish which lie at
the base. These are about 50 feet high in the middle, yet they appear insignificant
in those photographs which show the full height of the Pyramid—Plates LXXVII
& LXXIX. Another good point of comparison can be drawn from Plates Nos. CXLIV
& XXXI. In the former (which was taken from the hill above Mena House Hotel, and
shows our tents in front of the Great Pyramid), the angle-stones which lie above the
Entrance appear quite small in comparison with the long sloping sides of the Pyramid ;
but when these same stones are viewed at close quarters, as in No. XXXI, they are seen
to be very large.

528 Mere size would not of itself, however, cause us to be attracted to the Great
Pyramid more than to its companions. We have already alluded to other points of
distinction; and each day as we have progressed with our work, these have become
more impressed upon our minds. The chief distinction is the abundant proof that the
Great Pyramid is God’s stone “Witness” in the land of Egypt (Isa. 19 : 19), and it is
the knowledge of this which attracts us to the Great Pyramid to the almost total neglect
of the others.

Much love in the Lord from us all, Your loving brother,

Morton Edgar.


269


PLATE CXLV


% '•


'--.V V.


The WELL-MOUTH in the north-west corner of the Grand Gallery of the Great Pyramid of Gizeh,
from the south; showing the fractured West Ramp; and the upper end of the First
Ascending Passage to the right; also part of the floor of the Horizontal
Passage to the Queen’s Chamber in the foreground.


Plate CXLVI.


LETTER XXI.


Tents at the Great Pyramid of Gizeh
Friday night, 16th July, 1909.


Dear Brethren, —To-day, John and I visited the Well-shaft and Grotto. A day or
two ago, Judah fastened the rope-ladder (kindly lent to us by Mr. Covington) to the iron
pin which our workmen have fixed in the floor of an excavation in the north wall at the
upper end of the Well-shaft. Were it not for the ladder, I question whether we should
have ventured the
descent. Even
with the ladder’s
aid, we found it
laborious and not
without risk. How¬
ever, we feel that
the Lord has pro¬
vided this compar¬
atively safe means
of exploring this
symbol of death,
and that it is our
privilege to take ad¬
vantage of it. Who
would have thought
that we should find
a rope-ladder ready
for us on our arri¬
val at the Great
Pyramid ! The Well-mouth, from the south.

530 As you are

aware, the upper end of the Well is situated on the west side of the Grand Gallery,
about two feet from the north wall, so that all who emerge from the First Ascending
Passage into the Grand Gallery, cannot fail to see its open mouth at their feet on the
right-hand side—Plate XVIII.

531 We have already taken several photographs of the mouth of the Well; but it
seems to be difficult to secure a photograph of this important part, which will show it
as it appears to one who is standing in the Grand Gallery, We hope, however, by the
aid of those taken, to make a drawing or drawings which will give some idea of its


Plate CXLVII.


The WELL-MOUTH in the north-west corner of the Grand Gallery of the Great Pyramid of Gizeh,
from the east; showing the horizontal joint between the upper and lower portions of the
square-cut-off Ramp to the south (left); the fragmentary remains of the missing
Ramp-stone in the north (right) corner; and the upper end of the First
Ascending Passage to the right; also part of the floor of
the Horizontal Passage to the Queen's Chamber
in the foreground .


Plate CXLVIII.

general appearance. Two of our photographs show the fractured Ramp-stone very
plainly, and also the depression in the west wall of the Grand Gallery, which marks
the place formerly occupied by the missing portion of the Ramp immediately above the
Well-mouth—See Plate XIII. One of these (Plate CXLVI) was taken from a point on
the east side of the Horizontal
Passage leading to the Queen’s
Chamber. The camera was erect¬
ed three and a half feet to the
south of the centre of the Well-
mouth, with the lens about 18
inches above the floor, and there¬
fore much below the inclined
upper surface of the West Ramp
at this place. The other photo¬
graph (Plate CXLVIII) was taken
with the camera placed in the
opposite (north-east) angle of the
Grand Gallery, on top of the
East Ramp. The sloping upper
surface of the East Ramp ap¬
pears in the foreground. 1

532 It has been claimed (by
Professor Flinders Petrie among
others) that the Well did not
form part of the original design
of the Pyramid, but that, as a
mere afterthought, it was dug out
first through the already com¬
pleted masonry of the Grand

Gallery, and then down vertically „ ,, ,

* 1 The i Well-mouth, from the east.

through the core masonry and

rock to the lower end of the Descending Passage—Plates IX & XVII. If this were so,
it is unlikely that the stones in the immediate vicinity of the Well-mouth on the west,
would show any great difference in shape and arrangement from those directly opposite
on the east side of the Grand Gallery. Yet a careful comparison reveals a number of
important differences. This circumstance, in addition to the fact that the Well is an in¬
dispensable feature in the symbolical teaching of the Great Pyramid’s passage and
chamber system, seems to us to support the opinion held by Professor C. Piazzi Smyth

1 Since arriving home in Scotland, we have prepared from our various photographs two drawings
which show the whole of the Well-mouth with its immediate surroundings—Plates CXLV & CXLVII.

In these drawings, which are similar to the two photographs described above, the principal additions
are to the foreground. They show, at the line of the north edge of the Well-mouth, the irregular cut-off
in the continuation of the sloping floor of the First Ascending Passage (Compare Plates XII & XVIII);
also a small portion of the flat floor of the Horizontal Passage, which commences at this point and pro¬
gresses to the Queen’s Chamber.

273


Plate CXLIX.

and many others, that the Well is not an afterthought, but part of the original design of
the Great Pyramid.

533 On close examination it is seen that the north, west, and part of the south sides
of the mouth of the Well, are in one stone; namely, (1) the small fractured portion of

Ramp bounding the mouth on the
north, (2) the depressed portion of
the wall of the Grand Gallery on
the west,—forming the horizontal
roof of the small passage which
leads from the Grand Gallery
westward to the vertical shaft of
the Well (Compare Plate XIII),
and (3) the lower portion of the
square-cut-off end of the Ramp on
the south. It is evident, from its
peculiar shape, that this encircling
stone was specially designed to
strengthen the boundaries of the
Well-mouth. On the opposite side
of the Grand Gallery, the cor¬
responding portion of the East
Ramp presents no such peculiar
evidence of strength, where it is
not required.

534 The upper part of the
square-cut-off Ramp on the south
side of the Well-mouth, is an inde¬
pendent stone. Its top surface, of course, runs in line with the angle of the Grand
Gallery; but its under surface is level, and rests horizontally on that portion of the
large stone just described, which forms the south boundary of the Well-mouth—See
Plates CXLV & CXLVII. The distinctive shape of this upper stone was also, quite
evidently, specially designed to form at the south edge of the Well-mouth, a firm
termination to the long inclined Ramp which runs up the whole length of the Grand
Gallery to the south of it—Plate IX. Had the under surface of this stone been cut
parallel with its upper inclined surface, so forming a sloping joint with the stone
beneath, it would have shown a deficiency in constructional knowledge which cannot be
attributed to the ancient builders of the Great Pyramid, and would have helped to
support the claim that the Well was merely an afterthought.

535 Directly opposite, on the east side of the Grand Gallery, the joint between the
Ramp there, and the stones on which it rests, runs parallel with the inclined upper
surface; for the Ramp on that side continues unbroken to the north wall of the Gallery,
and therefore requires no special provision to stand against end-thrust. Our photograph
of this lower part of the East Ramp where it butts against the north wall of the Grand
Gallery (Plate CXLIX), shows also the abrupt cut-off of the smooth sloping floor, a
short distance up (south) from the line of the north wall of the Gallery,

274


536 We believe that further examination might reveal other distinctive evidences of
special masonic construction in the region of the Well; but those we have already
noticed, even apart from our belief in the necessity of the Well because of its symbolical
importance, are enough to satisfy us that the Well is indeed an integral part of the
Great Pyramid’s passage and chamber system as originally designed and completed.

537 The vertical shaft, down which the rope-ladder hangs, lies a few feet to the
west of the line of the Grand Gallery, being approached by the small horizontal passage
already referred to—Plates XVII & XIII. The floor of this small passage does not
appear to be the original one. It is not all on one level, but rises abruptly in a shallow
step near the Grand Gallery end. To determine the level of the original surface of the
floor might now be a little difficult; probably it was flush with the upper surface of
the step, but it may have been a little higher. Our drawings show this floor restored.

538 At the top of the vertical shaft, on the north side, there is a fairly large excava¬
tion. It is in the rough floor of this excavation, as I mentioned before, that our men
have fixed the iron pin, from which the ladder is suspended. It is difficult to understand
what purpose the excavators had in view in forcing their way into the masonry at this
point; quite probably it was they who cut the floor of the small passage, to gain more
headroom for working.

539 At the foot of the first vertical part (which is about 25 feet deep, and 28 inches
square in bore), we noticed a bend in the shaft southward. It still descends very
steeply, however, and the rope-ladder hangs down it for yet another ten feet. From
this point the shaft looks very fearsome, especially to us who are unaccustomed to such
places. We paused here and expressed doubt as to our being able to proceed further,
and wondered why Mr. Covington had not made his ladder longer. Judah, seeing our
hesitation, told us to “wait a minute,” and immediately disappeared down that fearful
shaft, using hands and feet, elbows and back in his descent. He went down to the
lowest almost vertical part, from the top of which there hangs a rope from another iron
pin—Plate IX. This second pin was fixed, to our order, by Judah and an assistant,
under the supervision of Mr. Covington, during our absence in Palestine, and Mr.
Covington has kindly supplied the rope to aid descent at this final, and very difficult
portion of the Well. Judah had gone down to fetch this rope, and in the meantime
John and I occupied ourselves squaring, plumbing and measuring the part of the shaft
already traversed. On his return, Judah fastened the rope to the end of the ladder,
and down we began to go again. We felt much safer with this continuous connection
with our iron pin at the top of the shaft, but we proceeded slowly, taking care to place
our feet firmly in the footholds, measuring as we descended.

540 The small opening into the Grotto is situated a short distance down the second
vertical part. For about seven and a half feet upward from the floor of the doorway,
the four walls of the square shaft are composed of masonry built of small stones in ten
horizontal courses. This short built part of the shaft goes through the Grotto. Below
this, right down to the lower opening into the Descending Passage, the shaft is cut
through the solid rock.

541 I gave a sigh of relief when, with the kindly aid of the rope, I reached the small
doorway of the Grotto and sat in it with my feet hanging down the shaft. After a few
more measurements from above, where John was, down to where I now sat, I crept

275


The lower end of the East Ramp in the
Grand Gallery.


Plate CL.


wBTiraT r _i ^ y//////y/////////.

Vt-KIIOAL OE.LTION (From cast toWcst, lookinc North) of the'GROTTO”

, SHOWING THE WELL-SHAFT BUILT THROUGH WITH TEN COURSES OF LIMESTONE BLOCKS- I

Block wedged at the edce of the Deep Hole in the floor.


backward into the Grotto, and John came down and joined me. We were now in the
Grotto! We had often hoped that we might explore this part of the Pyramid, and take
measurements, as most works we had read on the subject of the Great Pyramid seemed
rather contradictory and vague when treating of the Well. We measured the Grotto
m its length, breadth, height and depth. It is longer from east to west, than from north
to south. The roof is low; and except in one spot to the west, where there is a deep
hollow in the floor, it is too low to allow one to stand. The floor, walls and roof are
composed for the most part of gravel embedded in caked sand, which crumbles in the
hands with comparative ease. Here and there the natural rock appears—Plate CL.

542 We photographed the small doorway of the Grotto from the inside, getting
Judah to sit on the sandy floor on the west side with his head almost touching the roof
—Plate CLI. But before saying more about the Grotto at present, I would like to draw
your attention to some interesting matters in connection with the Well-shaft. The walls
of the first vertical part are comparatively smooth ; but from the bottom of the first
down to the top of the second vertical part, the shaft is very uneven indeed, being
neither square nor round in section—Plate IX. It looks as if the great irregularity in
this part of the shaft is the result of stones having been dislodged from its walls; for
the whole of this portion of the Well, from the Grand Gallery down to the top of the
second vertical part, descends through the comparatively rough core masonry of the
Pyramid. Here and there, one can see the open joints between the core stones; and we
found them sometimes large enough to stow away our measuring rods when not
required. Situated on the east, at the foot of the first vertical part, there is a crevice
large enough at its outer end to allow one to sit in it; and in at its further end, the
square corner of one of the core blocks is clearly distinguishable.

543 This thought seems to be supported by some of the older writers on the Great
Pyramid, who record that this irregular part of the shaft was in their time much
encumbered with large stones. If so, it is evident that to remove these stones without
first cutting into the sides of the shaft in order to gain room, would be very difficult, if
not impossible in so confined a place. Col. Howard Vyse quotes Mr. Salt’s account of
M. Caviglia’s descent of the Well in 1817—“He descended by means of a rope to the
bottom of the first shaft, 20 feet deep [our own measurement, taken from the roof of the
small horizontal passage above, down to the lowest part of the vertical shaft, is 25 feet],
when the passage, which inclined towards the south, was nearly filled up by some large
stones, which he had great difficulty in removing.”

544 M. Caviglia contemplated clearing the whole length of the Well-shaft; but, owing
to the lack of air, his Arab workers were unable to proceed, and he had therefore to
abandon the attempt. Later, when working in the Descending Passage, removing some
of the rubbish there, he unexpectedly discovered the lower opening of the Well, and
was now able to effect his former design ; for by drawing out the loose debris as it fell
down the almost perpendicular shaft, he cleared its entire length.

545 Many of the older operators at the Great Pyramid do not appear to ha ve been
aware that the Descending Passage proceeds downward in a direct line beyond its
junction with the First Ascending Passage. The constant accumulation of loose debris

rom A1 Mamoun’s forced passage must have effectually covered all trace of a subter¬
ranean connection. Davison (in 1763 A.D.—See Par. 241) seems to have been the only

277


through the lower courses of the built part of the vertical Well-shaft; also, at
the left-hand lower corner, part of the mysterious granite block.


one, previous to M. Caviglia, who had detected the rock-cut continuation; and this only
because recent rains had washed away part of the concealing debris. He was able,
however, only to penetrate down to a part about 80 feet short of the lower opening of
the Well. Even the French savants, who visited the Gizeh Pyramids at the time of the
French expedition to Egypt under Napoleon in 1799, though they carried on extensive
operations at the Great Pyramid, appear not to have known that this passage extends be¬
low its junction with the First Ascending Passage. This is evident from an examination
of the beautiful drawing which they published of the Great Pyramid’s passage-system.

546 Before the time of M. Caviglia, in 1817, therefore, the location of the lower
terminal of the Well was a great mystery; and many theories were held regarding it.
A common belief among the Arabs was that the Well led to the Sphinx ; while others
thought it communicated with the Second Pyramid. The many mythical tales concern¬
ing it were all calculated to heighten its mysterious character, and they aroused the
curiosity of some of the earlier investigators sufficiently to lead them to explore its
depth. As far back as 1652, their writings give evidence of a fairly accurate knowledge
of most of the upper portion of the Well, and of the existence of the Grotto. Some
even attempted to clear the shaft to its lower end, but, like M. Caviglia, were compelled
through lack of air to give up their ambition.

547 Because of a statement made by Pliny (79 A.D.) to the effect that: “ Within the
largest Pyramid there is a Well; the river is supposed to have been let in by it,” the
Well-shaft was believed by some to lead to a reservoir of water, Doubtless it is from
Pliny’s account that this most peculiar shaft became known as “ The Well.” However,
it is doubtful if Pliny’s informants really knew of the present Well-shaft. Sir J.
Gardner Wilkinson expresses it as his opinion that Pliny’s statement rather referred to
the Descending Passage; for he believes that there is conclusive evidence to show that
the Pyramid’s upper passage-system was entirely unknown previous to A1 Mamoun’s
forced entry in 820 A.D. ; a belief also shared by Professors C. Piazzi Smyth and
Flinders Petrie, and by many other authorities.

548 Owing to the thick coating of dust, and the extreme roughness of the walls of
the shaft, it is difficult to determine the level at which the core masonry of the Pyramid
rests upon the natural rock ; but it cannot be far above the Grotto. It appears to us as
if the large core blocks rest directly on the top of the ten courses of small stones which
line the upper half of the square shaft of the second vertical part. As I indicated
before, these courses of small stones were built to continue the shaft through the Grotto;
and the level of the rock on which they rest can be distinctly seen in our photograph
—Plate CLI.

549 Professor Petrie points out that the ancient workmen must have cut and com¬
pleted the Subterranean Chamber and the lower part of the Descending Passage in the
rock, before commencing the erection of the superstructure of the Pyramid with its built
continuation of the Descending Passage. So also with the Well, its lower part would
probably be cut in the rock first, and then it would gradually be continued upward as
the core masonry of the Pyramid was built up, course by course, until it reached its
present outlet on the west side of the lower end of the Grand Gallery. But before
proceeding to the erection of the Great Pyramid, the workmen would also probably
level the surface of the foundation rock. That they did not do this in one plane, but in


279


terraces, is evident, because the beginning of the rock-cut portion of the Descending
Passage is distinctly on a higher level than the rock under the pavement at the outside
base of the Pyramid ; while our measurements of the length of the Well-shaft show that
the rock-cut portion of that shaft begins on a still higher level—Plate IX.

550 Our thought with regard to the Grotto is that, while the ancient builders were
engaged in this work of levelling the rock surface in terraces preparatory to the erection
of the Pyramid, they uncovered a large natural cavity or fissure. As the shaft of the
Well passed through this cavity (and its peculiar course would lead one to believe that
it was diverted for this purpose), the workmen would be instructed to build a continua¬
tion of its four walls with small courses of stone up to the level of the rock.

551 The cavity or fissure would then be filled up to the level of the rock with sand
and gravel from the desert, packed in firmly round the four walls of this built continua¬
tion of the shaft, and so form a solid foundation for the masonry of the Pyramid. In
our photograph of the Grotto (Plate CLI), some of this sand and gravel can be seen
adhering to the white plaster of the masonry. 1

552 Curious investigators (probably shortly after A1 Mamoun’s time), wondering
what could be concealed behind such peculiar little walls, forced their way through the
four lowest of the small courses of the south wall. Encountering nothing but sand and
gravel, they would soon abandon their task ; but, from time to time, later investigators,
imbued with the same curiousity, would gradually extend the breach by picking away
large quantities of the partly caked sand and gravel, and throwing it down the shaft
would completely block up the bottom of the Well. (This thought was first advanced
by Col. Coutelle in 1801.) Thus, the lower portion of the four walls of the shaft, built
so long ago through the cavity, were again laid bare on their outer surfaces; for the
Grotto curves almost completely round the Well-shaft—Plate CL. Even Professor
Flinders Petrie did his share in enlarging what has for long been generally known as the
“ Grotto." We discovered, at the bottom of the deep hollow to the west, a basket of
the kind regularly used by the Arabs to carry sand, etc.

553 Wedged in at the east edge of the deep hollow in the floor of the Grotto is a
large granite stone, which, judging by its broken appearance, is a fragment of a larger
block. It has two worked surfaces at right angles to each other, and, most wonderful
of all, parts of two large holes drilled through it! The north-east upper corner of this
stone may be seen at the lower left-hand corner of our photograph of the Grotto—
Plate CLI.

554 There are similar granite stones elsewhere in the Great Pyramid. Three lie on
the floor of the Descending Passage. One of these, the largest, was discovered by
Professor Flinders Petrie, a little below the junction of the First Ascending Passage. It
is across the top of this stone, as mentioned before, that the iron grill-door is fixed. It

1 Col. Howard Vyse, in his 3rd Vol. of Pyramids of Gizeh, gives an account of a pyramid (the
Northern Brick Pyramid of Dashur) with a base of 350 feet square, resting entirely on a foundation of
sand. He writes : “ The foundation is remarkable. The stony surface of the desert had been made level
by a layer of fine sand [the sand and gravel from the desert], confined on all sides by a stone platform,
14 feet 6 inches wide, and 2 feet 9 inches thick, which supported the external casing ; and the pyramid
was built upon the sand, which was firm and solid. Mr. Perring has met with other instances in Egypt
where sand has been thus used; and provided it be retained in its place, it apparently may be
depended upon.”


has five worked surfaces, and the remains of one drill-hole four inches in diameter.
Another was discovered by Mr. Covington on the floor of the Descending Passage a
little above the opening of the lower end of the Well. Like the one in the Grotto there
are two drill-holes in it.

555 This second stone now lies below the Well opening. On the day our men
began to clear the debris from the Descending Passage, they had uncovered a third but
smaller granite stone, which lay on the floor a little below the iron grill-door. Taking
away too much of the supporting debris, this stone began to move, and quickly gathering
impetus on that steep floor, it plunged down the 200 feet or more of the passage and
crashed with great force into the granite stone with the two drill-holes, knocking it to
the bottom. Nevertheless, no damage was done to either of the blocks. As these two
stones now prevented entrance to the Small Horizontal Passage leading to the Pit, I had
them removed a few feet up the passage, and laid against the east wall, taking care so to
place the larger block that the drill-holes might be readily examined by interested visitors.

556 In one of our photographs of the lower end of the Well, taken before this
incident occurred, this larger stone may be seen lying further up the passage; and part
of one of the worked surfaces, and even the upper ends of the drill-holes may be
discerned—Plate CLII. Judah is seen reclining on the floor of the Descending Passage
above the stone, supporting his head on the board which Mr. Covington had placed
across the passage to keep back the debris when he was clearing away the rubbish
below that point. This board, of course, is no longer required, as the entire length of the
passage is now clear. This photograph (taken before John’s arrival in Egypt) shows the
Well-opening in better perspective than the two others previously described (Plates LXII
& LXIII), for in this instance the camera was erected at a lower point in the Descend¬
ing Passage.

557 There is still another granite stone lying in the small Recess in the passage
leading to the Pit, as may be seen in our photographs of this part—Plates LVIII &
LIX. It has worked surfaces, but no drill-holes.

558 At first we were greatly puzzled to know how one of these granite stones found
its way into the Grotto, of all places! It appears, however, that among the large stones
which formerly blocked the irregular portion of the Well-shaft above the Grotto, one
was of granite ; for we find in M. Caviglia’s list of measurements of the Well, the fol¬
lowing item: “ Depth of the Well to a block of granite that had fallen into it—38 feet.”

559 Some active operator at the Pyramid (probably Mr. Caviglia himself) must have
had this granite stone lowered by means of ropes until it hung opposite the small
doorway of the Grotto, into which it was then pulled and lodged out of harm’s way.
Although this operation must have been attended with considerable difficulty and
danger because of the size and weight of the block, it was the easiest way to get rid of
it, for had it been thrown down the lower part of the ^07"ell, it would have again become
tightly wedged somewhere in the narrow shaft, completely blocking the passage.

560 A more difficult problem, however, is to discover the original site and purpose
of these five blocks of partly dressed granite stones with their drill-holes. The fact tha t
one of the three largest is now in the Grotto, and has been traced to a point several feet
higher than its present lodging place, would seem to indicate that they all originally
occupied a position somewhere in the upper parts of the Pyramid.

281


280


Plate CLII.


561 When Professor Flinders Petrie made his discovery of the large granite block
on the floor of the Descending Passage at the junction of the First Ascending Passage
(he seems not to have known of the others), it occurred to him that it might have come
from the Ante-Chamber. The three pairs of grooves on the sides of that chamber
seemed to suggest the possibility of other Granite Leaves or portcullises stretching
across between the walls like the present Granite Leaf—See Plate CXIX. It was the
only likely place he could imagine; but he saw too many objections to this theory to
advance it as anything more than a mere suggestion. Why, he asks, should there be a
[four-inch] drill-hole through the block [and we have seen that the two next largest
also have each a pair of drill-holes], if it originally formed part of another Leaf? He
anticipates that some might claim that the hole was modern, made for smashing up the
block more easily; but objects that “it is such a hole as none but an ancient Egyptian
would have made, drilled out with a jewelled tubular drill in the regular style of the
fourth dynasty [the period during which this Great Pyramid was built], and to attribute
it to any mere smashers and looters of any period is inadmissible.”

562 The grooves in the Ante-Chamber are, in any case, too wide, being an inch more
than the thickness of the stone. Professor Flinders Petrie remembers that the blocks
of the Granite Leaf are also an inch narrower than their grooves ; but seems to forget
what he himself points out later, and as we have already seen (Par. 489), that the extra
inch is filled in by corresponding projections or rebates on the blocks, which are
wholly lacking in the block discovered by Professor Flinders Petrie ; nor are any to be
seen on the other blocks.

563 Without doubt, these granite stones with their unique drill-holes, form a mystery
which must be left for some future investigator to make plain ; we cannot think what was
their original purpose, and are bound to confess as did Professor Flinders Petrie, that, to
use his words, “ something has been destroyed, of which we have at present, no idea.”

564 While John and I were thinking over these matters, we distinctly heard a voice
coming up the Well-shaft from 125 feet below, asking us if we were coming down to
tea! Jack and Stanley had persuaded their mother to visit the Pit; and as Sayd had
arrived with our customary four o’clock tea, they were now impatiently waiting for us
to join them. We therefore caught hold of the knotted rope (which can be seen on the
right-hand side in the photograph of the Grotto, hanging down against the north wall
of the square shaft (Plate CLI), and began the descent. Seven feet or so brought us to
the end of the second vertical part. Beyond this the shaft descends at a steep angle
southward—Plate IX.

565 The average height of the roof from the floor in this inclined part of the shaft,
is about 30 inches. The width between the walls at the roof is greater that the width
at the floor, the former being about 25 inches, and the latter 22 inches. The roof, walls
and floor of this shaft are not, however, so regularly cut in the rock as are the Descend¬
ing Passage and Small Horizontal Passage leading to the Pit. In the angles between
the two walls and the floor, rough portions of the rock have been allowed to remain,
for the purpose of serving as footholds. These footholds, which are regularly spaced all
the way, are not very deep or secure, especially to those unaccustomed to such places.

566 Our measuring operations took longer than we had provided for, and our stock

283


The mouth of the little passage which leads to the lower end of the WELL-SHAFT of
the Great Pyramid of Gizeh, as it appears in the west wall of the Descending
Passage; showing Judah reclining against the debris-retaining board;
and on the east (right) side, Mr. Covington’s granite
block with the two drill-holes.


of candles was now nearly exhausted. We had, therefore, to send Judah to the tents for
a fresh supply, and, as might be expected, he was away for a long time. I remarked to
John that it was rather risky to be left in the dark in such a long dangerous shaft, especially
as we had nothing to hold on to ; for the rope which Judah had fastened to the end of
the rope-ladder did not reach beyond the bottom of the second vertical part, and we
had to work our way laboriously downward, placing our feet as best we could in the
shallow footholds, and lying with our backs pressed against the angle of the east wall
and floor. Not long after my remark, down came a shower of candles on our heads
and backs! Judah had returned with a packet, and in his descent down the shaft it
had slipped out of his shallow pocket and burst open, hence the unexpected but very
welcome shower. Most of the candles were broken, but we did not mind.

567 I was now getting tired and a little nervous, the passage is so long and so steep,
and the squaring, plumbing and measuring took so much time. I suggested to John
that possibly we had taken enough of such special square and vertical measurements to
get the general inclination of this portion of the shaft, which seemed to be constant
throughout its length ; and he agreed that linear measurements along the roof and floor
lines would now suffice. We noted, however, that at about the middle of its length
there is a slight bend westward, and then back eastward to the same general line
—Plate XVII.

568 I thought we should never reach that iron pin at the head of the final almost
vertical part. Judah had previously unfastened the rope from the foot of the rope-
ladder, and was now behind us, carrying it with him. I called out to John, who was
always some little distance further up with the other end of the steel measuring-tape,
that he and Judah might lower the rope to where I was, and hold on to it until I should
reach my next stopping place. John did not seem to mind so much, but I felt safer with
a life-line, as it were, to hold on to should I require it. I afterwards noted that the
passage did not appear so dangerous when, later, Judah passed me and kept below
holding a light. However, I believe John is more courageous than I. I confess I had
a feeling of rest and comparative safety when at last I reached that lower iron pin, and
had my feet set firmly against it. Lying on my right side on the steep floor, I waited
until Judah passed with the rope to fasten it to the pin. He was not long in doing this,
and then we began the descent of the final part of the shaft, but again fir ml y holding
on to a rope.

569 In this last portion of the Well-shaft we had to resume our squaring horizontally
from floor across to roof (if there can properly be said to be a floor and roof at this
part), plumbing vertically from the roof to a lower part of the floor, and then measuring
horizontally and vertically between the points thus ascertained, all the way down. This
method of measuring gave us the general angle at which this part of the shaft tends
southward. We also took linear measurements along both the floor and roof lines.

570 While measuring the long inclined part of the shaft, we had noted two fissures
in the rock, a wide one about half-way down, and another at the top directly below the
Grotto, as if it were in continuation of it. The relative positions of these two fissures
above two others in the Descending Passage below, suggests the probability of their
being continuous with those others, as is indicated in Plate IX. (This thought was first
suggested by M. Caviglia.)


284


571 We were not sorry when we had completed our measuring operations, and at
length reached the lower end of the Well. It had been a trying time, but we were
happy to think that we had accomplished this part of our work at the Great Pyramid.
That Well-shaft is 200 feet in length!

572 We found Grace and the two boys sitting in the Recess in the Small Horizontal
Passage leading to the Pit, taking tea, and using the granite block which I have already
mentioned, as a table. Our measuring operations in the Well-shaft had taken us much
longer than we had anticipated, and they had commenced without us. This was our
last “ tea ” inside the Great Pyramid of Gizeh ; and we were now able to demonstrate
what we had remarked on a former occasion about the accommodation of the gmall
Recess, for seven of us now sat in it, and yet we were not too crowded. We afterwards
crept into the Pit and had a last look round. We illuminated it with two lengths of
magnesium wire, and admired its proportions and rough symbolical floor. Grace had
now been in every part of the Pyramid we ourselves had visited, except the Well and
Grotto,—and she would not venture down there! Jack had come down with us as far
as the Grotto.

We all send our love in the Lord, Your loving brother,

Morton Edgar.


T


285


Plate CLIII,


PtXtE CL1V,


A section of the north end of the GRAND GALLERY of the Great Pyramid
of Gizeh; showing six of the seven overlappings of the side walls;
also, at the base of the north wall, the upper half of the
doorway of the First Ascending Passage,


’


LETTER XXII.


Train en route for Port Said.

8p.m., Saturday, 17th July, 1909.

DEAR Brethren,—W e are now seated in the train, bound for Port Said and home.
Our work at the Great Pyramid is ended.

574 This morning at 7 a.m., the sky was overcast with heavy clouds. Usually at
that time, and even earlier, it is bright and cloudless overhead. This morning it seemed
to frown at the thought of our near
departure! A day or two ago, how¬
ever, I looked out of my tent door
in the direction of the Great Pyra¬
mid to see how it was getting on,
and to bid it “ Good Morning," but
to my astonishment I could not see
the summit! It was quite obscured
with mist. I saw the mist driving
up the north face, blown by the
wind, just as I have so often seen
the mist driven up and over the
hills of Scotland. I hastened to
secure a photographic record of the
interesting sight, for I knew that the
strong sunlight of Egypt would soon
dispel the phenomenon.

575 We spent the first part of

the morning in packing, and at 10-30
a.m., John and I with Judah paid
our last visit to the interior of the
Great Pyramid. We had a few more
photographs to take, and another
passage to measure—the Horizontal
Passage to the Queen’s Chamber. ^ Pyramid obscured in mist

Among the photographs taken were three in the Grand Gallery. We have found it
very difficult to secure a proper photograph of the north end of the Grand Gallery
as it appears to one standing about thirty feet up the inclined floor. However, we
have succeeded in getting some fairly good ones of certain portions of it, enough to
indicate the proper perspective, so that a drawing may afterwards be taken from them.

287


Plate CLV.


The north end of the GRAND GALLERY of the Great Pyramid
of Gizeh ; showing the fall height of the north wall.


Nevertheless, the Grand Gallery is so large, and the floor slopes away so steeply, that
we think it will be impossible to reproduce on paper a true idea of its appearance
when looking north. 1

576 One of our photographs, however, shows the details of a large section of the
north end of the Grand Gallery very clearly—Plate CLIII. At the bottom appears the
upper half of the doorway of the First Ascending Passage. Six of the seven overlappings
of the walls are shown ; and it will be noticed that the lowermost on each of the east
and west side walls is not developed on the north wall., Immediately above the third
overlapping on the west (left) wall, there can be seen a small section of one of the pair
of shallow grooves, which are cut opposite each other in the masonry of the east and
west walls, and which run the entire length of the Grand Gallery—Compare Plate
XVIII. The original purpose of this pair of peculiar corresponding grooves is difficult
to imagine ; the structural reason for their existence has not yet been satisfactorily
explained ; but no doubt there is some symbolical significance in connection with them,
as there is in connection with many other mysterious features in this immense and
generally little understood edifice.

577 Col. Howard Vyse, who first drew attention to these grooves, wrote with regard
to them : “ For the long grooves running on each side the whole length of the passage,
it is difficult to assign a use ; they are roughly cut, and therefore could not have been
used for a sliding platform, for which, at first sight, they appear adapted. Perhaps
they were made to receive a scaffolding for the workmen employed in trimming off the
sides of the passage.” But to this suggestion Professor C. Piazzi Smyth objected—
“ that the groove is represented so near the bottom of its overlapping, sheet, that there
was little strength left to support any weightand as the grooved portion has to a great
extent perished, without any strain being put upon it,—we cannot regard it as anything
connected with scaffolding, but rather with some symbolic meaning.”

578 The grooves are each 6 inches wide by Ya 0 f an inch deep ; and the distance
from the edge of the third overlapping up to the lower edge of the groove is,, in each
case, 5% inches. According to the measurements of Professor Flinders Petrie, the
lower edges of these grooves run parallel with, and exactly midway between, the floor
and roof of the Grand Gallery.

579 ¥e have secured several photographs of the lower end of the Grand Gallery
looking south, with the camera erected about two feet from the north wall. These show
the sheer cut-off of the floor of the Grand Gallery immediately above the low doorway

1 Plate CLV is a reproduction of a drawing of the north wall of the Grand Gallery, kindly drawn
for us by Mr. Muirhead Bone, an eminent and well-known artist, brother of Mr. Bone of Messrs. Bone
& Hulley, the printers of this publication.

The photographs we secured of this north part of the Grand Gallery have, fortunately, been com¬
prehensive enough to convey to Mr. Muirhead Bone a sufficiently accurate impression of its details and
very difficult perspective lines, to enable him to record a pictorial idea of the appearance of this remark¬
able and noble Gallery, truer to the reality than any we have seen.

It must be remembered that, to one looking north, the side Ramps of the Grand Gallery dip down
very steeply. In order to gain this effect in the drawing, we suggest that the Plate be held in a vertical
position at a distance of six inches from the eyes, and with the top edge of the book a little below the
level of the eyes. When holding the book in this position, the reader requires to look down upon the
illustration, and thus he obtains the effect of the Ramps receding from him.


289


Plate clvi.


4 \ } :

... ■£ .


j .v * ^

' - .^ i r - i*7 ^


KUkjft


The GRAND GALLERY of the Great Pyramid of Gizeh, looking south; showing the
method of ascending the steep slippery floor by Ihe aid of the Ramps.


Plate CLVII.

of the Horizontal Passage leading to the Queen’s Chamber. One of these (Plate CL VII)
shows the floor of the Horizontal Passage, and John standing on it with his left hand
resting against the sheer-cut-off above the doorway.

580 Two other photographs, one of which was taken with a long-focus lens, and


The entrance of the Horizontal Passage to the Queen’s Chamber; showing the
sheer-cut-off of the Grand Gallery floor.


both taken with the camera erected on a higher level than in the one described, give a
good impression of the long sloping floor, Ramps and side walls disappearing into the
darkness above—Plates CLVI & CLVIII. Judah, who stands on the floor of the
Horizontal Passage, is leaning against the sheer-cut-off; while John is seen ascending
the very steep and slippery floor of the lofty Gallery, his feet placed in the shallow
footholds, and his hands holding firmly to the East Ramp.

581 The Ramps are exceedingly useful. The ancient builders carved out a series of
large oblong holes on the upper surface of each of them (a few of which can be seen in
the photographs), for what reason we do not know ; but they enable one to take hold of
the Ramps more firmly. As this passage represents the Gospel Dispensation, the


RlATE civil!.


Ramps symbolize the Grace of God, his “exceeding great and precious promises, that by
these we might be partakers of the Divine nature ”—2 Pet. 1 : 4. One misses them in
the First Ascending Passage, which so well symbolizes the Law Dispensation. There,
to help in the ascent and descent, we require to take advantage of the little irregularities
on the walls, which have been caused by exfoliation. If it were not for these irregular¬
ities, and the footholds hewn in the floor,—if the walls and floor of the First Ascending
Passage had preserved their original smooth condition,—it would be quite impossible
for any ordinary man to walk in it. On a former occasion (Friday, 18th June), while
showing Professor Alex. Ferguson of Cairo through the Great Pyramid, the thought
occurred to me while we were returning down the Grand Gallery from a journey to the
King’s Chamber, that the course of the “ backslider ” is harder than that of the willing
climber. To go back is more difficult than to go forward. I mentioned the thought to
John, and he thoroughly agreed with me, for at the time he was holding the East Ramp
firmly with his hands, and carefully sliding down one foot after another into the
footholds.

582 On the day in which Jack, Stanley and I visited the other pyramids higher up
the Nile (Par. 505), John measured the Horizontal Passage leading to the Queen’s
Chamber, getting Grace’s aid to hold one end of the steel tape, etc. We now desired to
go over it again, to verify these measurements.

583 As I indicated in a former letter, the masonry of this Horizontal Passage is very
symmetrical. For a length of about 64 feet from the beginning of the roof at the Grand
Gallery end, each wall is built in two equal courses. In each of these courses there are
15 stones of one uniform size, namely, 41% inches in length, and half the height of
the passage in breadth—Plate IX. The vertical joints in the upper course are in line
with those in the lower ; and those on the east are in direct opposition to those
on the west wall.

584 Following these uniform sets of 15 stones, are two long stones in each course,
averaging about six feet in length, after which each wall is built in one course only, ap¬
parently as far at least as the drop in the floor of the passage; but beyond this, on to
the Queen’s Chamber, the very thick and hard incrustation of salt which entirely covers
the walls of this passage, made it impossible for us to locate the joints with any
certainty. This salt incrustation is peculiar to the Horizontal Passage and Queen’s
Chamber, although a little of it may also be seen on the walls of the First Ascend¬
ing Passage.

585 With the camera erected in.the passage at the south end, a few feet in from the
doorway of the Queen’s Chamber, we secured a photograph of the drop or step in this
passage—Plate CLIX. To show the difference in the height of the passage north and
south of this step (which is between 20 and 21 inches in depth), we got Judah to stand
in front of it with a two-foot rule in his hand. It will be noticed that his head just
touches the roof. The extreme irregularity of the floor-surface in due to a thick layer
of dust, which covers an excavation made by Col. Howard Vyse in search of a supposed
secret passage or chamber under the step,

586 We took another photograph of the Horizontal Passage with the camera erected
in the Queen's Chamber, showing the doorway in the north wall of the chamber—


The GRAND GALLERY of the Great Pyramid of Gizeh, looking south ; showing
the sheer-cut-off of the floor; and the two Ramps ascending
into the darkness beyond .


293


Plate CLIX.


Plate clx.

Plate CLX. To show the height of the doorway, John stands near it on the west side,
and Judah occupies the same position as in the former photograph.

587 Whenever we visited the Queen’s Chamber,, we found it very fatiguing to walk
along the low part of the passage from the Grand Gallery. The reason is that we
required to bend so low,
lower even than when walk¬
ing up the Descending and
First Ascending Passages, be¬
cause although these two
passages are of the same
right-angled height from floor
to roof as is the Horizontal
Passage, i.e., a little under
four feet, yet while walking
upward in them we had the
advantage of the greater ver¬
tical height, which is about
five inches more than the
right-angled height. (Before
John arrived in Egypt I
photographed Judah walking
up the Descending Passage-
Plate CLXII. Contrast this
Plate with Plate XLVIII,
where John is shown walk¬
ing down the passage, a mode
of progression more difficult,
even, than walking in the
low Horizontal Passage.) We
always experienced a feeling
of relief when we reached
the lower part of the floor
to the south of the step,
where we could straighten ourselves. In this part of the passage which measures
exactly one-seventh of its total length, we found that one of average height like myself
could walk upright, his head just short of touching the roof ; but John, who is a little
over the average, had still to bow his head submissively until he reached the full
freedom of the Queen's Chamber. If you will re-read the article on the Great Pyramid
in the 3rd Vol. of Scripture Studies {or our own remarks on the same subject—Pars.
171-176), you will appreciate the significance of this more, possibly, than you have
done hitherto!

588 In the Queen’s Chamber we photographed the east wall (Plate CLXI), showing
the full height of the “ Niche,” that most peculiar recess which measures 184 British
inches in height, by 41 inches in depth, with a width at the bottom and top of 62 and 20

295


The doorway of . the Horizontal Passage in the north
wall of the Queen's Chamber.


The drop or step in the HORIZONTAL PASSAGE leading to the Queen’s
Chamber of the Great Pyramid of Gizeh.


Plate CLXI.


The QUEEN'S CHAMBER of the Great Pyramid of Gizeh, showing the
NICHE in the east wall; also portions of the north wall
and high gabled roof to the left.


inches respectively. John is sitting at the entrance of a long horizontal excavatior
which is now largely filled with debris; while I am shown walking toward the door
the top of which, it will bq noticed, is in line with the top of my head.

589 Professor C. Piazzi Smyth believed that the exact measurement of the eccentri¬
city of the Niche
southward from the

-5^ •. IK -

wall, is intended as
another key to the

mid Cubit; and his ? (f" -

measurements to
support this theory

are verified by Vi* V

those of Professor .1 ■■ F 'N

Flinders Petrie.

horizontal excava- &

tion driven east¬
ward from the back

another of those

fruitless attempts to

discover additional

chambers and pas- L

sages in the Great

Pyramid. Mr. Cov- ,

ington frequently 'ii r.~ '

expressed to us his

opinion that the ^

Passage conceals
the lower end of a
small vertical shaft;
and if he could


obtain the neces¬
sary permission, he


The Descending ^Passage of the Great Pyramid of Gizeh, as viewed
from the lower end of the Well-shaft; showing, when con -


would have the


trasted with Plate XLVIII, the greater headroom


Plug removed in
order to test the


which one has when walking upward
in this passage.


truth of his theory. He bases his theory on the fact that the small vertical Well-like
shaft in the Trial Passages (See Par. 520) descends to the junction of the two inclined
passages, and argues, therefore, that a similar shaft should be found at the junction of
the Descending Passage with the First Ascending Passage in the Great Pyramid. We


297


ventured to dissuade him from entertaining the thought of removing the Plug blocks, as
we believe we have good grounds for the opinion that the Granite Plug was intended
for a very different purpose than that of concealing a passage, and that it was firmly
fixed in its present position to stay !

591 In any case, Mr. Covington’s
theory will not hold, for an examin¬
ation of the sectional drawing of the
Trial Passages (Plate CXXXVIII)
shows that the lower opening of the
vertical shaft is situated at the point
of intersection of the roofs of the
inclined passages, and not at that
part of the ascending passage which
corresponds to the position occupied
by the Granite Plug in the First
Ascending Passage of the Great
Pyramid.

592 We do not share the opinion
held by some that there are cham¬
bers and passages in the Great
Pyramid other than those with
which we are already familiar. The
present passage and chamber system
of this wonderful Stone Witness so
completely and beautifully meets all
the symbolical requirements of our
heavenly Father’s great plan of the
Ages, that it would be difficult to
imagine how any of the features
of that plan could be further or
better symbolized by the addition of
a single passage or chamber.


The north air-channel of the Queen's Chamber
showing part of the five-inch-thickness of
once concealing stone.


593 The air-channels of the Queen’s Chamber are very interesting. Their existence
was not known till so recently as 1872 A.D., exactly six thousand years after the
creation of Adam, according to Bible chronology. Scratched on the walls above them
we read the words: “Opened, 1872.” In Our Inheritance in the Great Pyramid,
Professor. C. Piazzi Smyth relates how Mr. Waynman Dixon, perceiving a crack in the
south wall of the chamber, which allowed him at one place to push in a wire “ to a most
unconscionable length,” set his man, Bill Grundy, to apply his chisel, with the result
that before long the tool went right through into a cavity beyond. Further excavating
proved the cavity to be the inner end of a neatly squared air-channel! Proceeding to
the opposite wall, Mr. Dixon discovered a second channel similar to the first. The
builders had actually constructed two air-channels for the Queen’s Chamber, but had
not carried them through into the chamber itself! They had left the last five inches

298


uncut! That this was their set purpose is proved by the fact that the orifices were not
merely plugged, for there was no jointing, but, to quote Professor C. Piazzi Smyth, “the
thin plate was a ‘left,’ and a very skilfully, as well as symmetrically left, part of the
grand block composing that portion of the wall on either side.” This is well seen in the
photograph which we took of the orifice of the north air-channel—Plate CLXIII. Half
of it is still covered by this five-inch thickness of once concealing stone. (This was the
last flashlight photograph taken by us in the Great Pyr ami d of Gizeh.)

594 What purpose could the ancient architect have had in view to induce him to
expend so much time and trouble in constructing two long air-channels, in such a way
that they would be useless as conductors of air until someone would seek, find, and
remove the barrier ? For we must remember that the first part of the channels to be
laid down in the process of building the Pyramid, would be those portions which are
incomplete to the extent of the five inches of uncut stone ; and that all the hundreds of
feet of carefully executed channelling which ascend from the Queen’s Chamber at a
steep angle, must have been added stone by stone as the Pyramid rose course by
course. As even a casual examination of the various features of this great stone
building, convinces one that its erector was not by any means a fool, and that he had
reason in everything he did, the problem of these air-conductors of the Queen’s
Chamber has puzzled the minds of many, even as numerous other features in the Great
Pyramid have done.

595 Whatever may be the scientific reason, if any, for these incompleted channels,
the symbolical meaning which appeals to us as correct is that suggested by C. T.
Russell—See Pars. 141-143.

596 The greater part of the walls of the Queen’s Chamber is covered with salt
incrustation, which makes it difficult to examine them to any great extent. But here
and there are clear spaces, and on parts of the west wall especially we were able
to examine the joints between the stones. These joints are marvellous in their close¬
ness, and are barely discernible. Mr. Covington said he has great delight in pointing
them out to interested visitors, and watching the look of astonishment on their faces.
Some are at first inclined to believe that what are pointed out to them as joints, are
really the ruled scratch of a knife. And yet, though so fine, these joints, both vertical
and horizontal, contain cement!

597 When we had finished our work in the Queen’s Chamber and Horizontal
Passage, we picked up our camera, measuring-tape, etc., and made our way down the
First Ascending Passage for the last time. Then, taking a look into A1 Mamoun’s forced
passage to make sure that none of our measuring-rods had been left there (for we
always hid them in that place when away from the Pyramid), we climbed up the
Descending Passage to the Entrance, taking care not to give our heads a final knock
against the low roof. On reaching the outside we found Judah sitting there, looking
rather gloomy. We spoke cheeringly to him, and he brightened up. He had, lying
beside him, all our measuring-rods tied in a bundle, and the rope-ladder coiled up ready
to take over to Mr. Covington’s tent.

598 After lunch, we took leave of Abdul Salam Faid and his brothers (who. are
partners with him in the tent-contracting business), and thanked them for all their


299


kind attentions. Before we finally left, we had, of course, to give Sayd and the
cook their bakshish; they were quite satisfied with what they received. We then
bade farewell to our tents, and started off for our tramcar at 3-15 p.m., bound for
Cairo. Judah accompanied us to take charge of our lighter luggage, our heavy boxes
having gone off in the morning on the back of a camel.

599 On the car, we looked back now and again at the fast diminishing pyramids,
believing that we should probably not see them again while in the flesh. John said he
felt sad at leaving the Great Pyramid where we had spent so many busy days. We
had become familiar with the various passages and chambers, and had, if I may so say,
developed “ Pyramid ” muscles. During our first days we were so stiff that we could
hardly manage to creep up and down the passages. Latterly, we could go up and
down with comparative ease. I could even run up the uneven floor of the Descending
Passage from A1 Mamoun’s forced passage to the Entrance. On a former occasion I
had seen Sayd running up this passage when returning with the tea things to the tents,
and had admired his strength and wondered how he could do it. After fully five
weeks of work in these steep passages, I was able to do the same myself. John, on this
our last day, had lowered himself under the granite floor of the King’s Chamber, where
a few of the granite floor-stones have been raised at the north-west corner, and a hole
excavated in the soft lime-stone underneath that part of the granite floor which supports
the Coffer—Par. 498. He had also climbed to the top of the Granite Leaf in the
Ante-Chamber in order to see the upper surfaces of the Leaf and the two wainscots.
Both these feats require no small amount of strength and suppleness.

600 We parted with Judah at the railway station at Cairo, giving him his bakshish
and a testimonial. He is very anxious that his name should be remembered in our
“book,” just as Ali Gabri’s name was mentioned by Professor C. Piazzi Smyth. He
proved to be most useful during our operations in the Great Pyramid, especially in the
Well-shaft, holding the rope-ladder, fetching and tying the rope, carrying rods, camera,
stand, etc.; but above all, securing and superintending the workmen, and looking after
our general interests with the happy result that we received fair treatment from
everyone. Although he did not take so much interest in our measuring operations,
which were not so much his “ business ” as ours, he has nevertheless observed that our
work at the Great Pyramid is not without some purpose. He enquired one day when
we were working down in the Descending Passage, what this passage was for. We
explained that it symbolized the “ poor groaning creation ” on its way to destruction
represented in the Pit. He evidently agreed that the symbol was apt, for ever after,
when going down this passage, we could hear him groaning and sighing to himself. He
wanted to make the illustration as realistic as possible. It was only his little joke. On
another occasion he very particularly asked what we called those passages leading to
the Queen’s Chamber and to the Pit. We told him that these were “Horizontal”
passages. He repeated the word several times, then finally said “I know him.” He
also made a mental note of the Girdles in the First Ascending Passage, their position,
and the wonderful uniformity of the masonry of the three upper and more important
ones. He took special note of the Granite Plug blocking the entrance to the First
Ascending Passage, and also of the Ramps running the whole length of the Grand
Gallery. He particularly enquired about the size of the King’s Chamber, and on

300


receiving the information asked for a piece of paper that he might make a note of it.
He was anxious to get all the information he could, that he might be a proper guide to
visitors to the Great Pyramid of Gizeh.

Sunday, 18th July. We are now in Port Said, waiting for the arrival of the
Martaban which is late, and will not be here, we understand, till after midnight. We
shall be glad when our feet are on deck. Although we hope to have a restful fortnight
on board ship, we have enough work to keep us fully occupied, for we have our notes
to examine and arrange, drawings to make, and a great many photographs still
to develop.

We are looking forward to meeting all the dear brethren again in Glasgow ; and we
trust we shall soon be able to let you all have the results of our labours, so that your
faith in the Lord’s Holy Word may be stimulated as ours has been, by a rehearsal of
the many corroborative evidences of the Lord’s Great Stone Witness in the land of
Egypt, that wonderful SYMBOL OF THE CHRIST!

With love to all from all, Your loving brother,

Morton Edgar.

(From John) Dear Brethren,—The earnest desire of us both is that the fruit
of our work, when completed and published, may be found to the glory of our heavenly
Father. We have experienced keen delight in examining all the wonderful details of
the Great Pyramid, and in noting the apt symbolism and the accurate time-measure¬
ments embodied in this marvellous structure, and we trust that we shall be enabled by
the Lord’s grace to set everything before you in such a way, that you may be able to
comprehend them, and join with us in giving glory to God— John.


On board the S.S “ Martaban ” homeward-bound.


U


301


INDEX


INDEX.


Abraham, accounted righteous, 51.
God’s promise to, 30, 34.
intercedes for Sodom, 39.
strong in faith, 56, 163.
true seed of, 43, 44, 57.
when rewarded, 57.

Absalom, 399.

Abu Roash Pyr., 254.

Abusir Pyr,, 512.

Aceldama, 397, 398.

Adam, 44, 48, 70.
curse passed upon, 147.
dead in, 193.

had God's law written on his heart,

150.

hope given to, 33.
trial of, 32,
was mortal, 132.
wilfully broke God's law, 125.
will eventually be raised, 125.
Adamic Condemnation, 123, 147.
all Gentiles born under, 182.
fallen from world's shoulders, 175.
followers of Christ free from, 191.
Advent, second, 69.

Ages to come, 70.

Air-channels of King’s Ch., 342-348.
of King's and Queen's Chs., 141-
143.

mouth of King's Ch’s. north, 498.
mouth of King’s Ch’s. south, 497.
of Queen’s Ch., 349, 593-595.
Air-current, down well-shaft, 431.
through passages of Gt. Pyr., 319-
323.

through south air - channel of
King’s Ch., 322, 343, 497.
up First Ascen. Pass. 430.

Aiton and Inglis, 82.

Alabaster, 509.

Alexandria, 253.

Ali Gabri (Alee Dobree), 222, 600.

Hadji, 222, 229, 244, 301, 328.

A1 Mamoun, discovered Ascending
Passages in Gt. Pyr., 97, 98, 313.
Entrance of Gt. Pyr. unknown to,
231.

forced concealing block from low¬
er end of Well, 313.
forced hole in side of Desc. Pass.,
95, 164, 328, 331.

forced passage into Gt. Pyr., 96-98,
100, 124, 328, 334.
position of entrance of forced pass¬
age of, 229.

Almighty, 194.

Altar, 447.

American Colony, 373, 419.

Ancient worthies, 52.

Angels, 151, 156.

Angle of passages in Gt. Pyr., 384,
Angle-stones above Entrance of Gt.

Pyr., 229, 527.

Annie Edgar, 210.

Anointed, 43, 54, 156.

Ante-chamber, 103, 107.


Ante-chamber (continued),

Caviglia’s excavation in west wall
of, 345, 474, 477.
description of, 190, 475-492.
dimensions of, 481.
symbolisms of, 190-194.
symbolizes School of Christ, 121.
symbolizes the spirit-begotten, 178.
theory regarding grooves in, 483
488, 561, 562.

Apostles, twelve, 80.

Arabs, attendant, 103, 109.

burying-ground of, near “Well of
sweet water,” 521.
kept off by Judah, 324, 325.
sure to have trouble with, 220, 234.
untruthful, 438.

village of, 221,234,439,440,471,524.
women of, 436.

Arabic, 364.

Archangel, 448.

Architect of Plan of the Ages, 72,
76, 141.

Artaxerxes, 39.

Atmosphere of Egypt, 259, 280, 326,
336.

Atonement, 163.

Authors, joint-, 9, 214.

Babylon, 155-157.

Babylon the Great, 83, 158.
Backsliders, 204, 581.

Basalt, 518.

Base of Gt. Pyr., length, 15, 21.
Basement sheet of Desc. Pass., 337.
Baths, 509.

Bats, 247, 309.

Belzoni, M., 250.

Benha, 269.

Bethany, 453.

Bethlehem, birth-place of Jesus, 380.
distance from Jerusalem to, 379.
drive to, 376.

geographical position of, note p.
„ 199.

has direct connection with Gt. Pyr.

of Gizeh, 381-385.
women of, 377.

Bill Grundy, 593.

Birth of Jesus, 118, 126, 127.
Birthday, 366.

Blind, 358.

Bone, Mr. Muirhead, note p. 289.
Boss on Granite Leaf, 489-490.
Bottle, in Mosque of Omar, 448,
Bottomless Pit, 145.

Breasted, Prof., 225.

Breeze (See Wind).

Bride of Christ, 59, 63.

Brown, Canon Carnegie, 374, 424.
Builders,

of Antitypical Pyr., 76-79, 149.
of Gt. Pyr., 4-6.
of other Pyrs., 514.

Bulls, embalmed, 507, 508.

Burdens, 355, 356.


Burns family, 215.

Cairo, air in, 246.
journey from Port Said to, 218,
219, 265.

Journey from Pyrs. to, to meet
John and Stanley, 261.

Caliphs of Egypt (See A1 Mamoun),
84,

Calvary, 363, 446.

Calvin, 29, 30.

Camel, 355, 598.

Camera, 496.

Campbell’s Tomb, 298.

Canaan, symbolizes heaven, 383, 457.
Canal, Suez, 218.

at sides of fields, 218.

Candles, 341, 426, 509, 566.
Casing-stones,

of Great Pyramid.
cement used in joints of, 85- 87, 504
composed of limestone from Mo-
kattam Hills, 245.
cubical contents and weight of
largest of, 260.

formerly entirely covered with,

84, 223, 504.

illustrated by Prof. Breasted, 225.
joints of, 85, 86, 260, 274, 504.
measurements of, 260.
nineteen exposed at north base of,
273.

other casing-stones of, found by
Prof. Petrie, 275.
photographing, 225.
planned before built in position, 74.
Prof. Petrie on, 74, 86, 225,226, 504.
shown to Jack, 426.
symbolize members of Christ, 276,
386.

uncovered by Col. Howard Vyse,

85, 223 -226.

when uncovered, 84, 99.
of Sakkara Pyramid, 515, 516.
of Second Pyramid, 248.
of Third Pyramid, 254, 255.
Catholics, 362.

Causeway, 519.

Cave, under Church of Nativity, 380.

under Mosque of Omar, 448.
Caviglia, M., attempts to clear Well-
shaft, 543, 544.

discovers granite block in Well-
shaft, 558.

excavating along course of King’s
Ch. air-channel, 345, 474, 477.
suggested that fissures in Desc.
Pass, and Well-shaft are con¬
tinuous, 570.

work in Desc. Pass., 241, 242, 544.
Cavity, A1 Mamoun’s, 95, 100.
Ceiling of :—

Ante-Ch., 191, 194, 479.

Desc. Pass., 284, 332, 337.

First Ascen. Pass., 468.

Gr. Gallery, 103, 180, 185.


Ceiling of (continued) :—

Grotto, 541.

Hor. Pass, to Queen’s Ch., 176.
King’s Ch., 108, 110, 114, 115.
little pass, from Desc. Pass, to
Well-shaft, 314.

little pass, from Gr. Gallery to
Well-shaft, 533.

little south pass.from Subt. Ch.,307.
Recess, 303.

Subterranean Ch., 145, 294, 308.

Cement, 85-87, 275, 338, 504, 596.

Chaff, symbolical, 68.

Chambers of Construction, 74.
discovery and description of, 109-

115.

not intended to be visited, 117.
symbolize Divine things or be¬
ings, 135.

Chambers, direction of, in Gt. Pyr.,

116.

none in masonry of other Pyrs.,
252, 514.

Charcoal, 274.

Chart Talk, 221.

Cheops, 3, 297, 298.

Christ, appeared in presence of God
for us, 200.

a stumbling-stone, 75-79.

Bride of, 59, 63.

casing-stones of Gt. Pyr. symbol¬
ize members of body of, 276.
date of death of, indicated by north
wall of Gr. Gallery, 127.
dead in, 193.

end of Law and beginning of
Gospel Disp., marked by death
of, 127, 184.

end of the Law for righteousness,
180, 201.

faithful Jews privileged to suffer
and die with, 170.

Gentiles made nigh by the blood
of, 182.

gives his flesh for the life of the
world, 54.

Head corner-stone, 72, 81, 149, 275.
immersed by John the Baptist, 54.
immersed into, 43, 193.
joint-heirship with, 188, 209.
kept the Law of God, 125.
love unites members of, 275.
many members in, 43, 44, 193.
merit of, imputed to footstep
followers of, 191.
mind of, 194.

other foundation can no man lay,
207.

raised from the death-state, 125,
169.

ransom - sacrifice of, symbolized
by Well, 124, 181-184, p. 90.
received by few Jews, 181.
reign with, 1000 years, 196.
resurrection of, suggested by Well-
mouth, 118, 169.
rule of, an iron one, 176.


INDEX.


Christ (continued),
symbolized by top-stone of Gt.
Pyr., 23.

the fore-runner, 52.
the Seed of Abraham, 41.
those who will attain the heav¬
enly inheritance with, 189.
world not heard of him, 42.
written in the heai-ts of the fol¬
lowers of the Master, 158.

Christian religion, 362.

Christendom to be destroyed, 68,
79, 83.

Chronology of the Bible, 593.

Church glorified, 163.
nominal, 59, 158.
of the Holy Sepulchre, 361-363.
of the Nativity, 379, 380, note
p. 199.

Clouds, 246, 574, 428.

Coffer, 108, 483, 493, 498, 500.

Company, Great, 59, 62.

Concrete, 292, 293, 340.

Conder, Col., 444, 446.

Consecration (See Sanctification).

Cook, 256, 335.

Copper, 135.

Copper City, 350.

Core Masonry, 74, 226, 260, 542, 548,
549.

Cornelius, 49, 200

Corner-stone, chief, 71, 75, 82.

Cotton, Chas. W., 214, 217, 267, 270,
354, 359, 392, 414, 415, 451.

Coutelle, Col., 552.

Covington, L. Dow.,
believes that Granite Plug conceals
a shaft, 590.

calls attention to newspaper notices
of work at Gt. Pyr., 433.
clearing air-channels, 343, 349.
clearing out Desc. Pass., 235.
closed Desc. Pass, with iron grill-
door, 237, 283.

discovers granite block in Desc.
Pass., 554.

excavating casing-stones of Gt.

Pyr., 223, 273.
kindness of, 234.
measuring casing-stones, 260.
opinion of Arabs, 438.
preparing for journey to Copper
City, 350, 426.

remarks regarding work at Gt.
Pyr., 257.

standing near casing-stones, 276.
supervising fixing of iron pin in
Well-shaft, 539.

supplies rope-ladder for Well-
shaft, 327, 529.

Crops in Egypt and Palestine, 457.

Cross, Law nailed to, 167, 181.

Take up your, 188.

Cubit, Pyramid, 19, 490, 589.
of Israel and Egypt, 19.

Cup drank by Jesus, 169.

Customs, 216. 353.


Cyrus, 38.

Dark Ages s 158.

Darkness, 339.

Dark Sayings of our Lord, 232.

Date of:—

beginning and end of Daniel’s 70
symbolical weeks, 157, 158.
beginning and end of Times of the
Gentiles, 155.
birth of Jesus, 118, 127.
building of Gt. Pyr., 98.
commencement of removing cas¬
ing-stones of Gt. Pyr., 84.
Covington’s excavation of row of
nineteen casing-stones at north
base of Gt. Pyr., 225.
death of Ali Gabri (Alee Dobree),
222 .

death of Christ, p. 96, 1, 2.
death of Prof. C. Piazzi Smyth, 222.
destruction of Christendom, 159.
destruction of Jerusalem by Roman
army, 68.

discovery of air-channels of
Queen’s Ch., 593.

discovery of casing-stones at north
base of Gt. Pyr., 85.
discovery of lower Entrance of
2nd Pyr., 250.

discovery of lowermost Ch. of
Constr., 110.

discovery of socket-foundations of
Gt. Pyr., 82.

discovery of Subt. Ch. and lower
end of Well-shaft, 241.
discovery of upper Chs. of Constr.,
111 .

discovery of upper Entrance of
2nd Pyr., 250.

discovery of upper passages and
chambers of Gt. Pyr., 98, 312.
earthquake, which cracked ceil¬
ings of King’s Ch., 115.
forced entry into Gt. Pyr., 98.

Day, of judgment, 64, 65, 399, 449.
symbolized in Gt. Pyr., 21, 23.

David, city of, 422.

King, 37, 380.
street, 361, 423.
tomb of, 421.

Davison, Mr., 110, 241, 545.

Death (See Hades),
abolished, 121.

condition of those who sacrifice
unto, 189.

curse of, passed upon Adam, 32.
death-doomed body, 167.
evidence of, in Valley of Jehosha-
phat, 401.

immersed into Christ’s, 193.

Jesus could not be holden of, 125.
Jesus raised from, 169.
of Christ, indicated by North wall
of Gr. Gallery, 127.
of wicked, contrasted with that
of the saints, 192.


INDEX.


INDEX.


Death (continued),

swallowed up in victory, 64.
Second, 70, 204.

Debris on outside masonry courses
of Gt. Pyr., 343, 348, 349.

Delta of Lower Egypt, 1, 13, 245.

Deluge, 33, 151.

Descending Passage,
basement-sheet of, 337.
beautiful workmanship of, 338.

Col. Howard Vyse describes, 242.
continuous floor-measurement for
first time, 287, 288.

Davison describes, 241, 545.
debris removed from, by Judah,
235, 237-239, 277, 555.
debris removed from, by M.

Caviglia, 241, 242, 544.
debris removed from, by Mr.
Covington, 235.

debris removed from, by Prof.
Petrie, 243.

description of, 90-92, 144,145, 282.
description of lower flat terminus
of, 289-293.

granite blocks on floor of, 555.
length of, 144, 237.
light entering, 318.
lower reach of, closed by iron grill-
door, 283.

lowe»' reach of, not measured by
Prof. Smyth, 242, 285.
measured by Col, Howard Vyse,
and Prof. Petrie, 285, 286.

Mr. Covington’s method of re¬
moving debris from, 236, 238.
never so thoroughly clear of
debris as now, 243.
older operators unaware of lower
reach of, 545.

rock-cut part of, first completed, 549
symbolizes downward course of
“this present evil world,” 119,
122, 146-159, 282, p. 76.
symbolizes Plane of Condem¬
nation, 182, 188, 201.
the importance of carefully
measuring the, 244.
vertical height of, 587.
very difficult to walk down, 284.
wonderful straightness of, 317.

Diagonal length of base of Gt. Pyr.,
15, 25.

Diet, 368.

Dinner, 279, 310.

Diodorus, 254.

Dispensation, end of Law, and be¬
ginning of Gospel, 167.

First, 33, 151.

Second, 34, 152, 159.

Divine Nature, 133.

attained by those who gain the
Kingdom, 52.

belongs to the true Church, 163.
given to faithful among Israel, 170.
spirit-begotten are reckoned by
God as partakers of the, 194.


Divine Nature (continued),
symbolized by King's Ch., 136,
141, 178, pp. 71, 93.

Dixon, Waynman, 9, 142, 461, 593.
Doctrines of Devils, 379.

Donkey-boy, 256.

Donkeys, 396, 423, 506.

Door, iron grill-, closing lower reach
of Desc. Pass., 91, 237, 283, 331,
554.

swinging stone-, closing Pyrs., 231,
251.

Doorway of

each Chamber in Gt. Pyr., 116.
Grotto, 540, 542.

Hor. Pass, leading to Queen’s Ch.,
579, 586.

passages from Subt. Ch., 306, 307.
small pass, leading to King’s Ch.,
492.

Doubts, 188.

Dragoman, 376.

Drill-holes, 553, 554, 561.

Drills, 500, 501, 561.

Drawing of:—

First Ascen, Pass., 429, 432.
north wall of Gr. Gallery, 575.
upper mouth of Well, 531.
Dynasty, 403, 561.

Dysentery, 360.

Ears to hear, 197, 232.

Earnest (Pledge) of future inheri¬
tance, 194.

Earth, abideth for ever, 159.

Axis of, 20.

desolations made in the, 175.
distance from sun, 22.

Gt. Pyr. in centre of, 14.
to become man’s inheritance, 70,
140.

to be devoured by fire of God's
jealousy, 159.

Earthquakes, 84, 115.

East, changes not, 359.
mode of burial in the, 407.
morning best time to travel in
the, 410.

Eastern life, 354.

Egypt, invaded by Hyksos, 4, 5.
Jacob enters, 35.

Jewish nation delivered from, 36,
161.

soil of, 457.

symbolizes “ this present evil
world,” 160, 383, 457.

Egyptians, afraid of Israelites, 35.
detested their invaders, 4.
forced to build Gt. Pyr., 5, 6, 75.
mechanical skill of, 501, 508.
must have rejoiced when head¬
stone of Gt. Pyr. was placed in
position, 81.
use of cement by, 504.
use of tubular drills by, 500, 501,
561.

Egyptologists, 501, 502, 504.


Electric-light, 341.

Elijah, 373.

Entrance,

of Great Pyramid,
angle-stones above, 229.
cannot be seen from ground be¬
low, 229.

Col. Howard Vyse’s search for a
south, 522.

exact location of, lost, 96, 231.
fine workmanship displayed in,
338.

footpath up to, 339, 340.
light shining down, 146, 348.
originally closed by stone door,
231, 251.

position of, 90, 144.
visitors afraid to proceed down,
106.

of Second Pyramid,
discovery of Lower, 228, 250.
discovery of Upper, 250, 251.
of Third Pyramid,
abandoned upper, 253.
photographed, 255.
search for, 252.
of south Pyr. of Dashur, 231.
of Step Pyr. of Sakkara, 512.

Equinoxes, 24, 25.

Eternal torment, 29, 379, 449.

Eusebius, 380.

Eva Edgar, 210.

Evil (See Present Evil World),
angels become contaminated with,
151.

God’s wrath kindled against, 159.
so long as permitted, downward
course must continue, 154.
world unable to discern, 150.

Evolution, 502, 504.

Excavations,

along course of King's Ch. north
air-channel, 344, 345, 474.
at back of Niche in Queen’s Ch.,
588, 590.

at upper end of Well-shaft, 538.
clearing out debris from Desc.
Pass., 235.

clearing out fissure in front of Gt.
Pyr., 228.

clearing out Subt. Ch., 235, 295,
296.

in search for Entrance of 2nd
Pyr., 250.

in the interior of the 3rd Pyr., 252.
large vertical shaft in the Subt.
Ch., 296, 297.

of first Pyr., south of Gizeh group,
509, 510.

on south side of Gt. Pyr., 522
round all the Pyrs. of Egypt, 518.
to Chs. of Constr., Ill, 112.
uncovering casing-stones of Gt.

Pyr., 85, 223-226.
under step in floor of Hor. Pass.

to Queen's Ch., 585.
under floor of King’s Ch., 498.


Exfoliation, 317, 468, 581.

Ezra., 38.

Faid, Abdul Maujud (See Judah), 263.
Abdul Salam, 256, 425, 506, 598.
Abraheem (See Reis).

Hassan, 256.

Faith, Christ’s day seen with the
eye of, 163.

condition of those who have, 187.
doubts evidence lack of, 188.
foundation of, symbolized by floor
of Gr. Gallery, 207.
in the ransom-sacrifice, 182.
justified by, 178-198, p. 91.
strength as a result of, 185,
the death of those who have, 192.
the just shall live by, 167.
the righteousness of, 153.
the way to life and immortality,
124.

to move mountains, 208.
very few exercise saving, 183.
Faithful class, 62, 71.

Fall of mankind, 147, 502.

Fast, Mr., 361, 416.

Father (of Edgar family), 366.
Fayoum, 234.

Feralli (See cook).

Ferguson, Prof. Alex., 214, 234, 256,
264, 326.

Morton calls on, 220.
shown through Gt. Pyr., 581.

Fire of God’s jealousy* 159.

First Ascending Passage, blocked by
Granite Plug, 91, 123.
cutting footholds in, 257, 328.
dates in Jewish Disp. indicated by
Girdles in, 462.

description of masonry of, 460-470.
direction of ascent, 100, 161.
discovery of existence of, 97, 98,
313.

Jesus’ birth Indicated in, 126, 127.
leads to Gr. Gallery, 180.
measuring in, 429, 460.
method of access to, 328.
size of bore of, 101.
symbolises Law Covenant, 123,
201 .

symbolizes Law Disp., 119, 160-
170, 581, pp. 80, 81.
Well-mouth a cause of stumbling
to one who emerges from, 183.
Fissure, in :—

Desc. Pass., 311, 570.
little south pass, leading from
Subt. Ch., 305.

Recess, 303.

rock in front of Gt. Pyr., 228.
Well-shaft, 570.

Flashlight, 308, 480, 495, 593.

Flesh, and blood cannot inherit the
Kingdom, 195.

given by Jesus Christ for the life
of the world, 54.
no man hates his own, 187.


Floor of:—

Ante-Ch., 191,193,194,475,476,487.
Desc. Pass., 90, 91, 106, 160, 243,
282, 287, 332, 337.

First Ascen. Pass., 106, 166, 257,
332 431.

Gr. Gallery, 102-105,185,186, 204,
207, 579-581.

Grotto, 541.

Hor. Pass, to Queen’s Ch., 102,
579, 585, note p. 65.
in Gt. Pyr., very slippery, 279.
King’s Ch., 195, 487, 492, 498, 599.
little pass, leading from Gr. Gallery
to Well-shaft, 537, 538.
little south pass, leading from
Subt. Ch., 305.

lowermost Ch. of Constr., 110.
Queen’s Ch. produced to floor of
First Ascen. Pass., 126.

Small Hor. Pass, to Subt. Ch., 291,
302.

Subt. Ch., 93, 145, 294-296, 302.

Focussing in interior of Gt. Pyr. 496.

Fools, 150, 508.

Footholds, cutting, in floor of First
Ascen. Pass., 329.
in A1 Mamoun’s cavity, 100, 328.
in Well-shaft, 539, 565.
necessary to make use of, when
traversing passages, 278, 581.
on floor of Desc. Pass., 282.
on floor of First Ascen. Pass., 581.
on floor of Gr. Gallery, 580, 581.
on upper surface of East Ramp in
Gr. Gallery, 105, 109, 329.

Footpath, 339, 340.

Foundation-stone (Head-stone),
none for counterfeit Pyr., 83.
of Antitypical Pyr., 72.
socket, 82.

French, Revolution, 304.
savants, 82, 545.

Fruit, 368.

Gabri (See Ali Gabri).

Garden of Eden, 32, 42.

Gate, Damascus, 363.

Dung, 395.

Jaffa, 361.

St. Stephen’s, 373.

Zion, 423.

Gehenna, 122, 396.

Gentiles, aliens from the common¬
wealth of Israel, 182.
a people for his name taken out of
the, 158, 182.

Jerusalem trodden down of the,
155, 452.

more degraded than the Jews, 165.
not born under the Law, 182.
pass by the ransom-sacrifice sym¬
bolized by the Well, 183.
permitted to rule the world, 156.
Times of the, 155, 157.
unaware that a time of humiliation
awaits them, 175.


Geographical position of Gt. Pyr.
and Bethlehem, note p. 199.

German Emperor, 360, 361.

Gethsemane, Garden of, 372, 446.

Girdles, 461-468.

mark important dates in the Law
Disp., 462.

Glasgow, 215, 264, 600.

Glasses, coloured, 350, 376.

Goat Class, 68-70.

God, This is our, 453.

Gold, 135, 156.

Gospel Age, 43, 70, 71, 83, 182.

Disp., 127, 167, 184.

message, witnessed to world, 28.

Grace of God, condition of those who
lose the, 188.

symbolized by Ramps in the Gr.
Gallery, 185, 187, 204, 205.

Grace, Edgar, 262, 330, 341, 350,
572, 582.

Grand Gallery, 575-581.

description of, 103-107, 168, 178.
direction of ascent of, 101.
grooves on side walls of, 576-578.
lit up by magnesium wire, 103, 277.
small pass, to Ch. of Constr., from
south-east top corner of, 109-112.
sole purpose of, 188.
symbolizes condition of those justi¬
fied by faith, 178-198, p. 91.
symbolizes Disp. of Grace, 119,581.
symbolizes liberty, 168.
symbolism of side overlappings of,
206-209.

symbolizes the High-Calling, 199-
209, p. 96.

Granite, block below entrance of
First Ascen. Pass., 91, 237, 243,
287, 318, 328, 331, 554.
block in Desc. Pass., 554-556.
block in Grotto, 553, 558-560.
block in Recess, 303, 557, 572.
block in Well-shaft, 558,
blocks stopping up abandoned
Entrance pass, in 3rd Pyr.
of, 253.

casing-stones of Pyr. of Abu Roash
of, 254.

casing-stones of 2nd Pyr. of, 248.
casing-stones of 3rd Pyr. of, 254,255.
ceiling of King’s Ch. of, 108, 114,
115.

chamber in 3rd Pyr. lined with,

floor-stone in Ante-Ch. of, 193,
194, 476.

pavement of 3rd Pyr. of, 255.

sarcophagi of, 507.

symbolizes things Divine, 135,191.

Granite Leaf, 107, 479, 561.
received name from Prof. Greaves,
484.

side rebates and Boss on the, 489-
490.

space of twenty-one inches in front
of, 190, 475, 477.


INDEX.


INDEX.


Granite Leaf (continued),
symbolism of, 191-193, 491.
the wainscot grooves which hold
the, 482, 485, 562.
thickness of, 489.

thought to be a portcullis, 483-488.

Granite Plug, lower butt-end of, 91,
331, 332.

method of passing round the, 164,
238.

space in front of, formerly occu¬
pied by limestone block, 96, 97.
symbolizes Divine Law, 123, 162.
too tightly fitted to be removed,
98, 590.

upper end of, 333, 334.

Grave-stones, 399, 404.

Greaves, Prof., 338, 484.

Grooves, in:—

Ante-Ch. south wall, 492.

Ante-Ch. wainscots, 482, 483, 487,
489, 561, 562.

Gr. Gallery side walls, 576-578.

Grotto, 116, 327, 540, 541, 546, 550-
553, 558-560.

Guides, 106, 109, 283, 325, 436, 600.

Hades (death-state), Jesus raised
from, 125, 169.

Jewish nation passed into, 170.
symbolized by Well, 118,169, p. 90.
symbolized in Tombs of the Kings,
407-409.

Hairs from the beard of Mohammed,
449.

Hall, Mr., 270, 392, 456.

Harvest, in Egypt, 219, 548.
symbolical, 61-70.

Head-stone of Gt. Pyr.,

distance above King’s Ch., 114.
great rejoicing when placed in
position, 81.

none for counterfeit Pyr., 83.
Scriptural references to, pp. 43,44.
symbolizes Christ, 55, 81,149, 275,
383.

symbolizes the sun, 23.
Zechariah’s reference to a head¬
stone, 400, 401.

Heathen, 28, 415.

Heaven symbolized by King’s Ch.,
23, 121, 138, 140-142, 178, 185,
195, p. 93.

Height of Gt. Pyr., 15, 22.

Herodotus, 3, 4, 75, 228, 297, 298.

Heiroglyphics (See Quarry-marks),
108, 117, 513.

High-calling, of Jesus, began at his
baptism, 200.

requirements of those who would
accept the, 191.

symbolized by Gr. Gallery, 178,
182, 199.

Hill, of Evil Counsel, 397, 398.
to the south of Gizeh Pyrs., 521.

Hinnom, V. of, 360, 396, 397, 421.

Hipparchus, 24.


Holy of Holies, 385, 447, p, 93.
Hope, of the world wrecked, 175.

toward God, 65, 172.

Horizontal Passage (See Small Hori¬
zontal Passage, and Well),
to Queen's Chamber, 582-587.
direction and position of, 102.
divided into two parts, 171, 587.
drop in floor of, 102,171, 174, 585.
fatiguing to walk in, 587.
masonry of, 583, 584.
symbolizes seven thousand years
of world’s training, 171-176,184,
p. 83.

to Ante-Chamber, 107,186,191,474.
to King’s Chamber, 195, 474.
Hospital, London Jewish Mission,
365, 374.

Hotel, Bristol, 246.

Du Parc, 354.

Fast's, 360, 415.

Hughes', 415.

Mena House, 245, 256, 336, 472.
Houses of Jews in V. of Hinnom, 396.
Human Nature (See Planes),

Adam created on Plane of, 48.
may be attained by Jewish na¬
tion, 181.

progress toward, symbolized by
Hor. Pass, to Queen’s Ch., 172.
reckoned dead by God, when pre¬
sented in sacrifice, 193.
reckoned to those who are justi¬
fied by faith, 178.
restored to world, 70, 141-143.
sacrificed by Jesus, 53, 54,138, 139.
to be attained by Ancient Worthies,
52, 163.

Huts, 510.

Hyksos, 4, 75.

Idol, 232, 233, 243.

Idolatrous, 398, 509, 518.

Image, Nebuchadnezzar’s, 156.
Immortality, 131, 133.
brought to light, 121.
symbolized by King's Ch. ,136 ,p.71
Well-shaft symbolizes the way to,
24, 169, 183.

Inch, British, 19.

Pyramid, 19, 490.
symbolizes a day, 23.
symbolizes a year, 25, 118, 127.
Inset-stones, 311, 462-465.

Iron, 156, note p. 250.

Isaac, 35, 41, 56, 372.

Antitypical, 57.

Israel, 35.

Israelites, condition symbolized by
First Ascen. Pass., 163.
faithful, Israelites indeed, 166-168.
how they regarded their Law
Covenant, 123.

Jesus sacrificed on their behalf, 169.
standing with God firm and sure,
160.

typically justified, 123, 163.


Jack, 214, 330, 411, 425-427, 442, 572.
Jacob, 35.

Jaffa, walk round, 352-358.
leaving Port Said for, 350.
leaving, for Jerusalem, 359.
leaving, on return journey to Pyrs.

(Morton and Jack), 391, 410.
leaving Jerusalem for, (John), 465.
leaving, for Pyrs. (John), 465.
Jamal, Anis, 354, 362, 376.

well-known in Jerusalem, 371.
James' Tomb, 399.

Jar, water, 258.

Jehoshaphat, V. of, 372, 398-404, 422,
446, 449, 454.

Jerome, 380.

Jerusalem, air fresh in, 443.
ancient city wall of, 421.
built by Hyksos, 4.
cast off by Jesus, 452.
destroyed by Nebuchadnezzar, 38.
distance from Jaffa to, by rail¬
way, 359.

European part of, 360.
height above sea level, 359.

Jewish quarter of, 423.
lecture by John in, 451, 455.
population of, 364, 444.
railway terminus at, 360, 454.
restored by Nehemiah, 39, 157.
result of visit to, 409.
ride round, 396.
streets of, 364, 423.
trodden down of the Gentiles, 155,
452.

views of, 452, 454.
walk through centre of, to law
courts, 370, 371.

Jesus, able to save to the uttermost,
203.

birth indicated by north wall of
Gr. Gallery, 118.

birth indicated in First Ascen.

Pass., 126, 127, 167.
birth, traditional site of, 379.
born on Plane of Human Perfec¬
tion, 126.

born under the Law, 126, 182.
called with High-Calling at his
baptism, 200.
came to his own, 180.
gave up his life willingly, 125,189.
resurrection and the life, 453.
tomb of, 446.

wept over Jerusalem, 452.
years of life on earth, 118, 127,
167.

Jewish Nation, beginning of, 35.
cast off by Jesus, 452.
concluded in unbelief, 181.
delivered from Egypt, 36.
destroyed as a kingdom, 38, 155.
destroyed as a nation, 78, 157, 170.
favour removed from, 41.
few received Christ by faith, 181.
lead through various experiences,
154-157.


Jewish Nation (continued),
less degraded than Gentiles, 165.
lifted above other nations, 48, 164.
lost privilege of High-Calling, 182,
reformation period of, 157.
rejected offer of High-Calling, 170.
separated from other nations, 153.
special advantages of, 49.

Jews, cemeteries of, 399.

houses of, in V. of Hinnom, 396.
not allowed to attend Christian
gatherings, 420.

not allowed into Church of the
Holy Sepulchre, 362.
not venture within Temple Area,
447.

population of, in Jerusalem, 364,
444.

wailing-place of, 394.

Job, refers to Gt. Pyr., 82.

John the Baptist, 52, 200.

John Edgar, arrives in Egypt, 261,
265.

at bottom of Well-shaft, 431.
drives to Bethlehem, 376.
impressed by magnitude of Gt.
Pyr., 262.

in Gr. Gallery, 581. -

in Hor. Pass, to Queen’s Ch., 582,
587.

in King's and Ante-Chs., 599.
in Well-shaft, 568.
lectures in Jerusalem, 451, 455.
notes from, 330, 350, 390, 600.
sad at leaving Pyrs., 599.
sicknesses of, 326, 365, 368.
visit to Trial Passages, 520.

Joints of:—

casing stones of Gt. Pyr., 85, 86,
260, 274, 338, 594.
casing stones of 3rd Pyr., 255.
Entrance Pass, of Gt. Pyr., 338.
Entrance Pass, of 2nd Pyr., 250.
First Ascen. Pass., 460-469.

Hor. Pass, to Queen’s Ch., 584.
pavement and platform of Gt. Pyr.,
227, 338.

Queen's Ch., 596.

Well-shaft, 542.

Jones, Wordsworth E,, 206.

Jordan, V. of 457.

Judah, accompanies Morton to 2nd
Pyr., 248.

asked to pull out worm at lower
end of Desc. Pass., 293.
at Entrance of Gt. Pyr., 597.
brushes down First Ascen. Pass.
430.

descends Well-shaft for rope, 539.
dislikes Pit., 324.
farewell to, 600.

fastens rope-ladder to iron pin in
Well-shaft, 529.

instructed to clear out debris from
Desc. Pass., 236-239.
instructed to clear out dust from
corners of Desc. Pass., 285, 288.


Judah (continued),

meets Morton and Jack at Cairo,
411, 412.

photographed, 335.
proper name, 263.
recommends removal into new
tents, 256.

sent for electric-light bag, 341.
sent for candles, 566.
struck on face by bat, 309.

Judas, 389,

Justified, by faith, 180.
cannot present body a living sac¬
rifice unless, 192.
not through the Law, 153, 162.
not through Works, 182.
symbolized by Gr. Gallery, p. 91.
Justification by faith.

Jews received first offer of, 179.
not the result of Works, 124.
purpose of, 188.

symbolized by Gr. Gallery, 121,
178-198, pp. 91, 96.
when complete, 191.

Justinian, Emperor, 450.

Kedron (see Jehoshaphat).

King’s Chamber, air-channels of, 141,
142, 342-348.

entrance into 195, 196, 498.
excavation under Coffer in, 498,
599.

floor of, 487, 492, 498.
granite ceilings of, 108, 114, 115.
height above socket level, 25.
inclination to south-west, 115.
made of granite, 108, 493.
mouth of south air-channel of, 497.
planned before erection, 74.
position in Pyr., 108.
size of, 23, 108.

symbolizes Holy of Holies, heaven,
178, 185, 195, 385, p. 93.
symbolizes immortality or the
Divine Nature, 121,136,140,141,
p. 71.

temperature in, 322.
thought by Col. Howard Vyse to
have served as a sepulchre, 483.
Khamseens, 322.

Khufu, 401.

Ladder, 110, 327, 529, 566, 568, 597.
Lamb slain, 173.

Lamp, the Word of God, 166, 204.
Language, pure, 159.

Law,

Covenant,

made nothing perfect, 163, 167.
nailed to the cross, 167, 180, 181.
schoolmaster, 180.
symbolized by First Ascen. Pass.,
123, 181, 160-170, p. 80.
yoke of the, 166.

Divine,

Dispensation ended, 127.
engraved on tables of stone, 153.


Law (continued),

gradually obliterated from man's
nature, 152.

how regarded by Israelites, 123.
symbolised by Granite Plug, 123,
162.

two men only capable of keeping
the, 125.

written in man’s nature, 150.
Heredity, 32.

Lecture in Jerusalem, by John, 451,
455.

arranging for, 270, 393, 414-416.

Ledge in A1 Mamoun’s cavity, 328.

Lens, 478, 496.

Level, 226, 338.

Liberty, of the children of God, 173.
of Grace rejected by majority of
Jews, 191.

symbolized by Gr. Gallery, 168,
180, 201.

Libyan Desert, 437.

Life, Adam’s, 132.
brought to light by Jesus, 121.
crown of, 197.
from the dead, 49.

Jesus, the appointed way to, 180.
Jesus’, on earth, 118, 127, 167.

Jews judged themselves unworthy
of, 182.

laid down by Jesus, 189.
reward of those who, for Christ’s
sake, lose their, 191.
way to, symbolized by Well, 124,
169, 183.

whosoever will save his, shall lose
his, 188.

Light, down Desc. Pass., 146, 318.
the True, 166.

Limestone, angle-blocks above En¬
trance of Gt. Pyr., 229, 527.
block on Desc. Pass, floor, 91, 247,
287, 328, 331.

boulders on mountains of Pales¬
tine, 456.

casing-stones of Gt. Pyr., 85, 245.
chambers of constr., 114.
foundations of temples of 2nd and
3rd Pyrs., 249.

Gr. Gallery entirely of, 179.
hard, on Desc. Pass, floor, 91, 160.
passage to Ante-Ch. entirely of, 191.
Queen’s Ch. entirely of, 136.
roof block concealing entrance of
First Ascen. Pass., 96, 97, 313,
332.

step at head of Gr. Gallery, 194.
symbolizes things human, 135,136.

Little Flock, 183.

Living-stones, 71, 75, 80, 87, 387.

Locke, Mr., 217.

Lot, 34.

Love, 87, 189, 275.

symbolized in Gr. Gallery, 206-209’

Lunch, 310, 321, 598.

Mackeague, Capt. John, note p. 199.


INDEX.


INDEX.


Magnesium, 103, 277, 493-495.
Malaria, 427.

Malta, 268.

Mamelukes, 252.

Mamoun (See A1 Mamoun).
Manasseh, king, 398.

Manetho, 4, 6,

Mariette, M., 505, 507.

Martaban, S.S., 221, 600.

Mary and Martha, 453.

Maspero, M., 91, 220, 239, 264, 280,
283.

Measuring, Desc. Pass., 285 -288.
First Ascen. Pass., 429, 460-470.
-rods, 278, 279, 597.

Small Hor. Pass., 302.

-tape, 285-287, 305, 582.
Well-shaft, 539, 567, 569.

Meek, 189, 277.

Mediterranean Sea, 266.
Melchizedec, 5.

Members of Christ's Body, 43, 44,
Menzies, Mr. Robert, 118, 120.
Messiah, 39, 157, 167, 182.

Meter, French, 20.

Milk, 326, 368, 374, 424, 457.
Milky-Way, 281.

Millennial Age, 64-70, 171,
the proud to be abased in the, 176.
Mind of Christ, 194.

Minna Edgar, 210.

Mist, 474.

Mitchell, Mr., 13.

Models of Temples, 418, 447.
Mohammed, 448, 449,
Mohammedans, 438, 448, 449.
Mokattam Hills, 113, 245, 335.
Moloch, worship of, 398.

Mortality, 131.

Mosque of A1 Aksa, 450
Omar, 372, 447-449.

Mosquitos, 246, 256, 369, 443.

Mount,

Moriah, 56, 372, 417, 422, 447.
Offence, 398.

Olives, 372, 405, 452.

Scopus, 454.

Zion, 360, 395, 422.

Mountains of Judaea, 456.

Mouth of Well (See Well).

Mummy, none in Gt. Pyr., 108.
Museum, British, 113, 253,

Cairo, 220, 263, 505, 509.

Mystery, five granite blocks in Gt.
Pyr. a, 560-563.
lower end of Well a, 546.
of God’s Plan revealed, 40.

Names, on masonry of Gt. Pyr., 499.
Napoleon, 545.

Nebuchadnezzar, 38, 155, 156.
Nehemiah, 39, 157.

Newspapers, 433.

Newton, Sir Isaac, 19,

Niche in Queen’s Ch,, 588, 589.
Night, 247, 309, 336, 472.

Noah, 33.


North wall of Gr. Gallery, 107.
indicates date of birth of Christ,
118.

indicates date of death of Christ,
127.

Norton, Capt., 260.

Notches (See Footholds).

Nurse, 374.

Olive trees, 446.

Orient Commerce Co., 354, 359.

Overlappings on walls of Gr. Gallery,
103, 107, 576.

their symbolism, 206-209.

Owls, 347.

Palestine, 330, 341, 350.
soil of, 457.

Parable, 371.

Paradise, 70, 449.

Patriarchal Age, 34.

Paul, 268.

Pavement, in Temple Area, Jerusa¬
lem, 417.

of Gt. Pyr., 227, 338.

of 2nd Pyr., 228

of 3rd Pyr., 255.

on east side of Gt. Pyr., 518.

Pentecost, 167, 200.

Perring, Mr., 296, 297, 483,

Perspective, 332, 525, 575.

Petrie, Prof. Flinders, (See Quoted),
7, 99, 115, 213, 237, 243, 248,
254, 275, 291, 295, 298, 301, 312,
313, 317, 319, 343, 349, 500, 519,
532, 547, 549, 552, 561-563, 578,
589.

Mr. William, 22,

Petroleum, 369.

Philition, 4.

Photographs, 276, 471, 493, 506, 593.
cannot convey a true idea of pro¬
portion, 276, 332.
developing, 279, 280, 331, 341.
method of taking flashlight, 278,
495.

taken in confined places, 477, 478.

Pi (Greek letter 7r), 18.

Pilasters in Ante-Ch., 482.

Pit (See Subterannean Chamber).

Planes of relationship to God, 47,
58, 134, 177, 198.
condemnation, 182,
human depravity, 48, 164.
human perfection, 48, 52, 53, 121,
126, 140-143, p. 71.
justification, 182.

spirit-begetting, 54, 57, 178, 191,
193, 194,

spirit-birth, or immortality, 54,
121, 141, 142, 178, 195.

Plateau, Pyramid, 12.

Platform, below casing-stones of Gt.
Pyr., 227, 274.

Pliny, 547.

Plumbing, in Gt. Pyr., 332, 539, 567,
569.


Pointers in First Ascen. Pass., 462-
465,

Point of Intersection, 332.

Pope, 158, 191.

Portcullis, supposed to occupy
grooves in Ante-Ch., 483 488,
561.

of 2nd Pyr., 501.

Porter, 356, 411, 423.

Port Said, Grace's and Jack’s arri¬
val, 341, 351, 352,

John’s and Stanley’s arrival, 268.
leaving Pyrs. for, and home, 573.
Morton’s arrival, 216.

Morton’s and Jack’s passing
through en route for Pyrs., 410.

Post Office, 412.

Power used by Egyptians, 501.

Prayer, 438.

Precession of the Equinoxes, 24, 25.

Present Evil World, 122, 149, 152,
304.

to be destroyed, 159, p. 76.
symbolized by Egypt, 160, 383,
457.

Printing, 159.

Promise, exceeding great and pre¬
cious, 170, 205, 207.
holy spirit of, 194.
made to Abraham’s seed, 41.

Proportion, 276, 279, 525.

Pyramid, Antitypical, 56, 72, 76, 81.
Antitypical counterfeit, 83.
a symbol of perfection, 46.
geometrical definition of a, 402.

Pyramid, Great,
architect of, 27, 389.
builders of, 4-6, 75.
builders of other Pyrs. unaware
of upper system of, 514.
casing-stones of, removed, 99, 230.
casing-stones of, stripped off by
caliphs, 84.

could not be built by modern
builders, 503.
date of building, 98,
did not possess a temple like other
Pyrs., 518.
exactly oriented, 13.
first to be built, 75, 401-403, 514.
forcibly entered, 96-98.
fulfils Isaiah XIX., 13.

God’s stone witness, 528.
great rejoicing when completed,
81.

halo of light round lofty summit
of, 281,

indicates length of Precession of
the Equinoxes, 25.
measurements of day and year in,
21, 23.

meridian of, 14.

Messianic, 8.
method of building, 74.
methods of comprehending pro¬
portions of, 524, 525, 527.
now dilapidated, 84.


f


1


Pyramid, Great (continued),

occupies finest site on Gizeh hill,
401.

of Divine origin, 4, 389.
only Pyr. which has upper sys¬
tem, 514, 523.

only Pyr. which possesses air-
channels, 342.

only the one Entrance to, 522.
originally closed by stone door,

231.

originally covered with casing-
stones, 230, 504.
peculiar shape of top-stone, 75.
position of, 1, 12-14, note p. 199.
position of Entrance of, 90, 229.
referred to in Bible, 82.
relation to earth’s axis, 20.
size in comparison with Sphinx.

232, 521, 524.

size of, 15, 16, 18, 21, 22, 525.
socket-foundations of, 82, 273.
squaring the circle in, 18.
stones at the summit of, thrown
down, 99.

symbolizes distance of earth from

r \ sun, 22.

/theories held with regard to, 2.
time employed in building, 3.
top-stone of, must itself be a Pyr.,
73.

top-stone of, symbolizes the sun,
21, 23,

type of the new creation, 82, 383.
unit of measure of, 19.
upper passages and chambers of,
first discovered, 97,98, 313, 332,
514, 547.

Pyramid, Second,

Entrance Passages of, 250.
granite casing-stones of, 248.
lower Entrance Pass, of, dis¬
covered, 228, 250.

Portcullis of lower Entrance of,
581..

position of, 12.

remnant of casing at summit of,
248.

rock-levelling for erection of, 252.
thought to have connection with
Gt. Pyr., 546.

upper Entrance of, originally
closed by stone door, 251.
upper Entrance Pass, of, dis¬
covered, 250.

Pyramid, Third,

casing-stones of, 254, 255.
chasm in north side of, 252,
passages of, 253.
position of, 12.
sarcophagus of, 253.
seems as large as Gt. Pyr., when
viewed from the south, 525.
steps in, 253,

Pyramids, difficult to judge relative
sizes of, 525.

entirely peculiar to Egypt, 402.


Pyramids (continued),

first, south of Gizeh group, 509-
511.

number of, in Egypt, 10, 514.
of Abu Roash, 254.
of Aburis and Sakkara, very ruin¬
ous, 512.

of Dashur, 231, 517, note p. 280.
of Egypt, all copies of Gt. Pyr.,
514;

of Egypt (other than Gt. Pyr.)
built as monumental sepulchres,
483, 523.

of Gizeh, clearly visible from
tramway car, 336.
of Gizeh, forcibly entered, 250.
of Mexico, Assyria, etc, not true
Pyrs., 402, 403.

Quarry, 74, 75.

Quarry-marks, 74, 113, 117.

Queen’s Chamber, 102, 588.
air-channels of, 141-143, 349, 593-
595.

floor produced to intersect floor
of First Ascen. Pass., 126.
joints on walls of, 596.
seven sided, 172, 136.
symbolizes plane of human per¬
fection, 121, 136-138, 141-143,
175, p. 71.

symbolizes plane of justification,
163.

Quinine, 427.

Quoted, Caviglia, 558.

Davison, 241.

Forbes, Rev. John, 470.

Greaves, Prof., 338.

Mackeague, Capt. John, note p.
200 .

Manetho, 4, 6.

Mitchell, Prof. O. M., 24.

Petrie, Prof. Flinders, 74, 86, 286,
338, 401, 403, 501. 504, 561, 563,
note p. 251.

Petrocchi, poet, 1.

Pliny, 547.

Russell, Charles T., 88, 131-133,
141-143, 156, note p. 200.

Seiss, Dr., 82, 129.

Smyth, Prof. C. Piazzi, 13, 18, 23,
25, 338, 461, 469, 484, 577, 593.
Strabo, 231.

Taylor, John, 6.

Thomson, Rev. Andrew, 2, 3.
Vyse, Col. Howard, 86, 112, 224,
242, 252, 521, 522, 523, 526, 527,
543, 577, notes pp. 251, 280.

Rachel, tomb of, 378.

Railway, line between Jerusalem
and Jaffa, 359, 456.
terminus at Jerusalem, 360, 454.

Rain, 235, 243, 246, 293, 343, 428,
456.

Ramps, description of, 104-106, 186,
329, 581.


Ramps (continued),
distance between, 203.

East Ramp, 535.
holes in, 581.

symbolize Grace of God, 185, 187.

205-209, 581.

West Ramp, 531-534.
in Chambers of Tombs of the
Kings, 407-409.

Ransom, 53, 124, 138, 173, 181, 182,
183.

cause of stumbling to the Jews.

183.

at peace with God through faith
in the, 185.

centre or hub of plan of salvation,

184.

Rebates on Granite Leaf, 489, 490,
562.

Recess, in Subt. Ch., 300.

on west side of Small Hor. Pass.,
92, 303, 304, 310, 572.
Reformation, 156.
of Israel, 157, 159.
of Spiritual Israel, 159.

Reign with Christ, 196.

Reis, 220, 234, 236, 335.

Remnant of Jewish nation, 182.
Restitution, Times of, 63, 136, 141,
358.

now in beginning of, 502.
symbolized by terminal portion
of Hor. Pass., 171.
those who lose grace of God in
Gospel Age shall share the
blessing of, 188.

Resurrection, and the Life, 453,
believed to take place in V. of Je-
hoshiaphat, 399.

Christ’s, suggested by Well-mouth,
118.

first, 62, 193, 196.
north wall of Gr. Gallery indi¬
cate date of Christ’s, 127.
of the spirit-begotten, 178.
partakers of Christ’s, 193.
symbolized by entrance into
King's Ch., 196.

symbolized by Zechariah's tomb,
401.

Revolution (See French).

Robinson’s Arch, 395.

Rock, levelled at north front of Gt.
Pyr., 227.

-levelling before erection of 2nd
Pyr., 252.

of Mount Moriah, 447, 448.
on which Gt. Pyr., is built, 549.
-part of Descending Pass., 549.
-part of Well-shaft, 548, 541.
Rome, Empire, 156, 454.

Roof (See Ceiling).

Rope (See Ladder), 327.

Rubbish mounds at base of Gt. Pyr.,
84, 85, 275, 339, 340, 527.
Russell, Charles T., (See Quoted), 8,
135,155,171,177,211,595.


INDEX.


INDEX.


Sabbath, Mohammedans’, 438.
Sacrifice, 189.
joint-, with Christ, 200.
make a covenant by, 189.
present your bodies a living, 192.
when a sacrifice becomes a living,

191.

Sahara Desert, 350, 437.

Saints, precious are the death of,

192.

to judge the world, 40.

Sakkara Pyramids, 109, 505, 512,
casing-stones and Temple of one
of the, 515, 516.

Salt, 584, 596.

Mr., 543,

Sanctification, path of faith-justifica¬
tion leads one to, 187.
symbolized by Ante-Ch., 121, 178,
189.

symbolized by Gr. Gallery, p. 96.
Sanctified, symbolized by Ante-Ch.,
p. 92.

symbolized by Gr, Gallery, p. 96.
Sanctuary, Holy, 52, 195, p. 93.
Sand, -foundation, 551.

-hills, 472, 473.

Sarcophagus, 108, 253, 483, 507, 508,
513.

Satan, to be destroyed, 67.
to be let loose, 68.
workmanship of, 83.

Saws, 500, 501.

Sayd, waiter, 310, 326, 335, 347, 431,
436, 564, 599.

Scarabs, 506.

Schicks, Dr., 417, 418, 422, 447.
Schoenecke, Mrs., 417, 418.

School, -master, 180.

of Christ, 121, 178, 191, p. 92.
Scientific knowledge, 3, 502.

Scored lines on walls of Desc. Pass.,
337.

Scotland, 326, 339, 574.

Scriptural, references to head-stone,

pp. 43, 44.

reference to Gt. Pyr., 82.

Scripture Studies, 211, 221, 266, 450,
455 491 587.

Season, 258, 355, 412, 471.

Second death, 70.

Seed of Abraham, the true, 43, 44,
57.

Seiss, Dr., 27, 82, 129, note p. 199.
Sepulchral apartment, in Gt. Pyr.,
Ill, 112.
pit, 298.

Serpent, 33, 34.

Seventy, weeks of Daniel, 39, 43,
157-159.

years’ desolation, 38, 157.

Shadow, cast by Pyrs., 437.

of good things to come, 163.

Shaft (See Well),

in rock-hewn tombs, 441.
in Subt. Ch., 93, 296, 297, 299.
in Tombs of the Kings, 407- 409.


Shaft (continued),
in Trial Passages, 520, 590, 591.
sunk in search of Gt. Pyr. casing-
stones, 275.

up to topmost Ch. of Constr., 112.
Sheep class, 68-70.

Shem, 5.

Shepherd Kings, 4-6.

Siloam, 397, 398.

Simon, a tanner, 357.

the leper, 453.

Skull, 249, 446.

Small Horizontal Passage, 92.
difficult to creep through, 284.
general description of, 302.
junction with Desc. Pass., 289-291.
symbolism of, 159, p. 77.

Smoke, 494, 495.

Sjnith, Geo. Adam, 422.

Smyth, Prof. C. Piazzi, (See Quoted),
7, 82. 212, 213, 222, 254, 285, 287,
298, 337, 343, 440, 470, 490, 493,
519, 532, 547, 589, 600.
Socket-foundations, 15, 25, 82, 273.
Sodom, 34, 39.

Soil in Palestine and Egypt, 456, 457.
Solomon, 37.

Temple of, 74, 418.

South wall of Gr. Gallery, 107, 474.
Sphinx, 12, 232, 519, 521, 524, 546.
Spirit, -begotten, 54, 57.
symbolized by Ante-Ch., 178, 191,
193, 194, p. 92.

-born, symbolized by King’s Ch.,
178, 195, p. 93.
first to receive the Holy, 200.
graces of the, 206-209.
walking after the, 191, 201.
Stanley Edgar, 214, 265, 267, 279,
300, 326, 341, 360, 365, 368, 391,
413, 425, 459.

Star, 24, 247, 280, 281, 382.

Step in Gr. Gallery, 106, 109, 186,
474.

symbolism of, 187, 205.

Step Pyramid of Sakkara, 512.

Steps in 3rd Pyr., 253.

Stewart, Bro., 246.

Stone of stumbling, 75, 77, 78.
Strabo, 231.

Subterranean Chamber,

clearing out debris in, 235, 277,
295, 296.

general description of, 299-301.
last look round in, 572.
position of, 92, 145.
size of, 294, 299.

south passage from, 93, 295,

305, 306.

symbolizes destruction, Gehenna,
119, 145, 146, 172, p. 77.
temperature in, 323.
undressed knob of rock in, 301.
uncovering west wall of, 295.
vertical shaft in, 93, 296, 297, 299.
walls, ceiling and floor of, 145,
294-296, 302.


Suez Canal, 218.

Summit, of Gt. Pyr., 99, 281, 437
438, 574.
of 2nd Pyr., 248.

Sun, distance from earth, 22, 24.
sometimes obscured by clouds
246, 428.

Sykes, Rev., 414.

Symbolisms of Gt. Pyr., 128-130,
592.

Tabernacle of the wilderness, 135,
177, 389, 418.

Holy of the, symbolized by the
Ante-Ch., p. 92.

Most Holy of the, symbolized by
the King’s Ch., p. 93.

Tares, 61, 68.

Taylor, John, 4-7, 18.

Tea, afternoon, 310, 311, 431, 564,
572.

Temperature, 259, 264, 280, 319, 322,
323, 428.

Temple, foundation of first Pyr.’s,
which lies south of the Gizeh
Pyrs., 509.

foundation of 2nd Pyr.’s, 248, 249.
foundation of 3rd Pyr.’s, 249, 255.
found to be connected with most
of the Pyrs., 518.

Granite, near Sphinx, 519.
Herod’s, 373, 418.

Solomon's, 372, 389, 418.

Temple Area, Jerusalem, 404, 417,
422, 447, 449.

Tents, bade farewell to our, 598.
changed into new, 256.

Mr. Covington’s, 234, 472.
not removed from their position
during absence in Palestine, 330,
425.

of Cairo business people, 472.
of lady doctor, 256.
permission to erect, 234, 472.
sitting in newly erected, 245, 246.

Thomson, Rev., 415, 451.

Rev. Andrew, 2.

Threshing-floor, 219, 405.

Titus, 454.

Tombs, Apis, 507, 508.

Campbell's, 298.

Col. Howard Vyse's search for
supposed secret tomb-chamber
below Gt. Pyr., 228, 297, 298,
Garden, 446.
of David, 421.
of Lazarus, 453.
of the Kings, 406-409, 445.
on west side of Gt. Pyr., 441.
Rachel's, 378.

used by Prof. C. Piazzi Smyth, 440.
Zechariah's, St. James’, Absalom’s,
399-404.

Tramway car, 245, 336, 440.

Transverse Plates (See Girdles), 461.

Traveller (See Visitor).

Treading the com, 359, 405.


Tree, cursed is every one that
hangeth on a, 167.
olive, 446.

Trial, one hundred years’, 67.

Trial Passages, 520, 590, 591.
Trouble, great time of, 62, 64, 83.
hope beyond the, 172.
symbolized by drop in Hor. Pass.,
174.

symbolized by Subt. Ch., 304.
Turkish Constitution, 353, 370, 390,
444.

Twilight, 339.

Tyropceon Valley, 395, 397, 422.
United States of America, 437.


Viceroy’s residence, 471.

Virgins, wise and foolish, 59.
Visitors, to the interior of Gt. Pyr.,
106, 161, 165, 169, 174, 186, 190,
205, 233, 435, 436, 439, 469, 494,
596.

to the Pyrs., 526.

Vvse Col. Howard, (See Quoted), 82,
85. Ill, 213, 228, 242, 248, 250,


Wages, 240.

Wailing-place, 394.

Wainscots, 479, 481-489.

Waiter, (See Sayd), 256.

Walls of:—

Ante-Ch., 477, 479, 481, 492.

Desc. Pass., 337, 338.

First Ascen. Pass., 460-470.

Gr. Gallery, 103, 107, 206-209,
576-578.

Grotto, 541.

Hor. Pass, to Queen’s Ch., 583, 584.
Jerusalem, 421.

King’s Ch., 498, 499.
little pass, from Desc. Pass, to
Well-shaft, 314.

Queen’s Ch., 596.

Small Hor. Pass., 302.

Subt. Ch„ 145, 294, 302, 308.

Upper Entr. Pass., of 2nd Pyr.,
250.

Well-shaft, 542, 548, 565.

Warden, Capt. Wm. Orr, notep. 199.
Washing, 377.


Water, at Jerusalem, 368.
at the Pyrs., 258.
for tents at Pyrs,, 256.
tubes and wheels for raising, 218.
Weather, 258.

Weeks of Daniel (See Seventy).

Well, 529-571.

at the commencement of Hor.
Pass, to Queen’s Ch., 173, 181,
184.

bend in upper portion of shaft
of, 539.

built part of shaft of, 540, 548-552.
central position of upper end of,
184.

cleared out by M. Caviglia, 241,
242, 543, 544.

cleared out by Mr. Covington,
235.

final portion of shaft of, 569.
first vertical part of shaft of, 541,
543.

Prof. Flinders Petrie’s theory
regarding, 532.

inclined part of shaft of, 565-568,
570.

irregular portion of shaft of, 542,
543, 558.

length of shaft of, 571.

little passage leading from Desc.

Pass, to lower end of, 312-316.
lower end of, 94, 183, 312-316.
lower terminal of, formerly a
great mystery, 546.
mouth of upper end of, 105, 169,
183, 329, 530-536.
no faith in Well as a way to life,
183.

Pliny’s reference to the, 547.
recognition of symbolism of, the
key to understanding Gt. Pyr.’s
teaching, 120.

rock-cut part of, completed first,
549.

securing iron pin at head of, 327,
329.

size of, 124. ,

small hor. pass, at upper end of,
102, 532, 537.

stones found in shaft of, 543, 558.
summit below level of Queen s
Ch. floor, 126.


Well (continued),

symbolizes Hades, or the death-
state, 118, 122, 169, 409.
symbolizes the Ransom-sacrifice,
182, p. 90.

the only open way to the upper
passages and chambers, 124,169.
theories held regarding the, 546,
547.

Wheat, symbolical, 68.

Wheeler, Dr., 365, 424.

Where are the Dead? brochure, 217,
221, 266, 415. (See Adv.)
lecture, 451.

Wilkinson, Sir J. Gardner, 547.

Will, 191.

Wind, 264, 265, 319, 320, 322, 339,
343, 428, 474.

Women, 436.

Workmanship, 85, 226, 250, 338, 504.
World (See Present Evil World),
condition of the, 146-148.
escape the condemnation of the,
by faith, 182.

love of God in sending his Son to
die for the, 188.
of the ungodly, 33, 48, 61.
only way to save the, 149.
physical, not to be destroyed, 159.
plunged into degradation, 158,159.
those who lose grace of God, will
share in the condemnation of
the, 188.

those who will judge and bless
the, 209.

trial of the, symbolized by the
Hor. Pass, to Queen’s Ch., 171-
176.

ultimate salvation of the, 184.
Worm, 293.

Year, exact length of, 21.

symbolized by Pyr. Inch, 25, 118,
127, 167.

Yoke, of Jesus, 167.
of sin and death, 175.
of the Law, 166.


Zag-a-Zig, 265.

Zechariah’s Tomb, 399-401, 409.
Zedekiah, 38.

Zeiss, Carl, 348, 478.


INDEX OF SCRIPTURE CITATIONS.


Genesis.

2;7, . 143

3 ■ 17-19, ’. 147

4 : 22,.page 250

12 : 1-3. 34

12 : 3,. 30

15 : 5, 6, 34

18 : 17-33. 39

22 : 2. 56

22 ; 16-18, ... 34, 42


22 : 18, .

30

43 : 32, .

11

46 : 32-34,.

5

Exodus.


1 : 7-22, ..

35

8 : 25, 26.

5

19 : 1-8, .

161

19 : 8,.

123

26 : 30.

389


Leviticus.

16:34, . ... 48

18 : 5. 123, 138

23 :4-17, . 200

Deuteronomy.

11 : 1-. 138

11 . 21, 70

19 :21, 53

28 : 1-, 138

32:4,... 387


32 : 22, .... ... 445

II Samuel.

5:7, . 422

24 :18, . 422

I Kings.

4 : 26,. 417

6:7, .. 387

8:1. 422


I Chronicles.
28:11,19,... 389


INDEX OF SCRIPTURE CITATIONS.


II Chronicles.


Malichi.


5

8-11,


188


Colossians.

36

: 11-23, ...


38

I 3 :

16, 17,


387

5

12,

« ' *


32

1 :

16-19,

. 72


Job.


1

Matthew.


5

18, 19,


65

2 :

14, ...

127, 167, 181

38

: 4-7, ...


82

2 :

1-15,


381-

-383

6

3,


193

2 :

16, 17,

. 44


Psalms.


5 :

13, 14,


148

7

10,

123,

138,

162

3 :

3, ...

. .193

2 :

9, .


79

7 :

14, ...


203

*7

18,


162


I Thessalonians,

8 :

4-9,


70

10

: 5, 6,


49

7

22, 23,


166

4 :

16,

. 196

25

9,.


189

11

: 5, ...


39

8

1,


191,

201


I Timothys

45

14, 15, ...


59

11

: 11,


52,

200

8

1, 9,


57

2 ;

4 6,

53, 125, 138

45

16,

.. .i

52

11

: 23, 24,


39

8

15,


178

2 :

14,

. 125

46

8-10, ...


175

11

: 28-30,


167,

202

8

18,


197

6 :

16,

. 133

49

7, •


53

13

: 18-30,


61

8

19-22


44


II Timothy.

50

5,.


189

13

: 24-30,


68

8

20, -


172

1 :

10,

. 121

66

3,.


66

13

: 34-43,


...61, 68

8

21, 22,


173

2 :

11, 12,

... 189,196

76

10,


148

24

: 21,


304

8

22,


147


Hebrews.

86

9,.


66

25

: 31-46,


69

8

29,


387

2 :

9, ...

. 53

86

13,


445

25

: 34.


140

9

31-33,


78

2 :

14, ...

. 67

91

1, ...


194

28

: 19,


49

10

: 4,


180

3 :

1, ...

. 199

93

18,


204


Luke.


11

: 10,


181

6 :

4-6,

. 204

96

9 13. ...


209

3 :

15, ...


39

11

: 15, 25,

26,


49

6 :

13, ...

. 42

110:3,


66

3 :

16, 17,


68

11

: 32,


181

6 :

19, 20,

. 52

112:4,


204

9 :

23, 24,


188

12

: 1,

178,

192,

199

7 ;

26, ...

. 126

115 : 16,


70

9 :

24, ...


60


I Corinthians.


8 :

5, ...

. 389

116:15, ...


192

13

: 34, 35,


452

1 :

23,


183

9 :

24, ...

52, 195, 200

118:22, ...

55

, 73

14

: 11,


176

2 :

8, ...


77

10

: 1, ...

. 48

119:105, ...


204

19

: 10,


48, 65

2 :

16,


194

10

: 1, 4,

. 163

139 : 14-16,


388

19

: 41,


452

3 :

11,


207

10

: 4, ...

... 48, 123

145 : 20, ...


66

20

: 17-19,


77

6 :

2, ...


40,

209

10

: 29,

. 204


Proverbs


21

: 24,


155,

452

10

: 11,


48

11

: 6, ...

. 188

2 :

21, 22, ...


67

21

: 36,


62

12

: 12,


43

11

: 19,

41,56

4 :

18, .


204


John.


13

: 1-13,


209

11

: 39, 40,

52, 57, 163


Isaiah.


1 :

11, ...


49

15

: 50,


140,

195

12

:9,

. 178

8 :

14, ...


79

1 :

11, 12,


180

15

: 53,


58


James.

19

19,

13,

528

1 :

11-13,


68, 70

15

: 53. 54.


133

1 :

6, 7,

. 188

25

8, 9, ...


64

3 :

7, 8,


70


II Corinthians.


2 :

23, ...

. 56

25

9,.


453

3 :

18, ...


182

3 ;

3,


158

4:

6, ...

. 176

26

9,.


65

4 :

38, ...


68

5 :

•Jj ...

1,


178


I Peter.

28

16,


71

5 :

23, ...


81

6 :

1,


60,

188

2 :

1 8,

. 71

35

1-, ...

44,

437

5 :

26, ...


133

6 :

1, 2,


70

2 :

5, ...

. 387

40

31, ...


202

5:

28, 29,


52, 64

11

• 7


52

2 :

7, 8,

. 77

41

44

45

46

10, ...

28,

1-8, ..

10,


203

38

38

98

6 :
6 :

13

14

44, ..

51, ...

: 34,

: 6. ...


54,

183

138

56

207

1

2

Galatians.

4, ... 48, 122,

16.

152

48

2 :
3 :

1 :

19,. 62

18,... 53,54,125

II Peter.

2, . 178

51

53

53

53

55

55

1..

2, 3, ...

11,

12,

9,.

11,


386

76

40

118

140

31

15

17

17

1 :
2 :

: 19,

: 15-18, ...

: 22, ...
Acts.

13, 14, ...
1-18, ...


386

386

276

200

200

3

3

3

3

3

3

•5

/, 1U,

11-13,

12,

16,

24,

25, 26,


41

167

138

41

180

180

at.

1 :
1 :
1 :
2 :
2 :
3 :

4, 58,
5-7,
5-11,

5, ...
20-22,
7-10,

133, 205, 581

. 206

. 208

. 48

. ... 204

. 64

65

25

31

20, ...
Jeremiah
: 11, 12, ..

: 29, 30, ...


67

38

175

2 :
3 :
3 :
3 ;

34, ...
14, 15,
17, ...
19-23,


52

49

77

138

O

4

4

4

Zy,

4, ...

4, 5,

6, ...


...

‘xO

126

182

178

2 :
3 :
3 :

I John.

2, . 65

2, . 197

16, . ... 56, 189

32

: 18-20, ...


389

3 :

21, ...

63,

i26,

502


Ephesians.

387

4 :

10, 11,

. 189

51

: 25, 26, ...


83

4 :

10-12,


383

1

4, ,..


5 :

19,

. 148

Ezekiel.


4 :

11, 12,


149

1

6, ...


193


Jude.

21

: 25-27, ...


157

10

: 1-


49

200

1

10,


64

6,


. 151

33

: 11,


192

10

: 37, 38,


54

1

10, 15-

23,


55


Revelation.

37

: 9, 10, ...


143

13

: 46,


182

1

13,14,.

.57,

178,

194

2

20, ...

... 189,197

Daniel.


15

: 14,

62,

158

182

1

14,


64

3

21, ...

52, 59, 209

2 :

31-45, ...


156

15

: 18,


31

2

8, 9,


124

5

13, ...

. 81

11

: 16,


457

24

: 15,


65

2

10,


387

7

9-17,

59,62

12

: 1, ...


304

27

: 1-.


268

2

12, 13,


182

13

: 8,

. 173

9 :

24-27, ...

39,

157

28

: 1-.


268

2

20,


80

73

17

:5,

. 83


Hosea.

: 1;.


Romans.


2

20-22,


386

18

: 1-,

. 83

11


383

1

18-32,


150

508

4

9, 10,


385

18

: 5, 8,

. 83

Micah.'


3

9-26,


153

5

29,


187

19

: 7-9,

. 52

4 :

8.


64

3

10,


51


Philippians.


20

: 6,... 59, 62, 193, 196


Zephaniah.


3

20:


162

2

9-11,


383

20

: 7, 8,

. 0/

3-;

8. 9 • * * >. -


159

4

8-13,


51

3

10, 11,


193

21

: 3-5,

7U


Zechariah.


4

20-25,


56

3

13, 14,


199

21

: 8,

67, 69

4 :

7,


400

5

1> 2,


...

58

3

21,

...


197

21

: 14,

. 80
