A Treatise Concerning Religious Affections (Jonathan Edwards, 1746)
==========================================================
Edwards's 1746 Religious Affections — the Great Awakening theologian's classic on distinguishing true from false religious experience. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

* 2 Three ParTs; E. J 


TREATIS 
Concerning 4 
Religious Aﬀections, 


— "Sad 


Paxr I. Concerning the Nature of the Afecbionc, 
and their Importance- in Religion. +. 


Par II. Shewing what are no certain Signs that reli- 
' gious Aﬀettions are gracious, or that they are not. 


Par III. Shewing what are diſtinguiſhing *—_ of 
truly gracious and ha — 


—__ _ 


By Fonathan Edwards, A. M 


And Paſtor of the e Church in 8 
wy 2 


Levit. i: ix. ult. and x. 1, 2. And there came a Fire out fro ety oY 
Lord,-----upon the Altar ;-----which when all the Papk þ aw, they 
ſhouted and fell on their Faces. And Nadab and Abihu-----offrred r 
ftrange Fire before the Lord, which he commanded them not : Aud 
there went out a Fire from the Lord, and devoured them, and they 
died before the Lord. \* i 

Cant. ii. 12, 13. The Flowers appear on the Earth, the Time of the | 
Singing 9 Birds is come, and the Voice of the Turtle i is heard in our 
Land; Fig-tree putteth forth ber green Figs, and the, Vines evith 

' the —— Grape, give a good Smell, Ver. 15. Take us the Foxes, 
the little Foxes, which — the Vines ; for our Vines have tender 
| Grapes. | 


3 


— 


— 1 


111 


— 


The Second Eprriox. 


* 
44 


BOSTO N PRINTED: 


'Nzw-Youx; Re-printed by J. PARKER, for GaRRAT our, 
near the — 8 Coffee. Houſe. 1768. > 


* 


EE is n Queſtion whatſoever, that is of 
4 -1 greater Importance to Mankind, and that it more 
AL concerns every individual Perſon to be well reſol- 


7 ved in, than this, What are the diſtinguiſbing 
WI _Lualifications of thoſe that are in Favour with Go 
and entitled to his eternal Rewards? Or, which 


The Conſideration of theſe Things has long engaged me to attend 
to this Matter, with the utmoſt Diligence and Care, and Exactneſa of 
Search and Enquiry, that I have been capable of: It is a Subje& on 
which my Mind has been peculiarly intent, ever ſince I firſt entred on 
the Study of Divinity.—But as te the Succeſs of my Enquiries, it muſt 
be left to the Judgment of the Reader of the following Treatiſe. 


I am ſenſible it is much more difficult to judge impartially of that 
which is the Subject of this Diſcourſe, in the midſt of the Duſt and 
Smoke of ſuch a State of Controverſy, as this Land is now in, about 


here 


*% 


Things of this Nature: As it is more difficult to write impartially, ſo 
it 18 more difficult to read impartially.— Many will ly be hurt 
in their Spirits, to find ſo much that appertains to ous Affections, 


I 0 
I» . 

>. 
= £ 


_ 


%% r oem —_ — 
- i. ” N — 
4 = 
1 
— Ly 


Px e PREFACE, _ 
here condemned: And perhaps Indignati and Contempt will be ex- 
Cited in others, by finding ſa much here juſtified and approved. And 


great Reformation, an 


it may be, ſome will be ready to charge me with Inconſiſtence with 
myſelf, in ſv much approving ſome Things, and ſo much condemning 
others; as I have found, this has always been objected to me by ſome, 
ever fince the Beginning of our late Controverſies about * 
Tis a hard Thing to be a hearty zealous Friend of what has been 

and glorious, in the late extraordinary Appearances, and to re- 
Joice much in it; and at the fame Time, to ſee the evil and pernici- 
ous Tendency of what has been bad, and earneſtly to — that. 
But yet, I am humbly, but fully perſwaded, we ſhall never be in the 
Way of Truth, nor go on in a Way acceptable to God, and tending to 


che Advancement of Chriſt's Kingdom, till we do ſo. There is indeed 
ſomething very myſterious in it, that ſo much Good and ſo much 
Bad, ſhould be mix'd together in the Church of God: As tis a myſte- 


rious Thing, and what has puzzled and amazed many a Chri- 
ſtian, that there ſhould be that which is ſo divine and precious, as the 


- ſaving Grace of God, and the new and divine Nature, dwelling in 
the ſame Heart, with ſo much Corruption, Hypocriſy and Iniquity, 


in a particular Saint. Vet neither of theſe, is more myſterious than 
real. And neither of em is a new or rare Thing. *Tis no new 
Thing, that much falſe Religion ſhould prevail, at a Time of great 
reviving of true Religion; and that at ſuch a Time, Multitudes of 
'Hypocrites ſhould {pring up among true Saints. It was fo in that 

Revival of Religion, that was in Jofiab's 
Time; as appears by Jer. iii. 10. and iv. 3, 4. and alſo by the great 


Apoſtacy that there was in the Land, ſo ſoon after his Reign. So it 
Was in that great Out-pouring of the Spirit upon the Jews, that was 
in the Days of John the Baptift; as appears by the great Apoſtacy of 
that People, ſo ſoon after ſo general an Awakening, and the tempo- ' 


rary religious Comforts and Joys of many; John v. 35, Ye were 
willing, for a Seaſon, to rejoice in his Light. So it was in thoſe great 


Commotions that were among the Multitude, occaſion'd by the 


Preaching of Jeſus Chriſt : Of the many that were then called, but feug 
were choſen ; of the Multitude that were rouſed and affected by his 


Preaching, and at one Time or other appeared mightily engaged, full 


of Admiration of Chriſt, and elevated with Joy, but few were true 
Diſciples, that ſtood the Shock of the great 'Trials that came after- 
wards, and endured to the End: Many were like the ſtony Ground. 
or thorny Ground; and but few, comparatively, like the good Ground: 


Of the whole Heap that was gathered, great Part was Chaff, that the 


Wind afterwards drove away; and the Heap of Wheat that was left, 


was comparatively ſmall ; as appears abundantly, by the Hiſtory of 
the New Teſtament, So it was in that great Out-pouring of the 
Spirit that was in the Apoſtle's Days; as appears by Matth. 24, 10, 
11, 12, 13. Gal. 3, 1. and 4, 11, 15. Phil. 2, 21, and 3, 18, 


19. And the two Epiſtles of the Corinthians, and many other Parts 


of the new Teſtament, And ſo it was in the great Reformation from 


Popery. 


* 


The PREFACE. d 
Popery. It ap plainly to have been in the viſible church f 
God, in Times of great reviving of Religion, from Time to Time, 
as it is with the Fruit Trees in the Spring; there are a Multitude of 
Bloſſoms; all which appear fair and beautiful, and there is a promi- 
ſing Appearance of young Fruits; but many of them are but of ſhort 
Continuance, they ſoon Fall off, and never come to Maturity. _ 


Not thatit is to be ſuppoſed, that it will always be ſo: For tho” there 
never will, in this World, be an entire Purity ; either in particular 
Saints, in a perfect Freedom from Mixtures of Corruption; or in 
the Church of God, without auy Mixture of Hypocrites with Saints, 
and counterfeit Religion, and falſe Appearances of Grace, with 
true Religion and real Holineſs: Yet, tis evident, that there will 

come a Time of much greater Purity in the Church of God, than has 
been in Ages paſt ; itis plain by thoſe Texts of — Lai. Iii. 1. 
Exel. 44. 6, 7, 9. Joel 3, 17. Zecb. 14, 21. P/al, 69, 32, 35» 36. 
Lai. 35, 8, 10. Chap. 4, 3, 4. Exek. 20, 38. P/al. 37, 9, 10, 11, 
29. And one great Reaſon of it will be, t at that Time, 
God will give much greater Light to his People, to diſtinguiſh between 
true Religion and its Counterfeits ; Mal. in. 3. And be ſhall fit as a” 
Refiner and Purifier of Silver; and be ſhall purify the Sons of Levi, and 
ge them as Gold and Silver; that-they may offer to the Lord an Offer- 
ing in Righteouſneſs.” With Verſe 18, which is a Continuation of the 
Prophecy of the ſame happy Times; then Hall ye return, and diſcers 
between the Righteous and the Wicked, between him that ſerveth God, 
and him that ſerveth him not. . wy 1 


Tis by the Mixture of counterfeit Religion with true, not diſcern'd d 
and diſtinguiſhed, that the Devil has had his greateſt Advantage 
againſt the Cauſe and Kingdom of Chriſt, all along, hitherto. Tis 
pray by this Means, principally, that he has prevail'd againſt all 
Revivings of Religion, that ever have been, fince the firſt founding 
of the Chriſtian Church. By this, he hurt the Cauſe of Chriſtianity, 
in, and after the apoſtolic Age, much more than by all the Perſecu- =» 
tions of both Jes and Heathens : The Apoſtles in all their Epiſtles, ' 
ſhew themſelves much more concerned at the former Miſchief, than 
the latter. By this, Satan prevail'd againſt the Reformation, begun 
by Luther, Zuingiius, &c. to put a Stop to its Progreſs, and bring 
it into Diſgrace ; ten Times more than by all thoſe bloody, cruel, and 
before unheard of Perſecutions of the Church of Rome. By this 
os or has he prevailed againſt Revivals of Religion, that have 

n in our Nation ſince the Reformation, By this he prevaild © 2} 
againſt Neo- Bagland, to quench the Love, and ſpoil the Joy of her 
Eſpouſals, about an hundred Years 550. And I think, I have had 

— enough to ſee plainly, that by this, the Devil has pre- 

'd againſt the late great Revival of Religion in New-Englands 


O 
vai 


ſo happy and promiſing in its Beginning: Here moſt evidentiy has 
| dota 16s main Advantage Satan has had againſt us; by 1 7 


iv The PRE FACE. 
foil'd us; tis by this Means that the Daughter of Zion in this Land, 
now lies on the Ground, in ſuch piteous Circumſtances, as we now 
behold her; with her Garments rent, her Face disfigur'd, her Naked- 
neſs expos'd, her Limbs broken, and weltering in the Blood of her 
own Wounds, and in no wiſe able to ariſe; and this, ſo quickly after 
her late great Joys and Hope: Lam. i, 17. Zion ſpreadeth forth her 
Hands, and there is none to comfort her: The Lord hath commanded con- 
cerning Jacob, that his Ad venſaries ſhall be round about him: Jeruſalem 
is as a menſtruous Woman among them. I have obſerv'd the Devil prevail 
the ſame Way, againſt two great Revivings of Religion in this Coun- 
try.—Satan goes on with Mankind, as he began with them: He pre- 
vail'd any gal firſt Parents, and caſt em out of Paradiſe, and ſud- 
denly brought all their Happineſs and Glory to an End, by appearing 

to be a Friend to their happy Paradiſaic State, and pretending to 
advance it to higher Degrees. So the ſame cunning Serpent, that 
beguiled Ewe thro? his Subtilty, by perverting us from the Simplicity 
that is in Chriſt, hath ſuddenly prevail'd to deprive us of that fair | 
Proſpect, we had a little while ago, of a Kind of paradiſaic State of \ 
the Church of God in New-England 


After Religion has revived in the Church of God, and Enemies 
appear, People that are engaged to defend its Cauſe, are commonly 
moſt expoſed, where they are leaſt ſenſible of Danger. While they 

are wholy intent upon the Oppoſition that appears openly before em, 

to make Head againſt that, and do neglect carefully to look all round 

*em, the Devil comes behind 'em, and gives a fatal Stab unſeen; and 

has © ge? to give a more home Stroke, and wound the deeper, 
= e he ſtrikes at his Leiſure, and according to his Pleaſure, 
being obſtructed by no Guard or Reſiſtance, ' 


* - — - C 
— 2 . „ — „ W21 Ä—— —A%» 1 TT * — — 
7 - 0 


——ä—— 2 


And ſo it is likely ever to be in the Church, whenever Religion 
revives remarkably, till we have learned well to diſtinguiſh between 
true and falſe Religion, between ſaving Affections _ Experiences, | 
and thoſe manifold fair Shews, and glittering Appearances, by which L 
they are counterfeited ; the Conſequences of which, when they are 
not diſtinguiſhed, are often inexpreſſibly dreadfut. By this Means, 
the Devil gratifies himſelf, by bringing it to paſs, that That ſhould be 
offered to God, by Multitudes, under a Notion of a pleaſing accept- 
= able Sacrifice to him, that is indeed above all Things abdminable ta 
| him. By this Means, he deceives great Multitudes about the State 
of their Souls ; making them think they are ſomething, when they 
are nothing; and ſo eternally undoes them: And. not only fo, but 
| eſtabliſhes many, in a ſtrong Confidence of their eminent Holineſs, 
” _whoarein God's Sight ſome of the vileſt of Hypocrites. By this Means 
he many Ways damps and wounds Religion in the Hearts of the 
Saints, obſcures and deforms it by corrupt Mixtures, cauſes their reli- 
| -gious Affections wofully to degenerate, and ſometimes for a conſide- 
*rable Time, to be like the Manna, that bred worms and ſtank ; and 


* 


* 


Te PR TFA 
dreadfulty enfriares and confounds the Minds of others of the Sainte, - © 
and brings em into Difficulties and Temptations, and entangles =? 
em in a Wilderneſs, out of which/ they can by no Meany extricat 
mſelves. By this Means, Satay mightily encourages the Hearts of 
open Enemies a Religion, and ftrengthens their Hands, and fills them 
with Weapons, and makes ftrong their Fortreſſes; when at the fame 
Time, Religion and the Church of God Heexpoſe to eth, as x Ciry 
without Walls. By :h/s Meanr, he brings it to paſs, chat Men wor! 
Wickedneſs under a Notion of doing God Service, and -ſo ſin wich- 
out Reſtraint, yea with earneſt Forwardneſs and Zeal, and with all 
their Might. By this Means, he brings in, even the Friends of Reli- 
gion, inſenſibly to themſelves, to do the Work of Enemies, by deſtroy- 
ing Religion in a far more effectual Manner, than open Enemies can 
do, under a Notion of advancing it. By this Means, the Devil 
ſcatters the Flock of Chriſt, and ſets em one againſt another, and 
that with great Heat of Spirit, under a Notion of Zeal for God; and 
Religion by Degrees degenerates into vain Jangling ; and during the 
Strife, Satan leads both Parties far out of the right Way, driving 
each to great Extremes, one on the Right Hand, and the other on the 
Left, according as he finds they are moſt inclined, or moſt eaſily moved 
and ſway'd, *till the right Path in the Middle, is almoſt wholly neg- 
lected. And in the midſt of this Confuſion, the Devil has 
Opportunity to advance his own Intereſt, and make it ſirong in Wa 
innumerable, and'get the Government of all into his own Han 
and work his own Will. And by what is ſeen of the terrible Conſe- 
quences of this counterfeit Religion, when not diſtinguiſhed from 
true Religion, God's People in general have their Minds unhin 
and unſettled in Things of Religion, and know not where to ſet their 
Foot, or what to think or do; and many are brought into Doubts, 
whether there be any Thing at all in Religion; and Hereſy, and 
Infidelity ang Atheiſm greatly prevail. | "3s 


Therefore, it greatly concerns us to ufe our utmoſt Endeavours, 
clearly to diſcern, and have it well ſettled and eſtabliſhed, wherein 
ne Religion does conſiſt. Till this be done; it may be expected 

that great Revivings of Religion will be but of ſhort Continuance : 
Till this be done, there is but little Good to be expected, of all our 
warm Debates, in Converſation and from the Preſs, not knowing 
clearly and diſtinctly, what we ought to contend for, 

— 1 7 16 * 


2 Is to contribute my Mite, and to uſe my beſt (however 
feeble) Endeavours to this End, in the enſuing Treatiſe: Wherein it 
muſt be noted, that my Deſign is ſomewhat diverſe from the Defign 
of what I have formerly publiſhed, which was to ſhew he diftinguiſhing 
Marks of a Work of the Spirit of God, including both his common, 
and ſaving Operations ; but what I aim at now, 1s to ſhew the Nature 
and 1 of the gracious Operations of God's Spirit, by which they 
are to be diſtinguiſhed from all Things whatſoever, _— 


„i Ne PRE FACE. 
Nen are the Subjects of, which are not of a ſaving Nature. If I have 
faeceeded in this my Aim, in any tolerable Meaſure, I hope it will 
tend to promote the Intereſt, of Religion. And whether I have ſuc- 
ceeded to bring any Light to this Subject, or no, and however my 
Attempt may be reproach'd, in theſe captious, cenſorious Times, I 
hope in the Mercy of a gracious and righteous God, for the A 
- tance of the Sincerity of my Endeavours, and hope alſo, for. the' 
Candor and Prayers of the true Followers of the meck and charitable. 
Lamb of God. | Hol Minit 2555 


\ * 


— 
. 


bo 
— 8 2 2 
— 8 = / 
; * * x4 - f < 8 . Q eR N, : 
9 pe 9 . 1 '' * \ — I» 

1 8 * — 4 0 2 1 * — = | 

| 1 44 45 * 156 { * 
* F d r KS N 


f 4 
ö : * 
| 
| C 
* 
* x 
? = 
' of k 7 
— 4 * 3 
* T4 # p. 
* 
— - i 
« 
f * 0 „ d 
© # Fa! * ** w 4 * 1 
0 * 
7 4 m . * ; z 
<4 18. 
, 0 Pj 4 1 2 


ws id, 3 © key 


Concerning the Nature of the Affections, 
and their Importance in Religion. 


3 
a 5 . l 
I 1 & * - 89 * — * 4 hy * +» % - * * y 
4 A 
= 
| a , 0 ? * 0 4. 1 * — * 4 © 
1 * 1 5 0 + J 5 5 * 4 N * 7 


4 


2 


1 PETER i. 8. 


Whom baving not ſeen, ye love: In whom, though © 
now ye ſte bim not, yet believing, ye rejoice with 
Foy wnſpeakable, and full of Glory. 


e N theſe Words, the Apoſtle repre- 

ERP ſcents the State of the Minds of the 

, _ WW Chriſtians He wrote to, under the Per- 
ſecutions they were then the Subjects 
of. Theſe Perſecutions are what he 
has Reſpect to, in the two preceeding | - | 
ad. I Verſes, when he ſpeaks of the Trial of 1 
their Faith, and of their being in Heavineſs through ma- 
nifold Temptations. 3 OW. 

Such Trials are of threefold Benefit to true Religion: 
Hereby the Truth of it is manifeſted, and it appears 
to be indeed true Religion: They, above all other 
Things, have a Tendency to diſtinguiſh between true 
Religion and falſe, and to cauſe the Difference between 
them: gyidently. to appear. Hence they are called by 


the 


- TT "he Nature and Importance 
- the Name of Trials, in the Verſe nextly tho 
Text, and in innumerable other Places: het ' the 
ph jo and Religion of Profeſſors, of what Sort it is, 
Gold is tried in the Fire, and manifeſted? 
whet her it be true Gold or no. And the Faith of true 
Chriſtians being thus tried and proved to be true, is 
found to Praiſe, and Honour, and Glory; as in that pre- 
ceeding Verſe, 
— then, Theſe Trials are of further Benefit to 


true —— they not only manifeſt the Truth of it, 


but they make it's genuine Beauty and Amiableneſs re- 
| markably to appear. True Virtue never appears ſo 
lovely, as when it is moſt oppreſſed: And the divine 


ſuch Advantage, as when under the greateſt Trials: 
Then it is that true Faith appears much more precious 
| than Gold; and upon this Account, is found to Praiſe, 

. end Honour, and Glory. 


And again, Another Benefit that ſuch Trials are of 


to true Religion, is, that they purify and increaſe it. 
They not only manifeſt it to be true, but alſo tend to 
refine it, and deliver it from thoſe Mixtures of that 
which is falſe, which incumber and impede it; that 
nothing may be left but that which is true. They 
tend to cauſe the Amiableneſs of true Religion to appear 


to the beſt Advantage, as was before obſerved; and 
not only ſo, but they tend to increaſe it's Beauty, by 


1 : eſtabliſhing and confirming it, and making it more 
= lively and vigorous, and purifying it from thoſe Things 


| Þ thatobſcured it's Luſtre and Glory, + As Gold that is 


tried in the Fire, is purged from it's Alloy, and 
Remainders of Droſs, and comes forth more ſolid 


beautiful; ſotrue Faith being tried as Gold is tried in the 


Fire, becomes more precious; and thus alſo is found. 
ſeems 


anto Praiſe, and Honour, and Glory. The Apoſtie 


to have Reſpect to each of theſe Benefits, that Perſe - 


| <utions are of to true Religion, in the Verſe prececding ; 
Þ the Text. 


And 


Rxcellency of real Chriſtianity, is never exhibited with 


=> — — , TY — reer ns Brit. 2 3 3 7 I 


eee 0c 


* — 
by, 


— 
„ * 


PART I. of religious Aﬀetions. — 

And in the Text, the Apoſtle obſerves how true 
Religion operated in the Chriſtians he wrote to, under 
their Perſecutions, whereby theſe Benefits of Perſecu- 


tion appeared in them; or what manner of Operation 
of true Religion, in them, it was, whereby their Reli- 


gion, under Perſecution, was manifeſted to be true 


Religion, and eminently appeared in the genuine Beauty 
and Amiableneſs of true Religion, and alſo appeared to 
be increaſed and purified, and ſo was like to be found 
unto Praiſe, and Honour, and Glory, at the aring 


of Feſus Chriſt. And there were two Kinds of Opera- 
tion, or Exerciſe of true Religion in them, under 


their Sufferings, that the Apoſtle takes Notice of in 
che Text, wherein theſe Benefits appeared. 


1. Love to Chriſt; Whom having not ſeen, ye love. 
The World was ready to wonder, what ſtrange Prin- 


ciple it was, that influenc'd them to expoſe themſelves - 


to ſo great Sufferings, to forſake the Things that were 
ſeen, — renounce all that was dear and pleaſant, 
which was the Obje& of Sen'e: They ſeem'd to the 
Men' of the World about them, as though they were 
beſide themſelves, and to act as tho* they hated them 


ſelves; there was nothing in their View, that could 
induce them thus to ſuffer, and ſupport them under, 


and carry them thro' ſuch Trials. But altho? there was 
nothing that was ſeen, nothing that the World ſaw, or 
that the Chriſtians themſelves ever ſaw with their bodily 
Eyes, that thus influenced and ſupported em; yet 
they had a ſupernatural Principle of Love to ſomething 
unſeen; they loved Jeſus Chriſt; for they ſaw bim 


ſpiritually, whom the World ſaw not. and whom they 


themſelves had never ſeen with bodily Eyes. 


2. Joy in Chriſt, Tho' their outward Sufferings were 
very grievous, yet their inward ſpiritual Joys were 
greater than their Sufferings, and theſe ſupported them, . 


and enabled them to ſuffer with Chearfulneſs. 


There | 


— 


ö 


4 The Nature of Parr I 


There are two Things which the Apoſtle takes Notice 
of in the Text concerning this Joy. 1. The Manner 
| in which it riſes, the Way in which Chriſt, tho? unſeen, 
| is the Foundation of it, viz. By Faith; which is the 
1 Evidence of Things not ſeen; In whom, though now ye 
| fee him not, yet believing, ye rgoice—, 2. The Nature 
of this Joy; unſpeakable, and full of Glory. Unſpeakable 
in the Kind of it; very different from worldly Joys, and 
carnal Delights; of a vaſtly more pure, ſublime and 
heavenly Nature, being ſomething ſupernatural, and 
truly divine, and ſo ineffably excellent; the Sublimity 
and exquiſite Sweetneſs of which, there were no Words 
to ſet forth. Unſpeakable alſo in Degree; it pleaſing 
God to give em this holy Joy, with a liberal Hand, and I 
in large Meaſure, in their State of Perſecution. 

Their Joy was full of Glory: Altho' the Joy was un- 
ſpeakable, and no Words were ſufficient to deſcribe it; 
yet ſomething might be ſaid of it, and no Words more | | 
fit to repreſent it's Excellency, than theſe, that it was 
Full of Glory; or, as it is in the Original, glorified Toy. || , 
In rejoicing with this Joy, their Minds were filled, as 
i were, with a glorious Brightneſs, and their Natures 
c.! alted and perfected: It was a moſt worthy, noble Re- 
Joicing, that did not corrupt and debaſe the Mind, as 

many carnal Joys do; but did greatly beautify and dig- 
nify it: It was a Prelibation of the Joy of Heaven, that 
raiſed their Minds to a Degree of heavenly Bleſſedneſs: 
It filPd their Minds with the Light of God's Glory, 
and made em themſelves to ſhine with ſome Communi- 
cation of that Glory. | | | | 
— Hence the Propoſition or Doctrine, that I would raiſe 
from theſe Words is this, 


DOCT. True Religion, in great Part, confifts in holy 
, Aﬀedtions. Fa: | 
We ſee that the Apoſtle, in obſerving and rematking 

the Operations and Exerciſes of Religion, in, the Chri- 
fſtians he wrote to, wherein their Religion appeared to 


e 


W > hos r Ot wa 


mt mn 5ano Pt ro keond ie 


Parr I. the Aﬀettions, 


be true and of the right Kind, when it had it's oriateſt © 
e Trial of what Sort it was, being tried by Perſecution « 

er as Gold is tried in the Fire, and when their Religion | 
1, | not only proved true, but was moſt pure, and cleanſed 
ie from it's Droſs and Mixtures of that which was not true, 
ye and when Religion appeared in them moſt in it's genuine 
re Excellency and native Beauty, and was found to Praiſe, 
and Honour, and Glory; he ſingles out the religious 
d | Aﬀections of Love and Foy, that were then in exerciſe 
id in them: Theſe are the Exerciſes of Religion he takes 
id || Notice of, wherein their Religion did thus appear true 
ty and pure, and in it's proper Glory. RL 


Here I would, 
5 I. Shew what is intended by the Afe#ions. 

II. Obſerve ſome Things which make it evident, that 
a great Part of true Religion lies in the Affections. 


th I. It may be enquired, what the Affections of the 
re ¶ Mind are? 
as I anſwer, The Affections are no other, than the more 
)- | vigorous and ſenſible Exerciſes of the Inclination and 
as Will of the Soul. * 
es God has endued the Soul with two Faculties: One is 
that by which it is capable of Perception and Specula- 
as tion, or by which it diſcerns and views and judges of 
S” | Things; which is called the Underſtanding, The other 
at Faculty is that by which the Soul don't meerly perceive 
s: ¶ and view Things, but is ſome Way inclin'd with reſpect 
Y || to the Things it views or conſiders; either is inclined 
U- 0 'em, or is diſinclined, and averſe from em; or is the 
] Faculty by which the Soul don't behold Things, as an 
ie ¶ indifferent unaffected - but either as liking'or 
diſliking, pleas'd or diſpleas'd, approving or rejecting. 
This F * is called be fark Nina! t is 9 
called the Inclination: And, as it has reſpect to the 
Actions that are determined and governed by it, is cal- 
led the Will: And the Mind, with regard to the exer- 
ciles of this Faculty, is often called the Heart. in had 
n 2 


, « ; | | TI 


„„ The Naweef Fur 


+ The Exerciſes of this Faculty are of two Sorts ; either 
- thoſe by which the Soul is carried out towards the Things 
that are in view, in approving of them, being pleaſed 
with them, and inclined to them; or thoſe in which the 
Soul oppoſes the Things that are in view, in diſapprovine i=l 
them, and in being diſpleaſed with them, averſe from 
them, and rejecting them. | 
And as the Exerciſes of the Inclination and Will of 
the Soul are various in theit Kinds, ſo they are much 
more various in their Degrees. There are ſome Exerci. 
ſes of Pleaſedneſs or Diſpleaſedneſs, Inclination or Diſ- 
inclination, wherein the Soul is carried but a little 
beyond a State of perfect Indifference. And there are 
other Degrees above this, wherein the Approbation or 
Diſlike, Pleaſedneſs or Averſion, are ſtronger; wherein 
we may riſe higher and higher, till the Soul comes to 
act vigorouſly and ſenſibly, and the Actings of the Soul 
are with that Strength, that (thro* the Laws of the 
Union which the Creator has fix'd between Soul and 
Body) the Motion of the Blood and animal Spirits 
egins to be ſenſibly. alter'd ; whence oftentimes ariſes 
fome bodily Senſation, eſpecially about the Heart and 
Vitals, that are the Fountain of the Fluids of the Body : 
From whence it comes to paſs, that the Mind, with 
regard to the Exerciſes of this Faculty, perhaps in all 
Nations and Ages, is called the Heart. And it is to be 
noted, that they are theſe more vigorous and ſenſible 
_ Exerciſes of this Faculty, that are called the Afe#ions. 
The Will, and the Affections of the Soul, are not two 
Faculties; the Affections are not eſſentially diſtinct from 
the Will, nor do they differ from the meer Actings of 
the Will and Inclination of the Soul, but only in the 
Livelineſs and Senſibleneſs of Exerciſe. | 
It muſt be confeſſed, that Language is here ſomewhat 
imperfect. and the Meaning of Words in a conſiderable 
= . Meaſure looſe and unfixed, and not preciſely limited by 
Cuſtom, which governs the Uſe of Language. In ſome 
Senſe, the Affection of the Soul differs omg at all 
x © rom 


ww 3K 4 Dk DDr OA cos wo. AK. hs ER, 


. re. e e „ ah $00 od wo Fas a 


\ 


eee. 


PaxT J. the. Aﬀettim.,  »7 


from the Will and Inclination, and the Will never is 
in any Exerciſe any further than it is affeFed; it is not 
moved out of a State of perfect Indifference, any other- 
wiſe than as it is affeed one Way or other, and acts 
nothing any further. But yet there are many Acti 
of che Wil and Inclination, that are not ſo commonly 
called Affections: In every Thing we do, wherein we aft 
voluntarily, there is an Exerciſe of the Will and Incli- 
nation, *tis our Inclination that governs us in our Ac- 
tions: But all the Actings of the Inclination and Will, 
in all our common Actions of Life, are not ordinari 
called Affections. Yet, what are commonly called Af- 
fections are not eſſentially different from them, but ond; 
in the De and Manner of Exerciſe. In every Act 
of the Will whatſoever, the Soul either likes or diſlikes, 
is either inclined or diſinclined to what is in view: 
Theſe are not eſſentially different from thoſe Affections 
of Love and Hatred: That Liking or Inclination of the 
Soul to a Thing, if it be in a high Degree, and be vigo- 
rous and lively, is the very ſame Thing with the Affec- 
tion of Love: And that Diſliking and Diſinclining, if 
in a great Degree, is the very ſame with Hatred. In 
every Act of the Will for, or towards ſomething not 
preſent, the Soul is in ſome Degfee inclined to that 
Thing; and that Inclination, if in a conſiderable Degree, 
is the very ſame with the Affection of Defre. And in 
every Degree of the Act of the Will, wherein the Soul 
approves of ſomething preſent, there is a Degree of 
Pleaſedneſs; and that Pleaſedneſs, if it be in a conſi- 
derable Degree, is the very ſame with the Affection of 
Joy or Delight. And if the Will diſapproves of what is 
preſent, the Soul is in ſome Degree Gifpleaſed, and if ; 
that Diſpleaſedneſs be great, tis the very ſame with the 
Affection of Grief or Sorrow. 
Such ſeems to be our Nature, and ſuch the Laws of 
the Union of Soul and Bedy, that there never is in any 
Caſe whatſoever, any lively and vigorous Exerciſe 
de Will or Inclination gf the Soul, without ſome Effect 
| upon 


P * * F 4 * a : 
' 8 | 


The Nature of + Parr f. 


upon the Body, in ſome Alteration of the Motion of 
it's Fluids, and eſpecially of the animal Spirits. And 
on the other Hand, from the fame Laws of the Union 
of Soul and Body, the Conſtitution of the Body, and 
the Motion of it's Fluids, may promote the Exerciſe of 
the Affections. Bur yet, it is not the Body, but the 
Mind only, that is the proper Seat of the Affections. 
The Body of Man is no more capable of being really 
the Subject of Love or Hatred, Joy or Sorrow, Fear 
or Hope, than the Body of a Tree, or than the ſame 
Body of Man is capable of thinking and underſtanding. 
As *tis the Soul only that has Ideas, ſo tis the Soul only 
that is pleaſed or diſpleaſed with it's Ideas. As tis the 
Soul only that thinks, fo tis the Soul only that loves or 
hates, rejoices or is grieved at what it thinks of. Nor 
are theſe Motions of the animal Spirits, and Fluids of 
the Body, any Thing properly belonging to the Nature 
of the Affections; tho? they always accompany them, in 
the preſent State; but are only Effects or Concomitants 
of the Affections, that are entirely diſtinct from the 
Aﬀections themſelves, and no Way eſſential to them; 
ſo that an unbodied Spirit may be as capable of Love 


and Hatred, Joy or Sorrow, Hope or Fear, or other 


Affections, as one that is united to a Body. 

The Afe#ions and Paſſions are frequently ſpoken of 
as the ſame; and yet, in the more common Uſe of 
Speech, there is in ſome Reſpect a Difference; - and 
Aﬀefion is a Word, that in it's ordinary Signification, 


ſeems to be ſomething more extenſive than Paſſion; being 


uſed for all vigoraus lively Actings of the Will or Inch- 


nation; but Paſſion for thoſe that are more ſudden, 


and whoſe Effects on the animal Spirits are more violent, 


and the Mind-more overpower'd, and leſs in its own 


OO © NR dre Pe 
As all the Exerciſes of the Inclination and Will, are 
Either in approving and liking, or diſapproving and 
rejecting; ſo the Affections are of two Sorts; they are 


thoſe by which the Soul is carried out to what is in view, 


cleaving 


RH eee 


averſe from it, and oppoſes it. 


Of the former Sort are Love, Defire, Hope, Joy; S 
Gratitude, Complacence. Of the latter Kind, are Hatred, 


Fear, Anger, Grief, arid ſuch like; which it is needleſs 
now to icularly to define. 


And there are ſome Affections wherein there is a 


Compoſition af each -of the aforementioned Kinds of 
Actings of the Will; as in the Affection of Pity, there 
is ſomething of the former Kind, towards the Perſon 


ſuffering, and ſomething of the Latter, towards what 


he ſuffers. And ſo in Zeal, there is in it high Approba- 


tion of ſome Perſon or Thing, her with vigorous _ 


Oppoſition to what is conceived to be contrary to it. 


There are other mixt Affections that might be alſo 


mention d, but I haſten to the 
IId. Thing propoſed, Which was to obſerve ſome 


Things that render it evident, that true Religion, in 


great Part, conſiſts in the Affections. And here, 


1. What has been ſaid of the Nature of the Aﬀec- 


tions, makes this evident, and may be ſufficient, with- 


out adding any Thing further, to put this Matter out 


of Doubt: For who will deny, that true Religion con- 
ſiſts, in a great Meafure, in vigorous and lively Actings 
of the inclination and Will of the Soul, or the fervent 
Exerciſes of the Heart. | | | 

That Religion which God requires, and will accept, 
don't conſiſt in weak, dull and lifeleſs Wouldings, rai- 
ſing us but a little above a State of Indifference : God, 


in his Word, greatly infiſts upon it, that we be in good 
Earneſt, fervent in Spirit, and our Hearts vigorouſly 


engaged in Religion: Rom. xii. 11. Be ye fervent in 


Spirit, ſerving the Lord. Deut. x. 12. And now lracl, 


What doth the Lord thy God require of thee, but to fear 


the Lord thy God, to walk in all his Ways, and to love + 


him, and te ſerve the Lord thy God, with all thy Heart, 
«wg. with all thy Soul? Ne Chap. vi. 4, 5. 1 0 


5 


Parr: the Afﬀettion. . 5 
cleaving to it, or ſezking it; or thoſe by which it ids 


8 The Nature of ParxT f. 
Krael; the Lord our God is one Lord; and thou ſhalt love 
the Lord thy God, with all thy Heart, and with all thy 
Soul, and with all thy Might. *Tis ſuch a fervent, vi- 
gorous Engagedneſs of the Heart in Religion, that is 
the Fruit of a real Circumciſion of the Heart, or true 
Regeneration, and that has the Promiſes of Life; Deut. 
Xxx. 6. And the Lord thy God will circumciſe thine Heart, 
and the Heart of thy Seed, to love the Lord thy God, with 
all thy Heart, and with all thy Sout, that thou mayeſt live. 
If we ben't in good earneſt in Religion, and our 
Wills and Inclinations ben't ſtrongly exerciſed, we are 
Nothing. The Things of Religion are fo great, that 
there can be no Svitableneſs in the Exerciſes of our 
Hearts to their Nature and Importance, unleſs they be 
lively and powerful. In nothing, is Vigour in the 
Actings of our Inclinations fo requiſite, as in Religion; 
and in nothing is Lukewarmneſs ſo odious. True Reli- 
gion is evermore a powerful Thing; and the Power of 
it appears, in the firſt Place, in the inward Exerciſes of 
it in the Heart, where is the principal and original Seat 
of it. Hence true Religion is called the Power of God- 
lineſs, in Diſtinction from the external Appearances of 
it, that are the Form of it, 2 Tim. iii. 5. Having a Form 
of Godlineſs, but denying the Power of it. The Spirit 
of God, in thoſe that have ſound and ſolid Religion, is 
a Spirit of powerful holy Affection; and therefore, God 
is ſaid to bave given them the Spirit of Power, and of 
Love, and of a ſound Mind, 2 Tim. i. 7. And ſuch, 
when they receive the Spirit of God, in his ſanctifying 
and ſaving Influences, are ſaid to be baptized with the 
Holy Ghoſt, and with Fire; by reaſon of the Power and 
Fervour of thoſe Exerciſes the Spirit of God excites in 
their Hearts, whereby their Hearts, when Grace is in 
_ exerciſe, may be ſaid to burn within them; as is ſaid of 
the Diſciples, Luke xxiv. 32. 5 | 
The Buſineſs of Religion is, from Time to Time, 
compared to thoſe Exerciſes, wherein Men are wont to 
have their Hearts and Strength greatly exerciſed and 
ha yp I: 


, 
f. 


* 


r FN WU OY Wu Foy 1 V3 FRY V0 Of Of IO DP 200 Pe I REST wo 


j F | OY » M | * * X 8 Wer — | * " K | 
Parr I. re AﬀeTions, 11 * 


engaged; ſuch as Running, Wreſtling or Agonizit 
a great Prize or Crown, and Fighting 5 ESE | 


nemies that ſeek our Lives, and eren as th 
by Violence take a City or Kingdom 

And tho' true Grace has various Deg: and there 
are ſome that are but Babes in Chriſt, in whom the Ex- 
erciſe of the Inclination and Will towards divine and 
heavenly Things, is comparatively weak; yet every one 
that has the Power of Godlineſs in his Heart, has his 


Inclinations and Heart exerciſed towards God and divine 


Things, with ſuch Strength and Vigour, that theſe holy ® 
Exerciſes do prevail in him above all carnal or natural 
Affections, and are effectual to overcome them: For 
every true Diſciple of Chriſt, loves him above Father or 
Mother, Wife and Children, Brethren and Sifters, Houſes 
and Lands; yea, than his own Life. From hence it fol- 
lows, that wherever true Religion i is, there are vigorous 
Exerciſes of the Inclination and Will, towards divine 


Objects: But what was ſaid before, the vigorous, -* 


lively and ſenſible Exerciſes of the Will, are no other 
than the Affections of the Soul. 


. The Author of the human Nature has not © 
given Affections to Men, but has made em very much 
the Spring of Men's Actions. As the Affections do not 
only neceſſarily belong to the human Nature, but are a 
very great Part of it; ſo (inaſmuch as by Regeneration, 
Perſons are renewed in the whole Man, and ſanctified 
throughout) holy Aﬀections do not only neceſſarily be- 
long to true Religion, but are a very great Part of 
that., And as true Religion is of a practical Nature, 
and God hath fo conſtituted the human Nature, that 
the Affections are very much the Spring of Men's Ac- 
tions, this alſo ſhews, that true Religion muſt confiſt 


very much in the Affections, 


Such 1s Man's Nature, that he is very arg any 1 


- otherwiſe than he is influenc'd by ſome Affection, either 
eee or Hatred, Defre, Hope, © Fear” or ſome other. 


B 2 Theſe 


„ 
| .Fheſe Affections we ſee to be the Springs 


Religion con MC 5 "wn J. 
2 going, in all the Affairs of Life, and engage them in 


all their Purſuits ; Theſe are the Things that put Men 
forward, and carry em along, in all their — Buſi- 
neſs; and eſpecially are Men excited and animated 


theſe, in all Affairs, wherein they are earneſtly en 
and which they purſue with Vigour. We ſee the World 


of Mankind to be exceeding buſy and ative; and the 
Affections of Men are the Springs of the ng Take 
away all Love and Hatred, all Hope and Fear, all An- 
ger, Zeal and affectionate Defire, and the Word would 
be, in a great Meaſure, motionleſs and dead; there 
would be no ſuch Thing as Activity amongſt Mankind, 


or 3 earneſt Purſuit whatſoever. Tis — that 
es the covetous Man, and him that is greedy of 
y Profits, in his Purſuits; and. it is by the Aﬀec- 


= that. the ambitious Man is put forward in his 


Purfvit of worldly Glory; and *tis the Affections alfo 
that actuate the voluptuous Man, in his Purſuit of 


5 Pleaſure and ſenſual Delights: The. World continues, 
from Age to Age, in a continual Commotion and Agi- 


tation, in a Purſuit of theſe Things; but take away all 


Affection, and the Spring of all this Motion — be 


gone, and the Motion itſelf would ceaſe. And as in 
worldly Things, worldly Affections are very much the 


Spring of Men's Motion and Actions ſo in religious 
| - Matters, the Spring of their Actions are very much 
religious Affections: He that has doctrinal Knowledge 

and Speculation only, without Affection, never is enga- 
3 _-__ the Buſineſs of Religion.. 


3: Nothing is more manifeſt in. Fact, chan that the 
I = of Religion take hold of Men's Souls no fur- 
ther — they affe# them. There are Multitudes that 


2 often hear +: Word of God, and therein hear of thoſe 
Things that are infinitely great and important, and that 


moſt nearly concern them, and all that is heard ſeems to 
ber mae upon chem, and to make no Alte- 


Pax I. in holy Mecliom. : Tyr 
ration in their Diſpoſition or Behaviour; and the Reaſon” * 
is, they are not affected with what they hear. There 
are many that often hear of the glorious Perfections . 
God, his almighty Power, and boundleſs Wiſdom, his 
infinite Majeſty, and that Holineſs of God, by Which 
he is of purer Eyes than to behold Evil, and cannot lock. 
on Iniquity, and the Heavens are not pure in his Sight, 
and of God's infinite Goodneſs and Mercy, and hear of 
the great Works of God's Wiſdom, Power and Good- 
neſs, wherein there appear the admirable Manifeſtations 
of theſe Perfections; they hear particularly of the un 
ſpeakable Love of God and Chriſt, and of the 3 
Things that Chriſt has done and ſuffer'd, and 
at Things of another World, of eternal Miſery, in 
aring the Fierceneſs and Wrath of almi ty God. 
and of endleſs Bleſſedneſs and Glory in the 3 of. . 
22 and the Enjoyment of his dear Love; they alſo 
hear the peremptory Commands of God, and his gra- 
cious Counſels and Warnings, and the ſweet Invitations" 
of the Goſpel; I fay, they often hear theſe Things, and 
yet remain as they were before, with no ſenſible Altera- 
tion on them, either in Heart or Practice, becauſe they 
are not affected with what they hear; and ever will be 
ſo *till they are affected. I am * — aſſert, that there 
never was any conſiderable Change wrought in the 
9 or Converſation of any one Perſon, by any Thing 
a religiou 
that —— not his Affections moy'd. Never was a natural 
Man e earneſtly to ſeek his Salvation: Never- - 


s Nature, that ever he read, heard or ſaw, A 


were any ſuch brought to cry after Wiſdom, and lift up 
their Voice for Fs 660 2" Hin and to wreſtle with Gd 


in Prayer for Mercy; and never was one humbled; and: 
* the Foot of God, from any Thing that ever 

he heard or imagined of his own Unna and De- 
ſervings of God's Diſpleaſure; nor was ever one induced 
to fly for Refuge unto Chriſt, while his Heart remamed 
Qed. Nor was there ever a Saint awakened out 


3 lifeleſs Frame, or recovered from a declining, 1 


State 


14 Religion confifts much PART I. 
State in Religion, and brought back from a lamentable 
Departure from God, without having his Heart affec- 

ted. And in a Word, there never was any Thing con- 
ſiderable brought to paſs in the Heart or Life of any 


Man living, by the Things of e Things that had not 
_ Heart deeply affected by thoſe 14 | 


bg: The holy Scriptures do every wigs "ny Reli- 
ion very much in the Affections; ſuch as Fear, Hope, 
:ove, Hatred, Deſire, Joy, Sorrow, Grarirude, Com- 
paſſion and Zeal. 
The Sctiptures place much of Religion in godly Frar; 
inſomuch that 'tis often ſpoken of as the Character of 
> thoſe that are truly religious Perſons, that they tremble 
at "God's Word; that they fear before bim, that their 
Hieſßb trembles for Fear of him, and that they are afraid 
= of bis Judgments, that his Excellency makes them afraid, 
= and bis Dread falls upon them; and the like: And a 
| Compellation commonly given che Saints in Scripture, 
is," Fearers of God, or they that fear the Lord. And 
becauſe the Fear of God is a great Part of true Godli- 
| neſs, hence true Godlineſs in en is very commonly 
Called by the Name of the Ne ar f if God; as 1 7 one 
knows, that knows any Thing of the Bible. 
8d Hope in God and in the e Promiſes of his Word, is 
' often ſpoken of in the Scripture, as a very conſiderable 
Part of true Religion. *Tis mentioned as one of the 
three or Things of which Religion confiſts, 1 Cor. 
xlit.'13. Hope in the Lord is alſo frequently men- 
52 tioned as the Character of the Saints: Pal. cxlvi. 5. 
Ny, ts be that hath the God of Jacob for his Help, 
whoſe Hope is in the Lord bis God. Jer. xvil. 7. Bleſſed is 
of Man that truſteth in the Lord, whoſe Hope the Lord 
Pfal. xxxi. 24. Be of good Courage, and bt" ſhall. 
Mhdterber your Heart, all ye that Hope in the Lord. And 
the like" in many other Places. Religious Fear port 
Hope are, once and again, joined together, as jointly 
conftituting the Character of the true Saints. Pſal. xxxiii, 
18. 


ParT I. in holy Aﬀettions. «15 *} 
18. Bebold the He of the Lord is upon them that Fear 
him, upon them that Hope in his Mercy. Pſal. cxlvii. it. 
The Lord taketh Pleaſure in them that Fear bim, in thoſe 
that Hope in his Mercy. Hope is ſo great a Part of 
true Religion, that the Apoſtle ſays wwe are ſaved. by 
Hope, Rom. viii. 24. And this is ſpoken of as the Hel- 
met of the Chriſtian Soldier; 1 Theſ. v. 8. Aud for an 
Helmet, the Hope of Salvation; and the ſure and ſtedfaſt 
Anchor of the Soul, which preſerves it from being caſt 
away by the Storms of this evil World, Heb. vi. 19. 
Which Hope we have, as an Anchor of the Soul, both 
ſure and ſtedfaſt, and and which entereth into that within. the | 
Veil. Tis ſpoken of as a great Fruit and Benefit which =; 
true Saints receive by Chriſt's Reſurrection; 1 Pet. i. 3. 
Bleſſed be the God and Father of our Lord 70 
which. according ts his abundant Mercy, hath begviten u 
again unto a Loch Hope, by the Rana of Feſies 
Chriſt from the Dead. 

The Scriptures place Religion very much in the A& 
fection of Love, in Love to God, — the Lord Jefus 
Chriſt, and Love to the People of God, and to Man- 
kind. The Texts in which this is' manifeſt, both in the 
Old Teſtament, and New, are innumeralde. But of 
this more afterwards. | 

The contrary Affection of Hatred alſo, as having Sin Z 
for its Object, is ſpoken of in Scriptute, as no inconſi- 
derable Part of true Religion. It is ſpoken of as that 
by which true Religion may be known and diſtin 
Prov. viii. 13. The Fear of he — to bate Evil. and 
accordingly the Saints are called upon to give Evidence © _ 


of their Sincerity by this, Pal. 5 10. Te that far 4 


the Lord hate Evil. " And che Plalmift afren mentions 1 
as. an Evidence of his Si 3 -Pal. ci. 2, 3. U 
walt within my Houſe with a perfe® Heart Tal fetmo © 
Wicked Thing before mine Eyes : I hate the Work of tb 
that turn aide. Pſal. cxix. 104. F hate every fulſè .. 
Jo Verſe 128. Again Pſal. cxxxix. 21. ee "4 
— paſa that hate thee. c? * 


16 Religion confiſls much . PART I. 
So holy Defre, exerciſed in Longings, Hungrings 
and Thirſtings after God and Holineſs, is often men- 
tion'd in Scripture as an important Part of true Religion; 
Ifai. xXxvi. 8. The Defire of our Soul is to thy Name, and 
to the Remembrance of thee. Pſal. xxvii. 4. One Thing 
have I defired of the Lord, and that will I ſeek after; 
that I may dwell in the Houſe of the Lord, all the Days of 
my Life, to bebold the Beauty of the Lord, and to enquire 
in bis Temple. Pal. xlii. 1, 2. As the Hart panteth af. 
ter the Water-brooks, ſo panteth my Soul after thee, O 
God; My Soul thirfteth for God, for the living God: 
When ſhall I come and appear before God? Pal. Ixiii. 1, 2 
My Soul thirfteth for tec; my Fleſh longeth for thee, in 
a dry and thirſty Land, where no Water is, to ſee thy 
Power and thy Glory, ſo as I have ſeen thee in the Santu- 
2 . - bexxiv. 1, 2. How amiable are thy Tabernacles, 
O TLerd of Hoſts! My Soul longeth, yea, even fainteth, 
For the Courts of the Lord; my Heart and my Fleſb crieth 
aut for the living God. Pal. cxix. 20. My Soul breaketh 
for the Longing it bath unto thy Fudgments, at all Ti imef. 
So P/al. lxxiii. 25. and cxliii. 6, 7. and cxxx. 6. Cant. 
Jil. 1, 2. and vi. 8. Such a holy Deſire and Thirſt of 
Soul is mentioned, as one of thoſe great Things which 
renders or denotes a Man truly blefſed, in the Begin- 
ning of Chriſt's Sermon on the Mount, Matth. v. 6. 
Bleſſed are they that do bunger and thirſt after Righteouſ- 
eſs, for they ſhall be filed And this holy Thirſt } is 
Tpoken of, as a great Thing in the Condition of a Par- 


| . X ticipation of the Bleſſings of eternal Life, Rev. xxi. 6. 


Iwill give unto him that is athirft, of the Fountain of the 


SH Water of Life freely. . 


The Scriptures ſpeak of hol , as a great Part of 
true Religion. So 7 Ck the Text. And 
as an important Part of Religion, it is often exhorted 
to, and preſs'd, with great Earneſtneſs; Pal. xXxxvii. 4. 
Delight 2 in the Lord. and be ſpall give thee the De- 
fret of thine Heart. Pal. xcvii. 12. Rejoice in the Lord, 


1 Righteous. So Pſal. xxxiii, 1. Rejoice in tbe Lord, O 


TY. 


PART I. in boly Affectiont. "Tt 17 ö 


ye Righteous. Matth. v. 12. Rejoice, and be exceedin 

glad. Phil. iii 1. Finally Brethren, rejoice in the Lord 

And Chap. iv. 4. Rejoice in the Lord alway, and again 

1 ſay rejoice. 1 The. v. 16. Rejoice evermore. Plat. 

cxlix. 2. Let Iſrael rejoice in him that made bim; let the 

Children of Zion be joyful in their King. This is men- 

tioned among the principal Fruits of the Spirit of Grace, 

Gal. v. 22. The Fruit of the Spirit is Love, Foy, &C. 

The bſalmiſt mentions his holy Joy, as an Evidence of 

his Sincerity, Pſal. cxix. 14. I bave rejoiced in the Way 

of thy Teſtimonies, as much. as in all Riches. 

| Religious Sorrow, Mourning, and Brokenneſs of 

„Heart, are alſo frequently ſpoken of as a great Part of 

y true Religion. Theſe Things are often mentioned as 

A diſtinguiſhing Qualities of the true Saints, and a 

0 Part of their Character; Matth. v. 4. Bleſſed are they that 

„ mourn; for they ſhall be comforted. Pſal. xxxiv. 18. The 

/ Lord is nigh unto them that are of a broken Heart, and 

verb ſuch as be of a contrite Spirit. Iſai. Ixi. 1, 2. The. 

Lord hath anointed me—to bind up the broken-bearted,— - 

to comfort all that mourn. This godly Sorrow, and Bro- 

F © kenneſs of Heart is often ſpoken of, not only as a great 

Thing in the diſtinguiſhing Character of the Saints, but 

that in them, which is peculiarly acceptable and pleaſing 

| to God; Pſal. li. 17. The Sacrifices of God are a broken, 
Spirit; a broken and a contrite Heart, O God, thou wilt 
not deſpiſe. Iſai. lvii. 15. Thus ſaith the bigh and lofty 
One that inhabiteth Eternity, whoſe Name is Holy: 1 
dwell in the high and holy Place, with him alſo that is of @& & 
bumble and contrite Spirit, to revive the Spirit of tbe 
Humble, and to revive the Heart of the contrite Ones: © 
Chap. Ixvi. 2. To this Man will I look, even to bim that 
is poar, and of a contrite Spirit. 1 760 * 

| Another Affection often mentioned; as that in the 

' MF Exerciſe of which much of true Religion appears, ies 

Gratitude; eſpecially as exerciſed in Thankfulneſs ang 

Praiſe to God. This being ſo mych ſpoken of in the 

Bodk of Pſalms, and other Parts of the holy Scriptures, . . 

I need not mention particular Texts. Again, 1 


* 


„N. ©, A * * 


= 
e # * 


* 


* * _ „ 
* , 


18 Religion confiſts much 2 Paxr I 


Again, The holy Scriptures do frequently. ſpeak of 
Compaſſion or Mercy, as a very great and eſſential Thing 
in true Religion; inſomuch that good Men are in Scrip- 
ture denominated from hence; and a merciful Man, and 
a good Man, are equivalent Terms in Scripture ; Ifai, 
lvii. 1. The Righteous periſheth, and no Man layeth it ty 
Heart; and merciful Men are taken away. And the 
Seripture chooſes out this Quality, as that by which, in 


a peculiar Manner, a rightous Man in decypher'd; Pfal 


37. 21. The Rightous ſheweth Mercy, and giveth; and 


Ver. 26. He is ever merciful, and lendeth. And Prov. 


T4, 3. He that bonoureth the Lord, hath Mercy on the Poor. 
And Col. iii. 12. Put ye on, as the Ele of God, Hoh 


and Beloved, Bowels of Mercies, Sc. This is one of 


thoſe great Things, by which thoſe who are truly Bleſſed 
are deſcribed by our Saviour, Matth. v. 7.. Bleſſed are 


' the Merciful, fer they ſhall obtain Mercy. And this Chriſt 


alſo ſpeaks of, as one of the weightier Matters of the 
Law, Matth. xxiii. 23. Ho unto you Scribes and Phariſees, 


 Hypoerites, for ye pay Tythe of Mint, and Anniſe, and 
"  , Cummin, and have omitted the weightier Matters of the 
Law, Judgment, Mercy, and Faith. To the like Pur- 


poſe is that, Mic. vi. 8. He hath ſbewed thee, O Man, 
what is good: And what doth the Lord require of thee, 
but to do Juſtice, and love Mercy, and walk humbly with 


thy God? And alſo that, Ho. vi. 6. For I deſired Mercy, 
and not Sacrifice, Which ſeems to have been a Text 


much delighted 1 in by our Saviour, by his Manner of 


citing it once and again; Matth. ix. 13. and xii. 7. 

' Zeal is alſo ſpoken of, as a very eſſential Part of the 
Religion of true Saints. *Tis ſpoken of as a great 
Thing Chriſt had in View, in giving himſelf for our 


Redemption; Tit. ii. 14. Vbo gave himſelf for us, that 


de might redeem us from all Iniquity, and purify unto 


" bimſelf a peculiar People, zealous of good Works. And 


this is ſpoken of, as the great Thing wanting in the 


luke-warm Laodiccans, Rev. iii. 13, 16, 19. Iv 


hai 


TIJSAESBF SFE LY 2, „ 


Aar. 
I have mentioned but a few Texts, out of an innu- 
merable Multitude, all over the Scripture, which place 
Religion very much in the Affections. But what has 
been obſerved, may be fufficient to ſhew, that they who 
would deny that much of true Religion lies in the 
Affections, and maintain the Contrary, muſt throw 
away what we have been wont.to own for our Bible, 
and get ſome other Rule, by which to judge of the 
Nature of Religion. ws 12 N 


5. The Scriptures do repreſent true Religion, as 
being ſummarily comprehended in Love, the Chief of 
the Affections, and Fountain of all other Affections. 

So our bleſſed Saviour repreſents the Matter, in 
anſwer to the Lawyer, who aſked him, which was the 
great Commandment of the Law. Matth. xxii. 37, 38, 
39, 40. Jeſus ſaid unto him, Thou ſpalt love the Lord 
thy God, <with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul, and 
with all thy Mind: This is the firſt, and great Command- 
ment; and the ſecond is like unto it: Theu ſhalt love thy 
Neighbour as thyſelf. On theſe tuo Commandments hang 
all the Law and the Prophets. Which laſt Words ſigni 
as much, as that theſe two Commandments comprehend 
all the Duty preſcribed, and rhe Religion taught inthe 
Lad and the Prophets. And the Apoſtle Paul does 
from. Time to Time make the ſame Repreſentation of 
the Matter; as in Rom. xin. 8. He tbat loveth another, 
bath fulfilled the Law. And Ver. 10. Leave is the ful- 
filling of the Law. And Gal. v. 14. For all the Lau is 
fulfilled in one Word, even in this, Thou ſhalt love thy © 
Neighbour as thyſelf. So likewiſe in 1 Tim. i. 5. N 
the End of the Commandment is Charity, out of a pure 


Heart, &c. So the fame Apoſtle ſpeaks of Love, as 
the greateſt Thing in Religion, and as the Vitals, Effence 
and Soul of it; without which, the greateſt Knowledge 
and Gifts, and the moſt glaring Profeſſion, and every 
Thing elſe which appertains to Religion, are vain and 

daes, and repreſents it as the Fountain from whence 
3 | proceeds 


wor 


* 
- 
* 
— 


20 Religion canli me Par 


proceeds all that is good, in 1 Cor. xiii. throughout; for 
that which is there rendered Charity, in the Original js 
Agape, the proper Engliſh of which is Love. 
Nov altho' it be true, that the Love thus ſpoken of, 
includes the Whole of a benevolent Propenſity of the 
Soul, towards God and Man; yet it may be conſidered, 
that it is evident from what has been before obſerved, 
| that this Propenſity or Inclination of the Soul, when 
in ſenſible and vigorous Exerciſe, becomes Affeckian, 
and is no other than affectionate Love. And ſurely it 
is 4 25 vigorous and fervent Love which Chriſt ſpeaks 
of, as the Sum of all Religion, when he ſpeaks of L Lov- 
God. with all our Hearts, with all our Souls, and 
uch al all our Minds, and our Neighbour as ourſelves, 


as the Sum of all that was taught and preſcribed i in the 


Law and the Prophets. 

Indeed i it OE be ſuppoſed, when this Affection of 
Love is here, and in other Scriptures, ſpoken of as the 
Sum of all Religion, that hereby is meant the AR, 
excluſive of the Habit, or that the Exerciſe of the 
Underſtanding i is excluded, which is implied in all rea- 
ſonable Affection. But it is doubtleſs true, and evident 
from theſe Scriptures, that the Eſſence of all true Religion 
lies in holy Love; and that in this divine Affection, and 
an habitual Diſpoſition to it, and that Light which is 
the Foundation of it, and thoſe Things which are the 
Fruits of it, conſiſts the bole of Religion. 

From hence it clearly and certainly appears, that great 
Part of true Religion conſiſts in the Affections. For 


Cove is not only one of the Affections, but it is the firſt 


and chief of the Affections, and the Fountain of all 
the Affections. From Love ariſes Hatred of thoſe Thin 
which are contrary to what we love, or which o 


and thwart us in thoſe Thin ng: 2 ” dg light in: And. 
ove and Hatred, accord- 


from the various Exerciſes o 
ing to the Circumſtances of the Objects of theſe Affec- 
tions, as preſent or abſent, certain or uncertain, proba- 


ble or improbable, ariſe all thols other Affection; of 


Defre, 


ot ks 4+ ad — _” 


© £ A 5B > -< -, ty , Y kn + 


— 


— 


ParT 
Defire, Hope, Fear, Joy, Grief, Gratitude, Auger, &xc. 
From a vigorous, aftectione, and fervent Loue to God, 
will neceſſarily ariſe other religious AﬀeCtions: hence 
will ariſe an intenſe Hatred and Abhorrence of Sin, 
Fear of Sin, and a Dread of God's Diſpleaſure, Grati- 
tude to God for his Goodneſs, Complacence and Foy in 
God, when God is graciouſly and ſenſibly preſent, and 
Grief when he is abſent, and a joyful Hope when a 
future Enjoyment of God is expected, and fervent Zeal 
for the Glory of God, And in like Manner, from a 
fervent Love to Men, will ariſe all other vertuous Aﬀec- 
tions towards Men. 3 | 


— 


a” 


6. The Religion of the moſt eminent Saints we have 
an Account of in the Scripture, conſiſted much in holy 
Aﬀettions. 

I ſhall take particular Notice of three eminent Saints, 
which have expreſs'd the Frame and Sentiments of their 
own Hearts, and ſo deſcribed their own Religion, and 
the Manner of their Intercourſe with God, in the Write · 
ings which they have left us, that are a Part of the 
ſacred Canon. N 85 

The firſt Inſtance I ſhall take Notice of, is David, 
that Man after God's own Heart; who has given us a 
lively Portraiture of his Religion, in the Book of P/alms. 


F * . S AF AFS S. SLAaATLfoS M359 =S 


nothing elſe but the Expreſſions and Breathings of 
at devout and holy Affections; ſuch as an humble and fer- 
vent Love to God, Admiration of his glorious Perfecti- 
it Mons and wonderful Works, earneſt Defires, Thirſtings 
ll Wand Pantings of Soul after God, Delight and Joy in 
I God, a ſweet and melting Gratitude to God for his great 
Goodneſs, an holy Exultation and Triumph of Soul in 
d ihe Favour, Sufficiency and Faithfulneſs of God, his 
ove to, and Delight in the Saints the Excellent of the 
Earth, his great Delight in the Word and Ordinances of 
0d, his Grief for his own and others Sins, and his fer- 
ent Zeal for God, and againſt the Enemies of God 


in boly Aßecki ons. me 


Thoſe holy Songs of his, he has there left us, are 


206 7: 


of the Knowledge of him, and eſteeming them bul 


: 


| 8 22 


X ” 
. - 
* 


nn f | * > * * k 
bu * — : 

Religion confifts much 

| | 


and his Church. And theſe Expreſſions of holy Affet. 
tion, which the Pſalms of David are every where full 
of, are the more to our e Purpoſe, becauſe thoſe 
Pſalms are not only the Expreſſions of the Religion of 
o eminent a Saint, that God ſpeaks of as fo agreeable 
to his Mind; but were alſo, by the Direction of the 
Holy Ghoſt, penn'd for the Uſe of the Church of God 
in its publick Worſhip, not only in that Age, but in 
after Ages; as being fitted to expreſs the Religion of al 
Saints, in all Ages, as well as the Religion of the 
Pſalmiſt. And it is moreover to be obſerved, that David, 
in the Book of Pfalms, ſpeaks not as a private Perſon, 
but as the Pſalmiſt of Iſrael, as the ſubordinate Head of 
the Church of God, and Leader in their Worſhip and 
Praiſes; and in many of the Pſalms, ſpeaks in the 
Name of Chriſt, as perſonating him in theſe Breathing) 


forth of holy Affection, and in many other Pialms, he 


ſpeaks in the Name of the Church. 
Another Inſtance I ſhall obſetve, is the Apoſtle Paul 
who was, in many Reſpects, the Chief of all the Mini. 


ſters of the New-Teſtament; being above all others,: 


choſen Veſſel unto Chriſt, to bear his Name before the 
Gentiles, and made the chief Inſtrumentof propagating 
and eſtabliſning the Chriſtian Church in the World, and 
of diſtinctly revealing the glorious Myſteries of the 
Goſpel, for the Inſtruction of the Church in all Ages; 
and (as has not been improbably thought by ſome) the 


moſt eminent Servant of Chriſt that ever lived, received 


to the higheſt Rewards in the heavenly Kingdom of his 
Maſter. By what is ſaid of him in the Scripture, he 
appears to have been a Perſon that was full of Affection. 
And *tis very manifeſt, that the Religion he expreſſes in 
his Epiſtles, conſiſted very much in holy Affections. It 


appears by all his Expreſſions of himſelf, that he was, in 


the Courſe of his Life, enflamed, actuated and entirely 
ſwallowed up, by a moſt ardent Love to his glorious 
Lord, eſteeming all Things as Loſs, for the Excellency 


Dung 


Pax TIL 


„ rern eig «as — "EI" "OS n —_— 


PART I. in boly Aſetliont. 

Dung that he might win him. He repreſents himſelf, 
as overpower'd by this holy Affection, and as it were 
compelled by it to go forward in his Service, thro” all 
Difficulties and Sufterings, 2 Cor. v. 14, 15. And his 
Epiſtles are full of Expreſſions of an overflowing Aﬀec- 
tion towards the People of Chriſt: He fpeaks of his 


dear Love to them, 2 Cor. xii. 19. Phil. iv. 1. 2 Tim. i. 2. 
Of his abundant Love, 2 Cor. ii. 4. And of his affe 


onate and tender Love, as of a Nurſe towards her Chil- 


dren, 1 Theſſ. ii. 7, 8. But we were gentle among you; 
even as a Nurſe cheriſheth her Children; ſo being affection- 
ately defirous of you, we were willing to have imparted unto 
you, not the Goſpel of God only, but alſo our own Souls, 
becauſe ye were dear into us. So alſo he ſpeaks of his 
Bowels of Love, Phil. i. 8. Philem. v. 12, and 20. So 
he ſpea 


11. 1. and of his Cencern for others, even to Anguiſh of 
Heart, 2 Cor. ii. 4. For out of much Afifion, and Anguifh 
of Heart, I wrote unto you, with many Tears; not that 
ye ſhould be grieved; but that ye might know the Love 
which I bave more abundantly unto you. He ſpeaks of the 
great Conflict of his Soul for them, Col. ii. 1. 
of great and continual Grief that he had is his Heart 
from Compaſſion to the Fews, Rom. ix. 2. He ff 


ks of his earncft Care for others, 2 Cor. viii. 16. 
and of his Bowels of Pity or Mercy towards them, Phil. 


He ſpeaks 


of 
bis Mouth's being open'd, and his Heart enlarged towards 


Chriſtians, 2 Cor. vi. 11. O ye Corinthians, our Mouth 


is open unto you, our Heart is enlarged! He often ſpeaks 


of his affeFionate and longing Deſires, 1 Theſ. ii. 8. Rom. 


i. 11. Phil. i. 8. and Chap. iv. 1. 2 Tim. i. 4. The 
ſame Apoſtle is very often, in his Epiſtles, expreſſing 
the Affection of Foy, 2 Cor. i. 12. and Chap. vii. 7. 
and V. o, and 16. Phil. i. 4. and Chap. ii. 1, 2. and 


Chap. in. 3. Cel. i. 24. 1 The. iti. 9. He ſpeaks of his 
rejoicing with great Foy, Phil. iv. 10, Philem. i. 7. of 


his joying and rejoicing, Phil. ii. 1, 7. and of his rejcic- 
mg exceedingly, 2 Cor. vii. 13. 


And of his being filled 
with Comfort, and being exceeding joyful, 2 Cor. vil. 4. 


* 


5 


1 7 
- 
- _ 
23 
. 


t 


3 | 24 Religion confiſts much Pant I: 


He ſpeaks of himſelf as always rejoicing, 2 Cor: vi. 10; 
So he ſpeaks of the Triumphs of his Soul, 2 Cor. ii. 14, 
And of bis glorying in Tribulation, 2 Thel. i. 4. and 
Rom. v. 5. He alſo expreſſes the Affection of Hope; 
in Phil. i. 20. he ſp̃eaks of his earneſt Expeation, and 


bis Hope. He likewiſe expreſſes an Affection of Godly 


Fealouſy, 2 Cor. xi. 2, 3. And it appears by his whole 
iſtory, after his Converſion, in the As, and alſo by 
all his Epiſtles, and the Accounts he pres of himſelf 
there, That the Affection of Zeal, as having the Cauſe 
of his Maſter, and the Intereſt and Proſperity of his 
Church, for its Object, was mighty in him, continually 


inflaming his Heart, ſtrongly engaging to thoſe: great 


and conſtant Labours he went through, in inſtructing, 


exhorting, warning and reproving others, travailing in 


Birth with them; conflicting with thoſe powerful and 


. innumerable Enemies who continually oppoſed him, 


as one who beats the Air, running the Race ſet 


wreſtling with Principalities and Powers, not fighting 

before 
him, continually preſſing forwards through all Manner 
of Difficulties and Sufferings; ſo that others thought 
him quite beſide himſelf. And how full he was of Af- 


fection, does further appear by his being ſo full of 


Tears: In 2 Cor. ii. 4. he parks of his many Tears, and 


ſo A#s xx. 19. And of his Tears that he ſhed continually, 


Megbt and Day, v. 31. 


Now if any one can conſider theſe Accounts given 


in the Scripture of this great Apoſtle, and which he 


ives of himſelf, and yet not ſee, that his Religion con- 


taſted much in Affection, muſt have a ſtrange Faculty 


of managing his Eyes, to ſhut out the Light which 


= 
ov 
1 ” 


- 
* = 
* 
E 


F® 
-. 


* 
* * LY n 
N 5 


ſhines moſt full in his Face. 

The other Inſtance I ſhall mention, is of the Apoſtle 
Fobn, that beloved Diſciple, who was the rieareſt and 
deareſt to his Maſter of any of the Twelve, and was 
by him admitted to the greateſt Privileges of any of 
them: Being not only one of the three who were ad- 
mitted to be preſent with him in the Mount at his Tranſ- 

Lg figuration 


4 
” # 


N * 
2 2 4 
FM. * 
. 
1 — : 
4 * = 
* - « - 
——-— 2 = 4” . 1 


Pant 1 in boly Aﬀettions. 25 


figuration, and at the raiſing of Jairuf's Daughter, and 
whom he took with him when he was in his Agony, and 
one of the three ſpoken of by the Apoitle Paul, as the 
the three main Pillars of the Chriſtian Church; but was 
favour'd above all; in being admitted to lean on his 
Maſter*s Boſom, at his laſt Supper, and in being choſen 
by Chriſt, as the Diſciple to whom he would reveal his 
wonderful Diſpenſations towards his Church, to the 
End of Time; as we haye an Account in the Book of 
Revelation: And to ſhut up the Canon of the New- 
Teſtament, and of the whole Scripture; being preſerved 
much longer than all the reſt of the Apoſtles, to ſet all 
Things in Order in the Chriſtian Church, after their 
Death. . 5 

It is evident by all his Writings, (as is generally ob- 
ſerved by Divines) that he was a Perſon remarkably full 
of Affection: His Addreſſes to thoſe whom he wrote to, 
being inexpreſſibly tender and pathetical, breathing 
nothing but the moſt fervent Love; as tho' he were 
all made up of ſweet and holy Affection. The Proofs 
of which can't be given without Diſadvantage, unleſs 
we ſhould tranſcribe his whole Writings. 


5, He whom God ſent into the World, to be the 
Light of the World, and Head of the whole Church, 
and the perfect Example of true Religion and Vertue, 
for the Imitation of all, the Shepherd whom the whole 
Flock ſhould follow wherever he goes, even the Lord 
Jeſus Chriſt, was a Perſon who was remarkably of a 
tender and affectionate Heart; and his Vertue was ex- 
preſs*d very much in the Exerciſe of holy Affections. 
He was the greateſt Inſtance of Ardency, Vigour and 
Strength of Love, to both God and Man, that ever 
was. It was theſe Affections which the Victory, in 
that mighty Struggle and Conflict of his Affections, in 
his Agonies, when he prayed more earneſtly, and offered 
ſerong Crying and Tears, and wreſtled in Tears and in 
Blood. Such was the Power of the Exerciſes of his 
C | holy 


26 , Religion confifts much Part I; 
holy Love, that they were ſtronger than Death, and in 
that great e overcame thoſe ſtrong Exerciſes of 
the natural Aﬀections of Fear and Grief, when he was 
ſore amazed, and his Soul was exceeding ſorrowful, even 
_ unto Death. And he alſo appear'd to be full of Aﬀec- 
tion, in the Courſe of his Life. We read of his 
Zeal, fulfilling that in the 6th Pſalm, The Zeal of thine 
Houſe bath eateri me up, John 11. 179. We read of his 
Grief for the Sins of Men, Mark iii. 5. He looked round 
about on them with Anger, being grieved for the Hardneſs 
4 their Hearts. And his breaking forth in Tears and 
xclamations, from the Conſideration of the Sin and 
Miſery of ungodly Men, and on the Sight of the City 
of Feruſalem, which was full of ſuch Inhabitants, Luke 
xix. 41, 42. And when he was come near, he beheld the 
City, and wept over it, ſaying, if thou had'ft known, even 
thou, at leaſt in this thy Day, the Things which: belong 
unto thy Peace! but now they are hid from thine Eyes. 
With Chap. xi. 34. O Jeruſalem, Jeruſalem, which 
killeft the Prophets, and ftoneſt them that are ſent unto 
thee. How often would I have gathered thy Children toge- 
' ther, as a Hen doth gather ber Brood under ber Wings, 
and ye would not! We read of Chriſt's earneſt Defire, 
Lake xxn. 15. With Deſire have I defired to eat this 
Paſſover with you, before I ſuffer. We often read of the 
Affection of Pity or Compaſſion in Chriſt, Matth. xv. 
32, and xvill. 34. Luke vii. 13, and of his being moved 
_ with Compaſſion, Matth. ix. 36, and xiv. 14, and Mark 
V1. 34. And how tender did his Heart appear to be, 
on occaſion of Mary's and Martha's Mourning for their 
Brother, and coming to him with their Complaints 
and Tears: Their Tears ſoon drew Tears from his 
Eyes: He was affected with their Grief, and wept with 
them; tho' he knew their Sorrow ſhould ſo ſoon be 
turned into Joy, by their Brother's being raiſed from 


; © the Dead; ſee Jobn xi. And how ineffably affectionate 


was that laſt and dying Diſcourſe, which Jeſus had with 
his eleven Diſciples the Evening before he was crucified? 
| when 


Pak x I. in boly Aﬀettions. 27 
when he told them he was going away, and foretold 
them the great Difficulties and Sufferings they ſhould 
meet with in the World, when he was gone; and com- 
forted and counſeled them, as his dear little Children, 
and bequeathed to them his holy Spirit, and therein his 
Peace, and his Comfort and Joy, as it were in his laſt 
Will and Teſtament, in the 13th, 14th, 15th, and 16th 
Chapters of John; and concluded the Whole with that 
affectionate interceſſory —_ for them, and his whole 
eſs Church, in Chap. xvii. all the Diſcourſes ever 
ad penn'd, or utter'd by the Mouth of any Man, this ſeems 
d to be the moſt affectionate and affecting. 


de 8. The Religion of Heaven conſiſts very much in 
be Affection. 11 

en There is doubtleſs true Religion in Heaven, and true 
's WM Religion in it's utmoſt Purity and Perfection. But 
. according to the Scripture Repreſentation of the heavenly 
ch State, the Religion of Heaven conſiſts chiefly in hol 
to and mighty Love and Joy, and the Expreſſion of theſe 
in moſt fervent and exalted Praiſes. So that the Religion 
„, of the Saints in Heaven, conſiſts in the ſame Things 
e, wich that Religion of the Saints on Earth, which is 
1s MW ſpoken of in our Text, viz. Love and Joy unſpeakable, 
ie WW and full of Glory. Now it would be very fooliſh to 
v. pretend, that becauſe the Saints in Heaven be not united 
to Fleſh and Blood, and have no animal Fluids to be 
k WU moved, (through the Laws of Union of Soul and Body) 
e, W with thoſe great Emotions of their Souls, that therefore 
r i their exceeding Love and Joy are no Affections.— We 
ts are not ſpeaking of the Affections of the Body, but of 
is WM the Affections of the Soul, the Chief of which are 
h Love and Joy. When theſe are in the Soul, whether 
© I that be in the Body or out of it, the Soul is affected and 
7 moved. And when they are in the Soul, in that Strength 
e 

h 

? 


- 
: 
4 


in which they are in the Saints in Heaven, the Soul is 

mightily affected and moved, or, which is the” ſame 

Thing, has great Affections. *Tis true, we don't expe- 
N C 2 rimentally 


as Religion confifls mich Parr I, 


rimentally know what Love and Joy are in a Soul out 
of a Body, or in a glorified Body; i. e. we have not 
had Experience of Love and Joy in a Soul in theſe Cir- 
cumſtances; but the Saints on Earth do know what 
divine Love and Joy in the Soul are, and they know 
what Love and Joy are of the ſame Kind, with the 
Love and Joy which are in Heaven, in ſeparate Souls 
there. The Love and Joy of the Saints on Earth, is 
che Beginning and Dawning of the Light, Life, and 
Bleſſedneſs of Heaven, and 1s like their Love and Joy 
there; or rather, the ſame in Nature, tho* not the ſame 
with it, or like to it, in Degree and Circumſtances. 
This is evident by many Scriptures, as Prov. iv. 18. 
Jobn iv. 14. and Chap: vi. 40, 47, 50, 51, 54, 58. 
1 7obn wi. 15. 1 Cor. xiii. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Tis un- 
reaſonable therefore to ſuppofe, that the Love and Joy 
of the Saints in Heaven, not only differ in Degree and 
Circumſtances, from the holy Love and Joy of the 
Saints on Earth, but is ſo entirely different in Nature, 
that they are no Affections; and merely becauſe they 
have no Blood and animal Spirits to be ſet in Motion by 
them, which Motion of the Blood and animal Spirits is 
not of the Eſſence of theſe Aﬀections, in Men on the 
Earth, but the Effect of them; altho* by their Re- action 
they may make ſome circumſtantial Difference in the 
Senſation of the Mind. There is a Senſation of the 
Mind which loves and rejoices, that is antecedent to any 
* Effects on the Fluids of the Body; and this Senſation 

of the Mind, therefore don't depend on theſe Motions 
in the Body, and ſo may be in the Soul without the Body, 
And wherever there are the Exerciſes of Love and Joy, 
there is that Senſation of the Mind, whether it be in the 
Body or out; and that inward Senſation, or kind of ſpi- 
ritual Senſe or Feeling, and Motion of the Soul, is 
hat is called Affection: The Soul when it thus feels, 
(if I may ſo ſay) and 1s thus moved, is ſaid to be affected, 
and eſpecially when this inward Senſation and Motion, 
are to a very high Degree, as they are in * Saints in 

. | 1caVeln. 


r ©... -.& 7 


\ Gs 


Sy Yy.v 


e = ® 3. a £3, a a8. X.. i, $. ad ty 


Part 1. in toly Aﬀettions. 29 
Heaven. If we can learn any Thing of the State of 


Heaven from the Scripture, the Love 7 Joy that the 
Saints have there, is exceeding great and vigorous; im- 
preſſing the Heart with the ſtrongeſt and moſt lively 
Senſation of inexpreſſible Sweetneſs, mightily moving, 
animating, and engaging them, making them like to a 
Flame o Fire. And if ſuch Love — Joy be not Af- 
fections, then the Word Affection is of no Uſe in Lan- 
guage.— Will any ſay, that the Saints in Heaven, in 
beholding the Face of their Father, and the Glory of 
their Redeemer, and contemplating his wonderful 
Works, and particularly his laying down his Life for 
them, have their Hearts nothing moved and affected, 
by all which they behold or conſider? 

Hence therefore the Religion of Heaven, conſiſting 
chiefly in holy Love and = conſiſts very much in 
Affection: And therefore undoubtedly, true Religion 
conſiſts very much in Affection. The Way to learn the 
true Nature of any Thing, is to go where that Thing 
is to be found in its Purity and Perfection. If we 
would know the Nature of true Gold, we muſt view it, 
not in the Ore, but when it is refined. If we would 
learn what true Religion is, we muſt go where there is 
true Religion, and nothing but true Religion, and in its 
higheſt Perfection, without any Defect or Mixture. All 
who are truly religious are not of this World, they are 
Strangers here, and belong to Heaven; they are born 
from above, Heaven is their native Country, and the 
Nature which they receive by this heavenly Birth, is an 
heavenly Nature, they receive an Anointing from above ; 
that Principle of true Religion which is in them, is a 
— of the Religion of Heaven; their Grace 
is the Dawn of Glory; and God fits them n that Works 
by conforming them to 1t, 

9. This appears from the Nature a6 Deſign of the 
—— —.— and Duties, which God hath an, a, 
Means and RI of true Religion. _ 
. 0 


Parr I. 


40 e . confifts much 
To inſtance in hn of Prayer: : *Tis manifeſt, 


we are not appointed, in this Duty, to declare God's 
Perfections, his Majeſty, Holineſs, Goodneſs, and All- 
ſufficiency, and our own Meanneſs, Emptineſs, Depen- 
dence, and Unworthineſs, and our Wants and Deſires, 
to inform God of theſe Things, or to incline his Heart, 
and prevail with him to be willing to ſhew us Mercy; 
but ſuitably to affect our own Hearts with the Things 
we expreſs, and ſo to prepare us to receive the Bleſſings 
we aſk. And ſuch Geſtures, and Manner of external 
Behaviour in the Worſhip of God, which Cuſtom has 
made to be Significations of Humility and Reverence, 
can be of no further Uſe, than as they have ſome Ten- 
dency to affect our own Hearts, or the Hearts of others. 
And the Duty of ſinging Praiſes to God, ſeems to 
be appointed wholly to excite and expreſs religious 
Affections. No other Reaſon can be aſſigned, why we 
ſhould expreſs ourſelves to God in Verſe, rather than in 
Proſe, and do it with Muſick, but only, that ſuch is 
our Nature and Frame, that theſe Things have a Ten- 
dency to move our Affections. 
The fame Thing appears in the Nature and Deſign 
of the Sacraments, which God hath appointed. God, 
- conſidering our Frame, hath not only appointed that we 
ſhould be told of the great Things of the Goſpel, and 
of the Redemption of Chriſt, and inſtructed in them 


*. by his Word; but alſo that they ſhould be, as it were, 


exhibited to our View, in ſenſible Repreſentations, in 
the Sacraments the more to affect us with them. 
And the impreſſing divine Things on the Hearts and 
Affections of Men, is evidently one great and main 
— — God has ordained, or his Word deli- 
in the y Scriptures, ſhould opened, applied, 
and ſet home upon Men, in Preaching. And — 
it don't anſwer the Aim which God had in this Inſtitu- 
tion, merely for Men to have good ' Commentaries -and | 
Expoſitions on the Scri and other good Books of 


Divinity; becauſe, theſe may tend, as well as 
© | Pr caching, 


PART I. in holy Afﬀettions, 
Preaching, to give Men a good doctrinal or ſpeculative 
Underſtanding of the Things of the Word of God, 
yet they have not an equal Tendency to impreſs them on 
Men's Hearts and Afﬀections. God hath appointed a 
particular, and lively Application of his Word, to Men, 
in the Preaching of it, as a fit Means to affect Sinners, 
with the Importance of the Things of Religion, and 
their own Miſery, and Neceſſity of a Remedy, and the 
Glory and Sufficiency of a Remedy provided; and to 
ſtir up the pure Minds of the Saints, and quicken their 
Affections, by often bringing the great Things of Re- 
ligion to their Remembrance, and ſetting them before 
— in their proper Colours, tho' they know them, 
and have been Null, inſtructed in them —— 2 Pet. i. 
12, 13. And particularly, to promote thoſe two Affec- 
tions in them, which are ſpoken of in the Text, Love 
and Jay: Chriſt gave ſome Apoſtles, and ſome Prophets, 
and ſome Evangeliſts, and ſome Paſtors and 7. eachers, that 
the Body of Chriſt might be edified in Love, Eph. iv. 11, 
12, 16. The Apoſtle, in inſtructing and counſelling 
Timothy, concerning the Work of the Miniſtry, informs 
him that the great End of that Word which a Miniſter 
is to preach, is Love or Charity, 1 Tim. i intel Pita, 4» 5» 
And another Affection which God has appoi 
ing as a Means to promote in the Saints, is Foy; and 
therefore Miniſters are called — of ther 7% 
2 Cor. i. 24. 
10. Tis an Evidenee that true Religion, or + Holineſs 
of Heart, lies very much in the Affection of the Heart, 
that the Scriptures place the Sins of the Heart yery 
much in Hordueſ of Heert. Thus the Scriptures 
every where. It was Hardneſs of Heart, which excited 
Grief and Diſpleaſure in Chriſt towards the Fews, 
Mark, it. 5. l — looked round about an ibem cuith 2 
eing grieve, the Hardneſs of their Hearts. is 
from Men's having „15 —_— this, that they trea» 


; . e 2 ee c Barns © nk? 


4 8 a 
* + 4 
- 
-A 


LEY 


32 * Religion confifs much Pak I. 


Hardneſs and impenitent Heart, treaſureft up unto thyſelf 
Wrath, againſt the Day of Wrath, and Revelation of the 
righteous Fudgment of God. The Reaſon given why the 
Houſe of  Iſtae] would not obey God, was that they were 
warm Ezek. iii. 7. But the Houſe of Iſrael will 
not bearken unto thee; for they will not hearken unto me: 

For all the Houſe of lſrael are impudent and hard-hearted. 
The Wickedneſs of that perverſe rebellious Generation 
in the Wilderneſs, is aſcribed to the Hardneſs of their 
Hearts; Pſalm xcv. 7,—10. To Day, if ye will bear my 
Voi ce, herdei not your Heart, as in the Provocation, and 
as in the Day of Temptation in the Wilderneſs; when your 
Fathers tempted me, proved me, and ſat my Work: Forty 
Years long was I grieved with this Generation, and ſaid 
it is 4 People that dy err in their Heart, &c.—This is 
ſpoken of as what prevented Zedekiab's turning to the 
Lord, 2 Chron. xxxvi. 13. He ſtiffened bis Neck, and 
hardened his Heart, from turning to the Lord God of Iſrael. 
This Principle is ſpoken of as that from whence Men 
are without the Fear of God, and depart from God's 
Ways: Ifai. Ixiii. 17. O Lord, why haſt thou made us to 
err ow thy Ways, and bardened our Heart from thy 
Fear? And Men's rejecting Chriſt, and oppoſing Chrit- 
tianity, 1s laid to this Principle; Acts xix. 9. But when 
divers were hardened, and believed not, but ſpake Evil of 
that Way before the Multitude :—God's leaving Men to 
the Power of the Sin and Corruption of the Heart, is 


often expreſs'd by God's hardening their Hearts; Rom. 


Ix. 18. Therefore ab be Mercy on whom be will have 
Mercy, and whom be will be hardeneth. John xii. 40. 


He bath blinded their Minds, and hardened their Hearts. 


And the Apoſtle ſeems to ſpeak of an evil Heart, that 
departs from the living God, and a bard Heart as the ſame 


Thing, Heb. iii. 8. Harden not your Heart as in the Pro- 


vocation, &c. Verle xii. 13. Take beed Brethren, left 
there be in any of you an evil Heart of Unbelief in depart- 
ing from the living G ad; but exhort one another" daily, 


while i 15 called to Day; ; Lf an fx v be hardened Une | 
7 


LC 


„„ . wo N. UG SV N 


pur l. in boly Aﬀettions 33 


the Deceitfulneſs of Sin. And that great Work of God 
in Converſion, which canſiſts in delivering a Perſon from 
the Power of Sin, and mortifying Corruption, is ex- 
preſs'd once and again, by God's — away the Heart 
of Stone, and giving an Heart of Fleſh, Ezek. xi. 19. 
and Chap. xxxvi. 26, 

No by a hard Heart, is plainly meant an unaffected 
Heart, or a Heart not eaſy to be moved with vertuous 
Affections, like a Stone, inſenſible, ſtupid, unmoved ' 
and hard to be impreſſed. Hence the hard Heart is 
called a ſtony Heart, and is oppoſed to an Heart of Fleſp, 
that has feeling, and is ſenſibly touch'd and moved. We 
read in Scripture of a hard Heart, and a tender Heart: 

And doubtleſs we are to underſtand theſe, as contrary 
the one to the other. But what is a tender Heart, but 
a Heart which is eaſily impreſſed with what ought to 
affect it? God commends Fo/fiah, becauſe his Heart 
was tender; and 'tis evident by thoſe Things which are 
mentioned as Expreſſions and Evidences of this Tender- 
neſs of Heart, that by his Heart being tender is meant, 
his Heart being eaſily moved with religious and pious 
Affection; 2 Kings xxii. 19. Becauſe thine Heart was 
tender, and thou haſt humbled thyſelf before the Lord, 

when thou heardſt wbat I ſpake againſt this Place, and 
againſt the Inhabitants thereof, that they ſhould became a 
Deſolation, and a Curſe, and haſt rent thy Cleaths, and 
baſt wept before me; I alſo have heard thee, ſaith the 
Lord. And this is one Thing, wherein it is neceſſary 
we ſhould become as little Children, in order to our enter- 
ing into the Kingdom of God, even that we ſhould have 
our Hearts tender, and eaſily affected and moved in 
ſpiritual and divine Things, as little Children a. in 
other Things. 

Tis very plain in ſome Places, in the T exts * 

ſelves, that = Hardneſs of Heart is meant a Heart 
void of Affeclion. So to ſignify the Oftrich's being 

e ear Aﬀection to her —_ it is ſaid, — 


134 PT: 


34 Religion confiſls much Part I, 
48 though they were not bers. So a Perſon having a 
Heart Unaffeted in Time of Danger, is expreſs'd by 
his hardening his Heart, Prov. xxvui. 14. Happy is the 
Man that feareth alway; but be that hardeneth bis Heart 
Hall fall into Miſchief. 

Now therefore ſince it is ſo plain, that by a hard 

Heart, in Scripture, is meant a Heart deſtitute of pious 

Affections, and ſince alſo the Scriptures do ſo frequently 
place the Sin and Corruption of the Heart in Hardneſs 
of Heart; it is evident, that the Grace and Holineſs of 
the Heart, on the contrary, muſt, in a great Meaſure, 
conſiſt in its having pious Affections, and being caſily 
fuſceptive of ſuch Affection. Divines are generally 
„that Sin radically and fundamentally conſiſts in 
what is negative, or privative, having by Root and 
Foundation in a Privation or Want of Holineſs. And 
therefore undoubtedly, if it be ſo that Sin does very 
much conſiſt in Hardneſs of Heart, and ſo in the Want 
of pious Affections of Heart, Holineſs does conſiſt 
very much in thoſe pious Aﬀettions. 

I am far from ſuppoſing that all Affections do ſhew a 
tender Heart: Hatred, Anger, Vain-glory, and other 
ſelfiſh and ſelf-exalting Affections, may greatly pre- 
vail in the hardeſt Heart. But yet it is evident, that 
Hardneſs of Heart, and Tenderneſs — Heart, are Expreſ- 
ſions that relate to the Affections of the Heart, and 
denote the Heart's being ſuſceptible of, or ſhut up againſt 
certain Affections, of w I mal have occaſion to ſpeak 
more afterwards. 

Upon the Whole, I think it clearly and abundantly 


evident, that true Religion lies very much in the Affec- 


tions. Not that I think theſe Arguments prove, that 
Religion in the Hearts of the truly Godly, is _ in 
exact Proportion to the Degree of Affection, and 
ſent Emotion of the Mind. For undoubtedly, 
is much Affection in the true Saints which is not ip tual : 
Their religious Affections are often mixed; all is not 
PRES 2 but much from Nature. And tho? the 
Affections 


pax T J. in boly Afections. JJ 
Affections have not their Seat in the Body, yet the Con- 
ſtitution of the Body, may very much contribute to 
the preſent Emotion of the Mind. And the Degree 
of Religion is rather to be judged of by the Fixedneſs 
and Strength of the Habit that is exercifed in Affection, 
whereby holy Affection is habitual, than by the Degree 
of the preſent Exerciſe : And the Strength of that Habit 
is not always in Proportion to outward Effects and Ma- 
nifeſtations, or inward Effects, in the Hurry and Vehe- 
mence, and ſudden Changes of the Courſe of the 
Thoughts of the Mind. But yet it is evident, that 
Religion conſiſts ſo much in Affection, as that without 
holy Affection there is no true Religion: And no Light 
in the Underſtanding is good, which don't produce 
holy Affection in the Heart; no Habit or Principle in 
the Heart is good, which has no ſuch Exerciſe; and no 
ry external Fruit 1s 206d, which don't proceed from ſuch 
int Exerciſes. 


Having thus conſidered the Evidence of the Propo- 
2 ſition laid down, I proceed to ſome Inferences. 


e. 1. We may hence learn how great their Error is, who . 
at mare for diſcarding all religious Affections, as having 
nothing ſolid or ſubſtantial in them. 
1d There ſeems to be too much of a Diſpoſition * this 
t Way, prevailing in this Land at this Time. Becauſe 
ik many who, in i Oe late extraordinary Seaſon, 

to have great religious Affections, did not manifeſt a a 
ly MW right Temper of Mind, and run into many Errors, in 
Co the Time of their Affection, and the 4 of their 
at W Zeal; and becauſe the high Affections of many ſeem 
udo be ſo ſoon come to nothing, and ſome who ſeemed 
- to 9 raiſed and ſwallowed with Joy and Zeal, 
for a e, ſeem to have returned like the Dog to his 
I WW Vomit: Hence religious Affections in general are grown 
t out of Credit, with great Numbers, as cho true Reli- 
gion did not at all conſiſt in them. Thus we eaſily and 

naturally 


Y 36 Religion confifts much PakT I, 


naturally run from one Extreme to another. A little 
while ago we were in the other Extreme; there was a 
prevalent Diſpoſition to look upon all high religious 
Affections, as eminent Exerciſes of true Grace, without 
much inquiring into the Nature and Source of thoſe 
Affections, and the Manner in which they aroſe: If 
Perſons did but.appear to be indeed very much moved 
and raiſed, ſo as to be full of religious Talk, and ex- 

reſs themſelves with great Warmth and Earneſtneſs, 
and to be fill d, or to be very full, as the Phraſes were; 
it was too much the Manner, without further Exami- 
nation, to conclude ſuch Perſons were full of the Spirit 
of God, and had eminent Experience of his gracious 
Influences. This was the Extreme which was prevail- 
ing three or four Years ago. But of late, inſtead of 
efteeming and admiring all religious AfeFions, without 
Diſtinction, it is a Thing much more prevalent, to reject 
and diſcard all without Diſtinction. Herein appears the 
Subtilty of Satan. While he ſaw that Affections were 
much in Vogue, knowing the greater Part of the Land 
were not verſed in ſuch Things, and had not had much 
Experience of great religious Affections, to enable them 
to judge well. of them, and diſtinguiſh between true 
and falſe; then he knew he could beſt play his Game, by 
ſowing Tares amongſt the Wheat, and mingling falſe 
Afettions with the Works of God's Spirit: He knew 
this to be a likely Way, to delude and eternally ruin 
many Souls, and greatly to wound Religion in the Saints, 
and entangle them in a dreadful Wilderneſs, and by and 


. by, to bring all Religion into Diſrepute. But now, 


when the ill Conſequences of theſe falſe Affection 
appear, and *tis become very apparent, that ſome of 
- thoſe Emotions which made a glaring Shew, and were 


' by many greatly admired, were in Reality Nothing; 


the Devil ſees it to be for his Intereſt to go another Way 
to work, and to endeavour to his utmoſt to propagate 
and eſtabliſh a Perſwaſion, that all Affections and ſen- 


. ſible Emotions of the Mind, in Things of Religion, 


Pakr I. in boly Aﬀettions, 37 
are nothing at all to be regarded, but are rather to be 
avoided, and carefully guarded againſt, as Things of 
a pernicious Tendency. This he knows is the Way to 
bring all Religion to a meer lifeleſs Formality, and 
effectually ſhut out the Power of Godlineſs, and every 
Thing which is ſpiritual, and to have all true Chriſti- 
anity turn'd out of Doors. For altho' to true Religion, 
there muſt indeed be ſomething elſe beſides Affection; 
yet true Religion conſiſts ſo much in the Affections, 
that there can be no true Religion without them. He 
who has no religious Affection, is in a State of ſpiritual 
Death, and is wholly deſtitute of the powerful, quick- 
us cning, ſaving Influences of the Spirit of God upon his 
c Heart. As there is no true Religion, where“ there is 
7 I nothing elſe but Affection; fo there is no true Religion 
ja where there is no religious Affection. As on the one 
Hand, there muſt be Light in the Underſtanding, as 
' Wl well as an affected fervent Heart, where there is Heat 
q without Light, there can be nothing divine or heavenly 
n chat Heart; fo on the other Hand, where there is a 
h Kind of Light without Heat, a Head ſtored with 
1 WW Notions and Speculations, with a cold and unaffected 
Heart, there can be nothing divine in that Light, that 
4 Knowledge is no true ſpiritual Knowledge of divine 
© WW Things. If the great Things of Religion are rightly 
V I underſtood, they will affect the Heart. The Reaſon 
why Men are not affected by ſuch infinitely great, im- 
portant, glorious, and wonderful Things, as they often 
hear and read of, in the Word of God, is undoubtedly 


impoſſible, and utterly inconſiſtent with human Nature, 
that their Hearts ſhould be otherwiſe, than ftrongly 
impreſs'd, and greatly moved by ſuch Things. | 
This Manner of lighting all religious Afections, is 
the Way exceedingly to harden the Hearts of Men, 
and to encourage them in their Stupidity and Senſeleſs- 
" JW nels, and to keep them in a State of ſpiritual Death as 
| I long as they. live, and bring them at laſt to Death knees 


„ ALS E 2 Wh 


becauſe they are blind; if they were not fo, it would be 


ad , * 
1 1 
"+ g 1 
| 3 


Religion confiſls much PART I. 
nal. The prevailing Prejudice againſt religious Aﬀec- 
tions at this Day, in the Land, is apparently of awful 
Effect, to harden the Hearts of Sinners, and damp the 
_ Graces of many of the Saints, and ſtund the Life and 
Power of Religion, and preclude the Effect of Ordi. 
nances, and hold us down in a State of Dulneſs and 
Apathy, and undoubtedly caufes many Perſons greatly 
to offend God, in entertaining mean and low Thoughts 
of the extraordinary Work he has lately wrought in 
this Land. 

And for Perſons to deſpiſe and cry down all religious 
Afﬀettions, is the Way to ſhut all Religion out of their 
own Hearts, and to make thorough Work in ruining 
their Souls, | 1 

They who condemn high Affections in others, are 
certainly not likely to have high Affections themſelves. 
And let it be conlidered, that they who have but little 
religious Affection, have certainly but little Religion. 
And they who condemn others for their religious Aﬀec- 
tions, and have none themfelves, have no Religion. 

There are falſe Affections, and there are true. A 
Man's having much Affection, don't prove that he has 
any true Religion: But if he has no Affection, it proves 
that he has no true Religion. The right Way, is not 
to reject all Affections, nor to approve all; but to 
diſtinguiſh between Affections, approving ſome, and 
rejecting others; ſeparating between the Wheat and the 
Chaff, the Gold and the Droſs, the Precious and the 
Vile. | 


2. If it be ſo, that true Religion lies much in the 
Aﬀefions, hence we may infer, that ſuch Means are to 
be deſired, as have much of a Tendency to move the 
Affections. Such Books, and ſuch a Way of Preaching 
the Word, and Adminiſtration of Ordinances, and ſuch 
a Way of worſhipping God in Prayer, and ſinging 
Praiſes, is much to be defired, as has a Tendency 


deeply to affect the Hearts of thoſe who attend theſe 
Means. 


Such 


9 —_—_—. m _ 


J r * CPE” 


on &__ _. tun an ams oem a» an coco r , R3XD #*-c z Va» 


Mm ms 9155 OQ ft 


Ir kw 


.fr . 6 - 2 


* © 


0 


nene e 


PART I. in holy Affections. 39 

Such a Kind of Means, would formerly have been 
highly approved of and applauded by the Generality of 
the People of the Land, as the moſt excellent and pro- 
fitable, and having the greateſt Tendency to promote 
the Ends of the Means of Grace. But the prevailing 
Taſte ſeems of late ſtrangely to be alter d: That pathe- 
tical Manner of Praying and Preaching, which would 
formerly have been admir'd and extoll'd, and that for 
this Reaſon, becauſe it had ſuch a Tendency to move 
the Affections, now, in great Multitudes, immediately 
excites Diſguſt, and moves no other Affections, than 
thoſe of Diſpleaſure and Contempt. | 

Perhaps, formerly the Generality (at leaſt of the 
common People) were in the Extreme, of looking too 
much to an affectionate Addreſs, in publick Performan- 
ces: But now, a very great Part of the People, ſeem 
to have gone far into a contrary Extreme. Indeed there 
may be ſuch Means, as may have a' great Tendency to 
ſtir up the Paſſions of weak and ignorant Perſons, and 
yet have no great Tendency to Benefit their Souls. For 
tho* they may have a Tendency to excite Affections, 
they may have little or none to excite gracious Affections, 
or any Affections tending to Grace, But undoubtedly, 
if the Things of Religion, in the Means uſed, are 
treated according to their Nature, and exhibited truly, 
ſo as tends to convey juſt Apprehenſions, and a right 


Judgment of them; the more they have a Tendency to 
move the Aﬀections the better. th 


3. If true Religion lies much in the Affections, hence 
we may learn, what great Cauſe we have to be aſhamed 
and confounded before God, that we are no more 
affected with the great Things of Religion. It appears 
from what has been faid, that this ariſes from our having 
ſo little true Religion. | | 

God has given to Mankind Affections, for the ſame 
Purpoſe which he has given all the Faculties and Princi- 
ples of the human Soul, for, viz. that they might be 

| ſuhſervient 


40 Religion con ſiſls much ' Part 1 


ſubſervient to Man's chief End, and the great Buſineſs 
for which God has created him, that is the Buſineſs of 
Religion. And yet how common is it among Mankind, 
that their Affections are much more exerciſed and 
engaged in other Matters, than in Religion! In Things 
which concern Men's worldly Intereſt, their, outward 
Delights, their Honour and Reputation, and their natu- 
ral Relations, they have their Deſires eager, their A 

petites vehement, their Love warm and affectionate, 
their Zeal ardent; in theſe Things their Hearts are ten- 
der and ſenſible, caſily moved, deeply impreſs'd; much 
concerned, very ſenſibly affected, and greatly engaged; 
much depreſs'd with Grief at worldly Loſſes, and 
highly raiſed with Joy at worldly Succeſſes and Proſpe- 
rity. But how inſenſible and unmov'd are moſt Men, 
about the great Things of another World! How dull 
are their Affections! How heavy and hard their Hearts 
in theſe Matters! Here their Love is cold, their Deſires 
languid, their Zeal low, and their Gratitude ſmall. How 
they can fit and hear of the infinite Height and Depth, 
and Length and Breadth of the Love of God in Chriſt 
Jeſus, of his giving his infinitely dear Son, to be offered 
up a Sacrifice for the Sins of .Men, and of the unpa- 
rallePd Love of the innocent, holy and tender Lamb 
of God, manifeſted in his dying Agonies, his bloody 
Sweat, his loud and bitter Cries, and bleeding Heart, 
and all this for Enemies, to redeem them from deſerved, 
eternal Burnings, and to bring to unſpeakable and ever- 
laſting Joy and Glory; and yet be cold, and heavy, 
inſenſible, and regardleſs! Where are the Exerciſes of 
our Affections proper, if not here? What is it that 
does more require them? And what can be a fit Occa- 
ſion of their lively and vigorous Exerciſe, if not ſuch an 
one as this? Can any Thing be ſet in our View, greater 
and more important? Any Thing more wonderful and 
ſurpriſing? Or more nearly concerning our Intereſt? 
Can we ſuppoſe the wiſe Creator implanted ſuch Ame 


ples in the human Nature as the Affections, to be 0 
Ule 


AQ TX -f Bo» ud tn Tu Tr WF MF TTRRT Rn ” ao ee ze 


+ 


= x 


> 


Ft Oo? 


1, 1 hes 2 foo 


1, dw „% — | ww. 


— 


rr f . % 0, We 


—n—_ "ST W-., ©» 


_— — eee 50 


Uſe to us rand Be bherditd on certain proper Occa- 
fions, but to he Rill on ſuch an Oceaſion 
any Chriſtian,” who believes the Truth of de Thing, 
entertain ſuch Thoughts? 

If we oughtiever — Affe kon ar al, 
and if che Creator has not unwiſely conſtituted che 
human Nature, in making e — nds it, 
when they are vam and Helesd, then they 
exerciſed about thoſe Objects which are 2 orc of 
them. But is there any Thing, which Chri 
find in Heaven or Earth, ſo worthy to be che NE 
of their Admiration and Love, their earneſt andl6 nging 
Deſires, their Hope, and their Rejoi _— 
fervent Zeal, as thoſe Things that are held forth to us, 
in the Goſpel of "Jeſus Chriſt? n which not only are 
Things declared moſt worthy to affet us, but they are 
exhibited in the moſt Manner. The Gloty's 
and Beauty of the bleſſed Jehovah, which ĩs moſt worthy © 
in itſelf, 'to be the Object of our Admiration and Love, 
is there exhibited'in the moſt a Manner that can 
be conceived of, as it appears ſhining. in all its L, * 
* Face of an incarnate, infinitely loving, meck, 
onate, dying Redeemer. All the Vertues 
the amb of God, his Humility, Patience, Meekneſs, 
Submiſſion, Obedience, Love and Compaſſion, are ex- 
hibited to our View, in a Manner the moſt to 
move our Affections, of any that can be i 
they all had their 
a and fo their brighteſt Manifeſtation, when he was” 
in the affecting we ; even when he was 
under his laſt unutterable and unparat-” | 
lel'd Sufferings he endured, from his tender Love and 
Pity to us, There alſo; the hateful Nature of our Sins 
is manifeſted in the moſt, affecting Manner 3 as 


we ſee the dreadful Effects of them, in what our RE 
deemer, - who undertook to. anſwer for us, ſuffered for 

them. And there we have the moſt affecting Manifeſta- 
tions of God's ls Sin, and his Wrath and 


4 uſtice - 


* 


8 , — 3 
= 7 ; * d " >: : by oe. 
ol * 
x + 0 ' 


„ 
greateſt Trial, and their ER Exer-" 


** * 3 2 
Felgium une c. HAxr I 


Jolticvin punithieg e wake his Juſtice:in the Strich 
Need ae BexableneſOok it. and hid Wrath. in its Terri 

nes ig ſo dreadfuliy puniſhing our Sins, in One WG 
was infinitely dear to him, and evi to us. 80 has 
God diſpoſed: Wings nithe Affair of our Redemption, 
| 2 in his glorious Diſpenſationa, revealed to us in the 
Goſpel, as thqcevery Thing were purpoſely: contrived 
in ſuch a Manngy, jagito have the greateſt, poſſible Ten- 
dency to reach our Hearts in — {ok and 
moye gur AﬀeQions, moſt; ſenſily and ſtrongly. 
Bel have we — to be humbled — the 
uſt. that we are no more affectod-ꝶ 8 »./ 0 


* * 874 
Bat PAR anticott ont bas ö 1h 715 hou fd 


F 1821 "T a 8 „ er 4 . i | * 7 
8 604 Huh L . 141 J Ten - No ow 25 *. do! 7 1 


6 Ii 30n Adv A 5H oO eu Paotdt us. Fei 
Te vor 269 n 52536 08 ee er Rom wiggle ts A 
wvieloy oft 151% eee [1 "4 9 
roveve _. 0 nt 
* No. f D. | 
* 80 35:12 151118 
4 $3115. Fe £3 14 2 -f2 W 
ern egnt'vol | 

70 947775 * 2410 6 WJ 
nA 17 od 1 
ARR 01600039 Þ = 
07 412093 ru 9 7 75 4 

£5 : Dafuer ens N12 NX. 143 10 a#fs A 1-40 FAC 
WA 3690900 21013 12015 eu | 0168919 710 " A 17 
* ew 55 e ifi gran l Aare 
ety een ee 5 ev RETOUR 117 I 90 . 


= 3 IPRS. I 

8 $2141 86 a £42. 2-4 14308 
* as” 4 T 1 

k VT I: Sean £907 34434 


$a 15y R is | 11 | | | | 
| ' Fa | ed = 1 

s vo. 1 18 3 293 al 1 it ei Fi att ; 2 11 SINE "4 © fu D LJ 

4 42 40 10 D133 3 / 1 4051 4 13160 1 * 3 N 4 AN — 0 > ere 

4B -olcþif. oh! ani Ravi Vie 34 * . 11 618 24 T7 3.2150 + 


a, ui fed) io 9 "PA 1. ah 
a Prditt:: 20 inn 03 n R 1 
en 1! 5318 Done val P I 2 9TS4113 Fi; 1929 44 v4 . 


Unis aF i bog 2 1b baz be o bi 
e | 4 | 


£ 


_ 


* 


xz 


— ” = WS CT” << wi M3 = 


— * 


- 


ww a _ » 


OR. © 


| Therefore let us now endeavotir*to"do'this? e 


f 


JEM = deed pope 43 24.9 n 7 $1 0) mY 1 11 Phe 
* by WA: nite ag RT Thad II. I. % wink 
* wa, os. * 
ket 154 bill WN b t 42 Uh 12 


| $:00000000000008 | 


; * x. | 
Port, EARL OPT IO ITO YARD 257% 
woe * , % 1 „ Fey's M/ „ fa. "83. 1701 W 


Showing what are «ths; certain Signs \ that 


religious Affactions are truly gracious, 

or that they are Tr: 
YE DR F108 e 65 * Df An | 
*I 2 * 25 beiter nt $4 OJ e R 4 
* 1 Reading of what * 1 
now ſaid, is: ready” t 
acquit Manig and fay, Lam hot 
One of thoſe who have no religious 
1+ Aﬀettions; Lam oftengreatly moved! 
$ | * WiththeConſiderationof — | 
9 «of Reli on:“ Bet him not content. a 

himſelf" with this, that he has religious Affections: For + 
(as was obſerved before) as we . not to feject and 
condemn; all Affections, as tho true Religion did not at 
all confiſt in Affection; ſd ori the other Hand, e v 


not to a cof all, as th every one that was religion 
afidied, had true Grace, and was therein the . 
of the omg, at of the Spirit of Gods and 


that therefore the right is to Uiſting) 
e Ken 8 - als ohe ſort © and" 1 


A 
2 


order to it, I Would do do Things ee | 
\ + Set 2 ET ©. 91 (7: VI 2. I 64k 144 4 7 76 5 | 
Pg D 2 9 r 


1 . t * 
1 | " 7 


4 OY 9 * n 2 2 . 5 9 A 4 | 4 * a T be 
» . , : 
Fo 44 What are no Sigur Pant. II. 
* 
Y 


I. I vould mention ſome Things, which are no Signs 

one Way or the other, either that Affections are ſuch 
as true Religion conſiſts | in, or that they are otherwiſe; 

that we may be guarded 2 Judging of Aﬀetions 
* Signs. 


II. I would obſerve ſome Things, wherein thoſe 
Affections which are ſpiritual and gracious, differ from 
thoſe which are not fo, and may be diſtinguiſhed and 


known. 


FIRST, 1 3 take Notice of fine e Things, which 
are no Signs tha: Ir are gracious, or Ou they 
ae mar. | 

1 *Fis 1 no Sen 0 one Way or the other, that t religious 
Affections are very great, or raiſed very hi 

Some are ready to condemn all high Affections: If 
Perſons appear to have their religious Affections rais d 
toi an extraordimary Pitch, they are prejudiced againſt 
them, and determine that are Deluſions, without 
further Enquiry. But if it be, as has been proved, that 
true Religion lies very much in religious Affections; 
then it follows, that if there be a great deal of true 
Religion, there will be great religidus Affections; if true 
Religion in the Hearts of Men, be raiſed to a great 
Haiahs, divine and holy Affections will be raiſed to 2 
Ereat Height. 

Love 1 = an Affection; but will any Chriſtian fay, Men 
ought not to love God and Jeſus Chriſt in a high Degree? 
And will any ſay, we ought not to have a very great 
Hatred of Sin, andꝭ a very deep Sorrow for it? Or that 
ve ought not to exerciſe a high of Gratitude to 
_ God, for the Mercies we receive of him, and the 
Things he has done for the Salvation of fallen Men? 
Or that we ſhould not -have very great and ſtrong Deſires 


after God and Holineſs? Is there any who will profeſs, 


tha his Affections in Religion & are great enough; 9 


6 


Parr 1. 2 | diflinguifh 2 os 


ail ſay, I have no Cauſe to be humbled, «lacs am 
« no more affected with the Things of Religion than I 
by zm, I have no Reaſon to be aſhamed, that I have n 
ter Exerciſes of Love to God, and Sorrow for 
« Sin, and Gratitude for the Mercies which I have 
& received?” Who is there that will go and 'blefs God, 
that he is affected enough with what he has read and 
heard, of the wonderful Love of God to Worms and 
Rebels, in g. ving his only begutten Son to die for them, 
and of the dying Love of Chriſt; and will pray y.that.he 
may not be affected with them in any higher 2 1 
becauſe high Affections are r, and very unlovely 


in Chriſtians, weis enthuſia al, and rvinous th "= 


Our Text plain! ly ſpeaks ofa arent need bigh Affection, 
when it n 8 of rej oicin 0 To Toy ha nt an full - 
of Glory: Here the m rlative Expreſſions are 
bh which Language ail ord And the Scriptures 
often require us to exerciſe very bigh Affections: Thus 
in the firſt an great 5 the Law; there 
is an Accumulation of Expreſſions, as tho Words were 
wanting to expreſs the Degree, is which we ought to 
love God; Thau ſbalt love de Lord \thy God, with\alf 
thy Heart, epith all thy Soul, 4pith all thy Mind, and mit 
all thy Strength. So the _ are called n to exer- 
ciſe high Degrees of Joy: 4. ſays Chriſt o 
Diſciples, be exceedin 
ſaid, Pfal. da Let 'the: 2 — he glad; le 
rejoice before God) 143 let them exceedingly rejoice... So in 
the ſame Book. of Plams, he Saints are often called 
upon to ſhout for J and in Luke vi, ag, 10 leap\ fer 
J. So they are abundantly called upon to erer 
high Degrees of Gratitude for Mercies, to Praiſa G 
with all their Hearts, with Hearts lifted up in the Ways 
of the Lord, and their Souls magnifying. 5 Lord," fnging 
his Praiſes, talking of his mene fn orks, b ee 
Doings, Sc, "ar UC 1+-022Jap 2 


| Religion? - 


* 


Matth. V. 12. S0 i it is i 9 


* 


* * "* 
6 
. 
- 
0 
4 ; 


[ 
= 


is 


- 
Add 
2 . 
"ah a 125 
: PS 5 
* * 


8 
» 1 * * 


246 Ml ae m Signs HART. I. 


e Andlwe find che moſt eminent Saints in Scripture, 
oſtem profeſſing high Affections. Thus the Plalmiſt 
Hpeatt of his Love; as if it were wnſpeakedle,, Pfalm 
cxix. 9 + O' bor lode I thy Lato? So he expreſſes a 
great Degree of Hatred of Sin; Paley cxxxix. 21, 22, 
Do I mot hate them, O Lord; = bite "thee? Aud abs I 
not grieved with them Mu, riſe: againſt thee? I bats 
them with perfor Fredo. Tie 8 allo” Expreies a high 
NDegieewft- Sorrow for Sin: He ſpeaks of kys Sins 01 
ouer bis Head, as an heavy - Burden, 'that\'was' too 1 
for hi andvof bis roaring all the Day, and BI. Moiſture; 
bing: turned into tber Dronghl "of Summer, and bis Bones 
being as it were bjoken with Sorrow. Sothe often expreſſes 
great Degrees of Spiritual Deſires, in a Multitude of 
the: ſtrongeſt Expreſſions which can 7 conceived of; 
ſuch\avbis | „ bjs Su e ob and thirfy 
Land whire no W arm in bis panting, bis Fleh and | Heart 
omugiont, bis | Svit!'s breaking for . Wh it hath 
Stel Ha expreſſes the Exerciſes of | extrem 
Serif fenthe Sinscof others; Pal, c 146. Ri My 
Hater vun don une Eye berauſe they” keep not thy Law, 
Anti Verſe g % Horror Hark taten 88 B Mech 
e 


Hur icted that 'for/a Ny. Bhs 
HRxerciſes of J6y; Pfal. X 1 be % fe ay Ao 
ſhall 5 


Strength; and in . 

| cel Pall lexii/2 A Lips Bl 70 oice, when 

W £i/onganto thee. Plau xxl, 3,7. 1 5 au, je thy Fon 
Kan is: bettbr '-thar Hie, pp & Pal} "ga the. 

Nu till I bleſs tbee, bile I hive Tah N my 82725 

ul; Name: My: Svul' fhall* be; atisfred* as with Ms 

ang Fatneſs, and my "Mouth {bi A proife't 2 with” 5 7 8. 

LAhs: H ben I remember 2 tpon my Bed, and 2 5 on: 

thet in tbe Night Watches ; Becauſe thou at been my Help,. 


8 in — Shadow of thy Ings wi I rejoice. .. 

The Apoſtle Raul expreſſes high" ExetCifes of Affec. 
tiom Thus he expreſſes the Exerciſes of Pity and 
Caoncern for others Good, even 0 An guiſb of Peart: a 
erat, ferums,” and abundant Love, ak earneft and lk 
| | mg 


* 


- 
I 
* 
18 


= — Few 


Parr. II. . 10 1 Apr. 14 


ſhall tbey refoice all 2 Day, and in thy Ri rbreon 9 For 
"they be exalttd. Zech. ix. 9. 2 eatly, 


ing Deſires,” and exceeding Foy; and ſpeaks of the „ 
tation and Triumphs of his Soul, and his earneſt Exper- 
tation and Hope, and his abundant Tears, and the 776. 
wails of bis Saul, in Pity, Grief, earneſt Deſires, godly 
| Jealouſy, and fervent Zeal, in many Places that have 
been cited already, and which therefore J need not 
repeat. Jobn the Baptiſt expreſſed great Joy, ohn 3 Hi. 
Thoſe bleſſed Vomen that anointed the y of 
Jeſus, are repreſented as in a very, high Exerciſe of 
religious Affection, on occaſion of Chriſt's Reſurrection; 
Matth. xxvili. 8, 1 they departed from the Sepicbre, 
with Fear and eat Foy. © 
WTis often fotetold of the Church of God! in her 
future happy Seaſons here on Earth, that they ſhall ex- 
ceedingly rejoice; Pſal. Ixxxix. 15, 16. They ſhall walk, | 
O Lord, in the Light of thy Crantenance:, In 15 r. 


ter of Zion; ſhot, O Daughter , eruſalemʒ 5 22 
thy King cometh, &c. The ſame is repreſented in innu- 
merable» other Places. And: becauſe high Degrees of 
Jo y are the proper and genuine Fruits of the Goſpel of 

riſt, — 4 the Angel calls this Goſpel, good. Tir 
ding of — Foy, that ſhould be to all People, 

The Saints and Angels in Heaven, that have Reli- 
gion in it's higheſt Perfection, are exceedin y affected 


with what: hey behold and.conterplate, of God's Per- 


fections and Works, They are all as a pure: heayenly 
Flame of Fire; in their Love, and in'the Greatneſs and 
Strength of their Joy and ere Their Praiſes are 
pre ented, as the Voice of m ny Waters, and as thy 
Voice of a ar” Thunder.” Now" the only Reaſon why, 
their A ons are ſo much _— than the holy 7. — 
tions of S ts on Earth, is, they ſee the Thin 
are affected by, more according to their T « pus 
have their Aﬀe&tions more confortned to the e Neo 
Things. And therefore, if religious Affections in Men 
here belgw, are but of the fame” Nature and 1 5 with 
- theirs, 


* 


| 48 What « are oY Made Pak II. 


their's, the chile they are, and tlie nearer they are to 
their's in Degree, the better; becauſe therein they will 
be ſo much the more conformed to Truth, as their's are. 
From theſe Things it certainly appears, that religious 
Affections being in a very high Degree, is no Evidence 
that they are not ſuch as have the Nature of true Reli- 
on. Therefore they do greatly err, who condemn 
27 as Enthuſiaſts, meren becauſe their Affection 
are very high. 
And on the other Hand, "Tis no Evidence that reli- 
gious Affections are of a ſpiritual and gracious Nature, 
becauſe they are great. Tis very manifeſt by the holy 
Scripture, our ſure, and infallible Rule to judge of 
Things of this Nature, that there are religious Affecti. 
ons which are very high, that are not ſpiritual and ſav- 
ing. The Apoſtle Paul ſpeaks of Affections in the 
Galatians, which had been exceedingly elevated, and 
| Wee yet he manifeſtly ſpeaks of, as fearing that they 
were vain, and had come to nothing, Gal. 4. 25. Where 
15thbe B ed ber you ſpake of ? For I bear you Record, that 
if it h 1 you would have plucked out your 
—.— given them to me. And in the 11th 
\ Verſe be tells them, He was afraid of them, left be bad 
beftowed on _ Labaur in vain. So the Children of 
Vrael were greatly affected with God's Mercy to them, 
when they had ſeen how wonderfully he wrought for them 
at the Red Sea, where they ſang God's Praiſe; tho' they 
ſoon. forgot his Works. So they were greatly affected 
in at Mount Sinai, when they Taw the marvelous 
Manifeſtations God made of bimfelf there; and ſeemed 
mightily engaged in their Minds, and with great For- 


wWardneſs made Anſwer, when God propoſed his holy 


Covenant to them, ſaying, All that the Lord bath ſpoken 
will we do, and be obedient. But how ſoon M there an 
End to all this mighty Forwardneſs and Engagedneſs of 
Affection? How quickly were they tu aſide after 
other Gods, rejoicing and ſhouting around their golden 


Miracle 


Calf? So great Multitudes who were affected with the 


Pann. . todilingujh Aﬀedtion.. 4h | 


Miracle of; raiſing Lazarus from: the Dead, were ele- 
vated to a high Degree, and made a mighty ado, when 
Jeſus preſenily after enter'd into Jeruſalem, - exceedingly 
magnitying 1Chriſt, as tho? the Ground were not good 
enough for the Aſs he rode to tread u pon; and Se 
cut down, Branches of Palm- trees, and ſtreugd them in 
the Way ; ea, pull'd off their Garmenth, and ſpread 
them in the Way; and cried. with loud Voices, Hoſanna 
to the Son ras þ David, Bleſſed is he that cometh in the Name 
of the Lo Heme + in. 176 Higheſt; ; ſo as to make the 
whole Cy 15 again, and put all into an Uproar. 
We learn by the Evan wget} Jabn, that the Reaſon why 
the People made this ado, was becauſe they were affected 
with the Miracle of raiſing Lazarus: Jobn xii. 18. Here 
was a vaſt Multitude crying Fleſanna on this Occaſion, 
ſo that it gave Occaſion to the T hariſees to fay, Bebold 
the World is gone after bim, John xii. 19. but: Chxiſt had 
at that Time but few true Diſciples. And how quickly 
was this ado at an End? All of this Nature is guetl'd 
and dead, when.. this Zeus ſtands bound, with a.mock 
Robe and a Crown of Thorns, to be derided, ſpit upon, 
rum d ndemn'd and executed. Indeed there was 

at an loud Out- cry concerning him, among the 
Maltitude then, as well as before; but of a very differ- 
28 Tis nqt then, Heſanna, Hoſanna, but Crucij) 5, 

Tucify. 

And it is the concurring Voice cf all orchids 
Divines, that there may be religious Affections, which 
are raiſed to a very high Degree, and 4 there be nochins 
of true Religion. f | 


II. Tis no Sign that Affections have the Nature of 
true Religion, or that they have not, that they have 
great Effects on the Body. | 

All Affections whatſoever, have in * Reſpect or 
Degree, an Effect on the . As was obſerved be- 


fore, 


— 


» 


4 Mr. Stoddard obſerves, That common Aﬀettions are ſomeri ie. 
5 Guide to Chriſt, p. 21. 


T 2 . 1 * * 4 POE Pn i bk. JETS ES a * Fl * 1 . N 1 
, a - * _ 

1 , * 4 8 % © s © : 

— « 2 LJ" "TTY. 0 1 Mg , 

Fo bat are #0 S PART 


\ 


f 


fore; ſuch is our Nature, and fuch are the Laws of 
Union of Soul and Body, that the Mind can Rave 50 
lively or vigorous Exerciſe, without ſome Effect upon 
the Body. So ſubject 1 is the Body to che Mind, aud ſo 
much do its Fluids, eſpecially the animal Spirits rits, Attend 
the Motiohs d Exerciſes of the Mind, chat chere cart 
be'To much bs intenſe hou t, without an Effet 
upon them. Tea, tis queſtionable, whether an embd. 
ved Soul ever ſo 55 as thinks one Thought, or haz 
any Exerciſe At ell, but that there is ſome e 
Motion or Alteration of Moien, in, fotne Detree,. af 
the/Fhoids,' in 'forne Part of the Body.” 1205 univerſal 
Experience ſhews, that The Exerciſe of the Affection, 
have in a fpecial Manger, A Tendency, to ſothe ſenſible 
Effect upon the Body. And if t 11s be ſo, that all 


| Aﬀe&ions' have bine Effect on the Body, we may 
then well ſuppoſe, the gteater thoſe Affegctions be, and 
the more vigorous their Exerciſe (other Circumltance 


being, equal) the greater will be the Effect on the Bod 

Hence it is not * ered at, that ve great hd 
ſtrong Exęrciſes of the Aﬀedion, ſhould have rea 
Effects on che Body. And therefore, ſeting there are 


very great Affectſons, both common and” ſpiritual; 
* hence it is not to be wonde) red at, that rear, E fects on 


the Body, ſhould ariſe from both theſe inds of Aﬀec. 
tions. And conſequently theſe Effects are no Sign 
"that the Aﬀections rhey. ariſe from, are of one Kind 0 
the other. 

Great Effects on the Body certainly are no FR Evi- 
dences that Affections are ſpiritual; for we ee that ſuch 
Effects oftentimes ariſe. from great Affections about 
temporal Things, and when Religion is no con- 
cerned in them. And if great Affections abo choke 
Things, that are purely, — may have theſe Ef- 
fects, Ik now not by what Rule we ſhould detertifife, 
that high Aﬀections about religious Things, which ariſe 
in like Manner from Nature, can't have the like Effect, 


| : . Er BATS 
8 as Nor 
. 
: * 


r << Hl CA << --. 


— 


pos + by 


- © wt w-< x 


N _ » N Ferm 


pakr II. ft diflineuiſh " Aﬀettions. - 51 
Nor bm the other Hand, do I know of any Rule. any 
dave to determine, that gracious and holy Affections, 
when raiſed as high as any natural Affections, andi have 
equally ſtrong and vigorous Exerciſes, can't have a great 
Effect on the Body. No ſuch Rule can be drawn from 
Reaſon: I know of no Reaſon, why a being affected 
with 2 View of God's Glory ſhould not Nan Body 
eo faint, as, well as a being affected with a View. of 
$:lombn's* Glory. And no ſuch Rule has as yet been 
produced from the Scripture; None has ever been found 
n all the late Controverſjes , which have been) abour 
Things of this Nature. There is a great, Power in If 
rial A ffectlons; we read of che Pow er rhich nh | 
in Chriſtians, * and of the Spirit of God being in them, 
as the Spirit of Power, Fand of the effectuaſ yorking 
cr his Poet in chem, Tres of the working of God's 
mighty Power in them. L, But Man's Nature is weak; 
Freſh and'Bl6od are repreſented in Scripture as exggech 
weak; and particulafiy with Reſped e Le 
for great. ſpiritual” and heajenly / Operations and Exer- 
cifes, Mal, xxvi. 41. .1 Cor. xv. 43; & 50, The Text © 
ve are -upoti ſpeaks, of, 7ay z/peakable, and full of - | 
Gly." Ahd who: that conſiders; what Man's Nature is, 
and what the Nature of the Aﬀettions are, can reaſon- 
aby AbuÞr,"bue that ſuch unutterable and, glorious. Jays 
jay be too great and mighty for weak Putt and Aſhes; 
lo as to he conſiderably oyerbearing: ta it? It is evident 
y.the 0 ture, t WEE. Ly LM 26 or Ideas. 
Goc Glety, when given in a great Degree, have a 
endeney, by affecting the Mind, to overbear the 
I becauſe, the 8 ripture. teaches us often, that if 
thi Takkus of Views ſhould: be given to ſuch a De | 
as they are given in Heaven, the weak Frame of the 
body. could not ſubſiſt under it, and that no Man can, 
in Mat Manner, ſee God and live. The Knowledge 
which the Saints have of God's Beauty and Glory in; « 
ths World, and thoſe holy Affections that ariſe. from 
| 8 1 


— | * 
„ 


FSS 5 S8. 


or 


. ES. 


45 
wo 


7 -V* > 3-2-2 . 


— 


It 


EST - 


— IO 2 2 1 
g Eph. ii. 7. + 2 Tim. i. 7. f Ibid. v. 7. Ibid. v. 19. | Eph. i. 19. 


1 


— 


32 Wat are mw Sign! Parr, I 


for Fear of thee. 


» 
* 


it, are of the ſame Nature and Kind with what the 


7 Saints are the Subjects of in Heaven, differing only i 


Degree and Circumſtances: What God gives them here, 
A Foretaſte of heavenly Happineſs, and an Earneſt d 
their future Inheritance. And who ſhall limit God in 
his giving this Earneſt, or ſay he ſhall give ſo much d 
the Inheritance, ſuch a Part of the future Reward, a 
an Earneſt of the Whole, and no more? And ſeeing 


Bod has taught us in his Word, that the whdle Reward i 
ſuch, that it would at once deſtroy the Body, is it not 


too bold a Thing for us, ſo to ſet Bounds to the ſove. 
Teign God, as to ſay, that in giving the Earneſt of thi 
Reward in this World, he ſhall never give ſo much. of 
it, as in the leaſt to diminiſh the Strength of the Body, 
when God has no where thus limited himſelf? | - ... 
The Pfalmiſt ſpeaking of vehement 8 655 Aﬀec: 
tions he had, ſpeaks of an Effect in his Fleſh or Body, 
beſides what was in his Soul, cxpreſly diſtinguiſhing one 
from the © other, once and again, Pal. lxxxiy, 2. A 
Soul longeth, yea eden fainteth for the Courts of the Lord, 
my Heart and my Fleſh -crieth out fer the. living God, 
Here is a plain Diſtinction between the Heart and the 
Flefh, as being each affected. So Pſal. Ixiii. 1. My Soul 


thirfteth thee, my Fleſh Jongeth for thee, in 4 &y 
and thirſty Land, where no Water is. Here alſq is an 
evident defigned Diſtinction between the Soul ang the 
Fleſh. © | | a 


The Prophet Habakkuk ſpeaks of his Body's beir 
over: born, by a Senſe of the Majeſty of God, Hab i 


16. When I beard, my Belly trembled, my Lips quivered 


at the Voice, Rottenneſs entered into, my Bones, and | 
trembled in "myſelf. So the Pſalmiſt ſpeaks expreſly of 
his Fleſh trembling, Pſal. cxix. 120. My Fleſh trembleth 


That ſuch Ideas of God's Glory, as are ſometilip 
given in this World, have a Tendency to overbeat the 
Body, is evident, becauſe the Scripture gives us at 


Account, that this has ſometimes actually been the Ef. 


Fe 


* 


= 


Parr I. to diſtinguiſh Affeclions. 83 
weg fecr of thoſe external Manifeſtations God has made of 
Ju bimſelf, to ſome of the Saints, which were made ib that 
ere End, viz. to give them an Idea of God's Majeſty and 
da Glory. Such Inſtances we have in the Prophet Daniel, 
du and the Apoſtle Jobn. Daniel giving an Account of 
1 O81 external Repreſentation of the Glory of Chriſt, ſays, 
Dan. x. 8. And there remained no Strength in me, for my 
g Comelineſs was turned into Corruption, and I retained no 
Strength. And the Apoſtle John giving an Acebunt of 
ni x like Mnifeſtation made to him, ſays, Rev. i. 17. 
And when I ſaw bim, I fell at his Feet as dead. Tis in 
ns BY vain to ſay here, theſe were only external Manifeſtatipns 
or Symbols of the Glory of Chriſt, which theſe Saints 
% beheld: For though it be true, that they were outward 
Repreſentations of Chriſt's Glory, which they beheld 
with their bodily Eyes; yet the End and Uſe of theſe 
external Symbols or Repreſentations, was to give to 
theſe Prophets an Idea of the Thing repreſented, and 
that was the true divine Glory and Majeſty of Chriſt, 
which is his ſpiritual Glory; they were made Uſe of only 
as Significations of this ſpiritual Glory, and thus un- 


and were affected by them. According to thb End, 
for which God intended thefe outward Signs, they receĩ- 
ved by them a great and lively Apprehenſion of the 
real Glory and Majeſty of God's Nature, which they 
were Signs of; and thus were greatly affected, their 
Souls ſwallowed up, and their Bodies overborn. And 
I think, they are very bold and daring, who will ſay - 
God cannot, or ſhall not give the like clear and affecting 
Ideas and Appre henſions of the ſame real Glory and 
Majeſty of his Nature, to none of his Saints, without 
the Intervention of any ſuch external Shadows of it. 


Before I leave this Head, I would farther obſerve, 
that tis plain the Scripture often makes Uſe of bodily 
&iets, to expreſs the Strength of holy and ſpiritual 


SS SSB SC ELN NSS S8 


NP 


2 


doubtedly they received them, and improved them, 5 


* rr f 


54 What are * CEN N ene 4 


— I Degree of Affection; yet I hope ul wil 
allow, that they are fit and ſuitable 5 igures to repreſent 
the high ard of thoſe ſpiritual Affections, which 
the Spirit of God makes Uſe of them to repreſent 
Which I don't ſee how they would be, if thoſe ſpiritul 
Affections, let them be in never ſo high a Degree, hay: 


no Tendency to any ſuch Things; but that on the con- 


trary, they are the proper Effects, and ſad Tokens af 
falſe. Affections, and the Deluſion of the Devil. I cant 
think, God would commonly make Uſe. of Things 
wth are very alien from ſpiritual Affections, and are 
ſhrewd Marks of the Hand of Satan, and ſmell ſtrong 
of the bottomleſs Pit, as beautiful Figures, to repre- 
ben the high, Degree of holy and heavenly Aﬀections. | 


| III. *Tis no Sipn that- Affections are truly gracious 
Affections, or that they are not, that they cauſe thoſe 
who have them, to be fluent, fervent and abundant, in 


; "talking of the Things of Religion. 


There are many Perſons, who if they & this in others 
are greatly prejudiced againſt them. Their being fo 
full of Talk, is with them, a ſufficient Ground to con- 
demn them, as Phariſees, and oſtentatious Hypocrites. 
On the other Hand, there, are many, who if they ſee 
this Effect in any, are very ignorantly and imprudently 
forward, at once. to determine chat they are the true 
Children of God, and are under the faving Influences 
of his Spirit, and ſpeak of it as a great Evidence of a 
new Creature: They ſay fuch an one's Mouth is now 
pen d: He uſed to be flow ta ſpeat; but now be is ful 
and free: He is free now to open his Heart, and tell bis 
Experiences * declare you 1 4 Gad, it rumes 

3 fon 


4 * yy ] 
8 | 


* ar exix. 120. Exra is. « 4. Ila. Ixvi. 2, 6 1 ii. 16. +Rom. 
"viii. 26. Cant. ii. 5. and v. 8. § Pſal. — 2. || Pfal xxxviil. 
10. and xlii. 1. and cxix, 131. J Pſal. lxxxiv. 2. and cxix. 81. 


+ $5 Fx 


uy — OO — — me py — By 


n By - oe e , <Q tus ms wb 4 _ I, kk — I tw 88 X& 


RT. II. to diſtinguiſh Afﬀettions. 35 


Him, as Free as Mater from | a Fountain, and the 
— And eſpecially are they captivated into a confident 
and undoubted Perſwaſion chat they are ſavingly wrought 
oon, if they are not only free and abundant, * very 
| Fectionate and earneſt in their Talk. 
But this is the Fruit of hut little judgment, a ſonqy 
d ſhort Experience; as Events do abundantly-ſhew.z 
— is a Miſtake Perſons. often can run into, throuę 
their truſting to their own Wiſdom and Diſcerning, and 
making their on Notions their Rule, inſtead of the 
holy Scripture. Tho? the Scripture be full of Rules, 
boch how we ſhould judge of our own State, and alſo 
how we ſhould be conducted in our Opinion of others; 
yet we have no where any Rule, by which to judge our- 
ng Llxes or others to be in a good Eſtate from any ſuch 
Effect: For this is but the Religion of the Mouth and 
of the Tongue, and what is in the Scripture repreſented 
by the Leaves of a Tree, which tho' the Tree ought 
not to be without them, yet are no where given as an 
e Eeidence of the Goodneſs of the Tree. 

That Perſons are diſpoſed to be abundant in — 
of Things of Religion, may be from a good Cauſe, 
and it may be from a bad one. It may be becauſe their 
Hearts are very full of holy Affections; for out of the 
\. Vundance of the Heart, tbe Mouth ſpeaketh: And it may 
be becauſe Perſons Hearts are very full of religious 
Affection which is not holy; for ſtill out of the Abun- 
dance of the Heart the Mouth ſpeaketh. It is very. 
much the Nature of the Affections, of whatever Kind 
they be, and whatever Objects they are exerciſed about. 
if they are ſtrong, to diſpoſe. Perſons to be very much 
in ſpeaking of that which they are affected with; and 
not only to ſpeak much, but to ſpeak very carneſtly and 
ferrentiy. And therefore Perſons _ abundantly 
and very fervently about the Things of Religion, can 
be an Evidence of no more than this, that they are very 
much affected with the Things of Religion; but this 
may _ (6 has. been already ſhewn) and * be no 

race. 


(= 


» © THREE 


56 Mat are no Signs PART H 
Grace. That which Men are greatly affected with 
while the high Affection laſts, they will be earneſtly 
engaged about, and will be likely to ſhew that Earneſtnej 
in their Talk and Behaviour; as the greater Part of the 
Jews, in all Judea and Galilee, did for a while, about 
Jobn the. Baptiſt's Preaching and Baptiſm, when they 
were willing for a Seaſon to rejoice in his Light: A 
mighty ado was made all over the Land, and among all 
Sorts of Perfons, about this great Propher and-his Mi- 
niſtry. And ſo the Multitude in like Manner, often 
manifeſted a great Earneſtneſs, and mighty Engagedneſ 
of Spirit, in every Thing that was external, about 
Chriſt and his Preaching and Miracles, being aſtoniſhed 
at bis Dofirine, anon with Joy receiving the Word, fol- 
lowing him, ſometimes Night and Day, leaving Meat, 
Drink and Sleep to hear him; once following him into 
the Wilderneſs, faſting three Days going, to hear him; 
ſometimes crying him up to the Clouds, ſaying, Never 
Mean ſpake like this Man! being fervent and earneſt in 
what they ſaid. But what did theſe Things come to, in 

the greater Part of them? „en fs big 
A Perſon may be over- full of Talk, of his own Ex- 

riences; commonly falling upon it every where, and 
in all Companies; and when it is ſo, it is rather a dark 
Sign than a good One. As a Tree that is over full of 
Leaves, ſeldom bears much Fruit: _ as Cloud, 
tho' to Appearance very pregnant and full of Water, 
if it brings with it over — Wind, ſeldom affords 
much Rain to the dry and thirſty Earth: Which very 
Thing the holy Spirit is pleaſed ſeveral Times to make 
Uſe of, to repreſent a great Shew of Religion with the 
Mouth, without anſwerable Fruit in the Life: Prov. 
xxV. 14. Ibo ſo baaſteth himſelf of a falſe Gift, is like 
Clouds and Wind without Rain. And the Apoſtle Jude. 
ſpeaking of ſ6me in the primitive Times, that. crept in 
unawares among the Saints, and having a great Shew of 

— were for a While not ſuſpected, Theſe are 
| Clouds (ſays he) without Water, carried about of Laws 

Fe | Tuds 


PART II. to diſtinguiſh Affections. 56 
Jude v. 4 and 12. And the Apoſtle Peter, ſpeaking of 
the ſame, ſays, 2 Pet. ii. 17. Theſe are Clouds without 
Water, carried with a Tempeſt. 

Falſe Aﬀections, if they are equally ſtrong, are much 
more forward to declare themſel / es, than true. Becauſe 
tis the Nature of falſe Religion, to affect Shew and 
Obſervation; as it was with the Phariſees.“ 


IV. *Tisno Sign that Affections are gracious, or that 
they are otherwiſe, that Perſons did not make em 
themſelves, or excite them of their of their own Con- 
trivance, and by their own Strength. | 
There are many in theſe Days, that condemn all Affec- 
tions which are excited in a Way that the Subjects of 
of them can give no Account of, as not ſec ming to 
be the Fruit of any of their own Endeavours, or the 
natural Conſequence of the Faculties and Principles of 
human Nature, in ſuch Circumſtances, and under ſuch 


Means; but to be from the Influence of ſome extrinſick 
and 


* That famous experimental Divine Mr. Shephard, ſays, A 
« Phariſee's Trumpet ſhall be heard to the Town's End ; when Sim- 
« plicity walks thro? the Town unſeen. Hence a Man will ſometimes 
* covertly commend himſelf (and e ever comes in) and tells you 
« along Story of Converſion: And an hundred to one if ſome Lie 
or other {lip not out with it. Why the ſecret meaning is, I pray 
« admire me. Hence complain of Wants and Weakneſſes ; pray 
« think what a broken-hearted Chriſtian I am.” Parab. of the ten 
Virgins, Part I. Page 179, 180. 

And holy Mr. Flavel ſays thus, O Reader, if thy Heart were 
« right with God, and thou didſt not cheat thyſelf with a vain Pro- 
« fefſion, thou woul'ſt have frequent Buſineſs with God, which thou 
„ would'ſt be loth thy deareſt Friend, or the Wife of thy Boſom, 
« ſhould be privy to. Non eft Religio, ubi omnia patent. Religion 
« doth not lie open to all, to the Eyes of Men. Obſerved Dunes 
maintain our Credit; but ſecret Duties maintain our Life. It was 
the ſaying of a Heathen, about his ſecret Correſpondency with his 
„Friend, What need the World be acquainted with it * Thou and 1 
« are Theatre enough to cach other. There are encloſed Pleaſures in 
„Religion, which none but renewed ſpiritual Souls do feelingly 
* vaderſtand.” Flavel's Touch-ſtone of Sincerity, Chap. IL. Sec. 2. 

4 E n . 


— x 4 * * A e . —_ * * * 2 pa _ * _—_ N . * of 8 4 . " py C f . N * N — wy a 4 a 
_ * 4 a * BY : £ as | = : * 
-* . - - 
, — 
** = FA 
| — 9 are no Sigut ART 
* a n 2 7 . 
< n * 
* 
n — 


and ſupernatural Power upon their Minds. How greatly 
has the Doctrine of the inward Experience or ſenſible 
| Perceiving of the immediate Power and Operation of 
the Spirit of God, been reproach'd and ndicuPd by 
many of late, They ſay the Manner of the Spirit of 
, God, is to co-operate in a ſilent, ſecret and undiſcern- 
able Way, with the Uſe of Means, and our own Endea- 
yours; ſo that there is no diſtinguiſhing by Senſe, be- 
tween the Influences of the Spirit of God, and the 
natural Qperations of the Faculties of our own Minds. 
And it is true, that for any to expect to receive the 
ſaving Influences of the Spirit of God, while they neg- 
te& a diligent Improvement of the appointed Means of 
Grace, is unreaſonable Preſumption. And to me 
that the Spirit of God will ſavingly operate upon their 
Minds, without the Spirits making Uſe of Means, as 
ſubſervient to the Effect, is enthuſtaitical. Tis alſo 
undoubtedly true, that the Spirit of God is very various 
in the Manner and Circumſtances of his Operations, 
and that ſometimes he operates in a Way more ſecret 
and gradual, and from ſmaller Beginnings, than at 
others. | | 
But if there be indeed a Power, entirely different from 
” and beyond our Power, or the Power of all Means and 
Inſtruments, and above the Power of Nature, which B 
requiſite in order to the Production of ſaving Grace in 
the Heart, according to the general Profeſſion of the 
Country : Then certainly, it 1s in no wiſe unreaſonable 
+ to ſuppoſe, that this Effect ſhould very frequently be 
Produced after ſuch a Manner, as to make it very mani- 
feſt, apparent, and ſenſible that it is ſo. If Grace be 
indeed owing to the powerful and efficacious Operation 
of an extrinſiek Agent, or divine Efficient out of our- 
' felves, why is it unreaſonable to ſuppoſe, it ſhould ſeem 
to be ſo to them who are the Subjects of it? Is it a 
ſtrange Thing, that it ſhould ſeem to be as it is ? When 
| Grace in the Heart, indeed is not produced by our 
Strength, nor is the Effect of the natural Power of ous 
9 8 on 


* 
. 
** 


Oe A —— a wy  ww=w Dar MP PR . nos at a mics, ens % a, 282 


he 


als * FE — — 90 a Mc. 1 TP 3 TP | 


ParT II. to diſlinguiſh Affection: 59 
own Faculties, or any Means or Inſtruments, but is 
properly the Workmanſhip and Production of the Spirit 
of the Almighty, is it a and unaccountable 
Thing, that it ſhould ſeem to them who are Subjects of 

eeable to Truth, and not right contrary to Truth; - 

2 if Perſons tell of Effects Shes they are conſcious : 

to in their own Minds, that ſeems to them not to be | 
from the natural Power or Operation of their Minds, - 


but from the ſupernatural Power of ſome other Agent, 


it ſhould at once be looked upon as a ſure Evidence, of 
their being under a Deluſion, becauſe Things ſeem to 
them to be as they are? For this is the Objection which 
is made: Tis look'd upon as a clear Evidence that the 
Apprehenſions and Affections that many Perſons have, 
are not really from ſuch a Cauſe, becauſe they ſeem to 
them to be from that Cauſe: They declare that what 
they are conſcious of ſeems to them evidently not to be 
from themſelves, but from the mighty Power of the Spi- 
rit of God; and others from hence condemn them, and 


determine what they experience is not from the Spirit of ö 


God, but from themſelves, or from the Devil. Thus 


unreaſonably are Multitudes treated at this Day, yy their 


Neighbours. ; 

If it be indeed fo, as the Scripture abundantly r f 
that Grace in the Soul is ſo the Effect of God s Power, 
that it is fitly compared to thoſe Effects, which are 
fartheſt from being owing to any Strength in the Subject, 


ſuch as a Generation, or a being begotten, and Reſurrefion, ; } 


or @ being raiſed from the Dead, and Creation, or a bei 
brought out of nothing into Being, and that it is an E 
d the mighty Power of God is greatly glorified, 
and the exceeding Greatneſs of his Power is manifeſted ;® 
then what Account can be given of it, that the Almighty, 
in ſo great a Work of his Power, ſhould fo careful 
hide his Power, that the Subjects of it ſhould be able to 
diſcern nothing of it? Or what Reaſon or have 
R have 


— CY 


Erh. . 17, 785 19, 20. 


60 What are n Signs © PARr. II. 
have any to determine that he does ſo? If we may judge 
by the Scripture, this is not agreeable to God's Manner, 
in his Operations and Diſpenſations; but on the con- 
trary, tis God's Manner, in the great Works of his 
Power and Mercy, which he works for his People, to 
order Things ſo, as to make his Hand viſible, and his 
Power conſpicuous, and Men's Dependance on him 
moſt evident, that no Fleſh ſhould glory in his Preſence, l 
that God alone might be exalted, f and that the Excel- © 
lency of the Power might be of God and not of Man, 
and that Chriſt's Power might be manifeſted in our 
Weakneſs,h and none might ſay, mine own Hand hath e 
ſaved me.] So it was in moſt of thoſe temporal Salva- WW ( 
tions which God wrought for Jrael of old, which were 
Types of the Salvation of God's People from their ſpi- ! 
ritual Enemies. So it was in the Redemption of 1/rael, Il 7 
from their Egyptian Bondage; he redeem'd them with a il { 
ſtrong Hand, and an outſtretched Arm; and that his Wh ! 
| 
{ 
I 
t 
i 
f 
1 


c—= OO ©@ -—= © il yy 7 


Power might be the more conſpicuous, he ſuffer'd 1/rae! 
"firſt to be brought inte the moſt helpleſs and forlorn 
- Circumſtances. So it was in the great Redemption by 
Gideon; God would have his Army diminiſhed - to a 
Handful, and they without any other Arms than Trum- 
pets, and Lamps, and earthen Pitchers. So it was in 
the Deliverance of 1/rae! from Gohath, by a Stripling, 
with a Sling and a Stone. So it was in that great Work 
of God, his calling the Gentiles, and converting the 
' heathen World, after Chriſt's Aſcenſion; after that the ] 
World by Wiſdom knew not God, and all the Endea- Ml ! 
vours of Philoſophers had proved in vain, for many 
Ages, to reform the World, and it was by every Thing, 
become abundantly evident that the World was utterly Ill © 
helpleſs, by any Thing elſe, but the mighty Power of 
God. And ſo it was in moſt of the Converſions of 
particular Perſons, we have an Account of in the 


9 


SN La: Cor. i. 27, 28, 29. f Iſai. ii. 11.—17. 1 2 Cor. ir. (7 
2 Cor, X11, 9. [| Judg. vii. 2. [ 7 4 | a F 
. * T # 
* «. 1 


re ma I 


aur l. to diflinguiſh {fedtions. © 6 


on in that ſilent, ſecret, gradual and inſenſible Manner, 
which is now inſiſted on; but with thoſe manifeſt Eviden- 
ces of a ſugernatural Power, wonderfully and ſuddenly | 
cauſing a great Change, which in theſe Days are looked 
upon as certain Signs of Deluſion and Enthuſiaſm. - _ 
The Apoſtle, in Eph. 1. 18, 19, ſpeaks of God's en- 
lightning the Minds of Chriſtians, and fo bringing them 
to believe in Chriſt, to the End, that they might knowthe 
exceeding Greatneſs of his Power to them who believe. 

The Words are, The Eyes of your Underſtanding being 
enlightned, that ye may know what is the Hope of bis 
Calling, and what the Rithes of the Glory of his Inheri- 
tance in the Saints, and what is the exceeding Greatneſs of 
his Power to us-ward, who believe, according to the Work- 
ing of his mighty Power, &c. Now when the Apoſtle 
ſpeaks of their being thus the Subjects of his Power, 
in their enlightning and effectual Calling, to the End 
that they might know - what his mighty Power was to 
them who believe, he can męan nothing elſe, than that 
they might know by Experience. But if the Saints know 
this Power by Experience, then they feel it, and diſcern” 
it, and are conſcious of it; as ſenſibly diſtinguiſhable 
from the natural Operations of their own Minds, Which 
is not agreeable to a Notion of God's operating fo 
ſecretly, and undiſcernably, that it can't be known that. 
they are the Subjects of the Influence of any extrinſick 
Power at all, any otherwiſe than as they may argue it 
from Scripture Afertiongz which is a different Thing 
from knowing it by Experience. AA 

So that it is very unreaſonable and unſcriptural, to 

determine that Affections are not from the gracious Ope- 
rations of God's Spirit, becauſe they are ſenſihly not from 
the Perſons themſelves, that are the Subjects of them. 
On the other Hand, it is no Evidence that Affections 
are gracious, that they are not purpoſely produced by 
thoſe who are the Subjects of them, or that they ariſe 
in their Minds in a Manner they can't account for- 


There 


Y 


Poper of Satan may be as immediate, and as evident in 
falſe Comforts and Joys, as in Terrors and horrid Sug- 


62 Wat are mo Signs  Paxry. II. 


IT There are ſome who make this an Argument in their 

own Favour, when ſpeaking of what they have expe. 
rienced, they ſay, I am fure I did not make it my. 
< ſelf: It was a Fruit of no Contrivance or, Endeavour 
of mine; it came when I thought nothing of it; if I 

© might have the World for it, I can't make it 

© when 1 pleaſe.” And hence they determine, that what 
they have experienced, muſt be from the mighty In- 
fluence of the Spirit of God, and is of a ſaving Nature; 
but very ignorantly, and without Grounds. What they 
have been the Subjects of, may indeed, not be from 
themſelves directly, but may be from the Operation of 
an inviſible Agent, ſome Spirit beſides their own: But 
it does not thence follow, that it was from the Spirit of 
God. There are other Spirits who have Influence on 
the Minds of Men, beſides the Holy Ghoſt. We are 
directed not to believe every Spirit, out to try the Spi- 
rits, whether they be of God. There are many falſe 
Spirits, exceeding buſy with Men, who often —— 
themſelves into Angels of Light, and do in many won- 
derful Ways, with great Subtilty and Power, mimick 
the Operations of the Spirit of God. And there are 
many of Satan's Operations, which are very diſtin- 

ble from the voluntary Exerciſes of Men's own 
inds. They are ſo, in thoſe dreadful and horrid Sug- 
s, and blaſphemous Injections with which he fol- 
many Perſons; and in vain and fruitleſs Frights 
and Terrors, which he is the Author of. And the 


geſtions; and oftentimes is ſo in Fact. Tis not in Men's 
. Power to put themſelves into ſuch Raptures, as the 
Hnabaptifſts in Germany, and many other raving Enthu- 
fiaſts like them, have been the Subjects of. 


be of their own prod nor from an evil Spirit, 
but From the Spill of Gel, and yer noe be from an 
ſaving, 


And beſides, it is to be conſidered, that Perſons may 
have thoſe Impreſſions on their Minds, which may not 


2 
Ir 


— 


3 2 . ry "I. P77, —_7, we = . = 


Parr; II. to difinguiſh AﬀeFions, 
faving, but a common Influence of the Spirit of God: 


And the Subjects of ſuch Im 2 may be of the 
Number of thoſe we read Heb. vi. 4, 5. That are 


once enlightened, and taſte of the beavenly Gift, and are 


made Partakers of the Holy Ghoſt, and taſte the good 
Word of God, and the Power of the World to come; and 
yet may be wholly unacquainted with thoſe better Things 
that accompany Salvation, {poken of ver. . | 
And where neither a good nor evil Spirit have any 
immediate Hand, Perſons, eſpecially ſuch as are of a 
weak and vapoury Habit of Body, and the Brain weak, 
and eaſily ſuſceptive of Impreſſions, may have ſtrange 
«Apprehenſions and Imaginations, and ſtrong Affections 
attending them, unaccountably ariſing, which are not 
voluntarily produced by — Ve ſee that ſuch 
Perſons are liable to ſuch Impreſſions, about temporal 
Things; and there is equal Reaſon, why they ſhould. 
about ſpiritual Things. As a Perſon who is aſl oy 
Dreams, that he is not the voluntary Aythor of; 
ſuch Perſons, in like Manner, * the Suhjects af] —— 
luntary Impreſſions, when they are awake. 


V. *Tis no Sign that religious Affections are truly holy 
and ſpiritual, or that they are not, that they come with 
Texts of Scripture, remarkably brought to the Mind. 

Tis no Sign that Affections are not gracious, that 
they are occaſioned by Scriptures ſo coming to Mind 
provided it be the Scripture itſelf, or the Truth which 
the Scripture ſo brought contains and teaches, that is, the 
Foundation of the Affection, and not merely or mainly the * 
ſudden and unuſual Manner of it's coming to the Mind. 

But on the other Hand, neither is it any Sign that 
Affections are gracious, that they ariſe on Occaſion of © 


Scriptures brought ſuddenly and wonderfully to the 
Mind; whether thoſe Affections be Fear, or = key Joy, 


or Sorrow, or any other. Some ſeem to look upon this, 
a good Evidence that their Affections are ſaving; 
eſpecially be the Affections excited are Hope or Joys 


1 


5 ? * . 
3 


or any other which are pleaſing and delightful. They 
will mention it as an Evidence that all is right, 
that their Experience came with the Word, and 
will ſay, There were ſuch and ſuch ſweet Promiſes 
brought to my Mind: They came ſuddenly, as if 
they were ſpoke to me: I had no Hand in bringing 
e ſuch a Text to my own Mind: I was not thinking of 
6c any Thing leading to it; it came all at once, fo that 
« I was ſurpriſed. I had not thought of it a long Time 
© before; I did not know at firſt that it was Seripture 
I did not remember that ever I had read it.” And it 
may be, they will add, One Scripture came flowing in 
« after another, and ſo Texts all over the Bible, the 
& moſt ſweet and pleaſant, and the moſt apt and ſuita- 
& ble, which could be deviſed; and filled me full as 
I could hold: I could not but ſtand and admire: 
The Tears flow'd; I was full of Joy, and could not 
„doubt any longer.” And thus, they think they have 
undoubted Evidence, that their Aﬀections muſt be from 
God, and of the right Kind, and their State good: But 
without any Manner of Grounds How come they by 
any ſuch Rule, as that if any Aﬀections or Experiences 
ariſe with Promiſes, and comfortable Texts of Scri 


ture, unnaccountably brought to Mind, without their 


Kecollection, or if a great Number of ſweet Texts fol. 
low one another in a Chain, that this is a certain Evidence 
their Experiences are ſaving? Where is any ſuch Rule 
to be found in the Bible, the ou and only ſure 3 
tory in Things of this Nature: 

What deceives many of the leſs underſtanding — 
conſiderate Sort of People, in this Matter, ſeems to be 
this; That the Scripture is the Word of God, and has 

n in it which is wrong, but is pure and perfect: 

And therefore, thoſe Experiences which come from the 
Scripture muſt be right. But then it ſhould be conſi- 
gdered, Affections may ariſe on occaſion of the Scripture, 
and not properly come from the Scripture, as the 
nuine Fruit of the Scripture, and by a right Uſe of it; 

but 


64 : What are no Signs Par I. 


pakr. II. to diſtinguiſh Apections. 6 
but from an Abuſe of it. All that can be argued from N 
the Purity and Perfection of the Word of God, with 
Reſpect to Experiences, is this, that thoſe Experiences 
which are agreeable to the Word of God, are right, and 
can't be otherwiſe; and not that thoie Aﬀections muſt 
be right, which ariſe oz Occaſion of the Word of God 
coming to the Mind. | Tos 

What Evidence is there that the Devil can't bring 
Texts of Scripture to the Mind, and miſapply them, 
to deceive Ferſons? There ſeems to be nothing in this 
which exceeds the Power of Satan. *Tis no Work of 
fach mighty Power, to bring Sounds or Letters to Per- 
ſons Minds, that we have any Reaſon to ſuppoſe 
nothing ſhort of Omnipotence can be ſufficient for it. 
If Satan has Power to bring any Words or Sounds at all 
to Perſons Minds, he may have Power to bring Words 
contained in the Bible, There 1s no higher Sort of Power 
required in Men, to make the Sounds which expreſs the 
Words of a Text of Scripture, than to make the Sounds 
which expreſs the Words of an idle Story or Song. And fo 
the ſame Power in Satan, which is ſufficient to renew one of 
thoſe Kinds of Sounds in the Mind, 1s ſufficient to renew - 
the other: The different Signification, which depends 
wholly on Cuſtom, alters not the Caſe, as to Ability to 
make or revive the Sounds or Letters. Or will any 
ſuppoſe, that Texts of Scripture are ſuch ſacred Things, 
that the Devil durſt not abuſe them, nor touch them 
In this alſo they are miſtaken. He who was bold enough | 
to lay hold on Chrift himſelf, and carry him hither and 
thither, into the Wilderneſs, and into an high Moun- 
tain, and to a Pinnacle of the Temple, is not afraid to 
touch the Scripture, and abuſe that for his own Pu 
ſes: As he ſhew'd at the ſame Time that he was fo bold 
with Chriſt, he then brought one Scripture and another, 
to deceive and tempt him. And if Satan did prefume, 
and was permitted, to put Chriſt himſelf in Mind of < 
Texts of Scripture to tempt Him, what Reaſon have 


we to determine, that he dare not, or will not be per- 
| | mitted 


mitted, to put wicked Men in Mind of Texts of Scrip- 
ture, to tempt and deceive them? And if Satan may 
thus abuſe one Text of Scripture, ſo he may another, 
Ir's being a very excellent Place of Scripture, a comfort- 
able and precious Promiſe, alters not the Caſe, as to 
tis Courageor Ability. And if he can bring one com. 
fortable Text to the Mind, ſo he may a Thouſand; and 
may chooſe out fuch Scriptures as tend moſt to ferve 
his Purpoſe; and may heap up Scripture Promiſes, ten- 
ding, according to the perverſe Application he makes of 
them, wonderfully to remove the riſing Doubts, and to 
a 2 the falſe Joy and Confidence of a poor deluded 
inner. 
We know the Devil's Inſtruments, corrupt and here. 
tical Teachers, can and do pervert the Scripture, to 
their own and others Damnation; 2 Pet. iii. 16. We ſee 
they have the free Uſe of Scripture, in every Part of it: 
There is no Text ſo precious and ſacred, but they are 
permitted to abuſe it, to the eternal Ruin of Multitudes 
of Souls: And there are no Weapons they make Uſe of 
with which they do more Execution. And there is no 
Manner of Reaſon to determine, that the Devil is not 
permitted thus to uſe the'Scripture, as well as his Inſtru- 
ments, For when the latter do it, they do it as his 
Inſtruments and Servants, and through his Inſtigation 
and Influence: And doubtleſs he does the ſame he inſti- 
gates others to do: The Devil's Servants do but follow 
their Maſter, and do the ſame Work that he does 
himſelf. | | 
And as the Devil can abuſe the Scripture, to deceive 
and deſtroy Men, ſo may Men's own Folly and Corrup- 
tions, as well. The Sin which is in Men, acts like it's 


Father. Men's own Hearts are deceitful like the Devil, 


and uſe the ſame Means to deceive, _ 
So that *tis evident, that Perſons may have high Af- 


fections of Hope and Joy, ariſing on Occaſion of Texts 


of Scripture, yea precious Promiſes of Scripture coming 
ſuddenly and remarkably to their Minds, as though they 


. 


. 


66 © What are mo Signs PART. ILL WP 


&n DB wo 


——— . oc Va wa md a> aim 'wwau © hw &@ > =2 


RO . 7 8 7 co fr 5 


PRRT II. to diſtinguiſh Affection 67 
were ſpoke to them, yea a great Multitude of ſuch 
Texts, following one another in a wonderful Manner, 
and yet all this be no Argument that theſe Affections are 
divine, or that they are any other than the Effects of 
datan's Deluſions. : 

And I would further obſerve, that Perſons may have 
raiſed and joyful Affections, which may come with 
the Word of God, and not only fo, but from the Word, 
and thoſe Affections not be from Satan, nor yet pro- 

rly from the Corruptions of their own Hearts, but 
from ſome Influence of the Spirit of God with the Word, 
and yet have nothing of the Nature of true and ſaving 
Religion in them. Thus the ſtony Ground Hearers had 
great Joy from the Word; yea, which is repreſented as 
ariſing from the Word, as Growth from a Sced; and 
their Affections had, in their Appearance, a very great 
and exact Reſemblance with thoſe repreſented by the 
Growth on the good Ground, the Difference not 
appearing, till it was diſcovered by the Conſequences, 
in a Time of Trial: And yet there was no ſaving Reli- 
gion in theſe Affections.“ 


VI. *Tis no Evidence that religious Affections are 
ſaving, or that they are otherwiſe, that there is an Ap- 


pearance of Love in them. 
There are no profeſſing Chriſtians who pretend, that 


this is an Argument againſt the Truth and ſaving 


Nature of religious Affections. But on the other Hand, 

there are ſome who ſuppoſe, it is a good Evidence that 

Affections are from the ſanctifying and ſaving Influences 

of the Holy Ghoſt. Thgir Argument is, that Satan 

cannot love; this Affection being directly contrary to the 
| | Devil 


K 
— 


ths 
r ——_— 


Mr. Stoddard, in his Guide to Chrift, ſpeaks of it as à comme 
Thing, for Perſons while in a natural Condition, and before they 
have ever truly accepted of Chriſt, to have Scripture Promiſes come to 
them, with a great deal of Refreſhing; which they take as Toten of 
Gods Lowe, and hope that God has accepted them; and ſo are confident 
of their good Eſtate, Page 8, 9. Impreſſion Anne 1735. 


0 
* 5 


nere the more difficult it is to make any Thing that ſhall 


What are no Sign: 


68 PAR II. 
Devil, whoſe very Nature is Enmity and Malice. And 
it is true, that nothing is more excellent, heavenly and 
divine than a Spirit of true Chriſtian Love to God and 
Men: Tis more excellent than Knowledge, or Prophecy, 
or Miracles, or ſpeaking with the Tongue of Men and 
Angels. *Tis the Chiet of the Graces of God's Spirit, 
and the Life, Eſſence and Sum of all true Religion; 
and that by which we are moſt conformed to Heaven, 
and moſt contrary to Hell and the Devil. But yet it is 
ill arguing from hence, that there are no Counterfeits of 
it. It may be obſerved, that the more excellent any 
Thing. is, the more will be the Counterfeits of it. 
Thus there are many more Counterfeits of Silver and 
Gold, than of Iron and Copper: Thero are many falſe 
Diamonds and Rubies, but who goes about to counter. 
feit common Stones? Tho' the more excellent Things 


> SPHhHhhy gw = 


be like them, in their eſſential Nature and internal 
Virtue; yet the more manifold will the Counterfeits be, 
and the more will Art and Subtilty be exerciſed and 
diſplayed, in an exact Imitation of the Outward Roo 

ance. Thus there is the greateſt Danger of being cheated 
in buying of Medicines that are moſt excellent and 
ſovereign, tho? it be moſt difficult to imitate them, with 
any Thing of the like Value and Virtue, and their 
Counterfeits are good for nothing when we have them. 
So it is with Chriſtian Vertues and Graces; the Subtilty 
of Satan, and Men's deceitful Hearts, are wont chiefly 
to be exerciſed in counterfeiting thoſe that are in higheſt 
Repute. So there are perhaps no Graces that have more 
Counterfeits than Love andgHumility; _ theſe being 
Vertues wherein the Beauty of-a true Chriſtian does 
eſpecially appear. 

But with Reſped to Love; it is plain by the Scripture, 
"that Perſons may have a Kind of religious Love, and 
yet have no ſaving Grace. Chriſt ſpeaks of many pro- 
feſſing Chriſtians that have ſuch Love, whoſe Love will 
not continue, and fo ſhall fail of Salvation, Matth. xxiv. 


2 vB 


> oo = >, _ 


pakr. II. to diſtinguiſb Affection. 69 
12, 13. And becauſe Iniquity ſhall abound, the Love of 
many ſhall wax cold. But he that ſhall endure unto the 
End, the ſame ſpall be ſaved. Which latter Words plainly 
ſhew, that thoſe ſpoken of before, whoſe Love ſhould not 
-1dure tb the End, but wax cold, ſhould not be ſaved. 
Perſons may ſeem to have Love to God and Chriſt, 
yea to have very ſtrong and violent Affections of this 
Nature, and yet have no Grace. For this was evidently 
the Caſe with many graceleſs Jews, ſuch as cried Jeſus _ 
up ſo high, following him Day and Night, without, 
Meat, Drink or Sleep; ſuch as ſaid, Lord, I will follow 
thee whitherſoever thou goeſt, and cried, Hoſanna, to the 
Son of David. | 
The Apoſtle ſeems to intimate, that there were many 
in his Days, who had a counterfeit Love to Chriſt, in 
Eph. vi, 24. Grace be with all them that love the Lord 
Jeſus Chriſt in Sincerity. The laſt Word, in the Origi- 
nal, ſignifies in Incorruption; which ſhews that the A 
{tle was ſenſible that there were many who had a Kind of 
Love to Chriſt, whoſe Love was not pure and ſpiritual. ' 
So alſo Chriſtian Love to the People of God may be 
counterfeited. Tis evident by the Scripture, that there 
may be ſtrong Affections of this Kind, without ſaving - | 
Grace; as there were in the Galatians towards the Apoltle 
Paul, when they were ready to pluck out their Eyes and 
give them to him; altho' the Apoſtle expreſſes his Fear 
that their Affections were come to nothing, and that he 
had beſtowed upon*them Labour in vain, Gal. iv. 11,15. 


VII. Perſons having religious Affections of many Kinds 
accompanying one another, is not ſufficient to determine 


whether they have any gracious Affections or no. 
| | | Tho? 


t Agreeable to this, Mr. Stoddard obſerves, in his Guide to Chrif, 
That ſome Sinners have Pangs of Afeion, and give an Account t 
they find a Spirit of Love to God, and of their aiming at the Glory of God, 
baving that which has a great Reſemblance of ſaving Grace, and that 
Jometimes ** common Affections are ffronger than . And ſup- 
poſes that ſometimes natural Men may Wave ſuch wiolent Patgs FA 
falſe Afe&ion to God, that they may think tbemſel uss willing ta bt 


Fage 21, and 65. 


70 What are no Signs 

Though falſe Religion is wont to be maimed and 
monſtrous, and not to have that Entireneſs and Symme. 
try of Parts, which is to be ſeen in true Religion; yet 
there may be a great Variety of falſe Affections together, 
that may reſemble gracious Aﬀettions. 

Tis evident, that there are Counterfeits of all Kinds 
of gracious Affections; as of Love to God, and Love ty 
the Brethren, as has been juſt now obſerved; ſo of god 
ty Sorrow for Sin, as in Pharaab, Saul, and Ahab, and 

he Children of Jrael in the Wilderneſs; Exod. ix. 2). 

1 Sam. XXiv. 16, 17. and XXvi. 21. 1 Kings xxi. 27, 
Numb. xiv. 39, 40. and of the Fear of God, as in the 
Semaritans, who feared the Lord, and ſerved their own 
Geds at the fame Time; 2 Kings xvii. 32, 33. and thoſe 
Enemies of God we read of Pſal. Ixvi. 3. who through 
the Greatneſs of God's Power, ſubmit themſelves to hin, 
or, as it is in the Hebrew, lie unto bim, i. e. yield 2 
counterfeit Reverence and Submiſſion; ſo of a greciew 
Gratitude, as in the Children of Mael, who ſang God's 
Praiſe at th red Sea, Pfal. cvi. 12. and Naaman the 
Syrian, after his miraculous Cure of his Leproſy, 2 Kings 
V. 15, &c. | | 
So of ſpiritual Joy, as in the ſtony-ground Hearen, 
Maztth. xini, 20. and particularly many of Jobn the Bap- 
tiſt's Hearers, Jobn v. 35. So of Zeal, as in Jebu, 2 
Kings x. 16. and in Paul before his Converſion, Gal. i. 
14. Phil. iii. 6. and the unbelieving Jeu, As xxii. 4. 
Rom. x. 2. So graceleſs Perſons may have earneſt reli 
gious Defrres, which may be like Balaam's Deſires, 
which he expreſſes under an extraordinary View that he 
had of the happy State of God's People, as diſtinguiſhed 
from all the reſt of the World, Numb. xxiii. 9, 10. 
They may alſo have a ſtrong Hope of eternal Life, as 
the Phariſees had. 7 GAS 2 
And as Men, while in a State of Nature, are capable 
of a Reſemblance of all Kinds of religious Affections, 
ſo nothing hinders but that they may have many of them 
together. And what appears in Fact does abundantly 


* 


1 


PART II 


cvince 


e r e e , cm AAS e e . , ab Om 


r aan TW 4 _ i£<@< .-* 


— 


ne © T oe & 


S © & ey 


1 
— 


Parr Il, to difiinguiſh Ape. 71 


evince that it is very often ſo indeed. It ſeems commonly 


to be fo, that when falſe Affections are raiſed high, 


there are many falſe Affections attend each other. The 


at Miracle of raiſing Lazarus, ſeem to be moved 
with many religious Affections at once, and all in a 
high Degree. They ſeem to be filled with Admiration, 
and there was a Shew of an high Affection of Love, and 
alſo of a great Degree of Reverence, in their laying 
their Garments on the Ground, for Chriſt to tread upon; 
and alſo of great Gratitude to him, for the great and 
ood Works he had wrought, praiſing him with loud 
Foices for his Salvation; and earneſt Defres of the 
Coming of God's Kingdom, which they ſuppoſe ut 
was now about to ſet up, and ſhewed great Hopes and 
raiſed Expectations of it, expecting a would immediately 
appear; and hence were filled with Foy, by which they 
were ſo animated in their Acclamations, as to make the 
whole City ring with the Noiſe of them; and appear'd 
great in their Zeal and forwardneſs to attend Jeſys, and 
aſſiſt him without further Delay, now in the Time of 
the great Feaſt of the Paſſover, to ſet up his Kingdom. 


if the Affection which is raiſed high, be that of counter- 
teit Love, as it was in the Multitude who cried Hoſanna. 
This will naturally draw many other Affections after it. 
For, as was obſerved before, Love is the Chief of the 


Affections, and as it were the Fountain of them. Let 
us ſuppoſe a Perſon who has been' for ſome Time in 


great Exerciſe and Terror thro? Fear of Hell, and his 
Heart weaken'd with Diſtreſs and dreadful Apprehen- 
ſions, and upon the Brink of Deſpair, and is all atance 
deliver'd, by being firmly made to believe, thro' me 
Deluſion of Satan, that God has pardon d him; and 
accepts him as the Object of his dear Love, and pro- 
miſes him eternal Life: as ſuppoſe through ſome Viſion, 
S bat ©; | Or 


-e 


— 


Multitude that attended Chriſt into Jeruſalem, after that 


And it is eaſy from Nature, and the Nature of the Af- ,, 7 
fections, to give an Account why, when one Affection is 
raiſed very high, that it ſhould excite others; eſpecially 


* 


- 


* 
- 


a N 


What are no Signs _ Part IN 
or ſtrong Idea or Imagination, ſuddenly excited in him, 
of a'Perſon with a beautiful Countenance, imiling cn 

him, and with Arms open, and with Blood dropping 
down, which the Perſon conceives to be Chriſt, withou 
any 6ther Enlightning of the Underſtanding, to give: 
View of the ſpiritual divine Excellency of Chriſt and 
his Fulneſs, and of the Way of Salvation reveal'd in 
the Goſpel; or perhaps by ſome Voice or Words coming 
as if they were ſpoke to him, ſuch as thoſe, Son be of 

good Cheer, thy Sins be forgiven thee; or, Fear not, it i 

the Father's good Pleaſure to give you the Kingdom; which 
he takes to be immdiately ſpoken by God to him, tho 
there was no preceding Acceptance of Chriſt, or cloſing 
of the Heart with him: I ſay, if we ſhould ſuppoſe ſuch 
a Caſe, what various Paſſions'would naturally croud at 
once, or one after another, into ſuch a Perſon's Mind! 
It is eaſy to be accounted for, from meer Principles of 
Nature, that a Perſon's Heart, on ſuch an Occaſion, 
ſhould be raiſed up to the Skies with Tranſports of Joy, 
and be fill'd with fervent Affection, to that imaginary 
God or Redeemer, who he ſuppoſes has thus reſcued him 
from the Jaws of ſuch dreadful Deſtruction, that his 
Soul was ſo amazed with the Fears of, and has received 

© him with ſuch Endearment, as a peculiar Favourite; 
and that now he ſhould be fill'd with Admiration and 
Gratitude, and his Mouth ſhould be open'd, and be full 
of Talk about what he has experienc'd; and that, fora 
while, he ſhould think and ſpeak of ſcarce any Thing 
+ elſe, and ſhould ſeem to magnity that God who has done 
ſo much for him, and call upon others to rejoice with 
him, and appear with a chearful Countenance, and talk 
with a loud Voice: and however before his Deliverance, 
he was full of Quarrellings againſt the Juſtice of God, 
that now it ſhould be eaſy for him to ſubmit to God, and 
own his Unworthineſs, and cry out againſt himſelf, and 
appear to be very humble before God, and lie at his 

' Feet as tame as a Lamb; and that he ſhould now confels 


his Unworthineſs, and cry out, Ny me? Why E. * 
21 | 


r W ends end Sos ü , oe ¹w- —˙w ] . iro a. 


he Jk, 


— 
—— £ 


. © 5 2TfSe f . 5 o& S = 


* +, * 


3 
— 


0 —yv— ces gui WT — <5 —_ — 


__ \ enced — - 


Pur. u. zo diſtinguiſh Aﬀettrons. Is ! 
like Saul, who when Samuel told him that God had ap- * 


pointed him to be King, makes anſwer, Am not I 4 Benja- 
mite, of the ſmalleſt of the Tribes of Iſrael, andmy Family the 


haſt of all the Families of the T ribs of Benjamin? Whbere-, 
fore then Fee thou /o to me? Much in the Language 


of David, the true Saint, 2 Sam. vii. 18. Who am I. 
and what is my Father's Houſe, that thou baſt brought me 
bitberto!) Nor is it to be wonder'd at, that now he ſhould 
delight to be with them who acknowledge and applaud 
his happy Circumſtances, and ſhould love and eſteem 
all ſuch as admire him and what he has experienc'd, and 


have violent Zeal againſt allſuch as would make nothing 


of ſuch Things, and be diſpoſed openly to ſeparate, 
and as it were to proclaim War with all who be not of 
his Party; and ſhould now glory in his Sufferings, and 
be very much for condemning and cenſuring all who 
ſeem to doubt, or make any Difficulty of theſe Things; 
and while the Warmth of his Affections laſt, ſhould be 
mighty forward to take Pains, and deny himſelf, to 


promote the Intereſt of the Party who he imagines favour  -. 


ſuch Things, and ſeem earneſtly deſirous to encreaſe 
the Number of them, as the Phariſees compaſſed Sea 


and Land to make one Proſelyte.* And fo I might go 
on, and mention many other Things, which will natu- 
rally ariſe in ſuch Circumſtances. He muſt have but 
lightly conſider d human Nature, who thinks ſuck 
Things as theſe can't ariſe in this Manner, without aß 


ſupernatural Interpoſition of divine Power. 


As from true divine Love flow all chriſtian Affections, SHA 


ſo from a counterfeit Love in like Manner, naturally 


flow other falſe Affections. In both Caſes Love is the 
Fountain, and the other Affections are the Streams, 


The 


7— 


» « Aſſociating with godly Men don't prove that a Man has Grace: 2 


* Abithophel was David's Companion. Sorrows for the Afflictions 
* of the Church, and Deſires for the Converfion gf Souls, don't 
; prove it. Theſe Things may be found in carnal Men, and {o can 
or, p. 82. 


"FT 
. 


<4 


& 2 
— 


« # 
_ 
LE 


no Eyidences of Grace.” Stoddard's Narart of /aving Convers- 


0 


— 4 1 
* 


9 
* Q 
=. 
* 
p . 
* 


Ss 


- = 


* 


* 


of Conſcience, in a certain Order. Many 


r r * * * nnn c 2 a . 
a * - d . 
' * 
7 a are n sign, ART 
4 #4 R . 
. \ 
* 
S 


The various Faculties, Principles and Affections o 
human Nature, are as it were many Channels from one 


Fountain: If there be ſweet Water in the Fountain, 


ſweet Water will from thence flow out into thoſe various 
Channels; but if the Water in the Fountain be poiſon- 
ous, then poiſonous Streams will alſo flow out into all 
thoſe Channels. So that the Channels and Streams will 
be alike, correſponding one with another; but the great 
Difference will lie in the Nature of the Water. Or, 
Man's Nature may be compar'd to a Tree, with many 
Branches, coming from one Root: If the = in the 
Root be good, there will alſo be good Sap diſtributed 
throughout the Branches, and the Fruit that is brought 


forth will be good and wholeſome; but if the Sap in 


the Root and Stock be poiſonous, ſo it will be in many 
Branches, (as in the other Caſe) and the Fruit will be 
deadly. The Tree in both Caſes may be alike; there 
may be an exact Reſemblance in Shape; but the Differ- 
ence is found only in eating the Fruit, *Tis thus. (in 
ſome Meaſure at leaſt) oftentimes, between Saints and 
Hypocrites. © There is ſometimes a very great Similitude 


between true and falſe Experiences, in their Appear- 
| ance, and in what is expreſſed and related by the Sub- 
. jets of them: and the Difference between them is much 


like the Difference between the Dreams of Pharaoh's 
chief Butler and Baker; they feem'd to be much alike; 


© infomuch that when 7o/eph interpreted the chief Butler's 
Dream, that he ſhould be deliver'd from his Impriſon- 
ment, and reſtor'd to the King's Favour, and his ho- 
| © nourable Office in the Palace, the chief Baker had raiſed 

Hopes and Expectations, and told his Dream alſo; but 
he was wofully difappointed; and tho? his Dream was ſo 
much like the happy and well-boding Dream of his 


Companion, yet it was quite contrary in its Iſſue. 


VIII. Nothing can certainly be determined concer- 


ning the Nature of the Affections by this, that Comforts 
and Joys feem to follow Awakenings and Convictions 


- 


. 4 e 


$i 


— = - = 


ABR 5m = 


mis, wn =, © HO & © =&@ = a A or e Qt <w Q 


ot 


* 
+ , 


ParT II. to diſtinguiſh Aﬀettions' 75 
Many Perfons ſeem to be prejudiced againſt Affections 
and Experiences, that come in ſuch a Method, as has 
been much inſiſted on by many Divines; firſt, ſuch 
Awakenings, Fears and aweful Apprehenſions, followed 
with ſuch legal Humblings, in a Senſe of total Sinful- 
neſs and Helpleſneſs, and then, fuch and ſuch Light 
and Comfort; they look upon all ſuch Schemes, laying 
down ſuch Methods and Steps, to be of Men's devi- 
fing: And particularly if high Affections of Joy follow 
at Diſtreſs and Terror, it is made by many an Argu- 
ment againſt thoſe Affections. But ſuch Prejudices and 
Objections are without Reaſon or Scripture. Surely it 
can't be unreaſonable to ſuppoſe, that before Ged deli- 
vers Perſons from a State of Sin and Expoſedneſs to 
eternal Deſtruction, he ſhould give them ſome confi-+ © 
derable Senſe of the Evil he delivers from; that they _ 
may be delivered ſenſibly, and underſtand their own 
Salvation, and know ſomething of what God does for 
them. As Men that are ſaved are in two exceeding 
different States, firſt a State of Condemnation, and then 
in a State of Juſtification: and Bleſſedneſs; and as Gd 
in the Work of the Salvation of Mankind, deals with 
them ſuitably to their intelligent rational Nature; ſo it 
ſeems reaſonable, and agreeable to God's Wiſdom, that 
Men who are ſaved, ſhould be in theſe two States ſenſibly, 
firſt, that they ſhould ſenſibly to themſelves, be in a State 
of Condemnation, and fo in a State of woful Calamity and 
dreadful Miſery, and fo afterwards ſenſibly in a State of 
Deliverance and Happineſs; and that they ſhould be firſt 


< 


ſenſible of their abſolute extreme Neceſſity, and after 
wards of Chriſt's Sufficiency and God's Mercy thro” him. 
And that it is God's Manner of dealing with Men, 

to lead them into a Wilderneſs, before he ſpeaks comfortably = 
to them, and fo to order it, that they ſhall be brought 
into Diſtreſs, and made to ſee their own Helpleſneſs, 
and abfolute Dependance on his Power and Grace, be- 
fore he appears to work any great Deliverance for them,” 
is abundantly manifeſt by the. Scripture. Then is.God 
1 7 Ba wont. 


= 


. ww 
* » * 
* *. 


76 What are no Signs Parr. If, 
wont to repent himſelf for bis profe * People, wwhey 
their Strength is gone, and there is none ſhut up or left , 
and when they are Prought to ſee that their falle God's 
can't help them, and that the Rock in whem they truſted 
is vain; Deut. XXXiL 36, 37. Before God delivered the 
Children of Jrael out of Egypt, they were prepared for 
it, by being made to ſee, that they were in an evil Caſe, 
and to cry unto God, becauſe of tbeir hard Bondage; 
Exod. ii. 23, and v. 19. And before God wrought 
that great Deliverance for them at the Red Sea, K 
were brought into | pars Diſtrefs, the Wilderneſs had ſour 
them in, they could not turn to the right Hand nor the 
left, and the Red Sea was before them, and the great 
Egytian Hoſt behind, and they were brought to ſee that 
they could do nothing to help themſelves, and that if 
God did not help then, they ſhould be immediately 
ſwallowed up; and then God appeared, and turn'd their 
Cries into Songs. So before they were brought to their 
Reſt, and toenjoy the Milk and Honey af Canaan, God 
ted them through a great and terrible Wilderneſs, that he 
might humble them, and teach them what was in their 
| Heart, and ſo do them Good in their latter End; Deut. 
Vill. 2, 16. The Woman that had the Iſſue of Blood 
{ twelve Years, was not delivered, *till ſhe had firſt /pent 
ll ber Living on earthly Phyſicians, and could not be 
| healed of any, and ſo was left helpleſs, having no more 
Money to ſpend; and then ſhe came to the great Phyſi- 
cian, without any Money or Price, and was healed by 
him; Lake viii. 43, 44. Before Chriſt would anſwer 
the Requeſt of the Woman of Canaan, he firſt ſeemed 
utterly to den ny her, and humbled her, and brought her 
to own. herſelf worthy to be called a Dog; and then he 


ſhewed her Mercy, and received her as a dear Child; 
Mat. xv. 22, &c. The Apoſtle Paul, before a remarkable 
| Deliverance, was preſſed out of Meaſure, above Strength, 
. inſomuch that be deſpaired even of Life; but had the Sen- 
| tence of Death in himſelf, that he might nat truſt im him- 
E. * in God that raiſeth the 5 2 Cor. i. 8, 4 d 


sse. S ere ere ee ern 


9 8 - 


2 


Paxr II. to diſtinguiſp Ahectiaus. v7 © 
There was firft a great Tempeſt, and the Ship was 
covered with the Waves, and juſt ready to ſink, andthe 
Diſciples wgre brought to cry to Jeſus, Lord, ſave us, 
we periſh; and then the Winds and Seas were rebuked, 

and there was a great Calm; Matth. vill. 24, 25, 26. 

The Leper, before he is cleanſed, muſt have his Mouth 
ſtopped, by a covering on his upper Lip, and was to 

acknowledge his great Miſery and utter Uncleanneſs, 
by rending his Cloaths, and crying, Unclean, unclean: 
E Xill. 43. And backſliding I/rael, before God 
heals them, are brought to acknowledge that they have 
Anned, and have not — the Voice of the Lord, and to 

ſee that they He down in their Shame, and that Confuſion 
covers them, and that in vain is Salvation hoped for from 
the Hills, and from the Multitude of Mountains, and 
that God only can fave them; Fer. iii. 23, 24, 28. 
Joſeph, who was fold by his Brethren, and therein was 


a Type of Chriſt, brings his Brethren into great Per- 


plexity and Diſtreſs, and brings them to reflect on their 
Sin, and to ſay we are verily guilty; and at laſt to reſign 
up themſelyes entirely into his Hands for Bondmen; and 
then reveals himſelf to them, as their Brother and their 
Saviour, b " ; | pu 
And if we conſider thoſe extraordinary Manifeſtations | 
which God made of himſelf to Saints of Old, we ſhall 
find that he commonly firſt manifeſted himſelf in a Way 
which was terrible, and then by thoſe Things that were 
comfortable, So it was with Abrabam; firſt a Horror . 
of great Darkneſs fell upon him, and then God revealed 
himſelf to him in ſweet Promiſes; Gen. xv. 12, 13. So 
it was with Moſes at Mount Sinai; firſt, God appeared 
to him in all the Terrors of his dreadful Majeſty, ſo that 
Moſes ſaid, I exceedingly fear and quake, and then he 
made all his Goodneſs to paſs before him, and proclaimed 
his Name, the Lord God gracious and merciful, &c. So it 
was with Eůijab; firſt, there is a ſtormy Wind, and 
Earthquake, and deyouring Fire, and then a ftill, ſmall, 
lmeet Voice; 1 Kings xix. So it was with _—_ he 


* 


n ; WH 


Pak II. 


firſt ſaw Chriſt's Countenance as Lightning, that tert. 

fied him, and cauſed him to faint away; and then he is 
ſtrengthened and refreſhed with ſuch comfortable Words 
as theſe, O Daniel, a Man greatly beloved, Dan. x. 80 
it was with the Apoſtle John, Rev. i. And there is an 
Analogy obſervable in God's Diſpenſations and Delive- 
rances which he works for his People, and the Mani- 
feſtations which he makes of himſelf to them, both 
ordinary and extraordinary. 

But there are many Things in Scripture which da 


758 '* What are mw Sigs 


more directly ſhew, that this is God's ordinary Manner 


in working Salvation for the Souls of Men, and in the 
Manifeſtations God makes of himſelf and of his -Mercy 
in Chriſt, in the ordinary Works of his Grace on the 
Hearts of Sinners. The Servant that owed his Prince 
ten thouſand Talents, is firſt held to his Debt, and the 


- . King pronounces Sentence of Condemnation upon him, 


and commands him to be fold, and his Wife and Chil 
dren, and Payment to be made; and thus he humbles 
| him, and brings him to own the whole Debt to be juſt, 
and then forgives him all. The prodigal Son ſpends all 
he has, and is brought to ſee himſelf in extreme Cir- 
cumſtances, and to humble himſelf; and own his Un- 
worthineſs, before he is relieved and feaſted by his 
Father; Zuke xv. Old inveterate Wounds muſt be 
ſearched to the Bottom, in order to Healing: And the 
Scripture compares Sin, the Wound of the Soul, to 
* this, and ſpeaks of healing this Wound without thus 
ſearching of it, as vain and deceitful; ' Jer. viii. 11, 
Chriſt, in the Work of his Grace on the Hearts of Men, 
is compared to Rain on the mown Graſs, Graſs that 1 


cut down with a Scythe, Pſal. Ixxii. 6. repreſenting his 


refreſhing, comforting Influences on the wounded Spi- 


rit. Our firſt Parents, after they had ſinned, were firſt 


terrified with God's Majeſty and Juſtice, and had their 
Sin, with its Aggravations, ſet before them by their 
Judge, before they were relieved, by the Promiſe of 
the Seed of the Woman, Chriſtians are ſpoken of 
2 | of 


T T K ip . COLITRILoAT . TE On SE WW YT ( RN. "a3 *© 


yl =} 


— —— WP . 


thoſe that have fled for Refuge, to lay bold on the Hope 
ſet before them, Heb. vi. 18. which Repreſentation im- 
plies Fear, and Senſe of Danger preceeding. To 


the like Purpoſe, Chriſt is called @ hiding Place from 


the Wind, and a Covert from the Tempeſt, and as Rivers 


rk ater in a dry Place, and as the Shadow of a great 


ock in a weary Land; ai. xxxu. at the Beginning. 
And it ſeems to be the natural Import of the Word G 
pel, glad Tydings, that it is News of Deliverance and 
Salvation, after great Fear and Diſtreſs. There 1s all 
Reaſon to ſuppoſe, that God deals with particular Be- 
lievers, as he dealt with his Church, which he firſt made 
to hear his Voice in the Law, with terrible Thunders 
and Lightnings, and kept. her under that School Maſter, 
to prepare her for Chriſt; and then comforted her with 
the joyful Sound of the Goſpel from Mount Sion. So 
likewiſe Jobn the Baptiſt came to prepare the Way for 
Chriſt, and prepare Men's Hearts for his Reception, 
by ſhewing them their Sins, and by bringing the 
ſelf-righteous Fews off from their own Righteouſneſs, 
telling them. that they were a Generation of Vipers, and 
ſhewing them their Danger of the Wrath to come, tel- 


ling them that the Ax was laid at the Root of the Trees, &C. * 


And if it be indeed God's Manner (as I think the 
foregoing -Conſiderations ſhew that it undoubtedly is) 
before he gives Men the Comfort of a Deliverance from 


PART * wr” diftinguiſh Aſfections. : 79 A 


x 
E. 


their Sin and Miſery, to give them a conſiderable Senſe of _ | 


the Greatneſs and Dreadfulneſs of thoſe Evils, and their 
extreme Wretchedneſs by Reaſon of them; ſurely it is 
not unreaſonable to ſuppoſe, that Perſons, at leaſt often- 
times, while under theſe Views, | ſhould have great 


- Diſtreſs and terrible Apprehenſions of Mind: Eſpecially | 


if it be conſidered what theſe Evils are, that they have 
a View of; which are no other than great and manifold 
Sins, againſt the infinite Majeſty of the great Jehovah, 
and the Suffering of the Fierceneſs of his Wrath to all 


Eternity. And the more ſo ftill, when we have man 


plain Inſtances in Scripture, of Perſons that have [nag 


380 What are no Signs Pak II. 


been brought into extreme Diſtreſs, by ſuch Convictions, 
before they have received ſaving Conſolations: As the 
Multitude at Feru/alem, who were pricked in their Heart, 
and ſaid unto Peter, ud the reſt of the Apoſtles, Men 
and Brethren, What jvallwe do? And the Apoſtle Paul, 
wht trembled and was aſtoniſhed, before he was comforted; 
and the Jailor, when he called for a Light, and ſprang 
in, and came trembling, and fell down before Paul and 
Silas, and ſaid, Sirs, What muſt I do to be ſaved? 
From theſe Things it appears to be very unreaſonable 
in profeſſing Chriſtians, to make this an Objection 
inſt the Truth and ſpiritual Nature of the comfort- 
| able and joyful Affections which any have, that they 
follow ſuch awful Apprehenſions and Diſtreſſes, as have 
been mentioned. « 
And on the other Hand, It is no Evidence that Com- 
+ forts and Joys are right, becauſe they ſucceed great 
Terrors, and amazing Fears of Hell.“ This ſeems to | 
be what ſome Perſons Jay great Weight upon; eſteeming 
great Terrors an Evidence of a great Work of the Law 
'- wrought on the Heart, well preparing the Way for 
ſolid Comfort: Not conſidering that Terror, and a 
Conviction of Conſcience, are different Things. For 
though Convictions of Conſcience do often cauſe Ter- 
-ror; yet they don't conſiſt in it; and Terrors do often 
. ariſe from other Cauſes. Convictions of Conſcience, 
| - #hrough the Influences of God's Spirit, conſiſt in Con- 
Vviction of Sinfulneſs of Heart and Practice, and of the 
Dreacdfulneſs of Sin, as committed againſt a God of 
terrible Majeſty, infinite Holineſs and Hatred of Sin, 
and ftrict Juſtice in puniſhing of it. But there are ſome 
Perſons that have frightful Apprehenſions of Hell, a 


1 


1 


ö * Mr. Shepard ſpeaks of Men's “ being caſt down as low as Hell 
| | «© by Sorrow, and lying under Chains, quaking in Apprehenſion of 
4 Terror to come, and then raiſed up to Heaven in Joy, not able to 
« live; and yet not rent from Luſt, and ſuch are Objects of Pity now, 
t and are like to be the Objects of Terror at the great Day.” Para: 

ye of the ten Virgins, P. I. pag, 125. | | | 


* 
= 


ur IX 50 diflinguiſh Affection. 81 
Jreadful Pit ready to ſwallow them up, and Flames juſt 
ready fo lay hold of, them, and Devils around them, 
ready to ſeize them; who at the ſame Time ſeem to have 
very little proper Enlightenings of Conſcience, really 
convincing them of their Sinfulne.z of Heart and Life. 
The Devil, if permitted, can terrify Men as well as the 
Spirit af God: *Tis a Work natural to him, and he has 
many Ways of doing it, in a Manner . tending to no 
Good. He may exceedingly affright Perſons, by im- 
preſſing on them many external Images and Ideas, of a 
Countenance frowning, a Sword drawn, black Clouds 
of Vengeance, Words of an awful Doom pronounced, t 
Hell gaping, Devils coming; and the like; not to con- 
vince Perſons of Things that are true, and revealed in 
the Word of God, but to lead them to vain and ground- 
leſs Determinations; as, that their Day is paſt, that they 
are reprobated, that God is implacable, that he has 
come to a Reſolution immediately to cut them off, &c. 
And the Terrors which ſome Perſons have, are very 
very much owing to the particular Conſtitution and 
Temper they are of. Nothing is more manifeſt, chan 
that ſome Perſons are of ſuch a Temper and Frame, 
that their Imaginations are more ſtrongly impreſſed with 
every Thing they are affected with, than others; and the 
Impreſſion on the Imagination re- acts on the Affection, 
and raiſes that ſtill higher; and ſo Affection and Imagi- 
nation act reciprocally, one on another, till their Affec - 
Ction 1s raiſed to a vaſt Height, and the Perſon is ſwal- 
lowed up, and loſes all Poſſeſſion of himſelf. 5 | 

| | | And 


t The Way of the Spirit's Working, when it does convince Men, 
„is by enlightening natural Conſcience, The Spirit does not work 
60 by wing a Teſtimony, put by aſſiſting natural Conſcience to do 
its Work, Natural Conſcience is the Inſtrument in the Haud of 
Hand of God, to accuſe, condemn, terrify, and to urge to Duty. 
The Spirit of God leads Men into the Conſideration of their Dan- 
ger, and makes them to be affected therewith ; Prov. xx. 27. The - 

'** Spirit of Man is the Candle of the Lord, fearching ail the inward 
- —_ the Belly.” Stoddard's Guide to Chrift, p. 44- | 

} © The famous Mr. Perkins diſtinguiſhes between tho/e Sorrows 

F* that come through Convictions of Conſcience, and melancholic Paſſions 


a ria 


1 


82  HIWhat are no Signs PAR I 


And ſome ſpeak of a great Sight they have of thei 
Wickedneſs, who really when the Matter comes to be 
well examined into and thoroughly weighed, are found 
to have little or no Convictions of Conſcience. 


tell of a dreadful hard Heart, and how their Heart lis 


like a Stone; when truly they have ndne of thoſe Thing 
in their Minds or Thoughts, wherein the Hardneſs of 
Men's Hearts does really conſiſt. They tell of a dread. 
ful Load and Sink of Sin, a Heap of black and loath- 
ſome Filthineſs within them; when, if the Matter be 
carefully enquired into, they have not in View any 
Thing wherein the Corruption of Nature does truly 
conſiſt, nor have they any Thought of any particular 
Thing wherein their Hearts are ſinfully defective, or 
fall ſhort of what ought to be in them, or any Exerciſe 
at all of Corruption in them. And many think alfo 
they have great Convictions of their actual Sins, who 
truly have none. They tell how their Sins are ſet in 
Order before them, they ſee them. ſtand encompaſſing 
them. round in a Row, with a dreadful frightful Appes- 


| Fancez when really they have not ſo much as one of the 


Sins they have been guilty of in the Courſe of their Lives, 


coming into View, that they are affected with the Ag; 


gravations of. | | 
And if Perſons have had great Terrors, which really 
have been from the awakening and convincing Influences 
of the Spirit of God, it don't thence follow that they 
Terrors muſt needs iſſue in true Comfort. The unmor- 


tified Corruption of the Heart may quench the Spirit 


of God (after he has been ſtriving) by leading Men to 


preſumptuous, and ſelf-exalting Hopes and Joys, as 


well as otherwiſe. *Tis not every Woman who is 
in Trayail, that brings forth a real Child; but it may 
be a monſtrous Production without any Thing of the 


Form or Properties of human Nature belonging to it 
. "Is | Pbaraob's 


6 rifing only from mere Imaginations, ffrongly cenceived in they Hrais; 


— W 


. * which he ſays, uſually come on a ſudden, The Lightning into a Heat. 
Vol. x. of his Works, p. 388. WE | 


 v 
. 


———— 


ParT. II. to diflinguiſh Aﬀettions. 833 
Pharaoh's chief Baker, after he had lain in the Dungeon 
with Joſeph, had a Viſion that raiſed his Hopes, and he 
was lifted up out of the Dungeon, as well as the chief 
Butler; but it was to be hanged, | 
But if Comforts -and Joys do not only come after 
great Terrors and Awakenings, but there be an Appea- 
rance of ſuch preparatory Convictions and Humiliations, 
and brought about very diſtinctly, by ſuch Steps, and 
in ſuch a Method, as has frequently been obſervable in 
true Converts; this is no certain Sign that the Light 
and Comforts which follow are true and ſaving. And 
for theſe following Reaſons, 7 
 Firft, As the Devil can counterfeit all the ſaving 
rations and Graces of the Spirit of God, ſo he can 
counterfeit thoſe Operations that are preparatory to 
Grace, If Satan can counterfeit thoſe Effects of God's 
Spirit, which are ſpecial, divine and ſanctifying; ſo that 
there ſhall be a very great Reſemblance, in all that can 
be obſerved by others; much more eaſily may he imitate 
thoſe Works of God's Spirit which are common, and 
which Men, while they are yet his own Children, are 


the Subjects of. Theſe Works are in no wiſe ſo much | 


above him as the other. There are no Works of God 
that are ſo high and divine, and above the Powers of 


Nature, and out of the Reach of the Power of all 


Creatures, as thoſe Works of his Spirit, whereby he 
forms the Creature in his own Image, and makes it to be 
a Partaker of the divine Nature. But if the Devil can 
be the Author of ſuch Reſemblances of theſe as have 


been ſpoken of, without doubt he may of thoſe that 
are of an infinitely inferior Kind. And it is abundantiy-, -- 


evident in Fact, that there are falſe Humiliations, and 


falſe Submiſſions, as well as falſe Comforts.* How far 
—_— was 


9 


The venerable Stoddard obſerves, A Man may ſay, that new 
* he can juſtify God however he deals with him, and not be brought 
* off from his own Righteouſneſs ; and that ſome Men do juſſily 
God, from a partial Conviction of the Righteouſneſs of their Cun- 


3 5 . 


* . 


% demnation; N 
| 8 


oy 
1 


| 8 * 
8 — 


4 5. 2a. Et 
= 
a LI - 
4 
. 


him, and given him up, and an evil Spirit from the 


| altho they are in many Ways that are more plain and 


cgſecret and ſubtil. Oftentimes a great Degree of Dil: 1 


| upon, is taken for Humiliation: And that is called a ir 


Mal are no Signs © 


was Saul brought, tho' a very wicked Man, and of 
haughty Spirit,, when he (tho? a great King) was brought 
in Conviction of his Sin, as it were to fall down, all in 
Tears, weeping aloud, before David his own Subje&, 
(and one that he had for a long Time mortally hated, 
and openly treated as an Enemy) and condemn hirſelf 
before him, crying out, Thou art more rightecus than J. 
Thou haſt rewarded me Good, whereas I have rewarded 
thee Evil! And at another Time, I have finned, I bave 
played the Fool, I have erred exceedingly, 1 Sam. xxiv. 
15, 17, and Chap. xxvi. 21, And yet Saul ſeems then 

to have had very little of the Influences of the Spirit of 
God, it being after God's Spirit had departed from 


PART II, 


Lord troubled him. And if this proud Monarch, in a 
Pang of Affection, was brought to humble himſelf ſo 
low, before a Subject that he hated, and ſtill continued 
an Enemy to; there doubtleſs may be Appearances of 
great Conviction and Humiliation in Men, before God, 
while they yet remain Enemies to him, and tho' they 
finally continue ſo. There is oftentimes in Men who 
are terrified thro' Fears of Hell, a great Appearance of 
their being brought off from their own Righteouſneſs, 
when they are not brought off from it in all Ways, 


viſible. They have only exchang'd ſome Ways of truſt- 
ing in their own Righteouſneſs, for others that are more 


couragement, as to many Things they uſed to depend Wl ( 


Submiſſion to God, which is no abſolute Submiſſion, but 
has ſome ſecret Bargain in it, that it is hard to diſcover, 
| - | . | Secondly, 


* 


* fied God, Exed. ix. 27. And they give ſome Kind of Conſent to 
it, but many Times it don't continue, they have only a —_— 
Gori/h 


— 


«+ demnation ; Conſcience takes Notice of their Sinfulneſs, and tells 
them that they may be righteouſly damn'd ; as Pharaoh, who juſti- | 


mw a 2 -£A = 5 — © { 


them, that uſually dies away after a little Time.” Guide to 
P. 71. 1 | 


% 


AAT II. 0 diſtinguiſb Afeclions. 85 
Sttondly, If the Operations and Effects of the Spirit 


or God, in- the Convictions and Comforts of true Con- 
u Lerts, may be ſophiſticated, then the Order of them 
ö may be imitated. If Satan can imitate the Things 
K themſelves, he may eaſily put them one after another, 
7 in ſuch a certain Order. It the Devil can make A, B, 
and C, 'tis as eaſy for him to put A firſt, and B next, 

and C next, as to range them in a contrary Order. The 


Nature of divine Things is harder for the Devil to imi- 


tate, than their Order. He can't exa#ly imitate divine 
Operations in their Nature, tho' his Counterfeits may 
be very much like them in external Appearance; but 
he can exactly 1mitate their Order. When Counterfeits 
are made, there is no divine Power needful in order to 
the placing one of them firſt, and another laſt. And 
therefore no Order or Method of Operations and Expe- 
riences, is any certain Sign of their Divinity. That 
only is to be truſted to, as a certain Evidence of Grace, 
which Satan cannot do, and which it 1s impoſſible 
ſhould be brought to paſs by any Power ſhort of diyine. 
Thirdly, We have no certain Rule to determine how 
far God's own Spirit may go in thoſe Operations and 
Convictions which in themſelves are not ſpiritual and 
ſaving, and yet the Perſon that is the Subject of them, 
never be converted, but fall ſhort of Salvation at laſt. X 
There is no, neceſſary Connection in the Nature of 
Things, between anv Thing that a natural Man may 
experience, while in a State of Nature, and the ſavi 
Grace of God's Spirit. And if there be no Connection 
in the Nature of Things, then there can be no known © 
and certain Connection at all, unleſs it be by divine 
Revelation. But there is no revealed certain Connection 
between a State of Salvation and any Thing that a natu=" », 
ral Man can be the Subject of, before he believes in 
Chriſt. God, has revealed no certain Connection be- 
tween Salvation, and any Qualifications in Men, but 
only Grace and its Fruits. And therefore we don't 


find any legal Convictions, or Comforts following woo 
| | leg 


i 1 E * + 


4 ** 1 * — <P 


86 What are no Sign: PAR Tr. H. 
legal Convictions, in any certain Method or Order, Net 
ever once mention'd in the Scripture, as certain Sig . 
of Grace, or Things peculiar to the Saints; altho? ve 
do find gracious Operations and Effects therwſelves, ſo MW" 
mention'd, Thouſands of Times. Which ſhould be 
enough with Chriſtians, who are willing to have the W"" 
Word of God, rather than their own” Philoſophy, and 
Experiences and Conjectures, as their ſufficient and ſure WW” 
Guide in Things of this Nature. "4.45 
 Fourthly, Experience does greatly confirm, that Per. WW” 
fons ſeeming to have Convictions and Comforts following 
one another in ſuch a Method and Order, as 1s frequently 
- obſervable in true Converts, is no certain Sign of Grace.“ 
I appgal to all thoſe Miniſters in this Land, who have 
had much Occaſion of dealing with Souls, in the lae Nd 


extraordinary Seaſon, whether there have not been many v 
who don't prove well, that have given a fair Account of 5 
their Experiences, and have ſeem'd to be converted WM" 


according to Rule, i. e. with Convictions and Affections, 

ſucceeding diſtinctly and exactly, in that Order and WI,” 

Method, which has been ordinarily inſiſted on, as the 

Order of the Operations of the Spirit of God in Con- 
verſion. ws | | 

And as a ſeeming to have this Diſtinctneſs as to Steps 

and Method, is no certain Sign that a Perſon 1s converted; 

ſo a being without it, is no Evidence that a Perſon is not 

converted. For tho* it might be made evident to a 

Demonſtration, on Scripture Principles, that a ' Sinner 

can't be brought heartily to receive Chriſt as his Saviour, 

who is not convinced of his Sin and Mifery, and of his 

own Emptineſs and Helpleſneſs, and his juſt _—_ of 

1 | | etern 


&&-- 


Mr. Stadfard, who had much Experience of Things of this 
Nature, long ago obſerved, that converted and unconverted Men 
can't be certainly diſtinguiſhed by the Account they give of their 
Experience: The fame Relation of Experiences being common to beth. 
And that many Perſons have given a fair Account of a Work of Cit 
werfien, that have carried well in the Eye of the World for ſeveral 


Kg. SSS. HANG E ='S 5 Xx 


Tears, but have not proved well at la, Appeal to the Learned, pa. 
75» and 76. | „ | n 


* 
— 4 a0 "3d SIE. * 


fo difti nguiſh Action:. 


0 


N r 
* 3» : 
. 
ART. 11. 
F * * * 


— 


in his Soul; yet nothing proves it to be neceſſary, that 


Act of Faith in Chriſt muſt be plainly and diſtinctly 
rought in the Soul, in ſo many ſucceſſive and ſeparate 
orks of the Spirit that ſhall be, each one, plain and 
manifeſt, in all who are truly converted. On the con- 
rary, (as Mr. Shepard obſerves) ſometimes the Change 
made in a Saint, at firſt Work, is like a confuſed Chaos; 


> fc > Of 6& ( © 


Manner of the Spirit's proceeding in them that are born 
of the Spirit, is very often exceeding myſterious and 
unſearchable: We, as it were, hear the Sound of it, 
the Effect of it is diſcernable; but no Man can tell 
whence it came, or whither it went: And *tis oftentimes 


Birth, as in the firſt Birth: Eccl. xi. 5. Thou knoweſt not 
what is the Way of the Spirit, or how the Bones do grow 


keoweſt not the Work of God, that worketh all. The 
ingenerating of a Principle of Grace in the Soul, ſeems 
in Scripture to be compared to the conceiving of Chriſt 


+ CC(D how 21 wy, << CÞ CÞ ee 2 


particular Believer, Matth. xii. 49, 59. And the Con- 
ception of Chriſt in the Womb of the bleſſed Virgin, by 
the Power of the Holy Ghoſt, ſeems to be a deſigned 
Reſemblance of the Conception of Chriſt in the Soul of 


and wonderfully made. Marvellous are thy Works: And 
that my Soul knoweth right well. My Subſtance was not 
bid from thee, when I was made in ſecret. Concerning 


” ——__. 9-8. - 


the 


-\ 


o D 4 * a 


ternal Condemnation; and that therefore ſuch Con- 
ictions: muſt be ſome Way» implied in what is wrought 


all thoſe Things which are implied or preſuppoſed in an 


ſo that the Saints know not what to make of it. The 


as difficult to know the Way of the Spirit in the new 


in the Womb of her that is with Child: Even ſo tbr 


in the Womb; Gal. iv. 19. And therefore the Church 
1s called Chriſt's Mother, Cant. ii. 11. And fois every 


a Believer, by the Power of the ſame Holy Ghoſt. Anek 
we know not what is the Way of the Spirit, nor hoc 
the Bones do grow, either in the Womb, or Heart that 
conceives this holy Child. The new Creature may uſe 
that Language in Pal. cxxxix. 14. 15. I am*fearfully 


the Generation of Chriſt, both in his Perſon, and alſo n | 


88 What are no Signs Part If 


= | | . 4 , . 
the Hearts of his People, it may be ſaid, as in Ifai. lis 
8. Who can declare his Generation. We know not the 
Works of God, that worketh all. *Tis the Glory' of 
Cod to conceal a Thing, (Prov. xxv. 2.) and to have hy 
\ Path as it were in the mighty Waters, that his Footftey 

may not be known: And eſpecially in the Works of tis 

Spirit on the Hearts of Men, which are the higheſt and 

chief of his Works. And therefore it is ſaid, Iſai. xl, 
13. Who bath directed the Spirit of the Lord, or being hi 

" Counſellor, hath taught him. *Tis to be feared that ſome 
have gone too far towards directing the Spirit of the 

Lord, and marking out his Foot ſteps for him, and 

limiting him to certain Steps and Methods. Exper: 
ence plainly ſhews, that God's Spirit is unſearchable 
and untraceable, in ſome of the beſt of Chriſtians, in 

the Method of his Operations, in their Converſion : 

Nor does the Spirit of God proceed diſcernably in the 
Steps of a particular eſtabliſhed Scheme, one half 6 

often as is imagined. A Scheme of what is neceſſary, 
and according to a Rule already received and eſtabliſhed 
by common Opinion, has a vaſt (tho' to many) a very 
inſenſible Influence in forming Perſons Notions of the 
Steps and Method of their own Experiences. I know 
very well what their Way is; for I have had much Oppor- 
tunity to obſerve it. Very often, at firſt, their Expe- 
riences appear like a confuſed Chaos, as Mr., Shepard 
expreſſes 1t: But then thoſe Paſſages of their Experience 
are pick'd out, that have moſt of the Appearance of 
ſuch particular Steps that are inſiſted on; and theſe are 
delt upon in the Thoughts, and theſe are told of from 

Time to Time, in the Relation they give: Theſe Parts 
| grow brighter and brighter in their View; and others, 
being neglected, grow more and more obſcure: And 
wWiuhat they have experienc'd is i nſenſibly ſtrain'd to bring 

all to an exact Conformity to the Scheme that is eſta- 


I .* bliſhed. And it becomes natural for Miniſters, who 
have to deal with them and direct them that inſiſt upon 
Diſtinctneſs and Clearneſs of Method, to do fo too. 

Je | . | But 


I 6 y ” 
« - * 
—— — 4—— — ——— — —— ⏑— —ä—ͤũ nn — 


Parr Il. to diffinguiſh Aﬀethions, 39 
But yet there has been ſo much to be ſeen of the Ope- 
rations of the Spirit of God, of late, that they who 
have had much to do with Souls; and are not blinded 
with a ſeven-fold Veil of Prejudice, muſt know that the 
Spirit is fo exceeding various in the Manner of his 
operating; that in many Caſes it is impoſſible: to trace 
him, or find out his Way, Det n 
What we have principa ly to do with; in our Enquiries 
into our own State, or Directions we give to others, is 
the Nature of the F ffect hat God has brought to Le 9 
in the Soul. As to the Steps which the Spirit of | 
took to bring that Effect to pais, we may leave them to 
him. We are often in Scripture expreſly directed to 
ourſelves by the Nature of the Fruits of the Spirit; bur 
no where by the Spirit's Methed of producing them.“ 
Many do greatly err in their Notions of a clear Work 
of Convertion; calling that a clear Work, where the 
ſucceſſive Steps of Inttuence, and M thod of Experi- 
ence is clear: Whereas that indeed is the cleareſt Work 
(not where the Order of doing is cleareſt) but where the 
ſpiritual and divine Nature of the Work done, and Effect 8 
wrought, is molt clear. 29 :,, _- 
TSS, IX. , 


4 

* Mr. Shepard, ſpeaking of the Soul's cloſing with Chriſt, ſays, 
+ As a Child cannot tell how his Soul comes into it, nor it may be 
*© when; but afterwards it ſees and feels that Life; ſo that he were 
« 2s bad as a Beaſt, that ſhould deny an immortal Soul; fo here.” 
Parable of the ten Virgins, Part II. p. 172. - . + op 

1% If the Man do ä ime of — Converſion,” or firſt | 
« cloſing with Chriſt; may not draw any perem | 
1 Concluſion from thence, that he is not godly.”  Stoddard”s Cad | 
to Chriſt, p. 13. | | 3 _ - 

« Do * think there is no Compunction, or Senſe of Sin, wrought 
in the Soul, becauſe you cannot fo clearly diſcern and feel it; nor 
* the Time of the Working, and firſt Beginning of it. I have 
* known many that have come with their Complaints, that they were 
« never humbled, they never felt it ſo; yet there it hath been, and 
many Times they have ſeen it, by the other Spectacles, and bleſs'd 
God for it.” Shepard's ſound Believer, p. 38. the late Impreſ- 
bon in Beff n. * G . | 


* 


98 - What are mo Signs Fax f. 


IX. *Tis no certain Sign that the religious Aﬀe&tion 
which Perſons have are ſuch as have in them the Nature 
of true Religion, or that they have not, that they dif. 
poſe Perſons to ſpend much Time in Religion, and to be 
wealouſly engaged in the external Duties of Worſhip. 
This has, very unreaſonably, of late been looked 
upon as an Argument againft the religious Affection 
which ſome have had, that they ſpend ſo much Time in 
reading, praying, ſinging, hearing Sermons, and the 
like. *T1s plain from the Scripture, that it is the Ten- 
dency of true Grace to cauſe Perſons very much to 
delight in ſuch religious Exerciſes. True Grace had 
this Effect on Anna the Propheteſs; Luke i. 37. She 
departed not from the Temple; but ſerved God wi 40 Faſt- 
ings and Prayers, Night and Day. And Grace had this 
Effect upon the primitive Seide in Jeruſalem; Acts 
H. 46, 47. they continuing daily, with one Accord in 
the Temple, and breaking Bread from Houſe to Houſe, did 
eat their Meat with Gladneſs, and Sin ene ſs of Heart, 
raiſing God. Grace made Daniel delight in the Duty of 
Prayer, and ſolemnly to attend it three Times a Day: 
As it alſo did David, Pal. lv. 17. Evening, Morning, 
and at Noon, will I pray. Grace makes the 840 delight 
in ſinging Praiſes to God. Pal. cxxxv. 3. Sing Praiſe 
unte his Name, for it is pleaſant. And cxlvii. 1. Praiſe 
ze the Lord, for it is good to fing Praiſes unto our God, 
for it is pleaſant, and Praiſe is comely. It alſo cauſes 
them to delight to hear the Word of God preached, 
It makes the Goſpel a joyful Sound to them; Pal. Ixxxix. 
16. And makes the Feet of thoſe who publifh theſe 
Tidings, to be beautiful: Iſai. Iii. 7. How beautiful 
: 4pon the Mountains are the Feet of bim that bringeth good 
idings, &c. It makes them love God's publick Wor- 
fhip; Pſal. xxvi. 8. Lord, I have loved the Habitation of 
thy Houſe, and the Place where thine Honour dwelleth. 
And xxvii. 4. One Thing have I defired of the Lord, that 
will F ſeek after, that I may dwell in the Houſe of the 
Lord, all the Days of * Life; to bebold the Beauty =? 
| Lor 
M 


32 


"> cow ww 55 F9©& . 4&0 8 TT 5 


# w——_—_ F ww a 


to diſtinguiſh Aﬀettions. .' 91 
Lord, and 10 enquire in his Temple. Pal. Ixxxiv. 1, 2, 
xc. How amiable are thy Tabernacles, O Lord of Hoſts! * 
My Soul longeth, yea even fainteth, for the Courts of the ? 
Lord.— Tea the Sparrow hath found an Houſe, and the : 
Swallow a Neſt for berſelf, where ſhe may lay her Young, 
even thine Altars, O Lord of Hoſts, my King and my God. 


Bleſſed are they that dwell in thine Houſe; they will be fill © 


praiſing thee. © Bleſſed is the Man in whoſe Heart are the | 
Ways of them, who paſſing through the Valley of Baca, 
go from Strength to Strength, every one of them in Zion 
appeareth before God, —Verile 10. A Day in thy Courts is 


better than a Thouſand. | 
This is the Nature of true Grace. But yet, on the 


other Hand, Perſons being diſpoſed to abound and to | 


be zealouſly engaged in the external Exerciſes of Reli- 
gion, and to ſpend much Time in them, is no ſure Evi- 
dence of Grace; becauſe ſuch a Diſpoſition is found in 
many that have no Grace. So it was with the [/raehtes - 
of old, whoſe Services were abominable to God; they 


ſees, they made long Prayers, and faſted. twice a Week. 
Falſe Religion may cauſe Perſons to be loud and earneſt 
in Prayer: Iſai. Iviii. 4. Ze ſhall not faſt as ye do this iſ 
Day, to cauſe your Voice to be heard on high. That Reli- i 
gion which is not ſpiritual and ſaving, may cauſe Men to 
delight in religious Duties and Ordinances: Iſai. Iviii. 2. 
Zet they ſeek me daily, and delight to know my Ways; asa _ 
Nation that did Righteouſneſs, and forſook not the Ordi- 
nance of their God. They aſt of me the Ordinances of. © 
Juſtice, they take delight in approaching to God. It may 
cauſe them to take Delight in hearing the Word of God. 
preached; as it was with Ezetiel's Hearers, Ezek. xxxiii. 
31, 32. And they come unto thee as my People cometh, and 
they fit before thee as my People, and they hear thy Words; | 
Put they will not do them: for with their Mouth they ſhew: | 
much Lode ; but their Heart goeth after their Covetauſneſt 9 


attended the new Moons, and Sabbath, and calling of 4 | 


Aſſemblies, and ſpread forth their Hands, and made many % 
Prayers; Wai. i. 12,-—15. So it was with the Phari- "I 


92 What are no Signs _ Parr, Il. 
And Io, thou art unto them, as a very lovely Song, of one 
that hath a pleaſunt Voice, and can play well on an Inſtru- 
ment: For they hear thy Words, but they do them not. So 
it was with Herod, he heard John the Baptiſt gladly; 
Mark vi. 20. So it was with others of his Hearers, for 
A Scaſon, they rejoiced in his Light; John v. 35. So the 
ſtony- ground Hearers heard the Word OY 
Experience ſhews that Perſons, from falſe Religion, 
may be inclined to be exceeding abundant in the exter- 
nal Exerciſes of Religion; yea, to give themſelves up 
to them, and devote almoſt their whole Time to them. 
-Formerly a Sort of People were very numerous in the 
Romiſb Church, called Recluſes; who forſook the World, 
and utterly abandon'd the Society of Mankind, and 
fhut themfelves up cloſe, in a narrow Cell, with a Vow 
never to ſtir out of it, nor to ſee the Face of any of 
Mankind any more; (unleſs that they might be vilited 
in Caſe of Sickneſs); to ſpend all their Days in the Exer- 
ciſes of Devotion and Converſe with God. There were 
alſo inold Time, great Multitudes called Hermits and 


Ancborites, that left the World to ſpend all their Days 


in loneſome Deſarts, to give themſelves up to religious 
Contemplations and Exerciſes of Devotion; ſome Sorts 
of them having no Dwellings, but the Caves and Vaults 


of the Mountains, and no Food, but the ſpontaneous 
Productions of the Earth.——T once lived for many 


Months, next Door to a Few, (the Houſes adjoining 
one to another) and had much Opportunity daily to 
obſerve him; who appeared to me the devoureſt Perſon 
that ever I faw in my Life: great Part of his Time being 
ſpent in Acts of Devotion, at his eaſtern Window, 
Which open'd next to mine, ſeeming to be moſt earneſtly 
engaged, not only in the Day Time, but ſometimes 
whole Nights. | 


X. Nothing can be certainly known of the Nature of 
— Affections by this, that they much diſpoſe 
Perſons with their Mouths to praiſe and n 


* 


Parr II. to diſtinguiſb Afectiont. 93 
This indeed 1s implied in what has been juſt now obſerved, '! 
of abounding and ſpending much Time in the external 
Exerciſes of Religion, and was alſo hinted before; but 
becauſe many ſeem to look upon it as a bright Evidence ' 
of gracious Affection, when Perſons appear greatly diſ- 
poſed to praiſe and magnify God, to have their Mouths 
full of his Praiſes, and affectionately to be calling on 
others to praiſe and extol him, I thought it deſerved a 
more particular Conſideration. v3 
No Chriſtian will make it an Argument againſt a Per- 
ſon, that he ſeems to have ſuch a Diſpoſition. . Nor can 
it reaſonably be look'd upon as an Evidence for a Perſon, 
if thoſe Things that have been already obſerved and 
proved, be duly conſidered, viz. that Perſons, without 
Grace, may have high AfﬀeCtiongtowards God and Chriſt, 
and that their Affections, bei ong, may fill their 
Mouths, and incline them to ak much, and very 
earneſtly, about the Things they are affected with, and 
that there may be Counterfeits of all Kinds of gracious | 
Affection. But it will appear more evidently and directly, ll 
that this is no certain Sign of Grace, if we conſider 
what Inſtances the Scripture gives us of it in thoſe than i 
were graceleſs, We often have an Account of this, in 
the Multitude that were preſent when Chriſt . preached! i 
and wrought: Miracles; Mark ii. 12. Aud immediately WW 
be aroſe, took up bis Bed, and went forth before them all: 
Inſomuch that they were all amazed, and glorified Ged., 
ſaying, We never ſaw it on this Faſhion!' So Matth. Ix. 
8. and Luke v. 26. Alſo Matth. xv. 31. J[n/omuch that 
the Multitude wondered, when they ſat the Dumb to ſpeak, 
and tha Maimed to be whole, the Lame to walt, and be 
Blind to ſee; and they glorified the God of Iſrael. So we: 
are told, that on Occaſion of Chriſt's raiſing the Son of 
the Widow of Nain, Luke vii. 16. There. came a great i 
Fear on all; and they glorified God, ſaying, that'a great 
"Prophet is riſen up among us, and that God: hath ute! Mi 
lit People. So we read of their glorifying Chriſt, rẽ 
ſpeaking exceeding highly of him, Luke w. 15. r be: 8 
| taught 


2 


* 1 m CI 4 * 
: * - * 2 
"> 


I bat are no Signs PART. Il, 


| 96 
. tung bi in their” Synagogues, being glorified of all. And 


how did they praiſe him with loud Voices, crying, Ho- 
Janna to the Son of David, Hoſanna in the Higheſt. Big. 
fed is be that cometh in the Name of the Lord, a little 
before he was crucified! And after Chriſt's Aſcenſion, 
when the Apoſtles had heal'd the impotent Man, we are 
told, that all Men glorified God for that which was done, 
Acts iv, 21, When the Gentiles in Autioch of Piſi dis, 
heard from Pau! and Barnabas, that God would re ect 
the Jeus, and take the Gentiles to be his People in thei 
Room, they were affected with this Goodneſs of God to 
the Gentiles, and glorified the Word of the Lord: But all 

| That did fo, were not true Believers; but only a certain 
elect Number of them; as is intimated in the Account 
we have of ik; Acts xiii. 48. And when the Gentiles 
; beard this, they were þ wn glorified the Word of the 
Lord; and as many as dained to eternal Life, believed, 
Jos of old, the Children of Irael, at the Red Sea, ſang 
God's Proiſe; but ſoon forgat his Works, And tlie Jews 
min Ezekiel's Time, with their Mouth ſbewed much Love, 
while their Heart went after their Covetouſneſs. And tis 
foretold of falſe Profeſſors, and real Enemies of Reli- 
gion, chat they ſhould ſnew a Forwardneſs to glorify 
God; Tai. Ixvi. 5. Hear ye the Word of the Lord, ye 
that tremble at 55 Vord: Your Brethren that bated you, 


| * ſaid, Let the Lord 


ed 

| is no certain Sign, that a Perſon js graciouſly 
affeted; if in the Midſt A of his Hopes and Comforts, he 

is greatly affected with God's'unmerited Mercy to him 
tha is {o unworthy, and ſeems greatly to extol and-mag- 
 nify free Grace, Thoſe that yet remain with unmortt- 
fed Pride and Enmity againſt God, may, when they 
8 that they have received extraordinary Kindneſs 
from God, ery out of their Unworthineſs, and magnify 
; God's andeſcrned Goodneſs to them, from no other 
Convictions of their Jll-deſervings, and from no higher 
4 Principle, than Saul * who, while he yet romaney 


Wl 


. 


Parr. II. 0 diflinguifh Aﬀettitns. . 


4 extraordinary Circumſtances; as in the Caſe f 


" as 
* 2 nn 0 FI 
* * a * 
* - 
- 
- 


7 
95 

with unſubdued Pride and Enmity againft David, was 
brought, tho' a King, to acknowledge his Unworthineſs, 
and cry out, I have played the Fool, I have erred exceed. 
ingly, and with great Affection and Admiration, to 
magnify and extol David's unmerited and unexampled 
Kindneſs to him, 1 Sam. XXV. 16,——19, and xxvi. 21. 
And from no higher Principle, than that from whence 
Nebuchadnezzar was affected with God's Diſpenſations, 
that he ſaw and was the Subject of, and praiſes, extols 
and honours the King of Heaven; and both he and 
Darius, in their high Affections, call upon all Nations 
to praiſe God. Dan. iii. 28, 29, 305 * . * 2,9 34+ | 
35, 37, and vi. 25, 26, 27, 


XI. *Tjs no > Sign that Affections aresright, or chi 
they are wrong, that they make Perſons that have them, 
exceeding confident, that 2 they r is 8 
and that they are in a good Eſtate. 

It is an Argument with ſome, againſt Perſons, chat 
they are deluded if they pretend to be aſſured of ther 
good Eſtate, and to be carried beyond all Doubting f 
the Favour of God; ſuppoſi that there is no fuck Wl 
Thin to be expected in the (horch of God, as a full 
abſolute —— of Hope; unleſs it be in ſome 


Martyrdom: Contrary to the Doctrine of Proteſtants, 
which has been maintained by the moſt celebrated Wri- 
ters againſt the Papiſts; and contrary to the plaineſt 
Scripture Evidence, It is manifeſt that it was a common 
Thing for the Saints we have a Hiſtory, or parti- 
cular Account of in Scripture, to be aſſured, Godin 
the plaineſt and moſt poſitive Manner, revealed and 
teſtified his fpecial Favour to Noab, Abrabam, Iſaac, 
_ Moſes, 50," Dawes and pra =” ny ſpeaks of 
incerity tneſs with the greateſt imagina- 
ble Confidence ha gh oe] — God to 
witneſs to it; and ſays plainly, I know that my Redeemer- 


Pouch, ny her 1 ful jr him for myſelf, and not whe. 
ther, 


3 «BY as 9 
o 
=- 


* 


96 Nu are no Sigm * PAN H. r. 


tber, Job xix, 25, & c. David, throughout the Bock 
of Palms, almoſt every where ſpeaks without any Heſi. 
tancy, and in the moſt poſitive Manner, of God as his 
God: glorying in him as his Portion and Heritage. his 
Rock and Confidence, his Shield, Salvation and high 
Tower, and the like. Hezetiab appeals to God, as ont 
that knew that he had walked before him in Truth and 
with a perfect Heart, 2 Kings xx. 3. Jeſus Chriſt, in 
his dying Diſcourſe with his eleven Diſciples, in the 14th, 
i gth and 16th Chapters of Jobn, (which was as it were 
Chhriit's laſt Will and Teſtament to his Diſciples, and to 
his whote Church) often declares his ſpecial and ever- 
laſting Love to them, in the plaineſt and moſt poſitive 
Terms; and promiſes them a tuture Participation with 
im in his Glory, in the maſt abſolute Manner; and 
tells them at the ſame Time, that he does ſo, to the End 
that their Joy might be full; John xv. 11. Theſe Things 
bave I ſpoken unto you, that my Fry might remain in you, 


* 


ea that your Foy might be full. See alſo at the Conclu- 


Bon of his whole Ducourſe, Chap. xvi. g 3. Theſe Things 
" Gavel ſpoken unto you, that in me ye might have Peace, 
In the World ye ſhall have Tribulation; but be of good 
Cheer. I bave overcome the World. Chriſt was not afraid 
df ſpeaking too piainly and poſitively ta them: He did 
not de ſire to hold them in the leaſt Suſpenſe. And he 
concluded that laſt Diſcourſe of his, with a Prayer in 
their Preſence, wherein he ſpeaks poſitively to his Fa- 
ther of thoſe eleven Diſciples, as having all of them 
ſavingly known him, and believed in him, and received 
and kept his Word; and that they were not of the 
World; and that for their Sakes he ſanctified himſelf; 
and that his Will was that they ſnould be with him in his 

Glory: And tells his Father, that he ſpake theſe Things 

in his Prayer, to the End, that his Joy might be ful - 
filled in them, Verſe 13. By theſe Things it is evident, 


that tis agreeable to Chriſt's Deſigns, and the contrived 


Ordering and Diſpoſition Chriſt makes of Things in his 


Church, that there ſhould be ſufficient and \abundant 
3 Proviſion 


„. eee 


2 


n 


* . ooo” Wy — Ce Poo as ad mind AS hid 


„ C T S 5 I 5 5 


to diſtinguiſp Aſections. 97 


PART IT. 


Proviſion made, that his Saints might have full Aſſuraice = 


of their future Glory. 
The Apoſtle Paul, through all his Epiſtles. ſpeakesi in 


an aſſured Strain; ever ſpeaking poſitively of his ſpecial 
Relation to Chriſt, his Lord and Maſter and Redeemer, 
and his Intereſt in, and Expectation of the future Re- 
ward. It would be endleſs to take Notice of all Places 
that might be enumerated; I ſhall mention but three or - 
four, Gal ii. 20. Chriſt liveth in me, and the Life which 
Tnow live in the Fleſh, I live by the Faith of the Son of 
God; who loved me, and gave himſelf for me, Phil. i. 21. 
For me to live is Chriſt, and to die is Gain. 2 Tim. i. 12. J 
knew whom I have believed; and I am perſuaded that he is 
able to keep that which I bare committed to him, againſt that 
Day. 2 Tim. i. 8. I have fought a good Fight ;, I have 
* 5 my Courſe; 1 have kept the Faith: Henceforth there 
laid up for me a Crown of Righteouſneſs, which the 
Lard, the righteous Judge, will give me at that Day. 


And the Nature of the Covenant of Grace, and God's & 


declared Ends in the Appointment and Conſtitution of 
Things in that Covenant, do plainly ſhew it to be God's 
Deſign, ro make ample Proviſion for the Saints having 
an aſſured Hope of eternal Life, while living here upon 
Earth. For ſo are all Things ordered and contrived in 
that Covenant, that every Thing might be made ſure on 
God's Part. The Covenant is ordered in all Things, and 
fure: The Fromiſes are moſt full, and very otten re- 
peated, and various Ways exhibited; and there are 
many Witneſſes, and many Seals; and God has confir- 
med his Promiſes with an Oath. And God's declared 
Deſign in all this is, that the Heirs of the Promiſes 
might have an undoubting Hope, and full Joy, in an 
Aſſurance of their future Glory. Heb. vi. 17, 18. 
Mberein God willing, more abundantly to ſbety to the Heirs 
of Promiſe, the Immutability of bis Counſel, confirmed it 
by an Oath; that by two . Things, in whith it 
Was impoſſible for. God to Lie, we might "have a ſtrong 

bee who have fed for Refuge, to lay bold on the 
Hope 


98 Vat are no Signs Paxr 1! 


Me /et before us. But all this would be in vain, 9 
any ſuch Purpoſe, as the Saints ſtrong Coniolation, an 
Hope of their obtaining future Glory, if their Intereſ 
in thoſe ſure Promiſes in ordinary Caſes, was not atiain 
able. For God's Fromiſes and Oaths, let chem beg 
ſure as they will, can't gi c {trong Hope ana Comiort u 
any particular Perſon, any further than he can knoy 
that thoſe Promiſes are made to him. And in vain » 
Proviſion made in Jeſus Chriſt, that Believers might be 
perfect as pertaining to the Conſcience, as is fignificd 
Heb. ix. 9. if Aſſurance of Freedom from the Guilt of 
Sin is not attainable. 
It further appears that Aſſurance is not only attainable 
in ſome very extraordinary Caſes, that all Chriſtians are 
directed to give all Diligence to make their Calling and 
Election ſure, and are told how they may do it, 2 Pet. 
 L.5.—8. And 'tis ſpoken of as a Thing very uobeco. 
ming of Chriſtians, and an Argument of ſomething very 
_ . Þlameable in them, not to know whether Chriſt be in 


© them or no; 2 Cor. xiii, 5. Know ye not your own ſelves, 


. bow that Jeſus Chriſt is in you, except ye be Reprobates? 
And 'tis implied that it is an Argument of a very blame: 
able Negligence in Chriſtians, if they practice Chriſtu- 
nity after ſuch a Manner as to remain uncertain' of the 
Reward, in that 1 Cor. ix. 26. I therefore ſo run, as mt 
uncertainly. And to add no more, it is manifeſt, that 
Chriſtians knowing their Intereſts in the ſaving Benefits 
of Chriſtianity, is a Thing ordinarily attainable, becauſe 
the Apoſtles tell us by what Means Chriſtians (and not 
only . Apoſtles and Martyrs) were wont to know this; 
I Cor. 11. 12. Now ve have received, not the Spirit of 
the World, but the Spirit which is of God, that we might 
know the T hings that are freely given to us of God. And 
1 John ii. 3. And hereby do we know that we know him, 
15 we keep his Commandments. And Verſe 5. Hereh 
| Fnow wwe that wwe are in bim. Chap. iii. 14. We know 
that we are paſſed from Death to Life, becauſe we love 
the Brethren. Verſe 12. Hereby we know that we po of 
| | # 


ä nm 


arr II. fo v difinguiſ 28 


be Truth, and ſball ** our Hearts before him. Verſe 
. Hereby we know that be abideth in us, by the Spirit 

2 be bath given us. So Chap. iv, 13. and Chap. v. 

and Verſe 19. 

Therefore it muſt needs be very unreaſonable to deter- 


g, becauſe they ſeem to be out of Doubt of their 


f, ſeem to baniſh all Fears of Hell. 
On the other Hand, it is no ſufficient Reaſori to deter- 
mine, that Men are Saints, and their Affections gracious, 
vecauſe the Affections they have are attended with an 
-xceeding Confidence that their State is good, and their 
affections divine.“ Nothing can be certainly argued 
from their Confidence, how great and ſtrong ſoever it 
ſeems to be. If we ſee a Man that boldly calls God his 
Father, and commonly ſpeaks in the moſt bold, fami- 
Jiar and appropriating Language in Prayer, My Father 
my dear Regeemer, my ſweet Saviour, my Beloved, an 
L hke,-and it is a common Thing for him to uſe the 
moſt nent N 2 before Men, about the Good- 


neſs of his 8 tate; 
* 


7 0 Pro > 0c Took caretully to your Foundation: Re not! high 
ſ ninded, but fear. You have, it may be, done and ſuffered many 
i L Mie in and for Religion; you have excellent Gifts and ſweet 

; a warm Zeal for God, and high Confidence of your 

6 - nga ty: " All this may be right, for aught that I, or (it may be) 

now : But yet, 4 is poſſible it may be falſe alſo. You have 

a — judged yourſelves, and pronounced yourſelves upright ; 

« #* but remember your final Sentence is not yet pronounced by your 

e if God weigh you over again, in his more 

« — Balance: and. ſhould ſay, Mene, Teiel. Thou art wei — 

in the Balanee, and art found wanting! What a confounded 

* wilt thon be, under ſuch 2 Sentence ! Que /plendent in 2 | 

* Hominis, fordent in Conſpectu Judicis; Things that are highly 


* ſeeth not as Man ſeeth. Thy Heart may be falſe, and thou not 

* know it: Vea, it may be falſe, and thou fron ly confident of its 

fl —_— ” Flavel's Touchftoe of Sincerity, Chap. ii. Sect. 5. 
Some H are 2 great deal more confident than many 


ypocrites 
aints.“  Srodard's Diſcouri on the Way to kndw Sincerity and | 


Fopeerig, page 128. 


99 


Fn. that Perſons are Hypocrites, and their Affections 
= Loh. and the Affections they are the Subjects 


ch as, I know certainly that God is of 


* eſteemed of Men, are an Abomination in the Sight of God: He 


100 What are no Signs Parr Il. 
my Father; I know ſo ſurely. as there is a God in Heavn, 
| that be is my Cod; I know I ſhall go to Heaven, as wel 
as if I were there; I know that God is now manifeſting 
himſelf to my Soul, and is now ſmiling upon me: And 
ſeems to have done forever with any Enquiry or Exami. 
nation into his State, as a Thing ſufficiently known, and 
out of Doubt, and to contemn al that ſo much as inti- 
mate or ſuggeſt, that there is ſome Reaſon to Doubt or 
Fear whether all is right; ſuch Things are no Signs at 
all that it is indeed ſo as he is confident it is. Such an 
over-bearing, high-handed and violent Sort of Confi- 
dence as this, ſo affecting to declare itſelf with a moſt 
glaring Show, in the _ of Men, which is to be ſeen 
in many, has not, the Countenance of a true Chriſtian 
Aſſurance: It favours more of the Spirit of the Phari. 
ſees, who never doubted but that they were Saints, and 
the moſt eminent of Saints, and were bold to go to 
God, and come up near to him, and lift up their Eyes, 
and thank him for the great Diſtinction he had made 
between them and other Men; and when Chriſt inti- N ti 
. mated that they were blind and graceleſs, deſpiſed the I x 
Suggeſtion; John ix. 40. And ſome of the Phariſees which Il 1 
were with him, heard theſe Words, and ſaid unto bin, il C 
Are we blind alſo? If they had more of the Spirit of the Ill a 
Publican, with their Confidence, who in a Senſe of his Ill ] 
exceeding Unworthineſs, ſtood afar off, and durſt not ll 2 
ſo much as lift up his Eyes to Heaven, but ſmote on Ill « 
his Breaſt, and cried out of himſelf as a Sinner, their ll t 
. * Confidence. | 
+ ,** Doth the Work of Faith in ſome Believers, bear upon its top 
*« Branches, the full ripe Fruits of a bleſſed Aſſurance? Lo, what 
« ſtrong Confidence, and high-built Perſuaſions of an Intereſt in | 
«© God, have ſometimes been found in unſaftified Ones. Yea, fo | 
A ſtrong may this falſe Aſſurance be, that they dare boldly venture 
to go to the Judgment Seat of God, and there defend it; Doth 
the Spirit of fill the Heart of the aſſured Believer with Joy 
*« unſpeakable and full of Glory, giving them, through Faith, a 
10 Prelibation or Foretaſte of Heaven itſelf, in thoſe firſt Fruits of it? 
Ho near to this comes what the Apoſtle ſuppoſes may be found 
in Apoſtates!” Flavel's Huſbandry ſpiritualized, Chap, 12, 


— 


— 


ART. II. to diſtinguiſh Aﬀettiom. 101 
confidence would have more of the Aſpect of the Con- 
dence of one that humbly truſts and hopes in Chriſt, 
and has no Confidence in himſelf. 
If we do but conſider what the Hearts of natural Men 
ate, what Principles they are under the Dominion of, 
what Blindneſs and Deceit, what Selt-Flattery, Self- 
Exaltation and Self-Confidence- reigns there, we need 
not at all wonder that their high Opinion of themſelves, 
and Confidence of their happy Circumſtances, be as 
high and ſtrong as Mountains, and as violent as a Tem- 
= when once Conſcience is blinded, and Convictions 


i'd, with falſe, high Affections, and thoſe foremen- 


tion'd Principles let looſe, fed up and prompted by 
falſe Joys and Comforts, excited by ſome pleaſing Ima- 


ginations impreſs'd by Satan, transforming himſelf into 
| an Angel of Light. 


When once a Hypocrite is thus eſtabliſh'd in a falſe 
Hope, he has not thoſe Things to cauſe him to call his 


Hope in Queſtion, that oftentimes are the Occaſion of 


the Doubting of true Saints; as Firſt, He has that cau- 
tious Spirit, that great Senſe of the vaſt Importance of 


a ſure Foundation, and that Dread of being deceived. | 


The Comforts of the true Saints increaſe Awakening and 
Caution, and a lively Senſe how great a Thing it is to 


appear before an infinitely holy, juſt and omniſcient 
Judge. But falſe Comforts put an End to theſe Things, 


and dreadfully ſtupify the Mind. Secondly, The Hypo- 
crite has not the Knowledge of his own Blindneſs, and 
the Deceitfulneſs of his own Heggt, and that mean Opi- 
nion of his own Underſtanding, ® 

Thoſe that aredeluded with falſe Diſcoveries and Aﬀec- 
tions, are evermore highly conceited of their Light and 
Underſtanding. Thirdly, The Devil don't aſſault the 
Hope of the Hypocrite, as he does the Hope of a true 
Saint. The Devil is a great Enemy to à true Chriſtian 
Hope, not only becauſe it tends greatly to the Comfort 
of him that hath it, but alſo becauſe it is a Thing of. a 
holy, heavenly Nature, greatly tending to promogna 

| cher 


— 


at the true Saint has. 


„ 


2 


& Py. 0 * * o N 7 4 4 * 3 oy * *. * P » 
1 2 na 2 Pit 7 . n 0 * * "YL * 1 DT n Fa Wy 4 9 1 
" a> a... 2 : . , 9 9 5 L "5 A 4 3 
_— 4 * 1 8 
: * , 
2 * What are No S. 
= * 
1 - 


cheriſh Grace in the Heart, and a great Incentive 9 
Strictneſs and Diligence in the chriitian Life. But he 
is no Enemy to the Hope of a Hypocrite, which abo 
all Things eſtabliſhes his Intereſt in him that has it. 4 
Hypocrite may retain his Hope without Oppoſition, a 
long as he lives, the Devil never diſturbing it, not 
attempting to diſturb it. But there is perhaps no true 
Chriſtian but what has his Hope aſſaulted by him, 
Satan aſſaulted Chriſt himſelf, upon this, whether he 
were the Son of God or no: And the Servant is not 
above his Maſter, nor the Diſciple above his Lord; w- 
enough for the Diſciple, that is moſt privileged in thi 
World, to be as his Maſter. Forrthly, He who has a 
falſe Hope, has not that Sight of his own Corruptions, 
which the Saint has. A true Chriſtian has ten Time 
40 much to do with his Heart, and its Corruptions, as an 
Hypocrite: And the Sins of his Heart and Practice, 
appear to him in their Blackneſs; they look dreadful; 
and it often appears a very myſterious Thing, that any 


Grace can be conſiſtent with ſuch Corruption, or ſhould 


be in ſuch a Heart. But a falſe Hope hides Corruption, 
covers it all over, and the Hypocrite looks clean and 
bright in his own Eyes. I"; þ OY 
There are two Sorts of Hypocrites: one that are 
_ deceived with their outward Morality and external Reli- 
ion; many of which are profels'd Arminians, in the 
Hotine of Juſtification: And the other, are thoſe that 
are deceived with falſe Diſcoveries and Elevations; which 
often cry down Workgy and Men's own Righteouſneſs, 
and talk much of freE Grace; but at the ſame Time 
make a Righteouſneſs of their Diſcoveries, ang of their 
Humiliation, and exalt themſelves to Heaven with them. 
Theſe two Kinds of Hypocrites Mr. Shepard, in his 
Expoſition of the Parable of the ten Virgins, diſtin- 
guiſhes by the Names of legal and evangelical! Hypocrites; 
and often ſpeaks of the latter as the worſt, And 'tis 
evident, that the latter are commonly by far the molt 
' Eohfident in their Hope, and with the moſt Difficulty 
X " brought 


Bm ns AMI eres s HESMNSSSS PL} MMRTS PRFODPTS- 


ParT II. to diſlinguiſh Affections. 103 


brought off from it: I have ſcarcely known the Inſtance 
of ſuch an one, in my Life, that has been undeceived. 
The chief Grounds of the Confidence of many of them, 
are the very ſame Kind of Impulſes and ſuppoſed Reve- 
ations,” (fometimes with Texts of Scripture, and ſome- 
times without) that ſo many of late have had concerning 
future Events; calling theſe Impulſes about their good 
Eſtate, the Witneſs of the Spirit; intirely miſunder- 
ſtanding the Nature of the Witneſs of the Spirit, as I 
ſhall ſhew hereafter. Thoſe that have had Viſions and 
Impulſes about other Things, it has generally been to 
reveal ſuch Things as they are deſirous and fond 
of: And no wonder, that Perſons who give heed ta 
ſuch Things, have {ame Sort of Viſions or Impreſſions 
about their own eternal Salvation, to reveal to them 
that their Sins are forgiven them, that their Names 
are written in the Book of Life, that they are in 
high Fayour with God, Sc. and eſpecially when they _ 
earneſtly ſeek, expect and wait for Evidence of their 
Election and Salvation this Way, as the ſureſt and 
moſt glorious Evidence of it. Neither is it any Won 
der, that when they have ſuch a ſuppoſed Revelation 
of their Eſtate, it raiſes in them the higheſn 
Degree of Confidence of it. *Tis found by abundanr 
Experience, that thoſe who are led away by Impulies,* -* 
and imagined Revelations, are extremely confidentz Mi 
They ſuppoſe that the great Jehovah has declared theſe 
and thoſe Things to them; and having his immediate 
Teſtimony, a ſtrong Confidence is the higheſt Vertue. 
Hence they are bold to ſay, I know this or tbat; I know 
certainly ;---T am as ſure as that I have a Being, and the 
like: And they deſpiſe all Argument and Enquiry in 
the Caſe. And above all Things elſe, tis eaſy to be 
accounted for, that Impreſſions and Impulſes about that 
which is ſo pleaſing, ſo ſuiting their Self-Love and 
Pride, as their being the dear Children of God, diſtin- _M 
guiſhed from moſtgn the World in his Favour, ſhould 
make them ſtrongly confident: Eſpecially when  i 
cha 


* 
9 N 1 

1 

1 
* F 
WERE. N 


— 4 
— 


Wm ens, err 05-0 6 Oe FA” FS 


104 bat are 19 Sign 


their impulſes and Revelations they have high Aﬀec, 
tions, which they take to be the moſt eminent Exerc 
of Grace. I have known of ſeveral Perſons, that haye 
had a fond Deſire of ſomething ot a temporal Nature, 
through a violent Paſſion that has poſleſſed them, and 
they have been earneſtly purſuing the Thing they have 


Difhcuky and many Diſcouragements in it, but at laſt 
have had an Impreſſion or ſuppoſed Revelation that they 
ſhould obtain what they ſought: and they have looked 
upon it as a ſure Promiſe from the moſt High, which 
has made them moſt ridiculouſly confident, againſt 
all Manner of Reaſon to convince them to contrary, and 
all Events working againſt them. And there 1s nothing 
binders, but that Perſons who are ſeeking their Salvation, 
may be deceived by the like deluſive Impreſſions, and 
be made confident of that, the ſame Way. | 
The. Confidence of many of this Sort of Hypocrnes, 
that Mr. Shepard calls evangelical Hypocrites, is like the 
Confidence of ſome mad Men, who think they are 
Kings: They will maintain it againſt all Manner of 
Reaſon and Evidence. And in one Senſe, it is much 
more immoveable than a truly gracious Aſſurance; 2 
1 true Aſſurance is not upheld, but by the SouPs being 
Ekept in a holy Frame, and Grace maintained in lively 
F Exerciſe. | If the Actings of Grace do much decay in 
the Chriitian, and he falls into a lifeleſs Frame, he loſes 
his Aſſurance: But this Kind of Confidence of Hypo- 
crites will no: be ſhaken by Sin: They, (at leaſt ſome of 
them) will maintain their Boldneſs in their Hope, in the 
moſt corrupt Frames and wicked Ways: Which 4 
lure Evidence of their Deluſion.“ And 


„ *— 
— 


7 
' 2 


ll. —_— * r r 


Mr. Shepard. ſpeaks of it; 40 a preſumptuous Peace, that is not initr- 
rupted and broke by evil Works, Aud ſays, that the Spirit will figh, 


and not ſing in that Bojom, whence corrupt Diſpofitions- gnd Paſjiont, 


break out, Aud that though Men in ſusb Frames may ſeem to maintain 
the Conſolamon of the Spirit, and not fag their Hypocriſy, ander 
Pretence . of truſting the Tord: Mercy; yet cannot avoid thr Con 


Pax r. If 


deſired ſnould come to paſs, and have met with great 


ks. 
* 
122 


D 
by 
th 
th 
fic 
th 
4 
up 
$0 
ex 
ſte 


demmation of the Word. Parable of the ten Virgins, Part I. p. 1 * 4 cen 
x ” | 1. f 


ff 


1 


: 


Cl. 


Rr EET TY . 
* 4 0 - - 
* . . . | | 
aur f i 75 11 305 
95 | 
. . 


And here 1 Guet ut ene od an certain 
DgFtrinies often preached to the People, which need to 
be DE ivered with more Caution and Explanggion than 
they frequently are; fog as they are by many underſtood, 
they tend greatly to eſtabliſh this Deluſion and falſe Con- 
fidence of - Hypocrites. The Doctrines I ſpeak. of are 
thoſe of Chriſtians living by Faith, not by 5 ght; their * 
giving Glory to God, by truſting bim in the Dark; living _ 
upon Chriſt, and not upon Experiences; not making their {| 
good Frames the Foundation of their Faith : Which are 
excellent and'im rDo&trines indeed, rightly under- 
ſtood, but corrupt and deſtructive, as many underſtand, 
them. The Scripture ſpeaks of living or "ina te | 


Faith, and not by Sight, 8 — . Way 

diz. a. governed by reef Thing, vj 
that are t ee Faith, — and not 
by-a Reſpect to temporal Things, which are ſeen; and 
believing "Things revealed / that we never ſaw withbodily” 
Eyes; -and alſo J living by Faith in the Promiſe of futur 
Things; without yet ſeeing or enjoying the Things po- 
miſed, or knowing the Way how they can be fulfilled. 
This will be eaſily evident to any one that lobks over, A 
the Scriptures which. ſpeak of Faith in e to 
debt; as 2 Cor, 18, and v. 7. Heb. xi. 1,8, 13,17, | i 
27, 29. Rom. viii. 24. Fohn xx. 29. But this 4 vn 
as it is underſtood by V many, is, that ee ou SN _— 
firmly to believe and truſt in Chriſt, without {| 1 
Sight or Light, and altho' they are in a dark — — = 
and, for the preſent, have no ſpiritual Experiences or 
Diſcoveries. And it is truly the Duty of thoſe who ate ³ 
thus in Dagkneſs, to ann Darknelah into e 


4 
” — * 2 F 6 W 4 
8 1 ah 
_— ——— * CY 8 * ”—_ 


Dr. Ana thealle of it as a Thing, by which the Peace of a i wicked , 
Man may be diſtinguiſhed from the Peace of a godly Man, that "ſl 
* the — of, a wicked Man continues, whether he performs th 
Puties of Piety and Righteouſneſs, or no; provided thoſe ( ps i 
are avoided that appear E F159: _ Caſes o 
kience, Lib. II. * 7. 


- 
— m—_ 


* 


Rx, BP 3 _ Rd * 8 


3 Wy, 4 
f - 1 06 
% 
1 


_ * panies a Title to everlaſting Liſe, is a feeing the Son, and 


or Sight, is an antiſcriptural and abſurd Doctrine. The 


ny Scripture is ignorant of any ſuch Faith in Chriſt of the 


Operation of God, that is not founded in a ſpiritual 
Sight of Chrift : That believing on Chriſt, which accom- 


elieving on bim, John vi. 40. True Faith in Chriſtis never 
exerciſed, any further than Perſons behold as in a Glaſs, 


"obs Glory of the Lord, und have the Knowledpey of the 


Glory 'of God in the Face of Jeſus Cbriſt; 2 Cor. xviii, 


and iv. 6. They into whoſe Minds the Light ef the 


glorious Goſpel of Chriſt, who is the Image of God, does 


not ſhine: They believe not; 2 Cor. iv. 4. That Faith, 


which is without ſpiritual Light, is not the Faith of the 
Children of the Light, and of the Day; but the Pre- 
ſumption of the Children of Darkneſs. - And therefore 
to preſs and urge Men to believe, without any ſpixitual 


Light or Sight, tends greatly to help forward the Delu- 
ions of the Prince of Darkneſs. - Men not only can't 
_ exerciſe — without ſome ſplritual Light, but they can 


exerciſe Faith only juſt in ſuch Proportion as they have 
ſpiritual Light. oy will truſt in God no further than 
< "ai know him: And they can't be in the Exerciſe of 
Faith in him one Ace further than they have a Sight of 
his Fulneſs and Faithfulneſs in Exerciſe, Nor can they 
have the Exerciſe of. Truſt in God, .any further than 
they are in a gractous Frame. They that are in a dead 


| carnal F rame, doubtleſs ought to truſt in God; becauſe 
that would be the ſame Thing as coming out of their 
bad Frame, and turning to God: But to * Men 


confidently co truſt in God, and ſo hold up their Hope 


and Peace, t/o' they are not in a gracious Frame, and 
continue ſtill to be ſo, is the ſame Thing in Effect, as 


to exhort them confidently to truſt in God, but not with a 
gracious Truſt: And what is that but a wicked Pre- 
ſumption? It is juſt fo impoſſible for Men to have 4 


Y firong or lively truſt in God, when they have no lively 


Exerciſes 


A » EE 1 . ” Po * n = "Py 4 4 Y . N Nen p 4 
: * r * >. "vb 7 b ws . * 5 5 0 . 1 : 4, a4 * L —Y 
4 e 42+ "oa * | 1 
— * 1 
| , ' \ 
Py oy 4 * 1 , 
= 
„ * . 
* 


| and believe. But that they ſhould confidently believe 
and truſt, while they yet remain without ſpiritual Light 


bn See E. OO HAY n=” © ©,,0 i 0,4 . er; 


<< © had fats 


G. ere 


Par. II. 1 diſlinguiſo Affection. 107 


Exerciſes of Grace, or ; ſenſible chriſtian Experiences, 
& it is for them to be in the lively Exerciſes of Grace, 


without the Exerciſes of Grace. 

Tis true, that it is the Duty of God"” People to truſt 
in him, when in Darkneſs, and tho' they remain ſtill in 
Darkneſs, in that Senſe, that th 2 to truſt in Gd 
when the Aſpects of his Provideach are dark, and look as 
though God had forſaken them, and did not hear their 
Prayers, and many Clouds gather, and many Enemies 
furround them, with a formidable Aſpect, threatning to 
ſwallow them up, and all Events of Providence ſeem 
to be againſt them, all Circumſtances ſeem to render the 
Promiſes of God difficult to be fullfi'd, and God muſt  -} 
be truſted out of Sight, i. e. when, we can't ſee which 
Way it is poſſible for him ts fulfil his Word, every 8 
Thing but God's meer Word makes it look unlikelys. i 
ſo that if Perſons believe, they muſt Hope againſt Hope. | 
Thus _— Patriarchs, and Job, and the Pſalmiſt, ⁵ 
and Feremiab, Daniel, Shadrach, Meſhech, and Adeanego, 
and dhe Apoſtle Faul, gave Glory to God, by truſting” 
in God in Darkneſs, "£5 we have many Inſtances of 
ſuch a glorious Victorious Faith in the Eleventh of the 
Hebrews. - But how, different a Thing is. this, from 
truſting in God without 2 Sight, and bang at 
the ſame Time ip a dead and carnal Frame! 3 

There is alſo lach 4 Thing as ſpiritual Light's bell 7 
let into the Soul in one Way, when it is not in another; 
and fo there is ſuch a Thing as the Saints truſting in 
God, and alſo knowing their good Eſtate, when 3 | 
' are deſtitute of ſome Kinds of Experience, As for * ; 
Inſtance, they may have clear Views of God's Sufficiency 
and*Faithfylneſs, and fo confidently truſt in him, and 
know that thy are his Children; and at the ſame Time, 
not have thoſe clear and ſweet Ideas of his Love, as at 
other Times: For it was thus with Chriſt himſelf in his 
laſt Paſſion. And they may have Views of much of 
God's Sovereignty, Holineſs and Allſufficiency, read 
them ey to ſubmit 5 him, and exerciſe a hay an 

2 


— — 


1 


2 . oy 8 Mo - 4 * * 
- 


LES 2 
- 
| 108 
* 


moſt encouraging Hope in God's Fulneſs, when 
are not ſatisfied of their own good Eſtate. But how 
different Things are theſe, from confidently truſting in 
God, without Partual Light or Experience! 
Thoſe that thus inſiſt on Perſons living by F aith, 
when they have no Experience, and are in very bad 
Frames, are alſo very abſurd in their Notions of P aith. 
ese they mean by Faith is, believing that they are in 
Eſtate. Hence they count it a dreadful Sin do 
them to doubt of their State, whatever Frames 
', are in, and whatever wicked Things they do, ah, 
' ris the great and heinous Sin of Unbelief; ” he is the 
beſt Man, and puts moſt Honour upon God, that main- 
tains his Hope of his good Eſtate the moſt confidently 
and immoveably, when he has the leaſt Light or Expe- 
rience; that is to ſay, when he is in the og and wick- 
edeſt Frame and Way; becauſe, forſooth, that is a Sign 
that he is ſtrong in Faith, giving Glory to God, and 
* againſt Hope believes in Hope. But what Bible do they 
learn this Notion of Faith out. of, that it is a Man's 
confidently believing that he is in a good Eſtate? If 
this be Faith, the Phariſees had Faith in an eminent 
Degree; ſome of which, Chriſt teaches, committed the 
upardonable Sin againſt the Holy Ghoſt. The Scripture 
repreſents Faith, as that by which Memare brought into 
a good Eſtate; and therefore it can't be the ſame Thing, 
as oY that wick are already in a good Eſtate. 0 
'S k 4 apps 


ave Men = din know that the ra ty, by believing that they 
I re godly. We know many Faith, Heb. xi: I By Faith 
* ave underſtand that the 2 were 3 by the Word g God. Faith 
is the Evidence of Things not ſeen; Heb. xi. 1. Thu s Men know 
* the Trinity of Perſons of the Godhead ; that Jeſus Chriſt 1s the 
gon of God; that he that believes in him will have eternal Life; 


* 


n te Refurreftion of the Dead. And if God ſhould tell a Saint 


* that he hath Grace, he might know it by believing” the 'Word of 
God. Butitis not this Way, that godly Men do know that they 
& have Grace. It is not fèvealed in the Word; and the Spirit of 
* God doth not teſtify it to particular Perſons.” Stoddard's Nature 


of ſaving Converſion, p. 83, 84 


"What 4 are. no 1 e bid 


2 To DP ACC pAtAcQg mo ny © +», A =. (or, pag ee, =o pr AY, + #3 wad '#% Yoad 44 Wigs hit ets 


Js fr, > ww 


ä 
— * r + 
» » . , IO (1 


8 9 A * * n — ra 
. . 4 oF * 
* ; j b . . * . a» 
II to diſtinguiſb Affections 5 
PART II. o diſting 1 


uppoſe that Faith conſiſts in Perſons believing that they 
22 Rltate, is in Effect che ame Thing, as to 
ſuppoſe that Faith conſiſts in a Perſan's believing that he 
has Faith, or in believing that he believes. "1 
Indeed Perſons doubting of their good Eſtate, may 
in ſeveral Reſpects ari/e from Unbelief, It may be from 
Unbelief, or becauſe they have ſo little Faith, that they 
have ſo little Evidence of their good Eſtate: If they had 
more Experience of the Actings of Faith, and ſo more 
Experience of the Exerciſe of Grace, they would have 
clearer Evidence that their State was z 2nd ſo their 
Doubts would be removed. And then their doubting 
of their State may be from Unbelief thus, When tho? 
there be many Things that are good Evidences of a Work 
of Grace in them, yet they doubt very much whether 
they are really in a State of Favour with God, becauſe 
it is bey, thore that are ſo unworthy, and have done 
ſo much to provoke God to Anger againſt them. Their 
Doubts in fach a Cale ariſe from Unbelief, as they ariſe | 
from want of a ſufficient Senſe of, and Reliance on the Mi 
infinite Riches of God's Grace, and the Sufficiency of 
Chriſt for the Chief of Sinners. They may alſo be K 
from Unbelief, when they doubt of their State; becauſe if 
of the Myſtery of God's Dealings with tzem: They are 
not able to reconcile ſuch Dippel ens with God's Favour 
to them: Or when they doubt whether they have any 
Intereſt in the Promiſes, becauſe the Promiſes from the 
Aſpects of Proyidence, appear fo unlikely to be fulfilled, WM 
the Difficulties that are in the Way, are ſo many and 
great. Such Doubting ariſes from want of Dependance a 
upon God's Almighty Power, and his Knowledge and 
Wiſdom, as infinitely above theirs. But yet, in ſuch 
Perſons, their Unbelief, and their doubting of their State, ; 
are not the ſame Thing; tho” one ariſes from the other. 
Perſons may be greatly to blame for doubting of their 
State, on ſuch Grounds as theſe laſt mentioned; and | 
| 


> 


* 


* 1 
1 
a. 


5 


they may be to blame, that they have no more Grace, 
and no more of the preſent Exerciſes and EXPE , 


110 What are no Signs PAE Il. 
pe it, to be an Evidence to them of the Goodneſs of 
their State: Men are doubtleſs to blame for being in 
. dead carnal Frame; but when they are in-ſuch x 
Frame; and have no ſenſible Experience of the Ex. 
erciſes of Grace, but on the-contrary, are very much 

under the Prevalence of their Luſts, and an unchri- 
ſtian Spirit, they are not to blame for doubting of 
their State. Tis as impoſſible, in the Nature of 
Things, that a holy and chriſtian Hope, ſhould be 
kept alive, in its Clearneſs and Strength, in ſuch Cir. 
cumſtances, as it is to keep che Light in the Room, 


when the Candle is put out; or to maintain the bright 


Sun-ſhine in the Air, when the Sun is gone down, 
Diſtant Experiences, when darken'd by preſent prevail. 
ing Luft and Corruption, will never keep alive a gracious 
Confidence and Aſſurance; but that ſickens and decays 
upon it, as neceſſarily as a little Child by repeated Blows 
don the Head with the Hammer. 
- lamented, that Perſons doubt of their State in ſuch Cir- 
cumſtances; but on the Contrary, tis deſirable and every 
May beſt that they ſnould. Tis agreeable to that wiſe 
and merciful Conſtitution of Things, which God hath 
eſtabliſhed; that it ſhould be 16. © For ſo hath God 
contrived and conſtituted Things, in his Diſpenſations 
towards his own People, that when their Love decays, 
and the Exerciſes of it fail, or become weak, Fear ſhould 
ariſe; for then they need it to reſtrain-them from Sin, 
and to excite them to care for the Good of their Souls, 
and ſo to ſtir them up to Watchfulneſs and Diligence in 
Religion: But God hath ſo order'd that when Love riſes, 
and is in'vigorous Exerciſe, then Fear ſhould vaniſh, 
and be driven away; for then they need it not; having a 
higher and more excellent Principle in Exerciſe, to 
refirain them from Sin, and ſtir them up to their Duty, 
There are no other Principles, which human Nature is 
under the Influence of, that will ever make Men conſct- 
entious, but one of theſe two, Fear or Love: And 
therefore if one of theſe ſhould not prevail, * the — 
0 b | | : ec ay | 


nn | th - 4 , 
* * rr * 


Nor is it at all to be 


2 


Rare = 1 difinguifh nei _- 


| decay'd, God's « People when fallen into dead and carnal 
Frames, when Love is aſleep, would be lamentably 
*expoſed indeed. And therefore God has wiſely ordai 

that theſe two oppoſite Principles of Love and Fear, 
ſhould riſe and. fall, like the two oppoſite Scales of . 
Ballance; when one riſes, the other finks. As ; 
and Darkneſs, neceſſarily and unavoidably ſucceed _— 
other; if Light prevails, ſo much does Darkneſs ceaſe, . 
and no more; and if Light decays, ſo much does Dark 
neſs prevail; ſo it is in the Heart of a Child of God: If 
divine Love decays and falls aſleep, and Luſt prevails, 
the Light and Joy of Hope goes out, and dark Fear 


and Doubting ariſes; and if on the Contrary, divine 


Love prevails, and comes into lively Exerciſe, this 
— in the Brightneſs of Hope, and drives away 
black Luſt, and \Fear with it. Love is the Spirit of 
Adoption, or the Child-like Principle; if that Slumbers, 
Men fall under Fear, which is the Spirit of Bondage, or 

the ſervile Principles: And ſo on the contrary. And if* 
it be ſo, that Love or the Spirit of Adoption, be carried 
to a great Height, it quite drives away all Fear, and 
gives full Aſſurance; ggreeable to that of the Apoſtle, * 
1 John iv. 18. 2. — Fear in Love, but pbrfel Love |. 
caſts out Fear. Theſe two oppoſite Principles of Luſt WM 
and holy Love, bring Hope and Fear into the Hearts of 


God's Children, in Proportion as they prevail; that is, 
when left to their own natural Influence, without ſome- 


thing adventitious, or accidental intervening; as the 
Diſtemper of Melancholly, doctrinal Ignorance, Preju- 


dices of Education, wrong Inſtruction, * Principles, 


peculiar Temptations, &c, | 
Fear is caſt out by the Spirit of God, no other Way | 
than by the prevailing of Love: Nor is Affurance ever 
maintained by his Spirit, when Love is aſleep. | At ſuch - 
a Time, in vain is all the Saint's Self. Examinations, and 
| poring on paſt Experiences, in order to eſtabliſh his 
eace, and get Aſſurance. For it is contrary to the 
Nature of Things, as God hath conſtituted them, that 
he ſhould have Aſſurance at ſuch a Time. They | 


, . n * w”, Gy 1 4 8 "= 
l 9 1 8 * Airs TEE " , 7 Led * 8 8 
KEW: T4 2% ä | 


112 "What 6 are 10 n | | ParT Il; 


They therefore, do directly thwart God's wiſe and 
racious Conſtitution. of - Things, who exhort others to 
| = confident in their Hope, when in dead Frames; under 
2 Notion of living by Faith, and net by Sight, and truſting 
Cod in the Dark, and living upon Chriſt, and not upon 
a eriences; and warn them not to doubt of their good 
Eſtate, leſt they ſhould be guilty of the dreadful Sin of 
Unbelief. And it has a direct Tendency to eſtabliſh the 
moſt preſumptuous Hypocrites, and to prevent their 
ever calling their State in Queſtion, how much ſoever 
Wickedneſs rages, and reigns in their Hearts, and pre- 
vuails in their Lives; under a Notion of honouring God, 
by boping againſt Hope, and confidently truſting in God, 
when Things look very dark. And doubtleſs vaſt hag. | 
been the Miſchief, that has been done this Way. 
Perſons can't be ſaid to forſake Chriſt, and live on 
their Experiences of the Exerciſes of Grace, merely 
| becauſe they take them and uſe them as Evidences of 
Grace: for there are no other Eyidences that they can or 
k ought to take. But then may Perſons be d to live 
upon their Experiences, when they make a Righteouſ- 
neſs of them; and inſtead of kee G's their Eye on God's 
Glory, and Chriſt's Excellency, Wey turn their Eyes 
| theſe Objects without them, on to themſelves, to enter- 
tain their Minds, by viewing their own. Attpinments, - 
and high Experiences, and the great Things they have 


met with, and are bright and beautiful in their” ow n 


' Eyes, and are rich nds encreaſed with Goods, in their 
on Apprehenſions, and think that God has as admiring 
an Eſteem of them, on the ſame Account, as they have 
of themſelves: This is living on Experiences, and not 
on Chriſt; and is more abofninable in the Sight of God, 
than the groſs Immoralities of thoſe who make no Pre- 
tences to Religion. But this is a far different Thing from 


a mere improving Experiences as Evidences of an Intereſt | 


in a glonous Redeemer. 
But to return from this Digreſſion, I would mention 
one Chang more under the Ws Head that I —_—_—— 


EF. H. ro Aiſi guiſb Afetiom., 113 
XII. Nothing can be certainly concluded concerning 
the Nature of religious Affections, that any re the 
Subjects of, from this, that the outward Manifeſtations 

of them, and the Relation Perſons give of them, are 
very affecting and pleaſing to the truly Godly, and ſuch 

as greatly gain their Charity, and win their Hearts. 

The true Saints have not ſuch a Spirit of diſcerning, 
that they can certainly determine who are godly, ad 
who are got. For tho* they know experimentally what 
true Religion is, in the internal Exerciſes of it; yet theſe | 
are what they can neither feel or fee, in the Heart of 
another.“ There is nothing in others, that comes within 
their View, but outward Manifeſtations and Appear- 
ances; but the Scripture plainly. intimates, that this Way 
of judging what is in Men by outward Appearances, is 
at beſt uncertain, and liable to Deceit; 1 Sam. xv1. 7. 
The Lord ſeeth not as Man ſeeth; for Man looketh on ths 
outward Appearance, but the Lord looketh on i Heart. 
lai. xi. 3. He Hall not judge after the Sight of his Hes, 
neither reprove after the Hearing of his Ears.+ They 
commonly are but poor Judges, and dangerous Counſel- 
lors in Soul Caſes, who are quick and peremptory in 

0 | RELA | determining 


— — 


Men may have the Knowledge of their own Converſion: The if 
« Knowledge that other Men have of it is uncertain; becauſe no Maag i 
* can'look into the Heart of another, and ſee the Workings of Grace ĩ̃ . 
* there.” Stoddard's Nat. of ſaving Con. Chap. 15, at the Begin - 
ung. 4 1 IEG, >. A nr S 

Mr. Stoddard obſerves, That all wifible Signs are common 10 cons 
verted and unconverted Men; and a Relation of | EOS; , among the 


1 


reſt. Appeal to the Learned, p. 75. 1 Lo 
O how hard is it for the Eye of Man te diſcern betwixt Chat ' 
* and Wheat! And how many upright Hearts are now cenſured, _ i 
whom God will clear! How many falſe Hearts are new approved, J 
„whom God will condemn ! Men ordinarily have no convictive 
* Proofs, bat only probable Symptoms; which at moſt beget but a 
** conjettural Knowledge of another's State. And they that ſhall + + 
2 r po judge either Way, may poſſibly wrong the Genera- 
tion of the Upright, or on the other Side, abſolve and juſtify the 


„Wicked. And truly, conſidering what hath been faid, tis no 
Wonder that dangerous Miſtakes are ſo frequently made in this 
Matter.“ Flavels Huſb. ſpir. Chap. 12. 5 x 


N — 8 2 PS. ad. FE IIS bo wes" | 2 A. 
. / * 


1 p ”; nn , 
pr * A %* 2 5 8 


*% 7 W : ind on 4 4 2 F * 
enn * 4 1 
” : 4 as k y > , . 
114 dat are no Sjons 


determining Perſons States, vaunting themſelves in their 
extraordinary Faculty of diſcerning and diſtinguiſhing, 
in theſe. great Affairs; as tho' all was open and clear to 
them. They betray: one of theſe three Things; either 
that they have had but little Experience, or are Perſons 
of a weak Judgment; or that they have a great Degree 
of Pride and Selt-Confidence, and ſo ignorant of them. 
ſelves. Wiſe and experienced Men will proceed with 

Caution in ſuch an Affair. "Ss | 
When there are many probable Appearances of Piety 


' «in others, it is the Duty of the Saints to receive them cor- 
dially into their Charity, and to love them and rejoice in | 


them, as their Brethren in Chriſt Jeſus. But yet the 
beſt of Men may be deceived, when the Appearances 
| ſeem to them exceeding fair and bright, even ſo as 
entirely to gain their Charity, and conquer their Hearts, 
It has been a common Thing in the Church of God, for 
ſuch bright Profeſſors, that are received as eminent 
Saints, among the Saints, to fall a 
nothing.“ And this we need not won 
der the Things that have been already obſerved; what 
Things it hasbeen ſhewn, may appear in Men who are 
altogether graceleſs. Nothing hinders but __ - theſe 
S | ings 


. Be not offended, if you ſee great Cedars fall, Stars fall from 


Heaven, great Profeſſors die and decay: Do not think they be all 


* ſuch: Do not think that the Ele& ſhall fall. Truly, ſome are ſuch, 
* that when they fall, one would think a Man truly ſanctiſied might 


fall away, as the Arminians think. 1 John ii. 19. They eyere net of 


* #5. I ſpeak this becauſe the Lord is ſhaking ; and I look for gre 
% Apoſtacies: For God is trying all his Friends, thro' all the Chriſ- 
« tian World. In Germany what Profeſſion was there? Who would 


have thonght it? The Lord who delights to manifeſt that openly, 


_ < which wasHid ſecretly, ſends a Sword and they fall,” Shepard't 
Parab. Part I. p. 118, 119. Free PE 
©: , * The Saints may approve thee, and God condemn thee; Rev. ii. 
« N Thou Baß a Name thai thou liveft, and art dead, Men may ſay, 
# there is a true Narbanael; and God may ſay, There is a ſelf-cozen- 
«« ing Phari/ee.———Reader, thou haſt heard of Fudes, and Demas, 
** of Ananias and Sapphira, of Hymeneus and Philetus, once renown'd 
nnd famous Profeſſors ; and thou haſt heard how they proved at laſt.” 
Flavel 's Touchſtone of Sincerity, Chap. 2. Sect. To 


| 4. «A 
PAxT. N 


and come to 
at, if we con- 


13 1 F Sao cod. ws. n» f 


Þ — . 


r 3 r 


PART II. to diſtinguiſh Affections. 41 5 
4 | 


Things may meet together in Men, and yet they be 
without a Spark of Grace in their Hearts. They may 
have religious Affectons of many Kinds together; they 
may have a. Sort of Affection towards God, that bears 
agreat Reſemblance of dear Love to him; and fo a 
Kind of Love to the Bre hren, and great Appearances 
of Admiration of God's Perfections and Works, and 
Sorrow for Sin, and Reverence, Submiſſion, Self- 
Abaſement, Gratitude, Joy, religious Longings, and 
Zeal for the Intereſt of Religion and the Good of 
Souls. And theſe Affections may come after great 
Awakenings and Canvictions of Conſcience; and there 
may be great Appearances of a Work of Humiliation; 
and counterfeit Love and Joy, and other Affections may 
ſeem to follow theſe, and one another, juſt in the ſame 
Order, that is commonly obſervable in the holy Affec- 
tions of true Converts. Ard theſe religious Affections 
may be carried to a great Height, and may caulg Abun- 
dance of Tears, yea, may overcome the Nature of thoſe 
who are the Subjects of them, and may make them 
affectionate, and fervent, and fluent in ſpeaking of the 
Things of Gad, and diſpoſe them to be abundant in it; 
and may be attended with many ſweet Texts of Scrip- 
ture, and precious Promiſes, brought with great Impreſ- | 
ſion on their Minds; and may diſpoſe them with their, 
Mouths tor praiſe and glorify God, in a very ardent ll 
Manner, and fervently to call upon othets to praiſe him, 
crying out of their Unworthineſs, and extolling free 
Grace, And may, moreover, diſpoſe them to abound 
in the external Duties of Religion, ſuch as Prayer, hear- 
ing the Word preached, Singing, and religious Confe- 
rence; and «theſe Things attended with a great Reſem- 
Hance of a chriſtian Aſſurance, in its greateſt Height, ⁵ ³ 
when the Saints mount on Eagles Wings, above all 
Darkneſs and Doubting. I think it has been made plain, MW 
that there may be all theſe Things, and yet there be | 
nothing more than the common Influences of the Spirit 0 
of God, join'd with the Deluſions of Satan; and the 
wicked | 
.* , a= 


þ 


4 


4 - N " 
* * 1 * * 
1 „ 


116 WMbat are no Signs. Part. II 


wicked and deceitful Heart. To which T may add, 
that all theſe Things may be, attended with a ſweet 
natural Temper, and a good doctrinal Knowledge of 
| Religion. anif a long Acquaintance with the Saints W 
of talking, and of expreſſing their Affections and Expe, 
riences, and a natural Ability and Subtilty in accommo. 
dating their Expreſſions and Manner of ſpeaking to the 
Diſpoſitions and Notions of the Hearers, and a tak 
Decency of Expreſſion and Behaviour, formed by ag 
Education. How great therefore may the Reſemblaneę 
be, as to all outward Expreſſions and Appearances, 
between an Hypocrite and a true Saint! Doubtleſs it is 
the glorious Prerogative of the omniſclent God, as the 
great Searcher of Hearts, to be able well te ſeparate 
hetween Sheep and Goats. And what an indecent, Selt- 
Exaltation and Arrogance is it, in poor fallible dark 
Mortals, to pretend that they can determine and know, 
| who are really ſincere and upright before God, and who 
W es e 
Many ſeem to lay great Weight on that, and to ſup- 
pole it to be what may determine them with Reſpect to 
others real Piety, when they not only tell a plauſible 
Story, but when, in giving an Account of their Expe- 
riences, they make ſuch a Repreſentation, and ſpeak 
after ſuch a Manner, that they feel their Talk; that is 
* to ſay, when their Talk ſeems. to harmonize wich they 
own Experiente, and their Hearts are touched an 
affected and delighted, by what they hear them ſay, and 
drawn out by it, in dear Love to them. But there is not 
that Certainty in ſuch Things, and that full Dependance 
to be had upon them, which many imagine. A true 
Saint greatly delights in Holineſs: It is a moſt beautify 


— 


9 


re ese renne eee 


+. „ _ LQ0S9 a md 


Thing in his Eyes; and God's Work, in ſavingly renew- 

ing and making holy and happy, a poor, and before 

periſhing Soul, ap to him a moſt glorious Work. 

No wonder therefore; 'that his Heart is touch'd, and 

greatly affected, when he hears another give a probable 

Account of this Work, wrought 'on his own H 3 
| At 


Se 4 # .<c Au 


FP ͤ 1D ˙ LAST 2" 


PPP ]˙éRA 


ccc * * 1 | 3 r — PAY : 
parT Il. w diirnguiſh Aﬀettions, 117 


and when he ſees in him probable Appearances of Holi- 
neſs; whether thoſe pleaſing Appearances have any 
Thing real to anſwer them, or no. And if he uſes the 
fame Words, which are commonly made uſe of, to 
expreſs the Affections of true Saints, and tells of many 
Things following one another, in an Order, agreeable _. 
tothe Method of the Experience of him that hears him, 
and alſo ſpeaks freely and boldly, and with an Air of 
Aſſurance: No wonder that the other thinks his Expe- 
riences harmonize with his own. And if beſides all this, 
in giving his Relation, he fpeaks with much Affection; 
and above all, if in ſpeaking, he ſeems to ſhew much 
Affection · to him, to whom he ſpeaks, ſuch an Affection 
as the Galatiens did to the Apoſtle Paul; theſe Things 
will naturally have a powerful Influence, to affect and 
draw his Hearer's Heart, and open wide the Doors of 
his Charity towards him. David ſpeaks as one who had 
felt AbithophePs Talk, and had once a ſweet Savour and 
Reliſh of it. And therefore exceedipg great was his 
Surpriſe and Diſappointment, when he fell; it was almoſt 
too much for him. Pſal. Iv. 12, 13, 14. It wes net an 
En then I could have borne it, —but it was thou, 4 
Mall mine Equal, my Guide, and my Acquaintance; we | 
took ſweet Counſel together, and walked unto the Houſe of 
God in Company. . 1 
It is with Profeſſors of Religion, eſpecially ſuch as 
become ſo in a Time of out- pouring of the Spirit ofß ili 
God, as it is with the Bloſſoms in the Spring;“ there are 
vaſt Numbers of them upon the Trees, which all look 
fair and promiſing; but yet very many of them never 
come to any Thing. And many of theſe, that in a lit- 
tle Time wither up, and drop off, and rot under the 
Trees; yet for a while, look as beautiful and gay as 
5325 „ Res 


* A Time of out- pouring of the Spirit of God, reviving of Reli- 
gion, and producing the pleaſant Appearances of it, in new Con- 
verts, is in Scripture compared to this very Thing, wiz. the Spring 

e the 


Seafon, when .the bepign Influences of- the Heaven's, ca 
Bloſſoms to put forth. Cant. ii. 11, 12: | 


* 
. * 


* Y * — 2 2 "4 — = — Oy EIT 
3 i 129 * 3 N 22 * a * 5 — * 0 - x _ . a „ * 2 2 N , 
. + \ ' * \ a 
= — - 
= 
| * 
ii are no Signs | 
4 * ky 5 
4 
* 


others; and not only ſo, but ſmell ſweet, and ſend forth 
a pleaſant Odour: So that we can't, by any of our Senſes, 
certainly diſtinguiſh thoſe Bloſſoms which have in them 
that ſecret Vertue, which will afterwards appear in the 

Fruit, and that inward Solidity and Strength which ſhall 
enable them to bear, and cauſe them to be perfected by 
uß the others. *Tis 


the hot Summer Sun, that will dry 


the mature Fruit which comes afterwards, and not the 


beautiful Colours and Smell of the Bloſſom, that we 
muſt judge by. So new Converts, (profeſſedly ſo) in 
their Talk about Things of Religion, may appear fair, 
and be very ſavoury, and the Saints 8 they talk 
feelingly. They may reliſh their Talk, and imagi 
they perceive a divine Savour in it; and yet all may come 
to nothing. + EE 8 955 
*Tis ſtrange how hardly Men are brought to be con- 


tented with the Rules and Directions Chriſt has given 


them, but they muſt needs go by other Rules, of their 
. own inventing, that ſeem to them wiſer and better. I 
know of no Directions or Counſels which Chriſt ever 
delivered more plainly, than the Rules he has given us; 
to guide us in our judging of others Sinccrityg, viz. 
that we ſhould judge of the Tree chiefly by the Whit: 
But yet this won't do; but other Ways are found out, 
which are imagined to be more diſtigguiſhing and cer- 
tain. And woful have been the miſchievous Conſe- 
quences, of this a nt ſetting up Men's Wiſdom 
above the Wiſdom of Chriſt. I believe many Saints 
have gone much out of the Way of Chriſt's Word, in 
this Reſpect: And ſome of them have been chaſtiſed 
with Whips, and (I had almoſt ſaid) Scorpions, to bring 
them back again. But many Things which have lately 
appeared, and do now appear, may convince, that ordi- 
narily, thoſe who have gone furtheſt this Way, that 
have been moſt highly conceited of their Faculty of 
diſcerning, and have appeared moſt forward, perem 
torily and ſuddenly to determine the State of Men's Sou 
have been Hypocrites, who haye known nothing of true 
Religion Pye Toon gr Ia 


* 
* 


Pax II. 


2 «a S a» 24 » + th 2 * 


* a - - 
' 


2. WA OH pr oy nt = . 


— 
© = 


Paxr II. fo diſtinguiſh Aﬀettions. 119 
In the Parable of the Wheat and Tares, it is ſaid, 
Matth. xiii. 26. When the Blade was ſprung up, and | 
brought forth Fruit, then appeared the Tares alſo. And 
tho the Fares were not diſcerned, nor diſtinguiſhable - - 
from the Wheat, /] then, as Mr. Flavel Blerves % 
who-menti6ns it as an Obſervation of Jerom's, That 
I beat and Tares are ſo much alike, till the Blade of the 
Wheat comes to bring forth the Epr, that tis next to impoſ- 
fible to diſtinguiſh tbem. And then Mr. Flavel adds, 
« How difficult foever it be to diſcern the Difference 
«between Wheat and Tares; yet doubtleſs the Eye 
of Senſe can much eaſier diſcriminate them, than 
« the moſt quick and piereing Eye of Man, can diſcern 
the Difference between ſpecial ;and common Grace. 
For all ſaving Graces in the Saints, have their Coun- 
« terfeits in Hypocrites; there are ſimilar Works in thoſe, 

« which a ſpiritual and very judicious Rye may eaſily 
“ miſtake, for the ſaving and genuine Effects of a ſancti- 
* fying Spirit.” 1 — 4 

As *tis the Ear or the Fruit which diſtinguiſhes the 

Wheat from the Tares, ſo this is the true Sbibboletb, 
that he who ſtands as Judge at the Paſſages of Jordan, 
makes uſe of to diſtinguiſh thoſe that ſhall paſs over 
Jordan into the true Canaan, from thoſe that ſhould be 
lain at the Paſſages. For the Hebrew Word Shibboleth, 
ſignifies an Ear of Corn. And perhaps the more full 
Pronunciation of Fepthah's Friends, Shibboleth, may re- 
preſent a full Ear with Fruit in it, typifying the Fruits 
of the Friends of Chriſt, the 3 of Jeptbab; and 
the more lean Pronunciation of the Epbraimites his 


nn RY ET: 0 . 


Enemies, may repreſent their empty Ears, typifying tage 
Shew of Religion in Hypocrites, without Subſtance and _ 


Fruit. This is agreeable to the Doctrine we are abun- 
dantly taught in Scripture, viz. That he who is ſet to 
judge thoſe who paſs through Death, whether they have 
a Right to enter into the heavenly Canaan 1 5 or 
5 c Whether 


— 


* 


"'* Huſbandry ſpiritualiz'd, Chap. xiv © 


, 


3 by the moſt narrow Inſpection of the Appearan 
were upon him, till he had waited to ſee what the 


the Hair, Which 


ä 88 « . 13 " Ys 
I. 4 . 
* P * 
= 4 ” 
Y " 
© 


. - whetber they ſhould not be ſlain, will | judge err Man 


1 We to his Works. 

MWWe ſeem to be tau ht the ſame Things, by the Rules 
given for the Prieſts diſcerning the Leproſy. In many 
|F Caſes it was impoſlible for the 10 Priel to determine whe- 
ther a Man had the Leproſy, or whether he were clean, 
ces that 


Appearances would cone to, and had ſhut up the Per- 
ſon whoſhewed' himſelf to him, one ſeven Days after 
another; and when he judged, he was > decree ty 
| grew out of the Spot that was ſhewed 
% 3 was as it were the Fruit that it brough 
I. "EA 
F And here, before 1 finiſh what I have to ſay under 
Head, I. would fay ſomething to a ſtrange Notion 
- 8 have of late been led away i, of certainly know. 
ing the good Eſtate that others are in, as though it 
were immediately revealed to them from Heaven, by 
| their Love flowing out to them in an extraordinary Man-. 


ner. They argue thus, that their Love being very . 


ſenſible and great, it may be certainly known by them 
who feel it, to · be a true chriſtian Love: And if it be a 
true chriſtian Love, the Spirit of God muſt be the Au- 
thot of it: And inaſmuch as the Sp irit of God, who 
knows certainly, whether others _ the Children. of 
God or no, and is a Spirit of Truth, is pleaſed, by an 
uncommon Influence upon them, to cauſe their Love to 
flow out in an extrao Manner, towards ſuch a 
Perſon, as a Child of God; it, muſt needs be, that this 
infallible Spirit, who deceives none, knows, that that 
Perſon is a Child of God. But fuch Perſons might be 
convinced of the Falieneſs of their Reaſc * they 


would conſider whether or no it be not their uty, and 


what God requires of them, to love thoſe as the Chil- 
| dren of God, who they think are the Children of God, 
and whom they have no Reaſon to think otherwiſe of, 
* from all that they can fee in * though God, whe 


” | 
. 


What are ” „ Signs + on Park 


ſearches 


par. II. to diſtinguiſh Affections. 121 


ſearches the Hearts, knows them not to be his Children. 
If it be their Duty, then it is Good, and the Want of it 
Sin; and therefore, ſurely the Spirit of God may be the 
Author of of it: The Spirit of God, without being a 
Spirit of Falſhood, may in ſuch a Caſe aſſiſt a Perſon to 
do his Duty, and keep him from Sin. But then they 
argue from the uncommon Degree and L Manner, 
in which their Love flows out to the Perſon; which th 

think the Spirit of God never would cauſe, if he did not 
know the Object to be a Child of God. But then I 
would aſk them, whether or no it is not their Duty to 
love all ſuch as they are bound to think are the Children 
of God, from all that they can ſee in them, to a very 
great Degree, though God, from other Things which 
be ſees, that are out of Sight to them, knows them not 
to be ſo. *Tis Men's Duty to love all whom they are 
bound in Charity to look upon as the Children of God, 
with a vaſtly dearer Affection than they commonly do. 
As we ought to love Chriſt to the utmoſt Capacity of 
our Nature, ſo tis our Duty to love thoſe who we think 
are ſo near and dear to him as his Members, with an 
exceeding dear Affection, as Chriſt has loved us; and 
therefore it is Sin' in us not to love them ſo. We ought 
to pray to God that he would, by his Spirit keep us 
from Sin, and enable us to do our Duty: And may not 
his Spirit anſwer our Prayers, and enable us to do our 
Duty, in a particular Inſtance, without lying? If he 
can't, then the Spirit of God is bound not to help his 
People to do their Duty in ſome Inſtances, becauſe he 
can't do without being a Spirit of Falſhood. Bur ſurely 
God is ſo ſovereign as that comes to, that he may enable 
us to do our Duty when he pleaſes, and on what Occa- 
ſion he pleaſes. When Perſons think others are his. 
Children, God may have other Ends in cauſing their 
exceedingly endeared Love to flow out to them, . beſides 
revealing to them, whether their Opinion of them be 
right or no: He may have that merciful End in it, to 


enable them to do their Duty, and to keep 3 
1 | at 


122 What are no Signs 

that dreadful infinite Evil, Sin. And will they lay God 
ſhall not ſhew them that Mercy in ſuch a Caſe? If I am 
at a Diſtance from Home, and hear, that in my Abſence, 
my Houſe is burnt, but my Family have, in ſome extra- 


ordinary Manner, all eſcaped the Flames; and every 


Thing in the Circumſtances of the Story, as I hear it, 
makes it appear very credible: It would be a Sin in me, 
in ſuch a Caſe, not to feel a very great Degree of Gra- 
fitude to God, though the Story indeed be not true, 
And is not God ſo ſovereign, that he may if he pleaſes, 
ſhew me that Mercy on that Occaſion, and enable me to 
do my Duty in a much further Degree than I uſed to 
doc it, and yet not incur the Charge of Deceitfulneſs, in 
confirming a Falſhood ? | 


*Tis exceeding manifeſt, that Error or Miſtake may 


be the Occaſton of a gracious Exerciſe, and conſequently 
a gracious Influence of the Spirit of God, by Rom. xiv. 
6. He that eateth to the Lord, he eateth, and giveth 
God Thanks; and he that eateth not to the Lord, be catetb 
not, and giveth God Thanks. The Apoſtle is ſpeaking 
of thoſe, who through erroneous and needleſs Scruples, 
avoided eating legally unclean Meats.—By this it is very 
evident, that there may be true Exerciſes of Grace, a 
true Reſpect to tbe Lord, and particularly, a true Thank- 
fulneſs, which may be occaſioned, both by an erroneous 
Judgment and Practice. And conſequently, an Error 
may be the Occaſion of thoſe truly holy Exerciſes that 


>: are from the infallible Spirit of God. And if fo, tis 
©. certainly too much for us to determine, to how great a 


Degree the Spirit of God may give this holy Exerciſe, 
on ſuch an Occaſion. 
This Notion, of certainly diſcerning another's State, 
by Love flowing out, is not only not founded on Reaſon 
or Scripture, but it is anti- ſcriptural; *tis againſt the 
Rules of Scripture; which ſay not a Word of any ſuch 
Way of judging the State of others as this, but direct 
us to judge chiefly by the Fruits that are ſeen in them. 
And it is againſt the Doctrines of Scripture, _ do 
. | Plainiy 


PART. II. 


nh , ß , , . 4 SR toi a6 ac od , 1 $29} KS: re, 


"TS * 


r > WW 


1 


Panril, e dinge fem. way 


plainly teach us that the Btäte of other Souls tewärds 
8043 cannot be knowh- by us, as in Rev. n. 17. To 39: 
that overtometh, will T give to bat of de hidden Manna; 
and 1 will gibt bm a white None, and in the Stont @ wee 
Name written, bb no Man kneweth, faving he thar 
receiveth it. And Rom. ii. 29. He #5 a Jew; which is 
one inwardly , and Cireumcifion is that of - the Heart, in tt 
Spirit, and not in the Letter; whoſe Praiſe is not of Men, 
but of God. That by this laſt Expreſſion, whoſe Prai ſe is 
not of Men, but of God, the Apoſtle has Reſpect to the In- 
ſuffieiency of Men to judge concerning him, whether he 
be inwardly a Few or no (as they could eaſily ſee by 
outward Marks, whether Men were outwardly Jess) 
and would ſignify, that it belongs to God alone to give 
a determining Voice in this Matter, is confirmed by the 
ſame Apoſtle's Uſe of the Phraſe, in 1 Cor. iv. 5. There- 
fore judge nothing before the Time, until the Lord come; 
who both will bring to Light the hidden Things of Dark- 
neſs, and will make manifeſt the Counſels of the Hearts; 
and then ſhall every Man have Praiſe of God. The 
Apoſtle, in the two foregoing Verſes, ſays, But with me, 
it is a very ſmall Thing, that I ſhould be judged of you, 
or of Man's Judgment: Tea, I judge not mine own ſelf, 
for I know nothing by myſelf, yet I am not hereby juſtified; 
but he that judgeth me is the Lord. And again, it is 
further confirmed, becauſe the Apoſtle in this ſecond - 
* age to the Romans, direas his Speech eſpecially to 
thoſe who had a high Conceit of their own Holineſs, 
made their Boaſt of God, and were confident of their 
dyn Difcerning, and that they knew God's Wiltz and 
approved the Things which were excellent, or tried the 
Things that differ (as it is in the Margin.) V. 18. Aud 
were confident that they were Guides of the Blind, and a 
Light to them which are in Darkneſs, Iuſtructors of the 
Fooliſh, Teachers of Babes; and ſo took upon them to 
judg&dthetrs, ſee V. 1. and 17, 18, 19, 20. 

And how arrogant muſt the Notion be, that they have, 
who imagine they can ths know others 9 

— When 


* 


124 What are no Signs, Ge. Part Il, 

when that great Apoſtle Peter pretends not to ſay any 
more concerning Silvanus, than that he was @ faithful 
Brother, as be ſuppoſed, 1 Pet. v. 12. Though this 
Sylvanus appears to have been a very eminent Miniſter of 
Chriſt, and an Evangeliſt, and a famous Light in God's 
Church at that 2 and an intimate Companion of 
the Apoſtles, Sec 2 Cor. i. 19. 1 Theſ. i. 1. and 2 
a VP ORC 


He... 


Shewing what are diflinguiſhing Signs of 
truly gracious and holy fffetions, _ 


eee, 2 COME. now to the SzconD Thing 
GE = SNL 2 W appertaining to the Trial of reli- 
N gious Affections, which was pro- 
poſed, viz. To take Notice of 
ſome Things, wherein thoſe Affec- 
tions that are ſpiritual and gracious, 
do differ from thoſe that are not ſo, © 
But before I proceed directly to 
the diſtinguiſhing Characters, . 
would previouſly mention ſome Things, which I deſire 
may be obſerved, concerning the Marks I ſhall lay 


down. 


1, That I am far from undertaking to give ſuch Signs 
of gracious Affections, as ſhall be ſufficient to enable 
any certainly to diſtinguiſh true Affection from falſe. in 
others; or to determine poſitively which of their Neigh- 
bours are true Profeſſors, and which are Hypocrites. 
In ſo doing, I ſhould be guilty of that Arrogance Which 
I have been condemning, Though it be plain that 
Chriſt has given Rules to all Chriſtians, to enable them 
a judge of Profeſſors of Religion, hom they, are 


* 
* 4 
9982 


128 | © Concerning Signs. | PaxrT Ill. 


concerned with, ſo far as is neceſſary for their own Safety, 
and to prevent their being led into a Snare by falſe 
Teachers, and falſe Pretenders to Religion; and though 
it be alſo beyond Doubt, that the Scriptures do abound 
with Rules, which may be very ſerviceable to Miniſters, 
in counſelling and conducting Souls committed to their 
Care, in Things appertaining to their ſpiritual and 
eternal State; yet, 'tis alſo evident, that it was never 
God's Deſign, to _ us any Rules, by which we may 
certainly know, 
and to — a full and clear Separation between Sheep 
and Goats: But that on the Contrary, it was God's 


Ts Pap Gree elf, as his Prerogative. 


And therefore ng ſuch gi ing Signs as hal enable 
Chriſtians or Fw to oe. are ever to be expected 
to the World's End: For no more 1s ever to be expected 
from any Signs, that are to be found in the Word of 
God, or gathered from it, than Chriſt deſigned them for. 


2. No ſuch Signs are to be 8 that ſhall be 
— to enable thoſe Saints certainly to diſcern their 
Eſtate, who are very low in Grace, or are 
ſuch 1 have much departed from God, and are fallen 
into a dead, carnal and unchriſtian Frame. It is not 
agreeable to God's Deſign (as has been already obſerved) 
that ſuch ſhould know their good Eſtate: Nor is it 
defirable that they ſhould; but on the contrary, every 
Way beſt that they ſhould not; and we have — to 
bleſs God, that he has made no Proviſion that ſuch 
ſhould certainly, know the State that they are in, any 
other Way than by firſt coming out of the * F rame and 
Way chey are in. 
it is not properly through the Defect of we 


Signs given in the Word of God, that every Saint living, 
ed ſtrong or weak, and thoſe who are in a bad 
Frame, een as others, can't certainly know their 
good Eitate by them. For the Rules in themſolves are 
certain and lite, and every Saint has, > wr UI 
thole 


of our Fellow Profeſſors are his, 


of gracious Aﬀedtion. 129 


thoſe Thi in himſelf, which are ſure Evidences of 
Grace; fü very, even the leaſt Act of Grace is ſo. 

But it is through his Defect to whom the Signs are given. 

There is a two-fold Defect in that Saint who is very low 
in Grace, or in an ill Frame, which makes it impoſſible 

for him to know certainly that he has trye Grace, by the 
beſt Signs and Rules which can be given him. Firſt, A 
Defect in the O4je#, or the Qualification to be view'd 

and examin'd. I don't mean an eſſential Defect; becauſe 
I ſuppoſe the Perſon to be a real Saint; but a Defect in 

Degree: Grace being very ſmall, cannot be clearly and 
certainly diſcern'd and diſtinguiſhed. Things that are 
very ſmall, we can't clearly diſcern their Form, or diſtin- 
guiſh them one from another; though, as they are in 
themſelves, their Form may be very different. There 

js doubtleſs a great Difference between the Body of Man, 
and the Bodies of other Animals, in the firſt Conception 
in the Womb: But yet if we ſhould view the different 
Embyros, it might not be poſſible for us to diſcern the 
Difference, by reaſon of the imperfe& State of the 
Object; but as ic comes to greater Perfection, the Differ- 
ence becomes very plain. Ihe Difference between Crea- 
tures of very contrary Qualities, is not ſo plainly to be ſeen 
while they are very young, even after they are actually bro't 
forth, as in their more perfect State. The Difference 
between Doves and Ravens, or Doves and Vultures, 
when they firſt come out of the Egg, is not ſo evident; 
but as they grow to their Perfection, tis exceeding 
great and manifeſt. Another Defect attending the 
Grace of thoſe I am ſpeaking, is its being mingled with 
ſo much Corruption, which: clouds and hides it, and 
makes it. impoſſible for it certainly to be known. Tho 
different Things that are before us, may have in them: 
ſelves many Marks thoroughly diſtinguiſhing them one 
from another; yet if we ſee them only in a thick Smoke, 
it may nevertheleſs be impoſſible to diſtinguiſſi them. 
A fix'd Star is eaſily diſtinguiſhable from a Comet, in a 
clear Sy; but i we view them through a Cloud, it oO 


* 
i , 
0 


PART III. 


128 Concerning Signs PAR HI, 
be impoſſible to ſee the Difference. When ti Chriſti- 
ans are in an ill Frame, Guilt lies on the Conſciences: 
which will bring Fear, and ſo prevent the Peace and 
Joy of an aſſured Hope. 
© Secondly, There is in ſuch a Caſe a Defe& in the Eye, 
As the Feebleneſs of Grace and Prevalence of Corrup- 
tion, obſcures the Object; ſo it enfeebles the Sight; it 
darkens the Sight as to all ſpiritual Objects, of which 
Grace is one. Sin is like ſome Diſtempers of the Eyes, 
that make Things to appear of different Colours from 
thoſe which properly belong to them, and like many 
other Diſtempers that put the Mouth out of Taſte, fo 
as to diſenable from diſtinguiſhing good and wholeſome 
Food from bad, but every Thing taſtes bitter. Men 
in a corrupt and carnal Frame, have their ſpiritual-Senſes 
in but poor Plight for judging and diſtinguiſhing ſpiri- 
tual Things. | 
For theſe Reaſons, no Signs that can be given, will 
actually ſatisfy Perſons in ſuch a Caſe: Let the Signs that 
are given, be never ſo good and infallible, and clearly 
laid down, they will not ſerve them. It is like giving 
a Man Rules, how to diſtinguiſh viſible Objects in the 
Dark: The Things themſelves may be very different, 
and their Difference may be very well and diſtinctly de- 
ſcribed to him; yet all is inſufficient to enable him to 
diſtinguiſh them, becauſe he is in the Dark. And 


therefore many perſons in ſuch a Caſe ſpend Time in a 


fruitleſs Labour, in poring on paſt Experiences, and 
examining themſelves by Signs they hear laid down 
from the Pulpit, or that they read in Books; when there 


is other Work for them to do, that is much more 


expected of them; which, while they neglect, all their 


Self. Examinations are like to be in vain, if they ſhould 


ſpend never ſo much Time in them. The accurſed 
Thing is to be deſtroyed from their Camp, and Achan 


to be ſlain; and till this be done, they will be in Trou- 


ble. - *Tis not God's Deſign - that. Men ſhould obtain 
Affurance in any other Way, than by mortifying Corrup- 
52g Fon 


a = RR” oo” ' as = 4A _ anS tc Lond ood 


* SIS i * 


987 * = 


Parr III. of gracious AﬀedTions. 129 


tion, and encreaſing in Grace, and obtaining the lively 
Exerciſes of it. And although Self-Examination be a 
Duty of great Uſe and Importance, and by no Means 
to be neglected; yet it is not the principal Means, by + 
which the Saints do get Satisfaction of their good Eſtate. 
Aſſurance is not to be obtain'd ſo much by Self- Exami. 
nation, as by Action. The Apoſtle Paul ſought Aſſur- 
ance chiefly this Way, even by forgetting the Things that 
were behind, and reaching forth unto thoſe Things that 
were before, preſſing towards the Mark for the Prize of 
the high Calling of God in Chriſt Jeſus; if by any Means 
he might attain unto the Reſurrection of the Dead. And ; 
it was by this Means chiefly that he obtain'd Aſſurance, 
1 Cor. ix. 26. I therefore ſo run, as not uncertainly, He 
obtain'd Aſſurance of winning the Prize, more by ran- 
ning; than by conſidering. The Swiftneſs of his Pace, 
did more towards his Aſſurance of a Conqueſt, than the 
Strictneſs of bis Examination, Giving all Diligence to 
grow in Grace, by adding to Faith, Vertue, Sc. is the 
Direction that the Apoſtle Peter gives us, for making 
our Calling and Election ſure, and having an Entrance 
miniſtred to us abundantly, into Chriſt's everlaſting Ring- 
dom; ſignifying to us, that without this, our Eyes will 
be dim, and we ſhall be as Men in the Dark, that cannot 
plainly ſee Things paſt or to come, either the Forgive- 
neſs of our Sins paſt, or our heavenly Inheritance that 
is future, and far of, 2 Pet. i. 5,—1 1* 8 
Therefore, tho' good Rules to diſtinguiſh true Grace 
from counterfeit, may tend to convince Hypocrites, 
and be of great Uſe to the Saints, in many Reſpects; 
a | — and 


— — — 


* « The Way to know your Godlineſs, is to renew the viſible 
« Exerciſes of Grace. The more the viſible Exerciſes of Grace 
« are renewed, the more certain you will be. The more frequently, 
« theſe Actings are renewed, the more abiding and confirmed your 
« Aſſurance will be. The more Men's Grace is multiplied, the 
more their Peace is multiplied; 2 Pet. i. 2. Grace and Peace be mul- 
« tiplied unto you, through the Knowledge of God and Jeſus Chriſt our 
* Lord.” Stoddard's Way to know Sincerity and Hypocriſy, p. 139, 


and 142. | 


. erites are ſo conceited of their own Wiſdom, and fo 


130 Concerning Signs Par III. 

and among other Benefits, may be very uſeful to them 
to remove many needleſs Saruples, and eſtabliſh their 
Hope; yet I am far from pretending to lay down any 
ſuch Rules, as ſhall be ſufficient of themſelves, without 
other Means, to enable all true Saints to ſee their good 
Eſtate, or as ſuppoſing they ſhould be the princip 
Means of their Satisfaction. 


3. Nor is there much Encouragement, | in the Expe- 
rience of preſent or paſt Times, to lay down Rules or 
Marks to diſtinguiſh between true and falſe Affections, 
in Hopes of convincing any conſiderable Nymber of 
that Sort of Hypocrites, who have been deceived with 
great falſe —. and AﬀeCtions, and are once ſet- 
tled in a falle Confidence, and high Conceit of their own 
ſuppoſed great Experiences and Privileges, Such Hypo- 


Rhode and harden'd with a very great Self- Righteouſ- 
neſs, (but very ſubtil and ſecret, under the Di guiſe of 
great Humility) and fo invincible a Fondneſs of their 
pleaſing Conceit, of their great Exaltation, that it 
uſually ſignifies nothing at all, to lay before them the 
moſt convincing Evidences of their Hypocriſy.” Their 
State is indeed deplorable, and next to thoſe that have 
committed the unpardonable Sin ; ſome of this Sort of 
Perſons ſeem to be moſt out of the Reach of Means of 
Conviction and Repentance. But yet the laying down. 
good Rules may be a Means of preventing ſuch Hypo- 
cntes, and of convincing many of other Kinds of Hypo- 
crites : And God is able to convince even this Kind, and 
his Grace is not to be limited, nor Means to be neglected. 
And beſides, ſuch Rules may be of Uſe to the true 
Saints, to detect falſe Affections, which they may have 
mingled with true. And be a Means of their Religions. 
becoming more pure, and like Gold tried in the Fire. 


Having premiſed theſe Things, I now proceed directiy | 
ro take Notice of thoſe Things in which true religious 
Affections are diſtinguiſhed from falſeQ. I. 


Parr III. of gracious Aﬀettions, 131 


| I. Affections that are truly ſpiritual and gracious, do 
| ariſe from thoſe Influences and Operations on the Heart, 
which are ſpiritual, ſupernatyral and divine, | 

I will explain what I mean by theſe Terms, whence 

| will appear their Uſe to diſtinguiſh between thoſe Aﬀec- \ _ 
| tions which are ſpiritual, and thoſe which are not ſo. 

We find that true Saints, or thoſe Perſons who are 
ſanctified by the Spirit of God, are in the New Teſta- 
ment called * Perſons. And their being ſpiritual 
is ſpoken of as their peculiar Character, and that 
wherein they are diſtinguiſhed from thoſe who are not 
ſanctified. This is evident, becauſe thoſe who are ſpiri- 
tual are ſet in Oppoſition to natural Men, and carnal 
Men. Thus the ſpiritual Man, and the natural Man, 
are ſet in Oppoſition one to another; 1 Cor. ii. 14, 15. 
The natural Man receiveth not the Things of the Spirit of 
God, for they are Fooliſbneſs unto him; neither can be know 
them; becaaſe they are ſpiritually diſcerned. But he that 
is ſpiritual judgeth all Things. The Scripture explains 
itſelf to mean an ungodly Man, or one that has no Gra 
by a natural Man: Thus the Apoſtle Jude, ſpeaking o 
certain ungodly Men, that had crept in unawares among 

the Saints, Verſe 4, of his Epiſtle, ſays, Verſe 19. Theſe 
are ſenſual, having not the Spirit. This the Apoſtle 
gives as 3 Reaſon why they behaved themſelves in ſuch 
2 wicked Manner as he had deſcribed. Here the Word 
tranſlated ſenſual, in the Original is Pſuxikoi, which is 
the very ſame; which in thoſe Verſes in 1 Cor. Chap. 2. 
is tranſlated natural. In the like Manner, in the Con- 
tinuation of the ſame Diſcourſe, in the next Verſe but 
one, ſpiritual Men are oppoſed to carnal Men; which 
the Connection plainly ſhews mean the ſame, as ſpiritual 
Men and natural Men, in the foregoing Verſes; And J. 
Brethren, 'cauld not ſpeak unto you, as unto ſpiritual, but 
85 unto carnal; i. e. as in a great Meaſure unſanctified. 
That by carnal the Apoſtle means corrupt and unſancti- 
fed, is abundantly evident, by Rom. vii. 25. and viii. 
I, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 12, 13. Gal. v. 16, 8 
W . 9 2 g . , N 0 A 


Col. ii. 18. Now therefore, if by natural NR carnal, in r 


theſe Texts, he intended unſanZified then doubtleſs by ll 
ſpiritual, which is oppoſed thereto, is meant ſanctißed 2 


and gracious. 1 
And as the Saints are called ſpiritual in Scripture, fo t 
woe alſo find, that there are certain Properties, Qualities {i 
and Principles, that have the ſame Epithet given them. 0 


So we read of a ſpiritual Mind, Rom. viii. 6, 7, and of t 
. ritual Vi OR Col. i. 9. and of hpiritual Bleſſings, y 

-\ Eph. 1. 3. 

Now it may be obſerved, that the Epithet ſpiritual, - 
in theſe and other parallel Texts of the New Teſtament, 
is not uſed to fignify any Relation of Perſons or Things 
to the Spirit or Soul of Man, as the ſpiritual Part of 
Man, in Oppoſition to the Body, which is the material 
Part: Qualities are not ſaid to be ſpiritual, becauſe they 
have their Seat in the Soul, and not in the Body: For 

| there are ſome Properties that the Scripture calls carnal 
or fleſhly, which have their Seat as rows of in the Soul, as 
thoſe Properties that are called ſpiritual. Thus it is 
with Pride and Self- Righteouſneſs, and a Man's truſting 
to his own Wiſdom, which the Apoſtle calls feſbiy; Col. 
it. 18. Nor are Things called ſpiritual, becauſe they are 
converſant about thoſe Things that are immaterial, and 
not corporeal. For ſo was the Wiſdom of the wiſe 
Men, and Princes of this World, converſant about 
Spirits, and immaterial Beings; which yet the Apoſtle | 
ſpeaks of as natural Men, totally ignorant of thoſe 
Things that are /piritzal, 1 Cor, Chap. ii. But it is 
with Relation to the Holy Ghoft, or Spirit of God, that 
Perſons or Things are termed ſpiritual, in the New- | 
Teſtament. Spirit, as the Word is uſed to ſignify the 
third Perſon in the Trinity, is the Subſtantive, . of which 
is formed the Adjective ſpiritual, in the holy Scriptures. 
Thus Chriſtians are called ſpiritual Perfons, becauſe they 
are born of the Spirit, and becauſe of the Indwelling | 
and holy Influences of the Spirit of God in them. And 
Things are called ſpiritual as related to the Spirit wy . 
I Cor. 


wad ws A ao * ws . was po =, 


ai OA a- O_o ADwnk con f 


— 7 a6 —— 


+ 1 umme 


ParT III. of gracious Affection. 133 
1 Cor. it. 13, 14. Which Things alſo we ſpeak, not in 
the Words which Man's Wiſdom teacbetb, but which the 
Holy Ghoſt teacheth, comparing ſpiritual Things with ſpi- 
ritual. But the natural Man receiveth not the Things of 
the Spirit of God. Here the Apoſtle himſelf expreſly 
ſignifies, that by ſpiritual Things, he means the Things 
of the Spirit of God, and Things which the Holy Ghoſt © 
teacheth. The ſame is yet more abundantly apparent by 
viewing the whole Context. Again, Rom. viii. 6. 76 
ze carnally minded is Death: But to be ſpiritually minded 
is Life and, Peace. The Apoſtle explains what he means 
by being carnally and ſpiritually minded, in what follows 
in the gth Verſe, and ſhews that by being ſpiritually 
minded, he means a having the Indwelling and holy 
Influences of the Spirits of God in the Heart. But ye are 
not in the Fleſh, but in the Spirit, if /o be the Spirit of 
God dwell in you. Now if any Man have not the Spirit 
of Chriſt, be is none of his. The ſame is evident by all 
the Context. But Time would fail to produce all the 
Evidence there is of this, in the New-Teſtament. 

And it muſt be here obſerved, that although it is with 
Relation to the Spirit of God and: his Influences, that 
Perfons and Things are called ſpiritual; yet not all thoſe 
Perſons who are ſubject to any Kind of Influence of the 
Spirit of God, are ordinarily called ſpiritual in the New- 
Teſtament. They who have only the common Influen- 
ces of God's Spirit are not ſo called, in the Places cited 
above, but only thoſe, who have the ſpecial, gracious, 
and ſaving Influences of God's Spirit: As is evident, 
becauſe it * been already proved, that by ſpiritual Men 
is meant godly Men, in Oppoſition to natural, carnal 
and unſanctify'd Men. And it is moſt plain, that the 
Apoſtle by ſpiritually minded, Rom. viii. 6. means gra- 
ciouſly minded. And though the extraordinary Gifts of 
the Spirit, which natural Men might have, are ſometimes 
called ſpiritual, becauſe they are from the Spirit; yet 7 
natural Men, whatever Gifts of the Spirit they had, 


were not, in the uſual Language of the New-Teſta- 
| : | ment, 


134 The firft Sign Parr III. 
ment, called fpiritual Perſons. For it was not by Men's 
| having the Gifts of the Spirit, but by their having the Iſl © 
Vertues of the Spirit, that they were called ſpiritual; az Il © 
is apparent, by Gal, vi. 1. Brethren, if any Man be over. a1 
taken in a Fault, ye which are ſpiritual reſtore 'ſuch an 80 
one in the Spirit of Meekneſs. Meeknels is one of thoſe ill ® 
Vertues which the Apoſtle had juſt ſpoken of, in the Ml 
Verſes next preceding, ſhewing what are the Fruits d 1 
the Spirit. Thoſe Qualifications are ſaid to be ſpiritul i 7 
in the Language of the New-Teſtament, which ate ſo 
truly gracious and holy, and peculiar to the Saints, tt 
Thus when we read of ſpiritual Wiſdom and Under. 
ſtanding (as in Col. i. 9. We deſire that ye may be filled G 
with the Knowledoe of his Will, in all Wiſdom and 
Siegal Underſtanding.) Hereby is intended that 
iſdom which is gracious, and from the ſanctifying 
Influences of the Spirit of God. For doubtleſs, by 
ſpiritual Wiſdom, is meant that which is oppoſite to what 
the Scripture calls natural Wiſdom; as the ſpiritual Mah 
is oppoſed to the natural Man. And therefore ſpiritual 
Wiſdom is doubtleſs the ſame with that Wiſdom which 
is from above, that the Apoſtle James ſpeaks of, Jam. 
tit. 17. The Wiſdom that is from above, is firſt pure, 
then peateable, gentle, &c. for this the Apoſtle oppoſes 
to natural Wiſdom, Ver. 13. This Wiſdom 1 75 
not from above, but is earthly, ſenſua the laſt Word . 
in - Original is the ſame that is tranſlated natural, in 
. 5 | 
So that although natural Men may be the Subjects of - 
many Influences of the Spirit of God, as is evident by 
many Seriptures, as Numb. xxiv. 2. i Sam. x. 10. ard ; 
xi. 6. and xvi. 14. 1 Cor. Kili. 1, 2, 3. Heb. Vi. 4, 5, 6. 


and many others; yet they are not in the Senſe of the IN. 
Scripture, ſpiritual Perſons; neither are any of thoſe WI 
Effects, common Gi ualities or Affections, that 
are from the Influence the Spirit of God upon them, I 
called ſpiritual Thir The great Difference lies in , 


theſe two Things, * 


4. 26-5 


k A tf a a 1 


pax r III. of gracious Affections. 135 
1. The Spirit of God is given to the true Saints to 
dwell in them, as his proper laſting Abode; and to influ- 
ence their Hearts, as a Principle of new Nature, or as a 
divine ſupernatural Spring of Life and Action. The 
Scriptures repreſent the Holy Spirit, not only as moving, 
and occaſionally influencing the Saints, but as dwelling 
in them as his Temple, his proper Abode, and ever- 
laſting Dwelling-Place; 1 Cor. iii. 16. 2 Cor. vi. 16. 
John xiv. 16, 17. And he is repreſented as being there 
ſo united to the Faculties of the Soul, that he becomes 
there a Principle or Spring of new Nature and Life. 

So the Saints are ſaid to live by Chriſt living in them, 
Cal. il. 2. Chriſt by his Spirit not only ig in them, but 
lives in them; and ſo that they live by his Life; ſo is his 
Spirit united to them, as a Principle of Life in them; 
they don't only drink living Water, but this living Ma- 
ter becomes a Well or Fountain of Water, in the Soul, 
ſpringing up into ſpiritual and everlaſting Life, John iv. 
14. and thus becomes a Principle of Lite in them; this 
living Water, this Evangeliſt himſelf explains to intend 
the Spirit of God, Chap. yii. 38, 39. The Light of the 
Sun of Righteouſneſs don't only ſhine upon them, but 
is ſo communicated to them, that they ſhine alſo, and 
become little Images of that Sun which ſhines upon 
them; the Sap of the true Vine is not only conveyed 
into them, as the Sap of a Tree may be conveyed 
into a Veſſel, but is conveyed as Sap is from a Tree 
into one of it's living Branches, where it becomes a 
Principle of Life. The Spirit of God being thus com- 
municated and united to the Saints, they are from thence 
properly denominated from it, and are called ſpiritual. 

On the other Hand, though the Spirit of God may 
many Ways influence natural Men; yet becauſe it is not 
thus communicated to them, as an indwelling Principle, 
they don't derive. any Denomination or Character from 
It; for there being no Union, it is not their own. The 
ht may ſhine upon a Body that is very dark or black; 

though that Body be the Subject of the Light, 5 os h 
ODD becauſe | | 


136 The firſt Sign 
becauſe the Light becomes no Principle of Light in ir, 
ſo as to cauſe the Body to ſhine, hence that Body don! 
properly receive its Denomination from it, ſo as to he 
called a lightſome Body. So the Spirit of God acting 
upon the Soul only, without communicating itſelf to he 
an active Principle in it, can't denominate it /pirituu/, 
A Body that continues black, may be ſaid not to have 
Light, though the Light ſhines upon it; ſo natural Men 
are ſaid not to have the Spirit, Jude xix. ſenſual, or na. 
tural (as the Word is elſewhere rendered) having mt 

the Spirit. | 


2. Another Reaſon why the Saints and their Vertues 
are called ſpiritual, (which is the principal Thing) is 
that the Spirit of God, dwelling as a vital Principle in 
their Souls, there produces thoſe Effects wherein he 
exerts and communicates himſelf in his own proper Na- 
ture, Holineſs is the Nature of the Spirit of God, 
therefore he is called in Scripture the Holy Ghoſt. Ho- 
lineſs, which is as it were the Beauty and Sweetneſs 
of the Divine Nature, is as much the proper Nature 
of the Holy Spirit, as Heat is the Nature of Fire, or 
Sweetneſs was the Nature of that holy anointing Oil 
which was the principal Type of the Holy Ghoſt, in 
the Moaſaick Diſpenſation; yea, I may rather ſay that 
| Holineſs is as much the proper Nature of the Holy 

Ghoſt, as Sweetneſs was the Nature of the ſweet Odour 
of that Ointment. - The Spirit of God ſo dwells in the 
Heartsof the Saints, that he there, as a Seed or Spring of 
Life, exerts and communicates himſelf, in this his ſweet 
and divine Nature, making the Soul a Partaker of God's 
Beauty and Chriſt's Joy, ſo that the Saint has truly 
Fellowſhip with the Father, and with his Son Jeſus 
Chriſt, in thus having the Communion or Participation 
of the Holy Ghoſt. The Grace which is in the Hearts 
of the Saints, is of the ſame Nature with the divine 
Holineſs, as much as tis poſſible for that Holineſs to be, 
which is infinitely leſs in Degree; as the Brightneſs that 

ls 


Paxr Ill 


Part III. .of gracious Affection. 137 
is in a Diamond which the Sun ſhines upon, is of the 
ame Nature with the Brightneſs of the Sun, but onl 
that it is as nothing to it in - Therefore Chriſt 
ſays, John iii. 6. That which is bern of the Spirit is 
Spirit; i. e. the Grace that is tten in the Hearts of 
the Saints, is ſomething of the Nature with that 
Spirit, and ſo is properly called a ſpiritual Nature; after 
the ſame Manner as. that which is born of the Fleſh is 
Fleſh, or that which is born of corrupt Nature is cor- 
rupt Nature. | 9 | "oY 
But the Spirit of God never influences the Minds of 
natural Men after this Manner. Though he may in- 
fluence them many Ways, yet he never, in any of his 
Influences, communicates himſelf to them in his own 
proper Nature. Indeed he never acts diſagreeably to 
his Nature, either on the Minds of Saints or Sinners: 
But the Spirit of God may act upon Men agreeably to 
his own Nature, and not exert his p Nature in the - 
Acts and Exerciſes of their Minds: The Spirit of God 
may act ſo, that his Actions may be agreeable to his 
Nature, and yet may not at all communicate himſelf in 
his proper Nature, in the Effect of that Action. Thus, 
for Inſtance, the Spirit of God moved upon the Face of 
the Waters, and there was nothing diſagreeable to his 
Nature in that Action; but yet he did not at all com- 
municate himſelf in that Action; there was nothing of 
the proper Nature of the Holy Spirit in that Motion of 
the Waters. And ſo he may act upon the Minds of 
Men many Ways, and not communicate himſelf any 
more than when he acts on inanimate Things. 
| Thus not only the Manner of the Relation of the Spi- 
rit, who is the Operator, to the Subject of Nis Operator, 
is different; as the Spirit in the Saints, as 
dwelling in them, as an abiding Principle of Action, 
whereas he doth not ſo operate * Sinners; but the 
Influence and Operation itſelf is different, and the Effect 
wrought exceeding different. So that not only the Per- 
ſons are called piritual, as having the Spirit of God 
F dwelling 


- 


138 The firſt Sign Par II. 


| dwelling in them; but thoſe Qualifications, Affections 
and Experiences that are wrought. in them by the Spirit, 
are alſo /firitnal, and therein differ vaſtly in their Na. 
ture and Kind from all that a natural Man is or can be 
the Subject of, while he remains in a natural State; and 
alſo from all that Men or Devils can be the Authors of: 
Ti a ſpiritual Work in this high Senſe; and therefore 

above all other Works is peculiar to the Spirit of God, 
There is no Work ſo high and excellent; for there is 
no Work wherein God does ſo much communicate him- 
ſelf, and wherein the mere Creature hath, in ſo high a 
"Senſe, a Participation of God; fo that it is expreſſed in 
- Scripture by the Saints being made Partakers of the di- 
dine Nature; 2 Pet. i. 4. and having God dwelling in 
them, and they in God, 1 John iv. 12, 15, 16. and Chap. 
itt. 21. and having Chriſt in them, John xvii. 21. Rom. 
viii. 10. being the Temples of the living God, 2 Cor. vi. 16. 
living by Chriſt's Life, Gal. ii. 20. being made Partakers 
of God's Holineſs, Heb. xii. 10. having Chriſt's Love 
dwelling in them, John xvii. 26. having his Foy fulfilled 
in them, John xvii. 13. ſeeing Light in God's Light, and 
being made to drink of the River of God's Pleaſures, Pial. 


"xxxv1. 8, 9. having Fellowſhip with God, or communt- 


'cating and partating with him (as the Word ſignifies) 
1 John i. 3. Not that the Saints are made Partakers of 
the Effence of God, and fo are Godded with God, and 
Cbriſted with Chriſt, according to the abominable and 
blaſphemous Language and Notions of ſome Hereticks; 
but, to uſe the Scripture Phraſe, they are made Parta- 
| kers of God's Fullneſs, Eph. iti. 17, 18, 19. Jobn i. 16. 
that 1s, of God's ſpiritual Beauty and Happineſs, accor- 
Uing to the Meaſure and Capacity of a Creature; for fo 
it is evident the Word Fullneſs ſignifies in Scripture 
Language. Grace in the Hearts of the Saints, being 
therefore the moſt glorious Work of God, wherein he 
communicates - of the Goodneſs of his Nature, it is 
doubtleſs his peculiar Work, and in an eminent Man- 
ner, above the Power of all Creatures. And the 
Ys | Influences 


ww A4 _ % @, ©, . \ | wad — 


* 1 * g G 


1 
* 


PART III. of .gracious Affection. 139 . 


Influences of the Spirit of God in this, being thus pe- 
culiar to God, and being thoſe wherein God does, in 
ſo high a Manner, communicate himſelf, and make the 
Creature Partaker of the divine Nature, (the Spirit of 
God communicating itſelf in its own proper Nature.) 
This is what I mean by thoſe Influences that are divine, 
when I ſay that truly gracious Affections do ariſe from 
thoſe Influences that are ſpiritual and divine. 

The true Saints only have that which is ſpiritual; 
others have nothing which is divine, in the Senſe that 
has been ſpoken of. They not only have not theſe 
Communications of the Spirit of God in ſo high a De- 
gree as the Saints, but have nothing of that Nature or 
Kind, For the Apoſtle James tells us, that natural 
Men have not the Spirit; and Chriſt teaches the Neceſ- 
ſity of a New Birth, or a being born of the Spirit, from 
this, that He that is born of the Fleſh, has only Fleſh, 
and no Spirit, Fobn iii. 6. They have not the Spirit of 
God dwelling in them in any Degree; for the Apoſtle 
teaches, \that all who have the Spirit of God dwelling in 
them are ſome of his, Rem. viii. 9, 10, 11. And an 
having the Spirit of God is ſpoken of as a certain Sign 
that Perſons ſhall have the eternal Inheritance; for *ti 
ſpoken of as the Earneſt of it, 2 Cor. i. 22. and v. 5. 
Eph, i. 14. and an having any Thing of the Spirit is 
mentioned as a ſure Sign of being in Chriſt, 1 John iv. 
13. Hereby know we that we dwell in him, becauſe be 
bath given us of his Spirit. Ungodly Men, not only 
have not ſo much of the divine Nature. as the Saints, 
but they are not Partakers of it; which implies, that 
they have nothing of it; for a being Partaker of the 
divine Nature is ſpoken of as the peculiar Privilege of 
the true Saints, 2 Pet. i. 4. Ungodly Men are not 
Partakers of God's Holineſs, Heb. xii. 10. A natural 
Man has no Experience of any of thoſe Things that 
are ſpiritual: The Apoſtle teaches us, that he is ſo far 
from it, that he knows nothing about «hem, he is a 
perfect Stranger to them, the Talk about ſuch Things 
| | K 2 . 8 * 


140 The firfl Sign Par III. 
is all Fooliſhneſs and Nonſenſe to him, he knows not 
what it means, 1 Cor. ii. 14. The natural Man receiveth 
wot the Things of the Spirit of God; for they are Fool. 
ifhneſs to bim; neither can he know them; becauſe they 
are ſpiritually diſcerned. And to the like Purpoſe Chriſt 
teaches us that the World is wholly unacquainted with 
the Spirit of God. John xiv. 17. Even the Spirit of 
Truth, whom the World cannot receive; beranſe it ſeeth 
him not, neither knoweth bim. And 'tis further evident, 
that natural Men kave nothing in them of the ſame 
Nature-with the true Grace of the Saints, becauſe the 
Apoſtle teaches us that thoſe of them who go furtheſt 
in Religion, have no Charity, or true chriſtian Love, 
Cor. Chap. xiii. So Chriſt elſewhere reproves the 
Phariſees, thoſe high Pretenders to Religion, that they 
had not the Love of God in them. John v. 42. Hence 
natural Men have no Communion or Fellowſhip with 
Chriſt, or Participation with him, (as theſe Words fig- 
nify) for this is ipoken of as the peculiar Privilege of 
the Saints, 1 Job i. 3. together with Verſe 6, 7. and 
I Cor. i. 8, 9. And the Scripture ſpeaks of the actual 
Being of a gracious Principle in the Soul, though in its 
firſt beginning, as a Seed there planted, as inconſiſtent | 
with a Man's being à Sinner, 1 Jobn ii. 9. And natu- 
ral Men are repreſented in Scripture as having no ſpiri- 
rual Light, no ſpiritual Life, and no ſpiritual Being; 
and therefore Converſion is often compared to opening 
the Eyes of the Blind, raiſing the Dead, and a Work 
of Creation, (wherein Creatures are made entirely new) 
and beco new born Children. | 
From theſe Things it is evident, that thoſe gracious 
Influences which the Saints are the Subjects of, and the 
Effects of God's Spirit which they experience, are en- 
_tirely above Nature, altegether of a different Kind from 
any Thing that Men find within themſelves by Nature, 
or only in the Exerciſe of natural Principles; and arc 
Things which nv Improvement of thoſe Qualifications, 
or Principles that are natural, no advancing or 2 | 
: em 


PaxT III. of gracious Affections. 141 
chem to higher Degrees, and no Kind of Compaſition 
of them, will ever bring Men to; becauſe they not only 
differ from what is natural, and from every Thing that 
natural Men experience, in Degree and Circumſtances; 
but alſo in Kind; ond are of à Nature vaſtly more ex- 
cellent. And this 1s what I mean by ſupernatural, 
when I ſay, that gracious Affectians are from thoſe Influ- 
ences that are ſupernatural. 20h ; 
From hence it follows, that in thoſe gracious Exer- 
ciſes and Affections which are wrought in the Minds of 
the Saints, through ahe ſaving Influences of the Spirit 
of God, there is a new inward Perception or Senſation 
of their Minds, entirely different in its Nature and 
Kind, from any Thing that ever their Minds were the 
Subjects of before they were ſanctified. For doubtleſs 
if God by his mighty Power produces ſomething that is 
new, not only in Degree and Circumſtances, but in its 
whole Nature, and that which could be produced by 
no exalting, varying or compounding of what was there 
before, or by adding any Thing of the like Kind: I 


fay, if God produces ſomething thus new in a Mind,. 


that is a perceiving, thinking, conſcious Thing; the 
doubtleſs "lomething entirely new is felt, 2 8 
or thought; or, which is the ſame Thing, there is ſome 
ney Senſation or Perception of the Mind, which is en- 
tirely of a new Sort, and which could be produced by 
no exalting, varying or compounding of that Kind of 
Perceptions or Senſations which the Mind had before; 
or there is what ſome Metaphyſicians call a new /imple 
Idea. If Grace be, in the Senſe above deſcribed, an 
entirely new Kind of Principle; then the Exerciſes of it 
are alſo entirely a new Kind of Exerciſes, And if there 
be in the Soul a new Sort of Exerciſes which it is con- 
ſcious of, which the Soul knew nothing of before, and 
which no Improvement, Compoſition or Management 
of what it was before conſcious or ſenſible of, could 
produce, or any Thing like it; then it follows that the 


Mind has an entire 1 nan 
8 1 


142 The firſt Sign PART III. 
Senſation; and here is, as it were, a new ſpiritual Senſe - 
that the Mind has, or a Principle of new Kind of 
Perception or ſpiritual Senſation, which is in its whole 
Nature different from any former Kinds of Senſation of 
the Mind, as Taſting 1s diverſe from any of the other 
Senſes; and ſomething is perceived by a true Saint, in 
the Exerciſe of this new Senſe of Mind, in ſpiritual and 
divine Things, as entirely diverſe from any Thing that 
is perceived in them, by natural Men, as the ſweet 
Taſte of Honey 1s diverſe from the Ideas Men get of 
Honey by only looking on it, and feeling of it. So 
that the ſpiritual Perceptions which a ſanctified and ſpi- 
ritual Perſon has, are not only diverſe from all that 
natural Men have, after the Manner that the Ideas or 
Perceptions of the ſame Senſe may differ one from ano- 
ther, — rather as the Ideas and Senſations of different 
Senſes do differ. Hence the Work of the Spirit of God 
in Regeneration is often in Scripture compared to the 
giving a new Senſe, giving Eyes to fee, and Ears to 
- hear, unſropping the Ears of the Deaf, and opening 
e Eyes of them that were born Blind, and turning 
hr Darkneſs unto Light. And becauſe this ſpiritual 
Senſe is immenſely the moſt noble and excellent, and 
that without which all other Principles of Perception, 
and all our Faculties are uſeleſs and vain; therefore the 
giving this new Senſe, with the bleſſed Fruits and 
Effects of it in the Soul, is compared to a raiſing the 
Dead, and to a new Creation, . 
This new ſpiritual Senſe, and the new Diſpoſitions 
that attend it, are no new Faculties, but are new Prin- 
ciples of Nature, I uſe the Word Principles, for want 
of a Word of a more determinate Signification. By a 
Principle of Nature in this Place, I mean that Founda- 
ion which is laid in Nature, either old or new, for any 
particular Manner or Kind of Exerciſe of the Faculties 
of the Soul; or a natural Habit or Foundation for 
Action, giving a Perſon Ability and Diſpoſition to exert 


the Faculties in Exerciſes of ſuch a certain * lo 
me = 


pakr III. of gracious Aﬀettions. 143 


that to exert the Faculties in that Kind of Exerciſes, 
may be ſaid to be his Nature. So this new ſpiritual 
Senſe is not a new Faculty of Underſtanding, but it is 
anew Foundation laid in the Nature of the Soul, for 
a new Kind of Exerciſes of the ſame Faculty of Under 
ſtanding. So that new holy Diſpoſition of Heart that 
attends this new Senſe, is not a new Faculty of Will, 
but a Foundation laid in the Nature of the Soul for a 
new Kind of Exerciſes of the ſame Faculty of Will. 
The Spirit of God, in all his Operations upon the 
Minds of natural Men, only moves, impreſſes, aſſiſts, 
improves, or ſome other Way acts upon natural Prin- 
ciples; but gives no new ſpiritual Principle. Thus when 
the Spirit of God gives a natural Man Viſions, as he 
did Balaam, he only impreſſes a natural Principle, viz. 
the Senſe of ſeeing, immediately exciting Ideas of that 
Senſe; but he gives no new Senle; neither is there any 
Thing ſupernatural, ſpiritual or divine in it. So if the 
Spirit of God impreſſes on a Man's Imagination, either 
in a Dream, or when he 1s awake, any outward Ideas 
of any of the Senſes, either Voices, or Shapes and Co- 
lours, 'tis only exciting Ideas of the fame Kind that h 
has by natural Principles and Senſes. So if God — 
to any natural Man, any ſecret Fact; as for Inſtante, 
ſomething that he ſhall hereafter ſee or hear; this is not 
infuſing or exerciſing any new ſpiritual Principle, or 
giving the Ideas of any new ſpiritual Senſe; tis only 
impreſſing, in an extraordinary Manner, the Ideas that 
will hereatter be received by Sight and Hearing. So in 
the more ordinary Influences of the Spirit of God 
on the Hearts of Sinners, he only aſſiſts natural Prin- 
ciples to do the ſame Work to a greater Degree, which 
they do of themſelves by Nature. Thus the Spirit 
of God, by his common Influences may aſſiſt Men's 
natural Ingenioſity, as he aſſiſted Bezaleel and Aboliah 
in the curious Works of the Tabernacle: fo he may 
aſſiſt Men's natural Abilities in political Affairs, and 
improve their Courage, and other natural Qualifications; 
Guy 


1444 be firſt Sign 


as he is ſaid to have put his Spirit on the ſeventy Elders, 
and on Saul, ſo as to give bim another Heart: ſo God 
may greatly aſſiſt natural Men's Reaſon, in their Reaſon- 
ing about ſecular Things, or about the Doctrines of 
Religion, and may greatly advance the Clearneſs of their 

Apprehenſions and Notions of Things of Religion in 
many Reſpects, without giving any ſpiritual Senſe. 80 
in thoſe Awakenings and: Convictions that natural Men 
may have, God only aſſiſts Conſcience, which is a 
natural Principle, to do that Work in a further Degree, 
which it naturally does. Conſcience naturally gives 
Men an Apprehenſion-of Right and Wrong, and ſugpeſts 
the Relation there is between Right and Wrong, and : 
Retribution: The Spirit of God aſſiſts Men's Conſci- 
ences to do this in a greater Degree, helps Conſcience 


a gainſt ſtupifying Influence of worldly Otyects and their 


Luſts, And ſo there are many other Ways might be 
mention'd herein the Spirit acts upon, aſſiſts and moves 


natural Principles; byt after tis no more than 


Nature moved, acted and improved; here is nothing 
ſupernatural and divine. But the Spirit of God in his 
ſpiritual Influences on the Hearts of his Saints, 
Þy infuſing or exerciſing new, divine and ſupernatural 
Principles; Principles which are indeed a new and ſpi- 
ritual Nature, and Principles vaſtly more noble and 
excellent than all that is in natyra] M 


en. 


From what has been ſaid it follows, that all ſpiritual 


and gracious Affections are attended with, and do ariſe 


from ſome Apprehenſion, Idea or Senſation of Mind, 


which is in its whole Nature different, yea exceeding 
different from all that is or can be in the Mind of a 
natural Man; and which the natural Man diſcerns 
nothing of, and has no Manner of Idea of, (agreeable 
to 1 Cor. ii. 14.) and conceives of no more than a Man 
without the Senſe of Taſting can conceive of the ſweet 
Taſte of Honey, or a Man without the Senſe of Hear- 

ing can conceive of the Melody of a Tune, or a Man 
born Blind can 
Rainbow. But 


Pax r. III. 


nn K ,] 


have 2 Notion of the Beauty of the 


Ne 


Part III. of graciqus Afettions. 145 
gut here two Things muſt be obſerved in order to the 
right Underſtanding of this. pe” 74 

1. On the one Hand it muſt be bee! that not 
every Thing which in any Reſpect appertains to ſpiritual 
Affections, is new and entirely different from what natu= 
ral Men can conceive -of, and do experience; ſome 
Things are common to gracious Affections with other 
Affections; many Circumſtances, Appendages and 
Effects are common. Thus a Saint's Love to God has 
a great many Things appertaining to it, which are com- 
mon with a Man's natural Love to a near Relation: 
Love to God makes a Man have Deſires of the Honour of 
God, and 2 Deſire ta pleaſe him ſo does a natural Man's 
Love to his Friend make him deſire his Honour, and 
deſire to pleaſe him; Love to God cauſes a Man to 
| delight in the Thoughts of God, and to delight in the 

4 Dk of God, and to defire Conformity to God, and 
the Enjoyment of God; and ſo it is with a Man's Love 
to his Friend; and many other Things might be men- 
tioned which are common to both. But yet that Idea 
which the Saint has of the Lovelineſs of God, and that 
Senſation, and that Kind of Delight he has in that View, 
which is as it were the Marrow and Quinteſſence of his 
Love, is peculiar, and entirely diverſe from any Thi 
that a natural Man has, or can have any Notion © 
And even in thoſe Things that ſeem to be common, 
there is ſomething german: Both ſpiritual Love and 
Natural, cauſe Deſires after the Object beloved; but 
they be not the ſame Sort of Deſires; there is a Senſa- 
tion of Soul in the ſpiritual Deſires of one that loves 
God, which is entirely different from all natural Deſires. 
Both ſpiritual Love and natural Love are attended with 
Delight in the Object beloved; hut the Senſations of 
Delight are not the ſame, but entirely and exceedingly 
diverſe. Natural Men may haye Conceptions of many 
Things about ſpiritual Affections; but there is ſomethi 
in them which is as it were the Nucleus, or Kernel of 
them, that they have no more Conceptions of, than one 
born blind has of Colours. It 


0 | 


3 b | 
146 De firfl, Sign Pak III. 
It may be clearly illuſtrated by this: We will ſuppoſe 
two Meng one is born without the Senſe of Taſting, 
the other has it; the latter loves Honey, and is greatly 
delighted in it becauſe he knows the ſweet Taſte of it, 
the other loves certain Sounds and Colours: The Love 
of each has many Things that appertain to it, which iz 
common; it cauſes both to deſire and delight in the 
Object beloved, and cauſes Grief when it is abſent, Gs. 
Bur yet, that Idea or Senſation which he who knows the 
Taſte of Honey, has of its Excellency and Sweetneſs, 
that is the Foundation of his Love, 1s entirely different 
rom any Thing the other has or can have; and that 
Delight which he has in Honey, is wholly diverſe from 
any Thing that the other can conceive of; though t 
both delight in their beloved Objects. So both theſe 
Perſons may in ſome Reſpects love the ſame Object: 
The one may love a delicious Kind of Fruit, which is 
beautiful to the Eye, and of a delicious Taſte; not only 
becauſe he has ſeen its pleaſant Colours, but Knows its 


| | ſweet Taſte; the other, perfectly ignorant of this, loves 


it only for its beautiful Colours: There are many Things 
| ſeem, in ſome Reſpect, to be common to both; both 

love, both deſire, and both delight; but the Love, ang 
Deſire, and Delight of the one, is altogether dive 
from that of the other. The Difference between the 
Love of a natural Man and ſpiritual Man is like to this; 
but only it muſt be obferved, that in one Reſpect it is 
vaſtly greater, viz. that the Kinds of Excellency which 
are perceived in ſpiritual Objects, by theſe different 
Kinds of Perſons, are in themſ@ves vaſtly more diverſe, 
than the different Kinds of Excellency perceived in 
delicious Fruit, by a taſting and a taſteleſs Man; and in 
another Reſpe& it may not be ſo great, viz. as the ſpi- 
ritual Man may have a ſpiritual Senſe or Taſte, to per- 
ceive that divine and moſt peculiar Excellency, but in 
ſmall Beginnings, and in a very imperfect Degree. 

2. On the other Hand, it muſt be obſerved, that a 
natural Man may have thoſe religious A n 


D 


— 
— 


— 


wad trois. @ ax ' es of }ﬀ"vn> F103 


PART: III. of gracious Afections. 147 
and Affections, which may be in many Reſpects very 
new and ſurpriſing to him, and what before he did not 
conceive of; and yet what he experiences be nothing 
t; ¶ like the Bnerciſes of a Principle of new Nature, or the 
e Senſations of a new ſpiritual Senſe: His Aﬀections may 
s I be very new, by extraordinarily moving natural Princi- 
ic i ples, in a very new Degree, and with a great many new 
c. Circumſtances, and a new Co-operation of natural Af- 
e I fe&tions, and a new Compoſition of Ideas; this may be 
„tom ſome extraordinary powerful Influence of Satan 
tand ſome great Deluſion; but there is nothing but 
Nature extraordinarily acted. As if a poor Man, that 
had always dwelt in a Cottage, and had never looked 
beyond the obſcure Village where he was born, ſhould 
| ina Jeſt, be taken to a magnificent City and Prince's 
Court, and there arrayed in princely Robes, and ſet in 
the Throne, with the Crown Royal on his Head, Peers 
and Nobles bowing before him, and ſhould be made to 
believe that he was now a glorious Monarch ; the Ideas 
he would have, and the Affections he would experience, 
would in many Reſpects be very new, and ſuch as he 
had no Imagination of before; but all is no more, than 
only extraordinarily raiſing and exciting natural Prin- 
ciples, and newly exalting, yarying and compounding, 
ſuch Sort of Ideas, as he has by Nature; there is nothing 
like giving himga new Sende. 

Upon the Whole, Ithink it is clearly manifeſt, that 
alt truly gracious Affections do ariſe from ſpecial and 
peculiar Influences of the Spirit, working that /en/ible 
Effet or Senſation in the Souls of the Saints, Which are 
entirely different from all that it is poſſible a natural 
Man ſhould experience, not only different in Degree 
and Circumſtances, but different in its whole Nature: 
So that a natural Man not only cannot experience that 
which is individually the fame, but cannot experience 
any Thing but what is exceeding diverſe, and im- 
menſely below it, in its Kind; and: that which the 
Power of Men or Devils is not ſufficient to produce the 
like of, or any Thing of the ſame N ature, I 


Parr III. The firſt Sign 14} 
I have inſiſted largely on this Matter, becauſe it is of 
great Importance and Uſe, evidently to diſcover and 
emonſtrate the Deluſions of Satan, in many Kinds ef 
falſe religious Affections, which Multitudes are deluded 
by, and probably have been in all Ages of the chriſtian 
Church; and to ſettle and determine may Articles of 
Doctrine, concerning the Operations of the Spirit of 
God, and * ature of rag 421 
Now therefore, to a ſe Things to urpoſe 
of this Diſcourſe. 97280 | of 
From hence it appears that Impreſſions which ſome 
have made on their Imagination, or the imaginary Ideas 
which they have of God, or Chet, or Heaven or 
any Thing appertaining o Religion, have nothing in 
them 1 piritual, - of the — of true Gece 
Tho' ſuch Things may attend what is ſpiritual, and be 
mixed with it, yet in themſelves they have nothing that 
is ſpiritual, nor are they any Pare of gracious Raps 
rience. | | | 
Here, for the Sake of the common People, I will 
explain what is intended by Impreſſions vn the Imagins- 
tion, and imaginary Ideas. The Imagination is that 
Power of the Mind, whereby it can have a Conception, 
or Idea of Things of an external or outward Nature, 
(that is of ſuch Sort of Things as are the Objects of the n 
outward Senſes) when thoſe Things are * A and 2 


de not peceived by the Senſes. It is magination I 2 
from the Word Image; becauſe thereby a Perſon can 
have an Image of ſome external Thing in his Mind, f. 


when that Thing is not preſent in Reality, nor-any Thing 
like it. All ſuch Kind of Things as we perceive by our 
Rye external Senſes, Seeing, Hearing, Smelling, Taſting 
and Feeling, are external Things: And when a Perſon 
has an Idea, or Image of any of theſe Sorts of Things 
in his Mind, when they are not there, and when he 
don't really ſee, hear, ſmell, taſte, nor feel them; that 
15 to have an Imagination of them, and. theſe Ideas are 
m aginary Ideas: And when ſuch Kind of Ideas are 
= 4 ſtrongly 


a £-, er wy = TH 2. 


F a 


149 1 of © gracious Affections. | Pat In. 


ngly impreſs'd upon the Mind, and the Image of 
arg the” Mind is very lively, almoſt as if one faw 
them, or heard them, &c. that is called an [nmpaifion 
on the Imagination. Thus Colours, and Shapes, and a 
Form of Countenance, they are outward Things; becauſe 
they are that Sort of Things which are the Objects of 
the outward Senſe of Seeing: And therefore when any 
Perſon has in his Mind a lively Idea of any Shape or 
Colour, or Form of Countenance; that is to have an 
Imagination of thoſe Things. So if he has an Idea of 
ſuch Sort of Light or Darkneſs, as he perceives by the 
Senſe of Sering; that is to have an Idea of outward 
Light, and ſo is an Imagination. So if he has an Idea 
of any Marks made on Paper, ſuppoſe Letters and 
Words written in a Book; that is to have an external 
and imaginary Idea of- ſuch Kind of Things as we ſome- 
times perceive by our bodily Eyes. And when we have 
the Ideas of that Kind of Things which we perceive by 
any of the other Senſes, as of any Sounds or Voices, or 
Words ſpoken; this 1s only to have Ideas of ourward 
Things, viz. of ſuch Kind of Things as are perceived 
by the external Senſe of Hearing, and fo that alſo is 
magination: and when theſe Ideas are livelily imprefſed, 
almoſt as if they were really heard with the Ears, this is 
to have an Impreſſion on the Imagination. And fo] *- 
might go on, and Inſtance in the Ideas of Things 
appertaining the other three Senſes of Smelling, Taſting 
and Feeling. NI Eh 
Many who have had ſuch Things have very ignorantly _, 
ſuppoſed them to be of the Nature of ſpiritual Diſcove- 
ries. They have had lively Ideas of ſome external 
Shape, and beautiful Form of Countenance; and this 
they call ſpiritually ſeeing Chriſt. Some have had im- 
preſs'd upon them Ideas of a great outward Light; and 
this they call a ſpiritual Diſcovery of God's or Chriſt's 
Glory, Some have had Ideas of Chriſt's hanging on the 
Croſs, and his Blood running from his Wounds; and 
this they call a ſpiritual Sight of Chriſt crucify'd, 4 


150 De firſt Sign Pak III, 
the Way of Salvation by his Blood. Some have ſeen 


him zvich his Arms open ready to embrace them; and 
this they call a Diſcovery of the Sufficiency of Christ; 
Grace and Love. Some have had lively Ideas of Hea. 
ven, and of Chriſt on his Throne there, and ſhining 
Ranks of Saints and Angels; and this they call ſeeing 
Heaven open'd to them. Some from Time to Time 
have had a lively Idea of a Perſon of a beautiful Coun- 
tenance ſmiling upon them; and this they call a ſpiri- 
tual Diſcovery of the Love of Chriſt to their Souls, 
and taſting the Love of Chriſt. And they look upon 
it a ſufficient Evidence, that theſe Things are ſpiritual 
Diſcoveries, and that they ſee them ſpiritually, becauſe 
they ſay they don't ſee theſe Things with their bodily 
Eyes, but in their Hearts; for they can ſee them when 

their Eyes are ſhut. And in like Manner, the Imagi- 
nations of ſome have been impreſs'd with Ideas of the 
Senfe of Hearing; they have had Ideas of Words, as 
if they were ſpoke to them; ſometimes they are the 
Words of Scripture, and ſometimes other Words: They 
have had Ideas of Chriſt's ſpeaking comfortable Words 
to them. Theſe Things they have called having the 
inward Call of Chrift, hearing the Voice of Chriſt ſpi- 


ritually in their Hearts, having the Witneſs of the 


Spirit, and the inward Telimony of the Love of 
Chriſt, &c.— - 5 OI | 
The common, and leſs conſiderate and underſtanding 
Sort of People, are the more eaſily led into Apprehen- 
fions, that theſe Things are ſpiritual Things, becauſe 
ſpiritual Things being inviſible, and not Things that can 
be pointed forth with the Finger, we are forced to uk 
figurative Expreſſions in ſpeaking of them, and to 
| borrow Names from external and ſenſible Objects to 
ſignify them by. Thus we call a clear Apprenſion of 
Things ſpiritual by the Name of Light; and an having 
ſuch an Apprehenſion of ſuch or ſuch Things, by the 
Name of /ecing ſuch Things; and the Conviction of 


the Judgment, and the Perſwaſion of the Will, = * 
or 


18 


ne 
N- , 
i- 
ls, 
MN 
al 
ſe 
ly 
n 
j- 
ic 
5 
le 
7 
ls 
ie 


8 


Far Il. of gravieut Afeflion. » wy 


Word of Chriſt in the Goſpel, we ſignify by /piritually 
hearing the Call of Chriſt: And the Scripture itſelf 
abounds with ſuch like figurative Expreſſions. Perſons 
hearing theſe often uſed, and having preſs'd upon them 
the Neceſſity of having their Eyes open'd, and having a 
Diſcovery of ſpiritual Things; and ſeeing Chriſt in his 
Glory, and having the inward Call, and the like, they 
ignorantly look and wait for ſome ſuch external Diſco- 
veries, and imaginary Views as have been ſpoken of; 
and when they have them, are confident that now their 
Eyes are open'd, now Chriſt has diſcover'd himſelf to 
them, and they are his Children; and hence are exceed- 
ingly affected and elevated with their Deliverance and 
Happineſe, and many Kinds of Affections are at once 


ſet in a violent Motion in them. 


But it is exceeding apparent, that ſuch Ideas have 
nothing in them which is fpiritual and divine, in the 
Senſe wherein it has been demonſtrated that all gracious 
Experiences are ſpiritual and divine. Theſe external 
Ideas are in no wiſe of fuch a Sort, that they are entirely 
and in their whole Nature drverſe from all that Men 
have by Nature, perfectly different from, and vaſtly 
above any Senſation which 'tis poſſible a Man ſhould 
have by any natural Senſe or Principle; ſo that in order 
to have them, a Man muſt have a new fpiritual and 
divine Senſe given him, in order to have any Senſations 
of that Sort: So far from this, that they are Ideas of 
the ſame Sort which we have by the external Senſes, that 
are ſome of the inferior Powers of the human Nature; 
they are merely Ideas of external Objects, or Ideas of 
that Nature, of the ſame outward ſenſitive Kind; the 
fame Sort of Senſations of Mind (differing not in 
Degree, but only in Circumſtances) that we have by thoſe 
natural Principles which are common to us, with the 
Beaſts, viz. the five external Senſes. This is a low, 
miſerable Notion of ſpiritual Senſe, to ſuppoſe that tis 


only a conceiving or imagining that Sort of Ideas which 


we have by our animal Senſes: which Senſes * 
e ave * 


zz ie ff Sin Far if 


have in as great Perfection as we; it is, as it were, a turn. 
ing Chriſt, or the divine Nature in the Soul, into a meer 
Animal. There is nothing wanting the Soul, as it is by 
Nature, to render it capable of being the Subje& of al 
theſe external Ideas, without any new Principles. A 
natural Man is capable of having an Idea, and a lively 
Idea of Shapes and Colours and Sounds when they are 
abſent, and as capable as a regenerate Man is: So there 
is nothing ſupernatural in them. And *tis known by 
abundant Experience, that *tis not the advancing or 
perfecting human Nature, which makes Perſons more 
capable of having ſuch lively and ſtrong imaginary Ideas, 
-but that on the contrary, the Weakneſs of Body and 
Mind, and Diſtempers of Body, makes Perſons abun- 
dantly more ſuſceptive of ſuch Impreſſions.* 


As to a truly ſpiritual Senſation, not only is the Man- 


ner of its coming into the Mind extraordinary, but the 
Senſation itſelf is totallydiverſe from all that Men have, 
or can have, in a State of Nature, as has been ſhewn. 
But as toghoſe external Ideas, though the Way of their 
coming into the Mihd is ſometimes unuſual, yet the 


ldeas in themſelves are not the better for that: they are 


ſtill of no differeht Sort from what Men have by their 
Senſes; they are of no higher Kind, nor a whit better. 


For Inſtance, the external Idea a Man has now of Chriſt 


hanging on the Croſs, and ſhedding his Blood, is no 
better in itſelf, than the external Idea that Fews his 
Enemies had, who ſtood raund his Croſs and ſaw this 
with their bodily Eyes. The imaginary Idea which 
Men have now, of an external Brightneſs and ** of 


# 
— — Pn r — . 


9 


* Conceits and Whimſeys abound moſt in Men of weak Rea- 
% ſon; Children, and ſuch as are crack'd in their Underſtanding 
«© have moſt of them; Strength of Reaſon baniſhes them, as the Sun 
does Miſts and Vapours. But now the more rational an 10U8 
« Perſon is, by ſo much more is he fixed and ſettled and fatisfied in 
«« the Grounds of Religion: Yea, there is the higheſt and porch 
«« Reafon in Religion; and when this Change is wrought upon Men, 
* it is carried on in a rational Way, Jai. i. 18. John xix. 9. 
Flavel's Preparation for dufferings, Chap. vi. 


2 


r TY WF”, RS A 


Parr. III. of gracious Aﬀedios. 153 
God, is no better than the Idea the wicked Congre- 


gation in the Wilderneſs had of the external Glory of 


the Lord at Mount Sinai, when they ſaw it with bodily 
Eyes; or any better than that Idea which Millions of 
curſed Reprobates will have of the external Glory of 
Chriſt at the Day of Judgment, who ſhall ſee, and have 
a very lively Idea of ten Thouſand Times greater exter- 
nal Glory of Chriſt, than ever yet was conceived in any 
Man's Imagination;“ yea, the Image of Chriſt, which Men 
conceive in their Imaginations, is not in its own Nature, 
of any ſuperior Kind to the Idea the Papiſts conceive of 
Chriſt, by the beautiful and affecting Images of him 
which they {ce in their Churches; (though the Way of 
their receiving the Idea may not be ſo bad) nor are the 
Aﬀections they have, if built primarily on ſuch Imagi- 
nations, any better than the Affections raiſed in the 
ignorant People, by the Sight of thoſe Images, which 
oftentimes are very great; eſpecially when theſe Images, 
through the Cratt of the Prieſts, are made to move, 
and ſpeak, and weep, and the like. Meerly the plat 
A 0 


* « [f any Man ſhould ſee, and behold Chriſt really, immediately, 
« this is not the ſaving Knowledge of him. I know the Saints do 
« know Chriſt as if immediately preſent; they are not „ 
« their Diſtance: If others have ſeen him more immediately, I wi 
not diſpute it. But if they have feen the Lord Jeſus as immedi- 
« ately as if here on Earth, yet Capernaum ſaw him ſo; nay ſome 
« of them were Diſciples for a Time, and followed him, John vi. 
« And * Lord was hid from their Eyes. Nay, all the World 
* ſhall ſee him in his Glory, which ſhall amaze them; and yet this 
* 1s far ſhort of having the ſaving Knowledge of him, which the 
Lord doth communicate to the Elet. So that tho' you ſee the 
Lord ſo really, as that you become familiar with him, yet Luke xiii. 
* 26. Lord, have we not eat and drank, &c.—and ſo periſh.” She- 
fard's par, of the ten Virgins, P. I. p. 197, 198. 

+ © Satan is transformed into an Angel of Light: And hence we 
% have heard that ſome have heard Voices ; ſome have ſeen the very 
Blood of Chriſt dropping on them, and his Wounds in his Side; 
*« ſome have ſeen a great Light ſhining in the Chamber; ſome won- 
derfully affected with their Dreams; ſome in great Diſtreſs 2 

a «© wit 


L 


Far. of the ten Virgins, P. I. p. 198. 


154 We firſt Sign Parr III. 
of Perſons receiving theſe imaginary Ideas, don't alter 
the Nature of the Ideas themſelves that are received: 
Let them be received in what Way they will, they are 
ſtill but external Ideas, or Ideas of outward Appear- 
ances, and ſo are not ſpiritual. Lea, if Men ſhould 
actually receive ſuch external Ideas by the immediate 
Power of the moſt high God upon their Minds, they 
would not be fpiritual, they would be no more than a 
common Work of the Spirit of God; as t evident in 
Fact, in the Tnſtance of Balaam, who had impreſs'd on 
his Mind, by God himſelf, a clear and hvely outward 
Repreſentation or Idea ef Jeſus Chriſt, as -e Star riſing 
out of Jacob, when he heard the Words of God, and knew 
the Knowledge of the moſt High, and ſaw the Viſion of 
the Almighty, falling into a Trance, Numb. xxiv. 16, 17, 
But yet had no Manner of ſpiritual Diſcovery of Chriſt; 
that Day-Star never ſpiritually roſe in his Heart, he being 
but a natural Man. | | 
And as theſe external Ideas have nothing divine or ſpiti- 
tual in their Nature, and nothing but what natural Men, 
without any new Principles, are capable of; ſo there is 
nothing in their Nature which requires that peculiar, 
inimitable and unparallel'd Exerciſe of the glorious 
Power of God, in order to their Production, which it 
has been ſhown, there is in the Production of true Grace. 
There appears to be-nothing in their Nature above the 
Power of the Devil. Tis certainly not above the 
Power of Satan to ſuggeſt Thoughts to Men; becauſe 
otherwiſe he could not tempt them to Sin. And if he 
can ſuggeſt any Thoughts or Ideas at all, doubtleſs ima- 
ginary ones, or Ideas of Fhings external are not _ 
| | * 


1 


” 
3 „*— 


D 


$ ” r * th. —— 


* had inward Witneſs, Thy Sins ave forgiven; and hence ſuch 
Liberty and Joy, that they are ready to leap up and down the 
* Chamber. ' O adulterous Generation! This is natural and ufual 
«« with Men, they would fain ſee Jeſus,. and have him preſent to give 


« them Peace; and hence Papiſts have his Images. Wo to them 
* that have no other manifeſted Chriſt, but ſuch 


- 


an one. Shepard 8 


888 N ah. a 


Pakr III. of gracious Affectiont. 155 
his Power;* for the external Ideas Men have are the 
loweſt Sort of Ideas. Theſe Ideas may be raiſed only 
by Impreſſions made on the Body, by moving the ani- 
mal Spirits, and impreſſing the Brain. Abundant Expe- 
rience does certainly ſnow, that Alterations in the Body 
will excite imaginary or external Ideas in the Mind; as 
often, in Caſe of a high Fever, Melancholly, Ge. 


Theſe external Ideas are is much below the more intel- 


lectual Exerciſes of the Soul, as the Body is a leſs noble 
Part of Man than the Soul. | 


And there is not only nothing in the Nature of theſe 


external Ideas or Imaginations of outward Appearances, 
from whence we can infer, that they are above the Power 
of the Devil; but it is certain alſo that the Devil can 
excite, and often hath excited ſuch Ideas. They were 


external Ideas which he excited in the Dreams and Viſions 


of the falſe Prophets of old, who were under the 
Influence of lying Spirits, that we often read of in 
Scripture, as Deut. xiii. 1. 1 Kings xxii. 22. Jai. xxviii. 
7. Ezek. xiii. 7. Zech. xii. 4. And they were external 
Ideas that he often excited in the Minds of the heathen 
Prieſts, Magicians and Sorcerers, in their Viſtons and 
Extaſies; and they were external Ideas that he excited in 
the Mind of the Man Chriſt Jeſus, when he ſhewed 
him all the Kingdoms of the World with the Glory of 
them, when thoſe Kingdoms we not really in Sight. 
And if Satan, or any created Being, has Power ta 
impreſs the Mind with outward Repreſentations, then 
no particular Sort of outward Repreſentations can be 
any Evidence of a divine Power. Almighty Power is 
no more requiſite to repreſent the Shape of Man to the 


Imagination, than the Shape of any Thing elſe: There 


is 


, 


* 


* « Confider how difficult, yea, and impoſſible it is to determine 
that ſuch a Voice, Viſion, or Revelation is of God, and that Satan 
* cannot feign or counterfeit it ; ſeeing he hath left no certain 


* Marks by which we may diſtinguiſh one Spirit from another“ 


Flavel's Cauſes and Cures of mental Errors, Cauſe 14. 
L 2 83 


— 


» 
NY 
Ks 


155 


We firſt Sign Paxx Ill. 


3s no higher Kind of Power neceſſary to form in the 


Brain one © bodily. Shape or Colour than another: It 
needs a no more glorious Power to repreſent the Form 


of the Body of Man, than the Form of a Chip or 


Block; though it be of, a very beautiful human Body, 
with a ſweet Smile on his Countenance, or Arms open 


or Blood running from Hands, Feet, and Side: Thar 
Sort of Power which can repreſent Black or Darkneſs 
to the Imagination, can alſo repreſent White and ſhining 
Brightneſs: The Power and Skill which can well and 
exactly paint a Straw, or a Stick of Wood, on a Piece 
of Paper or Canvas; the ſame in Kind, only perhaps 
further improved, will be ſufficient to paint the Body 
of a Man, with great Beauty and in Royal Majeſty, or 
a magnificent City, pav'd with Gold, full of Brightneſs, 
and a glorious Throne, Sc. So 'tis no more than the 
fame Sort of Power that is requiſite to paint one as the 
other of theſe on the'Brain. The ſame Sort of Power 
that can put Ink upon Paper, can put on Leaf-Gold. 
So that it is evident to a Demonſtration, if we ſuppoſe 


4 it to be in the Devil's Power to make any Sort of external 


Repreſentation at all on the Fancy, (as without Doubt 
it is, and never any one queſtioned it who believed there 
was a Devil, that had any Agency with Mankind) I 
ſay, if ſo, it is demonſtrably evident that a created 
Power may extend to all Kinds of external Appearances 
and Ideas in the Mind. * 
From hence it again clearly appears, that no ſuch 
Things have any Thing in them that is ſpiritual, ſuper- 


natural and divine, in the Senſe in which it has been 


proved that all truly gracious Experiences have. And 
though external Ideas, through Man's Make and Frame, 


do ordinarily in ſome Degree attend ſpiritual Experi- 


ences, yet theſe Ideas are no Part of their ſpiritual Expe- 
rience, any more than the Motion of the Blood, and beating 
of the Pulſe, that attends Experiences, are a Part of ſpi- 
ritual Experience. And though undoubtedly, through 


Men's Infirmity in the preſent State, and eſpecially 


through 


ParT III. of gracious ¶Mfections. 157. 
through the weak Conſtitution of ſome Perſons, graci- 
ous Affections which are very ſtrong, do excite lively ß 
Ideas in the Imagination; yet tis alſo undoubted, that 
when Perſon's Affections are founded on Imaginations, 
which is often the Caſe, thoſe Affections are merely 2 
natural and common, becauſe they are built on a Foun- 
dation that is not ſpiritual; and ſo are entirely different 
from gracious Affections, which, as has been proved, 
do evermore ariſe from thoſe Operations that are ſpiri- 
tual and divine. 22 
Theſe Imaginations do oftentimes raiſe the carnal 
Affections of Men to an exceeding great Height:“ And 
— ? 4 : no 
— 1 7 — 
»There is a remarkable Paſſage of Mr. John Smith, in his Diſ- 
courſe on the Shortneſs of a Phariſaic Righteouſneſs, p. 370, 37 1» 
of his Select Diſcourſes, deſcribing that Sort of Religion which is 
built on ſuch a Foundation as I am here ſpeaking of. I cannot for- 
bear tranſcribing the Whole of it. Speaking of a Sort of Chriſtians, 
whoſe Life is nothing but a ſtrong Energy of Fancy, he ſays, ** Lett 
their Religion might too groſly diſcover itſelf to be nothing elſe 
« but a Piece of Art, there may be ſometimes ſuch extraordinary 
* Motions ſtirred up within them, which may prevent all their own 
Thoughts, that may ſeem to be a true Operatiqn of the divine 
Life; when yet all this nothing elſe but the Energy, of their own 
« Self-love, touch'd with ſome * fleſhly Apprehenhons of divine 
„Things, and excited by them. There are ſuch” Things in our 
« chriſtian Religion, when a carnal unhallowed Mind takes the 
Chair, and gets the expounding of them, may ſeg} very delicious 
« to the fleſhly Appetites of Men; ſome Doctrines and Notions of 
free Grace and Juſtification, the magnificent Titles of Sons" oF. 
„God, and Heirs of Heaven, ever flowing Streams of Joy and 
« Pleaſure that bleſſed Souls ſhall ſwim in to all Eternity, a ae . 
« Paradiſe in the World to come, always ſpringing up with welk 
« ſcented and fragrant Beauties, a new Jeruſalem payed with Gold, 
and beſpangled with Stars, comprehending in its vaſt Circuit ſuch 4 
« numberleſs Varieties, that a buſy Curioſity may ſpend itſelf abouß 
« toall Eternity. I doubt not but that ſometimes the moſt fleſhlbn® 
« and earthly Men, that fly in their Ambition to the Pomp.af t 0 
„World, may be ſo raviſhed with the Conceits of ſuch Things as 
« theſe, that they may ſeem tobe made Partakers of the Powers of 
the World to come. I doubt not but that they might be much 
v exalted with them, as the Souls of crazed or diſtracted Perſo 
* ſeem to be ſometimes, when their Fancies play with thoſe 1 
and nimble Spirits, which a Þ.'temper'd Frame of Body, an _ 
— 


The firfi Sign Parr III. 
no wonder, when the Subjects of them have an igno- 
rant, but undoubting Perſwaſion, that they are divine 

M.,anifeſtations, which the great Jehovah immediately 
makes to their Souls, therein giving them Teſtimonies, 
in an extraordinary Manner, of his high and peculiar 
Favour. | 7 . 

Again, it is evident from what has been obſerved and 

proved of the Manner in which gracious Operations and 
ffects in the Heart are ſpiritual, ſupernatural and divine, 

| | | that 


238 
.: 


* 


<« natural Heat in their Heads, beget within them. Thus may thoſe 
<& blazing Comets riſe up above the Moon, and climb higher than 
* the Sun; which yet, — they have no ſolid Conſiſtence of 
<< their own, and are of a baſe and earthly Alloy, will ſoon vaniſh 
and fall down again, being only borne up by an external Force. 
te they may ſeem to themſelves to have attained higher than thoſe 
4% noble Chriſtians, that are gently moved by the natural Force of 
v true Goodneſs: They ſeem to be pleniores Deo, [i. e. more full of 
« God] than thoſe that are really informed and actuated by the divine 
Spirit, and do move on ſteadily and conſtantly in the Way towards 
« Heaven. As the Seed that was ſown in ſtony Ground, grew up, 
and lengthen'd out in its Blade faſter, - than that which was ſow 
« in the gaod and fruitful Soil. And as the Motions of our Senſe 
t and Fancy and Paſſions, while our Souls are in this mortal Condi- 
te tion, ſunk down deeply into the Body, are many Times more 
« yigorous, and make ſtronger Impreſſions upon us, than thoſe of 
e the higher Powers of the Soul, which are more ſubtil, and remote 
< from theſe mixt and animal Perceptions: That Devotion which is 
« there ſeated, may ſeem to have more Energy and Life in it, than 
that which gently, and with a more delicate Kind of Touch, 
« | itſelf upon the Underſtanding, and from thence mildly 
4 derives itſelf through our Wills and Affections. But however, 
the former may be more boiſterous for a Time, yet this is of 3 


— N 


cc in indeed from nothing but a ſenſual and fleſhly A prehenſion 
« of God and true Happineſs, is but of a flitting and fading Nature; 
e and as the ſenſible Powers and Faculties grow more languid, ot 

* the Sun of divine Light ſhines more brightly upon us, theſe 


| earthly Devotions, like our culinary Fires, will. abate their Heat 

and Fervour. But a true celeſtial Warmth will never be extin- 

<< guiſh'd, becauſe it is of an immortal Nature; and being once 

4 < ſeated, vitally in the Souls of Men, it will regulate. and. order all 

e the Motions of it in a due Manner; as the natural Heat, radi- 
se cated in the Hearts of living Creatures, hath, the Dominion 

« (Economy of the whole Body under it, True Religion is no Piece 


«of 


more conſiſtent, ſpermatical and thriving Nature. For that pro- 


JFF adit wok. io o Ye. oo 


cr 5 ay > 7 


Part II. of graciaus Aﬀedtions. 159 , 


that the immediate ſuggeſting of the Words of Scrip- 
ture to the Mind, has nothing in it which is ſpiritual. 
I have had Occaſion to ſay ſomething of this already; 
and what has been ſaid may be ſufficient to evince at: 
But if the Reader bears in Mind what has been ſaid ._. 
concerning the Nature of ſpiritual Influences and Effects, *** 
it will be more abundantly manifeſt that this is no ſpiri- 73 
tual Effect. For I ſuppoſe there is no Perſon of common 
Underſtanding, whg will fay or imagine, that the bring- 
ing Words (let them be what Words they will) to the 
Mind, is an Effect of that Nature which it is impoſſible 
the Mind of a natural Man, while he r@nains'jn a'State 
of Nature, ſhould be the Subject of, or any Thifg like 
it; or that it requires any new divine Senſe in 8 Spul⸗ 
or that the bringing Sounds or Letters to the Mind: i 
an Effect of ſo high, holy, and excellent a Nature, 
that it is impoſſible any created Power ſhould be 
Cauſe of it. | RE ths 
As the ſuggeſting Words of Scripture to the Mind, is 
only the exciting in the Mind Ideas of certain Sounds 
or Letters; ſo it is only one Way of exciting Ideas in 
the Imagination; for Sounds and Letters are external 
Things, that are the Objects of the external Senſes of 
Seeing and Hearing. Ideas of certain Marks upon 
Paper, ſuch as any of the Twenty-four Letters, in 
whatever Order, or any Sounds of the Voice, are as 
much external Ideas, as any of. other Shapes or Sounds 
whatſoever: And therefore, by what has been already 
laid concerning theſe external Ideas, it is evident they 


are nothing ſpiritual; and if at any Time the Spirit of 


Kb— 


| God 


of Artifice; it is no boiling up of our imaginative Powers, nor 


y 


the glowing Heats of Paſſion; though theſe are too often miſtaken. - 4 


* for it, when in our Jugglings in Religion we caſt a Miſt before qur £ 
* own Eyes: But it is a new Nature, in forming the Souls of Men; 
it is a godlike Frame of Spirit, — itſelf moſt of all in 
* ſerene and clear Minds, in deep Humility, Meekneſs, Self-denial, 
* univerſal Love to God, and all true Goodneſh, , without Partiality, 
* and without Hypocriſy, whereby we are taught to know God, 
and knowing him to love him, and conform ourſelves as much az 
may be, to all that Perfection which ſhines in him.“ 


3s Affections.— But let it be obſerved, what it is 


& 


1660 The foft Sign 


God ſuggeſts theſe Letters or Sounds to the Mind; this is 
a common, and not any ſpecial or gracious Influence of 
that Spirit. And therefore it follows from what has 
been already proved, that thoſe Affections which have 
this Effect for their Foundation, are no ſpiritual or gra. 


that 1 ſay, viz. When this Effect, even the immedi. 


\ 


ate and extraordinary Manner of Words of Scripture; 
coming to the Mind, is that which excites the Affections, 
and is properly the Foundation of them, then theſe 
Affections are not ſpiritual. It may be fo, that Perſons 


may have gracious Affections going with Scriptures 


which come to their Minds, and the Spirit of God may 
make uſe of thoſe Scriptures to excite them; when it is 
ſome ſpiritual Senſe, Taſte or Reliſh they have of the 
divine and excellent Things contained in thoſe Scriptures, 
that is the Thing which excites their Affections, and not 
the extraordinary and ſudden Manner of Words. being 
brought to their Minds. They are affected with the 
Inſtruction they receive from the Words, and the View 
of the glorious Things of God or Chriſt, and Things 
appertaining to them, that they contain and teach; and 
not becauſe the Words came ſuddenly, as though ſome 
Perſon had ſpoke them to them, thence concluding that 
God did as it were immediately ſpeak to them. Perſons 
oftentimes are exceedingly affected on this Foundation; 
the Words of ſome great and high Promiſes of Scrip- 
ture come ſuddenly to their Minds, and they look upon 
the Words as directed immediately by God to them, as 
though the Words that Moment proceeded out of the 


Mouth of God as ſpoken to them: So that they take it 


as a Voice from God, immediately revealing to them 


their happy Circumſtances, and promiſing ſuch and ſuch 


great Things to them: And this it is that affe&s and 
elevates them. There is no new ſpiritual Underſtanding 
of the divine Things containned in the Scripture, or new 
ſpiritual Senſe of the glorious Things taught in that 
Part of the Bible, going before their AR and 


© 
4 


Parr III. 


th Wn n+ 


ww 
E 


ff.... ff one my =  wf 3 on. 


„ 
8 


f 


ParT III. of gratious Aﬀettions. 161 
being the Foundation of it: All che new Underſtanding 
they have, or think they have, to be the Foundation 
of their Affection, is this, that the Words are ſpoke to 
them, becauſe they me ſo ſuddenly and extraordinarily. 
And fo this Affection is built wholly on the Sand; becauſe 
it is built on a Concluſion for which they have no Foun- 
dation, For, as has been ſhown, the ſudden coming 
of the Words to their Minds, 1s no Evidence that the 
bringing them to their Minds in that Manner; was from 
God. And if it was true, that God brought the Words 
to their Minds, and they certainly knew it, that would 
not be ſpiritual Knowledge; it may be without 
ſpiritual Senſe: Balaam might know that the Words 
which God ſuggeſted to him, were indeed ſuggeſted to 
him by God, and yet have no ſpiritual Knowledge. 
So that theſe Affections which are built on that Notion, 
that Texts of Scripture are ſent immediately from God, 
are built. on no ſpiritual Foundation, and are vain and 
deluſive. - Perſons who have their Affections thus raiſed, 
if they ſhould be enquired of, whether they have any 
new Senſe of the Excellency of Things contained in 
thoſe Scriptures, would probably ſay, Yes, without He- 
ſtation: But it is true no otherwiſe than thus, that 
when they have taken up that Notion, that the Words 
are ſpoken immediately to them, that makes them ſeem 
ſweet to them, and they own the Things which theſe 
Scriptures ſay to them, for excellent Things, ,and won- 
fl Things. As for Inſtance, ſuppoſing theſe were 


de 
the Words which were ſuddenly brought to their Minds, 
Fear not, —it is your Father's good Pleaſure to give you 


be Kingdom, they having confidently taken up a Notion, 


that the Words were, as it were immediately ſpoken 
from Heaven to them, as an immediate Revelation, 
that God was their Father, and had given the Kingdom 
to them, they are greatly affected by it, and the Words 
ſeem ſweet to them; and oh, they ſay, they are excellent 
Things that are contained in thoſe Words! but the Reaſon 
why the Promiſe ſeems excellent to them, is only 8 
+ ey 


they think it is made to them immediately: All the 
Senſe they have of any Glory in them, is only from 
Self-Love, and from their own imagined Intereſt in the 
Words: Not that they had any or Senſe of the 
holy and glorious Nature of the „ dom of Heaven, 
and the ſpiritual Glory of that God So gives it, and 
of his excellent Grace to ſinful Men, in offering and 
giving them this Kingdom, of his own good Pleaſure, 
preceeding their imagined Intereſt in theſe Things, and 
their being affected by them, and being the F oundation 
of their Affection, and Hope of an Intereſt in them. 
On the contrary they firſt imagine they are intereſteg, 
and then are highly affected with that, and then can own 
theſe Things to be excellent. Sa, that the ſudden and 
extraordinary Way of the Scriptures coming to their 
Mind, is plainly the firſt Foundation of the Whole; 
which is a clear Evidence of the wretched Deluſion they 
are under, 

The firſt Comfort of many Perſons, and what they 
call their Converſion, is after this Manner: After Awa- 


3 kening and Terrors, ſome comfortable ſweet Promiſe 


comes ſuddenly and wonderfully to their Minds; and 
the Manner of its coming makes om conclude it comes 
from God zo them: And this is the very Thing that is 
all the Foundation of their Faith, and * and Com- 
fort: From hence they take their firſt Encouragement to 
truſt in God and in Chriſt, becauſe they think that God, 
by ſome Scripture ſo brought, has now already revealed 
to them that he loves them, and has already romiſed 
them eternal Life: Which i is very ahſurd; 10 r every 
one of common Knowledge of the Principles of Reli 
gion, knows, that it is God's Manner to reveal his Love 
to Men, and their Intereſt in the Promiſes, after they 
have believed, and not before; becauſe they muſt firit 
believe, before they have any Intereſt in the Promiſes 
to be revealed. The Spirit of God is a Spirit of Truth, 
and not of Lies: He Jon t bring Scriptures to Men's 
Minds to reyeal to them that ie Ve an Intereſt 


in 


162 The firft Sign Part I 


FOE TL Tr RE TT EET, SYFEEZYD ke Wn ES YC BE TI WER Tous ME WE mw 


Parr III. of gracious Aﬀettions. 163 


in God's Favour and Promiſes, when they have none, 
having not yet believed: Which would be the Caſe 
if God's bringing Texts of Scripture to- Men's Minds 
to reveal to them that their Sins were forgiven, or 
that it was God's Pleaſure to give them the Kingdom, 
or any Thing of that Nature, went before, and was 
the Foundation of their firſt Faith. There is no Pro- 
miſe of the Covenant of Grace belongs to any Man, 
till he has firſt believed in Chriſt; for ' tis by Faith glone 
that we become interei.ed in Chriſt, and the Promiſes 
of the new Covenant made in him: And therefore 
whatever Spirit applies the Promiſes of that Covenant 
to a Perſon who has nat firſt believed, as being already 
his, mult be a lying Spirit; and that Faith which is firſt 
built on ſuch an Application of Promiſes, is built upon. 
aLie. God's Manner 1s not to bring comfortable Texts 
of Scripture to give Men Aſſurance of his Love, and 
that they ſhall be happy, betore they have had a Faith 
of Dependance.* And if the Scripture which comes to 
a 


Mr. Stoddard, in his Guide to Chaift, Pa. 8, ſays, that © ſome- 
times Men, after they have been in Trouble a while, have ſome 
*« Promifes come to them, with a great Deal of Refreſhing; and they 
hope God has accepted them: And ſays, that © In this Cafe, 
* the Miniſter may tell them, that God never gives a Faith of Aſſur- 
„ ance, before he gives a Faith of Dependance; for he never mani- 
e fefts his Love, till Men are in a State of Favour and Reconcilia- 
tion, which is by Faith of Dependance. When Men have com- 
* fortable Scriptures come to them, they are apt to take them as 
« Tokens of God's Love; but Men muſt be brought into Chriſt, by 
« accepting the Offer of the Goſpel, before they are fit for ſuch 
« Manifeſtations. God's Method is, firſt to make the Soul accept 
* of the Offers of Grace, and then to manifeſt his good Eſtate unto 
„bim.“ And pa. 76, ſpeaking of them“ that ſeem to be brought 
* to lie at God's Foot, and give an Account of their cloſing with 
« Chriſt, and that God has revealed Chriſt to them, and drawn 
their Hearts to him, and that they do accept of Chriſt,” he ſays, 
* In this Caſe it is beſt to examine whether by that Light that was 
0 given him, he ſaw Chriſt and Salvation offered to him, or whether 
« be ſaw that Ged loved him, or pardon'd him: for the Offer of 
* Grace and our Acceptance goes before Pardon, aud therefore 


much more, before the Knowledge of it.“ | 1 
. - | : 4 8 i a f r. 


164 Pee firſt Sign —_— III 


a Perſon's Mind, be not ſo properly a Promiſe as an 
Invitation; yet if he makes the ſudden or unuſual 
Manner of the Invitation's coming to his Mind, the 
Ground on which he believes that he is invited; it is not 
true Faith; becauſe it is built on that which 1s not the 
true Ground of Faith. True Faith 1s built on no pre. 
carious Foundation; but a Determination that the Word; 
of ſuch a particular Text, were, by the immediate 
Power of God, ſuggeſted to the Mind, at ſuch a Time, 
as though then = and directed by God to him, 
becauſe the Words came after ſuch a Manner, is wholly 
an uncertain and precarious Determination, as has been 
now ſhewn; and therefore is a falſe and ſandy Founda- 
tion for Faith; and accordingly that Faith which is built 
upon it is falſe. The only certain Foundation which 
any Perſon has to believe that he is invited to partake of 
the Bleſſings of the Goſpel, is, that the Word of God 
declares that Perſons ſo qualified as he is, are invited, 
and God who declares it is true and cannot lie. If a 
Sinner be once convinced of the Veracity of God, and 
that the Scriptures are his Word, he'll need no more to 


convince and ſatisfy him _ he is invited; for the 


Scriptures 


Mr. Shepard, in his Parable of the ten Virgins, Part II. Page 15, 
ſays, That Grace and the Love of Chriſt (the faireſt Colours under 
the Sun) may be pretended; but if you ſhall receive, under this 
„Appearance, that God witneſſeth his Love, firſt by an abſolute 
* Promiſe, take heed there; for under this Appearance, you may 
<< as well bring in immediate Revelations, and from thence come to 
« forſake the Scriptures.” 

And in Part I. Pa. 86, he ſays, Is Chriſt yours? Ves I ſee it. How? 
By any Word or Promiſe! No: this is Deluſion.” And Pa. 136, 
ſpeaking of them that have no ſolid Ground of Peace, he reckons, 
«*« Thoſe that content themielves with the Revelation of the Lord's 
Love, without the Sight of any Work, or not looking to it.” And 
ſays preſently after, The Teſtimony of the Spirit does not make 
* a Man more a Chriſtian, but only evidenceth it; as tis the Nature 
« of a Witneſs not to make a Thing to be true, but to clear and 
t eyidence it.” And Pa. 140, ſpeaking of them that ſay they have 
the Witneſs of the Spirit, that makes a Difference between them 
and Hypocrites, he ſays, © The Witneſs of the Spirit makes not 
« the firit Difference; for firſt a Man is a Believer, and in Chrilt, 
and juſtified, called, and fanQified, before the Spirit does Wit- 
* neſs it; elſe the Spirit ſhould witneſs to an Untruth and Lie.“ 


S FO I 


S ͤĩ˙² wma k ,, 


Parr III. of gracious Aﬀedtions. 169 


Scriptures are full of Invitations to Sinners, to the chief 
of Sinners, to come and partake of the Benefits of the 
Goſpel: He won't want any new ſpeaking of God- to 
him, what he hath ſpoken already will beenough with him. 

As the firſt Comfort of many Perſons, and their Af 
fections at the Time of their ſuppoſed Converſion, 
are built on ſuch Grounds as theſe which have been 
mentioned; ſo are their Joys and Hopes, and other 
Affections, from Time to Time afterwards. They have 
often particular Words of Scripture, ſweet Declarations 
and Promiſes ſuggeſted to them, which by Reaſon of 
the Manner of their coming, they think are immediately 
ſent from God to them, at that Time; which they look 
upon as their Warrant to take them; and which they 
actually make the main Ground of their appropriating, 
them to themſelves, and of the Comfort they take in 
them, and the Confidence they receive from them. 
Thus they imagine a kind of Converſation is carried on 
between God and them; and that God, from Time to 
Time, does, as it were, immediately ſpeak to them, 
and ſatisfy their Doubts, and teſtifies his Love to them, 
and promiſes them Supports and Supplies, and his Bleſ- 
ling in ſuch and ſuch Caſes, and reveals to them clearly 
their Intereſt in eternal Bleſſings. And thus they are 
often elevated, and have a Courſe of a ſudden and tu- 
multuous Kind of Joys, mingled with a ſtrong Confi- 
dence, and high Opinion of themſelves; when indeed 
the main Ground of theſe Joys, and this Confidence is 
not any Thing contained in, or taught by theſe Scriptures, 
as they lie in the Bible, but the Manner of their coming 
to them; which is a certain Evidence of their Deluſion, 
There is no particular Promiſe in the Word of God 
that is the Saint's, or is any otherwiſe made to him, or 
ſpoken to him, than all the Promiſes of the Covenant 
of Grace are his, and are made to him, and ſpoken to 
him“: Tho! it be true that ſome of theſe Promiſes may 


Mr. Shepard, in his Sound Believer, p. 159. of the late Im- 


preſſion at Boſton, ſays, Embrace in thy Boſom, not only N 


166 The firſt Sign Paxr Il 
be more peculiarly adapted to his Caſe than others; and 
God by his Spirit may enable him better to underſtang 

ſome than others, and to have à greater Senſe of the 
Preciouſneſs, and Glory, and Suitableneſs of the Ble. 
ſings contained in them. te | 
But here, ſome may be ready to ſay, What, is there jy 
ſuch Thing as any particular ſpiritual Application of the 
Promiſes of Scripture by the Spirit of God? I anſwer, 
There is doubtleſs fuch a Thing as a ſpiritual and fay. 


ing Application of the Invitations and Promiſes of 


Scripture to the Souls of Men: But it is alſo certain, 
that the Nature of it is wholly miſunderſtood by many 
Perſons, to the great enfnaring of their own Souls, and 
the giving Satan a vaſt Advantage againſt them, and 
againſt the Intereſt of Religion, and the Church of God, 
The ſpiritual Application of a Scripture Promiſe does 
not conſiſt in its being immediately ſuggeſted to the 
Thoughts by ſome extrinſick Agent, and being bone 
into the Mind with this ſtrong Apprehenſion, that it is 
particularly ſpoken and directed to them at that Time: 
There is nothing of the Evidence of the Hand of God 
in this Effect, as Events have proved in many notorious 
Inſtances; and it is a mean Notion of a ſpiritual Appli- 
cation of Scripture; there is nothing in the Nature of 
it at all beyond the Power of the Devil, if he be not 
reſtrained by God; for there is nothing in the Nature 
of the Effect that is ſpiritual, implying any vital Com- 
munication 
« few Promiſes, but all.” And then he aſks the Queſtion, ** When 
* may a Chriſtian take a Promiſe without Preſumption, as ſpoken to 
«© him? He anſwers, * The rule is very ſweet, but certain; when 
de he takes all the Scripture, and embraces it as ſpoken unto him, 
« he may then take any particular Promiſe boldly. My Meaning is, 
cc when a Chriſtian takes hold, and wreſtles with God, for the Ac» 
« compliſhment of all the Promiſes of the New Teſtament, when he 
<« ſets all the Commands before him, as a Compaſs and Guide to 
dc walk after, when he applies all the Threatnings to drive him near- 
<« ex unto Chriſt the End of them. This no Hypocrite can do; this 
« the Saints ſhall do; and by this they may know when the Lord 
% ſpeaks in particular unto them.“ 


r III. of gracious Aſections. 167 


munication of God, A 1 Application of 
de Word of God is of a vaſtly higher Nature; as 
much above the Devil's Power, as it is, ſo to apply the 
Word of God to a dead Corpſe, as to raiſe it to Life; 
or to a Stone, toturnitinto an Angel. A ſpiritual Appli- 
cation of the Word of God conſiſts in applying it to the 
Heart, in ſpiritually enlightning, ſanctifying Influences. 
A ſpiritual Application of an Invitation or Offer of the 
Goſpel conſiſts in giving the Soul a ſpiritual Senſe or 
Reliſh of the holy and divine Bleſſings offered, and al- 

o the ſweet and wonderful Grace of the Offerer, in 
making fo gracious an Offer, and of his holy Excellen- 
y and Fraithfulneſs to fulfil what he offers, and his 
glorious Suffictency for it; ſo leading and drawing forth 
the Heart to embrace the Offer; and thus giving the 
Man Evidence of his Title to the Thing offered. And 
fo a ſpiritual Application of the Promiſes of Scripture, 
for the Comfort of the Saints, conſiſts in enlightning 
their Minds to ſee the holy Excellency and Sweetneſs of 
the Bleſſings promiſed, and alſo the holy Excellency of 
the Promiſer, and his Faithfulneſs and Sufficiency ; 
thus drawing forth their Hearts to embrace the Pro- 
miſer, and Thing promiſed; and by this Means, giving 
the ſenſible Actings of Grace, enabling them to ſee their 
Grace, and ſo their Title to the Promiſe. An Applica- 
ton not conſiſting in this divine Senſe and enlightning of 
the Mind, but conſiſting only in the Words being borne 
ntothe Thoughts, as if immediately then ſpoken, ſo 
making Perſons believe, on no other Foundation, that 
the Promiſe is theirs; is a blind Application, and belongs 
to the Spirit of Darkneſs, and not of Light. 

When Perſons have their Aﬀections raiſed after this 
Manner, thoſe Affections are really not raiſed by the 
Word of God; the Scripture is not the Foundation of 
tem; *tis not any Thing contained in thoſe Scriptures, 
vhich come to their Minds, that raiſe their Aﬀections; 
but truly that Effect, viz. the ſtrange Manner of the 
Words being ſuggeſted to their Minds, and a Propoſi- 

tion 


168 The firſt Sim Par. it 


tion from thence taken up by them, whieh indeed is not 
contained in that Scripture, nor any other; as that hi 
Sins are forgiven him, or that it is the Father's 
Pleaſure to give him in particular the Kingdom, or the 
like. There are Propoſitions to be found in the Bible, 
declaring that Perſons of ſuch and ſuch Qualifications 
are forgiven and beloved of God: But there are no Pro. 
poſitions to be found in the Bible, declaring that ſuch 
and ſuch particular Perſons, independent on any previous 
Knowledge of any Qualications, are forgiven and be- 
loved of God: And therefore when any Perſons are 
comforted, and affected by any ſuch Propoſition, it is 
by another Word, a Word newly coin'd, and not any 
Word of God contained in the Bible.} And thus many 
Perſons are vainly affected and deluded. 

Again, it plainly appears from what has been demon- 
ſtrated, That no Revelation of ſecret Facts by immediated 
Suggeſtion, is any Thing ſpiritual and divine, in that 
Senſe wherein gracious Effects and Operations are ſo. 

By ſecret Fats, I mean Things that have been done, 
or are come to paſs, or ſhall hereafter come to pals, MW 
which are ſecret in that Senſe, that they don't appear to 
the Senſes, nor are known by any Argumentation, or 

any Evidence to Reaſon, nor any other Way, but only 
by that Revelation by immediate Suggeſtion of the _ 
| | a 


. 4 — 
1 — — the _—_—— PIR | VG EE 


Some Chriſtians have reſted with a Work without Chriſt, 
te which is abominable : But after a Man is in Chriſt, not to judge 
„by the Work, is firſt not to judge from a Word. For though 
« there is a Word, which may give a Man a Dependance on Chrilt, 
without feeling any Work, nay, when he feels none, as abſolute 
* Promiſes; yet no Word giving Aſurance, but that which is made 
eto ſome Work; He that believeth, or is poor in Spirit, &c. Till that 
% Work is ſeen, has no Aſſurance from that Promiſe.” Shepard's 
Parable of the ten Virgins. Part I. Pa. 86. * 

*« [f God thould ell a Saint that he has Grace, he might knowit 
ce by believing the Word of God: But it is not in this Way that 
$6 8 do know that they have Grace; it is not revealed in the 
« Word, and the Spirit of God doth not teſtify it to particular Per- 
* ſons,” Stoddard's Nature of ſaving Converſion, Pa. 84, 85 


2 ——j3 ,,,]. 


- 


cw 


= O00 -© a=” T 024 & &. 8 


— 


0 


Pant i. © of graclout Aﬀeciomw. 1b 


a them to the Mind. Thus for Inftance, if it fhoald 7.4 
be revealed to me, that the next Year this Land would 1! 
be invaded by a Fleet from France, or that ſuch and 
ſuch Perſons would then be converted, or that I myſelf 
ſhould then be converted; nat by enabling me toargue 

out thefe Events from any Thing which now appears in 
Providence; but immediately ſuggeſting and bearing in 

upon my Mind, in an extraordinary Manner, the Ap- 
prehenſion or Ideas of theſe Facts, with a ſtrong Sug- 
geſtion or Impreſſion on my Mind, that I had no Hand 

in myſelf, that theſe Things would come to paſs: Or if 
it ſhould be revealed to me, that this Day there is a Battle 

fought between the Armies of ſuch and ſuch Powers in 
Europe; or that ſuch a Prince in Europe was this Day con- 
verted, or is now in a converted State, haying been convert- 
ed formerly, or that one of my Neighbours is converted,” 
or that I myſelf am converted; not by having any other 
Evidence of any of theſe Facts, from whence I argue 
them, but an immediate extraordinary Suggeſtion or 
Excitation of theſe Ideas, and à ftrong Tmpreflion of 
them upon my Mind: This is a Revelation of ſecret Facts 

by immediate Suggeſtion, as much as if the Facts wers » 
future; for the Facts being paſt, prefent, ot future 
alters not the Cafe, as long as they are ſecret and hidden 
from my Senſes and Reaſon, and not ſpoken of in 
Scripture, nor known by me any other Way than by 

immediate Suggeſtion. If T have it reveal d to me, that 
ſuch a Revolution is come to pats this Day in the Ozto-' 
nan Empire, it is the very ſame Sort of Revelation, as 
if it were revealed to me that ſuch a Revolution would 
come to paſs there this Day come Twelve- month; 
becauſe, though one is preſent and the other furure, yet 
both are equally hidden from me, any other Way than 
by immediate Revelation, When Samuel told Saul, 
that the Aſſes which he went to ſeek were found, and that 
his Father had left caring for the Aſſes, and ſorrowed 
for him; this was by the ſame Kind of Revelation, as 
that by which he told that in the Plain of 5 abor, 

there 


- — 


. 9 np , _— 


e 


there ſhould meet him three Men goin up to God to 
© Bethel, (1 Sam. x. 2, 3.) tho“ one of theſe Things wa 


future and the other was not. So when Eliſba told the 


Eing of Jad the Words that the King of Syria ſpake 
in his Bed Chamber, it was by the ſame Kind of Reye. 
lation with that by which he foretold many Things to 
cOme. | 

Tis evident by this Revelation of ſecret Facts by 
immediate Suggeſtion, has nothing of the Nature of 
a ſpiritual and divine Operation, in the Senſe before. 
mentioned: There is nothing at all in the Nature of the 
Preceptions or Ideas themſelves, which are excited in 


the Mind, that is divinely excellent, and fo, far above 


all the Ideas of natural Men; though the Manner of 


Exciting the Ideas be extraordinary. In thoſe Thi 
which are ſpiritual, as has been ſhown, not only 7 
Manner of producing the Effet, but the Effect wrought, 
is divine, and fo vaſtly above all that can be in an un- 
fanctified Mind. Now fimply the having an Idea of 
Facts, ſetting aſide the Manner of producing thoſe Ideas, 
is nothing 2 what the Minds of wicked Men are 
ſuſceptible of, without any Goodneſs in them; and they 
all, cither have, or will have, the Knowledge of the 
Truth of the greateſt and moſt important Facts, that 
have been, are, or ſhall be. 

And as to the extraordinary Manner of producing 
the Ideas or Perception of Facts, even by immediate 
Suggeſtion, there is nothing in it, but what the Minds 
of natural Men, while they are yet natural Men, are 
capable of; as is manifeſt in Balaam, and others ſpoken 
of in the Scripture. And therefore it appears that.there 
is nothing a ining to this immediate Suggeſtion of 
fecret Facts that is ſpiritual, in the Senſe in which it has 


been proved that gracious Operations are ſo. If there 
be nothing in the Ideas themſelves, which is holy and 
divine, and ſo nothing but what may be in a Mind not 
ſanctified, then God can put them into the Mind by 
immediate Power, without ſanctifying it. As there 

is 


serer rg. Zs SS ©2232 OUTS „ 


S. EE +> Poo =© 


pax r III. F gracious Action:. 171 
i nothing in the Idea of a Rainbow itſelf, that is of 2 
holy and divine Nature; fo that there is nothing hinders 
but that an unſanctified Mind may receive that Idea: 
So God, if he pleaſes, and when he pleaſes, immediately, 
and in an extraordinary Manner, may excite that Idea in 
an unſanctified Mind. So alſo, as there is nothing in 
the Idea or Knowledge that ſuch and ſuch particular 
Perſons are forgiven and accepted of God, and entitled 
to Heaven, but what unſanctified Minds may have and 
will have concerning many at the Day of Judgment; - 
ſo God can if he pleaſes, extraordinarily and immedi- 
ately ſuggeſt this to, and impreſs it upon an unſanctified 
Mind now: There is no Principle wanting in an unfanc- 
tiled Mind, to make it capable of ſuch a Suggeſtion or 
Impreſſion; nor is there any Thing in them to exclude, 
or neceflarily to prevent ſuch a Suggeſtion. A 
And if theſe Suggeſtions of ſecret Facts be attended 
with Texts of Scripture, immediately andextraordinarily ,, 
brought to Mind, about ſome other Facts that ſeem in 
ſome Reſpects ſimilar, that don't make the Operation to 
be of a ſpiritual and divine Nature. For that Suggeſtion 
of Words of Scripture is no more divine, than the 
vuggeſtion of the Facts themſelves; as has been juſt 
now demonſtrated: And two Effects together, which 
are neither of them ſpiritual, can't make up one complex 
Effect, that is ſpiritual. _ We 
Hence it follows, from what has been already ſnewn, 
and often repeated, that thoſe Affections which are pro- 
perly founded on ſuch immediate Suggeſtions, or ſup- 
poſed Suggeſtions of ſecret Facts, are not gracious 
Affections. Not but that it is poſſible that ſuch Sugge- 
ſions may be the Occaſion, or accidental Cauſe of gracious 
Affect ions; for ſo may a Miſtake and Deluſion; but it 
15 never properly the Foundation of gracious AﬀeCtions : 
For gracious Affections, as has been ſhewn, are all the 
Effects of an Influence and Operation which is ſpiritual, 
ſupernatural, and divine. But there are many Aﬀec- 
ns, and high Affections, which ſome have, that have 
M2 ſuch 


1572 © The firſt: Sign Part III, 
ſuch Kind of Suggeſtions or Revelations for their very 
Foundation: They look upon theſe as ſpiritual Diſco- 
veries; which is a groſs Deluſion; and this Deluſion is | 
truly the Spring whence their Affections flop. 

Here it may be proper to obſerve, that tis exceeding 
manifeſt ' from what has been ſaid, that what many 

Perſons. ca'l. the. Witneſs of the Spirit, that they are the 

Children of God, has nothing 1n it ſpiritual and divine; 

and conſequently that the Affections built upon it, are 

vain and deluſive. That which many call the Witneſs 
of the Spirit, 1s no other than an immediate Suggeſtion 
and Impreſſion of that Fact, otherwiſe ſecret, that th 
are converted, or made the Children of God, and ſo 
that their Sins are pardoned, and that God has given 
them a Title to Heaven.. This Kind of Knowledge, 
vix. Knowing that a certain Perſon is converted, and 
delivered from Hell, and entitled to Heaven, is no 
divine Sort of HAnewledge in itſelf. This Sort of Fact, 
is not that which requires any higher or more divine 
Kind of Suggeſtion, in order to impreſs it on the Mind, 
than any other Fact which Balaam had impreſs'd on his 
Mind. It requires no higher Sort of Idea or Senſation, 
for a Man to have the Apprehenſion of his own Con- 
verſion impreſs'd upon him, than to have the Apprehen- 
ſion of his Neighbour's Converſion, in like Manner, 
impreſs'd: : But God, if he pleaſed, might impreſs the 
Knowledge of. this Fact, that he had forgiven his Neigh- 
bour's Sins, and given him a Title to Heaven, as welt 
as any other Fact, without any Communication of his 
Holineſs: The Excellency and Importance of the Fact, 
don't at all hinder a natural Man's Mind being ſuſcep- 
tible of an immediate Suggeſtion and Impreſſion: of it. 
Balaam had as excellent, and important, and glorious 
Facts as this, immediately impreſs' d on his Mind, with- 
out any gracious Influence; as particularly, the coming 
of Chriſt, and his ſetting up his glorious Kingdom, and 
the Bleſſedneſs of the ſpiritual rae! in his peculiar 
Eavour, and their Happineſs living and dying. Tea 
3 e Abimelech 


Parr Hl. e gracious Micr. 173 


Himelech, King of the Philiſtines, had God's ſpecial 
Favour to a particular Perſon, even Abraham, revealed 
to him, Gen. xx. 6, 7. So it ſeems that he reveal'd to 
Laban his ſpecial Favour to Jacob, ſee Gen. xxxi. 24, 
and P/al. cv. 15. And if a truly good Man ſhould 
have an immediate Revelation or Suggeſtion from God, 
after the like Manner, concerning his Favour to his 
Neighbour, or himſelf; it would be no higher Kind of 
Influence; it wauld be no more than a common Sort of 
Influence of God's Spirit; as the Gift of Prophecy, 
and all Revelation by immediate Suggeſtion 1s; ſee 
1 Cor. Xt. 2. And though it be true, that it is not 
poſſible, that a natural Man ſhould have that indivi- 
dual Suggeſtion from the Spirit of God, that he is con- 
verted, becauſe it is not true; yet that don't ariſe from 
the Nature of the Influence, or becauſe that Kind of 
Influence which ſuggeſts ſuch excellent Facts, is too high 
for him to be the Subject of; but purely from the Defect 
of a Fact to be revealed. The Influence which immediately 
ſuggeſts this Fact, when it is true, is of no different Kind 
from that which immediately ſuggeſts other true Facts: 
And ſo the Kind and Nature of the Influence, is not 
above what is common to natural Men, with good Men. 
But this is a mean ignoble Notion of the Witneſs of 
the Spirit of God given to his dear Children, to ſup- 
— that there is nothing in the Kind and Nature of that 
nfluence of the Spirit of God, in imparting the high 
and glorious Benefit but what is common to natural 
Men, or which Men are capable of, and be in the mean 
Time altogether unſanctified, and the Children of Hell; 
and that therefore the Benefit or Gift itſelf has nothing 
of the holy Nature of the Spirit of God in it, nothing 
of a vital Communication of that Spirit. This Notion 
greatly debaſes that high and moſt exalted Kind of 
nfluence and Operation of the Spirit, which there is in 
the true Witneſs of the Spirit.“ That which is Cal 


he late venerable Stoddard in his younger Time, falling an 
with the Opinion of ſome others, received this Notion of 2 e 
0 


* 


* 


174 pie e Sign ART III. 


the Witneſs of the Spirit, Rom. viii. is elſewhere in the 

new Teſtament, called tbe Seal of the Spirit, 2 Cor. i. 
22. Eph. 1. 13, and iv. 13. alluding to the Seal of 
Princes, annexed to the Inſtrament, by which they 
advanced any of their Subjects to ſome high Honour 
and Dignity, or peculiar Privilege in the Kingdom, as 
a Token of their ſpecial Favour, Which is an Evidence 
that the Influence of the Spirit of the Prince of Princes, 
in ſealing his Favourites, is far from being of a common 
EKind; and that there is no Effect of God's Spirit what 
ſoever, which is in its Nature more divine; nothing 

more holy, peculiar, inimitable and diſtinguiſhing of - 
Divinity; as nothing is more Royal than the Royal 
Seal; nothing more ſacred, that belongs to a Prince, 
and more peculiarly denoting what belongs to him; it 
being the very End and Deſign of it, to be the moſt 
peculiar Stamp and Confirmation of the Royal Autho- 
rity, and great Note of Diſtinction, whereby that which 
3 from the King, or belongs to him, may be 
nown from every Thing elſe, And therefore . 


of the Spirit, by way of immadiate Suggeſtion; but in the latter 
Part of his Life, when he had more thoroughly weighed Things, and 
had more Experience, he 55 rejected it; as appears by his 
Treatiſe of the Nature of ſaving Converfion, p. 84. * The Spirit 
of God doth not teſtify to particular Perſons, that they are godly, 
Some think that the Spirit of God doth teſtify it to ſome ; and they 
« ground it on Rom, 8. 16. The Spirit itſelf beareth Witneſs qwith our 
«* Spirit, that we are the Children of God. They think the Spirit re- 
„ yeals it by giving an inward Teſtimony to it; and ſome podly 
«© Men think they have had Experience of it ; But they may ealily - 
% miſtake; when the Spirit of God doth eminently ſtir up a Spint 
of Faith, and ſheds abroad the Love of God in the Heart, it is 
«-exfy to miſtake it for a Teſtimony. And that is not the Meaning 
of Pauls Words. The Spirit reveals Things to us, by you 
*5.0nr Eyes to ſee what is revealed in the Word; but the Spirit dot] 
not reveal new Truths, not revealed in the Word. T Spirit 
« diſcovers the Grace of God in Chriſt, and thereby draws forth 
<<-fpecial Actings of Faith and Love, which are tial; but it 
*« doth not work in Way of Teſtimony. If God do but help us to 


& receive the Revelations in the Word; we ſhall have Comfort 
- $37 


— 


3 4 ! ] 


8 ** 


— ——X 


. 


Revelations 


4.87 


bs -. » 


* 


pakr III. of gracious Affection. 175 
edly the Seal of the great King of Heaven and Earth 
enſtamped on the Heart, is ſomething high and holy in 
its own Nature; ſome excellent Communication from 
the infinite Fountain of divine Beauty and Glory; and 
not meerly a making known a ſecret Fact by Revelation 
or Suggeſtion; which is a Sort of Influence of the 
Spirit of God, that the Children of the Devil have 
often e qa prong The Seal of the Spirit is a 
Kind of Effect of the Spirit of God on the Heart, 
which natural Men, while ſuch, are ſo far from aCapa- 
city of being the Subjects of, that they can have no 
Manner of Notion or Idea of it; agreeable to Rev. ii. 
17. To bim that overcometh, will I give to eat of the 
hidden Manna; and I will give him a white Stone, and 
in the Stone a new Name written, which no Man knoweth, 
ſaving he that receiveth it. There is all Reaſon to ſu 
ſe that what is here ſpoken of, is the ſame Mark, 
Evidence, or bleſſed Token of ſpecial Fayour, which 
is elſewhere called the Seal of the Spirit. 
What has miſled many in their Notzon of that Influ- 
ence of the Spirit of God we are ſpeaking of, is the 
Word W1Twess, it's being called the Miineſt of the 
Spirit. Hence they have taken it, not to be any Effect 
or Work of the Spirit upon the Heart, giving Evidence 
from whence Men may argue that they are the Children 
© wy but an inward * mge —— as tho? 
30d inwardly ſpoke to the Man, and teſtified to him, 
and told him Au was his Child, by aKind of a — 
Voice, or Im : Not obſerving the Manner in 


which the Word Fitneſs, or Teftimony, is often uſed in 


not only a meer declaring and aſſerting 
true, bu holding forth Evidence from whence a Thing 
may be argued and proved to be true. Thus, Heb. ii. 4. 
God is ſaid to bear Witneſs, with Signs and Wonders, 
"and diverſe Miracles, and Giftsof the Holy Ge. Now 
"theſe Miracles, here ſpoken of, are called God's Wit- 
neſs, not becauſe they are of the Nature ot 2 * 

ſe | ut 


\ * 
> 


, 
Fo 
= 


the New Teſtament; where ſuch Terms often ſignify, 
a Thing to be 


176 The firſt Sign _ Part It. 


but Evidences and Proofs. So Acts xr. 3. Long Time 
therefore, abode they ſpeaking boldly in the Lord; which 
gave Teſtimony unto the Word of his Grace; and granted 
_ and Wonders to be done by their Hands. And John 
i. 36. But Ibave greater Witneſs than that of John? fer 
45 Works which the Father hath given me to finiſh, the 
fame Works that I do, bear Witneſs of me, that the 
Father bath ſent me. Again, Chap. x. 25. The Work: 
that I do in my Father's Name, they bear Witneſs of ny. 
So the Water and the Blood are ſaid to bear Witneſs, 
1 Jobn v. 8. Not that they ſpake or aſſerted any Thing, 
but they were Proofs and Evidences. So God's Works 
of Providence, jn the Rain and fruitful Seaſons, are 
ſpoken of as Witneſſes of God's Being and Goodneks 
i. e. They were Evidences of thele Things. And when 
the Scripture ſpeaks of the Seal of the Spirit, it is an 
Expreſſion which properly denotes, not an immediate 
Voice or Suggeſtion, — ſome Work or Effect of the 
Spirit, that is left as a divine Mark upon the Soul, to 
be an Evidence, by which God's Children might be 
known. The Seals of Princes were the diftinguiſhing 
Marks of Princes: And thus God's Seal is ſpoken of 
as God's Mark, Rev. vii. 3. Hurt not the Earth, neither 
the Sea, or the Trees, till we have ſealed the Servants of 
our God in their Forebeads; together with Ezek. ix. 4. 
Set a Mark upon the F. orebeads of the Men that figh and 
cry for all the Abominations that are done in the Midſt 
thereof. When God ſets his Seal on a Man's Heart by 
his Spirit, there is ſome holy Stamp, ſome Image im- 
preſs d and left upon the Heart by the Spirit, as by the 
Seal upon the Wax. And this holy Stamp, or impreſs'd 
Image, > exhiblring clear Evidence to the Conſcience, 
that the Subject ofgit is the Child of God, is the very 
Thing which in Scripture is called the Seal of the Spirit, 
and the Witneſs, or Evidence of the Spirit, And 2 
Image inſtamp'd by the Spirit on Code Children's 
Hearts, is his own Image: That is the Evidence hy 
Which they are known to be God's Children, that they 
have 


5 r T — | 


have the Image of their Father ſtamp'd upon their 
Hearts by the Spirit of Adoption. Seals anciently had 
engraven on them two Things, vig. The Image and 
the Name of the Perſon whoſe Seal it was. Therefore 


when Chriſt ſays to his Spouſe, Cant. viii. 6. Set me as @ 


Seal upon thine Heart, as a Seal upon thine Arm; it is as 
much as to ſay, Let my Name and Image remain impreſt 
there, The Seals of Princes were wont to bear their 


Image; ſo that what they ſet their Seal and Royal Mark 


upon, had their Image left on it. It was the Manner 
1 Princes of old to have their Image engraven on their 
Jewels and precious Stones; and the Image of Auguſtus 
engraven on a precious Stone, was uſed as the Seal of 


the Roman Emperors, in Chriſt's and the Apoſtles 


Times.* And the Saints are the Jewels of Jeſus Chriſt, 
the great Potentate, who has the Poſſeſſion of the Em- 


pire of the Univerſe: And theſe Jewels have his Image 


enſtamped upon them, by his Royal Signet, which 1s 
the Holy Spirit. And this is undoubtedly what the 
Scripture means by the Seal of the Spirit; eſpecially 
when it is enſtamped in ſo fair and clear a Manner, as to 
be plain to the Eye of Conſcience; which is what the 
Scripture calls our Spirit. This is, truly an Effect that 
is ſpiritual, ſupernatural, and divine. This is, in itſelf, 
of a holy Nature, being a Communication of the divine 
Nature and Beauty. That Kind of Influence of the 
Spirit which gives and leaves this Stamp upon the Heart, 
is ſuch that no natural Man can be the Subject of any 
Thing of the like Nature with it. This is the higheſt 
Sort of Witneſs of the Spirit, which it is poſſible the 
Soul ſhould be the Subject of : If there were any ſuch 
Thing as a Witneſs of the Spirit by immediate Suggeſ- 
tion or Revelation, this would be yaſtly moge noble and 
excellent, and as much above it as the Heaven is above 


the Earth. This the Devil cannot imitate: As to an 


in ward Suggeſtion of the Spirit of God, by a Kind of 


ſecret - 


o 
— — — — . 
* — 


= 


* See Chambers's DiRionary, under the Word EXGRAVING. 


Pd 


Part IT. of gracteis Aections. 177 


I 


178 The firſt Sign PaAxx InP: 
ſecret Voice ſpeaking, and immediately aſſertin 
ing a Fact, he can do that — a Thouünd the 


Times fo like to this, as he can to that holy and divine 
Effect, or Work of the Spirit of God, which has been 


now ſpoken of.“ 
2 5 Another 


Mr. Shepard is abundant in militating againſt the Notien of 
Men's knowing their good Eſtate by an immediate Witneſs of the 
Spirit, without judging by any Effect or Work of the Spirit wrought 
on the Heart, as an Evidence and Proof that Perſons are the Child. 
Ten of God. Parab. Part * P · 134. cc Knowing your Eledion if ic 
* Gee. How ſo? Immediately ? Some Divines think Angels ſee i 
not fo, and that it is peculiar to God ſo to do; but mediately; 
« for our Word came in Power, and in much Aſſurance, to make y 
4 En! for God, to turn you from Idols unto God, , 
Again in the ſame Page It is Heaven to cleave to him in every 
Command; it is Death to depart from any Command. Herehy 
* {ou noe that wwe are in him. If it were poſſible to aſ of the An. 
-66 gb, bow they know they are not Devils, they would anſwer, the 
Lord's Will is ours. So here, how do you know you have not 
* the Nature of Devils, and fo in a State of Devils, bound there 
till the Judgment of the great Day ? Becauſe God hath 
our vile Natures, and made our Wills like unto his glorious Will, 
And p. 135. The Majer is the Word, the Miner Experience, and 
< the Concluſion the Lord's Spirit's Work, quickening your Spirits 
* to it. Now, fay ſome, how do you know this? Thys you may 
te be miſtaken; for many have been deceived thus. Grant that; 
and ſhall a Child not take Bread when it is given him, thoogh 
Dogs ſnatch at it“. And p. 137. If you look to a Spirit with- 
* out a Work, whilſt yon do ſeek 2 you cannot avoid 
the Condemnation of the Word. You ſay the Spirit has 
* Peace to you; but do you love Chirſt? I look not to that; but to 
« the Spirit. Why, the Word faith, He that loves him not, let hin 
* be Anathemea. So, is the League between your Sins and your Souls 
7 broken? Anſw. I look not to that. Why, Fehr ſaith, He that 
AZanmittetb Sin is of the Devil. Are you new Creatures? I Jook not 
to that. Why, the Word faith, ax/e/5 you be born again, you can, 
* not enter into the Kingdom of God“. Page 75 177. A Mag 
« faith, I hate Chriſt; and ſo have not they. 1 aſk, where is the 
Spirit? You have the Deed ; where is the Seal? You have the 
Teſtator; where is the Executor? The Spirit in yon? Yes, I have 
& it z it has witneſſed Chriſt is mine. Anfw. It has witneſſed ; but 
< what has it wronght? Where is the Power of his Death, killing thy 
= Luifts? Where is the Life of the Spirit of Jeſus in you? Where 
.* 35 the Oil in your Veſſel? Truly I look for the Bridegroom ; bot 
* F regard not that; neither arc others to regard — a 
ig 48 | * FEvidence, 


* 


_ Py a. as «a - a - - 


3 . = 


en 


- SS K 241 


—y 
— 


22FTVTyſ/üſĩ ³⁰ m ²˙ w Ä˙—¾dꝛ R 


blur III. of gracious Aﬀections. 170 
Another Thing which is a full Proof that the Seal of 
the Spirit is no Revelation of any Fact by immedi 
1 Suggeſtion, 


« Evidence. Then I ſay the chief Evidence is deſtroyed in the 
« Churches. I have known many that have bad Aſſurances ; yet 
\ - n 
« never ſaw them prove right, 'till it witneſſed this was here. What 
« ſhould be the Cauſes of this, and that Men ſhould make Bluſters 
«in the Churches becauſe of this, as though it was building on 
„Works? In ſeyeral Men they are ſeveral. 1. An Aptneſs to out- 
« run the Truth, and to fall from one Extream to another---. 2. 
« The Apoſtacy of eminent Profeſſors, who have been deceived in 
« their evidencing thus.--- I Corrupt Expenence.--- 4. A Heart 
« that never felt the Bitterneſs and Bondage of Sin, as the greatelt 
« Evil”. Page 215, 216. The Peace, and Joy, and Aſſurance 
« of that Glory, which Eye never ſaw, in the Saints, *tis from the 
« Witneſs of Spirit of Glory ; not only becauſe that God is 
« their God, but becauſe they are his People. Tis I ſay from the 
« Witneſs of God in his Word ; not from themſelves, nor from Man 
« only, that they approve me; nor from Dreams, and diabolical 
1 Breathings ; but from the Spirit of God; he brings Tidings of 
it; and from ſuch a Spirit (that you may know it) that not only 
« ſhews you God is your God, and fo you rejoice, becauſe of this; for 
* thus tis with many a carnal Heart, and he hath Peace, being in 
Horror, from this, the Lord loves me; but he makes you to re- 
« joice, becauſe you are the Lord's People, becauſe he hath chang- 
« ed your Heart: Now the Peace is ſound, and Joy is right: Ang 
« here I would try the Peace of any Man”, Part II. p. 168. 169. 
« All the Heirs of the Promiſes, as Heirs that have Legacies left 
them, they go to the Will of the deceaſed Father; and that com- 
« forts, that they hold to, that is ſure; ſuch an one ſhall have it, if 
his Name de there. But if one ſhall ſay, ſuch a one hath promiſed 
« me ſuch Lands; is it in his Will? No ; bur fince he died, as I 
was taking a Pipe, he came to me: Oh be not deceived! “. 
Again in his Sound Believer, there is a long Diſcourſe of Sanftik- 
cation as the chief Evidence of Juſtification, from p. 221, four many 
15 following, I ſhall tranſcribe but a very ſmall Part of it. 
„Tell me, how you. will know that you are juſtified, You will ſay, 
by the Teſtimony of the Spirit, And cannot the ſame Spirit ſhine 
upon your Graces, and witneſs that you are ſanctified, as well? 1 
Jabs iv. 13. 24. 1 Cor, ii. 12. Can the Spirit make the one clear 
* to you, and not the other? Oh Beloved, it is a ſad Thing, to hear 
* ſuch Queſtions and ſuch cold Anſwers alſo, that SanQification poſ- 
* fibly may be an Evidence. May be! Is it not certain? Aſſuredly 
to deny it, is as bad as to affirm that God's own Promiſes of Fa- 
„ vour are not true Evidences thereof, and conſequently that they 
* we Lies and Untruths“. 8 . 


180 The firſt Sign | P ART Il 
Suggeſtion, but is Grace itſelf in the Soul, is that the 
Seal of the Spirit 18 called the Earneſt of the Spirit, in 
the Scripture. Tis very plain, that the Seal of the 
Spirit is the ſame Thing with the Earneſt of the Spiri 
by 2 Cor. i. 22. Who bath alſo ſealed Us, and given th 
Earneſt of the Spirit in our Hearts. And Eph. i. 13, 1 4 


In 
Mr. Flavel alſo much oppoſes this Notion of the Witneſs of the 
Spirit by immediate Revelation. Sacramental Meditations, Med. 
ſpeaking of the Sealing of the Spirit, he ſays, “ In Sealing the Be. 
«© Hever, he doth not make uſe of an audible Voice, nor the Mini. 
« ftry of Angels, nor immediate and extraordinary Revelations ; but 
« he makes uſe of his own Graces, implanted in our Hearts, and 
his own Promiſf-s, written in the Scripture: And in this Method, 
4% he uſually brings the doubting trembling Heart of a Believer ts 
„ Reſt and Comfort.“ Again, Ib. Aſſurance is produced in our 
« Souls by the reflexive Acts of Faith: The Spirit helps us to reſſed 
upon what hath been done by him formerly upon our Hearts; hereh 
« ape know that wwe know him, 1 John ii. 3. To know that we know, 
e is a reflex Act. Now it is impoſſible there ſhould be a reflex, before 
« there hath been a direct Act. No Man can have the Evidence of 
« his Faith, before the Habit is infuſed, and the vital Act perform'd. 
*The Object Matter, to which the Spirit ſeals, is his own ſanctifying 
% Operation.“ Afterwards, big. he ſays, © Immediate Ways of the 
4 Sptrit's Sealing are ceaſed. No Man may now expect, by any new 
« Revelation, or Sign from Heaven, by any Voice, or 2 fro 
% Inſpiration, to have his Salvation ſealed; but muſt expect that 
Mercy in God's ordinary Way and Method, ſearching the Scrip- 
« tures, examining our own Hearts, and waiting on the Lord in 
« Prayer. The learned Gerſen gives an Inſtance of one that had been 
6 upon the Borders of Deſpair, and at laſt ſweetly aſſured and 
ce ferifed:; He anfwered, Nox ex nova aligua Revelation“; not by any 
new Revelation, but by ſubjecting my Underſtanding to, and com- 
« paring my Heart with the written Word. And Mr. Roberts, in his 
« Treatiſe of the Covenants, ſpeaks of another, that ſo vehemently 
*« panted after the Sealings and Aſſurance of the Love of God to hu 
« Soul, that for a long Time he earneſtly deſired ſome Voice from 
Heaven; and ſometimes, walking in the ſolitary Fields, earneſtly 
4 defired ſome miraculous Voice from the Trees or Stones there. 
„This was denied him; but in Time, a better was afforded, in: 
« ſcriptural Way.” Again, [b:d. ** This Method of Sealing, i 
« beyond all other Methods in the World. For in miraculous Voices 
* and Inſpirations, tis poſſible there may /ubeſe falſum, be found 
« ſome Cheat, or Impoſtures of the Devil; but the Spirit's Witnels 
% in the Heart, ſuitable to the Revelation in the Scripture, cannet 
«« deceive us. ESE 55 


F 


F ft.. 53. .4 a. @ £& ® I” Aa... S as. > & wes | 


Parr. III. of gracicas AﬀeFions, 187 
n whom, after that ye believed, ye were ſealgd with that 
holy Spirit of Promiſe, which is the Earneſt of our Inhe- 
ritance, until the Redemption of the purchaſed Poſſeſſion, 
unto the Praiſe of his Glory. Now the Earneſt is Part of 
the Money agreed for, given in Hand, as a Token of 
the Whole, to be paid in due Time; a Part of the pro- 
miſed Inheritance, granted now, in Token of full Poſ- 
{fon of the Whole hereafter. But ſurely that Kind of 
Communication of the Spirit of God, which is of the 
Nature of eternal Glory, is the higheſt and moſt exce}- 
lent Kind of Communication, ſomething that is in its 
own Nature ſpiritual, holy and divine, and far from any 
Thing that is common; and therefore high above any 
Thing of the Nature of Inſpiration, or Revelat.on of 


hidden Facts by Suggeſtion of the Spirit of God, which 


many natural Men have had. What is the Earneſt and 
Beginning of Glory, but Grace itſelf, eſpecially in the 


more lively and clear Exerciſes of it? *Tis not Prophecy, 
nor Tongues, nor Knowledge, but that more excellent 


divine Thing, Charity that never faileth, which is a 


Prelibation and Beginning of the Light, Sweetneſs, 


and Bleſſedneſs of Heaven, that World of Love or 


Charity. *T'is Grace that is the Seed of Glory, and 
Dawning of Glory in the Heart, and therefore tis 
Grace that is the Earneſt of the future Inheritance. 
What is it that is the Beginning or Earneſt of eternal 
Life in the Soul, but ſpiritual Life? And what is that 
but Grace? The Inheritance that Chriſt has purchaſed 
for the Elect, is the Spirit of God; not in any extraor- 
dinary Gifts, but in i 

exerting and communicating himſelf there, in his own 
proper, holy or divine Nature: And this is the Sum 
Total of the Inheritance that Chriſt purchaſed for the 
Elect. For ſo are Things conſtituted in the Affair of 
our Redemption, that the Father provides the Saviour, 
or Purchaſer, and the Purchaſe is made ofhim; and the 
Son is the Purchaſer and the Price; and the Holy Spirit 
i the great Bleſſing or Inheritance purchaſed, as is = 

mate 


is vital Indwelling in the Heart, 


182 The firſt Sign Part III 
mated Gal. iii. 13, 14. and hence the Spirit is often 
ſpoken of as the Sum of the Bleſſings promiſed in the 
Goſpel, Luke xxiv. 49. As i. 4, and Chap. ii. 38, 39. 
Gal. iii. 14. Epb. i. 13. This Inheritance was the 
Legacy which Chrift left his Diſciples and Chun, i 
his laſt Will and Teitament; Jobn Chap. xiv. and xy, 
and xvi. This is the Sum of the Bleſſings of eternal 
Life, which ſhall be given in Heaven. (Compare Joby 
vii. 37, 38, 39. and John iv. 14, with Rev. xxl. 6, 
and xxii. 1, 17.) Tis through the vital Communication: 
and Indwelling of the Spirit, that the Saints have all 
their Light, Life, Holineſs, Beauty and Joy in Heaven: 
And 'tis thraugh the vital Communications and In. 
dwelling of the ſame Spirit, that the Saints have all 
their Light, Life, Holineſs, Beauty, and Comfort on 
Earth; — only communicated in leſs Meaſure. And 
this vital Indwelling of the Spirit in the Saints, in this 
leſs Meaſure and ſmall Beginning, 1s tbe Earneſt of the 
Spirit, the Earneſt of the future Inheritance, and the 
firſt Fruits of the Spirit, as. the Apoſtle calls it, Rom. 
viii. 22, where, by the firſ® Fruits of the Spirit, the 
Apoſtle undoubtedly means the ſame vital gracious 
Principle, that he ſpeaks of in all the preceeding Part 
of the Chapter, which he calls Spirit, and ſets in Oppo- 
fition to Fleſh or Corruption. Therefore this Earneſt 


of the Spirit, and firſt Fruits of the Spirit, which has 


been ſhewn to be the ſame with the Seal of the Spirit, 
is the vital, gracious, ſanctifying Communication and 
Influence of the Spirit, and not any immediate Suggeſ- 
tion or Revelation of Facts by the Spirit.“ And 


* « After a Man is in Chriſt, not to judge by the Work, is not to 
judge by the Spirit. For the Apoſtle makes the Earneſt of the 
«« Spirit to be the Seal. Now Earneſt is Part of the Money bargain'd 
for; the Beginning of Heaven, of the Light and Life of it. He 
<< that ſees not that the Lord is his by that, ſees no God his at all. 
<<. Oh therefore, do not look for a Spirit, without a Word to reveal, 
nor a Word to reveal without ſeeing and feeling of ſome Work 


«« firſt. I thank the Lord, I do but pity thoſe that think otherwiſe. 
If a Sheep of Chriſt, Oh, wander not.” Shepards Parable, P. I. 


Pa, $5. 


— 


. — ws => » WW —- 
B ww ee > .- $- 5, CR Q 2 2 AST 2 > 2 SS 1 


— 
— | 


_ wv Wo. ww T av” a» ©» 


Part III. of gracious Affections. 183 
And indeed the Apoſtle, when in that Rom. viii. 16, 
de ſpeaks of the Spirit's bearing Witneſs with our Spirit, 
that we are the Children of God, does ſufficiently 
explain himſelf, if his Words were but attended to. 
What is here expreſs*d, is connected with the two pre- 
ceeding Verſes, as reſulting from what the Apoſtle had 
cid there, as every Reader may ſee. The three Verſes 
together are thus, For as many as are lee. by the Spirit of 
Cod, they are the Sons of God: "For ye have not received 
the Spirit of Bondage again to fear; but ye have received 
the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father - 
The Spirit itſelf beareth Witneſs with our Spirits, that we 
are the Children of God. Here, what the Apoſtle ſays, 
if we take it together, plainly ſnews, that what he has 
reſpe& to, when he ſpeaks of the Spirit's giving us 
Witneſs or Evidence that we are God's Children; is his 
dwelling in us, and leading us, as a Spirit of Adoption, 
or Spirit of a Child, diſpoſing us to behave towards 
God as to a Father. Thus is the Witneſs or Evidence 
the Apoſtle ſpeaks of, that we are Children, that we 
have the Spirit of Children, or Spirit of Adoption. 
And what 1s that, but the Spirit of Love? Thereare 
two Kinds of Spirits the Apoſtle ſpeaks of, the Spirit of 
a Slave, or the pers of Bondage, that is Fear; and the 
Spirit of a Child, or Spirit of Adoption, and that is Love. 
The Apoſtle ſays, we have not received the Spirit of 
Bondage, or of Slaves, which is a Spirit of Fear; but 
we have received the more ingenious noble Spirit of 
Children, a Spirit of Love, which naturally diſpoſes us 
to go to God, as Children to a Father, and behave 
towards God as Children. And this is the Evidence or 
Witneſs which the Spirit of God gives us, that we are 
Children, This is the plain Senſe of the Apoſtle: And 
undoubtedly the Apoſtle here is ſpeaking of the very 
ame Way of caſting out Donbting, and Fear, and the 
Spirit of Bondage, which the Apoſtle Jabn ſpeaks of, 
1 Jobn iv. 18. viz. By the prevailing of Love, that is 
tle Spirit of a Child. The Spirit of Bondage works 


184 The firſt Sign Paxr. If, 
by Fear, the-Slave fears the Rod; but Love cries A 
Father; it diſpoſes us to go to God, and behave out- 
ſelves towards God as Children; and it gives us clear 
Evidence of our Union to God as his Children, and ſo 
caſts out Fear. So that it appears that the Witneſ of 
the Spirit the Apoſtle ſpeaks of, is far from being any 
Whiſper, or immediate Suggeſtion or Revelation; but 
that gracious holy Effect of the Spirit of God in the 
Hearts of the Saints, the Diſpoſition and Temper of 
Children, appearing in ſweet child-like Love to God, 
which caſts out Fear, or a Spirit-of a Slave. 

And the ſame Thing is evident from all the Context: 
"Tis plain the Apoſtle ſpeaks of the Spirit, over and 
over again, as dwelling in the Hearts of the Saints, as 
2 gracious Principle, ſet in Oppoſition to the Fleſh, or 
Corruption: And ſo he does in the Words that immedi- 
ately introduce this Paſſage we are upon, Verſe 13. For 
if ye live after the Fleſh, ye fhall die; but if ye, thri 
the Spirit do mortify the Deeds of the Fleſh, ye Hall live. 

Indeed it is paſt Doubt with me, that the Apoſtle has 
a more ſpecial Reſpect to the Spirit of Grace, or the 
Spirit of Love, or Spirit of a Child, in its more lively 
Actings: For 'tis perfect Love, or ſtrong Love only, 
which 1o witneſſes or evidences that we are Children, as 
to caſt out Fear, and wholly deliver from the Spirit of 
Bondage. The ſtrong and lively Exerciſes of a Spitit 
of child-like, evangelical, humble Love to God, give 
clear Evidence of the Soul's Relation to God, as his 
Child; which does very greatly and dire&ly ſatisfy the 
Soul, And tho' it be far from being true, that the Soul 
in this Caſe, judges only by an immediate Witneſs, 
without any Sign or Evidence; for it judges and i- 
aſſured by the greateſt Sign and cleareſt Evidence; yet 
in this Caſe, the Saint ſtands in no need of multiplied 
Signs, or any long Reaſoning upon them. And tho 
the Sight of his relative Union with God, and' his being 
in his Favour, is not without a Medium, becauſe he 


ſces it by that Medium, viz, his Love; yer his _ 


Har HE J gratious” Aﬀettios. 


£ wv * * Pr 
= = 
" { 
* = . 
18 ce 
7 - 
» * 


3% cf the Union of bis Heart to God is immediate: Love, 
ar. W the Bond of Union, is ſeen intuitively : The Saint fees 
-1 and feels plainly the Union between his Soul and God: 

ie is fo ftrotig and lively, that he can't doubt of it. And 
of W hence he is aſſured that he is a Child. Ho can he doubt 

y whether he ſtands in a child-like Relation to God, When 
ut be plainly ſees a child-like Union between God and his- + 


"ant, LY 


* 
rr We 
bo. 


de Soul, and hence does boldly, and as it were, naturally. 4 


of nud neceſſarily ery, Abba Father ? 


d, And whereas the a ſays; the Spirit bears Wit- 

neſs with our Spirits; by our Spirit here, is meant our 
t: Conſcience, which is called the Spirit of Man; Prov. 
id WM xx; 27. The Spirit of Man is the Candle of the Lord, 


Ir 

„Cor. i. 12. Fer our rejoicing is this, the Teſtimony of otir 

r WW Conſcience. And x John i. 19, 20, 21. And hereby do \ 
ve know that we are of the Truth, and ſhall aſſure our 
Hearts before him. For if our Heart condemn us, Gs 


ſearching all the inward Parts of the Belly. We, elſe- 
where read of the Witneſs of this Spirit of ours; 2 


s Wl 5s greater than our Heart, and knoweth all Things. Be- © 
© W l/oved, if our Heart condemn us nat, then have we Confi- 


y dence towards God. When the Apoſtle Paul ſpeaks of 
, the Spirit of God bearing Witneſs with our Spirit, he 


b not to be underſtood of two Spirits, that are two 
f Wl feparate, collateral, independant Witneſſes; but tis b; 
© WM one, that we receive the Witneſs of the other: The 
. Spirit of God gives the Evidence, by infuſing and ſned- 
3 


= 


and declares this Evidence of our Rejoicing. 


that 


kim, and 
with, and ſometimes without a Text of Scripture; 
many have been the falſe, and vain (though very high 


— 

' 3 
fy 

th 


- „ 8222 


* 


eng abroad the Love of God, the Spirit of a Child, 
in the Heart; and our Spirit, or our Conſcience, receives. 


Many have been the Miſchiefs that have ariſen from "i 
alfe and deluſive Notion of the Witneſs of the 

Spirit, that it is a Kind of inward Voice, S ion, or 
Declaration from God td a Man, that he is beloved of 
5 rdoned, elected, or the like, 1 — 


5 
Affections that have ariſen from hence. And tis to be 


> 
- == 
* 


AST x \ 1 
* ” 75 

1 9 

* 

- 
* ain hr 2-20 r 1 8 9 * 


EF . N * 9 ö % Ae ' %. N . 8. 1 
2 9 8 +" * * „ % Sew 4 wu. "PW 
. KO 4 * ba . | 4s * 22 — — 
2 : g a : . l 
" Bl 7 4 
* 1 N 
' & k 
_m CF. 


| feared that Multitudes of Souls have been eternally 
| undone by it. I have therefore inſiſted the longer on 


4a 1 oy > PRI * * * - p 
e 88322 , * A v) 


* 


NU een. 22 | 
x K _» bs .. \ t. 
In. 
O 


— 


But I proceed now to a ſecond Characteriſtic of 


* i N 


gracious Affections. 


II. The firſt objective Ground of gracious A ffections, 
is the tranſcendently excellent and amiable Nature of 
divine Things, as they are in themſelves; and not any 
conceived Nelation they bear to Self, or Self-Intereſt. 

'T fay, that the fupremely excellent Nature of divine 


W Things, is the ff, or EG ee CR 


Foundation of the ſpititual A ns of true Saints; 
for I do not ſuppoſe that all Relation which divine 
Things bear to themſelves, and their own particular 
Intereſt, are wholly excluded from all Influence in their 

tous Affections. For this may have, and indeed 

, 2 ſecondary and conſequential Influence in thoſe 
Affections that are truly holy and ſpiritual; as I ſhall 


| ſhew how by-and-by. 


_—_ — 2 
— — — — * * 
a 


It was before obſerved, that the Affection of Love 
is as it were the Fountain of all Affection; and parti- 
cularly, that Chriſtian Love is the Fountain of all 
gracious Affections: Now the divine Excellency and 
Glory of God, and Jeſus Chriſt, the Word of God, 


the Works of God, and the Ways of God, Sc. is the 


primary Reaſon, why a true Saint loves theſe Things; 


| and not any ſuppoſed Intereft that he has in them, or 
any conceived Benefit that he has received from them, 
or ſhall receive from them, or any ſuch imagined Rela- 


| tion, which they bear to his Intereſt, that Self-Love 


4 But I humbly ſuppoſe it is for Want of Conſideration, 


can properly be ſaid to be the firſt Foundation of his 
Love to theſe Things. | 
Some ſay, that all Love ariſes from Self-Love; and 


that it is impoſſible in the Nature of Things, for any 


Man to have any Love to God, or any other Being, but 
that Love to himſelf muſt be the Foundation of it. 


that 


PazT III. of gracious Aﬀettrons. 187 


that they ſay ſo. They argue, that whoever loves God, 
and ſo Tae tis Glory, — the Enjoyment of * 5 
deſires theſe Things as his own Happineſs; the Glorfx 
of God, and the beholding and enjoying his Perfections, 
are conſidered as Things agreeable to him, tending to 
make him happy; he er his Happineſs in them, 
and deſires them as Things, which (if they were ob- 
tained) would be delightful to him, or would fill him 
with Delight and Joy, and ſo make him happy. And 
ſo, they ſay, it is from Self-Love, or a Deſire of his 
own Happineſs, that he deſires God ſhould be glorified, 
and deſires to behold and enjoy his glorious Perfections. 
But then they ought to conſider a little further, and 
enquire how the Man came 10 place his Happineſs in God's 
being glorified, ' and in contemplating and enjoying 
God's Perfections. There is no Doubt, but that after 
God's Glory, and the beholding his Perfections, are 
become ſo agreeable to him, that he places his higheſt 
Happineſs in theſe Things, then he will deſire them, as 
he deſires his own Happineſs. But how came theſe | 
Things to be ſo agreeable to him, that he eſteems it his 
higheſt Happineſs to glorify God, Sc.? Is not this the 
Fruit of Love? A man muſt firſt love God, or haye 
his Heart united to him, before he will eſteem God's 
Good his own, and before he will deſire the glorifying 1 
and enjoying of God, as his Happineſs,  *Tis not ſtrong 
arguing, that becauſe after a Man has his Heart united F 
to God in Love, as a Fruit of this, he deſires his Glorx 
and Enjoyment as his own Happineſs, that therefore a 
Deſire of this Happineſs of his own, muſt needs be 
the Cauſe and Foundation of his Love: Unleſs it be ſtrong 
arguing, that becauſe a Father begat a Son, that there- 
fore his Son certainly begat him. If after a Man loves 
God, and has his Heart ſo united to him, as to look ̃ . 
upon God as his chief Good, and on God's Good as 
his own, it will be a Conſegurnce and Fruit of this, that 
even Self- Love, or Love to his own Happineſs, will 
cauſe him to deſire N glorify ing and enjoying of Gd, 
. 2 1c 


/ 


* * ew -- > 


LO * = 
—_— A : 
* 


and Quatirics inherent in the Being be 


on * on 


cr ä r 5 | & ; 

* a N , * * g EPA 1 N bs 

oy * N a * . w p 
4 > | econd Sig ART III. 


tik vill not thence follow, that this very Exerciſe of Sell. 
Love, went before his Love to God, and that his Love 
to God was a Conſequence and Fruit of that. Somethin 
elſe, entirely diſtinct from Self-Love might be the Cauſe 
of this, viz. A Change made in the Views of his Mind; 
and Reliſh of his Heartz whereby he apprehends a 
Beauty, Glory, and ſupreme Good in God's Nature, as 
it is in itſelf. This may be the Thing that firſt draus 
| his Heart to him, and cauſes his Heart to be united to 
him, prior to all Conſiderations of his own Intereſt or 
Happineſs, although after this, and as -a Fruit of this, 
he neceſſarily feeks his Intereſt and Happineſs in God. 
There is ſuch 4 Thing, as a kind of Love or Affection 
that a Man niay have towards Perſons or Things, which 
does properly ariſe from Self- love; a preconceived Rela- 
tion to himſelf, or ſome Reſpect already manifeſted by 
another to him, or ſome Benefit already received or 
depended on, is truly the frſt Foundation of his Love, 
and what his Affection does wholly ariſe from; and is 
what preceeds any Reliſh of, or rs. 9 in the Nature 
oved, as beautiful 
and amiable. When the firſt Thing that draws a Man's 
Benevolerice to atiother, is the beholding thoſe Qualifi- 
cations and Properties in him, which appear to him 
bovely in themſelves, and the ſubject of them, on this 
Account, worthy of Eſteem and -will ; Love ariſes 
min a very different Manner, than when it firſt ariſes from 
ſome Gift beſtowed by another, or depended on from 
him; as a Judge loves and favours a Man that has 
bribed him ; or from the Relation he ſuppoſes another 
has to him, as a Man who loves another becauſe he looks 
= upon him as his Child. When Love to another ariſes 
thus, it does truly and properly ariſe from Self. love. 
That kind of Affection to God or Jeſus Chriſt, which 
does thus properly ariſe from Self- love, cannot be a truly 
gracious and ſpiritual Love Sas appears from what has 
been ſaid already: For Self- love is a Principle entirely 
natural, and as much in n | 


3 n r 


pak r III. of gracisus Affeclions. 189 

and therefore, ſurely nothing that is the meer Reſult ß 

it, can be ſupernatural and divine, in the Manner before 
deſcribed. F Chriſt plainly ſpeaks of this Kind of Love, 
as what is nothing beyond the Love of wicked Men,. 
Luke vi. 32. If ye love them that love you, what thank 
have ye? for Sinners alſo love thoſe that love them. And 
the Devil himſelf knew, that that Kind of Reſpe& to 
God which was ſo mercenary, as to be only for Benefits 
received or depended on, (which is all one) is worthleſs 
in the Sight of God ; otherwiſe he never would have 
made Uſe of ſuch Slander before God, againſt Job, as 
in Job i. 9, 10. Deth Job ſerpe God for nought ? Haft 
thou not made an Hedge about him, and about his Houſe, 
&c.----? Nor would God ever have implicitly allowed 
the Objection to have been good, in caſe the Accuſation 
had been true, by allowing that that Matter ſhopld be 

tried, and that ob ſhould be ſo dealt with, that it might 

appear in the Event, whether 7cb's Reſpect to God }F 

was thus mercenary or no, and by putting the Proof 

of the Sincerity and Goodneſs of bi Reſpect, upon 

2 that Iſſue. = 

*Tis unreaſonable to think otherwiſe, than that the 

firſt Foundation of a true Love to God, 1s that whereby 

he is in himſelf lovely, or worthy to be loyed, or the 
ſupreme Lovelineſs of his Nature. This 1s certainly 

what makes him chiefly amiable. What chiefly makes 

a Man, or any Creature lovely, is his Excellency; and 

ſo what chiefly renders God lovely, and muſt undoubt- 

edly be the chief Ground of true Love, is his Excel- 
lency. God's Nature, or the Divinity, is infinitely -Þ8 
excellent; yea *tis infinite Beauty, Brightneſs and Glory il 
itſelf, But how can that be true Love of this excellent 

and lovely Nature, which is not built on the Foundation 

of it's true Lovelineſs? How can that be ws 5s of 

Beauty 


3. 


ed 


* 


— 
_ 


W ”"Þ ww ED 0 


+ © There is a natural Love to Chriſt, as to one that doth thee 
„Good, and for thine own Ends; and ſpiritual, for himſelf, where» 
dy the Lord only is exalted.” ,s Parable of the ten Virgins, i 
Part1. p. 25, 4 | 


'S 2 6k <4, * & 8 a F "P* % + = 2 * "Y 5 4 * a r % . A a. we "RR 


190 ' The ſecond Sign Part III. 
Beauty and 8 which is not for Beauty and 
Brightneſs ſake? How can that be a true Prizing of 
that which is in itſelf infinitely worthy and precious, 
which is not for the Sake of its Worthineſs and Preci. 
coufneſs? This infinite Excellency of the divine Nature, 
as it is in itſelf, is the true Ground of all that is good 
in God in any Reſpect; but how can a Man truly and 
rightly love God, without loving him for that Excellency 
in him, which is the Foundation of all that is in any 
Manner of Reſpect good or deſireable in him? They 
whoſe Affection to God is founded firſt on his Profita- 
bleneſs to them, their Affection begins at the wrong 
End; they regard God only for the utmoſt Limit of 
the Stream of divine Good, where it touches them, 
and reaches their Intereſt; and have no Reſpect to that 
infinite Glory of God's Nature, which is the original 
Good, and the true Fountain of all Good, the firſt 
= Fountain of all Lovelineſs of every kind, and ſo the 
= firſt Foundation of all true Love. 
A natural Principle of Self- love may be the Foun- 
dation of great Affections towards God and Chriſt, 
without ſeeing any Thing of the Beauty and Glory of 
the divine Nature. There is a certain Gratitude that is 
a meer natural Thing. Gratitude is one of the natural 
Affections of the Soul of Man, as well as Anger; and 
there is a Gratitude that ariſes from Self- love, very much 
in the ſame Manner that Anger does, Anger in Men 
zs an Affection excited againſt another, or in Oppoſition | 
do another, for ſomething in him that croſſes-Self-love: 
Gratitude is an Affection one has towards another, for 
loving him, or gratifyirſg him, or for ſomething in him 
that ſuits Self- love. And there may be a kind of Gra- 
titude, without any true or proper Love; as there may 
be Anger without any proper Hatred, as in Parents to- 
wards their Children, that they may be angry with, and 
yet at the ſame Time have a ſtrong habitual Love to 
them. This Gratitude is the Principle which is in exer- 
cife in wicked Men, in that which Chriſt declares con- 
| cerning 


4 "Web N. - * 


cerning them, in the 6th of Luke, where he ſays, Sinners 


ing even the Publicans, who were ſome of the moſt 


eval and profligate Sort of Men, Matth. v. 46, This 


is the very Principle that is wrought upon by Bribery, 
in unjuſt Judges; and it is a Principle that even the 


brute Beaſts do exerciſe : A Dog will love his Maſter . 


that is kind to him, And we ſee in innumerable In- 
ſtances, that meer Nature is ſufficient to excite Grati- 
tude in Men, or to affect their Hearts with Thankful- 
neſs to others for Kindneſſes received; and ſometimes 
towards them, whom at the ſame Time they have an 
habitual Enmity againſt. Thus Saul was once and 
again greatly affected, and even diſſolved with Grati- 
tude towards David, for ſparing his Life; and yet re- 
mained an habitual Enemy to him. And as Men, from 
meer Nature, may be thus affected towards Men; ſo 
they may towards God. There is nothing hinders, but 


that the ſame Self- love may work after the ſame Man- i 


ner towards God, as towards Men. And we have 


manifeſt Inſtances of it in Scripture z as in the Children © 


of Iſrael, who ſang God's Praiſes at the Red Sea, but 
ſoon forgat God's Works; and in Naaman the Syrian, who 
was greatly affected with the miraculous Cure of his Le- 
proſy, ſo as to have his Heart engaged thenceforward 
to worſhip the God that had heal'd him, and him only, 
excepting when it would expoſe him to be ruin'd in his 


temporal Intereſt, So was Nebuchadnezzer greatly af- 
fected with God's Goodneſs to him, in reitoring him to 


his Reaſon and Kingdom, after his dwelling with the 
| Gratitude being thus a natural Principle, it renders 
Ingratitude ſo much the more vile and heinous; becauſe 
it ſhews a dreadful Prevalence of Wickedneſs, when it 


even dverbears, and ſuppreſſes the better Principles f 


human Nature: As it is mentioned as an Evidence of 


the high Degree of the Wickedneſs of many of the 
Heathen, that they were without natural Afection, Rom. | 


' love thoſe that love them ; and which he declares cdncern- 


ParT III. of gracious Aﬀettions. 191 | 
| r b | 


, 1 
„ 4 N 
S * 7 ry 8 


tion of their Love to him. After Awakenings 


r erer b 


Q l 1 $4 "a * js * a n * Aut. * ; DOT R 
: * 4 % * * ” . 0 
a 1 : ; © „ 
o 9 . 4 
102 2 ign PAR III 
2 a hy * a - - , 9 
* 


ii. 31. But that the Want of Gratitude, or natural Af. 
fection, are Evidences of an high Degree of Vice, is no 


Argument that all Gratitude and natural Affection, has 


the Nature of Vertue, or Saving-Grace. 
Self- love, through the Exerciſe of a meer natural 
Gratitude, may be the Foundation of a Sort of Love to 
God many Ways. A Kind of Love may ariſe from a 
falſe Notion of God, that Men have been educated in, 
or have ſome Way imbibed; as tho' he were only Good. 


neſs and Mercy, and no revenging Juſtice; or as tho 


the Exerciſes of his Goodneſs were neceſſary, and not 
free and fovereign ; or as tho" his Goodneſs were de- 


ndant on what is in them, and as it were conſtrained 
y them. Men on ſuch Grounds as theſe,” may love a 2 


God of their own forming in their Imaginations, when 
they are far from loving fuch a God as reigns in Hea- 
ven, | 
Again, Self-love may be the Foundation of an Aﬀe 
tion in Men towards God, thro? a great Inſenſibility of 
their State with Regard to God, and for Want of Con- 


viction of Conſcience to make em ſenſible how dread- | 


fully they have provoked God to Anger; they have no 
Senſe of the Heinouſneſs of Sin, as againſt God, and of 
the infinite and terrible Oppoſition of the holy Nature 
of God againſt it: And ſo having formed in their Minds 
ſuch a God as ſuits them, and thinking God to be ſuch 
an one as themſelves, who favours and agrees with them, 
they may like him very well, and feel a Sort of Love to 
him, when they are far from loving the true God. And 


| * Men's Affections may be much moved towards God, 


from delf- love, by ſome remarkable outward Benefits 
received from God; as it was with Naaman, Nebuchad- 
#ezzar, and the Children of 1/rael at the Red Sea. 
Again, a very high Affection towards God, may, 
and often does ariſe in Men, from an Opinion of the 
Favour and Love of God to them, as the firſt Fane 
an 
Diſtreſs through Fears of Hell, they may ſuddenly get 
. 


— 8 


. . f _ w&g__ We 


Parr III. & gracious Afictions. 193 
i Notion, through ſome Impreſſion on their Imaginati- 
on, or immediate Suggeſtion, with or without Texts of 


and has forgiven their Sins, and made them his Children; 
and this is the the firſt Thing that cauſes their Affections 
to flow towards God and Jeſus Chriſt: And then after 
this, and upon this Foundation, many Things in God 
may appear lovely to them, and Chriſt may ſeem excel- 
jent. And if ſuch Perſons are aſked, whether God ap- 

lovely and amiable in himſelf? They would per- 
haps readly anſwer, Yes; when indeed, if the Matter 
be ſtrictly examined, this good Opinion of God was 
purchaſed and paid for before ever they afforded it, in 


they received from God; and they allow God to be lovely 
in himſelf, no otherwiſe than that he has forgiven them, 


al 
to 
A 
N, 
l. 
OY 
* 
8 
9 
1 
4 
by 


and accepted them, and loves them above molt in the 


: World, and has engaged to emprove all his infinite 
f WW Power and Wiſdom in preferring, dignifying and exa!- 
ting them, and will do for em juſt as they would have 
him. When once they are firm in this Apprehenſion, 
tis eaſy to own God and Chriſt to be lovely and glori- 


to own Chriſt to be a lovely Perſon, and the beſt'in the 


" _—_— wr ERS ” wes | 


of the Univerſe, is captivated with Love to them, and 
has his Heart ſwallowed up in them, and prizes 'em 
far beyond moſt of their Neighbours, and loved 'em 
from Eternity, and died for em, and will make em 
reign in eternal Glory with him in Heaven. When this 
is the Caſe with carnal Men, their very Luſts will make 
tim ſeem lovely: Pride is ſelf will prejudice them in 
Favour of that which they call Chriſt : Selfiſh proud 


to his Intereſt, and gratifies his Ambition. 


Affections are raiſed from time to time, primarily on 
* oundation of Self- love, and a Conceit of God's 
1 | Love 


* 


Scripture, or by ſome other Means, that God loves em 


the diſtinguiſhing and infinite Benefits they imagined 


ous, and to admire and extol them. Tis eaſy for them 


World, when they are firſt firm in it, that he, tho' Lord 


Man naturally calls that lovely that greatly contributes 
And as this Sort of Perſons begin, ſo they go on. Their 


1 „ * W 


men 4» Ms * * 18 4 Fe "ma x . * — 
. 


194 The ſecond Sign Parr II 


Love to them. - Many have a falſe Notion of Commy, 
nion with God, as tho? it were carried on by Impulſe, 
and Whiſpers, and external Repreſentations, immediately 
made-to their Imagination. Theſe Things they often 
have; which they take to be Manifeſtations of Gods 
great Love to em, and Evidences of their high Exal. 


ration above others of Mankind; and fo their Affection 


are often renewedly fet a going. | 
Whereas the Exerciſes of true and holy Love in the 


Saints arife in another Way. They don't firſt ſee that 


God loves them, and then fee that he is lovely; but 
they firſt ſee that God is lovely, and that Chriſt is ex- 
cellent and glorious, and their Hearts are firſt capti 
vated wi h this View, and the Exerciſes of their Love 
are wont from time to time to begin here, and to ariſe 
primarily from theſe Views; and then, conſequentilly, 
they ſee God's Love; and great Favour to them.] The 
Saint's Affections begin with God; and Self love has a 
hand in theſe A ffections conſequentially, and ſecondarih 
only. On the contrary, thoſe falſe Affections begin 
with ſelf, and an Acknowledgment of an Excellency 
in God, and an Affectedneſs with it, is only conſequen- 
tial and dependant. In the Love of the true Saint God 


is the loweſt Foundation; the Love of the Excellency 
of his Nature, is the Foundation of all the Affection 


which come afterwards, wherein Self-Love is concern'd 


as an Handmaid: On the contrary, the Hypocrite lays 


himſelf at the Bottom of all, as the firſt Foundation, 
and lays on God as the Superſtructure; and even his 
AcknoMedgement of God's Glory itſelf, depends on 
his Regard to his private Intereſt. 
Self Love may not only influence Men, fo as to cauſe 
them to be affected with God's Kindneſs to them ſepa- 
| | rately 


5 l 6c There is a ſeeing of Chriſt, after a Man beheves, which 
is Chriſt in his Love, &c. But I ſpeak of that firſt Sight 
* of ny wn 13 the ſecond Act of Faith; and tis an * 5 
Dor real Sight of him, as he is in his Glory.” Shepard's P 

ef the ten Virgins, Part I. pa. 74. Rag * 


fi 


* 7 n 


part III. of gracious Affection: 195 
rately; but alſo with God's Kindneſs to them, as Parts 
of a Community: As a natural Principle of Self-Love, 
without any other Principle, may be ſufficient to make 
a Man concerned for the Intereſt of the Nation to which 
he belongs: As for Inſtance, in the preſent War: Self- 
Love may make natural Men rejoice at the Succeſſes of 
gur Nation, and ſorry for their Diſadvantages, they 
being concerned as Members of the Body. So the ſame 
the natural Principles may extend further, and even to the 
hat World of Mankind, and might he affected with the 
ut Benefits the Inhabitants of the Earth have, beyond 
. thoſe of the Inhabitants of other Planets; if we knew 
ti- WW that ſuch there were, and knew how it was with them. 
ve So this Principle may cauſe Men to be affected with the 
ue Benefits that Mankind have received beyond the fallen 
„ Angels. And hence Men, from this Principle, may be 
be ¶ much affected with the wonderful Goodneſs of God to 
Mankind, his great Goodneſs in giving his Son to die 
ly bor fallen Man, and the marvellous Love of Chriſt in 
in ſuffering ſuch great Things for us, and with the great 
Cory they hear God has provided in Heaven for us; 
„booking on themſelves as Perſons concerned and inte- 
d Wi reſted, as being ſome of this Species of Creatures, ſo 
1" highly favour'd : The ſame Principle of natural Grati- 
nude may influence Man here, as in the Caſe of perſonal 
d benefits. — 55 | 

$ WH But theſe Things that I have ſaid do by no Means 
» Wh imply that all Gratitude to God is a meer natural Thing, 
aud that there is no ſuch Thing as a ſpiritual Gratitude, 
ich is a holy and divine Affection: They imply no 
more, than that there is a Gratitude which is meerly 
natural, and that when Perſons have Affections towards 
God only, or primarily for Benefits received, their 
Affection is only the Exerciſe of a natural Gratitude. 
There is doubtleſs fuch a Thing as a gracious Gratitude, 
which does greatly differ from all that Gratitude which 
natural Men experience. It differs in the following 


Reſpects: / 


1. True 


196 We fecond Sign 


1. True Gratitude or Thankfulneſs to God for his 
Kindneſs to us, ariſes from a Foundation laid before, gf 
Love to God for what he is in himſelf; whereas a natury 


o© ©& * 


Gratitude no ſuch antecedent Foundation. The 
gracious Stiffings of grateful Affection to God, foe 


Kindneſs received, always are from a Stock of Lone 


already in the Heart, eſtabliſhed in the firſt Place on 
other Grounds, viz. God's own Excellency; and hence 
the Aﬀections are diſpoſed to flow out, on Occaſions of 
God's Kindneſs. The Saint having ſeen the Glory of 
God, and his Heart overcome by it, and captivated int 
a ſupreme Love to him on that Account, his Hean 
hereby becomes render, and eaſily affected with Kind: 
neſſes received. If a Man has no Love to another, yet 
Gratitude may be moved by ſome extraordinary Kind- 
neſs; as in Saul towards David: But this is not the ſame 


Kind of Thing, as a Man's Gratitude to a dear Friend, 


that his Heart was before poſſeſs'd with a high Eſteem 
of, and Love to; whoſe Heart by this Means became 
tender towards him, and more eaſily affected with G. 
titude, and affected in another Manner. Self- Love i 
not excluded from a gracious Gratitude; the Saints loye 
God for his Kindneſs to them, Pſalm cxvi. 1. I love tht 
Lord, becauſe he hath heard the Voice of my Supplicatin 
But ſomething elſe is included; and another Love pre 
pares the Way, and lays the Foundation, for thek 
grateful Affections. 


2. In a gracious Gratitude, Men, are affected with} 


the Attribute of God*s Goodneſs and free Grace, not 
only as they are concerned in it, or as it affects ther 
Intereſt, but as a Part of the Glory and Beauty of Gods 
Nature. That wonderful and unparallel'd Grace of 
God, which is manifeſted in the Work of Redemption, 
and ſhines forth in the Face of Jeſus Chriſt, is infinitely 
glorious in itſelf, and appears ſo to the Angels; tnt 
great Part of the moral Perfection and Beauty of Gods 
Nature: This would be glorious, whether it were Fry: 
ci 


PART 1 


I — awe . ˙ —p ata Q qc. m ws ⅛mm wotts ©... S C©@=, onS 


ar Ui. of. gracious Aﬀettions. 197 


ed towards us or no; and the Saint who exerciſes 

| gracious Thankfulneſs for it, ſees it to be ſo, and 
leights in it as ſuch; tho? his Concern in it ſerves the 
more to engage his Mind, and raiſe the Attention and 
Aection; and Self-Love here aſliſts as an Handmaid, 
xing ſubſervient to higher Principles, to lead forth the 


» on Wind to the View and Con:emplartion, and engage and 
ener ar the Attention, and heighten the Joy and Love: 
s of W6od's Kindneſs to them is a Glaſs that God ſets before 


them, wherein to behold the Beauty of the Attribute of 
God's Goodneſs: The Exerciſes and Diſplays of this 
eart 8 this Means, are brought near to them, and 
nd: et right before them. So that in a holy Thankfulneſs 
yet o God, the Concern our Intereſt has in God's Good- 
nd-Wreſs, is not the firſt Foundation of our being affected 
me With it; that was laid in the Heart before, in that Stock 
nd, of Love which was to God, for his Excellency in him- 
em elf, that makes the Heart tender, and ſuſceptive of 

me ſuch Impreſſions from his Goodneſs to us: Nor is our 
n. on Intereſt, or the Benefits we have received, the only 
e 1s Worthe chief objective Ground of the preſent Exerciſes 
raf the Affection: but God's Goodneſs, as Part of the 


the WW Beauty of his Nature; although the Manifeſtations of 


on. MW that lovely Attribute, ſet immediately before our Eyes, 
rey i in the Exerciſes of it for us, be the ſpecial Occaſion of 
ee the Mind's Attention to that Beauty, at that Time, and 
ſerves to fix the Attention, and heighten the Affection. 

Some may perhaps be ready to object againſt the 
Whole that has been ſaid, that Text, John iv. 19. Ve 
love him becauſe be firſt loved us, as tho? this implied that 
God's Love to the true Saints were the firſ# Foundation 
of their Love to him. 

In Anſwer to this I would obſerve, that the Apoſtle's 
Drift in theſe Words, is to magnify the Love of God to 
us from hence, that he loved us, while we had no Love 
to him; as will be ' manifeſt to any one who. compares 
tis Verſe, and the two following, with the gth, 1oth, 
ad 11th Verſes. And that God loved us, * 1 


* 


198 be fecond Sign 
had no Love to him, the Apoſtle proves by this Atgiy 


| was ſaid before. 3. God's Love to a particular ele 


"Argument can be drawn from hence, againſt a ſpiritual 


to their Intereſt. 


their Joy, and ſpiritual Delight and Pleaſure ; the fit 


of their Intereſt in divine Things; but it primarily 


PART Hl, 


ft 
ment, that God's Love to the Elect, is the Ground q 
their Love to him. And that it is three War 
1. The Saints Love to God, is the Fruit of God's Loye 
to them; as it is the Gift of that Love. God gay 
them a Spirit of Love to him, becauſe he loved then 
from Eternity. And in this Reſpe& God's Love to his 
Elect is the firſt Foundation of their Love to him, a8 
1s the Foundation of their Regeneration, and the Whol 
of their Redemption. 2. The Exerciſes and Diſcoyes 
ries that God has made. of his wonderful Love to ſinfi] 
Men, by Jeſus Chriſt, in the Work of Redemption, 
is one of the chief Manifeſtations, which God has made 
of the Glory of his moral Perfection, to both Angel 
and Men; and ſo is one main objective Ground of the 
Love of both to God; in a good Conſiſtence with what 


PACm9o Cf e. 


— 
© 


PT RQRHB ww To ££ ky 5. 


Perſon, diſcovered by his Converſion, is a great Mani 
feſtation of God's moral Perfection and Glory to him, 
and a proper Occaſion of the Excitation of the Love 
of holy Gratitude, agreeable to what was before aid, 
And that the Saints do in theſe Reſpects love God, 
becauſe he firſt loved them, fully anſwers the Deſign of 
the Apoſtle's Argument in that Place. So that no good 


co run 


> =S 


and gracious Love in the Saints, ariſing primarily from 
the Excellency of divine Things, as they are in them- 
ſelves, and not from any conceived Relation they, bear 


And as it is with the Love of the Saints, ſo it is with 
Foundation of it is not any Confideration or Conception 


conſiſts in the ſweet Entertainment their Minds have it 

the View or Contemplation of the divine and holy Beauty 

of theſe Things, as they are in themſelves. And this} 

indeed the very main Difference between the Joy of the 

Hypocrite, and the Joy of the true Saint, The forme! 
| | oo rejoices 


Fe SS 5, r= eee 


Pr III. of gracious Affection. 199 7} 


W:cjoices in himſelf: Self is the firſt Foundation of his 
ſoy : The latter rejoices in God, The Hypocrite has 
bis Mind pleaſed and delighted, in the firſt Place, with 
bo Privilege, and the Happineſs which he ſuppoſes 
be has attained to, or ſhall attain to. True Saints have 
their Minds, in the firſt Place, inexpreſſibly pleaſed and 
jelighted with the ſweet Ideas of the glorious and amia- 
ble Nature of the Things of God. And this is the 
pring of all their Delights, and the Cream of all their 
Pleaſures : tis the Joy of their Joy. This ſweet and 
nviſhing Entertainment, they have in the View of the 
beautiful and delightful Nature of divine Things, is the 
Foundation of the Joy that they have afterwards in the 
Conſideration of their being theirs. But the Dependance 
f the Affections of Hypocrites is in a contrary Order: 
They firſt rejoice,” and are elevated with it, that they 
are made ſo much of by God; and then on that Ground 
he ſeems in a ſort lovely to them. EY 
The firſt Foundation of the Delight a true Saint has 
in God, is his own Perfection; and the firſt Foundation 
f the Delight he has in Chriſt, is his own Beauty; he 
appears in himſelf the Chief among Ten Thouſand, and 
altogether lovely : The Way of Salvation by Chriſt, 1s 
a delightful Way to him ; for the ſweet and admirable 
Manifeſtations of the divinè Perfections in it; the holy 
Doctrines of the Goſpel, by which God is exalted and 
Man abaſed, Holineſs honoured and promoted, and Sin 
greatly diſgraced and diſcouraged, and free and ſovereign 
Love manifeſted ; are glorious Doctrines in his Eyes, 
and ſweet to his Taſte, prior to any Conception of his 
Intereſt in theſe Things. Indeed the Saints rejoice in 
their Intereſt in God, and that Chriſt is their's; and ſo 
they have great Reaſon ; but this is not the firſt Wen | 
of their Joy : They firſt rejoice in Gog as glorious an 
excellent in himſelf, and then ſecondarily rejoice in it, 
that ſo glorious a God is their's: They firſt have their 
Hearts fill'd with Sweetneſs, from the View of Chriſt's 
Excellency, and the Excellency of his Grace, and the 
x pes. 2auty 


= RO / TFT SREFR5S £7 


TI RR 


> >» = —— — m__ — 


* 1 

* Ba 
2 
- 
2 

. 1 
* 
| * 


- 


. ” % 
„ 


1 


4 
1 MH 
* * 
= 
+ % 
* 


* | 5 * 8 N 2 2 . a: " * 5 ” ” * n bs "RF * v N * , =_ 
„ | a oy "I, 
200 The ſecond Sign PART 


Beauty o the Way of Salvation by him; and ther they 
have a ſecondary Joy, in that fo excellent a Saviour, and 


= = N 


uch excellent Grace is their's.* But that which is the 


- 


true Saint's S ructure, is the Hypocrite's Founds 
tion. When they hear of the wonderful Things of the 


Soſpel, of God's great Love in ſending his Son, of 


Chriſt's dying Love to Sinners, and the great Thing 


Chriſt has purchaſed, and promiſed to the Saints, and 


hear thele Things livelily and eloquently fet forth; they 


may hear with a great deal of Pleaſure, and be lifted 


up with what they hear; but if their Joy be examined, 


it will be found to have no other Foundation than this, 


that they took upon theſe Things as their's, all thi 


exalts them, they love to hear of the great Love of 


Chriſt ſo vaſtly diſtinguiſhing ſome from others; for 
| - Self-Love, and even Pride itſeif, makes them affect 
geiteat Diſtinction from others: No Wonder, in this 


confident Opinion of their own good Eſtate, that they 
feel well under ſuch Doctrine, and are pleaſed in the 
1 75 | . Higheſt 


+. Ac 1 . —_ * . 


Pr. Oxven, on THE SPIRIT, Page 19 ſpeakin of a common 
Work of the Spirit, ſays, The Effects of this Work on the Mind, 


++ which is the firſt Subject affected with it, proceeds not fo far, u 


< to give it Delight, Comptacency and Satisfa ibn in the lovely 


40 ſpiritual Nature and Excellencies of the Things reveated unto it. 


« The true Nature of ſaving Illumination conſiſts in this, that it 
1% gives the Mind ſuch a direct intuitive Infight and Proſpect into 
„ ſpiritual Things, as that in their own ſpiritual Nature they fuit, 
«« pleaſe, and ſatisfy it; ſo that it is transformed into them, caſt into 


„the Mould of them, and reſts in them; Rom. vi. 17. Chap. xi. 


« 2, 1 Cor. ii. 13, 14. 2 Cor. iii. 18. Chap, iv. 6. This, the Work 


n we have inſiſted on, reacheth not unto. Far notwithſtanding an 


.- « Diſcovery that is made therein of ſpiritual Things unto the Mind, 
it finds not an immediate, direct, ſpiritual Excellency in them; 
* hut only with eee pr unto-ſome Benefit or Advantage, which 
to be attained by Means thereof. It will not give ſuch a 22 


Inſight into the myſtery of God's Grace by Jeſus Chriſt, c 

„Glory ſhining in the Face of Chriſt, 1 Cor. iv. 6, as that the Soul 
« in its firſt direct View of it, ſhould, for what it is in itſelf, admure 
« it, delight in it, approve it, and fink piritual Solace; with Re- 


- « freſhment in it. But ſuch a Light, ſuch a Knowledge, it comm® 


4, iv x a4. 


«« nicates, as that a Man may like it well in its EffeQs, as a Way d 
% Merey and Salvation.“ n | | 


* ) ae ing we Soar x 4 


pair III. ; of gracious Affection. FOX: 1 
kigheſt Degree, in hearing how much God and Chriſt 


makes of them. So that their Joy is really a Joy in 
; themſelves, and not in God. * 


0 And becauſe the Joy of Hypocrites is in themſelves, 
bence it comes to paſs, that in their Rejoicings and 
of Flevations, they are wont to keep their Eye upon them- 


ſelves; having received what they call ſpiritual Diſcove- 
ines or Experiences, their Minds are taken up about 
chem, admiring their own Experiences: And what they 
2+ principally taken and elevated with, is not the Glory 
ea of God, or Beauty of Chriſt, but the Beauty of their 
ed, Experiences. They keep thinking with themſelves, 
What a good Experience is this! What a great Diſco- 
very is this! What wonderful Things have I met with! 
And ſo they put their Experiences in the Place of Chriſt, 


5 and his Beauty and Fullneſs; and inſtead of rejoicing in 
5 Chriſt Jeſus, they rejoice in their admirable Experiences; 


iaſtead of feeding and feaſting their Souls in the View 
. of what is without them, viz. the innate, ſweet, re- 
* freſhing Amiableneſs of the Things exhibited in the 
WH Goſpel, their Eyes are off from theſe Things, or at 
on WW caſt they view them only as it were Side-ways; but the 
Object that fixes their Contemplation, is their Experi- 
ence; and they are feeding their Souls, and feaſting a 
ſelfiſh Principle with a View of their Diſcoveries: They 
take more Comfort in their Diſcoveries than in Chriſt 
diſcovered, which is the true Notion of living upon 
Experiences and Frames; and not a uſing Experiences 
as the Signs, on which they rely for Evidence of their 
good Eſtate, which ſome call living on Experiences : 
Tho! it be very obſervable, that ſome of them who do 
ſo, are moſt notorious for living upon Experiences, ac- 
cording to the true Notion of it. | 

The Affections of Hypocrites are very often after 
this Manner; they are firſt, much affected with ſome 
Impreſſion on their Imagination, or ſome Impulſe, 
which they take to be an immediate Suggeſtion, or 
Teſtimony from God, of his Love and their Happt- | 
2 neſs 


208 de ſecond Sign Part Wl 


neſs, and high Privilege in ſome Reſpect, either with 
or without a Text of Scripture ; they are mightily taken 
with this, as a great Diſcovery; and hence ariſe high 
Affections. And when their Affections are raiſed, then 
they view thoſe high Affections; and call them great 
and wonderful Experiences; and they have a Notion 
that God is greatly pleaſed with thoſe Affections; and 
this affects them more; and fo they are affected with 
their Affections. And. thus their Affections riſe higher 
and higher, till they ſometimes are perfectly ſwallowed 
up: And Self- conceit, and a fierce Zeal riſes withal; 
and all is byils like a Caſtle in the Air, on no other 
Foundation but Imagination, Self- iuve and Pride. 
And as the Thoughts of this Sort of Perſons are, ſo 
is their Talk; for out of the Abundance of their 
Heart, their Mouth ſpeaketh. As in their high Aﬀec. 
tions, they keep their Eye upon the Beauty of their 
Experiences, and Greatneſs of their Attainments; fo 
they are great Talkers about themſelves. The true 
Saint, when under great ſpiritual Affections, from the 
 Fulneſs of his Heart, is ready to be ſpeaking much of 
God, and his glorious Perfections and Works, and of 
the Beauty and Amiableneſs of Chriſt, and the glorious 
Things of the Goſpel; but Hypocrites, in their high 
Affections, talk more of the. Diſcovery, than they do 
of the Thing diſcovered; they are full of Talk about 
the great Things they have met with, the wonderful 
Diſcoveries they have had, how fure they are of the 
Love of God to them, how ſafe their Condition is, and 
how they know they ſhall go to Heaven, & c. 1 
A true Saint, when in the Enjoyment of true Diſco- 
veries of the ſweet Glory of God and Chriſt, has his 
Mind too much captivated and engaged by what he 
views without himſelf, to ſtand at that Time to view 
himſelf, and his own Attainments; it would be a Diver- 
fion and Loſs which he could not bear, to take his Eye 
off from the raviſhing Object of his Contemplation, to 
ſfurvey his on Experience, and to ſpend Time in 


a 


— 
* . 


jn. . ]⅛¾ Ü—ͤ———— ² ».. 


KA FAS = S 


PART 11. 5 Aﬀettion: 203 


thinking with himſelf, what an high Attainment thisis, | 
2 a good Story I now have to tell others. .. 
does the Pleaſure and Sweetneſs of his Mind at that; 
Time, chiefly ariſe from the Conſideration of the Safety 
of his State, _ Thing he has in View of his own 
Qualifications, Experiences, or Circumſtances; but from. 
the divine and ſupreme Beauty of what is the Object of 
his direct View, without himſelf; which perl nter 
tuns, and ſtrongly holds bis Mind. 

As the Love = Jo 1 Hypocrit es, are 1 
Source of Self- love; ſo it is with their other Affectidns, 
cheir Sorrow for Sin, their Humiliation and Submiſſigh, 
their Religious Deſires and Zeal: Every Thing is as dt 


were paid for before-hand, in God's/bighly En e 
their delf· love, and their Luſts, by making fo much « 
them, and exalring them ſo N as Things 

their Imagination. Tis gaſy for Nature, — 

it 8s, under a. Notion of being already ſome Fg 
tigheft Favourites af Heaven, Jan having a God who, 


does fo protect them and favour them in their Sins; to 
love this ĩmaginary God that ſuits chem ſo well, ande 


extol him, and ſubmit: to him, and to be fierce; and 


zealous for him. The high Affretions of many are ll 
built on the Suppoſition of their being eminent Saints? 
If that Opinion which they have of themſelres were: 
taken away, if they thought they were ſome ef thei 
lower Form of Saints, (tho they ſhould yet ſuppoſe 
themſelves to be real Saints) their high Affections would 
fall to the Ground. If they only ſaw a little of the 
Siafulneſs and Vileneſs of Heir own Hearts, and their: 
Deformity, in the Midſt of their beſt Duties, and their 
beſt Affections; it would knock their Affections on the 
Head; becauſe their Affections are built upon Self, 
therefore, Self knowledge would deſtroy them. But as: 
o truly gracious Affections, they are built elſewhere: 
they have their Foundation out of Self, in God and 


Jeſus Chriſt; and therefore a Diſcovery of themſelves,” 


of their „ SANA", and the. Meanneſs af their 
O 2 Experiences 1 


204 Tue third Sign, Par Ill 


: ror deft tho' it will purify their Affections, yet it 
not deſtroy A” Dirt in ſome Pn n 5 


ten them. 


V. 281. ö 0 
5 UI. Thoſe AﬀeRions that are truly holy, pt 
rity founded on the Lovelineſs of the moral Excellency 
of divine Things Or, (to expreſs it otherwiſe) à Love 
to divine Things for the Beauty and Sweetneſs of their 
moral Excellency, is the firſt Beginning and: Spring of 
all holy : Affectlons-. ee 
Here, for the Sake of the more * Reader, | 
will explain what Lean . 9 the moral Excellency: of 
divine Things. =F1=< 
And it may be obſerved, tharthe Word Moral is not 
ch bPunderficed. kere, according to the common and 
vulgar Acceptation of the Word, when Men ſpeak of 
Moray, and a'moral Behaviour; meaning an outward 
Sonformity to the Duties of the moral Law, and eſpe- 
6ially the Duties of the ſecond Table; or intending no 
more at fartheſt; than ſuch ſeeming Vertues, as proceed 
For natural Principles, in Oppoſition: to thoſe Vertues 
that are more inward, ſpiritual, ' and divine; as the Ho- 
ho . Juſtice; Generolity, Good- nature, and publick 
tf many of the Heathens are called moral Ver- 
on] in Diftir ion fromthe Holy Faith, Love, | Humi- 
and Heavenly-mindedneſs of true Chriſtians: I 
3 Moral! is not to be underſtood thus 1 1n this 


Zut in order to a tight Underſtanding what is meatit, 
it muſt be obſerved, that Divines commonly make a 
Diſtinction between moral Good and Evil; and natural 
Good and Evil. By moral Evil, they mean the Evil 
of Sin, or that Evil which is againſt Duty, and contrary 
to what is right and ought to be. By natural Evil, they 
don't mean that Evil which is properly oppoſed to 
Duty; but that which is contrary to meer Nature, 
without any Reſpect to a Rule of Duty. So the Evil 
of ee! is called natural En ſuch as Pain, and 
Torment 


Parr III. e "gracious Afecbimm. 20g 
Torment, Diſgrace, and the like: Theſe Things are 


contrary to meer Nature, contrary: to the Nature of 
both bad and good, hateful to wicked Men and Devils, 


-as well as good Men and Angels. So likewiſe natural 


Defects are called natural Evils, as if a Child be mon- 
ſtrous, or a natural Fool; theſe are natural Evils, but 
are not moral Evils, becauſe they have not properly the 
Nature of the Evil of Sin. On the other Hand, as 
by moral Evil, Divines mean the Evil of Sin, or that 
which is contrary to what is right; ſo by moral Good, 
they mean that which is contrary to Sin, or that Good 
in Beings who have Will and Choice, hereby as volun- 
tary Agents, they are, and act, as it becomes them to 
be and to act, or ſo as is moſt fit, and ſuitable, and 
lovely. By natura! Good they mean that Gogd that is 
entirely of a different Kind from Holineſs or Vertue, 
viz, That which perfects or ſuits Nature, conſidering 


Nature abſtrattly from any holy or unholy Qualifica- 


tions, and without any Relation to any Rule or Meaſure 
of Right and Wrong. "4p | 
Thus Pleaſure is a natural Good; ſo is Honour; ſo is 
Strength; ſo is ſpeculative Knowledge, human Learning, 
and Policy. Thus there is a Diſtinction to be made 
between the natural Good that Men are poſſeſſed of, and 
ther moral Good; and alſo between the natural and 


moral Good of the Angels in Heaven: the great Capa- 


city of their Underſtandings, and their great Strengeh, 
and the honourable Circumſtances they are in as the great 
Miniſters of God's Kingdom, whence othey are called 
Thrones, Dominions, Principalities, and Powers, is 
the natural Good which they are poſſeſſod of i but their 
perfect and glorious Holineſs and Gdodntſa, their pure 
and flaming Love to Gôd, and to the Shints, and obe 
another, is their moral Good.” So Divihts.make a Diſt 
tinction between the natural and moral Perfections af 
Cod: By the moral Perfections of God, they meaß 
thoſe” Attributes which God exerciſes as a moral Agent, 


or whereby che Heart ot Will of God are good, = 
5 Re 781 55 81 a7 þ rs of on ef | tt 


206 mie third Sign PART INI. 
and'infinitely becoming, and lovely; ſuch as his Righte. 
outneſs, Truth, F aichfülnel, and Goodneſs; or, in one 
Word, his Holineſs. By God's natural Attributes or 
Perfections, they mean thoſe Attributes, wherein, ac- 
cording to our Way of conceiving of God, conſiſtz, 
not the Holineſs or moral Goodneſs of God, but his 
Greatneſs; ſuch as his Power, his Knowledge whereby 
he knows all Things, and his being eternal, from ever. 
laſting to everlaſting ; his Omnipreſence, and his awful 
and terrible Majeſty. 5.67 I 
The moral Excellency of an intelligent voluntary 
Being, is more immediately ſeated in the Heart or Will 
of moral Agents. That intelligent Being whoſe Will 
is truly right and lovely, he is morally or excellent. 
This moral Excellency of an intelligent Being, when 
it is true and real, and not only external, or meerly 
ſeeming and counterfeit, is Holineſs. Therefore Holi- 
neſs comprehendd · all the true moral Excellency of intel. 
ligent Beings: There is no other true Vertue, but real 
Holineſs. Holineſs comprehends all the true. Vertue of 
a good Man, his Love to God, his gracious Loye to 
Men, his Juſtice, his Charity, and Bowels of Mercies, 
his gracious ' Meekneſs and Gentleneſs, and all other 
true Chriſtian Vertues that he has, belong to his Holi- 
neſs. So the Holineſs of God in the more extenſive 
Senſe of the Word, and the Senſe in which the Word is 
commonly, if not univerſally uſed concerning God in 
Scripture, is the ſame with the moral Excellency of the 
divine Nature, or his Purity and Beauty, as a moral Agent, 
domprehending all his moral Perfections, his Righteoul- 
neſs, Faithfulneſs and Goodneſs, As in holy Men their 
Charity, chriſtian Kindneſs and Mercy, belongs to their 
Holineſs; ſo the Kindneſs and Mercy of God belongs to 
His Holineſs. Holineſs in Man, is but the Image of God's 
Holineſs: There are not more Vertues belonging to the 
Image, than ate in the Original: Nerived Holineſs has not 
more in it, chan is in that underived Holineſs, which is its 
Fountain: There i no morethm Grace far Grace; or Grace 


inthe Image, anſwerable toGraceinthe Original. As 


** " * _ Py 


ing to our Way of conceiving of him, his moral Attri- 


pan T III. of graciaus Affectiaus. 207 
As there are two Kinds of Attributes in God, accord- 


butes, which are ſumm'd up in his Hokneſs, and his 
natural Attributes, of Strength, Knowledge, c. that 
conſtitute the Grea#ne/s of God; ſo there is a twofold 
Image of God in Man, bis moral or ſpiritual Image, 
which is his Holinefs, that is the Image of God's moral 
Excellency; (which Image was loſt by the Fall) and 
God's natural Image, conſiſting in Men's Reaſon and 
Underſtanding, his natural Ability, and Dominion over 
the Creatures, which is the Image of God's natural 
Attributes. p 
From what has been ſaid, it may eaſily be underſtood 
what I intend, when I ſay, that a Love to divine Things 
for the Beauty of their moral Excellency, is the Beginning 
and Spring of all holy Affections. It has been already 
ſhown, under the former Head, that the firſt objective 
Ground of all holy Affections is the ſupreme Excellency 
of divine Things, as they are in themſelves, or in their 
own Nature; I now proceed further, and ſay more par- 
ticularly, that that Kind of Excellency of the Nature 
of divine Things, which is the firſt objective Ground-of 
all holy Affections, is their moral Excellency, or their 
Holinefs. Holy Parſons, in the Exerciſe of holy Afec- 
tions, do love divine Thin gs prim arily for their Holineſs: 
They love God, in the firſt Place, for the Beauty of 
his Holinefs or moral Perfection, as being, ſupremely 
amiable in 1tſelf. Not that the Saints, in the Exerciſe 
of gracious Affections, do love God only for his Holi- 
els; all his Attributes are amiable and glorious in their 
Eyes; they delight in every divine Perfection; the Con- 
templation of the infinite Greatneſs, Power and Know-) 
ledge, and terrible Majeſty of God, is pleaſant to them. 
But their Love to God for his Holineſs is what is moſt/ 
fundamental and eſſential in their Love. Here it 18: 
that true Love to God begins: All other holy Love to 
Uvine Things flows from hence: This is the moſt eſſen- 
tal and; diſtinguiſhing Thing that belongs: to 4 holy 


208 © The third Sign Par MI, 
Love to God, with Regard to the Foundation of it. 
A Love to God for the Beauty of his moral Attributes, 
leads to, and neceffarily cauſes a Delight in God for al 
his Attributes; for his moral Attributes can't be without 
his natural Attributes : For infinite Holineſs ſuppoſes 
infinite Wiſdom, and an infinite Capacity and Great. 
| neſs; and all the Attributes of God do as it were imply 
| one another. 

The true Beauty and Lovelineſs of all intelligen 
Beings does primarily and moſt eſſentially conſiſt in their 
moral Excellency or Holineſs. Herein conſiſts the 
Lovelineſs of the Angels, without which, with all their 
natural Perfections, their Strength, and their Kiow: 
ledge, they would have no more Lovelineſs than Devils. 
Tis moral Excellency alone, that is in itſelf, and on it's 
own Account, the Excellency of intelligent Beings: 
Tis this that gives Beauty to, or rather is the Beauty 
of their natural Perfections and Qualifications. -Moral 
Excellency is the Excellency of natural Excellencies, 
Natural Qualifications are either excellent or otherwiſe, 


according as they are join'd with moral Excellency or 


not. Strength and Knowledge don't render any Being 
lovely, without Holineſs; but more hateful: Though 
they render them more lovely, when join'd with Holi- 
neſs. Thus the elect Angels are the more glorious for 
their Strength and Knowledge, becauſe theſe natural 
Perfections of their's, are ſanctified by their moral Per- 
fection. But though the Devils are very ſtrong, and of 
great natural Underſtanding, they ben't — more lovely: 
They are more terrible indeed, but not the more amia- 
blez but on the contrary, the more hateful. The Holineſs 
of an intelligent Creature, is the Beauty of all his natu- 
ral Perfections. And ſo it is in God, according to our 
Das of conceiving of the divine Being : : Holineſs is in 
a peculiar Manner the Beauty of the divine Nature. 
Hence we often read of the Beauty of Holineſs; P/al. 
xXix. 2. Pſal. xcvi. g. and cx. 3. This renders all his 
| other Acruibages glorious and lovely. Tis the 805 of 


a a a> wy a; ay ts 


FT RET ͤ ooo ms ww ww = 


bud w_— x 7 8, ev i 2D 


Part III. 


of gracious Affection. 209 
God's Wiſdom, that *tis a holy Wiſdom, and not a 
wicked Subtilty and Craftine!s. This makes his Majeſty 
lovely, and not merely dreadful and horrible, that it is 
z holy Majeſty, Tis the Glory of God's Immutability, 
that it is a holy Immutability, and not an inflexible 
Obſtinacy in Wickedneſs. 22, 3h 

And therefore it muſt needs be, that a Sight of God's 
Lovelineſs muſt begin here. A true Love to God muſt 
begin with a Delight in his Holineſs, and not with a 
Delight in any other Attribute; for no other Attribute is 
truly lovely without this, and no otherwiſe than as (ac- 
cording to our Way of conceiving of God) it derives 
its Lovelineſs from this; and therefore it is impoſſible 
that other Attributes ſhould appear lovely, in their true 
Lovelineſs, *till this is ſeen; and it is impoſſible that 
any Perfection of the divine Nature ſhould be loved 
with true Love, till this is loved. If the true Loveli- 
neſs of all God's Perfections, ariſes from the Lovelineſs 
of his Holineſs, then the true Love of all his Perfections, 
ariſes from the Love of his Holineſs. They that don't 
ſe the Glory of God's Holineſs, can't ſee any Thing 
of the true Glory of his Mercy and Grace: They ſee 
nothing of the Glory of thoſe Attributes, as any Excel- 
lency of God's Nature, as it is in itſelf; tho* they may 
be affected with them, and love them, as they concern 
their Intereſt: For theſe Attributes are no Part of the Ex- 
cellency of God's Nature, as that is excellent in itſelf, any 
otherwiſe than as they are included in his Holineſs, more 
largely taken; or as they are a Part of his moral Perfection. 

As the Beauty of the divine Nature does primarily con- 
ſift in God's Holineſs, ſo does the Beauty of all divine 
Things. Herein conſiſts the Beauty of the Saints, that 
they are Saints, or holy Ones: Tis the moral Image of 
God in them, which is their Beauty, and that is their 
Holineſs. Herein conſiſts the Beauty and Brightneſs of 
the Angels of Heaven, that they are holy Angels, and 
ſo not Devils; Dan. iv. 13, 17, 23. Matth. xxv. 31. 
Mark viii. 38. As x. 22. Rev. xiv. 10. * con- 
iſts 


l The third Sign PART Ill. 


ſiſts the Beauty of the chriſtian Religion, above ll 
other Religions, that it is ſo holy a Religion. Herein 
conſiſts the Excellency of the Word of God, that it is 
ſo holy; Pal. cxix. 140. Thy Word is very pure, there. 
fore thy Servant loveth it. Verſe 128. J eſteem all th 
Precepts, concerning all Things, to be right; and I bat: 
every falſe Way. Verſe 138. Thy Teſtimonies, that thay 
haſt commanded, are righteons, and very faithful. And 
172. My Tongue ſhall ſpeak of thy Word, for all th 
Commandments are Righteouſneſs. And Pſal. xix. 7, 8, 
9, 10. The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the 
Soul: The Teſtimony of the Lord is ſure, making wiſe the 
Simple: The Statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing the 
Heart : The Commanament of the Lord is pure, enlipht- 
ning the Eyes: The Fear of the Lord is clean, enduring 
forever : The Judgments of the Lord are true, and righ- 
feous altogether : More to be deſired are they than Gold, 
yea, than much fine Gold; ſweeter alſo than Honey, and 
the Honey-Comb, Herein does primarily conſiſt the 
Amiableneſs and Beauty of the Lord Jeſus, whereby 
he is the Chief among ten Thouſands and altogether 
lovely; even in that he is the boly One of God, Acts ii. 
14. and God's holy Child, Acts iv. 27. and be that is 
Holy, and he that is true, Rev. iii. 7. All the fpiritual 
Beauty of his human Nature, conſiſting in his Meekneſs, 
Lowlineſs, Patience, Heavenlineſs, Love to God, Love 
to Men, Condeſcenſion to the Mean and Vile, and 
Compaſſion to the Miſerable, &c. all is fumm'd up in 
his Holineſs. And the Beauty of his divine Nature, of 
which the Beauty of his humane Nature is the Image 
and Reflection, does alſo primarily conſiſt in his Holi- 
neſs, Herein primarily conſiſts the Glory of the Goſ- 
pel, that it is a holy Goſpel, and ſo bright an Emanation 
of the holy Beauty of God and. Jeſus Chriſt: Herein 
conſiſts the ſpiritual Beauty of it's Doctrines, that 
they are holy Doctrines, or Doctrines according to God- 
lineſs. And herein does conſiſt the ſpiritual Beauty of 
the Way af Salvation by Jeſus Chriſt, that it ſo holy 
R 4 


ParT III. of gracious Affections. 211 


2 Way. And herein chiefly conſiſts the Glory of Hea- 
ven, that it is the holy City, the holy Jeruſalem," the 
Habitation of God's Holineſs, and fo of his Glory , Iſai. 
Ixiii, 15. All the Beauties of the new Ferufalem, as is 
deſcribed in the two laſt Chapters of Revelation, are 
but various Repreſentations of this: See. Chap. xxi. 2, 
10, 11. 18, 21, 27. Chap. xxii. 1, 3. N 

And therefore it is primarily on Account of this Kind 
of Excellency, that the Saints do love all theſe Things. 
Thus they love the Word of God, becauſe. it is very 
pure. *Tis on this Account they love the Saints; and 
on this Account chiefly it is, that Heaven is lovely to 
them, and thofe holy Tabernacles of God amiable in 
their Eyes: Tis on this Account that they love God; 
and on this Account primarily it is, that they love 
Chriſt, and that their Hearts delight in the Doctrines of 
the Goſpel, and ſweetly acquieſce in the Way of Salva- 
tion therein revealed.* 

Under the Head of the firſt diſtinguiſhing Character- 
iſtick of gracious Affection, I obſerved Gat there is 
given to thoſe that are regenerated, a new ſupernatural 
Senſe, that is, as it were a certain divine ſpiritual Taſte, 
which is in its whole Nature diverſe from any former 
Kinds of Senſation of the Mind, as Taſting is diverſe 
from any of the other five Senſes, and that ſomething 
is perceived by a true Saint in the Exerciſe of this new 

Senſe 


To the right cloſing with Chriſt's Perſon, this is alſo required, 
* to taſte the Bitterneſs of Sin, as the greateſt Evil: Elſe a Man will 
never cloſe with Chriſt, for his Holineſs in bim, and from him, as 
the greateſt Good. For we told you, that that is the right Cloſiug 
«* with Chriſt for himſelf, when it is for his Holineſs. For aſk a 
* whoriſh Heart, what Beauty he ſees in the Perſon of Chriſt ; he 
will, after he has looked over his Kingdom, his Righteouſneſs, 
* all his Works, ſee a Beauty in them, becauſe they do ſerve his 
Turn, to comfort him only. Aſk a Virgin, he will ſee his Happi- 
* neſs in all; but that which makes the Lord amiable, is his Holineſs ; 
„which is in him to make him holy too. As in Marriage, it is the 
4 _— Beauty draws the Heart. And hence I have thought it 
" Reaſon, that he that loves the Brethren for a little Grace, will love 


" Chriſt much more.” Shepard's Parable, P. I. p. 84. 


212 We third Sign Paxr H 
Senſe of Mind, in ſpiritual and divine Things, as intireh the 
different from any Thing that is perceived in them hy an 
natural Men, as the ſweet Taite of Honey is divert“ 
from the Ideas Men get of Honey by looking on it o M 
feeling of it; now this that I have been ſpeaking, vz Gt 
The Beauty of Holineſs is that Thing in ſpiritual and l 

divine Things, which is perceived by this ſpiritual Senſe, M/: 
that is ſo diverſe from all that natural Men perceive in 
them: This Kind of Beauty is the Quality that is the 
immediate Object of this ſpiritual Senſe: This is the © 
Sweetneſs that is the proper Object of this ſpintuil 
Taſte. The Scripture often repreſents the Beauty and 
Sweetneſs of Holineſs as the grand Object of a ſpirituil 
Taſte, and ſpiritual Appetite. This was the ſweet 
Food of the holy Soul of Jeſus Chriſt, John iv. 22, 
34. 1 have Meat to eat, that ye know not of : = My Met 
ts to do the Will of him that ſent me, and to finiſh his 
Work. I know of no Part of the holy Scriptures, 
where the Nature and Evidences of true and ſincere 
Godlineſs, are ſo much of ſet Purpoſe, and ſo fully and 
largely inſiſted on and delineated, as the cxix Pſalm; 
the Pſalmiſt declares his Deſign in the firſt Verſes of 
the Pſalm, and he keeps his Eye on this Deſign all along 
and purſues it to the End: But in this Pſalm the Excel. 
lency of Holineſs is repreſented as the immediate Object 
of a ſpiritual Taſte, Reliſh, Appetite and Delight, Gud's 
Law, that grand Expreſſion and Emanation of the 
Holineſs of God's Nature, and Preſcription of Hol: 
neſs to the Creature, is all along repreſented as the Food 
and Entertainment, and as the great Object of the Love, 
the Appetite, the Complacence and Rejoicing of the 
gracious Nature, which prizes God's Commandments 
above Gold, yea, the fineſ# Gold, and to which they arc 
feveeter than the Honey, and Honey-comb; and that u 

Account of their Holineſs, as I obſerved before. The 
fame Plalmiſt declares, that this is the Sweetneſs that 3 
ſpiritual Taſte reliſhes in God's Law; Pſal. xix. 8, 9, 10. 
The Law of the Lord is perfett:—Tha Commandment f 

| | 1 


kT III. 2 = = 
: a * , 4 | 
Statutes of the 7. The Fear of h 4 213 
erke 7 udpments of ord are right ne Lord is PI | 
e #2 be 4% be Lord are true rejoicing the eg : The 
diz. oy 1 ſweel er "© — ec they t 1 — bteous — 
h ha n 5 ; 2 
n dat which? elpecially in 4 bje&: The Holir 4 * 
the tis the H — ho 5, 28 hol is, that it is ch olineſs of 
folineſs of y, or for it the Love 
ual needs love - and SS t, which is th s; ſo that 
nd agreeabl that in holy T wes. An hol e Qualit | 
ual which abo but ſurel efly, which i muſt 
H . ve all oth > cry that . 3 þ uch is m 
cet olineſs; be ers 18 in divine ö oſt 
Thi * cauſe Holt: agreeable to h = bp Thin 8 
I ngs agreeab ineſs m oly N 875 
eat apreeable to le tO Holineſs Py ſt be above . 18 
bis be above all any Nature th > cor nothing c other 
the h | Thin * an itſelf; hol an be more 
NOLY Nature agreeable t y. Natu | 
— ypre 212 chi Nature: And fo 
. 7 52 e holy N bove all 
And again Is | ature that 1 other 
* ſpecial n holy Natur | eps 
which chi has Enmi count of th oves hol 
ch chiefly ſinful Þ ity againſt at, for whi 4 
Things, is the: ul Nature 1 them : But r which 
Mind 18 En ell Holineſs; oe at Enmity 2 at that for 
God, and x wa againſt God: for this, Ob holy 
from Contr People of God Ks againſt h © carnal 
We know that Beine We ee arguing 
to Wickedneſs: olineſs is of a a1 o oppoſite Te 3 
neſs chiefly t 3: As therefore ti irectly contra ndencies, 
the Nature o oppole and e 'tis the Natu ry Nature 
ture of Holin hate Hol. ture of Wi 
in Holineſs olineſs chief olineſs; ſo 1 icked- 
1 Nature i , and deli 
cre the t in the Sai | light 
pally engaged | Tendency of nts and Angels 
| by the Holineſs * appears in Herren 
of divine non is princi- 
15 


. 
— 
ä 
— 2 
= — 
— —_—_— . — _ 


. ³˙·wk⁴̃ʃʃẽ ̃ •˙w; 7 Ä⁰ůn.n ,,,, , et Oe 
* 


214 | "The third Sign Pari 


is the divine Beauty which chiefly engages the Attention 
Admiration and Praiſe of the bright and burning Sers. 
Pbim; Iſai. vi. 3. One cried unto another, and ſaid, Hoh, 
Holy, Hely is the Lord of Heſts, the whole Earth is ful 
F his Glory. And Rev. iv. 8. They reſt not Day and 
Night, faying, Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God Almighq, 
<ohich was, and is, and is to come. So the glorified 
Saints, Chap. xv. 4. bo ſhall not fear thee, O Lord 
and 'plorify thy' Name, for thou only art Holy! © © 
And the Scriptures repreſent the Saints on Earth a; 
adoring God primarily on this Account, and admiring 
and extolling all God's Attributes, either as deriving 
Lovelineſs from his Holineſs, or as being a Part of it, 
Thus when they praiſe God for his Power, his Holineſs 
is the Beauty that engages them; Pſal. xcviii. x, 0 
fins unto the Lord a new Song, for be hath donemarovethy 
Things; his right Hand and bis hol Arm bath gotin 
him the Victory. So when they praiſe him for his Juſtice 
and terrible Majeſty; Pſal. xcix. 2, 3. The Lord is great 
in Zion, and be is high above all People: Let them praiſt 
thy great and terrible Nume, for it is noLy. Verſe, 
Exalt ye the Lord our God, and worſhip at bis Footſtoo|, 
for be is noLy. Verſe 8, 9. Thou waſt a God that fer. 
gaveſt them, though thou tookeſt Vengeance of their Invm- 
tions. Exalt ye the Lord our God, and worſhip at his 
holy Hill, for the Lord our God is HOLY. So when they 
praiſe God for his Mercy and Faithfulneſs; Pal. xcvi. 
11, 12. Light is ſown for the Righteous, and Gladns 
for the Upright in Heart, Rejoice in the Lord ye Righ- 
teous, and 'give Thanks at the Remembrance of his HoLi- 
NESS. 1 Sam ii. 2. There is none HOLY &s the Lord; fer 
there is none beſide thee, neither is there any Rock like our 
Ged. 3 * 

By this therefore all may try their Affections, and 
particularly their Love and Joy. Various Kinds of 
Creatures ſhew the Difference of their Natures, very 
much, in the different Things they reliſh as their proper 


Good, one delighting in that which another abhors. 


Such 


ee A ww Oo &t © =$=© Py FO (lb, CC B anhþDd BON © =. CO 5 wndl 


— — — wy — wy ey — 82 — 


KY XS 


rr ee ee 


* — 00 


ParT III. of gracious Affection. | 215 * 


duch a Difference is there between true Saints, and 
zatural Men: Natural Men have no Senſe of the Good- 
refs and Excellency of holy Things; at leaſt for their 
Holineſs; they have no Taſte of that Kind of Good; 
and ſo may be ſaid not to know that divine Good, or not 
to ſee it; it is wholly hid from them: But the Saints, by 
the mighty Power of God, have it diſcovered to them: 
They have that ſupernatural, moſt noble and divine 
Senſe given them, by which they perceive it: And it is 
this that captivates their Hearts, and delights them 
above all Things; *tis the moſt amiable and ſweet 
Thing to the Heart of a true Saint, that is to be found 
in Heaven or Earth; that which above all others attracts 
and engages his Soul; and that wherein, above all 
Things, he places his Happineſs, and which he lots 
Fen, Solace and Entertainment to his Mind, in this 
World, and full Satisfaction and Bleſſedneſs in another. 

this you may examine your Love to God, and to 
Jeſus Chriſt, and to the Word of God, and your Joy 
in them, and alſo your Love to the People of God, 
and your Deſires after Heaven; whether they be from a 
ſupreme Delight in this Sort of Beauty, without being 
primarily moved from your imagined Intereſt in them, 
or Expectations from them. There are many high 
Affections, great ſeeming Love and rapturous Joys 
d have nothing of this holy Reliſh. belonging to 
them. | 

Particularly, By what has been ſaid you may try 
your Diſcoveries of the Glory of God's Grace and Love, 
and your Affections ariſing from them. The Grace of 
God may appear lovely two Ways; either as Bonum 
Utile, a profitable Good to me, that which greatly ſerves 
my Intereſt, and ſo ſuits my Self-Love; or as Bonum 
formoſum, a Beautiful Good in itſelf, and Part of the 
moral and ſpiritual Excellency of the divine Nature. 
In this latter Reſpect it is that the true Saints have their 
Hearts affected, and Love captivated by the free Grace 
of God in the firſt Place. | 

From 


216. F hrt n p 


From the Things that have been ſaid, it appear, 
that if Perſons have a great Senſe of the natural Per. 
tections of God, and are greatly affected with them, or 
have any other Sight or Senſe of God, than that which 
conſiſts in, or implies a Senſe of the Beauty of his mor 
Perfections; it is no certain Sign of Grace: As pati. 
cularly, Men's having a great Senſe of the awful Great. 
neſs, and terrible Majeſty of God; tor this is only God's 
natural Perfection, and what Men may fee, and yet be 
entirely blind to the Beauty of his moral Perfection, and 
have nothing of that ſpiritual Taſte which reliſhes this 
divine Sweetneſs. | 

It has been ſhown already, in what was ſaid: upon the 
firſt diſtinguiſhing Mark of gracious Affections, that 
that which is ſpiritual, is entirely different in its Nature, 
from all that it is poſſible any graceleſs Perſon ſhould 
be the Subject of, while he continues graceleſs. But 
tis poſſible, that thoſe who are wholly without Grace, 
thould have a clear Sight, and very great and affecting 
Senſe of God's Greatnels, his mighty Power, and awful 
Majeſty; for this is what the Devils have, though they 
have loſt the ſpiritual Knowledge of God, conſiſting in 
a Senſe of the Amiablenets of his moral PerfeCtions; 
they are perfectly deſtitute of any Senſe or Reliſh of 
that Kind of Beauty, yer they have a very great Knoy- 
ledge cf the natural Glory of God (if I may ſo ſpeak) 
or his awful Greatneſs and Majeſty; this they behold, 
and are affected with the Apprehenſions of, and there. 
tore tremble before him. This Glory of God all ſhall 
behold at the Day of Judgment; God will make all 
rational Beings to behold it to a great Degree indeed, 
Angels and Devils, Saints and Sinners: Chriſt wil 
manifeſt his infinite Greatneſs, and awful Majeſty to 
every One, in a moſt open, clear and convincing Man. 
ner, and in a Light that none can reſiſt, when he ſb 
come in the Glory of his Father, and every Eye ſhall ſet 
bim; when they ſhall cry to the Mountains to fall upd! 


them, to hide them from the Face of him that fits _ 
the 


Part III. of gracious Affections. 217 

the Throne, they are repreſented as ſeeing the Glory of 
God's Majeſty, Jai. ii. 10, 19, 21. God will make all 
his Enemies to behold this, and to live in a moſt clear 
and affecting View of it, in Hell, to all Eternity. God 
hath often declared his immutable Purpoſe to make all 
his Enemies to know him in this Reſpect, in ſo often 

annexing theſe Words to the Threatnings he denounctes 
againſt them, and they ball know that I am the Lord; 
yea, he hath ſworn that all Men ſhall ſee his Glory in 
this Reſpect; Numb. xiv. 21. As truly as I live, all the 
Earth ſball be filled with the Glory of the Lord. And 
this Kind of Manifeſtation of God is very often ſpoken 
of in Scripture, as made, or to be made, in the Sight 
of God's Enemies in this World; Exed. ix. 16. and 
Chap. xiv. 18. and xv. 16. P/al. Ixvi. 3. and xlvi. 10. 
and other Places innumerable. This was a Manifeſtation 
which God made of himſelf in the Sight of that wicked 
Congregation at Mount Sinai; deeply affecting them 
with it; ſo that all the People in the Camp trembled. 
Wicked Men and Devils will ſee, and have a great 
Senſe of every Thing that appertains to the Glory of 
God, but only the Beauty of his moral Perfection. 
They will ſee his infinite Greatneſs and Majeſty, his 
infinite Power, and will be fully convinced of his Omni- 
ſcience, and his Eternity and Immutability; and they 
will fee and know every Thing appertaining to his moral 
Attributes themſelves, but only the Beauty and Ami- 
ableneſs of them : They will ſee and know that he is 
perfectly juſt and righteous and true; and that he is a 
holy God, of purer Eyes than to behold-Evil, who can- 


not look on Iniquity; and they will ſee the wonderful 


Manifeſtations of his infinite Goodneſs and free Grace 
to the Saints; and there is nothing will be hid from 
their Eyes, but only the Beauty of theſe moral Attributes, 
and that Beauty of the other Attributes, which ariſes 
from it. And fo natural Men in this World are capable 


of having a very affecting Senſe of every Thing elſe 


that appertains to God, but this only. N —— 
P 2 


| PAzr lt, 
had a great and very affecting Senſe of the infinite Greats 
neſs and awful Majeſty of God, of his ſupreme and 
abſolute Dominion, and mighty and irreſiſtable Power, 
and of his Sovereignty; and that he, and all the Inha: 
bitants of the Earth were nothing before him; and alſo 
had a great Conviction in his Conſcience of his Juſtice, 
and an affecting Senſe of his great Goodneſs; Dan. iv. 
1, 2, 3, 34, 35, 37. And the Senſe that Darius had of 
God's Perfections, ſeems to be very much like his; 
Dan. vi. 25, &c. But the Saints and Angels do behold 
the Glory of God conſiſting in the Beazty of bis Holi 
#eſs: And 'tis this Sight only, that will melt and hums 
ble the Hearts of Men, and wean them from the World, 
and draw them to God, and effectually change them. 
A Sight of the awful Greatneſs of God, may overpower 
Men's Strength, and be more than they can endure; 


219 FTFhe thiod Sid 


but if the moral Beauty of God be hid, the Enmity of 


the Heart will remain in its full Strength, no Love will 
be enkindled, all will not be effectual to gain the Will, 
but that will remain inflexible; whereas the firſt Glimpſe 
of the moral and ſpiritual Glory of God ſhining into 
the Heart, produces all theſe Effects, as it were with 
omnipotent Power, which nothing can withſtand, 
The Senſe that natural Men may have of the awful 
' Greatneſs of God, may affect them various Ways; it 
may not only terrify them, but it may elevate them, 
and raiſe their Joy ahd Praiſe, as their Circumſtances 
may be. This will be the natural Effect of it, under 


the teal or ſuppoſed Receipt of ſome extraordinary | 


Mercy from God, by the Influence of meer Principles 
'6f Nature. It has been ſhown already, that the Receipt 
of Kindneſs may, by the Influence of natural Princi- 

les, affect the Heart with Gratitude and Praiſe to God; 
but if a Perſon, at the ſame Time that he receives 
remarkable Kindneſs from God, has a Senſe of his inf- 
nite Greatneſs; and that he is but nothing in Compari- 
fon of him, ſurely this will naturally raiſe his Gratitude 
and Praiſe the higher, for Kindneſs -to one i much 

3 inferior 


a — «ee mr — = owe 


8 


r .,JFXX = o£-_—uunu i A a 8V @a 8 V oo JQJdltc tos hem Sew Stan i fm. co-_@ianm ia DOAa« oma ee 


r 


of gracieus Affecklens: 219 


inferior. A Senſe of God's Greatneſs had this Effe& 
upon Nebrebadueæzar, under the Receipt of that extra- 
ordinary Favour of his. Reſtoration, after he had been 
driven from Men, and had his dwelling with the Beaſts: 
A Senſe of God's exc Greatneſs raiſes his Gratis 
tude very high; ſo that he does, in the moſt lofty Terms, 
extol and magnify God, and calls upon all the World to to 
do it with — And much more, if a natural Man, 
at the ſame Time that he is greatly affected with God's 
infinite Greatneſs and Majeſty, entertains a ſtrong Con- 
ceit, that this great God has made him his Child and 
ſpecial Favourite, and promiſed him eternal Glory in his 
higheſt Lovez will this have a Tendency, according to 
the Courſe of Nature, to raiſe his his Joy and Praiſe to a 
great Height, ; 
Therefore, 1 beyond Doubt, that too much Weight 
has been laid, by many Perſons of late, on Diſcoveries of 
God's Greatneſs, awful Majefty, and natural Perfec- 
tion, operating after this Manner, without any real View 
of the holy, lovely Majeſty of God. And Experience 
does abundantly witneſs to what Reaſon and Scripture 
declare as to this Matter; there having been very many 
Perſons, who have ſeem'd to be overpower'd with the 
Greatneſs and awful Majeſty of and conſequen - 
tially elevated in the Manner that has been ſpoken of, 
who have been very far from having Appearances of a 
chriſtian Spirit and Temper, in any Manner of Propor- 
tion, or Fruits in Practice in any wiſe agreeable; but 
their Diſcoveries have worked in a Way contrary to the 


Operation of truly ſpiritual Diſcoyeries. | 
Not that a Senſe of God's Greatneſs and natural Attri- 


butes is not exceeding uſeful and neceſſary, For as I 


obſerved before, this is implied in a Manifeſtation of 
the Beauty of God's — Tho' that be ſomething. 
beyond it, it ſuppoſes it, as the greater ſuppoſes the 
leſs. And tho' natural Men may have a Senſe of the 
Natural Perfections of God; yet undoubtedly: this is 


more frequent and common with the Saints, Gain with. 


P 2 natural 


226 | * Fourth Sign Parr It, 


natural Men; and Grace tends to enable Men to ſee 
theſe Things in a better Manner, than natural Men do. 
And not only enables them to ſee God's natural Attri. 
bures, but that Beauty of thoſe Attributes, which (ac- 
cording to our Why of anne of _— is derived 
vat pg 


. Gracious AﬀeGions do ariſe from the Mind's 
being enlightned, rightly and ſpiritually to underſtand 
afprehend divine Things. 
Hey Affection are not Heat without Light; but 
evermore ariſe from ſome Information of the Under. 
ſtanding, ſome ſpirirual Inſtruction that the Mind re- 
_ecives, ſome Light or actual Knowledge. The Child 
of God is graciouſly affected, becauſe he ſees and under. 
Kands ſomething more of divine Things than he did 
before, more of God or Chriſt and of the glorious 
Things exhibited in the Goſpel; he has ſome clearer 
and better View than he had before, when he was not 
affected: Either he receives ſome Underſtanding of 
divine Things 
** View was decayed; 1 John 
iv. 7. Every one that loveth, tnoweth God. Phil. i. 9. 

T pray that your Love may abound more and more, in Know- 
ledge and in all Rom. x. 2. They have a Zed 
of God, but not according ts Knowledge. Col. iii. 10. 
The new Man, which is renewed in Knowledge. Plat. 


Xliii. 3, 4. O ſend out thy Light and thy Truth; let them 
lead me, let them bring me into thy holy Hill. John vi. 
45. It is written in the Prophets, and they ſball be all 


t of God: Every Man therefore that bath heard and 
hath learned of the Father, compth unto me. Knowledge 
is the Key that firſt opens the hard Heart, and enlarges 
the Aﬀe®tions, and fo opens the Way for Men into the 
Kingdom of Heavens Luke xi. 52. Te have taken away 
the Key of | Knowledge. 

No there are many Affections which don't ariſe from 


any Light! in · the Undorſtanding. And when it is thus, 
; - 7 


that is new to him; or has his former 


wy 


* 
— 


Parr III. 3 gracious Afections. 221 
it is a ſure Evidence that theſe A ffections are Yot ſpiri- 
tual, let them be ever fo high.“ Indeed they have ſome 
new Apprehenſions which they had not before. Such 
is the Nature of Man, that is impoſſible his Mifid 


ſhould be affected, unleſs it be by ſomething that he 


apprehends, or that his Mind conceives of. But in 
many Perſons thoſe rr or Conceptions that 
they have, where with they are affected, have nothing 
of the Nature of Knowledge or Inſtruction in the 


As for Inſtance; when a Perſon is affected with a lively ; 


Idea, ſuddenly excited in his Mind, of ſome Shape, or 
very beautiful pleaſant Form of Countenance, or ſome 
ſhining Light, or other glorious outward Appearance: 
Here is ſomething apprehended or conceived by the 
Mind; but there is nothing of the Nature of Inſtruction 

8 57 ag 


* « Many that have had mighty ſtrong Affections at firſt Conver- 
« ſion, afterwards become dry, and wither, and conſume, and pine, 
« and die away: And now their Hypocriſy is manifeſt ; if not to 
« all the World, b open Prophaneheſs; yet to the diſcerning 
Eye of livi Chridians ians, by a formal, barren, unſavoury, unfrait- 
« ful * and Courſe 1 they 2 had pe Genre + 
« enough as Yet ——p— Tis ſtrange to ſee ſome People carri i 
« mighty Allein againſt Sin and Hell, and after Chriſt. And 
« what is the Hell you fear? A dreadful Place, What is Chriſt? 
They ſcarce khow ſo much as Devils do; but that is all. O traſt 
« them not! Many bave, and theſe ww:1/ fall away to ſome Luft, or 
« Opinion, or Pride, or World; and the Reaſon is, never had 


Light 22 John v. 35, John war a burning and ſbining 9 | 


u and they did joy in him for a Seaſon; yet glonous as it was, 

« ſaw not Chriſt by it, eſpecially not with divine Light. Its rare to 
« ſee Chriſtians full both of Light and Affectiun. And therefo 
* conſider of this; many a Man has been well brought up, and is 


« a ſweet wy Nature, mild and Tarte and harmle!;, likes and 
e 


« loves the beſt Things, and his Meaning, and Mind, and Heart 
« is good, and has more in Heart than in Shew; and ſo hopes all 
* ſhall go well with him. 1 Jay there may lie greateſt Hypocriſy 


* under greateſt Affections; eſpecially if they want Light. Von 
— liked 


“e ſhall be hardened in your 8 by them. . I 
violent Affections and Pangs, 

* Light; becauſe thoſe come from an external Principle, and laſt 
* not, but theſe do. Men are not affrighted by the Light of the 


Page 146. 


1 


ut only ſuch as were drop'd in by - 


« Sun, tho' clearer than the Lightning.” © Shepard*s Parable, Parti. 


FER 


223 8 "The Fourth Sign Parr It, 


in it: Perſons become never the wiſer by ſuch Thingz, 
or more knowing about God, or a Mediator between 
God and Man, or the Way of Salvation by Chriſt, or 
any Thing contained in any of the Doctrines of the 
Goſpel. Perſons by theſe external Ideas have no further 
1 with God, as to any of the Attributes or 
Perfections of his Nature; nor have they any further 
Underſtanding of his Word, or any of his Ways or 
Works. Truly ſpirtual and gracious Affections are not 
raiſed after this Manner: Theſe ariſe from the enlight- 
ning of the Underſtanding to underſtand the Thing: 
that are taught of God and Chriſt, in a new Manner, 
the coming to a new Underſtanding of the excellent 
Nature of God, and his wonderful Perfections, ſome 
new View of Chriſt in his ſpiritual Excellencies and 
Fulneſs, or Things open'd to him in a new Manner, that 
appertain to the Way of Salvation by Chriſt, whereby 
he now ſees how it is, and underſtands thoſe divine and 
ſpiritual Doctrines which once were Fooliſnneſs to him, 
Suck Enlightnings of the Underſtanding as theſe, are 
Things entirely different in their Nature, from ſtron 
Ideas of Shapes and Colours, and outward Brightne 
and Glory, or Sounds and Voices. That all gracious 
Affections do ariſe from ſome Inſtruction or Enlightning 
of the Underſtanding, is therefore a further Proof, that 
Affections which ariſe from ſuch Impreſſion on the Ima- 
gination, are not gracious Affections, beſides the Things 
dbſerved before, which make this evident. . 
Hence alſo it appears, that Affections ariſing from 
Texts of Scripture coming to the Mind are vain, when 
no Inſtruction received in the Underſtanding from thoſe 
- Texts, or any Thing taught in thoſe Texts, is the Ground 
of the Affection, but So Manner of their coming to 


me Mind. When Chriſt makes. the Scripture a Means 
df the Heart's burning with gracious Affection, tis by 
opening the Scriptures to their Underſtandings; Luke xxiv. 
32. Did not our Heart burn within us, while be talked 
with us by the Way, and while be opened ta us the Span 


- » 


P. 


J r TOs uw 5% ar 141 — SBN 


Parr III. of gracious Aheckions. 223 


It appears alſo, that the Affection which is occaſioned by 
the coming of a Text of Scripture muſt be vain, when 
the Affection is founded on ſomething that is ſuppoſed to 
be taught by it, which really is not contained 1n it, nor 
ria any other Scripture; becauſe ſuch ſuppofed Inſtruction 
r is not real Inſtruction, but a Miſtake, and Miſappre- 
r kenfion of the Mind. As for Inſtance, when Perſons 
r of fppoſe that they are exprelsly taught by. ſome Scripture 
coming to their Minds, that they in particular are beloved 
: of God, or that their Sins are forgiven, that God is 
their Father, and the like: This is a Miſtake, or 
Miſapprehenſion; for the Scripture no where reveals 
the individual Perſons who are beloved, expreſsly; but 
only by Conſequence,” by revealing the Qualifications of 
Perſons that are beloved of God: And therefore this 
Matter is not to be learn'd from Scripture any other Way 
than by Conſequence, and from theſe Qualifications; 
For Things be not to be learn'd from the Scripture any 
other Way than they are taught ix the Scripture, 
Affections really ariſe from Ignorance, rather than 
Inſtruction, in theſe Inſtances which have been men- 
tion'd; as like wiſe in ſome others that might be men- 
tion d. As ſome when they find themſelves free of 
Speech in Prayer, they call it God's being with them; 
and this affects them more; and ſo their Affections are 
ſet a going and increaſed: When they look not into the 
Cauſe of this Freedom of Speech; which may ariſe many 4 
other Ways beſides God's ſpiritual Preſence. So ſome 
are much affected with — apt Thoughts that come 
into their Minds about the Scripture, and call it the 
Spirit of God teaching them. So they aſcribe many of 
the Workings of their own Minds, which they have a. 
high inion of, and are pleaſed and taken with, to the, 
ſpecial immediate Influences of God's Spirit; and ſo are 
mightily. affected with their Privilege. And there are, 4 
tome Inſtances of Perſons, in whom it ſeems marie 
that the firſt Ground of their Affection is ſome 
ages The animal Spirits, by ſome Cane (and. 


probably 


224 We fourth Sign PART III. 
probably ſometimes by the Devil) are ſuddenly and unac, 
countably put into a very agreeable Motion, cauſin 
Perſons to feel pleaſantly in their Bodies; the ani 
Spirits are put into ſuch a Motion as is wont to be con. 
need with the Exhileration of the Mind; and the Soul, 
by the Laws of the Union of Soul and Body, hence 
feels Pleaſure. The Motion of the animal Spirits don't 
firſt ariſe from any Affection or Apprehenſion of the 
Mind whatſoever; but the very firſt Thing that is felt, 
is an Exhileration of the animal Spirits, and a pleaſant 
external Senſation, it may be in their Breaſts. Hence 
through Ignorance, the Perſon being ſurprized, begins 
to think, ſurely this is the Holy Ghoſt coming into him. 
And then the Mind begins to be affected and raiſed: 
There is firſt great Joy; and then many other Affections, 
in a very tumultuous Manner, putting all Nature, both 
Body and Mind, into a mighty Ruffle. For though, 
as I obſerved before, tis the Soul only that is the Seat 
of the Affection; yet this hinders not but that bodily 

Senſations, may in this Manner, be an Occafion of Af. 
fections in the Mind. of” CERT 
| And if Men's religious Affections do truly ariſe from 
. ſome Inſtruction or Light in the Underſtanding; yet the 
Affection is not gracious, unleſs the Light which is the 
Ground of it be Firieual, Affections may be excited 
by that Underſtanding of Things, which they obtain 
merely by humane Teaching, with the common Improve: 
ment of the Faculties of the Mind. Men may be 
much affected by Knowledge of Things of Religion 
that they obtain this Way; as ſome Philoſophers have 
been mightily affected, and almoſt carried beyond them- 
ſelves, by the Diſcoveries they have made in Mathema- 
ticks and natural Philoſophy. So Men may be much 
affected from common Illuminations of the Spirit of 
God, in which God aſſiſts Men's Faculties to a greater 


Degree of that Kind of Underſtanding of religious 
Matters, which they have in ſome Degree, by only the 
ordinary Exerciſe and Improvement of their own Facul - 


ties. 


Part III. of gracious Affections. 225 
nes. Such Illuminations may much affect the Mind; 
4s in many whom we read of in Scripture, that were 
ance enlightened : But theſe Affections are not ſpiritual, 
There is ſuch a Thing, if the Scriptures are of any 
Uſe to teach us any Thing, as a fpiritual, ſupernatural 
Underſtanding of divine Things, that is peculiar to the 
Saints, and which thoie who are not Saints have nothing 
of, Tis certainly a Kind of Underſtanding, appre- 
hending or diſcerning of divine Things, that naturaf 
Men have nothing of, which the Apoſtle ſpeaks of, 
1 Cor, ii. 14, But the natural Man receiveth not the Things 
of the Spirit of God; for they are Fooliſbneſs unto bim; 
neither can he know them, becauſe they are ſpiritually diſ- 
cerned, Tis certainly a Kind of ſeeing or diſcern:ng 
ſpiritual Things, peculiar to the Saints, which is ſpoken 
of, 1 John ui. 6. V bhoſocver finneth hath not ſeen him, 
neither known bim. 3 John 11. He that doth Evil bath 
not ſeen God. And John vi. 40. This is the Will of bim 
that ſent me, that every one that ſeetb the Son, and be- 
lieveth on him, may have everlaſting Life. Chap. xiv. 19, 
The Werld ſeeth me no more; but ye ſee me. Chap. xvii. 
3. This is eternal Life, that they might know thee the 
only true God, and Jeſus Chriſt whom thou baſt ſent. 
Matth. xi. 27. No Man knoweth the Son, but the Father, 
neither knoweth any Man the Father, but the Son, aud be 
to whomſoever the Son will reveal him. John xi. 45. 
He that feeth me, ſeeth him that ſent me. Pſal. ix. 10. 
They that know thy Name, will put their Truſt in thee. 
| Phil. iii. 8. I count all Things but Loſs, for the Excellency. 
of the ' Knowledge of Chriſt Jeſus my Lord, —Verſe 10. 
That I may know him.— And innumerable other Places 
there are, all over the Bible, which ſhew the ſame. 
And that there is-ſuch a Thing as an Underſtanding of 
divine Things, which in its Nature and Kind is whol y 
different from all Knowledge that natural Men have, is 
evident from this, that there is an Underſtanding of 
divine Things, which the Scripture calls ſpiritual Under- 
ſtanding; Col. i. 9. We do not ceaſe to pray for you, and 
&. | ; | to | 


138, preceeding; But we all, with open Face, hebolding 


N . 


226 Te fourth Sign Parr Ill, 
d to defire that you may be filled with the - Knowledge of 

bis Will, in all Wiſdom, and ſpiritual Underſtanding. lt 
has been already ſhown, that that which is /piritual, in 
the ordinary Uſe of the Word in the New Teſtamen 
is entirely different in Nature and Kind, from all which 
natural Men are, or can be the Subjects of. 

From hence it may be ſurely infer d, wherein ſpiritual 
Underſtanding conſiſts. For if there be in the Saints 
a Kind of Apprehenfion or Perception, which is in its 
Nature, perfectly diverſe from all that natural Men 
have, or that it is poſſible they ſhould have, till they 
have a new Nature; it muſt conſiſt in their having a 
certain Kind of Ideas or Senſations of Mind, which are 
imply diverſe from all that is or can be in the Minds of 
natural Men. And that is the ſame Thing as to fay, 
that it conſiſts in the Senſations of a new ſpiritual Senſe, 
which the Souls of natural Men have not; as is evident 
by what has been before, once and again obſerved. 
But I have already ſnewn what that new fpiritual Senſe 
is, which the Saints have given them in R neration, 
and what is the Object of it. I have — that the 
immediate Object of it is the ſupreme Beauty and Excel: 
lency of the Nature ef divine Things, as they are in 
themſelves. And this is agreeable to the Scripture: 
The Apoſtle very plainly teaches that the great Thing 
diſcovered by ſpiritual Light, and underſtood by ſpiri- 
tual Knowledge, is the Glory of divine Things, 2 Cor. 
v. 3, 4. But if our Goſpel be hid, it is bid to them that 
are loſt; in whom the God of this World hath blinded the 

of them that believe not, leſt the Light of the glo- 
Goſpel of Chriſt, who is the Image of God, ſhould 
Hine unto them: together with Verſe 6. For God who 
commanded the Light to ſbine out of Darkneſs, hath ſpined 
in our Hearts, to give the Light of the Knowledpe-of "The 
Glory of God in the Face of Feſus Chriſt: And Chap. iii. 


PF ik ine er al I RT CESS - os 


Clas, "the Glory of the Lord, are changed into thi 
eme Image, from Glory to Glory, even gs by —_—_ of 


' 


[ 
of 
t 
n 
; 


pur III. of gracious Aﬀettion. 227 


Je Lord. And it muſt needs be ſo, for as has been 


before obſerved, the Scripture often teaches that all 
true Religion ſummarily conſiſts in the Love of divine 
Things. And therefore that Kind of Underſtanding or 
Knowledge, which is the proper Foundation of true 
Religion, muſt be the Knowledge of the Lovelineſs of 
divine Things. For doubtleſs, that Knowledge which is 
the proper . Foundation of Love, is the Knowledge of 
Loveline/s. What that Beauty or Lovelineſs of divine 
Things is, which is the proper and immediate Object 
of 8 of Mind, was ſhewed under the laſt 
Head inſiſted on, viz. That it is the Beauty of their 
moral Perfection. Therefore it is in the View or Senſe 
of this, that ſpiritual Underſtanding does more imme- 
diately and primarily conſiſt. And indeed it is plain it 
can be nothing elſe; for (as has been ſhewn) there is 
nothing pertaining to divine Things beſides the Beauty 
of their. moral Excellency, and thoſe Properties and 
Qualities of divine Things which this Beauty is the 
Foundation. of, but what natural Men and Devils can 
ſee and know, and will know fully and clearly to all 

From what has been ſaid, therefore, we come neceſ- 
farily to this Concluſion, concerning that wherein ſpiri- 
tual Underſtanding conſiſts ; viz. That it conſiſts in a 
Senſe-of the Heart, of the ſupreme Beauty and Sweetneſs 
of the 57 or moral Perfection of divine Things, tage- 
tber with all that Diſcerning and Knowledge of Things of 


Relpiew, that depends. upon, and flows from ſuch 2 
enſe. W 'D 8 f : 
Spiritual Underſtanding conſiſts primarily in a Senſe 
2 of that ſpiritual Beauty. I ſay, a Senſe of 
art; for it is not Speculation meerly that is concerned 


in this Kind of Underſtanding: Nor can there be aglear 


Diſtinction made between the two Faculties of Under- 
ſtanding and Will, as acting diſtinctly and ſeparately, 
in this Matter. When the Mind is ſenſible of the ſweer 
Beauty and Amiableneſs of a Thing, that implies a Sen- 


- fiblenefs 


228 The fourth Sign Paxr Il 
fibleneſs of Sweetneſs and Delight in the Preſence o 
the Idea of it: And this Senſibleneſs of the Amiable. 
neſs or Delightfulneſs of Beauty, carries in the very 
Nature of it, the Senſe of the Heart; or an Effect and 
— — the Soul is the Subject of, as a Subſtancy 
poſſeſſed of Taſte, Inclination and Will. 
There is a Diſtinction to be made between a meer 
notional Underſtanding, wherein the Mind only behold 
Things in the Exerciſe of a ſpeculative Faculty; and 
| Zhe Senſe of the Heart, wherein the Mind don't only 
* ſpeculate and bebolg, but 7 and feels. That Sort 
of Knowledge, by which a Man has a ſenſible Percep. 
tion of Amiableneſs and Loathſomegeſs, or of Sweet. 
neſs and Nauſeouſneſs, is not juſt the ſame Sort of 
Knowledge with that, by which he knows what a Tri- 
angle is, and what a Square is, The one is meer ſpecu- 
lative Knowledge; the other ſenſible Knowledge, in 
which more than the meer Intelle& is concerned; the 
Heart is the proper Subject of jt, or the Soul as a _ 
that not only beholds, but has Inclination, and is pl 
or diſpleaſed. And yet there is the Nature of Inſtruc- 
tion in it; ag he that has perceived the ſweet Taſte of 
Honey, knows much more about it, than he who haz 


only looked upon and felt of it. 


The Apoſtle ſeems to make à Diſtinction between 
meer ſpeculative 8 the Things of Religion, 

and ſpiritual Knowledge, in calling that the Form of 
Knowledge, and of the Truth; Rom. ii. 20. Which haf 
| the Form of Knewledge, and of the Truth in the Law. 
The latter is often repreſented. by reliſhing, ſmelling, 


or taſting; 2 Cor. ii. 14. Now Thanks be to God, which 


always cauſeth us to triumph in Chriſt Jeſus, and maketh 
' manifeſt the Savour of his Knowledge, in every Place. 
Match. xvi. 23. Thou ſavoureft not the Things that be 
God, but thoſe Things that be of Men. 1 Pet. ii. 2, 3. 
A new born Babes, difire the fincere Milk of the Wor 
Phat ye may grow thereby; if ſo be ye have taſted tb 
| the Lord is gratious. Cant. i. 3. Becauſe of the mw 


= 3B Ee RUA 


TILE pn og ny -=— FF = PT” tt 


I Part III. of gracious Affection: 229g 
of t Orntments, thy Name is as Ointment poured 
F Be — do the Virgins love thee; KF po 
John it. 20. But ye have an Unction from the Holy 
One, and ye know all Things. | | 
| Spiritual Underſtanding primarily conſiſts in this Senſe, 
* or Taſte of the moral Beauty of divine Things; ſo that no 
Knowledge can be called Spiritual, any er than It 
ariſes from this, and has this in it. But ſecondarily, it 
includes all that Diſcerning and Knowledge of Things of 
Religion, which depends upon, and flows from ſuch 4 
Fen 0” C | | . — 
| When the true Beauty and Amiableneſs of the Hoh- 
neſs or true moral Good that is in divine Things, is diſ- 
covered to the Soul, it as it were opens a new World 
to it's View. This ſhews the Glory of all the Perfec- 
tions of God, and of every Thing appertaining to the 
divine Being: For, as was obſcrved before, the Beaux 
of all ariſes from God's moral Perfection. This ſhews - 
the Glory of all God's Works, both of Creation and 
Providence: For *tis the ſpecial Glory of them, that 
God's Holineſs, Righteouſneſs, Faithfulneſs and Good- 
neſs'are ſo manifeſted in them; and without theſe moral 
Perfections, there woald be no Glory in that Power and 
Skill with which they are wrought. The glorifying of = 
God's moral Perfections, is the ſpecial End of all the 
Works of God's Hands. By this Senſe of the moral 
Beauty of divine Things, is underſtood the Sufficiency 
of Chriſt as a Mediator: For tis only by the Diſcovery 
of the Beauty of the moral Perfection of Chriſt, that 
the Belieyer is let into the Knowledge of the | 
of his Perſon, ſo as to know any Thing more of it than 
the Devils do: And *tis only by the Knowledge of the 
Excellency of Chriſt's Perſon, that any know his Suffi- 
gency as a Mediator; for the latter 2 and 
uiſes from the former. Tis by ſeeing the Excellency 
of Chriſt's Perſon, that the Saints are made ſenſible of 
the Preciouſneſs of his Blood, and it's Sufficiency ? 
Ktone for Sin: For therein, conſiſts the Precioufneſs of 
. ps Chriſts 


2 * 


230 We fourth dien PARTI 


Chriſt's Blood, that tis the Blood of ſo excellent ang 
amiable a Perſon. And on this depends the Meritor. 

_ ouſneſs of his Obedience, and Sufficiency and Prey. 
lence of his Interceſſion. By this Sight of the mori 
Beauty of divine Things, is ſeen the Beauty of the Wy 

of Salvation by Chriſt: For that conſiſts in the Beauty 

of the moral Perfe&ions of God, which wonderfully 
mines forth in every Step of this Method of Salvation, 
from Beginning to End. By this is ſeen the Fitneſs and 
Suitableneſs of this Way: For this wholly conſiſts in 

its Tendency to deliver us from Sin and Hell, and to 
bring us rf Happineſs which conſiſts in the Poſſeſſion 
and Enjoyment of moral Good, in a Way fwweetly 
agreel g with God's moral Perfections. And in the 
Way's being contrived ſo as to attain theſe Ends, conſiſts 


| the excellent Wiſdom of that Way. By this is ſeenthe 
t Excellency of the Word of God: Take away all the 
moral Beauty and Sweetneſs in the Word, and the Bible 
is left wholly a dead Letter, a dry, lifeleſs, taſteleſs 
Thing. By this is ſeen the true Foundation of our 
Duty; the Worthineſs of God to be ſo eſteem'd, ho- 
nour'd, lov'd, ſubmitted to, and ſerv'd, as he requires 
of us, and the Amiableneſs of the Duties themſelves 
that are required of us. And by this is ſeen the true 
Exil of Sin: For he who ſees the Beauty of Holineſs, 
F muſt neceſſarily ſee the Hatefulneſs of Sin, its contrary, 
Buy this Men underſtand the true Glory of Heaven, 
which conſiſts in the Beauty and Happineſs that is in 
' Holineſs. By this is ſeen the Amiableneſs and Happi- 
neſs of both Saints and Angels. He that ſees the Beauty 
of Holineſs, or true moral Good, ſees the greateſt and 
moſt important Thing in the World, which is the Ful. 
neſs of all Things, without which all the World is 
empty, no better than nothing, yea, worſe than nothing, 
Unleſs this is ſeen, nothing is ſeen, that is worth the 
Seeing: For there is no other true Excellency or Beauty. 
”, Unleſs this be underſtood, nothing is underſtood, that 
| is Worthy of the Exerciſe of the noble Faculty of 
Underſtanding. This is the Beauty of the * 


- - 
: 


i . * 
| . 0 
363 TT. 
4 
= 


— 


* n. KAMA * ww CD —— — ©” 


ind the Divinity of Divinity, (if I may ſo ſpeak) the 
Good of the infinite Fountain of Good; without which 
God himſelf (if that were poſſible to be) would be an 
afinite Evil, Without which, we ourſelves had better 


never have been; and without which there had better 
have been no Being. He therefore in Effect knows 


nothing, that knows not this: His Knowledge is but the 
Shadow of Knowledge, or the Form of Knowledge, as 
the Apoſtle calls it. Well therefore may the Scripture 


repreſent thoſe who are deſtitute of that ſpiritual Senſe, 


by which is perceived the Beauty of Holineſs, as totally 
blind, deaf and ſenſeleſs, yea dead. And well may 
Regeneration, in which this divine Senſe is given to the 
Soul by its Creator, be repreſented as opening the blind 
Eyes, and raifing the Dead, and bringing a Perſon into 
anew World. For if what has been ſaid be conſider'd, 


it will be manifeſt, that when a Perſon has this Senſe and 


— given him, he will view nothing as he did 
before: tho 


all Things are become new; agreeable to 2 Cor. v. 16, 17. 
And beſides the Things that have been already men- 
tioned, there ariſes from this Senſe of ſpiritual Beauty, 
alltrue experimental Knowledge of Religion; which is 
of itſelf, as it were a new World of Knowledge. He 
that ſees not the Beauty of Holineſs, knows not what 


one of the Graces of God's Spirit is; he is deſtitute of ' 


any. Idea or Conception of all ef, Exerciſes of 
Soul, and all holy Comforts and Delights, and all Effects 
of the ſaving Influences of the Spirit of God on the 


Heart: And ſo is ignorant of the greateſt Works of _ 


God, the moſt important and glorious Effects of his 


Power upon the Creature: And alſo is wholly ignorant 


of the Saints as Saints; he knows not what they are: 
And in Effect is ignorant of the whole ſpiritual World. 
Things being thus, it plainly appears, that God's 


been 


= . 


| before he knew all Things after the Fleſs, . 
Jet benceforth he will know them ſo no more; and be ix 
become a new Creature, old Things are paſt away, Bebold 


planting that ſpiritual ſupernatural Senſe which has 


Far III. of gracias Afeftims. 231 


. 


232 The fourth Sign PAR Ill 
been ſpoken of, makes a great Change in a Man. Ang 
were it not for the very imperfe& Degree, in which this 
Senſe is commonly given at firſt, or the ſmall Degree 0 
this glorious Light that firſt dawns upon the Soul, thy 
Change made by this ſpiritual Opening of the Eyes in 
Converſion, would be much greater, and more remark. 
able, every Way, than if a Man, who had been bon 
blind, and with only the other four Senſes, ſhould con. 
tinue ſo a long Time, and then at once ſhould have the 
Senſe of Seeing imparted to him, in the Midſt of the 
clear Light of the Sun, diſcovering a World of viſible 
Objects. For tho? Sight be more noble than any of the 
other external Senſes; yet this ſpiritual Senſe which ha 
been ſpoken of, is infinitely more noble than that, ot 
any other Principle of Diſcerning that a Man naturally 
has, and the Object of this Senſe infinitely great and 
more important. 

This Sort of Underſtanding or Knowledge is that 
Knowledge of divine Things from whence all truly 
. gracious Affections do proceed: By which therefore all 

Affections are to be tried. Thoſe Affections that ariſe 
wholly from any other Kind of Knowledge, or do reſult 
from any other Kind of Apprehenſions of Mind, are 
vain.“ | 
: From 


„Take Heed of contenting yourſelves with every Kind of 
Knowledge. Do not worſhip every Image of your own Heads; 
« eſpecially you that fall ſhort of Truth, or the Knowledge of it 
« For when you have ſome, there may be yet that wanting, which 
% may make you ſincere. There are many Men of great Knowledge, 
<< able to teach themſelves, and others too; and yet their Hearts in 
« unſound. How comes this to paſs? Is it becauſe they have ſo muci 
Light? No; but becauſe they want much. And therefore content 
* not yourſelves with every Knowledge. There is ſome Knowled 
* which Men have by the Light of Nature, (which leaves them witl- 
« out Excuſe) from the Book of Creation; ſome by Power of Educt 
tion; ſome by the Light of the Law, whereby Men know thel 
Sin and Evils ; ſome by the Letter of the Goſpel ; and fo Men mi) 
« know much, and ſpeak well; and ſo in ſeeing, ſee not; ſome by 
« the Spirit, and may ſee much, ſo as to prophecy in Chriſt's Name 
« and yet bid depart ; Matth. vii. Now there is a Light of Glu) 

\ « y 


nd MD  twnd Am OO OA co mw www oc fm OO ea A ww £m fo two ad a 


o 
4 = a 4 -a = «a 4 8a «IC « * 


W > >= © ” we 


* TE | -— : | ”" EE OP "IE 
* | | ER; * | * | * hes” 
Parr II. "of  gractous Aﬀeetions. 233 


From what has been ſaid, may be learn'd wherein the 8 


- moſt eſſential Difference lies between that Light or Un- 
MI derftanding which is given by the common Influences 
„ot the Spirit of God, on the Hearts of natural Men, 
1 W and that ſaving Inſtruction which is given to the Saints. 
The latter primarily and moſt eſſentially lies in behold- 
ng the holy Beauty that is in divine Things; which is 
te only traue moral Good, and which the Soul of fallen 


Man is by Nature totally blind to. The Former con- 
fits only in a further Und ing, thro' the Aſſiſtance 
of natural Principles, of thoſe Things which Men may 
know, in ſome Meaſure, by the alone ordinary Exer- 
8 ciſe of their Faculties. And this Knowledge confiſts 
b 
| 
| 


only in the Knowledge of thoſe Things pertaining to 
Religion, which arg natural. Thus for Inſtance, in 
thoſe Awakenings and Convictions of Conſcience, that 
natural Men are often ſubject to, the Spirit of Gd 
gives no Knowledge of the true moral Beauty which is 
n divine Things; but only aſſiſts the Mind to a clearer 
WW ldea of the Guilt of Sin, or its Relation to a Puniſh- 
ment, and Connection with the Evil of Suffering (with- 
out any. Sight of its true moral Evil, or Odiouſneſs  * 
as Sin) and a clearer Idea of the natural Perfections f 
God, wherein conſiſts, not his holy Beauty and Glory, 
but his awful and terrible Greatneſs. *Tis a clear Sight 
of this, that will fully awaken the Conſciences of wicked 


Men at the Day of Judgment, without any [oe ogy 


* 
. 


whereby the Elect ſee Things in another Manner: To tell you how, 
they cannot: It's the Beginning of Light in Heaven: And the 
% ſame Spirit that fills Chriſt, filling their Minds, that they know, 

* by this anointing, all Things: Which if ever you have, you muſt * 

become Babes and Fools in your own Eyes. God will never write 
* his Law in your Minds, till all the Scribblings of it are blotted , 
.* out. Account all your Knowledge Loſs for the Gaining of this. 


is fad to ſee many a Man pleaſing himſelf in his own dreaming 
* Delufions; yet the poor Creature in ſeeing, ſees not; which ia 


« God's heavy Curſe upon Men under greateſt Means, and which 
ys all wb and deſolate.” Shepard”s Parable,» Part I. p. 147 


— 


234 De fourth Sign PaxT III. 


Ligbti. And *tis a leſſer Degree of the ſame, that 
awakens the Conſciences of natural Men, without ſpiri. 
tual Light, in this World. The ſame Diſcoveries are 
in ſome Meaſure given in the Conſcience of an awakened 
Sinner in this World, which will be given more fully in 
the Conſciences of Sinners at the Day of Judgment. 
The ſame Kind of Sight or Apprehenſion of God, in a 
leſſer D „ makes awakened Sinners in this World, 
fenſible E the dreadful Guilt of Sin, againſt ſo great 
and terrible a God, and ſenſible of its amazing Puniſh- 
ment, and fills them with fearful Apprehenſions of 
divine Wrath; that will thoroughly convince all wicked 
Men, of. the infinitely dreadful Nature and Guilt of 
Sin, and aſtomſh» them with A nm; of Wrath, 
when Chriſt ſhall come in the G ory of his Power and 
Majeſty, and every Eye ſhall fee him, and all the Kin- 
dreds of the Earth ſhall wail becauſe of him. And in 
thoſe common Illuminations, which are ſometimes given 
to natural Men, exciting in them ſome Kind of religi- 
ous Deſire, Love and Joy, the Mind is only aſſiſted to a 
clearer Apprehenſion of the natural Good that is in 
divine Things. Thus ſometimes, under common Illu- 
minations, Men are raiſed with the Ideas of the natural 


hibited in the Goſpel, concerning God and Chriſt, and 
the Way of Salvation, that have a natural Good in them, 
which ſuits the natural Principle of Self-Love. Thus 
in that great Goodneſs of God to Sinners, and the 
— dying Love of Chriſt, there is a natural 
Good, which all Men love, as they love themſelves; as 
well as a ſpiritual and holy Beauty, which is ſeen only 
by the Regenerate. Therefore there are many Things 
appertaining to the Word of God's Grace, delivered in 
e Goſpel, which may cauſe natural Men, when they 
haar it, anon with Joy is receive it. All that 2 
54M 


— 


r INJ. of gracious Aﬀedtion. 233 


which natural Men haye to God, and Chriſt, and chri- 
tian Vertues, and good Men, is not from any Sight of 
the Amiableneſs of the Holineſs, or true moral Excel- 
lency of theſe Things; but only. for the Sake of the 
wturs! Good there is in them. All natural Men's Hatred 
of Sin, is as much from Principles of Nature, as Men's 
Hatred of a Tyger for his Rapgcaonſoels, or their Ayer. | 
fon to a Serpent for his Poiſon and Hurtfulneſs: And 
all their Love of chriſtian Vertue, is from no higher 
Principle than their Love of a Man's good Nature, 
which appears amiable to natural Men; but no other- 
wiſe than Silver and Gold appears amiable in the Eyes 
of a Merchant, or than the Blackneſs of the Soil is 
beautiful in the Eyes of the Farmer ; 
From what has been ſaid of the Nature of ſpiritual 
Underſtanding, it appears that ſpiritugl Underſtanding 
does not conſiſt in any new doctrinal Knowledge, or in 
having ſuggeſted to the Mind any new Propoſition, not 
before read or heard of: For tis plain that this ſuggeſting 
of new Propoſitions, is a Thing entirely diverſe from 1 
giving the Mind a new Taſte or Reliſh of Beauty and 
Sweetneſs.* *Tis alſo evident that ſpiritual Knowledge 
does not conſiſt in any new doctrinal Explanation of any 
Part of the Scripture; for ſtill, this is but doctrinal 
Knowledge, or the Knowledge of Propoſitions - the 
doctrinal explaining of any Part of Scripture, is only 
giving us to underſtand, what are the Proppſitions con- 
taind or taught in that Part of Scripture. - 


Hence 


. — VE BIRT TTUS WW". \ 05 * 
* Calvin, in his Inſtitutions, Book I. Chap. ix. $ t. ſays, It is 
not the Office of the Spirit that is promiſed us, to make new and 
before ynheard of Revelations, or to coin ſome new Kind of Doc- 
© trine, which tends to draw us away from the received Doctrine of 
* the Goſpel ; but to ſeal and confirm to us that very Doctrine which 
is by the Goſpel.” And in the ſame Place be ſpeaks of ſome, that 
in thoſe Days maintain'd a contrary Notion, pretending to be immedi- 
ately led by the Spirit, as Perſons that were go wand i a moſt haughty 
conceit ; and not /o properly to be looked upon as only labouring unger 
«Miſtake, as driven by A Mgane/5. FT oY 
2 


236 The fourth Sign Par ff 


- Hence it appears, that the /piritus] Underftanding uf 
the Scripture, don't conſiſt in opening to the Mind the 
myſtical Meaning of the Scripture, in it's | Parableg, 
Types and Allegories; for this is only a doctrinal Expli- 

cation of the Scripture. - He that explains what is meant 
by the ſtony Ground, and the Seed's ſpringing up ſud. 

diͤeenly, and quickly withering away, only explains what 

Propoſitions or Doctrines are taught in it. So he that 

explains what is typified by Jacobs Ladder, and the 

Angels of God aſcending and deſcending on it, or what 

= was typified by Jeſbua's leading Iſrael through Fordan, 
| only ſhews what Propoſitions are hid in theſe Paſſages, 
And many Men can explain theſe Types, who have no 

ſpiritual Knowledge. *Tis poſſible that a Man might 
know how to interpret all the Types, Parables, Enig. 
mas, and Allegones in the Bible, and not have one 

Beam of ſpiritual Light in his Mind; becauſe he may 

not have the leaſt Degree of that ſpiritual Senſe of the 

holy Beauty of divine Things which has been ſpoken of, 
and may ſee nothing of this Kind of Glory in any 
Thing contained in any of theſe Myſteries, or any other 
Part of the Scripture. *Tis plain; by what the Apoſtle 
ſays, that a Man might underſtand all ſuch Myſteries, 
and have no ſavi race; 1 Cor. xiii. 2. And though I 
have the Gift of Prophecy, and underſtand all Myſteries, 
and all Knowledge, and have not Charity, it profiteth me 
nothing. They therefore are very fooliſh, who are ex- 
alted in an Opinion of their own ſpiritual Attainments, 
from Notions that come into their Minds, of the myſti- 
cal Meaning of theſe and thoſe Paſſages of Scripture, 
as tho' it was a ſpiritual Underſtanding of theſe Pal- 
immediately given them by the Spirit of God, 

and hence have their Affections mighty raiſed: And 
what has been ſaid ſhews the Vanity of ſuch Affections. 
From what has l een ſaid, it is alſo evident, that it is 
not ſpiritual Knowledge, for Perſons to be informed of 
their Duty, by having it immediately ſuggeſted to their 

Minds, that ſuch and ſuch outward Actions or Deeds 

are 


a8 S 


r 


Pant II. | of gracious Atm . an” 


are the Will of God. If we ſuppoſe that is truly 
God's Manner thus to ſignify his Will to his People, by 
immediate inward Suggeſtions, ſuch Su have 
nothing of the Nature of ſpiritual Light. Such Kind 
of — would only be one Kind of doctrinal 
Knowledge: A Propoſition concerning the Will of God, 
is as ay a Doctrine of Religion, as a Propoſition . ©: 
concerning the Nature of God, or a Work of oops 
And an having either of theſe Kinds of P 
7 any other Propoſition, declared to a Man, oy by 

peech,. or inward Suggeſtion, differs vaſtly from an 
— the holy Beauty of divine Things manifeſted to 
the Soul, wherein ſpiritual Knowledge does moſt ęſſen- 
tially conſiſt. Thus there was no ſpiritual Light in 
Balaam; tho' he had the Will of God immediately ſug- 
geſted to him by the Spirit of God from Time to Time, 
concerning the Way that he ſhould go, and what he 
ſhould do and ſay. 

'Tis manifeſt therefore, that a Being led and directed 
in this Manner, is not that holy and ſpiritual Leading 
of the Spirit of God, which is peculiar to the Saints, and 
a diſtinguiſhing Mark of the Sons of God, ſpoken of 
Rom. viii. 14. For as many as are led by the 8 of 
God, are the Sons of God. Gal. v. 18. But if ye * tad 
by the Spirit, ye are not under the Law. 


And if Perſons have the Will of God concerning their 3 


Actions, ſuggeſted to them by ſome Text of Serif pture, 
ſuddenly and extraordinarily brought to their Minds, 
which Text, as the Words Sr in the Bible, before they 
came to their Minds, related to the Action and Beha; 
yiour of ſome other Perſon, but they ſuppoſe, as God 
ſent the Words to. them, he intended ſomething further 
by them, and meant ſuch a particular Action of theirs; - 
I fay, if Perſons ſhould have the Will of God thus ſug - 
_ to them with Texts of Scripture, it alters not the 

ale, The Suggeſtion being accompanied with an apt 
Text of Scri — don't make the Suggeſtion to be of 
the Nature of ſpiritual Inſtruction, As for Inſtance, if 
A 


7 the Scripture, is zo open the Eyes, P 


238 T be fourth Sign Part III. 
a Perſon in New-England, on ſome Occaſion, were at 
a Loſs whether it was his Duty to go into ſome popiſh 
or heatheniſn Land, where he was like to be expoſed to 
many Difficulties and Dangers, and ſhould pray to God 
that he would ſhew him the Way of his Duty; and 
after earneſt Prayer, ſhould have thoſe Words which 
God ſpake to Jacob, Gen. xlvi. ſuddenly and extraor. 
dinarily brought to his Mind, as if they were ſpoken tg 
him; Fear not to go down into Egypt; and I will g. 
with thee; and I will alſo ſurely bring thee up again. In 
which Words, though as they lay in the Bible before 
they came to his Mind, they related only to Jacob, and 
his Behaviour; yet he ſuppoſes that God has a further 
Meaning, as they were brought and applied to him; 
that thus they are to be underſtodd in a new Senſe, that 
by Egypt is to be underſtood this particular Country he 
has in his Mind, and that the Action intended is his 

ing thither, and that the Meaning of the Promiſe iz 
Drat God would bring him back into New-England again. 


There is nothing of the Nature of a ſpiritual or gracious 


| Leading of the Spirit in this; for there is nothing of the 
Nature of ſpiritual Underſtanding in it. Thus to un- 


derſtand Texts of Scripture, is not to have a ſpiritual 
Underſtanding of them. Spiritually to underſtand the 
Scripture, is rightly to underſtand what is in the Scrip- 
ture, and what was in it before it was underſtood: *Tis 
to underſtand rightly, what uſed to be contained in the 


Meaning of it; and not the making a new Meaning. 


When the Mind is enlightened ſpiritually and rightly 
to underſtand the Scripture, it is enabled to ſee That in 
the Scripture, which before was not ſeen, by Reaſon of 
Blindneſs. But if it was by Reaſon of Blindneſs ; that 
is an Evidence that the fame Meaning was in it before; 
otherwiſe it would have been no Blindneſs not to ſee it: 
*Tis no Blindneſs not to ſee a Meaning which is not 
there. Spiritually enlightening the 508 to underſtand 


thou mine Eyes, that I may bebold wondrous Things * 
| _— 


cxix. 18. Opn 


wh * 


E a. 0 MA a > A 1 "_ a «a r YWwlAtrH wo SS aA ond ot _ 1 wm git ” A, | w«'# — _ 7 a Ka. 


POS I, | 


pakr III. of gracious Affections. 
h Law; which argues that the Reaſon why the ſame 
was not ſeen in the Scripture before, was that the Eyes 
were but; which would not be the Caſe, if the Mean- 
ing that is now underſtood was not there before, but is. 
now newly added to the Scripture, by the Manner of the 
Scripture's' coming to my Mind. This making a new 
Meaning to the Scripture, is the ſame Thing as making 
a new Scripture: It is properly adding to the Word; 
which is threatened with ſo dreadful a Curſe. Spiritually 
to underſtand the Scripture, is to have the Eyes of the 
Mind opened, te behold the wonderful ſpiritual Excel- 
lency of the glorious Things contained in the true 
Meaning of it, and that always were contained in it, ever 
ſince it was written; to behold the amiable and bright 
Manifeſtations of the divine Perfections, and of the 
Excellency and-Sufficiency of Chriſt, and the Excellency 
and Suitableneſs of the Way of Salvation by Chriſt, 
and the ſpiritual Glory of the Precepts and Promiſes of 
the Scripture, Fc. Which Things are, and always 
were in the Bible, and would have been feen before, if 
it had not been for Blindneſs, without having any new 
Senſe added by the Words being ſent by God to a par- 
=_ Perſon, and ſpoken anew to him, with a new 


And as to a gracious Leading of the Spirit, it conſifts 
in two Things; partly in inſtructing a Perſon in his. Duty 
by the Spirit, and partly in powerfully inducing him to 
cornply with that Inſtruction. But fo far as the gracious 
Leading of the Spirit lies in Inſtruction, it confiſts in 
a Perſon's being guided by a ſpiritual and diftinguiſhing 
Taſte of that which has in it true moral Beauty. I have 
ſhewn that ſpiritual Knowledge primarily conſiſts in a 
Taſte or Reliſh of the Amiablenefs and Beauty of that 
which is truly good and holy: This holy Reliſh is a 
Thing that diſcerns and diſtinguiſties between Good and 
Evil, between holy and unholy, without being at the 
Trouble of a Train of Reaſoning, As he who has a true 
Reliſh of external Beauty, knows what is Wenn by 


0 


239 


240 The fourth Sign Paxrt III. 
looking upon it: He ſtands in no need of a Train of 
| Reaſoning about the Proportion of the Features, in 
F - order to determine whether that which he ſees be a beau. 
tiful Countenance or no: He needs nothing, but only 
the Glance of his Eye. He who has a rectified muſica] 
Ear, knows whether the Sound he hears be true Har. 
mony: He don't need firſt to be at the Trouble of the 
Reaſonings of a Mathematician, about the Proportion 
of the Notes. He that has a rectified Palate, knows 
what is good Food, as ſoon as he taſtes it, without the 
Reaſoning of a Phyſiczan about it. There is a holy 
Beauty and Sweetneſs in Words and Actions, as well as 
a natural Beauty in Countenances and Sounds, and 
Sweetneſs in Food; Job xii. 11. Doth not the Ear try 
Words, and the Mouth taſte his Meat. When a holy and 
amiable Action is ſuggeſted to the Thoughts of a holy 
Soul; that Soul, if in the lively Exerciſe of its ſpiritual 
Taſte, at once ſees a Beauty in it; and ſo inclines to it, 
and cloſes'with it. On the Contrary, if an unworthy 
unholy Action be ſuggeſted to it, its anctified Eye ſees 
no Beauty in it, and is not pleaſed with it; its ſanctified 
Taſte reliſhes no Sweetneſs in it, but on the contrary, 
it is nauſeous to it. Yea, its holy Taſte and Ap 
leads it to think of That which is * lovely, and - 
turally ſuggeſts it; as a healthy- Taſte and Appeti 
— — the Idea of its proper Object. fn 
a holy py is led by the Spirit, as he is inſtructed 
and led by his holy Taſte, pe Diſpoſition of Heart; 
whereby, in the lively Exerciſe of Grace, he eaſily diſtin- 
es G and Evil, and knows at once, what is a 
ſuitable amiable Behaviour towards God, and towards 
Man, in this Caſe and the other; and — 4 what u 
right, as it were ſpontaneouſly, and of hi without 
2 particular Deduction, by any other Arguments than 
the Beauty that is ſeen, and Goodneſs that is taſted, 
Thus Chriſt — 4 ＋ the Phariſees, that they did nat, 
even of their: own ſelves, judge what was right, without 
needing Miracles to — it, Luke xii. 57. The wo 
cems 


we, wy 


— HT = 


Pk 3 3 — ä ITY A——Cyc a FEY — PE Y 


ParT III. of gracious Affection. 244. 
ſeems plainly to have Reſpect to this Way of judging 
of ſpiritual Beauty, in Rom. xii. 2. Be ye transformed 
h the Renewing of your Mind, that ye may prove wheat 
is that good, and perfect, and acceptable Will of God. © 

There is ſuch a Thing as good Taſte of natural Beau- 

, (which learned Men often ſpeak of) that is exer- 
ciſed about temporal Things, in Judging of them as 
about the Juſtneſs of a Speech, the Goodneſs of Style, 


the Beauty of a Poem, the Gracefulneſs of Deportment, 
Sc. A late great Philoſopher of our Nation, writes thus 


upon it: © To have @ Taſte, is to give Things their 


« real Value, to be touch'd with the Good, to be ſhock'd 
« with the Ill; not to be dazzled with falſe Luſtres, 
hut in Spight of all Colours, and every Thing that 
might deceive or amuſe, to judge ſoundly. Taſte and 
Judgment then, ſhould be the ſame Thing; and yet 
« *tis eaſy to diſcern a Difference. The Judgment forms 
« its Opinions from Reflection: The Reaſon on this 
« Occaſion fetches a Kind of Circuit, to arrive at its 


« End; it ſuppoſes Principles, it draws Conſequences, 1 
* and it judges; but not without a thorough Know "= - 


of the Caſe; ſo that after it has pronounced, it is 
to render a Reaſon of its Decrees. Good Taſte che 
* none of theſe Formalities; e' er it has Time to conſult; 
« it has taken its Side; as ſoon as ever the Object is pre- 
* ſented it, the Impreſſion i made, the Sentiment for-. 
* med, aſk no more of it. As the Ear is wounded with 

ea harſh Sound, as the Smell is ſooth'd with an agree- 
* able. Odour, before ever the Reaſon have meddled 
* with thoſe Objects to judge of them, ſo the Taſte 
* opens itſelf at once, and prevents all Reflection. They 
* may come afterwards to confirm it, and diſcover the 
* ſecret Reaſons of its Conduct; but it was not in its 
Power to wait for them. Frequently it happens not 


40 know them at all, and what Pains ſoever it uſes, 


* cannot diſcover har it was determined it to think ass 
vit did. This Cane Is very different from Thar om, * 


cc hr 


berker 8 Bas Ix the Word Tar 


2 | The fourth Sion 


« to ſay, that good Taſte is as it were a firſt Motion, or 


| - <a Kind of Inſtin& of right Reaſon, which hurries on 


« with Rapidity, and conducts more ſecurely, than al 


« the Reaſonings ſhe could make: Tis a firſt Glance of 


» the Eye, which diſcovers to us the Nature and Rela. 
<« tions of Things in a Moment.” | 

Now as there is ſuch a Kind of Taſte of the Mind a; 
this, which Philoſophers ſpeak of, whereby Perſons are 

ided in their Judgment of the natural Beauty, Grace. 
fulneſs, Propriety, Nobleneſs and Sublimity of Speechey 
and Actions, whereby they judge as it were by the Glance 
of the Eye, or by inward Senſation, and the firſt Im- 
preſſion of the Object; ſo there is likewiſe ſuch a Thi 
as a divine Taſte, given and maintained by the Spirit 
God, in the Hearts of the Saints, whereby they are in 
like Manner led and guided in diſcerning and diſtin- 
guiſhing, the true ſpiritual and holy Beauty of Actions; 
and that more eaſily, readily and accurately, as they 
have more or leſs of the Spirit of God dwelling in them, 
And thus the Sons of God are ſed by the Spirit of God, 
in their Bebaviour in the World. | ; 
| A holy Diſpoſition and ſpiritual Taſte, where Grace 

is ſtrong and lively, will enable a Soul to determine what 
Actions are right and becoming Chriſtians, not only 
more ſpeedily, but far more exactly, than the 1 
Abilities without it. This may be illuſtrated by the 
Manner in which ſome Habits of Mind, and Diſpoſiti 
ons of Heart, of a Nature inferiour to true Grace, will 
teach and guide a Man in his Actions. As for Inſtance, 
if a Man be a very good natur'd Man, his good Nature 
will teach him better how to act benevolently amongſt 
Mankind, and will direct him, on every Occaſion, to 
thoſe Speeches and Actions, which are agreeable to 
Rules of Goodneſs, than the ſtrongeſt Reaſon will a 
Man of a moroſe Temper. So if a Man's Heart be 
under the Influence of an entire Friendſhip, and molt 
endeared Affection to another; though he be a Man af 


a 


| Paxr III. 
jJudęment obſerves in its Deciſions: Unleſs we chuſe 


„ 0 KL eee te OO Fer OO, qs=  -=©o = & e er e Qu =» wy 


n. - aut  Mbpe ... 


ParT III. of gracious Affectiont. 243. 
in indifferent Capacity, yet this Habit of his Mind will 
direct him, far more readily and exactly, to a Speech 
and Deportment, or Manner of Behaviour, which ſhall 
in all Reſpects be ſweet and kind, and agreeable to a 
benevolent Diſpoſition of Heart, than the greateſt Ca- 

city without it. He has as it were a Spirit within 

im; that guides him; The Habit of his Mind is 

attended with a Taſte, by which he immediately reliſhes 
that Air and Mein which is benevolent, and diſ-reliſhes 
the contrary, and cauſes him to diſtinguiſh between one 
and the other in a Moment, more preciſely, than the 
moſt accurate Reaſonings can find out in many Hours, 
As the Nature and inward Tendency of a Stone, or 
other heavy Body, that is let fall from a Loft, ſhews 
the Way to the Centre of the Earth, more exaQtly in an 
Inſtant, than the ableſt Mathematician, without it, 
could determihe, by his moſt accurate Obſervations, in 
2 whole Day. Thus it is that a ſpiritual Diſpoſition 
and Taſte teaches and guides a Man in his Behaviour 
in the World. So an eminently humble, or meek, or 
charitable Diſpoſition, will direct a Perſon of mean 
Capacity to ſuch a Behaviour, as is agreeable to chriſtian 
Rules of Humility, Meekneſs and Charity, far more 
readily and preciſely, than the moſt diligent Study, and 
elaborate Reaſonings, of a Man of the ſtrongeſt Facul- 
ties, who has not a chriſtian Spirit within him. So alſo 
will a Spirit of Love to God, and holy Fear and Reve- 
rence towards God, and filial Confidence in God, and 
an heavenly Diſpoſition, teach and guide a Man in his 
a—. 

Tis an exceeding difficult he bop a wicked Man, 
deſtitute of chriſtian Principles in his Heart, to guide 
him, to know how to demean himſelf like a Chriſtian; 
with the Life, and Beauty, and heavenly Sweetneſs of 
2 truly holy, humble, Chriſt-like Behaviour. He 
knows hot how to put on theſe Garments; neither do 
they fit him; Eccl. x. 2, 3. A wiſe Man's Heart is at 
bis Right Hand; but a Fool's Heart is at his Left. Yes 

| alle 


244 We fourth Sign Parr II 
alſo, when he that is a Fool, walketh by the Way, bj; 
Wiſdom faileth bim; and he ſaith to every one that be 114 
Fool: With Verſe 15. The Labour of the Fooliſh, weayi. 
eth every one of them; becauſe he knoweth not how to 7 
to the City, Prov. x. 32: The Lips of the Righteous tou 
what is acceptable. Chap. xv. 2. The Tongue of the Wi 
uſeth Knowledge aright; but the Mouth of Fools poureth ou 
Fooliſhneſs. And Chap. xvi. 23. The Heart of the Righ. 
teous teacheth his Mouth, and addeth Learning 10 his Li: 
The Saints in thus judging of Actions by a ſpiritual 
Taſte, have not a particular Recourſe to the expreſ 
Rules of God's Word, with Reſpect to every Word 
and Action that is before them, the Good or Evil of 
which they thus judge of: But yet their Taſte itſelf in 
general, is ſubject to the Rule of God's Word, and muſt 
be tried by that, and a right Reaſoning upon it. As a 
Man of a rectified Palate judges of particular Morſels 
* by his Taſte: But yet his Palate itſelf muſt be judged 
of, whether it be right or no, by certain Rules and 
Reaſons. But a ſpiritual Taſte of Soul, mightily helps 
the Soul, in its Reaſonings on the Word of God, and 
in judging of the true Meaning of its Rules; as it re- 
moves the Prejudices of a depraved Appetite, and natu- 
rally leads the Thoughts in the right Channel, caſts a 
Light on the Word of God, and cauſes the true Mean- 
ing, moſt naturally to come to Mind, through the 
Harmony there is between the Diſpoſition and Reliſh of 
a ſanctified Soul, and the true Meaning of the Rules 
of God's Word. Yea, this Harmony tends to bring 
the Texts themſelves to Mind, on proper Occaſions; 
as the particular State of the Stomach and Palate, tends 
to bring ſuch particular Meats and Drinks to Mind, a 
are agreeable to that State. Thus the Children 
| gre led by the Spirit of God, in judging of Actions them- 
ſelves, and in their Meditations upon, and judging of, 
and applying the Rules of God's holy Word: And ſo 
God teaches them his Statutes, and cauſes them to under- 
fland the Way of his Precepts; which the Pſalmiſt ſe 
often prays for. But 


2 


S f COLE FI HH # &f © 


as. a eu Xa — — — 


Pr III. of gracious Affeckions. 24 

But this Leading of the Spirit is a Thing exceeding 
diverſe from that which ſome call fo; which conſiſts not 
in teaching them God's Statutes and Precepts, that he 
has already given; but in giving them new Precepts, 
by immediate inward Speech or Suggeſtion; and has in 
it no taſting the true Excellency of Things, or judging 
or diſcerning the Nature of Fhings at all. They don't 
determine what is the Will of God by any Taſte or 
Reliſh, or any Manner of Judgment of the Nature of 
Things, but by an immediate Dictate concerning the 
Thing to be done: There is no ſuch Thing as any 
Judgment or Wiſdom in the Caſe. Whereas in that 
Leading of the Spirit which is peculiar to God's Children, 
i; imparted that true Wiſdom, and holy Diſcretion, ſo 
often ſpoken of in the Word of God; which is high 
above the other Way, as the Stars are higher than 2 
Glow-Worm; and that which Balaam and Saul (who 
ſometimes were led by the Spirit in that other Way) 
never had, and no natural Man can have, without a 
Change of Nature. 

What has been ſaid of the Nature of ſpiritual Under- 
ſtanding, as conſiſting moſt eſſentially in a divine ſuper- 
natural Senſe and Reliſh of the Heart, not only ſhews 
that there is nothing of 1t in this falſly ſuppoſed Leadin 
1 Spirit, which has been now ſpoken of; but alſo 

the Difference between ſpiritual Underſtanding, 
and all Kinds and Forms of Enthuſiaſm, all imaginary 
Sights of God and Chriit, and Heaven, all ſuppoſed 
Witneſſing of the Spirit, and Teſtimonies of the Love 
of God by immediate inward Suggeſtion; and all Im- 
preſſions of future Events, and immediate Revelations 
of any ſecret Facts whatſoever; all enthuſiaſtical Impreſ- 
lions and Applications of Words of Scripture, as tho? 
they were Words now immediately ſpoken by God to a 
particular Perſon, in a new Meaning, and carrying 
lomething more in them, than the Words contain as 
they lie in the Bible; and all Interpretations of the myſ- 
ical Meaning of the Scripture, by ſuppoſed immediate 

| Revelation. 


rr rr >: os - TT > > Xs 


* r QG»> 0 + re 


commonly raiſe the Affections of ſuch as are deluded 


and Colours, or Words ſpoken, or Letters written, or 


Ideas; either of ſome Words, implying a Declaration 


Command of God; or elſe by exciting and impreſſing 


falſe Religion that has been in the 


246 The fourth Sign ParTHI. 
Revelation. None of theſe Things conſiſt in à divine 
Senſe and Reliſh of the Heart, of the holy Beauty ang 
Excellency of divine Things; nor have they any Thing 
to do with ſuch a Senſe; but all conſiſt in Impreſſions in 
the Head; all are to be refer*d to the Head of Inpreſ 


frons on the Imagination, and conſiſt in the exciting exter- 
nal Ideas in the Mind, either in Ideas of outward Shapes 


Ideas of Things external and ſenſible, belonging to 
Actions done, or Events accompliſhed, or to be accom. 
pliſhed. An enthuſiaſtical ſuppoſed Manifeſtation of 
the Love of God, is made by the exciting an Idea of x 
ſmiling Countenance, or ſome other pleafant outward 
Appearance, or by the Idea of pleaſant Words ſpoken, 
or written, excited in the Imagination, or ſome pleaſant 
bodily Senſation. So when Perſons have an imaginar 
Revelation of ſome ſecret Fact, tis by exciting — ö 


of that Fact, or ſome viſible or ſenſible Circumſtances, 
of ſuch a Fact. So the ſuppoſed Leading of the Spint, 
to do the Will of God, in outward Behaviour, is either 
by exciting the Idea of Words (which are outward 
Things) in their Minds, either the Words of Scripture, 
or other Words, which they look upon as an immediate 


ſtrongly the Ideas of the outward Actions themſelves. 
So when an Interpretation of a Scripture Type or Alle- 
ry, is immediately, in an extraordinary Way, ſtrongly 
ed, it is by ſuggeſting Words, as tho? one ſecretly 
whiſper'd, and told the Meaning; or by exciting other 
Ideas in the Imagination. | | 
Such Sort of Experiences and Diſcoveries as theſe 


by them, to a great Height, and make a mighty Uproar 
in both Soul and Body. And a very great Part of the 
orld, from one 
Age to another, conſiſts in ſuch Diſcoveries as theſe, 
and in the Affections that low from them. In ſuch 

Things 


Chings confiſted the Experiences of the ancient Pytha- 
rears among the Heathen, and many others among 
dem, who had ſtrange Extaſies and Raptures, and 
retended to a divine AMlatus, and immediate Revela- + 
ons from Heaven. In ſuch Things as theſe ſeem to 
ve conſiſted the Experiences of the Eſſenes, an antient 
dect among the Jews, at, and after the Times of the 
\poſtles. Fn ſuch Things as theſe conſiſted the Experien- 
of many of the ancient Gnoſticks, and the Montaniſts, 
nd many other Sects of ancient Hereticks, in the primi- 
ve Ages of the chriſtian Church. And in ſuch Things 
theſe conſiſted the pretended immediate Converſe, 
vith God and Chriſt, and Saints and Angels of Heaven, 
of the Monks, Anchorites, and Recluſes, that formerly 
Xt bounded in the Church of Rome. In fuch Things 
J MWeonfiſted the pretended high Experiences, and great 
1 

, 

| 

ö 


Spirituality of many Sects of Enthuſiaſts, that ſwarm'd 
in the World after the Reformation; ſuch as the Ana- 
laptiſts, Antinomians, and Familiſts, the Followers of 
N. Stork, Th. Muncer, Fo. Becold, Henry Pfeifer, David 
George, Caſper Swenckfield, Henry Nicolas, Fobannes 
Aericola Eiſſebius; and the many wild Enthuſiaſts that 
were in Englaud in the Days of Oliver Cromwell; and 
the Followers of Mrs. Hutchinſon, in Netw-Eugland; 
25 appears by the particular and large Accounts given 
of all theſe Sects, by that eminent holy Man, Mr. 
Samuel Rutherford, in his Diſplay of the ſpiritual Anti- 
crit, And in ſuch Things as theſe conſiſted the Expe- 
ences of the late French Prophets, and their Followers. 
And in theſe Things ſeem to lie the Religion of the 
many Kinds of Enthuſiaſts of the preſent Day. *Tis 
by ſuch Sort of Religion as this chiefly, that Satan tranſ- 
forms himſelf into an Angel of Light: And it is that 
which he has ever moſt ſucceſſively made uſe of to con- 
found hopeful and happy Revivals of Religion, from 
the Beginning of the Chriſtian Church to this Day. 
When the Spirit of God is poured out, to begin a glo- 
nous Work, then the old Serpent, as faſt as poſſible, 


Er III. of gracious Affection. 247 


-. 
\ — 2 2 "i L % 


248 die fourth Sign PAT 
| and by all Means introduces this Baſtard Religion, an 
mingles it with the true; which has from Time to Time 
foon brought all Things into Confuſion. The pernici. 
ous Conſequence of it is not eaſily imagined or conceiyeg 
of, *till we ſee and are amazed with the awful Effed 
of it, and the diſmal Deſolation it has made. If the 
Revival of true Religion be very great in ity Beginning, 
yet if this Baſtard comes in, there is Danger of it 
doing as Gideon's Baſtard Abimelech did, who never lef 
*ill he had flain all his Threeſcore and Ten true born 
Sons, excepting one, that was forced to flee. Great 
and ſtriit therefore ſhould be the Watch and Guard that 
- Miniſters maintain againſt ſuch Things, eſpecially at a 

Time of great, Awakening: For Men, — the 


- © common People; are eaſily bewitched with ſuch Thing: 


they having ſuch a glaring and gliſtering Shew of high 
Religion; and the Devil hiding his own Shape, and ap- 
pearing as an Angel of Light, that Men may not be 
afraid of him, but may adore him. | 

The Imagination or Phantaſy ſeems to be that wherein 
are form'd all thoſe Deluſions of Satan, which thoſe are 
carried away with, who are under the Influence of falſe 
Religion, and counterfeit Graces and Affections. Here 
is the Devil's grand Lurking-Place, the very Net of 
* foul and deluſive Spirits. Tis very much to bedoubted 
whether the Devil can come at the Soul of Man, at 
all to affect it, or to excite any Thought or Motion, or 
produce any Effect whatſoever in it, any other Way, 
than by the Phantaſy; which is that Power of the Soul, 
by which it receives, and is the Subject of the Species, 
or Ideas of outward and ſenſible Things. As to the 
Laws and Means which the Creator has eſtabliſhed, for 
the Intercourſe and Communication of unbodied Spirits, 
we know nothing about them; we don't know by what 
Medium they manifeſt their Thoughts to each other 
or excite Thoughts 1n each other. But as to Spirits that 
are united to Bodies, thoſe Bodies God has united them 
to, are their Medium of Communication: They bare 

N as 


eats 


ww LS 2% wwe Ain —_— n a ac — 


EA % % . „e r fc #._ 


— ww — 98 — — — 98 — — — FA 


=> 


= = => is +» &® it 5©- 7 . 


> 


©Y $# ww we CD 3#30- 


paar =” of gracious Aﬀettions. 249 ; 


no other Medium of acting on other Creatures, or being 
ated on by them, than the Body. Therefore it is not 
to be ſuppoſed, that Satan can excite any Thought, or 
produce any Effect in the Soul of Man, any otherwiſe 
than by ſome Motion of the animal Spirits, or by 
cauſing ſome Motion or Alteration in ſomething which 
appertains to the Body. There is this Reaſon to think 
that the Devil can't produce Thoughts in the Soul imme- 
diately, or any other Way, than by the Medium of the 
Body, viz. That he can't immediately ſee or know the 
Thoughts of the Soul: It is abundantly declared in the 
Scripture to be peculiar to the omniſcient God to do that. 
But it is not likely that the Devil can immediately produce 
an Effect which is out of the Reach of his immediate 
View, It ſeems unreaſonable to ſuppoſe that his imme- 
diate Agency, -ſhould be out of his own Sight, or that 
it ſhould be impoſſible for him to ſee what he himſelf 
immediately does. Is it not unreaſonable to ſuppoſe, that 
any Spirit or intelligent Agent, ſhould by the Act of 
his Will, produce Effects, according to his Underſtand- 
ing, or agreeable to his own Thoughts, and that imme- 
diately; and yet the Effects produced, be beyond the 
Reach of his Underſtanding, or where he can have no 
immediate Perception or Diſcerning at all. But if this 
beſo, that the Devil can't produce Thoughts in the Soul 
immediately, or any other Way than by the animal 
Spirits, or by the Body; then it follows, that he never 
brings to paſs any Thing in the Soul, but by the Ima- 
gination or Phantaſy, or by exciting external Ideas. 
For we know that Alterations in the Body, do immedi- 

ately excite no other Sort of Ideas in the Mind, but 
external Ideas, or Ideas of the outward Senſes, or Ideas 
which are of the ſame outward Nature. As to Reflec- 
tion, Abſtraction, Reaſoning, Sc. and thoſe Thoughts 
and inward Motions which are the Fruits of theſe Acts 
of the Mind, they are not the next Effects of Impreſ- 
hons on the Body. So that it muſt be only by the 
Imagination, that Satan has Acceſs to the Soul, to tempt 

R and 


Paxr III. 


230 "ON The fourth Sign 


and delude it, or ſuggeſt any Thing to it.“ And this 
ſeems to be the Reaſon why Perſons that are under the 
Diſeaſe of Melancholy, are commonly ſo viſibly and 
remarkably ſubject to the 2 and Temptations 
of Satan: That being a Diſeaſe which peculiarly affect; 
the animal Spirits, and is attended with Weakneſs of 
that Part of the Body which is the Fountain of the ani. 
mal Spirits, even the Brain, which is, as it were, the 
Seat of the Phantaſy. Tis by Impreſſions made on 
the Brain, that any Ideas are excited in the Mind, by 
the Motion of the animal Spirits, or any Changes made 
It 


* «© The Imagination is that Room of the Soul, wherein the Devil 

« doth often appear. Indeed (to ſpeak exactly) the Devil hath no 

*« efficient Power over the rational Part of a Man: He cannot change 

« the Will; he cannot alter the Heart of a Man. So that the utmoſt 

* he can do, in tempting a Man to Sin, is by Swaſion and Suggeſtion 

« only. But then how doth the Devil do this? Even by working 

upon the Imagination. He obſerveth the temper, and bodily Con- 

« ſtitutian of a Man; and thereupon ſuggeſts to his Fancy, and 

&« injects his fiery. Darts thereinto, by which the Mind and Will come 

«to be wrought upon. The Devil then, tho* he hath no imperious 

*« Efhetcy over thy Will, yet becauſe he can thus ſtir and move thy 
Imagination, and thou being naturally deſtitute of Grace, can't 

% not withſtand theſe Suggeſtions; hence it is that any Sin in thy 
„Imagination, tho” but in the outward Works of the Soul, yet doth 
* & quickly lay hold on all. And indeed, by this Means do ariſe thoſe \ 

ts horrible Delufions, that are in many erroneous Ways of Religion: 

« All is becauſe their Imaginations are corrupted. Yea, how often 

te are theſe diabolical Deluſions of the Imagination, taken for the 

« gracious Operations of God's Spirit ?—lt is from hence that many 

« have pretended to Enthuſiaſms; —They leave the Scriptures, and 

« wholly attend to what they perceive and feel within them.“ Bur- 

ge/5 on original Sin, Pa. 369, 

The great Turretixe, ſpeaking on that Queſtion, What is tht 

Power of Angels, ſays, As to Bodies, there is no Doubt, but that 

s they can do a great deal upon all Sorts of elementary and ſublunaij 

Bodies, to move them locally , and variouſlyto agitate them. IU 


« alſo certain, that they can act upon the external and interna 
« Senſes, to excite them, or to bind them. But as to the rational 
Soul itſelf, they can do nothing immediately upon that; for to 
6 God alone, who knows and ſearches the Hearts, and who has them 
« in his Hands, does it alſo appertain to bow and move them whi- 
te therſoever he will. But Angels can act upon the rational Soul, only 
% mediately, by Imaginations.” Theolog. Elench. Lock. VII. Quefte 7 


„ e 


* E cy — . + 


. * „ M — Dy TY Fo Uy 


ParT III. of gracicus Aſections. 251 
in the Body. The Brain being thus weaken'd and diſ- 
caſed, tis leſs under the command of the higher Facul- 
ties of the Soul; and yields the more eaſily to extrinſick 
Impreſſions, and is over-power'd by the diforder'd 
Motions of the animal Spirits; and ſo the Devil has 


greater Advantage to affect the Mind, by working on 
the Imagination. And thus Satan, when he caſts in 


n, 


thoſe horrid Suggeſtions into the Minds of many melan- 


cholly Perſons, in which they have no Hand themſelves, 
he does it by exciting imaginary Ideas, either of ſome 
dreadful Words or Sentences, or other horrid outward 
Ideas. And when he tempts other Perſons who are not 
melancholly, he does it by preſenting to the Imagination, 
in a lively and alluring Manner, the Objects of their 
Luſts, or by exciting Ideas of Words, and ſo by them 
exciting Thoughts; or by promoting an Imagination of 
outward Actions, Events, Circumſtances, Sc. Innume- 
rable are the Ways by which the Mind might be led on 
to all Kind of evil Thoughts, by exciting external Ideas 
in the Imagination. | 
If Perſons keep no Guard at theſe Avenues of Satan, 

by which he has Acceſs to the Soul, to tempt and 
delude it, they will be likely to have enough of him. 
And eſpecially, if inſtead of guarding againſt him, 
they lay themſelves open to him, and ſeek and invite 
him; becauſe he appears as an Angel of Light, and 
counterfeits the Illuminations and Graces of the Spirit 
of God, by inward Whiſpers, and immediate Suggeſ- 
tions of Facts and Events, pleaſant Voices, beautiful 


Images, and other Impreſſions on the Imagination. 


There are many who are deluded by ſuch Things, ang 
are lifted up with them, and ſeek after them, that have 


2 continued Courſe of them, and can have them almoſt 


when they will; and eſpecially when their Pride and 
Vain-glory has moſt Occaſion for them, to make a Shew 


of them before Company. *Tis with them, ſomething 
as tis with thaſe who are Profeſſors of the Art of telling 


where laſt Things are to be found, by Impreſſions mage 
| R 2 on 


252 De fifth Sign Parr lt, 
on their Imaginations; they laying themſelves open w 
the Devil, he is always at Hand to give them the deſired 
Impreſſion. 
Before I finiſh what I would fay on this Head of Im. 
ginations, counterfeiting ſpiritual Light, and Affectionz 
ariſing from them, I would renewedly (to prevent Mis 
underſtanding of what has been ſaid) deſire it may be 
_ obſerved, that I am far from determining, that no Aﬀec. 
tions are ſpiritual, which are attended with imagin 
Ideas. Such is the Nature of Man, that he can ſcarcely 
think of any Thing intenſely, without. ſome Kind of 
outward Ideas. They ariſe and interpoſe themſelves 
unavoidably, in the Courſe of a Man's Thoughts; tho 
oftentimes they are very confuſed, and are not what the 
Mind regards. When the Mind is much engaged, and 
the Thoughts intenſe, oftentimes the Imaginatiog is 
more ſtrong; and the outward Idea more tively; eſpeci- 
ally in Perſons of ſome Conſtitutions of Body. But 
there is a great Difference between theſe two Things, 
viz. Lively Imaginations ariſing from ſtrong Aﬀettion, 
and Strong Aﬀettions ariſing from lively Imagination. 
The former may be, and: doubtleſs often is, in Caſe of 
truly gracious Aﬀections. The Affections don't ariſe 
from the Imagination, nor have any Dependance upon 
it; but on the contrary, the Imagination is only the 
accidental Effect, or Conſequent of the Affection, 
through the Infirmity of human Nature. But when the 
latter is the Caſe, as it often is, that the Affection ariſes 
from the Imagination, and is built upon it, as its Foun- 
dation, inſtead of a ſpiritual Illumination or Diſcovery; 
then is the Affection, however elevated, worthleſs and 
"vain. And this is the Drift of what has been now ſaid, 
of Impreſſions on the Imagination. Having obſerved 
this, I proceed to another Mark of gracious Affection. 


V. Truly gracious Affections are attended with 2 
reaſonable and ſpiritual Conviction of the Judgment, 
of the Reality and Certainty of divine Things. 1 


4 
A 


PART III. of gracious Mfections. 2:53 
This ſeems to be implied in the Text that was laid 
as the Foundation of this Diſcourſe, Thom having not 
ſer, ye love; in whom, though now ye ſee him not, yet 
BELIEVING, Je rejoice with Joy unſpeakable and full of 


Glory. 

401 thoſe who are truly gracious Perſons have a ſolid, 
full, thorough and effectual Conviction of the Truth 
of the great Things of the Goſpel. I mean, that they 
no longer halt between two Opinions; the great Doc- 
trines of the Goſpel ceaſe to be any longer doubtful 
Things, or Matters of Opinion, which, tho' probable, 
are yet diſputable; but with them, they are Points ſettled 
and determined, as undoubted and indiſputable; fo that 
they are not afraid to venture their All upon their 
Truth. Their Conviction is an efefual Conviction; fo 
that the great, ſpiritual, myſterious and inviſible Things 
of the Goſpel, have the Influence of real and certain 
Things upon them; they have the Weight and Power 
of real Things in their Hearts, and accordingly rule in 
their Affections, and govern them through the Courſe 
of their Lives. With Reſpect to Chriſt's being the Son 
of God, and Saviour of the World, and the great 
Things he has revealed concerning Himſelf, and his 
Father, and another World, they have not only a pre- 
dominating Opinion that theſe Things are true, and ſo 
yield their Aſſent, as they do in many other Matters of 
doubtful Speculations; but they ſee that it is really ſo: 
Their Eyes are open'd, ſo that they ſee that really 
Jeſus is the Chriſt, the Son of the living God. And 
as to the Things which Chriſt has revealed, of God's 


eternal Purpoſes and Deſigns, concerning fallen Man, 


and the glorious and everlaſting Things prepared for 
the Saints in another World, they ſee that they are ſo 
indeed: And therefore theſe Things are of great 
Weight with them, and have a mighty Power upon 
their Hearts, and Influence over their Practice, in ſome 


Meaſure anſwerable to their infinite Importance. 
That 


254 The fifth Sign Part II 
That all true Chriſtians have ſuch a Kind of Convic. 
tion of the Truth of the Things of the Goſpel, i, 
abundantly manifeſt from the holy Scriptures. I wil 
mention à few Places of many; Matth. xvi. 15, 16, 17, 
But whom ſay ye that I am? Simon Peter, anſwered and 
ſaid, Thou art Chriſt, the Son of the living God. Aid 
Feſus anſwered, and ſaid unto him, bleſſed art thou Simon 
Barjona:—My Father which is in Heaven, hath revealed 
it unto thee, John vi. 68, 69. Thou haſt the Words if 
eternal Life: And we believe, and are ſure that thou art 
that Chriſt, the Son of the living God. John xvi. 6, ), 
8. I have manifeſted thy Name to the Men which thi 
gaveſt me out of the World. Now they have known that 
all Things whatſoever thou haſt given me, are of thee: Hor 
. T have given unto them, the Words which thou gaveſt me; 
and they have received them, and have known ſurely that 
J came out from thee; and they have believed that thou 
didſt fend me. Acts viii. 37. If thou believeſt with all 
thy Heart, thou mayeſt. 2 Cor. iv. 11, 12, 13, 14. W: 
which live, are always delivered unto Death, for Jeſus 
ake:—Death workeeh in us,—we having the Spirit of 
Faith; according as it is written, Ibelieved, and therefort 
have I ſpoken; we alſo believe, and therefore ſpeak : Know: 
ing that be which raiſed up the Lord Feſus, ſhall raiſe uw 
up alſo by Jeſus, and ſhall preſent us with you. Together 
with Verſe 16. For which Cauſe, we faint not. And 
Verſe 18. While we look not at the Things which are ſet, 
&c. And Chap. v. 1. For we know that if cur earth) 
- Houſe of this Tabernacle were diſſolved, we have a Building 
of God. —And Verle 6, 7, 8. Therefore we are alway 
confident ; knowing that whilſt we are at home in the Boch, 
we are abſent from the Lord: For we walk by Faith, nit 
by Sight; wwe are confident, I ſay, and willing rather ts 
be abſent from the Body, and preſent with the Lord. 2 
Tim. i. 12. For the which Cauſe, I alſo ſuffer theſe T hings: 
Nevertheleſs, I am not aſhamed; for I know whom [ have 
believed; and I am perſuaded that he is able to keep that 


which I have committed unto him, againſt * > 
; e þ 


Part IH. h of gracious Aﬀedtions. FG . 


Heb. iii. 6. Vbeſe Houſe are we, if we hold faſt the 
Confidence, and the Rejoicing of the Hope, firm unte the 
End. Heb. xi. 1. Now Faith is the Subſtance of Things 
heped for, and the Evidence of Things not ſeen: Toge- 
ther with that whole Chapter. 1 John iv. 13, 14, 15, 
16. Hereby know we that we dwell in him, and be in us; 
becauſe he hath given us of bis Spirit; .and we have ſeen, 
and do teſtify, that the Father ſent the Son to be the Savi- 
our of the World. Whoſoever ſhall confeſs that Feſus is 
the Son of God, Cad dwelleth in bim, aud he in God. 
And wwe have known and believed the Love that God hath to 
us, Chap. v. 4, 5. For whatſoever is born of God, 
overcometh the World: And this is the Victory that overcom- 
eth the World, even aur Faith. Who is he that overcometh 
theWorld, but he that believeth that 7eſus is the Son of God? 

Therefore truly gracious Aﬀections are attended with 
ſuch a Kind of Conviction and Perſwaſion of the Truth 
of the Things of the Goſpel, and Sight of their Evi- 
dence and Reality, as theſe and other Scriptures ſpeak of. 

There are many religious Affections, which are not 
attended with ſuch a Conviction of the Judgment. There 
are many Apprehenſions and Ideas which ſome have, 
that they call divine Diſcoveries, which are affecting, 
but not conyincing. Tho' for a little while, they may 


ſeem to be more perſwaded of the Truth of the Things 
of Religion, than they uſed to be, and may yield a 
forward Aſſent, like many of Chriſt's Hearers, who 
believed for a while; yet they have no thorough and 


effectual Conviction; nor is there any great abiding 
Change in them, in this Reſpect, that whereas formerly 
they did not realize the great Things of the Goſpel, 
now theſe Things, with Regard to Reality and Certainty, 
appear new to them, and they behold them quite in 


another View than they uſed to do. There are many 


Perſons who have been exceedingly raiſed with religious 
Affections, and think they have been converted, they 
don't go about the World any more convinced of the 


Truth of the Goſpel, than they uſed to be; or 5 leaſt 
8 1 


. Sign Par Ill. 
there is no remarkable Alteration; they are not Men 
who live under the Influence and Power of a realizin 
Conviction of the infinite and eternal Things which the 
Goſpel reveals: If they were, it would be impoſlible 
for them to live as they do. Becauſe their Affections 
are not attended with a thorough Conviction of the 
Mind, they are not at all to be depended on; however 
= a Shew and Noiſe they make, tis like the Blaze of 

ow, or Crackling of Thorns, or like the forward 
flouriſhing Blade on ſtony Ground, that has no Root, nor 
Deepneſs of Earth to maintain its Life. 

Some Perſons, under high Aﬀections, and a confident 
Perſwaſion of their good Eſtate, have that, which they 
very. ignorantly call a Seeing the Truth of the Word 
of God, and which is very far from it, after this Man- 
ner; they have ſome Text of Scripture coming to their 
Minds, in a ſudden and extraordinary Manner, immedi- 
ately declaring to them (as they ſuppoſe) that their Sins 
are forgiven, or that God loves them, and will ſave them; 
and it may be have a Chain of Scriptures coming one af. 
ter another, to the ſame Purpoſe; and they are convin- 
ed that it is Truth; 5. e. they are confident that it is cer- 
tainly ſo, that their Sins are forgiven, and God does 
love them, &c.--z they ſay they know it is ſo; and when 
the Words of Scripture are ſuggeſted to *em, and as 
they ſuppoſe immediately ſpoken to em by God, in this 
Meaning, they are ready to cry out, Truth, Truth! "Tis 
certainly ſo ! The Word of God is true! And this they 
call a Seeing the Truth of the Word of God. Whereas 
the Whole of their Faith amounts to no more, than 
only a ſtrong Confidence of their own good Eſtate, and 
ſo a Confidence that thoſe Words are true, which 


they ſuppoſe tell them they are in a good Eſtate: When 


indeed (as was ſhewn before) there is no Scripture which 
declares that any Perſon is in a good Eſtate directly, or 


any other Way than by Conſequence. So that this, 


inſtead of being a real Sight of the Truth of the Word 
of God, is a Sight of nothing but a Phantom, a _ 19 


3 


Parr III. of gracious Aﬀettions. 259" i 
ill over a Deluſion. Truly to ſee the Truth of the 
Word of God, 1s to ſee the Truth of the Goſpel; which 
ie is the glorious Doctrine the Word of God contains, 
le concerning God and Jeſus Chriſt, and the Way of 
ns Salvation by him, and the World of Glory that he is 
ce entered into, and purchaſed for all them who believe; 
r and not a Revelation that ſuch and ſuch particular Per- 
f ſons are true Chriſtians, and ſhall go to Heaven. There-. 
i fore thoſe Aﬀections which ariſe from no other Perſwa- 
r fon of the Truth of the Word of God than this, ariſe 
t from Deluſion, and not true Conviction; and conſe- 
, quently are themſelves deluſive and vain. 
7 But if the religious Aﬀections that Perſons have, do 
| indeed ariſe from a ſtrong Perſwaſion of the Truth of 
the chriſtian Religion; their Affections are not the 
better, unleſs their Perſwaſion be a reaſonable Perſwaſion 
or Conviction. By a reaſonable Conviction, I mean a 
Conviction founded on real Evidence, or upon that 
which is a good Reaſon, or juſt Ground of Convittion, 
Men may have 4 firong Perſwaſion that the chriſtian 
Religion is true, when their Perſwaſion is not at all built 
on Evidence, but altogether on Education, and the 
Opinion of others; as many Mabometans are ſtrongly 
perſwaded of the Truth of the Mahometan Religion, 
becauſe their Fathers, and Neighbours, and Nation 
believe it. That Belief of the Truth of the Chriſtian 
Religion which 1s built on the very ſame Grounds, with 
Mabometans Belief of the Mahometan Religion, is the 
fame Sort of Belief. And though the Thing believed 
happens to be better; yet that don't make the Belief _ 
{elf to be of a better Sort: For though the Thing 
believed happens to be true; yet the Belief of it is not 
owing to this Truth, but to Education. So that as the 
Conviction is no better than the Mahometans Convittion; 
ſo the Affections that flow from it, are no better, in 
themſelves, than the religious Affections of Mahometans. 
But if that Belief of chriſtian Doctrines, which Per- 
lon's Affections ariſe from, be not meerly from Educa- 
tion, 


| 258 ö The fifth Sign Parr It 


tion, but indeed from Reaſons and Arguments which 
© are offered, it will not from thence neceſſarily follow, 
that their Affections are truly gracious: For in order to 
that, it is requiſite, not only that the Belief which their 
Affections ariſe from, ſhould be a reaſonable, but alſo x 


« 


C 25 ſpiritua! Belief or Conviction. I ſuppoſe none vil 
doubt, but that ſome natural Men do yield a Kind af 


Aſſent of their Judgments to the Truth af the chriſtian 
Religion, from the rational Proofs or Arguments that 
are offered to evince it. Judas, without Doubt, thought 

Jeſus to be the Maſſiab, from the Things which he tay 


and heard; but yet all along was a Devil. So in Joby 


ii. 23, 24, 25. We read of many that believed in Chriss 
Name, <ohen they ſaw the Miracles that he did; whom 
yet Chriſt knew had not that withinthem, which was to 
be depended on. So Simon the Sorcerer believed, when 
he beheld the Miracles and Signs which were done; but 
yet remained in the Gall of Bitterneſs, and Bond of Ini- 
Juity, Acts vin. 13, 23. And if there is ſuch a Belief 
or Aſſent of the Judgment in ſome ntural Men, none 
can doubt but that religious Affections may ariſe from 
that Aſſent or Belief; as we read of ſome who believed 
for a while, that were greatly affected, and anon, with 
Jay received the Word. 

Tis evident that tkere is ſuch a Thing as a /piritual 
Belief or Conviction of the Truth of the Things of the 
. Goſpel, or a Belief that is peculiar to thoſe who are 
F-iritua!, or who are regenerated, and have the Spirit 
of God, in his holy Communications, and dwelling in 

them as a vital Principle. So that the Conviction they 
have, don't only differ from that which natural Men 
Have, in its Concomitants, in that it is accompanied with 
good Works; but the Belief itſelf is diverſe, the: Aﬀent 
and Conviction of the Judgment is of a Kind peculiar 
to thoſe who are ſpiritual, and that which natural Men 
are wholly deſtitute of. This is evident by the Scripture, 
if any Thing at all is ſo; John xvii. 8. They have believed 


that thou didſt ſend me. Tit. i. 1. According to the 7 6 
8 


% * 
4 Cade? ad 82 4, 
, 


js after Godlineſs. John xvi. 27. The Father himſelf 


liveth you, becauſe ye have loved me, and have believed -- 


that I came out from God. 1 John iv. 15. Wheſeever 
ſhall confeſs that Jeſus is the Son of God, God dwelleth in 
him, and be in God. Chap. v. 1. Whoſoever believeth 


that Jeſus is the Chriſt, 15 born of God: Ver. 10. He 


that believeth on the Son of God, bath the Witneſs in 


himſelf. 
What a ſpiritual Convifticn of the Judqgieat-i is, we 


are naturally led to determine, from what has been faid- 


already, under the former Head of a ſpiritual Under- 


fanding. The Conviction of the Judgment ariſes from 


the Illumination of the Underſtanding: The paſſing of 
a right Judgment on Things, de ends on an having a 
right Apprehenſion or Idea of Things. And therefore 
it follows, that a ſpiritual Conviction of the Truth of 
the great Things of the Goſpel, is ſuch a Conviction, 


as ariſes from having a ſpiritual View or Apprehenſion 


of thoſe Things in the Mind. And this is alſo evicent 
from the Scripture, which often repreſents, that a ſavir g 


Belief of the Reality and Divinity of the Things pre- 
ſed and exhibited to us in the Goſpel, is from the 


Spirit of God's enlightening the Mind, to have right 
Apprehenſions of the Nature of thoſe Things, and ſo 
as it were unveiling Things, or revealing them, and 


enabling the Mind to view them and fee them as they. 


are, Luke x. 21, 22. I thank thee, O Father, Lord of 
Heaven and Earth, that thou haſt rv theſe Things from 
the Wiſe and Prudent, and haſt REVEALED them unto 


Babes: Even ſo Father, for ſo it ſeemed gocd in thy 


Sight. All Things are delivered unto me of my Father; 


and no Man knoweth «who the Son is, but the Father, and 
who the Father is, but the Son, and he to whom the Son 


will REVEAL Him. John vi. 40. And this is the Will of 
lim that ſent me, that every one that SEETH the Son, and 


BELIEVETH on him, may have everlaſting Life. Where it 


8 plain, that true Faith ariſes from a ſpiritual Sight of 
Clint, 


PAxT III. of gracious Afclians. 259 
if God's Eleft, and the acknowledging of the Truth which - 2 


| 


1266 
Chriſt. And John xvii. 6, 7, 8. 7 have MAN1PesrTy 
thy Name unto the Men which thou gaveſt me out of th, 
World. — Now they have known that all Things whatſoever 
thou haſt gi uen me, are of thee; far I bave given unto then 
#he Words which thou gaveſt me, and they have received 
them, and known furely that I came out from thee, and 
they have believed that thou didft ſend me. Where Chriſt' 
manifeſting God's Name to the Diſciples, or giving 
them a true Apprehenſion and View of divine Things, 
was that whereby they knew that Chriſt's Doctrine was 
of God, and that Chriſt himſelf was ef him, and was 
ſent by him. Matth. xvi: 16, 17. Simon Peter /aid, 
T hou art the Chriſt, the Con of the liuing God. And Jeſus 
anſwered, and . ſaid unto him, Bleſſed art thou, Simon 
Bar-jona, for Fleſh and Blood hath not REVEALED it unts 
thee, but my Faiher which is in Heaven. 1 John v. 10. 
| He that believeth on the Son of God, hath the Witneſs in 
himſelf. Gal. i. 14, 13, 16. Being more exceedingly 
zealous of the Traditions of my Fathers. But when it 
pleaſed God, who ſeparated me from my Mother's Womb, 
end cglled me by bis Grace, to REVEAL his Son in me, that 

might preach him among the Heathen, immediately I con. 
\ ferred not with Fleſh and Blood. S 
I.! it be fo, that that is a fpiritual Conviction of the 

Divinity and Reality of the Things exhibited in the 
Goſpel, which ariſes from a ſpiritual Underſtanding of 
thoſe Things; I have ſhewn already what that is, viz. 
a Senſe and Taſte of the divine, ſupreme and holy Ex- 


cellency and Beauty of thoſe Things. So that then is 


the Mind ſpiritually convinced of the Divinity and 
- Truth of the great Things of the Goſpel, when that 
Conviction ariſes, either directly or remotely, from ſuch 


” a Senſe or View of their divine Excellency and Glory, 


| as is there exhibited. This clearly follows from Things 

' that have been already ſaid; and 4 this the Scripture 

is very plain and expreſs. 2 Cor. iii. 3, 4, 5, 6. But 

F our Goſpel be bid, it is bid to them that are loſt: In 

<2bom the God of this World hath blinded the Minds 75 then 
| tba 


© The g S, Par i 


ww. Wwe 3 


EE. .. . . ir Ac. om. as 


og 1 — — 


jbat BELIEVE not, leſt the Light of the oloRIOο; Gasper. 
of Chriſt, who is the Image of God, ſhould ſhine-unto 
them. For we preach not ourſelves, but Chriſt Jeſus the 
Lord, and ourſelves your Servants for Feſus Sake. For 
Cod, who commanded the Light to ſhine out of Darkneſs, 
hath ſhined in our Hearts, to give the LicnT or Tas 
KNOWLEDGE OF THE GLORY or Gob, in the Face of 
Jeſus Chriſs. Together with the laſt Verſe of the fore- 
going Chapter, which introduces this, But we all with 
open Face, en as in a Glaſs, the GLoky OF TRR 
LorD, are changed into the ſame Image, from Glory to 
Glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord. Nothing can 
be more evident, than that a ſaving Belief of the Goſpel, 
is here ſpoken of, by the Apoſtle, as ariſing from the 
Mind's being enlightened, to behold: the divine Glory 
of the Things it exhibits  _ , 
This View or Senſe of the divine Glory, and unparal- 
eld Beauty of the Things exhibited to us in the Goſpel, 
has a Tendency to convince the Mind of their Divinity 
two Ways; directly, and more indirefly and remotely. 
1. A View of this divine Glory dire, convinces the 7 
Mind of the Divinity of theſe Things, as this Glory 1 
in itſelf a direct, clear, and all-conquering Evidence 2 
it; eſpecially when clearly diſcovered, or when this 
ſupernatural Senſe is given in a good Degree. wad © 
He that has his Fr apo thus direly convinced and 
aſſured of the Divinity of the Things of the Goſpel, 
by a clear View of their divine Glory, has a reaſonable 
Conviction; his Belief and Aſſurance is altogether agree- 
able to Reaſon; becauſe the divine Glory and Beauty of 
divine Things is in itſelf, real Evidence of their Divinity, 
and the moſt direct and ſtrong Evidence. He that 
truly ſees the divine, tranſcendent, ſupreme Glory of 
thoſe Things which are divine, does, as it were, know 
their Divinity intuitively; he not only argues that they 
are divine, but he ſees that they are divine; he ſees that 
m them wherein Divinity chiefly conſiſts; for in-this 
Glory, which is ſo vaſtly and inexpreſſibly diſtinguiſhed 


trom 


wie fifeb Sign" PAxr II 


from che Glory of artificial Things, and all other 
does mainly conſiſt the true Notion of Divinity: God i 
God, and diſtinguiſhed from all other Beings, and 
exalted above them, chiefly by his divine Beauty, which 
is infinitely diverſe from all other Beauty. They there. 
fore that ſee the Stamp of this Glory in divine Things, 
they ſee Divinity in them, they ſee God in them, and ſo 
ſee them to be divine; becauſe they ſee that in them 
wherein the trueſt Idea of Divinity does conſiſt. Thus 
a Soul may have a Kind of intuitive Knowledge of the 
Divinity of the Things exhibited in the Goſpel; not 
that he judges the Doctrines of the Goſpel to be from 
God, without any Argument or Deduction at all; but 
it is without any long Chain of Arguments; the Argu- 
ment is but one, and the Evidence direct; the Mind 
aſcends to the Truth of the Goſpel but by one Step, 
and that is its divine e's” 

It would be very ſtrange, if any profeſſing Chriſtian 
ſhould deny it to be poſſible that there ſhould be an 
Excellency in divine Things, which is ſotranſcendent, and 
exceedingly different from what is in other Things, that 


262 


if it were ſeen, would evidently diftinguiſh them. We 


can't rationally doubt, but that Things that are divine, 
that appertain to the ſupreme Being, are vaſtly different 
from Things that are humane; that there is a god-like, 
high, and glorious Excellency in them, that does ſo dil- 
tinguiſn them from the Things which are of Men, that 

the Difference as ineffable; and therefore ſuch, as, if ſeen, 
will have a moft convincing, fatisfying Influence upon 
any one, chat they are what they are, viz. divine. 
Doubtleſs there is chat Glory and Excellency in the divine 
Being, by which he is ſo infinitely diſtinguiſned from all 
other Beings, that if it were ſern, he might (be; known 
by it. It would therefore be very unreaſonable to dem 
that it 1s poſſible for God, to give Manifeſtations of this 
diſtinguiſning Excellency, in Things by which he 3s 
pleaſed to make himſelf known; and that this diftin- 
guiſhing Excellency may be clearly ſeen in them. There 


Parr III. of gracious Affe ions. 263 


ae natural Excellencies that are very evidently diſtin- 
guiſning of the Subjects of Authors, to any one who be- 
holds them. How vaſtly is the Speech of an underſtand- 
ing Man different from that of a little Child! And how 
greatly diſtinguiſhed is the Speech of ſome Men of 

Genius, as Homer, Cicero, Milton, Locke, Addiſon, and 
others, from that of many other underſtanding Men! 
There are no Limits to be ſet to the Degrees of Manifeſt- 
ations of mental Excellency, that there may be in 
Speech. But the Appearances of the natural Perfecti- 
ons of God, in the Manifeſtations he makès of himfelf, 


may doubtleſs be unſpeakably more evidently diftin- - ? 


guiſhing, than the Appearances of thoſe Worms of the 
Duſt, in which they differ one from another. He that. 
is well acquainted with Mankind, and their Works, by 
viewing the Sun, may know it is no human Work. And 
tis reaſonable to ſuppoſe, that when Chriſt comes at the 
End of the World, in the Glory of his Father, it will 
be with ſuch ineffable Appearances of Divinity, as wi 
leave no Doubt tothe Inhabitants of the World, even the 
moſt obſtinate Infidels, that he who appears, is a divine 
Perſon. But above all, do the Manifeſtations of the moral 
and ſpiritual Glory of the divine Being (which is the 
proper Beauty of the Divinity) bring their own Evidence, 
and tend to aſſure the Heart. Thus the Diciples were 
aſſured that Jeſus was the Son of God, for they Bebeld 
his Glory, as the Glory of the only Begotten of the Father, 
full of Grace and Truth, John 1. 14. When Chriſt ap» 
peared inthe Glory of his Transfiguration tohis Diſeiples, 
with that outward Glory, to their bodily Eyes, which 
was a ſweet and admirable Symbol and Semblance of his 
ſpiritual Glory, together with his ſpiritual Glory itſelf, 
manifeſted to their Minds; the Manifeſtation of Glory 


was ſuch, as did perfectly, and with good Reafon, afſure  * 


them of his Divinity; as appears by what one of them, 
viz. the Apoſtle Peter, ſays concerning it, 2 Pet. i. 
16. 17. 18. For we have not followed cunningly deviſed: - 


Fables, when we made known unto you the Power and Com- 


ng 


264 


* 


© © The fifth Sign PanzM 


ing of. our Lord Feſus Chriſt, but were Eye-witneſſes of jj, 
Majeſty : For be received from God the Father, Honour and 
Glory; when there came ſuch a Voice to him from the excel. 
lent Glory, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well Plea- 


fed. And this Voice which came from Heaven, we beard 


when we were with bim in the holy Mount. The Apoſtle 
calls that Mount tbe boly Mount, becauſe the Mani. 


feſtations of Chriſt, which were there made totheir Minds, 


and which their Minds where eſpecially impreſs'd and 


* Taviſhed with, was the Glory of his Holineſs, or the 


Beauty of his moral Excellency ; or, as another of theſe 
Diciples, who ſaw it, exprefles it, His Glory, as full of 


Grace and Truth. 


Now this diſtinguiſhing Glory of the divine Being 


| has it's brighteſt Appearance and Manifeſtation, in the 


Things propoſed and exhibited to us in the Goſpel, the 
Doctrines there taught, the Word there ſpoken, and the 
divine Counſels, Acts and Works there revealed. Thele 


Things have the cleareſt, moſt admirable, and diſtin- 


guiſhing Repreſentations and Exhibitions of the Glory 
of God's moral Perfections, that ever were made to the 
World. And if there be ſuch a diſtinguiſhing, eviden- 
nal Manifeftation of divine Glory in the Goſpel, 'tis 


reaſonable to ſuppoſe that there may be ſuch a Thing as 


Seeing it: What ſhoald hinder but that it may be ſeen? 


is no Argument that it can't be ſeen, that ſome don't 


ſee it; tho' they may be diſcerning Men in temporal 
Matters. If there be ſuch ineffable, diſtinguiſhing, 


evidential Excellencies in the Goſpel, tis reaſonable to 


ſuppoſe that they are ſuch as are not to be diſcerned, but 


by the ſpecial Influence and Enlightnings of the Spirit 


of God. There is need of uncommon Force of Mind 
to diſcern the diſtinguiſhing Excellencies of the Works 
of Authors of great Genius: Thoſe Things in Milton, 
which to mean Judges, appear taſteleſs, and Imper- 

ions, are his inimitable Excellencies in the Eyes of 
thoſe who are of greater Diſcerning, and better Taſte. 


And if there be a Book, which God is the Author ol, 
7 £18 


farin. of gracious Aﬀettiom. 263 


is moſt reaſonable to L that the diſtinguiſhing 
Glories of his Word are o 


8 r 


nner . 


- % = 3 LE 7 SF TD CTCTD JS 


a Man ſees his own Si! 


ſuch a Kind; as that the Sin 
and Corruption of Men's Hearts, which above all 
Things alienates Men from the Diety, and makes the 
Heart dull and ſtupid to any Senſe or Taſte of thoſe 
Things wherein the moral Glory of the divine Perfec- 
tions conſiſts; I ſay, tis but reaſonable to ſuppoſe, that 
this would blind Men from diſcerning the Beauties of 


ſuch a Book; and that therefore they will not ſee them, 


but as God is pleaſed to enlighten them, and reſtore an 
holy Taſte, to diſcern and reliſh divine Beauties. 
This Senſe of the ſpiritual Excellency and Beauty of 


divine Things, does alſo tend dire#ly to convince the 


Mind of the Truth of the Goſpel, as there are very 


many of the moſt important Things declared in the 


Goſpel, that are hid from the Eyes of natural Men, the 


Truth of which does in Effect conſiſt in this Excellency, 


or does ſo immediately depend upon it and reſult from 


it; that in this Excellency's being ſeen, the Truth of 
" thoſe Things is ſeen. As ſoon as ever the Eyes are 
opened to behold the holy Beauty and Amiableneſs 
that is in divine Things, a Multitude of moſt important 


Doctrines of the Goſpel, that depend upon it, (which 


all appear ſtrange and dark to natural Men) are at once 


ſeen to be true. As for Inſtance; hereby appears the 
Truth of what the Word of God declares concerning 


the exceeding Evil of Sin; for the fame Eye that 


diſcerns the tranſcendent Beauty of Holineſs, neceſlarily - 


therein ſees the exceeding Odiouſneſs of Sin: The fame 
Taſte which reliſhes the Sweetneſs of true moral Good, 
taſtes the Bitterneſs of Evil. And by this Means 


has now a Senſe to dis Objects of this Nature ; and 
ſo ſees the Truth of what the Word of God declares 


concerning the exceeding Sinfulneſs of Mankind, which 
before he did not ſee. e now ſees the dreadful Pol 
lution of his Heart, and the deſperate Depravity of his 
Nature, in a new Manner; for his Soul has now a Senſe 


S 


* 


and Loathſomneſs; for he 


— 


| | 266 
. ven it to feel the Pain of ſuch a Diſeaſe: And this 
| Hows him the Truth of what the, «Scripture reveals 
opncerning uy, Corruption of Man's Nature, his original 
Sin, and the ruinous undone Condition Man is in, and 


his need of a Saviour, his need, of the mighty Power of 


God to renew his Heart and change his Nature, Men 
by ſeeing the true Excellency of Holineſs, do ſee the 


ſhown, that the Glory of them. depend on this: And 
hereby they ſee the Truth of all that the Scripture de- 
clares concerning  Gad's glorious Excellency and Ma- 


jeſty, his being the Fountain of all Good, the only 


Happineſs of the Creature, &c. And this again ſheys 
the Mind the Truth of what the Scripture teaches con- 
cerning the Evil of Sin againſt ſo glorious a God; and 
alſo the Truth of what it teaches concerning Sin's juſt 
Deſert of that dreadful Puniſhment which it reveals; 
and alſo concerning the Impoſſibility of our offering any 
Satisfaction, or ſufficient Atonement, for that which is 
ſo infinitely evil and heinous. And this again ſhews 
the Truth of what the Scripture reveals concerning the 
Neceſſity of a Saviour, to offer an Atonement of infinite 
Value for Sin. And this Senſe of ſpiritual Beauty that 
has been ſpoken of, enables the Soul to ſee the Glory 


of thoſe Things which the Goſpel reveals concerning the 


Perſon of Chriit; and ſo enables to ſee the exceeding: 
Beauty and Dignity of his Perſon, appearing in what 
the Goſpel exhibits of his Word, Works, Acts and. 
Life: And this Apprehenſion of the ſuperlative Dignity 
of his Perſon, ſhews the Truth of what the Goſpel de- 
clares concerning the Value of his Blood and Righteouſ- 
neſs, and ſo the infinite Excellency of that Offering he 
has made to God for us, and fo its Sufficiency to atone 
for our Sins, and recommend us to God. And thus the 
Spirit of God diſcovers the Way of Salvation by Chriſt: 
Thus the Soul ſees the Fitneſs and Suitableneſs of this 

Way of Salvation, the admirable Wiſdom. of the Con- 

triyvance, 


The geb Sign PA II 


lory of all thoſe Things, which both Reaſon and 
Scripture ſhey to be in the divine Being; for it has been 


as * 5 — | n nn 2 


rr „ 2 we d 


Parr III. of gracious Aﬀettions, 267 
trivance, and the perfect Anſwerableneſs of the Proviſion 
that the Goſpel exhibits, (as made for us) to our Ne- 
ceſſities. A. Senſe of true divine Beauty being given to 
the Soul, the Soul diſcerns the Beauty of every Part of 
the Goſpel Scheme. This alſo ſhews the Soul the Truth 
of what the Word of God declares concerning Mans 
chief Happineſs, as conſiſting in holy Exerciſes and _ 
Enjoyments. This ſhews the Truth of what the Goſpel 
declares concerning the unſpeakable Glory of the he- 
venly State. And what the Prophecies of. the old 
Teſtament, and the Writings of the Apoſtles declare 
concerning the Glory of the Meſſiah's Kingdom, is 
now all plain; and alſo what the Scripture teaches con- 
cerning the Reaſons and Grounds of our Duty. The 
Truth of all theſe Things revealed in the Scripture, and 
many more that might be mentioned, appear to the 
Soul, only by imparting that ſpiritual Taſte of divine 
Beauty, which has been ſpoken of; they being hidden 
Things to the Soul beforeeeee. 1 

And beſides all this, the Truth of all thoſe Things: 
which the Scriptare ſays about experimental Religion, 
is hereby known; for they are now experienced. , And 
this convinces the Soul that one who knew the Heart 
of Man, better than we know. our own Hearts, and 
perfectly knew the Nature of Virtue and Holinefs, was 
the Author of the Scriptures. And the opening to 
View, with ſuch Clearneſs, ſuch a World of wonderful 
and glorious Truth in the Goſpel, that before was un- 
known, being quite above the View of a natural Eye, 
but now appearing ſo clear and bright, has a powerful 
and invincible Influence on the Soul, o perſuade of the 
Divinity of the Goſpel. „I 

Unleſs Men may come to a reaſonite ſolid Perſuaſion 
and Conviction of the Truth of the Goſpel, by the 
internal Evidences of it, in the Way that has been ſpokeg 
of, viz. By a Sight of it's Glory; tis impoſſible, that 
thoſe who are illiterate, and unacquainted with Hiſtory, 
ſhould have any thorough and effectual Conviction of 

| S 2 it 


my : "A _— - * " 
* 4 ha N 
- 7 


268 The fifth Sign Part Ul, 
it at all. They may without this, ſee a great deal of 
Probability of it; it may be reaſonable for them to give 
much Credit to what learned Men, and Hiſtorians tell 
them; and they may tell them ſo much, that it may look 
very probable and rational to them, that the chriſtian 
Religion 1s true; and fo much that they would be very 
unreaſonable not to entertain this Opinion. But to have 
2 Conviction, ſo clear, and evident, and aſſuring, as tb 
| be ſufficient to induce them, with Boldneſs, to ſell all, 

confidently and fearleſsly to run the Venture of the Loſs 
of all Things, and of enduring the moſt exquiſite and 
long-continued Torments, and to trample the World 
under Foot, and count all Things but Dung, for Chriſt, 
the Evidence they can have | Hiſtory, cannot be 
ſufficient. It is impoſſible that Men, who have not 
ſomething of a general View of the hiſtorical World, or 
the Series of Hiſtory from Age to Age, ſhould come at 
the Force of Arguments for the Truth of Chriſtianity, 
drawn from Hiſtory, to that Degree, as effeCtually to 
induce them to venture their all upon it. After all that 
learned Men have faid to them, there will remain innu- 
merable Doubts on their Minds: They will be ready, 
when pinched with ſome great Trial of their Faith, to 
ſay, How do I know this, or that? How do I know 
£*when theſe Hiſtories were written? Learned Men tell 
Vine theſe Hiſtories were ſo and ſo atteſted in the Day 
of them; but how do I know that there were ſuch 
Atteſtations then? They tell me there is equal Reaſon 
ce to believe theſe Facts, as any whatſoever that are 
<« related at ſuch a Diſtance; but how do I know that 
c other Facts which are related of thoſe Ages, ever 
« were?” Thoſe who have not ſomething of a general 
View of the Series of hiſtorical Events, and of the State 
of Mankind from Age to Age, cannot ſee the clear 
Evidence from Hiſtory, of the Truth of Facts, in 
diſtant Ages; but there will endleſs Doubts and Scru- 


' ples remain. tops 
| | . But 


pax T III. of gracious Affection. 269 

But the Goſpel was not given only for learned Men. 
There are at leaſt Nineteen in Twenty, if not Ninety- 
nine in an Hundred, of thoſe for whom the Scriptures 
were written, that are not capable of any certain or 
effectual Conviction of the divine Authority of the 
Scriptures, by ſuch Arguments as learned Men make 
Uſe of. If Men who have been brought up in Hea- 
theniſm, mult wait for a clear and certain Conviction of 
the Truth of Chriſtianity, 'till they have Learning and 
Acquaintance with the Hiſtories of politer Nations, 
enough to ſee clearly the Force of ſuch Kind of Argu- 
ments; it will make the Evidence of the Goſpel, to 
them, immenſely cumberſome, and will * the 
Propagation of the Goſpel among them, infinitely 
difficult. Miſerable is the Condition of the Houſſatun- 
nuck Indians, and others, who have lately manifeſted a a 
Deſire to be inſtructed in Chriſtianity; if they can come 
at no Evidence of the Truth of Chriſtianity, ſufficient 
to induce them to ſell all for Chriſt, in any other Way 
but this. 

Tis unreaſonable to ſuppoſe, that God has provided for 
his People, no more than probable Evid ences of the 
Truth of the Goſpel. He has with great Care, abun- + 
dantly provided, and given them, the moſt convincing, 3 
aſſuring, ſatisfying and manifold Evidence of his Faith- 
fulneſs in the Covenant of Grace; and as David ſays, 
made a Covenant, ordered in all Things and ſure. There- 
fore it is rational to ſuppoſe, that at the ſame Time, he 
would not fail of ordering the Matter ſo, that there 
ſhould not be wanting, as great, and clear Evidence, 
that this is his Covenant, and that theſe Promiſes are his 
Promiſes ; or, which is the ſame Thing, that the Chriſ- 
tian — is true, and that the Goſpel is his Word. 
Otherwiſe in vain are thoſe great Aſſurances he has given 
of his Faithfulneſs in his enant, by confirming it 

with his Oath, and ſo varioul eſtabliſhing it by Seal, 
and Pledges. For the Evidence that it is his Covenant 
properly the Foundation on which: all the Force ang 

| Effect 


2 


270 Fe fifth Sign Pakr III. 
Effect of thoſe other Aſſurances do ſtand. We may 
therefore undoubtedly ſuppoſe and cnclude, that there 
is ſome Sort of Evidence which God has given, that 
this Covenant, and theſe Promiſes are bis, ed all 
meer Probability; that there are ſome Grounds of Af. 
| ſurance of it held forth, which, if we are not blind to 
them, tend to give an higher Perſwaſion, than any argu- 
ing from Hiftory, human Tradition, Fc. which the 
Ilſiterate, and Unacquainted with Hiſtory, are capable 
of; yea, that which is good Ground of the higheſt and 
moſt perfect Aſſurance, that Mankind have in any Caſe 
whatſoever; agreeable to thoſe high Expreſſions which 
the Apoſtle uſes, Heb. x. 22. Let us draw near in FULL 
AssvRAnce or Fairn, And Col. ii. 2. That their 
Hearts might be comforted, being knit together in Love, 
and unto ALL RiIchEs, OF THE FULL ASSURANCE of 
-UnpersTANDING, f the Acknowledgement of the Myſtery 
of 'God, and of the Father, and of Chriſt. It is reaſon- 
| able to ſuppoſe, that God would give the greateſt Evi- 
dence, of thoſe Things which are greateſt, and the 
Truth of which is of greateſt Importance to us: And 
that we therefore, if we are wiſe, and act rationally, 
ſhall have the greateſt Deſire of having full, undoubting, 
and perfect Aſſurance of. But it is certain, that ſuch 
an Aſſurance is not to be attained, by the greater Part 
of them who live under the Goſpel, by Arguments 
fetch'd from ancient Traditions, Hiftories, and Monu- 
ments. a — OY 
And if we come to Fact and Experience, there is not 
the leaſt Reaſon to ſuppoſe, that dhe in an Hundred of 
thoſe who have been ſincere Chriſtians, and have had a 
Heart to fell all for Chriſt, have come by their Convic- 
tion of the Truth of the Goſpel, this Way. If we 
read over the Hiſtories of the many Thouſands that 
died Martyrs for Chriſt, ſince the Beginning of the 
Reformation, and have chearfully undergone extreme 
Tortures, in a Confidence of the Truth of the Goſpel, 
and conſider their Circumſtances and OY how 
cy 


Wes 


Par III. of gracious Aﬀettiom. 271 


few of them were there, that we can reaſonably ſuppoſe, 


ever came by their aſſured Perſwaſion, this Way; or 


indeed for whom it was poſſible, reaſonably to receive fo + 


full and ftrong an Aſſurance, from ſuch Arguments! 


Many of them were weak Women and Children, and 


the greater Part of them illiterate Perſons, .many of 
whom 'had been brought up in popiſh Ignorance and 
Darkneſs, and were but newly come out of it, and lived 
and died in Times, wherein thoſe Arguments for the 
Truth of Chriſtianity from Antiquity and Hiſtory, had 
been but very imperfectly handled. And indeed, tis 


but very lately that theſe Arguments have been ſet in a 


clear and convincing Light, even by learned Men them- 
ſelves: And ſince it has been done, there never were 
fewer thorough Believers, among thoſe who have been 
educated in the true Religion: Infidelity never prevailed 
ſo much, in any Age, as in this, wherein theſe Argu- 
ments are handled to the greateſt Advantage. 


The true Martyrs of Jeſus Chriſt, are not thoſe Who 


have only been ſtrong in Opinion, that the Goſpel of 


Chriſt is true, but thoſe that bave ſeen the Truth of. it; 
as the very Name of Martyrs or Witneſſes (by which 


they are called in Scripture) implies. Thoſe are very 
improperly called Witneſſes of the Truth of any Thing, 
who only declare they are very much of Opinion that 


ſuch a Thing is true, Thoſe only are proper Witneſſes 


who can, and do teſtify, that they have ſeen the Truth of 
the Thing they aſſert; John in. 11. Ve ſpeak that we do 
know, and teſtify that we have ſcen. John i. 34. And 
I ſaw, and bear Record; that this is the Son of God. 
1 John iv. 14. Aud we have ſeen, and do teſtify, that 
the Father ſent the Son, to be the Saviour of th World. 
Acts xxit. 14, 15. The God of our Fathers bath choſen 
ther, that thon ſhould ft know his Will, and ſee that juſt 


One, and fhould'ft hear the Voice of his Mouth: For in 
Halt be bis Witneſs unto all Men; of what thou. haf ſeen __ 


and heard. But the true M of Jeſus Chtiſt are 


7 


called his Witneſſes; and all the Saints, who by their 
| holy - 


* 


„ 


* 


” 1 
„ 


272 The fifth Sign 


Part III. 


holy Practice under great Trials, declare that Faith, 
aunbich is the SUBSTANCE of Things hoped for, and the 
EviDEnce of Things not ſeen, are called Witneſſes; 
Heb. xi. 1, and xii. 1, becauſe by their Profeſſion and 
Practice, they declare their Aſſurance of the Truth 
and Divinity of the Goſpel, having had the Eyes 
of their Minds enlightened, to ſee Divinity in the Gof. 
pel, or to behold that unparallel'd, ineffably excellent, 
and truly divine Glory ſhining in it, which is alto- 
gether diſtinguiſhing, evidential, and convincing: $9 
that they may truly be ſaid to have ſeen God in it, 
and to have ſeen that it is indeed divine: And ſo can 


| ſpeak in the Style of Witneſſes; and not only fay, 


that they think the Goſpel is divine, but ſay, that i 
is divine, giving it in as their Teſtimony, becauſe they 
have ſeen it to be ſo. Doubtleſs Peter, James, 
and Fobn, after they had ſeen that excellent Glory of 
Chriſt in the Mount, would have been ready, when 
they came down, to ſpeak in the Language of Witneſſes, 


and to ſay poſitively, that Feſus is the Son of God; as 


Peter ſays, they were Eye-witneſſes, 2 Pet. 1. 16. And 
ſo all Nations will be ready poſitively to lay this, when 
they ſhall behold his Glory at the Day of Judgment; 


though what will be univerſally ſeen, will be only his 


natural Glory, and not his moral and ſpiritual Glory, 


which is much more diſtinguiſhing. But yet, it muſt 
be noted, that among thoſe who have a ſpiritual Sight 


of the divine Glory of the Goſpel, there is a great 
Variety of Degrees of Strength of Faith, as there is a 
vaſt -Variety of the Degrees of Clearneſs of Views of 
this Glory: But there is no true and ſaving Faith, or 


ſpiritual Conviction of the Judgment, of the Truth 


of the Goſpel, that has nothing in it, of this Mani 
feſtation of its internal Evidence, in ſome Degree. The 
Goſpel of the bleſſed God don't go abroad a begging 
for its Evidence, ſo much as ſome think; it has its 
7, qa and moſt proper Evidence in itſelf. Tho' great 
Uſe may be made of external Arguments, they are not 
$a 89 


me e re . e e 


— 


pakr III. of gracious Affections. 273 
to be an ene but highly prized and valued; for 
they may be greatly ſerviceable to awaken Unbelievers, 
and bring them to ſerious Conſideration, and to confirm 
the Faith of true Saints: Yea, they may be in ſome 
Reſpects ſubſervient to the begetting of a ſaving Faith in 
Men. Though what was ſaid before remains true, that 
there is no ſpiritual Conviction of the Judgment, but 
what ariſes from an Apprehenſion of the ſpiritual Beauty 
and Glory of divine Things: For, as has been obſerved, 
this Apprehenſion or View has a Tendency to convince 
the Mind of the Truth of the Goſpel, two Ways; 
either directly or indirectly. Having therefore already 
obſerved how it does this directly, I proceed now, 


2. To obſerve how a View of this divine Glory does 
convince the Mind of the Truth of Chriſtianity, more 
indirectly, 


Firſt, It doth ſo as the Prejudices of the Heart 
againſt the Truth of divine Things are hereby removed, 
ſo that the Mind thereby lies open to the Force of the 
Reaſons which are offered. The Mind of Man is 
naturally full of Enmity againſt the Doctrines of the 
Goſpel; which is a Diſadvantage to thoſe Arguments 
that prove their Truth, and cauſes them to loſe their 
Force upon the Mind: But when a Perſon has diſcovered - 
to him the divine Excellency of chriſtian Doctrines, 
this deſtroys that Enmity, and removes the Prejudices, 
and ſanctifies the Reaſon, and cauſes it to be open and 
free. Hence is a vaſt Difference, as to the Force that 
Arguments have to convince the Mind. Hence was 
the very different Effect, which Chriſt's Miracles had to 
toconvince the Diſciples, from what they had to convinee 
the Scribes and Phariſees: Not that they had a ſtronger 
Reaſon, or had their Reaſon more improved; but their 
Reaſon was ſanctified, and thoſe blinding Prejudices, 
which the Scribesand Phariſees were under, were removed, 
by the Senſe they had of the Excellency of Chriſt and 
his Doctrine. Secondly, 


> 


* 


274 


Reaſon, but poſitively helps Reaſon. It makes even 
the ſpeculative Notions more lively. It aſſiſts and 
engages the Attention of the Mind to that Kind of 
Objects; which cauſes it to have a clearer View of them, 
and more clearly to ſee their mutual Relations. The 
Ideas themſelves, which otherwiſe are dim and obſcure, 
by this Means have a Light caſt upon them; and are 
impreſs d with greater Strength; ſo that the Mind can 
better judge of them, as he that beholds the Objects on 
the Face of the Earth, when the Light of the Sun is 


caſt upon them, is under greater Advantage to diſcern 


them, in their true Forms, and mutual Relations, and 


to ſee the Evidences of divine Wiſdom and Skill in their 


Contrivance, than he that ſees them in a dim Star-light, 
or Twilight. . 
What has been ſaid, may ſerve in ſome Meaſure to 


ſhew the Nature of a ſpiritual Conviction of the Judg- 


ment of the Truth and Reality of divine Things; and 


ſo to diſtinguiſn truly gracious Affections from others; 
for gracious Affections are evermore attended with ſuch 
2 Conviction of the Judgment. 


But before I diſmiſs this Head, it will be needful to 
obſerve the Ways whereby ſome- are deceived, with 
Reſpect to this Matter; and take Notice of ſeveral 
Things, that are ſometimes taken for a ſpiritual and 


faving Belief of the Truth of the Things of Religion, 


which are indeed very diverſe from 1 t. 
1. There is a Degree of Conviction of the Truth of 


the great Things ot Religion, that ariſes from the com- 


mon Enlightnings of the Spirit of God. That more 
Hvely and ſenſible Apprehenſion of the Things of Reli- 
gion, with Refpe& to what is natural in them, ſuch as 
natural Men have who are under Awakenings and 
common Illuminations, will give ſome Degree of Con- 
viction of the Truth of divine Things, beyond what 
they had before they were thus enlightened, For here- 


by 


2 : Id LY 


The fifth Sim Px II. 


Secondly, It not only removes the Hindrances of 


arr III. of gracious Affection. 275 
by they ſee the Manifeſtations there are, in the Reve- 
nion made in the holy Scriptures, and Things exhibited 
that Revelation, of the natural Perfections of God, 
ch as his Greatneſs, Power, and awful Majeſty ; which 
ends to convince the Mind, that this is the Word of a 
geat and terrible God. From the Tokens there are 
i God's Greatneſs and Majeſty in his Word and Works, 
which they have a great Senſe of, from the common 
Influence of the Spirit of God, they may have a much 
geater Conviction, that theſe are indeed the Word and 
Works of a very great inviſible Being. And the livelß 
apprehenſion of the Greatneſs of God, which natural 
Men may have, tends to make them ſenſible of the 
geat Guilt, which Sin againſt ſuch a God brings, and 4 
he Dreadfulneſs of his Wrath for Sin. And this tends 
o cauſe them more eaſily and fully to believe the Reve- 
ation the Scripture makes of another World, and of 
the extreme Miſery it threatens, there to be inflicted on 
Sinners. And fo from that Senſe of the great natural 
Good there is in the Things of Religion, which is 
ſometimes given in common Illuminations, Men may 
te the more induced to believe the Truth of Religion. 
Theſe Things Perſons may have, and yet have no Senſe 
of the Beauty and Amiableneſs of the moral and holy 
Excellency that is in the Things of Religion; and there- 
fore no ſpiritual Conviction of their Truth. But yet 
ſuch Convictions are ſometimes miſtaken, for ſaving 
Convictions, and the Affections flowing from them, for 
aring Affections. . a 


0 ** — —— Fi 


*% 


2. The extraordinary. Impreſſions which are made on = 
the Imaginations of ſome Perſons, in the Viſions, and 
Immediate ſtrong Impulfes and Suggeſtions that they 
ave, as though they ſaw Sights, and had Words ſpoken 
them, may, and often do beget a ftrong Perſwaſion 
of the Truth of inviſible Things. T _ the general 
Tendency of ſuch Things, in their final Iflue, is to x 
ity Men off from the Word of God, and to cauſe 


them 


276 The fifth Sign Pan I 


them to reject the Goſpel, and to eſtabliſh Unbelief ang 
Atheiſm; yet for the preſent, they may, and often do 
beget a confident Perſwaſion of the Truth of fone 
Things that are revealed in the Scriptures; however 
their Confidence is founded in Deluſion, and fo nothing 
worth. As for Inſtance, if a Perſon has by ſome inviſible 
Agent, immediately and ſtrongly impreſſed on his Ima. 
gination, the Appearance of a bright Light, and glo- 
rious Form of a Perſon ſeated on a Throne, with great 
external Majeſty and Beauty, uttering ſome remarkable 
Words, with great Force and Energy: The Perſon who 
is the Subject of ſuch an Operation, may be from hence 
, confident, that there are inviſible Agents, ſpiritual Being 
from what he has experienced, knowing that he had ng 
Hand himſelf in this extraordinary Effect, which he has 
experienced: And he may alſo be cenfident, that this is 
_ Chriſt, whom he ſaw and heard ſpeaking: And this 
may make him confident, that there 1s a Chriſt, and that 
Chriſt reigns on a Throne in Heaven, as he ſaw him; 
and may be confident, that the Words which he heard 
him ſpeak are true, Sc.—In the ſame Manner, as the 
lying Miracles of the Papiſts, may for the preſent, 
beget in the Minds of the ignorant deluded People, a 
ſtrong Perſwaſion of the Truth of many Things declared 
in the New- Teſtament. Thus when the Images of 
Chrift,. in popiſh Churches, are on ſome extraordinary 
Occaſions, made by Prieſt-craft to appear to the People, 
as if they wept, and ſhed freſh Blood, and moved, and 
uttered ſuch and ſuch Words; the People may be verih 

waded that it is a Miracle wrought by Chriſt himſelt, 
and from thence may be confident there is a Chriſt, and 
that what they are told of his Death and Sufferings, and 
Reſurrection, and Aſcenſion, and preſent Government 
of the World is true; for they may look upon this 
Miracle, as a certain Evidence of all theſe Things, and 
a Kind of occular Demonſtration of them. This may 
de the Influence of theſe lying Wonders for the preſent; 
though the general Tendency of them is not to 35 


Rur III. graciau Aﬀettiom. 3277 . 


that Jeſus Chriſt is come in the Fleſh, but finally to 
promote Atheiſm. Even the Intercourſe which Satan 
has with Witches, and their often experiencing his 
immediate Power, has a Tendency to convince them of 
the Truth of ſome of the Doctrines of Religion; as 
particularly the Reality of an inviſible World, or World 
of Spirits, contrary to the Doctrine of the Sadduces. 
The general Tendency of Satan's Influences is Deluſion: 
But yet he may mix ſome Truth with his Lies, that his 
Lies may not be ſo eaſily diſcovered. 

There are Multitudes that are deluded with a coun- 
terfeit Faith, from Impreſſions on their Imagination, in 
the Manner which has been now ſpoken of. They ſay 
they know that there is a God, for they have ſeen him; 
they know that Chriſt is the Son of God, for they have 
ſeen him in his Glory; they know that Chriſt died for 
Sinners, for they have ſeen him hanging on the Croſs, 
and his Blood running from his Wounds; they know 
there is a Heaven and a Hell, for they have ſeen the 
Miſery of the damned Souls in Hell, and the Glory of 
Saints and Angels in Heaven, (meaning ſome external 
Repreſentations, ſtrongly impreſs'd on their Imagina- 
tion) they know that the Scriptures are the Word of 
God, and that ſuch and ſuch Promiſes in particular, are 
his Word, for they have heard him ſpeak em to them, 
they came to their Minds ſuddenly and immediately from 
God, without their having any Hand in it. p 


3. Perſons may ſeem to have their Belief of the Truth 
of the Things of Religion greatly increaſed, when the 
Foundation of it is only a Perſwaſion they have received, 
of their Intereft in them. They firſt, by ſome Means 
or other, take up a Confidence, that if there be a Chriſt 
and Heaven, they are their's; and this prejudices them 
more in favour of the Truth of them. When they 
hear of the great and glorious Things of Religion, 
tis with this Notion, that all theſe Things belong to 


them; and hence eaſily become confident that they are 
| | true 


iliation. | 
Evangelical Humiliation is a Senſe that a Chriſtian 
es of his own utter Inſufficiency, Deſpicableneſs, and 
F Qdltouinefs, with an anſwerable Frame of Heart. 


ttue: They look upon it to be greatly for their Inter 
that they ſhould be true. Tis very obvious what x 
ſtrong Influence Men's Intereſt and Inclinations have on 
their Judgments, While a natural Man thinks, that if 
there be a Heaven and Hell; the latter, and not the 
former, belongs to him; then he will be hardly perſwa. 
ded, that there is a Heaven or Hell: But when he comes 
to be perſwaded, that Hell belongs only to other Folks, 
and not to him; then he can eaſily allow the Reality of 
Hell, and cry out of others Senſeleſſneſs and Sottiſhneſs, 
in neglecting Means of Eſcape from it: And being con- 
fident that he is a Child of God, and that God has pro- 
miſed Heaven to him, he may ſeem ſtrong in the Faith 
af its Reality, and may have a great Zeal againſt that 
Infidelity which denies it. | 5 

But I proceed to another diſtinguiſhing Sign of gta. 
cious Aﬀections. | | 


VI. Gracious Affections are attended with evangeliea 


There is a Diſtinction to be made between a gu 
and ebangelical Humiliation. The Former is what Men 
may be the Subjects of, while they are yet in a State 
of Nature, and have no gracious Affection; the Latter 
zs peculiar to true Saints: The Former is from the 
cothmon Influence of the Spirit of God, aſſiſting natu- 
ral Principles, and eſpecially natural Conſcience; the 
Latter is from the ſpecial Influences of the Spirit of 
God, implanting and exerciſing ſupernatural and divine 
Principles: The Former is from the Mind's being aſſi- 
ſted to a greater Senſe of the Things of Religion, as to 
| —_ natural Properties and Qualities, and particularly 

of the natural Perfections of God, ſuch as his Great- 
neſs, terrible Majeſty, Sc. which were manifeſted to 

the Congregation of Vrael, in giving * at 

g N Mount 


1 


Paxr M 


7 5 . 


1 


3 


PART III. of grations Affections. 1 279 ON 
Mount Sinai; the Latter is from a Senſe of the tran- 


cendent Beauty of divine Things in their moral Quali- 
tes: In the Former a Senſe of the awful Greatneſs, and 
tural Perfections of God, and of the Strictneſs of his 
Law, convinces Men, that they are exceeding ſinful 
nd guilty, and expoſed to the Wrath of God, as it 
gill wicked Men and Devils at the Day of Judgment; 
but they don't ſee their own Odiouſneſs on the Account 
of Sin; they don't ſee the hateful Nature of Sin; a 
Senſe of this is given in evangelical Humiliation, by a 
Diſcovery of the Beauty of God's Holineſs and moral 
perfection. In a legal Humiliation, Men are made ſenſi- 
ble chat they are little and nothing before the great and 
terrible God, and that they are undone, and wholly 
inſufficient to help themſelves; as wicked Men will be at 


the Day of Judgment: But they have not an anſwerable 
Frame of Heart, conſiſting in a Diſpoſition to abaſe them- 


elves, and exalt God alone: This Diſpoſition is given only 
nevangelical Humiliation, by overcoming the Heart, and 


changing its Inclination, by a Diſcovery of God's holy _ 
Beauty: Ina legal Humiliation, the Conſcience is convin- 


&d; as the Conſciences of all will be moſt perfectly at the 
Day of Judgment; but becauſe there is no ſpiritual Un- 
derſtanding, the Will is not bowed, nor the Inclination 
altered : This is done only in evangelical Humiliation. 
In legal Humiliation Men are brought to deſpair of 
helping themſelves; in Evangelical, they are brought 
voluntarily to deny and renounce themſelves : In the 
Former they are ſubdued and forced to the Ground; in 
the Latter, they are brought ſweetly to yield, and freely 
7 Sen Delight to proſtrate themſelves at the Feet 
0 : | | * 
Legal Humiliation has in it no ſpiritual Good, no- 
thing of the Nature of true Virtue; whereas evangelical 
Humiliation is that wherein the excellent Beauty of 
chriſtian Grace does very much conſiſt. Legal Humi- 


lation is uſeful, as a Means in order to Evangelical; as 


common Knowledge of the Things of Religion is a 
ot, Means 


280 The fixth Sign 
Means requiſite in order to ſpiritual Knowledge. Men 
may be legally humbled and have no Humility ; as the 
Wicked at the Day of Judgment will be thoroughly 
convinced that they have no Righteoufneſs, but are 
altogether ſinful, and exceeding guilty, and juſtly e. 
poſed to eternal Damnation, and be fully ſenſible of 
their own Helpleſſneſs, without the leaſt Mortification 
of the Pride of their Hearts: But the Eſſence of evan. 
gelical Humiliation conſiſts in ſuch Humility, as becomes 
à Creature, in itfelf exceeding ſinful, under a Diſpen- 
ſation of Grace; conſiſting in a mean Eſteem of himſelf, 
as in himſelf nothing, and altogether contemptible and 
odious; attended with a Mortification of a Difpoſition 
to exalt himſelf, and a free Renunciation of his own 
Glory. | 

This is a great and moſt eſſential Thing in true Rel. 
gion. The whole Frame of the Goſpel, and ever 
Thing appertaining to the new Covenant, and all God's 
Diſpenſations towards fallen Man, are calculated to 
bring to paſs this Effect in the Hearts of Men. They 
that are deſtitute of this, have no true Religion, what- 
ever Profeſſion they may make, and how high ſoever 
their religious Affections may be; Hab. ii. 4. Behold, 
Bis Soul which is lifted up, is not upright in him; but the 

Fuſt ſhall live by his Faith: i. e. He ſhall live by his 
Faith on God's Righteouſneſs and Grace, and not his 
own | Goodneſs and Excellency. God has abundantly 
manifeſted in his Word, that This is what he has a pe- 
culiar Reſpect to in his Saints, and that nothing 1s 
acceptable to him without it; Pſal. xxxiv. 18. The 
Lord is nigh unto them that are of a broken Heart, and 
ſaveth ſuch as be of a contrite Spirit. Pſal. li. 17. The 
Sacrifices of God are a broken Spirit; a broken and a con- 
trite Heart, O God, thou wilt not deſpiſe. Pal. cxxxvill. 
6. Though the Lord be High, he hath Reſpect unto the 
Lowly. Prov. iii. 34. He giveth Grace unto the Louh. 
Iſai. Ivii. 15. Thus ſaith the high and lofty One who inha- 
| biteth Eternity, whoſe Name is Holy, I dwell in the = 


Parr III 


"Part III. 1 of gracious Aﬀettions. 281 
| and boly Place, wirb bim alſo that is of a contrite a 


humble Spirit, to revive the Spirit of the Humble, and to 
revive the Heart of the contrite Ones. Iſai. Ixvi. 1, 2. 
Thus ſaith the Lord, the Heaven is my Throne, and the- 
Earth is my Footſtoof: — But to this Man will I look, even 
to him that is poor, hd of a contrite Spirit, and trembleth 


at my Word, Micah vi. 8. He hath ſbewed thee, 0 


Man, what is good; and what doth the Lord thy Ged 


require of thee, but to do juſtly, and to love Mercy, and 


to walk humbly with thy God? Matth. v. 3, Bleſſed are 
the Poor in Spirit: For their's is the Kingdom of Ged. 
Matth. xviil. 3, 4. Verihy I ſay unto you, except ye be 
converted, and become as little Children, ye Hall not enter 
into the Kingdom of Heaven. Whoſoever therefore all 
bumble himſelf as this little Child, the ſame is greateſt 

in the Kingdom of Heaven. Mark x. 15. Verily I ſay © 
unto you, whoſoever ſhall not receive the Kingdom of God 
as a little Child, be ſhall not enter therein. The Centurion 
that we have an Account of Lukevii. acknowledged, 
that he was not worthy that Chriſt ſhould enter under his 
Roof, and that he was not worthy to come to him. See 
the Manner of the Woman's coming to Chriſt that was 


a Sinner, Luke vii. 37, &c. And beheld a Woman in the 


City which was a Sinner, when ſhe knew that Jeſus ſat 
at Meat in the Phariſee's Houſe, brought an Alabaſter- 
Box of Ointment, and ſtood at his Feet behind bim werp- 
ing, and began to waſh his Feet with her Tears, and did 
wie them with the Hairs of ber Head. She did not 
think the Hair of her Head, which is the natural Crown 
and Glory of a Woman, (1 Cor. x1. 15.) too good to 
wipe the Feet of Chriſt withal. Jeſus moſt graciouſly 
accepted her, and fays to her, Thy Faith hath ſaved 
thee, go in Peace. The Woman of Canaan ſubmi ted. + 
to Chriſt, in his ſaying, It is not meet to take the Children's © 

Brtad, and to caſt it to Dogs, and did as it were own 
that ſhe was worthy to be called a Dog; whereupon 


_ Chriſt ſays unto her, O Woman, great is thy Faith; be 
1t unto thee, even as thou wilt. Matth. xv. 26, 27. The 


T Prodigal 


1 


$2 een Sim 


Prodigal Son ſaid, I will ariſe and go tomy Father, and! 
will ſay unto him, Father, I have ſinned againſt Heaven, 


and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy 


Son; mate me as one of thy hired Servants; Luke xv. 18, 
&c. See allo Luke xviii. 9, &c. And he ſpake this Pa- 
rable unto certain that truſted in themſelves that they were 
righteous, and deſpiſed others, &c.— he Publican ſtand- 
ing afar off, would not ſo much as lift up his Eyes 10 
Heaven, but ſmote upon his Breaſt, ſaying, God be merciful 
to me a Sinner. I tell you, this Man went down to his 
Houſe juſtified, rather than the other : For every one that 
exalteth himſelf ſball be abaſed, and be that humbleth bim- 
* ſelf ſhall be exalted. Matth. xxvin. 9. And they came, 
"  gnd beld him by the Feet, and worſhipped him. Col, iii. 
12. Put ye on, as the Kle#f of God,—Humbleneſs of 
Mind. Ezek. xx. 41, 43. I will accept you with your 
weet Savour, when I bring you out from the People, &c, 
EAA there ſhall ye remember your Ways, and all your 
8 Doings, wherein ye have been defiled; and ye ſhall loath 
yourſelves in your own Sight, for all your Evils that you 
Bave committed. Chap. xxxvi. 26, 27, 31. Anew Heart 
alſo will I give unto you, — And I will put my Spirit within 
yon, and cauſe you to walk in my Statutes, 8&c.—Then 
Hall ye remember your aten evil Ways, and your Doings 
that were not good, and ſhall loath yourſelves in your 
own Sight, for your Iniquities, and for your Abomina- 
tions. Chap. xvi. 63. That thou mayeſ remember and 
be confounded, and never open thy Mouth any more, becauſe 
of thy Shame, when I am pacified toward thee, for all 
that thou haſt done, ſaith the Lord. Job xlu. 6. J 
abbor myſelf, and repent in Duſt and Aſhes. 

As we would therefore make the Holy Scriptures our 
Rule, in judging of the Nature of true Religion, and 
Judging of our own religious Qualifications and State; 
it concerns us greatly to look at this Humiliation, as 
one of the .moſt eſfential Things pertaining to true 
Chriſtianity.“ This the principal Part of the * 

7 | | Duty 


Calvin in his Inſtitutions, Book II. Chap. 2: T 11. ſays, ©1 


vas always exceedingly pleaſed with that ſaying of CHEN 


Fan i 


Par fil. of graciols Af. ab; 


Duty of Self-denial. That Duty conſiſts in two Things, 
viz. Firſt, In a Man's denying his worldly Inclinations, 3 
and in forſaking and renouncing all worldly Objects and 
Enjoyments; and Secondly, In denying his natural Self- 
exaltation, and renouncing his own Dignity and Glory, 
and in being emptied of himſelf; ſo that he does freely, 
-and from his very Heart, as it were renounce himſelf, 
and annihilate himſelf. Thus the Chriſtian doth, in 
evangelical Humiliation. And this Latter is the greateft 
and moſt difficult Part of Selt-demial: Although they 
always go together, and one never truly 1s, where the 
other is not; yet natural Men can come much nearer to 
the former than the latter. Many Ancborites and Reclu- 
ſes have abandon d (tho* without any true Mortification) 
the Wealth and Pleaſures, and common Enjoyments of 
the World, who were far from renouncing their own 
Dignity and Righteouſneſs; they never denied themſelves 

for Chriſt, but only ſold one Luſt to feed another, fold 
a beaſtly Luſt to pamper a deviliſh One; and ſo were 
never the better; but their latter End was worſe than 
their Beginning; they turn'd out one black Devil, to 
let in ſeven white ones, that were worſe than the firſt, 

tho' of a fairer Countenance. Tis inexpreſſible, and 
almoſt inconceivable, how ſtrong a ſelf-righteous, ſelf- 

exalting Diſpoſition is naturally in Man; and what he 

will not do and ſuffer, to feed and gratify it; and 

what Lengths have been gone in a ſeeming Self-denial in 
other Reſpects, by Eſſenes and Phariſees among the Jews, 

and by Papiſts, many Sects of Hereticks, and Enthu- 

ſiaſts, among profeſſing Chriſtians; and by many Mabo- 
metans and by Pythagorean Philoſophers, and others, 

"LEES among 


OT 1 
„ 


The Foundation of our Philoſophy is Humility,“ and yet more 
« pleaſed with that of Auguſtine, As, ſays he, the Rhotorician, 
being aſked, what was the firſt Thing in the Rules of Elequence, 
© he anſwered, Pronunciation; what was the ſecond, Pronunciation; 
* what was the third, till he anſwered, - Pronunciation. So if you 
* ſhould aſł me concerning the Precepts of the chriſtian Religion, 1 
2 3 anſwer, firſtly, een and thirdly, and fore ver, Humi- 
Spc, ; 2 3 ; 


17 a. — 


ls J. en Sin. Par IM 


among the Heathen: And all to do Sacrifice to this 
Molo cb of ſpiritual Pride or Self- righteouſneſs; and that 


before God, and above their Fellow creatures. 

That Humiliation which has been ſpoken of, is what 
all the moſt glorious Hypocrites, who make the moſt 
ſplendid Shew of Mortification to the World, and high 
religious Affection, do groſy fail in. Were it not that 
this is ſo much inſiſted on in Scripture, as a moſt eſſential 
Thing in true Grace; one would be tempted to think 
that many of the Heathen Philoſophers were truly 


gracious, in whom was ſo bright an Appearance of 


many Vertues, and alſo great Illuminations, and in ward 
Fervours and Elevations of Mind, as though they were 
truly the Subjects of divine Illapſes and heavenly Com- 
munications.* , 
Tis true that many Hypocrites make great Pretences 
to Humility, as well as other Graces; and very often 
| | there 


— — — —————— — — — — 
Albeit the Pythagoreant were thus for Fudaic myſterious © Wil- 
1 dom, and many moral, as well as natural Accompliſhments; yet 
« were they not exempted from Boaſting and Pride. Which was 
indeed a Vice moſt epidemick, and as it were congenital, among 
« all the Philoſophers ;- but in a more particular Manner, among 


46 the Pythagoreans. So Hormus Hiſt. Philoſoph. Ls 3. Chap. II. | 


«© The Manners of the Pythagoreans were not r rom Boaſting. 
« They were all IFTEPTAUTOAOFOI fach as abounded in the Senſe 
% Commendation if their own Excellencies, and boafting even almoſt 
ie the Degree of {mmodefly and Impudence, as great Heinſius ad 
« Horat. has rightly obJerved. Thus indeed does proud Nature 
4 delight to walk in the Sparks of its own Fire. And altho' many 
of theſe old Philoſophers could, by the Strength of their own 
Lights and Heats, ti er with ſome common Elevations and 
« Raiſures of Spirit, (peradventure from a more than ordinary, tho' 
< not ſpecial and ſaving Aſſiſtance of the Spirit). abandon many 
« groſſer Vices; yet they were all deeply immerſed in that miſerable 
« curſed Abyſs of ſpiritual Pride: ſo that all their natural and m 
<« and philoſophic Attainments, did feed, nouriſh, ſtrengthen, an 
e render moſt inveterate, this Hell-bred Peſt of their Hearts. Yea 
«© thoſe of them that ſeem'd moſt modeſt, as the Academicks, who 
« profeſs'd they knew nothing, and the Cynicks, who greatly de- 
« cried, both in Words and Habits, the Pride of others, yet even 
a they abounded in the: moſt: notorious. and viſible Pride. So 3 
| «© natura 


they may have ſomething wherein to exalt themſelves 


paxr III. of gracious Afectians. 285 
there is nothing whatſoever which they make a higher 
Profeſſion of. They endeavour to make a great Shew 
of Humility in Speech and Behaviour; but they com- 
monly make bungling Work of it; tho' glorious Work 
in their own Eyes. They can't find out what a humble 
Speech and Behaviour is, or how to ſpeak and act ſo 
that there may indeed be a Savour of chriſtian Humility 
in what they ſay and do: That ſweet humble Air and 
Mien is beyond their Art, being not led by the Spirit, 
or naturally guided to a Behaviour becoming holy 
Humility: by the Vigour of a lowly Spirit within them. 
And therefore they have no other Way, many of them, 
but only to be much in declaring that they be humble, 

and teiling how they were humbled to the Duſt at ſuch 
and ſuch Times, and abounding in very bad Expreſſions 
which they uſe about themſelves; ſuch as, I am the leaſt 
of all Saints, I am a poor vile Creature, I am not worthy 
of the leaſt Mercy, or that God ſhould look upon me! Ob, 
I have a dreadful wicked Heart! My Heart is worſe than 
the "Devil! OF, this curſed Heart of mine, &c. Such 
Expreſſions are very often uſed, not with a Heart that 
is broken, not with ſpiritual Mourning, not with the 
Tears of her that waſhed Jeſus's Feet with her Tears, 
not as remembring and being confounded, and never opening 
their Mouth more, becauſe of their Shame, when God is 
facified, as the Expreſſion is, Ezek. xvi. 63. But with 
a light Air, with Smiles in the Countenance, or with a 
phariſaical Affectation: And we muſt believe that they 
are thus humble, and fee themſelves ſo vile, upon the 
Credit of their Say ſo; for there is nothing appears in 
them of any Savour of Humility, in the Manner of 
their Deportment and Deeds that they do. There are 
many that are full of Expreſſions of their own Vileneſs, 
| who 


| — — 
** A 8 


* natural and morally eſſential to corrupt Nature, is this envenom'd 
Root, Fountain and Plague of ſpiritual Pride : Eſpecially where 
there is any natural, moral or philoſophic Excellence to feed the 
* ſame, Whence Auſtin rightly judged all theſe philoſophie Ver- 
„ tues, to be but ſplended Sins.” Gale Court of the Gentiles, 
Part II. B. II. Chap. 10. 4 37. 


286 | The fixth Sign Pant III. 
who yet expect to be looked upon as eminent and bright 
Saints by others, as their Due; and *tis dangerous for 
any ſo much as to hint the Contrary, or to carry it 
towards them any otherwiſe, than as if we looked upon 


them ſome of the Chief of Chriſtians. There are 
many that are muth 'in crying out of their wicked 


Hearts, and their great Short- comings, and Unprofit- 


ableneſs, and ſpeaking as tho! they looked on themſelves 
as the Meaneſt of the Saints; who yet, if a Miniſter 
ſhould ſeriouſly tell them the fame Things in private, 
and ſhould fignify, that he feared they were very low 
and weak Chrifians, and thought they had Reaſon 
ſolemnly to conſider of their great Barrenneſs and 
Unprofitableneſs, and falling ſo much ſhort of many 
others; | would be more than they could digeſt; they 
would think themſelves highly injured; and there 
would be Danger of a rooted Prejudice in them a 
ſuch a Miniſter. 

There are ſome. that are abundant in ja! Iking agaitif 
legal Doctrines, legal Preaching, and legal Spirit, who do 
but little underſtand the Thing they © all againſt, A 
legal Spirit, is a more ſubtil Thing Abe they imagine, 
2 is too ſubtil for them. It lurks and operates, and 
prevails in their Hearts, and they are moſt notoriouſly 
guilty of 1 It, at the ſame Time, when they are inveigh- 
ing againſt it. So far as a Man is not emptied of him 
ſelf, and of his own Righteouſneſs and Goodneſs, in 
whatever Form or Shape, ſo far he is of a legal Spirit. 
A Spirit of Pride of a Man's own Righteouſneſs, Mora- 


|  lity, Holineſs, Affection, Experience, Faith, Humili- 


ation, or any Goodneſs whatſoever, is a legal Spirit. 
It was no Pride in Adam before the Fall, to be of 2 


legal Spirit: Becauſe of his Circumſtances, he might 


ſeek Acceptance by his own Righteouſneſs. But a legal 


Spirit in a fallen ſinful Creature, can be nothing elle 
but ſpiritual Pride; and reciprocally, a ſpiritually proud 

rit is a legal Spirit. There is no Man living that 1s 
iked v up with a Conceit of his own Experiences and 
8 Diſcoveries, 


S ᷣͤ . a: nw ar we ans --- iis Od e e os e woe wwe hn 


Le _2S a. 


ParT III. of gracious Aſfections. 287 
Diſcoveries, and upon the Account of them gliſters in 
his own Eyes, but what truſts in kis Experiences, and 
makes a Righteouſneſs of them; however he may uſe 
humble Terms, and ſpeak of his Experiences as of the 
great Things God has done for him, and it may be calls. 
upon others to glorify God for them; yet he that 1s 
roud of his Experiences, arrogates ſomething to him- 
{elf, as tho' his Experiences were ſome Dignity of his. 
And if he looks on them as his own Dignity, he neceſ- 
farily thinks that God looks on them ſo too; for he 
neceſſarily thinks his own Opinion of them to be true; 
and conſequently judges that God looks on them as he 
does; and ſo unavoidably imagines that God looks on 
| his Experiences as a Dignity in him, as he looks on them 
himſelf; and that he gliſters as much in God's Eyes, as 
he does in his own.. And thus he truſts in what 1s inhe- 
rent in him, to make him ſhine in God's Sight, and 
recommend him to God: and with this Encouragement ' 
he goes- before God in Prayer; and this makes him 
expect much from God; and this makes him think that 
Chriſt loves him, and that he is willing to cloath him with 
his Righteouſneſs; becauſe he ſuppoles, that he is taken 


with his Experiences and Graces: And this is a high De- 


gree of living on his own Righteouſneſs; and ſuch Perſons 
are in the high Road to Hell. Poor deluded Wretches, 
who think they look ſo gliſtering in Gad's Eyes, whenthey 
are a Smoke in his Noſe, and are many of them more 
odious to him, than the moſt impure Beaſt in Sodom, 
that makes no Pretence to Religion! To do as theſe do, 
is to live upon Experiences, according to the true Notion 
of it; and not to do as thoſe, who only make Uſe of 
ſpiritual Experiences, as Evidences of a State of Grace, 
and in that Way receive Hope and Comfort from em. 
There is a Sort of Men, who indeed abundantly 

down Works, and cry up Faith in Oppoſition to Works, 
and ſet up themſelves very much as evangelical Perſons, 
in Oppolition to thoſe that are of a legal Spirit, and 
make a fair Shew of advancing Chriſt and the Goſpel, _ 

and 
F 


J 


1 


288 D 5 Sa Paur 1 m. 


and the Way of free Grace, who are indeed ſome of 

the greateſt Enemies to the Goſpel Way of free Grace, 

ot ther moſt dangerous Oppoſers of pure humble C hri- 
tanity, 

1 is a pretended great Humiliation, and being 
dead to the Law, and emptied of Self, which is one 
of the biggeſt and moſt elated Things i in the World. 
Some there are, who have made great Profeſſion of 


Experience of a thorough Work of the Law on their 


own Hearts, and of being brought fully off from 
Works; whoſe Conyerſation has favoured moſt of a 
Selt-righteous Spirit, of any that ever I had Opportu- 
nity to obſerve. And ſome who think themſelves quite 
emptied of themſelves, and are confident that they are 
abaſed in the Duſt, are full as they can hold with the 
Glory of their own Humility, and lifted up to Heaven 
with an high Opinion of their Abaſement. Their 
Humility, is a ſwelling felf-conceited, confident, ſhowy, 


i. n Humility. It ſeems to be the Nature 
of 


Take not every Opinion and Doctrine from Men or 4 Abach 
* that bear a fair Shew of advancin 18 Chriſt; for they may be but 
te the Fruits of evangelical Hypocriſy and Deceit; ; that being de- 
<« ceived themſelves, may deceive others too; Matth. vii. 15. Be- 
« ure of them that come in Sheep's Cleathing ; in the Innocency, 
rc Purity, and Meekneſs of Chriſt and his People, but inwardly are 
% Wolves, proud, cruel, cenſorious, ſpeaking Evil of what thy 
te now not. By their Fruits you ſhall know them. Do not think, 
« beloved, that Satan will not ſeek to ſend Deluſions among us. 


„ 


„ And do you think theſe Deluſions will come out of the popiſh 


« Pack, whoſe Inventions ſmell above Ground here ? No, he muſt 
come, and will come with more evangelical, fine-ſpun Devices. 

*-It's a Rule obſerved among Fe/uits, at this Day, if they would 
* conquer Religion by Subtility, neyer oppoſe Religion with a crols 
Religion; but ſet it againſt itſelf: So oppoſe the Goſpel by the 
<© Goſpel. And look, as Churches pleading for Works, had new 
« invented deviſed Works; ſo - when Faith 1s preached, Men will 
< have their new Inventions of Faith. I ſpeak not this againſt the 
e Doctrine of Faith, where it is preached; but am glad of it: Nor 
that I-would have Men content themſelves with every Form of 
* Faith; for I believe that moſt Men's Faith needs confirming or 
t trying. But Iſpeak to prevent Danger on that Hand.“ Shepard's 

' Parable, Dare Pa. 122. 


wy 


PF IUN — — — — a &© 


_y 
en 


© © Þ 


"FR SD TS o&T Hy = 


— 
WI 


9 


pak III. of gracious Aﬀettion. 289 
of ſpiritual Pride to make Men conceited and oftenta- 
tious of their Humility. This appears in that firſt- 
born of Pride, among the Children of Men, that would 
be called His Holineſs, even the Man of Sin, that exalts 
himſelf above all that 1s called God, or is worſhipped; 
he ſtyles himſelf Servant of Servants; and to make a 
Shew of Humility, waſhes the Feet of a Number of 

r Men at his Inauguration. IM 

For Perſons to be truly emptied of themſelves, and 
to be poor in Sptrit, and broken in Heart, is quite 
another Thing, and has other Effects, than many ima- 
ine. Tis aſtoniſhing how greatly many are deceived 
about themſelves as to this Matter, imagining themſelves 
moſt humble, when they are moſt — and their 
Behaviour 1s really the moſt haughty. The Deceitful- 
neſs of the Heart of Man appears in no one Thing ſo 
much, as this of ſpiritual Pride and Self- righteouſneſs. 
The Subtilty of Satan appears in its Height in his 
managing of Perſons with Reſpect to this Sin. And 

rhaps one Reaſon may be, that here he has moſt 
ede He knows the Way of its coming in; he 
Is ET with the ſecret Springs of it; it was his 
own Sin.—Experience gives vaſt Advantage in leading 
Souls, either in Good or Evil. 

But tho? ſpiritual Pride be ſo ſubtil and ſecret an 
Iniquity, and commonly appears under a Pretext of 
great Humility; yet there are two Things by which 
it may (perhaps univerfally and ſurely) be diſcovered 
and diſtinguiſhed. Ken 

The rt Thing is this; He that is under the Preva- 
lence of this Diſtemper, is apt to think highly of his 
Attainments in Religion, as comparing himſelf with. 
others. Tis natural for him to fall into that Thought 
of himſelf, that he is an eminent Sa nt, that he is very 
high amongſt the Saints, and has diſtinguiſhingly good 
and great Experiences. That is the ſecret Language 
of his Heart, Luke xviii. 11. God, I thank thee, that 
I am not as other Men. And Ifai. Ixv. 5. I am How 
1 than 


* 


Xxili. 6, 7, i. e. They are apt to expect that others 
ſhould regard them, and yield to them, as Maſters, 


mean, and to eſteem himſelf low among the Saints, 


Teachers; but on the contrary, they are diſpoſed to 


290 The fixth Sign PART III. 
than thou. Hence ſuch are apt to put themſelves for. 
ward among God's People, and as it were to take: 
high Seat among them, as if there was no doubt of it 
but it belonged to them. They, as it were, naturally 
do that which Chriſt condemns, Luke xiv. 7, &c. take 
the bigbeſt Room. This they do, by being forward to 
take upon them the Place and Buſineſs of the Chief; 
to guide, teach, direct and manage; They are confident 
4hat they are Guides to the Blind, a Light of them which 
are in Darkneſs, Inſtruftors of the Fooliſh, Teachers of 
Babes, Rom. ii. 19, 20. Tis natural for them to take 
it for granted, that it belongs to them to do the Part of 
Dictators and Maſters in Matters of Religion; and ſo 
they implicitly affect to be called of Men Rabbi, which 
is by Interpretation Maſter, as the Phariſees did, Matth. 


in Matters of Religion.? 

But he whoſe Heart is under the Power of chriſtian 
Humility, is of a contrary Diſpoſition. If the Scrip- 
tures are at all to be relied on, ſuch an one is apt to 
think his Attainments in Religion to be comparatively 


and one of the leaſt of Saints. Humility, or true Low- 
lineſs of Mind, diſpoſes Perſons to think others better 
than themſelves; Phil. ii. 3. In Lowlineſs of Mind, let 
each eſteem others better than themſelves. Hence they 
are apt to think the loweſt Room'belongs to them; and 
their inward Diſpoſition naturally leads them to obey | 
that Precept of our Saviour, Luke xiv. 10. *Tis not 
natural to them to take it upon them to do the Part of 


think 


1 There be two Things wherein it appears that a Man has only 
© common Gifts, and no inward Principle; 1. Theſe Gifts ever, 
„puff up, and make a Man ſomething in his own Eyes, as the 
*« Corinthian Knowledge did; and many a private Man thinks him- 
« ſelf fit to be a Miniſter.” Shepard's Parable, Part I, Pa. 181, 
182. | | | 


Oo O- Hf OS I. RY 59 © Pm RM go wth fZ HH 


pax T III. of gracious Affections. 291 
think that they are not the Perſons, that others are fitter 
for it than they; as it was with Moſes and Feremiab; 
(Exod. iii. 11. Jer. 1. 6.) tho* they were ſuch eminent 
Saints, and of great Knowledge, It is not natural to 
them to think that it belongs to them to teach, but to 
be taught: They are much more eager to hear, and to 
receive Inſtruction from others, than to dictate to others; 
Jam. i. 19. Be ye ſwift to bear, flow to ſpeak. And 
when they do ſpeak, tis not natural to them to ſpeak 
with a bold, maſterly Air; but Humility diſpoſes them 
rather to ſpeak trembling. Hoſea xiii. 1. Vben Ephraim 
ſpake trembling, he exalted himſelf in Iſrael; but when be 
offended in Baal, he died. They are not apt to aſſume _ 
Authority, and to take upon them to be chief Mana- 
gers and Maſters; but rather to be ſubject to others; 
ſam. iii. 1, 2, Be not many Maſters. 1 Pet. v. 5. All of 
you be ſubjelt one to another, and be cloathed with Humi- 


ity. Eph. v. 21. Submitting yourſelves one to another, 
in the Fear of God. Sa 


There are ſome Perſon's Experiences that naturally. _ 


work that Way, to make them think highly of their 
Experiences; and they do often themſelves ſpeak of 
their Experiences as very great and extraordinary; they 
freely ſpeak of the great Things they have met with. 
This may be ſpoken, and meant in a good Senſe, In 
one Senſe, every Degree of ſaving Mercy is a great 
Thing : It is indeed a Thing great, yea, infinitely great, 
for God to beſtow the leaſt Crumbof Children's Bread 
on ſuch Dogs as we are in ourſelves; and the more hum- 
ble a Perſon is that hopes that God has beſtowed ſuch 
Mercy on him, the more apt will he be to call it a great 
Thing that he has met with, in this Senſe. But if by 
great Things which they have experienced, they mean com- 
paratively great ſpiritual Experiences, or great compared 
with others Experiences, or beyond what is ordinary. 
which is evidently oftentimes the Caſe; then for a Perſon 
to ſay, 1 have met with great Things, is the very ſame 
Thing as to ſay, Jam an eminent Saint, and have more 
: . Grace 


9 


292 De fixth Sign Parr Ill. 
| | Grace than ordinary; for to have great Experiences, if M 
the Experiences be true and worth the telling of, is the M 
ſame Thing as to have great Grace: there is no true Not 
Experience but the Exerciſe of Grace; and exadtly þ 
according to the Degree of true Experience, is the li 
Degree of Grace and Holineſs. I he Perſons that talk bi 
thus about their Experiences, when they give an Account Ml 
of them, expect that others ſhould admire them. In. WW jj 
deed they don't call it Boaſting to talk after this Man. v 
ner about their Experiences, nor do they look upon it 

as any Sign of Pride; becauſe they ſay, they know that 

it was not they that did it, it was free Grace, they art 
the great Things that God has done for them, they would 

* acknowledge the great Mercy Ged has ſhown them, and 
not make light of it. But ſo it was with the Phariſee that 
Chriſt tells us of, Luke xvii, He in Words gave God 
the Glory of making him to differ from other Men; 
God I thank thee, ſays he, that I am not as other Men.“ 
Their verbally aſcribing it to the Grace of God, that 
they are holier than other Saints, don't hinder their 
Forwardneſs to think ſo highly.of their Holineſs, being 

a ſure Evidence of the Pride and Vanity of their Minds, 
If they were under the Influence of an humble Spirit, 
their Attainments in Religion, would not be ſo apt to Il *: 

> ſhine in their own Eyes, nor would they be ſo much in 
* admiring their own Beauty. The Chriſtians that are Wl *« 
really the moſt eminent Saints, and therefore have the 
moſt excellent Experiences, and are greateſt in the Ring- 
dom of Heaven, humble themſeves as a little Child, Matth. 
xvili. 4. Becaule they look on themſelves as but little MI * 
Children in Grace, and their Attainments to be but the 
Attainments of Babes in Chriſt, and are aſtoniſhed at, E 
and aſhamed of the low Degrees of their Love, and 

| "I their 2 


182828 ty 2 3 


— 
— 


11 Q . 


Calvin, in his Inſtitulions, B. 3, Chap. 12. 5, ſpeaking of 
this Phariſee, obſerves, That in his outward Confeſſion he acknow- 
* ledges that the Righteouſneſs that he has is the Gift of God: But 
„ (fays he) becauſe he truſts „hat he is righteous, he goes away out 
** of the Preſence of God, unacceptable and odious.“ 


Parr III. of gracious Aﬀettions. 293 


their Thankfulneſs, and their little Knowledge of God. 
Meſes when he had been converſing with God in the 
Mount, and his Face ſhone ſo bright in the Eyes of 
others, as to dazzle their Eyes, wiſt not that bis Face 
ſhone There are ſome Perſons that go by the Name of 
heh Profeſſors, and ſome will own themſelves to be 
high Profeflors; hut eminently humble Saints, that will 
ſhine brighteſt in Heaven, are not at all apt to profeſs 
high. I don't believe there is an eminent Saint in the 
World that is a high Profeſſor. , Such will be much 
more likely to profeſs themſelves to be the leaſt of all 
Saints, and to think that every Saint's Attainments and 
Experiences are higher than his.* 

Such is the Nature of Grace, and of true ſpiritual 
Light, that they naturally diſpoſe the Saints in the 
preſent State, to look upon their Grace and Goodneſs. 
little, and their Deformity great. And they that have 
the moſt Grace and ſpiritual Light, of any in this 
World, have moſt of this Diſpoſition. As will a 
moſt clear and evident to any one that ſoberly and tho- 
roughly weighs the Nature and Reaſon of Things, and 
conſiders the Things following. | That 


* Luther, as his Words are cited by aN in his Di/play of 
the ſpiritual Aulichriſt, Pa. 143, 144, ſays thus, So is the Life 
« of a Chriſtian, that he that has begun, ſeems to himſelf to have 
© nothing; but ſtrives and preſſes forward, that he may apprehend. 

« Whence Paul ſays, I count not my/elf to haue apprebended. For 
indeed nothing is more pernicious to a Believer, than that Pre- 
« ſumption, that he has already apprehended, and has no farther 
Need of ſeeking. Hence alſo many fall back, and pine away in 

4 ſpiritual Security and Slothfulneſs. So Bernard ſays, To fland 
*« fill in God's Way, is to go back. Wherefore this remains to him 
that has begun to be a Chriſtian, to think that he is not yet a 
« Chriſtian, but to ſeek that he may be a Chriſtian, that he may 
glory with Paul, I am not, but defire to be; a Chriſtian not yet 
* finiſhed, but only in his Beginnings. Therefore he is net a 
« Chriſtian, that is a Chriſtian ; that is, He that thinks himſelf a a 
« finiſhed Chriſtian, and is not ſenſible, how he falls ſhort. We 
« reach after Heaven, but are not in Heaven, Woe to him that is 
« wholly renewed, that is, that thinks himſelf to be ſo. That Man, 

« without Doubt, has never ſo much as begun to be renewed, nor 
did he ever taſte what it is to be a Chriſtian,” 


/ 


"4 


204 * The fixth Sim Pann 


That Grace and Holineſs is worthy to be called little 
that is, little in Compariſon of what it ought to be. 
And fo it ſeems to one that is truly gracious: For ſuch 
an one has his Eye upon the Rule of his Duty; a Con. 
formity to that is what he aims at; it is what his Sou 
ſtruggles. and reaches after; and it 1s by that that he 
eſtimates and judges of what he does, and what he 
has. To a gracious Soul, and eſpecially to one eminently 
gracious, that Holineſs appears little, which 1s little of 
what it ſhould be; little of what he ſees infinite Reaſon 
for, and Obligation to. If his Holineſs appears to him 
.to be at a vaſt Diſtance from this, it naturally appear 
deſpicable in his own Eyes, and not worthy to be men- 
tioned as any Beauty or Amiableneſs in him. For the 
like Reaſon as a hungry Man naturally accounts that 


fich is ſet before him, but a little Food, a ſmall Ma: 
ter, not worth mentioning, that is nothing in Compariſon 


of his Appetite.” Or, as the Child of a great Prince, 
that is jealous for the Honour of his Father, and 
beholds the Reſpect which Men ſhew him, naturally 
looks on that Honour and Reſpect very little, and not 
worthy to be regarded, which is nothing in Compars 
riſon of that which the Dignity of his Father requires. 


But that is the Nature of true Grace and ſpirituil 


Light, that it opens to a Perſon's View the infinite Reaſon 


there is that he ſhould be holy in a high Degree. And 


the more Grace he has, the more this is open'd to View, 
the greater Senſe he has of the infinite Excellency and 
Glory of the divine Being, and of the infinite Dignity 


of the Perſon of Chriſt, and the boundleſs Length and 


Breadth, and Depth and Height, of the Love of Chi 
to Sinners. And as Grace increaſes, the Fields opens 
more and more to a diſtant View, *till the Soul is fwal 


lowed up with the Vaſtneſs of the Object, and the Per- 


fon is aſtoniſhed to think how much it becomes him to 
love this God, and this glorious Redeemer, that has ſo 
loved Man, and how little he does love; And fo the 


more he apprehends, the möre the Smallneſs of hs 
| | ; Grace 


Ar III. / gracious Aﬀection®. 205 


Grace and Love appears ſtrange and wonderful: And 
therefore is more ready to think that others are beyond 
him. For wondering at the Littleneſs of his own Grace, 
he can ſcarcely believe that ſo ſtrange a Thing happens 
to other Saints: Tis amazing to him, that one that is 
zel really a Child of God, and that has actually received 
the ſaving Benefits of that unſpeakable Love of Chriſt, 
ſhould love no more: And he is apt to look upon it as 
a Thing peculiar to himſelf, a ſtrange and exem 
Inſtance; for he ſees only the outſide of other Chriſti- 
ans, but he ſees his own inſide. 

Here the Reader may poſſibly object, that Love to 
God is really increaſed, in Proportion as the Knowledge 
of God is increaſed; and therefore how ſhould an 
Increaſe of Knowledge in- a Saint, make his Love 
appear leſs, in Compariſon of what is known? To 
which I anſwer, that although Grace and the Love of 
God in the Saints, be anſwerable to the Degree of 
Knowledge or Sight of God; yet it is not in Proportion 
to the Object ſeen and known, The Soul of a Saint, 
by having ſomething of God open'd to Sight, is con- 
vinced of much more than is ſeen. There is ſomething 
that is ſeen, that is wonderful; and that Sight brin 
| WJ vith it a ſtrong Conviction of ſomething vaſtly Berkel. | 
dat is not immediately ſeen. So that the Soul, at the 
| WJ fame Time, is aſtoniſhed at its Ignorance, and that it 
WH knows fo little, as well as that it loves ſo little. And 

a the Soul, in a ſpiritual View, is convinced of infi- 
nitely more in the Object, yet beyond Sight; ſo it is, 
convinced of the Capacity of the Soul, of knowing 
vaſtly more, if Clouds and Darkneſs were but removed, 


Which cauſes the Soul, in the Enjoyment of a ſpiritual - _ 


View, to complain greatly of ſpiritual Ignorance, and 
Want of Love, and long and reach after more Know- 
ledge, and more Love. | : hs; 
Grace and the Love of God in the moſt eminent 
daints in this World, is truly very little in Compariſon 
of what it ought to be. Becauſe the higheſt 1 
tnat 


1 — 
4 


| * | | 
- 

_ 
3 


that ever any attain to in this Life, is poor, cold, ex. 
ceeding low, and not worthy to be named in Compariſon 


N. fixth Sion * * "Part IN 


of what our Obligations appear to be, from the join 


Conſideration of theſe two Things; viz. 1: The Rez 


ſon God has given us to love him, in the Manifeſtations 


he has made of his infinite Glory, in his Word, and in 


his Works; and particularly in the Goſpel of his Son, 
and what he has done for ſinful Man by him. And 2. 
The Capacity there is in the Soul of Man, by thoſe 


intellectual Faculties which God has given it, of ſeeing 
”- _ and underſtanding theſe Reaſons, which God has given 


us to loye him, How ſmall indeed is the Love of the 
moit eminent Saint on Earth, in Compariſon of what 


theſe Things jointly conſidered do require! And this 


Grace tends to convince Men of; and eſpecially emi. 


nent Grace: For Grace is of the Nature of Light, and 
-brings Truth to View. And therefore, he that has 


much Grace, apprehends much more than others, that 
eat Height to which his Love ought to aſcend; and 
—— better than others, how little a Way he has riſen 


towards that Height. And therefore, eſtimating bis 
Love by the whole Height of his Duty, hence ir appears 
- aſtoniſhingly little and low in his 3 | 


And the eminent Saint, having ſuch a Conviction ef 


the high Degree in which he ought to love God, this 


ſhews him, not only the Littleneſs of his Grace, but 
the Greatneſs of his remaining Corruption. In order 
to judge how much Corruption or Sin we have remain- 


ing in us, we muſt take our Meaſure from that Height 


to which the Rule of our Duty extends: The whole of 
the Diſtance we are at from that Height, is Sin: For 
failing of Duty is Sin; otherwiſe our Duty is not our 


Duty; and by how much the more we fall ſhort of our 


Duty, ſo much the more Sin have we. Sin is no other 


than Diſagreeableneſs, in a moral Agent, to the Lay, 


or Rule of his Duty. And therefore the Degree ot 


Sin, is to be judged of by the Rule: So much Dils 


greeableneſs to the Rule, ſo much Sin, whether it be 
in 


Ur A | "ASS Ta DK44 AM tas a £ſtTC . oa Aon TT zvo .. ͤ => OL = PTE Ie 1 


Fr ee fon e 


in Defe or Exceſs. Therefore if Men, in their Love 
to God, don't come up half Way to that Height which 
Duty requires, then they have more Corruption in their 
Hearts than Grace; becauſe there is more Goodneſs 
wanting than is there; and all that is wanting is Sin: it 
is an abominable Defect; and appears ſo to the Saints, 
eſpecially thoſe that are eminent; it appears exceedin 
abominable to them, that Chriſt ſhould be loved ſo 
little, and thanked ſo little for his dying Love; it is in 
their Eyes hateful Ingratitude. 8 
And then the Increaſe of Grace has a Tendency 
another Way, to cauſe the Saints to think their Defor- 
mity vaſtly more than their Goodneſs: It not only tends 
to convince them that their Corruption 1s much greater 
than their Goodneſs; which is indeed the Caſe: But it 
alſo tends to cauſe the Deformity that there is in the 
leaſt Sin, or the leaſt Degree of Corruption, to appear 
ſo great, as vaſtly to outweigh all the Beauty there is 
in their greateſt Holineſs: For this alſo is indeed the 
Caſe, For the leaſt Sin ”__ an infinite God, has an 


infinite Hatefulneſs or Deformity in it; but the higheſt 


Degree of Holineſs in a Creature, has not an infinite 
Lovelineſs in it: And therefore the Lovelineſs of it is 
as nothing, in Compariſon af the Deformity- of the 
leaſt Sin. That every Sin has infinite Deformity and 
Hatefulneſs in it, is moſt demonſtrably evident; becauſe 
what the Evil, or Iniquity, or Hatefulneſs of Sin conſiſts 
in, is the violating of an Obligation, or the being or 
doing contrary to what we ſhould be or do, or are 
obliged to. And therefore, by how much the greater 
the Obligation is that is violated, ſo much the greater 
is the Iniquity and Hatefulneſs of the Violation. But 
certainly our Obligation to love and honour any Being, 
is in ſome Proportion to his Lovelineſs and Honourable- 
neſs, or to his Worthineſs to be loved and honoured by 
us; which is the ſame Thing. We are ſurely under 
greater Obligation to love a more lovely Being, than a 
leſs lovely: And if a m_ be infinitely lovely or worthy 
7 0 


5 


498 Me fixth Sign 
to be loved by us, then our Obligations to love 
Aare a e And therefore, whatever is — 
to this Love, has in it infinite Iniquity, Deformity and 
Unworthineſs. But on the other Hand, with Reſpe& 
to our Holineſs or Love to God, there is not an infinite 
Worthineſs i in that. The Sin of the Creature againſt 
God, is ill-deſerving and hateful in Proportion to the 
Diſtance there is between God and the Creature: The 
Greatneſs of the Object, and the Meanneſs and Inferio- 
rity of the Subject, vates it. But *tis the Reverſe 
with Regard to the Worthineſs of the Reſpe&t of the 
Creature to God; *tis wortbleſs, and not worthy, in 
Proportion to the Meanneſs of the Subject. So much 
the greater the Diſtance between God and the Creature, 
ſo much the leſs is the Creature's Reſpect worthy of 
God's Notice or Regard. The great Degree of Supe- 
fiority, increaſes the Obligation on the Inferior to regard 
the Superior; and ſo makes the Want of Regard more 
hateful: But the great Degree of Inferiority diminiſhes 
the Worth of the Regard of the Inferior ; becauſe the 
more he is inferior, the leſs is he worthy of Notice; the 
leſs he is, the leſs is what he can offer nb oh for he can 


offer no more than himſelf, in offering his beſt Reſpect; | 


and therefore as he is little, and little worth, ſo is his 
Reſpect little worth. And the more a Perſon has of 
true Grace and ſpiritual Light, the more will it appear 
thus to him; the more will he appear to himſelf infinitely 
1 by Reaſon of Sin, the leſs will the Good- 
- neſs that is in his Grace, or Experience, appear 
in Proportion to it. For de I is nothing 3 It 
is leſs than a Drop to the Ocean: For finite bears no 
Proportion ar all to that which is infinite. But the 
Th a Perſon has of Piritual Light, the more do 
Things ; part to him, in this Reſpe&, as they are 
indeec nee it moſt demonſtrably appears, that true 
; Grace 1 is of that Nature, that the more a Perſon has of 
it, with remaining Corruption, the leſs does his Good- 


and Holineſs * in OO to his Defor- 
| mityʒ 


NA 


* * * 
ART III. 


mity z ahd not only to his 2 Deformity, but to his 
ſent Deformity, in the that now appears in h 
eart, and in the — — — = his hight 
and beſt Affections, and brig | 
The Nature of many hi aße Aeon and 
t Diſcoveries (as they are called) in many Perſons 
that I have been pointed with, is to hide td cover 
over the Corruption of their Hearts, and to make it 
ſeem to them as if - their Sin was gone, and to leave 
them without Complaints of any hateful Eyil left in 
them; (tho' it may — cry out much of their paſt 
Unworthineſs) a ſute and certain Evidence that their 
Diſcoveries (as they call them) are Darkneſs and not 
Light. Tis Darkneſs that hides Men's Pollution and 
Deformity; but Light let into the Heart diſcovers it, 
ſearches it out in its ſecret Corners, and makes it plainly 
to appear; eſpecially that penetrating, all-ſearchii 
Light of God's Holineſs and Glory. Tis true that 
ſaving Diſcoveries may for the preſent hide Cortuption 
in one Senſe; z they reſtrain the poſetive Exerciſes of it, 
ſuch as Malice, Envy, Covetouſneſs, Fat outhen, | 
Mutmuring. Er. but they bring Corruption to Light 
in that which is privative, viz. that there is ho more 
Love, no more Humility, nod more Thankfulneſs. 
Which Defects appear moſt hateful, in the Eyes of thoſe 
who have the moſt eminent Exerciſts of Grace: and 
are very burthenſome, and cauſt the Saints to ery '6ut 
of their Leanneſs, and odious Pride and Ingratitude. 
And whatever poſitive Exerciſes of C tion, at any 
Time ariſe, and mingle themſelves with eminent Acti 
of Grace, Grace will exceedingly magtify the View of 
them, and render their Appeataiice far more heinous 
and horrible: 
The more eminent Saints are, and the mote they Have 
of the Light of Heaven in their Souls, the more do 


they ap — to themſelves, as the moſt Eminent Saints 


in this World do to the Saints and Angels in Henven. 
How can we rationally ſuppoſe the moſt eminent Saints 


on Earth appear to * N if beheld any otherwiſe, than 


covered 


of gracioits Afikfioni. 200 N 


— 


— 


300 Nie ih Sg 


'  . Covered over with the Righteouſneſs of Chriſt, and 
their Deformities ſwallowed up and hid in the Corruſca. 
tion of the Beams of his abundant Glory and Love? 
How can we ſuppofe our moſt ardent Love and Praiſes 
appear to them, that do behold the Beauty and Glory 
of God withouta Veil? How does our higheſt Thank. 
fulneſs for. the dying Love of Chriſt appear to them, 
who ſee Chriſt as he 1s, who know as they are known, 
and ſee the Glory of the Perſon of him that died, and 
the Wonders of his dying Love, without any Cloud or 
Darkneſs? And how do they look on the deepeſt Reve- 
.rence and Humility, with which Worms of the Duſt 
on. Earth approach that infinite Majeſty, which they 
behold? Do they appear great to them, or ſo much as 
worthy of .the Name of Reverence and Humility, in 
thoſe that they ſee to be at ſuch an infinite Diſtance 
from that great and holy God, in whoſe glorious Pre- 
fence they are? The Reaſon why the higheſt Attain- 
ments of the Saints on Earth appear ſo mean to them, 
is becauſe they dwell in the Light of God's Glory, and 
ſee God as he is. And it is in this Reſpect with the 
Saints on Earth, as it is with the Saints in Heaven, in 
Proportion as they are more eminent in Grace. 
I would not be underſtood that the Saints on Earth, 
have, in all Reſpects, the worſt Opinion of themſelves, 
when they haye moſt of the Exerciſe of 'Grace. In 
many Reſpects tis otherwiſe. With Reſpect to the 
poſitive Exerciſes of Corruption, they may appear to 
themſelves freeſt and beft whenGrace is moſt in Exerciſe, 
and worſt when the Actings of Grace are loweſt. And 
when they. compare themſelves with themſelves, at 
different Times, they may know, when Grace is in 
lively Exerciſe, that *tis better with them than it was 
before (tho? þefore, in the Time of it, they did not ſee 
- . fo much Badneſsas they ſee now) and when afterwards 
they ſink again in the Frame of their Minds, they may 
know that they fink, and have a new Argument of 
their great remaining Corruption, and a * Con- 
| V On. 


© vw we" PT B ig RS ea, 


O17 BE 5 Y B Gt WE re EN 


"Tf 


Parr III. & gracious ¶ectiann. wor * 
viction of a greater Vileneſs than they ſaw before; and 
may have more of a Senſe of Guilt, and a Kind of 
liga Senſe of their Sinfulneſs, by far, than when in the 
lively Exerciſe of Grace, . But yet it is true, and 
demonſtrable from the forementioned. Conſiderations, 
that the Children of God never have ſo much of a 
ſenfible and ſpiritual Conviction of their Deformity; 
and ſo great and quick and abaſing a Senſe of their 
preſent Vileneſs and Odiouſneſs, as when they are higheſt 
in the Exerciſe of true and pure Grace; and never are 
they ſo much diſpoſed to ſet themſelves low among 
Chriſtians as then, And thus be that is greateſt in the 
Kingdom, or moſt eminent in the Church of Chriſt, is 
the ſame that humbles himſelf, as the leaſt Infant among 
them; agreeable to that great Saying of Chriſt, Matth. 
xviii. 4. | 

A true Saint may know that he has ſome true Grace: 
And the more Grace there is, the more eaſily is it known; 
# was obſerved and proved before. But yet it does not 
follow, that an eminent Saint is eaſily ſenſible that he is 
an eminent Saint, when compared with others,—I will 
not deny, that it is poſſible, that he that has much Grace, 
and is an eminent Saint, may know it. But he won't 
be apt to know it: It won't be a Thing obvious to him: 
That he is better than others, and has higher Experi- 
ences and Attainments, is not a foremoſt Thought; nor 
is it that which, from Time to Time, readily offers 
itſelf : It is a Thing that is not in his Way, but lies far 
out of Sight: He muſt take Pains to convince himſelf 
of it: There will be need, of a great Command of 
Reaſon, and a high Degree of Strictneis and Care in 
arguing, to convince himſelf. And if he be rationally 
convinced, by a very ſtrict Conſideration of his own 
Experiences, 3 — with the great Appearances of 

w Degrees of Grace in ſome other Saints, it will 
ardly ſeem real to him, that he has more Grace than 
they: And he'll be apt to loſe the Conviction, that 
be has by Pains obtained: Nor vill it ſcem at all natural 

| £9 


. f dien ; 


be laid down as an infallible Thing, That the Perſon 
| who is apt to think, that he, as compared with others, is g 


very eminent Saint, much diſtinguiſbed in Chriſtian Expe- - 
rience, in whom this is g firſt Thought, that . riſes of 


' Itſelf, and naturally offers itſelf; be is 9 miſta ten; 
be is no eminent Saint; but under the great Prevailings 
A proud and ſelf-rig bteous Spirit. And if this be habi- 
tual with the Man, and is ſtatedly the prevailing Temper 
of his Mind, he is no Saint at all; he has not the leaſt 
Degree of any true Chriſtian Experience, ſo ſurely as 
the Word of God is true. 
And that Sort of Experiences that appears to be of 
that Tendency, and is found from Time to Time to 


have that Effect, to elevate the Subject of them with a 


great Conceit of thoſe E 0d Dies is certainly vain 
and deluſive. Thoſe ſuppoſed Diſcoveries that naturally 


blow up the Perfon with's an Caen of the Eminenc 


of his Diſcoveries, and fill him with Conceit, that n 
he has ſeen, and knows more than moſt other Chriſtians, 
have nothing of the Nature of true ſpiritual Light in 
them. All true ſpiritual Knowledge i is of that Nature, 
that the more a Perſon has of it, the more is he ſenſible 
of his own Ignorance; as is evident by 1 Cor. viii. 2. 
He that thinketh be knoweth any 7 bing, be knoweth 
potting yet, as be ought to know. Agur, when he had 
a great Diſcovery of God, and Senſe of the wonderful 
Height of his. Glory, and of his marvellous Works, 
and cries out of his Greatneſs and Incomprehenſibleneſs; 
at the ſame Time, had the deepeſt Senſe of his brutiſh 
orance, and look*d upon himſelf the moſt ignorant 


of all the Saints; Prov. xxx. 2, 3ů 4+ Surely I am more 


bruvif than any Man, and have not the Underſtanding of 
4 Man: I neither learned Wiſdom, nor have . the: Know- 
ledge of the Hoh. Who hath:aſcended up into. Heav ay 


er deſcended ? Who bath gathered th Word in bis Fiſts? 


29 8 bath bound. the Woters in a Garment ?. Who bath 
2279 . 


* 


Parry III. 
2 92 to hiew: to act upon that Suppoſition. And this may 


. ee © » © wy 


WE TFT Fo; wy 


eftabliſhed all the Ends of the Earth? What is his Name? 
And what is bis Son's Name? I thou canſt tell. * 
For a Man to be highly coneeited of his ſpiritual and 
divine Knowledge, is for him to be wiſe in his own 
Eyes, if any Thing is. And therefore it comes under 
thoſe Prohibitions, Prov. iii. 7. Be not wiſe in thine own 
Hes. Rom. xii. 16. Be not wiſe in your own Conceits. 


And brings Men under that Wo, Ifai. v. 21. Wo unto 


them that are wiſe in their own Eyes, and prudent in their 


own Sight. Thoſe that are thus wile in their own Eyes, 


are ome of the leaſt likely to get Good of any in the 

World. Experience ſhews the Truth of that, Prov. 

xvi. 12. Seeft thou a Man wiſe in bis own Conceit ? There 
is more Hope of a Fool than of him. 


To this ſome may object, That the Pſalmiſt, when 


we muſt ſuppoſe that he was in a holy Frame, ſpeaks 
of his Knowledge as eminently great, and far greater 


than that of other Saints, Pſal. cxix. 99, 100. I have- 


nore Underflanding than all my Teachers: For thy Teſti- 
monies are my Meditation. I underſtand more than the 
Ancients : Becanſe I keep thy Precepts. 
To this I anſwer two Things: 
Firſt, There is no Reſtraint to be laid upon ol Spirit 


of God, as to what he ſhall reveal to a Prophet, for the 


Benefit- of his Church, who is ſpeaking or writing 
under immediate Inſpiration. The Spirit of God may 
reveal to ſuch an one, and dictate to him, to declare to 
others, ſecret Things that otherwiſe would be hard 

yea, impoſſible for him to find out. As he may rey we, 
to him Myſteries, that otherwiſe would be above the 
Reach of his Reaſon; or Things in a diſtant Place, 
that he can't ſee; or future Events, that it would be 
Impoſſible for him to know and declare, if they were 


not extraordinarily revealed to him. So the Spirit of 
God might reveal to David this diſtinguiſhing Benefit 


he had received, by converſing much with God's Teſti- 
monies; and uſe him as his Inſtrument to record it for 
the Benefir of others, to excite them to the like of 


\ 


% 


0 C2 
- =" nn 
| 
” 


PaxT HI, of gratious Aeckions. © go 


"904 The fixth Sin Pax Ill 


and to uſe the ſame Means to gain Knowledge. Nothing 
can be gathered concerning the natural Tendency of the 
ordinary gracious Influences of the Spirit of God, from 
that, that David declares of his diſtinguiſhing Know. 
ledge under the extraordinary Influences of God's Spirit, 
immediately dictating to him the divine Mind by Inſpi- 
ration, and. uſing David as his Inſtrument, to write 
what he pleaſed, for the Benefit of his Church; any 
more than we can reaſonable argue, that it is the natu- 
ral Tendency of Grace to incline Men to curſe others; 
and with the moſt dreadful Miſery to them that can be 
thought of, becauſe David, under Inſpiration, often 
curſes others, and prays that ſuch Miſery may come 
upon them, | 


Secondly, It is not certain that the Knowledge David 
here ſpeaks of, is ſpiritual Knowledge, wherein Holi- 
neſs does fundamentally conſiſt. But it may be that 
greater Revelation which God made to him, of the 
Meſfah, and the Things of his future Kingdom, and 
the far more clear and extenſive Knowledge that hehad 

of the Myſteries and Doctrines of the Goſpel, than 

others; as a Reward for his keeping God's Tellimonies 
In this, it is apparent by the Book of Pſalms, that 
David far exceeded all that had gone before him. 


 _ Secondly, Another Thing that is an infallible Sign of 
ſpiritual Pride, is Perſons being apt to think highly of 

their Humility. Falſe Experiences are commonly at- 
tended with a counterfeit Humility. And it is the very 
Nature of a counterfeit Humility, to be highly conceited 
of itſelf. Falſe religious Affections have generally that 
Tendency, eſpecially when raiſed to a great Height, 
to make Perſons think that their Humility is great, 
and accordingly to take much Notice of their great. 
Attainments in this Reſpect, and admire them. But 
eminently gracious Affections (I ſcruple not to ſay it) 
are evermore of a contrary Tendency, and have 2 
2 ally 


ww . *d< —_—_  — =. Ms REO. ale oo. SC Sod dc. anc oc@/-c wu <9. ax ww. ac aaca.c.ao, oe ee oo. 4 


PART III. of gracious Affection. 305 
fally a contrary Effect, in thoſe that have them. They 
indeed make them very ſenſible, what Reaſon there is 
that they ſhould be deeply humbled, and cauſe. them 
earneſtly to thurſt and long after it; but they make their 
preſent Humility, or that which they have already 
attained to, to appear ſmall; and their remaining Pride 

at, and exceedingly abominable. | 

The Reaſon why a proud Perſon ſhould be apt to 
think his Humility great, and why a very humble 
Perſon ſhould think his Humility ſmall, may be eaſily 
ſeen, if it be conſidered, That it is natural for Perſons, 
in judging of the Degree of their own Humiliation, 
to take their Meaſure from that which they eſteem, their 
proper Height, or the Dignity wherein they properly 
ſtand, That may be great Humiliation in one, that is 
no Humiliation at all in another: Becauſe the Degree 
of Honourableneſs or Conſiderableneſs, wherein each 
does properly ſtand, is very different. For ſome great 
Man, to ſtoop to looſe the Latchet of the Shoes of 


another great Man, his Equal, or to waſh his Feet, 


| would be taken Notice of as an Act of Abaſement in 
him; and he being ſenſible of his own Dignity, would 
look upon it ſo himſelf. But if a poor Slave is ſeen 
ſtooping to unlooſe the Shoes of a great Prince, no 
Body will take any Notice of this, as any Act of Hu- 
miliation in him, or Token of any great Degree of 

Humility: Nor would the Slave himſelf, unleſs he be 
horribly proud, and ridiculouſly conceited of himſelf: 
And if after he had done it, he ſhould, 1n his Talk and 
Behaviour, ſhew that he thought his Abaſement great 
in it, and had his Mind much upon it, as an Evidence 
of his being very humble; would not every Body cry 
out upon him, Who do you think yourſelf to be, 
* that you ſhould think this that you have done, ſuch 
* a deep Humiliation?” This would make it plain to 
a Demonſtration, that this Slave was ſwolen with a 
high Degree of Pride and Vanity of Mind, as much 
as if he declared in plain Terms, I think myſelf to be 


Jome © 


306 We fixth Sign Par III. 
ſiome great one. And the Matter is no leſs plain and 
certain, when worthleſs, vile and loathſome Worms of 
the Duſt, are apt to put ſuch a Conſtruction on their 
Acts of Abaſement before God, and to think it a Token 
of great Humility in them, that they, under their Affec- 
tions, can find themſelves ſo willing to acknowledge 
themſelves to be ſo, and ſo mean and unworthy, and to 
behave themſelves as thoſe that are ſo inferior. The 
very Reaſon why ſuch outward Acts, and ſuch inward 
Exerciſes, look like great Abaſement in ſuch an 
is becauſe he has a high Conceit of himſelf, Whereas 
if he thought of himſelf more juſtly, theſe Things 
would appear nothing to him, and his Humility in them 
worthy of no Regard; but would rather be aſtoniſhed 
at his Pride, that one fo infinitely deſpicable and vile, 
is brought no lower before God. When he ſays in his 
Heart, This is a great Act of Humiliation: It is 
certainly a Sign of great Humility in me, that I ſhould 
« feel thus, and do ſo;“ his Meaning is, This is 
great Humility for me, for ſuch a one as I, that am 
* fo conſiderable and worthy,” He conſiders how low 
he is now brought, and compares this with the Height of 
' Dignity, on which, he in his Heart thinks he properly 
ſtands; and the Diſtance appears very great, and he 
calls it all meer Humility, and as ſuch admires it. 
Whereas, in him that is truly humble, and really ſees 
his own Vileneſs and Loathſomneſs before God, the 
Diſtance appears the other Way. When he is brought 
loweſtof all, it does not appear to him, that he is brought 
below his proper Station; but that he is not come to 
it: He appears to himſelf, yet vaſtly above it: He longs 
to get lower, that he may come to it; but appears at ( 
greatDiſtance from it. And this Diſtance he calls Pride. WW © 
And therefore his Pride appears great to him, and not 
his Humility. For altho' he is brought much lower 
than he uſed to be; yet it don't appear to him worthy 
of the Name of Humiliation, for him that is ſo infinite- 
ly mean and deteſtable, to come down to a Place, which 
6, though 


> ata. ent wand was IAN<”M * aa OS. 


"or = > . yy A fad 


as rf MM ©a0-X%. 


WY Ty =” ͤ⅛˙ e Q » OS” . 6 Y WF. SW 


though it be lower than what he ufed to aſſume, is yet 
vaſtly higher than what is proper for him. As Men 
would harldly count it worthy of the Name of Humi- 
lity, in a contemptible Slave, that formerly affected to 
be a Prince, to have his Spirit ſo far brought down, as 
to take the Place of a Nobleman; when this is ſtill fo 
far above his proper Station. | 

All Men in the World, in judging of the Degree of 
their own and others Humility, as appearing in any Act 
of theirs, conſider two Things, viz. the real Degree 
of Dignity they ſtand in; and the Degree of Abaſement, 
and the Relation it bears to-that real Dignity. Thus 
the complying with the fame low Place, or low Act, 
may be an Evidence of great Humility in one, that 
evidences but little or no Humility in another. But 
truly humble Chriſtians have ſo mean an Opinion of 
their own real Dignity, that all their Self- abaſement, 
when conſidered with Relation to that, and compar'd 
with that, appears very ſmall to them. It don't ſeem 
to them to be any great Humility, or any Abaſement to 
be made much of, for ſuch poor, vile, abject Creatures 
a they, to lie at the Foot of God. | 
The Degree of Humility is to be judged of by the 
Degree of Abaſement, and the Degree of the Cauſe for 
Abaſement : But he that 1s truly and eminently humble, 
never thinks his Humility great, conſidering the Cauſe. 
The Cauſe why he ſhould be abaſed appears ſo great, 
and the Abaſement of the Frame of his Heart ſo greatly 
ſhort of it, that he takes much more Notice of his Pride 
than his Humility. © 4 
Every one that has been converſant with Souls under 
Convictions of Sin, knows that thoſe who are greatly 
convinced of Sin, are not apt to think themſelves 
greatly convinced. And the Reaſon is this: Men judge 
of the Degree of their own Convictions of Sin, by 
two Things jointly conſidered; viz. the Degree of Senſe 
which they have of Guilt and Pollution, and the Degree 


of Cauſe they have for ſuch a Senſe, in the Degree f 
5 op their 


305 Ne ſixth Sign 


Conviction of Sin, for ſome Men to think themſelves 
to be very ſinful, beyond moſt others in the World; 
becauſe they are ſo indeed, very plainly and notoriouſly, 
And therefore a far leſs Conviction of Sin may incline 
ſuch an one to think ſo than another: He muſt be very 
blind indeed not to be ſenſible of it. But he that is 
truly under great Convictions of Sin, naturally thinks 
this to be his Caſe. Ir appears to him, that the Cauſe 
he has to be ſenſible of Guilt and Pollution, is greater 
than others have; and therefore he aſcribes His Senſi- 
pleneſs of this, to the Greatneſs of his Sin, and not to 
the Greatneſs of his Senſibility. - *Tis natural for one 
under great Convictions to think himſelf one of the 
teſt of Sinners in Reality, and alſo that it is fo very 
plainly and evidently; for the greater his Convictions 
are, the more plain and evident it ſeems to be to him. 
And therefore it neceſſarily ſeems to him ſo plain and fo 
eaſy to him to ſee it, that it may be ſeen without much 
Conviction. That Man is under great Convictions, 
whoſe Conviction is great in Proportion to his Sin. But 
no Man that is truly under great Convictions, thinks his 
Conviction great in Proportion to his Sin. For if he 
does, *tis a certain Sign that he inwardly thinks his Sins 
ſmall. And if that be the Caſe, that is a certain Evi- 
dence that his Conviction is ſmall, And this, by the 
Way, is the main Reaſon, that Perſons, when under a 
Work of Humiliation, are not ſenſible of it, in the 
Time of it. | 8 | 
And as it is with Conviction of Sin, juſt fo it is, by 
Parity of Reaſon, with Reſpect to Perſon's Conviction 
or Senſibleneſs of their own Meanneſs and Vileneſs, 
their own Blindneſs, their own Impotence, and all that 


low Senſe that a Chriſtian has of himſelf, in the Exerciſe 


of evangelical Humiliation. So that in a high Degree of 
this, the Saints are never diſpoſed to think their Senſi- 
bleneſs of their own Meanneſs, Filthineſs, Impotence, 
Sc. to be great; becauſe it never appears great to them, 
conſidering the Cauſe. An 


Parr II. 
real Sinfulneſs. *Tis really no Argument of any great 


vg. 
A. 


FS. Serge. Beg. SSO 2 8 . SS 


Parr III. | 


An eminent Saint is not apt to think himſelf eminent 
in any Thing; all his Graces and Experiences are ready 
to appear to him to be comparatively ſmall; but eſſ 
cially his Humility. There is nothing that appertains 
to chriſtian Experience, and true Piety, that is fo much 
out of his Sight as his Humility. He is a thouſand 
Times more quick-ſighted to diſcern his Pride, than his 
Humility: That he eaſily diſcerns, and is apt to take 
much Notice of, but hardly diſcerns his Humility. 
On the contrary, the deluded Hypocrite, that is under 
the Power of ſpiritual Pride, is ſo blind to nothing as 
his Pride; and ſo quick-fighted to nothing, as the Shews 
of Humility that are in him. 

The humble Chriſtian is more apt to find Fault with 
his own Pride than with other Men's. He is apt to put - 
the beſt Conſtruction on other's Words and Behaviour, 
and to think that none are ſo proud as himſelf, But 
the proud Hypocrite is quick to diſcern the Mote in his 
Brother's Eye, in this Reſpect; while he ſees nothing 
of the Beam in his own, He is very often much in 
crying out of other's Pride, finding Fault with other's 
Apparel and Way of Living; and is affected ten Times 
a3 much with his Neighbour's Ring or Ribband, as 
with all the Filthineſs of his own Heart. 

From the Diſpoſition there is in Hypocrites to think 
highly of their Humility, it comes to paſs that counter- 
feit Humility, is forward to put forth itſelf to View. 
Thoſe that have it, are apt to be much in ſpeaking of 
their Humiliations, and to ſet them forth in high Terms, 
and to make a great outward Shew of Humility, in 
affected Looks, Geſtures or Manner of Speech, or 
Meanneſs of Apparel, or ſome affected Singularity. 
So it was of old with the falſe Prophets, Zech. xiii. 4. 
So it was with the hypocritical Jews, Iſai. Ivii g. And 
ſo Chriſt tells us it was with the Phariſees, Matth. vi. 
16, But it is contrariwiſe with true Humility: They 
that have it, are not apt to diſplay their Eloquence in 
ſetting of it forth, or to ſpeak of the Degree of their 

| Abaſement 


of gracious Aﬀettions. : 309 * 


XY 


lo Tue ſixth Sign Pax Hf 
Abaſement in ſtrong Terms.“ It don't affect to ſhey 
itſelf in any ſingular outward Meanneſs of Apparel, 
or Way of Living; agreeable to what 1s implied in 
Matth. vi. 17. But thou, when thou faſteſt, anoint thing 
Head, and waſh thy Face. Col. ii. 23. Which Thing 
bave indeed a Shew of Wiſdom, in Will-worſhip, and Humi. 
lity, and neglefing the Body. Nor is true Humility 
noiſy Thing; it is not loud and boiſterous. The Scrip- 
ture repreſents it as of a contrary Nature. Abab, when 
he had a viſible Humility, a Reſemblance of true Hu- 
mility, went ſoftly, 1 Kings xxi. 27. A Penitent, in 
the Exerciſe of true Humiliation, is repreſented as ftill 
and filent, Lam. ii. 28. He fitteth alone, and keepeth 
Silence, becauſe he hath borne it upon him. And Silence 
is mentioned as what attends Humility, Prov. xxx. 32. 
F thou haſt done fooliſhly, in lifting up thyſelf, or if thou 
beſt thought Evil, lay thy Hand upon thy Mouth. 


Thus I have particularly and largely ſhewn the Nature 
of that true Humility that attends holy Affections, as 
it appears in its Tendency to cauſe Perſons to think 
meanly of their Attainments in Religion, as compared 
with the Attainments of others, and particularly, of 
their Attainments in Humility: And have ſhewn the 
contrary Tendency of ſpiritual Pride, to diſpoſe Perſons 
to think their Attainments in theſe Reſpects to be great. 

I have infiſted the longer on this Matter, becauſe 
look upon it a Matter of great Importance, as it affords 
a certain Diſtinction between true and counterfeit Humi- 
lity z and alſo as this Diſpofition of Hypocrites to look 

| on 
® It is an Obſervation of Mr. Jener, in his excellent Treatiſe of 
the Canon of the New 'Teſtament, that the Evangeliſt Mark, who 
was the Companion of St. Peter, and 9 wh have written his 


Goſpel, under the Direction of that Apoſtle; when he mentions 


Peter's Repentance after his denying his Maſter, he don't uſe ſuch 
firong Terms to ſet it forth as the other Evangeliſts, He only uſes 
theſe Words, When he thang ht thereon he wept, Mark xv. 72. Whereas 
the other Evangeliſts ſay thus, He went out and wept bitterly, Matth 
XXV1. 75. Luke xxii. 63. 


has”, 
+. 


ere re os oo rm yn mm wrH©2v FF sss 1912 Sn 


kd £-=y 


a Aa wwd .£-A 


= © ev» S F 8 „ TY S 


ow i 2 K. f- A” U& OO 


PT 


Part III. 


83 
— 
— N 


nee. nr 


on themſelves better than others, is what God has 
declared to be very hateful to him, @ Smoke in bis Noſe, 
and 4 Fire that burneth all the Day, Iſai. Ixv. 5. *Tis 
mentioned as an Inſtance of the Pride of the Inhabi- 
:ants of that holy City (as it was called) Jeruſalem, that 


they eſteem'd themſelves far better than the People of 


Sodom, and ſo looked upon them worthy to be over- 
booked and diſregarded by them; Ezek. xvi. 56. For 
thy Siſter Sodom was not mentioned by thy Mouth, in the 
Day of thy Pride. | 

Let not the Reader lightly paſs over theſe Things in 
Application to himſelf. If you once have taken it in, 
that it is a bad Sign for a Perſon to be apt to think him- 


elf a better Saint than others, there will ariſe a blinding 
Prejudice in your own Favour; and there will probably 


be need of a great Strictneſs of Self-Examination, in 
order to determine whether it be ſo with you. If on 
the Propoſal of the Queſtion, you anſwer, No, it ſeems 
to me, none are ſo bad as IJ. Don't let the Matter paſs 
off ſo; but examine again, whether or no you don't 


think yourſelf better than others on this very Account, 


becauſe you imagine you think ſo meanly of your- 
ſelf. Have not you an high Opinion of this Humility? 
And if you anſwer again, No, I have not an bigh Opi- 
nion of my Humility: It ſeems to me I am as proud as the 
Devil: Yet examine again, whether Self-conceit don't 
riſe up under this Cover; whether on this very Account, 


that you think yourſelf as proud as the Devil, youdon't 


think yourſelf to be very humble. 


From this Oppoſition that there is between the Nature 


of a true, and of a counterfeit Humility, as to the 
Eſteem that the Subjects of them have of themſelves, 
uiſes a manifold Contrariety of Temper and Behaviour. 


A truly humble Perſon, having ſuch a mean Opinion 


of his Righteouſneſs and Holineſs, is poor in Spirit. 

For a Perſon to be poor in Spirit, is to be in his own 

denſe and Aboichention poor as to what is in him, and 
iſpoſi 


to be of aa anſwerable 
| kumble | 


ey of gracious Afﬀettions. 8 31 * 


tion. Therefore a truly 


g 
& 


3132 
humble Perſon, eſpecially one eminently humble, naty- 


= 
. 


* The fixth Sign | Par Il 


rally behaves himſelf in many Reſpects as a poor Man. 
The Poor uſeth Intreaties, but the Rich anſwereth rough, 
A poor Man is not diſpoſed to quick and high Refent. 


ment when he is among the Rich: He is apt to yield to 


others, for he knows others are above him; he is nor 
Riff and ſelf-willed; he is patient with hard Fare; he 
expects no other than to be — me and takes it pati. 
ently; he don't take it heinouſly that he is overlook d, 
and but little regarded; he 1s prepar'd to be in loy 
Place; he readily honours his Superiors; he takes 
Reproofs quietly; he readily honours others as aboye 


him; he eaſily yields to be taught, and don't claim 


much to his Underſtanding and Judgment; he is not 
over nice or humourſome, and has his Spirit ſubdued 
to hard Things; he is not aſſuming, nor apt to take 
much upon him, but *tis natural for him to be ſubject 
to others. Thus it is with the humble Chriſtian. Hu- 
mility is (as the great Maſtricht expreſſes it) a Kind of 
holy Puſillanimity. FE 

A Man that is very poor is a Beggar; ſo is he thats 
Poor in Spirit. This is a great Difference between thoſe 
Affections that are gracious, and thoſe that are falſe: 
Under the former, the Perſon continues ſtill a poor 
Beggar at God's Gates, exceeding empty and needy; 
but the latter make Men appear to themſelves rich, 
and encreaſed with Goods, and not very neceſſitous; 
they have a great Stock in their own Imagination for 


their Subſiſtance.* Fe 


A 


— 


r 


2 This Spirit ever keeps a Man poor and vile in his own Eyes 


% and empty.—When the Man hath got ſome Knowledge, and a 


4 diſcourſe pretty well, and hath ſome Taſtes of the heavenly Gift, 
« ſome ſweet Illapſes of Grace, and ſo his Conſcience is pretty well 
« quieted: And if he hath got ſome Anſwer to his Prayers, and 


, hath ſweet Aﬀettions, he grows full: And having Eaſe * 


« Conſcience, caſts off Senſe, and daily groaning under Sin. An. 
« hence the Spirit of Prayer dies: He loſes his Eſteem of God 
56 Ordinances; feels not ſuch Need of them; or gets no Oo 
« feels tio Life or Power by them. This is the woful 8 


if 


. 7 Poe ds oo rn 88 F 


2 K Oo I” 


ERS 


ADE BS oF ”=.,” L 


© 


ſo, and much more, and more certainly and univerſally, 


Pant III. & gracious Albin. iy 
A poor Man is modeſt in his Speech and Behaviout;, 


is one that is poor in Spirit; he is humble and modett 


in his Behaviour amongſt Men. *Tis in vain for an, 


—_—_ that they are humble, and as little Children 


ore God, when they are haughty, aſſuming and 
impudent in their Behaviour amongſt Men. The 


Apoſtle informs us, that the Deſign of the Goſpel is to 
cut off all Glorying, not only before God, but alſo 
before Men, Rom. 1v. 1, 2, Some pretend to great 
Humiliation, that are very haughty, audacious and 
aſſuming in their external Appearance and Behaviour; 
But they ought to conſider thoſe Scriptures, Pſal. cxxxi. 


1. Lord my Heart is not haughty, nor my Eyes lofty, © 


neither do I exerciſe myſelf in great Matters, or in Things 


tio bigh for me, Prov. vi. 16, 17. Theſe fix Things © 


doth the Lord hate, yea, ſeven are an Abomination unto 
bim; a proud Look, &c.—Chap. xxi. 4. An high Look, 


and a proud Heart, are Sin. Pſal. xviii. 27. Thou ile 


bring down high Looks. And Plalm ci. 5. Him that 


bath an high Look, and à proud Heart, will I not ſuffer. © 
1 Cor. xit1. 4. Charity vaunteth not itſelf; doth not bebavs © 
itſelf unſeemly. There is a certain amiable Modeſty y 


and Fear that belongs to a chriſtian Behaviour among 
Men, ariſing from Humility, that the Scripture often 
ſpeaks of; 1 Pet. iti. 16. Be ready to give an Anſwer to 


1 3 1 


« ſome : But yet they know it not. But now he that is filled with 
the Spirit, the Lord empties him: And the more, the longer he 


« lives, So that tho' others think he needs not much Grace; yet 
he accounts himſelf the pooreſt.” Shepard's Parable of the ten 
Virgins, Part II. P. 132. 8 


After all Fillings, be ever empty, hungry and Grain Need, 
and praying for more.“ bid. P. 151. 8 . 


« Chriftians, that are now gr full of their Parts, Gifts, Peace, 
« Comforts, Abilities, Duties, I ſtand adoring the Riches of the 
„Lord's Mercy, to a little Handful of poor Beli 3 not only 1 


„making them empty, but in keeping them ſo all their Days.“ 


Shepard's Sound Believer, the * Edition in Bofton, P. 158, 1 59. 


\ 


* Truly Brethren, when I ſee the Curſe of God upe many _ 


4 . ay n £ . £ P 
3 me fixth Sign ART, III. 


every Man that. afteth you, —with Meekneſs: and. Fear. 
* Rom. xlii. 7: Fear, to whom Fear. 2 Cor, vii. 15. 

Whilſt he remembreth the Obedience of you all, how with 
Fear, and Trembling yi received him. Epheſ. vi. 5. Ser. 


vans be obedient to them which are your Maſters according 


% the Fleſb, with Fear and Trembling. 1 Pet. ii. 18, 
Servants be ſubjef to your Maſters, with all Fear. 1 Pet. 
ii. 2. H/bile they behold your chaſte: Converſation, coupled. 
with Fear. 1 Tim. ii. 9. That Women-adorn themſelves 
in, modeſt Apparel, with Shame-facedns/s and Sobriety. In- 
this Reſpect æ Chriſtian.1s. like a little Child; a little 


Child is modeſt before Men, and his Heart is apt to be 


poſſeſſed: with Fear and Awe amongſt them. 

The ſame Spirit will diſpoſe a Chriſtan to honour all 
Men. 1 Pet. ii. 17. Honour all Men. A humble 
Chriſtian is not only diſpoſed to honour the Saints in 
his Behaviour; but others alſo, in all thoſe Ways that 
don't imply a viſible Approbation of their Sins. Thus 
Abrabam, the great Pattern of Believers, honoured the 
Children of Heth. Gen. xxiii. 11, 12. Abrabam ſtood 
up, and bowed. himſelf to the People ef tbe. Land. This 
Was a remarkable Inſtance of a humble Behaviour 
towards them that were out of Chriſt, and that Abrabow 


knew ta he acdurſed; and therefore would by no Means 


ſulffer his Servant to take a Wife to his Son, from among 


tdem; and Eſau's Wives, being of theſe Children of 


Heth, were a Grief of Mind to 1/aac and Rebecca. So 
Paul honoured. Eeſtus, Acts xxvi. 29. I am not mad, 
moſt: noble. Fifties, Not only will Chriſtian Humility. 
diſpoſe Perſons to honour thoſe wicked Men that are 
- out of the viſible Church, but alſo falſe: Brethren and 

Perſecutors. As Jacob, when he was in an excellent 
Frame, having juſt been wreſtling all Night with God, 
and received the Bleſſing; . honoured Eſau, his falſe and 


perſecuting Brother; Gen. xxxiii. 14, 15. Jacob bowed-- 


hiexfelf, toithe Ground ſeven Times, until be came ntar- bit 
Brother Eſau. So he called him Lord; and commanded: 
all his Family to honour him in like Manner. * 


/ = 
. 


=—_— MS MS T_T 2 as OS ans rods cou. wm. / . IT ge=z 


2 G09” 0) ©A- 


Part IN. bf gracious Aﬀettim: 315 
Thus I have endeavoured to deſcribe the Heart and 
Behaviour of one that is governed by. a truly gracious 


* 


Humility, as exactly agrecable to the Scriptures, as 1 


r 1 he 6s. IO” 

Now it is out of ſuch a Heart as this, that all truly 
holy Affections do flow. Chriſtian Affections are like 
Mary's precious Ointment, that ſhe poured; on Chriſt's 


Head, that filled the whole Houſe with a ſweet Odour. 


That was poured out of an "Alabaſter-Box; ſo gracious 


Affections flow out to Chriſt out of a pure Heart. 
That was poured out of a Broten Box; till the Box was 
broken the Ointment could not flow, nor diffuſe its 
Odour: So gracious Affections flow out of a broken 


Heart. Gracious Affections are alſo like thoſe of Mary 
Magdelene (Luke vii. at the latter End) who alſo pours 


precious Ointment on Chriſt, out of an Alabaſter broken 
Box, anointing therewith the Feet of Jeſus, -when” ſhe. 


had waſh'd them with her Tears, and wiped them with 
the Hair of her Head. All gracious Aﬀections, that 


are a ſweet Odour to Chriſt, and that fill the Soul of a 
Chriſtian with an heavenly Sweetneſs and Fragrancy, 
are broken-hearted Affections. A truly Chriſtian Love, 


either to God or Meh; is a humble broken-hearted Love. 


The Deſires of the Saints, however earneſt, are humble 


Deſires: Their Hope is an humble Hope; and their 
Joy, even when it is anſpeakable, and full of Glory, is a 


humble, broken-hearted Joy, and leaves the Chriſtian. 
more por in Spirit, and more like a little Child, and 


more diſpoſed to an univerſal Lowlineſs of Behaviour. 
VII. Anothict Thing, wherein gratious Affections 
re diſtinguiſhec 

vith a Change of Nature. 


All gracious Affections do ariſe from a ſpiritual Un. 
derſtanding, in which the Soul has the Excellency and 


ed from others, is, that they are attended 


Glory of divine Things diſcovered to it, as was ſhewn 
before. But all ſpiritual Diſcoveries are transforming; 


aid not only make an Alteration of the preſent Exer- 


'X 2 _ ciſe 


I 


ES.) * | 
* C - of © : 4 
* 36 
4 2 


all, with open Face, bebolding as in a Glaſs, the Glory of 
©. "7be Lord, are changed into the ſame Image, from Glory to 
Glory, even as by tbe Spirit of the Lord. Such Power 


” 
. - Sw C 
. * 
1 
- 


a6. Ni- ſeventh Sin. Par Il 
ciſe, Senſation and Frame of the Soul; but ſuch Power 
and Efficacy have they, that they make an Alteration 
in the very Nature of the Soul; 2 Cor. iu. 18. But we 


as this is properly divine Power, and is peculiar to the 
Spirit of the Lord: Other Power may make a great 
; 2 Be in Men's preſent Frames and Feelings; but 
*tis the Power of a Creator only that can change the 
Nature, or give anew Nature. And no Diſcoveries or 
Hluminations, but thoſe that are divine and ſupernatu 
will have this ſupernatural Effect. But this Effect 
thoſe Diſcoveries have, that are truly divine. The Soul 
is deeply affected * theſe Diſcoveries, and fo affected 
as to be transformed. ; 
Thus it is with thoſe Affections that the Soul is the 
Subject of. in its Conyerſion. The Scripture Repreſen- 
tations of Converſion- do ſtrongly imply and ſignify a 
Change of Nature: ſuch as being born again; becoming 
new Creatures; riſing from the Dead; being renewed in 


Ide Spirit of the Mind; dying to Sin and, and living to 


Righteouſneſs, putting off the old Man, and putting en 
the new Man; a being ingrafted into a new Stock; a having 
a divine Seed implanted in the Heart ;, a being made Parta- 


| kers of the divine Nature, &c. 


Therefore if there be no great and remarkable, abi 


ding Change in Perſons, that think they have experi- 
_ eficed a Work of Converſion; vain are all their N 


is a great and unive a 
hum from Sin to God. A Man may be reſtrained from 


. is unſound.” 


nations and Pretences, however they have been affect 
Converſion (if we may give any Credit to the Scripture) 
rial Change of the Man, turning, 


Sin 


Soul, in affectionate Expreſſions and Actions, may be carried to 
„ Chriſt; but * this Bent, and Change of Affection 
pard's Parable, Part I. P. 3 | 


} 


n A 
5 


ParT III. of gracious Affection. 347 


Sin, before he is converted; but when he is converted, 
he is not only reſtrained from Sin, his very Heart and 
Nature is turned from it, unto Holineſs: So that thence- 
forward he becomes a holy Perſon, and an Enemy to 
Sin. If therefore, after a Perſon's high Affections, at 
his ſuppoſed firſt Converſion, it comes to that in a little 
Time, that there is no very ſenſible, or remarkable 
Alteration in him, as to thoſe bad Qualities, and evil 
Habits, which before were viſible in him, and he is ordi- 
narily-under the Prevalence of the fame Kind of Diſ- 
poſitions that he uſed to be, and the ſame Things ſeem 
to belong to his Character, he appears as ſelfiſh, carnal, 
as ſtupid, and perverſe, as unchriſtian, and unſavoury 
as ever; it is greater Evidence againſt him, than the 
brighteſt Story of Experiences that ever was told, is for 
him. For in Chriſt Jeſus neither Circumcifion, nor 
Uncircumciſion, neither high Profeſſion, nor low Pro- 
feſſion, neither a fair Story, nor a broken one, avails 
any Thing; but a new Creature. a 
If there be a very great Alteration viſible in a Perſon 
for a while; if it be not abiding, but he afterwards 
returns, in a ſtated Manner to be much as he uſed to 
de; it appears to be no Change of Nature. For Nature 
is an abiding Thing. A Swine that is of a filthy Nature 
may be waſh'd; but the ſwiniſh Nature remains. And 
a Dove that is of a cleanly Nature may be defiled, bu 
þ its cleanly Nature remains.* | 
Þ Indeed Allowances muſt be made for the natural 
p Temper: Converſion don't entirely root out the natural 
" BW Temper: Thoſe Sins which a Man by his natural Con- 
ſtitution was moſt inclined to before his Converſion, he 
5 may 
Is with the Soul, as with Water; all the Cold may be gone, 
** but the native Principle of Cold remains till. You may remove 
= ©« the burning of Luſts, not the Blackneſs of Nature. Where the 
ſo Power of Sin lies, Change of Conſcience from Security to Terror, 
le * Change of Life from Prophaneneſs to Civility, and Faſhions of 
0 * the World, to eſcape the Pollutions thereof, Change of Luſts, nay 
* * quenching them for a Time: But the Nature is never . 2 
r 


p 3 ypocrite that ever was.” Shepard's Yarable, 


. | alive. y 


* " 2 A P ut K * S ol 4 EY . : * wy * N * K 3 ; * : _ y * 
3 7 4 
. " | * 
9 ” R 
318 8 ſeventh Sign ART III 
2 A Py , 0 * * . - = 
A : 7 4 ? . 4: 


may be moſt apt to fall into ſtill. But yet Converſion 
will make a great Alteration even with Reſpect to theſe 
Sins. Tho' Grace, while imperfect, don't root out an 
evil natural Temper; yet it is of great Power and Eff. 
cacy with 1 U to it, to correct it. The Change that 
is wrought in Converſion, is an univerſal Change: Grace 
changes a Man with Reſpect to whatever is ſinful in 
him: The old Man is put off and the new Mar put on: 
He is ſanctified throughout: And the Man becomes 2 
new Creature; old Things are paſs'd away, and all 
Things are become new: All Sin is mortified: Conſti- 
tution Sins, as well as others.' If a Man before his 
Converſion, was by his natural Conſtitution, eſpecially 
inclined to Laſciviouſneſs, or Drunkenneſs, or Malici- 
ouſneſs; converting Grace will make $ great Alteration 
in him, with reſpect to theſe evil Diſpoſitions; ſo that 
however he may be ſtill moſt in Danger of ' theſe Sing, 
yet they ſhall no longer have Dominion over him; nor 
will they any more be properly his Character. Tea, 
true Repentance does in ſome Reſpects, eſpecially turn 
a Man againſt his own Iniquity; that wherein he has 
.been * Guilty, and has chiefly diſnonoured God. He 
that forſakes other Sins, but ſaves his leading Sin, the 
Iniquity he is chiefly inclined to; is like Saul, whet 
ſent againſt God's Enemies the Amaletites, with a ſind # 
Charge to ſave none of them aliye, but utterly to deſtroy 
them, ſmall and great; who utterly deſtroy'd inferior 
People, but ved the King, the chicf of them all, 


8. * 3 — i 


STS GS 


: An 
5 3 
* 9 % . 


* 


Tis very true that all Grace and Goodneſs in the 
Hearts of the Saints is entirely from God; and they are 
univerſally and immediately dependant on him for it. 
But yet theſe Perſons are miſtaken, as to the Manner of 
God's communicating himſelf and his holy Spirit, in 
imparting ſaving Grace to the Soul, He gives his Spirit 
to be united to the Faculties of the Soul, and to dwell 
there after the Manner of a Principle of Nature; fo - 
that the Soul, in being endued with Grace, is endued 
with a new Nature: But Nature is an abiding Thing 
All the Exercifes of Grace are entirely from Chriſt: 
But thoſe Exerciſes are not from Chriſt, as ſomething 
that is alive, moves and ſtirs ſomething that is without 
Life, and yet remains without Life; but as having 
Life communicated to it; ſo as through Chriſt's Power, 
to have inherent in itſelf, a vital Nature. In the Soul 
where Chriſt ſavingly is, there he lives. He don't only 
live wit bout it, ſo as violently to actuate it; but he lives 
init; ſo that that alſo is alive, Grace in the Soul is as 
much from Chriſt, as the Light in a Glaſs, held out in 
the Sun-beams, is from the Sun. But this repreſents 
the Manner of the Communication of Grace to the 
Soul, but in Part; becauſe the Glaſs remains as it | 
the Nature of it not being at all chang'd, it is as mu 


without any Lightſomneſs in its Nature as eyer. But 


the Soul of a Saint receives Light from the Sun of 
Righteouſneſs, in ſuch a Manner, that its Nature is 
changed, and it becomes prepgerly a luminous Thing: 
Not only does the Sun ſhine in the Saints, but they alſo 
become little Suns, partaking of the Nature of che 
Fountain of their Light. In this Refj the Manner - 
of their Derivation of Light, is like that of the Lamps 
in the Tabernacle, rather than that of a reflecting Glais; 
which tho' they were lit up by Fire from Heaven, yet 
thereby became, themſelves burning fhining Things, 
The Saints dot only drink of the Water of Life, 
that flows from the original Fountain; but this Water 
becomes a Fountain of Water in them, ſpringing up 
8 ere 


220 We ſeventh Sign PAR III. 
ttzhere, and flowing out of them; Jobn iv. 14: and Chap. 
Fü. 38, 39. Grade is compared to a Seed implante 
that not only is in the Ground, but has hold of it, has 
Root there, and grows there, and is an abiding Principle 
of Life and Nature there. 
A s it is with ſpiritual Diſcoveries and Affections given 
at firſt Converſion, ſo it is in all Illuminations and Af. 
fections of that Kind, that Perſons are che Subjects of 
afterwards; they are all transforming. There is a like 
divine Power and Energy in them, as in the firſt Diſco- 
veries: And they ſtill reach the Bottom of the Heart, 
and affect and alter the very Nature of the Soul, in 
Proportion to the Degree in which they are given. And 
a Transformation of Nature is continued and carried on 
by them, to the End of Life; till it is brought to Per- 
fection in Glory. Hence the Progreſs of the Work of 
Grace in the Hearts of the Saints, is repreſented in 
Scripture, as a continued Converſion and Ronovation of 
Nature. So the Apoſtle exhorts thoſe that were at 
Rome, beloved of God, called to be Saints, and that were 
the Subjects of God's redeeming Mercies, to be tranſ- 
Formed by the renewing of their Mind; Rom. Xii. 1, 2, 
I beſeech you therefore by the Mercies of God, that ye pre- 
t, ſent your Bodies, a living Sacrifice;---and be not conformed 
to this World; but be ye transformed, by the renewing of 
your Mind. ' Compared with Chap. 1. 7. So the Apo- 
ſtle writing to the Saints and Faithful in Chriſt Feſus, 
that were at Epheſus, (Eph. i. 1.) and thoſe who wer? 
- once dead in Treſpaſſes and Sins, but were now quickened, 
and raiſed up, and made to fit together in heavenly Plates, 
mn Chriſt, and created in Chriſt Jeſus unto good Works, 
' that were once far eff, but were now made nigh by tht 
Blood of Cbriſt; and that were no more Strangers and 
Foreigners, but Fellou-Citizens with the Saints, and of 
- the Houſhold of God, and that were built together for an 
Habitation of God through the Spirit; I ſay, the Apoſtle 
writing to theſe, tells them, that be ceaſed not to pro 
for them, that God would give them the Spirit of Ty 


their Underſtanding being enlightened, that they might know 
or Experience, what was the exceeding Greatneſwof God*s 
Power towards them that believe; according to the Wort- 
ing of his mighty. Power, - which he wrought in Chriſt, 
when he raiſed bim from the Dead, and ſet him at his 
own Right Hand in the heavenly Places, Eph. i. 16, to 
the End. In this the Apoſtle has Reſpect to the glori- 
ous Power and Work of God in converting and renew- 
ing the Soul: As 1s moſt plain by the Sequel. So the 
Apoſtle exhorts the ſame Perſons to put off the old Man, 
which is corrupt according to the deceitful Luſts; and be 
renewed in the Spirit of their Minds ; and put on the new 
Man, which after God, is created in Righteouſneſs, and 
true Holineſs, Eph. iv. 22, 23, 24. 
There is a Sort of high Affections that ſome have 
from Time to Time, that leave them without any 
Manner of Appearance of an abiding Effect. They 
go off ſuddenly; ſo that from the very Height of their 
motion, and ſeeming Rapture, they paſs at once to be 
uite dead, and void of all Senſe and Activity. It 
urely is not wont to be thus with high gracious Affecti- 


ons;* they leave a ſweet Savour and Reliſh of divine . 
Things on the Heart, and a ſtronger Bent of Soul 
towards God and Holineſs. As Moſes's Face not only 
ſhone while he was in the Mount, extraordinarily con- 


verſing with God; but it continued to ſhine after he 
came down from the Mount. When Men have been 
converſing with Chriſt in an extraordinary Manner, 
there is a ſenſible Effect of it remains upon them; there 
is ſomething remarkable in their Diſpoſition and Frame, 


which if we take Knowledge of, and trace to its Cauſe, 


ve ſhall find it is becauſe they have been with Jeſus; 


Ads iv. 13. 
wh VIII. | | 


1 — 


. you think the Holy Ghoſt comes on a Man, as on Balaam, 
« by immediate acting, and then leaves him; and then he has 
„nothing?“ Shepard's Parable, Part I. P. 126, | 


Parr Ill. "of gracious Aﬀefions. 321 "BY 


and Revelation, in the Knowledge of Chriſt; the Eyes. of | 2 


Ly 
. 
. - 7 


R 
„ A * 6 2 
"as. et 
* 22 
? 3 
* N 
W * - 


"The ergbth Sion. Far . 
VIII. Truly gracious Affections differ from thaſe 
Affections that are falſe and deluſive, in that they tend 
Zo, and are attended with the Lamb: like, Dove. like 
Spirit and Temper of Jeſus Chriſt; or in other Words 
they naturally beget and promote ſuch a Spirit of Love, 
Meekneſs, Quietneſs, Forgiveneſs and Mercy, as ap- 
red in Chriſt. | 

The Evidence of this in the Scripture, is very abun. 
dant. If we judge of the Nature of Chriſtianity, and 
the proper Spirit of the Goſpel, by the Word of God, 
this Spirit is what may by way of Eminency be called 
the chriſtian Spirit; and may be looked upon as the 
true, and diſtinguiſhing Diſpoſition of the Hearts of 
Chriſtians, as Chriſtians. When ſome of the Diſciples 
of Chriſt ſaid ſomething, through Inconſideration and 
Infirmity, that was not agreeable to ſuch a Spirit, 
Chriſt told them that they know not what Manner 
of Spirit they were of,* Luke ix. 55, implying that this 
Spirit that I am ſpeaking of, is the proper Spirit of his 
Religion and Kingdom. All that are truly Godly, and 
real Diſciples of Chriſt, have this Spirit in them; and 

not only ſo, but they are of this Spirit; it is the Spirit 
by which they are ſo poſſeſſed and governed, that it is 


© = their true and proper Character. This js evident by 


What the wiſe Man ſays, Prov. xvii. 27, (having Re- 
-. fpe& plainly to ſuch a Spirit as this) A Man of Under- 
> ſtanding is of an excellent Spirit;* and by the particular 
Deſcription Chriſt gives of the Qualities and "Temper 
of ſuch as are truly Bleſſed, that ſhall obtain Mercy, 
and are God's Children and Heirs, Matth. v. Bleſſed 
are the Meek: For they ſhall inherit the Earth. Bleſ- 
ſd are the Merciful: For they ſhall obtain Mercy. 
Bleſſed are the Peace-makers: For they ſhall be called 
the Children of God.“ And that this Spirit is the 
ſpecial Character of the Ele& of God, is manifeſt by 
Col. iii. 12, 13. Put on therefore, as the Elect of 
God, holy and beloved, Bowels of Mercies, Kindneſs, 
Humbleneſs of Mind, Meekneſs, Long-ſuffering; for- 
© bearing 


— > Law | ”'Y 


ParT III. / gracious Affection. 223 
bearing one another, and forgiving one another. And © 


the Apoſtle ſpeaking of that Temper and Diſpoſition  » 
which he ſpeaks of as the moſt excellent and effential _ : 


Thing in Chriſtianity, and that without which none are 
true Chriſtians, and the moſt glorious Profeſſion and 


Gifts are nothing (calling this Spirit by the Name ot 
Charity) he deſcribes it thus; (8 Cor. xii. 4, 5.) Cha- 
rity ſuffereth long and is kind: Charity enyieth not: 
Charity vaunteth not itſelf, is not puffed up; doth not 
behave itſelf unſeemly; ſeeketh not her own; is not 
caſily provoked; thinketh no Evil.“ And the ſame _ 
Apoſtle, Gal. v. deſignedly declaring the — 53 

Marks and Fruits of true chriſtian Grace, chiefly inſiſts 
on the Things that appertain to ſuch a Temper and 


Spirit as I am ſpeaking uf, Verſe 22, 23. The Fruit 


of the Spirit is Loye, Joy, Peace, Long-ſuffering, 
Gentleneſs, Goodneſs, Faith, Meekneſs, Temperance. 
And ſo does the Apoſtle James, in deſcrib:ng tas 
Grace, or that Wiſdom that is from above, with that 

declared deſign, that others who are of a contrary 
Spirit may not deceive themſelves, and lie againſt the 


Truth, in profeſſing to be Chriſtians, when they are 
not, Jam. li. 14,—17. If ye have bitter Envying 


and Strife in your Hearts, glory not, and lie not, againſt 


the Truth: This Wiſdom deſcendeth not from above; 
but is earthly, ſenſual, deviliſn. For where Envying 
and Strife is, there is Confuſion and every evil Work: 
But the Wiſdom that is from above, is firſt pure, then 
peaceable, gentle, eaſy to be intreated, full of Mercy 
— A 6 2 : 
Every Thing that appertains to Holineſs of 12 


does indeed belong to the Nature of true Chriſtiani 
and the Character of Chriſtians; but a Spirit of Holi- 
neſs appearing in ſome particular Graces, may more eſpe- 
cially be called the Chriſtian Spirit or Temper. There 
are ſome amiable Qualities and Vertues, that do more 
eſpecially agree with the Nature of the Goſpel Conſtitu- 
tion, and Chriſtian Profeſſion; becauſe there is a ſpecial 
J EN 85 Agreeableneſs 


, r n N „„ * e * 

he * = 4 N 4 - Wo = x : > » — * be | p < * | - = K * 

4 * 4 1 *. * 15 1 Y — * 5 Fd FJ 
y> e 
2 The && Ton 
| 24 arg gn 
3 * 
> * 


5 ableneſs in them, with thoſe divine Attributes 

which God has more remarkably manifeſted and glori- 
fied in the Work of Redemption by Jeſus Chriſt, that 
is the grand Subject of the Chriſtian Revelation; and 


. alſo a ſpecial Agreeableneſs with thoſe Vertues that were 


ſo wonderfully exerciſed by Jeſus Chriſt towards us in 
that Affair, and the bleſſed Example he hath therein ſet 
us; and likewiſe becauſe they are peculiarly agreeable 
to the ſpecial Drift and Deſign of the Work of Redemp- 
tion, and the Benefit we thereby receive, and the Rela- 
tion that it brings us into, to God and one another, 
And theſe Vertues are ſuch as Humility, Meekneſs, 
Love, Forgiveneſs, and Mercy. Theſe Things there. 
_ 3 belong to the Character of Chriſtians, 
as ſuch. 

Theſe Things are ſpoken of as what are eſpeciall 


: the Character of Jeſus Chriſt himſelf, the great H 


of the Chriſtian Church. They are ſo ſpoken of in 
the Prophecies of the Old Teſtament; as in that cited 
Matth. xxi. 5.'< Tell ye the Daughter of Sion, behold 
thy King cometh unto thee, meek, and ſitting upon an 
Aſs, and a Colt the Foal of an Aſs.“ So Chriſt himſelf 
ſpeaks of them, Matth. xi. 29. Learn of me; for J 
am meck and lowly in Heart.” The ſame appears by 
the Name by which Chriſt is ſo often called in Scripture, 
viz. THE LAMB. And as theſe Things are eſpect- 


ally the Character of Chriſt; fo they are alſo eſpecially 


the Character of Chriſtians. Chriſtians are Chriſtlike: 
None deſerve the Name of Chriſtians that are not fo, 
in their, prevailing Character. The new Man is re- 
newed, after the Image of him that creates him, Col. 
Ii. 10.“ All true Chriſtians © behold as in a Glaſs, the 
_ Glory of the Lord, and are changed into the fame 
Image, by his Spirit, 2 Cor. iii. 18.“ The Ele& are 
all © predeſtinated to be conformed to the Image of the 
Son of God, that he might be the Firſt-born among 
many Brethren,* Rom. vui. 29. As we have borne 

the Image of the firſt Man, that is carthly, ha” 
' * | allo 


* 


Parr IIt 


we. * 1 Py r nnn Fig a6 « 1 — 1 inn twc aw 


CH 


E * 


rr 


„ uy 


„ rr 


Parr III. 


>— — TB — CD uw oy 


—_ 


alſo bear the Image of the heavenly: For as is the earthy, - 
ſuch are they alſo that are earthy; and as is the heavenly, 
ſuch are they alſo that are heavenly, 1 Cor. xv. 47, 48, 
49. Chriſt is full of Grace; and Chriſtians * all receive 
of his Fulneſs, and Grace for Grace:* i. e. there is 


Grace in Chriſtians anſwering to Grace in Chriſt, ſuch _ 


an anſwerableneſs as there is een the Wax and the ; 
Seal; there is Character for Character: Such Kind: of 
Graces, fuch a Spirit and Temper, the ſame Things 
that belong to Chriſt's Character, belong to their's. | 
That Diſpoſition wherein Chriſt's Character does in a. 
ſpecial Manner conſiſt, therein does his Image in a ſpecial 
Manner conſiſt. Chriſtians that ſhine by reflecting the 
Light of the Sun of Righteouſneſs, do ſhine with the 
fame Sort of Brightneſs, the ſame mild, fweet and 
pleaſant Beams. Theſe Lamps of the ſpiritual Temple, 
that are enkindled by Fire from Heaven, burn with the 


ſame Sort of Flame. The Branch 1s of the ſame Nature N 


with the ou and Root, has the ſame Sap, and bears 
the ſame Sort of Fruit, The Members have the ſame 

Kind of Life with the Head. It would be ftrange if 
Chriſtians ſhould not be of the ſame Temper and Spirit 
that Chriſt is of; when they are his Fleſh and his 
Bone, yea, are one Spirit, 1 Cor. vi. 17, and hve ſo, 
that it is not they that live, but Chriſt that Ives in them.” 
A chriſtian Spirit is Chriſt's Mark, that he ſets upon the 
Souls of his People; his Seal in their Foreheads, bea- 
ring his Image and Superſcription. Chriſtians are the 
Followers of Chriſt : And they are ſo, as they are obe- 
dient to that Call of Chriſt, Matth. xi. 28, 29. Come 
to me, and learn of me, for I am meek and lowly of 
Heart.“ They follow him as the Lamb; Rev. xiv. 
4: Theſe are they which follow the Lamb witherſoever 
he goeth. True Chriſtians are as it were cloathed with _ 
the meek, quiet, and loving Temper of Chriſt; for as 
many as are in Chriſt, have put on Chriſt. And in this 
Reſpect the Church is cloathed with the Sun, not only by 
being cloathed- with his imputed Righteouſneſs, but 


alſo * % 


of gracious Aﬀettimns. 1 323 * 


4 _— F * E — * 0 : 4 " * 4 * 5 — un 9 9 7 * * * 8 — p I, < of 
* a N - : Is P42 * F dy - Ty 2 y p * % *. e * 22 8 T 

Ss Fe * So — * e 
a — : * 1 . - _ 

q I N * ws. % LL * & = A * X * P * f . 

1 326 | eg gn ART III. 

* 
X . . 


alſo by being adorned with his Graces; Rom: xiii. 14, 
Chriſt the great Shepherd, is himſelf a Lamb, and Be. 


lievers are alſo Lambs; all the Flock are Lambs; 
John xxi. 15. Feed my Lambs.“ Luke x. 3. I ſend 


you forth as Lambs, in the Midſt of Wolves,” The 


Redemption of the Church by Chriſt from the Power 
of the Devil was typified of old, by David's delivering 
the Lamb, out of the Mouth of the Lion and the Bear, 

That ſuch Manner of Vertue as has been ſpoken of, 
is the very Nature of the Chriſtian Spirit, or the Spirit 
that worketh in Chriſt and in his Members; and the 
diſtinguiſhing Nature of it, is evident by this, that be 
Dove is the very Symbol or Emblem, choſen of God, 

to repreſent it. Thoſe Things are fitteſt Emblems of 
bother Things, which do belt repreſent that which is moſt 
Wn ri Nature. The Spirit that deſcended 
on Chriſt, when he was anointed of the Father, de- 

ſcended on him lite a Dove. The Dove is a noted 
Emblem of Meekneſs, Harmleſſneſs, Peace and Love. 
But the ſame Spirit that deſcended on the Head of the 
Church, deſcends to the Members. God hath ſent 
forth the Spirit of his Son into their Hearts, Gal. iv. 
6. And if any Man has not the Spirit of Chriſt, he 
is none of his, Rom. viii. 9. There is but one Spirit 
to the whole myſtical Body, Head and Members, 1 Cor. 
vi. 17. Eph. iv. 4. Chitiſt breathes his own Spirit on his 


Diſciples, John xx. 22. As Chriſt was anointed with 


the Holy Ghoſt, deſcending on him like a Dove; fo 


Chriſtians alſo © have an Anointing from the holy One, 


1 John ii. 20, 27. And they are anointed with the ſame 
Oil; 'tis the ſame precious Ointment on the Head, 
that goes down to the Skirts of the Garments:“ And on 

th it is a Spirit of Peace and Love: Pſal. cxxxiii. 1, 


2. Behold how good, and how pleaſant it is, for Bre- 
thren to dwell together in Cy It is like the precious 


Ointment upon the Head, that ran down upon the 


Beard, even Aaron's Beard; that went down to the 
Shirts of his Garments. The Oil on Aaron's Garments 


had 


— 


— 4 


tt 
1 
1 
* 
N 
E. 
* 


Fr lk of gracine Afedtiom. e, 


his Head; the Smell of the ſame ſweet Spices. Chriſ- 
ian Affections, and a Chriſtian Behaviour, is but the 
gowing out of the e of Chriſt's ſweet Ointments. 
Becauſe the Church has a dove- like Temper and Diſpo- 


Eyes, Cant. i. 13. Behold thou art fair, my Love; 
behold thou art fair: Thou haſt Dove's Eyes.“ And 
Chap. iv. 1. * Behold thou art fair, my Love; behold 
du art fair: Thou haſt Dove's Eyes within thy Locks.” 
The fame that is ſaid of Chriſt, Chap. vi. 12. © His 
ves are as the Eyes of Doves.” And the Church is 
' frequently compared to a Dove in Scriptuae, Cant. ii. 
„ © O my Dove, that art in the Clefts of the Rock 
Chap. v. 2. Open to me my Love, my Dove.“ And. 
Chap. vi. g. © My Dove, my Undefiled, is but one.“ 
al. leviil. 13. Ye ſhall be as the Wings of a Dove, 
covered with Silver, and her Feathers with yellow Gold.?. 
| Wand lxxiv. 1 3. O deliver not the Soul of thy Turtle- 
Dove unto the Multitude of the Wicked.“ The Dove 
that Noah ſent out of the Ark, that could find no Reſt 
or the Soul of her Foot, till ſhe returned, was a Type 
* Wot a true Saint. | X 
: Meekneſs is ſo much the Character of the Saints, 
chat the. Meek and tbe Godly, are uſed as ſynonymous 
Terms in Scripture: So Pſal. xxxvii. 10, 11. the Wicked 
* Mad the Meek are ſet in Oppoſition one to another, as 
Wicked and Godly. *© Yet a little While, and the 
wicked ſhall not be,---but the Meek ſhall- inherit the 
Darth.“ So Pſal. cxlvii. 6. The Lord lifteth up the 
neck: He caſteth the Wicked down to the Ground.“ 
a Tis Doubtleſs very much on this Account, that 
Chriſt repreſents all his Diſciples, all the Heirs of -Hea- 
ven, as little Children, Matth. xix. 14. Suffer little 
hildren to come unto me, and forbid them not; for 
F ſuch is the Kingdom of Heaven.“ Matth. x. 42. 
Whoſoeverſh all give to drink unto one of theſe little 
nes, a Cup of cold Water, in the Name of a Diſciple, 
| | verily 


had the ſame ſweet and inimitable Odour, with that cx 


ition, therefore it is ſaid of her that ſhe has Doves | 


328 The eighth Sign PAR III. 
verily I ſay unto you, he ſhall in no wiſe loſe his Re. 
Sand” Matth. xviii. 6. Whoſo ſhall offend one of 
theſe little ones, &c. Ver. 10. Take Heed that ye 
deſpiſe not one of theſe little ones. Ver. 14. It is not 
the Will of your Father which is in Heaven, that ons 
of theſe little ones ſhould periſh.* John xi. 33. Little 
Children, yet a little While am I with you.“ Little 
Children are innocent and harmlefs : They don't do a 
great deal of Miſchief in the World: Men need not 
be afraid of them: They are no dangerous Sort of 
Perſons: Their Anger don't laſt long: They don't lay 
up Injuries in high Reſentment, entertaining deep and 

rooted Malice. So Chriſtians, in Malice, are Children, 
1 Cor. xiv. 20. Little Children are not guileful and 
deceitful; but plain and ſimple: They are not verſed 
in the Arts of Fiction and Deceit; and are Strangers 
to artful Diſguiſes. They are yieldable and flexible, 
and not wilful and obſtinate; don't truſt to their own 
Underſtanding, but rely on the Inſtructions of Parents, 
and others of 0 rior Underſtanding. Here is therefore 
a fit and lively Emblem of the Followers of the Lamb. 
Perſons being thus like little Children, is not only a 
Thing highly commendable, and what Chriſtians approve 
of, and aim at, and which ſome of extraordinary Pro- 
fieiency do attain to; but it is their univerſal Character, 
and abſolutely neceſſary in order to entering into the 
Kingdom of Heaven; unleſs Chriſt was miſtaken; 
Matth. xviii. 3. © Verily I ſay unto you, except ye be 
converted, and become as little Children, ye ſhall not 
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.“ Mark x. 15. 
« Verily I ſay unto you, whoſoever ſhall not receive the 
Kingdom of God as a little Child, he ſhall not enter 
therein. | 

But here ſome may be ready to ſay, Is there no ſuch 
Thing as chriſtian Fortitude, and Boldneſs for Chriſt, 
being good Soldiers in the Chriſtian Warfare, and 
coming out bold againſt the Enemies of Chriſt and bus 
People? | 1 | 

0 


N r . e Eno tem 


Parr . 


To which I ufer, There doubtleſs is ſuch 2 Thing.” 
The whole chriſtian Life is compared to a Warfare, 


beſt rs, endowed with the greateſt Degrees of 
chriſtian Fortitude. And it is the Duty of God's Peo- 
ple to be ſtedfaſt, and vigorous in their Oppoſition to 


the Deſigns and Ways of ſuch, as are endeavouring to 1 


overthrow the Kingdom of Chriſt, and the Intere of 
Religion. But yet many Perſons ſeem to be quite miſ- 
taken concerning the Nature of chriſtian Fortitude. 
Tis an exceeding diverſe Thing from a brutal Fierce- 
neſs, or the Boldneſs of Beaſts of Prey. True chriſtian 
Fortitude conſiſts in Strength of Mind, through Grace, 
exerted in two Things: In ruling and ſup eg re 
evil, and unruly Paſſions and Aﬀe&ions of cheating 

and in ſtedfaſtly and freely exerting, and following” 
good Affections and Diſpoſitions, without being hindred 
by ſinful Fear, or the Oppoſition of Enemies. But 
the Paſſions that are reſtrained and kept under, in the 
Exerciſe of this chriftran . Strength and Fortitude, are 
thoſe very Paſſions that are vigorouſly and violently * * 
exerted, in a falſe Boldneſs for Chriſt. And thoſe A- 
feRtions that are vigorouſly exerted in true Fortitude, 


are thoſe chriſtian holy Affections, that are directly con- 1 4 


trary to them. Tho chriſtian Fortitude appears, in 


withſtanding and counteracting the Enemies that are 


without us; yet it much more appears, in reſiſting and 
ſuppreſſing the Enemies that are within us; becauſe 
are our worſt and ſtrongeſt Enemies, and have 
eres Jets againſt us. The Strength of the good 
Soldier of Jeſus Chriſt, appears in nothing more, than 
in ſtedfaſtly maintaining 
Sweetneſs, and 1 of his Mind, amidſt all 


the Storms, Injuries, ſtrange Behaviour,” and ſurpriſi 


_ y * 5 © 9 1 = : £ * * * V | tn N * 8 , - of * , im * 5 
* I l : P 9 * - . LOI. . a * - 
* J - 7 
. f ä 8 . ; ＋ l 
va 37 # ; 
* 


and 2 ſo. And the moſt eminent Chriſtians are the 


the holy Calm, Meeknem, 


* 


++, __ 


1 Ti * 
- . 


bh 


"IKE. 

- 

* 
— . 
” = 


Atts and Events of this evil and unreaſonable World. 
The Scripture ſeems to intimate, that true Fortitude © 


conſiſts chiefly in this, Prov. xvi. 32. He that is flow - 


* aloe A 6 . * IF 6 — , 
WITS Ev TEE * * | " 
4 1 4 \ * . hd . ? . 


to Anger, is better than the Mighty; and he that ruleth 
his Spirit, than he that taketh a City 

The directeſt and ſureſt Way in the World, to make 
a right Judgment, what a holy Fortitude is, in fighting 
with God's Enemies; 1s to look to the Captain of all 
God's Hoſts, and our great Leader and Example; and 
ſee wherein his Fortitude and Valour appeared, in his 
chief Conflict, and in the Time of the greateſt Battle 
that ever was, or ever will be fought with theſe Ene- 
mies, when he fought with them all alone, and of the 
People there was none with him, and exerciſed his For- 
titude in the higheſt Degree that ever he did, and got 
that glorious Victory that will be celebrated in the 
Praiſes and. Triumphs of all the Hoſts of Heaven, 
throughout all Eternity; even to Jeſus Chriſt in the 
Time of his laſt Sufferings; when his Enemies in 
Earth and Hell made their moſt violent Attack upon 
him, compaſſing him round on every Side, like renting 
and roaring Lions. Doubtleſs here we ſhall ſee the 
Fortitude of a holy Warrior and Champion in the 
' Cauſe of God, in its higheſt Perfection and greateſt 
Luſtre, and an Example fit for the Soldiers to follow, 
that fight under this Captain. But how did he ſhew his 
holy Boldneſs and Valour at that Time? Not in the 


Exerciſe of any fiery Paſſions; not in fierce and violent 


+ Speeches, and vehemently declaiming againſt, and cry- 

ing out of the intolerable Wickedneſs of Oppoſers, 
giving em their own in plain Terms; but in not opening 
his Mouth when afflicted and oppreſſed, in going as 2 
Lamb to the Slaughter, and as a Sheep before his 
Shearers, 1s dumb, not Nee his Mouth; praying that 
the Father would forgive his cruel Enemies, becauſe 
they knew not what they did; not ſhedding others Blood; 
but with all-conquering . Patience and Love, ſhedding 
his own. Indeed one of his Diſciples, that made 4 
forward Pretence to Boldneſs for Chriſt, and confidently 
declared he would ſooner die with Chriſt than deny him, 
began to lay about him with a Sword: But Chriſt 

| | meelcly 


FE 


er 


* 


* 


99 
— 


r — -© J©Q 


„ 0 + a BUY ow 


Paar III. of geycius fem. 331 
meekly rebukes him, and heals the Wound he gives. 


And never was the Patience, Meekneſs, Love, and 
Forgiveneſs of Chriſt, in ſo glorious a Manifeſfation, 
as at that Time, Never did he appear ſo much a Lamb, - 
and never did he ſhew ſo much of the dove-like Spirit, 
as at that Time. If therefore we ſee any of the Fol-- 
lowers of Chriſt, in the Midſt of the moſt violent, 
unreaſonable and wicked Oppoſition, of God's and his 
own Enemies, maintaining under all this Temptation, 
the Humility, Quietneſs, and Gentleneſs of a Lamb, 
and the Harmlefineſs, and Love, and Sweetneſs of a 
Dove, we may well judge that here is a good Soldier of 
Jeſus Chriſt. | 

When Perſons are fierce and violent, and exert their 
ſharp and bitter Paſſions, it ſhows Weakneſs, inſtead of 
Strength and Fortitude. 1 Cor. iii. at the Beginning, 
And I, Brethren, could not ſpeak unto you, as unto 
Spiritual, but as unto Carnal, even as unto Babes in 
Chriſt, For ye are yet Carnal: For whereas there is 
among you Envying and Strife, and Diviſions, are ye 
not carnal, and walk as Men?“ 

There is a pyetended Boldneſs for Chriſt, that ariſes 
from no better Principle than Pride. A Man may be 
forward to expoſe himſelf to the Diſlike of the World, 
and even to provoke their Diſpleaſure, out of Pride. 
For *tis the Nature of ſpiritual Pride to cauſe Men to 
ſeek Diſtinction and Singularity; and ſo oftentimes to 
ſet themſelves at War with thoſe that they call carnal, 
that they may be more highly exalted among their 
Party. True Boldneſs for Chriſt is univerſal, and 
overcomes all, and carries Men above the Diſpleaſure of 
Friends and Foes; ſo that they will forſake all rather 
than Chriſt; and will rather offend all Parties, and be 
thought meanly of by all, than offend Chriſt. And 
that Duty which tries whether a Man is willing to be 
deſpiſed by them that are of his own Party, and thought 
the leaſt worthy to be regard 
proper Trial of his Baldneſs for Chriſt, than his being 

\ | 12 * forward 


ed by them, is a much more 


332 "The erghth S Tarn 
forward to expoſe himſelf to the Reproach of his 
Oppoſers. The Apoſtle ſought not Glory, not only of 
Heathens and Fews,. but of Chriſtians; as he declares, 

1 Theſ. ii. 26.* Hie is bold for Chriſt, that hasChriſtian 
Fortitude enough, to confeſs his Fault openly, when 
he has committed one that requires it, and as it were to 

tome down upon his Knees before Oppoſers. Such 

Things as theſe are a vaſtly greater Evidence of holy 
Boldneſs, than reſolutely and fiercely confronting Op- 

oſers. | 
| . ſome are much miſtaken concerning the Nature 
of true Boldne/s for Chriſt, ſo they are concerning 

. chriſtian Zeal. *Tis indeed a Flame, but a ſweet One: 
Or rather it is the Heart and Fervour of a ſweet Flame. 

For the Flame of which it is the Heat, is no other than 

that of divine Love, or chriſtian Chaaity; which is the 

ſweeteſt and moſt benevolent Thing that is, or can be, 
in the Heart of Man or Angel. Zeal 1s the Fervour 
of this Flame, as it ardently and vigorouſly goes out 
towards the Good that is its Object, in Deſires of it, 


and Purſuit after it; and fo conſequentially, in Oppo- 


ſition to the Evil that is contrary to it, "Md impedes it. 
There is indeed Oppoſition, and «eh {7 pm 
that is a Part of it, or rather is an Attendant of it; but 


tit is againſt Things, and not Perſons. Bitterneſs againſt 


the Per/ons of Men is no Part of it, but is very con- 
trary to it; inſomuch that ſo much the warmer true 


| * Zealis, and the higher it is raiſed, ſo much the farther 


are Perſons from ſuch Bitterneſs, and ſo much fuller of 
Love, both to the Evil and to the Good. As appears 
from what has been juſt now obſerved, that it is noother 
in its very Nature and Eſſence, than the Fervour of 2 
Spirit of chriſtian Love. And as to what Oppoſition there 
is init, to Things, it is firſtly and chiefly againſt the evi/ 
| T bings 


Mr. Shepard, ſpeaking of H rites affecting Applauſe, ſays; 
© hence Mc, Dal their 8 — _ Foot the 
*« Scorns of the World: They have Credit elſewhere. To main- 
* tain their Intereſt in the Love of godly Men, they will ſuffer 
„much.“ Parable of the ten Virgins, Port I. P. 180. 6 


„ EC aA £25 D244 HS. EE 


%” — 


928 96 


Par Ul, of -qpacious Aﬀection. 333 


' Things in the Perſon himſelf, who has this Zeal; againſt 5 
the Enemies of God and Holineſs, that are in his own m 


in teaching us, that i 


not eyery, one his Brother their Treſpaſles. 


Heart; (as theſe are moſt in his View, and what he is 
moſt to do with) and but ſecondarily againſt the Sins of 
others. And therefore there is nothing in a true chriſ- 


tian Zeal, that is contrary to that Spirit of Meekneſs, 


Gentleneſs and Love, that Spirit of a littie Child, a 
Lamb and Dove, that has been ſpoken of; but is en- 
tirely agreeable to it, and tends to promote it. 

But to ſay ſomething particularly concerning this 
chriſtian Spirit I have been ſpeaking of, as exerciſed in 
theſe three Things, Forgiveneſs, Love and Mercy; 1 
would obſerve, that the Scripture is very clear and 
expreſs concerning the abſolute Neceſſity of each of 
theſe, as belonging to the Temper and Character of 
every Chriſtian, | {OD 

It is ſo as to a forgiving Spirit, or a Diſpoſition to 


overlook and forgive Injuries, Chriſt gives it/to us 


both as a negative and poten Evidence; and is cxpreſs 
we are of ſuch a Spirit, tis a 
Sign we are in a State of Forgiveneſs and Fayour our- 


' ſelves; and that if we are not of ſuch a Spirit, we are 


not forgiven of God; and ſeems. to take ſpecial Care 
that we ſhould take good Notice of it, and always bear 


it on our Minds. Matth. vi. 12, 14, 15. Forgive us 


our Debts, as we forgive ou, Debtors.— For if ye 


forgive Men their Treſpaſſes, your heavenly Father 
will alſo forgive you: But if ye forgive not Men their 
Treſpaſſes, neither will your Father forgive your Treſ- 
poles Chriſt expreſſes the ſame again at another 


| ime, Mark Xi. 2 5, 26. - and again in Alatth. xXvili. 22 


o 


tothe End, in the Parable of the Servant that owed his 
Lord ten thouſand: Talents, that would not forgive, his 
fellow Servant an hundred Pence; and. therefore was 
delivered to the Tormentors. An the Application of 
the Parable... Chriſt ſays, Verſe 35. So likewiſe ſhall 
my heavenly Father do, if ye from your Heart forgive 


And 


3% The eighth Sn Paxr III. 


And that all true Saints are of a loving, benevolent 
and beneficent Temper, the Scripture is very plain and 
abundant. Without it the Apoſtle tells us, Tho? we 
ſmould ſpeak with the Tongues of Men and Angels, 
Vo are as a ſounding Braſs or a tinkling Cymbal: And 
that tho' we have the Gift of Prophecy, and underſtand 
all Myſteries, and all Knowledge; yet without this 
Spirit we are nothing.“ And there is no one Virtue or 
{ * Diſpoſition of the Mind, that is fo often, and ſo expreſly 
inſiſted on, in the Marks that are laid down in the New 
Teſtament, whereby to know true Chriſtians. Tis 
often given as a Sign that is peculiarly diſtinguiſhing, 
by which all may know Chriſt's Diſciples, and by which 
they may know themſelves: And is often laid down, 
both as a negative and poſitive Evidence. Chriſt calls 
the Lawof Love, by Way of Eminency, his Command- 
ment, John xiii. 34. A new Commandmen I give 
{ unto. you, that ye love one another, as I have loved 
you, that ye alſo love one another.“ And Chap. xv. 
12. This is my Commandment, that ye love one another 
as I have loved you.“ And Verſe 17. Theſe Things 
I command you, that ye love one another.” And fays, 
Chap. xiii. 33. By this ſhall all Men know that ye are 
my Diſciples, if ye love one another.” And Chap. xiv. 
21. (ſtill with a ſpecial Reference to this which he calls 
F bis. Commandment)-* he that hath my Commandments, 
and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me.“ The 
beloved Diſciple, who had ſo much of this ſweet Tem- 

per himſelf, abundantly inſiſts on it, in his Epiſtles. 
There is none of the Apoſtles, is fo much in laying 
down expreſs Signs of Grace, for Profeſſors to try 
themſelves by, as he; and in his Signs, he inſiſts ſcarcely 
on any Thing elſe, but a Spirit of chriſtian Love, and 

an agreeable Practice; 1 John ii. 9, 10. He that faith I * 

he is in the Light, and hateth his Brother, is in Dark- 

, neſs even until now. He that loveth his Brother abideth 

in the Light, and there is none Occaſion of * 
in him.) Chap. iii. 14. We know that we * paſſed 
k | rom 


"> Freer 


F no A. he a8. £M.- 4. ..4 


Parr II. of gracious Affection. 335 
' from Death to Life, becauſe we love the Brethren. He 


that loveth not his Brother, abideth in Death.“ Verſe 
18, 19. My little Children, let us not love in Word 
and in Tongue, but in Deed and in Truth. And hereby 
we know that we are of the Truth, and ſhall aſſure our 
Hearts before him.“ Verſe 23, 24. This is his Com- 
mandment, that we ſhould love one another. And he 
that keepeth his Commandments, dwelleth in him, and 
he in him: And hereby we know that he abideth in us, 
by the Spirit which he hath given us. Chap. iv, Fi 
«Beloved, let us love one another; for Love is of ; 
and every one that loveth is born of God, and knoweth 
God: He that loveth not, knoweth not God; for God 
is Love.” Verſe 12, 13. * No Man hath ſeen God at 


any Time: If we love one another, God dwelleth in 4 | 


us, and his Love is perfected in us. Hereby know we 
that we dwell in him, becauſe he hath given us of his 
Spirit.” "Verſe 16. God is Love: And he that dwelleth 
in Love, dwelleth in God, and God in him.“ Verſe 20. 
© If a Man ſay, I love God, and hateth his Brother, 
he is a Liar: For he that loveth not his Brother that he 
2 how can he love God whom he hath not 

nf 4 | 1 

And the Scripture is as plain as it is poſſible it ſhould 
be, that none are true Saints, but thoſe whoſe true 
Character it is, that they are of a Diſpoſition to pity and 
relieve their Fellow-creatures, that are poor, indigent 
and afflicted ; Pal. xxxvii. 21. The Righteous ſheweth 
Mercy, and giveth.” Verſe 26. He is ever merciful, 
and lendeth.*  Pſal. cxii. 3. A good Man ſheweth 
Favour, and lendeth.* Verſe 9g. He hath diſperſed 
abroad, and given to the Poor. Prov. xiv. 31. He 
that honoureth God, hath Mercy on the Poor. Prov. 
xXx1. 26. The Righteous giveth, and ſpareth not.” 
— xxii. 16. He judged the Cauſe, of the Poor and 
eedy: Then it was well with him: Was not this to 


know me, ſaith the Lord? Jam. i. 27. Pure Religion al 


and undefiled before God and the Father, is this, To 
VIUT 


T. 
* 
od 


' 
1 * 


= 
— 
* 
$4.39 
* * * 


336 The eighth Sign 
| viſit the Fatherleſs and Widows in their Affliction, &c. 


* 


PART III. 


Hoſ. vi. 6. For I deſired Mercy, and not Sacrifice; 
and the Knowledge of God, more than Burnt-Offerings. 
Matth. v. 7. Bleſſed are the Merciful, for they ſhall 
obtain Mercy.“ 2 Cor. viii. 8. I ſpeak not by Com- 
mandment, but by Occaſion of the Forwardneſs of 
others, and to prove the Sincerity of your Love.“ Jam. 
ii. 13, 14, 15, 16. For he ſhall have Judgment with. 


Ef - - out Mercy, that hath ſhewed no Mercy.—What doth it 


profit my Brethren, though a Man faith he hath Faith, 
and have not Works? Can Faith fave him? If a Bro- 
ther, or Siſter be naked, and deſtitute of daily Food, 
and'one of you ſay unto them, depart in Peace, be you 
warmed and filled; notwithſtanding ye give them not 


thoſe Things which are needful for the Body; what 
doth it profit? 1 John iii. 17. Whoſo hath this 


World's Goods, and- feeth his Brother have Need, and 
but eth up his Bowels of Compaſſion from him, how 
dwelleth the Love of God in him? Chriſt in that 
Deſcription he gives us of the Day of Judgment, 
Matth. xxv. (which is the moſt particular that we have 


in all the Bible) repreſents that Judgment will be pals'd 


at that Day, according as Men have been found to 
have been of a mercitul Spirit and Practice, or other- 
wiſe.” Chriſt's Deſign in giving ſuch a Deſcription of 
the Proceſs. of that Day, is plainly to poſſeſs all his 
Followers with that Apprehenfion, that unleſs this was 
their Spirit and Practice, there was no Hope of their 
being accepted and own'd by him, at that Day. There- 
fore this is an Apprehenſion that we ought to be poſ- 
ſeis'd with. We find in Scripture, that a righteous Man 
and a merciful Man, are ſynonimous Expreſſions; Iſai. 


vii. 1. The Righteous periſneth, and no Man layeth 


it to Heart; and the merciful Men are taken away, none 
conſidering that the Righteous is taken away from the 


Evil to come. n 


Thus we ſee how full, clear and abundant, the Evi- 
dence from Scriptute is, that thoſe who are truly graci- 
| | ous 


i ParT III. of gracious. Aﬀeions. mY 337 


ous, are under the Government of that Lamb- like, 


S e „ . A” _A5_wwunWwWe 55 wW Tv” C”_CY MY. PR” 


DT” 8,” Y = U© 0” My & 


"> 


ons of Chriſtianity. quite different trol 
delineated in the Scriptures. The Scripture knows of 
no ſuch true Chriſtians, as are of a fordid, ſelfiſh, croſs 


4 _ EF me . | , 
8 1 4- 1 


dove- like Spirit of Jeſus Chriſt, and that this is eſſch- 
tially and eminently the Nature of the ſaving Grace of 
the Goſpel, and the proper Spirit of true Chriſtianity. . 


We may therefore undoubtedly determine that all truly 


chriſtian Affections are attended with ſuch a Spirit; 
and that this is the natural Tendency of the Fear and 
Hope, the Sorrow and the Joy, the Confidence and the 
Zeal of true Chriſtians. 5 q | 
None will underſtand me that true Chriſtians have no 
Remains of a contrary Spirit, and can never, in any 
Inſtances, be guilty of a Behaviour diſagreeable to ſuch 
2 Spirit. But this I affirm, and ſhall affirm 'till I deny 
the Bible to be any Thing worth, that every Thing in 
Chriſtians that belongs to true Chriſtianity, is of this 
Tendency, and works this Way; and that there is no 
true Chriſtian upon Earth, but is ſo under the prevailing 
Power of ſuch a Spirit, that he is properly denominated 
from it, and it is truly and juſtly his Character: And 
that therefore Miniſters, and others have no Warrant 
from Chriſt to encourage Perſons, that are of a contrary 
Character and Behaviour, to think they are converted, 
becauſe they tell a fair Story of Illuminations and Di- 
coveries. In ſo doing they would ſet up their own 
Wiſdom againſt Chriſt's, and judge without, and againſt 
that Rule by which Chriſt has declared all Men ſhould 
know his Diſciples. Some Perſons place Religion 0 
much in certain tranſient Illuminations and Impreſſions 
(eſpecially if they are in ſuch a particular Method and 
Order) and ſo little in the Spirit and Temper Perſons are 
of, that they greatly deform Religion, form Noti- 
at it is, as 


and contentious Spirit. Nothing can be invented that 

is a greater Abſurdity, than a moroſe, hard, cloſe, 

high- ſpirited, ſpiteful true Chriſtian. We mult learn 

the Way of bringing Men to Rules, and not Rules to 
i Men 


338 - » "The eigbib Sign 
Men, and ſo ſtrain and ſtretch the Rules of God's Word, 
to take in ourſelves, and ſome of our Neighbours, till 
we make them wholly of none Effect. bis | 
Tiis true that Allowances muſt be made for Men's 
natural Temper, with Regard to theſe Things, as well 
as others. But not ſuch Allowances, as to allow Men, 
that once were Wolves and Serpents, to be now con- 
verted, without any remarkable Change in the Spirit of 
their Mind. The Change made by true Converſion, 
is wont to be moſt remarkable and ſenſible, with Reſpe& 
to that which before was the Wickedneſs the Perſon was 
moſt notoriouſly guilty of. Grace has a great Tendency 
to reſtrain and mortify ſuch Sins, as are contrary to the 
Spirit that has been ſpoken of, as it has to mortify 
Drunkenneſs or Laſciviouſneſs. Yea, the Scripture 
repreſents the Change wrought by Goſpel Grace, as 
eſpecially appearing in an Alteration of the former Sort; 
Iſai. xi. 6, —9. The Wolf ſhall dwell with the 
Lamb; and the Leopard ſhall lie down with the Kid; 
and the Calf, and the young Lion, and the Fatling 
together; and a little Child ſhall lead them: And the 
| Cow, and the Bear ſhall feed; their young ones ſhall lie 
down together: And the Lion ſhall eat Straw like the 
Ox: And the ſuckling Child ſhall play on the Hole of 
the Aſp; and the weaned Child ſhall put his Hand on 
the Cockatrice Den. They ſhall not hurt nor deſtroy in 
all my holy Mountain. For the Earth ſhall be full of 
the Knowledge of the Lord, as the Waters cover the 
Sea.“ And to the ſame Purpoſe is Jai. Ixv. 25. Ac- 
cordingly we find, that in the primitive Times of the 
chriſtian C 

in this Ref Tit. ini. 3, &c. For we ourſelves allo 
were ſometimes fooliſh, diſobedient, deceived, ſerving 
divers Luſts and Pleaſures; living in Malice and Envy, 
hateful, and hating one another. But after that the 
Kindneſs and Love of God our Saviour, towards Men, 
appeared.------- He ſaved us, by the Waſhing of Rege- 


neration, and renewing of the Holy Ghoſt,” And. 


Col. 


PART III. 


, Converts were remarkably changed 


F ² : —⁵ R ß ̃ꝗAͥ mA ũ ²⁵ — £ £M.XNAaftr_ TEM &M_52_»1 


„ —_— —_— g_—_—_ * 


D „ 
- 


PaxT III. of gracious Aﬀettions. "Py 339 


Col. ii. 7, 8. In the which ye alſo walked, ſome Time, 
when ye lived in them. But now you alſo put off all 
theſe; Anger, Wrath, Malice, Blaſphemy, filthy Com- 
munication out of your Mouth.“ 93. 


IX. Gracious Affections ſoften the Heart, Ga are 1 | 


attended and followed with a chriſtian Tenderneſs of 
Spirit. N 
'F alſe Affections, however Perſons may ſeem to be 
melted by them while they are new, yet have a Tendency 
in the End to harden the Heart, A Diſpoſition to ſome _ 
Kind of Paſſions may be eſtabliſhed ; ſuch as imply 
Self-ſeeking, Self-Exaltation, and Oppoſition to others. 
But falſe Affections, with the Deluſion that attends 
them, finally tend to ſtupify the Mind, and ſhut it up 
zgainſt thoſe Affections wherein Tenderneſs of Heart 
conſiſts: And the Effect of them at laſt is, that Perſons 
in the ſettled Frame of their Minds, become leſs affected 
with their preſent and paſt Sins, and leſs conſcientious 
with Reſpect to future Sins, leſs moved with the War- 
nings and Cautions of God's Word, or God's Chaſtiſe- 
ments in his Providence, more careleſs of the 
Frame of their Hearts, and the Manner and Ten- 
dency of their Behaviour, leſs quick- ſighted to diſcern 
what is ſinful, leſs afraid of the Appearance of Evil, 
than they were while they were under legal Awakenings 
and Fears of Hell. Now they have been the Subjects 
of ſuch and fuch Impreſſions and Affections, and have 
a high Opinion of themſelves, and look on their State 
to be ſafe; they can be much more eaſy than betore, in 
living in the Neglect of Duties that are troubleſome and 
Inconvenient; and are much more ſlow and partial in 
complying with difficult Commands; are in no Meaſure 
ſo alarmed at the Appearance of their own Defects and 
Tranſgreſſions; are embolden'd to favour themſelves 
more, with Reſpe& to the Labour, and painful Care 
and Exactneſs in their Walk, and more eaſily yield to 
Temptations, and the Solicitations of 3 and 
ave. 


* 4% * "> 
. 281 oy * | K 0 7 Os 
i . 
N 4 _ 
; 40 
A © 
1 


r 
Le ed * 


Eaſe and their Luſts. , 


thuſe, ©* Who like ſtrange Eggs, be 


r 


have far leſs Care of their Behaviour, when they come 
into the holy Preſence of God, in the Time of publick 
or private Worſhip. Formerly it may be, under legal 
Convictions, they took much Pains in Religion, and 
denied themſelves in many Things: But now they 
think themſelves out of Danger of Hell, they very 
much put off the Burden of the Croſs, and fave them. 
ſelves the Trouble of difficult Duties, and allow them. 
ſelves more of the Comfort of the Enjoyment of their 


o 


Such Perſons as theſe, inſtead of embracing Chriſt a 
their Saviour from Sin, they truſt in him as the Saviour 
of their Sins: Inſtead of flying to him as their Refuge 
from their ſpiritual Enemies, they make Uſe of him s 
the Defence of their ſpiritual Enemies, frem God, and 
to ſtrengthen them againſt him. They make Chriſt the 
Miniſter of Sin, and great Officer and Vicegerent of the 
Devil, to ſtrengthen his Intereſt, and make him above 
all Things in the World ſtrong againſt JEHOVAH; 


ſo that they may fin againſt him with good Courage, 


and without any Fear, being effectually ſecured from 


Reſtraints by his moſt folemn Warnings and moſt awful 


Threatnings. They truſt in Chriſt to preſerve to them 
the quiet Enjoyment of their Sins, and to be their 
Skicld to defend them from God's Diſpleaſure; while 


they come cloſe to him, even to his Boſom, the Place 


of his Children, to fight againſt him, with their mortal 
Weapons, hid under their Skirts.“ However ſome of 
ST 3 WE , ; theſe 

* ++ Lhete are liypocrites that believe, but fail in Rægard of the 
Uſe of the Goſpel, and of the Lord Jeſus. And theſe we read of, 
Jude iii. viz. of ſome Men that did turn Grace into Wantonne/s. 
For therein appears the exceeding Evil of a Man's Heart, that 
* net only the Law, but alio the glorious 2 the Lord Jeſus, 
© works in him all Manner of Unrigbteouſneſs. And 'tis too cm- 
mon for Men at the firſt Work of Converſion, O then to cry for 
Glace and Chriſt, and afterwards grow licentious, live and lie in 


the Breach of the Law, and take their Warrant for their Courl 


from the Goſpel. Shepard's Parable, Part. I. P. 126. 


Again, P. 232. Mr. Shepard ſpeaks of ſuch Hypocrites, 4 
; 188 put into the ſame _— _— 
«« honeſt 


Parr Ill 


— — —_ —y nn nm i — - 


PT c 3, oY” Ry 


I. N AR III. ey gracious Aﬀetions. 341 


theſe, at the ſame Time, make à great Profeſſion of 
Love to God, and Aſſurance of his Favour, and great 
Joy in taſting the Sweetneſs of his Love. >. d 
After this Manner they truſted in Chriſt, that the "= 
Apoſtle Jude ſpeaks of, who crept in among the Saints 1 
untnoton; but were really ungodly Men, turning the Grace 
of Ged into Laſciviouſneſs, Jude iv. Thele are they that 
truſt in their being righteous; 'and becauſe God has 
promiſed that the Righteous ſhall ſurely live, or certainly 
be ſaved, are therefore embolden'd to commit Iniquity, 
| | whom 


1 


* 
* 


« honeſt Men have lived, they have been hatch'd up; and when 
« they are young, keep their Neſt, and live by crying and opening f 
« their Mouths wide after the Lord and Food of his Word ; but when .4 
« their Wings are grown, and they have got ſome Affections, ſome 
« Knowledge, ſome Hope of Mercy, are harden'd thereby to fly from 
« God.” And adds, ** Can that Man be good, whom God's Grace 
makes worſe?” 

Again, Part II. P. 167. When Men fly to Chriſt in Times of 
peace, that ſo they may preſerve their Sins with greater Peace f 
« Conſcience; ſo that Sin makes them fly to Chriſt, as well as 
« Miſery ; not that they may deftroy and aboliſh Sin, but that they 
may be preſerved in their Sins with Peace; then Men may be ſaid 
« toapprehend Chriſt only by a ſeeming Faith —Many an Heart 
« ſecretly ſaith this, If I can have my Sin and Peace, and Conſcience 
quiet for the preſent, and God merciful to pardon it afterward ; 
hence he don't rely (as he ſaith) only on the Mercy of God in 
« Chriſt: And now this hardens and blinds him, and makes him 
ſecure, and his Faith is Sermon-Proof, nothing ſtirs him.—And . 
« were it not for their Faith they ſhould deſpair, but this keeps them 
„up. And now they think if they have any Trouble of Mind, the 
« Devil troubles em; and ſo makes Chriſt and Faith Protectors of 
gin, not Purifiers from Sin; which is moſt dreadful; turning 
Grace to Wantonneſs, as they did ſacrifice. So theſe would fin 
* under the Shadow of Chriſt, uſe the Shadow 1s good and ſweet, 

* Mich. iii. 11. They had ſubtil fly Ends in good Duties; for therein 
% may lie a Man's Sin: Vet they lean upon the Lord, When 
„Money-changers came into the Temple, Ten baue A Dex 
"of Thieves, Thieves when hunted, fly to their Den ave, and 
there they are ſecure againſt all Searchers, and Hue - and-eries; ſo 
„here. But Chriſt whipped them out. So when Men are purſued, 

* with Cries and Fears of Conſcience, away to Chriſt they go as to 
their Den: Not as Saints to pray and lament out the Life of their 
Sin there; but to preſerve their 8Sin. This is vile: Will the Lord 

receive ſuch? 8 


R 


342 6 The ninth Sign * PART in. 


whom God threatens in Ezek. xxxiii, 13. V ben I ſball 
fay to the Righteous, that be ſhall ſurely live; if be truſt; 
to bis own Righteouſneſs, and commit Iniquity; all hit 
Righteouſneſs ſhall not be remembred; but for his Iniquity 
that be gpth committed, be ſhall die for it. 

Gracious Affections are of a quite contrary Tendency; 
they turn a Heart of Stone more and more into a Heart 
of Fleſh. An holy Love and Hope are Principles that 
are vaſtly more efficacious upon the Heart, to make it 
tender, and to fill it with a Dread of Sin, or whatever 
might diſpleaſe and offend God, and to engage it to 
Watchfulneſs and Care and Strictneſs, than a laviſh 
Fear of Hell. Gracious Affections, as was obſerved 
before, flow out of à contrite Heart, or (as the Word 
ſignifies) a bruiſed Heart, bruiſed and broken with 
godly Sorrow; which makes the Heart tender, as 
bruiſed Fleſh is tender, and eaſily hurt. Godly Sorrow 
has much greater Influence to make the Heart tender, 
than meer legal Sorrow from ſelfiſh Principles. 

The Tenderneſs of the Heart of a true Chriſtian, is 
elegantly ſignified by our Saviour, in his comparing 
ſuch a one to a little Child. The Fleſh of a little 
Child is very tender: ſo is the Heart of one that is new- 
born. This is repreſented in what we are told of 
Naaman's Cure of his Leproſy, by his waſhing in Jordan, 
by the Direction of the Prophet; which was undoubt- 
edly a Type of the renewing of the Soul, by waſhing 
in the Laver of Regeneration. We are told, 2 Kings 

v. 14. That be went down, and dipped himſelf ſeven Times 
in Jordan, according to the Saying of the Man of God; 
and bis Fleſh came again, like unto the Fleſh of a littk 
Child.” Not only is the Fleſh of a little Child tender, 
but his Mind is tender. A little Child has his Heart 
eaſily moved, wrought upon and bowed: So is a Chriſ- 
tian in ſpiritual Thin A little Child is apt to be 
affected with Sympathy, to weep with them that weep, 
and can't well bear to ſee others in Diſtreſs: So it is 
with a Chriſtian; John xi. 35. Rom. xii. 13. e xi. 
26. 


13 Hpaxr III. & gracious Affection. 343 
26. A little Child is eaſihy won by Kindneſs: So is a 
r Chriſtian. A little Child is ö eaſily affected with Grief 
„ at temporal Evils, and has his Heart melted, and falls 
ity : weeping: Thus tender 1s the Heart of a Chriſtian, 
with Regard to the Evil of Sin. A little Child is caſily* 
5; WI afrighted at the Appearance of outward Evil, or any 
rt Wl Thing that threatens its Hurt: So 1s a Chriſtian apt to 
at be alarmed at the Appearance of moral Evil, and any 
it MW Thing that threatens the Hurt of the Soul. A little 
er child when it meets Enemies, or fierce Beaſts, is not 
to I apt to truſt its own Strength, but flies to its Parents for 
h kefuge: So a Saint is not ſelf-confident in engaging 
ed 
d 
th 
as 
WW 


ſpiritual Enemies, but flies to Chriſt. A little Child is 
apt to be ſuſpicious of Evil in Places of Danger, 
afraid in the Dark, afraid when left alone, or far from 
Home: So is a Saint apt to be ſenſible of his ſpiritual 
Dangers, jealous of himſelf, full of Fear when he can't 
r, WI fee his Way plain before him, afraid to be left alone, 
and to be at a Diſtance from God; Prov. xxviti. 14. 
is Happy is the Man that fearth alway; but be that harden- 
ng 4b bis Heart foall fall into Miſchief. A little Child is 
le apt to be afraid of Superiors, and to dread their Anger, 
nnd tremble at their Frowns and Threatnings: So is a 
of I true Saint with Reſpect to God: Pſal. cxix. 120. My Z——— 
m, Lie trembleth for Fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy © 
N. Judoments. Iſai. Ixvi. 2. To this Man will I look, even 
ng I bim that is poor, and trembleth at my Word. Verſe 5. 
os I Hear ye the Werd of the Lord, ye that tremble at bis 
vs Verd. Ezra . 4. Then were aſſembled unto me, ev 
4; ¶ one that trembleth at the Words of the God of Iſrael. 
Chap. x. 3. According to the Counſel of my Lord, and of 
r, tboſe that tremble at the Commandmeni of our God, A | 
ut MI little Child approaches Superiors with Awe: So do the | 
iſ- © Saints approach God with holy Awe and Reverence. 43 
be Job xiii. 11. Shall not his Excellency make you afraid, © 
p, and bis Dread fall upon you. Holy Fear is fo much 
is the Nature of true Godlineſs, that it is called in Scrip- 
ii, ture by no other Name more frequently, than the Fear- 
IV God. | | Hence 


- 
* — 3 - — « 
r HT P 


WT ; P .* . 18 _ R - a 5 < 
4 344 de ninth Sign 
$M / 
1 


Hence gracious Affections don't tend to make Men 


bold, forward, noiſy and boiſterous; but rather to ſpeat 
trembling; (Hoſ. xiii. 1. When Ephraim ſpake trembling, 
be exalted himſelf in Iſrael ; but toben he offended in Bail, 
Be died,) and to cloath with a Kind of holy Fear in all 
their Behaviour towards God and Man; agreeable to 
Pſal. ii. 11. 1 Pet. iii. 15. 2 Cor. vii. 13. Eph. vi. 5. 
1 Pet. iii. 2. Rom. Xi. 20. * 

But here ſome may object and ſay, Is there no ſuch 
Thing as a holy Boldneſs in Prayer, and the Duties of 
divine Worſhip? I anſwer, There is doubtleſs ſuch a 
Thing; and it is chiefly to be found in eminent Saints, 
Perſons of great Degrees of Faith and Love. But 
this holy Boldneſs is not in the leaſt oppoſite to Reve- 
Fence; though it be to Diſunion and Servility. It aboliſhes 
or leſſens that Diſpoſition which ariſes from moral 
Diſtance or Alienation; and alſo Diſtance of Relation, as 
that of a Slave: But not at all, that which becomes the 
natural Diſtance, whereby we are infinitely inferior. No 
Boldneſs in poor ſinful Worms of the Duſt, that have 


a right Sight of God and themſelves, will prompt them 


to approach to God with leſs Fear and Reverence, than 
ſpotleſs and glorious Angels in Heaven; who cover 
their Faces helices his Throne; Jai. vi. at the Beginning. 
Rebecca, (who in her Marriage with Jaac, in almoſt all 
its Circumſtances, was manifeſtly a great Type of the 
Church, the Spouſe of Chriſt) when ſhe meets [/aac, 
lights off from her Camel, and takes a Veil, and covers 
herſelf; although ſhe was brought to him as his Bride, to 
be with him, in the neareſt Relation, and moſt intimate 
Union, that Mankind are ever united one to another in.* 
Llijab, that great Prophet, who had ſo much holy 

amiliarity with God, at a Time of ſpecial Nearneſs to 
zod, even when he converſed with him in the Mount, 


wrapped 
Pr. Ames, in his Caſes of Conſcience, B k UI. Chap. Iv. 


1! ie Humility. 


PRI III. 


A 2aks of an holy Modeſty in the Woaſhip of God, as one Sign of 


- _ ff — , 3Ra Fry ww 


AS ASC. Se: KM 


© — OO — oO „ ww - 


1 "3 
— 


„ 


SS ww aw DP eee e eee 


"ParT III. of gractous Afeftiom., 345 


wrapped his Face in his Mantle. Which was not becauſe 
he was terrified with any ſervile Fear, by the terrible 
Wind, and Earthquake, and Fire; but after theſe were 
all over, and God ſpake to him as a Friend, in 4 fill 
mall Voice; 1 Kings xix. 12, 13. And after the Fire, a 
fill ſmall Voice: And it was ſo, when Elijah beard it, 
be wrapped his Face in his Mantle. And Moſes, with 
whom God ſpake Face to Face, as a Man ſpeaks with 
his Friend, and was diſtinguiſhed from all the Prophets, 
in the Familiarity with God that he was admitted to; 
ata Time when he was brought neareſt of all, when 
God ſhewed him his Glory in that ſame Mount, where 
he afterwards ſpake to Elijah; He made Haſte, and bowed 
his Head towards the Earth, and worſhipped. Exod. xxxiv. 
8. There is in ſome Perſons, a moſt unſuitable and 
unſufferable Boldneſs, in their Addreſſes to the great 
Jznovan, in an Affectation of an holy Boldneſs, and 
Oſtentation of eminent Nearneſs and Familiarity ; the 
very Thoughts of which would make them ſhrink into 
nothing, with Horror and Confuſion, if they ſaw the 
Diſtance that is between God and them. They are like 
the Phariſee, that boldly came up near, in a Confidence 
of his own Eminency in Holineſs. Whereas if they 
ſaw their Vileneſs, they would be more like the Publican, 
that food afar off, and durſt not ſo much as lift up his 
Eyes to Heaven; but ſmote upon his Breaſt, ſaying, God 
be merciful to me à Sinner. It becomes ſuch ſinful Crea- 
tures as we, to approach a holy God (altho* with Faith, 
and without Terror,) yet with Contrition, and penitent 
Shame and Confuſion of Face. It is foretold that this 
ſhould be the Diſpoſition of the Church, in the Time 
of her higheſt Privileges on Earth, in her latter Day 
of Glory, when God ſhould remarkably comfort her, 
by revealing his Covenant-Mercy to her; Ezek. xvi. 60, 
to the End. 7 will eftabliſh unto thee an everlaſting Cove- 
nant, Then thou ſhalt remember thy Ways, and be aſhamed, 
—And I will eftabliſh my Covenant with thee; and thou 
ſalt know that Im the Land : That thou mayeſt * 


, : + 22 2 n 
3 43 „ * 9 


and be confounded, and never open thy Mouth any more, 
” becauſe of thy ſhame, when I am pacified toward thee, 
* for all that thou haſt done; ſaith the Lord God. The 
Woman that we read of in the 7th Chapter of Luke, 


that was an eminent Saint, and had much of that true 


Love which caſts out Fear, by Chriſt's own Teſtimony, 
Verſe 47, ſhe approached Chriſt in an amiable, and 
acceptable Manner, when ſhe came with. that humble 
Modeſty, Reverence and Shame, when ſhe ſtood at his 
Feet, weeping behind him, as not being fit to appear 
before his Face, and waſhed his Feet with her Tears. 
One Reaſon why gracious Affections are attended 
with this Tenderneſs of Spirit which has been ſpoken 
of, is that true Grace tends to promote Convictions of 
Conſcience. Perſons are wont to have Convictions of 
| Conſcience before they have any Grace: And if after- 


wards they are truly converted, and have true Repen- 


tance, and Joy, and Peace in believing; this has a 
Fendency to put an End to Terrors, but has no Tendency 
to put an End to Convictions of Sin, but to increaſe them. 
It don't ſtupify a Man's Conſcience; but makes it more 
ſenſible, more eaſily and thoroughly diſcerning the 
Sinfulneſs of that which is ſinful, and receiving a greater 
Conviction of the henious and dreadful Nature of Sin, 
ſuſceptive of a quicker and deeper Senſe of it, and 
more convinced. of his own Sinfulneſs, and Wickedneſs 
of his Heart: and conſequently it has a Tendency to 
make him more jealous of his Heart. Grace tends to 
give the Soul a further and better Conviction of the ſame 
Things concerning Sin, that it was convinced of under 
a legal Work of the Spirit of God; viz. Its great 
Contrariety to the Will and Law and Honour of God, 
the Greatneſs of God's Hatred of it, and Diſpleaſure 
againſt it, and the dreadful Puniſhment it expoſes to 
and deſerves. And not only fo, but it convinces the 
Soul of ſomething further concerning Sin, that it ſaw 
nothing of while only under legal Convictions; and that 
is the infinitely hateful Nature of Sin, and its Do 
oF n 


"The ninth Sign WS FEST 


29 = heed ſo. 6 n 4 


— . . 


s LAS . 3... 3% A _ Aa. = „„ ZE... 


Part III. of gracious Aﬀettions. 347 


neſs upon that Account. And this makes the Heart 
tender with Reſpect to Sin; like David's Heart, that 
ſmote him, when he had cut off Saul's Skirt. The 
Heart of a true Penitent is like a burnt Child, that 
dreads the Fire. Whereas on the Contrary, he that 
has had a counterfeit Repentance, and falſe Comforts 
and Joys, is like Iron that has been ſuddenly heat and 
uenched; it becomes much harder than before. A 
Iſe Converſion puts an End to Convictions of Con- 
ſcience; and ſo either takes away, or much diminiſhes . 
that Conſcientiouſneſs, which was manifeſted under 
Work of the Law. : 
All gracious Affections have a Tendency to promote 
this chriſtian Tenderneſs of Heart, that has been ſpoken 
of: Not only a godly Sorrow, but alſo a gracious Joy; 
Pſal. ii. 11. Serve the Lord with Fear, and rejoice 


with Trembling.“ As alſo a gracious Hope; Pſal xxxiii: 


18. Behold the Eye of the Lord is upon them that 
fear him, upon them that hope in his Mercy.” And 
Pal. cxlvii. 11. The Lord taketh Pleaſure in them 
that Fear him, and in them that hope in his Mercy.“ 
Yea, the moſt confident and aſſured Hope, that is truly 
gracious, has this Tendency. The higher an holy 
Hope is raiſed, the more there is of this chriſtian Ten- 
derneſs. The baniſhing of a ſervile Fear, by a holy 
Aſſurance, is attended with a propor: ionable Increaſe of 
a reverential Fear. The diminiſhing of the Fear of the 
Fruits of God's Diſpleaſure in future Puniſhment, is 
attended with a proportionable Increaſe of Fear of his 
Diſpleaſure itſelf: The diminiſhing of the Fear of 
Hell, with an Increaſe of the Fear of Sin. The vaniſh- 
ing of Jealouſies of the Perſon's State, is attended with 
a proportronable Increaſe of Jealouſy of his Heart, in 
a Diſtruſt of its Strength, Wiſdom, Stability, Faith- 
fulneſs, &c. The leſs apt he is to be afraid of natural 
Evil, having his Heart fixed truſting in God, and ſo 
hot afraid of evil Tidings;* the more apt is he to be 


alarmed with the Appearance of moral Evil, or the 
2 2 Evil 


348 The tenth Sign 


Evil of Sin. As he has more holy Boldneſs, fo he has 
leis of Selt-confidence, and a forward aſſuming ' Bold- 
neſs, and more Modeſty, As he is moie ſure than 
Others of Deliverance from Hell, ſo he has more of a 
Senſe of the Deſert of it. He is leſs apt than others to 


be ſhaken in Faith; but more apt than others to be 


moved with folemn Warnings, and with God's Frowns, 
and with the Calamities of others. He has the firmeſt 
Comfort, but the ſofteſt Heart: Richer than others, 
but pooreſt of all in Spirit: The talleſt and ſtrongeſt 
Saint, but the leaſt and tendereſt Child amongſt them, 


X. Another Thing wherein thoſe Affections that are 
truly gracious and holy, differ from thoſe that are falſe, 


is beautiful Symmetry and Proportion. 
Nor that the Symmetry of the Vertues, and gracious 


Affections of the Saints, in this Life, is perfect: It 


ofientimes, is in many Things detective, thro' the Imper- 
fe&t.on of Grace, for want of proper Inſtructions, thro' 
Errors in Judgment, or ſome particular Unhappineſs of 
natural Temper, or Defects in Education, and many other 
Diſadvantages that might be mentioned. But yet there 
is, in no wiſe, that monſtrous Diſproportion in gracious 
Affections, and the various Parts of true Religion in the 
Saints, that is very commonly to be obſerved, in the 
falſe Religion, and counterfeit Graces of Hypocrites. 

In the truly holy Affections of the Saints is found 


that Proportion, which is the natural Conſequence of 


the Univerſality of their Sanctification. They have 
the whole Image of Chriſt upon them: They have pur 
off the old Man, and have put on the new Man' entire 


in all his Parts and Members. It hath pleaſed the 


Father that in Chriſt all Fulneſs ſhould dwell:* There 
is in him every Grace: He is full of Grace and Truth: 
And they that are Chriſt's, do of his Fulneſs receive, 
and Grace for Grace; (John i. 14, 16.) i. e. there is 
every Grace in them, which is in Chriſt: Grace for 


Grace; that is; Grace anſwerable to Grace: There is 
no 


PART UI. 


0 
0 
4 
: 


PART III. of gracious. Aﬀettions, 349 


no Grace in Chriſt, but there is its Image in Believers 
to anſwer it: The Image is a true Image; and there is 
ſomething of the ſame beautiful Proportion in the 
Image, which is in the Original; there is Feature for 
Feature, and Member for Member. There is Symme- 
try and Beauty in God's Workmanſhip, The natural 
Body, which God hath made, conſiſts of many Mem- 
bers; and all are in a beautiful Proportion: So it is in 
the new Man, conſiſting of various Graces and Affec- 
tions. The Body of one that was born a perfect Child, 
may fail of exact Proportion through Diſtemper, and 
the Weakneſs and Wounds of ſome of its Melia 
yet the Diſproportion is in no Meaſure like that of thoſe 
that are born Monſters. 

It is with Hypocrites, as it was with Ephraim of old, 
at a Time when God greatly complains of their Hypo- 
eriſy; Hoſ. vii. Ephraim is a Cake not turned,“ nalf 
roaſted and half raw: There is commonly no Manner 
of Uniformity in their Aﬀections. 

There is in many of them a great Partiality, with 
Regard to the ſeveral Kinds of religious Aﬀections: 
Great Affections in ſome Things, and no Manner of 
Proportion in others. An holy Hope and holy Fear 
go together in the Saints, as has been obſerved from 
Pſal. xxxiii. 18, and cxlvii. 11. But in ſome of theſe is 
tae moſt confident Hope, while they are void of Reve- 
rence, Self-jealouſy and Caution, and to a great Degree 
caſt off Fear. In the Saints, Joy and holy Fear go 
together, though the Joy be never ſo great; as it was 
with the Diſciples, in that joytul Morning of Chriſt's 
Reſurrection, Matth. xxviii. 8. And they departed 
quickly from the Sepulchre, with Fear and GREAT 


Joy.“ But many of theſe rejoice without trembling: 
Their 


EET 
* a —— 


* Renewed Care and Diligence follows the Sealings of the 
Spirit. Now is the Soul at the Foot of Chriſt, as Mary was at 
* the Sepulchre, «w#h Fear and great Foy. He that travels the Road 
with a rich Treaſure about him, is afraid of a Thief in every f 
„Buſh.“ Flave/'s Sacramental Meditations. Medi. 4 


3850 The tenth Sign PaRT II. | 


© 


Their Joy is of that Sort, that is truly oppoſite to 


godly Fear. 


Bur particularly, one great Difference between Saints 
and Hypocrites is this, that the Joy and Comfort of 
the Former is attended with godly Sorrow and Mourn- 
ing for Sin. They have not only Sorrow to prepare 
them for their firſt Comfort, but after they are comforted, 
and their Joy eſtabliſhed. As it is foretold of the 
Church of God, ghat they ſhould mourn and loath 
themſelves for their Sins, after they were returned from 
the Captivity, and were ſettled in the Land of Canaan, 
the Land of Reſt, and the Land that flows with Milk 
and Honey, Ezek. xx. 42, 43. And ye ſhall know 
that I am the Lord, when I ſhall bring you into the 
Land of 1/ael, into the Country for the which I lifted 
up mine Hand, to give it to your Fathers. And there 
ſhall ye remember your Ways, and all your Doings, 
wherein ye have been defiled; and ye ſhall loath your- 
ſelves in your own Sight, for all your Evils that ye have 
committed.” As alſo in Ezek. xvi. 61, 62, 63. A true 
Saint is like a little Child in this Reſpe&; he never had 
any godly Sorrow before he was born again; but ſince - 
has it often in Exerciſe: As a little Child, before it is 
born, and while 1t remains in Darkneſs, never cries; 
but as ſoon as ever it ſees the Light, it begins to cry; 
and thenceforward is often crying. Although Chriſt 
hath borne our Griefs, and carried our Sorrows, ſo that 
we are freed from the Sorrow of Puniſhment, and may 
now ſweetly feed upon the Comforts Chriſt hath pur- 
chaſed for us; yet that hinders not but that our feeding 
on theſe Comforts ſhould be attended with the Sorrow of 
Repentance. As of old, the Children of 1/rae! were 
commanded, evermore to feed upon the paſchal Lamb, 


with bitter Herbs.“ True Saints are ſpoken of in 


a 3 Scripture 

0 ce If Repentance accompanies Faith, 'tis 8 RY 
„believe. Many know the Sia; and hence believe in Chriſt, truſt 
FE in Chriſt; and there is an End of their Faith. But what 1 
855 e . „E 48 feſſion 


84 1 * ll. 
A 1 * _— 
Li 


Parr III. of graciou Afeftims, 351 


Scripture, not only as thoſe that have mourn'd for Sing 


but as thoſe that do mourn, whoſe Manner it is ſtill to 


mourn; Matth. v. 4. Bleſſed are they that mourn, for 
they ſhall be comforted.” | : 
Not only is there often in Hypocrites, an eſſential 
Deficiency, as to the various Kinds of religious Affec- 
| tions; 


| « feſſion and Sorrow for Sin? What more Love to Chriit follows 


«this Faith? Truly none. Nay, their Faith is the Cauſe why they 
« haye none. For they think, if I truſt in Chriſt to forgive me, he 
« will do it; and there is an End of the Buſineſs. Verily this 
« Hedge Faith, this Bramble-Faith, that catches hold on -Chriſt, 
« and pricks and ſcratches Chriſt, by more Impenitency, more Con- 
« tempt of him, is meer Preſumption; which ſhall one Day be 
* burnt up and deſtroyed by the Fire of God's Jealouſy. Fie upon 
* that Faith, that ſerves only to keep a Man from-being tormented 
« before his Time! Your Sins would be your Sorrows, but that 
*« your Faith quiets you. But if Faith be accompanied with Repen- 
* tance, Mourning for Sin, more Eſteem of God's Grace in Chriſt; 
e ſo that nothing breaks thy Heart more than the Thoughts of 
“ Chriſt's unchangeable Love to one fo vile, and this Love makes 
*« thee love much, and love him the more; as thy Sin increaſeth, ſo 
* thou defireſt thy Love's Increaſe; and now the Stream of thy 
„Thoughts run, how thou mayeſt live to him that died for thee ; 
« This was Mary's Faith, who fat at Chriſt's Feet weeping, waſhing 
« them with her Tears, and loving much, becauſe much was fore 
„given.“ Sbepard's Sound Believer, Page 128, 129. 
« You ſhall know godly Sorrow (ſays Dr. Prefton, in his Diſcourſe 
* on Paul's Converſion) by the Continuance of it: It is conſtant; 
* but worldly Sorrow is but a Paſſion of the Mind, it changes, it laſts 
© not. Thoꝰ for the preſent it may be violent and ſtrong, and work 
* much outwardly; yet it comes but by Fits, and continues not; 
„Like a Land Flood, which violently, for the preſent, overflows 
the Banks; but it will away again; it is not always thus. But 
« godly Sorrow is like a Spring, that ſtill keeps his Running both 
Winter and Summer, Wet and Dry, in Heat and Cold, early and 
* late. So this godly Sorrow is the ſame in a regenerate Man ſtill; 
* take him when you will, he is ſtill ſorrowing for Sin. This godly 
Sorrow ſtands like the Centre of the Earth, which removes not, 
* but ſtill remains.” * 
I am perſwaded, many a Man's Heart is kept from breaking and 
** mourning, becauſe of this. He faith (it may be) that he is a vile 
Sinner; but I truſt in Chriſt, Oc. If they do go to Chriſt ta 
e deſtroy their Sin, this makes them more ſecure in their Sin. For 
* (fay they) I cannot help it, and Chriſt muſt do all. Whereas 
Faith makes the Soul mourn after the Lord the more.” Shepard s 
Parable of the Ten Virgins, Part II. P. 1666. 


/ 


352 be tenth Sign Pax III. 
tions; but alſo a ſtrange Partiality and Diſproportion, 


in the ſame Affections, with Regard to different Objects. 
Thus as to the Affection of Love, ſome make high 


Pretences, and a great Shew of Love to God and 
Chriſt, and it may be have been greatly affected with 


what they have heard or thought concerning them: But 


they han't a Spirit of Love and Benevolence towards 
Men, but are diſpoſed to Contention, Envy, Revenge, 
and Evil-ſpeaking; and will, it may be, ſuffer an old 
Grudge to reſt in their Boſoms towards a Neighbour, 
for ſeven Years together, if not twice ſeven Years; 
living in real IIl- will and Bitterneſs of Spirit towards him. 
And it may be in their Dealings with their Neighbours, 
are not very ſtri&t and conſcientious in obſerving the Rule 
of doing to others, as they would that they ſhould do to 
them : 1 John iv. 20. If a Man ſay, I love God, and 
bateth his Brother, he is a Liar: For be that loveth not 
his Brother, whom he hath ſeen, bow can he love God 
whom he hath not ſeen? And on the other Hand, there 
are others, that appear as if they had a great deal of 
Benevolence to Men, are very good natur'd and generous 
in their Way; but have no Love to God. 

And as to Love to Men, there are ſome that have 
flowing Affections to ſome; but their Love is far from 
being of ſo extenſive and univerſal a Nature, as a truly 
chriſtian Love is. They are full of dear Affections to 
ſome, and full of Bitterneſs towards others. They are 
knit to their own Party, them that approve of them, 
love them and admire them; but are fierce againſt thoſe 
that oppoſe arid diſlike them. Matth. v. 5, 46. Be lite 
your Father which is in Heaven: For be maketh his Sun to 
riſe on the Evil and on the Good. For if ye love them which 
love you, what Reward have ye? Do not even the Publi- 
cans the ſame? Some ſhew a great Affection to their 


Neighbours, and pretend to be raviſhed with the Com- 


any of the Children of God abroad; and at the ſame 
Time are uncomfortable and churliſh towards their 


Wives and other near Relations at Home, and are very 


negligent 


— 
r r a ä K wine . 


Err 


Pak r III. of gracious Affection. 383 'Y 
negligent of relative Duties. And as to the great Love 
to Sinners and Oppoſers of Religion, and the great 
Concern for their Souls, that there is an Appearance of 
in ſome, even to extreme Diſtreſs and Agony, ſingling 
out a particular Perſon, from among a Multitude, for 
its Object, there being at the ſame Time no general 
Compaſſion to Sinners, that are in equally miſerable 
Circumſtances, but what is in a monſtrous Diſproportion; 
this ſeems to be of the Nature of a gracious Affection. 
Not that I ſuppoſe it to be at all ſtrange, that Pity to 
the periſhing Souls of Sinners ſhould be to a Degree of 
Agony, if other Things are anſwerable; or that a truly 
gracious Compaſſion to Souls ſhould be exerciſed much 
more to ſome Perſons than others that are equally miſe- 
rable, eſpecially on ſome particular Occaſions: There 
may many Things happen to fix the Mind, and affe& 
the Heart, with Reſpect to a particular. Perſon, at ſuch 
a Juncture: and without Doubt ſome Saints have been 
in great Diſtreſs for the Souls of particular Perſons, ſo 
as to be as it were in Travail for them: But when Perſons 
appear, at particular Times, in racking Agonies for 
the Soul of ſome ſingle Perſon, far beyond” what has 
been uſually heard or read of in eminent Saints, but 
appear to be Perſons that have a Spirit of meek and 
fervent Love, Charity, and Compaſſion to Mankind in 
general, in a far leſs Degree than they; I ſay, ſuch 
Agonies are greatly to be ſuſpected, for Reaſons already 
given; viz. That the Spirit of God is wont to give 
Graces, and gracious Affections in a beautiful dymme- 
try and Proportion. 

And as there is a monſtrous Diſproportion in the Love 
of ſome, in its Exerciſes towards different Perſons, ſo 
there is in their ſeeming Exerciſes of Love towards the 
ſame Perſons. Some Men ſhew a Love to others as to 
their outward Man, they are liberal of their worldly7 
Subſtance, and often give to the Poor; but have no 
Love to, or Concern for the Souls of Men. Others 


pretend a great Love to Men's Souls, that are not com- 
| Paſſionate 


354 The tenth Sign Parr III. 


paſſionate and charitable towards their Bodies. The 
making a great Shew of Love, Pity, and Diſtreſs for 
Souls, coſts them nothing; but in order to ſhew Mercy 
to Men's Bodies, they muſt part with Money out 
of their Pockets. But a true chriſtian Love to our 
Brethren, extends both to their Souls and Bodies. And 
herein is like the Love and Compaſſion of Jeſus Chriſt, 
He ſhewed Mercy to Men's Souls, by labouring for 
them in preaching the Goſpel to them; and ſhewed 
Mercy to their Bodies, in going about doing Good, 
healing all Manner of Sickneſs and Diſeaſes among the 
People. We have a remarkable Inſtance of Chriſt's 
having Compaſſion at once both to Men's Souls and 
Bodies, ſhewing Compaſſion by feeding both, in Mark 
vi. 34, &c. And Jeſus, when he came out, ſaw much 
People, and was moved with Compaſſion towards them; 
becauſe they were as Sheep not having a Shepherd; And be 
began to teach them many Things. Here was his Compaſ- 
fion to their Souls. And in the Sequel, we have an 
Account of his Compaſſion to their Bodies, becauſe 
they had been a long While having nothing to eat: He 
fed five Thouſand of them with five Loaves and two 
Fiſhes. And if the Compaſſion of profeſſing Chriſtians 
towards others don't work in the ſame Ways, it 154 
Sign that it is no true chriſtian Compaſſion. 

And furthermore, tis a Sign that Affections are not 
of the right Sort, if Perſons ſeem to be much affected 
with the bad Qualities of their Fellow-Chriſtians, as 
the Coldneſs and Lifeleſſneſs of other Saints, but are 
in no Proportion affected with their own Defects and 
Corruptions. A true Chriſtian may be affected with 
the Coldneſs and Unſavourineſs of other Saints, and 
may mourn much over it. But at the ſame Time he is 
not ſo apt to be affected with the Badneſs of any Bodys 
Heart as his own. This is moſt in his View: This he 
is moſt quick-ſighted to diſcern: This he ſees moſt of 
the Aggravations of, and is moſt ready to cry out of, 
And a leſſer Degree of Vertue will bring him to * 

. | himſe 


as e {  yuuui 


— — my — 2 — — wm we, — — — E , wS . . @S amet 


— — KK } IM og 


ParT III. of gracious Affections. 355 
himſelf, and be concerned at his own Calamities, than 
rightly to be affected with others Calamities. And if 
Men have not attained to the Leſs, we may determine 
they never attained to the Greater. | 

And here by the Way, I would obſerve, that it may 
be laid down as a general Rule, That if Perſons pretend 
that they come to high Attainments in Religion, but 
have never yet arrived to the leſſer Attainments, *tis a 
Sign of a vain Pretence. As if Perſons pretend that 
they have got beyond meer Morality, to live a ſpiritual 
and divine Life; but really have not come to be ſo much 
as moral Perſons. Or pretend to be greatly affected 
with the Wickedneſs of their Hearts, and are not 
affected with the palpable Violations of God's Com- 
mands in their Practice, which is a leſſer Attainment. 
Or if they pretend to be brought to be even willing to 
be damned for the Glory of God, but have no Forward- 
neſs to ſuffer a little in their Eſtates and Names and 
worldly Convenience, for the Sake of their Duty. Or 
pretend that they are not afraid to venture their Souls 
upon Chriſt, and commit their All to God, truſting 
to his bare Word, and the Faithfulneſs of his Promiles, 
for their eternal Welfare; but at the ſame Time, havn't 
Confidence, enough in God, to dare to truſt him with a 
little of their Eſtates, beſtowed to charitable Uſes: I 
ty, when it is thus with Perſons, their Pretences are 
d I manifeſtly vain. He that is in a Journey, and imagines 
as 
re 


Jy 


> FD fa > OO SS £2. 


> a 3B TY *> 


8 8 


he has got far beyond ſuch a Place in his Road, and 

never yet came to it, muſt be miſtaken; and he is not 
4 Let arrived to the Top of the Hill, that never yet got 
h half. way thither. But this by the Way. 
* The ſame that has been obſerved of the Affection of 
Love, is alſo to be obſerved of other religious Affections. 
» I Thoſe that are true, extend in ſome Proportion, to the 
e various Things that are their due and proper Objects: 
of But when they are falſe, they are commonly ſtrangely 
f I Diſproportionate. So it is with religious Dęſres and 
y Longings: Theſe in the Saints, are to thoſe Tn 

| that 


—ͤ— — — 


256  - The renth Sign Parr Ill 


that are ſpiritual and excellent in general, and that in 
tome Proportion to their Excellency, Importance or 
Neceſſity, or their near Concern in them: But in falſe 
Longings, tis often far otherwiſe. They will ſtrangely 
run, with an impatient Vehemence, after ſomething of 
leſs Importance, when other Things of greater Impor. 
tance are neglected. Thus for Inſtance, ſome Perſony 
from Time to Time, are attended with a vehement 
Inclination, and unaccountably violent Preſſure, to 
declare to others what they experience, and to exhort 
others; when there is at the ſame Time, no Inclination, 
in any Meaſure equal to it, to other Things, that true 
Chriſtianity has as great, yea, a greater Tendency to; 
as the pouring out the Soul before God in ſecret earneſt 
Prayer and Praiſe to him, and more Conformity to him, 
and living more to his Glory, c. We read in Scrip- 
ture of Groanings that cannot be uttered, and Soul-break- 


ings for the Longing it bath, and Longings, 'T hirſtings, 


and Pantings, much more frequently to theſe. latter 
Things, than the former. 

And ſo as to Hatred and Zeal; when theſe are from 

right Principles, they are againſt Sin in general, in ſome 
Proportion to the Degree of Sinfulneſs; Pſal. cxix. 104. 
1 hate every falſe Way. So Verſe 128. But a falſe 
Hatred and Zeal againſt Sin, is againſt ſome particular 
Sin only. Thus ſome ſeem to be very zealous againſt 
Prophaneneſs, and Pride in Apparel, who themſelves 
are notorious for Coveteouſneſs, Cloſeneſs, and it may 
be Backbiting, Envy towards Superiors, Turbulency 
of Spirit towards Rulers, and rooted IIl-will to them 
that have injured them. Falſe Zeal is againſt the Sins 
of others, while Men have no Zeal againſt their own 
Sins. But he that has true Zeal, exerciſes it chiefly 
againſt his own Sins: Tho? he ſhews alſo a proper Zeal 
againſt prevailing and dangerous Iniquity in others, 
And ſome pretend to have a great Abhorrence of their 
own Sins of Heart, and cry out much of their inward 
Corruption; and yet make light of Sins in i 
| an 


+ Fo — nn ww. * — — — — — — 2 ©. — 


— a I © rd = +” $#* 2 0-A 75 


= wed CO) wy => Hd . = 


Parr III. of gracious Afettlio. 35 


ind ſeem to commit them without much Reſtraint or 
Remorſe; though theſe imply Sin, both in Heart and 
. 

As there is a much greater Diſproportion in the 
Exerciſes of falſe Affections, than of true, as to different 
Objects; ſo there is alſo, as to different Times. For 
altho* true Chriſtians are not always alike; yea, there is 
a very great Difference, at different Times, and the beſt 
have Reaſon to be greatly aſhamed of their Unſteadi- 
neſs; yet there 1s in no wiſe that Inſtability and Incon- 
ſtancy in the Hearts of thoſe who are true Virgins, that 
follow the Lamb whitherſoever he goeth, which is in falſe 
hearted Profeſſors. The righteous Man is truly ſaid to 
be one whoſe Heart is fixed, truſting in God, (Pſalm cxii. 
1.) and to have his Heart eſtabliſbed with Grace, (Heb. 
xiil. 9.) and to Hold on his Way. Job. xvii. 9. The Righ- 
teous ſhall hold on his Ways, and be that bath clean Hands 
ſhall wax ſtronger and ſtronger. *Tis ſpoken of as a 
Note of the Hypocriſy of the Jewiſh Church, that 
they were as @ ſwift Dromedary, traverſing ber Ways. 

If therefore Perſons are religious only by Fits and 
Sarts; if they now and then ſeem to be raiſed up to the 
Clouds in their Affections, and then ſuddenly fall down 
again, loſe all, and become quite careleſs and carnal, 
and this is their Manner of carrying on Religion; if 
they appear greatly moved, and mightily engaged in 
Religion, only in extraordinary Seaſons, in the Time of 
aremarkable Out-pouring of the Spirit, or other uncom- 
mon Diſpenſation of Providence, or upon the real or 
ſuppoſed Receipt of ſome great Mercy, when they have 
received ſome extraordinary temporal Mercy, or ſuppoſe 
that they are newly converted, or have lately had 
what they call a great Diſcovery; but quickly return to 
ſuch a Frame, that their Hearts are chiefly upon other 
Things, and the prevailing Bent of their Hearts and 
Stream of their Affections is ordinarily towards the 
Things of this World; when they are like the Children of 
Hrael in the Wilderneſs, who had their Affections - ghly 

| | 71 


8 * 


338 * The tenth Sign Pany mn 


raiſed by what God had done for them at the Red Sea 
and ſang his Praiſe, and ſoon fell a luſting after the Fleſh. 
Pots of Egypt, but then again when they came to Mount 
Sinai, and ſaw the great Manifeſtations God made of 
himſelf there, ſeem'd to be greatly engaged again, and 
mighty forward to enter into Covenant with God, ſaying, 
All that the Lord hath ſpoken will wwe do, and be obedient, 
but then quickly made them a golden Calf; I ſay, when 
it is thus with Perſons, *tis a Sign of the Unſoundneſ 
of AﬀeCtions.* They are like the Waters in the Time 
IE | 2 


Dr. Owen, (on the Spirit, Book III. Chap. 2. $ 18. ſpeaking 
of a common Work of the Spirit, ſays, * This Work operates 
te oreatly on the Affections: we have given Inſtances, in Feu, 
a 33 Joy and Delight, about ſpiritual Things, that are ftirred 
s up and acted thereby: But yet it comes ſhort in two Things, of x 
** thorough Work upon the Affections themſelves. For ½, It doth 
not fix them. And 20%, It doth not fl them. 1. It is required 
« that our Affections be fixed on heavenly and ſpiritual Things: 
« And true Grace will affect it; Col. iii. 1, 2. Ir ye be riſen with 
« Chriſt, ſeek theſe Things which are above, where Chriſt fitteth un 
« the Right Hand of God. Set your Aﬀetions on Things above. The 
« Joys, the Fears, the Hopes, the Sorrows, with Reference unto 
« ſpiritual and eternal Things, which the Work before-mentioned 
6 doth produce, are evanid, uncertain, unſtable, not only as to the 
Degrees, but as to the very Being of them. Sometimes they are 
4 a5 a River ready to overflow its Banks, Men cannot but be pouring 
« them out on all Occaſions; and ſometimes as Waters that fail, no 
«« Drop comes from them. Sometimes they are hot, and fometimer 
« cold; ſometimes up, and ſometimes down; ſometimes all Heaven, 
« and ſometimes all World; without Equality, without Stability, 
«« But true Grace fixeth the Affections on ſpiritual Things. As to 
« the Degrees of their Exerciſe, there may be, and is in them 1 
« Variety, according as they may be excited, aided, aſſiſted by 
Grace and the Means of it; or obſtructed and impeded, by the 
« Interpoſition of Temptations and Diverſions. But the conſtant 
Bent and Inclination of renewed Affections, is unto ſpiritual 
«© Things; as the Scripture every where teſtifieth, and as Experience 
« doth confirm.” ; 
„There is, (ſays Dr. Preſten) a certain Love, by Fits, whick 
«« God accepts not; when Men come and offer to God great Promiſes, 
« like the Waves of the Sea, as big as Mountains: Oh, they think; 
they will do much for God! But their Minds change; and they 
become as thoſe high Waves, which at laſt fall level with the other 


Waters. 


8 


oO eee eee renne erer n en- 


SS 


PART III. of gracious Affeckions. 359 
of a Shower of Rain, which during the Shower, and a 
little after, run like a Brook, and flow abundantly; but 
ue preſently quite dry: And when another Shower 
comes, then they will flow again. Whereas a true 
Saint is like a Stream from a living Spring; which tho“ 
it may be greatly increaſed by a Shower of Rain, and 
dimiſhed in Time of Drought; yet conſtantly runs: 
(John iv. 14. The Water that I ſhall give him, ſhall be 
m him, a Well of Water ſpringing up, &c.) or like a 
Tree planted by ſuch a Stream, that has a conſtant Sup- 
ply at the Root, and is always green, even in Time of 
the greateſt Drought. Jer. xvi. 7, 8. Bleſſed is the 
Man that truſteth in the Lord, and whoſe Hope the 
Lord is. For he ſhall be as a Tree planted by the Waters, 
and that ſpreadeth out her Roots by the River; and ſhall 
not ſee when Heat cometh; but her Leaf ſhall be green; 
and ſhall not be careful in the Year of Drought; neither 
ſhall ceaſe from yielding Fruit.” Many Hypocrites are 
like Comets, that appear for a While with a mighty _ 
Blaze; but are very unſteady and irregular in their 
Motion, (and are therefore called wandering Stars, 
Jude xiii.) and their Blaze ſoon diſappears, and they 
appear but once in a great While. But the true Saints 
are like the fixed Stars, which, tho' they riſe and ſet, and 
are often clouded, yet are ſteadfaſt in their Orb, and 
may truly be ſaid to ſhine with a conſtant Light. H 
critical Aﬀections are like a violent Motion; like that 
of the Air that is moved with Winds. (Jude xii.) But 
_ gracious 


„Waters. If a Man ſhould profer thee great Kindneſſes, and thou 
* ſhouldſt afterwards come to him to make uſe of him, and he ſhould. 
„look ſtrangely upon thee, as if he were never acquainted with 
* thee: How would'f thou eſteem of ſuch Love? If we are now on, 
now off, in our Love, God will not eſteem of ſuch Love. il- 
courſe on the divine Love of Chriſt. f 

Mr. Flavel, ſpeaking of theſe changeable Profeſſors, ſays, © Theſe 
« Profeſſors have more of the Moon than of the Sun; little Light, 
* leſs Heat, and many Changes. They deceive many, yea, they 
* deceive themſelves, but cannot deceive God. They want that 
* Ballaſt and Eſtabliſhment in themſelves, that would have kept them 
* tight and ſteady.” Touchſtone of Sincerity, Chap. II. 92. 


% 


J 


_— 


= 


360 ?Qö The tenth Sin Pax II. 


1 are more a natural Motion, like the 
tream of a River; which though it has many Turns 
hither and thither, and may meet with Obſtacles, and 
run more freely and ſwiftly in ſome Places than others; 
yet in the general, with a ſteady and conſtant Courſe, 
tends the ſame Way, till it gets to the Ocean. 
And as there is a ſtrange Unevenneſs and Diſpropor. 
tion in falſe Affections, at different Times; ſo there often 
is in different Places. Some are greatly affected from 
Time to Time, when in Company; but have nothing 
that bears any Manner of Proportion to it, in Secret, 
in cloſe Meditation, ſecret Prayer, and converſing with 
God, when alone, and ſeparated from all the World. + 
A true Chriſtian doubtleſs delights in religious Fellow. 
ſhip, and Chriſtian Converſation, and finds much to af- 
fect his Heart in it: But he alſo delights at Times to 
retire from all Mankind, to converſe with God in ſoli- 
tary Places. And this alſo has it's peculiar Advantages 
for fixing his Heart, and engaging it's AfﬀeCtions. 
True Religion diſpoſes Perſons to be much alone, in 
ſolitary Places, for holy Meditation and Prayer. So it 


. wrought in [ſaac, Gen. 24. 63. And which is much 
| more 


* " 
4 
a 


— — 


+. * + © The Lord is neglected ſecretly, yet honoured openly ; becauſe 
- © there is no Wind in their Chambers to blow their Sails; and there- 

e fore there they ſtand ſtill. Hence many Men keep their Profeſſion, 

cc when they loſe their Affection. They have by the one a Name 

4 to live (and that is enough) tho' their Hearts be dead. And hence 

4 ſo long as you love and commend them, ſo long they love you; 

« but if not, they will forſake you. They were warm only by ano- 

« ther's Fire, and hence having no Principle of Light within, ſoon 

| * grow dead. This is the Water that turns a Phariſee's Mill. 

 Shepard's Par. Part I. p. 180. | 4d 

The Hypocrite ** Mr. Flawel) is not for the Cloſet, but the 

.<e' Synagogue ; Matth. vi. 5, 6. Tis not his Meat and Drink to re- 

« tire from the Clamour of the World, to enjoy God in Secret.”— 
Touchſtone of Sincerity, Chap. VII. 5 2. 

Dr. Ames, in his Caſes of Conſcience, Lib. III. Chap. v. ſpeaks 


of it as a Thing by which Sincerity may be known, „ That Perſons 
being obedient in the Abſence, as well as in the Preſence of 
| * Lookers on; in Secret, as well, yea more than in public; al- 
|  tedging Pbil. ii. 12. and Matth. vi. 6. | 


„„ ,, e 


PaxT III. of gracious Aﬀedtions. 


more, ſo it wrought in Jeſus Chriſt. How often do we 
read of his retiring into Mountains and ſolitary Places, 
for holy Converſe with his Father? *Tis difficult to 
conceal great Affections, but yet gracious Affections 


are of a much more ſilent and ſecret Nature, than thoſe 
that are counterfeit. So it is with the gracious Sorrow 


of the Saints. So it is with their Sorrow for their own 
Sins. & Thus the Future gracious: Mourning of true 
Penitents, at the ny of the latter Day Glory, 
is repreſented as being ſo ſecret, as to be hidden from 
the Companions of their Boſom; Zech.-xii. 12, 13, 14. 
And the Land ſhall mourn, every Family apart. The 
Family of the Houſe of David apart, and their Wives 
apart. The Family of the Houſe of Nathan apart,; 
and their Wives apart. The Family of the Houſe 

Levi apart, and their Wives apart. The Family of 
Sbimei apart, and their Wives apart. All the Families 
that remain, every Family apart, and their Wives apart? 
So it is with their Sorrow for the Sins of others. The 
Saints Pains and Travailing for the Souls of Sinners is 
chiefly in ſecret Places; Jer. xiii. 17. * If ye will not 
hear it, my Soul ſhall weep in ſecret Places for your 
Pride: And mine Eye ſhall weep ſore, and run down 


with. Tears; becauſe the Lord's Flock is carried away 
captive.“ So it is with gracious Joys: They are hidden 


Manna, in this Reſpect, as well as others; Rev. ii. 17. 


The Pfalmiſt ſeems to ſpeak of his ſweeteſt Comforts, 


as thoſe that were to be had in Secret; Pal: Ixiii.. C. My 
Soul ſhall be ſatisfied as with Marrow and Fatneſs, and 


my Mouth ſhall praiſe thee with joyful Lips; when I 


remember thee upon my Bed, and meditate upon thee 


in the Night Watches.“ Chriſt calls forth his Spouſe, 


away from the World, into retired. Places, that he may 
. give 


= 
. 
2 —— "TT, 8 ** of 


. - * 
ä * 


Mr. Flavel, in reckoning up thoſe Things, wherein the Sorrow 


of Saints is diſtinguiſhed from the Sorrow of Hypocrites, about 


their Sins, ſays, © Their Troubles for Sin are more private, and fi- 


* lent Troubles than others are; their Sore runs in the Night.“ 
Touchſtone of Sincerity, Chap. VI. 5 v. 


- N at * D 
- V 4 N n —=Y 
0 » 
- 
51 
- 

6 g 

\ 


e of 


= - 
= 


4 


— 


give her his ſweeteſt Love; Cant. vii. 11. 12. Come 
my Beloved, let us go forth into the Field, let us lodge 
in the Villages: There will I give thee my Love.“ T 

moſt eminent divine Favours that the Saints obtained, 
that we read of in Scripture, were in their Retirement, 


The principal Manifeſtations that God made of himſelf, 


and his Covenant-Mercy to Abrabam, were when he 


| was alone, apart from his numerous Family; as any 


one will judge that carefully reads his Hiſtory. Jace 
received that ſpecial Gift of God to him, Rebekab, who 
was ſo great a Comfort to him, and by whom he ob- 

tained the promiſed Seed, walking alone, meditating 
in the Field. Jacob was retired for ſecret Prayer, when 
Chriſt came to him, and he wreſtled with him, and ob- 
tained the Bleſſing. God revealed himſelf to Moſes in 
the Buſh, when he was in a ſolitary Place in the Deſert, 
in Mount Horeb ; Exod. iii. at the Beginning. And af. 
terwards, when God ſhewed him his Glory, and he was 


admitted to the higheſt Degree of Communion wich 


God that ever he enjoyed; he was alone, in the ſame 
Mountain, and continued there forty Days and forty 
Nights, and then came down with his Face ſhining, 
God came to thoſe great Prophets, Elijab and Elifba, 
and converſed freely with them, chiefly in their Retire- 
ment. Elijah converſed alone with God at Mount Sinai, 

as Moſes did. And when Jeſus Chriſt had his greateſt 
Prelibation of his future Glory, when he was transfi- 
gur'd; it was not when he was with the Multitude, or 
with the twelve . Diſciples, but retired into a ſolitary 
Place in a Mountain, with only three ſelect Diſciples, 
charging them that they ſheuld tell no Man, till he was 
riſen from the Dead. When the Angel Gabriel came to 
the bleſſed Virgin, and when the Holy Ghoſt came up- 
on her, and the Power of the Higheſt overſhadowed 
her, ſhe ſeems to have been alone, and to be in this 
Matter hid from the World; her neareſt and deareſt 
earthly Friend Joſeph, that had betrothed her (tho a 


Juſt Man) knew nothing of the Matter. And 1 


| $62 Tb tenth Sign Part Il. 


PaxT III. of gracious Affection: 363 
firſt partook of the Joy of Chriſt's Reſurrection, was 
alone with Chriſt at the Sepulchre; Jobn xx. And when 
the beloved Diſciple was favoured with thoſe wonderful 
Viſions of Chriſt, and his future Diſpenſations towards 
the Church and the World, he was JS in the Iſle of 
Patmos. Not but that we have alſo Inſtances of great 
Privileges that the Saints haye receiv'd when with 
others; or that there is not much in chriſtian Converſa- 
tion, and ſocial and public Worſhip, tending greatly to 
refreſh and rejoice the Hearts of the Saints. But this 
is all I aim at by what has been ſaid, to ſhew that it is 
the Nature of true Grace, that however it loves chri- 
ſtian Society in its Place, yet it in a peculiar Manner 
delights in Retirement, and ſecret Converſe with God. 
So that if Perſons appear greatly engaged in ſocial Re- 
ligion, and but little in the Religion of the Cloſer, and 
are often highly affected when with others, and but lit- 
tle moved when they have none but God and Chriſt to 
converſe with, it looks very darkly upon their Religion. 

XI. Another great and very diſtinguiſhing Difference 
between gracious Affections and others is, that gracious 
Affections, the higher they are raiſed, the more is a ſpi- 
ritual Appetite and Longing of Soul after ſpiritual At- 


tainments, encreaſed. On the contrary, falſe Aﬀettions 


reſt ſatisfied in themſelves. * Aa 2 Thee 


Truly there is no Work of Chriſt that's right ( ſays Mr. She- 
« pare) but it carries the Soul te long for more of it.“ Par. of the 
ten Virgins, Part I. p. 136. | | 0. 

And again, There is in true Grace an infinite Circle: A Man 
« by thirſting receives, and receiving thirſts for more. But hence 
* the Spirit is not poured out abundantly on Churches; becaule 
* Men ſhut it out, by ſhutting in, and contenting themſelves with 
their common Graces and Gifts; Mazth. vii. 29. Examine if it 
* be not ſo.” Ibid. p. 182. 3 | XI? 
And in p. 210, he ſays, ©* This I ſay, True Grace as it comforts, . 
* ſo it never fills, but puts an Edge on the Appetite : More of that 
„Grace Lord! Thus Paul, Phil. iii. 13, 14. Thus David: Out 
* of my Poverty I have given, &c. 1 Chron, xxix. 3, 17, 18. It's ' 
** a ſure Way never to be decefved in lighter Strokes of the Spirit, 
to be thankfal for any, but te be content with no Meaſure of it. 
And this cuts the Thread of Difference, between a ſuperficial 
lighter Stroke of the Spirit, and that which is ſound.” 


f 


364 The eleventh Sign 

The more a true Saint loves God with a gracious 
Love, the more he deſires to love him, and the more 
unealy is he at his Want of Love to him: The more 
be hates Sin, the more he deſires to hate i it, and laments 
that he has ſo much remaining Love to it: The more 
he mourns for Sin, the more he longs to mourn for Sin: 
The more his Heart is broke, the more he deſires it 
ſhould be broke: The more he thirſts and longs after 
God and Holineſs, the more he longs to long, and 
* breathe out his very Soul in Longings after God: The 
 Kindling and raiſing of gracious Affections is like kind- 
ling of a Flame; the higher it is raiſed, the more ardent 
it is; and the more it burns, the more vehemently does 


it tend and ſeek to burn. So that the ſpiritual Appe- 


tite after Holineſs, and an Increaſe of holy Affections, 
is much more lively and keen in thoſe that are eminent 
in Holineſs, than others; and more when Grace and ho- 
ly Affections are in their moſt lively Exerciſe, than at 


other Times. Tis as much the Nature of one that is 


ſpiritually new-born, to thirſt after Growth in Holineſs, 
as tis the Nature of a new-born Babe, to thirſt after 
the. Mother's Breaſt ; who has the ſharpeſt Appetite, 
when beſt in Health; 1 Pet. ii. 2, 3. As new-born 
Babes, deſire the fincere Milk of tbe Word, that ye may 

grow thereby; if ſo be that ye have taſted that the Lord 
' ts gracious, The moſt that the Saints have in this 
World, is but a Taſte, a Prelibation of that future 
Glory which is their proper Fulneſs; tis only an Earneſt 
of their future Inheritance in their Hearts; 2 Cor. i. 


22. and v. 5. and Epb. i. 14. The moſt eminent Saints 


in this State are but Children, compared with their fu- 

ture, which is their proper State of Maturity and Per- 
fection; as the Apoſtle obſerves, 1 Cor. xiii. 10, 11. 
+ "The greateſt Eminency and Perfection, that the Saints 
arrive to in this World, has no Tendency to Satiety, or 
to abate their Deſires after more; but on the. contrary, 
makes em more eager to preſs forwards ; z as 1s evident 


by the * 8 Words, Phil, iii. 13, 14, 15. Forget. 
ting 


— 


PART III. 


ting thoſe Things which are bebind, and reaching forth. 
unto theſe Things which are before, I preſs teward the 
Mark.—Let us therefore, as many as be PERFECT, be 
thus minded. Ft - 

The Reaſons of it are, that the more Perſons have 
of holy Affections, the more they have of that ſpiritual 
Taſte which I have ſpoken of elſewhere; whereby they 
perceive the Excellency, and reliſh the divine Sweet- 
neſs of Holineſs. And the more Grace they have, 
while in this State of Imperfection, the more they ſee 
their Imperfection and Emptineſs, and Diſtance from 
what they ought to be; and ſo the more do they ſee 
their Need of Grace; as I ſhewed at large before, when 
ſpeaking of the Nature of evangelical Humiliation, 
And beſides Grace, as long as it is imperfect, is of a 

owing Nature, and in a growing State. And we ſee 
it to be ſo with all living Things, that while they are 
ia a State of Imperfection, and in their growing State, 
their Nature ſeeks after Growth; and ſo much the more, 
as they are more healthy and proſperdus. Therefore 
the Cry of every true Grace, is like that Cry of true 
Faith, Mark ix. 24. Lord I believe, help thou my Unbe- 
lief. And the greater ſpiritual Diſcoveries and Aﬀec- 
tions the true Chriſtian has, the more does he become 
of an earneſt Beggar for Grace, and ſpiritual Food, 
that he may grow; and the more earneſtly does he pur- 
ſue after it, in the Uſe of proper Means and Endea- 
vours: For true and gracious Longings after Holineſs, 
are no idle ineffectual Deſires. . 
But here ſome may object and ſay, How is this con- 
ſiſtent with what all allow, That ſpiritual Enjoyments 
are of a Soul- ſatisfying Nature? „ 

I anſwer, Its being ſo, will appear to be not at all 
inconſiſtent with what has been ſaid, if it be conſidered 
in what Manner ſpiritual Enjoyments are ſaid to be of 
2 Soul- ſatisfying Nature. Certainly they are not ſo in 
that Senſe, that they are of ſo cloying a Nature, that 
he who has any Thing of them, though but in a very 

| imperfect 


imperfect Degree, deſires no more. But ſpiritual Enjoy. 
ments are of a Soul: ſatisfying Nature in the following 
Reſpects, 1. They in their Kind and Nature, are fully 
adapted to the Nature, Capacity and Need of the Soul 
of Man. So that thoſe who find them, deſire no other 
Kind of Enjoyments; they fit down fully contented with 
that Kind of Happineſs which they have, deſiring no 
Change, nor inclining to wander about any more, ſaying 
who will ſhew us any Good? The Soul is never cloyed, 
never weary; but perpetually giving up itſelf, with all 
its Powers to this Happineſs. But not that thoſe who 
have ſomething of this Happineſs, deſire no more of 
the ſame, 2. They are ſatisfying alſo in this Reſpect, 
that they anſwer the Expectation of the Appetite. 
When the Appetite is high to any Thing, the Expecta- 
tion is conſequently ſo. Appetite to a particular Object, 
implies Expectation in its Nature. This Expectation is 
not ſatisfyed by worldly Enjoyments, the Man expected 
to have a great, Acceſſion of Happineſs, but he is dif- 
appointed. But it is not ſo with ſpiritual Enjoyments: 
They fully anſwer and ſatisfy the Expectation. 3. The 
Gratification and Pleaſure of ſpiritual Enjoyments is 
permanent. Tis not ſo with worldly Enjoyments. 
They in a Senſe ſatisfy particular Appetites; but the 
Appetite in being ſatisfied, is glutted, and then the 
Pleaſure is over: And as ſoon as that is over, the gene- 
ral Appetite of humane Nature ofter Happineſs returns; 
but is empty, and without any Thing to ſatisfy it. So 
that the glutting of a particular Appetite, does but take 
way from, and leave empty, the general Thirſt of 
Nature. 4. Spiritual Good is cariatying, as there is 
enough in it, to ſatisfy the Soul, as to Degree, if Ob- 
ſtacles were but removed, and the enjoying Faculty 
duly applied. There is Room enough here for the Soul 
to extend it ſelf; Here is an infinite Ocean of it. If 
Men ben't ſatisfied here, in Degree of Happineſs, the 
Cauſe is with themſelves ; *tis becauſe they don't open 
their Mouths wide enou . 1 
ut 


366 The eleventh Sin Pant Ill. 


nd A > An Dri wad min tt food ©» A© OoAoS ao foo tr ics 


n+, {4 + B60 = „ © fro + wo „ 


r 


( 


3D A Me 


717. ] Ü wmQ».a. ²˙·uãöx ̃¶ð ¾ ¼]ũr 


Pakr III. of gracious Affection. 367 
But theſe Things don't argue that a Soul has no Ap-'. | 
tite excited after more of the ſame, that has taſted a 

little; or that his Appetite will not encreaſe, the more 

ke taſtes, till he comes to Fulneſs of Enjoyment: As 

Bodies that are attgacted to the Globe of os Earth, tend 

to it more ſtrongly, the nearer they come to the attrac- 

ting Body, and are not at Reſt out of the Centre. Spi- 
ritual Good is of a ſatisfying Nature; and for that very 

Reaſon, the Soul that taſtes, and know it's Nature, 

will thirſt after it, and a Fulneſs of it, that it may be 

ſatisfied. And the more he experiences, and the more 


he knows this excellent, unparrallel'd, exquifite, and 


ſatisfying Sweetneſs, the more earneſtly will he hunger 
and thirſt for more, till he comes to Perfection. And 
therefore this is the Nature of ſpiritual Affections, 
that the greater they be, the greater the Appetite and 
Longing is, after Grace and Holineſs. 

But with thoſe Joys, and other religious Affections, 
that are falſe and counterfeit, it is otherwiſe. If before, 
there was a great Deſire, of ſome Sort, after Grace; as 
theſe Affections riſe, bat Deſire ceaſes, or is abated. It 
may be before, while the Man was under legal Convic- 
tions, and much afraid of Hell, he earneſtly longed that 
he might obtain ſpiritual Light i in his Underſtanding, 
and Faith in Chriſt, and Love to God: But now, when 
theſe falſe Affections are riſen, that deceive him, an 
make him confident that he is converted, and his State 
good, there are no more earneſt Longings after Light 
and Grace: For his End is anſwer'd; 1 is confident 
that his Sins are forgiven him, and that he ſhall go to 
Heaven; and ſo he is fatisfied. And eſpecially when 
falſe Affections are raiſed very high, do they put an End 
to Longings after Grace and Holineſs. The Man now 


is far from appearing to himſelf, a poor empty Creature : 


On the Contrary, he is rich, and encreaſed with Goods; 


and hardly conceives of any Thing more excellent, than 


what he has already attain'd to. 


Hence there is an End to many Perſons Earneſtnefs 
in 


368 The eleventh Sign 
in Seeking, after they have once obtain'd that which 
they call their Converſion : or at leaſt, after they have 
had thoſe high Affections, that make them fully confi. 
dent of it. Before, while they looked upon themſelves 
as in a State of Nature, they were engaged in ſeeki 
after God and Chriſt, and cried earneſtly for Grace, — 
ſtrove in the Uſe of Means: But now they act as tho' they 
thought their Work was done: They live upon their 
firſt Work, or ſome high Experiences that are paſt; and 
there is an End to their crying, and ſtriving after God 
and Grace.“ Whereas the holy Principles that actuate 
a true Saint, have a far more powerful Influence to ſtir 
him up to Earneſtneſs in ſeeking God and Holineſs, 
than ſervile Fear. Hence ſeeking God is ſpoken of as 
one of the diſtinguiſhing Characters of the Saints; and 
thoſe that ſeek God, is one of the Names by which the 
Godly are called in Scripture; Pſal. xxiv. 6. This is 
the Generation of them that ſeek him, that ſeek thy Face, 
O Jacob. Pal. Ixix. 6. Let not ihoſe that ſeek thee be 
| | confounded 
2 « It is uſual to ſee a falſe Heart moſt diligent in ſeeking the 
„Lord, when he has been worſt, and moſt careleſs when *tis beſt. 
% Hence many at firſt Converfion, ſought the Lord earneſtly : Af. 
&* terwards Affectious and Endeavours dis; that now they are as 
„ good as the Word can make *em.—An Hypocrite's laſt End is to 
« ſatisfy himſelf: Hence he has enough. A Saint's is to ſati 
„ Chriſt: Hence he never has enough.” Shepard's Parable, Part]. 
P- 157. g * | 
Many a Man, it may be, may ſay, I have nothing in myſelf, and 
call is in Chriſt; and comfort himſelf there; and ſo falls aſleep. 
* Hands off! And touch not this Ark, leſt the Lord ſlay thee: A 
« Chrift of Clouts wonld ſerve your Turn as well.” Ibid p. 71. 
An Hypocrite's Light goes ont, and grows not. Hence many 
e ancient Standers take all their Comfort their rk Work, and 
« droop when in old Age.” Ibid. p. 77. 
And p. 93, 94. Mr. Shepard, mentioning the Characters of thoſe 
that have a dead Hope, ſays, „They that content themſelves with 
any Meaſure of Holineſs and Grace, they look not for Chriſt's 
„Coming and Company. For Saints that do look for him, tho 
«© they have not that Holineſs. and Grace they would have, yet th 
* reſt not ſatisfied with any Meaſure; 1 John iii. 3. He that bat 
*« this Hepe, purifieth himſelf gs be is pare, The Saints content not 
| » 7 3 themſelves 


PART III. 


einm «a i nn 1 — — — 1 — SS a « 


- oa a ak = al Al.” om oct 4 a i. am 


3 a aa - @ ** ih © at 


PART III. of gracious Afectins. 369 
confounded for my Sake: Verſe 32. The Humble ſhall 


ſee this and be glad, and your Heart ſhall live that ſeek 
e | God. 


« themſelves with any Dreſſings, till made glorious ; and fo fit for 
« Fellowſhip with that Spouſe. When a Man leaves not; *till he 
gets ſuch a Meaſure of Faith and Grace, and now when he has 
10 this, contents himſelf with this, as a good Sign that he ſhall 
10 Fed he looks not for Chriſt. Or when Men are heavily laden 
« with Sin; then cloſe with Chriſt; and then are comforted, ſeal'd, 
« and have Joy that fills them; and now the Work is done. And 
« when Men ſhall not content themſelves with any Meaſure ; but 
« with they had more, if Grace would grow, while they tell Clocks 
« and fit idle; and ſo God muft de all; but do not purge themſclyes, 
« and make Work of it.” 

Again, p. 109,,** There is never a Hypocrite living, but cloſeth 
« with Chriſt for his own Ends: For he cannot work beyond his 
« Principle. Now when Men have ſerved their own Turns out of 
« another Man, away they 80, and keep that which they have. 
« An Hypocrite cloſeth with Chriſt, as a Man with a rich Shop: 
« He will not be at Coſt to buy all the Shop, but ſo much as ſerves 
« his Turn, Commonly Men in Horror, ſeek ſo much of Chrift 
« 25 will eaſe them; and hence profeſs, and hence ſeek for ſo much 
« of Chritt as will credit them ; and hence their Deſires after Chriſt 
« are ſoon ſatisfied. Appelitus Finis eff infinitus.” 

« Wo to thee that canff paint ſuch a Chriſt in thy Head, and re- 
« ceive ſuch a Chriſt into thy Heart, as muſt be a Pander to your 
« Sloth. The Lord will revenge this Wrong done to his Glory, 
« with greater Sorrows than ever any felt: To make Chriſt not only 
« Meat and Drink to feed, but Cloaths to cover your Sloth. —Why 
« what can we do? What can we do?—Why as the firſt Adam con- 
« veys not only Guilt, but Power; fo the Second conveys both 
« Righteouſneſs and Strength.” Ibid p. 158. 
„ When the Lord had given ſome Light and Affection, and ſome 
« Comfort, and ſome Reformation, now a Man grows full here. 
« Saints do for God; and carnal Hearts do ſomething too; but a 
« little fills them, and quiets them, and ſo damns them. And 
« hence Men at the firſt Work upon them, are very diligent in the 
« Uſe of Means ; but after that, they be brought to 3 Prayer, 
« ſleep out Sermons, and to be careleſs, ſapleſs, lifeleſs.— . Ibid 
p. 210. 5 
lt is an Argument of Want of Grace, when a Man faith to 
« himſelf, as the Glutton ſaid to his Soul, Take thy Reft, fer thou 
a, Goods laid up for many Years. So thou haſt Repentance and 
„Grace, and Peace enough for many Years: And kence the Soul 
takes it's Reſt, grows ſluggiſh and negligent. Oh, if you dic in 
« this Caſe, this Night thy Soul ſhall be taken away to Hell.“ 
Ibid. p. 227. 


30 The eleventh Sign 


God. And lxxiv. 4. Let all thoſe that ſeek thee rejoice, 
and be glad in thee; and let ſuch as love thy Salvation 
- ſay continually, the Lord be magnified. And the Scrip- 
tures every where repreſent the Seeking, Striving and 
Eabour of a Chriſtian, as being chiefly after his Con. 
verſion, and his Converſion as being but the Beginning 
of his Work. And almoſt all that is ſaid in the new 
Teſtament, of Men's watching, giving earneſt Heed 
to themſelves, running the Race that is ſet before them, 
ſtriving and agonizing, wreitling not with Fleſh and 
Blood, but Principalities and Powers, fighting, putting 
on the whole Armour of God, and ſtanding, having 
done all to ſtand, preſſing forward, reaching forth, 
continuing inſtant in Prayer, crying to God Day and 
Night; I ſay, almoſt all that is ſaid in the new Teſta- 
ment of theſe Things, is ſpoken of, and directed to 
the Saints. Where theſe Things are applied to Sinners, 
ſeeking Converſion once, they are ſpoken of the Saints 
Proſecution of the great Buſineſs of their high Calling 
ten Times. But many in theſe Days have got into a 
ſtrange antiſcriptural Way, of having all their Striving 
and Wy over before they are converted; and 
having an eaſy Time of it afterwards, to fit down and 
enjoy their Sloth and Indolence; as thoſe that now have 
a Supply of their Wants, and are become rich and full, 
But when the Lord fills the Hungry with good Things, 
theſe Rich are like to be ſent away empty, Luke 1. 53. 
But doubtleſs there are ſome Hypocrites, that have 
only falſe Affections, who will think they are able to 
ſtand this Trial; and will readily ſay, that they defire 
not to reſt fatisfied with paſt Attainments, but to be 
| preſſing forward, they do deſire more, they long after 
God and Chriſt, and deſire more Holineſs, and do ſeek 
it. But the Truth is, their Deſires are not properly the 
Deſires of Appetite after Holineſs, for its own Sake, 
or for the moral Excellency and holy Sweetneſs that 1s 
in it; but only for By-Ends. They long after clearer 
Diſcoveries, that they may be better ſatisfied about the 
| | State 


Part III. 


dd Atm ds You. ” NC =, * £m 24 aa | r——_ g 


r p oe aun oo 


F. 


Par III. of gracious. Affections. 371 
State of their Souls; or becauſe in great Diſcoveries, 
Self is gratified, in being made ſo much of by God, 
and ſo exalted above others, they long to taſte the Love 
of God (as they call it) more than to have more Lobe to 
God. Or, it may be, they have a Kind of forced, fan- 
cied or made Longings; becauſe they think they muſt 
long for more Grace, otherwile it will be a dark Sign 
upon them. But ſuch I hings as theſe are far different. | 
from the natural, and as it were neceſſary Appetite ang 
Thirſting of the new Man, after God = Holineſs,® 
There is an inward burning Defire that a Saint has after 
Holineſs, as natural to the new Creature, as vital Heat 
is to the Body. There is a holy Breathing and Panting 
after the Spirit of God, to increaſe Holineſs, as natural 
to a holy Nature, as breathing 1s to a living Body. And 
Holineſs or Sanctification is more directly the Object of 
it, than any Manifeſtation of God's Love and Favour. 
This is the Meat and Drink that is the Object of the 
ſpiritual Appetite; John iv. 34. My Meat is to do the 
Vill of him that ſent me, and to finiſh bis Werk. Where 
we read in Scripture of the Delires, Longings and 
Thirſtings of the Saints, Righteouſneſs and God's Laws 
are much more frequently mention'd, as the Object of 
them, than any Thing elſe. The Saints de/re the fincere 
Milk of the Word, not ſo much to teſtify God's Love to 
them, as that they may grow thereby in Holineſs. I have 
ſhewn before, that Holineſs is that Good which is the im- 
mediate Object of a ſpiritual Taſte. But undoubtedly 
the ſame Sweetneſs that is the chief Object of a ſpiritual 
Taſte, is alſo the chief Obje& of a ſpiritual Appetite. 
Grace is the godly Man's Treaſure; Iſai. xxxiii. 6. The 
Fear of the — is his Treaſure. Godlineſs is the Gain 
that he is covetous and greedy of; 1 Tim. vi. 6. Hy- 
pocrites long for Diſcoveries, more for the preſent Com- 
fort of the Diſcovery, and the high Manifeſtation of God's 
Love in it, than for any ſanctifying Influence of it. But 
neither a Longing after great Diſcoveries, or after great 
Taſtes of the Love of God, nor Longing to be in Hea- 


ven, 


+ 


372 Tue twelfth Ses Par II fl; 

ven, nor Longing to die, are in any Meaſure ſo diſtin. | 

guiſhing Marks of true Saints, as Longing after a more 
holy. Heart, and living a more holy Life. 


t I am come now to the laſt diſtinguiſhing Mark of 
holy Affections that I ſhall mention. 


XII. Gracious and holy Affections have their Exer. 

ciſe and Fruit in Chriſtian Practice. I mean, they have 
that Influence and Power upon him who is the Subject 
ef 'em, that they cauſe that a Practice, which is uni. 
verſally conformed to, and directed by chriſtian Rules, 
ſhould be the Practice and Buſmeſs of his Life. l 

This implies three Things; 1. That his Behaviour 

or Practice in the World, be univerſally conformed to, 

and directed by chriſtian Rules. 2. That he makes 2 
Bufineſs of ſuch a holy Practice above all Things; that . 

it be a Buſineſs which he is chiefly engaged in, and de- 
voted to, and purſues with higheſt Earneſtneſs and Dil Ill © 
&ence : So that he may be ſaid to make this Practice of . 
Religion eminently bis Work and Buſineſs. And 3. . 
That he perſiſts in it to the End of Life: So that it 

may he ſaid, not only to be his Buſineſs at certain Sea- 
ſeons, the Buſineſs of Sabbath Days, or certain extraor- . 
dinary Times, or the Bufineſs of a Month, or a Tear, 
or of ſeven Years, or his Buſineſs under certain Circum- I © 
ſtances ; but the Bu/ineſs of his Life; it being that Bu MW 
ſineſs which he perſeveres in through all Changes, and . 
under all Trials, as long as he lives. 15 6 
The Neceſſity of each of theſe, in all true Chriſtians, Iſ © 

is mott clearly and fully taught in the Word of God. . 
1. Tis neceſſary that Men ſhould be univerſally obe-. 
dient: Þ 1 John, iii. 3. &c. Every Man that hath this il « 
| _ , Hope 6 

1 He that pretends to Godlineſs, and turns afide to crooked . 
« Ways, is an Hypocrite : For thoſe that are really godly, do live 4 
in a Way of Obedience; Pſal. cxix. 1, 2, 3. Bleſſed are the undr- ff « 
« filed in the Way, that walk in the Law of the Lord. They alſo 4 1 
« no Iniquity. Luke i. 6. They were both righteous before God, walk- iſ « 


&« iz in all the Commandments of the Lord blameliſi. But ſuch a5 f 


« live in Ways of Sin, are Diſſemblers; for all ſuch will be rejected If « , 
: | ne 


d 
e 
* 
ls 
(. 
15 
d 


ParT III. of - gracious Affection. $73 *© 

Hope in him, purifieth himſelf, even as be is pure. — And 

ye know that be was manifeſted to take away our Sins, and 
— 


« in the Day of Judgment; Matth. vii. 23, Depart from me ye that 
« evork Intquity. The like we have Lake xiii. 27. If Men live 
in a Way of Diſobedience, they don't love God; for Love will 
« make Men keep God's Commandments; 1 John v. 3. Here 
«in is Love, that we * his Commandments, and his Command 
a ments are not grievous. Men live in a Way of Diſobedience, 
« they: have not a Spirit of Faith; for Faith ſanQiifies Men; F 
« Acts xxvi, 68. Sandified by Faith that is in me. If Men live 
«ina Way of Diſobedience, they are not Chriſt's Sheep; for his 

« Sheep hear his Voice; John x. 27. Men that live in a Way of Diſ- 

« obedience are not born of God; 1 John iii. 9. He that is born of 
« God fonneth not. Men that live in a Way of Diſobedience are the 

« Servants of Sin; John viii. 38. He that committeth Sin is the Ser- 

« yant of Sin. A Courſe of external Sin is an Evidence of Hy- 

« pocrify; whether it be a Sin of Omiſſion or Commiſſion. If Men 

4 tein the Neglect of known Duties, or in the Practice of known 

« Eyils, that will be their Condemnation ; let the Sin be what it will; 

© let it be Prophaneneſs, Uncleanneſs, Lying or Injuſtice.----If Men 

« allow themſelves in Malice, Envy, wanton Thoughts, prophane 
„Thoughts, that will condemn them; though thoſe Corruptions 

« don't break out in any ſcandalous Way. Theſe Thoughts are an 
Evidence of a rotten Heart; Tit iii. 3. Ve our/elves were ſometimes 

*« frolifſh, diſobedient, deceived, ſerving divers Lufts and Pleaſures, liu- 

" ing in Malice, and Envy, hateful, and hating one anather. If a 
„Man allows himſelf, tho' he thinks he doth not, in Malice and 
Envy, he is an Hypocrite : Tho' his Conſcience diſallows it, yet 

« if his Heart allows it, he is no Saint. -Some make Pretences to 

« Godlineſs, whereby they do not only deceive others, but (which 
is a great deal worſe) deceive themſelves alſo: But this will con- 

„ demn them, that they live in a Courſe of Sin, and ſo muſt go 
«* with ungodly Men; Pſal. —_— As for ſuch as turn aftde unto _ 
their crooked Ways, the Lord will lead them forth with the Workers 

* of Iniquity. If there be ad Change in a Man's Carriage, and 
he be reformed in ſeveral Particulars, yet if there be one evil 
Way, the Man is an ungodly Man; where there is Piety there 

* 1s univerſal Obedience. A Man may have great Infirmities, yet 

* be a godly Man. So it was with Lot, David, and Peter : But 
„if he lives in a Way of Sin, he don't render his Godlineſs only 

* ſuſpicious, but it is full Evidence againſt him. Men that are 

* godly have Reſpect to all God's Commandments 3 P/al. cxix. 6. 

* There Be a great many Commands, and if there be one of them 

* that a Man has not Reſpe& unto, he will be put to Shame another 
„Day. If a Man lives in one evil Way, he is not ſubje& to God's 
* Authority ; but then he lives in Rebcllion ; and that will take off 


« all 


374 die twelfth Sign 


in him was no Sin, Whoſoever abideth in bim,  finneth 
not. Whoſover finneth, hath not ſeen him, neithen known 
bim. He that doth Righteouſneſs, is righteous, even 47 
be is righteous. He that committeth Sin, is of the Devil 
Chap. v. 18. We know that whoſoever is born of God, 
finneth not; but he that is begotten of God, keepeth bin- 
ſelf, and that wicked one toucheth him not. John xv. 14. 
Ze are my Friends, if ye do whatſoever I command you. 
James ii. 10. Whoſoever ſhall keep the whole Law, and 
yet offend in one Point, be is guilty of all, 1 Cor. vi. . 
Know ye not that the Unrighteous ſhall not inherit . 
Kingdom ef God. Be not deceived, neither Fornicators, 
nor Idolaters, &c. ſhall inberit the Kingdom of God. Gal, 
v. 19, 20. Now the Works. of the Fleſh are manifeſ, 
which are theſe, Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanneſs, La. 
civicuſneſs, Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance, Emu- 
| | lations, 


«« all his Pleas, and at once cut off all his Pretences ;- and he will 
be condemned in the Day of Judgment,—One Way of Sin is Ex- 
<« ception enough againſt the Man's Salvation. Tho' the Sin that 
< he lives in be but ſmall: Such Perſons won't be guilty of Perjury, 
„Stealing, Drunkenneſs, Fornication ; they look upon them to be 
& heinous Things, and they are afraid of them; but they do not 
much matter it, if they oppreſs a little in a Bargain, if they com- 
mend a Thing too much which they are about to ſell, if they break 
« 2 Promiſe, if they ſpend the Sabbath unprofitably, if they negle& 
«« ſecret Prayer, if they talk rudely and reproach others; they think 
e theſe are but ſmall Things: If they can keep clear of great Tranſ- 
4 greſſions, they hope that God will not inſiſt upon ſmall Things. 
« But indeed all the Commands of God are eſtabliſhed by divine 
« Authority: A ſmall Shot may kill a Man, as well as a Cannon 
« Bullet: A ſmall Leak may ſink a Ship. If a Man lives in ſmall 
« Sins, that ſhews he has no Love to God, no ſincere Care. to pleaſe 
« and honuur God. Little Sins are of a damning Nature, as well 
«« as great: If they don't deſerve ſo much Puniſhment as greater, 
yet they do deſerve Damnation. There is a Contempt of God 


nin all Sins; Matth. v. 19. He that ſhall break one of the leaft of 
4 theſe Commands, and ſhall teach Men ſo, ſhall be called the leaff in 


<« the Kingdom of God. Prov. xix. 16. He that keepeth the 

« ment, keepeth his own Soul; but be that deſpiſeth his Way, ſpall dit. 
<« If a Man ſays, this is a great Command, and fo lays Weight on 
eit, and another is a little Commandment, and ſo don't regard it, 


but will allow himſelf to break it, he is ia a periſhing Condition,” 


Steddard's Way to know Sincerity and Hypocriſy. 


4 


#, 
14 


Part In. 


TS DM WY 


FTS 


3 


Lions, M. rath, Strife, Envyings, Murders, Drunkenneſs, 
ff Revellings, and ſuch like: Of the which 1 tell you before, 
"i i; 7 have alſe told you in Time paſt, that they which do 
| ſuch Things, ſhall not inherit the Kingdom of God. Which 
is as much as to ſay, they that do any Sort of Wicked- 

Wl nfs. Job xxxiv. 3, 4, 3, 6, 7. I not Deſtruction to the 
Victed, and à ſtrange Puniſhment to the Workers of Ini- 
quity ? Doth not he ſee my Ways, and count all my Steps? 
Let me be weighed in an even Ballance, that God may know 
my Integrity. Fm Step hath turned out of the Way, 
and mine Heart walked after mine Eyes, and if any Blot 
hath cleaved to mine Hands, &c. Ezek. xxxili. 15. If 
he walk in the Statutes of Life, without committing Ini- 
guy, be all ſarely live. If one Member only be 
corrupt, and we don't cut it off, it will carry the whole 
Body to Hell; Meath. v. 29, 30. Saul was command- 
ed to ſlay all God's Enemies, the Amaletites; and he 
ſlew all but Agag, and the ſaving him alive proved his 
Ruin. Caleb and Joſbua enter'd into God's promis'd 
Reſt, becauſe they wholly followed the Lord; Numb. 
xiv, 24, and xxxii. 11, 12. Deut. i. 36. Fofp. xiv. 6, 8, 
, 14. Naaman's Hypocriſy ap in that, however 
# ſeem?d to be greatly affected with Gratitude to God 
for healing his Leproſy, and engag'd to ſerve him, yet 
in one Thing he deſired to be excuſed. And Herod, 
tho' he feared John, and obſerved him, and heard him 
gladly, and did many Things; yet was condemned, in 
that in one Thing he would not hearken to him, even in 
parting with his beloved Herodias. So that it is neceſ- 
lary that Men ſhould part with their deareſt Iniquities, 
which are as their right Hand and right Eyes, Sins that 
moſt eaſily beſet them, and which they are moſt expo- 
ſed to by their natural Inclinations, evil Cuſtoms, or 
particular Circumſtances, as well as others. As Joſepb 
would not make known himſelf to his Brethren, who 
had fold him, *till Benjamin, the beloved Child of the 
Family, that was moſt hardly parted with, was deliver- 
ed up; no more will Chriſt reveal his Love to us, till 


Part III. of gracious Aﬀettions. 3759 


PL * 1 
FY * o 
bh * * 1 * 
- 0 „ 
- 


| e 1173 
376 De twelfth Sign Part HII 
ve part with our deareſt Luſts, and till we are brought 

to comply with the moſt difficult Duties, and thoſe that 
we have the greateſt Averſion to. >, 
And it is of Importance, that it ſhould be obſerveq, 
that in order to a Man's being truly ſaid to be uniyer. 
fally obedient, his Obedience muſt not only conſiſt in 
Negatives, or in univerſally avoiding wicked Prafticez, 
conſiſting in Sins of Commiſſion ; but he mult alſo be 
univerſal in the Poſitives of Religion. Sins of Omiſ. 
ſion are as much Breaches of God's Commands, as Sins 
of Commiſſion. Chriſt, in Matth. xxv. repreſents thoſe 
on the left Hand, as being condemned and curſed u 
everlaſting Fire, for Sins of Omiſſion, I was an bungre 
and ye gave me no Meat, &c. A Man therefore can't 
be ſaid to be univerſally obedient, and of a chriſtia 
Converſation, only becauſe he is no Thief, nor Opprel: 
ſor, nor fraudulent Perſon, nor Drunkard, nor Tavem. 
haunter, nor Whore-Maſter, nor Rioter, nor Night- 
walker, nor unclean, nor profane in his Language, not 
Slanderer, nor Liar, nor Furious, nor Malicious, not 
Reviler: He is falſely ſaid to be of a Converſation that 
becomes the Goſpel, who goes thus far and no fatthet; 
but in order to this, it is neceſſary that he ſhould alſo be 
of a ſerious, religious, devout, humble, meek, forgiv- 
ings peaceful, reſpectful, condeſcending, benevolent 
merciful, charitable and beneficent Walk and Conver- 
ſation, Without ſuch Things as theſe, he don't obey 
the Laws of Chriſt, and Laws that he and his Apoſtles 
did abundantly infift on, as of greateſt Importance and 
Neceſlity. | MY 
2. In order to Men's being true Chriſtians, it is ne. 
ceſſary that they proſecute the Buſineſs of Religion, and 
the Service of God with great Earneſtneſs and Diligence 
as the Work which they devote themſelves to, and mal 
the main Buſineſs of their Lives. All Chriſt's pecul 
People, not only do good Works, but are zealous of gow 
Works; Tit. ii. 14. No Man can do the Service of th 


Maſters at once, They that are God's true Servants, 1 
give 


/ OC: Ee PSs... - Wes 


o * 
o 
4 


P N * "© RR 
by . 7 K XY ** 
"1 
ey T 
8 ' 
1 
— 


give up themſelves to his Service, and make it as it were 
their whole Work, therein employing their whole Hearts, 
and the chief of their Strength; Phil. iii. 13. This one - 
Thing I do. Chriſtians in their effectual Calling, are not 
called to Idleneſs, but to Labour in God's Vineyard, and 
ſpend their Day in doing a great and laborious Service. 
All true Chriſtians comply with this Call (as is implied 
in its being an effectual Call) and do the Work of | 
Chriſtians ; which is every where in the new Teſtament _ Þ 
compared to thoſe Exerciſes, wherein Men are wont to 
exert their Strength, with the greateſt Earneſtneſs, as * -Þ 
Running, Wreſtling, Fighting. All true Chriſttans 7 
are NT and faithful Soldiers of Jeſus Chriſt, and fgbt * 
the good Fight of Faith : For none but thoſe who do ſo, 
do ever lay hold on eternal Life. Thoſe who fight as 
thoſe who beat the Air, never win the Crown of Victo- 
ry. They that run in 4 Race, run all; but one wins 
the Prize; and they that are ſlack and negligent in 
their Courſe, do not /o run, as that they may obtain. 


PART I, gracious Aﬀecmrions. © 


B—_— 


DBS Mp T3” 55 » 5 


N- 


or The Kingdom of Heaven is not to be taken but by 
or Violence. Without Earneſtneſs there is no getting 
all along, in that narrow Way that leads to Life; and ſo 
vo arriving at that State of glorious Life and Happi- 


neſs which it leads to. Without earneſt Labour, there 
i no aſcending the ſteep and high Hill of Zion; and ſo 8 
ny no arriving at the heavenly City on the Top of it. 
rr Without a conſtant Laboriouſneſs, there is no ſtemming -— ? 
che ſwift Stream in which we ſwim, ſo as ever to come 
lf to that Fountain of Water of Life, that is at the Head 
na of it. There is need that we ſhould watch and pray al. 
ways, in order to our eſcaping thoſe dreadful Things, that 
are coming on the Ungedly, and our being counted twor- 
thy to ſtand before the Son of Man. There is need of 
our putting on the whole Armour of God, and doing all to. 
ſand, in order to our avoiding a total Overthrow, and 
being utterly deſtroyed by the fery Darts of the Devil. 
There is need that we ſhould forget the Things that are + 
vl Gehing, and be reaching forth to the Things that are be- 
TT + i ro fare, © 


a 


* * * * 18 * > © N , F PR +. N 9 ls \ * 5 vil as. * 0 n 2 % VO" "ve 
$288 The twelfth” Sigh ParT III. 
E. 1 Ld * n 8 

I « 


| fore, and preſſing towards the Mart for the Prize of the 
bib Calling of God, in Chriſt Feſus our Lord, in order 
d our obtaining that Prize. Slothfulneſs in the Service 
of God, in his profeſſed Servants, is as damning as 
open Rebellion: For the ſlothful Servant, is a wicked 
Servant, and ſhall be caſt into outer Darkneſs, among 
God's open. Enemies; Matib. xxv. 26, 28. They that 
are ſothful, are not Followers of them, who thro Faith 
and Patience inherit the Promiſes. Heb. vi. 11, 12. And 
e defire that every one of you do ſbet the ſame Diligence, 
to the full Aſſurance of Hope, unto the End; that ye be 
not ſletbful; but Followers of them, who thro Faith and 
Patience inherit the Promiſes. And all they who follow 
that Cloud of Witneſſes that are gone before to Heaven, 
do lay. afide every Weight, and the Sin that eaſily beſets 
them, and do run with Patience the Race that is ſet before 
them; Heb. xii. 1. That true Faith, by which Perſons 
rely en the Righteouſneſs of Chriſt,. and the Work that 
ke hath done for them, and dg truly feed and live upon 
him, is evermore accompanied with ſuch a Spirit of 
Earneſtneſs in the chriſtian Work and Courſe. Which 
Was typified of old, by the Manner of the Children of 
| A1/rae!'s feeding on the Paſchal Lamb: Who were di- 
rected to cat it, as thoſe that were in Haſte, with their 
| - Loins girded, their Shoes on their Feet, and Staff in 
* their Hand; Exod. xii. 11. And thus ſhall ye eat it; 
E "361th your Loins girded, your Shoes on your Feet, and your 
Staff in your Hand, and ye ſhall eat it in Haſte: It is the 
Lord's Paſſover. 5 | 
3. Every true Chriſtian perſeveres in this Way of 
univerſal Obedience, and diligent and earneſt Service 
of God, thro? all the various Kinds of Trials that he 
meets with, to the End of Life. That all true Saints, 
all thoſe that do obtain eternal Life, do thus perſevere 
in the Practice of Religion, and the Service of God, 
is a Doctrine ſo abundantly taught in the Scripture, 
that particularly to rehearſe all the Texts which imply 
it, would be endleſs. I ſhall content myſelf Bar re? 
95 . ferring 


* 


8 . 
"Rb... = 
< — 


Nn 
un, 
0 
= 


ParT III. e gracious Afebkioms. 379 


* 


fetring to ſome in the Margin. | 

But that in Perſeverance in Obedience, which is 
chiefly infiſted on in the Scripture, as a ſpecial Note of 
the Truth of Grace, is the Continuance of Profeſſors in 
the Practice of their Duty, and being ſtedfaſt in an holy 
Walk, through the various Trials that they meet with # 
By Trials, here I mean, thoſe Things that occur, 
and that a Profeſſor meets with in his Courſe, that do 

eſpecially render his Continuance in his Duty, and 
Faithfulneſs to God, difficult to Nature. Theſe Things 
are from Time to Time called in Scripture by the Name 
of Trials, or Temptations (which are Words of the fame ® 
Signification) Theſe are of various Kinds: There are 
many Things that render Perſons Continuance in the 
Way of their Duty difficult, by their Tendency to che- 
riſh and foment, or to ſtir up and provoke their Luſts 
and Corruptions. Many Things make it hard to con- 
tinue in the Way of Duty, by their being of an alluring 
Nature, and having a Tendency to entice Perſons to 
Sin; or by their Tendency to take off Reſtraints, and 
embolden 'em in Iniquity. Other Things are Trials f 
the Soundneſs and Steadfaſtneſs of Profeſſors, by their 
Tendency to make their Duty appear terrible to them, 
and ſo to affright and drive them from it: Such as the 
Sufferings which their Duty will expoſe them to; Pain, 
IIl-will, Contempt, and Reproach, or Loſs of outward -? 
Poſſeſſions and Comforts. If Perſons, after they have 
made a Profeſſion of Religion, live any conſiderable 3 
Time in this World, which is ſo full of Changes, and 
Bb 2 wv YA 
, 4 — 2 \ 
Dent. v. 29. Deut. xxxii. 18, 19, 20. 1 Chron. xxviii. 9. Hal. 
bexviii, 7, 8, 10, 11, 35, 35, 37» 41, 42, 56, Oc. P/al. VI. 3, 12, 
13, 14, 15. Pſal. exxv. 4, 5. Prov. xxvi. 11. Lai. Ixiv. 5. Jer. 
xvii. 13. Exel. iii. 20. and xviii. 24. and xxxiii. 12, 13. Matth. x. 
22. Marth. xiii. 4,---8, with Verſes 19,---23. Matth. xxv. 8. Matth: | 
Xxiv. 12, 13. Lake ix. 62. Chap. xit. 35. &c. Chap. xxii. 28. C. 
xvii. 32. John viii. 30. 31. — * 6, 7, 8, 10, 16. Rom. 117. 
Chap. xi. 22. Col. i. 22, 23. Heb. iii. 6, 12, 14. Chap. vi. 11, 44—᷑—᷑— 
Chap. x. 35, Oc. James i. 25. Rev. ii. 13, 26. Chag. ii. 10. 1 77. 7 
. 15. 2. Tim. iv. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. 4 


+4 
It 
- 
. 7 


: 


— — — 


TY o w 8 
2 R * . . —_ n 5 » 2 x "a. £ FI C F - : \ . 


* ” . 4 A 
<3 ts. _—*) Fo 0 N " TY. ; ws rr 4.” 4a 9 
- 5 K = * * "4 » KA » A 1 > * * * 4 \ 0 . 
* \ = 
* 


N yy 
* * ©, * . "I. 4 
* 


* 


. 


. 
OS. 


ſo full of Evil, it can't be otherwiſe, than that they 
ſhould meet with many Trials of their Sincerity and 
Steadfaſtneſs. And beſides, *tis God's Manner, in his 
Providence, to bring Trials on his profeſſing Friends 


and may exhibit ſufficient Matter of Conviction of the 


State which they are in, to. their own Conſciences; and 


often- times to the World. As appears by innumerable 
Scriptures; ſome are refer'd to in the Margin, & 
True Saints may be guilty of ſome Kinds and Degrees 


of Backſliding, and may be foil'd by particular Temp- 


tations, and may fall into Sin, yea great Sins: But they 
can never fall away ſo, as to grow weary. of Religion, 
and the Seryice of God, and habitually to diſlike it and 
neglect it; either on its own- Account, or on Account 
of the Difficulties that attend it: As is evident by Gai. 
vi. 9. Rom. ii. 7. Heb. x. 36. ſat. xliii. 22. Mal. i. 13. 
They can never backſlide, ſo as to continue no longer in 
a Way of univerſal Obedience; or ſo, that it ſhall ceaſe 
to be their Manner, to obſerve all the Rules of Chriſti- 
anity, and do all Duties required, even the moſt diffi- 
eult, and in the moſt difficult Circumſtances. This 
| is 


* . 
; * 2 2. * A „ 


$ Gen. xxii. 1. Exod. xv. 25. Chap. xvi. 4. Deut. viii. 2, 15 16. 
Chap. xiii. 3. Judges ii. 22. Chap. iii. 1, 4. Fob. xxiii. 10, P/al. 


at. 
3 


AIævi. 10, 11. Exel. iii. 20. Dan. xii. 10. Zech. xiii. 9. Matth. viii. 


19, 20. Chap. xviii. 2, 22. Exke i. 35. 1 Cor. xi. 19. 2 Cor. viii. 
8. Jam. i. 12. 1 Pet. iv. 12. 1 Jobe ii. 190. Heb. xi. 17. Rev. iii. 10, 
„One Way of Sin is Exception enough againſt Men's Salvi- 
« tion, though their Temptations be great. Some Perſons delight 
« jn Iniquity ; they take Pleaſure in Rudeneſs, and intemperate 
.«« Practices: But there be others, that don't delight in Sin; when 
they can handſomely avoid it, they don't chuſe it; except they 
« be under ſome great Neceſſity, they will not do it. They are 


1 afraid to fin; they think it is dangeruus, and have ſome Care to 
-«« void it: But ſometimes they force themſelves to ſin; they are re- 
2 duced to Difficulties, and can't tell how well to avoid it; it is 2 


« dangerous Thing not to do it. If Naaman don't bow himſelf in 


* the Houſe of Rimmon, the King will be in a Rage with him, take 
+ << away his Office, it may be take away his Life, and ſo he com- 
© plies; 2 Kings v. 18.—80 Ferobeam forced himſelf to ſet up the 


Calyes 


Parr III. 


and Servants deſignedly, that he may manifeſt them, 


| 

i 

{ 

4 

4 
4 
4 

1 
0 
4 
= 
« 
t 


PAR r III. of gracious Affedtionn. 3814 
is abundantly manifeſt by the Things that have been 
obſerved already. Nor can they ever fall away ſo, aas 
habitually to be more engaged in other Things, 8 9 
in the Buſineſs of Religion; or ſo that it ſhould become 
their Way and Manner to ſerve ſomething elſe more 
than God; or ſo as ſtatedly to ſerve God, with ſuch 
Earneſtneſs and Diligence, as {till to be habitually de- 
voted and given up to the Buſineſs of Religion. Un- 
leſs thoſe Words of Chriſt can fall to the Ground, Ye 
cannot ſerve two Maſters; and thoſe of the Apoſtle, 4 
He that will be a Friend of the World, is the Enemy: 5 2 7 
God; and unleſs a Saint can change his God, and et 
be a true daint. Nor can a true Saint ever fall away ſo, 
that it ſhall come to this, that ordinarily there -ſhall be © 
no remarkable Difference in his Walk and Behaviour. 

fince his Converſion, from what was before. They that 

are truly converted are new Men, new Creatures; new, 

not only within, but without; they are ſanctified through- 

out, in put, Soul and Body: old Things are paſs'd 


away, all Things are become new; | they have new 
Hearts, 


— „Calves at Dan and Bethel : He thought that if the People went u 
« to Feraſalem to worſhip, they would return to Rehoboam, and ki 

% him; therefore he muſt chink of ſome Expedient to deliver him. _} 
* ſelf in this Strait; 1 Kings xi. 27, 28.—He was driven by ap- 

J Neceſſity to take this wicked Courſe. So the ſtony Ground 
Hearers were willing to retain the Profeſſion of the true Religion; 
but the Caſe was ſuch, that they thought they could not well do 

it; Matth. xiii. 21. hex Tribulation or Per/ecution ariſenb becauſe 

„ the Word, by and by he is offended. —+So Acbhas and Gahazi had 

< ſingular Opportunities to get an Eſtate; if they live twenty Years 

« hos. are not like to have ſuch an Advantage; and they force them- 

« ſelves to borrow a Point, and break the Law of God. They lay 

a Neceſſity on Eſtate and Liberty and Life, but not upon Obe- 

* dience. If a Man be willing to ſerve God in ofdinary Caſes, but 

< excuſe himſelf when there be great Difficulties, he 1s not godly. 

* It is a ſmall Matter to ſerve God, when Men have no Temptation; 

* but Lot was holy in Sodom, Neah was righteous 1 in the old World. 

< Temptations try Men, but they don't force Men to fin: And 

„Grace will eſtabliſh, the Heart in a Day of Temptation. They 

d are bleſſed that do endgre Temptation, Jam. i. 12. But they are 
< curſed that fall away in a Day of Temptation.“ as ct: Way 
to know Sincerity and Hypocriſy. | | 


2 
* 
3 


Ls” 


= #7 


. 
KA 
* 
1 


* . 4 - 
bi 
G 


Shepard 's Parable, Part J. p. 226. 


The twelfth Sign PART III. 


Hearts, and new Eyes, new Ears, new Tongues, new 


Fd 


Hands, new Feet; i. e. a new Converſation and Prac- 


tice; and they walk in Newneſs of Life, and continue 


to do ſo to the End of Life. And they that fall away, 
and ceaſe viſibly to do fo, tis a Sign they never were ri- 


ſen with Chriſt. * And eſpecially when Men's Opinion 
of their being converted, and ſo in a ſafe Eſtate, is the 
very Cauſe of their coming to this, it 1s a moſt evident 
Sign of their Hypocriſy. F And that, whether their 


Falling away be into their former Sins, or into ſome 
= new Kind of Wickedneſs; having the Corruption of 
* nj only turned into a new Channel, inſtead of it's 
being mortified. As when Perſons that think themſelves 


converted, tho? they do not return to former Prophane, 
EY 0 not ret ung 


= 2 Hence we learn what Verdict to paſs and yy in, concerning 
% thoſe Men that decay and fall off from the Lord. They never 


2 had Oil in the Veſſel; never had a Dram of Grace in their 


„Heart. Thus 1 John ii. 9. If they had been of us, they would m 
% Doubt hade continued with us. It ſeems they were ſuch Men, 


„ which were ſo eminent and excellent, as that there were no Brands 


«© nor Marks upon them, to give Notice to the Churches, that they 
<< were mark'd out for Apoſtacy; but were only diſcovered to be un- 
«ſound, by their Apoſtacy ; and this was Argument good enough.” — 
Shepard's Parable, Part I. p. 226. abs 
+ When a Man's Rifing is the Cauſe of his Fall, or ſeals 2 
« Man up in his Fall, or at leaſt the Cauſe through his Corruption, 
%% Ex. Gr. Time was, a Man lived a looſe, careleſs, carnal Life; 
* by the Miniſtry of ſome Word, or Reading of ſome Book, or 
Speaking with ſome Friend, he comes to be convinced of his 
e Miſery and woful Condition, and ſee no Good nor Grace in him- 
« ſelf; he hath been even hitherto deceived : At laſt he comes to get 


* „ ſome Light, ſome Tafte, ſome Sorrows, ſome Heart, to uſe the 


Means, ſome Comfort and Mercy and Hope of Life: And when 
« jt is thus with him, now he falls; He grows full and falls ; and 
4 this, Riſing is the Cauſe of his Fall; his Light is Darkneſs and 
Death to him; and grows to a Form of Knowledge; his Riſin 

makes him fall to Formality, and then to Prophaneneſs; and 10 
« his Taſting ſatisfies him; his Sorrows empty his Heart of Sorrow 
« for Sin; and his Sorrows for his Falls harden his Heart in his 
« Falls; and all the Means of recovering him harden him.—Look 
<« az it is in Diſeaſes; if the Phyſic and Meat turns to be Poiſon, 
«© then there is no Hope of Recovery; a Man is ſick to Death now. 
The Saint's little Meaſure makes him forget what is behind.“ 


** 


* Las ** 


Part HI. of gractous Aﬀettions. 363 2 
neſs and Lewdnels; yet from the high Opinion they have 
of their Experiences, Graces and Privileges, gradually . 
ſettle more and more in a ſelf- -righteous and ſpiritually | 
roud Temper of Mind, and in ſuch a Manner of Be- 
Faviour an Converſation, as naturally ariſes therefrom 

When it is thus with Men, however far they may ſeem 
to be from their former evil Practices, this. alone is 

enough to condemn them, and may render their 1 
State far worſe than the firſt. For this ſeems to be the 
very Caſe of the Jews of that Generation that Chriſt 
ſp — 5 of, Maith. xii. 43, 44, 45. who having been 
3 by Jobn the Baptiſi's Preaching, and brought 
to a Reformation of their former licentious Courſes, 
whereby the unclean Spirit was as it were turned out, 
and the Houſe ſwept and garniſh'd ; yet being empty of 
| God and of Grace, became full of themſelves; and were 
exalted in an exceeding high Opinion of their own 
Righteouſneſs and eminent 110 linefs and became habi- 
tuated to an anſwerably Self- exalting Behaviour; fo 
changing the Sins of Publicans and Harlots, for thoſe 
of the Phariſees; and in the Iſſue, had ſeven Devils, 1 
worſe than the firſt. ö 
Thus I have explain 'd what Exerciſe and Fruit I 1. 
mean, when I lay, that gracious Affections have their 
Exerciſe and Fruit in chriſtian Practice. | 
The Reaſon why gracious Affections have ſuch. a 
Tendency and Effect, appears from many Things that 
have already been obſerved, in the preceeding , Parts f 
this Diſcourſe. 
The Reaſon of it appears from this, that gracious Af- 
fections do ariſe from thoſe Operations and FA ia which 
are ſpiritual, and that the inward Principle from whence 
they flow, is ſomething divine, a Communication of Gad, 
2 Participation of the divine Nature, Chriſt living in the 
Heart, the holy Spirit dwelling there, in Union with 
the F aculties of the Soul, as an internal vital Principle, 
exerting his own proper Nature, in the Exerciſe of thoſe 
Faculties. This is ſufficient to new us why 42 a f 
ou | 


a__ = 
"4 421 + 4 = of o 
9 1 


F | EIN * einge 
a B* bs REA 
8 4 7 7 * 


7 1 * 1 » * * 
8 — P *. 3 * RT. 7 A * „ ©. ang 
* r 9 8 
4 9 L l 
* i 
_ 


4 3 8 \ x N 
„ 


3 84 y 4&# 


ſhould hive ſuch Activity, Power and Efficacy. No 
Wonder that which is divine, is powerful and effectual; 


for it has Omnipotence on it's Side. If God dwells in | 


the Heart, and be vitally united to it, he will ſhew that 
is a God, by the Efficacy of his Operation. Chriſt 


is not in the Heart of a Saint, as in a Sepulchre, or as 


a dead Saviour, that does nothing; but as in his Tem- 
ple, and as one that is alive from the Dead, For in the 
eart where Chriſt ſavingly is, there he lives and exerts 


B  himſclf after the Power of that endleſs Life, that he 
received at his Reſurrection. Thus every Saint that is 
the Subject of the Benefit of Chriſt's Sufferings, is made 


to . and experience the Power of his Reſurrection, 
The Spirit of Chriſt, which is the immediate Spring of 
Grace in the Heart, is all Life, all Power, all An. 


2 Cor. ii. 4. In Demonſtration of the Spirit, and of | 


Power. 1 Thel. i. 5. Our Goſpel came not unto you in 
Word only, but alſo in Power, and in the Holy Ghoſt, 
1 Cor. iv. 20. The Kingdom of God is not in Word, but 


"in Power. Hence ſaving Affections, tho oftentimes 
they don't make ſo great a Noiſe and Show as others; 


yet have in them a ſecret Solidity, Life and Strength, 


whereby they take hold of, and carry away the Heart, 
leading it into a Kind of Captivity, 2 Cor. x. 5. gain- 


ing a full and ſtedfaſt * of the Will for 


.. God and Holineſs; Pal. cx. 3. Thy People ſhall be wil- 


ling in the Day of thy Power. An! Hey it is that holy 
Allections have a governing Power in the Courſe of a 


Man's Life. A Statue may look very much like a real 
Man, and a beautiful Man; yea it may have, in it's Ap- 


Pearance td the Eye, the Reſemblance of a very lively, 
ſtrong and active Man; but yet an inward Principle 
of Life and Strength is wanting; and therefore it does 
nothing, it brings nothing to paſs, there is no Action 
or Operation to anſwer the Shew. Falſe Diſcoveries 
and Aﬀections don't go deep enough, to reach and go- 
vern the Spring of Men's Actions and Practice. The 
Seed in ſtony * had not IN of Earth, 2 


The twel tb Sign Pax III. 
\ 


, %ũͤ é ¾ ¶ GV. , ] ＋ 6nd! a ear ., D.. 


R 1 99... YT EPR WW 


i ww © (0 vw 


32 * 
* 4 
* 
- 


. r AY. _» £tsn_ fo. Lot cc mh 


—— a _ 
+> or 
TY — 


4 * 
the Root did not go deep enough to bring forth Fruit. 


But gracious Affections go to the very Bottom of the 
Heart, and take hold of the very inmoſt Springs of 
Life and Activity. Herein chiefly appears the Power 


of true Godlineſs, viz. in it's being effectual in Prac- - 
tice. And the Efficacy of Godlineſs in this Reſpect, * -1 
is what the Apoſtle has Reſpect to, when he ſpeaks aff” Þ® 
the Power of Godlineſs, 2 Tim. iii. 5. as is very plain; 5 


for he there is particularly declaring, how ſome h rofeſ- 
ſors of Religion would notoriouſly fail in the Practice 
of it; and then in the th Verſe obſerves, that in being 
thus of an unholy Practice, they deny the Power of 
Godlineſs, tho' they have the Form of it. Indeed the 
Power of Godlineſs is exerted in the firſt Place within 
the Soul, in the ſenſible, lively Exerciſe of gracious 
Affections there. Yet the principal Evidence of this 
Power of Godlineſs, is in thoſe Exerciſes of holy Af- 


fections that are practical, and in their being practical; 


in conquering the Will, and conquering the Luſts and 
Corruptions of Men, and carry ing Men on in the Way 
of Holineſs, thro' all Temptation, Difficulty and Op- 


polition. 
Again, The Reaſon «why gracious Affections have 


EIN "IE — © 22 * 2 "I 
Parr III. of gracious Affection... 385 7 


OO 
3 


= 


their Exerciſe and Effect in chriſtian Practice, appears | 1 


from this (which has alſo been before obſerved) that tbe 


frſt objeftive Ground of gracious Affectious, is the trat- 
ſcendently excellent. and amiable Nature of divine Things, © 
as they are in themſelves, and not any conceived Relation 


they bear to Self, or Self-Intereſt. This ſhews why holy 


Affections will cauſe Men to be holy in their Practice 


univerſally, What malggs Men partial in Religion is, 


that they ſeek themſelv&8, and not God, in their Rel l 


gion, and cloſe with Religion, not for its own excellent 
Nature, but only to ſerve a Turn. He that cloſes wit 


Religion only to ſerve a Turn, will cloſe with no more _ 1 


of it than he imagines ſerves that Turn. But he that 
Cloſes with Religion for its own excellent and lovely 


Nature, cloſes with all that has that Nature: He that 


embraces, 


386 Tb twelfth Sign © Parr, 


embraces Religion for its own Sake, embraces the 
Whole of Religion. This alſo ſnews why gracious 
Affections will cauſe Men to practice Religion perſeve. 
ringly, and at all Times. Religion may alter greatly 
in Proceſs of Time, as to its Conſiſtence with Men' 
private Intereſt, in many Reſpects; and therefore he 
that complies with it, only from ſelfiſh Views, is liable, 
in Change of Times, to forſake it: But the excellent 
Nature of Religion, as it is in itſelf, is invariable; it 
is always the ſame, at all Times, and thro? all Changes; 
it never alters in any Reſpect. * 

The Reaſon why gracious Affections iſſue in holy 
Practice, alſo further appears from the Kind of Excel. 
lency of divine Things, that it has been obſerved is the 
Foundation of all holy Affection, viz. their moral Excel 
lency, or the Beauty of their Holineſs. No wonder that 
Love to Holineſs, for Holineſs Sake, inclines Perſons to 

ractice Holineſs, and to practice every Fhing that i; 
1 Seeing Holineſs is the main Thing that excites, 
draws and governs all gracious Affections, no wonder 
that all ſuch Affections tend to Holineſs. That which 
Men love, they deſire to have and to be united to, and 
poſſeſſed of. That Beauty which Men delight in, they 
deſire to be adorned with. Thoſe Acts which Men de- 

light in, they neceſſarily incline to do. 

And what has been obſerved of that divine Teaching 
and Leading of the Spirit of God, which there is in gra- 
cious Affections, ſhews the Reaſon of this Tendency of 
ſuch Affections to an univerſally holy Practice. For as 
has been obſerved, the Spirit of God in this his divine 
Teaching and Leading, givegthe Soul a natural Relih 

of the Sweetneſs of that whith is holy, and of ever) 

Thing that is holy, ſo far as it comes in View, and ex- 
Cites a Diſreliſh and Diſguſt of every Thing that is un- 
r . 

Ihe fame alſo appears from what has been obſerved 
of the Nature of that ſpiritual Knoxledge, which is the 

Foundation of all holy Affection, as conſiſting in 4 


Senſe 


here | 


ww Fm uu I £m— eo G& ww. A. 


wn 


nd 
= 


_oN 5 Þ 2 4 or 


* 


£ 
* 
* * 4 N 
—_— l G * 
0 2 


cm +6 


r e = r From £@Cuds. 


„ Me. dow Sis, $t.,. 234, oe... 


5" <q fa $3 wy 


1 
' 


Parr III. of gracious Afectioni. 387 


Senſe and View of that Excellency in divine Things, which 
is ſupream and tranſcendent. ' For hereby theſe Thin 
appear above all others, worthy to be choſen and ad- 
hered to. By the Sight of the tranſcendant Glory of 
Chriſt, true Chriſtians fee him worthy to be followed; 
and fo are powerfully drawn after him: They ſee him 
worthy that they ſhould forſake all for him: By. the 
Sight of that ſuperlative Amiableneſs, they are thorough- 
ly Ciſpoſed to be ſubject to him, and engaged to labour 
with Earneſtneſs and Activity in his Service, and made 
willing to go thro' all Difficulties for his Sake. And 
'tis the Diſcovery o? this divine Excellency of Chriſt, 
that makes them conſtant to him: For it makes a deep 
Impreſſion upon their Minds, that they cannot forget 
him; and they will follow him whitherfoever he goes, 
and it is in vain for any to endeavour to draw them away 
from him. | 
The Reaſon of this practical Tendency and Iſſue of 
gracious Affections, further appears, from what has been 
obſerved of ſuch Affections being attended with a thorough 
Convition of the Judgment, ef the Reality and Certainty 
of divine Things. No wonder that they who were never 
thoroughly convinced that there is any Reality in the 
Things of Religion, will never be at the Labour and 
Trouble of ſuch an earn-{t, univerſal and perſevering 
Practice of Religion, thro' all Difficulties, Self-denials 
and Sufferings, in a Dependance on that, which they 
are not convinced of. But on the other Hand, they 
who are thoroughly convinced e the certain Truth of 
thoſe Things, muſt needs be govern'd by them in their 
Practice z Re the Things revealed in the Word of God 
are ſo great, and fo infinitely more important, than all 
other Things, that it is inconſiſtent with the human Na- 
ture, that a Man ſhould fully believe the Truth of them, 
and not be influenced by them above all Things, in his ; 
Practice. | * | | 
Again, The Reaſon of this Expreflion and Effect of 


holy Affections in the Practice, appears from what has 


been 


* 
" . 
7 — 2 
* * 4 " —_——* 46 — 
. \ n 2 2 1 ** wn : 


„„. 


% © _— ws * 7 
r 
* * — * 


<4 Li N 
* 4 


388 The twelfth Sign 

been obſerved of à Change of Nature, accompanying ſuch 
Affectians. Without a Change of Nature, Men's Prac. 
tice will not be thoroughly changed. *Till the Tree be 
made good, the Fruit will not be good. Men don't ga. 
ther' Grapes of Thorns, nor Figs of Thiſtles. The 
Swine may be waſhed, and appear clean for a little while, 
but yet, without a Change of Nature, he will ſtill walloy 
in the Mire. Nature is a more powerful Principle of 
Action, than any Thing that oppoſes it: Tho? it may 
be violently reſtrain'd for a while, it will finally overcome 
that which reſtrains it: Tis like the Stream of a River, 
it may be ſtopp'd a while with a Dam, but if nothing 


be done to dry the Fountain, it won't be ſtop'd always: 


It will hve a Courſe, either in its old Channel, or a new 
one. Nature is a Thing more conſtant and permanent, 
than any of thoſe Things that are the Foundation of 
carnal Men's Reformation and Righteouſneſs. When 
a natural Man denies his Luſt, and lives a ſtrict, religious 
Life, and ſeems humble, painful and earneſt in Religion, 
tis not natural, tis all a Force againſt Nature; as when 
a Stone is violently thrown upwards ; but that Force wil 
be gradually ſpent; yer Nature will remain in its full 
Strength, and ſo prevails again, and the Stone returns 
downwards. As long as corrupt Nature is not mortified, 
but the Principle left whole in a Man, tis a vain Thing 
to expect that it ſhould not govern. But if the old Na- 
ture be indeed mortified, and a new and heavenly Nature 
infuſed; then may it well be expected, that Men will 
walk in Newneſs of hife, and continue to do ſo to the 
End of their Dayͤs. | 

The Reaſon of this practical Exerciſe and Effect of 
holy Affections, may alſo be partly ſeen, from what has 
been faid of that Spirit of Humility, which attends them. 
Humility is that wherein a Spirit of Obedience does 
much conſiſt. A proud Spirit is a rebellious Spirit, but 
a humble Spirit is a yieldable, ſubject, obediential Spirit. 
We ſee among Men, that the Servant who is of a haugh- 
ty Spirit, is not apt in every Thing to be ſubmiſſive and 

„„ obedient 


* 


„ n 
18 wy — " - 
1 1 . A * F > 2 * — 


Parr III. 


A — 8 a, Fa, oe 


on . — — 22 A © — 


„ <Y?5 3 74 


S. Eh = 


2 


q 


. i Ss An. £8... > 3 i Ik Fs. ES 1 


r oe ed ws DV o2 ww Fr 8 Wo\ a -»- 


+ US © 


— 0» 


a =- „ . 


— 
* 


7 -£F* 


obedient to the Will of his Maſter; but it is otherwiſe 2 
with that Servant who is of a lowly Spirit. oj 

And the Lamdblike, Dovelike Spirit, that has been ſpo 
ken of, which accompanies all gracious Affections, po 1 
fills {as the Apoſtle obſerves, Rom. xiii, 8, 9, 10. and 
Gal. v. 14.) all the Duties of the ſecond Table of the 
Law; wherein Chriſtian Practice does very much con- 
fiſt, and wherein the external Practice of Caring 
chiefly conſiſts. 

And the Reaſon why gracious Affections are attended 
with that ſtrift, univerſal and conſtant Obedience which 
has been ſpoken of, further appears, from what has been 
obſerved of that 7. enderneſs of Spirit, which accompanies 
the Affections of true Saints, cauſing in them ſo quick 
and lively a Senſe of Pain, through the Preſence of mo- 
ral Evil, and ſuch a Dread of the Appearance of Evil. 

And one greatReaſon why the chriſtian Practice which 
flows from gracious Affections, is univerſal, and con- 
ſtant, and perſevering, appears from what has been ob- 


ſerved of thoſe Affections themſelves, from whence _ 


this Practice flows, being univerſal and conſtant, in all 
Kinds of holy Exerciſes, and towards all Objects, and 


in all Circumſtances, and at all Seaſons, in 4 beautiful | 


Symmetry and Proportion. 

And much of the Reaſon why holy Affections are ex- 
preſſed and manifeſted in ſuch an Earneſtneſs, 2 
and Engagedneſs and Perſeverance in holy Practice, as 
has been ſpoken of, appears from what has been obſer- 
ved, of the ſpiritual Appetite and Longing after further 
Attainments in Religion, whicdWvermore attends true 
Affection, and do not decay, but encreaſe, as thoſe Af. 
fections increaſe. 

Thus we ſee how the-T endency of holy Affections to 
ſuch a chriſtian Practice as has been explained, ap | 
from each of thoſe Characteriſticks of holy Affection, 
that have been before ſpoken of. | 

And this Point may be further illuſtrated and con- 
firmed, if it be conſidered, that the holy Scriptures do 

| _— 


ParT III. of gracious Afeclions. 389 


399 The twelfth Sion Pax IN! 


abundantly place Sincerity- and Soundneſs in Religion, ll 
in making a full Choice of God as our only Lord and! 
Portion, forſaking all for him, and in a full Determina. 
tion of the Will for God and Chriſt, on counting the 
Coſt; in our Hearts cloſing and complying with the 
Religion of Jeſus Chriſt, with all that belongs to it, em. 
bracing it with all its Difficulties, as it were hating our 
deareſt earthly Enjoyments, and even our own Lives, 
for Chriſt; giving up ourſelves, with all that we have, 
wholly and forever, unto Chriſt, without keeping back 
any Thing or making any Reſerve; or in one Word, m 
the great Duty of Self-denia! for Chriſt; or in deny: 
ing, i. e. as it were diſowning and renouncing ourſelye 
for him, making ourſelves nothing that he may be all 
See the Texts to this Purpoſe referred to in the Margin. 
Now ſurely having an Heart. to forſake all for Chrit, 
tends to actually forſaking all for him, ſo far as there i; 
Occaſion, and we have the Trial. And having an Hean 
to deny ourſelves for Chriſt, tends to a denying ourſelves 
in Deed, when Chriſt and Self-Intereſt ſtand in compe- 
tition. A giving up ourſelves, with all that we have in 
our Hearts, without making any Reſerve there, tends to 
our behaving ourſelves univerſally as his, as ſubje to 
his Will, and devoted to his Ends. Our Hearts entirely 
cloſing with the Religion of Jeſus, with all that belongs 
to it, and as attended with all its Difficulties, upon a d. 
liberate counting the Coſt, tends to an univerſal cloſing 
with the ſame in Act and Deed, and actually going 
throngh all the Diffigylties that we meet with in the 
, | . 2 Way 
3 — SENT — ——— — 
®* Matth. v. 29, 30. Matth. 6. 24. Chap. 8. 19,22. Chap. 4 
13,—22. Chap. 10. 37, 38, 39. Chap. 13. 44, 45, 46. Chap. 10. 24 
25, 26. Chap. 18. 8, 9. Chap. 19. 21, 27,—29. Luke 5. 27, 28. Lutt 
10, 42. Chap. 12. 33, 34. Chap. 14.16,—20, 25,—33, Chap. 16.13 
Adds 4. 34, 35. with Chap. 5. 1.—11. Rom. 6. 3.—8. Gal. 2. 20 
Chap. 6. 14. Philip. 3. 7,—13- Jam. 1. 8, 9, 10. Chap. 4. 4. 1 Jo" 
2. 15. Rev. 14. 4. Gen. 12. 1,4. with Heb. 11. 8, gz 10. Gen. 2% 
12. and Heb. 11. 17. Heb. 11. 24,27. Deut. 13. 6. and Chap. 35 
9. Ruth 1. 6,—16. with P/al. 45. 10, 11. and 2 Sam. 15. 19,-# 
Pal. 73. 25. Bal 16. 5, 6. Lam. 3. 24. Jer. 10. 16, 


i 
n 
10 
fl 
V 
t 
4 
fs 
8 
B 
B 
bi 
ty 
hc 
V 
la 
V. 
eu 
in 
10 


F 


* = 


r 
, 


oe” wo —” & -s =I, FF out 


o U&u o& 


(0 


arr. * of gracious AﬀeSjons. mY 391 


Way of Religion, and ſo holding out with Patience and 
perſeverance. 
The Tendency of Grace in the Heart to holy Practi 

is very direct, and the Connection molt natural cloſe = 5 
neceſſary. True Grace is not an unactive Thing; there 

is nothing in Heaven or Earth of a more active Nature; 
for tis Life itſelf, and the moſt active Kind of Life, e- 
yen ſpiritual and divine Life. Tis no barren Thing z 


there is nothing in the Univerſe that in its Nature has a 
greater Tendency to Fruit. Godlineſs in the Heart hass 
25 direct Relation to Practice, as a Fountain has to a = 


Stream, or as the luminous Nature of the Sun has to 
Beams ſent forth, or as Life has to Breathing, or the 
Beating of the Pulte, or any other vital Act; or as a Ha- 
bit or Principle of Action has to Action; for *tis the ve- 
ty Nature and Notion of Grace, that it is a Principle f 
holy Action or Practice. Regeneration, which is that 


Work of God in which Grace is infuſed, has a direct R- 


lation to Practice; for it is the very End of it, with a 
View to which the whole Work is wrought: All is cal- 
culated and framed, in this mighty and manifold C 
in the Soul, ſo as directly to tend to this End: Eph. ii. 
10. For we are bis Workmanſhih, created in Chriſt Feſus, 
unto good Works. Yea tis the very End of the Redemp- 


tion of Chriſt; Tit. ii. 14. /ho gave himſelf for us, that ** 


be might redeem us from all Iniquity, and purify unto bim- 
ſelf a peculiar People, zealous of 42 Works. 2 Cor. v. 15. 
He died for all, that they which live, ſhould not benceforth 
live unto themſelves, but unto him who died, and roſe Again. 
Heb. ix. 14. How much more fall the Blood of Chriſt, 
who through the eternal Spirit, offered up himſelf without 
Spot to God, purge your Conſciences from dead Works, to 


ſerve the living God? Col. i. 21, 22. And you that were 4 we 


ſometimes alienated, and Enemies in your Minds by wicked 
Works, yet now hath be reconciled, in the Body of bis Fleſh, 


through. Death, to preſent you holy and unblameable, and 4 


unreproveable in his Sight. 1 Pet. i. 18. For as much | | 
& ye know that ye were not redeemed with e | 


„ 


» 
8 —_—__ 
* 


r 
= y _ 


How? wh. x43 
„ 


392 de twelfth Sign, Pax 


FDhings, as Silver and Gold, from your vain Converſation.— 
Luaukc i. 74, 75. That be would grant us, that we being 
delivered out of the Hands of our Enemies, might ſerve hin 
without Fear, in Holineſs and Righteouſneſs before him, all 
the Days of our Lives. God often ſpeaks of holy Prac- 
tice, as the End of that great typical Redemption from 
£gypiian Bondage; as Exod. iv. 23. Let my Sen go, that 
he may ſerve me. So Chap. iv. 23. and vii. 16. and viii, 
2, 20. and ix. 1. 13. and x. 3. And this is alſo declared 
to be the End of Election; John xv. 13. Ye have wt 
choſen me; but I have choſen you, and ordained you, that 
you go and bring forth Fruit, and that your Fruit ſhould re- 
main. Eph. i. 4. According as he bath choſen us in hin, 
before the Foundation of the World, that we fhould be hoh, 
end without Blame before him, in Love. Chap 11. 10. Cre- 
ated unto good Works; which God hath fore-ordained that 
we Gould walk in them, Holy Practice is as much the 
End of all that God does abour his Saints, as Fruit is the 
End of all the Huſbandman does about the Growth of 
his Field or Vineyard: As the Matter is often repre- 
ſented in Scripture; Matth. iii. 10. Chap. xui. 8, 23, 
24.—30, 38. Chap. xxi. 19, 33, 34. Luke xi. 6. John 
XV. 1, 2, 4, 5, ©, 8. 1 Cor. iii. 9. Heb. vi. 7, 8. Iſai. v. 
1,.—8. Cant. vill. 11, 12. ai. xxvil. 2, 3: + And there- , 
fore every Thing in a true Chriſtian is calculated u . 
reach this End. This Fruit of holy Practice, is what 


every Grace, and every Diſcovery, and every individual . 
| Thing, Fa 


— 


— 


71 « To profeſs to know much is eaſy ; but to bring your Affec- , 
1 tions into Subjection, to wreſtle with Luſts, to croſs your Will F _ 

and yourſelves, upon every Occaſion, this is hard. The Lov . 
« Jooketh, that in our Lives we ſhould be ſerviceable to him, and . 
&« uſeful to Men. That which is within, the Lord and our Brethren * 
« are never the better for it: but the ontward Obedience, flowing | 
« thence, glorifieth God and does good to Men The Lord will have 
« this done. What elſe is the End of our planting and watering, W 
« but that the Trees may be filled with Sap? And what is the End . 
« of that Sap, but that the Trees may bring forth Fruit? Wha! 
« careth the Huſbandman for Leaves and barren Trees !“ Dr. Pre: 


fron of the Church's Carriage. 


4 
% 


$ 
i 
d 
n 
4 
e 


30 
— 


„ 


wy 


ParT IN. of gracrous Aﬀettions. Y 393 7 
Thing, which belongs to chriſtian Experience, has 4 


direct Tendency to. 7 
The conſtant and in diſſoluble Connection that there is 


between a chriſtian Principle and Profeſſion in the true 


Saints, and the Fruit of holy Practice in their Lives, 
was typified ef old in the Frame of the golden Candle- 
ſtick in the Temple. Tis beyond Doubt that that gol- 
den Candleſtick, with its ſeven Branches and ſeven 
Lamps, was a T ype of the Church of Chriſt. The 
Holy Ghoſt himſelf, has been pleaſed to put that Matter 
out of Doubt, by repreſenting his Church by ſuch 4 
olden Candleſtick, with ſeven Lamps; in the fourth 
hapter of Zechariah, and N the ſeven 
Churches of Alia, by ſeven golden Candleſticks, inthe 


firſt Chapter of the Revelation. That golden Candle- 

tick 

* What is the End of every Grace, but to mollify the H 

te and make it pliable ro ſome Command or other? Look how many 
© Commandments, ſo many Graces there are in Virtue and Efficacy; 
% although not ſo many ſeveral Names are given them. The End of 
© every ſuch Grace is to make us obedient: As the End of Tempe- 
trance is Chaſtity, to bow the Heart to theſe Commands, Be 5 
« ſober, &c. not in Chambering and Wantonneſs, &c. When 
„Lord commandeth us not to be angry with our Brother, the End 
© of Meekneſs, and why the Lord infuſeth it, is to keep us from 
te unadviſed raſh Anger. So Faith; the End of it is to take Jeſus” 
* Chriſt, to make us obedient to the Command of the Goſpel 
% which commands us to believe in him. So as all Graces do join 
together, but to frame and faſhion the Soul to Obedience; then 
„ ſo much Obedience as is in your Lives, ſo much Grace in your 
© Hearts, and no more. Therefore aſk your Hearts, how ſubject 
* you are to the Lord in your Lives? It was the Counſel that Francis 
Spire gave to them about him, faith he, Learn all of me to take 
Heed of ſevering Faith and Obedience; I taught ſuſtiſ cation by 
{© Faith, but neglected Obedience; and therefore is this befallen me. 
t have known ſome ly Men, whoſe Comfort on their Death- 
* Beds hath been not from the inward Acts of their Minds, which 
apart conſidered, might be ſubject to Miſapprehenſions, but from 
* the Courſe of Obedience in their Lives, iſſuing thence. — 
* Chriſtians look to it, that in all their Converſation, as they ſtan 
* in every Relation, as Scholars, 'Kradeſmen, Huſbands, Wives, 
look to this, that when they come to die, they have been ſubject 
un all Things. This will yield Comfort.“ Dr. Prefon's Church 
Carriage. "AS Se 


— — 


394 Thb twelfth Sign a Pax r II. 
ftick in the Temple was every where, throughout its 
whole Frame, made with Knops aud Flowers; Exod; 
„v. 31, to the End, and Chap. xxxvii. 17, —m24, 
The Word tranſlated Knop, in the Original ſignifies 
Apple or Pomegranate. There was a Knop and a Flower, 
a Knop and a Flower: Wherever there was a Flower, 
| -there was an Apple or Pomegranate with it: The 
Flower and the Fruit were conſtantly connected, without 
fait. The Flower contain'd the Principles of the Fruit, 
and a beautiful promiſing Appearance of it; and it 
neyer was, a deceitful Appearance: The Principle or 
Shew of Fruit, had evermore real Fruit attending it, 
or ſucceeding it. So it is in the Church of Chriſt: 
There is the Principle of Fruit in Grace in the Heart; 
and there is an amiable Profeſſion, ſignified by the open 
Flowers of the Candleſtick; and- there is anſwerable 
Fruit, in holy Practice, conſtantly attending this Prin- 
_ *Eiple and Profeſſion. Every Branch of the golden 
Candleſtick, thus evmpos'd of golden Apples and 
Flowers, was crown'd with a burning, ſhining Lampon 
the Top of it. For 'tis by this Means that the Saints 
' ſhine as Lights in the World, by making a fair and 
good Profeſſion of Religion, and having their Profeſſion 
evermore join'd with anſwerable Fruit in Practice: 
Agreeable to that of our Saviour, Matth. v. 15, 16. 
Neither do Men light a Candle, and put it under a Buſbel, 
but on a Candleſtick; and it giveth Light unto all that are 
in the Houſe. Let your Light ſo ſhine before Men, that 
they may  SEE- YOUR SOD Works, and glorify your 
Father which is in Heaven. A fair and beautiful Pro- 
feſſion, and golden Fruits accompanying one another, 
are the amiable Ornaments of the true Church of Chriſt. 
Therefore we find that Apples and Flowers were not 
only the Ornaments of the Candleſtick in the Temple, 
but of the Temple itſelf, which is a Type of the Church; 
which the Apoſtle tells us, is the Temple of the living 
God. See 1 Kings vi. 18. And the Cedar of the Houſe 
within, was carved with Knops and open Flowers. The 
| Ornaments 


Pak III. of graciout Affeclint.. 49g 1 
Ornaments and Crown of the Pillars, at the Entrance 
df the Temple, were of the ſame Sort: They wers 
Lillies and Pomegranates, or Flowers and Fruits md 
together; 1 Kings vii. 18, 19. So it is with all thoſe 
that are as Pillars in the Temple of God, who ſhall go nd 
more out, or never be rejected as Intruders; as it is with Þ 
all true Saints; Rev. ili. 12. Him that overcometh will E! 
make a Pillar in the Temple of my God, and be ſhall gs 
no more out. . 7 1 

Much the ſame Thing ſeems to be ſighified by th 
Ornaments on the Skirt of the Ephod, the Garment of ' } 
Aaron the high Prieſt; which were golden Bells and 
Pomegranates. That theſe Skirts of Aaron's Garment 
repreſent the Church, or the Saints (that are as it were 
the Garment of Chriſt) is manifeſt; for they are 

evidently ſo ſpoken of, Pſal. cxxxiii. 1, 2: Behold, hom 
good and how pleaſant it is for Brethren to dwell together © 

in Unity! It is like the pretious Ointment upon the Head; 

' that ran down upon the Beard, even Aaron's Beard, that 
vent down to the Skirts of his Garments. That Ephod 
of Aaron ſignified the ſame with the ſeamleſs Coat of 

Chriſt our great High Prieſt. As Chriſt's Coat had na 

Seam, but was woven from the Top throughout, ſo it 

was with the Ephod, Exed. xxxix. 22. As God took = 

Care in his Providence, that Chriſt's Coat ſhould not 

be rent; Exed. xxviii. 32. and Chap. xxxix. 23. The 
golden Bells on this Ephod, by their precious Matter 

and pleaſant Sound, do well repreſent the good Profefs 23 

ſion that the Saints make; and the Pomegranates, the 

Fruit they bring forth. And as in the Hem of the 

Ephod, Bells and Pomegranates were conſtantly con- 

nected, as is once and again obſerved, there was 4 

golden Bell and a Pomegranate, a golden Bell and a Pome- 

granate, Exod. xxviil. 34. and Chap. xxxix. 26. So it 
is in the true Saints; their good Profeſſion and their 
good Fruit, do conſtantly accompany one another: The 

Fruit they bring forth in Life, ever more anſwers the 

pleaſant Sound of their Profeſſion, 5 

. Ce 2 4% Againy 


/ 


_ 


— x i 


» 


6 + ds _—_ I 8 4 * „* * * 8 
* N 3 * 
. 


39% e eib N 


Again, The very ſame Thing is repreſented 
Chriſt, in his Deſcription of his Spauſe, Cant. vii. 2. 
Thy Belly is like an Heap of Wheat, ſet about with Lillies.. 


Here again are beautiful Flowers, and good Fruit, 


accompanying one another. The Lillies were fair 
and beautiful Flowers, and the Wheat was good Fruit. 

As this Fruit of chriſtian Practice is evermore found 
in true Saints, according as they have Opportunity and 
Trial, ſo it is found in them only; none but true Chri- 
ſtians do live ſuch an obedient Life, ſo univerſally 
devoted to their Duty, and given up to the Buſineſs of. 
a Chriſtian, as has been explain'd. All unſanctified 
Mien are Workers of Iniquity: They are of their Father 
the Devil, and the Luſts of their Father they will do. 
There is no Hypocrite that will. go through with the 
Buſineſs of Religion, and both begin and finiſh the 
Tour: They wilt not endure the Trials God is wont. 
to bring on the Profeſſors of Religion, but will turn 
alide to their crooked Ways: They will not be tho- 
roughly faithful to Chriſt in their Practice, and follow 
him whitherſoever he goes. Whatever Lengths they 

may go in Religion, in ſome Inſtances, and though they 
may appear exceeding ſtrict, and mightily engaged in 
che Service of God for a Seaſon; yet they are Servants 
to Sin; the Chains of their old Taſk-Maſters are not 
broken: Their Luſts yet have a reigning Power in their 


Hearts; and therefore to theſe Maſters they will bow 
down again.“ Dan. xii. 10. Many ſpall be purified and 


made 


- . 
— ä ä —_— a TY _ 


* _— 


$ „* No unregenerate Man, tho' he go never ſo far, let him do 
4 never ſo much, but he lives in ſome. one Sin or other, ſecret or 
< open, little or great. Judas went far, but he was covetous: 


% Herod went far, but he loved his Herodias. Every Dog hath his 
« Kennel; every Swine hath his Swill; and every wicked Man his 
«©Luſt.” Shepard's Sincere Convert, 1ſt Edition, Pa. 96. | 
There is never an unſound Heart in the World, but as they 
« ſay of Witches, they have ſome Familiar that ſucks them, ſo they 
„have ſome Luſt that is beloved of them, ſome Beloved there is, 
they have given a Promiſe never to forſake.” Shepard's Parable, 
Part I. Page 15. 1 No 


PART III. 


: 


4 


PART III. "of gracicus Affettions. 397 : 


— 


Aud none of the Wicked ſhall underſtand. Wai. 26. Let Fa- 
| a Vour 


þ made white. and tried: But the Wicked will do 4wickedly: | 


— 


No Man that is married to the Law, but his Fig- leaves cover 
« ſome Nakedneſs. All his Duties ever brood ſome Luſt. There is 
s ſome one Sin or other the Man lives in; which either the Lord 
% diſcovers, and he will not part with, as the young Man; or elſe 
is ſo ſpiritual, he cannot ſee all his Life-Time. Read through the 
4 ſtricteſt of all, and ſee this, Mat. 23. Painted Sepulchres. Paul 
es that was blameleſs, yet (Eph, ii. 3. Tit. in. '3.) ſerved divers 
4 Lufts and Pleaſures. And the Reaſon is, the Law is not the Mini- 
« ſtration of the Spirit, 2 Cor. ui. 8, g. Which breaks off from every 
Sin. There is no Law that can give Life, Cal. iii. 21. and hence 
% many Men have ſtrong Reſolutions, and break all again. Hence 
„Men fin and ſorrow, and pray again, and then go with more 
« Eaſe in their Sin. Examine thyſelf; is there any living Luſt with 
e thy Righteouſneſs? Tis ſure, tis a, Righteouſneſs thou art marr 
ed to, and never wert yet matched to Chriſt.“ Shepard's Parable | 
Part I. p. 19, 20, 2 
No Hypocrite, though he cloſeth with Chriſt, and for a Time 
oe row up in Knowledge of, and Communion with Chriſt, but he 
* hath at that Time hidden Luſts and Thorns that overgrow his 
% Growings, and choak all at laſt, and in Concluſion mediates # 
League between Chriſt and his Luſts, and ſeeks to reconcile then: 
te together.” .Shepard's Parable, Part I. p. 109. Wo, 
„Their Faith is in ſuch a Party, as never was yet thoroughly 
e rent from Sin. And here is the great Wound of the moſt cunning 
« Hypocrites living.-Leta Man be caſt down as low as Hell with 
«« Sorrow, and lie under Chains, quaking in Apprehenſion of Ter- 
. .** ror to come; let a Man then be raiſed up to Heaven in Jey, not able 
< to live; let a Man reform and ſhine like an earthly Angel; yet if 
not rent from Luſt, that either you did never ſee it, or if fo, yon 
<< have not followed the Lord to remove it, but proud, dogged, 
« worldly, fluggiſh till, falſe in your Dealings, cunning in your 
„Tradings, Devils in your Families, Images in your Churches; 
you are Objects of Pity now, and ſhall be of Terror at the great 
" Day. For where Sin remains in Power, it will being Faith, and 
«« Chriſt, and Joy, into Bondage and Service of itſet.” Shepard's 
Parable Part I. p. 125. ; 
Methinks it is with the beſt Hypocrites, as *tis with divers old 
Merchants: they prize and deſire the Gain of Merchandize ; but 
to be at the Trouble to prepare the Ship, to put themſelves upon 
the Hazards and Dangers of the Ship, to go and fetch the Trea- 
< ſure that they prize, this they will never do. So many prize and 
deſires earneſtly the Treaſures of Heaven; but to be at the Trou- 
ble of a Heaven ME to fetch this ' Treaſure, to paſs through 
L 


* the Valley of Face, Neu, Temptations, the Powers of Darknelt 


* 


99 The twelfth Sign Par III. 

| . wour be ſhewed to the Wicked, yet will be not learn Righ. 

Teo ſneſs; in the Land of Uprightneſs will be deal unjuſtly. 
Tfaf. xxxv. 8. And an Highway ſhall be there, and a Way, 
and it ſhall be called the Way of Holineſs, the Unclean fhatl 

not paſs over it, Ho. xiv. 9. The Ways of the Lord arg 
rigbt, and the 7uſt ſhall walk in them; but the Tranſeref. 
ſors ſhall fall therein. - Job xxvii. 8, 9, 10. What is the 
Hope of the Hypocrite ? Mill be delight himſelf in the 

| 'Almighty? Vill he always call upon God? An unſancti- 

| fied Man may hide his Sin, and may in many Things, 

* and tor a Seaſon, remain from Sin; but he will not be 

brought finally to renounce his Sin, ang give it a Bill 

of Divorce: Sin is too dear to him, for him to be wil- 

| oy | | ling 


—__._ 


—— — * 


8 


te the Breaches, Oppoſition and Contradiftions of a ſinful unbeliey- 
< inp Heart, good and evil Report, to paſs from one Depth and 
Wave to another, this the beſt Hypocrite fails in; and hence 
f© loſes all at laſt. And this I conceive to be one of the great Dif- 
references between the ſtrong Deſires and Eſteems of Hypocrites and \ 
7 Saints Look, as 'tis with Men that have two Trades, or two 
1. Shops; one is as much as ever they can follow or tend; they are 
4 forced at laſt to put off one, and they muſt neglect one; ſo here. 
% That Spirit of Sloth and Slumber, which the Lord ever leaves the 
ge beſt Hypocrites to, ſo mightily oppreſſeth all their Senſes, that 
< they cannat uſe effectually all Means 20 accompliſh their Ends. 
And hence a Man defires the End, but has it not; Prov. xiii. 4.” 
Shepard's Parable, Part I. p. 150, 151. | | 
Read through all the Scripture; conſtantly, never any Hypo- 
1 erites but they had this Brand, Matth. vii. 23. You Workers of Ini- 
« gut,, Shepard's Parabl, Part I. p. 195. 
de A carnal Man may hit upon ſome good Duty that God com- 
© mands, and refrain ſome Sin that God forbids ; but to go through, 
e he cannot: to take up Reproach ang Diſgrace, to loſe his Credit, 
<* to forſake his Friends, to loſe Honour, and Riches and Pleaſures ; 
«'thjs he will not do, till he be humbled.” Dr. Prefton, on Paul's 
\ Converſion. | | | 
- » « So it is with Men, becauſe they want Humiliation Therefore 
< their Profzfjon and They do not continue, but part willingly one 
« from another. They will do ſome Things, but not all Things: 
& And they will forego ſome Things, but not alk Things. And 
« therefore our Saviour ſaith, Luke xiv. He that will not forſake all 
« for my Sake, ts not worthy of Me. He is not worth the ſaving, 
© that prizes not me above all Things whatſoever. And a Man will 
e not prize Chriſt, nor forſake all Things for Chriſt, till he be 
** humbled.” Ibid, : | 3 


\ 


* 


Parr III. of gracious AﬀetTions, 9 


. Self-aemial or Self-renunciation. 


399 
ling for that: Wickedneſs is ſweet in his Mouth; and 
therefore he hides it under his Tongue; he ſpares it and | 
forſakes it not; but keeps it ſtill within his Mouth, Job 
xx. 12, 13, Herein chiefly conſiſts the Straitneis of the 
Gate, and the Narrownels of the Way that leads to Life; 
upon the Account of which, carnal Men will not go in 
thereat, viz, That it is a Way of utterly denying and 
finally renouncing all Ungodlineſs, and ſo a Way of 

Many natural Men, under the Means that are uſed: 
with them, and God's Strivings with them, to bring them 
to forſake their Sins, do by their Sins, as Pharaoh did 
by his Pride and Covetouſneſs, which he; gratified by 
keeping the Children of Vrael in Bondage, when God 
ſtrove with him to bring him to let the People go. When 
God's Hand preſſed. Pharaoh ſore, and he was exerciſed 
with Fears of God's future Wrath, he entertained ſome 
thoughts of letting the People go, and promiſed he 


would do it; but from Time to Time he broke his 


Promiſes, when he ſaw there was Reſpite. When God 
fil'd Egypt with Thunder and Lightning, and the Fire 
ran along the Ground, then Pharaoh is brought to 
confeſs his Sin with ſeeming Humility, and to have a 
great Reſolution to let the People go. Exod. ix. 
27, 28. And Pharaoh ſent and called fer Moſes and Aa- 
ron, and ſaid unto them, I have ſinned this Time; the * 


Lord is righteous, and I and my People are wicked : In- | 


treat the Lord (for it is enough) that there be no more 
mighty T hunderings and Hail, and I will let you go, and ye 
ſhall ſtay no longer. So Sinners are ſometimes, by Thun- 


ders and Lightnings, and great Terrors of the Law, 


brought to a ſeeming Work of Humiliation, and to Ap- 
pearance to part with their Sins; but are no more 


throughly brought to a Diſpoſition to diſmiſs them, than 


Pharaoh was to let the People go. Pharaoh in the Struggle 
that was between his Conſcience and his Luſts, was for 
contriving that God might be ſerved, and he enjoy his Luſts 
that were gratified by che Slavery of the People, oo. 


Ne 


\ 


_ 4 4 N "4 g 
” —> * * 
% 9 . 
. 


Maſe inſiſted that IJſraels God ſhould be ſerved and 
ſacrificed to: Pharaoh was willing to conſent to that; 
but would have it done without his parting with the 


People: Go ſacrifice to your God in the Land, ſays he, 


Exod. viii. 25. So many Sinners are contriving to ſerve 
God, and enjoy their Luſts too. Moſes objected againſt 
complying with Pharaoh's Propoſal, that ſerving God, 

and yet continuing in Egypt under their Taſk-maſters, 


did not agree together, and were inconſiſtent one with 


another; (there is no ſerving God, and continuin 
Slaves to ſuch Enemies of God at the ame Time.) TY 
ter this Pharaob conſented to let the People go, pro- 
vided they would not go far away: He was not willing 


to part with them finally, and therefore would have 
them within Reach. So do many Hypocrites with re- 


ſpect to their Sins. Afterwards Pharaoh conſented to 
let the Men go, if they would leave the Women and 
Children ; Exod. x. 8, 9, 10. And then after that, when 
God's Hand was yet harder upon him, he conſented 
that they ſhould go, even Women and Children, as well 
as Men, provided they would leave their Cattle behind: 
But he was not willing to let them go, and all that they 
had; Exod. x. 24. So it ſometimes is with Sinners; 
They are willing to part with ſome of their Sins; but 
not all : They are brought to part with the more groſs 
Acts of Sin; but not to part with their Luſts, in leſſer 
Indulgencies of them, Whereas we muſt part with all 
dur Sins, little and great; and all that belongs to them, 
Men, Women, Cbildren and Cattle; They muſt all bo 
let go, with their Joung, and with their Old, with their 


Sons, and with their Daughters, with their Flocks, and 


' with their Herds; there muſt not be an Hoof left behind : 


As Moſes told Pharaoh, with Reſpe& to the Children 


of Vrael. At laſt, when it come to Extremity, Pharaoh 
. conſented to let the People all go, and that they 
had; but he was not ſtedfaſtly of that Mind: He ſoon 
repented, and purſued after them again: And the Rea- 


fon wa, that thoſe Luſts of Pride and Covetouſneſs, | 


that 


The. twelfth Sign Pax I 


ww IJ 


4a =  -© -—— -a - A q R Aw wo . .  — —ñ' ᷣ ë !! <<< Rwy ood ot 


Parr III. of gracious Affection. 401 
that were gratified by Pharaoh's Dominion over the 
People and the Gains of their Service, were never really 
mortified in him, but only violently reſtrained. And 
thus, he being guilty of backſliding, after his ſeeming 
Compliance with God's Commands, was deſtroyed without 
Remedy. - Thus there may be a forced parting with 
Ways of Diſobedience to the Commands of God, that 
may ſeem to be univerſal, as to what appears, for a lit- 
tle Seaſon: But becauſe tis a meer Force, without the 
Mortification of the inward Principle of Sin, they will 
not perſevere in it; but will return as the Dog to his 
Vomit; and ſo bring on themſelves dreadful and reme- 
dileſs Deſtruction. There were many falſe Diſciples in 
Chriſt's Time, that followed him for a while; but none 
of them followed him to the End; but ſome on one Oc- 
caſion, and ſome on another, went back and walked no 
more with him.“ | ; From 


_— 


* «« The, counterfeit and common Grace of fooliſh Virgins, after 
« ſome Time of glorious Profeſſion, will certainly go out and be 
e quite ſpent. It conſumes in the uſing and ſhining and burning. 
Men that have been moſt forward, decay; their Gifts decay, Life 
« decays.— It is ſo, after ſome Time of Profeſſion : For at firſt, it 
* rather grows than decays and withers: But aiterward they have 
« enough of it, it withers and dies.— The Spirit uf God comes up- 
+ on many Hypocrites, in abundant and plentiful Meaſure of awake- 
ning Grace; it comes upon them, as it did upon Balaam, and as 
it is in overflowing Waters, which ſpread far, and grow very deep, 
and fill many empty Places.—--Tho! it doth come upon them 1o, 
yet it never reſts within, ſo as to dwell there, to take up an eternal 
% Manſion for himſelf.—---Hence it doth decay by little and little; 
till at laſt it is quite gone. As Ponds fill'd with Rain-Water, 
* which comes upon them; not Spring-Water, that riſeth up with 
in them; it dries up by little and little, until quite dry.” Shepard's 
Parable, Part II: p. 58, 59. | 

Some Men may apprehend Chriſt, neither out of Fear of Miſe- 
„ry, nor only to preſerve ſome Sin; but God lets in Light and 
Heat of the bleſſed Beams of the glorious Goſpel of the Son of God; 
* And therefore there is Mercy, rich, free, ſweet, for damned, great, 
vile Sinners: Good Lord, ſaith the Soul, what a ſweet Miniſtry, 
* Word, God and Goſpel is this! and there reſts. This was the 
* Frame of the Steny-Ground ; which heard the Word, and received 
* 1t with Joy, and for a Time believed. And this is the Caſe of 
** Thouſands, that are much affected with the Promiſe and — of 

x «ax — ' 
| At, 


403 The twelfth Sign PaxrT III. 
From what has been ſaid it is manifeft, that chriſtian 
Practice or a holy Life, is à great and diſtinguiſhing Sign 
of true and ſaving Grace. But I may go turther, and 
aſſert, that it is, the cbief of all the Signs of Grace, both 
as an Evidence of the Sincerity of Profeſſors unto o- 
thers, and alſo to their on Conlciences. | 
But then it is neceſſary that this be rightly taken, and 
that it be well underſtood and obſerved, in what Senſe 
and Manner chriſtian Practice is the greateſt Sign of 
Grace. Therefore, to ſet this Matter in a clear Light, 
{ wiil endeavour particularly and diſtinctly to prove, that 
Chriſtian Practice is the principal Sign by which Chriſti- 
ans are to judge, both of their own and others Sincerity 
of Godlineſs; withal obſerving ſome Things that are 
needful to be particularly noted, in order to a right Un- 
derſtanding of this Matter. | 
I. I ſhall conſider chriſtian Practice and an holy Life, 
as a Manifeſtation and Sign of the Sincerity of a profeſ- 
ſing Chriſtian, to the Eye of bis Neighbours and Breths 
Ten. * 
And that this is the chief Sign of Grace in this Re- 
ſpect, is very evident from the Word of God. Chriſt, 
who knew beſt how to give us Rules to judge of others, 
has repeated it and inculcated it, that we ſhould know 
them by their Fruits; Matth. vii. 16. Te Hall know 
thenrby their Fruits. And then after arguing the Point, 
giving clear Reaſons why it muſt needs be, that Men's 


Fruits muſt be the chief Evidence of what Sort they are, 
. 2 0 in 


# 
— 


« Chriſt, and hang upon free Grace for a Time: But as 'tis with 
«« {weet Smells in a Room, they continge not long; or as Flowers, 
they grow old and withered, and then fall. In Time of Temp- 
< tation, Luſt and World, and Sloth, is more ſweet than Chriſt, and 
4% all his Goſpel is.” Shepard's Parable, Part II. p. 168. 

« Never any carnal Heart, but ſome Root of Bitterneſs did grow 
up at laſt in this Soil.“ Sheperd's Parable, Part I p. 195. 

% We ſhall ſee in Experience: Take the beſt Profeſſors living; 
« tho? they may come, as they and others judged, to the Lord, and 
*« follow the Lord; yet they will in Time depart.--—The Spirit ne- 
ver was given effectually to draw them; nor yet to keep them.“ 


Shepard's Parable, Part I. p. 205. 


gg Rn_= Sm=kKow.r es ecooffa_ a. ia ac oc 5 


Pax r III. of gracious Aﬀettions. 403 


in the following Verſes, he cloſes by repeating the Aſſer- 
tion ; Verſe 20. Wherefore by<heir Fruits ye ſhall know 
them. Again, Chap. xii. 33. Either make the Tree good, 
and his Fruit good; or elſe make the Tree corrupt, and bis 
Fruit corrupt.---As much as to ſay, 'tis at very abſurd 
Thing, for any to ſuppoſe that the Tree is good, and 
yet the Fruit bad; that the Tree is of one Sort, and the 
Fruit of another; for the proper Evidence of the Na- 
ture of the Tree is its Fruit. Nothing elſe can be in- 
tended by that laſt Clauſe in the Verſe, For the Tree is 
known by its Fruit, than that the Tree 1s chiefly known 
by its Fruit, that this the main and moſt proper Diag- 
noſtick by which one Tree is diſtinguiſhed from ano- 
ther. So Luke vi. 44. Every Tree is known by his own 
Fruit. Chriſt no where ſays, Ye ſhall know the Tree by 
its Leaves or Flowers, or ye ſhall know Men by their 
Talk, or ye ſhall know them by the good Story they 
tell of their Experiences, or ye ſhall know them by the 
Manner and Air of their ſpeaking, and Emphaſis and 
Pathos of Expreſſion, or by their ſpeaking feelingly, or 
by making a very great Show by Abundance of Talk, or 
by many Tears and affectionate Expreſſions, or by the 
Affections ye feel in your Hearts towards them: But 
by their Fruits ſhall ye know them; the Tree is known by 
its Fruit; Every Tree is known by its own Fruit. And 
as this1s the Evidence that Chriſt has directed us main- 
ly to look at in others, in judging of them, ſo it is the 
Evidence that Chriſt has mainly directed to give to o- 
thers, whereby they may judge of us; Matth v. 16. 
Let your Light ſo ſhine before Men, that others ſeeing your 
good Works may glorify, your Father which is in Heaven. 
Here Chriſt direfts us to manifeſt our Godlineſs to o- 
thers. Godlineſs is as it were a Light that ſhines in- - 
the Soul : Chriſt directs, that this Light ſhould not only 
ſhine within, but that it ſhould ſbine out before Men, 
that they may ſee it. But which Way ſhall this be? *Tis 
by our good Works. Chriſt don't ſay, that others 
learing your good Words, your good Story, or your 
| 2A jos - Pathetical . 


a 8 N N * 
* >. * 2 0 
: 
* 


pathetical Expreſſions; but that others ſeeing your goof 
Horks, may glorify your Father which is in Heaven, 
Doubtleſs when Chriſt gives us a Rule how to make our 
Light ſhine, that others may have Evidence of it, his 
Rule is the beſt that is to be found. And the Apoſtles 
do mention a Chriſtian Practice, as the principal Ground 
of their Eſteem of Perſons as true Chriſtians ; as the A- 
poſtle Paul, in the 6th Chapter of Hebrets. There the 
Apoſtle in the beginning of the Chapter, ſpeaks of them 
that have great common Illuminations, that have been 
enlightened, and bave taſted of the beavenly Gift, and were 
made Partakers of the Holy Ghoſt, and have taſted thi 
good Word of Gad, and the Powers of abe World to come, 
that afterwards fall away, and are like barren Ground, 
that is nigh unto curſing, whoſe End is to be burned: And 
Then immediately adds in the gth Verſe, (expreſſing his 
Charity for the chriſtian Hebrews, as having that ſaving 
Grace, which is better than all theſe common Illumina- 
nations) But beloved, we are perſwaded better Things of 
you, and Things that accompany Salvation; though wt 
thus ſpeak. And then in the next Verſe, he tells them 
what was the Reaſon he had ſuch good Thoughts of 
them: He don't ſay, that it was becauſe they had given 
him a good Account of a Work of God upon their 
Souls, and talked very experimentally; but it was their 
Work, and Labour of Love; For God is not wnrighte- 
us, to forget your Work, and Labour of Love, which ye 
have ſbewed towards his Name, in that ye haue miniſtered 
zo the Saints, and do miniſter. And the ſame Apoſtle 
ſpeaks of a faithful ſerving God in Practice, as the pro- 
per Proof to others of Men's loving Chriſt above all, 
and preferring his Honour to their private Intereſt, Phil. 
11. 21, 22. For all ſeek their own, not the Things which 


are Jeſus Chriſt's: But ye know the Proof of him, that as 4 


Son with the Father, he bath ſerved with me in the Go: 
pel. So the Apoſtle Jobn expreſſes the ſame, as the 
Ground of his good Opinion of Gaius, 3 John iii, 4, 5, 6. 
For I rejoiced greatly, when the Brethren came and * 
— N f E 


be pwelfib Sign" Par In 


e. enn geen => rh 


— 
— 


aw . © 


1 
9 
w 
00 
0 


* ks } w- 3 „ — —_ — — ww w- 


' PART Hr. 


of gracious Afictinun frog 


ed of the Truth that is in thee. But how did the Bre- 
thren teſtify of the Truth that was in Gaius? And how 
did the Apoſtle judge of the Truth that was in him? It 
was not becauſe they teſtified that he had given them a. 
Account of the Steps of his Experiences, and 
talk'd like one that felt what he ſaid, and had the very 
Language of a Chriſtian; but they teſtified, that be 
walked in the Truth; as it follows, even as thou walleſt 
in the Truth. I have no greater Joy, than to bear that 
my Children walk in the Truth. Beloved, thou doſt faithfully, - 
whatſoever thou doſt to the Brethrenand to Strangers, which 
bave born Witneſs of thy Charity before the Church. Thus 
the Apoſtle explains what the Brethren had born Wit- 
neſs of, when they came and teſtified of his walking in the 
Truth. And the Apoſtle ſeems in this Place, to give 
it as a Rule to Gains, how he ſhould judge of others; 
in Verſe 10, he mentions one Drotrephes, that did not 
himſelf well, and led away others after him; and 
then in the 11th Verſe, he directs Gaius to beware of 
ſuch, and not to- follow them; and gives him a Rule 
whereby he may know them; exactly agreeable to that 
Rule Chriſt had given before, By their Fruits ye ſhall 
tow? em; ſays the Apoſtle, Beloved, follow not that - 
which is evil, but that which is good. He that doth Good is 
of God; but he that doth Evil bath not ſeen God, And E 
would further obſerve, that the Apoſtle James, expreſly 
comparing that Way of ſhewing others our Faith and 


Chriſtianity by our Practice or Works, with other Ways . 


of ſhewing our Faith without Works, or not by Works, 
does plainly and abundantly prefer the former; Jam. it, 
18. Tea, a Man may ſay, thou haſt Faith and I baveWorks: 
Shew me thy Faith without thy Works, and I will ſhew thee 
my Faith by my Works, A Manifeſtation of our Faith 
without Works, or in a Way diverſe from Works, is & 
Manifeſtation of it in Words, whereby a Man profeſſes 
Faith. As the Apoſtle ſays, Ver. 14. What deth it 
profit, my ' Brethren, the* a Man say be hath Faith ?---- 
Therefore here are two Ways of manifeſting to our 
| 8 Neighbour 


406 4 e twelfth Sign. Part nt, 


Neighbour what is in our Hearts; one by what we 
ſay, and the other by what we de. But the Apoſtle 
abundantly prefers the Latter as the beſt Evidence. 
Now certainly all Accounts we give of ourſelves in 
Words, our ſaying that we have Faith, and that we 
are converted, and telling the Manner how we came 
to have Faith, and the Steps by which it was wrought, 
and the Diſcoveries and Experiences that accompanied 
it, are ſtill but manifeſting our Faith by what we ſay; 
tis but thewing our Faith by our Words; which the 
Apoſtle ſpeaks of as falling vaſtly ſhort of maniteſting 
of it by what we do, and ſhewing our Faith by ou 


8 ' Works. F 


And as the Sctipture plainly teaches that Practice is 
the beſt Evidence of the Sincerity of profeſſing Chri- 
ſtians ; fo Reaſon teaches the fame Thing: Reaſon 
ſhews that Men's Deeds- are better and more faithful 
Interpreters of their Minds, than their Words: The 
common Senſe of all Mankind, thro' all Ages and Na. 
tions, teaches *em to judge of Men's Hearts chiefly by 
their Practice, in other Matters: As whether a Man 
be a loyal Subject, a true Lover, a dutiful Child, or 2 
faithful Servant. If a Man profeſſes a great deal of 
Love and Friendſhip to another, Reaſon teaches all 
Men, that ſuch a Profeſſion is not of ſo great an Evi. 
dence of his being a real and hearty Friend, as his ap- 
pearing a Friend in Deeds; being faithful and conſtant 
to his Friend, in Proſperity and Adverſity, ready to lay 
out himſelf, and deny himſelf, and ſuffer in his perfonal 
Intereſt, to do him a Kindneſs. A wiſe Man will truſt 
to ſuch Evidences of the Sincerity of Friendſhip, fur- 
ther than a thouſand earneſt Profeſſions and ſolemn De- 
| clarations, and moſt affectionate Expreſſions of Friend- 
ſhip in Words. And there is equal Reaſon why Prac- 
tice ſhould alſo be looked upon as the beſt Evidence of 
Friendſhip towards Chriſt. Reaſon ſays the ſame that 
Chriſt ſaid, in John xiv. 21. He that hath my Command. 
ments," and keepeth them, be it is that loveth me, = us 

TI. N 1 


| 


— — — — — 


2 2 2 


PART III. of gracious Affectiont. 407 
if we ſee a Man, who in the Courſe of his Life, ſeems 
to follow and imitate Chriſt, and greatly to exert and 
deny himſelf for the Honour of Chriſt, and to promote 
his Kingdom and Intereſt in the World; Reaſon teach- 
es that this is an Evidence of Love to Chriſt, more to 
be depended on, than if a Man only ſays he has Love to 
Chriſt, and tells of the inward Experiences he has had 
of Love to him, what ſtrong Love he felt, and how his 
Heart was drawn out in Love at ſuch and ſuch a Time, 
when it may be there appears but little Imitation of 
Chriſt in his BehFviour, and he ſeems backward to do 
any great Matter for him, or to put himſelf out of his 
Way for the promoting of his Kingdom; but ſeems to 
be apt to excuſe himſelf, whenever he is called to deny 
himſelf for Chriſt. So if a Man in declaring his Expe- 
riences, tells how he found his Heart weaned- from the 
World, and ſaw the Vanity of it, ſo that all looked as 
nothing to him, at ſuch and ſuch Times, and profeſſes 

that he gives up all to God, and calls Heaven and Earth 

b witneſs to it; but yet in his Practice is violent in pur- 
un ſuing the World, and what he gets he keeps cloſe, is 
2 exceeding loath to part with much of it to charitable 
of and pious Uſes, it comes from him almoſt like his Heart's - 

il! MY Blood. But there is another profeſſing Chriſtian that 

ii- ſays not a great deal, yet in his Behaviour ſeems ready 

p- at all Times to forſake the World, whenever it ſtands 

nt in the Way of his Duty, and is free to part with it at 

any Time, to promote Religion and the Good of his Fel- 

ul low- Creatures; Reaſon teaches that the Latter gives far 

it the moſt credible Manifeſtation of an Heart weaned from 

ir- the World. And if a Man appears to walk humbly be- 

e- fore God and Men, and to. be of a Converſation that 

d- ſavours of a broken Heart, appearing patient and re- 

ic- ſign'd to God under Affliction, and meek in his Beha- 
of viour amongſt Men; this is a better Evidence of - Hu-— 

at miliation, than if a Perſon only tells how great a Senſe 

1d- be had of his own Unworthineſs, how he was 1 

udo lie in the Duſt, and was quite emptied or hi * 

| - an 


408 The twelſitb Sign Parr tit 
and ſee himſelf nothing and all over filthy and abomi: 
hable, Cc. &c. but yet acts as if he looked upon him- 
ſelf one of the firſt and beſt of Saints, and by juſt Right 
the Head of all the Chriſtians in Town, and is aſſum. 
ing, ſelf-willed, and impatient of the leaſt Contradic. 
tion or Oppoſition; we may be aſſured in ſuch a Caſe, 
that a Man's Practice comes from a lower Place in his 
Heart, than his Profeſſion. So (to mention no more 
Inſtances) if a Profeſſor of Chriſtianity manifeſts in his 
Behaviour a pitiful tender Spirit towards others in Cala- 
mity, ready to bear their Burthens with them, willing 
to ſpend his Subſtance for them, and to ſuffer many In- 
conveniencies. in his worldly Intereſt to promote the 
Good of others Souls and Bodies; is not this a more 
credible Manifeſtation of a Spirit of Love to Men, than 
only a Man's telling what Love he felt to others at cer. 
tain Times, how he pitied their Souls, how his Soul 
was in Travail for them, and how he felt a hearty Love 
and Pity to his Enemies; when in his Behaviour he 
ſeems to be of a very ſelfiſh Spirit, cloſe and niggardly, 
all for himſelf and none for his Neighbours, and per- 
haps envious and contentious ? Perſons in a Pang of Af- 
fection may think they have a Willingneſs of Heart for 
great Things, to do much and to ſuffer much, and fo 
may profeſs it very earneſtly and confidently z when 
really their Hearts are far from it. Thus many in their 
affectionate Pangs, have thought themſelves willing to 
be damned eternally for the Glory of God. Paſſing At- 
fections eaſily produce Words; and Words are cheap; 
and Godlineſs is more eaſily feigned in Words than in 
Actions. Chriſtian Practice is a coſtly laborious Thing. 
The Self-denial that is required of Chriſtians, and the 
Narrowneſs of the Way that leads to Life, don't conſiſt 
in Words, but in Practice. Hypocrites may much 
more eaſily be brought to talk like Saints, than to act 
like Saints. 
\- Thus it is plain that chriſtian Practice is the beſt Sign 
or Manifeſtation of the true Godlineſs of a profeſſing 
Chriſtian, to the Eye of his Neighbours. Thus 


D Er 


1 CD ww 45. ot CK CE 


OY "I. IS 
L. _ 


— ww 
Q' -z 


ParT III. * of gracious Affections. | 409 ys 
But then the following Things ſhould be well ob- 
ſerved, that this Matter may be rightly underſtood. 


Firſt, It muſt be obſerved, that when the Scripture 
ſpeaks of chriſtian Practice, as the beſt Evidence to 
others, of Sincerity and Truth of Grace, a Profeſſion of 
Chriſtianity is not excluded, but ſuppoſed. The Rules 
mentioned were Rules given to the Followers of Chriſt, 
to guide them in their Thoughts of profeſſing Chriſtians, 
and thoſe that offered themſelves as ſome of their Socie- 
ty, whereby they might judge of the Truth of their 
Pretences, and the Sincerity of the Profeſſion they made; 
and not for the Trial of Heathens,' or thoſe that made 
no Pretence to Chriſtianity, and that Chriſtians had no- 
thing to do with. This is as plain as is poſſible in that 
great Rule which Chriſt gives in the 7th of Matthew, 
By their Fruits ye ſhall know them. He there gives a 
Rule how to judge of thoſe that profeſſed to be Chri- 
ſtians, yea that made a very high Profeſſion, falſe Pre- 
phets, «pho come in Sbeep's Cloathing, as Verſe 15. So it 
is alſo with that of the Apoſtle James, Chap. ii. 18. Shew | 
me thy Faith without thy Works, and I will ſhew thee my 
Faith by my Werks. Tis evident that both the Sorts of 
Perſons offering to give theſe diverſe Evidences of their 
Faith, are Profeſſors of Faith: This is implied in their 
offering\each of them to give Evidences of the Faith 
they profeſſed, And *tis evident by the preceeding 
Verſes, that the Apoſtle is ſpeaking of Profeſſors of 
Faith in Jeſus Chriſt, So it 1s very plain that the A- 
poſtle Jobn, in thoſe Paſſages that have been obſerved in 
his third Epiſtle, is ſpeaking of profeſſing Chriſtians, 
Tho? in theſe Rules, the. chriſtian Practice of Profeſſors 
be ſpoken of as the greateſt and moſt diſtinguiſhing Sign 
of their Sincerity in their Profeſſion, much more evi- 
dential than their Profeſſion itſelf; yet a Profeſſion of 
Chriſtianity is preſuppoſed: It is not the main Thing in 
the Evidence, nor any Thing diſtinguiſhing in it; yet 
us a Thing requiſite and as init, As the having 
OS. an 


410 ze twelfth Sim Par II. 


an nina Body, is not any Thing diſtinguiſhing of a 
Man, from other Creatures, and is not the main Thing 
in the Evidence of human Nature; yet 'tis a Thing re- 
quiſite and neceſſary in the Evidence. So that it any 
Man ſhould ſay plainly that he was not a Chriſtian, and 
did not believe that Jeſus was the Son of God, or a Per- 
ſon ſent of God; theſe Rules of Chriſt and his Apoſtles 
don't at all oblige us to look upon him as a ſincere Chri- 
ſtian, let his viſible Practice and Virtues, be what they 
will. And not only do theſe Rules take no Place wick 
Reſpect to a Man that. explicitly denies Chriſtianity, 
and is a profeſs'd Deiſt, Jew, Heathen, or open Infidel, 
but alſo with Reſpect to a Man that only forbears to 
make a Profeſſion of Chriſtianity : Becauſe theſe Rules 
were given us only to judge of profeſſing Chriſtians : 
Fruits muſt be joined with open. Flowers; Bells and 
Pomegranates go together. 

But here will naturally ariſe this Enquiry, viz. when 
a Man may be ſaid to profeſs Chriſtianity, or what Pro- 
ar may properly be called a Profeſſion of Chriſti 
anit | 
NS in two Things; 
I. In order to a Man's being properly ſaid to make a 
Profeſſion of Chriſtianity, there muſt undoubtedly be a 
Profeſſion of all that is neceſſary to his being a Chriſtian, 
or of ſo much as belongs to the Eſſence of Chriſtianity. 
Whatſoever is eſſential in Chriſtianity itſelf, the Profeſ- 
ſion of that is eſſential in the Profeſſion of Chriſtianity. 
The Profeſſion muſt be of the Thing. profeſſed. For 
a Man to profeſs Chriſtianity, 1s for him to declare that 
he has it. And therefore ſo much as belongs to a Thing, 
Þ as to be neceſſary in order to its being truly denomi- 
nated that Thing; fo much is eſſential to the Declaration 
of that Thing, in order to its being truly — 
a Declaration of that Thing. If we take only a 
of Chriſtianity, and leave out a Part that is 15 to 
it, what we take is not Chriſtianity; becauſe ſomething 
that. is of the Eſſence of it is wanting. So if we 1 


as =_ — KS + «as as » 8 Min At an 


— © mm 2 22 AAR — on, .- 


= — 2 


PART III. ey 'gracious Affection. 41 

feſs only a Part, and leave out a Part that is eſſential, 
that which we profeſs3s not Chriſtianity, Thus in order 
to a Profeſſion of Chriſtianity, we muſt profeſs that we 
believe that Jeſus is the Meffab; for this Reaſon, becauſe 
ſuch a Belief is eſſential to Chriſtianity. And fo we 
muſt profeſs, either expreſly or implicitly, that Jeſws 
ſatisfied for our Sins, and other eſſential Doctrines 
of the Goſpel; becauſe a Belief of theſe Tings alſo 
are eſſential to Chriſtianity, But there are other Things 
as eſſential to Religion, as an orthodox Belief; which 
it is therefore as neceſſary that we ſhould profeſs, in 
order to our being truly ſaid to profeſs Chriſtianity. 
Thus it is eſſential to Chriſtianity, that we repent of 
our Sins, that we be convinced of our own Sinfulneſs, 
and that we are ſenſible we have juſtly expoſed ourſelves 
to God's Wrath, and that our Hearts do renounce all 
Sin, and that we do with our whole Hearts embrace 
Chriſt as our only Saviour, and that we love him above 
all, and are willing for his Sake to forſake all, and that 
we do give up ourſelves to be entirely and forever his, 
Sc. Such Things as theſe do as much belong to the 
Eſſence of Chriſtianity, as the Belief of any of the 
Doctrines of the Goſpel: And therefore the Profeſſion 

of them does as much belong to a chriſtian Profeſſion. 
Not that in order to a being profeſſing Chriſtians, tis 
neceſſary that there ſhould be an explicit Profeſſion of 
every individual Thing that belongs to chriſtian Grace 
or Vertue: But certainly, there muſt be a Profeſſion, 
either expreſs or implicit, of what is of the Eſſence of 


Religion. And as to thoſe Things that Chriſtians ſhould - _ 


expreſs in their Profeſſion, we ought to be guided by the 
Precepts of God's Word, or by-Scripture Examples of 
publick Profeſſions of Religion, God's People have 
made from Time to Time. Thus they ought to profeſs 
their Repentance of Sin: As of old, when Perſons 
were initiated as Profeſſors, they came confeſſing their 
Sins, manifeſting their Humiliation for Sin, Marth. iii. 
6. And the Baptiſm they were baptiſed with, was 
| D d 2 called 


— 


F412. _ The twelfth Sign 
called tbe Baptiſm of Repentance, Mark i. 3. And Jobn, 


when he had baptiſed them, exhorted them to bring 
forth Fruits meet for Repentance, Matth. iii. 8. i. e. 


aàgreeable to that Repentance which they had profeſſed; 


encouraging them, that if they did ſo, they ſhould 


eſcape the Wrath to come, and be gather'd as Wheat 


into God's Garner, Matib. iii. 7, 8, 9, 10, 12. So 
the Apoſle Peter ſays to the Jews, Acts ii. 38. Repent, 
and be baptiſed: Which thews that Repentance is a 
Qualification that muſt be viſible in order to. Baptiſm, 
and therefore ought to be publickly profeſſed. So 
when the Jews that returned from Captivity, entered 

ublickly into Covenant, it was with Confeſſion, or 
publick Propfeſſion of Repentance of their Sins, Nehem, 
ix. 2. This Profeſſion of Repentance ſhould include 
or imply a Profeſſion of Conviction that God would be 
Juſt in our Damnation: See Nebem. ix. 33, together 
with Verſe 35, and the Beginning of the next Chapter, 
They ſhould profeſs their Faith in Jeſus Chriſt, and 
that they embrace Chriſt, and rely upon him as, their 
Saviour, with their whole Hearts, and that they do 
Joyfully entertain the Goſpel of Chriſt. Thus Philip, 
in order to baꝑtiſing the Eunuch, required that he ſhould 
. Profeſs that he believed with all his Heart: And they 
chat were received as viſible Chriſtians, at that great 
Outpouring of the Spirit, which began at the Day of 
Pentecoſt, appear'd gladly to receive the Goſpel, Acts ii. 4 
. Then they that gladly received the Word, were baptiſed, 
and the ſame Day there were added unto them about three 
bon, d Souls. They ſhould profeſs that they rely 


only ou Chriſt's: Righteouſneſs and Strength, and that 


they are devoted to him, as their only Lord and Saviour, 
and that they rejoice in him as their only Righteouſneſs 
and Portion. It is foretold that all Nations ſhould be 
brought publickly to make this Profeſſion, Iſai. xlv. 22, 
to the End;. Look to me, and be ye ſaved, all the Ends 
of the Earth; for J am God, and there is none elſe. I have 
ſworn by myſelf, the Word is gong out of my Mouth is 

Pp a | Righteouſneſs, 


Parr III. 


—_— . ͤ 


2 
- ©. _ 
\ ©. „„ 


Pax III. of gracious A ections. 


Seed of Iſrael be juſtified, and ſhall glory. They ſhould: 


413 


Righteouſneſs, and ſpall nat return, that unto me every 
Knee ſhall bow, every Tongue ſhall ſwear. Surely ſhall 
one ſay, In the Lord have 1 Righteouſneſs and Strength. 
Even to him ſhall Men come: And all that are incenſed 
againſt him ſhall be aſhamed. In the Lord fhall all the 


profeſs to give up themſelves entirely to Chriſt, and 
to God through him; as the Children of MVael, when 
they publickly recognized their Covenant with God; 
Deut. xxvi. 17. Thou haſt avouched the Lord this Day ta 
be thy God, and to walk in his Ways, and to keep bis 
Statutes, and his Commandments, and his Fudgments, and 
to hearken unto his Voice. They ought to profeſs a 
Willingneſs of Heart, to embrace Religion with all its 
Difficulties, and to walk in a Way of Obedience to | 
God univerſally and perſeveringly; Exod. xix. 8. and 
xxiv. 3,---7. Deut. xxvi. 16, 17, 18. 2 Kings xxiii. 2. 
Nehem. x. 28, 29. Pſal. cxix. 57, 106. They ought 
to profeſs that all their Hearts and Souls are in theſe 
Engagements to be the Lord's, and for ever to ſerve 
him; 2 Chron. xv. 12, 13, 14. God's People's ſwearing 
to God, and ſwearing by his Name, or to his Name, as 
it might be render'd (by which ſeems to be ſignified 
their ſolemnly giving upthemſelves to him in Covenant, 
and vowing to receive him as their God, and to be entirely 
his, to obey and ſerve him) is ſpoken of as a Duty to be 
performed by all God's viſible rael; Deut. vi. 13, and 
x. 20. Pſal. Ixiii. 11. Iſai. xix. 18. Chap. xlv. 23, 24, 
compared with Rom. xiv. 11, and Phil, ii. 10, 1 1. Iſai. 
xlviii. 1, 2, and Ixv. 15, 16. Jer. iv. 2, and v. 7, and 

xii. 16. Hol. jv. 15, and x. 4. Therefore, in order to 
Perſons being entitled to full Eſteem and Charity, with 
their Neighbours, as being ſincere Profeſſors of Chriſti- 
anity; by thoſe forementioned Rules of Chriſt and his 
Apoſtles, there muſt be a viſibly holy Life, with a 
Profeſſion, either expreſſing, or plainly implying ſuch 3 
Things as thoſe, which have been now mention d. We 
are to kyow them by their Fruits; that is, we are 2 their 


Fruits to know whether they be what they profeſs to 


be; not that we are to know by their Fruits, that they 


have ſomething in them, which they don't ſo much as 
pretend to. 


And moreover, | 
2. That Profeſſion of theſe Things, which'is properly 
called a chriſtian Profeſſion, and which muſt be joined 
with chriſtian Practice, in order to Perſon's being entitled 
to the Benefit of thoſe Rules, muſt be made (as to what 
appears) underſtandingly: that is, they muſt be Perſons 
that appear to have beeg ſo far inſtructed in the Princi- 
les of Religion, as to be in an ordinary Capacity to 
underſtand the proper Import of what is expreſs'd in 
their Profeſſion. For Sounds are no Significations or 
Declarations of any Thing, any further than Men 
underſtand the Meaning of their own Sounds, 

But in order to Perſons making a proper Profeſſion 
of Chriſtianity, ſuch as the Scripture directs to, and 
ſuch as the Followers of Chriſt ſhould require, in order 
to the Acceptance of the Profeſſors with full Charity, 
as of their Society; tis not neceſſary they ſhould give 
an Account of the particular Steps and Method, by 
which the Holy Spirit, ſenſibly to them, wrought and 
brought about thoſe great eſſential Things of Chriſtia- 
nity in their Hearts. There is no Footſtep in the Scrip- 
ture of any ſuch Way of the Apoſtles, or primitive 
| Miniſters and Chriſtians requiring any ſuch Relation, in 
order to their receiving and treating others, as their 
- Chriſtian Brethren, to all Intents and Purpoſes, or of 
their firſt examining them, concerning the particular 
Method and Order of their Experiences. They required 
of them a Profeſſion of the Things wrought; but no 
Account of the Manner of Working was required of 
them. Nor is there the leaſt Shadow in the Scripture 
of any ſuch Cuſtom in the Church of God, from Adam 
to the Death of the Apoſtle John. . 


Lam 


} 


/ 


E 414 De twelfth Sign | Parr III. 


r , . . , y ß . wal 


- 2. 
28 * 
-- * 
—— 
* 2 


ParT III. of gractous Aﬀetions. 415 


I am far from ſaying, that it is not requiſite that Per- 
ſons ſhould give any Sort of Account of their Experi- 
ences to their Brethren, For Perſons to profeſs thoſe 
Things wherein the Eſſence of Chriſtianity lies, is the 
ſame Thing as to profeſs that they experience thoſe 
Things. Thus for Perſons ſolemnly to profeſs, That, 
in a Senſe and full Conviction of their own utter Sinful- 
neſs, Miſery, and Impatence, and tatally undone State 
as in themſelves, and their juſt Deſert of God's utter 
Rejection and eternal Wrath, without Mercy, and the 
utter Inſufficiency of their own Righteouſneſs, or any 
Thing in them, to ſatisfy divine Juſtice, or recommend 
em to God's Favour, they do only and entirely depend 
on the Lord Jeſus Chriſt, and his Satisfaction and 
Righteouſneſs; that they do with all their Hearts believe 
the Truth of the Goſpel of Chriſt; and that in a full 
Conviction and Senſe of his Sufficiency and perfect Ex- 
cellency as a Saviour, as exhibited in the Goſpei, they 
do with their whole Souls cleave to him, and acquieſce in 
him, as the Refuge and Reſt of their Souls, and Foun- 
tain of their Comfort; that they repent of their Sins, 
and utterly renounce all Sin, and give up themſelves 
wholly to Chriſt, willingly ſubjecting themſelves to him 
as their King; that they give him their Hearts and their 
whole Man; and are willing and reſolved to have God 
for their whole and everlaſting Portion; and in a De- 
pendance on his Promiſes of a tuture eternal Enjoyment 
of him in Heaven, to renounce all the Enjoy ments of 
this vain World, ſelling all for this great Treaſure and 
future Inheritance, and to comply with every Command 
of God, even the moſt difficult and ſelf-denying, and 
devote their whole Lives to God's Service; and that in 
Forgiveneſs of thoſe that have injured them, and a ge- 
neral Benevolence to Mankind, their Hearts are united 
to the People of Jeſus Chriſt as their People, to cleave 
to them and love them as their Brethren, and worſhip 
and ſerve God, and follow Chriſt in Union and Fellow- 

ſhip with them, being willing and reſolved to . 


116 me twelfth Sign Paxr IIl. 


all thoſe Duties that belong to them, as Members of the 
fame Family of God, and myſtical Body of Chriſt, 1 
ſay, for Perſons ſolemnly to profeſs fuch Things as 
_ as in the Preſence of God, 1s the ſame Thing, as 

rofeſs that they are conſcious to, or do ae 
fach Things in their Hearts. 

Nor is it what I ſuppoſe, that Perſons giving an Ac- 
count of their Experience of particular Exerciſes of 
Grace, with the Times and Circumſtances, gives no 
Advantage to others in forming a Judgment of their 
State; or that Perſons may not fitly be enquired of con- 


cerning theſe in ſome Caſes, eſpecially Caſes of great 


Importance, where all poſſible Satisfaction concerning 
Perſons Piety is eſpecially to be deſired and ſought after, 
as in the Caſe of Ordination or Approbation of a Mini- 
ſter. It may give Advantage in forming a Judgment, 
in ſeveral Reſpects; and among others, in this, That 
hereby we may be better ſatisfied that the Profeſſor 
ſpeaks honeſtly and — in what he pro- 


feſſes; and that he don't make the Profeſſion in meer 
Formality. In order to a Profeſſion of Chriſtianity 


being accepted to any Purpoſe, there ought to be good 
Reaſon, from the Circumſtances of the Profeſſion, to 
think that the Profeſſor don't make ſuch a Profeſſion 
out of a meer cuſtomary Compliance with a preſcribed 
Form, uſing: Words without any diſtinct Meaning, or 
in a very lax and ambiguous Manner, as Confeſſions of 
Faith are often ſubſcribed ; but that the Profeſſor under- 
ſtandingly and honeſtly Genifies what he is conſcious of 
in his own Heart; otherwiſe his Profeſſion can be of no 


A Significance, and no more to be regarded than the Sound 


of Things without Life. But indeed (whatever Advan- 
tage an Account of particular Exerciſes may give in 


3 Judging of this) it muſt be own'd, that the Profeſſor 


having been previouſly thoroughly inſtructed by bis 
Teachers, and giving good Proof of his ſufficient has 
lege, together with a Practice —_— to his Profeſſion, 
iS the der Evidence of this. 37 1 

| or 


- aw a nn as = * ä 


ö a_ -.-. Ss 


>> OG So, JO DO © -f = Mt M5 for i= Maps bode 


Ez 
* * - 


PaxT III. of gracious Aﬀeions. 417 
Nor do I ſuppoſe, but that, if a Perſon that is en- 


quired of about particular Paſſages, Times and Circum- 
ſtances of his chriſtian Experience, among other 


Things, ſcems to be able to give a diſtin&t Account of 


the Manner of his firſt ' Converſion, in ſuch a Method 
as has been frequently obſervable in true Converſion, fo 
that Things ſeem, ſenſibly and diſtinctly to follow one 
another, in the Order of Time, according to the Order 
of Nature; it 1s an illuſtrating Circumſtance, that among 
other Things, adds Luſtre to the Evidence he gives his 
Brethren of the Truth of his Experiences. 

But the Thing that I ſpeak of as unſcriptural, is the 
. inſiſting on a particular Account of the diſtinct Method 
and Steps, wherein the Spirit of God did ſenſibly pro- 
ceed, in firſt bringing the Soul into a State of Salvation, 
as a Thing requiſite in order to receiving a Profeſſor into 
full Charity as a real Chriſtian; or ſo, as for the Want 
of ſuch Relation, to diſregard other Things in the Evi- 
dence Ferſons give to their Neighbours of their Chriſti- 
anity, that are vaſtly more important and eſſential, 


Secondly, That we may rightly. underſtand how chri- 
ſtian Practice is the greateſt Evidence that others can 
have of the Sincerity of a profeſſing Chriſtian, tis need- 
ful that what was ſaid before, ſhewing what chriſtian 
Practice is, ſhould be borne in Mind ; and that it ſhould 
be conſiderd how far this may be viſible to others. 
Meerly that a Profeſſor of Chriſtianity is what is com- 
monly called an honeſt Man, and a moral Man, (i. e. 
we have no ſpecial Tranſgreſſion or Iniquity to charge 


him with, that might bring a Blot on his Character) is 


no great Evidence of the Sincerity, of his Profeſſion. 
This is not making bis Light ſhine before Men. This is 
not that Work and Labour of Love ſhewed towards Chriſt's 
Name, which gave the Apoſtle ſuch Perſwaſion of the 
Sincerity of the profeſſing Hebrews, Heb. vi. 9, o. It 
may be ſo, that we may ſee nothing in a Man, but that 


he may be a good Man, there may appear n - his 
h . 9 4 ; 6 1 S ( 


418 The twelfth Sign 
Life and Converſation inconſiſtent with his being godly, 
and yet neither may there be any great poſitive Evidence 
that he is ſo. But there may be great poſitive Appear- 
ances of Holineſs in Men's viſible. Behaviour : Their 
Life may appear to be a Life of the Service of God: 
They may appear to follow the Example of Jeſus Chriſt, 
and come up in a great Meaſure to thoſe excellent Rules 
in the 5th, 6th, and 7th Chapters of Matthew, and 
z2th of Romans, and many other Parts of the New- 
Teſtament : There may be a great Appearance of their 
being univerſal in their Obedience to Chriſt's Commands 
and the Rules of the Goſpel. They may appear to be 
univerſal in the Performance of the Duties of the firſt 
Table, manifeſting the Fear and Love of God; and 
alſo univerſal in fulfilling Rules of Love to Men, Love 
to Saints, and, Love to Enemies; Rules of Meceknel; 
and Forgiveneſs, Rules of Mercy and Charity, and 
looking not only at our own Things, but alſo at the 
Things of others; Rules of doing Good to Men's Souls 
and Bodies, to particular Perſons and to the Public; 
Rules of Temperance and Mortification, and of an 
humble Converſation; Rules of bridling the 'Tongue, 
and improving it to glorify God and bleſs Men, ſhewing 
that in their Tongues is the Law of Kindneſs. They 
may appear to walk as Chriſtians in all Places, and at 
all Seaſons, in the Houſe of God, and+1n their Families, 
and among their Neighbours, on Sabbath-Days, and 
every Day, in Buſineſs and in Converſation, towards 
Friends and Enemies, towards Superiors, Inferiors, and 
Equals. Perſons in their viſible Walk may appear to 
be very earneſtly engaged in the Service ,of God and 
Mankind, much to labour and lay out themſelves in 
this Work of a Chriſtian, and to be very conſtant and 
ſtedfaſt in it, under all Circumſtances and Temptations. 
There may be great Manifeſtations of a Spirit to deny 
themſelves, and ſuffer for God and Chriſt, and the In- 
tereſt of Religion, and the Benefit of their Brethren. 
There may be great Appearances in a Man's Walk, of 


a Dil 


, 


PART III. 


.So ee 2 


USP TY * Fw 


—_— _— wo RN Vwy T VvJY Www FF} =” wp _ FD * pr DS WW 


*. ENS 
1 
= „ 8 
-* + * = 
. - ** 422 


PART III. F gracious Affections. 419 
a Diſpoſition to forſake any Thing, rather than to for- 
ſake Chriſt, and to make every Thing give Place to his 
Honour. There may be great Manifeſtations in a Man's 
Behaviour of ſuch Religion as this being his Element, 
and of his placing the Delight and Happineſs of his Life 
in it: And his Converſation may be ſuch, that he may 
carry with him a ſweet Odour of chriſtian Graces and 
heavenly Diſpoſitions, wherever he goes. And when it 
is thus in the Profeſſors of Chriſtianity, here is an Evi- 
dence to others of their Sincerity in their Profeſſion, to 
which all other Manifeſtations are not worthy to be 
compared, | 
There is doubtleſs a great Variety in the Degrees of 
Evidence that Profeſſors do exhibit of their Sincerity, 
in their Life and Practice; as there is a Variety in the 
Fairneſs and Clearneſs of Accounts Perſons give of the 
Manner and Method of their Experiences: But un- 
doubtedly ſuch a Manifeſtation as has been deſcribed, 
of a chriſtian Spirit in Practice, is vaſtly beyond the 
faireſt and brighteſt Story of particular Steps and Paſ- 
ſages of Experiences, that ever was told. And in gene- 
ral a Manifeſtation of the Sincerity of a chriſtian Pro- 
feſſion in Practice, is far better than a Relation of Ex- 
periences. | | | 


But yet, | 3 

Thirdly, It muſt be noted, agreeable to what was for- 
merly obſerved, That no external Manifeſtations and 
outward Appearances whatſoever, that are viſible to the 
World, are infallible Evidences of Grace. Theſe Ma- 
nifeſtations that have been mentioned, are the beſt that 
Mankind can have; and they are ſuch as do oblige Chri- 
ſtians entirely to embrace Profeſſors as Saints, and love 


em and rejoice in em as the Children of God, and are 


ſufficient to give them as great Satisfaction concerning 
them, as ever is needful to guide them in their Conduct, 


or for any Intent and Purpoſe that needs to be anſwered 


in- this World. But nothing that appears to 1 in 
cir 


40 The twelfth Sign Par 1. 


their Neighbour, can be ſufficient to beget an abſolute 
TCertainty concerning the Sate of his Soul: For they ſee 
not his Heart, nor can they ſee all his external Beha- 
viour; for much of it is in ſecret, and hid from the Eye 


of the World: And {is impoſſible certainly to deter- 


mine, how far a Man may go in many external Appea- 
rances and Imitations of Grace, from other Principles, 
Tho' undoubtedly, if others could ſee ſo much of what 
belongs to Men's Practice, as their own Conſciences may 
ſee of it, it might be an infallible Evidence of their 
State, as will appear from what follows. | | 


Having thus conſidered chriſtian Practice as the beſt 
Evidence of the Sincerity of Profeſſors to others, I now 
proceed, £5 Oh 1 7 


2. To obſerve that the Scripture alſo ſpeaks of chri- 
ſtian Practice, as a diſtinguiſhing and ſure Evidence of 
Grace to Perſons own Conſciences. This 1s very plain in 

1 John ii. 3. Hereby we do know that we know him, if 
wwe keep his Commandments. And the Teſtimony of opr 
Conſciendes, with Reſpect to our good Deeds, is ſpoken 


of as that which may give us Aſſurance of our own. 


Godlineſs; 1 John iii. 18, 19. My little Children let us 


| mot love the World, neither in Tongue, nor in Deed in the 


Original it is yr & in Work) and in Truth. And hereby 
we know that we are of the Truth, and ſhall aſſure our 
Hearts before him. And the Apoſtle Paul, in Heb. vi. 
{peaks of the Work, and Labour of Love, of the chriſtian 


Hebrews, as that which both gave him a Perſwaſion, 


that they had ſomething above the higheſt common II- 
luminations, and alſo as that Evidence which tended to 
give them the higheſt Aſſurance of Hope 3 
themſelves; Ver. 9. &c. But Beloved, we are perſtaded 
better Things of you, and Things that accompany Salvation, 
tho" we thus ſpeak. For God is not unrighteous, to forget 
your Mork, tand Labour of Love, which ye have ſhewed 
| _ #owaras bis Name; in that ye have miniſtered to his p 
| | bY a 


Yu. OY WA TO mW , , os F RE % IL 


„ © ku 


wh 


Ll 


Pak r III. of gracions Aﬀeftiom, © 421 


and do miniſter. And we deſire that every one of you do 
. ſhew the ſame Diligence, to the full Aſſurance of Hope, 

unto the End. So the Apoſtle direAs the Galatians to 
examine their Behaviour or Practice, that they might 
have Rejoicing in themſelves in their own happy State; 
Gal. vi. 4. Let every Man prove his own Work; ſo ſhall 
he have Rejoicing in himſelf, and not in another. And the 
Pſalmiſt ſays, Pſal. cxix. 6. Then ſhall I not be aſhamed, 
when 1 have Reſpect to all thy Commandments. i. e. Then 
ſhall I be bold and affured, and ſtedfaſt in my Hope. 
And in that of our Saviour, Matth. vii. 19, 20. Every 
Tree that bringeth not forth good Fruit, is hewn down, 
and caſt into the Fire: Wherefore, by their Fruits ye ſhall 
know them. Tho' Chriſt gives this firſtly, as a Rule by 
which we ſhould judge of others, yet in the Words 
that next follow, he plainly ſhews, that he intends it 
alſo as a Rule by which we ſhould judge ourſelves; Not 
every one that ſaith unto me Lord, Lord, ſhall enter into 


the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that born THE WilL of | 


my Father which is in Heaven. Many will ſay unto nc in 
that Day, Lord, Lord, &c.---and. then I will profeſs unto 
them, I never knew you; depart from me YE THAT WORK 
IntqQuity. Therefore whoſoever heareth theſe Sayings of 
mine, and DoTH them, I will liken them to à wiſe Man, 
which built his Houſe upon a Rock. And every one that 
beareth theſe Sings of mine, and DOTH THEM NOT, pa 
be liken'd unto a fooliſh Man, which built bis Houſe upon 

the Sand. | ſhall have Occafion to mention other Texts 
that ſhew the ſame Thing, hereafter. r 
But for the greater Clearneſs in this Matter, I would 

Firſt, Shew how chriſtian Practice, doing good Works, 
or keeping Chriſt's Commandments, is to be taken, 
when the Scripture repreſents it as a ſure Sign to our 
own Conſciences, that we are real Chriſtians. And 
Secondly, will prove that this is the Chief of all 
Evidences that Men can have of their own ſincere 
Godlineſs. | | 
| Firſt, © 


122 + "The rwelſib Sign Puaxr II 


Firſt, I would ſhew how chriſtian Practice, or keep. 
ing Chriſt's Commandments, is to be taken, when the 
Scripture repreſents it as a ſure Evidence to our own 
Conſciences, that we are ſincere Chriſtians. 

And here I would obſerve, that we can't reaſonably 
ſuppoſe, that when the Scripture in this Caſe ſpeaks of 
good Works, good Fruit, and keeping Chriſt's Com- 
mandments; that it has Reſpect merely to what is ex. 
ternal, or the Motion and Action of the Body, without 
including any thing elſe, having no Reſpect to any 
Aim or Intention of the Agent, or any Act of his Un- 
derſtanding or Will. For conſider Men's Actions fo, 
and they are no more good Works or Acts of Obedi- 
ence, than the regular Motions of. a Clock; nor are 
they conſidered as the Actions of the Men or any hu- 
man Actions at all. The Actions of the Body, taken 
thus, are neither Acts of Obedience, nor Diſobedience; 
any more than the Motions of the Body in a Convulſion. 
But the Obedience and Fruit that is ſpoken of, is the 
Obedience and Fruit of the Man; and therefore not only 


the Acts of the Body, but the Obedience of the Soul, 


conſiſting in the Acts and Practice of the Soul. Not 
that I ſuppoſe that when the Scripture ſpeaks, in this 
Caſe, of gracious Works and Fruit and Practice, that in 
theſe Expreſſions is included all inward Piety and Holi- 
neſs of Heart, both Principle and Exerciſe, both Spirit 
and Practice: Becauſe then, in theſe Things being 
given as Signs of a gracious Principle in the Heart, the 
ſame Thing would be given as a Sign of itſelf, and there 
would be no Diſtinction between Root and Fruit. But 
only the gracious Exerciſe, and holy Act of the Soul is 
meant, and given as the Sign of the holy Principle, and 
good Eſtate. | Neither is every Kind of inward Exerciſe 
of Grace meant; but the practical Exerciſe, that Exer- 
ciſe of the Soul, and Exertion of inward Holineſs, 
which there is an obediential Act; or that Exertion of 
the Mind, and Act of Grace, which iſſues and terminates 
in what they call the imperate Acts of the uy 1 in 
| | whic 


IE 8 RES, = WOE CFE OHSS 0 ES CWP eee 


© ©. þ | + x 


N. 


— — LK _— —- _— 


„ e WY IS WEIS We. 5 


"” 56; 
= 75 * 1 


Parr III. of gracious Aﬀettiom. 423 _ 


which ſomething is directed and commanded by the Sout 
to be done, and brought to paſs in Practice. 

Here for a clearer Underſtanding, I would obſerve; 
that there are two Kinds of Exerciſes and Grace. 1. 
There are thoſe that ſome call immanent Acts: That is, 
thoſe Exerciſes of Grace that remain within the Soul, 
that begin and are terminated there, without any imme 
diate Relation to any Thing to be done outwardly, or 
to be brought to paſs in Practice. Such are the Exerciſes . 
of Grace, which the Saints often have in Contemplation : 
When the Exerciſe that is in the Heart, don't directly 
proceed 0, or terminate in any Thing beyond the 
Thoughts of the Mind; however they may tend. to 
Practice (as all Exerciſes of Grace do) more remotely. 
2. There is another Kind of Acts of Grace, that are 
more ſtrictly called practical, or effective Exerciles 
becauſe they immediately reſpect ſomething to be done. 
They are the Exertions of Grace in the commanding 
Acts of the Will, directing the outward Actions. As 
when a Saint gives a Cup of cold Water to a Diſciple, 
in and from the Exerciſe of the Grace of Charity; or 
voluntarily endures Perſecution, in the Way of his 
Duty, immediately from the Exerciſe of a fupreme 
Love to Chriſt. Here is the Exertion of Grace pro- 
ducing it's Effect in outward Actions. Theſe Exerciſes 
of Grace are practical and productive of good Works, 
not only in this Senſe, that they are of a produtiive Na- 
ture, (for ſo are all Exerciſes of true Grace) but they are 
the producing Acts. This is properly the Exerciſe of 
Grace in the Act of the Will; and this is properly the 
Practice of the Soul. And the Soul is the immediate 
Actor of no other Practice than this: The Motions of 
the Body follow from the Laws of Union between the 
Soul and Body, which God, and not the Soul has 
fixed, and does maintain. The Act of the Soul, and 
the Exerciſe of Grace, that is exerted in the Performance 
of a good Work, is the good Work itſelf, as far as the 
Soul is concerned in it, or ſo far as it is the —_ = 

: | OTK. 


'F 


X looketh on the Heart. 


Work. The Determinations of the Will, are indeed 
our very Actions, ſo far as they are properly ours, as 
Dr. Doddridge obſerves. In this Practice of the Soul, 
is included the Aim and Intention of the Soul which is 
the Agent. For not only ſhould we not look on the 
Motions of a Statue, doing Juſtice or diſtributing Alms 
by Clock-work, as any Acts of Obedience to Chrilt in 
that Statue; but neither would any Body call the volun- 
tary Actions of a Man, externally and materially agree. 
able to a Command of Chriſt, by the Name of Obedi- 
ence to Chriſt, if he had never heard of Chriſt, or any 
of his Commands, or had no Thought of his Commands 
in what he did.---If the Acts of Obedience and good 
Fruits ſpoken of, be looked upon, not as meer Motions 
of the Body, but as Acts of the Soul; the whole Exer- 
ciſe of the Spirit of the Mind, in the Action, muſt be 
taken in, with the End acted for, and the Reſpect the 
Soul then has to God, &c; otherwiſe they are no Acts 
of Denial of ourſelves, or Obedience to God, or Ser- 
vice done to him, but fomething elſe. Such effective 
Exerciſes of Grace as theſe that I have now deſcribed, 1 
many of the Martyrs have experienc'd in a high Degree. 
And all true Saints live a Life of ſuch Acts of Grace as il © 
theſe; as they all live a Life of gracious Works, of E 
which theſe operative Exertions of Grace are the Life 
and Soul. And this is the Obedience and Fruit that a 
God mainly looks at, as he looks at the Soul, more than g 
the Body; as much as the Soul, in the Conſtitution of 5 
the human Nature, is the ſuperior Part. As God looks BY 
at the Obedience and Practice of the Man, he looks at ib 
the Practice of the Soul; for the Soul is the Man in ' 

God's Sight; For the Lord ſeeth not as Man ſeeth, for be 

And thus it is, that Obedience, good Works, good 
Fruit, are to be taken, when given in Scripture as a ſure 

| Evidence 


— 


8 —— 
— —— 
. 


+ Scripture Doctrine of Salyation. Sermon I. p. 11, 


F 


- — 
. N 


o 


of the Soul, ⁊s preceeding and governing the Actions 


of the Body. When Practice is given in Scripture as * 
the main Evidence of our true Chriſtianity to others, 
then is meant that in our Practice which is viſible ta 


them, even our outward Actions: But when Practice 13 
given as a ſure Evidence of our real Chriſtianity to our 
own Conſciences, then is meant that in our Practice 


Evidence to our own Conſciences of a true Principle of 
Grace; even as including the Obedience and Practice 


4.3 
> 


which is viſible to our own Conſciences; which is not 


only the Motion of eur Bodies, but the Exertion and 
Exerciſe of the Soul, which directs and commands that 
Motion; which is more directly and immediately under 
the View of our own Conſciences, than the Act of the 
Body. And that this is the Intent of the Scripture, not 
only does the Nature and Reaſon of. the Thing ſhew, 


but it is plain by the Scripture itſelf; Thus it is evident 


that when Chriſt, at the Concluſion of his Sermon on 
the Mount, ſpeaks of deing or practiſing thoſe Sayings 
of his, as the grand Sign of Profeſſors being true Diſ- 
ciples, without which he likens em to a Man that built 
his Iouſe upon the Sand, and with which, to a Man 


that built his Houſe upon a Rock; He has a ReſpeR, 


not only to the outward Behaviour, but to the inward 
Exerciſe of the Mind in that Behaviour: As 1s evident 
by obſerving what thoſe preceeding Sayings of his are, 
that he refers to, when he ſpeaks of our doing or prac- 


tiſing them: And we ſhall find they are ſuch as theſe; 
Bleſſed are the poor in Spirit, Bleſſed are they that my 


Bleſſed are the Meek, Bleſſed are they that do hunger an 


thirſt after Righteouſneſs, Bleſſed are the Merciful, Bleſſed © 
are the Pure in Heart, Whoſoever is angry with his Bro- : 


ther without a Cauſe, Ec. Whoſoever looketh on a Woman 
to luſt after ber, &c. Love your Enemies, Take no Thought 


for your Life, and others of the like Nature, which 


imply inward Exerciſes: And when Chriſt lays, John 

xv. 21. He that hath my Commandments and keepeth them, 

be it is that loveth me; He has evidently a ſpecial Re- 
| | Ee ; ſpect 


23 


». 


i r roffibSigy Par Hf 


80 to that Command ſeveral Times repeated in the 
me Diſcourſe (which he calls, by Way of Eminence, 


bad loved tbem: (See Chap. xiii. 34, 35, and Chap. xv. 
10, 12, 13, 14.) But this Command reſpects chiefly 
an Exerciſe of the Mind or Heart, tho' exerted in 
Practice. So when the Apoſtle John ſays, 1 John ii. 3. 
Hereby we do know that. we know him, if we keep bis 
' Commandments; He has plainly a principal Reſpect to 
the ſame Command, as appears by what follows, Ver. 7, 
8, 9, 10, 11; and 2d Epiſt. Ver. 5, 6. And when we 
are told in Scripture, that Men ſhall at the laſt Day be 
judged arcording to their Works, and all ſpall receive ac- 
cording te ibe Things done in the Body; it is not to be un- 
derſtood only of outward Acts; for if ſo, why is God 
ſo often ſpoken of as ſearching the Hearts and try ing 
the Reins, That he may render to every one according ta 
bis Works? as Rev. ii. 23. And all the Churches ſhall 
know that I am be that ſearcheth the Reins and the Hearts; 
and I will give unto every one according to his Works, 
Fer. xvii. 9, 10. I the Lord ſearch the Hearts, I try the 
Reins; even to give every Man according to his Ways, and 
according to the Fruit of bis Doings. But if by bis Ways, 
and the Fruit of his Doings, is meant only the Actions 
of his Body, what need of ſearching the Heart and Reins, 
in order to know them? Hezekiab in his Sickneſs pleads 
Kis Practice as an Ev:dence of his Title to God's Favour, 
as including, not only his outward Actions, but what 
was in his Heart, Iſai. xxxviti. 3. Remember now, O 

Lord, I beſeech thee, how I have walked before thee, in 
Truth, and with a perfect Heart. 

Tho? in this great Evidence of Sincerity that the 
Scripture gives us, what is inward is of greateſt Impor- 
tance; yet what is outward is included and intended, as 
connected with the practical Exertion of Grace in the 
Will, directing and commanding the Actions of the 
Body. And hereby are effectually cut off all Pretenſions 
chat any Man can have to Evidences of Godlineſs, who 


externally 


His Commandment) that they ſhould love one another, as be 


an am macs ww Sd. ak... a. ont 


ParT III. of gracious Afetim. 427 
externally lives wickedly: Becauſe the great Evidence 
lies in that inward Exerciſe and Practice of the Soul, 
which conſiſts in the Act of the Will, commanding 


outward Acts. But *tis known that theſe commanding 
Acts of the Will are not one Way, and the Actions of 


- A 2 1 * * 
0 = a . 


the bodily Organs another: For the unalterable Law of 


Nature 1s, that they ſhould be united, as long as Soul 
and Body are united, and the Organs are not fo deſtroyed 
to be incapable of thoſe Motions that the Soul com- 
mands. Thus it would be ridiculous for a Man to 
plead, that the commanding Act of his Will was to go 
to the public Worſhip, while his Feet carry him to a 
Tavern or Brothel-Houſe; or that the commanding Act 
of his Will was to give ſuch a Piece of Meney, he had 
in his Hand, to a poor Beggar, while his Hand at the 
ſame Inſtant, kept it back, and held it faſt. | 


Secondly, I proceed to ſhew that chriſtian Practice, 
taken in the Senſe that has been explained, is the chief 
of all the Evidences of a ſaving Sincerity in Religion, to 
the Conſciences of the Profeſſors of it; much to be pre- 
ferr'd to the Method of the firſt Convictions, Enlight- 
nings and Comforts in Converſion, or any immanent 
Diſcoveries or Exerciſes of Grace whatſoever, that begin 
and end in Contemplation. * The Evidence of this 


appears by the following Arguments, 
E e 2 


* « Look upon John, Chriſt's beloved Diſciple and Boſom Com- 
* panion ; he had received the anointing to know him that is true, 
* and he knew that he knew him, 1. John ii. 3. But how did he 
know that? He might be deceived (as tis ſtrange to ſee what a me- 
„ lancholly Fancy will do, and the Effects of it; as honeſt Men are 
« reputed to have weak Brains, and never ſaw the Depths of the 
Secrets of God) what's his LasT Proof? Becauſe we keep his Com. 
© mandmente.” Shepard's Par. Part I. p. 131. | * 
A Man may know his preſent Union to the Lord Jeſus, by a, 
„Work; 1 John ii. 4. He that ſaith I knaw him, and keeps not his.. 
* Commandments, is a Lyar.---Yes that is true negatively ; but may. 
* a Man, ought a Man, to ſee or know his Union poſitively by this ? 
Anſ. Verſe 5. Many ſaid they did know and love the Lord, — | 

8 | «2 


*% 
# 


t  ligion, as has been obſerved already, conſiſts in ſetting 


. > 


77 * 


Part I p. 140. 


"© 


De twelfth Sign 


28 
3 


they do reall) prefe in their Hearts. Sincerity in Re- 


God higheſt in the Heart, in chuſing him betore other 
Things, in having a Heart to ſell all for Chr.ſt, &c.--- 
But a Man's Actions are the proper. Trialwhat a Man's 


Heart preters. uns for Inſtance, when it is ſo. that God 


and other Things:come to. ſtand in Competition, God is 


as it were ſet before a Man on one Hand, and his worldly 


Intereſt or Pleaſure on the other, (as it often is ſo in the 


Courſe of a Man's Life) his Behaviour in ſuch Caſe, in 


actually cleaving to the one and forſaking the other, is 
the proper Trial wh ch he prefers. Sincerity conſiſts in. 
forlak ng al. for Chriſt- in Heart; But to forſake all for 
Chriſt in Heart, is the very ſame Thing as to have. an 
Heart to forſake all for Chriſt: But certainly the proper 
Trial whether a Man has an Heart to forſake all for 
Chriſt, is his being actually put to it, the having Chriſt 
8 ET and 


4 — 


—— —y 


«© that keeps his Nord. -O they are ſweer! It's Heaven to cleave to 
«him in every Command; it's Death wo depart from any Com- 
«© mand: Hereby know we that we are in bim. If it were poſſible to. 
« aſk of Angels, how they know they are not Devils, they would 
«anſwer, the Lord's Will is ours.” Shepard's Par. Part. I. p. 138 
f the Queſtion be, Whom doth the Lord Jeſus love; you need 
« not go to Heaven for it, the Word is nigh thee, Thoſe that love 


0 <EChrift? Who are thofe? The/e that keep his Commanidments.”" © 


Shepard's Par. Part. I. p. 138. | 

« Will you have Chriſt-ſit in Heaven, and not took that he ſub- 
« due your Luſts by the Work of his Grace, and ſo ſway your 
t Hearts? You deſpiſe his Kingdom then. Do you ſeek for Pardon 
4 in the Blood of Chriſt, and never look for the Vertue and End of 
«that Blood to waſh you and make you without Spot, &c? You 
« deſpiſe his Prieſthood and Blood then. Do you look for Chriſt to 
«do Work for yon, and you not do Chriſt's Work, and bring forth 
«Fruit to him? You deſpiſe his [Honour then, Zobx xv. 8. If I were 
« to diſcover 4 Hypocrite, or a falſe Heart, this I would fay, It is he 
« that ſhall ſet up Chriſt, but loath his Work.” Sbepard's Parable: 


* 


PART III. 


Argument I. Reaſon plainly ſnews that thoſe Things. 
which put it to the Proof what Men will actually cleave 
to and prefer in their Practice, when left to follow their 
cen Choice and Inclinations, are the proper Trial what 


. ogy HP en. 


ParT III. of pracious Affection. 429 


and other Things coming in Competition, * Suk . 


actually or practically c eave to one and torſake the 


other. To forſake all for Chriſt in Heart, is the ſame 
Thing as to have a Heart to forſake all for Chriſt when 
called to it: But the higheſt Proof to ourſelves and 
others, that we have an tneart to fo ſake all for Chriſt 
when called to ãt, is actually doing it when called to it, 
or ſo far as called to it. To follow Ch iſt in Heart, is 
to have an Heart io follow him. To deny ourſelves in 
Hcart for Chriſt, is the ſame Thing as to have an Heart 
to deny ourſelves fo! him in Fatt, The main and moſt 


proper Proof of a Man's having an Heart to any Thing, 


concerning which he 1s at Liberty to follow his own" In- 
clinations, and either to do or not to do as he pleaſes, _ ? 
is his doing of it. When a Man is at Liberty Whether 
to ſpeak or keep Silence, the moſt proper Evidence of 
his having an Heart to ſpeak, is his {pedking. When 
a Man is at Liberty whether to walk or tit ſtill, the 
proper Proof of his having an Heart to walk, is his 
walking. Goodlineſs confifts-nor in an Heart to intend 
to do the Will of God, bit in an Heart to do it. The 
Children of 1/rael in the Wilderneſs h:d the former, of 
whom ve read, Deut. v. 2y, 28, 29. Go thou near, and 
hear all that the Lord our God ſhall ſay. and ſpeak thou 
unt us all that the Lord our God ſhall ſpeat unto thee, and 
we will bear it and do it. And he Lord heard the Voice 
of your Words, when ye ſpake unto me; and the Lord ſaid 
unto me, I have heard the Voice of the Words of this People, 
which they have ſpoken unto thee : They have well ſaid all 
that they have ſpoken: O that there were ſuch an HEART 
in them, that they would fear me, and keep all my Com- 
.mandments always, that it might be well with them, and 
with their Children forever. The People manifeſted that 
they had a Heart to intend to keep God's Commandments, 
and to be very forward in thoſe _—— but God 
maniteſts that this was far from being the Thing that he 
deſired, wherein true Godlineſs conſiſts, even an Heart 
Actually to keep them, 1 

8 'Tis 


* 


130 
Tiis therefore exceeding abſurd, and even ridiculous, 
for any to pretend that they have a good Heart, while 
| theylive a wicked Life, or don't bring forth the Fruit 
of — Holineſs in their Practice. For 'tis proved 
in Fact, that ſuch Men don't love God above all. Tis 
fooliſh to diſpute againſt plain Fact and Experience. 
Men that live in Ways of Sin, and yet flatter themſelves 
that they ſhall go to Heaven, or expect to be received 
hereafter as holy Perſons, without a holy Life and 


Practice, act as tho' they expected to make a Fool of 


their Judge. Which is implied in what the Apoſtle 

ſays ({peaking of Men's doing good Works, and living 
an holy Life, thereby exhibiting Evidence of their Title 
to everlaſting Life) Gal. vi. 7. Be net deceived; God 1; 
wot mocked: For whatſoever a Man ſoweth, that ſpall be 
 #iſoreap. As much as to ſay, © Don't deceive your- 
< ſc}ves with an Expectation of reaping Life everlaſting 
< hereafter, if you don't ſow to the Spirit here; tis in 
ts yain to think that God will be made a Fool of by you, 
<« that he will be ſham'd and baffled with Shadows in- 
< ſtead of Subſtance, and with vain Pretences, inſtead 
© of that good Fruit which he expects, when the Con- 
<« trary to what you pretend, appears plainly in your 
< Life, before his Face.” In this Manner the Word 
mock is ſometimes uſed in Scripture. Thus Delilab ſays 
to Sampſon, Behold, thou haſt mocked me, and told me Lies, 
Judg. xvi. 10, 13. i. e. Thou haſt baffled me, as tho 
« you would make a Fool of me, as if! might be eaſily 
< turned off with any vain Pretence, inſtead of the 


-i Truth.” So it is ſaid that Lot, when he told his Sons 


in Law that God would deſtroy that Place, he ſcem d as 
one that mocked to his Sons in Law, Gen. xix. 14. i. e. 
He ſeemed as one that would make a Game of them, 
as tho' they were ſuch credulous Fools as to regard ſuch 
Bugbears. But the great Judge, whoſe Eyes are as a 


39 — of Fire, will — be mocked or baffled with any 


Pretences, without a holy Life. If in his Name Men 
Haze I and e Miracles, and have had 


F aith 


The eelfth Sign | Part III. 7 


r 3 a Ys war Y F RE LE YEA * 


out Devils, and however high their religious Affection 


have been, however great Reſemblances they have had 


of Grace, and tho* their hiding Place has been fo darł 


and deep, that no human Skill nor Search could find 


them out; yet if they are Workers or Practiſers of Ini- 
ity, they can't hide their Hypocriſy from their Judge; 


ob. xxxiv. 22. There is no Darkneſs, nor Shadow ef 


Death, where the Workers or InjquitY may, li de 3 


themſelves. Would .a wiſe Prince ſu er himſelf to be 
fool'd and baffled by a Subject, who ſhould pretend that 
that he was a loyal Subject, and ſhould tell his Prince 
that he had an entize Affection to him, and that at ſuch 
and fuch a Time he had Experience of it, and felt his 


— 


Affections ſtrongly working towards him, and ſhould 


come expecting to be accepted and rewarded by hit 1 


Prince, as one of his beſt Friends on that Account, tho 
he lived in Rebellion againſt him, following ſome Pre- 
tender to his Crown, and from Time to Time ſtirring 
up Sedition againſt. him? Or would a Maſter ſuffer him- 
ſelf to be ſham'd and gull'd by a Servant, that ſhould 
pretend to great Experiences of Love and Honour to- 
wards him in his Heart, and a great Senſe of his Wor- 


-_ ” p- 
* "ET 4 

5 * 7 
+ 


Pax IN, S gractous Aﬀettions, , 4734 
Faith, ſo that they could remove Mountains, and caſt 1 


thineſs and Kindneſs to him, when at the ſame time e 


refuſed to obey him, and he could get no Service done 


Argument II. As Reaſon ſhews that thoſe Things ; 


which occur in the Cour:e of Life, that put it to the 
Proof whet er Men will prefer God to other Things in 
Practice, are the proper Trial of the Uprightneſs and 
Sincerity of their Hearts; ſo the ſame are repreſented as 


the proper Trial of the Sincerity of Profeſſors, in the _ 


Scrip ure. There we find that ſuch Things are called 
by that very Name, Trials or Temptations (which I before 
obſerved are both Words of the ſame Signification.) 
The Things that put it to the Proof whether Men will 
Prefer God to other Things in Practice, are the Diffi- 


eulties 


„ We twelfth Sign PART III. 


— 


+ulties of Religion, or thoſe Things which occur that 
make the Practice of Duty difficult and croſs to other 
Principles beſides the Love of God; becauſe in them 


Cod and other Things are both ſet before Men together, 


for their actual and practical Choice; and it comes to 


this, that we can't hold to both, but one or the other 


' muſt be forſaken. And theſe Things are all over the 


| Scripture called by the Name of Trials or Progfs.* And 


they,are called by this Name, becauſe hereby Profeſſors 

are Bed ed and proved of what Sort they be, whether 
— be really * they profeſs and appear to be; 
and becauſe in them, the Reality of a ſupreme 
Love to God is brought to the Teſt of Experi 


ment and Fact; they are the proper Proofs, in which | 
it is truly determined by Experience, whether Men have 


a thorough Diſpoſition of Heart to cleave, to God or no; 
Deut. viii. 2. And thou ſhalt remember all the Way which 
the Lord thy God led thee, theſe forty Years in the Wilder- 
neſs, to humble thee, and to prove thee, whether thou 
wouldſt keep his Commanaments or no. Judges ii. 21. 22. 

T alſo will not henceforth drive out any from before them, of 
the Nations which Joſhua left when he died; that through 
them. I may prove Iſrael, whether they will keep the Way 


4 . of the Lord. So Chap. iii. 1, 4. and Exod. xvi. 4. And 


the Scripture, when it calls theſe Difficulties of Religion 
by the Name of Temptations or Trials, explains itſelf 
to mean thereby, the -Trial or Experiment of their 
Faith, Jam. i. 2, 3. My Brethren, count it all Joy when 
ye fall into divers Temptations; knowing this, that the try- 
ing of your Faitb worketh Patience. 1 Pet. i. 6, 7. New 
for à Seaſon ye are in Heavineſs, tbro manifold Tempta- 


tions; That the Trial of your Faith, being much more 


precious than of Gold, &c. So the Apoſtle Paul ſpeaks 


of that expenſive oy of parting with our Subſtance 
to 


— 


— — 
— 


1 2 Cor. viii. 2. Heb. xi. 36. 1 1 Pet I. 7. Ce iv. 12. Gen. 
xxii. i. Deut. viii. 2, 16. Chap. 13, 3. Exod. xv. * and xvi. 4. 
EP 22. Chap. iii. 1, 4. Pſal. Eq 10, 11. Xii. 10. 
ev, Lil. 19. Job. iii. 10. Zach. xili. 9. Jam. i. 1 Pet, i. 6. 


» 
* 


— 


wa 5 . K . TH 6 — Ny ed © © 


-_ 


oy. oO, +. Hy — Ye 4 ry II 22 


=> 


9" bag ay” a» © ah 


* 
SG 


PART III. of gracious Affection. 433 
to the Poor, as the Proof of the Sincerity of the Love 
of Chriſtians, 2. Cor. viii. 8. And - the- Difficulties of 
Religion are often repreſented in Scripture as being the 
Trial of Profeſſors, in the ſame Manner that the Fur- 
nace is the proper Trial of Gold or Silver; Pſal. Ixvi. 
10, 11. Thou, O God, haſt proved us, thou haſt tried us, 
as Silver is tried: Thou broughteſt us into the Net; thou 
laidſt Afliction upon our Leins, Zech. xiii. 9. And I will 
bring the third Part of them through the Fire: And I will 
' refine them as Silver is refined; and I will try them as Hold 
is tried. That which has the Colour and Appearance 
ot Gold is put into the Furnace, to try whether it be 
what it ſeems to be, real Gold or no. So the Difficul- 
ties of Religion are called Trials, becauſe they try thoſe 
that have the Profeſſion and Appearance of Saints, 
whether they are what they appear to be, real Saints. 
If we put true Gold into the Furnace, we ſhall find it's 
reat Value and Preciouſneſs: So the Truth and ineſti- 
mable Value of the Virtues of a true Chriſtian appear, 
when under theſe Trials; 1 Pet. 1. 7. That the Trial of 
your Faith, being much more precicus than of Gold that 
periſheth, might be found unto Praiſe, and Henour, and 
Glory, True and pure Gold will come ot of the Fur- 
nace in full Weight: So true Saints when tried come 
forth as Gold, Job. xxiil. 10. Chriſt diſtinguiſhes true 
Grace from counterfeit by this, that it is Geld tried in 
the Fire, Rev. iii. 17, 18. So that it is ev ident that theſe 
Things are called Trials in Scripture, principally as they. 
try to proye the Sincerity of Profeſſors. And from 
what has been now obſerved, *tis evident that they are 
the moſt proper Trial or Proof of their Sincerity; Inaſ- 
much as the very meaning of the Word Trial, as it is 
ordinarily uſed in Sripture, is the Difficulty occurring in 
the Way of a Profeſſor's Duty, as the Trial or Experi- 
ment of his Sincerity. If Trial of Sincerity be the proper 
Name of theſe Difficulties of Religion, then doubtleſs 
theſe Difficulties of Religion are properly and eminently 
the Trial of Sincerity : For they are doubtleſs cone 
5 3 | What 


\ 


= 
— 


4% PETR” "we * * | * * ED ad; P , 
. The twelfth Sign Parr III. 


what they are called by the Holy Ghoſt : God gives 
Things their Name from that which is eminently their 
Nature. And if it be ſo, that theſe Things are the pro- 
per and eminent Trial, Proof or Experiment of the 
Dincerity of Profeſſors; then certainly the Reſult of the 
Trial or Experiment (that is Perſons Behaviour or Prac- 
tice under ſuch Trials) is the proper and eminent Evi- 
dence of their Sincerity. For hey are called Trials or 
Proofs, only with Regard to the Reſult, and becauſe 
the Effect is eminently the Proof or Evidence. And this 
is the moſt proper Proof and Evidence to the Conſcience 
of choſe that are the Subjects of theſe Trials. For when 
God is ſaid by theſe Things to try Men, and prove them, 
o ſee what is in their Hearts, and whether they will ker 
bis Commandments or no; we are not to underſtand, that 
it is for his own Information, or that he may obtain 
Evidence himſelf of their Sincerity; (for he needs no 
Trials for his Information) but chiefly for their Con- 
viction, and to exhibit Evidence to their Conſciences.“ 

Thus when God is ſaid to prove J/rael by the Diffi- 
culties they met with in the Wilderneſs, and by the 
Ditficulties they met with from their Enemies in Canaan, 
to Kk O what was in their Hearts, whether they would 
keep his Commandments or no; it muſt be underſtood 
that it was to diſcover them to themſelves, that they 
might know what was 1n their own Hearts, So when 
God tempted or tried Abraham with that difficult 
Comman of offering up his Son, it was not for 
his Zatistaction, whether he fear'd God or no, but for 
Abraham's own greater Satisfaction and Comfort, and 
the more clear Manifeſtation of the Favour of God to 
him. When Alrabam had proved faithful under this 
| Trial 


IL am perſwaded, as Calvix is, That all the ſeveral Trials of 
Men, are to ſhew them to themſelves, and to the World, that they 
<< be but Counterfeits; and to make Saints known to themſelves, the 
better Vom. v. 5. Tribulation works Trial, and that Hope. Prov. 
4 xvii 2 If you will know whether it will hold Weight, the Trial 
* wail icll you,” Shepard's Parable, Part I. p. 391. 


# 


hw. 


- 


kant III. of gracious Aﬀeftiomm. 433 
Trial, God ſays to him, Now I know that thou feareſt 
Cod, ſeeing thou haſt not witheld thy Son, thine only Son 
from me. Which plainly implies, that in this practical 
| Exerciſe of Abrabam's Grace under this Trial, was a 
clearer Evidence of the Truth of his, Grace, than ever 
vas before; and the greateſt Evidence to Abraham's 
Conſcience ; becauſe God himſelf gives it to Abraham 
as ſuch, for his Comfort and Rejoycing; and ſpeaks of 
it to him, as what might be the greateſt Evidence to his 
Conſcience, of his being upright in the Sight of his 
Judge. Which proves what I ſay, that holy Practice 
under Trials 1s the higheſt Evidence of the Sincerity of 
Profeſſors to their own Conſciences. And we find that 
Ml Chriſt from Time to Time took the ſame Method to 
convince the Conſciences of thoſe that pretended Friend- 
ſhip to him, and to ſhew them what they were. This 
BW was, the Method he took with the rich young Man, 
Matth. xix. 16, &c. He ſeem'd to ſhew a great Reſpect 
to Chriſt; he came kneeling to him, and called him 
Good Maſter, and made a great Profeſſion of Obedience 
to the Commandments; but Chriſt tried him by bidding 
him go and ſell all that he had, and give to the Poor, and 
come and take up his Croſs, and follow him; telling him 
bat then be ſhould have Treaſure in Heaven. So he tried 
| 


another that we read of Matth. viii. 20. He made a 
great Profeſſion of Reſpect to Chriſt: Says he, Lord, I | 
will follow thee whitherſoever thou goeſt. Chriſt imme- © 
diately puts his Friendſhip to the Proof, by telling him, 
chat the Foxes had Holes, and the Birds of the Air had 
Nets, but that the Son of Man had not where to lay his 
Head. And thus Chriſt is wont ſill to try profeſſed 
, | Diſciples in general, in his Providence, So the Seed” 
ſown in every Kind of Ground, ſtony Ground, thorny. 
Ground, and good Ground, which in all appears alike, 
ven it firſt ſprings up; yet is tried, and the Difference 
made to appear, by the burning Heat of the Sun. | 
Seeing therefore that theſe are the Things that God 
makes Uſe of to try us, tis undoubtedly I | 
8 . ay | , 


A 436 om The relfth Sign 


Way for us to paſs a right Judgment on ourſelves, to 
try ourſelves by the ſame Things. Theſe Trials of his 
are not for his Information, but for ours; therefore we 
ought to receive our Information from thence. The 
ſureſt Way to knaw our Gold, is to look upon it and 
examine it in God's Furnace, where he tries it for that 
End, that we may ſee what it is. If we have a Mind 
to know whether a Building ſtands ſtrong or no, we muſt 
look. upon it when the Wind bl ws. If we would 


know whether that which appears in the Form of Wheat, 


has the real Subſtance of Wheat, or be only Chaff, we 
mult obſerve it when it is winnowed. If we would know 
whether a Staff be ſtrong, or a rotten broken Reed, we 
muſt obſerve it when it is leaned on, and Weight is 
borne upon it. If we would weigh ourſelves juſtly, we 
muſt weigh ourſelves in God's Scales, that he makes 


Uſe of to weigh us.“ Theſe Trials the Courſe of our 
| Practice 


Dr. Sibbs, in his bruiſed Reev, ſays, When Chriſt's Wil 
% cometh in Competition with any worldly Loſs or Gain, yet if 
then, in that particular Caſe, the Heart will ftoop to Chriſt, it is 
«« a true Sign. For the trueſt Trial of the Power of Grace, is in 
* ſuch particular Caſes as touch us neareſt ; for there our Corruption 
*© maketh the greateſt Head. When Chriſt came home to the young 
«« Man in the Goſpel, he loſt a Diſciple of him.“ 

Mr. Flawve (peaks of a holy Practice under Trials, as the greateſt 
Evidence of Grace: No Man (ſays he) can ſay what he is, whether 
* his Graces. be true or falſe, till they be tried and examined by 
* thoſe Things which are to them as Fire to Gold.” Touchſtone of 
Sincerily. Chap. 4, Sect. 1. Again, ſpeaking of great Difficulties 
and Suffcrings in the Way of Duty, wherein a Perſon miſt actually 
part with what is deareſt of a worldly Nature, or with his Duty; be 
favs; That ſuch Sufferings as theſe will diſcover the Falſeneſs and 
Rottenneſs of Men's Hearts, cannot be doubted ; if vou con ſi der 
that ti. is is the Fire deſigned by God for this very Uſe and Purpole, 
« to {ſeparate the Gold from the Droſs. So you will find it, 1 Pet. 
% iv. 12. Beloved, think it not flrange concerning the flery Trial that 
*. to fry you, 1. e: The very Deſign and Aim of Providence in 
„ permitting and ordering them, is to try you. Upon this Account 
« you find the Hour of Perſecution (in a ſuitable Notion) called the 
<< Hour of Temptation or Probation, Rev. iii. 10. For then Pro- 
* ſeſiors are ſifted to the very Bran, ſearched to the very bottom 

| - - „Principles 


- 


Paxr Ill. 


Pak r III. of gracious Affectiens. 437 
practice are as it were the Ballances in which our Hearts 
are weighed, or in which Chriſt and the World, or 
Chriſt and his Competitors, as to the Eſteem and Regard 
they have in our Hearts, are weighed, or are put into 
oppoſite Scales, by which there is Opportunity to ſee 


which pre, onderates. When a Man is brought to the 
dividing 


SE 


= 


« Principles. This is the Day that burns as an Oven; all that do 
* ewickedly, ſpall be as Stubble, Mal. iv. 1. For in that Day the 
„ predominant Intereſt muſt appear and be diſcovered, it can be 
( concealcd no longer. No Man can jerve two Maſters, ſaith Chriſt, 
„Luke xvii 13, A Man may ſerve many Malters, if they all 
« command the fame Thing or Things ſubordinate to eachother ; 
« but he cannot ſerve two Maſters, it their Commands elaſh and 
( interfere with each other: And ſuch are the Commands of Chriſt 
and the Fleth in a ſuffering Hour :—Thus the two Intereſts come 7 
« in full Oppoſition. And now have but Patience and wait a little, 
« and you will diſcern which is predominant. A Dog follows two 
« Men, while they both walk one Way, and you know not which 
« of the two is his Malter: Stay but a little, till this Path parts, 
7 and then you ſhall quickiy lee who is his Maſter, So it is in this 
« Caſe.” Ibid Chap. 8, Sect. 3. And in another Chapter he ſays, 
Great Numbers ot Perſons are deceived and deſtroyed by truſting 
« to ſeeming untried Grace. This was the miſerable Condition of 
« the Laedicean Profeſſors; They reckon'd themſelves rich, but were 
© really poor: All is not G Id that gliſters: Their Gold (as they 
« accounted it) was never tried in the Fire. If a Man's whole 
« Eſtate lay in ſome precious Stone, ſuppoſe a rich Diamond, how: 
eis he concern'd to have it thoroughly tried, to fee whether it wilt | 
© bear a ſmart Stroke with a Hammer, orfly like a Briſtol Diamond? 
Ibid Chap. 10, Sect. 3. Again in the ſame Place, The Promiſes. , 
of Salvation are made over to tried Grace, and that only as will 
« endure the Trial.“ | 
„The Lord will try you. God hath his trying Times: And 
* they were never ſent, but to diſcover who were Droſs, who were 
„Gold. And the main End of all God's Trials, is to diſcover 
this Truth that I am now prefling upon you. Some have a tho-/ 
„rough Work; and now the Trial diſcovers the Truth, as in Abra- - 
„bam, Heb. xi. 17. Some have a ſuperficial Work, and they fall in 
« Trial, as in Saul; and it doth diſcover it was but an overly Work. 
For this is the Queſtion God makes, Is it thorough or no? Ay, 
* ſaith the carnal Heart; yes, ſaith a gracious Heart. Hence it is 
* ſtrange to ſee what Men will do when a Trial comes.” Shepard"s * 
Par. Part I. Pa. 219. | . 
There is an Hour of Temptation which tries Men, which wall . ' 
* diſcover Men indeed,” Shepard's Parable, Part II. Pa. 60. 


4 @® 


G 
e 


438 The twelfth Sign Par Ilt 


\ | 0 | 
dividing of Paths, the one of which leads to Chriſt, 
and the other to the Objects of his Luſts, to ſee which 
Way he will go, or is brought, and as it were ſet between 
Chriſt and the World, Chriſt on the Right Hand, and 
the World on the left; ſo that if he goes to one he muſt 
leave the other, to ſee which his Heart moſt inclines to, 
or which preponderates in his Heart; this is juſt the 
fame Thing as laying Chriſt and the World in two 
oppoſite Scales; and his going to the one, and leaving 
the other, is juſt the ſame Thing, as the ſinking of 
one Scale, and riſing of the other. A Man's Practice 
therefore, under the Trials of God's Providence, are 
as much the proper Experiment and Evidence of the 
ſuperior Inclination of his Heart, as the Motion of the 
Ballance, with different Weights, in oppoſite Scales, 
is the proper Experiment of the ſuperior Weight. 


Argument III. Another Argument, that holy Practice, 
in the Senſe which has been explain'd, is the higheſt 
Kind of Evidence of the Truth of Grace to the Con- 
* ſciences of Chriſtians, is, that in Practice, Grace, in 
Scripture Style, is ſaid to be made perfect, or to be 
finiſhed. So the Apoſtle James ſays, Jam. ii. 22, Seef 
thou how Faith wrought with his Works, and by Works 
was Faith made perfect, or finiſhed, (as the Word in the 
Original properly fignifies.) So the Love of God is 
ſaid to be made perfect, or finiſhed, in keeping his 
Commandments; 1 John ii. 4, 5. He that ſaith, I know 
bim, and keepeth not his Commandments, is a Liar, and 
the Truth is not in him; but whoſo keepeth bis Word, in 
bim verily is the Love of God perfected. The Com- 
mandment of Chriſt, which the Apoſtle has eſpecial 
Reſpect to, when he here ſpeaks of our keeping his 
Commandments, is (as I obſerved before) that great 
Commandment of his, which reſpects Deeds of Love 
to our Brethren; as appears by the following Verſes. 
Again, the Love of God is ſaid to be perfected, in the 
ſame Senſe, Chap. iv. 12, 1f we love one another, God 

a 8 dwelletb 


* 


R 


Paxr HI. of gracious Afettim. 439 
dewelleth in us, and his Love is perfefted in us. Here 
t, | doubtleſs the Apoſtle has till Reſpect to loving one 
ch another, in the fame Manner that he had explain d in 
en the preceeding Chapter, ſpeaking of loving one another, 
das a Sign of the Love of God, Verſe 17, 18. boſo 
t bath this World's Goods, and fbutteth up his Bowels, &c. 
o, how dwelleth the Love of God in bim? My little Children, 
ie Wl ot us not love in Mord, neither in Tongue, but in Deed (or 
o in Work) and in Truth. By thus loving in Work, the 
2 | Apoſtle ſays, the Love of God is perfefted in us. Grace 
of is faid to be perfected or finiſhed in holy Practice, as 
ce WW therein it is brought to its proper Effect, and to that 
re Exerciſe which is the End of the Principle; the Ten- 
ie WM dency and Deſign of Grace, herein is reached, and its 
ic © Operation compleated and crown'd. As the Tree is 
„ made perfect in the Fruit; tis not perfected in the Seed's 
being planted in the Ground; it is not perfected in the 
firſt quickning of the Seed, and in its putting forth 
Root and Sprout; nor is it perfected when it comes up 
out of the Ground; nor is it perfected in bringing forth 
Leaves; nor yet in putting forth Bloſſoms: But when 
it has brought forth good ripe Fruit, then it is perfected, 
therein it reaches its End, the Deſign of the Tree is 
finiſhed: All that belongs to the Tree is compleated 
and brought to its proper Effect in the Fruit: So is 
Grace in its practical Exerciſes. Grace is ſaid to be 
made perfect or finiſhed in its Work or Fruit, in the 
fame Manner as *tis ſaid of Sin, Jam. i. 15. When Luft 
bath conceived, it bringeth forth Sin, and Sin, when it is 
finiſhed, bringeth forth Death. Here are three Steps; firſt, 
Sin in its Principle or Habit, in the Being of Luſt in the 
Heart; and next iy, here is its conceiving, conſiſting in the 
immanent Exerciſes of it in the Mind; and lach, here 
is the Fruit that was conceived actually brought forth, 
in the wicked Work and Practice. And this the Apoſtle 
calls the finiſping or perfecting of Sin: For the Word 
in the Original is the ſame that is tranſlated perfeed in 
thole foremention'd Places, 1 | 


No certainly if it be fo, if Grace be in this Manner 
made perfect, in its Fruit, if theſe practical Exerciſcs 
of Grace are thoſe Exerciſes wherein Grace is brought 
to its proper Effect and End, and the Exerciſes wherein 
whatſoever belongs to its Deſign, Tendency and Ope- 
ration is compleated and crown'd; then theſe Exerciſes 
muſt be the higheſt Evidences of Grace aboye all other 
Exerciſes, Certainly the proper Nature and Tendency 
of every Principle, muſt appear beſt and moſt fully, in 
its moſt perfect Exerciſes, or in thoſe Exerciſes wherein 
its Nature is moſt compleatly exerted, and its Tendency 
molt fully anſwer'd and crown'd, in its proper Effect 
and End. If we would ſee the proper Nature of any 
Thing whatſoever, and ſee it in its full Diſtinction from 
other Things; let us look upon it in the finiſhing of 
it. The Apoſtle James ſays, by Works is Faith made 
perfect; and introduces this as an Argument to prove 
that Works are the chief Evidence of Faith, whereby 
the Sincerity of the Profeſſors of Faith is juſtified, 

Jam. ii. And the Apoſtle Jobn, after he had once and 
again told us, that Love was made perfect in keeping 
Chriſt's Commandments, obſerves, 1 John iv. 18. That 
perfett Love caſteth out Fear. Meaning (at leaſt in Part) 
Love made perfect in this Senſe; agreeable to what he 
had ſaid in the foregoing Chapter, That by loving in 
| Deed or Work, we know that we are of the Truth, and 
ſhall aſſure our Hearts, Verſe 18, 19. 


Argument IV. Another Thing which makes it evi- 
dent that holy Practice is the principal Evidence that we 
ought to make uſe of in judging both of our own and 
- other's Sincerity, is, that this Evidence is above all 

others inſiſted on in Scripture. A common Acquantance 
with the Scripture, together with a little Attention and 
Obſervation, will be ſufficient to ſhew to any one, that 
this is ten Times more inſiſted on as a Note of true 


Piety, throughout the Scripture, from the Beginning of 
 Gene/is to the End of Revelations, than any Thing 2 


Py off E N 
y „ 
bb 


- 


\ 
- 


#49 The twelfth. Sinn by PART III. 


22 


S 227 2 w 


. 2 


=> 


PART III. | of gracious Aﬀeftions. | tas | 


And in the New Teſtament, . where Chriſt and his 
Apoſtles do expreſly, and of declared Purpoſe, lay 
down Signs of true Godlineſs, this is almoſt wholly 
inſiſted on. It may be obſerved, that Chriſt and his 
Apoſtles, do not only often ſay thoſe Things, in their 
Diſcourſing on the great Doctrines of Religion, which 
do ſhew what the Nature of true Godlineſs muſt be, or- 
from whence the Nature and Signs of it may be inferr'd 
by juſt Conſequence, and often occaſionally mentions 
many Things which do appertain to Godlineſs; but 
they do alſo often, of ſet Purpoſe, give Signs and Marks 
for the Trial of Profeſſors, putting them upon trying 
themſelves by the Signs they give, introducing what 
they ſay with ſuch like Expreſſions as theſe; By this you 
ſhall know that you know God; By this are manifeſt the 
Children of God and the Children of the Devil, He that 
hath this, builds on a good Foundation; He that hath it not, 
builds on the Sand; Hereby we ſhall aſſure our Hearts; 
He is the Man that loveth Chriſt, &c. But I can find no 
Place, where either Chriſt or his Apoſtles do in this 
Manner give Signs of Godlineſs, (tho* the Places are 
many) but where chriſtian Practice is almoſt the only 
Thing inſiſted on. Indeed in many of theſe Places, Love 
to the Brethren is ſpoken of as a Sign to Godlineſs ; and 
as I have obſerved before) there is no one virtuous Aﬀ- 
fection or Diſpoſition ſo often expreſly ſpoken of as a. 
Sign of true Grace, as our having Love one to another; 
But then the Scriptures explain themſelves to intend 
chiefly this Love as exerciſed and expreſſed in Practice, 
or in Deeds of Love. So does the Apoſtle 7obn (who 
above all others inſiſts on Love to the Brethren as a Sign 
of Godlineſs) moſt expreſly explain himſelf, in that 
1 John iii. 14, &c; We know that we have paſſed 
from Death to Life, becauſe we love the Brethren. He 
that loveth not his Brother abideth in Death. Whoſo 
hath this World's Good, and ſeeth his Brother have 
Need, and ſhutteth up his Bowels of Compaſſion from 
him, how dwelleth the Love of God in him? My little 
| Ff Children 


2 


_ * uy 1 * * N f , N * * N A ' „ 
1 4 
- * * . 
* * * * 1 
5 CY 
* 


Children, let us love, not in Word, neither in Tongue, 


a great Sign of Godlineſs, we are not thereby 
ſtand the immanent Workings of Affection which Men 


PART III. 


but in Deed (i. e. in Deeds of Love) and in Truth, and 


hereby we know that we are of the Truth, and ſhall 
aſſure our Hearts before him.“ So that when the 


Scripture ſo much inſiſts on our loving one another, as 
to under- 


feel one to another, ſo. much as the Soul's practiſing all. 
the Duties of the ſecond Table of the Law; all which 


- the new Teſtament tell us again and again, a true Love 


one to another comprehends; Rom. xiii. 8, and 10. 
Gal. v. 14. Maltb. xxii. 39, 40. So that really, there 


js no Place in the new Teſtament, where the declared 


Deſign is to give Signs of Godlineſs, but that holy 
Practice, and keeping Chriſt's Commandments, is the 
Mark choſen out from all others to be inſiſted on. 
Which is an invincible Argument that it is the Chief of 
all the Evidences of. Godlineſs: Unleſs we ſuppoſe that 
when Chriſt and his Apoſtles on Deſign, ſet themſelves 
about this Buſineſs of giving Signs, by which profeſſing 
Chriſtians in-all Ages might determine their State, they 
did not know how to chooſe Signs ſo well as we could 


have choſen for em. But if we make the Word of 


Chriſt our Rule, then undoubtedly thoſe Marks which 


Chriſt and his Apoſtles did chiefly lay down, and give 
to us, thatwe might try ourſelves by them, thoſe fame 


Marks we ought eſpecially to receive, and chiefly to 


make uſe of, in the Trial of - ourſelves.* And ſurely 


*thoſe Things which Chriſt and his Apoſtles chiefly in- 


ſiſted on in the Rules they gave, Miniſters ought chiefly 
to inſiſt on in the Rules they give. « To inſiſt much on 
thoſe Things that the Scripture inſiſts little on, and to 
inſiſt very little on thoſe Things on which the Scripture 


infifts much, is a dangerous Thing; becauſe it is going 


Out 


— 


elt is a ſure Rule, (ſays Dr; Preſton) that what the Scriptures 


©Heſtow much Words on, we ſhould have much  Tho'ts on; and. 


« what the Holy Ghoſt- urgeth - moſt, - we ſhould- prize moſt-" 
Churches Carriages. : 


. 


PART III. of: gracious Affection. 443 
out of God's Way, and is to judge ourſelves, and guide 
others, in an unſcriptural Manner. God knew which 
Way of leading and guiding Souls was ſafeſt and beſt 
for them: He inſiſted ſo much on ſome Things, be- 
cauſe he knew it to be needful that they ſhould be in- 
ſiſted on; and let other Things more alone, as a wiſe 
God, becauſe he knew it was not beſt for us, ſo much 

as to lay the Weight of the Trial there. As the Sabbath 
was made for Man, ſo the Scriptures were made for 
Man; and they are by infinite Wiſdom fitted for our 
Uſe and Benefit. We ſhould therefore make them our 
Guide in all Things, in our Thoughts of Religion, and 

of ourſelves. And for us to make that great which the 
Scripture makes little, and that᷑ little which the Scripture 
makes great, tends to give us a monſtrous Idea of Re- 
ligion ; and (at leaſt indirectly and gradually) to lead us 
wholly. away from the right Rule, and from a right 
Opinion of ourſelves, and to eſtabliſh Deluſion and 


Hypocriſy. 


Argument V. Chriſtian Practice is plainly ſpoken of in 
the Word of God, as the main Evidence of the Truth of 
Grace, not only to others, but to Men's own Con- 
ſciences. It is not only more ſpoken of and inſiſted on 
than other Signs, but in many Places where it is ſpoken 
of, it is repreſented as the Chief of all Evidences. This 

zs plain in the Manner of Expreſſion from Time to 

Time. If God were now to ſpeak from Heaven to re- 

ſolve our Doubts concerning Signs of Godlineſs, and 

mould give ſome particular Sign, that by it all might 

| know whether they were ſincerely Godly or not, with 

-  fuch emphatical Expreſſions as theſe, The Man that 

has ſuch a Qualification or Mark, That is the Man that 

| is a true Saint; that is the very Man; by this you may 

know, this is the Thing by zobich it is manifeſt who are 

| Saints and who are Sinners, ſuch Men as theſe are Saints 

| indeed; Should not we look upon it as a Thing beyond 

Doubt, that this was given as a ſpecial, and eminently 
Fr diſtinguiſning 


"diſtinguiſhing Note of true Godlineſs ? But this is the 
very Caſe with Reſpect to the Sign of Grace I am ſpeak- 
"ing of; God has again and again utter'd himſelf in his 

Word in this very Manner, concerning chriſtian Practice; 


as John xiv. He that hath my Commandments and keepeth 
'#bem, HE IT IS THAT LOVETA ME. This Chrift in this 


Place gives to the Diſciples, not ſo much to guide em 
in judging of others, but to apply to themſelves for 


their own Comfort after his Departure, as appears by 
every Word of the Context. And by the Way I would 


obſerve, that not only the Emphaſis with which Chriſt 
Utters. himſelf is remarkable, but alſo his ſo much in- 


Fiſting on, and repeating the Matter, as he does in the 


Context; Ver. 15, If ye love me, keep my Command- 


ments.“ Ver. 23. If a Man love me, he will keep my 
Words.” And Ver. 24. © He that loveth'me not, 
keepeth not my Sayings.” And in the next Chapter 
over and over; Ver. 2. Every Branch in me that 
beareth not Fruit, he taketh away; and every Branch 
that beareth. Fruit, he purgeth.” Ver. 8. Herein is 


my Father glorified, that ye bear much Fruit, fo ſhall 
Je be my Diſciples.” Ver. 14. Ye are my Friends, if ye 
do whatſoever I command you.“ We have this Mark 


laid down with the ſame Emphaſis again John viii. 31. 
© If ye continue in my Word, Trxn ye are my Diſciples 
INDEED.” And again 1 John ii. 3. HereEBy we db 


Rnow that we know him, if we keep his Command 


ments.“ And Ver. 5. < Whofo keepeth his Word, 1 
HIM VERILY is the Love of God perfected; PERI IT 
"Know we that we are in him.” And Chap. iii. 18, 19. 


Let us Love in Deed and in Truth, REREBVY we know 


[ 


"that we are of the Truth.“ What is tranſlated hereby, 


would have been a little more emphatical, if it had been 
render d more literally from. the Original, By This we 
of as the grand Note of Diſtinction between the Chil 
dren of God, and the Children of the Devil, in Ver. 10. 


ef the ſame Chapter? In Tris the Children of God are 


manifeſt, 


282 CY — 6 + Wes A , 7 "oe COR 


„ — 


d know.---And how evidently is holy Practice ſpoken 


«a aw a ah 


„ £2... at. les. 


Paxr Ill, of gracious Aﬀectios. 44 
manifeſt, and the CHildren.of the Devil.” Speaking. of 


a holy, and a wicked Practice, as may be ſeen in all the 


Context; as Ver. 3. Every Man that has this hope in 
him, purifieth himſelf, even as he is pure.” Ver. 6, 7, 
8, 9, 10. Whoſoever abideth in him ſinneth not; who- 
ſoever ſinneth, hath not ſeen him nor known him. 
Little Children, let no Man deceive you; he that doth 
Righteouſneſs is righteous, even as he is righteous; he 
thatcommittcth Sin is of the Devil. Whoſoever is born 
of God ſinneth not. Whoſoever doth not Righteouſ- 
neſs is not of God. So we have the like Emphaſis 2 
John vi. © Tais 1s Love, that we walk after his Com- 
mandments.* That is (as we muſt underſtand it) This 

is the proper Evidence of Love. So 1 John v. 3. Tars 
1s THE Love or God, that we keep his Commandments? 
So the Apoſtle James, ſpeaking of the proper Evidences 
of true and pure Religion, ſays, Jam. i. 27. Pure 
Religion, and undefiled before God and the Father, is 
THIS, to wifit the Fatherleſs and Widows in their 
Affliction, and to keep himſelf unſpotted from the 
World.“ We have the like emphatical Expreſſions uſed 
about the ſame Thing in the old Teſtament; Job. xxviti. 
28. * And unto Man he ſaid, Behold the Fear of the 
Lord, that is Wiſdom, and to depart from Evil is Un- 
derſtanding.“ Jer. xxii. 15, 16. Did not thy Father 
eat and drink, and do Judgment and Juſtice? He 


judged the Cauſe of the Poor and Needy : Was nat this 


to know me? ſaith the Lord.“ Pal. xxxiv. 11, &c. 
Come ye Children unto me, and I will teach you the 
Fear of the Lord. Keep thy Tongue from Evil, and thy 
Lips from ſpeaking Guile; depart from Evil, and do 
Good, ſeek Peace, and purſue it.“ Pſal. xv. at the 
Beginning, Who ſhall abide in thy Tabernacle? Who 


ſhall dwell in his holy Hill? He that walketh uprightly, 
&c.“ Pſal. xxiv, 3, 4. Who ſhall aſcend into the Hill of 


the Lord? And who ſhall ſtand in thy holy Place? He 

that hath clean Hands, and a pure Heart, &c.“ Pal. 

a. L., Herd are the Undefied in the Way, who 
44 HIRE 


< * 5 ole * T nd Sama WE N - 7 ' . 
* \ N * N . * 
446 De tavelfth Sign Px III. 
wad 


walk in the Law of the Lord.“ Ver. 6. Then ſhall 1 
not be aſhamed, when I have Reſpect to all thy. Com- 
mandments.? Prov. viii. 13. * The Fear of the Lord is to 

hate Evil. | | 

So the Scripture never uſes ſuch emphatical 


ſions concerning any other Signs of Hypocriſy, and Un- 
foundneſs of Heart, as concerning an unholy Practice. 
So Gal. vi. 7. Be not deceived, God is not mocked: 
For whatſoever a Man ſoweth, that ſhall he alſo reap. 
x Cor. vi. 9, 10, Be not deceived, neither Fornicators, 
nor Idolaters, &c. ſhall inherit the Kingdom of God. 
Eph. v. f. 6. For this know, that no Whoremonger, 
nor unclean Perſon, &c. hath any Inheritance in the 
Kingdom of Chritt and of God: Let no Man deceive 
you with vain Words:“ 1 John iii. 7, 8. Little Chil- 
dren, let no Man deceive you; he that doth Righteouſ- 
neſs is righteous, even as he is righteous: He that com- 
mitteth Sin is of the Devil.” Chap. ii. 4. He that ſaith, 
I know him, and keepeth not his Commandments, isa 
Liar, and the Truth is not in him.“ And Chap. i. 6. 
If we ſay we have Fellowſhip with him, and walk in 
Darkneſs, we lie, and do not the Truth.” Jam. i. 27. 
If any Man among you ſeem to be religious, and 
bridleth not his Tongue, but deceiveth his own Heart, I 
this Man's Religion is vain.) Chap. ui. 14,15. If ye Nl ; 
have better Envying and Strife in your Hearts, glory 
) 
L 


not; and lie not againſt the Truth: This Wiſdom. 
deſcendeth not from above, but is earthly, ſenſual, de- 
| vilith* Pal. cxxv. 5. As for ſuch as turn aſide to It 
their crooked Ways, the Lord ſhall lead them forth with | , 
the Workers of Iniquity.” Iſai. xxxv.8, * An high || « 
Way ſhall be there, and it ſhall be called the Way of |} 7 
_ the Unclean ſhalknot paſs over it.” Rev. ar © 
And there ſhall in no wiſe enter into it, whatſo- 0 
| everworketh Abomination, or maketh aLie:* Andin | 1 
many Places. _—_ from me, I pow you Hor, ye 


n Work UNI. 
— Argument 


| 


I Par HI. 


= 


* J 


t 


eternal Retribution, will not be his trying, and finding 
out, and paſſing a Judgment upon the State of Men's. 
Hearts, in his own Mind; but it will be a declarative: 
Judgment: And the End of it will be, not God's for- 
ming a Judgment within himſelf, but the Manifeſtation 
of his Judgment, and the Righteouſneſs of it, to Men's 
own Conſciences, and to the World. And therefore the 


ment, will be ef 


of the Judgment; viz. the. Manifeſtation of the righte- 


4 


Sincerity of Profeſſors, not only to the World, but to 


their own Conſciences, is, that this is the grand EA 
dence which will hereafter be made Uſe of, before the 


Judgment Seat of God; according to which his Judg- 


ment will be regulated, and the State of every Profeſſor 


of Religion unalterably determined. In the future 


Judgment, there will be an open Trial of Profeſſors; 
and Evidences will be made uſe of in the Judgment. 


or God's future judging of Men, in order to their 


Day of Judgment is called the Day of the Revelation of 
the righteous Judgment of God, Rom. ii. 5. And the End 


of God's future Trial and Judgment of Men, as to the 
Part that each one in particular is to have in the Judg- 
jally the clear Manifeſtation of God's 
righteous Judgment, with. Reſpect to him, to his Con- 
ſcience: As his manifeſt by Matth. xviii. 31, to the 
End. Chap. xx, 8, 15. Chap. Xxii. 11, 12, 13. Chap. 
v. 19, 30, and Verſe 35, to the End. Luke xix. 13, 
23. And therefore tho God needs no Medium, whereby 
to make the Truth evident to himſelf, yet Evidences 


will be made uſe of in his future judging of Men. And 


doubtleſs the Evidences that will be made uſe of in their 


Trial, will be ſuch as will be beſt fitted to ſerve the Ends 


ous Judgment of God, not only to the World, but to 


Men's on Conſciences. But the Scriptures do ahun- 


dantly teach us, that the grand Evidences which the 


Judge will make uſe of in the Trial, for theſe Ends, 


according to which the Judgment of every one ſhall he 2 


regulated 


of | gratious Aﬀfeftions. 0 ay 
Argument VI. Another Thing which makes it evident, | 
hat holy Practice is the chief of all the Signs of the 


1 
ll 
i 
4 


8. Pwoffth Ss 
regulated, and the irreverſible Sentence paſs'd, vill be 


Men's Works; or Practice, here in this World; Rev. 


xx. 12. And I ſaw the Dead, ſmall and great, ſtand 


befbre God; and the Books were opened---And the' 
Dead were Judged out of thoſe Things which were 


written in the Books, according to their Works.“ So 
Verſe 13. And the Sea gave up the Dead which were 
in it, and Death and Hell gave up the Dead which were 
in them; and they were judged, every Man, according 
to their Work.“ 2 Cor. v. 10. For we muſt all appear 
before the Judgment Seat of Chriſt, that every one may 
receive the I hings done in the Body, whether it be good 
or bad,*:*So-Men's Practice is the only Evidence, that 
Chriſt repreſents the future Judgment as regulated by, 
in thar'moſt particular Deſcription of the Day of Judg- 
ment, which we have in the holy Bible, Marth. xxv. 
av tlle latter End. See alſo Rom. ii. 6,13. Jer. xvii. 
10 Job. xxxiv. 11. Prov. xxiv. 12. Jer. xxxii. 19. 
Rev: xxii. 12. Matth. xvi. 27. Rev. ii. 23. Ezek. xxxiii. 
201 1 Pet. i. 17. The Judge at the Day of Judgment, 
won't (for the Conviction of Men's own Conſciences, 
and to manifeſt em to the World) go about to examine 
Men, as to the Method of their Experiences, or ſet 
every Man to tell his Story of the Manner of his Con- 
verſion; but his Works will be brought forth, as Evi- 
dences of what he is, what he has done in Darkneſs and 
in Light; Eccl. xii. 14. For God will bring every 
Work into Judgment, with every ſecret Thing, whe- 
ther it be good, or whether it be evil. In the Trial 
that Profeſſors ſhall be the Subjects of, in the future 
Judgment, God will make uſe of the ſame Evidences, 
to manifeſt em to themſelves and to the World, which 
he makes uſe of to manifeſt them, in the Temptations 
or Trials of his Providence here, viz. Their Practice, 
in Caſes wherein Chriſt and other Things come into 
actual and immediate Competition. At the Day of 
Judgment, God, for the Manifeſtation of his righteous 
Judgment, will weigh Profeſſors in a Balance 15 5 
viſible, 


PANT III. 


* 
«4 „ 11 JR” WT".G- 2 = 1 » 


_ aa A: @ 


viſible. And the Balance will be the fame thats Þ 
weighs Men in now ; which has been already deſcribed.” 
Hence we may undoubtedly infer, that Men's Works 
(taken in the Senſe that has been explain'd) are the 
higheſt Evidences, by which they ought to try them-" 
ſelves. Certainly that which our ſupreme Judge will 
chiefly make uſe of, to judge us by, when we come to 
ſtand before him, we ſhould chiefly make uſe of, to 
judge ourſelves by.“ If it had not been revealed in what 
Manner, and by what Evidence the Judge would pro- 
ceed with us hereafter; how natural would it be for one 
to ſay, O that I knew what Token God will chiefly- 
look for and inſiſt upon in the laſt and deciſive: Judgs, 
e ment; and which he expects that all ſhould be able to 
produce who would then be accepted of him, and ac- 
« cording to which Sentence ſhall be paſs'd; that I might 
know what Token or Evidence eſpecially to look at 
e and ſeek after now, as I would be ture not to fail then. 
And ſeeing God has fo plainly and abundantly revealed 
what this Token or Evidence is; ſurely if we act wiſely, 
we ſhall regard it as of the greateſt Importance. 


Now from all that has been ſaid; I think it to be 
abundantly manifeſt, that chriſtian Practice is the moſt 
proper Evidence of the gracious Sincerity of. Profeſſors; 
to themſelves and others; and the chief of all the Mares 
of Grace, the Sign of Signs, and the Evidence of Evi- 
dences, that which ſeals and crowns all other Signs. 
I had rather have the Teſtimony of my. Conſcience, that 
I have ſuch a Saying of my ſupreme Judge on my Side, 
as that, John. xiv. 21. He that hath my Commandments 
and keepeth them, be it is that loveth me; than the 

at. Judgment, 

% That which God maketh a Rule of his own Judgment, as that 
by which he judgeth of every Man, that is a ſure Rule for every 
Man to judge himſelf by. That which we ſhall be judged by at 
* the laſt Day, is a ſure Rule to apply to ourſelves for the preſent. 
* Now by our Obedience and Works, he judgeth us. He will give ' 
to every Man according to his Works,” Dr Preſton's Churches Car- 
nages. 


\ * ” a 
4 : = q * 
3 2 e 
. * = . eo 
> , . 
I * 
= 
* 
9 — 
* . 
» 
" 
= 
- 


Touhd and experienced Divines, that have lived this 
thouſand Years, on the moſt exact and critical Examina- 


tion of my Experiences, as to the Manner of my Con- 
verſion. Not that there are no other good Evidences 


of a State of Grace but this. There may be other Exer- 
C.iſes of Grace, beſides theſe efficient Exerciſes, which 
che Saints may have in Contemplation, that may be very 


ſatisfying to them: But yet this is the chief and moſt 


Proper Evidence. There may be ſeveral good Evi- 
dences that a Tree is a F ig-Tree; but the higheſt and 
\ . moſt proper Evidence of it, is, that it actually bears 
Figs. Tis poſſible that a Man may have a 

' Affurance of a State of Grace, at his firſt — we 


beford he has had Opportunity to gain Aſſurance, by 
this great Evidence I am ſpeaking of.---If a Man hears 


that à great Treaſure is offered him, in a diſtant Place, 


ol. Condition that he will prize it ſo. much, as to be wil- 


ing to leave what he poſſeſſes at home, and go a Journey 
for it, over the Rocks and Mountains that are in the 
Way, to the Place where it is; *tis poſſible the Man 
may be well aſſured, that he values the Treaſure to the 
Degree ſpoken of, as ſoon as the Offer is made him; he 
may feel a Willingneſs to go for the Treaſure, within 
| Him, beyond all Doubt: Bur yet, this don't hinder but 
/ that his actual going for it is the higheſt and moſt pro- 
Evidence of his being willin 

t to himſelf. But the as an 
his outward Actions, and the Motions of his Body in 


his Journey, are not conſidered alone, excluſive of the 
Action of his Mind, and a Conſciouſneſs within him- 
ſelf, of the Thing that moves him, and the End he 


es for; otherwile, ' his bodily Motion is no Evidence 
to him, of his prizing the Treaſure. In ſuch a Manner 


is Chriſtian Practice the moſt proper Evidence of a ſaving | 
Value of the Pearl of great Price, and T eat hid in 


| e . 


The ue e PAT II. 
; and fulleſt Approbation, of all the wiſe, 


9 not only to others, 
vidence to himſelf, | 


| 


FA SS , Y., NY ac foi ownS on —— —_— — nne, . aad 8 = 


2 wut > Hy © . nw a= a 


PazT III. of gracious Aﬀettidns. | 451 - 
Chriſtian Practice is the Sign of Signs, in this Senſs 
that it is the great Evidence, which confirms and crowns 
all other Signs of Godlineſs. There is no one Grace of 
the Spirit of God, but that chriſtian Practice is the moſt * 
proper Evidence of the Truth of it. it is with the 
Members of our Bodies, and all our Utzafils, the pro- 
per Proof of the Soundneſs and Goodneſs of em, is in 
the Uſe of em; ſo it is with our Graces (which are 
given to be uſed in Practice, as much as our Hands and 
Feet, or the Tools with Which we work, or the Arms 
with which we fight) the proper Trial and Proof of them 
is in their Exerciſe in Practice. Moſt of the Things we 
uſe, are ſerviceable to us, and ſo have their Serviceable- 
neſs proved, in ſome Preſſure, Straining, Agitation, or 
Colliſion. So it is with a Bow, a Sword, an Ax, a Saw, 
a Cord, a Chain, a Staff, a Foot, a Tooth, &c. And 
they that are ſo weak, as not to bear the Strain or Preſ- 
ſure we need to put them to, are good for nothing. So 
it is with all the Virtues of the Mind. The proper 
Trial and Proof of them is in being exerciſed under thoſe 
Temptations and Trials that God brings us under, in 
the Courſe of his Providence, and in being put to ſuch 
Service as ſtrains hard upon the Principles of Nature. 
Practice is the proper Proof of the true and ſaving 
Knowledge of God; as appears by that of the Apoſtle al- 
ready mention'd, Hereby da we know that we know him, 
that we keep bis Commandments. Tis in vain for us to 
profeſs that wwe know God, if in Works we deny him. Tit. 
i. 16. And if we know God, but glorify bim not as God, 
our Knowlege will only condemn us, and not fave us, 
Rom. i. 21. The great Note of that Knowledge which, 
faves and makes happy, is that it is practical; John xni. 
17. F ye know theſe Things, happy are ye if ye do them. 
Job. xxviii. 28. To depart from Evil is Underſtanding. 
Holy Practice is the proper Evidence of Repentances 
When the Jes profeſſed Repentance, when they cams 
confeſſing their Sins, to John, preaching the Bapulm 
of Repentance for the Remiſſion of Sins; he directed 
3 | — 


em to the right Way of getting and exhibiting. proper 
Evidences of the Truth of their Repentance, when he 
ſaid to em, Bring forth Fruits meet for Repentance, Matth. 
iii. 8. Which was agreable to the Practice of the Apoſtle 
Paul, ſee Avi. 20. Pardon and Mercy are from 
time to timeiPromiſed to him who has this Evidence of 
true Repentance, that he forſakes his Sin; Prov. xxviii. 
x3, and Jai. lv. 7; and many other Places. 
Holy Practice is the proper Evidence of a ſeving 
Faith. *Tis evident that the Apoſtle James ſpeaks of 
Works, as what does eminently juſtify Faith, or (which 
is the ſame Thing) juſtify the Profeſſors of Faith, and 
vindicate and manifeſt the Sincerity of their Profeſſion, 
not only to the World, but to their own Conſciences: 
As is evident by the Inſtance he gives of Abraham, Jam. 
ii. 21,---24. And in Verſe 20, and 26, he ſpeaks of the 
practical and working Nature of Faith, as the very Life 
and Soul of it; in the ſame Manner, that the active 
Nature and Subſtance, which is in the Body of a Man, 
is. the Life and Soul of that. And if ſo, doubtleſs 
Practice is the proper Evidence ef the Life and Soul of 
true Faith, by which it is diſtinguiſhed from a dead 
Faith. For doubtleſs, Practice is the moſt proper 
Evidence of a practical Nature, and Operation the moſt 
Proper Evidence of an 123 Nature. 
Practice is the beſt Evidence of a ſaving Belief of 
#be'Truth. That is ſpoken of as the proper Evidence of 
the Truth's being in a profeſſing Chriſtian, that be walks 
in the Truth, 3 John iii, I rejoiced greatly, when the 
Brethren came and teſtified of the Truth that is in the, 
even as thou walkeſt in the Truth. | ei 
Practice is the moſt proper Evidence of a true coming 
to Chriſt, and accepting of, and claſing with him. A true 
and ſaving Coming to Chrilt, is (as Chriſt often teaches) 
2 Coming ſo, as to forſake all for bim. And as was 
obſerved before, to forſake all for Chriſt in Heart, is the 
fame Thing as to have a Heart actually to forſake all; 
but the proper Evidence of having a Heart Sy. 


Parr II. of Frarbaf Afeftifims., ag; © 


forſake all, is indeed actualty to ſorſake all, fo far as 
called to it. If a Prince makes Suit to a Woman in a 
far Country, that ſhe would forfake her own People, 
and Father's Houſe, and come to him, to be his Bride; 
the proper Evidence of the Compliance of her Heart 
with the King's Suit, is her actually forſaking her o s 
People, and Father's Houſe, and coming to him. By + | 
this, her Compliance with the King's Suit, is made per- 
fect, in the ſame Senſe, that the Apoſtle James ſays; by 
Works is Faith made perfe##.* Chriſt promiſes us eternal 
Life, on Condition of our Coming to him: but it is fuck _ } 
a Coming as he directed the young Man to, who came 
to enquire: What he fhall do, that he may have eternal 
Life, Chriſt bid him Go, and ſell all that be bad, and 
tome to bim, and follow him. If he had conſented in his 
Heart to the Propoſal, (and had therein come to Chaiſt 
in his Heart) the proper Evidence of it would have'Been 
his doing of it: And therein his coming to Chriſt would 
have been made perfect. When Chriſt called Levi the 
Publican, when ſitting at the Receipt of Cuſtom, and 
in the midſt of his worldly Gains; the cloſing of Levis 
Heart with this Invitation of his Saviour, to come to 
him, was manifeſted, and made perfect, by his actually 
riſing up, leaving all, and following him, Lake v. 25. 
28. Chriſt and other Things, are ſet before us together, 
for us practically to cleave to one, and forſake the 
other: In ſuch a Caſe, a practical Cleaving to Chriſt; is 
a practical Acceptance of Chriſt; as much as a Beggar's 
| | reaching 


* «« Our real taking of Chriſt, appears in our Actions and Works; 
* Ifai. i. 19. If ye conſent and obey, ye Gall eat the good Thinges of the 
Land. That is, If ye will conſent to take Jehovah for your Lord 
* and King; 1f ye give Con/ent ; there is the firſt Thing; But that is 
« not enough; but if ye alſe obey. The Conſent that ſtandeth in the 
« inward Act of the Mind, the Truth of it will be ſeen in your 
«« Obedience; in the Acts of your Lives. If ye conſent and obey, ye 
all eat the good T hings of the, Land; that is, you ſhall take of all 
« that he — that is convenient for you; For then you are married 
« to him in Truth, and have an Intereſt in all his Goods.“ Dr. 
Prefton Church's Carriage. | 


iy w CDP & ID. Y 06” 


9 


„ d EW”. vWF w WP ED MS 


DP SS OY . 


_—  — * » TS 


r wv 


— 


A e dach Se 
teaching out his Hand, and taking a Gift that is offer d, 
is his practical Acceptance of the Gift. Yea, that A& 


of the Soul that is in cleaving to Chriſt in Practice, is 


itſelf the moſt perfect coming of the Soul to Chriſt. 
Practice is the moſt proper Evidence of Truſting in 


"Thrift for Salvation. The proper Signification of the 


Word Truſt, according to the more ordinary Uſe of it, 
both in common Speech, and in the holy Scriptures, 
is the Emboldening and Encouragement of a Perſon's 
Mind, to run ſome Venture in Practice, or in ſomething 


that he does, on the Credit of another's Sufficiency and 


Faithfulneſs. And therefore the proper Evidence of 
kis Truſting, is the Venture be runs in what he does. He 

is not properly ſaid to run any Venture, in a Dependance 
"en any Thing, that does nothing on that Dependance, 
or hoſe Practice is no otherwiſe than if he had no De- 
pendance. For a Man to run a Venture, on a Depen- 
dance on another, is for him to do ſomething from that 
Dependance, by which he ſeems to expoſe himſelf, and 
which he would not do, were it not for that Dependance. 
And therefore it is in complying with the Difficulties, 
and ſeeming Dangers of chriſtian Practice, in a Depen- 
dance on Chriſt's Sufficiency and Faithfulneſs to beſtow 
eternal Life, that Perſons are ſaid to venture themſelves 
upon Chriſt, and truſt in him for Happineſs and Life. 
They depend on ſuch Promiſes as that, Matth. x. 39. 
Fe that loſeth bis Life for my Sake, ſhall find it. Ando 
they part with Al, and venture their All, in a Depen- 
dance on Chriſt's Sufficiency and Truth. And this is 
the Scripture Notion: of Truſting in Chriſt, in the Exer- 
ciſe of a ſaving Faith in him. Thus Abraham, the 
Father of Believers, truſted in Chriſt, and by Faith, 
forſook his own Country, in a Reliance on the Covenant 
of Grace God eſtabliſhed with him, Heb. xi. 8, 9. 
Thus alſo Moſes, By Faith, refuſed to be called the Son of 
Pharaoh's Daughter, cbuſing rather to ſuffer Afiiion 
with the People of Gad, than to enjoy the Pleaſures of Sin 
Fer a Seaſon, Heb. xi. 23, &c, So by Faith, vor . 

| poſed 


Parr III 


. 0 mM 6 yvY +» # 3 Tt © RY TR og OO RI 


2 


* 


Paxr IN. of gracious Affection. ag 3 


ain with the Sword 


for I know whom I have believed; and I am penſuuded, 


Intereſt; he, and he only, may properly be ſaid to ven- 


both to God and Men. The Texts that plainly teach 


poſed themſelves to be ſtoned, and ſawn in ſunder, os 
z endured the Trial of cruel Mock- 

ings and Scourgings,. Bonds and Impriſonments, and wan. 
dered about in Sheep-ſkins and Goat-ſeins, being deſtitute, \ © 


affitted, tormented. And in this Senſe the Apoſtle Pam, 


by Faith, truſted in Chriſt, and committed himſelfito 


him, venturing himſelf, and his whole Intereſt, in ta 
Dependance on the Ability and Faithfulneſs of his Re- 
deemer, under great Perſecutions, and in ſuffering the 
Loſs of all Things; 2 Tim. i. 12. Fer the tobich Cauſe 
I alſo ſuffer theſe Things, nevertheleſs J am not aſhameu; 


that he is able to keep that which I bave committed to him, 
againſt that Day. | | K 1944 

If a Man ſhould have Word brought him from the 
King of a diſtant Land, that he intended to make him 
his Heir, if upon receiving the Tydings, he immediately 
leaves his native Land, and Friends, and all that he has 
in the World, to go to that Country, in a Dependange 
on what he hears; then he may be ſaid to venture him- 
ſelf, and all that he has in the World upon it. But if 

he only ſits ſtill, and hopes for the promiſed Benefit, 

inwardly pleaſing himſelf with the Thoughts of itz he 

can't properly be ſaid to venture himſelt upon it; he 
runs no Venture in the Caſe; he does nothing, otherwiſe 
than he would do, if he had received no ſuch Tidings, 
by which he would be expoſed to any Suffering, in Caſe 
all ſhould fail. So he that on the Credit of what he 
hears of a future World, and in a Dependance on the 
Report of the Goſpel, concerning Life and Immortality, 
forſakes all, or does fo at leaſt ſo far as there is Occaſton, 
making every Thing entirely give Place to his eternal 


ture himſelf on the Report of the Goſpel. And this is 
the proper Evidence of a true Truſt in Chriſt for Sal- 
vation. An 

Practice is the proper Evidence of a gracious Love, 


this, 


456%¶ e twelfth Sign Pax III. 
this, have been ſo often mention'd already, that it is 


needleſs to repeat them. 


Expreſſion and Manifeſtation of Heart, which God 
ſpeaks of, as the great Expreſſion of it, that he inſiſts 
on; That we ſhould look upon as the proper Expreſſion 
and Maniteſtation of it: But this is walking humbly; 
-Micah. vi. 8. “he hath ſhewed thee, O Man, what is 
good, and what doth the Lord require of thee, but to 
—_—_ to love Mercy, and to walk humbly with thy 


This is alſo the proper Evidence of the true Fear of 


Cod. Prov. viii. 13. © The Fear of the Lord is to hate 
Evil.“ Pfal. xxxiv. 11, &c. Come ye Children, hearken 
-unto me, and I will teach you the Fear of the Lord.--- 
Keep thy Tongue from Evil, and thy Lips from ſpeak- 
ing Guile; depart from Evil and do Good, ſeek Peace, 
and purſue it.” Prov. iii. 7. Fear the Lord, and de- 
part from Evil.“ Prov. xvi. 6. By the Fear of the 
Lord, Men depart from Evil.“ Job i. 8. © Haſt thou 
conſidered my Servant Job, a perfect and an upright 
Man, one that feareth God, and eſcheweth Evil? And 
ſtill he holdeth faſt his Integrity, although thou movedſt 
me againſt him.“ Pſal. xxxvi. 1. * The Tranſzyreſfſion 
of the Wicked, faith within my Heart, there is no Fear 
of God before his Eyes.” | 
So Practice, in rendering again according to Benefits 
received, is the proper Evidence of true Thankfulne/s. 
Pſal. cxvi. 12. What ſhall I render to the Lord, for 
all his Benefits towards me?“ 2 Chron. xxxii. 23. But 
. zekiah rendered not again according to the Benefit 
done unto him.” Paying our Vows unto God, and or- 
dering our Converſation aright, ſeem to be ſpoken of, 
as the proper Expreſſion and Evidence of true Thank- 
fulneſs, in the goth Pſalm, Verſe 14. Offer unto God 
Thankſgiving, and pay thy Vows unto the Moft High." 
. Verſe 23. Whoſo offereth Praiſe, glorifieth me; and 
to him that ordereth his Converſation aright, will I ſhew 
the ſalvation of God,” ES 80 


Practice is the proper Evidence of Humility. That 


** 


taken for my Heritage | 
of my Heart ; I babe inclined my Heart to perform thy Std. 


aur I. of gracious, Affection. 457 


So the proper. Evidence of gracious Deſires and q 

ings, andthat which diſtinguiſhes them from thoſe Lo: 3 

falſe and vain, is that they are not. idle Wiſhes and | 

Wouldings, like Balaam' s; but effeQual 1 in Practice, to 

{tir up Petſons earneſtly; and thoroughly to ſeck t 

Things they long for. Pſal. xxvii. 4. 60 One Thing hz 'S 

I defixed of the Lord, that will. I ſeck after. Pal. 1 . 

1, 2. 0 God, thou art my God; early will I ſeek the 

My, Soul thirſteth for = my Fleſ longeth for 15 

in a dry and thirſty Land, where. no. Water is, 6 fee 

thy Power and thy Glory. Verſe. 8. My. Soul e | 

= hard after thee.” Cant. 3 i. 4. Draw. . we wil 

after rhee,' 
Practice is the proper Evidence of a graci BY Ns 

1 John iii. 3. Every Man that bath. this Hope in Bin, 

gurißeth himſef, even as be is pure. Patient neinuane 

in well doing, through the Difficulties and, Trials of the 

chriſtian Courſe, is often mention'd .as the proper Ex- 

preſſion and Fruit of a. chriſtian Hopg, 10 Tbei, . 2. > 

Remembering without ce ing,, Your. 77 1 0 Faith," 4 

Labour of Love, and Patience Hope. 1 Fet. 4 + x. 

Wherefore, gird up the Coins of your. Mind, be 7 ob, | 

Hope to the Exd; for the Grace that is to be” 7 un 4. 

you, at the Revelation of Jeſus Chriſt, as obedle nt Chil- 

dren, &c. Pſal cxix. 166. Lord, I have Bebel I ty 

Salvation, and done thy Commandments. | Pfal. e 15 * 

That they might ſet their Hope in Ged, aud not forget 1 2 


Warks of the Lerd, but keep bis Commandments,  - 


MA chearful Practice of our Duty and doing the wil | 
of God, is the proper Evidence of a truly boly Foy. 7 x 
Ixiv, 5, T hou meeteſt bim that rejoiceth, 2 workeſt Righ- 


teouſneſs., Pal. cxix. 111, 112. J% Teſtimonies heve I 
fr or ever, for they are the rejoicing 


tutes alway, even unto the Eng. Verſe 14. J have rejoiced 


inthe Way a 27 thy Te Tefimonies, as much as in all Riches. 


1 Cor, xiu. 6. Charity. rejoiceth not in Iniquity, Pit fe- 


joiceth in the T ruth, 2 Cor. viii. 2. 7. he abundance of th 'n 


Toy, aboutded to the Riches of their Liberality. © 10S; 
Ge Practice 


/ 


F 45S e rwelfth Sign PazT III. 


Practice alſo is the proper Evidence of chriſtian For- 
| Hitude. The Trial of a good Soldier, is not in his Chim- 
F ney Corner, but in the Field of Battle; 1 Cor. ix. 25,26, 
2 Tim. ü. 3, 45 5: | 8 
And as the Fruit of holy Practice is the chief Evidence 

of the Truth of Grace; ſo the ages in whicHExpe- 
riences have Influence on a Perſon's Practice, is the 
ſureſt Evidence of the Degree of that which is ſpiritual 
and divine m his Experiences. Whatever Pretences 
Perſons may make to great Diſcoveries, great Love and 

Joys, they are no further to be regarded, than they have 
Influence on their Practice. Not but that Allowances 
muſt be made for the natural Temper. But that don't 
hinder, but that the Degree of Grace is juſtly meaſur- 
ed, by the Degree of the Effect in Practice. For the 
Effect of Grace is as great, and the Alteration is as re- 
markabk, in a Perſon of a very ill natural Temper, as 
another. Although a Perſon of ſuch a Temper, will not 

behave himſelf ſo well, with the ſame Degree of Grace, 
as another; the Diverſity from what was before Con- 
verſion, may be as great; becauſe a Perſon of a good 

natural Temper, did not behave himſelf fo ill, before 

Converſion. | 


Thus I have endeavoured to repreſent the Evidence 
there is, that chriſtian Practice is the chief of all the 
Signs of ſaving Grace. And before I conclude this Diſ- 
courſe, I would fay ſomething briefly, in Anſwer to two 
Objections, that may poſſibly be made by ſome, againſt 
what has been faid upon this Head, 


Object. 1. Some may be ready to ſay, This ſeems to 
be contrary to that Opinion, ſo much received among 
4 People; that Profeſſors ſhould judge of their State, 
chiefly by their inward Experience, and that ſpiritual 
Experiences are the main Evidences of true Grace. 
I anſwer, Tis doubtleſs a true Opinion, and Jolly 
much received among good People, that Profeſſors 


would chiefly judge of their State by their ns 
| | | ut 


PART III. of gracious Aﬀettions. 459 4 


But it is a great Miſtake, that what has been ſaid is at 
all contrary to that Opinion. The chief Sign of Grace 
to the Conſciences of Chriſtians, being chriſtian Prace- 
rice, in the Senſe that has been explain'd, and accord- 
ing to what has been ſhewn to be the true Notion of 
chriſtian Practice, is not at all inconſiſtent with chriſtian "il 
Experience being the chief Evidence of Grace, Chriſt WY 
an or holy Practice is ſpiritual Practice; and that is not 
the Motion of a Body, that knows not how, nor when; 
nor wherefore it moves: But ſpiritual Practice in Man; 
is the Practice of a Spirit and Body jointly, or the Pracs 
tice of a Spirit, animating, commanding and actuating 
a Body, to which it is united, and over which it has 
Power given it by the Creator. And therefore the main 
Thing in this holy Practice, is the holy Acts of the 
Mind, directing and governing the Motions of the Bo» A 
dy. And the Motions of the Body are to be looked upon 
as belonging to chriſtian Practice, only ſecondarily, and 
as they are dependent and conſequent on the Ads 
of the Soul. The Exerciſes of the Grace that Chri- 
ſtians find, or are conſcious to, within themſelves, are 
what they experience within themſelves; and herein there- 
fore lies chriſtian Experience: And this chriſtian Expe- 
rience, conſiſts as much ĩn thoſe operative Exerciſes 'of - 
Grace in the Will, that are immediately concerned in 
the Management of the Behaviour of the Body, as in 
other Exerciſes, Theſe inward Exerciſes, are not the leſs 
a Part of chriſtian Experience, becauſe they have out- 
ward Behaviour immediately connected with them, A 
ſtrong Act of Love to God, is not the leſs a Part of ſpi- 
ritual Experience, becauſe it is the Act that immediate 
ly produces and effects ſome felf-denying and expenſive 
outward Action, which is much to the Honour and 
Glory of God. i e, wig 
To ſpeak of chriſtian Experience and Practice, as if 
they were two Things, properly and entirely diſtinct, is 
to make a Diſtinction without Conſideration or Reaſon. 
Indeed all chriſtian Experience is not properly called 
_ G g 2 Practice; | 


ä 
n The. 


460 Tie tuelſtb Sign Pax III. 


Practice; but all: chriſtian Practice is properly Experi- 
| ence., Ahd the Piſtinction that: is made between them, 
js not oaly an unreaſonable, but an unſcriptural Diſtinc- 
tion. Holy. Practice is one Kind or Part of chriſtian Ex- 
perience; and hoth Reaſon and Scripture repreſent it as 
the chief, and. moſt important, and moſt-diſtinguiſhing 
Part of it. S jt is repreſented in Jer. xxii. 15, 16, *Did 
not thy Father eat and drink, and do Juſtice and;Judg- 
ment? He judged the Cauſe of the Poor and Needy : 
-1 Was not this to know me? faith the Lord., Our in- 
ward Acquaintance with God, ſurely belongs to the 
Head of experimental Religion; but this God repre- 
ſents, as conſiſting chiefly in that Experience which there 


is in holy Practice. So the Exerciſes of thoſe Graces of 


te Love of God, and. the Fear of God, are a Part of 


„ 


experimental Religion; but theſe the Scripture repre- 
ſents as conſiſting chiefly in Practice, in thoſe foremen- 
tioned Texts. 1 John v. 3. This is the Love of God, 
that we keep his Commandments.“ 2 John vi. This is 
Love, that we walk after his Commandments. Pſal. 
Xxxiv. 11, Fc. Come, ye Children, and I will teach 
vou the Fear of the Lord :---Depart from Evil, and do 
' Good.” Such Experiences as theſe Hezekiab took Com- 
Fort in chieffy; on his ſick Bed: When he ſaid, Re- 
member, O Lord, I beſeech thee, how I have walked 
7 4 ee, in Truch, and with a perfect Heart.“ And 
ſueh Experiences as theſe, the Pſalmiſt chiefly inſiſts 
upon, in the 119th Pſalm, and elſewhere. Such Expe- 
riences as theſe, the Apoſtle Paul mainly inſiſts upon, 
when he ſpeaks of his Experiences in his Epiſtles; as 
Rom. i. 9. God is my Witneſs, whom I ſerve with my 
Spirit, in the Goſpel of his Son. —-2 Cor. i. 12. for our 
kejoicing is this, the. Teſtimony of our Conſcience, - 
that by the Grace of God, we have had our Converſa- 
tion in the World.“ Chap. iv. 13. We having the ſame . 
Spirit of Faith: According as it is written, I have believ- 
ed, and therefore have I ſpoken; we alſo believe, and 
ee ee Chap. x. 7. We walk by fd ng 


9 - 
* # .v * 2» > 


Pax III. / gracious Aﬀettions. 461 
by. Sight, Verſe 14. The Love of Chriſt conſtraineth. "MW 
us.“ Chap. vi. 4,---7. In all Things approvigg ourſelves 
as the Miniſters of God, in much Patience, in Afflictions, 
in Neceſſities, in Diſtreſſes, -in Labours, fin Watchings, 
in Faſtings; by Pureneſs, by Knowledge, by Kindneſs, 
by the Holy Ghoſt, by Love unfeigned, - -by the Power 


of God.” Gal. ii, 20. I -am/ crucified, with Chriſt; WM 


Nevertheleſs, I live: Vet not I; but Chriſt liveth in me, 
And the Life which I now live in the Fleſh, I live by. . 

the Faith of the Son of God.“ Phil. iii. 7, 8. But what 
Things were gain to me, thoſe I counted laſs for Chriſt; 

Yea doubtleſs, and I count all Things but loſs for the 

Excellency of the Knowledge of Chriſt Jeſus my Lord, 

and do count them but Dung that I may win Chrift.} 

Col i. 29. Whereunto J alſo labour, ſtriving, accord- 
ing to his working, which worketh in me mightily. 
1 Theſſ. ii. 2. We are bold in our God, to ſpeak unto 
you the Goſpel of God, with much Contention,% Verſes 
8, 9, 10. Being affeQionately deſirous of you, we Were 
willing to have imparted vynto you, not the Goſpel of 
God only, but alſo our on Souls; becauſe ye were dear 
unto us. For ye remember, Brethren, our Labour and 
Travail, labouring Night and Day. e are Witneſſes, 
and God alſo, how holily,: and juſtly, and unblameably 
we behaved ourſelves among you. And fuch:Expetiens 


ces as theſe, they were: chat this bleſſed Apoſtle ehiefly 


Ale found, and prove effectual, at the very Point of — ri- } 
N 7 > BE i Meds of 


* 


A : The" rweſfeh Sign Pant HI. 


al, wherein God proves which we will actually cleave 
to, whether Chrit's or our Luſts, are as has been ſhown 
already, the proper Experiment of the Truth and Power 
of our Godlineſs; wherein it's victorious Power and Ef- 
fieacy, in producing it's 2 Effect, and reaching it's 
End, is found by Experience. This is properly chriſtian 
Experience, wherein the Saints have Opportunity to ſee, 
by actual Experience and Trial, whether they have a Heart 
to do the Will of God, and to forſake other Things for 
Chriſt, or no. As that is called. experimental Philoſo- 
y, which brings Opinions and Notions to the Teſt of 
act; ſos that properly called experimental Religion, 
which brings religious Aﬀections and Intentions to the 
like Teft. 

There is a ſort of external religious Practice, wherein 
is no inward Experience; which no Account is made of 
in the Sight of God; but it is eſteemed good for nothing. 
And there is what is called. Experience, that is without 
Practice, being neither accompanied, nor followed with 
” achriſtian Behaviour; and this is worſe than nothing. 
| Many Perſons ſeem to have wrong Notions of chriſtian 
Experience, and ſpiritual Light and Diſcoveries. When- 

ever a Perſon finds within him, an Heart to treat God 
as God, at the Time that he has the Trial; and finds 
his Diſpoſition effectual in the Experiment, That is the 
moſt proper, and moſt diſtinguiſhi rience. And 

have at ſuch a Time that Senſe of divine Things, that 
Apprehenſton of the Truth, Im ce and Excellen- 
cy of the Things of Religion, which then ſways and pre- 
| vails, and governs his Heart and Hands; this is the moſt 
excellent ſpiritual Light, and theſe are the moſt diſtin- 
gaiſhing Diſcoveries. Religion conſiſts much in holy 
Ackectioh; but -rhoſe Exerciſes of Affection which are 
| moſt diſtinguiſhing of true Religion, are theſe practical 
| Exerciſes. Friendſhip between earthly Friends conſiſts 
much in Affection; but yet thoſe ſtrong Exerciſes of 
Affection, that actually c carry them through Fire and 
| "Water for each other, are the higheſt Evidences of true 
3 Frandhip There 


. ; 
22 
2 


Parr UL of graciuu Aﬀettim. 463 
There is nothing in what has been ſaid, contrary to 


what 18 aſſerted by ſome ſound Dwines 3 when they ſay, 9 


That there are no ſure Evidences of Grace, but the Acts 
of Grace. For that don't hinder but that theſe operative, 
productive Acts, thoſe Exerciſes of Grace that are effec- 
tual in Practice, may be the higheſt Evidences, above 
all other Kinds of Acts of Grace. Nor does it hinder 
but that, when there are many of theſe Ats and Exer- 
ciſes, following one another in a Courſe, under various 
Trials, of every Kind, the Evidence is ſtill heighten'd ; 
as one Act confirms another. A Man by once ſeeing 
his Neighbour, may have good Evident of his Preſence: 
But by ſeeing him from Day to Day, and converſing 
with him in a Courſe, in various Circumſtances, the 
Evidence is eſtabliſhed. The Diſciples, when they firſt 
ſaw Chriſt, after his Reſurrection, had good Evidence 
that he was alive: But by converſing with him for forty 
Days, and his fhewing himſelf to em alive, by many in- 
fallible Proofs, they had yet higher Evidence. T 
The Witneſs or Seal of the Spirit that we read of, 
doubtleſs conſiſts in the Effect of the Spirit of God in 
the Heart, in the Implantation and Exerciſes of Grace 
there, and ſo canſiſts in Experience. And it is alſo be- 
yond Doubt, that this Seal of the Spirit, is the higheſt 


+ © The mare theſe viſible Exerciſes of Grace are renewed, the 


<* more certain you will be. The more frequently theſe Actings are 
<< renewed, the more abiding and confi your Aſſurance will be. 
« A Man that has been gffured of ſuch viſible Exerciſes of Grace, 
« may quickly after be in Doubt, whether he was not miſtaken. 
% But when ſuch Actions are renewed again and again, he grows 
«© more ſettled and eftabliſhed about his good Eſtate. If a Man ſee 
„a Thing once, that makes him ſure: But if afterwards he fear he 
«© was deceived, when he comes to fee it again, he is more ſure he 
«© was not miſtaken, If a Man read ſuch P in a Book, he js 
« ſure it is ſa. Some Months after, ſome may bear him down, that 
% he was miſtaken, ſo as to make him queſtion it himſelf : But when 
he looks, and reads it again, he is abundantly confirmed. The 
„more Men's Grace is multiplied, the more their Peace is multi- 
*« plied; 2 Pet. i. 2. Grace and Peace be multiplied into you, through 


* the — © of God and Jeſus 5 Lord.” Stoddard's Way to know Þ 


Sincerity and ; oye 
8 kind 


We twelfth Sign PART III. 
' Kind of Evidence of the Saints Adoption, that ever they 
obtain. But in theſe Exerciſes of Grace in Practice, that 
have been ſpoken of, God gives Witneſs, and ſets to 
chis Seal, in the moſt conſpicuous eminent and evident 
Manner. It has been abundantly found to be true in 
Fact, by the Experience of the chriſtian Church; that 
"Chriſt commonly gives, by his Spirit, the greateſt, and 
moſt joyful Evidences to his Saints, of their Sonſhip, 
in thoſe effectual Exerciſes of Grace, under Trials, which 
have been ſpoken of; as is manifeſt in the full Affurance, 
and unſpeakable Joys of many of the Martyrs, Agrec- 
able to that, 1 Pet. iv. 14. F ye are reproached for the 
Name of Chriſt, happy are ye; for the Spirit of Glomy, and 
of God reſteth upon you. And that in Rom. v. 2, 3. Ve 
Fejoice in bope of the Glory of God, and glory in Tribula- 
tions. And agreeable to what che Apoſtle Paul often 
\ declares of what he experienc'd in his Trials. And 
— the Apoſtle Peter, in my Text, ſpeaks of the Joy | 
unſpeakable, and full of Glory, which the Chriſtians to 
whom he wrote, experienc'd; he has Reſpect to what 
they found under Perſecution, as appears by the Con- 
text. Chriſt's thus manifeſting himſelf, as che F riend 
and Saviour of his Saints, cleaving to him under Trials, 
ſeems to have been repreſented of old; by his coming 
and manifeſting himſelf, to Shadrach, Me hack, and Abed- 
nego, in the Furnace. And when the Apoſtle ſpeaks of 
the Witneſs of the Spirit, in Rom. viii. 13, 16, 17; he 
has a more immediate Reſpect to what the Chriſtians ex- 
Perienced, in their Exerciſes of Love to God, in ſuf- 
fering Perſecution, as is plain by the Context. He is, 
in the foregoing Verſes, encouraging the chriſtian Romans 
under their Sufferings, that though their Bodies be dead, 
becauſe of Sin, yet they ſhould be raiſed to Life again. 
But it is more eſpecially, plain by the Verſe immediately 
| following, Ver. 18. For I reckon that the Sufferings of 
- "this preſent Time, are not worthy to be compared with, the 
Glory that ſhall be revealed in us. So the, Apoſtle hi evi- 


aer 8 to their Perſecutions, in all that he ſays 
to 


... MW FW 


Parr III. . grqcious* Affection: 
to the end: of the Chapter. So when the Apoſtle ſpeaks of the Car- 


neft of the Spirit, which God had given to him, in 2 Cor. v. g. the 
Context thews plainly that he has Reſpea to what was given him in 
his great Trials and Sufferings. And in that Promiſe of the white 
Stone, and new Name to him that overcomes, Rev. ii. 17; tis evident 


Chriſt has a ſpecial Reſpect to a Benefit that Chriſtians ſhould obtain, 


by overcoming, in the Trial they had, in that Day of Perſecution. 
This appears by Verſe 13, and many other Paſſages in this Epiſtle to 
the Seven Churches of Aa. ITE: + 1 


* 


CCC 


ſaid of chriſtian Practice being the chief Evidence of the Truth of 


Grace, that chis is a /egal Doctrine; and that this making Practice a 
Thing of ſuch great Importance in 1 * magniſies ¶ eris, and tends 
to lead Men to make too much of tir own Doings, to the Diminu- 
tion oſ the Glory of free Grace, and does not ſeem well to conſiſt with 
that great Goſpel Doctrine of 7u/tification by Faith alone. 2 

Bur this Objection is altogether without Reaſon, Which Way is 
it inconſiſtent with the Freeneſs of God's Grace, that holy Practice 
ſhould be a Sign of God's Grace? Tis our Works being the Price 
of God's Favour, and not their being the Siga of it, that is the Thing 


which is inconſiſtent with the Freeneſs of that Favour. Surely the Beg- 
; vn the Money he has in his Hands, as a Sign of the 


Kindneſs of him who gave it to him, is in no Reſpect, inconfiſtent 


with the Freeneſs of that Kindneſs. - Tis his having Money in his 


Hands as the Price of a Benefit, that is the Thing which is inconſiſtent 
with the free Kindneſs of the Giver. The Notion of the Freeneſs of 
the Grace of God td Sinners, as that is revealed and taught in the 
Goſpel, is not that no holy and amiable Qualifications vr Actions in 


us ſhall be a Fruit, and fo a Sign of that Grace; but that is not the 


Worthineſs or Lovelineſs of any Qualification or Action of ours which 
recommends us to that Grace; that Kindneſs is ſhown to the Unwor- 
thy and Unlovely; that there is great Excellency in the Beneñt be- 
ſtowed, and no Excellency in the Subject as the Price of it; that 


Goodneſs goes forth and-flows out, from the Fulneſs of God's New 
ture, the Fulneſs of the Fountain of Good, without any Amiableneſs 


in the Object to draw it. And this is the Notion uf - Juſtthcativn 
without Works (as this Doctrine is taught in the Scripture) that it is 
not the Worthineſs or Lovelineſs of our Works, or any Thing in us, 


which is in any wiſe accepted with Got; as a Balance for the Guilt 
of Sin, or a Recommendation for Sinners to his Acceptance as Heiss 
of Life. Thus we are juſtified only by the Righteouſneſs of Chriſt, and 
not by our Righteouſneſs. And when Works are oppoſed to þ aith / 


- 


in this Affair, and it-is/{aid that we are juſtified by Faith and not by 


Works; thereby is meant, that it is not the Worthineſs or Amiable- . 
neſs of our Works, or any Thing in us, which recommends us to an 


Intereſt in Chriſt and his Benefits; but that-we have this Intereſt only 


by Faith, or by our souls receiving Chriſt; ur adhering to, and Song 
= wien 


2 4 
. 
— — wy D?D'e7::!:„ 


= 


o 
/ | * 
4 i N * 5 
— — — ͥ — On, 


109 


5 5 1 4 * | | * | pts. Aha CODE" | 4 : 
1 N. 6 Sign Par III. 
F 4 The twelſth Sign ART: III. 
3 


recommends and brings us to an Intereſt in Chriſt, is no Argument 
1 chat nothing in us is a Sign of an Intereſt in Chriſt. 
I the Dectrines of free Grace, and Juſtification by Faith alone, be 
. Anconſiſtent with the Importance of holy Practice as a Sign of Grace; 
«then they are equally inconſiſtent with the Importance of any Thing 
awhatſoever in us as a Sign of Grace, any Holineſs, or any Grace that 
is in us, or any of our — or Religion: for *tis as contrary 
to the Doctrines of free Grace and Juſtification by Faith alone, that 
any of theſe ſhould be the Righteouſneſs which we are juſtified by, as 
that holy Practice ſhould be fa. "Tis with holy Works, as it is with 
Holy Qualifications: "Tis inconfiſtent with the Freeneſs of Goſpel 
Grace, that a Title to Salvation ſhould be given to Men for the 
Lovelineſs of anv of their holy Qualificatians, as much as that it ſhould 
be given for the Holineſs of Works. It is inconſiſtent with the 
Goſpel Doctrine of free Grace, that an Intereſt in Chriſt and his Be- 
nefits ſhould be given for the Lovelineſs of a Man's true Holineſs, for 
the Amiableneſs of his renewed, ſanctiſied, heavenly Heart, his Love 
to God, and being like God, or his Experience of Joy in the Holy 
_ Self-empuneſs, a Spirit to exalt Chriſt above all, and to give 
all Glory to him, and a Heart devoted unto him: I ſay, -it is incon- 
Fiſtent with the Goſpel Doctrine of free Grace, that a Title to Chriſt's 
Benefits ſhould be given out of Regard to the Lovelineſs of any of 
theſe, or that any of theſe. ſhould be our Righteouſneſs in the Affair 
of Juflification. —_— this don't hinder the Importance of theſe 
Things as Evidences of an Intereſt in Chriſt, Juſt ſo it is with Re- 
Fpett ro holy Actions and Works. To make light of Works, be- 
cauſe we ben't juſtified by Works, is the ſame Thing in Effect, as to 
make light of all Religion, all Grace and Holineſs, yea, true evange- 
Iical Holineſs, and all gracious Experience : For all is included, when 
the Scripture ſays, we are not juſtified by Works: For by Works in 
„ Cate, is meant all our own Righteouſneſs, Religion, or Holineſs, 
and every Thing chat «& in u, all the Good we do, and all the Good 
which we are conſcious of, all external Acts, and all internal Acts and 
Exerciſes of Grace, and all Experiences, and all thoſe holy and hea- 
venly Things wherein the Life and Power, and the very Eſſence of 
Religion do conſiſt, all thoſe great Things which Chriſt and his A- 
poſtles mainly inſiſted on in their Preaching, and endeavoured to pro- 
mote, as of the greateſt Conſequence in the Hearts and Lives of Men, 
and all good Diſpaſitions, Exerciſes and Qualifications of every Kind 
whatſoever ; and even Faith itſelf, conſider'd as a Part of our Hali- 
neſs. For we are juſtified by none of theſe Things: And if we were, 
we ſhould, in a Scripture Senſe, be juſtified by Works. And there- 
fore if it ben't legal, and contrary to the evangelical Doctrine of 
Juſtification without Works, to inſiſt on any of theſe, as of great Im- 
portance, as Evidences of an Intereſt in Chriſt ; then no more is it 
thus to infiſt on the Importance of Holy Practice. It would be legal 
to ſuppoſe that holy Practice juſtifies by bringing us to a Title to Chriſt's 


Benefits, 


* 


with him. But that the Worthineſs or Amiableneſs of aothing in us 


* 
3 = OTE S Perg 2 r , (,,,! Wo WT OO” SR . ] ——— . ¾ àÄ 


9 


7 ef 7 . 7 RY SES one Ka ft = ty © 8 


Benefits, as the Price of it, or as recommending to it by its PreciouC. 
neſs or Excellence; but it is not legal to ſuppoſe, that holy Practice 
juſtifies the ſincerity of a Believer, as the proper Evidence of it. The 
Apeſtle James did not think it! to ſay, that Abreham our Father 
was juſtified by Works in this Senſe. The Spirit that indited the Scri 

ture did not think the great Importance and abſolute Neceſſity of holy 
Practice, in this ReſpeR, to be inconſiſtent with the Freeneſs of 
Grace; for it commonly teaches em both together; as in Rev. xxi. 


6, 7. God ſays, [ will give unte him that is thirft, of the Fountain of - 


the Water of Life freely: And then adds, in the very next Words, 


ParT III. of pracious AﬀeFions. 73 467 


He that overcometh ſhall inherit all Things. As tho' behaving well in 


the chriſtian Race and Warfare, were the Condition of the Promiſe. 
So in the next Chapter, in the 14th, and 15th Verſes, Chriſt ſays, 
Blefſed are they that do his Commandments, that they may have Right to 
the Tree of Lift, and enter in thro' the Gates, inte the City + And then 
declares in the 15th Verſe, how they that are of a wicked Practice ſhall 
be excluded ; and yet in the two Verſes next following, does with 
very great Solemnity, giveforth an Invitation to all to come and take 
of the Water of Life freely; I am the Root and the Off-/pring of Da- 
vid, the bright and Mcrning-Star . And the Spirit and the Bride Jay, 
Come, and let him that heareth ſay, Come, and let him that is Athirft, 
Come, and whoſoever will, let him come and take of the Water of, Life 
freely. So Chap. iii. 20, 21. Behold I fand at the Door and knock : If 
any Man hear my Voice, and pen the Door, I will come in to him, and 
up with him, and be with me; But then it is added in the next 
Words, To him that evercometh, awill I grant te fit wwith me on my Throne. 
And in that great Invitation of Chriſt, Matth. xi. latter End, Come 
unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy Laden, and I quill give you Reft; 


Chriſt adds in the next Words, Take my Yoke upon you, and learn of 


me, for I. am meek and lowly of Heart, and ye ſhall find Reft unto your 
Souls Fer my Yoke is eaſy, * Burden is light : As tho taking the 
Burden of Chriſt's Service, and imitating his ple, were neceſſary 
in order to the promis'd Reſt, So in that great Invitation to Sinnen 
to accept of free Grace, Iſai. Iv, Ho, every one that thirſterbh! come ye ts 
the Waters : And he that hath no Money, come ye, buy and eat ; 1 
come, buy Wins and Milk, æuitbeut Monq and without Price: Even 
there, in the Continuation of the ſame Invitation, the Sinners forſa- 
king his wicked Practice is ſpoken of as neceſlary to the obtaining 
Mercy : Verſe 7, Let the Wicked fomale his Way, and the unrighteous 
Man his Thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have 
Merey apm him, and to our Ged, and he auill abundantly pardon. So the 
Riches of divine Grace, in the Juſtification of Sinners, is ſet forth, 
with the Neceſſity of holy Practice, Iſai. i. 25, &c. Wafo ye, make 
you clean; put away the Evil of your Doings, from before mine Eyer': 
Ceaſe to do evil, learmto do avell; ſeek Judgement, relleue the Oppreſſet, 
judge the Fartherleſs, plead for the Widow : Come now, let us Reafon to- 
gether, ſaith the Lord, tho your Sins be as Scarlet, they ſhall be as white 


ar Snow ; tho' they be red like Crimſon, they /oall be as Wool. And in 


and 


* 


+ 
* - A 
\ 7 
CY * * = 
* 888 4 4 
4 e 8 Fs * 
; 8 0 1 d 2 2 
. e N * * 
7 F - _ 
Z = — — LICL SS. 
r ES CRT. ms - — og. — 


= _—_—_ . ; * . _ 9 
68 The twelfth Sign 
4568 2 twelfth Sign 


that moſt ſolemn Invitation of Wiſdom, Prov. ix, - after it is repre. 
Tented what great Proviſion was made, and how that all Things werg 
Teady, the Houſe built, the Beaſts killed, the Wine mingled, and the 


Table furniſhed, and the Meſſengers ſent forth to invite the Gueſts ; 


then we have the free Invitation, Ver. 4, j 6. Whoſe in Simple, lu 
Bim turn in hither; as for him that wwanteth Underſtanding, (i. e. has 


no Righteouſneſs) [be ſaith to him, Come, eat of my Bread, and drink 


ef the Wine which I have mingled : But then in the next Breath it 
tollows, Forſale the Fooliſh, and live, and go in the Way of Underſtand. 
ing - As tho' forſaking Sin, and going in the Way of Holineſs, were 


* 


nẽceſſary in order to Life. So that the Freeneſs of Grace, and the 


Neceſſity of holy Practice, which are thus from Time to Time join 'd 
together in Scripture, are not inconſiſtent one with another. Nor 
does it at all diminiſh the Honour and Importance of Faith, that the 
Exerciſes and Effects of Faith in Practice, ſhould be eſteem'd the 
chief Signs of it; any more than it leſſens the Importance of Liſe, 
that Action and Motion are eſteemed the chief Signs ot that. 

So that in what has been ſaid of the Importance of holy Practice, 
as the main Sign of Sincerity ; there is nothing legal, nothing deroga- 
tory to the Freedom and Sovereignty of the Goſpel Grace, nothing in 


- *the leaſt claſhing with the Goſpel Doctrine of Juſtification by Faith 


alone, without the Works of the Law, nothing in the leaſt tending 
| tv leſſen the Glory of the Mediator, and our Dependance on his 


Righteouſneſs, nothing infringing in'the ſpecial Prerogatives of Faith 
In'the Affair of our Salvation, nothing in any wiſe FetraQting from 
the Glory of God ànd his Mercy, or exalting Man, or diminiſhing 
his Dependance and Obligation. So that if any are againſt ſuch an 


Importance of holy Practice as has been ſpoken of, it muſt be only 


* 


from a ſenſeleſs Averfion to the Letters and Sound of the Word Works; 
when there is no Reaſon in the World to be given for it, but what 
may be given with equal Force, why they ſhould have an Averſion to 
the Words Holineſs, Godlineſs, Grace, Religion, Experience, and 
even Faith itſelf: For to make a Righteouſneſs of any of theſe, is as 


? 


Von ſay you know Chriſt, and the Love and Good. will of Chil 


4 towards you, and that he is the Propitiation for your Sins. ' How do 


4 you know this; He that ſaith I know bim, and keepeth not his Command- 


* ments, ts a Liar, 1 John ii. 4. True, might ſome reply, he that keeps 
% not the Commands of Chriſt, hath thereby a ſure Evidence that be 
* knows him not, and that be js not united to him; but is this any Evidence 


| , *© that we do know him, and that we are ynited to him, if we do keep his 
,. « Commandments; Yes verily, faith the Apoſtle, Hereby wwe do know that 


4d know bim, if we keep his Commanitments.' And again, Ver. 3. Here 
e know we that wwe are in bim. What can be more plain? What a Vanity 


js it to ſay that this is running upon a Covenant of Works? — Be- 


* loved, it is a ſad Thing to hear ſuch Queſtions, and ſuch cold Anſwers 
<« alfo,. that Sanctification poſſibly may be an Evidence. May be? Is it 
« not certain? Aſſuredly to deny it, is as bad as to affirm that God's own 
* | FVV 


PAR III. 


egal, and as inconfiſtent with the Way of the new Covenant, as to 
make a Righteouſneſs of holy Practice.“ dal * 


SY ED GH A — os K — — — 2 = 2 A400 


— 


n . yl bis „eee ee Of. ed + od 


1 


Panr Il, of grativis Afedtion, 469 


Tis greatly to the Hurt of Religion, for Perſons to make light of, 
and inſiſt little on, thoſe Things which the Scripture inſiſt moſt upon, 
as of moſt Importance in the Evidence of our Intereſt in Chriſt; (un- 
der a Notion that to lay Weight on thoſe Things is legal, and an old 
Corenant Way) and ſo to neglect the Exerciſes, and effectual Opera- 
tions of Grace in Practice, and inſiſt almoſt wholly.on Diſcoveries; 
and the Method and Manner of the immanent Exerciſes of Con- 
ſcience and Grace in Contemplation; depending on an Ability to make 
nice Diſtinctions in theſe Matters, and a Faculty of accurate Diſcern- 
ing in them, from Philoſophy or Experience. It is in vain to ſeek 
for any better, or any further Signs, than thoſe that the Scriptures 
have moſt expreſly mention'd, and moſt frequently inſiſted on, -as 
Signs of Godlineſs. They who pretend to a great Accuracy in giv- 
ing Signs, or by their extraordinary Experience, or Inſight into the 
Nature uf Things, to give more diſtinguiſhing Marks, which ſhall more 
thoroughly ſearch out, and detect the Hypocrite; are but ſubtil to 
darken their own Minds, and the Minds of others; their Refinings, 

and nice Diſcerning, are in God's Sight, but refined Fooliſhneſs, and 
ſagacious Deluſion. Here are applicable thoſe Words of Agar, Prov. 

XXX. 5, 6. Every Word of God is pure; he is @ Shield to them that pus 

their Truft. in him: Add thou not unto his Words, left he reprove thee, and 

thou be feund a Liar. Our Wiſdom and Diſcerning, with Regard to F 
the Hearts of Men, is not much to be truſted. We can fee but a litile - 
Way into the Nature of the Soul, and the Depths of Man's Heart, 

The Ways are ſo many whereby Perſons Aſfections may be moved with- 

out any ſupernatural influence, the natural Springs of the Affections 

are ſo various and fo ſecret, ſo many Things have oftentimes a joint 
Influence on the Affections, the Imagination, (and that in Ways in- 


* 
* 
| 
- l 
- 
= * 
4 
8 
— "£ 
_ * 
oy 
7 
* 
* 
© + 
* Y 
L 
* 
1 
4 . 
| | 
-£ 
- uy 
Lo 


namerable and unſearchable) natural 'Temper, Education, the com- 


mon Influences of the Spirit of God, a ſurpriſing Concourſe of affect- 
ing Circumſtances, an extraordinary Coincidence of Things in the 
Courſe of Men's Thoughts, together with the ſubul Management of 
inviſible malicious Spirits ; that no Philoſophy or Experience wilt ever 
be ſufficient to guide us ſafely thro* this Labyrinth and Maze, with- 
out our cloſely following the Clew which God has given us in his 
Word. God knows his own Reaſons why he inſiſts on ſome Things; 
and plainly ſets them forth as the: Things that we ſhould try ourſelves * 
by, rather than others. It may beit is becauſe he knows: that theſe 
Things are attended with leſs Perplexity, and that we are leſs liable 
to be deceived, by them than others. He beſt knows our Nature; 
and he knows the Nature and Manner of his own. Operations; and. 
he beſt knows the Way of our Safety: he knows what Allowances \,. 
to make for different States of his Church, and different Tempers f 


4. 


1 — — 


« Promiſes of Favour are not ſure Evidences thereof, and conſequently 
* that they are Lies and Uatruths. Our Saviour, who was no legal 
Preacher, pronounceth, and gonſequently evidenceth Blefledneſs, by 
* eight or nine Promiſes, expreſly made to ſuch Perſons, as had inherent 
« Graces, Matth, v. 3, 4, &c.“ Shepard's Sound Believer, p. 221, 222, 223. 

E- particular 


% The cue üs Pax III 
particular Perſons, and Varieties in the Manner of his own Operati. 


ons, how far Nature may reſemble Grace, and how far Nature may 
be mix'd with Grace, what Affections may ariſe from Imagination, and 
how far Imagination may be mix'd with ſpiritual Illumination. And 
therefore tis our Wiſdom not to take his Work out of his Hands; 
but to follow him, and to lay the: Streſs of * of ourſelves 
there, where he has di 5 If we do ot erwiſe, no wonder if 
we are bewilder'd, confounded and fatally deluded ; but if we had 
t into the Way of looking chiefly at thoſe Things, which Chriſt and 
is Apoſtles and Prophets chiefly inſiſted on, and fo in judging of our- 
ſelves and others, chiefly regarding practical Exerciſes and Effects of 
Grace, not neglecting other Things; it would be of manifold happy 
Conſequence ; it would above all Things tend to the Conviction of 
deluded Hypocrites, and to prevent the Deluſion of thoſe whoſe 
' Hearts were never t to a thorough Compliance with the ſtrait 
and narrow Way which leads to Life ; it would tend to deliver us 
from innumerable Pepplexities, arifing from the various inconſiſtent 
Schemes there are about Methods and Steps of Experience ; it would 
greatly tend to prevent Profeſſors neglecting Strictneſs of Life, and 
tend to promote their Engagedneſs and Earneſtneſs in their chriſtian 
Walk; and it would become faſhienable for Men to ſhew their Chri- 
ftianity, more by an amiable diſtinguiſhed Behaviour, than by an 2. 
bundant and exceſſive declaring their Experiences; and we ſhould 
get into the Way of appearing lively in Religion, more by being lively 
in the Service of God and our Generation, than by the Livelineſs and 
Forwardneſs of our Tongues, and making a Buſineſs of proclaimin 
on the Houſe Tops, with our Mouths, the hay and eminent Acts an 
Exerciſes of our own Hearts; and Chriſtians that are intimate Friends, 
would talk together of their Expenences and Comforts, in a Manuer 
better becoming chriſtian Humility and Modefty, and more to each 
athers Profit; their Tongues not running before, but rather going be- 
hind their Hands and Feet, after the prudent Example of te bleſſed 
Apoſtle, 2 Cor. xii. 6; and many Occafions of ſpiritual Pride would 
be cut off; and ſo a great Door ſhut againſt the Devil; and a great 
many of the main ſtumbling Blocks againſt experimental and power- 
. ful Religion would be removed; and Religion would be declared 
and manifeſted in ſuch a Way, that inſtead of hardening Spectatom, 
and exceedingly promoting Inſidelity and Atheiſm, would above all 
Things tend to convince Men that there is a Reality in Religion, and 
greatly awaken them, and win them, by convincing their Confeien- 
ces of the Importance and Excellency of Religion. Thus the Light of 
Profeſſors would ſo ſhine before Men, that others ſeeing rheir good 


Works, would glorify 56881 in Heaven. 


« 


T HE E N B. 


A. 

FFECTIONS,what they 
are, Page 5—9. Religion 
conſiſts much in them 1--5, 

35. This appears from their 
F 10, 11. From their being 
very much the Spring of Men's 
Aclions 11, 12. From Fac and 
Experience 12— 14. From the ho- 


ly * 14—19. From Reli- 


gion's being ſummarily compre- 
hended in Love 19—21. From In- 
ſtances of the moſt eminent Saints 
in Scripture 21—25, From the Ex- 
ample of Chriſt 25—27. From the 
Religion of Heaven 27—29. From 
the Defign of Ordinances 29—31. 
From the Nature of Hardneſs of 
Heart 31—35. 
AGectione Religious, very high 
ſome Times from Impreſſions on 
the Imagination 80, 151, 156, 
157, 158, 200, 246. Such Means 
to be deſired as tend to excite them 
18. We have Reaſon to be aſhamed 
that we have no more of them 38, 
39. Prejudices againſt them 35 
38. How in the Saints in Heaven 
27, 28. Falſe, their pernicious 

endency 35, 37, 247. a 

Tis no Sign that religious Af- 
fections are gracious or otherwiſe, 
that they are great 44, &c. That 
they have . con bodily Effects 49, 
&c. That t ey cauſe Perſons to a- 
bound in religious Talk 54, &c. 
That Perſons did not make em 
themſelves 56, &c. That they 
come with Texts of Scripture $3, 
&c. That there is an Appearance 


of Love in them 67, æt. That they 
come in a certain r 74, &c. 
That they diſpoſe Perſons i - 
bound in Duties of Worſhip go, 
&c. That they diſpoſe Perſons to. 


abound in external Praiſe 92, &c. 5 4 
That they make. Perſons exceed -- 


ing confident 95, &c. That they 
beget great Charity in others 14 3. 

Afﬀittions 
ſpiritual Influence 131. &c. Are 


founded in the excellent Nature 


of divine Things as they are in 
themſelves 186, &c. Primarily 
founded in the moral Excellency 
of divine Things 204, &c. Ariſe 
from ſpiritual Underſtanding 220, 
&c. From aſpiritual Convittion of 


the Judgment 252, &c. Attended 


with the evangelical Humiliation 


acious, ariſe from KK N 


es , 


.* "I 
y | 
- * 0 
1 
9 
— 
. = 
" 
ry 
f #) 
© 


2 4 


278, &c. Attended with a Change 


of Nature 315, &c. Attended with 
the Lamb-like, Dove-like Tem- 
per of Chriſt 322, &e. Effect a 
Chriſtian-Tenderneſs of Spirit 
339, &c. In a beautiful Symmetry 
and Proportion 348, &c. Attend- 
ed with ſpiritual Appetites and 


Longings 363, &c. Have their 


Exerciſe and Fruit in Chriſtian 
Practice 372, &c. | 
Affection, of Hypecrites, all from 


Self-Love 203. Diſproportionate | 


and monſtrous 348, &c. Unftable 
357, 360. Flow moſt before Com- 
pany 360—363. Why ſometimes 


ſo high 81, 201. Leave Men dead 


| 322. 
Appetites, ſee Longings. , 

Application partic 2 of Pro- 
| „ wiſer, 


© et. 8 
Fr 3. FIT is not 
N _— 166, 67 


Joy'd in corrupt Frames 104, 105. 
209, 112, 120, 30. Can't 
maintain'd only on old Experien- 
ces 10g, 11. Not deſirable in ill 
Frames 111, 112, 126. How to 
be ohtain'd 128, 130. Goes not. 
before a Faith of Dependance 162, 
1 A true one, its Concomitants 


9. 
_ 348. 
+B * 

a 


| higher not without the lower 35 

- Atteibutes of God, natural ot 
moral, how diſtinguiſhed 205 
. * C onvidtions. | 


A *KSLIDING, what Kinds 
of it are Evidences of Hy- 
riſ 379, 333 
l of the Truth of b divine 
Things. See Convidion, From E- 
ducation duly, vain 257. From 
E Hiſtory and ancient Monuments 
„ only, inſufficient 257, 258. What. 
may Ariſe from 2 7 wo on the 
Imagination 274, 276. What 4 
©» from a falſe Hope | 250 
Benevolence, the Character of all 


XZ 
. % 


" 


* Bodily e through the Af. 
| fections the Soul 8, 9, 49. No 
2 Siga to dikingui AﬀeQions 49 
Ke. 
Bolaneſt for Chriſt, true _ 
; Counterfeit” 329=—331. Holy 
Prayer, a falſe Notion of it bor 


N 3445 9 4 


ALL of Chriſt 1 a I 
Bo... 7 Nocion of it refuted 162, 164, 
YH Wee, of Nature, attends gra- 
| 48 AﬀeCtions”” ' 35, 332. 
*Chilaren lee Little... 2 
4 Chriſtian S/W it eſpe- 
8 . ods 323, 323, 


4 


t be iu 44 


* Attainments in Religion, the Fa 
lence 101, 0, 104. Often ariſes 
from Impulſes and ſuppoſed Reve- 
lations 103, 104, 164. Is main- 


dune Chriſtians 334,336. 


others, none have 


F 


r — 


. Wark of NES what'i is, 
nd 25 is not juſtly ſo called 


1s brgmagzily* attains [460 
Fer 95, 98. A ok one nvt en- Fn — . it 


uten from ſpiritual Underſtand- 
232, 235. 
oemmunion with God, what the 
Phraſe imports 137. A falſe No- 
tion of it as thu'Carried * by Im- 
pulſes | 168564. 193. 
Confidence, ſtrong, no Sigh. to 


— „ 


diſtinguiſn Affections gg,&c. Why 


ſo great in Hypocrites 102, 103. 
fe 5 its Boilteronſuch and Vio- 


tain'd in Hypocrites i in wicked 
Frames and Ways. 
It onverfion, why called a being 
born again, created anew, raiſed 
from the dead, &c. 141, 142, 231. 
How often renewed . 320, 321, 
" Conwidtions, preceed Comfort 
7480. Some are counterfeit and 
only. from Imagination 80—82. 
And Terrors not the ſame 80, 82. 


No certain Sign of Converſion 85, 


Increaſed by Grace ro1, 102, 346: 


How from the Spirit of God 144. 
Why great ſeem ſmall. 307, 329. 


Convictian ſpiritual of Truth, 
what it is 259, 73. Attends gra- 


cious AﬀeCtions 252, 298, Its 


Counterfeits 256, 275, 278. 
Cerrupiton more than Grace | in 
the beſt _—_ 299 


PD his ele in min- 


gling his Works with God's 


fee of Religion the pro- 
als of Bine 15 379. 


per 
431 4.38. 
© Diſcerning certai 


a Gift. I 13. 
&. 469. 


hen 


10½ 105. 


nly the State of 
pe 


" Diſeeveritty 'of + God's Ghory,” 


&k % +4 +. 6 «4 "= 7 FF a Tay © 


when true begin with a Senſe of 
the Beauty of his moral Perfection 
209. In what Reſpects natural 
Men may have great Diſcoveries 
of God 216, 219. How common 
Diſcoveries of God may excite Joy 
and Praiſe 219. True, reveal the 
Corruption of the Heart 295, 299 
Falſe, hide Corruption 103, 298. 
Spiritual, all transforming 3 5, 
321. And Illuminations, the ill 
Conſequence of judging chiefly by 
them of others State 337 

Divine, how gracious Qualites 
are ſo | 137, 138 

Divine Nature, how Saints are 
Partakers of it 136, 138 

Doubting of Saints concerning 
their State, what are often the 
Cauſes of it 101, 102. Not the 
ſame with the Sin of Unbelief 109 
Profitable in ill Frames 111, 112 

Duties of Worſhip, no Sign to 


diſtinguiſh Affections 90, &c, 
ARNEST of the Spirit, what 
it is 181, 183. 


Earneftneſs in Religion neceſſa- 
ry to Salvation 375» 376, 
Enthufiaſm, wherein it conſiſts 
in all its Varieties of Operation 


245, 252. 
Error may be the Occaſion of 
a gracious Exerciſe 122. 


Evidence of the Truth of the 
Seel, internal, what 260—273. 
External, its Uſe 272. That which 
is the Ground of a ſaving Belief is 
more than a meer Probability 26g, 
272. And is as it were intuitive 
291, 267. And is chiefly internal 
260, 273. 

Excellency of divine Things as 
in themſelves, the firſt Ground of 


gracious Affections 193, 203. 
Exerciſes of Grace immanent 
and practical 429, . 


IAxperience Chriſtian, not pro- 


of the CONTENTS. 


true Chriſtian Ho 


perly diſtinguiſhed from practice 
458—460. How the beſt Evidence 
of 1 good Eſtate, ibid. 

| Experimental. Religion, ſpiritual 
Practice moſt properly & eas 


461, 462. * 
Extremes, how the Devil drives 
"Ry W774 


F. 
Fi H, is never without ſpi- 
ritual Light and Sight 105. 
107. And Sight, how they differ 
10g. Is not a believing our ſtate to 
be good 10, 108. Is not a believ- 
ing the promiſes are made to us in 
particular 162, Falſe, makes Chriſt 
the Miniſter ef Sin 340, 341 
Fear of God, the Temper of true 
Chriſtians 344, 346. Attends a 
346, 349. 
Fear Ser vile, and Love, one de- 
cays as the other prevails 110, 
111, 184, 185. f | 
Feelings inward * 56,63 
Feeling others talk of their Ex- 
periences, no certain Sign of their 
Grace 116, 117 
Firft Work, many Hypocrites 
live upon. it and indulge their 
Sloth 368—370. 
Forgiving Spirit, the S pirit of 
all true Chriſtians 332, 333 
Fortitude Chriſtian the Nature 
of ĩt 329, 332 
Frames, living upon them 106 
Fruit, is that by which chiefly 
we muſt judge of others 117, 120. 
See Practice. 
G. 
OO D, See moral 
Grace, counterieit, its great 
Reſemblance of true 114, 116. 
Saving, differs from common in 
Nature and Kind 138, 139. In 
what Reſpects it does ſo 145, 146, 
True, the Nature of it to think it 
ſelf comparatively ſmall 294, 304. 
Leſs than Corruption in the beſt 


H h 297. 


feits 


Gracious, how it 


ar > 
© ONS 


. 102, Increaſes Conviction o 
101, 346. Has, greater Influence 


4 cays with Love en Sk 
oe e pocrites, not aſſaulte 
1 * I, 102. Hides the Cor- 


a * 


3.8, 319 
Grace alÞ have their Counter- 
6774. 114—118 
4 — ſometimes meerly 

m natural —— — 190, 194. 


from com- 


194» 197 
ARDNESS of Heart, Irre- 


ligion conſiſts much in it 21, 
n Effect of falſe Aﬀecti- 
239, &e. 


* Holineſs, the immediate Gbject 


mon 


of a ſpiritual Senſe and Appetite 


211, 213. The primary objective 
Ground of gracious Affections 
204, 20. The Beauty of all intel- 
ligent Beings 207, 209. The Beau- 
ty of all natural Perfections 
The Beauty of all divine Things 
2 9, 210. Of God, in Scripture 
comprehends all his moral Per- 
fections « 205, 209 
- Hope true, aſſaulted by Satan 
101, 102. Diſcovers Corru _ 


to make theConſcience tender than 
Fear of Hell 342, Attended with 


godly Fear 349. Prevails and de- 
110, 111. 


n of the Heart, and puts an 


End to Convictions 101 102. Not 


ſhaken by their Wickedneſs 104, 


105. Emboldens them in Sin 339 
2343. Often from Impulſes 102, 


5 —10 
Humiliation legal, uſually pre- 
cedes the firft Comfort 75—80. 


Its Nature, and how it differs 


from Evangelical 278. There are 
Counterfeits of it 83, 84. Why 


Perſons under this Work ſeldom 


know it inthe Time of it 5070 399. 
- Humiliation Evangelical (ſte 


- * 


"24 © B LE 
29. How an abiding Principle 
dt Nature 


Humility) what it is, and how it 
differs 2 legal 278, 279. At- 
tends all gracious Affections 278, 
315. The moſt difficult Part of 
Self-denial 282, 284. Hypocrites 
make great Pretences to it, but 
make an awkward Shew of it 
| EN og.) 285, 256, 
Humility, (ſee Humiliation) The 
Notes of it 2g0=315. Diſpoſes 
Perſons to think their Grace imall 
289—304: Eſpecially diſpoſes 
Perſons to think their Humility 
ſmall 304—310. A humble. Be- 
haviour deſcribed 309, 315 

Hypocrites, their great Reſem- 
blance of true Saints 6g—74. 83 
—0. 115-—120, Often very for- 


ward and poſitive in determining 
209: others State 119, Of two Sorts, by 


ſome called legal and evangelical 
162. Why they talk much about 
themſelves and their Experiences 
201, 203. Their Religion diſpro- 
* and monſtrous 347, &c. 
heir Inſtability 257, 358. Defi- 
cient as to ſecret Religion 3 58--- 
363. Their Earneftneſs in ſeeking 
Chriſt and Grace abates after 
their ſuppoſed Converſion 367--- 
x 379 


MAGINATION, what it is 
148, 149. By this only Satan 

has acceſs to the Soul 248—252 
impreſſions on the Imagination, 
what they are 148, 149. They are 
nothing ſpiritual 148—153. Not 
above the Power of Satan 155, 
156. Often miſtaken for ſpiritual 
Diſcoveries and why 148, 150. 
Sometimes attend ſpiritual Expe- 
riences 156, Often cauſe great 
Affections 156—1 59. 201— 
246. Cauſe Counterfeit Convic- 
tions of Sin 80—82. Affection: 
founded on them not gracious 
156—158. 221, 222. There is no- 

: thing 


% 


+ wh 


q *% VY 4 we 


WW, TS QF. 0... Wo 


ns » OY 2 © VU & BD 


— 


WWW . ma. £a. 


thing of the Nature of ſpiritual 
Light. in them 221, 222. All 


Kinds of Enthuſiaſm conſiſt in 


them 245, 249, By theſe mainly 
the Devil confounds happy Re- 
vivals of Religion 248 What Per- 


ſwaſion of. the Truth may ariſe 


from them 275, 277 
Inpulſes, or ſeeming Revelations, 


no ſpiritual Effects 168--171,236- 


238. Often ſeem to reveal Things 
that Perſons are moſt fondly de- 


ſirous of 102, 103 The Ground of 


the Hope of many Hypocrites 102, 
103, 102, 160, 173 186. Occafi- 
on high and tumultuous Aﬀec- 


tions 167, 172, 185, 201, 247-- 


They that follow them, tho* com- 
ing with Texts of Scripture, add 
to the Word of God 167, 168, 


With Texts of Scripture, more 


| #7 than others 171, 236 Af- 
ections founded on them not gra- 
cious 121 
Indwwelling of the Spirit 135, 137 
Joy of the Hypocrite, in Himſelf 


and how 198, 2 2. Without Re- 


verence 349. Without mourning 
for Sin 349» 352 

Foy of @ Sajnt, not primarily 
founded in an Apprehenſion of 
God's Love to him 198. Attended 
with godly Fear 340. Attended 
with godly Sorrow 349, 352 

Judging poſitively of others 


State, the beſt of Men inſufficient 


enn >, 114, &c. 370 

Juſtißcaion by Faich alone, 

what Uſe of Works is, and what 

is not inconſiſtent with it 465. 
K 


. 9 
NOFLEDGE, ſee Unaer- 


ſtanding. 
Knops ana Flowers in the Gol- 
den Candleſtick 393» 395 


AMB-like Dove-like Spirit 
attends gracious Affections 
326, 327. *© 


Law, a Work of it precedes 
Comfort -  74---29 
Leading of the Spirit, the Na- 
ture of it 237,245 
Legal Doctrine a wrong Notion 
of it correted 465, 468 
Legal Spirit, ſome that exclaim 
moit againſt it are the moſt guilty 


of it 286, 289. What it is 284. A__ Y 


ſubtil I hing ibid. l 


Little Children, in what Reſpects | 


the Saints are as ſuch 293, 314, 


Lively Chriſtian?, what are t 
proper Evidences of fuch 470 
Living by Faith, not by Sight 

| I e ICS, 111 
Living on Experiences andi i amet, 
and not on \ brift, a falſe and miſe 


32Þ, 379: 34 1, 455 
e 


chievous Notion of it 106, 11. 


When Perſons may be truly ſaid to 
do ſo 111, 199, 200, 286, 57 

Longings religious, ſtrangly diſ- 
proportionate in Hy pocrites 3 6. 
Affections of Hypocrites extin- 


guiſli them 367. In Saints are 


ma 
© 
. 


F. CONTENT I 


higher as their Attainments are 


higher 363, &c. Gracious, hoy 
diſtinguiſhed 


| 370 
Love, the Sum of all Religion 


1921. How all other religious 
Affections flow from it 20, 21, 71, 
74. Is the Spirit of Adoption 110, 
184. Appearances of it witihut 
Grace 67, 68. All is not from yelt- 
Love 186, 187. And Fear cait out 
one another 11, 111, 184, 195. 
Drawn out to another as a Saint, 
no certain Sign he is ſq 120, 123 

Love to God, true, not or ginal- 
ly from Self-Love 112, 203. Row 
natural Men have tome ind of 
it 190, 194. In the Saints, not 


firlt tounded on a perſwaſion that 4 


God loves them 191-194, 1987 
99. True, is primarily for God's 

olineſs 203, 220. Attended with 
Love to Men e 


* TA 


Ales promote barneſt ſeeking of 
God and Grace than yp. 


£ — Znfined 52, 354+ 
is to both aal and Body 


„356 
* 354835 


ATFESTY and greatneſs of 
God, there may be a great 
Sight of it and nothing ſpiritual 
216--218 
Ma tugſi, the Temper of every 
Chriſtian 2322-339 
Melancholick *Perſons, why re- 
markably ſubject to Satanick Sug- 
ions 251 
Mercy the Temper of all true 
| Chriſtians. 335» 336. Gracious, 
zs exerciſed both to Men's Souls 
and Bodies 354355 
' Methodof Experiences, ſee Order. 
Mocking of God, how Hypocrites 
are guilty of it I 
Meral Good and Evil, how i 
Kinguiſhed from natural 204, 205. 
* ſee 1 N 


AURAL ſee 9; 

Natural and moral Perfec- 

tions of God, how diſtinguiſh'd 

204, 805 

| Natural Good and Evil, all that 

is ſeen in common Illuminations 
and Convictions 232, 235, 27 

| . Natural Men, who are ſo Lalla 

in Scripture 131, 132. How they 

5 = experience that which is new 


may love Virtue and hate Vice 
233, 234 

Natural Perfeions of God, there 
may be a great Sight of them with- 
out Grace 216—219. ſee 
them in a better Manner than na- 
tural Men 220. A Sight of them 


ft 


not converted 


with 


ſurprizing 146. How they 


n L E 
cauſes legal Humiliation 278, 279 


BEDIENCE of the Saints, 

univerſal 372-376, 385 Of 
Hypocrites, not univerſal and per- 
ſevering 396-402 See Practice. 
' Order of Experiences, no Sign 
that diſtinguiſhes them 74, &c. 
Want of ſenſiole Diſtinétneſs in 
it no certain Sign that Perſons are 


enn 417 


ERSEVERANCE in Cbriſi- 
an Practice, in all true Saints 
378-383, 385 All natural Men 


Bal of 3857, 388, 396-402 


Pharaoh, his Behaviour like 
that of Hypocrites 399-401 
Poverty of Spirit, the Nature of 
it 311, 312 
Power of Godlineſs, wherein 
it appears 9, 10. 384 
Pragice, is that chiefly by which 
we muſt judge of others 119, 120 
PraticeChriftian, the Nature of 
it 372, 383, 417 A Sign of gra- 
cious Affections 372, &c. Conſiſts 
not only in Negatives 375, 376 
The Work a Chriſtian is devoted 
to 376, 378 Saints —_—_ in it 
378-383, 385 Cloſely connected 
Grace 391, 395 Found only 
in true Saints 396-401 The chief 
Sign of Grace to others 118-122, 
402, 419 Arguments to prove it 
the chief Sign of grace to other 
402, 40% How it is to be taken as 
the chief Sign of Grace to others 
402, 419 How farit may be viſi- 
ble to others 417, 419 Can be no 
infallible Sign of Grace to others 
419 A ſure Evidence of Grace 
to Men's on Conſciences 419, 
420 In what Senſe it is ſo 422, 427, 
449 The chief Evidence of Grace 
to the Conſcience 429, 458 Ex- 
ternal and internal4.25-429,Grace 
made perfect in it 438, 439. 4 27 
453 


453 An Evidence of Grace chief- 
ly inſiſted on in Scripture 440, 443 
Spoken of as the greateſt Evi- 
dence in Scripture 443, 447 The 
chief Evidence made Uſe of at 
the Day of Judgment 447, 449 
The chief Sign of each particular 


Grace 450, 457 The beſt Evi- 


dence of the Degree of Grace 
457 How Chriſtian Experience 
does eſpecially conſiſt in it 457, 
46 5 The great Conſequence of 
inſiſting much upon it as a Sign 
of Grace 469, 470 See Works, 
Obedience. 

Praifing God with the Mouth 
being much in it no Sign to diſ- 
tinguith 92, &c. | 

Preaching pathetical, profitable 


8 

Pride ſpiritual, how hard to — 
mortified 282, 284 The ſame with 
a legal Spirit 285 Commonly at- 
tended with a great Conceit of, 
and Pretenſions to Humility and 
Self-empuneſs 288, 304, 310 
How ſecret and ſubtil 288, 311 
How it may be diſcover'd 288, 
319 Makes Perſons apt to think 
highly of their Attainments in 
Religion 288, 993, 229 Many 


ef te CONTENTS 


Faith 162 How fi to Ws, 4 
cular Saints __ panda.” g 


os 


UINTESSENCE of ſpiritu- 
| al Affections entirely diverſe, 
all that natural Men can conceive 


* 1 146 


no certain Manifeſtation of 
another's State 112, &c. 403, 408, 


419 How far requiſite in order to 


others Charity 414, 416 
Religion falſe, its bad Conſe- 

quences 36, 38, 248 
Revelations, ſee Impul/es. 
Reverence, ſee Fear. 


8. 


five, how a continued Work 
of Converſion 320, 321 
Satisfying Nature of ſpiritual 
Enjoyments explain'd 36 
Scripture, don't reveal to parti- 
cular Perſons their good Eſtate, 
except by Conſequence 107, 167, 
222 A confuſed Notion about · its 
ſpiritual Meaning confuted 235, 
236 How ſtrictly to be regarded ay 


our Rule with Reſpect to Signs of 


Grace 443, 469, 470 See Word of 


Hypocrites takeit up in Exchange God 


for Profaneneſs and Senſuality 
284, 316. 


Principals ſpiritual and natural, $8 


what intended thereby 142 

Profeſfion of Chriſtianity, what 
belongs to it 410, 4 4 How far to 
be made Uſe of in our judging of 
others Goodneſs 409, 410, 41 5 


| 41 
Profeſſors bright, often come to 
nothing 114 


Promiſes, the Manner of their 
coming to the Mind, not the 
Ground of true Faith 162 Abſo- 
lute, made to a particular Perſon 


Seal of the Spirit, what it is 

175, 176. See Witneſs. 

ecrer Religion, the Delight of 

all true Saints. - 360—363. 
Seeking and ſtriving after Chriſt 

and Grace abates in Hypocrites 

after ſuppoſed Converſion, but 


increaſes after true Converſion, 


368,—370 
| Self-denial, wherein it conlilts, 
28 . 
very much conſiſts in it 389 

Self Examination, not the chief 
Means of Aſſurance 128, 129 


Self- Leve, not the Foundation 
got the Ground of the firſt At of of all other Love, 186, 187 LN | 


of 
Rn of Experiences, | 


ANCTIFICATION progreſ- 


Sincere Godlineſs 


. -J 


fectiom 186—203. 


minations and Diſcoveries 


OS, 
— 


- 
_ 


ous Af 
The Way in 
which it may be the Ground of a 
Sort of Love to God 186, 187, 
ws 195 How it may have a 
Hand in true Love to God 95 
How it may-have a Hand 


the firſt Ground. of 


197. 


Senſe a new /[piriflal one, in the 


"Regenerate 141, 142,226. The 


Beauty of Holineſs its immediate 


Odject, 211, 212 
: Senſe of Heart, how it differs 
from ſpeculative Knowledge 227, 
228 ON 
Shibboleth,- what is the true one 
to diſtinguiſh Saints from Hypo- 
crites, 119, 120 | 
Sign of Grace, what is and 
what is not to be expected from 
them 125, &c. None will ſatisfy 
Saints that are low in Grace, and 


in ill Frames 109,--112,---126, 


* 260 


Sin, its infinite Evil 297 
' Sorrow for Sin, attends the Com- 
Forts of true Saints 350,---352 
When true is chiefly tor Men's 
own Sins 5 355 
© Spirit and Temper Perſons are of, 
we ſhould judge more by it of the 
State Perſons are in, than by Illu- 
337 
Spirit of Bondage and » 6. <4 
"what they are 210,--184 How 
they caſt out one another 110, 


112,—184, 85 


-» Spiri? of Gad, how it influences 


the Minds of natural Men.135,-- 


137,--142, 143233 Is the Sum 
of the Inheritance Chriſt has pur- 
chaſed 182, 183 8 
: Spiritual, what the ordinary 
Meaning of the Epithet in Scrip- 


tu 131, Ce. How the Saints 


and their peculiar Qualities are 


ä ſo called 131, 138 
Syrritual Meaning, ſee Scripture. 


4A TABLE 


m the Joy of true Saints 199, 200 


- Spiritual, ſupernatural and di. 
vine Influences diſtinguiſh graci- 
ous Affections 131, &c, 
Spiritual Pride, fee Pride 
Supernatural, how gracious Qua- 
lities are fo 141 
Symmetry and Proportion in 
gracious Affections 348, &c. 


1 much and earneſt, 
no Sign to diſtinguiſh Af- 
fections 54, &c. Of Experiences, 
there is an Exceſs in it 55, 56, 471 
Of Hypocrites, why ſo much 
about themſelves and their own 
Experiences 2015 203 

Taſte of the Mind, ſpiritual, its 
immediate Object is the Beauty of 
Holineſs 241, 212 Of Actions 
239,--245 Natnral, what is 241, 
— 242 

Tafting the Love of Chriſt, 
what is talſly fo called 149,--165 
172,245 _ 1 

Temper natural, the Effect of 
Grace with Reſpect to it, and 
what Allowances muſt be made 
for it 319-337, 338,--458 

Tenderneſs of Heart, how much 
true Religion conſiſts in it 33,-35 
How a Sign of gracious Affection 
339, &c. 

errors, not the ſame with 
Convictions, of Conſcience 80, 81 
Great, no Sign of true Comfort 
following 80,--82 - 

Texts of Scripture coming ſud- 
denly and remarkably to the Mind, 
no Sign to diſtinguiſh Affections 
63, &c. This no ſpiritual Effet 
158, 159 Affections founded on 
this Effect not gracious 1 59,--1%2 
222 Affections founded on this 
of Texts 
the Word 


Way of the 8 
High Aﬀec- 


not properly excited 
of God 1 67,--1 69 


tions ſometime arifing hence 159, 
160 The Manner in which many 
arc 


FFC ad... Abarad... 


/ i. Af 


Ld 


nw ET 


— vw 


0 ʒ.f IA. > Arras 4A. Av. 


mony from God, 161d. 
Travailing for Sculs, when to 
be ſuſpected 352 In true Saints 
is chiefly in ſecret Places 261 
Trials, what they are 39 Why 
the Difficulties of Religion are 
ſo called 1,--434, 435 Profeſſors 
in general meet with them 379,--- 
431,---434. The main Proof of 
the State of Profeſſors 431,--438 
Trufting God in the Dark 105, 
&c In Chriſt for Salvation, the 


true Notion of i 454» 455 


2 pri- 


tual, There is ſuch a Thing 

225 Wherein it conſiſts 226,231 
Difference between it and com- 
mon Illuminations 232,-234 Don't 
conſiſt in a Revelation of new Pro- 
ſitions 235 Don't conſiſt in open- 
ing the myſtica . of the Pa- 
rables and Allegories of Scripture 
234-225 Don't conſiſt in immedi- 
ate Revelation of Duties required 
236, 237 The Foundation of all 
gracious Affections and Exerciſes 
of Mind ic5---107o 220---252 
The various Counterfeits of it 
245, 246 How it differs from 
ſpeculative Knowledge 227, 228 
Cauſes a Perſon to think he knows 
but little 10+ 294. 295-304, 305 
The Importance and Extent of it 


J te CONTENTS. + 


are deluded. by this 162,--: 6, 
222 This is no immediate Teſti- 


* — * 


230, 231 Of the Scripture; its 
Nature 
Union vital, between Chriſt and 


Believers, its Nature 135---137 | 


ITNESS of the Spirit that 
we are the Children of God, 
falſly ſuppoſed to be of the Natuve 


of a Revelation 102-104-169 - Y 


186 Whatit is, ibid. Vain Af- 


fections from a falſe Notion of it 


171---185 What is ſaid of it 
Rom. viii. 16 explain'd 183--185 
Eſpecially given in ſpiritual Prac- 
tice 464, 

Witneſs immediate of 8447 
Love to a particular Perſon, not 


the Ground of firſt Faith 162, 163 


Witneſſes of the Truth of the 
Goſpel, how the Saints are fo 


270, 271 


Word of God, added to by thoſe 
that follow Impulſes, tho* with 
Texts of Scripture 167-169-239 
See Scripture. | | 


Works. See Prafice., What 
Improvement of tlem is inconfif- * , ” 4 
tent with Grace, and what is noet 
. 465—4 1 
Worſhip. See Duties. * by 
= * * 


EAL, Chriſtian, the Nature 


of it 332 Chiefly againſt 


Men's own Sins 332--353--356 ä 
Falſe not againſt Sin in general  _Þ 


356 


237239 


4 
* 
o 


— Rs © ls
